OF THE SACRAMENTS IN GENERAL, In Pursuance of an EXPLICATION OF THE CATECHISM
OF THE Church of England.

By GABRIEL TOWERSON, D. D. and Rector of Welwynne in Hartfordshire.

Imprimatur.

Ex Aedib. Lamb. Julii 24. 1685.

Jo. Battely RRmo P. D. Guil. Archiep. Cantuar. a Sacris Domesticis.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXXVI.

TO THE Right Reverend FATHER in GOD FRANCIS Lord Bishop of ELY, AND LORD
ALMONER TO His Majesty.
My Lord,
THough I am almost ashamed to make my Address to your Lordship with so small a
Treatise as this, yet having no more of it finished, and this little being the
Foundation of the rest, I hope your Lordship will accept of it as some
acknowledgement of those great Condescentions with which your Lordship has
been pleased to honor so mean a Person as my self.

I might indeed, if I had conceived it better so to do, have kept it by me,
till it had grown more complete, and so have made it a more suitable Present to
a Person of your Lordship's Character in the Church and in the Court: But I
considered that what I now humbly offer to your Lordship and the Public, must
be my Measure in the following Tracts, and so may need the advice of others as
well as my own thoughts to perfect it, and I may gain this advantage by the
separate Edition of it, to know from some of my Friends, what in it is weak or
imperfect: In which if your Lordship will further vouchsafe your admonition, it
will make what remains the more fit to be presented to your Lordship, by

Your Most Obliged, Most Obedient, and Most humble Servant, Gabriel Towerson.
Welwynne, Nov. 2^. 1685.
THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST PART.
Of the Signification of the Word SACRAMENT.
THE Word Sacrament, in the primitive notion of it, the name of the Military
Oath; as well that, which came to be afterward imposed, as that which was at
first voluntarily taken by the Soldiers. Which denomination it had both from
the sacredness of an Oath in its own Nature, and from those Sacred Ceremonies,
wherewith that, and other Oaths were attended. The Word Sacrament, in the
Christian sense of it, translated from thence into the Church, and applied to
those Institutions of it, which now go under that name. As is made appear from
the footing the former signification had gotten in the World; From the
Scriptures, and the Ancient Christians representing the Life and Institution of
a Christian under the notion of a Military one; And, in fine; s^om the same
Ancients making use of that Word in the Military sense. Evidence of this last
from general applications of it, and an account given thereupon of the
particular instances; which they gave of the likeness of the Christian
Sacrament to the parely Military one. page 1.

The CONTENTS of the SECOND PART.
Of the Nature of a SACRAMENT.
A Sacrament shown to be a Relative thing, more particularly such a Relative
thing, as has the relation of an outward, and visible sign of that, of which
it is a Sacrament. That therefore assigned as the Genus of a Sacrament; and
enquiry thereupon made after those essential attributes, which difference it
from other outward and visible signs. Which is endeavored to be evinced from
the several things to which a Sacrament relates, the manner of its relation to
each of them, and the foundation of that relation. The things, to which a
Sacrament relates, shown in the general to be Sacred, or Divine, more
particularly, divine Graces, and humane Duties, that New Covenant, which
connects them together, and that body of men, which is confederated by it. To
the first of which a Sacrament relates in the nature of a sign, a means of
conveyance, and a pledge; To the second in the nature of a simple sign, or
declaration, and (by means of that Covenant, which it conciliates) as an
Obligation to them; To the third in the nature of such a sign, as serves also
to give being to, or renew it; And to the fourth, and last in the nature of a
Discriminative sign, or badge, and as a means of bringing particular men into
it, or continuing them in it. The foundation of all these relations shown to be
the Institution of Christ, as that again, not so much as delivered by him, as
applied to those elements, in which they are subjected, by a declaration of the
purport of the Institution, and by doing such other things to them, as either
the general precepts of Christianity, or the more particular precepts of the
institution oblige to the performance of. A brief recollection made of all the
forementioned particulars, and the essential attributes of a Sacrament deduced
from thence, and exemplified in several definitions of it. page 9.

The CONTENTS of the THIRD PART.
A farther Explication of the Nature of a SACRAMENT, with a resolution of
several Questions belonging thereunto, or depending more immediately upon it.
THE Nature of a Sacrament brought again under consideration, and enquiry
accordingly made concerning that inward and Spiritual Grace, to which it
relates, the manner of its relation to it, and the foundation of that relation.
This last more particularly insisted upon, and as it was before resolved to be
the Institution of Christ, so a more ample account given thereupon of that
Institution of his, and of those Commands, and Promises, whereof it does
consist. Those Commands again considered with reference to the sacramental
Elements, before they put on that relation, or after they are invested with it.
The former whereof are shown in the general to enjoin the setting them apart
for that purpose, or Consecrating them, and enquiry thereupon made by whom they
ought to be set apart, and whether their intention, or good disposition be
requisite to give force unto it: The latter the Consecrators dispensing them as
the Institutor thereof has prescribed, and the peoples receiving them from
them, with the Manner of it. Upon occasion whereof Enquiry is made, concerning
the necessity of Sacraments, and in what sort, or degree they ought to be
accounted such. A like particular account given of the Promises of the
Institution, which are shown in the general to assure Christ's making what is
done both by the Consecrators, and Receivers to be available for those ends,
for which they were enjoined; More particularly his converting that into a
Sacrament, which is by the former set apart to be so (and which how it is done
is, upon that account, inquired into) and, where the Receivers are rightly
disposed, accompanying the dispensation of the Sacramental Elements with the
Dispensation of the Divine Graces. An application of the whole to the business
in hand, and Enquiry accordingly made, how the former Commands, and Promises
contribute toward the Founding a Sacramental Relation, and how also to the
efficacy of the elements, after that Relation is produced in them. page 31.

The CONTENTS of the FOURTH PART.
Of the Jewish SACRAMENTS, and the Number of the Christian.
THE Doctrine of the Sacraments drawn down to particulars, and enquiry first
made concerning the Jewish Sacraments, and then concerning the Christian ones.
As to the former whereof is shown first, that there were indeed such Sacraments
among them, and evidence made thereof, from their enjoying the same Saving
Graces, which our Sacraments pretend to convey, from their being furnished
alike with External Symbols to convey them, and those Symbols of God, and
Christ's institution: Secondly, that those Sacraments of theirs were either the
extraordinary ones they had in their passage from Egypt to Canaan, as their
Baptism in the Cloud, and in the Sea, and the Eucharist of Manna, and the Water
of the Rock, or the ordinary ones of Circumcision, and the Passover; Thirdly,
That, though they were of the same general nature with the Christian, yet they
differed from them, both as to the manner of their representing the Divine
Graces, which was not so clear, and as to the measure of conveyance of them,
which was not so full, as in the Christian Sacraments. Those Christian
Sacraments, in the next place, brought under consideration, and evidence made
of Baptism, and the Lords Supper being the only true, and proper ones, or of
general necessity to Salvation. p. 43.

ERRATA.
In the Text PAge 35. l. 24. for under read on. p. 51. l. 11. r. As appears. p.
55. l. 7. for wherewith r. wherein.

In the Margent. Page 2. l. 33. r. dimisit. p. 3. l. 7. praecedes. p. 16. l. 7.
li. 5. p. 50. l. 3. cap. 3. p. 54. l. 3. 2 Timothy 1.1.6.

OF THE SACRAMENTS IN GENERAL.
PART I. Of the Signification of the Word SACRAMENT.
The Contents.
The Word Sacrament, in the primitive notion of it, the name of the Military
Oath, as well that, which came to be afterward imposed, as that which was at
first voluntarily taken by the Soldiers. Which denomination it had both from
the sacredness of an Oath in its own Nature, and from those Sacred Ceremonies,
wherewith that, and other Oaths were attended. The Word Sacrament, in the
Christian sense of it, translated from thence into the Church, and applied to
those Institutions of it, which now go under that name. As is made appear from
the footing the former signification had gotten in the World; From the
Scriptures, and the Ancient Christians representing the Life and Institution of
a Christian under the notion of a Military one; And, in fine, from the same
Ancients making use of that Word in the Military sense. Evidence of this last
from general applications of it, and an account given thereupon of the
particular instances, which they gave of the likeness of the Christian
Sacrament to the purely Military one.

IF it shall please that God, Question. How many Sacraments has Christ
ordained in his Church? Answer. Two only, as generally necessary to Salvation,
that is to say, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord.
by whom I have been carried on thus far, to continue to me the same Health,
and Leisure, and Assistances, which I have met with in composing the three
foregoing parts of this Explication, I will endeavor to inform my self, and
then others concerning the Sacraments of our Religion, more particularly
concerning those two, which (in the opinion of our Church) are the only either
proper Art. of Rel. 25.
, or generally necessary Catech. ubi supra.
ones. Those, as they are the Argument of the fourth and last Part of our
Churches Carechism; so being accordingly to be the matter of this fourth and
last Part of my Explication of it,

I will begin, for that purpose, with the signification of the word Sacrament,
and which, though it will not clear up to us the full Nature of the things
intended by it, yet will serve to discover to us a considerable part thereof,
and help toward the finding out of the other. Now the word Sacrament, in the
Ancient intendment of it, signified an Oath, and particularly that Oath, which
Soldiers took to be faithful to their Generals, and to do all those other
things which the duty of their place, or the Discipline of War required of
them: With this only difference in point of time (which is wont either to
contract, or enlarge the signification of words) that as that Oath was at first
voluntarily taken by the Soldiers, so the word Sacrament was some time set to
denote such voluntary ones in contradistinction to those, which were afterward
imposed. We have an illustrious proof of all this in a passage of Livy Hist.
lib. 22. Milites tunc, quod nunquam antea factum erat, jurejurando a Tribunis
militum adacti, jussu Consulum conventuros, neque injussu abituros. Nam ad eam
diem nil praeter Sacramentum fuerat, and ubi ad decuriatum, aut centuriatum
convenissent, sua voluntate ipsi inter se equites decuriati, centuriati pedites
conjurabant, sese fugae, atque formidinis ergo, non abituros, neque ex ordine
recessuros, nisi teli sumendi, aut petendi, ant bostis feriendi, aut civis
servandi caus^. Id ex voluntario inter ipsos foedere ad legitimam jurisjurandi
adactionem translatum.
, which therefore I shall here subjoyn. Then first (even in the Consulship of
L. Aemilius Paulus, and Terentius Varro) were the Soldiers obliged by their
Tribunes under an Oath to meet together at the command of their Confuls, and
not to depart without their leave. For till that time there had been nothing
but a Sacrament, and when they were met together by Tens, or by Hundreds, the
Horsemen, who met by Tens, and the Footmen, who met by Hundreds, did, of their
own proper motion, take an Oath among themselves, that they would not depart
out of fear, or cowardice, nor quit their ranks at any time, unless it were to
take up their Weapon, to dart at, or strike the Enemy, or to save a Citizen.
But that which proceeded at first from a voluntary Covenant among themselves,
was by the Tribunes altered into a prescribed, and imposed Oath, and the
Soldiers forced to take it from them. Where we have not only the word
Sacrament set to denote a Soldier's Oath, but such an Oath, as was voluntarily
taken by them, and had rather their own free consent, than the Command of their
General to give being to it. But as we find by the same passage, that what was
at first but voluntary, came afterward to be imposed upon the Soldiers; so we
find also that the word Sacrament came afterward to signify those imposed
Oaths, as well as the former voluntary ones. For thus it is plain, Cicero De
Officiis li. 1. M. Popillius Imperator tenebat provinciam, in cujus exercitu
Catonis filius tiro militabat. Quum autem Popillio videretur unam dimittere
Legionem, Catonis quoque filium, qui in eadem legione militabat, demisit. Sed
quum amore pugnandi in exercitu remansisset, Cato ad Popillium scripsit, ut si
eum pateretur in exercitu remanere secundo eum obligaret Militiae Sacramento,
quia, priore amisso, jure pugnart cum hostibus non poterat.
used it in the account he gives of Cato's writing to Popillius a General of
the Romans, to list his Son anew, if he thought good to continue him in his
Army; His words, as Tully recites them, being, that if Popillius, who had
before dismissed the Legion, wherein he served, thought good to suffer young
Cato to abide in his Army, he should oblige, or bind him by a second military
Sacrament, because the former being made void, he could not lawfully fight with
the Enemy. Which passage plainly imports the military Sacrament to be of the
Generals Imposing, yea so necessarily, that had not the General, in whom the
right of making War was, given it to young Cato, he could not, in the opinion
of his Father have struck a stroke against the Enemy. Thus the use of the word
Sacrament stood in the days immediately preceding our Savior; And as the thing
intended by it, even the Military Oath, was continued in the succeeding Ages,
as is manifest from the frequent mention there is in Suetonius Suet. in Claud.
c. 9. in Othone c. 8. and alibi passim.
, and others of the Soldiers swearing to their Generals, so it continued to be
represented under the title of a Sacrament, even to late posterity. As appears,
among other things, from Horace's telling -- non ego perfidum Dixi Sacramentum,
ibimus, ibimus Vtcunque procedes.

Carm. li. 2. Od. 17.


his Mecaenas, that he had not taken a perfidious Sacrament, because (as it
there follows) he was resolved to follow him, where ever he led, which we know
Dionys. Halicarnass. li. 11. (...).
to have been a great part of a Soldiers Oath: From Juvenal's describing
Soldiers Praemia nunc alia, atque alia emolumenta notemus Sacramentorum --
Sat. 16.
themselves under the title of Sacramenta; As in fine from the Ancients
describing Soldiers either departing, or being freed from their former
service, by a departure, or freedom from their Sacrament. Of which beside other
proofs Ammianus Marcellinus li. 24. Refiduos duos Tribunos Sacramento solvit,
ut desides, and ignavos. Idem li. 26. Et Serenianus, olim Sacramento digressus,
recinctus est.
, we have a Law of Theodosius, and Honorius, and which as it is under the title
de Veteranis, or such as, by reason of their being superannuated, were
dismissed from their former service, so expresses the same Veteranes under the
title of those who have ceased Cod. li. 12. tit. 47. l. 4. Nullus eorum qui
Sacramentis inhaerere desierit, etc.
to be entangled by their former Sacraments. Other instances I doubt not might
be produced, if these were not enough, to show the word Sacrament to have had
for its most usual sense that of a military Oath. But I shall only add, that
though it were set to denote also a piece of money left by each of the
Litigants Varro de lingua Lat.
in Court; Yet as that was in a thing less known, than the Oaths of Soldiers
were, and so the less likely to have any influence upon the framing of that
mode of Speech, which was afterward so much in use among the Christians; so it
had this in common with the Military Sacrament, that it was an Obligation upon
the parties, that deposited it, to prosecute that suit which they had commenced.

But because whatever the usual sense of the word Sacrament might anciently be,
yet it is certain that it did not receive that sense from the literal notation
of it, but rather from something of Sacredness, wherewith those Oaths were
attended: And because the discovery of that Sacredness may help yet more to
discover the true nature of those Sacraments of ours, to which that name is now
applied; therefore enquire we in the next place what there was in them of
Sacred to occasion that denomination of them. Now as Sacred is nothing else
than what tends to the honor of God, whether in its own nature, or by
institution; so there were two things of that quality in those Oaths, whereof
we speak, and from whence therefore they may be supposed to have received that
denomination. First their being in themselves an acknowledgment of Gods
glorious Attributes, and particularly of his Knowledge, Truth, Justice, and
Power; He who appeals to God as a Witness, and a Judge (as every man, that
swears does) implying his believing him to be a competent witness, and so
both Knowing, and True, and one too, who both can, and will assert the cause of
truth in the punishment of the party swearing, if he swear any other, than what
he intends, or means. And in this sense as it was that Cicero De Offic. l. 3.
Est. enim jusjurandum Affirmatio religiosa. Quod autem affirmate, quasi Deo
test, promiseris, id tenendum est.
entitled an Oath a Religious Affirmation, because an Affirmation under the
testimony of God; so I no way doubt it was in a great measure, that Oaths came
to have the name of Sacraments, and particularly all Military ones. But besides
that Sacredness which is intrinsecal to all Oaths, and therefore also to those,
whereof we are now discoursing; They had a further sacredness from those
religious Rites, wherewith they were attended, and which under the veil of
sensible things, and such as were sometime contemptible enough, were intended
to insinuate more valuable, and spiritual ones. Of this nature among the Romans
was their laying their hands Falfus erit testis, vendet perjuria summa Exigua,
Cereris tangens aramque pedemque Juv. Sat. 14.
upon the Altars of their Gods, or, which was yet more sacred than that, their
taking a Stone Festus. Lapidem silicem tenebant, juraturi per Jovem, haec verba
dicentes; Sisciens fallo, tum me Diespiter, falva urbe, arceque, bonis ejiciat,
uti ego hunc lapidem.
into their hand, and then throwing it from them, withal praying, that if they
falsified in the Oath they then took, Jupiter would throw them out of all, as
they themselves did that Stone from them: By the former whereof they designed
to express the reverence they themselves bare even to things dedicated to them,
as well as a belief of their Gods taking care to preserve them from all
pollution; By the latter the quick apprehension they had of the power of their
Gods over them, and particularly as to the spoiling them of their fortunes. And
though I am not able to say, what were the particular rites of the Military
Oath, at least among the Ancient Romans; yet as there is reason enough to
believe, that so signal an Oath was not without them, and which was upon the
matter the foundation of all the Roman greatness, so there is this farther
reason to believe it, that the Ancients Vulgat. Lat. in Ephesians. 5.32. and alibi.
Tertull. de Anima c. 20. ubi recitat d. l. ad Ephesios.
made use of the word Sacramentum to express the Greek (...), and which as we
know to have had a peculiar reference to those Rites, and Ceremonies, which
were in use in the service of the Gods, so must consequently imply the like
sense of that word, which was made use of to express it, and the like
ceremoniousness of those Military Oaths, upon which it was imposed. I may not
forget to add, though applied by some Is. Casaub. Exercit. 16. c. 43.
to another sense, that Herodian (...). Herod. l. 8.
brings in the Emperor Maximus representing the Military Oath as the Venerable
mystery of the Roman Empire. For as that is a farther evidence, that that Oath
was not without its Sacred Rites, because mysteries properly so called were no
other, than such; so I know nothing to take off the force of it, but a
presumption of the word's (...) admitting a lower sense, and accordingly
denoting no more than an Arcanum, or Secret of the Roman State, and by which
the Founders thereof cunningly raised it to that greatness, to which it
afterward arrived. But how ill that notion agrees with the intention of him,
who so entitled the Military Oath, will need no other proof than his prompting
the Soldiers in the words before to look upon the Gods, by whom they had
sworn, as the Authors of their present peace. For what was this but to
intimate, that it was the religious observation of their Oaths, which was the
cause of their prosperity, and consequently, that if those Oaths were also the
foundation, and prop of the Roman greatness, it was not so much by the politic
imposition of them, as by the sacredness thereof, and by the religious
observation of which the Gods were induced to bless them with that ample
dominion, which they had attained? In this sense yet more agreeably to the
received opinion Cicero Orat. de Harusp. Resp. -- Etenim quis est tam vecors,
qui aut, cum suspexerit in coelum, deos esse non sentiat, etc. Aut, cum deos
esse intellexerit, non intelligat eorum numine hoc totum Imperium esse natum,
and auctum, and retentum? Quam volumus licet P. C. ipsi nos amemus, tamen nec
numero Hispanos, nec robore Gallos, nec calliditate Poenos, nec artibus
Graecos, nec denique boc ipso ejus gentis, ac terrae domestico, nativoque sensu
Italos ipsos, ac Latinos, sed pietate, ac religione, etc. omnes gentes,
nationesque superavimus.
of the Romans, because attributing their success, not so much to their own
Wit, and Valor as to their religious veneration of the Gods, and those Gods as
having a favorable regard to them because of it. If they looked upon the
Military Sacrament, and the Soldiers religious observation of it as
contributing more especially to the advancing of their greatness, it is the
less to be wondered at, because it was more immediately by the Arms of their
Soldiers, that the Romans became masters of the World. The result of the
premises is this; The word Sacrament, in its Original intendment, had the
signification of a Military Oath, it had the signification of such a Military
Oath, as was attended with Sacred Rites, and such as led men by sensible
resemblances to things of a higher nature. But whether or no, and how far it is
to be looked upon as of the like signification, in the Christian intendment of
it, does not as yet appear, but will be worth our labor to enquire.

Now that the word Sacrament, in the Christian intendment of it, is to be
looked upon as of like signification to what it had before acquired, will
appear if we consider first, what footing the former signification had gotten
in the minds of men, before there was any appearance of the latter. For as
considering the footing the former signification had gotten, we cannot but
think that it would be apt to suggest it self, as often as the word Sacrament was
made use of; so neither therefore but that it would form a like conceit of the
Christian Sacraments, and consequently, if that were such, an erroneous one.
Which it being not to be thought, that they would give occasion to, who first
applied the word to the Christian Sacraments; especially when they might have
had other words to express their conception of them: It is but reasonable to
think that they made use of it upon occasion of some likeness between the one
and the other Sacraments, and consequently that they intended it a like
signification with the other. I deny not indeed (which is the answer Mr. Calvin
Instit. li. 4. cap. 14. Sect. 13.
makes to this Argument in another instance) I deny not, I say, but that
religion may, and does very often strangely alter words from their pristin
signification; I deny not farther (which is the instance he assigns) that the
word fides, in the Christian use of it, is both a very apt, and pregnant proof
of such a change. But as it does not appear to me, that Religion did ever
(unless in a long tract of time) so alter the known signification of words, as
not to make them bear some analogy to the former signification of them; so the
Word, in which that Learned man instanceth, is not so transformed by
Christianity, but that we may as yet see upon it the impress of its old
signification, and be thereby therefore induced to believe, that they, who
first used it in a Christian sense, took their measures from the former one.
For, as the aforesaid persons namesake (even John Calvin the Lawyer) has
observed Lex. Juridic. in Verbo fides.
, the word fides, among the Latins, signified belief Virgil. Aeneid. li. 4. v.
12. Credo equidem, nec vana fides, genus esse deorum.

Live. Hist. li. 1. Haec ferme, Romulo regnante, domi, militiaeque gesta: quorum
nil absonum fidei divinae originis, divinitatisque post mortem creditae fuit,
i. e. qua creditus est natus fuisse ex Mart.

Idem Live. paulo post. Mirum quantum illi viro nuncianti haec fides fuerit.


, as well as veracity, or fidelity, and so was not at all removed from one
great sense of it in Christianity: And though it was more usually set to denote
the other, yet if we may judge ought by the words fido, and confido, which are
at least of the same lineage with it, the word fides came to signify veracity,
and fidelity, not so much from any other reason, as because those virtues are
the just object of men's trust, which is another, and no less usual
signification of it in Christianity. Which notion I am the more confirmed in,
because though Tully do in one place De Offic. li. 1. Ex quo (quanquam hoc
videbitur fortasse cuipiam durius) tamen audeamus imitari Stoicos, qui studiose
inquirunt unde verba sint ducta; credamusque quia fiat quod dictum est,
appellatam fidem.
represent it as having its name from fit quod dicitur, yet as he does even
there intimate it to be a harsh etymology, and rather a piece of Stoical
confidence, than a well grounded conjecture: So he himself elsewhere Fides
autem ut habeatur, duabus rebus effici potest, si existimabimur adepti
conjunctam cum justitia prudentiam. Nam and iis fidem habemus, quos plus
intelligere, quam nos arbitramur. Justis autem, and fidis hominibus, id est
viris bonis, ita fides habetur, ut nulla sit in his fraudis, injuriaeque
suspicio. De Offic. 2.
uses the word Fides for that trust we repose in another upon the account of
his wisdom, and justice. For ought therefore that does as yet appear, there is
not any reason to believe, but that Christianity had a respect, in it is words,
to the Ancient signification of them; And consequently but that it had so in
the use of the word Sacrament, and intended it a like signification with that,
which it before had, and was now very prevalent in the world. But beside the
footing that signification of it had gotten, and by which therefore we may
reasonably imagine, that the first Christians guided themselves in the use of
the same word in Christianity, it is as certain that the same persons, led
thereto by the language of the Scripture, did both conceive of, and represent
the life, and institution of a Christian under the notion of a Military one.
For if so, it is yet more reasonable to think, that they made use of their
Sacrament to express some of their own Institutions by. Now that the first
Christians, led thereto by the language of the Scripture, did both conceive of,
and represent the Christian state as a Military one, will soon appear if we
look either into those Scriptures, or the Ancient Writers. Witness for the
former, St. Paul's speaking in one 1 Cor. 9.26.
place of his fighting as one, that did not beat the air, and in another 2 Timothy
4.7.
of his having fought a good fight; his calling upon Timothy in a third 1 Timothy
6.12.
to fight the good fight of Faith, as, in fine, upon the generality of
Christians Ephesians. 6.11, etc.
to prepare themselves for that fight, by putting on the whole Armor of God,
which therefore he does there reckon up, and prompts them to buckle on. For
these, and other expressions of the like nature, show plainly enough, that even
the Penmen of the New Testament had that opinion of a Christian State, and that
accordingly they represented it under the notion of a military one. The like
evidence there is of their opinion of it, who took upon them to hand down that
doctrine, which they received from the other: Witness Tertullian's representing
the Christians in general as the Militia of God De orat. c. 14.
, and affirming the Stations, that were in use among them, to have had their
original from the Military ones; His representing that Soldier, who refused to
put on his Crown, as more the Soldier of God De corona c. 1.
, than of the Emperor; His afterward describing the same person Ibid.
as one clad all in red with the hope of his own blood, shod with the
preparation of the Gospel, girt with the sharper Word of God, armed Cap-a-pe
out of the Apostle, and in a short time to be crowned with the Crown of
Martyrdom, and to receive the donative of Christ in prison. For what are these
but pregnant proofs of the likeness they conceived between a Christian, and a
Military state, and consequently that, in agreement thereto, they spoke of
their own Sacraments in the same Military strain? Though if neither that will
suffice, we have their own express applications of the word to warrant us, and
accordingly either making the Sacraments a badge of their military state, or
arguing from men's taking upon them the Sacraments of Christ's warfare, the
unlawfulness of obliging themselves by a humane one. For, agreeably to the
former of these, we find the forequoted Tertullian affirming Vocati sumus ad
militiam Dei vivi, jam tunc cum in Sacramenti verba respondimus. Ad Martyr. c.
3.
, that we were called even then to the Militia of God, when we answered to the
words of the Sacrament, meaning that of Baptism; As Arnobius yet more plainly
Adv. Gentes li. 2. Quod ab dominis se servi cruciatibus affici, quibus
statuerunt, malunt, solvi conjuges Matrimoniis, exhaeredari a parentibus
liberos, quam fidem numpere Christianam, and salutaris militiae Sacramenta
deponere.
, where he represents one, who denies the Faith, as one who deposits the
Sacraments of the saving Militia of God. For what was this but to say, that, in
respect to that warfare, which Christianity commands us to take up, they called
the principal institutions of it by the name of Sacraments, and consequently
that they made use of the word in a sense analogous to that, in which it had
been formerly taken? On the other side, when the forementioned Tertullian De
Corona. c. 11. Etenim, ut ipsam causam coronae militaris aggrediar, puto prius
conquirendum, an in totum Christianis militia conveniat. Quale est alioquin de
accidentibus retractare, cum a praecedentibus culpa sit? Credimusne humanum
Sacramentum divino superinduci licere, and in alium Dominum respondere post
Christum?
, where he goes about to prove the unlawfulness of a Christians taking upon him
a Military life, demands whether any man can think it lawful to superinduce a
humane, or Military Sacrament upon a divine one, and to answer to another
Master after Christ; What other can he be thought to mean, than that the
divine, and humane Sacraments were of one, and the same general nature, that
the divine Sacraments had therefore the name of the humane ones imposed upon
them, and so the word Sacrament of like signification in them both. The only
thing to be farther enquired into is how far this likeness of signification may
be supposed to prevail in the divine or Christian intendment of it.

And here in the first place it is easy to observe, that the word Sacrament,
in the Christian intendment of it, did equally imply the thing, to which it was
attributed to lay an Obligation upon him, that took it, to intend those things,
to which it related. For besides that otherwise it could have had little
affinity with the Military Sacrament, the principal design whereof was to lay
an Obligation upon those, that took it; The first time we find any mention made
of a Christian Sacrament, we find mention also made Plin. Epist. li. 10. ep. 97.
of the Christians obliging themselves by it, to the doing of those things,
that are there remembered. It is no less easy to see, secondly, by the account
we before gave of the Symbolizing of our Sacraments with the Military one, and
particularly by a passage before remembered out of Tertullian, that the same
word, in the Christian sense of it, did equally imply the things, to which it
was attributed, to lay an Obligation upon those, that took them, to intend that
warfare, to which Christianity called them. I add thirdly, as no less evident
from the premises, the same words implying the things, to which it was
attributed, to oblige the party, that took them, to be faithful to their
General Christ, and who was the Captain, as well as the Author of our Spiritual
warfare. As is evident, among other things, from Tertullian's making the divine
Sacrament to be accompanied with a profession of our obedience unto Christ our
Master, and accordingly arguing from thence the unlawfulness of taking upon us
the Military one, and so answering to another Master after him. I say Fourthly,
that as the Military Sacrament did, among other things, oblige the party, that
took it, to the avoiding of several things, which were inconsistent with the
orderly management of an Army, and particularly to the avoiding of theft, and
other such like injustices, as appears by the form of it in Gellius Noct.
Attic. li. 16. c. 4.
, so the word Sacrament, in the Christian intendment of it, did equally imply
that, to which it was attributed, to oblige the persons, that took it, not to
commit Theft, or Robberies Plin. Ep. li. 10. ep. 97. Adfirmabant antem hanc
fuisse summam vel culpae suae, vel erroris, quod essent soliti stato die ante
lucem convenire, etc. seque Sacramento non in scelus aliquod obstringere, sed
ne furta, ne latrocinia, ne adulteria committerent, ne fidem fallerent, ne
depositum appellati negarent.
, or Adulteries, not to falsify their trusts, or, when they were called upon
to restore, to deny any thing that was committed to their custody. I observe
lastly, that as the Military Sacrament was attended with religious rites, yea
received both its denomination, and a great deal of its force from them; so the
word Sacrament, in the Christian intendment of it, was meant to denote the like
Religious Rites, and the Obligation of those, that took the Sacrament, by them.
Which is so true, that in Tertullian first, and afterward in other Christian
Writers, the word Sacrament came especially to be applied to the ritual part
thereof, yea to such things, as had little of a Sacrament properly so called,
beside the ceremonies thereof.

Of what use these Observations may be, will then more clearly appear, when I
proceed (as I mean to do in the following Discourse) from the signification of
the word Sacrament to the unfolding of the nature of the things intended by it.
The only use I shall make of them at present, is, that if we will consider the
nature of a Sacrament in its full latitude, we ought to consider it as well
with respect to our selves, and those Obligations it lays upon us, as with
relation to God, and Christ, and those Graces, which it was intended, on their
part, to signify, or convey to the worthy Receiver of it.

PART II. Of the Nature of a SACRAMENT.
The Contents.
A Sacrament shown to be a Relative thing, more particularly such a Relative
thing, as has the relation of an outward, and visible sign of that, of which
it is a Sacrament. That therefore assigned as the Genus of a Sacrament, and
enquiry thereupon made after those essential attributes, which difference it
from other outward and visible signs. Which is endeavored to be evinced from
the several things to which a Sacrament relates, the manner of its relation to
each of them, and the foundation of that relation. The things, to which a
Sacrament relates, shown in the general to be Sacred, or Divine, more
particularly, divine Graces, and humane Duties, that New Covenant, which
connects them together, and that body of men, which is confederated by it. To
the first of which a Sacrament relates in the nature of a sign, a means of
conveyance, and a pledge; To the second in the nature of a simple sign, or
declaration, and (by means of that Covenant, which it conciliates) as an
Obligation to them; To the third in the nature of such a sign, as serves also
to give being to, or renew it; And to the fourth, and last in the nature of a
Discriminative sign, or badge, and as a means of bringing particular men into
it, or continuing them in it. The foundation of all these relations shown to be
the Institution of Christ, as that again, not so much as delivered by him, as
applied to those elements, in which they are subjected, by a declaration of the
purport of the Institution, and by doing such other things to them, as either
the general precepts of Christianity, or the more particular precepts of the
institution oblige to the performance of. A brief recollection made of all the
forementioned particulars, and the essential attributes of a Sacrament deduced
from thence, and exemplified in several definitions of it.

I Have hitherto entreated of the signification of the word Sacrament,
Question. What meanest thou by this word Sacrament?

Answer. I mean an outward, and visible sign of an inward, and spiritual Grace
given unto us, ordained by Christ himself as a means, whereby we receive the
same, and a pledge to assure us thereof.


I have shown what they meant by it, who first made use of it, and what they
also intended, who first applied it to those Christian Institutions, which are
now commonly known by that name. But because no names are so expressive of the
nature of things, as to bring men to a clear, and perfect understanding of
them: And because, though some names should be thought to be so expressive, yet
we cannot well conceive so of this, by any thing that has hitherto appeared
concerning the signification of it; Therefore to satisfy our selves yet more
fully concerning the nature of the thing intended by it, we must take another
course, and particularly by finding out under what head of things it ought to
be placed, and what are the essential attributes thereof: Whereof the former
among the Learned has the name of its Genus, the latter of the specifical
difference thereof.

It is the observation of the Judicious Hooker Eccl. Pol. li. 5. sect. 57.
, where he entreats of the nature, and necessity of the Sacraments, that as no
one part of religion has been more diversely interpreted, or disputed of, so
that diversity has especially arisen from the mixedness of their natures, and
from that variety of properties, which flow from it. Which therefore whilst
they, who handled this Argument, have but imperfectly considered, they have not
only taken up different notions of a Sacrament, but thought themselves obliged
to combat those, who have assigned it other properties, than what they
themselves had taken notice of. I find no reason to question the truth of that
Observation of his, either as to the variety of men's conceits concerning a
Sacrament, or that mixed nature of a Sacrament, to which he entitles the variety
of the other. But neither the one, nor the other will hinder us from
discovering, under what head of things to place it, which is that we are first
of all to intend. For whether we consider a Sacrament, as to Christ, or to our
selves, as a means in his hands to profit us, or in ours to declare our piety
toward him; Whether again we consider it, in the hands of Christ, as a means
whereby he signifies, and seals his own graces, or as a means whereby he
conveys, as well as either signifies, or seals them; Yet still it will be found
to be in the number of relative things, or such, whose very being consists in
the respect they bear unto another: Because, whatever it may be in it self, yet
it is not considered as such, but with respect to that Grace of Christ, which
it so signifies, or seals, or exhibits, or with respect to that piety, which it
is intended on our part to declare. But so the Scriptures themselves will
oblige us to consider a Sacrament, as is evident from what they teach
concerning Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, which are, if not the only, yet the
most undoubted Sacraments of our Religion. For, agreeably thereto, they prompt
us to consider the water of Baptism 1 Pet. 3.21.
, not as putting away the filth of the Flesh (which is the proper consideration
of water, as such) but as washing us from Act. 22.16.
our sins, and purifying those consciences 1 Pet. 3.21.
, wherein they are; As, on the other fide, the Bread, and Wine of the Lord's
Supper, not as intended to satisfy 1 Cor. 11.34.
our hunger, but as Matt. 26.26, etc.
the body, and blood of Christ, or rather the communication 1 Cor. 10.16.
of it. For well may we look upon those things as relative ones, which we are
not only forbidden to consider in their natural properties, but prompted to
attribute to them the properties of others, yea to consider in the same notion
with them. I say secondly, that as a Sacrament is a relative thing, and that
therefore to be reputed as the remote Genus of it, so it is of the number of
those relative ones, which are signs, or representations of what they so relate
unto. As is evident in part from what we were before taught concerning the
water of Baptism, and will be yet more, when I come to show the Analogy there
is between the elements of each Sacrament, and that, to which they do relate.
For if the water of Baptism, (though not to be considered as to any proper
purification, yet) is to be considered under the notion of a Laver Tit. 3 5.
, and accordingly as washing Act. 22.16.
those who are sprinkled with it, from their sins, then ought it to be looked
upon under the notion of a sign of that, to which it does so relate. Because
whatever force the Baptismal water may have toward the doing away our sins, yet
it cannot be supposed, because sin is no corporal spot, to wash us from them;
And that term of washing therefore attributed to it upon the account of the
Analogy there is between the property of water considered in its own nature,
and that of the same water as consecrated into a Sacrament. Which will
consequently make the water of Baptism, (and, by proportion thereto, the
elements of other Sacraments) not only to have a relation to something of
another nature, but also to be a sign, or representation of it. I say nothing
at present of a Sacrament's being a means of conveying something to us, as well
as a sign of it, and a pledge to assure us of it, as well as either; Partly,
because that, which has the nature of a sign, may also be made use of as a
means of conveyance, and a pledge; And partly because the first intention of a
Sacrament is to signify that, of which it is so, and that therefore by which
it comes to do so, more commodiously assigned as the Genus of it. And I shall
only add, that forasmuch as a sign is nothing else, than that, which offers it
self to the senses, and that, of which it is a sign, to the understanding;
Forasmuch therefore as it must be subjected in some sensible being, and (if it
be also a formal sign, or that which represents the thing, of which it is so)
in such a being, as is apparent to the eyes; Forasmuch lastly as Baptism, and
the Lord's Supper (which are, at least, the most considerable Sacraments of our
Religion) are subjected in such sensible, yea visible beings; It cannot but be
deemed reasonable, for the more clear declaring of the nature of a Sacrament,
to represent it (as our Catechism does) as an outward, and visible one.

That therefore being to be looked upon as the Genus of a Sacrament, or that
general head of things, under which we are to conceive of it; Enquire we in the
next place after the essential attributes thereof, and by which it will not
only be more perfectly known what it is, but also be more clearly discriminated
from those things, which are of the same general nature. Now as the essence of
a relative thing consists in the relation it bears to another, and that
relative thing therefore, whereof we speak, in the relation which it bears to
that, of which it is a sign; So the essential attributes of a Sacrament cannot
therefore be better learned, than by the knowledge of those things, to which it
does relate, the manner of its relation to them, and the foundation of it.

I. In the general I observe, that that, to which a Sacrament relates, must be
something Sacred, or Divine, as both the term of Sacrament, and the known
nature of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper persuade. Which is the rather to be
remarked, to distinguish it from such signs, as relate to civil matters, and
particularly from the purely military Sacrament. For though even that had a
relation to God, as whose name it did invoke, and to whose truth, and justice
it did appeal; yet it referred to God rather as a witness of what it affirmed,
than as to the object of it. For the object of a Military Sacrament was no
other than the being faithful to those Generals, under which the Soldiers,
that took that Sacrament, were.

I observe more particularly, that as that may be termed Sacred, or Divine,
which has God either for its principle, or object, and accordingly flows from
him to us, or passes from as to him; so a Sacrament relates both to the one,
and the other, and ought to be looked upon as such. That a Sacrament relates to
that, which flows from God to us, is a thing neither denied, nor forgotten by
any, and is evident from what the Scriptures teach concerning Baptism, and the
Lord's Supper. Witness, for the former, their representing Baptism as the laver
Tit. 3.5.
of Regeneration, which is a thing we must have from God Joh. 3.5.
, and as a thing, by which we must obtain forgiveness of sins Act. 2.38.
, which is as undoubtedly Expl. of the Lords Pr. forgive us, etc.
another. For the latter, the same Scriptures requiring us to look upon the
elements thereof, as that body of Christ, which was Luke 22.19.
given for us, and that blood which was shed for many Matt. 26.28.
, for the forgiveness of sins. For as these, and the former benefits are such
as manifestly come from God, so they are alike manifestly represented as the
consequents of the former Sacraments, and a Sacrament therefore, as such, to be
looked upon as having a relation to that, which flows from God to us. The only
difficulty, in my opinion, is to show a Sacrament to relate equally to that,
which passes from us to God, and imports our duty, and service. But besides
that the Ancients apprehended no such difficulty in it, because giving it the
title of a Sacrament, in respect of that Obligation See the prec. Disc.
, which it lays upon the Receivers of it; The Scriptures have said enough
concerning Baptism, and the Lords Supper, to confirm us in the belief of this
relation of them. Only because I would not too much anticipate my Discourse
concerning those Sacraments, and, beside that, may have another occasion to
speak more largely to this Argument, I will content my self at present with
what St. Peter has observed of Baptism 1 Pet. 3.21.
, and which I have elsewhere Explic. of the Prel. Quest. and Answers, etc.
given a more particular account of. For if, as that Apostle insinuates, and
has accordingly been more largely confirmed, the stipulation or answer of a
good conscience toward God be a considerable part of Baptism; If it be so
considerable a part of it, as to give it much of that savingness which it has;
Then must that Sacrament be thought (because the stipulation of a good
Conscience is of that nature) to relate to something, that must come from us,
as well as to those things, which flow from God to us. It is true indeed that
our Church, where it sets it self to define a Sacrament, takes no notice of
this object of it; Whether it were through a simple inadvertency, and from
which our Church does no where pretend it self to be free, or (which I rather
think) that it might give so much the more particular an account of that other,
and more considerable object of it, even that inward, and Spiritual Grace,
which it was intended to signify, and exhibit, and assure. For that our Church
did not wholly forget this second object of a Sacrament (even that duty, and
service of ours, which it does equally signify, and prompt us to declare) is
evident from its before minding the Catechumen of his Baptismal vow Prelim.
Quest. and Answ. of the Cat.
, and from the declaration it elsewhere Office of Publ. Bapt.
makes, that they who are to be baptized must also for their parts promise the
renouncing of the Devil, and his works, and both Faith and Piety toward God:
That, as it shows her to have looked upon Baptism as a federals rite, or
ceremony, so that she equally believed it to relate to our duty, and service,
as well as to those divine benefits, we receive from the Author of it. Let it
remain therefore for an undoubted truth, and the acknowledged Doctrine of our
Church, that a Sacrament relates as well to what is to pass from us to God, as
to what is to come from God to us, and that accordingly it may be so far forth
defined, such an outward, and visible sign, whereby we make a declaration of
our piety toward God, as Mr. Calvin Instit. li. 4. c. 14.. 1.
has very well observed.

I may not forget to add, for the farther clearing of this head, that as a
Sacrament relates first, and chiefly to that, which passes from God to us; so
we are to conceive of that, to which it so relates, under the notion of a Grace
given unto us, yea of an inward, and spiritual one. That we ought to conceive
of it under the notion of a grace given unto us, is evident from those Texts,
which I but now made use of to show, that a Sacrament relates to that which
passes from God to us. For instancing in such things, as have the nature of
benefits, and, so far forth therefore, are to be looked upon as Graces, or
Favors, instancing moreover in such benefits, as are manifestly the issues of
the Divine Goodness, yea which the Scripture expressly affirms to be given to us
by him (for so it does as to that Luke 22.19.
Body of Christ, which is the foundation of them all) they must consequently
oblige us to conceive of that, to which a Sacrament relates, as a Grace given
unto us. But neither will there be less evidence from thence, if those Texts be
well considered, that that Grace, to which a Sacrament relates, is an inward
and Spiritual one. For as our Church means no other by an inward and Spiritual
Grace, than that which conduces in an especial manner to the welfare of our
inward man, or Spirit, (as is evident from its making the Body and Blood of
Christ the inward, and Spiritual Grace of the Lords Supper, and which it cannot
be in any other sense, than that it has such an effect upon us) so the Texts
before alleged attribute such Graces to the Sacraments, as are, in that sense
at least, inward and Spiritual ones: Witness their attributing to them the
Graces of regeneration, and forgiveness, which are as it were the formal causes
of our welfare, and the grace of Christ's Body, and Blood, which is the
meritorious cause thereof, and under God, and by his acceptance, in the place
of an Efficient also.

I observe farther, that as a Sacrament relates to such things, as have the
nature of divine Graces, or humane duties; so those graces, and duties being
parts of the New Covenant, and receiving all their force from it, a Sacrament
must consequently relate to that New Covenant, to which they do belong, and
from which they receive all their force. Of which yet if there remain any
doubt, it will not be difficult to clear it from what the Scripture assures us
concerning Baptism, and the Lords Supper; St. Peter 1 Pet. 3.21.
representing the former under the notion of a Stipulation, or Contract, as our
Savior the Cup of the other Luke 22.20. Matt. 26.28.
as the New Covenant in his Blood for the remission of those sins, for which it
was shed. For that that is in truth the meaning of the words (...), and not (as
we usually render it) the New Testament in it, is not only evident from the
word (...) being always so used by the Greek Translatours of the Old Testament,
and whom the Writers of the New Testament generally follow, but from the
opposition, which the Scriptures of both Testaments Jer. 3, 31. etc. Heb. 8.8,
etc.
make between the (...), and the (...) even where Heb. 9.15-18.
there is the greatest appearance of its being to be translated a Testament.
For the (...) being certainly a Covenant, and accordingly expressed by the
Hebrews, by the word (...), which is never used in any other sense, it is but
reasonable to believe, that that (...), which is opposed to it, is of the same
nature: Because as it has the same word to express it, and is therefore in
reason to be looked upon as so far the same; so it would otherwise be different
from the Old as to its general nature, as well as particular quality, which the
sole mention of its newness forbids us to believe; Oppositions (like exceptions
from a general rule) supposing an identity there, where no opposition is taken
notice of. And indeed, though the word (...) may seem in one place to require a
different rendering, even there Heb. 9.17.
, where mention is made of its being of no force till he, by whom it was made,
was dead; Yet as even that did not hinder our Translatours from rendering it a
Covenant both in the foregoing Heb. 8.9, etc.
, and following Heb. 10.29.
Chapters, so that place will not only admit of the notion of a Covenant, but
be found (all things considered) to require it of us. For with what sense first
of all can our Savior be said to be the Mediator of the New Heb. 9.15.
Testament, upon the sense of which expression the following periods do depend.
And for this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that, by means of
death for the redemption of the Transgressions, that were under the first
Testament, they, which are called, might receive the promise of an eternal
inheritance. For shall we say that Christ may be styled the Mediator of the New
Testament, because interposing himself between two persons, that concur to the
making of it? But as a Testament is the Act of one, and not of more, and
therefore admits not of any such mediation; so the New Testament is supposed
to be the Act of Christ, and he therefore rather the Maker, than the Mediator
of it. Shall we then say, that Christ is the Mediator of the New Testament,
because interposing between the maker of that Testament, and those who are the
Legatees in it? But by this means God the Father shall become the Testator,
which, if death be required to make him such, he can by no means be. Shall we
say lastly, that Christ may be looked upon as a Mediator of the New Testament,
because by means of that Testament of his taking up the difference between God,
and Man? But that is rather to make him a Mediator by a Testament, than of one,
which Christ is here affirmed to be. So difficult will it be found to make any
tolerable sense of those words, if we understand them (as our Translators
prompt us) of the Mediator of a Testament: Whereas, if we understand them of
the Mediator of a Covenant, the sense will be clear, and plain; Because as
there are two parties required to the making of a Covenant, and such who do,
for the most part, need a Mediator to bring them to it; so God, and Man are
manifestly the Parties of the New Covenant, and brought to enter into it by the
mediation of Christ. If it be also said, as it is, that the Mediator of the New
Covenant brings the Parties concerned to it by his death, it is no more than
will be found to be agreeable to the Eastern mode of making Covenants, and
particularly to the manner of making that Covenant, which was of old between
God, and the Israelites. For as that Covenant (and indeed all the kindness that
passed between them) was brought about by the mediation of Sacrifices Exo. 24.5.
, and the blood of those Sacrifices therefore styled the blood of the Covenant
Exo. 24.8.
, so Christ; by the blood Col. 1.19.
of his Cross brought about this New Covenant between God, and us, and so, as
the Author to the Hebrews speaks, became the Mediator of it. If it be said yet
farther, that Christ became the Mediator of the New Covenant, that they, who
were called might receive the promise of an eternal inheritance; That also will
be found to be as agreeable to the notion of a Covenant, as it is to that of a
Testament: Because, as an inheritance may pass by other means beside that of a
Testament, so the Children of Israel came to the inheritance of the Land of
Canaan by a Covenant Genesis 15.7, 8, 18.
between God, and their Progenitor Abraham, yea by such a Covenant, as was
conciliated by the mediation Genesis 15.9.
of a Sacrifice. That therefore being the sense of those words of the Apostle,
and so, as I think, evinced to be by no contemptible proofs, it will be but
reasonable to give a like sense to the following ones Heb. 9, 16, 17, 18.
, because but a proof of the former, if it may be made appear, that they are
capable of it. Which that they are, will appear from the Translation I shall
now subjoyn, and which, if it be duly considered, will be found to be no forced
one. For (...), etc.
where a Covenant is, there must of necessity [even by that necessity which
arose from the Ancient mode of making Covenants] be the death of that Mediator,
that made it. For a Covenant becomes firm after those Mediators, that made it,
are dead, for it is never of force, whilst he, who so makes it, lives.
Whereupon neither the first Covenant was dedicated without blood. For when
Moses had spoken every precept to all the people according to the Law, he took
the blood of Calves, and of Goats with water, and scarlet Wool, and Hyssop, and
sprinkled both the Book, and all the people, saying, This is the blood of the
Covenant Exo. 24.8.
, which God has enjoined unto you. That I render the words (...), the death of
the Mediator, that makes the Covenant, is because the Apostle speaks in the
verse before of him, who makes the Covenant, not as a Party, but as a Mediator,
and what is here said therefore of the Maker of a Covenant to be understood of
such a Maker of it. That I render those words (...), for a Covenant becomes
firm, after those Mediators, who made it, are dead, is be cause those words are
intended as a confirmation of the former ones, and so in reason to be
understood of the death of the same Mediators. In fine, that I render the words
(...), for it is never of force, whilst he, who so makes it, lives, is because
those words, as the former, are a continuation, and confirmation of the
foregoing Argument, and so still to be understood with reference to the same
Mediator. All which things I have laid together, not so much out of a desire of
being thought the Author of a new Interpretation (from which no man is more
averse, where there is not some kind of necessity for it) but to clear up an
acknowledged, and important truth, and which the Text, I have so long insisted
upon, has helped, more than any thing, to obscure. For as there is nothing
more certain from the Scripture, nor more attested to by our own Translators,
than that the dispensation of the Gospel ought to be looked upon under the
notion of a Covenant; As there is nothing, in like manner, of more importance
to us to know, and consider, because it will prompt us to the doing of our part
in the Covenant, if we mean that God should do his; so, setting aside this Text
of the Hebrews, there is not one, where this (...) is mentioned, which will not
as commodiously, or more be interpreted of a Covenant, than it can be thought
to be of a Testament. Only, if some men swayed by their former prejudices, or
by the Latins giving the Codex of the Old, and New Law the title of the Old,
and New Testament Tertull. de jejun. c. 11. Secundum utriusque Testamenti
paraturam.
(though they also give them the more general title of Instrumenta Idem Apol.
c. 19. Primam Instrumentis istis auctoritatem summa Antiquitas vindicat. Ib. c.
21. Sed quoniam edidimus antiquissimis Judaeorum Instrumentis sectam istam esse
suffultam. Adv. Marc. li. 1. c. 13. Quantas autem foveas in ista vel maxim
epistola [ad Romanos nempe] Marcion fecerit auferendo quae voluit, de nostri
Instrumenti integritate parebit.
.) But if some men, I say, swayed by the one, or the other, think fit to
continue to the former Text, and some others the notion of a Testament; As I
shall not contend with them about it, for the reverence I my self bear to the
judgment of the Ancients, so I shall ask, as is but reason, their acknowledging
in like manner that the words (...) do equally import a new Covenant, and
particularly, where mention is made of the Cup of the Lord's Supper being the
blood of that (...), or a (...) in it. Partly, because that old (...), to which
it was opposed, had the nature of a Covenant, and could not, unless very
improperly, be styled a Testament; And partly, because it was not only sealed
with blood, but that blood also styled the blood of Exo. 24.8.
the Covenant. For that is enough to persuade (especially, when we otherwise
know, that the dispensation of the Gospel is undoubtedly a Covenant) that our
Savior, when he represented the Cup of his Last Supper as the blood of the
(...), meant the blood of the New Covenant, and consequently that that
Sacrament, and the other have a relation to it.

I will conclude what I have to say concerning those things, to which a
Sacrament relates, when I have taken notice of its relating to that body of
men, with whom this New Covenant is made, as well as to the Covenant it self.
For that it does so, we have the former instances of Baptism, and the Lord's
Supper to assure us, or rather what we learn from the Scriptures concerning
them: St. Paul giving us to understand, that it is into that body, that we are
baptized 1 Cor. 12.13.
, as, in like manner, that though we be many, yet we become one bread, and that
one body 1 Cor. 10.17.
by partaking of the bread of the other Sacrament.

II. It appearing from the premises, what those things are, to which a
Sacrament relates, and the way therefore so far plained toward the discovery of
the properties thereof, enquire we in the next place into the nature of that
relation, which I have affirmed it to bear unto the other. For my more
advantageous discovery whereof I will resume each of those things, to which it
does relate, and show what kind of relation it bears to them.

Now as the first of those things is an inward and Spiritual Grace, that is to
say, such a one as conduces in an especial manner to the welfare of our inward
man, or spirit; so we shall find a Sacrament, as to it, to have the nature of a
sign, or visible representation of it. A thing so acknowledged by all, by whom
the Sacraments are acknowledged in any measure, that it will hardly be worth
our while to insist upon it. It may suffice here to say, that as a sign is so
much of the Essence of a Sacrament, that it is the very Genus of it, and must
therefore be supposed to be such, as to all those things to which it relates;
so we shall find the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper to represent
even to our eyes those inward and spiritual graces, which are attributed to
them. For thus the water of Baptism does by that cleansing quality, which is
natural to it, and which, as such, is a representation of that spiritual Grace,
which purges Heb. 9.14.
the Conscience from dead works, which are, as it were, the filth 2 Cor. 7.1.
, and pollution of it. And thus too the Elements of the Lord's Supper do, as by
other ways, and means, so by that which is done unto them; The breaking of the
one serving to set forth the breaking of Christ's body upon the Cross, as the
pouring out of the other does the shedding of his blood at those passages,
which were made for it by the Nails, and Spear, that pierced him.

But beside that a Sacrament has the relation of a sign to that inward, and
spiritual Grace, which belongs to it, it has also the relation of such a
sign, as is moreover an apt instrument to convey that grace, which is signified
by it. I instance, for the proof hereof, in the Scriptures attributing such
effects to Baptism and the Lord's Supper, as are the immediate issues of those
graces, which are signified by them. For if it attribute such effects to them,
it must consequently intimate them to be the conveyers of those Graces, from
whence they result, as which otherwise they could not be in a condition to
produce. Now that the Scriptures attribute such effects to the Sacraments
before remembered, as are the immediate issues of those graces, which are
signified by them, will appear, as to Baptism, by their attributing to it a
power of washing away Acts 22.16.
the sins of men. For whether we understand thereby the washing away their
guilt, or washing away the pollution of them, we shall still find it to be the
immediate issue of an inward, and spiritual Grace; It being the blood of Jesus
Christ (as the Scriptures Explic. of the Creed in the word Dead.
every where declare) that washes us from sin in the former sense, and the
sanctifying Graces of God's spirit Expl. of the Creed, in the words, I believe
in the Holy Ghost.
, which purify us from it in the other. If therefore the Sacrament of Baptism
may be said so to wash, and purify, it must be as it is an Instrument, whereby
it conveys to us those graces, to which that purification does belong. But so
the same Scriptures do yet more expressly declare, as to that other Sacrament of
our Religion, even the Supper of the Lord; St. Paul telling us 1 Cor. 10.16.
of the bread of it, that it is the Communion, or Communication of Christ's
body, as of the Cup that goes along with it, that it is the Communion of his
blood. For what other can we well understand by that expression of his, than
that they are an instrument, whereby God conveys, and we accordingly come to
partake of that body, and blood of Christ, which is signified by them? This
only would be added, for the clearer Explication of it, that when were present
the Sacrament as an instrument, whereby God conveys to us that grace, which is
signified by it, we do not mean thereby that it is a natural one, or such as
contains that grace in it, as a Vessel does liquor, or a cause its effect, but
rather (as the Judicious Hooks Eccl. Pol. li. 5. sect. 57.
speaks) as a moral instrument thereof; That is to say, as such a one, to the
use whereof God has made a promise of his grace, and which accordingly he will
accompany with the exhibition of the other.

I deny not indeed but there are, who are otherwise persuaded, and who
accordingly either attribute a greater efficacy to a Sacrament, or deny even
that, which we have attributed to it. Of the former sort are they, who not
contented to affirm that a Sacrament is an instrument, whereby God conveys
grace to the worthy receiver of it, do moreover represent it under the notion
of a Physical one, yea of such a Physical one, as contains grace in it, as a
cause does its effect, and accordingly contributes by its own internal force to
the producing of it, as well as to the possessing us thereof. Even as a Chezil
(for so they Hist. of Counc. of Trent li. 2.
explain themselves) contributes to the formation of a Statue, or as a Hatchet
to that Bed, Aquin. sum. Part. 3. Qu. 62. Art. 1.
which is shaped by it. But as it appears by Aquinas Ibid.
, who was it may be the first framer of it, that that conceit had its original
from the fear of making a Sacrament to be nothing but a bare sign of grace,
contrary to the opinion of the Holy Fathers; so nothing more therefore can be
necessary toward the overthrowing of it, than to show the groundlesness of that
fear, which the doctrine before delivered will sufficiently evince. For if it
be but a moral instrument, whereby God conveys his own graces, it is certainly
more than a sign, yea it may, in some sense, be said to be a cause, as well as
the instrument thereof. For as they, who attribute to a Sacrament the efficacy
of a cause, make it to be no farther a cause of grace, than that it produces
in the Soul a disposition Hist. of Counc. of Trent li. 2.
to receive it (by which means it is not so much the cause of grace, as of our
receiving it) so such a kind of causality will be found to belong to it, though
we make a Sacrament to be no other than a means whereby we attain it: Because
it is so far forth by the force of a Sacrament, that grace comes to be in us,
that without that we cannot ordinarily hope to attain it, nor fear to fail of
it, where the other is duly received. The only difference as to this particular
between the one, and the other opinion, is, that whereas the former makes a
Sacrament to dispose us to the reception of Grace, as well as to convey it; The
latter supposes that disposition already produced, and consequently leaves no
place for the former operation. In that respect yet more agreeably to the
Doctrine of the Scriptures, because not only pre-requiring certain
qualifications Act. 8.36, 37. 1 Cor. 11.20.
of those, that are to receive it, but assuring them, that if they come so
qualified, they shall not fail Mark. 16.16. Act. 2.38.
of that grace, which the Sacrament was intended to convey; These and the like
assertions, as they suppose the Soul to be before disposed, so leaving no place
for any other causality in a Sacrament, than its serving to us as a means of
conveying that grace, which we are so disposed to receive. And indeed as it
does not appear by any thing that Schoolman has alleged, that the Ancients
ever attributed any other causality to a Sacrament (for though St. Augustine,
as he is quoted by him, affirms the power of God to work by a Sacrament, yet he
does not affirm it to do so as by a Physical instrument) As it appears farther,
even from that Schoolman, that St. Bernard was of opinion, that Grace is no
otherwise conveyed by a Sacrament, than a Canonry in his time was by a Book, or
a Bishopric by Ring; so there is no defect in the Instances of that Father,
supposing a Book or a Ring to have been as much a means of conveying of those
preferments, as we affirm a Sacrament to be of the divine Grace. For in that
case the delivery of a Ring, or a Book, would not only have been a sign,
whereby the delivery of those preferments was declared, as Aquinas argues in
the place before, but a ceremony by which they were actually made over, and
without which they could not have been Canonically invested in them. I conclude
therefore, that if a Sacrament be an instrument of Grace, it is a moral one,
and such as contributes no farther toward our partaking of it, than as it is a
means to which God has annexed the promise of it, and which accordingly he
will not fail (where the receiver is rightly disposed) to accompany with the
exhibition of the other.

But because there are some, who are so far from owning a Sacrament to be a
physical instrument of grace, that they will not so much as allow it to be a
moral one; And because such a conceit may tend as much to the depretiating of a
Sacrament, as the other seems to tend to the overvaluing of it; Therefore
consider we in the next place the pretensions of those, that entertain it, and
the strength, or rather weakness of those pretensions. There are who have
thought (and it were to be wished that many more did not, who do not perhaps
speak it out) that a Sacrament, as to this particular is a bare sign of the
Divine Grace, and accordingly intended by God, only to awaken men's minds to
conceive it, and their hearts to the embracing of it. What induced them so to
opine, I am not able to say, unless it were, on the one hand an universal
acknowledgment of its being a sign; and a fear, on the other, lest if they made
it any thing more, they should approach too near to those excesses, into which
the former had cast themselves. But as it is a very ill way of choosing
opinions in Religion by the distance, which they bear to the excesses of other
men; so the fondness of this cannot better be made appear, than by those
glorious effects, which are attributed to a Sacrament, and which, in strictness
of speech, are the proper, and immediate issues of that which is signified by
it. For that which is only a sign being no way capable of producing such
effects, nor therefore with any reason of having such effects attributed to it,
we are in reason, where the thing will bear it, to conceive it under such a
notion, as will make those effects yet more proper to it. Which we shall then,
and then only do, when we make it such a sign, whereby (as was before said) God
conveys to us that Grace, by which those effects are produced. Only as there
are, who think all this may be salv'd, by making a Sacrament a seal, as well as
a sign of Grace, or rather a seal of that New Covenant, by which we are
entitled to it; so it may not therefore be amiss to examine that pretension
also, and enquire into the validity thereof. What relation a Sacrament bears to
the New Covenant, and how far the notion of a seal is competible to it, shall
be examined in another place, and I will not therefore at present engage my
self in that dispute. But I shall not stick to affirm, that how legitimate
soever that notion of a Sacrament may be, yet it is no adequate one; As will
appear in part from the insufficiency of those grounds upon which it is built,
and in part also from the nature of that Covenant, whereof they speak, and of
which they represent it as a seal. For the evidencing the former whereof we are
to know, that as the ground upon which it is built is a passage of St. Paul
Romans 4.11.
, where he represents the Circumcision of Abraham as a seal of that
righteousness of faith, which he had yet being uncircumsised; so that Text, if
it be well examined, will not be found to be a sufficient proof of that, for
which it is alleged. For not to require those that urge that Text (which yet
they seldom do) to make it appear that the Christian Sacraments are of the same
nature with Circumcision, and consequently that what is said concerning
Circumcision ought to be alike understood of the other; Neither is what is
there affirmed concerning Circumcision affirmed concerning Circumcision in the
general, but only of the Circumcision of Abraham, neither is it affirmed
concerning his, that it was a seal of that Covenant, to which it did more
immediately relate, but of that righteousness, which he had before he entered
into it. Things, which if duly considered, will render that testimony perfectly
ineffectual, as to what it is designed to establish. For as if Abraham's case
were different from that of other Circumcised persons, what may have been to
him a seal of the righteousness of Faith, may not yet have been such to them;
so that Abraham's case was so far different from that of the generality of
Circumcised persons, may appear from his having before had that righteousness
of Faith, which the other, because Infants, could not be supposed to have had,
or, at least, not till they had it by the sign of Circumcision. And indeed,
whosoever shall consider what the Apostles design in that place is, even to
show that the righteousness of Faith is not annexed to Circumcision, because
Abraham had it before he was Circumcised, must consequently believe that when
he afterward makes that Circumcision of his a seal of that righteousness in
him, his meaning was only to say, that it was a testimony from God to him, and
others, that he allowed of the former righteousness, as which if he had not
done, he would not thus have entered with him into that other Covenant, of which
Circumcision was a sign. By which way of arguing, what is here said concerning
Circumcisions being a seal, must not be understood of it, as it was in it self,
and so in a notion common to all that received it, but with respect to that
righteousness of Abraham's, which it followed after in time, and which it could
not but be looked upon as some Confirmation from God of, because a sign of that
New Covenant which God then entered into with him. As for that New Covenant, or
any righteousness of Faith accruing to Abraham by it; This St. Paul is so far
from affirming his Circumcision to have been a seal of, that he may seem rather
to intimate, that it had no such relation to it: Because affirming it to have
been a seal of that righteousness, which he had before it, and which therefore
he derived not from the Covenant of Circumcision, or was under any necessity of
having it sealed to him by the sign of it. I conclude therefore, that how true
soever it may be, that a Christian Sacrament is a seal of the New Covenant; Yet
the Text before mentioned conferrs not at all to the proving of it, and much
less toward the showing, that it has no other relation than that of a seal
either to that Covenant, or the graces of it. But beside that the single notion
of a seal, how plausible soever it may appear, has no countenance from that
Text, which is usually produced for it; It will be found to have as little from
the nature of that Covenant, of which it is represented as a seal. For that
Covenant importing as well the conferring of present benefits, as a promise of
future ones, it must consequently if it be tranfacted by any visible ceremony,
make use of that ceremony to convey those present benefits, as well as to
ascertain the exhibition of future ones; The former whereof a seal being no way
proper for, or at least not in the usual notion of it, we are in reason to give
the respective Sacraments of that Covenant another, and a more effectual
notion, even that of a means, whereby Christ, who is the Author of them,
conveys his graces to mankind.

One only relation there is besides, which a Sacrament bears to the Divine
Grace, even that of a pledge to assure us thereof (as our Catechism expresses
it) or (as the 25th Article of our Church has it) a certain sure witness of
it. A relation, which stands sufficiently confirmed by the imperceptibleness of
the Divine Grace in it self, and the aptness of a Sacrament to manifest its
approaches to us. For as the imperceptibleness of the Divine Grace in it self
makes it but necessary; for the comfort of mankind, to have its approaches
manifested to them by some other ways, and means; so a Sacrament as before
described, is an apt means to notify it to us, yea assure us of the approaches
of it. Partly, because a means to which God has annexed the exhibition of his
grace, and partly because such a means, as is apparent to men's senses, and
which therefore whilst they are so assured of, they can as little doubt of that
Grace, which by the Decree of God is annexed to it.

Of the relation a Sacrament bears to the Divine Grace I have spoken hitherto,
and shown what kind, or kinds of relation it bears to it; I come now,
according to the method before laid down, to entreat of its relation to our
selves, and of that piety, and service, which we owe to the giver of it. For
the understanding whereof we are to know, that as a Sacrament is undoubtedly a
sign of that, of which it is such, so if it has a relation to our piety (as I
have before shown it to have, and as the very title of a Sacrament, in the
Original notion of it, obliges us to conceive) it must be looked upon as such
a sign, whereby we may make a declaration of that piety of ours, as was before
observed out of Mr. Calvin. But so we do in Baptism, as by other ways, and
means, so especially by our receipt of it, as a mark of our present
acknowledgment of those Divine Persons, into whose names we are baptized, and a
resolution for ever after to keep a good Conscience to them: In the Eucharist,
by the grateful commemoration we there make of the death of Christ, by a
declaration of our intimate union with those, who partake with us thereof, and
a resolvedness to maintain it by all the offices of love, and kindness. Which
things I do now only mention, because I must insist upon them more largely
elsewhere, and whither it will be more proper to deferr the particular
explication of them. Only as a Sacrament appears to have received its Name from
the obligation it lays upon us to the performance of religious duties; so I
cannot forbear to add, that as it is a declaration of that piety we owe to God,
so it is also an obligation to the continuance of it: Because (as I shall
afterward show) it serves to conciliate, or renew that New Covenant, by which
we are obliged to them.

From that second thing, to which a Sacrament relates, pass we to the third,
even that New Covenant, in which both the former are founded, and to which I
shall not stick to affirm: First, that a Sacrament has the relation of a sign,
because at once representing the concernments of each party, what God obliges
himself to conferr, and what we make profession of performing. But neither
shall I stick to affirm, that it has moreover the relation of such a sign,
whereby the parties concerned declare their consent to it, and so make that,
which was before but in a disposition, to become a Covenant, or, at most, but
in a weak, and tottering condition, to become actually, and firmly such. Which
if any man shall give the title of a Seal unto, I for my part shall not be at
all displeased, because seals were sometime Neh. 9.38.
made use of, for the declaration of such a consent. But I have my self avoided
to make use of the expression, because there may be some Ambiguity in it; And
because they, who have lately employed it, seem to look upon it as a thing,
which rather adds strength to men's faith concerning it, than to the Covenant it
self, and much less does either give being to it, or renew it. Whereas Baptism,
in my opinion, is that, which first strikes the Covenant between God, and man,
and the Eucharist, that which continues, or renews it after it has been
shattered by our miscarriages; As is evident; as to the former, by its being
the means of Matt. 28.19.
making Disciples, and the laver of our Tit. 3.5.
new birth, and, as to the latter, by our Savior's entitling it the New
Covenant Luke 22.20.
in his blood, and remitting men to it for that remission of Matt. 26.28.
sin, which had been made over to them by the other. This I take to be the true
relation of a Sacrament to the New Covenant, and so I shall continue to do,
till I come to be better enlightened in it. For which cause I shall only add,
that as the consent, we now speak of, is in a Sacrament declared by both
parties; so he, who administers it, is in that case in the place of God, and
declares his consent to the Covenant; Because doing what he does by virtue of
that Commission Matt. 28.19.
, which empowered the Apostles, and their Successors to Baptize all, that
should offer themselves unto it, and made them the dispensers of that, and the
other 1 Cor. 4.1.
mysteries of our Religion.

The fourth and last thing, to which I affirmed a Sacrament to relate, is the
body of Christ, even that mystical one, which is made up by those, that believe
in him, and adore him. Now to this Body it relates, in the general, as a
discriminative sign of the profession of it, and by which the several members
thereof may both know, and be known by one another, and accordingly join in
such acts, as God exacts of their body. For because God, who made men sociable
Creatures, was willing they should worship him in society also, as for other
reasons, so to make him an apt return Expl. of the fourth Com. Part 1.
of praise for that blessing, which they received by God's disposing them to a
sociable life; And because (as St. Augustine Aug. contr. Faust. Manichae. li.
19. c. 11.
speaks) men cannot be associated into any Religious body, nor indeed into any
other, but by a community of visible signs, and Sacraments (of which, beside
the thus confederating of men of all Religions, we have a proof in men's
general inability to judge of the profession of their Associates by any other
way, than by such outward notes, or characters) therefore, I say, God, and
Christ, when they meant to erect a Christian body, gave it such signs, and
notes also; Partly, to give beginning to it, and the several members of it, and
partly to continue them in those joint Offices, and services, which they
required the performance of. The former whereof is done by the Sacrament of
Baptism, the latter by the Sacrament of the Eucharist. And how much these two
Sacraments conferr toward the keeping up the profession of Christianity, will
appear, on the one hand, from those miserable Christians, who live under the
Turks, and, on the other, from those much more miserable persons the Quakers,
who live among our selves. For as the poor Greeks, by reason of the ignorance
of their Priests, and the unintelligibleness, as well as the hudling up of
their Liturgies, have little other means beside those Sacraments, and other
such symbolical rites to keep up the profession of Christianity among them
(which yet, it may be, they are more tenacious of, than those who are better
instructed among us, would be under the like circumstances) so those much more
miserable persons the Quakers, having thrown off the visible signs of
Christianity, have upon the matter come to throw off Christianity it self, and
whatsoever it obliges us either to believe, or do in order to our obtaining
the salvation promised by it. If they have made a shift to rear, or keep up so
much as their own Profession, it was owing in the beginning to that Quaking,
which gave denomination to them, and, since that, to their affected looks, and
habits, and behavior, which are, if I may so speak, the visible signs, or
Sacraments thereof. And, if once they fall off from these, as we see they begin
to do, we shall soon find their profession to fail together with it, and to be
buried in the same grave. But to return to that more sacred body, of which I
but now entreated, and to which as I affirmed a Sacrament to have the relation
of a general badge, or discriminative sign of the profession of it, so I must
also to be a means of bringing particular men into it, or continuing them in
the communion of it: It being into this body (as was before observed out of St.
Paul) that all Christians are baptized, and so therefore first entered by that
Sacrament; And in that body too that they continue by the receipt of the other
Sacrament, because it is, by their partaking of the bread of it, that the same
St. Paul affirms, that they become that one Bread, and Body. For being members
of that body by the former Sacrament, they cannot otherwise be said to make it
up by the partaking of the latter, than as that may serve to keep them within
the communion of it.

III. An account being thus given of the things, to which a Sacrament relates,
together with the nature of that relation it bears to them; It remains that I
enquire what the foundation of that relation is, which is the only thing
farther to be known toward the discovery of the properties of a Sacrament. For
the understanding whereof we are to know, that as the relation, whereof we
speak, is of different sorts, to wit the relation of a sign, of a means of
conveyance, and of a pledge (for such I have shown a Sacrament to be, as to
that grace of God, to which it principally referrs) so it may have different
foundations, agreeably to that diversity, which I have said to be in the nature
of the relation. For, as a sign, it is founded in part in the resemblance,
which it bears to the things signified by it (for so all signs of
representation are) and in part also in the Institution of him, whose the
Sacrament is: Because as the former resemblance is not so apparent, as by its
own force to have suggested to us the things signified by it, so it could not
without his institution, whose the Sacrament is, have laid any obligation upon
us to consider it in that relation of it. I say not the same concerning that
relation of a Sacrament, whereby it becomes a means of conveying to us the
Divine grace, or a pledge to assure us thereof: Because each of these relations
is founded simply, and only in the Institution of him, whose the Sacrament is.
For a Sacrament having no natural aptitude either to convey the Divine Grace to
us, or to assure us, that if we receive that Sacrament, we shall receive the
other also; It must consequently (if it become such a means, or pledge) become
so by the Institution of him, by whom it is suggested to us. But because I have
said nothing hitherto, whose that Institution is, by virtue of which a
Sacrament puts on the forementioned relations; And because it is alike certain,
that whosoever's that Institution is, yet it produces not those effects by its
own immediate force, but by the intervention of some Act, or Acts of those,
whom he has entrusted with the dispensation of them; Therefore, to satisfy
our selves yet farther concerning the foundation of those relations, enquire we
in the next place whose that Institution is, upon which they are founded, and
how that Institution ought to be applied to enable it to produce them.

As concerning the Person, whosethat Institution is, little needs to be said,
considering what the Scripture has said concerning Baptism, and the Lord's
Supper, which are the only clear Sacraments of our Religion. For Baptism, and
the Lord's Supper being apparently Christ's own Institutions, and so declared
to be by those Scriptures, which give an account of them; Whatsoever has the
relation of a Sacrament, must have him for its Author, or (as our Church has
expressed it) be ordained by him. Besides, a Sacrament, as such, being both a
conveyer, and a pledge of Grace, the dispensation whereof is entrusted unto
Christ Ephesians. 4, 7. -- 15, 16.
, either that, which pretends to be a Sacrament, must have him for its Author,
or it must not be looked upon under that relation. And thus far we find even
those of Rome to go, because not only representing all the Sacraments of the
New Law as instituted by Jesus Christ our Lord, but pronouncing an Anathema
also Conc. Trid. Sess. 7. Can. 1. de Sacr.
upon those, that shall deny it.

It being therefore not at all to be doubted, whose that Institution is, upon
which the relations of a Sacrament are founded; enquire we in the next place
how that institution ought to be applied, to enable it to produce those
relations. Which must be first by a declaration of the purport thereof, and
secondly by doing those things to the elements, which either the general tenor
of the Christian Religion, or the particular precepts of the Institution prompt
us to the performance of. That I represent the first of these as one of those
things, which makes the Institution of Christ to become effectual toward the
producing of the former relations, or (as it is more commonly expressed) toward
the consecration of those elements, which are to put them on, is partly upon
the account of the necessity of such a declaration, and partly upon the account
of the Commands of him, by whom the Sacraments were instituted. For a Sacrament
being not so clear a representation of that, of which it is so, as by its own
force to suggest it to the minds of those, for whom it was intended; Being much
less so clear a representation of it, as to invite those to reflect upon it,
who are either slow of understanding, or otherwise indisposed to contemplate
it, such as are the generality of men; It cannot but be thought necessary, even
upon that account, to call in the assistance of such words, as may declare to
those, that are concerned, for what ends, and purposes it was appointed.
Otherwise men may either look upon the whole as a purely civil action, or (if
the Person that administers it, and other such like circumstances prompt them
to conceive of it, as a religious one) yet fancy to themselves such ends, and
purposes, as are either different from, or contrary to the true intendment of
it. Agreeable hereto is the command of the Author of our respective Sacraments,
as is evident from what he enjoins concerning Baptism and the Lord's Supper;
His own express injunction concerning the former being, that his Disciples
should baptize men in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, which could not be done without a rehearsal of those names at least; As
concerning the latter, that they should do what they had seen, and heard him
do, as often as that Sacrament was administered, and therefore also make a verbal
declaration concerning it. For though that be not so clear from those words of
our Savior, Do this in remembrance of me, I mean as they lie in St. Luke Luke
22.19.
; yet will it be found to be so, if we take in the Comment of St. Paul 1 Cor.
11, 20. etc.
, where he gives a like account of the Institution of it. For representing what
was then said, and done as a prescription for future 1 Cor. 23.25, 26.
Sacraments, as well as for that of Christ's own immediate consecration;
Representing it moreover as such upon the account of what Christ then enjoined
concerning their doing the same things in remembrance of him, he must
consequently (because he brings in our Savior making a verbal declaration
concerning the purport of that Sacrament, and subjoyns the former injunction to
it) be thought to represent it as our Savior's mind, that they, who
consecrated that Sacrament, should use the same declarations concerning it. But
beside a declaration of the purport of the Institution, and which the Church
has generally kept so close to, as to make that declaration by the very words
Constit. Apost. li. 8. c. 12.
of the Institution, it is no doubt alike necessary, if not more toward the
producing of the former relations, to do those things to the Elements, which
either the general tenor of Christianity, or the particular precepts of the
Institution prompt us to the performance of. For if Prayer be so generally
necessary toward the procuring of any favor, that it becomes such as to the
obtaining of common, and ordinary ones; If it be so far necessary toward them,
as to become such even to the blessing of our ordinary repast 1. Tim. 4.4.5.
, though that be not without a natural aptitude to nourish, and sustain us; How
much more may we think it to be necessary, as to the making of those elements,
which are in no disposition to it, to become the conveyers of the Divine Grace
to those, who are to partake of them. But so the perpetual practice of the
Church will oblige us to believe, and act, as to the one, and other Sacrament,
of our Religion. For though there be not any particular injunction concerning
consecrating the water of Baptism, and I suppose because the necessity thereof
was sufficiently known by what the Scripture has said concerning the general
necessity thereof; Yet as we find Ananias admonishing St. Paul Act. 22.16.
to wash away his sins by Baptism calling upon the name of the Lord, and which,
no doubt, because he Baptized him, the same Ananias went before him in; As we
find farther by Justin Martyr Apolog. 2.
, that they, who were to be baptized, were admonished to fast, and pray, the
Brethren praying, and fasting for, and with them (for these are sufficient
proofs, that some sort of Prayers did always precede it) so we find by those,
who have given a more particular account of the Offices of the Church, that the
Priest did pray particularly Constit. Apost. lib. 7. c. 43. Dionys. Areop.
Eccl. Hier. c. 2.
, that God would look down from Heaven, and sanctify that water, wherein they
were to be Baptized by him. The case is yet more plain as to the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, as shall be made appear, when I come to entreat purposely
concerning it. And therefore I shall only add, that as the Institution of our
respective Sacraments cannot obtain its effect, without doing those things to
the Elements thereof, which the general tenor of Christianity obliges us to
perform, so much less without the doing of those things, which the particular
precepts of the Institution oblige to the practice of. For the force of a
Sacrament depending more immediately upon the Institution of him, whose the
Sacrament is, it must consequently, as to the application of that Institution,
depend more upon the doing of those things, which the particular precepts of
the Institution oblige to the practice of, than upon those, which the more
general, and therefore remoter precepts of Christianity oblige unto. The
consequence whereof, as to the Eucharist, will be, among other things, a
necessity of giving God thanks for those gracious boons, which that Sacrament
was intended both to convey, and assure. The result of the premises is this; A
Sacrament, as such, is a relative thing, it is so in an especial manner as to
the Divine Grace, as which it signifies, and conveyes, and assures. But as
those relations thereof are founded, rather in the institution of the Author of
it, than in the virtue of those elements, in which they are subjected; so in
that again, not so much as delivered by our Savior, as applied to the elements
by a declaration of the purport of it, and by such other Acts as the general
tenor of Christianity, or the particular precepts of the Institution oblige
those, who are the dispensers of a Sacrament, to do to the elements thereof.

I do not at all found the relations of a Sacrament in such Act, or Acts, as
are required of those, that partake of it; Yea though without such Act, or
Acts, they cannot partake of the Graces of it: Partly, because a Sacrament
being an institution of Christ, it must rather depend upon his appointment, and
the facts of those, who act in his behalf, than upon the disposition of such as
are to partake of it; And partly, because a Sacrament, though not conveying, or
assuring the Divine Grace to any, but the worthy Receivers of it, yet is as
really and truly a Sacrament to those, who are otherwise disposed, as it is to
the most worthy ones. As is evident among other things from St. Paul's
affirming the unworthy receiver of the Eucharist to be guilty of the Body 1
Cor. 11.27.
, and Blood of Christ, and again to eat, and drink Damnation to himself, for
not discerning 1 Cor. 11.29.
the Lord's Body. For how come they to be guilty of the Body, and Blood of
Christ by the mere reception of the elements, if those elements be not even to
them a Sacrament of his Body, and Blood? Or how faulty for not discerning in
them the Lord's Body, and Blood, if those elements, which they receive, have
not the relation of a Sacrament to them? Neither will it avail to say, that
such persons may become guilty of Christ's Body, and Blood, because receiving
not as they ought, those elements, which are the signs of them. For as it will
follow from thence, that those elements, which they receive, are so far, at
least, a Sacrament of Christ's Body, and Blood, I mean as that is a sign of
them; so there is reason enough to believe from the way the Apostle takes to
prove the forementioned charge, that those elements were as really a Sacrament
to them in all other respects, as they were in the notion of a sign: Because he
founds that charge of his upon Christ's making those elements the Sacrament of
his Body, and Blood 1 Cor. 11.27.
, and which therefore he must suppose them to be as much to them, as they are
to any person whatsoever. That which I conceive has occasioned men to be
otherwise opinionated, was their conceiving of a Sacrament, not as a means
fitted by Christ to convey, or assure the Divine Grace, and which accordingly,
where it is duly received, actually does so; but as a thing, which is not only
in a disposition to it, but, where it is really a Sacrament, infallibly does so
to all, that partake of it. Which conceit, it may be, they were the more easily
betrayed into by the Scriptures representing it rather as a thing, which
actually sanctifies, and saves, than as a thing, which is only fitted for it.
But as there might be ground enough for such expressions, as those, whether
upon the account of the persons, whom it is so said to sanctify, and save, or
upon the account of there being enough in a Sacrament to do it, where the
parties, that partake of it, are duly qualified for it; so the Scripture has
sometimes so qualified its own assertions by making the due disposition of the
party receiving it to be necessary to procure the other, that we cannot but
look upon a Sacrament, rather as a thing fitted to produce such effects, than
as actually, and infallibly producing them. And indeed, as there is therefore
but reason to conceive so of a Sacrament, even as a means fitted by God, and
Christ to produce those effects, which are attributed to it; so, by thus
stating it, a way is opened to distinguish between the Efficacy of a Sacrament,
and of the Receiver's faith, and accordingly to assign each its proper interest
in the procuring of those Graces, which are attributed to it. For by this means
we shall make a Sacrament, with that blessing of God, which attends it, to be
the sole conferrer, and assurer of those Graces, which is but agreeable to it
as an instrument in the hand of God; And the faith of the party receiving only
the receiver, and applier of the other, which is as agreeable to that hand of
man. For as, if a Sacrament be a means fitted by God for the forementioned
purposes, the conferring, and assuring of those Graces will belong to it, and
that blessing of God, which does accompany it; so nothing therefore will remain
to the faith of the party receiving, but to receive, and apply what the other
does so conferr, and assure. I say, secondly, that as by this means a due
distinction will be made between the efficacy of a Sacrament, and that of the
receiver's faith; so a way will be opened in like manner (without detracting,
in the least, from the efficacy of a Sacrament) to return an answer to what is
advanced, on the one hand, for the opus operatum of all Sacraments, and, on the
other, for making the elements of the Eucharist to be that very Body, and Blood
of Christ, which it was intended to convey. For whereas it is pretended Vid.
Chemnit. Exam. Conc. Trid. Part. 2. in Can. 7, 8. de Sacram.
, in the behalf of the former, and accordingly alleged as a proof of it, that
the efficacy of a Sacrament depends upon the institution of God, and not upon
the dignity of him, that administers it, or the faith of the receiver; I
answer, that that is indeed true, and agreeable enough to our stating the
nature of a Sacrament, but of no force at all to show that opus operatum,
whereof they speak. For as, if a Sacrament be a means fitted by Christ for the
conferring of his Graces, the conferring of those Graces will belong wholly to
it, and that blessing of God, which goes along with it; so if it be a means
rather fitted for the conferring of them, than that, which actually, and
infallibly does, any otherwise than as it is received, and applied, as
Christianity admonishes, there will be a like necessity of the opus operantis,
even of that faith, and repentance, which are required in order to the
reception of them. And it may not unfitly be illustrated by the natural quality
of those elements, which are by Christ made use of for the Sacrament of his own
Body, and Blood. For as of what force soever those elements may be either to
sustain, or refresh us, yet they cannot be expected to do either, unless they
be received, and well digested; so how well fitted soever by the Institution of
God the same elements may be to conferr to higher purposes, yet there is as
little reason to expect they should, unless they be applied by us, as he, who
so instituted them, has admonished. In like manner, whereas it is pretended
Esth. Com. in locum.
from unworthy receivers of the Eucharist being guilty of the Body and Blood of
Christ, that therefore those elements, which they do so receive, are really
that Body, and Blood, and accordingly are actually partook of; That also is
taken away by what we have before said concerning the Eucharists being a means
fitted by Christ for the conveying of them: Because, if it be only such, there
will be place for that guilt, yea though that Body, and Blood of Christ be not
in it, nor received by those, who are partakers of the other; In as much as he
offers a sufficient affront to them, who receives those elements unworthily,
which were by God, and Christ intended, and fitted for the conveying of them. I
may not omit to add, if it were only for that hint, which the former
observation affords us, that we shall, by thus stating the nature of a
Sacrament, imprint also in the minds of men a just apprehension of that guilt,
which arises from an unworthy reception of it For as, if it be fitted by
Christ to convey, or assure the Divine Grace, it must make those, that partake
unworthily thereof, guilty of an equal affront to that Grace, which it is so
fitted to convey, or assure; so if it be not so fitted, the crime will still be
the less, by how much the less relation it has to that Grace, which is
pretended to be violated by the unworthy reception of it. In fine, by stating
the nature of a Sacrament, as is before described, we shall make our account
thereof agree so much the more exactly with that, which our own Catechism
presents us withal; That, though it represent a Sacrament as a means of Grace,
and a pledge of it, yet representing it not as actually, and infallibly such,
but only as ordained by God to be so, and which accordingly, in the event, may
prove such, or not, as it shall be found to be received, and applied.

For the applying of all which to the business, that is now before us, even the
making up of that Definition, which we have been hitherto making way to, I
cannot but admonish, that a Sacrament referring to so many several things, and
referring to them also with so many different relations, it will be hard, or
rather impossible to furnish out any one definition of it, which shall with any
exactness answer to its several properties. For considering a Sacrament with
respect to the Divine Grace, and to which of all others it seems more
especially to relate; so it may, and ought to be defined to be such an outward,
and visible sign thereof, as is moreover ordained, and fitted by Christ to be a
means of conveying it to us, and a pledge to assure us thereof. Considering it
again, with relation to our own piety, and to which no doubt it was also
intended to administer; so it will be such an outward and visible sign thereof,
as is by Christ ordained, and fitted for us to make a declaration of it by, and
an obligation to the continuance of it. Considering it Thirdly, with relation
to that New Covenant, by which the Divine Grace, and our piety are tied
together; so it will be such an outward, and visible sign as is ordained, and
fitted by the same Christ, for God, and Man to declare their consent unto it
by, and either first enter into that Covenant by it, or to renew it.
Considering it lastly, with respect to those, who are joined together in the
same Covenant, and so connected to Christ, and to one another; so it will be
such an outward, and visible sign, as is by Christ ordained, and fitted for a
general badge of their common profession, and a means of bringing particular
men into their Society, or continuing them in the Communion of it. Only if any
man desire a more simple definition of it, and which though it will not answer
to all the properties thereof, yet will at least answer the more especial ones;
so it may not inconveniently be defined to be such an outward, and visible
sign, as is ordained and fitted by Christ to signify, and convey, and assure
the Divine Grace to us, and, on our part, to declare the duty we owe to God,
and Christ, and oblige our selves to the continual practice of it.

PART III. A farther Explication of the Nature of a Sacrament, with a
resolution of several Questions belonging thereunto, or depending more
immmediately upon it.
The Contents.
The Nature of a Saorament brought again under consideration, and enquiry
accordingly made concerning that inward and Spiritual Grace, to which it
relates, the manner of its relation to it, and the foundation of that relation.
This last more particularly insisted upon; and as it was before resolved to be
the Institution of Christ, so a more ample account given thereupon of that
Institution of his, and of those Commands, and Promises, whereof it does
consist. Those Commands again considered with reference to the sacramental
Elements, before they put on that relation, or after they are invested with it.
The former whereof are shown in the general to enjoin the setting them apart
for that purpose, or Consecrating them, and enquiry thereupon made by whom they
ought to be set apart, and whether their intention, or good disposition be
requisite to give force unto it: The latter the Consecrators dispensing them as
the Institutor thereof has prescribed, and the peoples receiving them from
them, with the Manner of it. Upon occasion whereof Enquiry is made, concerning
the necessity of Sacraments, and in what sort, or degree they ought to be
accounted such. A like particular account given of the Promises of the
Institution, which are shown in the general to assure Christ's making what is
done both by the Consecrators, and Receivers to be available for those ends,
for which they were enjoined; More particularly his converting that into a
Sacrament, which is by the former set apart to be so (and which how it is done
is, upon that account, inquired into) and, where the receivers are rightly
disposed, acompanying the dispensation of the Sacramental Elements with the
Dispensation of the Divine Graces. An application of the whole to the business
in hand, and Enquiry accordingly made, how the former Commands, and Promises
contribute toward the Founding a Sacramental Relation, and how also to the
efficacy of the elements, after that Relation is produced in them.

NOW though from what has been said it be competently evident, Question. How
many parts are there in a Sacrament?

Answer. Two; the outward visible sign, and the inward Spiritual Grace.


what the Nature of a Sacrament is, and we thereby at liberty to go on to other
considerations concerning it; Yet because there are some things in it, which
may require a farther Explication, and others, which depend more immediately
upon the due understanding of it, I purpose to go over the definition of it
again, or, at least, over so much of it, as may require a farther Explication,
or Help toward the clearing of the other.

In the general I observe, that as it appears by our own Catechism, and the
definition before given, that a Sacrament consists of an outward, and visible
Sign, and an inward Spiritual Grace; so that more general notion of it stands
confirmed to us by the suffrage of Irenaeus Adv. haer. l. 4. c. 34.
, though by him delivered under another form: He representing the Eucharist,
even after the Invocation of God has past upon it, as consisting of two
things, to wit, an Earthly, and a Heavenly one. And I shall only add, that they
seem not to be over mindful of it, who make the Sign, or Earthly part of the
Eucharist to vanish, as soon as the thing signified by it, or the Heavenly one
approaches: A Sign in the common understanding of it, together with that
relation whereby it becomes so, and those accidents, wherein it is immediately
founded, connoting the Subject of them both, and therefore not with reason to
be predicated of that Sacrament, which has no such Subject to uphold them.

But because there is otherwise no great Controversy concerning the general
notion of a Sacrament, nor yet so far, concerning that particular one I before
gave, as to its being an outward, and visible Sign of that, of which it is a
Sacrament; Therefore pass we both from the one, and the other, to that Heavenly
thing, to which it relates, the manner of its relation to it, and the
foundation of that relation.

Now as the first of these has been before defined to be an inward, and
Spiritual Grace, as that again declared to be such a Grace, or favor of God,
as conduces in an especial manner to the welfare of our inward Man, or Spirit;
so I must now add, for the farther Explication of it, that it is moreover such
a Grace, as conduces immediately to the welfare of it: Whether as purifying
the soul from the filth of sin, and introducing the contrary affections, or as
delivering it from that guilt, which the filth of sin had brought upon it. A
notion, which stands confirmed to us, not only by the Doctrine of our own
Catechism, but by the account the Scripture gives us both of Baptism and the
Eucharist, and the confesons of the Romanists themselves. Witness for the
first, its declaring the inward, and Spiritual Grace of Baptism to be a death
unto sin, and a new birth unto Righteousness, as the inward grace of the
Eucharist to be the Body, and Blood of Christ, and by which (as it afterward
follows) our Souls are strengthened, and refreshed, as our bodies are by the
outward elements thereof; Witness, for the second, its representing Baptism as
a thing, which sanctifies Ephesians. 5.26.
, and saves 1 Pet. 3.21.
, and both that Act. 2.38.
, and the Eucharist Matt. 26.28.
as things, which tend to the remission of Sins; Witness, for the third, their
great Schoolman Aquinas Sum. 3. Part. quaest. 60. Art. 2.
representing a Sacrament as a sign of such a Sacred thing, as procures the
sanctification of us. Which is the rather to be noted, because of the use it
will hereafter be of toward the determining the Number of those things, which
are to be accounted of as Sacraments of our Religion.

Concerning the relation a Sacrament bears to the object of it, and
particularly to that Grace, to which it especially referrs, I have nothing to
add, and shall not therefore bring it again under consideration. I shall only
observe, from what has been before said concerning it, that it is an
instrument of Grace, as well as a pledge of it, that it is a moral instrument
thereof, and not a physical one, that it is such a moral instrument thereof, as
is rather apt to convey, or produce it, than that which actually, and
infallibly does; The actual conveying of that Grace depending upon the due
disposition of the party receiving it, and who (as St. Paul speaks) if he be
not rightly qualified for it, will rather reap Damnation by it, than either the
Divine Graces, or the rewards of them. Which things I have this second time
made mention of, not because they were not before sufficiently cleared, but
because they lay dispersedly in my former account of this relation, and so
would have been less useful toward the forming a distinct conception of it.

That, which will especially require our second thoughts, is the foundation of
that, and other the relations of a Sacrament; The which as I have affirmed in
the general to be the Institution of Christ, so the farther consideration of
that Institution will both lead us to a more distinct knowledge of the nature
of a Sacrament, and inform us concerning the necessity, and efficacy thereof.
Now as there are two things, which that Institution does manifestly import,
that is to say a Command, and a Promise; so that Command again respects the
elements of a Sacrament, either as being to put on that relation, or as
actually invested with it. In the former of these regards it commands the
setting them apart for that purpose, but more especially (because that is the
principal design of a Sacrament) for their becoming a means of conveying the
Divine Graces to us. Which, as was before observed, it either prescribes
particular rules for, or remits men for them to the general precepts of
Christianity, so far as they are applicable thereto. And I shall only add
(because those rules were before declared) that, to make the elements put on
the relation of a Sacrament, there is a necessity of applying that part of the
Institution to them by the execution of those Commands, which it enjoins:
Because the setting them apart for that purpose is, by the Institution it self,
put into the hands of men. But of what men, and how qualified, I have not as
yet declared, and shall therefore now set my self to enquire.

And here in the first place it is easy to see, by what is delivered in the
general concerning the power of remitting sins, or in particular concerning the
power of Baptism, that the Separation or Consecration of the elements is the
proper work of the Ministers of the Gospel, and ought accordingly to be left to
them to perform: Because as both the one, and the other were by Christ
committed to his Apostles, so none can therefore pretend to the power of
either, but those who derived it from them, which none but the Ministers of the
Gospel have. It is no less easy to see secondly, that as the Separation, or
Consecration of the elements is the proper work of the Ministers of the Gospel,
even by the Institution of Christ; so it cannot therefore, ordinarily at least,
be attempted without sin by others, because a deviation from his Institution.
And thus far all, who acknowledge a Ministerial Function, are at an accord in
this particular, and the farther prosecution thereof no way necessary to be
intended. I say therefore thirdly, that as the Separation, or Consecration of
the elements cannot, ordinarily at least, be attempted without sin by other
than the Ministers of the Gospel; so there is reason enough to believe, even
from thence, that those elements cannot ordinarily have the relation of a
Sacrament by any others Consecration, than theirs. For beside that the Promise
of Christ is not to be supposed to extend any farther, than those Commands, to
which it is annexed, are observed; Neither can we think he will vouchsafe his
benediction to that Action, which without any necessity at all varies from his
own Institution: This being to encourage men to go against his own Institution,
which no wise Institutor can be supposed to give way to. All therefore, that
can be supposed to admit of a dispute in this affair, is, whether in
extraordinary Cases (and where a lawful Minister cannot be had) other Persons
may take upon them to Consecrate, and Administer it; And whether, if they do
so, what they do is so far valid, as to make that, which they pretend to
Consecrate, and Administer, to have the relation of a Sacrament. But as it
would be considered whether it were not equally advisable for such Persons to
let alone altogether the Consecration, and Administration thereof; Because
Christ may as well supply to men the want of the Sacraments themselves, as the
defects of those, who pretend to Consecrate, and Administer them: As it would
be considered farther, whether it were not much more advisable to do so,
because he, who omits the Consecration, or Administration of a Sacrament, that
belongs not properly to him, is certainly guilty of a far less error, than he
who arrogates to himself that, which does not appear to appertain unto him; so
if a Sacrament so Consecrated, or Administered, be either lawful, or valid (as I
will not be very forward to deny it, considering the Authorities Vid. Tert. de
Bapt. c. 7. and quae annotavit Hookerus noster Eccl. Pol. l. 5. Sect. 62.
it has for it) it must become so by the either express, or tacit allowance of
those, to whom the Administration of it is regularly committed. For the
Institutor of a Sacrament, and by whom alone it can become such, having put
into their hands the preparation of it, I see not how any thing can become
such, which is not either mediately, or immediately set apart by their
Authority, and Ministry.

It appearing from the Premises, to whom the separation, or Consecration of the
elements does belong, and so far therefore also the producing of a sacramental
relation in them; Enquire we in the next place how those persons ought to be
farther qualified, to enable them to make that Separation, or Consecration;
Which I shall not stick to affirm to be simply, and only by keeping, as to the
outward work, to the Institution of our Savior. For though much more may be
required of them, yea undoubtedly is, to make that Act of theirs available to
their own welfare, and acceptance; Even the intending what they are about, not
only with a present mind, but with a sound, and religious one; Yet cannot the
like be supposed to be required, to make that Act of theirs available toward
the Consecrating of those elements into a Sacrament: Partly because if such an
intention were required in those, that Consecrate, no man could have any
tolerable assurance of his receiving a valid Sacrament, because having no such
assurance of their intention; And partly, because that Act of theirs is a
Ministerial Act, and must not therefore depend for its force, upon the personal
intentions or qualifications of those, that exercise it, but upon that
Authority, from which it proceeds, and upon its serving the ends, and
intentions of those principal Agents, to which it is appointed to minister.
Which ends, and intentions if it can serve in this affair by an outward
conformity to the rules of Christ's Institution, nothing more can be supposed
to be required either of it, or those, that exercise it, to give it that force,
whereof we speak. That therefore would in the next place be inquired into,
which accordingly I will now set my self to do.

For the clearing whereof we are first to know, that as of old the Priests
under the Law were ordained Heb. 1.5. and Philo de special. l^g (...).
by God for men in things pertaining to God, partly to offer up to him, in
their names, Gifts, and Sacrifices for sin, and partly to convey from God to
them graces, and benefits; so we are, in like manner, to conceive of the
Priests under the Gospel, as being not only the Ministers of God, and Christ,
but appointed too, on the one hand, to dispense their mysteries 1 Cor. 4.1.
, and graces to the Church, and, on the other hand, to offer up the Churches
Prayers, and Services to them. From whence as it will follow, that those
principal Agents, to which they minister, are God, and Christ, on the one hand,
and Christ's Church, and People under the other; so that the end of the former
is to convey, by their means, their own graces, and blessings, of the latter to
offer up those Prayers, and other Services, which are due from the Church to
them. Those therefore being the Principal Agents, to which the Evangelical
Priesthood ministers, and those their respective ends, and intentions; the next
thing to be inquired into is, which of those Principal Agents it is, to which
the Evangelical Priesthood ministers in those acts which respect the
Consecration of a Sacrament. Which I shall not stick to affirm, from what was
before said concerning those Acts, to be the Church, and People of God. For
that, which the Minister does toward the Consecration of a Sacrament, being
principally, at least, the offering up of Prayers and Praises, he must
consequently (because those are the duties of the Church to God, and Christ) be
thought to minister to the Church in them, and so have that for his Principal
Agent. From whence as it will follow thirdly, that the end to which he is to
serve, is the offering up, in the behalf of the Church, such Prayers, and
Praises, as are by the Institution of Christ imposed upon it (because that is
the end of the Church in all such Administrations); so he shall sufficiently
serve that end, who shall only rehearse such Prayers and Praises, wherever, or
whatsoever his intention be: Because the Church may as well offer up its
Prayers, and Praises by the voice of him, that intends them not, as by the
voice of him, that does. And I have been the more particular in the Explication
of this affair, partly to make it farther evident, that the validity of a
Sacrament depends not upon the intention of the Minister, but much more to show
from thence, that those acts, which are done by him toward the Consecration of
the Sacramental elements, do not, by the either absence, or perverseness of his
intention, cease to be religious, and so incapable of inducing God to consider
of them, or give force unto them: Because as those Acts are rather the
Churches, than his (the Minister being in this affair but the Instrument
thereof) so his want of Intention, and Devotion, may be abundantly supplied by
the others, and those Acts thereby become both Religious and valid.

From that Command, which respects the elements, before they put on the
relation of a Sacrament, pass we on to that Command, which considers them as
invested with it; Which again we shall find to have a double reference. For it
may either concern those, in special, who have so set apart, or Consecrated
them, or both them (if they are also to be the receivers of them) and all
others, for whose sanctification they are intended. Upon the former of these it
enjoins the dispensing, or bestowing of what they have so Consecrated, as that
too in such a manner, and with such solemnities, as the Institutor thereof has
prescribed. It enjoins upon them farther, for their own souls health, to
dispense them with a suitable intention, and devotion of soul; As without which
what they do cannot otherwise be profitable to themselves. But it does not so
enjoin that intention, and devotion, that what they dispense, shall, for the
want thereof, be in like manner unprofitable to others: Because, as we already
suppose the elements to have put on the relation of a Sacrament, and so far
therefore to be in a capacity to profit those, to whom they are dispensed; so
it is Christ, and not the Minister, who must dispense the Graces of the
Sacrament, and the effect of that Sacrament therefore depend, not upon the
Minister's intention, and purpose, but upon the intention, and purpose of
Christ, whose Instrument, and Minister he is. As will appear yet more clearly,
when I come to consider the Promises of the Institution, the second thing,
whereof I affirmed it to consist. Only, as that Command of it, which I am now
entreating of, does as well respect those, for whose sanctification the
Sacraments were intended, as those who are the Consecraters, and Dispensers of
them; so I must therefore admonish first of all, that as that part of the
Institution of Christ enjoins upon his Ministers the dispensation of the
Sacraments, so it must consequently enjoin the receipt, or use of them by all
that are capable thereof, as without which the former injunction would be vain.
I say, secondly, that as it enjoins upon all, that are capable thereof, the
receipt, or use of the Sacraments; so it enjoins their receipt, or use of them
under the relation of Sacraments, and particularly (because that is the
principal relation of a Sacrament) as a means appointed by Christ for the
conveying of the Divine Graces. Which is so true as to those Sacraments, which
are the only clear, and undoubted ones, and by which, if there be any such, the
other are to be judged, that men are expressly called upon to be Baptized Act.
2.38.
for the remission of sins, and as expressly admonished by our Savior to take
the elements of the Eucharist Matt. 26.26, etc. Luke 22.19.
, as that Body which was given for them, and as that Blood, which was shed for
them, and others, for the same remission of sins. From whence as it will
follow, that those Sacraments are of necessary use, as which both the one, and
the other injunction oblige us to believe; so they are also so necessary by
virtue of the former, that they cannot be neglected without sin, and by the
latter, if not the former, that men cannot hope for the graces of them, where
those Sacraments are in like manner neglected. For beside that every neglect of
a Command is, as such, a sin against the imposer of it, and must consequently
not only despoil us of his favor, but expose us also to his Wrath, and
Vengeance; Beside that that neglect must be yet more sinful, and dangerous,
which is a neglect of such a Command, as is enjoined for the Subjects profit;
He, who commands this, or that particular for such, or such an end, must
thereby be presumed to declare, that he will not give it in any other way, than
that, which is prescribed by him: Because otherwise a gap would be open to the
Violation of his Authority, which every wise Lawgiver must be supposed to
provide against. Neither will it avail to say, that there are other means,
beside Sacraments, for the attaining of the Divine Graces, and such as God has
promised to reward with the bestowing of them; Of which nature are our
attendance to the word, and Prayer. For as it does not appear, that these are
any where represented as sufficient of themselves for that purpose, and
therefore the Divine Graces not to be expected by them alone; so they can
however be no farther represented as such, than as made use of by men out of a
due regard to his Authority, and wisdom, by whom they are imposed on them:
Which cannot be supposed to be there, where any one prescribed mean is
neglected, because the same Authority, and Wisdom will lead to the observation
of it. As little will it avail to say, that the Divine Graces have been
sometime bestowed without them, and the Sacraments therefore not to be
accounted as necessary to the attaining of them. For as the question is not
now, Whether Sacraments are so necessary, that the graces thereof can, in no
case, be hoped for without them, but whether they can be hoped for, where the
Sacraments are neglected; so that they are so far necessary will need no other
proof, than the enjoining of Baptism to those, who may seem, if any, to have
attained the graces thereof without it. For so we find St. Peter to have done
as to Cornelius Act. 10.48.
, and his company; Yea though Cornelius had before his Preaching, received a
Divine approbation of his Prayers, and Alms, and, after that, that gift of the
Holy Ghost, for the procuring whereof we find Baptism to have been especially
Act. 2.38.
ordained. For well may we look upon that Sacrament as so far necessary to
obtain the Divine Graces, the use whereof was commanded even to those men, who
had in a great measure before attained them. The only thing, that seems to me
to admit of any doubt, is whether Sacraments be so far necessary, that the
Divine Graces cannot be had without them, or at least cannot with any assurance
be expected by us. But as the single example of the Thief upon the Cross (to
say nothing now of that of Cornelius) may suffice to persuade, that no
Sacrament is so necessary, but that the Graces thereof may be had without it:
As the benignity of the Divine nature, and those Graces God has sometime given
even to unbaptized persons, may serve in like manner to persuade men, that if
that, or any other Sacrament be wanting without their fault, it shall be
otherwise supplied to them; So I cannot forbear to say, that such persons have
not the same Assurance with that, which Baptized persons have. Partly, because
they have no promise to bottom their assurance on, and partly, because God, who
may annex what conditions he pleases to his own favors, has made those
Sacraments, whereof we speak, the standing means of obtaining them. I will
conclude what I have to say concerning that part of the Institution, which
enjoins the receipt, or use of the Sacraments, when I have admonished in the
third place, that it requires our coming to it with certain previous
qualifications in order to our receiving the benefit thereof. Which is so
notorious as to Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, and will hereafter be so
largely insisted on, that I shall content my self with the bare mention of it.
All that I at present aim at, is to give a general account of what it enjoins,
and which having now in some measure done, I shall proceed to consider of what
it promises, which is the second thing whereof I affirmed the Institution of a
Sacrament to consist.

For the clearing whereof we are first to know, that though those Promises,
whereof we speak, are not always so express, as its Commands must be
acknowledged to have been; Yet will it not be difficult for us to evince the
being of such Promises, nor, after that, to show what things it makes a promise
of. For supposing, as we now may (because I have heretofore evinced it) that
the Institution of Christ enjoins the Administration, and use of the Sacraments
for the bringing about those gracious purposes, which they have no natural
aptness to produce, and we must also suppose it to make a promise of Christ's
making them effectual for those purposes, for which they were so enjoined by
him. Because otherwise those Commands of his would give hope of such things, as
were not likely to accrue by the observation of them, and so (which is not to
be supposed of the Commands of Christ) prove delusory ones. Only as he, who
instituted those Sacraments for our benefit, cannot well be thought to omit any
thing, which may encourage our expectation of it; so we find both him, and his
Apostles sometime to make express promises of those things, which the
Sacraments were intended to convey. For thus after our Savior had commanded
the Administration of the Sacrament of Baptism to all, whom they could dispose
to the reception of it, the more to encourage them to intend the doing of it,
he makes a promise of being Matt. 28.19, 20.
with them in it, and consequently that their ministry, at least, should not
fail of its intended effect in the Consecration, and Administration of it. In
like manner, after St. Peter had called upon those to be Baptized, whom God had
stirred up by his precedent Preaching, to enquire after the means of Salvation;
He does not only insinuate their obtaining remission of sins by it, by calling
upon them to be Baptized in order to it, but assure them also in express terms
Act. 2.38.
, which he could not have done without a promise from Christ, that, if they
were so Baptized, they should receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.

It appearing from the Premises, that the Institution of Christ is not without
its promises, and such too, as are sometime delivered in express terms; Enquire
we in the next place what those promises are, or rather what things they make a
promise of. Which, in the general, will be found to be, Christ's making what is
done both by Minister, and People, in obedience to his Commands, to be a
vailable to those ends, for which they were enjoined. For neither otherwise
could he have said, that he would be with the former in those Acts of theirs,
and much less could St. Peter have assured to the latter the receiving of those
Graces, which Baptism was intended to convey. But from thence it will follow
more particularly, that the Institution of Christ makes a promise to the
Minister, that he will convert that into a Sacrament, which is by him set apart
to be so, and where the party, that is to receive it, is duly qualified for it,
accompany his Dispensation of it with the Dispensation of the Divine Graces; To
such of the People again, as receive the Sacrament as they ought, that they
shall receive together with it, those Graces which it was intended to convey:
Those being the ends, for which the former Acts were enjoined, and the Promise
of Christ therefore supposed to assure, that, if those Acts be performed, they
shall become available for them. It will follow lastly, that, as there is a
promise of the things before remembered, answerably to the several Acts, which
the Commanding part of the Institution enjoins; so that Promise being the
Promise of him, who has power enough to accomplish it, and is of too much
fidelity, and truth not to fulfill, what he may, it is as little to be doubted,
but what he has so promised he will not fail to accomplish, as often as what
he enjoins is performed. Which last particular I have the rather remarked,
because as the Commands of the Institution cannot make way for the blessings of
a Sacrament, till they come to be fulfilled by those, on whom they are imposed;
so neither can the promises thereof help us to them, till they come to be
executed, and applied by him, whose those Promises are: A Promise, (because
importing only a will to conferr a favor) requiring the reducing of that will
to Act, in order to the availableness thereof.

An account being thus given of that Institution of Christ, which I have said
to be the foundation of the relation of a Sacrament, it will not be difficult
to show first, how that, and each part thereof contribute to the founding of
it. For as that Institution of Christ may be considered under a double notion,
to wit either as simply such, or as executed, and applied; so the Institution
of Christ, in the former notion of it, is the more remote foundation of it; in
the latter the more near, and immediate. For it being by virtue of Christ's
Command, as such, that the elements come to be set apart by men for the purpose
of a Sacrament, and by virtue of his own Promise, that he himself gives them
the relation of one; That Institution, which is made up of them, must, as such,
be thought a remote foundation of it, because the foundation of those Acts,
which are done by men, and Christ toward the producing of it. Again, it being
more immediately by what is done by men, that the elements come to be so set
apart, and by what is done, on the other side by Christ, that they come to have
the relation of a Sacrament, the more near, and immediate foundation of it must
be the same Institution not considered as such, but as executed, and applied by
those, to whom it appertains. From whence as it will follow, that the
Institution of Christ, and the several parts thereof contribute to the founding
of this relation by that obedience, which is paid to its commands, and by that
completion, which is given to its promises, because it is by those means that
they are executed, and applied; so nothing more therefore can be required
toward the clearing of it, than to show at once what those Commands and
Promises import, because that will let us know what obedience is due to the
one, and what completion, or fulfilling to the other.

Of the Commands of the Institution I have already sufficiently entreated, and
shall therefore need only briefly to recapitulate what I have said concerning
them. Which, so far, as concerns our present purpose, may be done by saying,
that they enjoin in the general the Ministers setting apart the elements in
order to their becoming a Sacrament, more particularly by imploring the
blessing of God, and Christ upon them, or (as the Church has used to express
it) the sanctification of them. Which Commands, as they tend rather to prepare
the elements to be a Sacrament, than to produce that relation in them (for he,
who begs of another the doing of this, or that particular, shows the doing of
that thing not to belong unto himself) so will make the Minister's compliance
with, and execution of them to contribute no farther to the founding of that
relation, than as that is, by the Institution of Christ, to make way for some
other Act, or Acts, whereby that relation is to be produced.

From the Commands of the Institution therefore, and that obedience which is
due to them, pass we to the Promises thereof, and of which also I have before
given no contemptible account. For which cause I shall only observe here, that
there is, among those Promises, a Promise from Christ to the Minister, that he
will be with him in his ministration, and therefore also make what he does,
available for those ends, for which it was enjoined; That he will consequently
(because that is the end of his ministration in the Consecration of a
Sacrament) make those elements to be a Sacrament, which were by the Minister
set apart to be so; But by what way, and means, as I have not as yet taken upon
me to show, so I know not whether I ought to be over positive in defining. I
shall only represent as a thing, which seems most probable to me, That as God
sanctifies our ordinary repast by his own word 1 Timothy 4.5.
, even by that word of command, by which he made the creatures to be Genesis 1.3.
etc.
at first, and by which he does as yet uphold Heb. 1.3.
them, so when the elements of a Sacrament are before prepared by Prayer, and
such other means as Christ himself has prescribed, the same God, or rather
Christ, by his appointment, passes his word of power upon them, and thereby
commands them, not to become actually the conveyers of his Grace (for that
requires another word of power, or rather his accompanying the Dispensation of
them with the Dispensation of his Grace) but to be in a readiness to be so. By
which means (as was before said) they are fitted for that gracious purpose, and
accordingly, if they prove not effectual for it, it is not, because they were
not before ordained and fitted for it, but because the persons, to whom those
Sacramental elements are dispensed being not duly prepared for such a favor,
He, who commanded the Sacramental elements to be in a readiness for it, does
not make use of them for it, nor accompany the Dispensation of them with the
Dispensation of his Grace. This I take to be that Act, whereby the Institutor
of the Christian Sacraments produces in the elements thereof that Sacramental
relation, whereof we speak; But as whatever the Act be, by which that relation
is produced, most certain it is that it cannot be any Act of man, so it is
evident from thence, and from the promises of the Institution, that it must be
some Act of Christ in pursuance of them, and which whilst he does so fulfill,
he gives birth to that Sacramental relation, which the Act, or Acts of the
Minister did only make way for, as that too by the sole force of Christ's
Commands.

The elements being thus invested with the relation of a Sacrament, and so
fitted, in particular, to convey the Divine Graces; It remains that the
Minister dispense them to Gods People in that way and manner, which he has
prescribed, and that they accordingly receive them with those qualifications,
which are by the same Christ required of them. As without the former whereof
there can be no hope of the Ministers approving himself unto Christ, nor can
the people, without both, expect to reap that benefit by them, which they were
so fitted to convey. For the validity, and efficacy of Sacraments depending
upon the good will of him, that instituted them, and not upon any virtue of
their own, or the power of him that consecrates them, neither can men expect
any benefit thereby, where there is not a due compliance with his Laws, by whom
they were so instituted, and ordained. But as if those Laws be compli'd with,
there can be no doubt of a happy issue, considering the Promises of Christ to
the due Administration, and Reception of them; so that is enough to show the
efficacy thereof, where they are so administered, and received: There being no
doubt of the efficacy of those things, which have the Promises of Christ to
assure them, because no doubt at all of his fulfilling those Promises, and so
giving efficacy to the other. And I shall only add, that as what is done by the
Minister toward the producing of a Sacramental relation, does rather make way
for it, than actually produce it; (this being the proper work of the Institutor
of a Sacrament in pursuance of his own Promises:) So the like is to be said, as
to the efficacy of the elements, after that relation is produced in them. For
though those elements become not effectual for the ends, for which they were
appointed, unless they be both dispensed, and received as they ought; yet does
that dispensation, and reception rather make way for, than give them their
respective efficacy; It being God Tit. 3.5.
, or rather Christ, by his appointment (and not either the Minister, or our
selves) which saves us by the washing of regeneration, and the renewing of the
Holy Ghost, and the same Christ Ephesians. 5.26.
, who sanctifies, and cleanses his Church, by the washing of water through
the word. Which will consequently oblige us to look upon God, and Christ as the
Authors of the efficacy of Sacraments, as well as of the Sacraments themselves,
and accordingly depend upon them for it, and return them thanks, when we have
obtained it.

PART IV. Of the Jewish SACRAMENTS, and the Number of the Christian.
The Contents.
The Doctrine of the Sacraments drawn down to particulars, and enquiry first
made concerning the Jewish Sacraments, and then concerning the Christian ones.
As to the former whereof is shown first, that there were indeed such Sacraments
among them, and evidence made thereof, from their enjoying the same Saving
Graces, which our Sacraments pretend to convey, from their being furnished
alike with External Symbols to convey them, and those Symbols of God, and
Christ's institution: Secondly, that those Sacraments of theirs were either the
extraordinary ones they had in their passage from Egypt to Canaan, as their
Baptism in the Cloud, and in the Sea, and the Eucharist of Manna, and the Water
of the Rock, or the ordinary ones of Circumcision, and the Passover; Thirdly,
That, though they were of the same general nature with the Christian, yet they
differed from them, both as to the manner of their representing the Divine
Graces, which was not so clear, and as to the measure of conveyance of them,
which was not so full, as in the Christian Sacraments. Those Christian
Sacraments, in the next place, brought under consideration, and evidence made
of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper being the only true, and proper ones, or of
general necessity to Salvation.

THE Nature of a Sacrament being thus explained, and a resolution given of such
questions, as belong to it, or depend more immediately on it; It will be but
time for us to descend to Particular ones, whether they be such, as preceded
Christianity, and have the name of Jewish, or such as were enjoined by it, and
any therefore more properly be termed Christian. This only would be premised
concerning the former Sacraments, that as we make them to have their birth
before Christianity, so we must therefore suppose them not to have had the
Author of it for their immediate Institutor, or, at least, not as God-Man,
which is the notion, wherein Christianity considers him: He, to whom we give
the title of Christ, becoming not God-Man, till long after the Institution of
those Sacraments, and when indeed they were to be abolished. Which will
consequently oblige us to consider those Sacraments (if there were any such)
rather as to those purposes, for which we have affirmed all Sacraments to have
been ordained, than as to the immediate ordainer of them; Or, if also as to the
immediate ordainer of them, yet not in the same capacity, wherein Christianity
considers him, but only as appointed by God to be so, when the time of his
Manifestation should appear.

Now there are three things to be inquired into, as concerning those
Sacraments, which are to be the subject of our present consideration; First,
Whether there were any such among the Jews, Secondly, What those Sacraments
were, Thirdly, Wherein they differed from ours.

I. That there were such things, as Sacraments among the Jews, will appear if
these three things be considered; First, that the same Graces, which Sacraments
profess to convey, prevailed among them, as well as us, Secondly, That they had
external signs, or symbols to convey those Graces to them, Thirdly, that those
external signs, or symbols were instituted by God, and Christ.

Of the first of these I have given an account elsewhere Expl. of the Creed, in
the words, Our Lord.
, and shall therefore referr my Reader thither, for his farther satisfaction.
All I shall observe from thence is, that they partook of Christ, as well as we,
and must therefore be supposed to have partaken of his Graces, which are the
Graces all Sacraments were intended to convey.

But neither will there be less evidence concerning their being furnished with
certain external sions, to convey from God to them the forementioned graces.
For St. Paul 1 Cor. 10.1, etc.
, where he affirms the Jews to have partaken of Christ, and his Graces,
affirming in like manner that they did it, as by a Baptism on the one hand, so
by eating, and drinking on the other, must consequently be supposed to affirm,
that they did it by the means of such symbols, as our Sacraments are, and
therefore also, that they were not unfurnished with them. Other wise there
could have been no place for giving the former means the name of Baptism, and
much less for expressing the latter by the terms of eating, and drinking, or
that drinking again by drinking of that Rock, which followed them. For as the
foregoing mention of Baptism, which was one of the Christian Sacraments, could
not but incline the Corinthians to interpret what followed concerning the Jews
eating, and drinking, of a Sacramental one, especially, when it is also
affirmed that they partook of Christ by it; so much more, when they saw the
Apostle expressing that drinking by drinking of that Rock, that followed them,
or rather of the Water, that flowed from it. For that being manifestly an
allusion to the Water, that flowed out of that Rock which was sometime smitten
Numb. 20.11.
by Moses, and by the drinking whereof the Jews were a long time sustained;
Neither could the Corinthians look upon that Rock, to which he alluded, as
other than a figure of Christ; Nor therefore (considering their own Sacraments,
as such, which did also convey what they were figures of) as other, than such a
figure of Christ, as conveyed to the believing Jews Christ's graces, and
benefits, which are the spiritual waters, that flow from him. Two things only
there are, that may seem to prejudice this notion, and which therefore it may
not be amiss to consider; First, That the former Baptism is affirmed by St.
Paul himself 1 Cor. 10.2.
to have been a Baptism into Moses, and not into Christ, and his Graces;
Secondly, That what is affirmed to have been to the Jews spiritual meat, and
drink, was also their constant temporal one, and which therefore if we affirm
to have been a Sacrament of Christ's graces, and benefits, must have made that
Sacrament to have been as ordinary, as their Meals: Which how the Jews should
be always in a disposition for, is not easy to imagine, and therefore as
difficult to believe the Institution of. As touching the former of these, even
that Baptism's being styled a Baptism into Moses, it would not be easy to give
an account, were it not that the Verses, which follow, persuade the design of
the Apostle to have been to show the Jews to have enjoyed the same Christian
Graces with our selves: Because the Baptizing into Moses seems most naturally
to denote the baptizing into his Religion, as that may seem to have been
distinguished from, and opposed to that of Christ; For so we know the Economy
of Moses is generally taken by the Scriptures Joh. 1.17.
, and ought therefore, if there were nothing to hinder it, to be alike
interpreted here. But as the same is not to be said, where the design of the
Apostle is to show, that the Jews partook with us of the same Graces, and
Benefits; So nothing there fore can hinder our affixing a like sense to the
former Baptism, if we can give a tolerable account of its being said to be a
Baptism into Moses. Which may be done by representing it as a Baptism into that
Economy of our Redemption, which prevailed under Moses, and of which he was
the Minister of God unto the people, as well as of the Law. For thus the
Baptism, which John administered, is represented as Matt. 21.25.
his Baptism, even when it is intimated by our Savior to have been a Baptism
from Heaven, and so more the Baptism of that, than of the other. If therefore
there lie any just exception against the being of these Jewish Sacraments, it
must be upon the account of their supposed Eucharist's being also their
constant temporal food, and which it is not easy to imagine they should be
always in a disposition for, or therefore believe it was ever intended by God
as such. But as it appears from the Acts of the Apostles Act. 2.46.
, that our Eucharist was almost of the same ordinary usage at the first, which
may take off in some measure from the force of that Objection; So nothing
hinders us from believing, that that Meat, and Drink of the Jews being designed
for a temporal, as well as a Spiritual refreshment, it might be sometime, yea,
for the most part, appointed only for the former (to wit, when the satisfying
of their bodily necessities called for their regard) but at other times, though
less frequently, appointed, and used for the latter, and accordingly
accompanied with such Prayers, and Praises, as were proper for that
consideration of it, and received with alike religious preparations, and
disposition. For even the elements of our Eucharist, though appointed by Christ
as the Sacrament of his Body, and Blood, yet are not always used as such; But
only, when they are by God's Priests set apart for that purpose, and his
spiritual Benediction, and Grace invoked on them.

I will conclude what I have to say concerning the Being of the former
Sacraments, when I have added thereto their being ordained by God, and Christ,
for the gracious purposes before remembered. Of the former whereof as we cannot
reasonably doubt, because nothing less than a Divine Institution could make
them the conveyers of Christ's Graces; so as little of the latter, if we
consider what has been elsewhere Expl. of the Creed, in the words, Our Lord.
said concerning Christ's governing even then, and the Apostles exhorting the
Corinthians, immediately after 1 Cor. 10.9.
, not to tempt Christ, as the Israelites did, and were destroyed by Serpents
for it. For as it is not to be imagined, how the Israelites could tempt Christ,
unless they had been even then under his conduct; So if Christ had the conduct
of them, there is as little doubt of his being the Institutor of their
Sacraments, because that was a considerable part of it.

II. There being therefore no doubt of the Being of Sacraments among the Jews,
which was the first thing we proposed to consider; Enquire we in the next
place, what those their Sacraments were, and which we shall find to be either
Extraordinary, or Ordinary. Extraordinary those which were just before recited,
even their being baptized in the Cloud, and in the Sea, and their partaking of
Manna, and of the Water of the Rock; Manna being no doubt the spiritual meat
St. Paul speaks of, both because their then only repast, and the bread Exodus
16.4.
, that came down from Heaven; As the water of the Rock their spiritual Drink,
and so yet more plainly declared by him. And I have the rather given to them
the name of Extraordinary Sacraments, because as they had them only, during
their passage through the Wilderness; so they had them too, when their ordinary
Sacraments ceased, which is the proper season for extraordinary ones. As will
appear if we can show (what I shall by and by endeavor) that Circumcision, and
the Passover were their ordinary ones; It being certain from the Book of Joshua
Josh. 5.5.
, that, from the time of the Israelites going out of Egypt, till their coming
to Gilgal, none of the Israelites were circumcised, and as certain too from the
same place Josh. 5.10.
, that they had not till then any Passover; That, as it is the first time
wherein the observation of it is mentioned after their coming out of Egypt, so
being the first time also, wherein they were in a capacity to observe it,
because not till then furnished, or at least not ordinarily, with that earthly
Bread, wherewith their Passover was required to be observed.

From those their Extraordinary Sacraments therefore pass we to their Ordinary
ones, and which as I have already intimated to be Circumcision, and the
Passover, so I must now manifest to be so, but it must be by other Arguments,
than are commonly alleged for it. For as for what is alleged from St. Paul's
representing the Circumcision of Abraham Tom. 4.11.
as a Seal of that righteousness, which he had being yet uncircumcised, it
seems to me to make nothing at all for it; Because (as was before Supra Part II.
shown) rather intended to denote God's approbation of his particular
Righteousness, than any declaration of the nature of the thing it self. But as
therefore I cannot see, what can be argued from thence toward proving
Circumcision to have been a Sacrament; So I shall choose rather to evince it
from the Institution of it, as where, if any where, the design thereof is most
clearly set down. Now the first thing observable from thence is, that
Circumcision was a Sign, as our Sacraments are, and so far therefore of the
nature of them. For this (says God) shall be a sign, or token Genesis 17.10.
of the Covenant between me and you; That is to say, as was before Genesis 17.7.
expressed, between God on the one hand, and Abraham, and his Seed on the
other. It is alike observable, secondly, that as Circumcision was a sign, yea a
sign of that Covenant, which God then proposed between himself, and the
forementioned persons; So it was such a sign too, as was also of the Essence of
it, and till the passing whereof it was not to be looked upon as struck. Which
I gather not only from its being styled a Covenant Genesis 17.10.
, as well as a sign of it, yea more often a Covenant, than the other, but from
God's affirming it to be that Covenant, which ought to be kept Ibid.
between him, and them, and accordingly representing the neglecters of it, as
those which had broken Genesis 17.14.
his Covenant. From whence as it will follow, that it had a more intimate
relation to the Covenant, than that of a bare sign, or token; So it must be
either that, which was to strike the Covenant between them, and so make it
actually such as to those persons that received it, or one of those things,
which were to be observed after the Covenant was struck between them, and for
which it was entered into. But as it appears from those words of God, which
usher in the mention of this Covenant, that the thing so agreed upon was a
matter of much more weight, even their walking before God, and being perfect;
So we are therefore in reason to resolve Circumcision to be that, which was to
strike the Covenant between God, and them, and make it actually such, as to
those persons that received it. From whence as it will follow farther, because
striking the Covenant between God, and them, that it ensur'd to those, that
received it, the future Blessings of it, and so might not unreasonably be
represented as a Seal or a Pledge of them; So that it put them into actual
possession of such Blessings, as were presently to be bestowed, if there were
really any such, and accordingly was no less a means of conveying them. Which
will consequently leave nothing more to enqui e, than whether that Covenant
assured the same Blessings with the Christian, and whether any of those
Blessings were to be immediately bestowed by virtue of it. For if that Covenant
assured the same Blessings with the Christian, then had the sign thereof
relation to the same inward Graces with ours, and so far forth therefore agreed
with them; And if any of those Blessings were to be immediately bestowed, it
was also a conveyer of them, and so yet more perfectly the same. Now that that
Covenant, of which Circumcision was a sign, assured the same Blessings with the
Christian seems to me to be sufficiently evident from it is being affirmed Genesis
17.7.
to import, that God would be a God to Abraham, and to his Seed after him. For
that implying at least, that he would be as gracious to him, as he was before,
and consequently (because God dealt with him so before) that he would count his
Faith to him for Righteousness, it must also be thought to import his assuring
the same Blessings with the Christian Covenant, because that is the sum, and
substance of them all. All therefore, that we have farther to show, is, That
some at least of those Blessings were, by virtue of the Covenant it self, to be
immediately bestowed on those, who entered into it, which will be no hard matter
to evince. For thus much at least it must be thought to import, that if the
party to be Circumcised received his Circumcision with that Faith, which God
required of him, that Faith of his should from that very instant be accounted
to him for Righteousness: Because, the Covenant being so far performed on his
part, there must ensue a like completion on the part of God, as which otherwise
he could not have been said to be punctual to, nor approved himself a God to
the party in Covenant with him. And though we cannot make the like Inference upon
the part of Children, because there was nothing of Faith in them to procure
them such an Imputation; Yet in as much as they were admitted into the same
Covenant with their believing Parents, and, as they could bring nothing more
toward the procuring the Blessings of it, than their external Circumcision, so
they had nothing more required of them, It is but reasonable to believe, that
they received the same Benefits by it, and had their Circumcision imputed to
them for it. Such Evidence there is for Circumcision's being a Sacrament, yea
of the same general nature with the Christian ones; And I no way doubt we ought
to think the same of the Feast of the Passover, if not also of many of their
other Sacrifices: Not, it may be, for any particular evidence there is from the
Institution of it, or them, but from the relation they bore to Christ's
Sacrifice upon the Cross, and the care it appears God took to convey the
Benefits of Christ's Sacrifice by those extraordinary Sacraments, which he gave
them in the Wilderness. For the Sacrifices before mentioned being equally signs
of that of Christ, yea intended by God to remit men See Expl. of the Creed, in
the word, Dead.
to him; It is but reasonable to believe, that God made the same use of them,
and conveyed Christ, and his Benefits by them. Otherwise their condition in the
Land of Cana an would have been worse, than in the Wilderness, because as soon
as they entered that, their extraordinary Sacraments ceased.

III. Only as it is not to be thought, that those Sacraments, though the same in
substance with ours, did yet agree with them in all other particulars, because
belonging to a Dispensation, which was manifestly inferior to the Christian;
So there are two things, wherein they differed from ours, and by which they
will appear to have fallen short of them: First, That they did not so clearly
represent the things they were intended to signify, Secondly, That they did
not convey, what they so signified, in so ample a manner. For beside that those
significations of theirs were rather hinted, than plainly expressed, and much
less so plainly expressed, as the designs of the Christian Sacraments; Those
significations were not a little obscured by the concomitancy of others, and
which they were equally obliged to intend. For thus Circumcision, because a
sign of that Covenant, by which God did equally oblige himself to possess
Abraham, and his natural Seed of the Land of Canaan, was a sign of God's giving
them that promised Land, as well as the righeousness of Faith, and that
Heavenly Canaan, which belonged to it. And thus too the Passover was a sign of
that People's Egyptian Servitude, and God's delivering them from it, as well
as Christ's delivering them from the slavery of Sin, and Satan, by the shedding
of his Blood. By which means it is easy to see, that these latter, and more
noble significations of them must have been yet more obscured to them, and so
administer less Spiritual Consolation to them. This I take to be one signal
difference between the Jewish Sacraments, and ours, and wherein therefore they
must be thought to fall far short of what we now enjoy. But that it is not the
only material difference between them, will appear if we consider the
preference the Scripture gives to that Dispensation, under which we are, above
that of Moses, or Abraham; And that exuberance of Grace, which was poured out
upon the embracers of the Christian Dispensation, and of which we find no
footsteps under the other. For that is enough to show, that though the Jewish
Sacraments conveyed the same Spiritual Benefits; yet they did not do it in that
proportion, wherein the Christian did, and so fell yet shorter of them. Which
will not only oblige us to set so much the greater value upon our own
Sacraments, but be the more curious in enquiring, what ought to be looked upon
as such, which is that I am in the next place to intend.

For the resolution whereof we are to know (what we need go no farther than our
own Homilies Hom. of Com. Pray. and Sacram.
for the understanding) that the word Sacrament may be taken either in a more
lax and general, or in a more strict and particular acceptance. If we take it
in the former of these, so the number of the Christian Sacraments will be found
to be much greater, than even the Romanists themselves have made it: Because
(as our Homily observes) in a general acception the name of a Sacrament may,
and has been attributed to any thing, whereby an holy thing is signified.
Whence it is (as the same Homily goes on) that Ancient Writers have given that
Name, not only to those Five, which have been added by the Papists, but also to
diverse, and sundry Ceremonies, as to Oil, washing of Feet, and such like. But
as the Question between us, and the Papists, even in their own Conc. Trid.
Sess. 7. can. 1.
way of stating it, is not what may in a more lax, and general sense be looked
upon as Sacraments, but what are strictly, and properly such, so that Question
cannot better be voided, than by examining those things, which pretend to that
dignity by the account we have before given of the Nature of a Sacrament.

Of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper I shall say nothing at present, partly
because there is no Controversy at all concerning their being truly, and
properly Sacraments, and partly because we have no other certain means of
judging of the Nature of Sacraments, but by that, which is observable
concerning them. Our business must therefore be to examine the other Five by
them, and by what we have before observed, concerning the Nature of a
Sacrament, from them.

To begin with Confirmation, because the first Religious Rite after Baptism,
and because of all the Five best deserving the name of a Sacrament. A Rite,
which as our Church receives, and enjoins, so the more sober sort of
Protestants allow to have been an Institution of the Apostles, and such as is
of signal use to those, who were baptized in their Infancy, by that
examination, which is to precede it, and those solemn Prayers, that do attend
it. But as the thing it self does not appear to me to have been instituted by
Christ, which, even by the Doctrine of the Trent Council Ibid.
is made a Character of a Sacrament, so there is yet less appearance of its
having any outward sign, to which the blessings thereof may be supposed to have
been annexed, which is of the very Essence of a Sacrament: That, which was at
first administered by a bare Imposition of hands, and afterward by the addition
of the Chrism, coming at length to be performed by the sole ceremony of
Unction, as the practice of the Greek, and Latin Church declares. Of which
variation what account can be given, but that the Church it self did at first
look upon the Rites of Confirmation as arbitrary, and consequently not of the
same nature with the signs of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper. For whatever
additions, or variations came afterward to be made in these, the Water of the
one, and the Bread, and Wine in the other were ever preserved in them.

The next supposed Sacrament is that of Penance, or rather (because the form
thereof is by themselves Conc. Trid. Sess. 14. c. 13.
made to consist in Ego absolvo te, etc.) the Sacrament of Absolution. An
Institution, which we willingly acknowledge to be an Institution of Christ, and
which our Church moreover confesses Hom. of Com. Pray. and Sacr.
to have the promise of the forgiveness of sins. But differs from a Sacrament
in this, that it has not that promise annexed, and tied to the usual visible
sign thereof, even Imposition of hands. For for the use of any such visible
sign in it we find no Command, and much less any declaration from Christ, that
it should not be available, unless it were conveyed by it, or made to depend
upon the usage of it.

But it may be much more may be said for that, which they call the Sacrament of
Extreme Unction, because affirmed by the Council of Trent Sess. 14. can. 1.
to have been instituted by our Lord, and published to the World by St. James.
And I no way doubt, that when our Savior sent forth his Disciples by two, and
two Mark 6.7, etc.
, he gave them power to anoint sick persons, as well as to cast out unclean
Spirits, and, it may be too, commanded them, for that time, to make use of that
particular ceremony toward the healing of them. I as little doubt, for the
mention that is made of it in St. James James 5.14.
, that the same ceremony of Unction was continued in the Church, and perhaps
prescribed by other Apostles, as well as by him, to the Governors of the
Church. But it does not appear to me to have been intended by Christ for
perpetual use, and much less for those purposes, for which it is alleged. For
if it were intended by Christ for perpetual use, how came the same Christ to
promise to those that believe, that if they only laid hands Mark 16.18.
on the sick they should recover? How came he to give his Apostles power to
cure diseases by the use of that only ceremony, as in the case of Publius Act.
28.8.
, by taking infirm people by the hand Act. 3.5.
, yea by their bare Act. 9.34.
word? This being to give encouragement to the neglect of his own Commands, if
the ceremony of Unction were to be looked upon as such. Though granting that
Ceremony to have been intended for perpetual use, what appearance is there of
its having been intended for the purposes of a Sacrament, yea to procure, in an
especial manner, the forgiveness of sins? For all that St. Mark says concerning
the Apostles anointing with Oil is, that they thereby healed Mark 6.13.
those they did so anoint; Yea it is, if not the only, yet the principal thing
St. James assures to those, whom he enjoined the use of it. As it appears by
his ushering it in as an application to be made to sick persons, his promising
that that Prayer, which went along with it, should save the sick, and procure
God's raising of them, in fine by his exhorting men to confess their faults one
to another, that they might be healed. For these things show plainly, that if
the healing of sick persons was not the only thing intended, yet it was at
least the principal one. But so the Church it self appears to have understood
this ceremony, as is evident, among other things, from that Prayer, which did
accompany it: That, as Cassander Consult. de Artic. Rel. etc. ubi de Unctione
infirm. agit.
informs us, being, I anoint thee with the holy Oil in the name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, imploring the mercy of that one Lord, and our God, that
all the griefs and incommodities of thy body being driven away; there may be
recovered in thee virtue [or strength] and health, that so being cured by the
operation of this mystery, and this Unction of the Sacred Oil, and our prayer,
through the virtue of the Sacred Trinity, thou may deserve to receive thy
ancient, yea more robust health through our Lord. Which though it do not so
directly oppose the (...) of the Greeks, because designed against Corporal See
Ricdut Pres. State of the Greek Church c. 12.
, as well as Spiritual evils, yet does perfectly overthrow the Extreme Unction
of the Papists, as which is so far from designing the recovery of the sick
person, that it is not allowed to be administered to any, who seem not perfectly
desperate. One only passage there is in St. James, which may seem to give this
Ceremony of anointing a higher, and a far better design; even his affirming,
that that prayer, which did accompany it, should procure for the sick person
also, that if he had committed sins James 5.15.
, they should be forgiven him. But beside that St. James does not attribute
that forgiveness to the ceremony of Unction, but to the prayer that attended,
or followed it; The design of the Elders visitation of the Sick being no doubt
to procure as well their Spiritual, as Corporal health, it is not unreasonable
to think, that that very Prayer, which they made over them, did not only aim at
God's accompanying the former ceremony with the blessing, for which it was
intended, but extend farther to the imploring for them all those spiritual
blessings, which they wanted, and particularly perfect remission, and
forgiveness. Which if it did, as is but reasonable to believe, that Oil cannot
be thought to have had any interest in it, and much less to have been
especially intended as the Sacrament thereof. And indeed, as there are no
footsteps in that Antiquity, which is truly primitive, of any such Unction of
sick persons in order to their spiritual welfare; As there is mention moreover
in it of another kind of treatment, and particularly of the Elders of the
Church giving unto those, Dionys. Alex. apud Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. li. 6. c. 44.
item Conc. Nic. can. 13.
that were under penance the Sacrament of Christ's Body, and Blood, as their
last, and necessary Viaticum; So I see not what necessity there is of any such
Sacrament as Extreme Unction to confer upon sick persons the remission of sins,
or other such like graces, as they may stand in need of; There being place,
even in them, for the Absolution of the Church, and the Sacrament of Christ's
Body and Blood. In fine, so far is that Unction, of which St. James speaks,
from being any standing Sacrament of our Religion, that it may seem to have
been only an Appendage of that extraordinary gift of healing. 1 Cor. 12.9.
, which was sometime deposited in the Church, and which therefore was to cease,
when that, and other such like operations vanished. As appears in part from its
being joined in St. Mark Mark 6.13.
with the casting out of Devils, but more from our Saviors ranking the laying
on of hands upon the sick (which was but another way of administering it) with
Mark 16.17, 18.
the same casting out of Devils, speaking new tongues, and the taking up of
Serpents. For if these be to be looked upon as extraordinary gifts, there is
equal reason to believe, the anointing, or laying on of hands upon the sick to
have been of the same order. Sure I am Tertullian Tert. ad Scapnlam cap. 4.
does not only rank the gift of healing, even in his time, with the casting out
of Devils, but makes mention of one Proculus a Christian administering this
supposed Sacrament to Severus the Emperor, yea curing him by the Oil of it.

From Extreme Unction therefore pass we to that, which they call the Sacrament
of Orders, and which is not only affirmed by the Trent Council to be a true
Sess. 13. Can. 3.
, and proper Sacrament, but as certainly to confer Ib. cap. 3.
grace, as the most undoubted Sacraments do. It is not my purpose, nor was it
ever the purpose of the Church of England to detract in the least from the
force of that, which they entitle the Sacrament of Orders. But that it has not
the nature of a true, and proper Sacrament, will appear in the first place from
its not having by the Institution of Christ any external sign, to which the
grace thereof may be supposed to be annexed. For if it had, it must have been
the external sign, or ceremony of breathing on the persons to be ordained; This
being the only one, which our Savior Joh. 20.22.
made use of, when he conferred the power of Order upon his Apostles. But so
far were the Apostles, or the succeeding Church from making use of that, that
we find them, on the contrary, to have made use of Imposition of Hands, yea to
have entitled the grace of Orders 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6.
in a more especial manner to it. Whether it were, that they took their pattern
therein from the known usage of the Jews, and which we find our Savior himself
to have followed in other instances, or (which I rather think) that they were
directed to it by that spirit of God, which guided them in all their actions,
and to whose guidance, and instruction our Savior had left them after his
being taken from them. Sure I am there are no footsteps of that external sign
in the first Institution of it (as there was, in the Institution of Baptism,
and the Lord's Supper, of their proper ones) nor any appearance from Scripture
of any after command of Christ concerning it. But because the external sign of
Ordination, though none of our Saviors Institution, yet is confessed by our
selves to have had a legitimate one; Therefore enquire we in the second place,
whether, after the manner of other Sacraments, it be a means of Grace, or (as
the Romanists love to speak) have the power of conferring it. A thing, which
seems to them sufficiently evident, not only from that form of words Joh. 20.22.
, wherewith by the prescript of Christ it has been always attended, even
receive ye the Holy Ghost, but from St. Paul's willing Timothy in one place 1 Timothy 4.14.
not to neglect that gift, or grace, which was given with it, and in another 2 Timothy 1.6.
to stir up that gift, or Grace of God, which was in him by the laying on of
his hands. And thus much I willingly yield to the force of the forementioned
Texts, that the Holy Ghost ever was, and still is conferred upon those men, who
are rightly ordained by the Governors of the Church. But in what measure, and
to what purposes is the thing in question between us, and particularly whether
it is conferred, as to its sanctifying, and saving Graces, which I have shown
elsewhere Supra, Part 3.
to be the proper graces of a Sacrament. Now what is there in any, or all the
forementioned Texts, to evince that, which they call the Sacrament of Orders to
confer such graces upon the person Ordained? If we enquire, as to the first of
them Joh. 20.22.
, even that Text which makes Orders to exhibit the Holy Ghost, the utmost that
can be inferred from thence is such an exhibition of it, as may be requisite
for the party ordained to remit, or retain sins, as for which Joh. 20.23.
, and which alone it is professed to be bestowed. But so sure the person
ordained may be qualified to do, without the sanctifying graces of God's
Spirit, even in the opinion of the Tridentine Fathers themselves: It being
their opinion Sess. 7. can. 12.
, as well as ours Art. of Rel. 26.
, that the personal qualifications of the Minister do neither add to, nor
detract from the force of the Sacraments they dispense. But as therefore no
such sanctifying graces can be supposed to be designed, though we make the Text
to import such an exhibition of the Holy Ghost, as is requisite for the
remitting, or retaining of sins; so much less, if nothing more were meant by
Receive ye the Holy Ghost, than receive ye Authority from him so to do. Which
that there was not is at least probable from his referring them to another time
Act. 1.4. etc.
for the other powers of the Holy Ghost, yea bidding them not to expect them,
till after his ascension Joh. 16.7.
into Heaven. For that supposes them to have been as yet without those powers
of the Holy Ghost, and consequently that Christ meant no more by Receive ye the
Holy Ghost, than receive ye of his Authority, to whom the power of the Church
is committed under me, as ye shall in due time of such abilities, and gifts, as
may fit you for the exercise thereof. And if that were the sense, yea only
sense of those words of Christ, which contain both the Exemplar, and
Institution of Ordination, I know not why we should suppose that, which they
call the Sacrament of Orders, to have a farther design in it self, than to
communicate a Ghostly Authority to those, on whom it is bestowed. But let us
suppose, that something more was meant by these words, than Receive ye a
Ghostly Authority, or, at least, that it was the intention of our Savior
(because of what we read 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.16.
concerning Timothy) that something more should be afterward intended by them,
when no Apostolical Pentecost was to ensue, even the communicating of gifts and
graces, as well as a Ghostly Authority. Yet even so it will not follow, that an
exhibition of Sanctifying, and Saving Graces was intended, or that even Timothy
received any such Graces by it. For who knows not that there are Gratiae gratis
datae, as well as Gratum facientes, yea that the word Romans 12.6. 1 Cor. 1.7. 1
Cor. 12.4. 1 Cor. 12.9. 1 Cor. 12.28. 1 Cor. 12.30.
(...), is as often, if not more often the title of the former? Who knows not,
that those Gratiae gratis datae are more proper for the Ministerial Function,
than the other can be supposed to be, yea that they may avail for those
spiritual purposes, for which that Function was intended? In fine, who knows
not, that God has appointed other Sacraments for the conveying of his
sanctifying Graces, and by the participation of which therefore they might be
more reasonably expected? For these things being supposed, there will not only
be no necessity of understanding St. Paul of the sanctifying Graces of God's
Spirit, but not so much as any probable reason for it. Though granting thirdly,
that there were also some sanctifying Graces attending it; Yet as we cannot for
the reasons before mentioned understand any other sanctifying Graces, than what
may serve more immediately for the discharge of the Ministerial Function, such
as is a holy Zeal for the welfare of those Souls, which are committed to those
that are of it, so we can much less (as our Homily Hom. of Com. Pray. and
Sacram.
instructs us) expect remission of sins by it, which is the undoubted fruit of
Baptism, and the Lord's Supper. From all which put together it is evident, that
if judgment be to be made of Sacraments by Baptism, and the Lord's Supper,
Orders will hardly pass for one of them; As which varies so much from them both
in the External Sign, and in the Graces, which are signified by it.

One only Institution remains of those, which have the name of Sacraments, and
which if they, who so entitled it, would understand only in a general sense,
they would not find our Church dissenting from them, because affirming The form
of Solemn. of Matrim.
God to have consecrated the State of Matrimony into such an excellent mystery,
that in it is signified, and represented the Spiritual Marriage, and Unity,
that is betwixt Christ and his Church. But to make it a true, and proper
Sacrament of the Evangelical Law, as the Council of Trent Sess. 24. can. 1.
does, is extremely unreasonable, and neither hinted by St. Paul in that place
Ephesians. 5.25. etc.
, from whence they pretend to infer it, nor, any farther than a simple
representation reaches, agreeable with those things, whichhave the name of
Sacraments either with us, or among themselves. For neither was that, which
they call a Sacrament of the Evangelical Law, instituted by Christ, but by God,
nay St. Paul in the place before quoted founds all the Sacramentality thereof
in those passages Ephesians. 5.30, 31.
which are represented by Moses Genesis 2.23, 24.
, as declaring the Identity of Man, and Wife, and the necessity that arises
thereupon of their adhering to one another, even to the abandoning of all other
relations for it. It has no certain external sign, as other Sacraments have,
to confer that grace, which is supposed to belong to it; It has no other
promise of Grace belonging to it, than may be supposed to belong to any state
of life, which a Man shall set himself to, with a due respect to the Commands
of God, and use with that care, and sobriety, that becomes him. It has much
less any promise of the forgiveness of sins, and an Universal Holiness, as
Baptism, and the Lord's Supper undoubtedly have. And if it has not, nothing
can oblige us to look upon it as a true, and proper Sacrament, or indeed but in
the same degree, wherewith their other Sacraments are. For they, though not
perfectly such, have yet some more near resemblance to those, which they
pretend to rival.

But because it may be demanded, how, if there be but two strict, and proper
Sacraments, several other things should come to have the same name, and honor,
and particularly how the Church of Rome should at length advance them to the
number of Seven (this seeming to be some prejudice against our asserting only
two) I answer first by reason of their general cognation with them, and which
we know, in other things, to procure the same name to things, that are of a
very disserent nature. Whence it is, that (as was before observed out of one of
our own Hom. of Com. Pray. and Sacram.
Homilies) not only those five, which we but now mentioned, have obtained the
name of Sacraments, but whatsoever, in a manner, has been made use of to
signine a holy thing. Which is so true, that Tertullian in one place De Anima
cap. 9.
gives the name of Sacrament to Dreams, and Visions, and in others De pudic. c.
9. and adv. Marcion. li. 5. c. 4.
to Parables, and Allegories. For if even Dreams, and Parables come to have the
name of Sacraments by reason of their representing things of a higher nature;
How much more such Religious Institutions, as were transacted by the same
visible solemnities as Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, as to be sure the
Institutions before remembered were? For though, it may be, they had not the
ceremonies now in use, or at least had not that number of them, wherewith they
are now encumbered, yet wanted they not some, or other, which was of the same
symbolical nature, and particularly Imposition of hands. For that, as we learn
from the Scripture, they made use of in Confirmation Act. 8.17.
, in the gift of healing Act. 28.8.
, Orders 1 Timothy 4.14.
, and Absolution 1 Timothy 5.22.
; And that too, as we learn from Grotius Annot in Consult. Cassand. ad Art. 9.
, they made use of toward those, who entered into Marriage, and still do in the
Eastern parts. But beside that general, and external cognation, which is
between Sacraments, and Sacramentals (for so I shall for the future entitle
those things, which are not strict, and proper ones) there is also, as to some
of the latter, a more particular, and intimate cognation, but especially as to
those, which are before remembered, and are by the Papists advanced into true,
and proper Sacraments. For setting aside that, which they call the Sacrament of
Marriage, and which has, even among them, rather the name, than nature of one;
There is none of the other four, which tend not to the conferring of some
Divine Grace, or Benefit, as well as to the signification of it. For thus
Confirmation tends to procure a farther addition of God's sanctifying Graces,
and so to strengthen, and perfect the person, that ofers himself unto it; And
thus the Oil of Unction, as used of Old, toward the procuring of the Grace of
health, and the removal of the sick persons guilt so far, as was necessary for
the procuring of the other. Thus Absolution tends to the procuring of the
forgiveness of the Penitent, and Ordination, for the person ordained, of a
spiritual, and ghostly Authority, if not also of such spiritual gifts, as are
necessary for the exercise thereof. By which means as they approach yet nearer
to the nature of true, and proper Sacraments, so it is the less to be wondered
at, that they should obtain the name of Sacraments, yea have the reputation of
such in a more eminent manner, than other Sacramentals had: Especially if we
consider thirdly, that those five supposed Sacraments are upon the matter the
only noted Acts, that are administered by the Church, or, at least, that are
attended with such Rites, and Ceremonies. For so it is yet less difficult to
believe, that they might not only come by degrees to be ranked with Baptism,
and the Lord's Supper, but together with them to be accounted, if not the only,
yet at least the primary ones. Which Peter Lombard Sentent. li. 4. Distinct. 2.
taking notice of, made the Number of Christian Sacraments to be neither more,
nor less than seven, and the Church of Rome, swayed by him, did afterward
Authoritatively confirm. This I take to have been the true Original of that
number, to which the Sacraments are now advanced, and not either any cogent
arguments for the being of so many, or indeed any firm belief, even in that
Church it self, that they ought all to be looked upon as true, and proper ones.
And I am yet more confirmed in that belief by the silence there was Consult.
Cassandri ad Art. 13.
before Peter Lombard of any certain, and determinate number, and by the
Authority of two of the greatest Fathers of the Latin Church: St. Ambrose in
his tract de Sacramentis, and in another de iis qui mysteriis initiantur,
mentioning only Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, and St. Augustine not only
resolving Epist. 118. ad Januar.
the Sacraments to be numero paucissima, and mentioning none but those, but
affirming elsewhere De Doctr. Christ. li. 3. cap. 9.
, that our Lord, and the Apostolical discipline had delivered some few; such as
is the Sacrament of Baptism, and the celebration of Christ's Body, and Blood.
For that is enough to show, that though the Fathers might sometime mention the
other Institutions under the notion of Sacraments, yet they looked upon
Baptism, and the Lord's Supper as the only true, and proper ones, or, at least,
were not over confident of the being so of the other. If the Church of Rome
has since arrived at a greater confidence, it will concern her, rather than us
to give an account of it; But however not so far concern us, as to remove us
from an opinion, which seems to us to be built upon solid, and substantial
grounds. For either she has arrived at that confidence by the means before
declared, and then her Authority will be very incompetent; Or she has arrived
at it by some other means, which we are not acquainted with, and which
therefore we cannot be supposed to be influenced by till she shall be pleased
to declare them.

I have insisted thus long upon the Number of the Christian Sacraments, not
because I was obliged to it by my more immediate task (for our Catechism
contents it self to declare, that there are two only as generally necessary to
Salvation) but because our Church affirms elsewhere Art. of Rel. 25. and Homily
of Com. Pr. and Sacram.
, that there are but two strict, and proper ones, and because the joining of
others with them in the same rank, and order of Sacraments may help in time to
bring them into less repute; It being natural for men, where there are several
means tending to the same end, either to adhere to some of them to the utter
rejecting of the other, or to use those others with less preparation, and
respect. And whether this be not the case of the Eucharist, where that, which
they call the Sacrament of Penance is so much in vogue, may be judged of by the
little care they take to fit themselves for the one, where they have obtained,
as they easily may, the absolution of the other. And I shall only add, that if
our Church did not distinguish in the present Catechism between proper, and
improper Sacraments, it was not, as I conceive, because she had departed from
her own Articles, and Homilies, but because, being to instruct those, who were
no proper Auditors of higher matters, she contented her self to let them know,
what was sufficient for their purpose, that there were but two, that were
generally necessary to Salvation, even Baptism and the Supper of the Lord.

Now that there are no more than these, that are generally necessary to
Salvation, (which is all, that remains for me to demonstrate) will appear if we
reflect upon those, which have been added to them by the Papists, and ranked in
the same order with them. For who can think Marriage to be such, who believe,
as the Papists do, that it is unlawful to the whole Order of Priesthood, yea
who know that there are not a few, who live not long enough to desire, or need
it, or are otherwise sufficiently fortified by God against any necessity of
espousing it? Who can believe Orders to be such, when there ever was, and ever
will be a greater number of those, who are to be instructed, than there was, or
ever will be of those, who are to instruct them? In fine, who can believe the
Unction of the sick to be such, when it appears by the former discourse to have
had no other design, than the recovery of them from their infirmities? For well
may that be looked upon, as not generally necessary to Salvation, which appears
not to have been intended to minister at all unto it. If therefore there be any
of the five of that necessity, it must be Confirmation, and Absolution, but
which how useful soever they may be, and are so esteemed by our selves, yet
will not be found to be any more than such. I allege as to the former of these
the no precept there appears concerning it, which is one of those things, which
induce a necessity to Salvation; And I allege too (which is another) the no
appearance there is of any tendency in it to procure some blessings, for which
no other means are appointed. For the Eucharist having for its end the
confirming and strengthening of our Graces, which is all that Confirmation, as
now in use, professes to intend; neither can there be any necessity of the
means to oblige us to the use of the latter, or endanger our Salvation by the
omission of it. In fine, I allege, what is with me of no small moment, the no
mention there is in Justin Martyr Apol. 2. (...), etc.
of it, even where he takes notice of their bringing the New Baptized person to
the Assembly of the Faithful, and to a Communion with them in their Prayers,
and Eucharist. For though that Father does not obscurely intimate, that they
had a particular regard in their Prayers to the welfare of the new Baptized
person, as well as to the more general welfare of the other; Yet he takes no
notice at all of any Imposition of hands upon him, or any other ceremony, that
may be supposed to be analogous to it. Which in all probability he would have
done, (especially when he mentioned the Kiss of Peace, as well as both the
other Sacraments) if either the Church had then used the Sacrament of
Confirmation, or he looked upon it as a Sacrament of the same general necessity
with the other. Which things I have said, not in the least to detract from the
use of Confirmation (for I think this very passage of Justin Martyr does
sufficiently warrant the more material part of it, even prayer over the new
Baptized person) but to show that the Church did not then look upon it as a
Sacrament, or, at least, not as such a one, as was generally necessary for
Salvation, as our Catechism has taught us to speak.

But it may be much more may be said for Absolution, than Confirmation, and so
no doubt there may, if we consider Absolution as comprehending within the
compass of it the whole power of the Priest in remitting sins. For
comprehending within it, in that sense, the Administration of Baptism, and the
Lord's Supper, because the most effectual means the Church has for absolving
offenders from their guilt, so far as those Sacraments, or the Priests
Administration of them is necessary to Salvation (which no doubt they generally
are) so far also his Absolution must be looked upon as such. But so to consider
Absolution is to make it the same with Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, and not
(as it is here proposed) a distinct Sacrament from them. If therefore we will
speak pertinently either to our own Catechism, or the present Controversy, we
must consider Absolution as abstracting from those Sacraments; which if we do,
we shall find it to consist either in declaring the word of reconciliation to
Offenders, or praying to God for their Pardon, or pronouncing them absolved
from their guilt, or loosing them from the Censures of the Church.

If we consider Absolution in the first of these senses, to wit as importing
the declaration of the word of reconciliation to Offenders; so we shall not
stick to affirm, that it is generally necessary to Salvation, but then we must
say withal, that it is no Sacrament, nor esteemed by the Papists themselves to
be so.

If we consider it in the second sense, to wit, as denoting the Priest's
praying for the Pardon of Offenders (and in which form, as Bishop Usher Answ.
to the Jesuits Chall. p. 125. etc.
observes, Absolution was anciently wont to be made) so it will be found to
have a respect to that Community, over which he presides, or to particular
persons in it. In the former of these regards it is no doubt as necessary to
Salvation, as it is for the Priest to celebrate, or the people to join with him
in the public worship of God, of which such prayers as those are a necessary
part. But as there is no presumption of that Offices being a Sacrament, so it
is not the Absolution our Adversaries intend; That, which they profess to
advance, being the Absolution of particular persons, after a confession made by
them of their particular offenses. And yet even here too they make a
distinction, because professing to restrain that Confession, and Absolution to
such sins only, as are mortal. But who taught them to distinguish in this
affair between Mortal, and Venial? Or what is there in those words of Christ,
which convey the power of remitting sins, which can be thought to restrain it
to the former? What have they to ground the general necessity of such a
Confession upon, but especially as to that form of Absolution, whereof we
speak? For in praying for the pardon of Offenders the Priest is not to be
considered as a Judge, but as a person appointed to mediate between God, and
his People, and whom that charity, which belongs to him as such, will oblige
him to look upon as penitent, if he knows them not to be otherwise, especially
if they beg his prayers for their own particular pardon. And indeed neither is
this the Absolution the Papists contend for, nay they declare Conc. Trid. Sess.
14. cap. 3.
those very Prayers, which go along with their own, not to be of the Essence of
it. Which will oblige us to pass on to

A third sort of Absolution, even pronouncing offending persons to be loosed
from their offenses. A thing, which though of signal use, and comfort to men of
afflicted minds, and which no doubt such persons ought to seek, when they
cannot otherwise satisfy themselves, yet cannot be looked upon as generally
necessary to Salvation; Partly, because none but desponding persons can be
supposed to stand in need of it, and partly because such an Absolution, as
that, supposes men to be already loosed from their offenses, and consequently
not to want any thing, but the sense thereof. Which though it may be an
infelicity, yet is no sin in it self, nor can prove so to him, in whom it is,
unless it do otherwise take him off from the due performance of his duty.
Though, even in that case, such an Absolution will be necessary, rather to
prevent future offenses, than to procure the forgiveness of former ones. And I
shall only add, that I conceive that form of Absolution to be such, which
occurrs in our Visitation of the Sick; Partly, because it is ordered by our
Church to be applied to men of troubled minds, and partly because it prompts
the Priest to beg of God the forgiveness of the sick persons offenses, before
it allows him to say I absolve thee from all thy sins; That supposing the
forgiveness of God to precede in this affair, and consequently that the Priest
rather declares the person already absolved, than absolves him himself from the
band of his offenses.

The fourth sort of Absolution is that, which loses men from the censures of
the Church, and which I shall not stick to affirm to be generally necessary to
the loosing of those, who have been before bound, even from the band of their
offenses before God: Partly, because God has promised to bind that in Heaven,
which the Governors of the Church shall rightfully bind on Earth; And partly,
because the Censures of the Church consisting especially in restraining men
from its saving Offices, and particularly from the Sacrament of the Eucharist,
till men are loosed from those Censures, they must be deprived of the ordinary
means, whereby God has appointed to transmit the pardon of offenses. But as
the question is not, Whether Absolution may be necessary in a particular case,
or to particular persons, but whether it be generally so; So we cannot look
upon this Absolution as generally necessary to Salvation, unless it were such
to fall under those Censures, from which this Absolution frees. The result of
the Premises is this; The Church of God is indeed invested with a power of
Absolution, and such, as exerts it self in several Acts, answerably to the
needs of those, with whom it has to do: But as it is not invested with any
such power of Absolution, as does actually free the Offender from his guilt,
the doing of that pertaining only unto God; As it is not therefore invested
with any other power of Absolution, than what may serve to declare the pardon
of God, or help toward the procuring of it; So what it does toward either of
these (unless it be in Baptism, or the Lord's Supper) is either no Sacrament at
all, and so falls not under this enquiry, or is no generally necessary one. And
indeed, however the Church of Rome may seem to advance another Absolution, even
that which actually loses the sinner from his guilt; Though she moreover
represent that Absolution of here is, as generally necessary to the Salvation of
those who are under any mortal sin; yet is there no appearance of any such
Absolution, nor indeed of the necessity of any, but what is before described.
As is evident, as to the former of these, from that very Text, on which it is
founded, even a promise of loosing that in Heaven, which shall be loosed on
Earth. For if there must be a loosing in Heaven, after that on Earth, that on
Earth cannot be looked upon as actually freeing the Sinner from his guilt, but
only as preparatory to it; With this only advantage (which might very well
occasion the so entitling it) that that loosing shall certainly be followed by
a more effectual, and heavenly one. So little reason is there to believe, that
there is any Absolution among men, but what is purely preparatory to the
Absolution of God; And we shall find there is as little reason to seek out any
other modes of it, than those, which were before described: As will appear if
we consider, who they are, that are to be loosed, and who as they are either
such, as are within the Communion of the Church, or such as are excluded from
it, so, if they be of the former sort, have either done nothing to deserve an
exclusion, or have committed such offenses, as are worthy of it. If the persons
we speak of be such Members of the Church, as have not done any thing to
deserve an exclusion from it; So there cannot lie any engagement upon them to
confess their sins to a Priest, or seek any other Absolution, than by the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, or other the like ordinary methods of the Church:
The Communion, in which they are, and which they have not done any thing to
deprive themselves of, giving them a title to that Sacrament, or any other
privilege of their Religion. But then if they be such, as do really deserve to
be excluded, till they have given sufficient testimonies of their repentance;
Either they ought to be excluded, and afterward loosed as Excommunicate
persons, or, if they be thought fit to be continued in the Church, be looked
upon as Members of it, and allowed the common Absolutions of it: It being a
kind of contradiction in adjecto to continue men in the Communion of the
Church, and yet deny them the common privileges thereof. All therefore, that
remains to be accounted for, is the Absolution of those, who have been shut out
of the Church; But concerning which as there is no great difference between us,
and the Church of Rome, so we deny not but that it may require a peculiar form
of words, and such as may signify to the persons concerned, and the Members of
the Church the act of the Officers thereof in it. But that the Essence of
Absolution consists in it, does not appear to us, nor can indeed be
reasonably affirmed; Partly, because the very restoring Excommunicated persons
to the Communion of the Church will as effectually vacate its former Censures,
as any express declaration can do; And partly, because Excommunication
consisting in a deprivation from those methods of Salvation, which God has
deposited in the Church, the only effectual release of it must lie in a
readmission to them, and particularly to the Sacrament of the Eucharist. But
so the Ancient Church appears to have understood it, as is evident both from
her language, and practice; She not only expressing this Absolution, by See
Usher's Answer to the Jesuits Challenge. page 132.
bringing men to the Communion, reconciling them to it, or restoring it to
them, but taking care above all things, that no Excommunicated person generally
should go out of the World Dionys. Alex. apud Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. li. 6. c. 44.
item Conc. Nic. can. 13.
without partaking of the Eucharist. For what other account can be given of
that both language, and practice of hers, than that she conceived the
Absolution of Excommunicated persons to lie in a readmission to the common
methods of Salvation, and consequently that they were rather loosed by the use
of those methods, than by any judicial sentence? This however is certain (which
is enough for our present purpose) that Absolution in this sense cannot be
looked upon as generally necessary, because the peculiar refuge of such, as
have been shut out of the Church. And if that be the case of Absolution, as
well as of the other supposed Sacraments; Baptism and the Lord's Supper will
continue to be the only ones, that are of that necessity to Salvation.

THE CATECHISM OF THE Church of England. PART IV.
Question.

HOW many Sacraments has Christ ordained in his Church?

Answer.

Two only, as generally necessary to Salvation: that is to say, Baptism and the
Supper of the Lord.

Question.

What meanest thou by this word Sacrament?

Answer.

I mean an outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace, given
unto us, ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby we receive the same,
and as a pledge to assure us thereof.

Question.

How many parts are there in a Sacrament?

Answer.

Two: the outward visible sign, and the inward spiritual grace.

Question.

What is the outward visible sign, or form in Baptism?

Answer.

Water: wherein the person is baptized, In the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost.

Question.

What is the inward and spiritual grace?

Answer.

A death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness: for, being by nature
born in sin, and the children of wrath, we are hereby made the children of
grace.

Question.

What is required of persons to be baptized?

Answer.

Repentance, whereby they forsake sin, and Faith, whereby they steadfastly
believe the promises of God made to them in that Sacrament.

Question.

Why then are Infants baptized, when by reason of their tender age they cannot
perform them?

Answer.

Because they promise them both by their Sureties: which promise when they come
to age, themselves are bound to perform.

Question.

Why was the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper ordained?

Answer.

For the continual remembrance of the sacrifice of the death of Christ, and of
the benefits which we receive thereby.

Question.

What is the outward part or sign of the Lord's Supper?

Answer.

Bread and Wine, which the Lord has commanded to be received?

Question.

What is the inward part or thing signified?

Answer.

The body and blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed taken and received
by the faithful in the Lord's Supper.

Question.

What are the benefits whereof we are partakers thereby?

Answer.

The strengthening and refreshing of our souls by the body and blood of Christ,
as our bodies are by the bread and wine.

Question.

What is required of them who come to the Lord's Supper?

Answer.

To examine themselves, whether they repent them truly of their former sins,
steadfastly purposing to lead a new life; have a lively faith in God's mercy
through Christ; with a thankful remembrance of his death, and be in charity
with all men.

OF THE SACRAMENT OF BAPTISM, In Pursuance of an EXPLICATION OF THE CATECHISM
OF THE Church of England.

BY GABRIEL TOWERSON, D.D. and Rector of Welwynne in Hartfordshire.

Imprimatur.

Ex Aedib. Lamb. Apr. 10. 1686.

Jo. Battely RRmo P. ac Dno Dno Wilhelmo Archiep. Cantuar. a Sacris Domesticis.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVII.

TO THE Right Reverend FATHER in GOD FRANCIS Lord Bishop of ELY, AND LORD
ALMONER TO His Majesty.
My Lord,
YOUR Lordship's favorable acceptance of my Discourse of the Sacraments in
General, with the desire I have, if it may be, to put an end to the whole, has
prompted me to make the more have to present your Lordship, and the World with
this of Baptism in particular.

Two things there are in it, which I thought my self most concerned to clear,
and which therefore I have employed all requisite diligence on, the Doctrine of
Original Sin, and Infant Baptism: The former being in my opinion the foundation
of Christianity, the latter of our interest in it. For if there be no such
thing as Original Sin, I do not see but some persons heretofore might, and may
here after live with such exactness, as not at all to stand in need of a
Savior. And I see as little, if Infant Baptism be null, what interest any of
us can have in him, according to the ordinary dispensation of the Gospel, who
have for the most part been baptized in our Infancy, or at least have been
baptized by those that were.

Throughout the whole Treatise I have endeavored to retrive the ancient notion
of Baptism, to show what advantages are annexed to it; and what duties it
either involves, or obliges to. To either of which if I have given any light,
or strength, I shall hope I have done some small service to the Church, and
which your Lordship in particular will take in good part from

Your Lordship's Most Obliged, Most Obedient, and Most humble Servant, GABRIEL
TOWERSON.
Wellwyne, Aug. 23. 1686.
THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST PART.
Of the Rite of Baptism among the Heathen and the Jews.
THe Heathen themselves not without the knowledge of another World, and of the
insufficiency of natural Religion to bring them to the happiness thereof.
Occasion taken by them from thence to enquire after other ways of obtaining it,
and by the Devil to suggest the mysteries of their respective Deities as the
only proper means of compassing it. Those mysteries every where initiated into
by the Rite of Baptism; partly through Men's consciousness of their past sins,
and which they judged it but meet they should be some way purged from, and
partly through the policy of the Devil, who thereby thought to procure the
greater veneration to them: That as it was a Rite, which was in use among God's
own people, so naturally apt to represent to Men's minds their passing from a
sinful to a holy Estate. Of what Service the Heathens use of this Rite is
toward the commendation of the Christians Baptism, and a transition from thence
to the use of it among the Jews. Which is not only proved at large out of the
Jewish Writings, and several particulars of that Baptism remarked, but that
usage farther confirmed by several concurring proofs; such as is in particular
the no appearance there is otherwise of any initiation of the Jewish Women, the
Baptizing of the whole Nation in the Cloud, and in the Sea, and a remarkable
allusion to it in our Savior's Discourse to Nicodemus. The silence of the Old
Testament concerning that Rite shown to be of no force, because though it take
notice of the first Jews being under the Cloud, and passing through the Red
Sea, yet it takes no notice at all of their being Baptized in them, or of their
Eating, and Drinking that spiritual Repast whereof S. Paul speaks. The
Baptism of Christians copied by our Savior from that of the Jews, and may
therefore, (where it appears not, that he has made an alteration) receive an
elucidation from it. page 1.

The Contents of the Second Part.
Of the Baptism of the Christians, and the Institution of it.
THe Institution of the Christian Baptism more ancient, than the Command for it
in S. Matthew 28.19. though not as to the generality of the World, nor it may
be as to the like explicit Profession of the Trinity. As is made appear from
Christ, or his Disciples baptizing in Judea, not long after his own Baptism by
S. John. Enquiry thereupon made, whether it were not yet more ancient, yea as
ancient as Christ's execution of his Prophetical Office. Which is rendered
probable from our Saviors making Disciples before, and the equal reason there
appears to have been for his making them after the same manner with those of
Judea; From Christ's representing to Nicodemus the necessity of being born
again of water, and the spirit, which is shown at large to be meant of a true
and proper Baptism; As, in fine, from Christ's telling S. Peter, when he asked
the washing of his Hands, and Head, as well as Feet, that he, who had been
washed, needs not save to wash his feet. An answer to the supposed silence of
the Scripture concerning so early a Baptism, and that shown to be neither a
perfect silence, nor an unaccountable one. p. 9.

The Contents of the Third Part.
Of the outward visible Sign of Baptism.
THe outward visible Sign of the Christian Baptism shown to be the Element of
Water, and enquiry thereupon made wherein it was intended as a Sign; Which is
shown, in the general, to be as to the cleansing quality thereof, more
particularly as to the use it was put to toward new born Infants, and that
application of it which was first in use, even by an immersion, or plunging the
Party baptized in it. Occasion taken from thence to enquire farther, how it
ought to be applied, more especially whether by an immersion, or by that, or an
aspersion, or effusion. Evidence made of an immersion being the only legitimate
Rite of Baptism, save where necessity does otherwise require; And enquiry
thereupon made, whether necessity may justify the Application of it by an
Aspersion, or Effusion, and, if it may, whether the case of Infants be to be
looked upon as such a necessity. What is to be thought of those additions,
which were anciently made, or continue as yet in being in the outward
solemnities of Baptism. Where the sign of the Cross in Baptism is more
particularly considered, and answer made to those Exceptions that are made
against it as a Ceremony, as an addition of Men to the Institution of Christ,
and as a supposed Relic of Popery, or giving too much countenance to the
Papists abuses of it. p. 17.

A Digression concerning Original Sign, by way of Preparation to the following
Discourses. The Contents.
OF the ground of the present Digression concerning Original Sin, and enquiry
thereupon made, what Original Sin is. Which is shown in the General to be such
a corruption of the Nature of every Man, that is naturally engendered of the
offspring of Adam, whereby it becomes averse from every thing, that is good,
and inclinable to every thing, that is evil. The nature of that corruption more
particularly inquired into, and shown by probable Arguments to be no other,
than a Privation of a Supernatural Grace. That there is such a thing, as we
have before described, evidenced at large from the Scripture, and that evidence
farther strengthened by the experience we have of its effects, and the
acknowledgments of the wiser Heathen. Enquiry next made from whence it had its
beginning, which is shown to have been not from any evil Spirit, or Demon, the
pravity of matter, or the evil habits the Soul contracted in a praeexistent
state, but from the pravity of our first Parents. This last at large confirmed
out of the Doctrine of the Scripture, and followed by some light reflections
upon the means, by which it is conveyed. A more just account from the Scripture
of its being truly, and properly a sin, partly from its having the title of a
sin, but more especially from its being represented as such, upon the account
of our Obligation to the contrary. A consideration of those Objections, which
are commonly made against the Doctrine of Original Sin; Which are shown either
not to be of that force, whereof they are esteemed, or however not to be a
sufficient bar to what the Scripture has declared concerning it. p. 33.

The Contents of the Fourth Part.
Of the things signified by Baptism on the part of God, or its inward and
spiritual Grace.
THE things signified by Baptism are either more general, or particular: More
general, as that Covenant of Grace, which paseth between God, and Man, and that
body of Men, which enter into Covenant with him; More particular, what the same
God does, by virtue of that Covenant, oblige himself to bestow upon the
Baptized, and what those Baptized ones do on their part undertake to perform.
These latter ones proposed to be considered, and entrance made with the
consideration of what God obliges himself to bestow upon the Baptized, called
by the Church, An inward, and spiritual Grace. Which inward, and spiritual
Grace is shown to be of two sorts, to wit, such as tend more immediately to our
spiritual, and eternal welfare, or such as only qualify us for those Graces,
that do so. To the former sort are reckoned that inward, and spiritual Grace,
which tends to free us from the guilt of sin, called by the Church forgiveness
of sin; That which tends to free us from the pollution of sin, called by our
Catechism A death unto it; And that, which tends to introduce the contrary
purity, and has the name of a New birth unto righteousness. To the latter sort
is reckoned our union to that Body, of which Christ Jesus is the Head, and by
means whereof he dispenses the former Graces to us. Each of these resumed, and
considered in their order, and shown to be, what they are usually styled, the
inward, and spiritual Graces of Baptism, or the things signified by the outward
visible Sign thereof. p. 65

The Contents of the Fifth Part.
Of Forgiveness of sin by Baptism.
OF the relation of the sign of Baptism to its inward, and spiritual Grace, and
particularly to Forgiveness of sin; Which is either that of a means fitted by
God to convey it, or of a pledge to assure the Baptized person of it. The
former of these relations more particularly considered, as that too with
respect to Forgiveness of Sin in the general, or the Forgiveness of all Sin
whatsoever, and Original Sin in particular. As to the former whereof is
alleged first the Scriptures calling upon Men to be Baptized for the
remission, or forgiveness of sin, Secondly the Church's making that Forgiveness
a part of her Belief, and Doctrine, Thirdly the agreeing opinions or practices
of those, who were either unsound members of it, or Separatists from it, And
Fourthly the Calumnies of its enemies. The like evidence made of the latter
from the Scripture's proposing Baptism, and its Forgiveness as a remedy against
the greatest guilts, and in special against that wrath, which we are Children
of by Nature. From the premises is shown, that the sign of Baptism is a pledge
to assure the Baptized of Forgiveness, as well as a means fitted by God for the
conveying of it. p. 71

The Contents of the sixth Part.
Of Mortification of sin, and Regeneration by Baptism.
OF the relation of the sign of Baptism to such inward, and spiritual Graces,
as tend to free us from the pollution of sin, or introduce the contrary purity;
And that relation shown to be no less than that of a means, whereby they are
conveyed. This evidenced as to the former, even our death unto sin (which is
also explained) from such Texts of Scripture, as make mention of our being
baptized into it, and buried by Baptism in it, or from such as describe us as
cleansed by the washing of it. The like evidenced from the same Scripture
concerning the latter, even our new birth unto righteousness; As that again
farther cleared as to this particular by the consentient Doctrine, and practice
of the Church, by the opinion the Jews had of that Baptism, which was a Type,
and exemplar of ours, and the expressions of the Heathen concerning it. The
Doctrine of the Church more largely insisted upon, and exemplified from Justin
Martyr, Tertullian, and S. Cyprian. p. 77

The Contents of the Seventh Part.
Of our Union to the Church by Baptism.
OF the relation of the sign of Baptism to our Union to the Church, and that
relation shown to be no less than that of a means, whereby that Union is made.
This evidenced in the first place from the declarations of the Scripture, more
particularly from its affirming all Christians to be baptized into that Body,
as those, who were first baptized after the descent of the Holy Ghost upon the
Apostles, to have been thereby added to their company, and made partakers with
the rest in the Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship, in breaking of Bread, and in
Prayers. The like evidence of the same Union to the Church by Baptism from the
declarations of the Church it self, and the consequences of that Union shown to
be such, as to make that also to be accounted one of the inward, and spiritual
Graces of that Baptism, by which it is made. p. 85

The Contents of the Eighth Part.
Of the Profession that is made by the Baptized Person.
THE things signified by Baptism on the part of the baptized brought under
consideration, and shown from several former discourses (which are also pointed
to) to be an Abrenunciation of sin, a present belief of the Doctrine of
Christianity, and particularly of the Trinity, and a resolution for the time to
come to continue in that belief, and act agreeably to its Laws. Our resolution
of acting agreeably to the Laws of Christianity more particularly considered,
and the Profession thereof shown by several Arguments to be the intendment of
the Christian Baptism. What the measure of that conformity is, which we profess
to pay to the Laws of Christianity, and what are the consequences of the
Violation of that Profession. p. 89

The Contents of the Ninth Part.
Of the right Administration of Baptism.
AFter a short account of the Foundation of the Baptismal relation, and
reference made to those places from which a larger one may be fetched; Enquiry
is made touching the right Administration of Baptism, as therein again, First,
Whether Baptism ought expressly to be made in the name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, Secondly whether Schismatics, and Heretics are valid
Administratours of it, Thirdly, to what, and what kind of persons it ought to
be administered, Fourthly, Whether it may be repeated. The two first of these
spoken to here, and first, Whether Baptism ought to be expressly administered in
the form proposed. Which is not only shown to be under obligation from the
express words of the Institution, but answer made to those Texts, which seem to
intimate it to be enough to baptize in the name of the Lord Jesus only. The
Baptism of Schismatics, and Heretics more largely shown to be valid, unless
where they baptize into a counterfeit Faith, and the several objections against
it answered. p. 95

The Contents of the Tenth Part.
Of the Baptism of those of riper Years.
TO what, and what kind of persons Baptism ought to be administered; Which, as
to those of riper years, is shown to be unto all, that come duly qualified for
it. What those qualifications are, upon that account inquired into, and
Repentance, and Faith shown from the Scripture, as well as from our own
Catechism to be they. That Repentance, and Faith more particularly considered,
the definitions given of them by our Church explained, and established. The
former whereof is effected, by showing what Repentance does presuppose, what it
imports, and to what it does naturally dispose us: The latter by showing what
those promises are, which by the Catechism are made the object of our Faith, or
Belief, what that Belief of them does presuppose, what is meant by a steadfast
Belief of them, and what evidence there is of that being the Faith, or Belief
required to the receiving of Baptism. p. 103

The Contents of the Eleventh Part.
Of the Baptism of Infants.
WHat ground Infant Baptism has in Scripture, and particularly in what it
suggests concerning Christ's commanding his Disciples to suffer little Children
to come unto him. S. Paul's giving the Children of the faithful the title of
Holy, and the Circumcision of Infants. The concurrence of Antiquity therein
with the Doctrine of the Scripture, and that concurrence fartherstrengthned by
the Pelagians so freely admitting of what was urged against them from thence. A
brief account of that remission, and regeneration, which Infants acquire by
Baptism, and a more large consideration of the Objections, that are made
against it; More particularly of what is urged against the Regeneration of
Infants in Baptism, or their ability to answer what is prerequir'd to it on the
part of persons to be baptized, or is to be performed by them in the reception
of it. Where the Regeneration of Infants is more largely considered, and what
is promised for them by others shown to be both reasonable, and sufficient. p.
111

The Contents of the Twelfth Part.
Whether Baptism may be repeated.
WHat the true state of the present question is, and that it is not founded in
any supposed illegitimateness of the former Baptism, but upon supposition of
the baptized persons either not having before had, or forfeited the
regeneration of it, or fallen off from that Religion, to which it does belong.
Whereupon enquiry is made, whether if such persons repent and return, they
ought to be baptized anew, or received into the Church without. What there is
to persuade the repeating of Baptism, and what the Church has alleged against
it. The Churches arguments from Ephesians. 4.4. and John 13.10. proposed, but waved.
The Churches opinion more firmly established in the no direction there is in
Scripture for re-baptization in those cases, but rather the contrary, and in
the no necessity there is of it. The Arguments for rebaptization answered. p.
131

ERRATA
In the Text. Page 22. l. 1. after do add not. p. 47. l. 46. after of add that.
p. 81. l. 3. corruption. p. 109. l. 32. for boil r. boglt.

In the Margent. Page 3. l. 14. (...). ibid. l. 27. (...). p. 23. l. 44. for
Sacramentum, r. incrementa. p. 83. l. pmult. (...).

OF THE SACRAMENT OF BAPTISM.
PART I. Of the Rite of Baptism among the HEATHEN, and the JEWS.
The Contents.
The Heathen themselves not without the knowledge of another World, and of the
insufficiency of natural Religion to bring them to the happiness thereof.
Occasion taken by them from thence to enquire after other ways of obtaining it,
and by the Devil to suggest the mysteries of their respective Deities as the
only proper means of compassing it. Those mysteries every where initiated into
by the Rite of Baptism; partly through Men's consciousness of their past sins,
and which they judged it but meet they should be some way purged from, and
partly through the policy of the Devil, who thereby thought to procure the
greater veneration to them: That as it was a Rite, which was in use among God's
own people, so naturally apt to represent to Men's minds their passing from a
sinful to a holy Estate. Of what Service the Heathens use of this Rite is
toward the commendation of the Christians Baptism, and a transition from thence
to the use of it among the Jews. Which is not only proved at large out of the
Jewish Writings, and several particulars of that Baptism remarked, but that
usage farther confirmed by several concurring proofs; such as is in particular
the no appearance there is otherwise of any initiation of the Jewish Women, the
Baptizing of the whole Nation in the Cloud, and in the Sea, and a remarkable
allusion to it in our Savior's Discourse to Nicodemus. The silence of the Old
Testament concerning that Rite shown to be of no force, because though it take
notice of the first Jews being under the Cloud, and passing through the Red
Sea, yet it takes no notice at all of their being Baptized in them, or of their
Eating, and Drinking that spiritual Repast whereof S. Paul speaks. The
Baptism of Christians copied by our Savior from that of the Jews, and may
therefore, (where it appears not, that he has made an alteration) receive an
elucidation from it.

THOUGH the Baptism of Christians be my proper business, and ought accordingly
to be made the subject matter of my Discourse; yet I think it not amiss to
premise something concerning the use of the like Rite among the Heathen, and
(which is of much more consideration) among the people of the Jews: Partly
because Christianity may seem to have borrowed her Baptism from the Baptism of
the latter, and we therefore may borrow some light from it toward the clearing
of our own; And partly because it may appear both from the one, and the others
Baptism, that Christianity has laid no other imposition on us, than what the
general reason of Mankind, or a more early Tradition prompted others to the
embracing of.

For the understanding whereof we are to know, that as the Heathen themselves
were not without a presension of another World, wherein the Souls of Men should
be treated according to their demeanor here; So they alike saw, or at least
suspected, that they could not expect a happy futurity by a bare compliance
with those rules, which natural Religion suggested to them: Partly, because
they saw but too well that they could never arrive at a perfect compliance with
them, by which means they should always stand in need of the divine favor, and
forgiveness; And partly, because they knew it to be in the power of their
offended Deities to prescribe what ways and means they thought good for Men's
obtaining a reconciliation with them. This therefore being the general, and
indeed natural sense of Mankind, and not a little quickened at the first by what
they might learn from God's own people concerning the Sacrifices, and other
Rites, whereby he appointed them to atone him; Men began to look out every
where for proper means to obtain the favor of their Gods; and the Devil, who
was willing by all means to precipitate them into destruction, did either by
himself, or his Agents suggest such, as might gratify those their hopes, but
withal not only no way profit them, but debauch their minds so much the more.
Only lest too gross a deceit should come to be discerned, he took care, among
other things, that what he suggested should be concealed from the generality of
Men, and indeed even from those, who were desirous to understand them, till
they had approved themselves by a long expectation, and the undergoing of all
those things, which were preparatory to them. From hence it was, that the
mysteries of the several Heathen Deities came to have their beginning, and
name; Those of the Mother of the Gods in Samothracia, and of Hecate in many
places. Hence those famous ones of Ceres and Proserpina at Eleusis in Attica,
of Bacchus in Boeotia, and of Mithras in Asia. In fine, hence those of Orpheus
almost all over Greece, and of Isis in Egypt, and many other places: They
Cicero de leg. lib. 2. Mihi autem cum multa eximia, divinaque videntur Athenae
tuae peperisse, atque in vitam hominum attulisse, tum nihil melius illis
mysteriis, quibus ex agresti immanique vita exculti ad humanitatem, and
mitigati sumus, initiaque, ut appellantur, ita revera principia vitae
cognovimus, neque solum cum laetitia vivendi rationem accepimus, sed etiam cum
spe meliore moriendi.
, who were not without a due esteem of piety, and virtue making the end of
those mysteries to have been the procuring to those that were initiated into
them a possibility of living happily in the other World, whilst nothing but
extremest miseries attended the neglecters of them.

Sophocles -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
But because mysteries of this nature were not to be communicated to all, no
nor yet to any before they were purged from their past sins; Therefore care was
taken first of all (as we learn from Clemens Alexandrinus Strom. lib. 5. p.
424. (...), etc.
) that they should pass through certain purgations, or washings, and which
though (as Tertullian De Baptismo. c. 5.
speaks) performed viduis aquis, that is to say, with such, as had not the
incubation of God's Spirit, yet were, as he afterward Ibid. Certe ludis
Apollinaribus, and Eleusiniis tinguntur, idque se in regenerationem, and
impunitatem perjuriorum suorum agere praesumunt.
affirms, both administered, and received as effectual Symbols of a new Birth,
and a freedom from the punishment of their ofences. It was thus in particular,
that Men were initiated into the mysteries of Eleusis, even the lesser ones,
and such as were preparatory to the greater, and he who initiated them into
them entitled (...) Hesvch. (...).
or the Waterer. It was thus, as we learn from Tertullian De Bapt. c. 5. Nam
and sacris quibusdam per lavacrum initiantur Isidis alicujus, and Mithrae.
, that they initiated Men into the rites of Mithras, and so too into those of
Isis: The Chief Priest of that Goddess (as Apuleius Milesi. 11. citat. a
Seldene de success. ad leg. Haebr. c. 26.
describes his own initiation) leading the party, that was to be initiated, in
the Company of that Religious band to the next Bath. Where having first
delivered him to the usual washing, and asked pardon of the Goddess, he
sprinkled him all about, and bringing him back to the Temple, after two parts
of the day were spent, placed him before the feet of the Goddess.

How this way of initiation by Baptism came to prevail so generally, is hard to
say, and I will not therefore be over positive in defining. That, which seems
to me to be the most probable, is, that those mysteries, to which this way of
initiation belonged, came all out of the same forge, even the contrivance of
the Devil, and his dependants, to whom, though ignorantly, the Heathen offered
1 Cor. 10.20.
Sacrifice; That he suggested such an initiation to them, partly in imitation
of those Baptisms, or washings, which God had appointed among his own people,
and partly as a Symbol, which did most naturally represent to their minds their
passing from a sinful to a holy Estate: Sin, by reason of the odiousness
thereof, coming to have both the esteem, and name of Pollution, and that
therefore, which professed to do it away, best represented by that Element,
which was most proper to purge away the natural one; In fine, that they, to
whom that form of initiation was proposed, being thereby possessed with a good
opinion of the sacredness of those mysteries, to which it led, and a hope of
its also purging them from their former guilt, greedily embraced it, and made
it as sacred in their own esteem, as it seemed to be in the design of those,
that instituted it. Which moreover they were more easily persuaded into,
because they found it much more easy thus to wash away their Sins, than to
purge their Conscience Heb. 9.14.
from dead works by repentance, and amendment. By these degrees, I suppose, it
was, that Baptism came, even among the Heathen; to be the general form of
initiating them into their respective mysteries; And had those mysteries been
as sacred, as their initiation into them was specious, it might have served to
them for a perpetual monument of that inward, and far better purity, which it
becomes all those to put on, who hope for approbation from the Divine Majesty.
But as that initiation of their's had for its Institutor some false God, or
other, or rather some Evil Spirit, who acted the part of one; As it was
moreover an Introduction into abominable mysteries, as well as into
unprofitable ones; Witness in particular those so much talked of mysteries of
Eleusis Arnob. adv. Gent. li. 5. and Clem. Alex. (...) p. 10.
, and which I will favor chaste Ears in concealing: so I have insisted on it
for no other reason, than to show, how willing the Devil was to procure credit
to his mysteries by it, and how easily Men were prevailed upon by the
speciousness thereof to engage themselves in the pursuit of them. Which, though
it were no commendation to those mysteries, to which it was applied, yet is a
sufficient one of the Rite it self, and will add yet more luster to that
Baptism of ours, which leads to a Religion, that is as spotless as it self.

From the Baptism of the Heathen pass we to that of the Jews, and so much the
rather, because if such a Baptism can be proved, it will not only be a farther
commendation to our own, but it may be also give light to it: He, who came not
to destroy the Law, and the Prophets, but to fulfill them (as Christ himself
declared Mat. 5.17.
in the very entrance upon his Ministry) being likely enough to have had a
regard to their Baptism also, and to have copied out his own Baptism by it. And
indeed if any credit may be given to the most Authentic writings the Jews now
have, and to one Maimonides.
of the most sober Rabbis, which that Nation has ever produced, there will be
no reason to doubt of the Jews having, even from Ancient times, the same way of
initiating Men into their Religion, which Christianity does now prescribe. For
from their Writings it has been observed, (and the express words of their
respective Authors alleged Seld. de Jure Not. and Gent. li. 2. c. 2. etc. Ham.
in his Quaer. concern. Inf. Baptism.
for it) that the Males of the native Jews were of Old initiated into that
Religion by Baptism, or washing of the whole body, as well as by Circumcision,
and an Oblation, and the Females by Baptism, if not also by an Oblation; That
the Males of their Proselytes of Justice (sutably to the Males of those native
Jews, into whose Religion they were admitted) were initiated by Baptism, and an
Oblation, as well as by Circumcision, and the Females by Baptism, and an
Oblation; That the Baptism of Proselytes was to be performed in a natural
receptacle of Waters, as in a River, a Pool, or a Fountain, and the whole body
washed in it; That there were three Men appointed to preside over their
Baptism, and who, as the Baptized persons stood in the water, were to lean over
them, and twice explain to them some of the more weighty, and lighter precepts
of the Law; That where the Proselyte was a Female, she should be encompassed
with other Women to preserve her from being seen by the Triumviri, and they to
depart, when she was to come out of the water; That this Baptism being rightly
performed was not to be repeated, and that in what condition Proselytes were
baptized, that is to say, whether in a servile or free condition, (for that was
then to be professed) in that they were to abide; That, from the time of their
being thus proselyted, they were for the main accounted of as Jews, and had the
title of such, that they were accounted of as persons new born, yea so far,
that after that time they were not to own any of their former Relations; In
fine, that that new birth was looked upon as so singular, that it gave occasion
to their Cabalistical Doctors to teach, that the old Soul of the Proselyte
vanished, and a new one succeeded in its place. For all these particulars have
been observed concerning that Baptism whereof we speak, and the Baptism it self
not only made as ancient as Moses, but deduced by them from that command of God
Exodus 19.10.
, whereby Moses was enjoined to sanctify the Israelites, and cause them to
wash their Clothes, against the time that God declared from Mount Sinai that
legal Covenant, which they were then to enter into.

Whether the Jewish Writers might not somewhat overlash in making their Baptism
so very ancient, or err in assigning the former Command as the Original
thereof, is a thing I mean not to dispute, and much less will I concern my self
so far in it, as to vindicate them against all opposers. But as it is hard to
believe, they would attribute so great an antiquity to that, which was not at
least somewhat antienter than our Savior's time, which is all we are concerned
to assert; So it will be much more hard to detract altogether from their
testimony, if it has any concurring proofs, and be otherwise fairly defensible
against the adversaries thereof. Now that the testimony of the Jewish Writers
is not without some concurring proofs, and such as will at least add to the
probability thereof, will appear if we consider first, that though Circumcision
both was, and was intended as a means of initiating the Jews, yet it was such a
form of initiation, as was competible only to the Males. By which means, if
there had been no other form of initiation, all of the Female Sex, who were
undoubtedly as much in Covenant with God, as those of the other, must have been
debarred of any visible Sacrament to assure them of their interest in it. Which
though it be not so great an inconvenience, as to enforce altogether the use of
somewhat beside Circumcision, because the Females might be initiated in their
Fathers, yet will make it reasonable enough to believe, that God, with whom
there is no respect of Sexes, appointed some form of initiation, by which they
might be alike admitted. I say Secondly, that as Circumcision was not
competible to those of the Female Sex, and not unlikely therefore that there
might be some other ceremony for their initiation; So it is apparent from S.
Paul 1 Cor. 10.2.
, that however God might deal with the Jews before, or after, yet all of them,
in their passage from Egypt unto Canaan, were baptized into Moses in the
Cloud, and in the Sea. For being so, it is not difficult to believe, that the
same form of initiation might afterward have force in those, who were not
capable of Circumcision, yea even in them, that were capable of it, after the
Rite of Circumcision was over, if it were only to put them in mind, of that
deliverance they received by it: Especially, when their Eucharistical Manna,
though thence forward not enjoined to be used, because it ceased from among
them, was yet laid up in the Ark of God Exodus 16.32, etc.
to put them in mind of God's nourishing them by it. I say Thirdly, that though
Baptism might not be enjoined at the first, or at least enjoined only for the
use of those, who were not capable of Circumcision, yet it might by the advice
of their Governors, and the approbation of those Prophets whom God raised up
among them, be afterward added to Circumcision, both upon the account of their
Forefathers being commanded to sanctify themselves, and wash their Clothes
when they appeared before God at Mount Sinai, and as a farther declaration to
them of the impurity of their Nature, and of that pure, and holy estate, which
they entered into. For if their Forefathers were, even by the command of God,
to sanctify themselves with washings toward their entering into Covenant with
God at Mount Sinai, what should hinder such of their posterity, as presided
over that Nation, to make an addition of the like Baptism? Especially, when all
was little enough to admonish them of their own natural impurity, and of the
necessity that lay upon them of purging themselves from it. I observe Fourthly,
that though there be not any express mention in the Scripture of that Baptism
whereof we speak, nor indeed of any like it beside that of John the Baptist,
which being immediately from Heaven ought not to be drawn into example; yet is
it sufficiently intimated by our Savior, where, upon Nicodemus's wondering how
a Man could be born of Water, and the Spirit, he with equal wonder demanded
Joh. 3.10.
, Art thou a Master of Israel, and know not these things? For as that is a
sufficient indication, that the notion our Savior advanced was no stranger to
the Israelites, and therefore neither such a Baptism, as was the subject of it;
So it became yet more clear by the Jewish Writers representing the Baptism of a
Proselyte as giving a new birth unto him: That as it is the same in effect with
the product of Christ's Baptism, so making it yet more reasonable to believe,
that our Savior had an eye to it, when he wondered so much at Nicodemus for
stumbling at that property in his. All which put together, because tending
toward the same thing, will make it yet more reasonable to believe, that the
Jewish Writers spoke not at adventure, when they represented the Rite of
Baptism as a Rite of their own Nation, and by which both themselves, and their
Proselytes had been of old initiated, no less than by the Rite of Circumcision.
If there be any thing to hinder the admission of it, it must be the silence of
the Old Testament concerning it, or at least concerning the Institution of it.
But as we find no great mention, even of Circumcision it self after the five
Books of Moses, and may therefore the less wonder at the no mention of Baptism,
especially if, as it might be, instituted, after his time; As we find as little
mention, even where it might have been more reasonably expected, of the first
Jews being baptized into Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea, or of their
Eating, and Drinking that spiritual repast, whereof S. Paul speaks 1 Cor.
10.3, 4.
: So there is as little reason therefore to wonder at its silence concerning
this Rite, especially considering, what is notorious enough from thence, that
God from time to time raised up Prophets among them. For their Authority, and
Preaching might suffice to constitute, or confirm a matter of greater moment,
than the Rite of Baptism, as added to Circumcision, can be supposed to have
been.

There being therefore no great doubt to be made of a Baptism among the Jews
antecedent to that of John the Baptist, and our Savior, it will not be
difficult to believe first, that our Savior had an eye to it, when he
appointed the same Rite to initiate Men into his Religion: Partly because it
was his avowed Profession, that he came rather to reform, than destroy their
former Economy; and partly because he might the more reasonably hope to bring
them over to that faith, which it was an initiation into. It will be as easy
to believe, Secondly, upon the score of the same condescension, and compliance,
that Christ departed as little as might be from their manner of Administration
of it, or from the ends, which it was appointed for among them; such a
compliance being equally necessary to carry on his design of bringing them over
to his Religion. The consequence whereof will be thirdly, that where it does
not very plainly appear that Christianity has made an alteration in it, we
interpret the Baptism thereof conformably to that of the Jews, from whence it
appears to have been transcribed. How much more then, where there are any fair
hints in Christianity of its symbolizing with the Doctrine of the other? The
result of which will be fourthly, our having recourse upon occasion to the
Baptism of the Jews for the better clearing, or establishing the Doctrine of
our own. Which as I shall therefore not fail to do as often as their Writings
shall furnish matter for it; so having said thus much concerning their Baptism,
and that of the Heathen, I will pass on to the Baptism of the Christians, and
confine my self yet more strictly to the consideration of it.

PART II. Of the Baptism of the Christians, and the Institution of it.
The Contents.
The Institution of the Christian Baptism more ancient, than the Command for it
in S. Matthew Matt. 28.19.
, though not as to the generality of the World, nor it may be as to the like
explicit Profession of the Trinity. As is made appear from Christ, or his
Disciples baptizing in Judea, not long after his own Baptism by S. John.
Enquiry thereupon made, whether it were not yet more ancient, yea as ancient as
Christ's execution of his Prophetical Office. Which is rendered probable from
our Saviors making Disciples before, and the equal reason there appears to
have been for his making them after the same manner with those of Judea; From
Christ's representing to Nicodemus the necessity of being born again of water,
and the spirit, which is shown at large to be meant of a true, and proper
Baptism; As, in fine, from Christ's telling S. Peter, when he asked the washing
of his Hands, and Head, as well as Feet, that he, who had been washed, needs
not save to wash his feet. An answer to the supposed silence of the Scripture
concerning so early a Baptism, and that shown to be neither a perfect silense,
nor an unaccountable one.

NOW the first thing to be enquired after is the Institution of it, and so much
the rather, because though there is no doubt as to the thing it self, yet there
is as to the first beginning of it. For there are, who have thought this
Sacrament to have been first instituted by our Savior immediately before his
Ascension, and when he gave command to his Disciples Matt. 28.19.
to go, and teach, or disciple all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And I willingly grant (because
our Savior was sent only Matt. 15.24.
to the lost sheep of the House of Israel) that that was the first institution
of it, as to that more general extent it was to have in the World, and it may
be too as to that clear, and explicit profession of the Trinity, into the Names
of which our Savior afterward commanded to baptize: Because such Doctrines as
that were to be poured into the Disciples by degrees, and according as they
should be able to receive them. But that the Sacrament it self had a more early
Institution, will appear from the mention there is of our Savior's baptizing
long before, or at least of his Disciples doing it by his Commission, and
Appointment.

For the clearing whereof we are to know, that whatsoever he may be thought to
have done, before he first passed into Judaea after his own Baptism by John the
Baptist, yet there he Joh. 3.22.
, or his Disciples Joh. 4.2.
baptized; yea to so great a number, that John's Disciples Joh. 3.26.
affirmed to their Master, that all men came to him, and it; and news was
afterward brought to the Pharisees Joh. 4.1.
, that he made, and baptized more Disciples, than John himself. Into what
profession is not difficult to conjecture from our Savior's being said to make
Joh. 4.1.
Disciples by it, and from the Baptist's affirmming in allowance of our
Savior's Baptism, that he that believed on the Son Joh. 3.36.
, should have everlasting Life, but he, that believed not the Son, should not
see life, but, on the contrary, have the wrath of God abiding on him. For what
could that assertion have signified toward the legitimating of our Savior's
Baptism, especially when John himself admonished Men by his to believe on him,
that should come after him Acts 19.4.
, that is, on Christ Jesus? Were it not, that our Savior, or his Disciples did
expressly baptize Men into the belief of him, and of that August Authority, and
saving power, which was vested in him as the Messiah. Which makes me wonder so
much the more, that Tertullian De Bapt. c. 11.
should make that Baptism of the Disciples but of the same nature with that of
John, but above all at his asking, how Christ could be supposed to baptize into
himself, when he at that time made it his business to conceal who, and what he
was. For as John the Baptist was not wanting Joh. 1.29, etc.
to discover what he was; so our Savior was so far from being reserved as to
that particular, that the very first of those Disciples, that came to him, did
both acknowledge him Joh. 41.45.
as the Messiah immediately, and represent him as such to other Men.

But let us rise yet higher, than Christ's baptizing in Judaea, though that be
not far removed from his first setting up for Disciples, because whilst John
was yet Joh. 3.22, 23.
baptizing, which is the time, from whence the Scripture Act. 1.22. -- 10.37.
makes our Savior's preaching to commence. Not that there are any express
proofs before that time of his baptizing any Disciples, but that it may be some
probable proofs may offer themselves for it, and such as we cannot reasonably
refuse. Of which nature I reckon first his making Disciples before that time,
and particularly those Disciples, whom he made use of to baptize in the Land of
Jury. For if our Savior made Disciples before, why not after the same manner,
wherein he made those of Judaea? He had to induce him to it the custom, that
then prevailed among the Jews, of making Disciples by that solemnity, as
appears both by their so admitting Proselytes, and the Baptism of his
Forerunner. He had to induce him to it the greater likelihood there was thereby
of inviting others to the same Baptism, than if those, who were the first, and
chief, and moreover made use of by himself to baptize, had not first been
baptized themselves: Because so there could have been no pretense to refuse the
Baptism he proposed, whereas otherwise they might have rejected it as a thing
unnecessary to be had, or scrupled it as proceeding from incompetent
Administrators of it. In fine, he had to induce him to it that, which prevailed
with himself Matt. 3.15.
to receive the Baptism of John, even their fulfilling all righteousness, who
were not only the first of his Disciples, but ordained by himself to be a
pattern unto others. Which inducements as they are of no small force to
persuade his baptizing from the beginning, because but suitable to his own
proceedings, or the common reasonings of Mankind; so will no doubt be accounted
such, if there be not equal probabilities to the contrary, as which are the
only things, that can take off the edge of them. Now what is there of that
nature, that can persuade Christ's omission of Baptism, unless it be either the
Scripture's silence, which shall be afterward considered, or his willingness
thereby to intimate, that he had not so tied his own Graces to an external
Rite, but that he could, and would upon occasion conferr them without it? But
beside that there was a like fear thereby of Men's neglecting his appointments
upon a presumption of their receiving his Graces as the Apostles did; This may
seem to have been too early a season for such an intimation, because before Men
were well confirmed in his Authority, or ability to conferr them, even by the
ordinary solemnities. For if they were not as yet well confirmed in that, how
should they dream of a greater power, yea not rather be thereby tempted to
question altogether his Authority, because departing so far even from the
example of John the Baptist, whom all Men Matt. 21.26.
accounted as a Prophet?

But beside that our Savior made Disciples before, and may therefore not
improbably be thought to have made them after the same manner; We find yet
farther, that before he baptized those of Judaea, he represented the solemnity
of Baptism as a thing necessary to enter Men into that Kingdom of God, to which
he invited them: Our Savior not only telling Nicodemus, that except a Man were
born again Joh. 3.3.
, he could not see the Kingdom of God, but yet more plainly, that except he
were born again of Water Joh. 3.5.
, and of the Spirit, he could not possibly enter into it. For how could Christ
represent that as necessary, which he himself had not afforded to his first,
and chiefest Disciples, nor, for ought that does appear, ever after did? For if
he did, he would certainly have done it before he made use of them to baptize
others; Partly because they were the first Disciples he had, and partly because
so they would have been more apparently qualified to have administered the same
Baptism unto others. If therefore Christ represented Baptism as necessary, even
before his baptizing in Judaea, it is not unreasonable to think he had both
instituted, and administered it before: Especially, when the Disciples he before
had cannot well be thought to have had it afterward, as in reason they must
have had it, if it were so necessary as our Savior affirmed it. And possibly
neither would they, who are otherwise persuaded, have in the least suspected
the force of this argument, had it not been for an opinion of theirs, that our
Savior spoke not in this place of Baptism, but of Men's being born again of
that spirit of God, which has the same cleansing quality with water: So making
that speech of our Savior to be that, which the Rhetoricians call an (...),
and consequently resolvable into a watery, or cleansing Spirit, as Virgil 's
pateris libamus and auro, is into pateris aureis, or golden Dishes. Even as
they suppose the Scripture Matt. 3.11.
meant when it affirmed, that Christ should baptize with the Holy Ghost, and
with fire, that is to say, with that Holy Ghost, which has the purifying, and
warming qualities of that Element. I will not now say, though I might, that
that figure might have been more allowable here, if that speech of Christ could
have been so fairly resolved into a watery Spirit, as pateris and auro may be
into pateris aureis; Which that it cannot be, is sufficiently evident from
Gold's being the proper Material of those Dishes, whereof the Poet speaks,
which water to be sure is not of the other. But neither will I any more than
say, that Christ's baptizing with the Holy Ghost, and with fire does not make
at all for this figure, because it is certain that at the day of Pentecost,
which was the most notorious descent of the Holy Ghost, and particularly
referred to by that Baptism Act. 1.5.
, Christ baptized his Disciples with a material fire, as well as that. But I
say, which is more material, that there is great reason to understand our
Savior here of that Baptism by water, which we have affirmed his words to
import. For so first (as Mr. Hooker Eccl. Pol. li. 5.. 59.
did long since observe) the Letter of the Text persuades, and which we are not
lightly to depart from, unless we will make the Scripture a very uncertain
Rule, and indeed to prove any thing, which wanton wits would have it. So
secondly (as the same Hooker Ibid.
observes) the Ancients Justin Martyr. Apol. 2. p. 94. Tertul. de Bapt. c. 13.
Cyprian Epist. 73.
without exception understood it, yea he Tertul. ubi supra.
, who makes the Baptism now under consideration, even the Baptism of Christ
before his Ascension, to be but of the same nature with S. John's. So thirdly,
we have cause to understand Christ here, because expressing what he here
intended by a new birth from water, which is the property Tit. 3.5.
of that Baptism, he afterward commanded the Apostles to administer. In fine,
so several circumstances both of the Text, and Context persuade, and some too,
that are not so ordinarily taken notice of. Of which nature I reckon as none of
the least that, which gave occasion to them, even Nicodemus's coming to Jesus
by night Joh. 3.2.
, and there, and then acknowledging to him, that he was a teacher come from
God, and that he himself was induced to believe it by the miracles our Savior
wrought. For that secret confession of his being not only not agreeable to that
more public one Matt. 10.32.
, which our Savior required, but (as appears by the answer he returned to it)
intimated by him to be insufficient, because letting him know, that except he
was born again of water, and the spirit, he could not enter into the Kingdom of
God; Nothing can be more agreeable to our Savior's mind, than to understand
those Words of his of Men's making a more public confession of him in order to
their Salvation, if the Words can with any reason be thought to admit of it.
Which that they may is evident from hence, that, whatever our Savior now
understood by them, the like expression Tit. 3.5.
became afterward an usual periphrasis of Baptism, which was a public
confession of our Savior. I say secondly, that as the occasion of the words
does naturally lead to such a sense, as will make them import a more public
Confession of our Savior; So it will consequently prompt us to understand them
of such a new Birth, as is performed by Water, and the Spirit, rather than of
that, which is performed by the Spirit alone: That, as it is a Birth, which
manifests it self to the Eyes of others, which this cannot be supposed to do,
so being a Birth therefore, which may publicly declare our Confession of him,
by whose appointment we are born again. Agreeable hereto thirdly, is the sense
of the words themselves, if those Jews, of whom Nicodemus was sometime a Ruler,
may be listened to in this affair; They not only affirming their own Proselytes
to have been admitted by Baptism, but that Baptism also represented as a thing,
which gave them a new birth, yea so far, as to make them put off their old
relations by it. For what then can be more reasonable, than to think, that our
Savior, when he spoke to a Jew, spoke the same Language with them, and
consequently, that, as he spoke of being born of Water, as well as the Spirit,
he meant a like Baptism by it. Especially, when it is observable, fourthly,
that our Savior asked Nicodemus, not without some amazement, Joh. 3.10.
, Art thou a Master in Israel, and know not these things? For what was this,
but to intimate yet more, that the new Birth, whereof he spoke, was no stranger
to themselves, and consequently, because he spoke of being born of Water, that
he meant a Baptism by it? Add hereunto, fifthly; our Savior's affirming
himself in the former Discourse to have spoken of earthly Joh. 3.12.
things, and (as one would think) therefore of such a Birth, which though
influenced by God's Spirit, yet had something of earthly, as that is opposed to
heavenly, adhering to it: As, in fine, the Evangelist's subjoyning to this
Discourse of a new Birth by Water the mention of our Savior's Joh. 3.22.
passing into Judaea, and there baptizing; There being not a fairer account
either of that connection, or our Savior's proceedings, than that, agreeably to
what he had said concerning the necessity of Men's being so born again, he went
into Judaea, and baptized, and so made way for their entrance into God's
Kingdom. Such evidence there is of our Savior's meaning a proper Baptism, when
he spoke of the necessity of Men's being born again of water, and of the
Spirit; And if our Savior meant such a Baptism, there is as little doubt of
his having before both instituted, and administered it, yea even from the time
of his setting up for Disciples; There being not the least appearance of
Christ's baptizing those first Disciples afterward, which yet he must have
done, considering the necessity thereof, if they had not been baptized before.

I will conclude what I have to say concerning the earliness of our Savior's
Baptism, when I have added from a passage of Christ to S. Peter the farther
probability there is of his, and the other Apostles having received it, and
therefore, if they did so, of their having received it from the beginning of
their Discipleship: That I mean, whereupon S. Peter's begging of Christ to wash
not only his feet, but his hands, and his head, if (as our Savior had told
him) he could have no part in him, unless he washed him, Christ is said to have
made answer Joh. 13.10.
, that he, that had been washed, even by a more general washing, needed not
save to wash his feet. For as our Savior intimates by that expression, that
he, and the rest had passed under the former washing, and consequently did not
need such a general washing a second time; so he may not improbably be thought
to have meant the washing of Baptism, and which though in it self an outward
purification, yet was attended with an inward, and spiritua lone: Partly,
because it is certain that our Savior had before this time madeuse of the
Baptism of Water to purify Men unto himself, and may therefore be well enough
supposed to allude unto it; And partly, because that Baptism, or washing will
be more directly opposed to that, which our Savior now intended, and which
though designed by him to signify a more spiritual purgation, even that of the
affections, or actions, yet was performed by him by an outward washing. For why
then should we not think, that the Apostles had that more general washing of
Baptism? Especially when we know that about this time Christ administered to
them the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and which as it is in order of nature
after that of Baptism, and may therefore not unreasonably be thought to have
been preceded by theirs, so is an evidence that Christ meant, in some measure
at least, to conduct them by the same Rites, and Ceremonies, wherewith he
intended to bring other Men unto himself.

One only thing there is, which can any way prejudice the former Discourse,
even the silence there is in the New Testament of any Baptism by Christ before
that in Judaea, yea the silence there is of it in that very Evangelist, who
takes such particular notice of the other. And surely such a silence would have
been of no small force, if it had been either a perfect silence, or an
unaccountable one. But as that story cannot be looked upon as perfectly silent,
which affords so many probable proofs of what it is pretended to be silent in;
so there may be reason enough given of its ascending no higher in its account
of Christ's administration of Baptism, than that, which was performed by him in
Judaea: Partly, because the Author of it had before acquainted his Readers with
Christ's representing it as generally necessary Joh. 3.5.
to Salvation, and from which, and the following practice of our Savior in
making Disciples, Men might reasonably enough collect his having so made the
former ones; And partly, because he knew, that what was defective in his
account of our Savior's Baptism, might be abundantly supplied to posterity (to
whom he, and the other Evangelists principally wrote) by what those other
Evangelists Matt. 28.19. Mark 16.15, 16.
had said concerning Christ's giving command to his Apostles of baptizing all
Nations in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. For
that, together with his own account of our Savior's Baptism, was enough to let
them know (and therefore enough for their own purpose) that as Christ himself
initiated Men by Baptism, yea represented it as necessary to Salvation, so it
was his absolute will, and pleasure, that those, to whom his Apostles, and
their Successors published his Gospel, should be initiated by the same means,
if they meant to enter into the Kingdom of God.

PART III. Of the outward visible Sign of Baptism.
The Contents.
The outward visible Sign of the Christian Baptism shown to be the Element of
Water, and enquiry thereupon made wherein it was intended as a Sign; Which is
shown, in the general, to be as to the cleansing quality thereof, more
particularly as to the use it was put to toward newborn Infants, and that
application of it which was first in use, even by an immersion, or plunging the
Party baptized in it. Occasion taken from thence to enquire farther, how it
ought to be applied, more especially whether by an immersion, or by that, or an
aspersion, or effusion. Evidence made of an immersion being the only legitimate
Rite of Baptism, save where necessity does otherwise require; And enquiry
thereupon made, whether necessity may justify the Application of it by an
Aspersion, or Effusion, and, if it may, whether the case of Infants be to be
looked upon as such a necessity What is to be thought of those additions, which
were anciently made, or continue as yet in being in the outward solemnities of
Baptism. Where the sign of the Cross in Baptism is more particularly
considered, and answer made to those Exceptions that are made against it as a
Ceremony, as an addition of Men to the Institution of Christ, and as a supposed
Relic of Popery, or giving too much countenance to the Papists abuses of it.

BUT because whatever doubt there may be of the first Institution of the
Christian Baptism, Question. What is the outward visible sign or form in
Baptism?

Answer. Water, wherein the person is baptized in the name of the Father, etc.


yet there neither is, nor can be any doubt of our Savior's instituting it
then, when he was about to take his leave of his Disciples; Therefore pass we
on to the Sacrament it self, which (agreeably to the procedure of our own
Catechism, and the method before observed, when I entreated of the nature of a
Sacrament in the general) I will consider, I. As to its outward and visible
Sign. II. As to its inward and Spiritual Grace, or the thing signified by it.
III. As to that relation, which its outward, and visible Sign bears to its
inward, and Spiritual Grace. IV. As to the Foundation of that Relation. For as
the nature of the Sacrament of Baptism will be found to lie within these four,
so I no way doubt we shall be able to reduce to one, or other of these generals
whatsoever is any way necessary to be known concerning it.


Now there are four things to be inquired concerning the first of these, even
the outward and visible sign of Baptism. First, what that outward and visible
sign is. Secondly, wherein it was intended as a sign. Thirdly, how it ought to
be applied. Fourthly, what is to be thought of those additions, which were
anciently made, or continue as yet in being in the outward solemnities of
Baptism.

1. As touching the outward, and visible sign of Baptism, there is no doubt it
is the Element of Water, as is evident from the native signification of the
word Baptism, which signifies an immersion, or dipping into some liquid thing,
from the matter of those Baptisms, which were in use among the Jews, and which
our Savior (because making use of the same word to express his own Baptism by)
is in reason to be supposed to have so far conformed it to, but more especially
from the account we have of the Administration of it, both whilst our Savior
continued here, and after his Ascension into Heaven. For thus after S. John had
said Joh. 3.22.
, that our Savior, presently after his entering upon his Prophetic Office,
came into the Land of Judaea, and there baptized, he immediately subjoined Joh.
3.23.
, that John the Baptist also was then baptizing in Aenon near to Salim, because
there was much water there. For as it is evident from thence, as well as from
other places Matt. 3.6. -- 13.
, that the Baptism of John was a Baptism by Water; so the Evangelist mentioning
John the Baptist as practicing the same thing with our Savior, shows the
Baptism of our Savior to have been so far like it, and consequently to have
had Water for the Instrument thereof. The same is yet more evident as to the
practice of our Savior's Disciples, after his more general Command Matt. 28.19.
of Baptism, and his own Ascension into Heaven. For thus we find Philip and the
Eunuch going down into a certain water Act. 8.38.
, by which they passed in order to the Baptism of the latter; As that too,
after the Eunuch had admonished him Act. 8.36.
, See here is water, what does hinder me to be baptized? And thus too we find
S. Peter Act. 10.47, 48.
, before he gave order for Cornelius, and his companies being baptized in the
name of the Lord, demanding of those of the Circumcision, that came with him,
whether any Man could forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which
had received the Holy Ghost, as well as themselves; Thereby intimating, or
rather expressly declaring, that our Savior's Baptism was, as to the outward,
and visible sign, the same with that of John the Baptist, and other the
Baptisms of the Jews.

2. Water therefore being no doubt the outward and visible sign of Baptism, and
so declared to be by the manner of its Administration; The next thing to be
inquired into is, wherein it was intended as a sign, which will appear to have
been in these three particulars: First in respect of that cleansing quality,
which is natural to it, secondly in respect of that use which it was put to
about newborn Infants, thirdly in respect of that manner of Application of it,
which was first used, and no doubt generally intended, I mean the dipping of
the Party baptized in it.

That the Water of Baptism was intended as a sign in respect of the first of
these, will need no other proof, than Ananias's admonishing Paul to arise and
be baptized, and wash Act. 22.16.
away his sins, calling upon the name of the Lord. For it appearing, on the one
hand, that the Baptism, to which Paul was invited, even the Christian one, was
a Baptism by Water, and, on the other hand, that it was at least ordained for
the remission Act. 2.38.
of sins, and so the putting away their guilt; Nothing can be more reasonable,
than to think, that when Ananias subjoined to the precept of being baptized
that of washing away his sins, he meant his washing them away by Baptism, and
consequently that the Water of Baptism was both a sign of something relating to
the putting away of his sins, and a sign too in particular in respect of that
cleansing quality, which is natural to it, because that Baptism, to which it
belongs, is described as washing away the other.

But beside that Water was intended as a sign in respect of that cleansing
quality, which is natural to it; There is equal reason to believe, that it was
also intended as such in respect of the use it was then put to about newborn
Infants, even the washing away of those impurities, which they contracted from
the Womb. We have (as Mr. Mede did long since observe Disc. on Tit. 3.5.
) an allusion to this custom in the description, which God gives of the poor
and forlorn condition of Jerusalem, when he first took her unto himself, under
the parable of an exposed Infant. For as for thy Nativity, says he, Eze. 16.4.
in the day that thou wast born, thy Navel was not cut, neither wast thou
washed in water to supple thee, thou wast not salted at all, nor swadled at
all: Thereby intimating what was then done to Infants in their Nativity, and
particularly the washing them from their impurities. And how generally received
this custom was, even among the Heathen, may appear (as the same Mr. Mede Vbi
supra.
has observed) from what was done to the (...), or (...), who were persons
Hesych. in utramque vocem.
, to whom the Rites of Burial had been performed as dead, but did afterward
appear again in the World. For as these were looked upon as born anew Plutarch
Quaest. Romans statim ab initio. (...) --.
into the World, so like newborn Infants they were to be washed with Water
before they could be admitted to the conversation of Men, or allowed to enter
into the Temples of their Gods. But so that the Water of Baptism was intended
for a sign, is evident from its being styled the laver Tit. 3.5.
of regeneration, or a new Birth, and from the addition, that was made to it in
after times of giving milk Tertul. de Corona c. 3. Inde [nempe post
immersionem] suscepti, lactis and mellis concordiam praegustamus.
and honey to the new-baptized persons, as that too to declare their Infancy
Idem adv. Marcion. li. 1. c. 14. Sedille quidem usque nunc nec aquam reprobavit
creatoris qua suos abluit, nec oleum quo suos uncuit, nec mellis and lactis
societatem, quo suos infantat, etc.
. For this evidently shows this second Birth to relate to the first, and
consequently, that the Element of Water, and the Regeneration by it, though
borrowed more immediately from the Baptism of the Jews, yet was intended by our
Savior (as I no way doubt it was also by the Jews) as of like use with that,
which was applied to newborn Infants, and to represent alike washing away of
natural pollutions.

One other particular there is, wherein I have said the Water of Baptism to
have been intended as a sign, and that is in respect of that manner of
application, which was sometime used, I mean the dipping, or plunging the party
baptized in it. A signification, which S. Paul will not suffer those to forget,
who have been acquainted with his Epistles. For with reference to that manner
of Baptizing we find him affirming Romans 6.4.
, that we are buried with Christ by Baptism into death, that like as Christ was
raised up from the dead, by the glory of the Father, even so we also should
walk in newness of life; And again Romans 6.5.
, that if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall
be also in the likeness of his resurrection. To the same purpose, or rather yet
more clearly, does that Apostle discourse, where he tells us Col. 2.12.
, that as we are buried with Christ in Baptism, so we do therein rise also with
him through the faith of the operation of God, who has raised him from the
Dead. For what is this but to say, that as the design of Baptism was to oblige
Men to conform so far to Christ's Death, and Resurrection, as to die unto Sin,
and live again unto Righteousness, so it was performed by the ceremony of
immersion, that the person immersed might by that very ceremony, which was no
obscure image of a Sepulture, be minded of the precedent death, as in like
manner, by his coming again out of the Water, of his rising from that death to
life, after the example of the Instituter thereof? For which cause, as has
been elsewhere Expl. of the Creed, in the words, And Buried.
observed, the Ancient Church added to the Rite of immersion the dipping of the
party three several times to represent the three days Christ continued in the
Grave (for that we find to have been the intention of some) and made the Eve of
Easter one of the solemn times of the Administration of it.

3. The third thing to be inquired concerning the outward visible sign of
Baptism is, how it ought to be applied, where again these two things would be
considered. First, whether it ought to be applied by an immersion, or by that,
or an aspersion, or effusion. Secondly, whether it ought to be applied by a
threefold immersion, or aspersion, answerably to the names into which we are
baptized, or either by that, or a single one.

The former of these is, it may be, a more material question, than it is
commonly deemed by us, who have been accustomed to baptize by a bare effusion,
or sprinkling of water upon the party. For in things, which depend for their
force, upon the mere will, and pleasure of him, who instituted them, there
ought, no doubt, great regard to be had to the commands of him, who did so; As
without which there is no reason to presume, we shall receive the benefit of
that ceremony, to which he has been pleased to annex it. Now, what the command
of Christ was in this particular, cannot well be doubted of by those who shall
consider first the words of Christ Matt. 28.19.
concerning it, and the practice of those times, whether in the Baptism of
John, or of our Savior. For the words of Christ are, that they should Baptize,
or Dip those, whom they made Disciples to him (for so, no doubt, the word (...)
properly signifies) and, which is more, and not without its weight, that they
should baptize them into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost: Thereby intimating such a washing, as should receive the party
baptized within the very body of that Water, which they were to baptize him
with. Though, if there could be any doubt concerning the signification of the
words in themselves, yet would that doubt be removed by considering the
practice of those times, whether in the Baptism of John or of our Savior. For
such as was the practice of those times in Baptizing, such in reason are we to
think our Savior's command to have been concerning it, especially, when the
words themselves incline that way; There being not otherwise any means either
for those, or future times to discover his intention concerning it. Now what
the practice of those times was as to this particular, will need no other proof
than their resorting to Rivers, and other such like receptacles of waters for
the performance of that ceremony, as that too because there was much Water
there. For so the Scripture does not only affirm concerning the Baptism of John
Matt. 3.5.6.13. John 3.23.
, but both intimate concerning that, which our Savior administered in Judaea
(because making John's Baptism, and his to be so far forth of the same sort
Joh. 3.22, 23.
) and expressly affirm concerning the Baptism of the Eunuch, which is the only
Christian Baptism the Scripture is any thing particular in the description of:
The words of S. Luke Act. 8.38.
being, that both Philip and the Eunuch went down into a certain water which
they met with in their journey, in order to the baptizing of the latter. For
what need would there have been either of the Baptist's resorting to great
confluxes of Water, or of Philip, and the Eunuch's going down into this, were
it not that the Baptism both of the one, and the other was to be performed by
an immersion? A very little Water, as we know it does with us, sufficing for an
effusion, or sprinkling. But beside the words of our Blessed Savior, and the
concurrent practice of those times, wherein this Sacrament was instituted; It
is in my opinion of no less consideration, that the thing signified by the
Sacrament of Baptism, cannot otherwise be well represented, than by an
immersion, or at least by some more general way of purification, than that of
effusion, or sprinkling. For though the pouring, or sprinkling of a little
Water upon the Face may suffice to represent an internal washing, which seems
to be the general end of Christ's making use of the Sacrament of Baptism; yet
can it not be thought to represent such an entire washing, as that of newborn
Infants was, and as Baptism may seem to have been intended for, because
represented as the laver Tit. 3.5.
of our regeneration: That, though it do require an immersion, yet requiring
such a general washing at least, as may extend to the whole Body; As other than
which cannot answer its type, nor yet that general, though internal purgation,
which Baptism was intended to represent. The same is to be said yet more upon
the account of our conforming to the Death, and Resurrection of Christ, which
we learn from S. Paul to have been the design of Baptism to signify. For,
though that might, and was well enough represented by the baptized persons
being buried in Baptism, and then rising out of it; yet can it not be said to
be so, or at least but very imperfectly by the bare pouring out, or sprinkling
the Baptismal Water on him. But therefore as there is so much the more reason
to represent the Rite of immersion, as the only legitimate Rite of Baptism,
because the only one, that can answer the ends of its Institution, and those
things, which were to be signified by it; so especially if (as is well known,
and undoubtedly of great force) the general practice of the Primitive Church
was agreeable thereto, and the practice of the Greek Church to this very day.
For who can think either the one, or the other would have been so tenacious of
so troublesome a Rite, were it not that they were well assured, as they of the
Primitive Church might very well be, of its being the only instituted, and
legitimate one.

How to take off the force of these Arguments altogether, is a thing I mean not
to consider; Partly, because our Church See the Rubric in the Office of
Baptism before the words, I baptize thee, etc.
seems to persuade such an immersion, and partly, because I cannot but think
the forementioned Arguments to be so far of force, as to evince the necessity
thereof, where there is not some greater necessity to occasion an alteration of
it. For what benefit can Men ordinarily expect from that, which depends for its
force upon the will of him, that instituted it, where there is not such a
compliance at least with it, and the Commands of the Instituter, as may answer
those ends, for which he appointed it? And indeed, whatever may have been done
to Infants, which I no way doubt were more or less baptized from the beginning,
the first mention we find of Aspersion in the Baptism of the Elder sort, was in
the case of the Clinici, or Men who received Baptism upon their sick Beds; and
that Baptism represented by S. Cyprian Epist. ad Magn. 76. In Sacramentis
salutari^^s, necessitate cogente, and Deo indulgentiam suam largiente, totum
credentibus conserunt Divina compendia.
as legitimate upon the account of the necessity, that compelled it, and the
presumption there was of God's gracious acceptance thereof because of it. By
which means the lawfulness of any other Baptism, than by an immersion, will be
found to lie in the necessity there may sometime be of another manner of
Administration of it; and we therefore only enquire, whether the necessity of
the party to be baptized can justify such an alteration, and what is to be
looked upon as such a necessity. And indeed though that Magnus, to whom S.
Cyprian directed the forementioned Letter, seemed to question the lawfulness of
such a Baptism, and that Father, as his manner is, spoke but modestly
concerning it; yet there is not otherwise any appearance of the Ancient
Churches disapproving the Baptism of the Clinicks, because they were not loti,
but perfusi, as S. Cyprian expresses it. For even he himself does there
intimate, that they Aut si aliquis existimat eos nihil consecutos, eo quod aqua
salutari tantum perfusi sunt, etc. non decipiantur, ut si incommodum languoris
evaserint, and convaluerint, baptizentur. Si autem baptizari non possunt, qui
jam Baptismo Ecclesiastico sanctificati sunt, cur in fide sua, and Domini
indulgentia scandalizentur? Cypr. ubi supra.
, who liked not the Baptism of the Clinicks, did not yet care to baptize them
again. He adds farther, that they who had been so baptized, were known to have
been delivered thereby from that unclean spirit, which before possessed them
Denique and rebus ipsis experimur, ut necessitate urgenle, in aegritudine
baptizati, and gratiam consecuti, careant immundo spiritu, quo antea
movebantur, and laudabiles ac probabiles in Ecclesia vivant, plusque per dies
singulos in augmentum coelestis gratiae per fidei Sacramentum proficiant. Cypr.
ibid.
, and after their recovery, gave as good proof, as any, by their holy living,
of their being sanctified by that Baptism. In fine, that they, who differed
from him, as to the rebaptization of Heretics, (which was the sounder part of
the Church in that particular) did, without any difference, admit those, who
had been baptized by Heretics Et tantus honor habeatur haereticis, ut inde
venientes non interrogentur, utrumne loti sint, an perfusi, utrumne Clinici
sint, an Peripatetici. Cypr. ibid.
, neither were scrupulous in enquiring, whether they were washed or sprinkled,
Clinicks or Peripateticks. Which passages alone are a sufficient proof, that
the generality of the Church looked upon sprinkling as enough, where there was
any just necessity to constrain it. But so (to omit other proofs) we may be
satisfied even by that Canon Cod. Eccl. Vniv. can. 57. cum not. Just.
, which was made against some of the forementioned Clinicks; The utmost, that
Canon pretended to do against them, being the hindering them from being promoted
to the Priesthood, as that too, not because of any unlawfulness in the manner
of their Baptism, but because there was sometime a presumption, that that
Baptism proceeded rather from necessity, than choice, or that they had (as
Tertullian De Poenit. cap. 8.
speaks) deferred the receiving of it, that they might in the mean time indulge
to their sins, as nothing doubting, but their future Baptism would wipe off
all. There being therefore no doubt to be made (so far as the judgment, or
practice of the Church can warrant us) that necessity does justify a bare
Aspersion in Baptism; Enquire we, for our farther confirmation in it, what
there was in the Scripture to induce them to it, or establish us in the belief
of it. Which I conceive to be their understanding from thence 1 Pet. 3.21.
, that though Baptism was the thing, that saved, yet it was not so much by its
washing away the filth of the flesh, as from that answer of a good Conscience,
which it did involve; That, though the external washing was also necessary in
its kind, and, where it might be had, in those circumstances also, wherein it
was instituted, yet since God had declared Matt. 12.7.
, That he would have mercy, and not sacrifice, there was reason enough to
believe, that he required no farther a compliance in this particular, than was
consistent with the safety of Men's lives to afford; especially, when what was
wanting in the application of the outward visible sign might be made up by the
form of words, wherewith it was administered, and Men admonished thereby of
those significations of Baptism, which the visible solemnities thereof did not
suggest. For, the several ends of Baptism being thus secured, there was still
the less reason to be scrupulous about the means, or think God would be
rigorous in exacting them. But so they might be yet more assured (as it appears
St. Cyprian Ubi supra.
was) by what the Prophet Ezekiel Ezekiel. 36.25.
brings in God as speaking concerning the times of the Messiah; Even that he
would sprinkle clean Water upon them, and they should be clean from all their
filthiness, and from their Idols. For as it appears from what follows Ezekiel.
36.26, 27.
, even that God would give the persons there spoken of a new heart, and a new
Spirit, take away their stony heart from them, and put his own spirit within
them, that this whole passage was spoken more particularly with reference to
the times of the Messiah, Maimonides himself Explic. Tract. Sanb. c. 10. a pud
Pocock. Port. Mosis, p. 160.1.
so applying this, and the like passages; So we cannot therefore better
interpret the sprinkling of clean Water upon them in order to it, than of the
Water of Baptism, and which the Spirit of God expressing by the term of
sprinkling of Water shows it to have foreseen a necessity of its being so
administered oftentimes, and his own allowance of it. All which things whosoever
shall consider, will, I doubt not, see reason enough to think, that necessity
may justify an Aspersion in Baptism, and nothing more therefore left to
enquire upon this Head, than what may be looked upon as such a necessity, which
will bring the question yet nearer to our selves. Now as there can be no doubt
of sickness being such, and particularly such a sickness, as fastens Men to
their Beds; So we shall therefore have nothing more to consider of, than the
case of Infants, and to whom as Baptism is generally administered, so it is also
performed by an effusion, or sprinkling. With what necessity, is the thing we
are to enquire, and so much the rather because the Greek Church uses
immersion, or dipping to this very day, and the Muscovitish Church after its
example. For if the coldness of any Clime may be thought to make that Rite
dangerous to such tender Bodies, one would think they of the latter should find
it to be such, and therefore see a necessity of changing it. For the clearing
whereof we are to know, that as they, who use the Rite of immersion, even in
warmer Countries, are so sensible of the tenderness of Infant Bodies, that they
make use of warm Water to baptize them; So the Muscovites making use of it
without any danger (if yet they always do so) will not make it cease to be such
to Infants of other Countries: There being, as every one knows, no small
difference between the Bodies of Infants, as well as those of Men, and to some
of whom therefore, and in some Countries that may be exceeding dangerous, which
Infants of other Countries find no such inconvenience by. And indeed as such an
Immersion of Infants, especially in these Northern parts, cannot generally be
thought to be without its hazard, how warily and carefully soever managed; As
it may be yet more hazardous to weaker Infants, and whom, as it would not be
thought fit to deny Baptism to, so as little, to do any thing to send them out
of the World; so I am apt enough to believe upon second thoughts (for I have
elsewhere Expl. of the Creed, in the Words, And Buried.
spoken more harshly concerning it) that that Rite came to be disused here
after a sufficient proof of the inconveniences thereof; Because (as Erasmus
notes Vid. Pamel. in not. ad Cypr. epist. ad Magnum.
) it was in use among us, even in his time, and the Liturgies, that have been
in force since, not excepting the present one, seem rather to persuade the use
of it. For our Fore fathers being so strangely tenacious of that Rite, and both
they, and their posterity not without a venerable opinion of it, it cannot well
be thought they should come at length so generally to disuse it, but that they
found by experience, that it was not without its hazard, and so more prudently
omitted. However it be, our Church has acquitted it self from all blame,
because manifestly licensing See the Rubr. of Bapt. before the Words, I baptize
thee, etc.
the sprinkling of Infants with respect to the weakness of their State; And I
have the more carefully noted both that, and the ground of our practice, the
better to defend our selves from a retort of the Romanists, when we charge them
with Sacrilege in the matter of the Eucharist for taking away the Cup from the
Laity. For why not (as they sometime answer) as well as change the Rite of
Immersion in Baptism into that of sprinkling? Especially, when a great part of
the Symbolicalness of that Sacrament lies in the manner of the application of
its sign. Which Answer of theirs were not in my opinion easy to be repel'd,
were it not, that we have that necessity to justify our practice, which they
cannot pretend for their own.

Having thus said enough concerning the applying of the outward sign of
Baptism, whether by an Immersion, or Aspersion, which was the first thing I had
to consider; Enquire we in the next place how often that application ought to
be made, that is to say whether as many times as there are persons in the
Godhead, into which we baptize, or once for all into the three. The ground of
which question is not only that distinct profession of the Trinity, which
Baptism was intended to declare, but the appearance there is of the Churches
using a threefold immersion from the beginning. For, not to mention any other
proofs, Tertullian, who flourished within an hundred years after the last of
the Apostles, does not only mention the threefold immersion, as a thing in use
in his time, but as a thing which was derived to them from Tert. de Corona, c.
3. Ergo quaeramus, an and Traditio nisi scripta non debeat recipi. Plant
negabimus recipiendam, si nulla exempla praejudicent aliarum observationum,
quas sine ullius scripturae instrumento, solius traditionis titulo, and exinde
consuetudinis Patrocinio vindicamus. Denique, ut a Baptismo ingrediar, Aquam
adituri ibidem, sed and aliquanto prius in Ecclesia sub Antistitis manu
contestamur, nos renunciare Diabolo, and pompae, and angelis ejus. Dehinc ter
mergitamur, amplius aliquid respondentes, quam Dominus in Evangelio
determinavit. Item adv. Praxeam c. 26.
Tradition, and which, considering the time wherein he lived, cannot well fall
short of an Apostolical one. And thus much certainly ought to be allowed to
this, and other testimonies, that in or near the Apostolical Age, the more
fully to express that distinction of persons, into the Faith of which Christ
commanded to baptize, Men were with the command, or allowance of those who
presided in the Church, plunged into the Baptismal Water at the mention of each
person's name. But as that threefold immersion cannot be collected from the
command of Christ, because simply enjoining to baptize into the Faith of the
Trinity, and which one immersion may declare as well as a threefold one; As
there is as little appearance of such a threefold immersion from the account we
have in the Scripture of the administration of it: So it is but reasonable to
think, that as ancient as it was, yet it was postnate to the single one, and
had its rise from some Men's beginning to call the Doctrine of the Trinity in
question (as we find by Tertullian they did very early) and, the better to
color their own error, as well as to overthrow the other, admonishing Men
from S. Paul, that Baptism was peculiarly intended to baptize Men into Christ's
death. For beside that they, who consider the primitive face of Christianity,
will need no other proof than that to persuade them to believe, that the more
simple any Rite is, so much the more ancient it ought to be thought to be; That
Apostolic Canon (...), etc. (...). Can. 50.
, which commands the deposing of him, who should not use a threefold immersion,
but a single one, does not so much as prefer the threefold immersion to the
single one simply, and absolutely considered, but as opposed to that single
one, which was made use of to baptize Men into the death of our Lord, and not
into the Faith of the Trinity. Thereby not only not condemning the single
immersion considered in it self, but also intimating the triple one to have
been rather instituted at first to obviate that heretical opinion. And if this
were the rise of the triple Immersion, as is probable enough from the premises;
The single one, abstracting from any command of the Church to the contrary,
will at least be as lawful as that, and nothing therefore left to us to
enquire, but what is to be thought of those additions, which were anciently
made, or continue as yet in being in the outward solemnities of Baptism.

4. As touching the additions, which were anciently made in this particular,
and concerning which they, who desire an account, may meet with an ample one in
Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity Part 1. c. 10.
; They were either such, as they thought more peculiarly warranted to them by
an Apostolical Tradition, of which nature till better information I must needs
think the triple Immersion to have been, or such as were brought into the
Church by those, who presided in it, the more effectually to declare the
intention of that Sacrament, to which they were added by it. Which they thought
they might most assuredly do, if they made use of such farther Rites, as did
represent yet more to their senses what that Sacrament was intended to declare.
And indeed, as that way of Instruction was in part warranted by the Sacraments
themselves, because professing by sensible things to teach Men Spiritual ones;
As it became yet more necessary by the grosness of the Vulgar sort, and that
infinity of Ceremonies, to which they had been before accustomed: So that,
which afterward made them faulty, was either the exceeding multitude thereof
(and which experience assures us does rather obscure, yea overwhelm the thing
signified by them, than help toward the declaration of it) or their advancing
by degrees into the same repute, or necessity with the signs of Christ's own
Institution. Which is so true, that they came in fine to be represented, as
means, and conveyers of Grace, as well as significative thereof; Thereby making
them Sacraments, rather than appendages of such; and which whosoever goes about
to do, must necessarily usurp the place of God, and Christ, as to whom alone it
does belong (because the only givers of Spiritual Graces) to make any ceremony
the conveyer of them. But as that Church, whose Catechism I explain, has been
so far from multiplying Rites in Baptism, that she has contented her self with
one single one, even the Sign of the Cross; So she has so explained her own
meaning in it, both in that form of words In the Office of Bapt.
, wherewith she appoints it to be made, and in a Canon Can. 30.
devised expressly for that purpose, that it will not be easy for considerate
Men to believe, that she represents it as a Sacrament, or indeed that she may
not require the conformity of her Children to it. Only, because they, who
separate from the Church, have made the injunction of that Ceremony one of the
particular reasons of their separation, and occasion may well be taken from
thence to show the ground both of that, and others, which are as yet retained
in the Church of England, I will set my self to consider the exceptions, that
have been made against it, and return a particular answer to them.

Now there are three sorts of charges, which are brought against this Ceremony,
and which therefore it will be necessary to consider; Its being a Ceremony, and
so Iess agreeable to a spiritual, and substantial Religion; Its being an
addition to the Institution of Christ, and therefore implying something of
imperfection in that; As lastly, its being a relic of Popery, or giving too
much countenance to the errors of it.

The first of these is certainly one of the most unreasonable charges, that
were ever advanced against our Church by the Adversaries thereof. As will
appear if we consider the nature of those, for whose edification that, and the
like Ceremonies were intended, The use such things are of to procure respect to
those Institutions, to which they are annexed, And the nature of that Religion,
with whose Offices they are intermixed.

That I allege as one ground of this, and the like Ceremonies the very nature
of those Men, for whose edification they were intended, is their being composed
of Flesh, as well as Spirit, and consequently the need they stand in of such
sensible helps to awaken their understandings to consider, and their affections
to embrace what they were designed to represent. For being so framed, it is not
easy to believe, that, if there were not somewhat in all actions of moment to
affect Men's sense, they would intend them as they ought, or be duly affected
with them. Of which yet if any doubt be made, we have the constant practice of
the World to justify it, because rarely, if ever, suffering that, which was
such (though there wanted not words to express their meaning) to pass without
some visible solemnities. Thus, as Mr. Hooker Eccl. Pol. li. 4.. 1.
did long since observe, Abraham proceeded with his Servant, because not only
obliging him to take a Wife for his Son out of his Kindred, but to accompany
that Oath of his, with the putting of his Hand Genesis 24. 2-9.
under his Master's Thigh. And thus too Israel made Joseph swear Genesis 47.29.
, that he would not bury him in Egypt: Both of them, as is not unlikely, from
some received custom of that time, because as they say Vatabl. in Genesis 24.2.
, yet observed in some of the Eastern parts, and as a token of the homage the
Party swearing owed to those to whom they swore, and of their readiness to
execute it in the thing sworn to by them. In like manner, as the same Mr.
Hooker Vbi supra.
has also observed, it was an Ancient manner in Israel concerning redeeming,
and exchanging, for the Man, who refused to redeem, to pluck off his Shoe, and
Ruth 4.7.
give it to him, that would; As among the Romans, when they made any Man Free,
not only to declare before the Magistrate, that they intended to make him such,
but to strike him on the Cheek, to turn him round, and have his Hair shaved
off, the Magistrate, after that, touching him with a White Rod, and bestowing a
Cap, and a White Garment on him. Of which, and infinite other instances, that
might be produced, what account can be given, but that Men have generally
thought such solemnities but requisite to imprint the things, to which they
were annexed, upon the minds of those, that were concerned, and procure a due
estimate thereof? But so it appears, that they themselves were in a great
measure persuaded, who showed themselves the greatest Enemies of the Ceremonies
of the Church; Because obliging those, that took their solemn League, and
Covenant, to swear to the Contents thereof with their hands lift up to the most
High God, as is expressed in the very entrance of it. For why that Ceremony of
lifting up of the hands, especially in a Covenant, that was intended to beat
down the supposed superstition of the Church of England, were it not that they
themselves found it in a manner necessary to awaken the minds of Men to intend
the Religion of it?

But beside that humane nature does, by the very contexture of it, require such
kind of solemnities to awaken their minds, and affections; It is not a little
to be considered of what use they are to procure respect to those Institutions,
to which they have been at any time annexed. For may not Men observe that
usefulness in the solemnities of all civil affairs, and particularly in those
solemnities, which are observed in Courts of Judicature? Does not the very
raising high of those Benches, on which the Judges sit, admonish Men of their
Superiority over them? Do not those Robes, whereby they are differenced from
other Men, draw the Eyes of the Vulgar to them, yea mind them of that greater
difference there is between the Judges, and themselves, as to that power,
wherewith they are also invested? Have not the same persons therefore (whatever
clamor has been raised against things of that nature) kept up them, and the
like solemnities among them? Have they not done it in those very instances,
which have been scrupled at in the Church? For how superstitious a thing in a
Bishop, or other Clergy Man has the use of that Cap been, which these earthly
Gods the Judges, and when they are about their great Master's work, do not only
not scruple at, but diligently retain? As knowing, that such marks of
distinction do naturally lead Men to consider those persons, or things, to
which they are applied, as of a peculiar nature, and accordingly, if they
deserve it, to respect them. And if such be the usefulness of external
solemnities in other matters, why should they be excluded from our Religion?
Nay, why should they not (considering the momentousness thereof be rather
applied to it?

Especially if we consider thirdly the nature of that Religion, with whose
Offices they are intermixed by us. For though that do more peculiarly call us
to the intending of spiritual things; Though it do loudly proclaim the
abrogation of the Ceremonial Law of Moses, and not obscurely condemn the
substituting of any the like burdensome one: Yet as it no where condemns such a
number of Ceremonies, as may serve the better to lead Men to the contemplation,
and regard of spiritual things, so it gives a sufficient countenance to them by
the Sacraments I am now upon, and by those other usances, which were in vogue
with the first Professors of it. For how can that Religion be looked upon as an
enemy to Ceremonies, which requires Men to be initiated into it by the water,
and immersion of Baptism? Yea to keep up their interest in it by partaking of
the Bread, and Wine of the Eucharist, those signs of our Savior's Crucified
Body, and of the spiritual benefits we reap by it? And though we do not find
that our Savior instituted any other Ceremonies, or at least not with a design
of giving them the same lasting obligation; Yet as we find our Savior giving
command to his Disciples, when he first sent them out to Preach, to shake off
the dust of their Feet Mark 6.11.
against those that would not hear them, as a testimony of their contempt of
God's word, and of their own resolution not to have to do with them in the like
kind, which was a kind of Excommunication of them; So we find that Paul, and
Barnabas (though under no obligation from the former command, because but a
temporary one) shook off the dust of their feet Acts 13.51.
against those Jews of Antioch, that rejected, and expelled them, as the same
S. Paul after that, when the Jews of Corinth opposed themselves, and
blasphemed, shaking his raiment at them Acts 18.6.
, as a testimony of his rejecting them, in like manner, and leaving them to go
unto the Gentiles. For what was this but to declare by a significant Ceremony,
that as they had rejected the Counsel of God toward themselves, so God had
rejected them in like manner, neither would that his Ministers should make the
like proposals to them? The same is yet more to be said upon the account of
Imposition of hands, and which, though from no Command of Christ, was either
used, or approved by the Apostles themselves, both in the Ordination of
Ministers 2 Timothy 1.6.
, and receiving penitent Sinners to Absolution 1 Timothy 5.22.
, and pardon. For these being noted Acts of that Religion, which we profess,
and yet by the allowance of the Apostles themselves transacted by the Ceremony
of Imposition of Hands, make it evident, that our Religion does rather commend,
than reject such visible solemnities, where they are sparingly, and discreetly
applied.

That first charge against the sign of the Cross being thus wiped off, even
that which pretends to discard it upon the account of its being a Ceremony; Let
us see, whether it be likely to suffer any more by the pretense of its being an
addition of Men to the Institution of Christ, yea to one, that is not without
visible solemnities of his own appointment: Such additions seeming to imply the
imperfection of that, to which they are made, and which there is the less
reason to believe in the present affair, because care has been taken by our
Savior as to the outward form of its Administration, as well as to more
material things. And surely so such Additions might very well be thought to do,
if either they were represented as of the Essence of the Sacrament, or our
Savior had professed to prescribe, or direct the whole form of the
Administration of it. But as it is notorious enough, that the Church of England
does not represent the sign of the Cross as pertaining to the Essence of the
Sacrament, because administering it after Baptism first given, yea after the
mention of the Minister's receiving the baptized person into the Congregation
of Christ's flock; So our Savior is so far from prescribing the whole external
form of its Administration, that he has left us to the general tenor of his
Doctrine, and the directions of our own reason, even for those things that are
more material, yea for such as are directed See the Directory in the
Administration of Baptism.
by those very Men, who cry out against us for adding to Christ's Institution.
For where, I beseech you, is there any prescription of other words concerning
Baptism, than what is implied in that short belief, into which he commands to
Baptize? Where to admonish all, that are present, to look back to their own
Baptism, and to repent of the violations of the Covenant they made with God in
it? Where any directions for requiring the Parent of the Child to bring him up
in the nurture of the Lord, yea to require the Parents solemn promise for the
performance of it? Nay where, which is of all others the most material, any
Prayer to Almighty God for the sanctifying of the Water he is going to make use
of, and which I no way doubt is necessary to the Consecration of it? All, that
the Institution of Baptism represents to us, being the baptizing those, that
offer themselves to it, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. Now if our Savior has not professed to prescribe, even as to the
things before directed, but left Men to the general conduct of his Doctrine,
and the guidance of their own reason; What appearance is there as to his
prescribing after what external form, and order, all these things were to be
done, and which if he has not, there is no doubt the Governors of the Church
may order, as they shall see fit, yea do so without any fear of being thought
to charge his Institutions with imperfection? They being not to be thought to
do so, who prescribe rules concerning those things, which the Institutions of
Christ profess not to give perfect directions in. The only thing, which has
occasioned Men's misapprehensions first, and then their passing so severe a
Censure upon humane prescriptions in this kind, is an hasty opinion they have
taken up of Christ's being as particular in directing the external management
of sacred Duties, as Moses appears to have been as to the services of the Law.
For which yet they have had no other pretense, than a misapplied Text of the
Author to the Hebrews Heb. 3.2.
, even Christ's being as faithful in that house of God, which was committed to
his charge, as Moses was in his. But beside that there appear not any such
particular directions from God to our Savior, as there were sometime given to
Moses, and our Savior therefore not to be looked upon as unfaithful, for not
reaching out such particular directions to us; Besides that, if our Savior did
not furnish such particular directions, yet he has furnished his Church with a
far greater portion of his Spirit, and which may serve to it as a guide to fit
those Services for its respective members; Beside lastly that the Services he
enjoined, because to be exercised among people of several Nations, and humors,
were not capable, as to circumstances, of such strict limitations, as that,
which was to be exercised in one single Nation only: There is nothing more
evident to those, that read the Scriptures, than that Christ has given no such
particular directions, and all Arguments from Christ's fidelity therefore of no
more avail in this affair, than those, which the Papists are wont to draw from
the wisdom and goodness of God, toward the proving of an Infallible Guide. For
as no wise Man will be persuaded by such Arguments against the Testimony of his
own senses, which assure him of the errors of those, whom they would have to
be Infallible; So no considering Man will be persuaded by the other into a
belief of those particular directions, which are not any where to be seen, nor
which they themselves, who maintain those directions, have yet been able to
show. For when they have said all they can toward the evincing of their
Conclusion, the utmost they are able to prove is, that Christ has given some
general directions concerning the Administration of religious Offices, and
which as it does not prejudge the giving of more particular ones, so does much
less make them to reflect any imperfection upon the Institution of Christ,
because pretending not to concern it self about them.

One other Charge there is, which is more peculiar to the sign of the Cross,
and that is its being a relic of Popery, or giving too much countenance to
the Papists abuses of it. But as they, who advance the former of these, make
Popery much more Ancient, than it is for the advantage of Protestantism to
allow; It being certain from Tertullian De Corona cap. 3.
, that this Ceremony was in use in his time in almost all the actions they set
about: So our Church has taken care to prevent in its own Members all
misapplications of it, or the giving the least encouragement to those, that are
made of it by others; Partly by confining the use of it to the Administration
of Baptism, and partly by representing it as only a token of Men's being not
ashamed to own the Faith, and reproaches of him, who suffered upon it. Which is
certainly a more proper course to discountenance Popery, than it can be thought
to be to remove the use of it altogether: Because at the same time we disavow
the errors of that, we show by our Practice our allowance of the Ceremony it
self, and, together therewith, our accordance with the Primitive Church, which
is the only plausible thing the Papists have to boulster up their own cause, or
reproach us with the neglect of.

A DIGRESSION CONCERNING Original Sin By way of PREPARATION To the Following
DISCOURSES.
The Contents.
Of the ground of the present Digression concerning Original Sin, and enquiry
thereupon made, what Original Sin is. Which is shown in the General to be such
a corruption of the Nature of every Man, that is naturally engendered of the
offspring of Adam, whereby it becomes averse from every thing, that is good,
and inclinable to every thing, that is evil. The nature of that corruption more
particularly inquired into, and shown by probable Arguments to be no other,
than a Privation of a Supernatural Grace. That there is such a thing, as we
have before described, evidenced at large from the Scripture, and that evidence
farther strengthened by the experience we have of its effects, and the
acknowledgments of the wiser Heathen. Enquiry next made from whence it had its
beginning, which is shown to have been not from any evil Spirit, or Demon, the
pravity of matter, or the evil habits the Soul contracted in a praeexistent
state, but from the pravity of our first Parents. This last at large confirmed
out of the Doctrine of the Scripture, and followed by some light reflections
upon the means, by which it is conveyed. A more just account from the Scripture
of its being truly, and properly a sin, partly from its having the title of a
sin, but more especially from its being represented as such, upon the account
of our Obligation to the contrary. A consideration of those Objections, which
are commonly made against the Doctrine of Original Sin; Which are shown either
not to be of that force, whereof they are esteemed, or however not to be a
sufficient bar to what the Scripture has declared concerning it.

AN account being thus given of the outward visible Sign of Baptism, Question.
What is the inward, and spiritual Grace? Answer. A death unto Sin, and a new
birth unto Righteousness. For being by nature born in Sin, and the Children of
wrath, we are hereby made the Children of Grace.
which is the first of those things I proposed to entreat of; Reason would, (as
well as the method before laid down), that I should consider the things
signified by it: Which, on the part of God, and Christ, are an inward and
Spiritual Grace, as, on the part of the baptized, an Abrenunciation of their
former sins, and a resolution to believe, and act, as Christianity obliges
them to do. But because both the one, and the other of these suppose the
baptized persons to have been before in a sinful Estate, and our Catechism in
particular to have been born in it, and by that, as well as by the sins they
afterward contracted, to be made the Children of wrath; Therefore it will be
but necessary for us to premise something concerning that sinful Estate, as
which Baptism both presupposes, and professes to provide a remedy for.

Now as that sinful State, whereof we speak, is best known by the name of
Original Sin, and will therefore most commodiously be described by it; So I
will make it my business to enquire What that is, and what appearance of the
being of it, from whence it had its beginning, and by what means it is
conveyed, whether, as it has for the most part the name of a Sin, so it be
truly, and properly such, and what is to be said to the Objections, that are
made against it.

I. To begin with the first of these, even what Original Sin is, and which, in
the general, may be defined to be such a Corruption of the nature of every Man,
that is naturally engendered of the offspring of Adam, whereby it becomes averse
from every thing, that is good, and inclined to every thing, that is evil. I
call it a Corruption of nature to distinguish it from nature considered in it
self, and as it was in the first formation of it: Partly, because Nature being,
as such, the work of God, cannot be supposed to be corrupt; And partly because
the Scripture assures us, that whatsoever it now is, God made it upright Eccl.
7.29.
, and so free from all corruptions whatsoever. But so also do I entitle it the
Corruption of the Nature of every Man, that is naturally engendered of the
offspring of Adam: Partly, because the Scripture, where it entreats of it,
represents all Men as under the Contagion of it, and partly to exempt our Lord,
and Savior from it, who was engendered after another manner, and whom the same
Scripture assures to have been free 2 Cor. 5.21.
from all sin, yea to have been so Luke 1.35.
from his Birth. I call it lastly such a Corruption of humane Nature, whereby
it is averse from every thing, that is good, and inclined to every thing, that
is evil. Which I do upon the account of the Scripture's representing it as a
sinful Psa. 51.5.
one, and which, as such, will make those in whom it is, averse from good, as
well as inclinable to evil, yea averse from all, that is good, and inclinable
to all evil: Because good, yea all good is opposite to such an estate, and
evil, yea all evil connatural to it. If they, in whom that corruption of nature
does as yet abide, be not always actually prevailed upon to reject that good,
from which we have affirmed them to be so averse, or to pursue that evil, to
which we have affirmed them to be inclinable, it is not because they want any
averseness for the one, or inclination to the other, but for some other
collateral considerations: Such as is, for example, the reputation, or
advantage, that may accrue to them from the espousing of any thing, that is
good, or the omission of any thing, that is evil. For all good, and all evil
being of one uniform nature, because becoming good or evil by the conformity
they bear to the divine Laws, or by their deviation from them; where there is
an inclination to any thing, that is good, there must be an inclination to all,
that is of the same nature; as on the other side where an averseness from any
thing, that is evil, an averseness for all that, which is alike a transgression
of the Divine Laws. But as therefore nothing can hinder us from representing
natural corruption as making Men averse from all that is good, and inclinable
to every thing that is evil; So neither can any thing oblige us to extend the
force of it so far, as to make it to determine them in all their actions, and
accordingly to carry them to an actual rejection of all, that is good, or a
pursuance of all, that is evil: Partly because Men may, and often do act
contrary to their natural aversions, or inclinations, where there is hope of
temporal advantage, or fear of any temporal evil; And partly, because we do not
only find few natural Men proceeding to the extremity of Impiety, but find also
great variety among them in the omission of good Actions, or the commission of
those that are evil. Of which variety what account could be given, when the
Corruption of Nature is, and must be equal, because all Men were alike in, and
are alike descended from Adam, were it not that even that Corruption leaves
place for the performance of many good, and the avoiding of many things, that
are evil? For to ascribe that variety either wholly, or principally to the
different degrees of God's restraining Grace, is not only to speak without all
Authority, that I know of, but to take away all diversity between the evil
demerits of natural Men, and, together therewith, all different degrees of
punishment; yea to make the Corruption of Nature the only proper ground of
punishment. For as, if there be nothing but God's restraining Grace to take off
natural Men from falling into the worst of sins, the greatest actual sinner
cannot deserve more punishment, than he who offends in a far less degree;
Because all demerit arises from the pravity of the will, which is not more or
less for the mere absence, or presence of God's restraining Grace: So the
greatest actual sinner cannot become obnoxious to punishment upon the score of
any other Corruption than that of Nature; That as it makes all his actual sins
to be necessary, and therefore in reason to bear the whole blame, and
punishment, so receiving no new aggravation from the want of that restraining
Grace, which might have withheld the party from them, in as much as that want
(if it be a fault) is no less the result of his natural corruption, than his
actual offenses are. But therefore also as we cannot look upon natural
corruption as determining Men to all their actual errors, without taking away
all diversity between the demerits of natural Men, yea making natural
Corruption the only proper ground of their punishment; so they, who do so, will
be found to contradict the declarations of the Scripture, as well as the
allowed practice of the World. For why, if there be no difference between the
demerits of natural Men, should those, that are in Authority, mete out
different punishments to them according to the different degrees, or kinds of
those offenses, which they commit? Nay, why should the Scripture affirm, that
it shall be more tolerable for some sinners Matt. 11.22, 24.
, than for others at the great day of judgment? That, as it is a judgment of
righteousness, so being consequently to mete out equal punishments to all
sinners, if there be but an equality in their demerits. Again, if natural
Corruption be upon the matter the only proper ground of punishment, as it must
of necessity be, if it be the unavoidable cause of actual sins; How comes the
Scripture to declare, that God will reward every Man according to his works
Romans 2.6.
, yea the wicked Romans 2.8.
according to his works, as well as the righteous according to theirs? For if
natural Corruption be the only proper ground of punishment, the works of Men in
propriety of Speech can have no concernment in it, and much less (as the
Scripture declares) be the principal object of judgment, and therefore of that
punishment, which it shall award. The utmost in my opinion, that can be said in
this particular, is that as Men by the Corruption of their Nature are averse
from every thing, that is good, so that averseness will indispose those, in
whom that Corruption abides, to all good actions whatsoever, and infallibly
take them off from them, where either some work of God upon their minds does
not thrust them on to them, or the comeliness, or profitableness thereof shall
not more strongly impel them to the practice of them. The former whereof will
make the consent of such persons even to those good actions, which they
perform, incomplete, and imperfect, and indeed a consent to them rather as
expedient, than good; whence it is that our Church Art. 13.
represents them as having the nature of sins: The latter cause them to neglect
all such, as are not in a manner thrust upon them by God, or have not one of
the former motives to incite them to the practice of them, yea present to their
minds, when they ought to make use of them. Which will occasion such persons
for the most part to neglect all good actions, where there is not place for
serious thoughts, as in cases of surprise, or where they have not been
habituated to the practice of virtue, or to the consideration of the comeliness
or profitableness thereof. But as where there is place for serious thoughts,
there may be place also for the former motives to impel Men to the practice of
that, from which they are otherwise sufficiently averse; So it is not unlikely
that the minds of those, who have been before habituated to the practice, or
contemplation of Virtue, may be thrust on by the former motives to pursue many
things, that are good, yea acquit themselves singularly in them. Of which yet
if any doubt be made, we have the laudable example of several Heathens to
convince us thereof, and who, because Heathen, cannot be supposed to be free
from the power of natural Corruption, or to be thrust on by other motives, than
the former, to the doing of such actions, from which they are naturally so
averse. In like manner, As Men by the Corruption of their Nature are inclined
to every thing that is evil, as well as averse from every thing that is good;
So that inclination will dispose those, in whom it is, to an allowance of all
evil actions, and infallibly betray them into them, where God's restraining
Grace does not withhold them, or the indecency, or dangerous consequences of
the other do not alike keep them back. The former whereof will make their
abstaining even from those evil actions, which they avoid, to be but an
imperfect abstinence from them, and indeed an abstinence from them rather as
inexpedient, than evil; The latter cause them to fall into all such, from which
they are not restrained by God, or by a present, and intense consideration of
the indecency, or danger of them. Which will occasion such persons for the most
part to fall into all evil actions, where there is not room for serious
thoughts, as in cases of surprise, or where they have not been habituated to
the avoiding of vice, or the consideration of the indecency, or dangerousness
thereof. But as, where there is room for serious thoughts, there may also be
place for the former reasons to take them off from the practice of that, to
which they are otherwise sufficiently inclined; So it is not unlikely, that the
minds of those, who have been before habituated to the avoiding of Vice, or the
consideration of the indecency, or dangerousness thereof, may be taken off by
the former reasons from the pursuit of evil things, yea acquit themselves
singularly in it. As is farther evident from the resistance, that has been
made by several Heathens to all the temptations of sin, and who, because
Heathen, cannot be supposed either to have been free from natural Corruption,
or to have been taken off by other means, than the former, from the doing of
those evil actions, to which they were so strongly inclined.

But because what we have hitherto said concerning the Corruption of our Nature
does rather tend to show what effects it has upon us, than what that
Corruption is; And because that word, whereby we have chosen to express it, is
but a Metaphorical one, and will therefore serve yet less clearly to declare
the thing intended by it; Therefore it may seem but reasonable to enquire yet
farther, what it is, and wherein it does consist, as without which we shall
discourse but imperfectly concerning it. Now as that question cannot otherwise
be solved, than by the knowledge of that Estate, of which it is affirmed to be
a Corruption; So I shall therefore enquire again what that Estate was, and then
what relation this Corruption bears to it. As touching that estate, wherein
God did at first create our Nature, most certain it is first (for so Solomon
Eccl. 7.29.
affirms it to be) that it was an estate of uprightness, that is to say such an
estate as fitted Man for the obedience of all those Laws, which God had obliged
him to perform. That, as it is the most usual signification of the word we
render upright, and accordingly rendered by the Chaldee Paraphrast right, and
innocent before God, so best answering the account before given concerning the
depravation of humane Nature, and particularly in those of the Female Sex. For
Solomon speaking in the 26th verse of the deceitfulness of that Sex, and of the
influence that deceitfulness of theirs would have upon sinful Men; Affirming
afterward because representing the event of his search as contrary to the
desires of his Soul, that though he could find one Man among a thousand of a
better temper, yet he could not find One such Woman among them all; He must
consequently, when he comes to say that he found only that God made Man
upright, be thought to mean such an uprightness, as was opposite to that
general depravation, whereof he before complained. There being therefore no
doubt to be made that God created our Nature in a state of uprightness, even in
such a one as fitted Man for the obedience of all those Laws, which he was
obliged to comply with; Enquire we in the second place wherein that state of
uprightness consisted, but which we shall not find to be of so easy a
resolution, as the former: Because there is some presumption of its consisting
in a right disposition of our natural faculties; And there is some presumption
of its consisting in a supernatural Grace overruling, and directing those
natural faculties to those pious purposes, for which they were chiefly
designed. We have to persuade the former of these the natural ability of the
understanding to discern the invisible things of God by the things, which he
has made, and the natural propension of the Will to embrace that, which is
good, and therefore also the chiefest good, where that is clearly apprehended,
and where there is no depravation in the Will (as to be sure there was not at
first) to draw it to lesser ones. In fine, we have to persuade it the power the
superior faculties of the Soul have even now over the Inferior ones, and
which we may well believe in that state of Innocence to have been of sufficient
force to keep them within those bounds, which God, and Nature had set them.
This, I say, we have to persuade that uprightness, wherein our first Parents
were Created, to have consisted in a right disposition of their natural
faculties; And we are not without reason on the other hand to persuade the same
uprightness of Nature to have consisted in its being overruled, and directed
by a supernatural Grace: Because without such a supernatural Grace our first
Parents could not have come to the knowledge of God, but by the knowledge of
Created Beings, and the excellencies thereof, and (what that knowledge would
have produced) a love, and affection for them. Which would not only have made
God to be loved after his Creatures, who as being the first, and chiefest good
ought to have the precedence thereof, but endangered also the diminution of our
affections to him by the prepossession of them by the other. To which of these
two reasonings to give the preeminency is hard to say, and I will not therefore
be over positive in determining concerning the force of them, nor therefore,
whether Original Righteousness were a right disposition of our natural
faculties, or a supernatural Grace overruling, and directing them. But as how
equal soever those reasonings may be in themselves, yet nothing will hinder our
inclining rather to the one, than the other, if the Scripture, which is the
best judge of things of that nature, seem to favor such an inclination; So I
must needs say that the Scripture Genesis 1.28, etc. Genesis 2.19, etc.
seems to favor those reasonings, which makes Original Righteousness to be a
Supernatural Grace: Because not only representing Adam as imbued from the very
first with the knowledge of God, which yet he could not be without a revelation
from him, but as moreover freely conversing with God, and receiving both Laws,
and privileges from him. For as it appears from thence, that God did
immediately shine upon his mind, and so far forth therefore influenced him by a
supernatural Grace, so it is not unlikely that he, who so shone upon his mind,
did as immediately influence his will, and affections, and so dispose him to a
compliance with those Laws he imposed upon him: That, as it was but agreeable
to the immediate illumination of his understanding, so becoming yet more
necessary by the different inclinations of his Flesh, and Spirit, and which the
presence of a Supernatural Grace may seem but requisite to bring to a due
compliance with each other, and with those Laws, which God had imposed upon
them both. And I shall only add, that if that uprightness, wherein our Nature
was at first Created, were no other than a Supernatural Grace, as is at least
highly probable from the former reasonings, and the declarations of the
Scripture; We shall need to assign no other relation of that Corruption of
Nature, whereof we speak, than that of a simple privation of the other. For if
the desires of the Flesh could so far prevail even under a supernatural Grace,
as to carry our first Parents to the eating of that fruit, which God had so
severely forbidden them; The simple privation of that supernatural Grace may
well suffice to give birth to all our evil inclinations, and consequently pass
for a sufficient account of that Corruption of our Nature, whereby, as I said
before, we become inclinable to Evil, as well as averse from Good, and which
what evidence we have of the being of, is in the next place to be inquired.

II. Now as we cannot certainly better inform our selves concerning the present
state of our Nature, than from him who, as he was the Author of it, so is
intimately present to it; So I will therefore begin with that account, which he
has given us of it, and which we shall find to bear an ample Testimony to that
Corruption, whereof we speak. For the evidencing whereof I will show First,
that it affirms all Men whatsoever to be under sin, yea under a perpetual
course of it. Secondly, that it affirms them to be so from the time they
begin to be in a capacity to offend. Thirdly, that they are so from a principle
bred in them, and derived to them from their birth.

1. That all Men are under sin S. Paul does so fully declare, that we shall
need no other Testimony than his to evince it; More particularly, where he
affirms that both Jews and Gentiles Romans 3.9.
are all under sin; That though the former may seem of all others to have been
most free from it, yet the Law Romans 3.19.
had not stuck to affirm, that there was none Romans 3.10, etc.
righteous, even among them, no not one; That there was none that understood,
none that sought after God; That they were all gone out of the way, they were
altogether become unprofitable, that there was none, that did good, no not one;
In fine, that all the World must thereby Romans 3.19.
be looked upon as guilty before God, because, as he afterward Romans 3.23.
speaks, all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God. But so the same
Scripture did long before declare, with an addition of all Men's being under a
perpetual course of sin, as well as in some measure tainted with it; It being
not only the voice of God concerning that part of Mankind, that lived before
the flood, that every imagination Genesis 6.5.
of the thought of their heart was only evil continually, but alike intimated
by him concerning that part, which was to follow, even to the end of the World.
For affirming, as he does Genesis 8.21.
, that he would not any more drown the World, because the imagination of Man's
heart is evil from his youth, he both supposes that Mankind would again give
occasion to it by their evil imaginations (as without which otherwise there
could be no occasion for God's suspending it) and that Mankind would do so also
in every individual, and Generation of it: The former, because he speaks of the
imaginations of Mankind in the general, and which are therefore to be extended
to all the individuals of it; The latter, because if any Generation of Men were
likely to be free from those imaginations, there would so far forth have been
no need of his declaring, that he would not drown the World, because no ground
for bringing it on the Inhabitants thereof. But therefore, as we have reason to
believe from the places before recited, that the World always was, and will be
under sin, yea under a constant course of it; So we shall be yet more confirmed
in it, if we compare the latter place with the former, as the likeness, that is
between them, will oblige us to do: There being not a more apt sense of that
latter Speech of God, than that he would not again drown the Earth, because he
knew the imaginations of Men would be as evil as they had before been, and he
therefore, if he were disposed to take that vengeance, to bring a flood often
upon it, to the no profit of those, that inhabited it, as well as to the
defacing of the Earth it self. Which will make the condition of Man to be so
sinful, that it cannot be otherwise, unless by some powerful means delivered
from it.

2. But so also may we infer from thence, which was the second thing to be
proved, that all Men are under sin from the time they begin to be in a capacity
to offend: That, as it affirms the imagination of Men's heart to be evil, so to
be evil from their Youth, and, as I should therefore think, from the time they
begin to be in a capacity to be guilty of it. Not that that Age, to which we
are wont to give the denomination of Youth, is the first wherein Mankind begins
to be in a capacity to offend (for there is but too much evidence of that in
the riper years of Childhood) but that we cannot well understand that Text of
any other youthful Periode, than that wherein Mankind begins to be in a
capacity to reason, and consequently also to offend: Partly, because the word
we render Youth is sometime used even for infancy Judges 13.7. Exodus 2.6.
, and ought not therefore without manifest reason to be removed too far from
it; But more especially because it is the manifest design of God in the place
we speak of to aggravate the evil of Men's imaginations from the earliness
thereof, and that earliness therefore to be carried as high, as the capacity
Men are in to imagine evil will suffer the doing of it.

3. Now as nothing therefore can be wanting toward the proof of Original
Corruption, than that they, who are so universally, and so early under sin, are
so also from an inward principle, and such an inward principle too, as was
derived to them from their birth; so we shall not it may be need any other
proof of that, than their being so universally, and early under the other: The
former of these persuading Men's being under sin from some inward principle,
the latter from such an inward principle, as is derived to them from their
Birth. That I make Men's being so universally under sin, an argument of their
being so from some inward principle, is because as so general an effect must be
supposed to have some general Cause, so no external Cause, how general soever,
can be supposed to produce it without the assistance of the other. As will
appear if we consider the force of example, and which as it is the most
general, and the most effectual external Cause, that can be assigned, so is
that, into which they who deny the Corruption of Nature, are wont to resolve
the universality of sin. For neither first is even Example of so great force,
as infallibly, and universally to draw Men to the imitation of it; For some Men
are Virtuous, even when they have an ill example before them, and others as
Vicious, where they have a good. Neither secondly has it any force, but what
it receives from Men's aptness to imitate those, with whom they converse. Which
as it will make it necessary for us to have recourse to an inward principle,
even for those effects, which are produced by the mediation of example, so make
our very aptness to imitate the evil examples of others, a branch of that
inward principle, which we affirm to be the cause of so universal an impiety.
Only because we are yet upon Scripture proofs, and which the more express they
are, so much the more convictive; Therefore I shall yet more particularly
endeavor to evince from thence, that as all Men are under sin, so they are so
by an innate principle. But so S. Paul gives us clearly enough to understand,
because both asserting such a principle, and that all actual sins are the
issues of it: The former, where he represents even the Man, who was under the
conviction of the Law (and who therefore might be supposed to be most free from
the contagion of sin) as Carnal, yea sold under it Romans 7.14.
, as one, who had sin dwelling in him (for so he affirms no less than twice
Romans 7.17. Romans 7.20,
) and as one too, who had a law in his members Romans 7.23,
that warred against the law of his mind, or (as he afterward entitles it) a
law of sin; The latter, where he represents that carnality, and sinful
captivity, under which the Jew was, as the cause of his doing what he would not
Romans 7.15.
, and omitting what he would, That sin, which dwelt in him, as doing all the
evil Romans 17.20.
he committed, And that law, that was in his members, as warring against the
law of his mind Romans 17.23.
, and bringing him into Captivity unto the law of sin. For what more could be
said on the one hand to show the thing S. Paul there speaks of to be an inward
evil principle, and which, because even in those, who were under the Law, is
much more to be supposed in the Gentiles? Or what more on the other to show
that evil principle to be the parent of our actual sins, yea that which gives
being to them all. And I know nothing to take off the force of it, but a
supposition of St. Paul's speaking in that place of Evil habits, and which as
they must be confessed to be of the same pernicious efficacy with Original
Corruption, so to have been for the most part the condition both of Jew, and
Gentile, before they came to be overtaken by the Gospel. But how first
supposing the Apostle to have spoken only of evil habits (for nothing hinders
us from assigning them a part in that Body of sin) How first, I say, does that
agree with the account he before gave concerning sins entering in Romans 5.12.
by Adam, and our being constituted Romans 5.19.
sinners by him. For though Original Corruption may come from him, yet evil
habits can be only from our selves, and consequently those sins, that flow from
them? How secondly supposing none but evil habits to be here intended, can we
make that Body, or law of sin, whereof S. Paul speaks, to be the portion of
all, that are under an obligation to Baptism, as that Apostle plainly
supposes, when he makes the design of Baptism Romans 6.6.
to be the destruction of it? For to say nothing at present concerning the case
of Infants, because the best evidence of their Obligation to Baptism is the
Corruption of their Nature, and that Obligation therefore rather to be proved
from Natural Corruption, than Natural Corruption from it; Neither can it be
denied, even from the Commandment Mat. 28.19.
, that our Savior gave concerning Baptism, that all adult persons are under an
Obligation to it, nor therefore but that they carry about them that body of
sin, which Baptism was intended for the destruction of. But so all adult
persons cannot be supposed to do, if that body of sin be no other, than evil
habits; Because it must be sometime after that maturity of theirs before they
can come to those evil habits, or therefore to be under an Obligation to that
Sacrament which is to destroy it. In fine, how supposing none but evil habits
to be intended by that body, or law of sin, whereof the Apostle speaks, can we
give an account of so holy, and just a Law, as that of Moses is, stirring Romans
7.9.
Concupiscence in those, that are under it, and not rather hindering it from
coming to effect. For as nothing hinders the proposing of that Law before such
persons come to any evil habits, and therefore also before there is any thing
in them to stir them up to such a Concupiscence; So nothing can hinder that
Law, when duly proposed to them, from preventing all such Concupiscence, as it
was the design of the Lawgiver to forbid: Because as the persons we speak of
must be supposed to be without any contrariety in their Nature to the matter of
that Law, which is proposed; So they must also be supposed to be in that state,
wherein God had set them, and (because God cannot be thought to place Men in
any other estate, than that of uprightness) in such a state, as will make them
willing to listen to the divine Laws, and receive their directions from them.
By which means the divine Laws shall rather keep Men's Concupiscence from
coming to effect, than give any occasion for the stirring of it. I conclude
therefore from that, as well as the former arguments, that the evil principle
spoken of by S. Paul cannot be evil habits, and consequently nothing more left
to us to demonstrate, than that it is derived to us, from our Birth, or rather
from our Conception in the Womb, which is all, that is affirmed concerning
Original Corruption. Now that that evil principle, whereof we speak, is derived
to us from our Birth, will become at least probable from what was before said
concerning the earliness of Men's being under sin, yea their being so, as the
Scripture instructs us, even from their Youth. For as it is hard to believe,
that all Men should be so early under sin, if it were not from some inward
principle, that was antecedent to that Age (For what should otherwise hinder
some of them at least from preserving their integrity for some time, especially
supposing, (as that tender Age makes it reasonable to suppose) a more peculiar
watchfulness of the Divine Providence over it?) So it will be much more hard to
believe, supposing that evil principle to be antecedent to their Youth, that it
should not be derived to them from their Conception, and Birth: The Ages
preceding that being not in a capacity to produce in themselves such an evil
principle, and therefore to be supposed to have had it transmitted to them
together with their Nature, and so also by the same means, and from the same
time, in which that their Nature was. And indeed, as even the tenderest age
falls under death, and not unreasonably therefore concluded to be some way, or
other under sin, if (as S. Paul Romans 5.12.
speaks) death entered by it, and so passed upon all Men, for that all have
sinned; So there want not some places of Scripture, which do yet more directly
evince, that the first beginnings of our Nature are tainted with that, of which
we speak. Of this sort I reckon that of Job Job 14.4.
, which is so commonly applied to this affair, even his demanding of God, with
reference to himself Job 1, etc.
, and all other Men, who could bring a clean thing out of an unclean? and
thereby therefore intimating that it was not to be done. For as it is manifest
from his alleging that the better to countenance his own expostulation
concerning God's bringing him into judgment, tha by the unavoidable uncleanness
there intimated must be meant a sinful one, as which alone could either dispose
him to such actions, as could be a proper matter for judgment, or be alleged
in bar to a severe one: So it is alike manifest from Job's asking, who can
bring a clean thing out of an unclean, that Men are not only so unclean in
their Nature, but that they become so by those evil principles, out of which
they are brought, and so also from the time that they were separated from them.
Of the same Nature is that of our Savior, where he asserts the necessity of
Men's being born again of water, and the Spirit, upon the account of their
being before but flesh Joh. 3.6.
, because born of flesh. For as we cannot well understand our Savior of any
other flesh, than flesh corrupted, or rather of the whole Nature, that is so;
Partly because of the opposition, that is there made Ibid.
between a fleshly, and spiritual temper, and partly because that is the most
usual notion of it in the New Romans 7.18, 25. Gal. 5.19, 24.
Testament: So neither therefore but conclude all Men to become such flesh by
those fleshly persons, from whom they are born, and so also from the time that
they receive their being from them. But of all the Texts of Scripture, which
are commonly alleged in this affair (even the earliness of that evil
principle, wherewith we have said all Men to be imbued) there is certainly none
of greater force, than the profession, that David makes Psalm. 51.5.
, that he was shapen, or born in iniquity, and conceived by his Mother in sin;
That, if it entreat of the Corruption of humane Nature, making it as early as
the first beginnings of it, because speaking as manifestly of its Conception
Ham. Annot. in locum.
, and Birth. And indeed as we have no reason to believe from any thing the
Scripture has said concerning David, or his Parents, that what he spoke of his
own formation was to be understood of that alone; so we have much less reason
to believe, that he intended any other thing by the sin, and iniquity thereof,
than that Original Corruption, whereof we speak. For beside that the letter of
the Text is most agreeable to that notion, and not therefore without manifest
reason to be diverted to another; Beside that that sense is put upon it by the
most eminent Fathers Voss. Pelag. Hist. l. 2. Part. 1. These. 1.
of the Church, and the Doctrine contained in it confirmed by the concordant
Ibid. These. 6.
testimonies of them all; Beside that that sense has the suffrage of one of
the most learned Ham. ubi. supra.
of the Jewish Writers, as the thing it self the consentient belief of all the
rest; Aben Ezra resolving the meaning of the Psalmist to be, that in the hour
of his Nativity the evil figment was planted in his heart, even that
Concupiscence (as he afterward interprets himself) by which he was drawn into
sin: Beside all these, I say, it is no less agreeable to the scope of the whole
Psalm, and particularly to the care he takes in the Verse before to condemn
himself for his offenses, and so justify the severity of God, if he should
think good to take vengeance of them. For what could be more suitable to that,
than to lay open, together with his actual sins, that polluted Fountain from
whence they came, and so show himself to be vile upon more accounts, than one,
and God to have as many reasons to chastise him? And I shall only add, that as
that sense cannot therefore be fairly refused, because conformable to the
design of the Psalmist, as well as to the letter of the Text it self, and to
the interpretation of the Ancients, as well as either; So they seem to me to
add no small confirmation to it, who can find no other means to elude it, than
by making the words of the same sense with that hyperbolical expression of the
same Author, where he affirms Psalm. 58.3.
, that the wicked are estranged from the Womb, and that as soon as they are
born, they go astray speaking lies. For as it cannot be denied that there is a
very wide difference between Men's being conceived, and born in sin, and their
going astray from their Mother's Womb, and their own birth; This latter
expression importing that iniquity, which follows after it, whereas the former
denotes the condition of the Conception, and Birth it self: So it is evident
from what the Psalmist adds in the place alleged concerning the wicked's
speaking lies, that he there entreats of actual sins, which as no Man denies to
require a more mature Age for the perpetration of, so make it necessary to
allow an Hyperbole in it; Whereas the place we insist upon has not the least
umbrage of actual sins, and is therefore under no necessity of being
interpreted conformably to it.

But because it can hardly be imagined, but if there be such a thing as
Original sin, it will produce suitable effects in those, in whom it is; And
because it can as little be thought, but that those effects will lie open to
the observation of all, that shall take the pains to reflect upon them;
Therefore enquire we in the next place, whether that Original Sin, whereof we
speak, does not discover it self by suitable effects, and so add yet farther
strength to what the Scripture has affirmed concerning it. A thing not to be
doubted of, if we reflect upon the behavior of Children, as soon as they come
to have any use of reason. For do not some of those, as the Psalmist speaks
Ibid.
, go astray from their Mothers Womb, speaking lies? Do not others discover in
their actions as much of malice, and revenge? Are not a third sort as
refractory to the commands of their Superiors? Does not a fourth equally pride
it self in all its supposed excellencies? Now from whence, I beseech you,
proceeds all this untowardness of behavior, but from as untoward a principle,
and such a one too, as is interwoven with their very Being, and derived to them
with it? For shall we say from the force of Example? But experience assures us
of the contrary, because visible in such Children, as have no such examples
before them, and who moreover do not want a severe education to prevent, or
correct it. Shall we then say from some previous habits? But the same
experience assures us of the contrary, because it is antecedent to any evil
habits, and therefore not imputable to them. Shall we say lastly (and more than
that we cannot say) that it proceeds from their natural temperament? But as I
no way doubt, and shall not therefore stick to confess, that the Corruption of
our Nature runs out that way, which our natural temperament leads it; So I see
no necessity to grant, that that natural temperament has any other interest in
our untowardness, than by inclining our natural Corruption to that particular
evil, to which we are carried. For to make it any other way the cause of that
untowardness is to charge it upon God, because he must be confessed to be the
Author of all that is purely natural in us. Only if it be said, that that
natural temperament may incline Children, before they have any free use of
reason, to those untowardnesses, whereof we speak, and so at length by the
means of those untowardnesses produce such an habitual inclination to them,
that their more free reason, when they come to it, shall not be able to
surmount it; I answer, that that indeed might well enough be granted, if we had
no reason to believe, that God would so watch over them by his providence, as
to hinder their natural temperament from having such an influence upon them.
But as we have reason enough to believe, from the love God bears to his own
Workmanship, as well as to Piety, and Virtue, that he would not be wanting in
that particular to the estate of Children, if it were no other than such as he
himself had placed them in; So we must therefore believe also, that that
temperament of theirs is not the cause of their miscarriages, but somewhat else
that is not from God, and which, because not from him, he does not think
himself under any necessity to provide against.

And indeed though some, who call themselves Christians, have notwithstanding
the former evidences, opposed themselves against that, which we have offered as
the Original cause thereof; Yet have the more sober Heathen, though ignorant of
the occasion of it, both acknowledged, and lamented it, and so furnished us
with a farther argument for the belief of it. For thus (as Dr. Jackson Coll. of
his Works Book 10. Chapter 8.
did long since observe) we find one of them affirming that the nature of Man
is prone to lust, and another, that nature cannot separate just from unjust.
Thus a third (as the forementioned Author remarks) that to Man of all the
creatures is sorrow given for a portion, to him luxury in innumerable fashions,
and in every Limb; To him alone ambition, and avarice, to him alone an
unmeasurable desire of living; In fine, that whilst it is given to other
creatures, yea the most savage ones, to live peaceably, and orderly together,
Man is naturally an enemy to those of his own stock. To the same purpose are
those, which are quoted by Grotius De jure Becti ac. Pac. li. 2. c. 20. sect.
19. and in Annot. intocum.
, if they are not also yet more worthy of our remark; Such as are, that among
the other incommodities of mortal nature there is the darkness of Men's minds,
and not only a necessity of erring, but a love of errors; That we have all
sinned, some in weightier instances, others in lighter, some of set purpose and
design, others it may be carried away by other Men's wickedness; That we do not
only offend, but we shall offend to the end of our lives, and although some one
may have so purged his mind, that nothing shall any more disturb, or deceive
him, yet he comes to innocence by offending; That this evil disposition is so
natural to Men, that, if every one be to be punished, that has it, no Man
shall be free from punishment; That there is therefore a necessity upon those,
who are entrusted with the power of Chastisement, to wink at some errors; He,
who punishes Men, as if they could be free from all sin, exceeding the measure
of that correction, which is according to nature, or (as another has expressed
it) showing himself injurious to the common infirmity of Men, and forgetful of
that infirmity, which is humane, and universal. For as it is evident from
these, and the like passages, that they, from whom they fell, had the same
opinion of the State of Nature, which Christianity obliges us to take up; So
that opinion of theirs cannot but add to the confirmation of our own, and to
the belief of that depravation, which it is the design of this Discourse to
evince: Because not taken up either in whole, or in part from prejudices
imbibed from Books, but from the experience they had of its effects, and which
as they themselves could not but feel, and acknowledge, so we have no reason to
question, because conscious of the like effects of it in our selves.

III. There being therefore no doubt to be made, but that there is such a thing
as Original Sin, because sufficiently attested by the Doctrine of the
Scripture, and our own, and other Men's experience; It cannot but be thought
reasonable to enquire, from whence it had its beginning, and so much the rather
because both Scripture, and reason assure us, that it cannot be thought to have
had its Original from God. Now there are but four things, from whence it can be
supposed to proceed, and within the consideration whereof therefore this
Enquiry of ours will necessarily be bounded; some evil Demon, or Spirit, which
concurrs with God to our production, or the natural pravity of that matter,
which God makes use of in order to it; Some evil habits, which Souls
contracted, before they were sent into their present bodies, or some pravity in
those from whom they first descended, and which is transmitted from them to
particular souls, and persons. The first of these opinions is attended with
this great inconvenience among many others, that it charge God either with
malignity, or impotency; With malignity, if willingly suffering any evil spirit
to mix it self in his productions; With impotency, if not able to hinder it,
though he would. The second, as it is alike injurious to the power of God,
because subjecting that power of his to the indisposition of the matter, so it
makes Original Sin to be natural, and unavoidable, and consequently also those
actual sins, that slow from it. By which means it not only renders all our
endeavors against them useless, but casts a blemish upon those divine Laws,
which pretend to forbid them, and upon those divine judgments, which pretend to
punish them. For neither can God without great unreasonableness forbid what is
not to be avoided, nor punish it without the imputation of injustice. But it
may be though Original Sin had not its beginning either from some evil spirit,
or the pravity of the matter, which are the two first opinions, which pretend
to give an account of it; yet it might, as is suggested in the third, arise
from such evil habits, as Men's souls contracted before their descent into this
World, and into those bodies, wherewith they are invested. That indeed might
yet more reasonably be believed, that I say not also (abstracting from the
Authority of the Scripture) much more reasonably, than the account, that is
given of it from Adam, if there were but equal reason to believe, that Men's
Souls had any separate existence antecedently to their conception in the Womb.
But as that is a thing for which there is not any solid ground either in
reason, or Scripture, and the supposition of it therefore the mere issue of
fancy, and conjecture; So it is sufficiently confuted by the ignorance Men's
Souls are under of any such previous estate. For why, if Men's Souls had any
such previous existence, should they not be conscious of it, and of the things,
that were performed by them in it? Nay, why should not God take care to fix
such a remembrance in them, that so what was wanting in their former estate
might be supplied by them in their following one? For as it is not easy to
suppose, that the corruptible body should so far stupefie the Soul, as to
hinder it from emerging in time out of sleep, in which it may seem to have been
cast, and accordingly from calling to mind what had been before transacted
within it; Because though the Body may be some hindrance to the faculties of
the Soul, yet it does not hinder them from coming in time to exert their proper
operations: So it is much less easy to suppose, that God should not however
bring to it is memory its past State, and Actions, by which it offended against
him; Partly to make it sensible of its former guilt, and God's choosing to
punish it by thrusting it into a Body, and partly to make it so much the more
careful to break off from those sins, by which it had before offended him;
These, as they are the only imaginable ends, why God should thrust an offending
Soul into such a Body, so being perfectly lost to that Soul, in which there is
no consciousness of it is former state, and of those enormities, which were
contracted in it. I conclude therefore, that whatever may be said as to this
particular concerning Original Sin, yet it did not take its rise from the evil
acts, or habits of the Soul in any praexistent estate, and nothing therefore
left to us to resolve it into, but the depravedness of those, from whom we all
descended, and from whom it is transmitted to particular Souls, and Persons.

I deny not indeed, that even this Account is not without its difficulties, and
such as it will be hard, if not impossible perfectly to assoile. I deny not
farther, that those difficulties are much enhanc'd by the ignorance we are
under concerning the Original of humane Souls, and which whilst we continue
under, it will not be easy for us to show, how that depravedness of Nature
should pass from them to us. But as those difficulties are no ways comparable
to the difficulties of two of the former, even those, which resolve Original
Sin into the malignity of some evil spirit, or the pravity of matter; So they
can much less be thought to be of force against the testimony of the Scripture,
if that (as I shall afterward show) favor its arising from the pravity of our
first Parents: Partly because the thing in question is a matter of fact, and
therefore to be determined rather by testimony, than the force of reason, and
partly because the testimony of Scripture is the most Authentic one, as being
no other than the testimony of God. Now that there wants not sufficient
evidence from thence, that that Original Sin, whereof we speak, arises from
the pravity of those, from whom we first descended, will appear if these three
things can be made out; First, that the sin of all mankind entered in by Adam;
Secondly, that it entered in by Adam not merely as the first that committed it,
or tempted other Men by his ill example to do the like, but as more, or less
the cause of all their sins by his own; Thirdly that he became the cause of all
their sins through his, by depraving thereby his own Nature, and then
communicating that depravation to those, that descended from him.

That the Sin of all Mankind entered in by Adam, will need no other proof, than
that known Text of S. Paul Romans 5.12.
, even that by one Man sin entered into the World, and death by sin, and so
death passed through unto all Men, for that all have sinned. For as we cannot
well interpret the word sin of any other, than the sin of all Men, because
there is nothing in the Text to limit it to any particular Man's, so much less,
when S. Paul does afterward affirm, that that death, which entered in by it,
passed thorough unto all Men, for that, or because all had sinned by the means
of him; That as it makes death to pass upon all Men with respect to their
several sins, and consequently their several sins to be the immediate door by
which it enters, so making those several sins therefore to be included in that
sin, which he before affirmed to be the cause of that death, and, together with
it, to have entered in by Adam.

But because among those at least, by whom the Scripture is acknowledged, the
question is not so much, whether all sin entered by Adam, but after what manner
it entered by him; And because, till that be known, we cannot speak with any
certainty concerning the derivation of the corruptness of our Natures from that
of our first Parents or Parent; Therefore pass we on to show, according to the
method before laid down, that as the sin of all Mankind entered in by Adam, so
it entered in by him, not (as some have vainly deemed) merely as one, who first
committed it, or tempted others by his example to do the like, but as one also,
yea especially, who by the malignant influence of his sin was more or less the
cause of all those sins, that followed it. That the sin of all Mankind entered
not in by Adam either merely, or principally as one, who first committed it,
will need no other proof than his being not the first committer of sin even in
this sublunary World, but that Serpent, who tempted our first Parents to it.
For as he, and his fellow Angels sinned before them in those glorious seats, in
which they were first bestowed; So he sinned also before them here by that
temptation, which he suggested to them, and without which they had not fallen
from their integrity. Which as it is an evidence of sin's not entering in by
Adam in that sense, and consequently that that was not the sense intended by S.
Paul; So is the more to be considered, because S. John attributes this entrance
of sin to the Devil 1. Joh. 3.8.
, yea makes all the committers of sin to be therefore of him. But besides that
Adam was not the first of those that sinned, and we therefore not so to
understand S. Paul, when describing sin as entering by him; Neither was he the
first of humane kind that sinned, which will be a yet farther prejudice to the
former surmise. For (as we learn from the story of the Fall Genesis 3.6.
, yea from this very Apostle elsewhere) 1 Timothy 2.14.
Adam was not deceived, that is to say, was not the first that was so, but the
Woman being deceived was in the transgression. Which what is it but to say,
that sin did not enter in by Adam in that sense, and consequently that that was
not the sense intended by the Apostle in it? Only if it be said (and more than
that cannot be said in it) that we are not so to understand S. Paul, when
describing sin as entering by Adam, as not also to suppose him to connote the
Partner both of his Bed, and of his transgression; As I will not be forward to
deny the suggestion altogether, because believing them both to have contributed
to the production of our transgressions, as well as Nature, so I cannot forbear
to say upon the account of that which follows, that we ought to consider Adam
as the more especial instrument in it. Because S. Paul not only represents him
Romans 5.14.
in particular as the Type, or Figure of him, that was to come, but both
describes him all along under the notion of one Man Romans 12.15, 16. etc.
, yea makes a great part of the likeness, that was between him and Christ to
consist in it. Which could by no means have been proper, if he had meant no
other by sin's entering in by Adam, than entering in by him as one of the first
committers of it. For in this sense Eve must necessarily have had the
preeminence, because not only offending before her Husband, but tempting even
him to do the same. From that first sense therefore pass we to the second, and
which indeed is both more ancient, and plausible, than the former. For as it is
as old as that Pelagius Vid. Voss. Hist. Pelag. li. 2. part 2. These. 1.
, who first called Original Sin in question, so it allows the sin of Adam to
have had an influence upon other Men's sins, as well as to have given beginning
to the being of it. But that it has as little solidity, or pertinency to the
words, whereunto it is applied, will appear if we reflect upon the sequel of S.
Paul's Discourse, or the subject matter of that, which is offered as the
interpretation of it. For is there any reason to think (without which that
interpretation can be of no avail) that Adam by his sin tempted all his
posterity to offend? Nay, is there not reason enough to believe, that that
example of his contributed little to Men's following sins, yea contributed
nothing at all to many of them? For how many Men have there been, to whom the
knowledge of his sin never reached? How many are there yet, who are under the
same ignorance, or may hereafter be? And must not these therefore be looked
upon as exempted from the influence of his ill example, and consequently, if
their sins entered in by Adam, be acknowledged to have entered some other way?
And though the same be not to be said of those, to whom the Scriptures have
come, because those are not without the knowledge of his sin, nor incapable of
being influenced by his example; Yet is there as little reason to think, that
that example of his contributes much to their sins, or indeed ever did to
theirs, who lived nearer to him, and so were more likely to have been inflicted
by him. For beside that a sin so chastis'd, as that was, was not very likely to
draw their thoughts toward it, and therefore as little likely to tempt them to
the imitation of it; Beside that many of them might have no actual
consideration of it, as no doubt many now have not, even when they offend in
the like kind; They might have been influenced, and no doubt were by other sins
of his, as much, or more than by his first transgression, or by the ill
examples of those, that were nearer to them, rather than by any of his. In fine
they might have been, and no doubt often were influenced by the baits of
pleasure, or profit, and thereby drawn aside from their integrity; These having
been as apt to influence them, as the example of that sin, by which their
several offenses are supposed to have entered into the World. And I shall only
add, that as that sense cannot therefore be reasonably imposed, if we regard,
as no doubt we ought, the subject matter of it; So we shall find as little
encouragement for it from the sequel of his Discourse, whose words are now
under consideration. For beside that he himself may seem sufficiently to
obviate it by affirming presently after Romans 5.14.
, that there were many of those, that sinned, that did not, nor well could sin
after the similitude of Adam's transgression, because knowing nothing at all of
any such positive law, as he transgressed; It is the main design of his
Discourse to compare the good, that Christ brought by his obedience, with the
hurt which that type of his did by his transgression. Which comparison had been
but a frigid one, if all the hurt, that Adam did us, was by the force of his
ill example: Because it is certain that Christ's obedience was of a much more
efficacious influence in the kind of it, as well as in the degree, and would
therefore rather have been vilified, than any way illustrated, or commended by
the comparison, if the malign influence of Adam's sin had reached no farther,
than that of an example. I conclude therefore, that what ever was meant by
sin's entering in by Adam, yet something more was meant by it, than its entering
by him either as the first committer of it, or as one, who by his ill example
tempted others to do the like. And indeed as the instance but now alleged,
even the likeness, that is between Adam's sin, and Christ's obedience, makes it
but reasonable to look upon all sin as entering also by Adam, as more, or less
the cause of it, so it stands yet more confirmed by what S. Paul affirms in the
ninteenth verse, especially as it lies in the Original: The purport thereof
being, that Men are constituted sinners by his disobedience, yea that they are
so constituted sinners by it, as Men are constituted righteous by the obedience
of Christ. For though the words (...) may in themselves be capable of a softer
sense, and accordingly signify no more, than Men's being reputed, and used as
sinners upon the account of that transgression, which Adam committed; Yet I see
not how that sense can be thought to fit them here, or indeed any other than
that of constituting, or making Men sinners: Partly because their being
constituted sinners by Adam's disobedience is rendered by S. Paul Romans 5.18, 19.
as the reason of their condemnation by it, and ought therefore to be
distinguished from it; And partly because they are said to be constituted
sinners by Adam's disobedience, as they, who belong to Christ, are constituted
righteous by his obedience. For the obedience of Christ procuring Men's being
really righteous, as well as their being reputed such, yea procuring their
being really righteous in some measure, that they may be so accounted of, and
used; What can be more reasonable than to think, that that disobedience of
Adam, which is affirmed to be like it, is of the same causality, and
accordingly constitutes, or makes Men sinners, as well as accounted of as such.

One only thing remains toward the clearing of the matter in hand, even the
derivation of the corruptness of our Nature from that of our first Parent, or
Parents; And that is, that as all sin entered in by Adam as more, or less the
cause of it by his own, so he became the cause of it by his own by thereby
depraving his own Nature first, and then communicating that depravation to
those, that descended from him. Of the former whereof as there cannot well be
any doubt, considering the hainousness of that sin, which he committed (That as
it could not but occasion the withdrawing of the Divine Grace from Adam, so
neither but draw after it the depravation of his Nature, as which received all
its rectitude from the other) so there will be as little doubt of the latter,
if we compare what S. Paul here says concerning Adam's being the cause of all
our sins by his own, with what he afterward says Romans 7.17-20.
concerning Men's falling into actual sin by virtue of an evil principle, that
dwells in them. For if all actual sin proceed immediately from such an evil
principle, that evil principle must be also from Adam, as without which
otherwise he could not be the cause of our sins by his own, nor constitute us
sinners by it.

IV. I will not be over positive in defining by what means this evil principle
is conveyed, because I am not well assured how our very Nature is. It shall
suffice me to represent (what may tend in some measure toward the clearing of
it) That Original sin, cleaving to our nature from the first beginnings of it,
must consequently be conveyed to us by the same general means, by which our
nature is, even by natural generation, yea that the Scripture teaches us so to
reason, where it affirms Men to be conceived in sin Psalm. 51.5.
, to become flesh by being born Joh. 3.6.
of flesh, and unclean Job 14.4.1.
by being brought out of those Parents, that are so; That, though the more
particular means, by which Original Sin is conveyed, cannot with any certainty
be assigned, because it is alike uncertain, whether those Souls, in which it is
most reasonable to place it, be either traduced, or immediately created, yet
there would not be any uncertainty as to this particular, if we believed the
Souls of Men to be traduced, as several of the Ancients Vid. Vossi. Hist.
P^lag. Lib. 2. Part 3. These. 1.
, and not a few of the Moderns have believed (For so it would not only not be
difficult to apprehend the particular means of the others conveyance, but
almost impossible to overlook them, because making it to pass together with
those Souls, to which it adheres, and diffuse it self from thence to those
Bodies, to which they are united) That, though the traduction of Souls be not
without its difficulties, and such as I shall not be so vain as to attempt the
solution of, yet it is in that particular but of the same condition with the
immediate Creation of them, that I say not also less exceptionable, as to the
business of Original Sin; In fine, That, as it has nothing from Scripture to
prejudice the belief of it, as appears by the solutions, which have been long
since Hotham's Introd. to the Trent. Philosophy.
given to the Objections from it; So it seems to me much more agreeable to that
account, which it gives of the Creation, and indeed to the Nature of a Parent.
For what can be more clear from the Story of the Creation, than that God
designed once for all to Create all the Beings, which he intended, leaving
them, and particularly Man, to carry on the Succession by those productive
principles, which he had planted in them? For if so, what should hinder us from
believing, but that Men produce their like after the same manner, that other
Creatures do, and by the same Divine Benediction, and concurence. Sure I am, as
they will otherwise fall short of the powers of inferior beings, as well as be
an anomalie in the Creation, so they will be but very imperfectly in the
condition of Parents, because contributing only to that part, which is the
least considerable in their Posterity. Only as I list not to contend about any
thing, of which I my self am not more strongly persuaded; So I shall leave it
to those, whom the immediate creation of Souls better pleases, to make their
advantage of it, and satisfy themselves from it concerning the means of
Original Sin's conveyance. Which if they do, they shall do more, than the great
S. Augustine could after all his travails in this Argument; Because professing
that he could not find either by reading or praying, or reasoning Ep. 157. ad
Optatum.
, how Original Sin could be defended with the opinion of the Creation of Souls.

V. I may not dismiss the Argument that is now before us, or indeed so much as
attend to the consideration of those Objections, that are made against it,
before I have also inquired, whether that, which has the name of Original Sin,
be truly, and properly such, and not rather so styled in respect of that first
sin, from which it proceeded, or in respect of those sins, to which it leads.
For beside that that Church, whose Catechism I have chosen to explain, leads us
to the consideration of it, because both there, and elsewhere Art. of Relig. 6.
affirming it to have the nature of a Sin, to make us the Children of Wrath,
and to deserve God's Wrath and Damnation; The resolution of it is of no small
moment toward the right stating of our duty, and the valuableness of that
remedy, which Christianity has provided for it. For neither otherwise can we
look upon Original Sin as any proper matter for our Repentance, whatsoever it
may be for our lamentation, nor upon Baptism as bringing any other pardon to
Infants, than that of the Sin of their first Parents, and which they who look
upon Original Sin as rather our unhappiness, than fault, are generally as far
from charging them with. This only would be premised for the better
understanding of it, that by Sin is not meant any actual transgression of a Law
(for no Man was ever so absurd, as to affirm that concerning Original Sin) but
that which is contrary to a Law in the nature of an evil habit, and both
imports an absence of that Righteousness, which ought to be in us, and an
inclination to those evils, from which we ought to be averse; This, as it is no
less the transgression of a Law, than any actual sin is, so making the person,
in whom it is, as obnoxious to punishment, and consequently to be looked upon
as yet more properly a sin. Now that that, which we call Original Sin, is
really such in this latter notion, will appear if these two things be
considered; First, that the Scripture gives it the title of sin, Secondly, that
it represents it as such upon the account of our being obliged by the Law of
God to have in us a contrary temper. That the Scripture gives that, whereof we
speak, the title of sin, is evident from those Texts, which we before made use
of to prove the being of it; More particularly from that Psa. 91.5.
, which represents David as conceived, and born in sin, and those Romans 7.17-20.
, which represent us all as having sin dwelling in us. For these having been
before shown to speak of Original Sin make it evident that the Scripture gives
it the title of Sin, because in the former places representing it under that
notion. And though I will not from that only Topic conclude it to be properly
such, because the Scripture makes use of figurative expressions, as well as
proper, yea does so in this very particular whereof we speak (for thus it
sometimes gives the title of sin to that, which is intended only as the
punishment thereof) yet as we may lawfully infer from thence, that there is
more cause to believe Original Sin to be properly, than figuratively such, till
the contrary thereof be made appear, The proper sense being otherwise to be
preferred before the figurative; So that there can be no place for the
figurative sense, if that, which is there represented as a sin, be elsewhere
represented as such upon the supposition of our being obliged to have in us the
contrary temper. Which that it is will appear from such Texts, as do more
immediately affirm it, or such as affirm those things, from which it may by
good consequence be deduced. Of the former sort I reckon that, which is
immediately subjoined by David to the mention of his being conceived in sin,
and brought forth in iniquity Psa. 51 6.
. Behold thou requirest truth in the inward parts, and shall, or rather have
made me to understand wisdom secretly. For as we cannot but look upon what is
there said concerning God's requiring truth in the inward parts as spoken with
relation to that sin, whereof he before complains, and to the mention whereof
he subjoyns the mention of the other; So neither (considering it to have been
his intent to aggravate his sinfulness before God) but look upon it as also his
intent to aggravate the sinfulness of his frame by that piety which God
required of him. Which supposed, Original Sin will not only be found to be so
entitled by the Scripture, but to have had that name bestowed upon it upon the
account of Men's obligation to the contrary, and consequently to be truly and
properly such. And though there be not it may be many more Texts of that
nature, or which therefore can be thought so directly to affirm, that it
becomes the sin of those, in whom it is, upon the account of their obligation
to the contrary; Yet will it not be difficult to find others, which do as
clearly assert those things, from which it may by good consequence be deduced.
Such as are those which make Original Sin to be a proper matter for confession,
yea to induce a guilt upon the person, in whom it is. But so the Prophet David
does plainly suppose in that very Psalm, which we but now made use of; Because
not only confessing Psa. 51.5.
the sinfulness of his Nature together with that of his external actions, but
begging of God, immediately after that confession of his, that he would purge
him Psa. 51.7.
with Hyssop from it. For as we have no reason to exclude that from the matter
of the desired purgation, which immediately precedes the Prayer that is put up
for it; So much less reason to doubt, after that Prayer for the purgation of
it, of its inducing a guilt upon the person, in whom it is: The use of Hyssop
in the Old Law (as appears by several places Exo. 12.22. Lev. 14.6.
in it, and a consentient Text in the Epistle to the Hebrews Heb. 9.19. etc.
) being to sprinkle the Blood of the Sacrifices upon those, who were any way
obnoxious to its censures, and so deliver them from the severity thereof. For
what other then could the Psalmist mean by that Prayer of his, than that God
would purge him from that, and his other sins by the blood of an expiatory
Sacrifice? Or so meaning be thought to intimate more clearly, than that that,
from which he desired to be purged, stood in need of such a Sacrifice, and
consequently was no more without its guilt, than his actual transgressions
were. Only, if that notion may not be thought to be of sufficient clearness to
build so important a Conclusion on, it will not be difficult to strengthen it
yet more by the word the Hebrew makes us of for purge, and those Prayers, which
the Psalmist subjoyneth to it; By the former because literally (...)
signifying a purification from sin, by the latter, because importing it to be
his desire Psalm. 51.7, 8, 9.
, that God would wash him from it, that he would cause those bones, that had
been broken by it, to rejoice, and in fine, that he would hide his face from
his sins, and blot out all his iniquities: These, as they are known and usual
expressions for the remission of sins, and consequently importing the guilt of
those, to whom they are applied, and their purification from it, so with this
farther reason to be so taken here, because the Psalmist afterward begs Psalm.
51.10.
, that God would purify him from the filth of them, and renew a right spirit
within him.

VI. Now though from what has been said it be competently evident, that the
Doctrine of Original Sin is not without good Authority to warrant it, yet
because that Doctrine has been impugned by the Pelagians of Old, and since
that by the followers of Socinus, therefore it may not be amiss for the farther
clearing of it to consider their Objections against it, and either return a
direct, and satisfactory answer to them, or at least show, that they ought not
however to be admitted as a bar against what the Scripture has said concerning
it. To begin with those Objections which respect the being of it, or rather
tend to show that it has no being in the World; Which are either such, as
consider it as a simple corruption of humane Nature, or such as do also
consider it as a sinful one. Of the former sort are those, which represent it
as a thing unconceivable, how it should come into humane Nature, which the
better to persuade, they allege plausible reasons against all those means,
whereby it may be supposed to find admittance. For these being destroyed, they
think they may lawfully infer, that there is indeed no such depravation upon
humane Nature. Of what force those reasons are will be then more seasonable to
enquire, when I consider what is objected against the fountain of Original
Corruption, or the means by which it is conveyed. At present it may suffice to
say, that of what force soever they may be thought to be, yet they are not of
sufficient force to destroy the being of Original Corruption, which is the
thing for which they are here alleged; Partly, because many things may be, yea
be assured to us, of the original, or conveyance whereof we our selves are
perfectly ignorant (for who doubts of the being of humane Souls, though he
neither knows, nor well can, whether they be traduced, or infused) and partly
because the testimony of Scripture, with the experience we have of its effects,
is a much more forcible argument of the being of it, than all the former
reasons are of the other: These being direct, and immediate proofs of its
existence, whereas the other are only indirect, and mediate. From such
objections therefore as consider Original Sin as a simple Corruption of humane
Nature, pass we to those, which consider it also as sinful, and which indeed
seem most hardly to press upon it: Such as are, that all sin is the
transgression of a Law, which Original Sin seems not to be; That it requires
the consent of the will of him, in whom it is, which cannot well be affirmed of
that; As in fine, that the Scripture it self may seem to make that, which we
call Original Sin, rather the Parent of Sin, than sin it self, because making
sin to arise James 1.13, etc.
from the conception, and parturition of it. As to what is objected from the
forementioned Scripture, it is either nothing at all to the purpose, or very
much against the purpose of those, that allege it: Partly because by the sin
there spoken of can be meant no other, than actual sin, and nothing therefore
to be concluded from thence, but that all actual sin is the product of Men's
Lust, and partly because that Text makes even actual sins to be the product of
Men's Lust, yea of such a lust as draws them aside, and enticeth them. For
who can well think the Parent of such Children to be of a better Nature, than
the Children themselves, especially when she is described as giving birth to
them by false, and deceitful Arts? Such Arts as those reflecting no great
honor upon the Mother, but on the contrary making her to be altogether as
criminal, as the other. If therefore they, who impugn Original Sin as such,
would do it with any advantage, it must not be by Arguments drawn from
Scripture, which will rather hurt, than profit them, but by Arguments drawn
from reason, and particularly by such as represent Original Sin as no
transgression of a Law, and therefore no sin properly so called, or as a thing
which has not the consent of the will of him, in whom it is, and therefore yet
farther removed from it. As concerning the former of these, even that which
represents Original Sin as no transgression of a Law, I answer that they, who
so speak, must deny it to be such, either because it is no Act, or because
there is no Law, which it can be supposed to be a transgression of. If the
former of these be their meaning, I willingly grant what they allege, but I
say withal, that it will not from thence follow, that it is no sin at all. For
if Men are obliged by the divine Law to a pious, and innocent temper, as well
as not to swerve from it in their actions, the want of that happy temper, or
the having a contrary one will be as much the transgression of a Law, as the
want of the same piety in their actions. Which will consequently devolve the
whole force of that Objection upon the supposition of there being no such Law
of God, which requires the former temper, or which therefore Original Sin can
be thought to be a transgression of. But as I have already made it appear in
some measure, that there is in truth such a Law, as requires a pious, and
innocent temper, so I shall now endeavor to strengthen it by some more
particular proofs, and by answering those exceptions, that are made against it.

In order to the former whereof we are to know, that as the Law we speak of
must be supposed to have been given to Adam, as that too not only in his
private, but public capacity, and as he may be thought to have been the
representative of all Mankind (there being no other Law, which can be supposed
to concern us, before we come to be in a capacity to apprehend, and obey it) so
I shall endeavor to make it appear first, that there was such a Law given to
Adam, and then that it was given to him not only in his private, but public
capacity, and as he may be thought to have been the representative of all
Mankind. Now that there was a Law given to Adam, requiring a pious, and
innocent temper, as well as the preserving that piety and innocence in his
actions, will need no other proof than God's creating him in it, and the love
he may be supposed to bear unto it. For as we cannot think God would have ever
entrusted such a Jewel with Adam, if it had not been his intention that he
should preserve, and exercise it; so much less, when the holiness of the divine
Nature persuades his love to it, as well as the declarations of his word. For
what were this, but to make God indifferent, what became of his most excellent
gifts, which no wise person, and much less so hearty a lover of them can be
supposed to be? If therefore there can be any doubt concerning the Law we speak
of, it must be as to its having been given to Adam in his public capacity, and
as he may be supposed to have been the representative of all Mankind. Which I
shall endeavor to evince first by showing what I mean by his public capacity,
secondly by showing that Adam was set in such a capacity, and thirdly that the
Law we speak of was given to him as considered in it. By the public capacity
of Adam I mean such a one, whereby as he was designed to be the Father of all
Mankind, so God made him a kind of Trustee for it; In order thereunto both
giving him what he did for their benefit, as well as his own, and obliging him
for their sakes, as well as his own, to see to the preservation of it, and act
agreeably to it. Which if he did, his Posterity as well as himself should have
the benefit thereof, and God's favor together with it, but if not, forfeit
together with him what God had so bestowed upon him, and incurr the penalty of
his displeasure. Now that Adam was set in such a capacity (which is the second
thing to be demonstrated) will appear from the Scriptures making him the cause
of all Men's death by his offense, and disobedience. For the effects of another
disobedience being not otherwise chargeable upon any Man, than as that other
may be supposed to be appointed to act for him; If the effects of Adam's
disobedience were to fall upon all his Posterity, he also must be supposed to
have been appointed to act for them, and consequently to have been set in that
public capacity, whereof I speak. Which will leave nothing more for us to show
upon this Head, than that that Law, which requires a pious and innocent temper
was given to Adam in that capacity. But as we can as little doubt of that, if
his contracting a contrary temper was as fatal to his Posterity, as to himself;
So that it was, will need no other proof than his producing the like temper in
them, and that temper's proving as deadly to them. The former whereof is
evident from what I before said to show, that Original Sin had its beginning
from Adam, the latter from S. Paul's Romans 7.24.
calling it a Body of Death, or a Body that brings it: The Genitive Case Grot.
in loc.
among the Hebrews, and Hellenists, being usually set for such Adjectives, as
betoken a causality in them; Even as the Savor of Death is used for a deadly
one, or that which brings death, and the Tree of Life for a life-giving one,
or that which was apt to produce, or continue it.

I deny not indeed (that I may now pass to those Exceptions that are commonly
made against it) that it may seem hard to conceive how Adam should be set in
such a capacity, as to involve all mankind in happiness, or misery, according
as he either continued in, or fell from that integrity, wherein God created
him. I deny not therefore, but that it is equally hard to conceive how God
should give him such a Law, the observation, or transgression whereof on his
part should redound to the account of his Posterity. But as every thing, that
is hard to be conceived, is not therefore to be denied, if it be otherwise
strengthened with sufficient proofs; So it would be considered also, whether it
be not much more hard to conceive, how God should otherwise involve Infants,
and Children in those calamities, into which they often fall, especially in
National Judgments: It being certainly more agreeable to the divine Justice, to
conceive those to have some way, or other offended, and consequently thereto to
have fallen under the displeasure of it, than to conceive them to suffer it
without any offense at all. For why then should we not think, especially when
the Scripture has led the way, that God obliged them in Adam to a pious, and
innocent temper, and which they losing in him, they became obnoxious with him
to the same sad effects of his displeasure? And though it be true, that there
is this great imparity between the cases, that the effect of God's displeasure
upon occasion of Original Sin is made to reach to eternal misery, as well as to
a temporal one, whereas the case we before instanced in concerns only a
temporal punishment: Yet as they do thus far agree, that a punishment is
inflicted, where there is no actual sin to deserve it, which is sufficiently
irreconcilable with the understanding we otherwise have of the divine Justice;
So that great imparity may be much abated by considering, that God has
provided a Plaster as large as the Sore, (even by giving his Son to dye for all
Mankind) and appointed the Sacrament of Baptism to convey the benefit of it.
For as the consequents of Original Sin will be thereby taken off from so many
Infants at least, as are admitted to that Sacrament, so that mercy of his to
those, and the assurance we have from the Scripture of his giving his Son to
dye for all may persuade us to believe, that though he has not revealed the
particular way to us, yet he has some other way to convey the benefit of that
death to those, who are not admitted to the other.

But it will be said it may be (which is a no less prejudice against the being
of Original Sin) that all sin, to make it truly such, must have the consent of
the will of those, in whom it is, as well as be the transgression of a Law. A
thing by no means to be affirmed concerning that, which we call Original Sin,
because not only contracted before we had a being, and therefore also before we
had so much as the faculty of willing, but moreover conveyed to us, when we had
neither reason to apprehend it, nor any power in our wills either to admit, or
reject it. And indeed how altogether to take off the force of that Objection is
beyond my capacity to apprehend, or satisfy the understandings of other Men:
Because as I cannot see how any thing can be a sin, which has not also the
consent of the will of those, in whom it is, so I am as little able to conceive
how Original Sin should have the consent of ours, either when it was first
contracted, or when it was transmitted to us. But as I am far less able to
conceive how Infants, and Children should come to be so severely dealt with
without any offense at all, or therefore without having some way, or other
consented to one; So I think first, that that difficulty may well be laid in
the balance against the other, yea alleged as a bar to the supposed force of
it. For why should my inability to apprehend how Infants, and Children could
consent to Original Sin, prevail with me to deny the being of it, when a far
greater inability to apprehend how the same persons should come to be so
severely dealt withal without it, does not prevail with me to deny that severe
usage of them? Neither will it avail to say (which is otherwise considerable
enough) that we have for the belief of this last the testimony of our Senses,
which is not to be alleged as to the other. For the question is not now
whether the severe usage of Infants, and Children may not more reasonably be
believed, than their Original Sin, upon the account of the greater evidence
there may be of it; But whether we can any more deny the Original Sin of
Infants, and Children upon the account of our inability to apprehend, how they
should consent unto it, than we can deny the severe usage of the same persons
upon the account of our inability to apprehend, how they should come to be so
dealt with without the other. Which that we cannot is evident from hence, that
we are equally at a loss in our apprehensions about the one, and the other,
that I say not also more at a loss about the latter, than about the former. And
indeed, as we find it necessary to believe many things notwithstanding our
inability to apprehend how they should come to pass, and ought not therefore to
deny the being of any one thing upon the sole account of that inability; So our
apprehensions are so short as to the modes of those things, of the being
whereof we are most assured, that it will hardly be deemed reasonable to insist
upon the suggestions of them, against the affirmations of the Scripture: Partly
because of the Authority of him, from whom it proceeded, and partly because we
cannot so easily fail in our apprehension concerning the due sense of the
affirmations of it, as in the deductions of our own reason concerning the
things affirmed; Nothing more being required to the understanding of the one,
than a due consideration of the signification of the words, wherein they are
expressed; whereas to the right ordering of the other, there is required a due
understanding of the Nature of those things about which we reason, which is
both a matter of far greater difficulty, and in many cases impossible to be
attained. Whatever difficulty therefore there may be in apprehending how
Original Sin could have the consent of those, in whom it is supposed to be, and
consequently how it should be truly and properly a sin; Yet ought not that to
be a bar against our belief of it, if the Scripture has represented it as
such, and which whether it has, or no, I shall leave to be judged by what I
have before observed from it.

From such Objections, as are levelled more immediately against the being of
Original Sin, pass we to those which impugn the derivation of it from Adam,
and from whom we have affirmed it to proceed. Which Objections again do either
tend to show, that it had its Original from something else, or that it cannot
be supposed to have its Original from Adam. An opinion has prevailed of late
years, that that, which we call Original Sin, took its rise from the sins of
particular Souls in some praexistent estate, and from those evil habits, which
they contracted by them. And certainly the opinion were reasonable enough to be
embraced, if the praeexistence of Souls were but as well proved, as it is
speciously contrived. For, that supposed, it would be no hard matter to give an
account of the rise of that Corruption, which is in us, nor yet of God's
afflicting those on whom no other blame appears: That corruption, as it is no
other than what particular Souls have themselves contracted, so making them as
obnoxious to the vengeance of God, as any after sins can be supposed to do. But
do they, who advance this hypothesis, think the plausibleness thereof a
sufficient ground to build it on? Or are problems in Divinity no other way to
be determined, than those of Astronomy, or other such conjectural Arts are? I
had thought that for the resolution of these we ought rather to have had
recourse to that word of God, which was designed to give us an understanding of
them, to have examined the several assertions of it, and acquiesced in them,
how difficult soever to be apprehended. I had thought that we ought to have
done so much more, where the Scripture professes to deliver its opinion, and
does not only not wave the thing in question, but speaks to it. Which that it
does in the present case will need no other proof than the account it gives of
the Original of Mankind, and then of the Original of Evil. For as it professes
to speak of Adam not only as created by God, but as appointed by him Genesis 1.28.
to give being by the way of natural Generation to all, that after him should
replenish the Earth (which how he should be thought to do, if he were only to
be a means of furnishing them with a Body, who had the better part of their
being before, is past my understanding to imagine) so it professes to speak of
the same Adam as one by whom sin, and death Romans 5.12. 1 Cor. 15.21, 22.
entered into the World, as well as the persons of those, on whom it seizes.
And can there then be any place for a precarious hypothesis about the Original
of Mankind, or the evils of it? Can there be place for advancing that
hypothesis not only beside, but against the determinations of the Scripture? Do
not all such hypotheses proceed upon the uncertainty of the matter, about which
they are conversant? Do they not come in as a relief to the understandings of
Men, where they cannot be satisfied any other way? But how then can there be
place for such a one, where the Scripture has determined? How can there be any
place even for the most specious, and plausible? For as that cannot be supposed
to be uncertain, which the Scripture has determined; So no plausibility
whatsoever can come in competition with the determinations of God, such as
those of the Scripture are. But such it seems is the restlesness of some Men's
minds, that if they cannot satisfy their scruples from what the Scripture has
advanced, they will be setting up other Hypotheses to do it by. Wherein yet
they are for the most part so unlucky, as to advance such things themselves, as
have nothing at all of probability in them. For who can think it any way
probable, that, if men's Souls had an existence antecedent to their conception
in the Womb, they should not in the least be conscious of it, nor of any of
those things, which were transacted by them in it? Is it (as one has observed,
who seems to have been the first broacher of it in this latter Age) is it, I
say, for want of opportunity of being reminded of their former transactions, as
it happens to many, who rise confident that they slept without dreaming, and
yet before they go to bed again recover a whole series of representations by
something that occurred to them in the day? But who can think, when the Souls
of Men must be supposed to carry in them the same evil tendencies, and
inclinations, that they should never light upon any one thing, which might
bring back to their minds what they had formerly transacted, or but so much as
that they had a being antecedent to their present one? For whoever was so
forgetful of his dreams, as not to remember he was sometime in a dreaming
condition, yea that he actually dreamed in it? Is it secondly (as the same
Learned Man goes on) by a desuetude of thinking of their former actions, and
whereby it sometimes comes to pass, as he there observes, that what we have
earnestly meditated, labored for, and penned down with our own hands, when we
were at School, becomes so lost to our memories, that if we did not see our own
handwriting to it, we should not acknowledge it to be our own? But does this
come home to the present case? Does it persuade such a forgetfulness in the
Souls of Men, as not only not to remember their particular actions, but not so
much as that they were in a condition to act any thing, or acted any thing
under it? For though a Man may forget the particular exercise he did at School,
yet can any Man (though he slept an Age, and never so much as dreamed in all
that time of being at School, or any other thing, be supposed, if he awoke in
his right wits, to forget he was sometime in such a place, and performed some
exercises in it? Is it lastly by means of some distemper, that happens to the
Soul by coming into an earthly Body, and by which the forementioned person
conceives the Soul may suffer in its memory, as we see it sometime does in its
present state by casualties, and diseases, yea so far as to make the person
forget his own name? But though the Soul should be supposed to fall into such a
forgetfulness by entering into a body (as we see it is a long time before it
comes to exercise its respective faculties) yet is there any reason to think it
should continue in it after it has gotten above the infirmities of the other,
yea so far as to reason with that clearness, wherewith this Author does in many
things, and with great plausibility in all others? For though Men may happen to
be so stricken by a disease, as to forget even their own names, yea have
undoubtedly suffered in that nature; yet is there no evidence from story that I
know of, or indeed presumption for the supposition of it, that though the
parties did again recover the free use of their faculties, yet they were unable
to look back to their pristine state, or call to mind any of the passages
thereof. So much more specious, than strong are the reasons that Author
alleges to show the Soul to be in a natural incapacity to call to mind its
pristin state, and actions. And yet if they proved what they intended, they
would hardly make it credible, that it should be without all knowledge of them:
God, who thrusts it down into its present state by reason of its former
errors, being likely enough to bring them to its mind, though it should be
otherwise ignorant of them. Otherwise he should neither make it sensible of its
own guilt, and his choosing thus to punish it, which is one supposed end of his
thrusting it down, nor careful to break off from it, which is another. And I
shall only add, that as we cannot therefore be in any great danger from those
Objections, which pretend to derive Original sin from another principle; So
shall we not now be much incommoded by the force of those Objections, which
profess more directly to impugn the derivation of it from Adam. For as those
Objections are principally founded upon the incompetency of Adam to involve all
mankind in the guilt of his transgression, so I have not only made it appear
already, that Adam was no way incompetent for that purpose, because appointed
by God as the representative of all mankind, but said enough, though not to
answer, yet to silence what is objected against it from the supposed want of
our consent to his transgression. Which will leave nothing more for us to do,
than to consider what is objected against the means, we have before assigned of
the conveying of that Original Sin whereof we speak. But as I have not been
positive in assigning the particular means of its conveyance, and must
therefore be the less concerned to answer what is objected against them; So I
shall oppose to all those Objections the assurance we have from the Scripture
of our having it in us from our Conception, and Birth, yea contracting it from
those fleshly, and unclean persons, from whom we are descended: That, as it is
enough to show that it is conveyed to us by the same general means, by which
our very nature is, so making it at least probable that it passes from them to
us together with our Souls, and from thence diffuseth it self unto our Bodies.
And how far a probability so founded ought to prevail against all the
Arguments, which are opposed to the traduction of Souls, especially when the
Scripture seems to favor that traduction also, will be no hard matter for him
to judge, who shall consider on the one hand the shortness of our own
reasonings, and on the other what difficulties attend the Creation, and
Infusion, as well as the traduction of Souls. For as those very difficulties
will oblige us to sit down after all with a probable assent in this affair, so
the shortness of our own reasonings to guide that assent rather by probable
testimonies of Scripture, than by probable arguments from Reason: Because as we
are more assured of the truth of those testimonies, than we can be of the truth
of any of those arguments, which we ground our selves upon in this affair; So
we cannot so easily fail in our apprehensions concerning the other; Nothing
more being required toward the apprehending the force of the former, than the
due consideration of the sense of the words, wherein they are expressed,
whereas to the apprehending of the force of the latter we must have a clear
knowledge of the nature of those things, about which they are conversant, which
is certainly a matter of far greater difficulty, and wherein therefore we may
more easily mistake. Only if what is said in this particular may not be thought
to be satisfactory, because rather a bar to what is objected against the
traduction of Souls (and consequently of Original Sin) than any direct answer
to it; I shall desire those, who are dissatisfied with it, to give such an
answer, as they themselves demand to what is objected by the other party
against the immediate Creation, and infusion of them: It seeming not so easy
to imagine (that I may not now press them with any other inconveniences) that
God should create a Soul on purpose to infuse it into such incestuous
conceptions, as he himself cannot but be thought to abhor. For my self, as I
can with equal ease digest the traduction of Souls with all its
inconveniences, or rather acquiesce in that evidence, which the Doctrine of
the Scripture, and the simple nature of a generation do seem to suggest; So I
shall hardly think it reasonable to quit it, till they, who assert the Creation
of Souls, free it from the former inconvenience, and other such difficulties,
wherewith it is alike encumbred. For till that be done, the traduction of Souls
will not only be of greater probability, but serve more clearly to declare how
that corruption, which our first Parents contracted, passed from them unto
their Children, and so on to succeding Generations.

PART IV. Of the things signified by Baptism on the part of God, or its inward
and spiritual Grace.
The Contents.
The things signified by Baptism are either more general, or particular: More
general, as that Covenant of Grace, which passes between God, and Man, and
that body of Men, which enter into Covenant with him; More particular, what the
same God does, by virtue of that Covenant, oblige himself to bestow upon the
Baptized, and what those Baptized ones do on their part undertake to perform.
These latter ones proposed to be considered, and entrance made with the
consideration of what God obliges himself to bestow upon the Baptized, called
by the Church, An inward, and spiritual Grace. Which inward, and spiritual
Grace is shown to be of two sorts, to wit, such as tend more immediately to our
spiritual, and eternal welfare, or such as only qualify us for those Graces,
that do so. To the former sort are reckoned that inward, and spiritual Grace,
which tends to free us from the guilt of sin, called by the Church forgiveness
of sin; That which tends to free us from the pollution of sin, called by our
Catechism A death unto it; And that, which tends to introduce the contrary
purity, and has the name of a New birth unto righteousness. To the latter sort
is reckoned our union to that Body, of which Christ Jesus is the Head, and by
means whereof he dispenses the former Graces to us. Each of these resumed, and
considered in their order, and shown to be, what they are usually styled, the
inward, and spiritual Graces of Baptism, or the things signified by the outward
visible Sign thereof.

BUT to return to that, from which I have diverted, even the things signified
by the outward visible sign of Baptism, which are either more general, or
particular: More general, as that Covenant of Grace, which passes between God,
and Man, and that Body of Men, which enter into Covenant with him; More
particular, what the same God does by virtue of that Covenant oblige himself to
bestow upon the Baptized, and what those Baptized ones do on their part make
profession of. Of those more general things I have given some account already
Of the Sacraments in general, Part 2.
, and shall have occasion, as I go, to add yet farther light to them; I will
therefore proceed forthwith to the consideration of the more particular ones,
such as are on the part of God an inward and Spiritual Grace, and on the part
of the Baptized an abrenuntiation of their former sins, and a resolution to
believe, and act, as Christianity obliges them to do.

Now the inward and Spiritual Grace of Baptism is of two sorts, to wit, such as
tend more immediately to our spiritual, and eternal welfare, or such as only
qualify us for those Graces, that do so. Of the former sort again is that
inward and Spiritual Grace, which tends to free us from the guilt of sin, best
known by the name of forgiveness, or that which tends to free us from the
pollution of sin, called by our Catechism a death unto it, or lastly that which
tends to introduce the contrary purity, and has the name of a new birth unto
Righteousness. Of the latter sort is our union to that body, of which Christ
Jesus is the head, and by means of which he dispenses the former Graces to us.
For that each of these is signified on the part of God by the outward visible
sign of Baptism, and consequently is a part of its inward and Spiritual Grace,
will appear if we descend to particulars, which therefore I will now set my
self to do.

To begin with those inward, and Spiritual Graces, which tend more immediately
to our spiritual, and eternal welfare; Among which as I assigned the first
place to forgiveness of sin, so I shall make it my business to show first, that
that is a Grace which is signified by the outward visible sign of Baptism, and
Secondly give a more particular account of the nature of that forgiveness,
which I have said to be signified by the other.

That forgiveness of sin is a Grace signified by the outward visible sign of
Baptism, will appear if these two things can be made out; First, that the
outward visible sign of Baptism has a relation to the forgiveness of sin, and
Secondly that it has the relation of a sign unto it. For if the outward
visible sign of Baptism has the relation of a sign to the forgiveness of sin,
Forgiveness of sin, as being its correlatum, must be looked upon as signified
by it. That the outward visible sign of Baptism has a relation to the
forgiveness of sin, S. Peter will not suffer us to doubt, because admonishing
Act. 2.38.
the Jews to be baptized for the remission of sins; And as little doubt can
there well be of its having the relation of a sign unto it, which is the only
thing we are at present to consider: Partly, because Baptism has been before
Of the Sacraments in general, Part 2.
shown to have been intended by God as a sign of many things, and why then not
as a sign of that forgiveness, to which I have shown it equally to relate, and
partly because it is proposed to us as washing away Acts 22.16.
the sins of those, that are sprinkled with it. For as if the Water of Baptism
be to be considered as washing away Men's sins, it must be upon the account of
its being a sign of that inward Grace thereof, that does so, as which alone can
be a just foundation of attributing such a property to it (for neither can the
Water of Baptism put away Men's sins, but by means of that Grace, which it
conveys, nor with any propriety even so be said to wash them away, but upon the
account of the likeness there is between its own natural property, and that of
the divine Grace, which will make the Water of Baptism a sign, or
representation of it) So if the Water of Baptism be to be considered as washing
away Men's sins, it will equally lead us to believe, that it ought to be
considered in particular as a sign of that forgiveness, whereof we speak:
Partly, because that forgiveness is an undoubted correlatum of Baptism, and
partly because the term of washing away Men's sins is most frequently made use
of to denote the forgiveness of sins, and that outward sign therefore, to which
such a washing is attributed, intended as a sign of the forgiveness of them. I
conclude therefore that whatever else may be thought to be excluded from the
signification of the Water of Baptism, yet it has the relation of a sign to
the forgiveness of sin, and that forgiveness therefore to be looked upon as one
of the Graces signified by it. And I shall only add, that this was always so
acknowledged in the Church, that even the Pelagians themselves, though they
denied all sin in Infants, and consequently left no place for the forgiveness
of sin in them, yet did allow of their being Baptized for the remission of sins
according to the rule of the Universal Church, and the tenor of the Gospel, as
appears from the words of Pelagius himself Vid. Voss. Hist. Pelag. li. 2. part.
2. These. 4.
, and those of his Scholar Coelestius.

There being therefore no doubt to be made, that forgiveness of sin is one of
those inward, and Spiritual Graces, which are signified by Baptism, it may not
be amiss for the farther clearing of that Grace, to say somewhat concerning the
nature of it, both as to those sins it pretends to assoile, and the measure of
its forgiveness. But because I have elsewhere Expl. of the Creed. Art. of The
forgiveness of sins.
given no contemptible account thereof, and shall have occasion to resume it,
when I come to show what farther relation the outward visible sign of Baptism
bears to this, and its other inward Graces; I shall content my self to observe
at present, that as that forgiveness, which is signified by it, has a relation
to all our past sins, so it relates in particular to Original Sin, and
consequently tends alike to the cancelling of its Obligation. Witness not only
the Churches applying this sign of it to Infants, as that too, as was before
noted for the remission of sins, but S. Paul's making that quickening Ephesians. 2.1
, which we have by Baptism, to save us as well from that wrath, which we were
the Children of by Nature, as from our own vain conversation, and the
punishment thereof. For other sense than that as the generality of the Latins
Vid. Voss. Pelag. Hist. li. 2. part. 1. These. 2.
did not put upon the Apostles words, so neither is there indeed any necessity
for, or all things considered any probability of: Partly because the Apostle
might intend to aggravate the sinfulness of Men's former estate from their
natural, as well as contracted pollutions (even as David aggravated his Psalm.
51.5.
where he deplores his Adultery, and Murder) and partly because there is
sufficient evidence from other Texts of Men's being sinful by their birth, as
well as practice, and which as S. Paul's Children of wrath by Nature is more
strictly agreeable to, so is therefore more reasonable to be interpreted of.
And I have insisted so much the longer both upon this particular, and the Text
I have made use of to confirm it, because as Original Sin is one main ground of
Baptism, and accordingly in this very Catechism of ours represented by our
Church as such, so she may seem to make use of that very Text to evidence the
being of Original Sin, and the efficacy of Baptism toward the removing of it:
Her words being, that as we are by nature born in sin, and the Children of
wrath, so we are by Baptism made the Children of Grace.

From the Grace of forgiveness of sin pass we to that, which tends to free us
from its pollution, entitled by our Church a death unto it. A grace, which as
the corruption of our Nature makes necessary to be had, so cannot in the least
be doubted to be signified by the outward sign of Baptism: It being not only
the affirmation of S. Paul that all true Christians are dead Romans 6.2.
to sin, but that they are buried by Baptism Romans 6.4,
into it, that they are by that means planted together into the likeness Romans
6.5,
of Christ's death, and that their Old Man, even the Body of sin, is crucified
Romans 6.6.
with Christ in it. For as that, and other such like Texts Col. 2.12.
of Scripture are a sufficient proof of Baptism's having a relation to our
death unto sin, as well as unto the death of Christ; So they prove in like
manner, that it had the relation of a sign unto it, and consequently make the
former death to be one of the Graces signified by it: Because not only
describing the Rite of Baptism under the notion of a death, and Burial, which
it cannot be said to be, but as it is an image of one, but representing it as a
planting of the Baptized person into the likeness of that death of Christ,
which is the exemplar of the other. For what is this but to say, that it was
intended as a sign, or representation of them both, and both the one, and the
other therefore to be looked upon as signified by it. The same is to be said
upon the account of those Texts of Scripture, which represent the Water of
Baptism as washing Acts 22.16.
away the sins of Men, or (if that expression may not be thought to be full
enough, because referring also to the forgiveness of them) as sanctifying, and
cleansing Ephesians. 5.26, 27.
the Church, to the end it may be holy, and without blemish. For as that shows
the Water of Baptism to have a relation to that grace, which tends to free the
Church from sinful blemishes, so it shows in like manner, that it was intended
as a sign of it, and of that inward cleansing, which belongs to it: There being
not otherwise any reason why the freeing of the Church from sin by means of the
Baptismal water should have the name of cleansing, but upon the account of the
analogy there is between the natural property thereof, and the property of that
Grace, to which it relates.

One only Grace remains of those, which tend more immediately to our spiritual
welfare, even that which our Catechism entitles a new birth unto righteousness.
Concerning which I shall again show (because that will be enough to prove, that
it is a Grace signified by it) that the Water of Baptism has a relation to it,
and then that it has the relation of a sign. I allege for the former of these
S. Paul's entitling it the laver of regeneration Tit. 3.5.
, as our Savior's affirming Joh. 3.5.
before him, that we are born again of that, as well as of the Spirit; For the
latter what has been before shown in the general concerning its having been
intended as a sign of the things, to which it relates. For if the Water of
Baptism were intended as a sign of those things, to which it relates, it must
consequently have bin intended as a sign of our new birth, because by the
former Texts as manifestly relating to it. But so we shall be yet more fully
persuaded, if it carry in it a representation of that new birth, to which it
does relate. Which that it does will need no other proof, than its being an apt
representation of that spiritual purity, which the Soul puts on at its first
conversion, and wherein indeed its new birth Ephesians. 4.24.
consists. For so it is in part by that cleansing quality, which is natural to
it, and which induces a purity in those bodies, to which it is applied; But
especially by the use that was formerly made of it toward the washing of
newborn Infants from those impurities, which they contracted from the Womb:
This last serving to set forth the first beginnings of our spiritual purity, as
well as the former does that purity it self. And I shall only add, that as a
resurrection from the Dead is also a kind of new Birth, and accordingly so
represented by the Scriptures themselves (witness their entituling our Savior
upon the account of his Resurrection the first-begotten Col. 1.18.
from the dead, yea making that Resurrection of his to be a completion Acts
13.33.
of that signal prediction of God Psalm. 2.7.
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee) So the same Scriptures do not
only represent our new birth unto Righteousness under the notion of a
Resurrection, but sufficiently intimate that whether Birth or Resurrection to
be a Grace signified by it: Because not only admonishing us to look upon our
selves as alive unto God by Baptism Romans 6.11.
, as well as dead unto sin in it, but as risen Col. 2 12.
with Christ therein through the faith of the operation of him, who raised him
from the dead. For how come Men by reason of their being alive unto God through
Baptism to be affirmed to have risen with Christ in it, but upon the account of
that Baptism of theirs being a representation of that new life, or birth, which
we have by the means of it, as well as of the Resurrection of our Savior?

I will conclude what I have to say concerning the inward, and Spiritual Grace
of Baptism, when I have taken notice of that, which though it do not
immediately tend to our spiritual, and eternal welfare, yet qualifies us for
those Graces, that do; Even our union to that Body, of which Christ Jesus is
the Head, and by means of which he dispenses the other graces to us. For that
that is also signified by the outward visible sign of Baptism, will appear if
we consider that visible sign as having a relation to it, and then as having
the relation of a sign. Of the former whereof as S. Paul will not suffer us to
doubt, because affirming all 1 Cor. 12.13.
whether Jews or Gentiles to be baptized into that body; So there will be as
little doubt of the other from the general design of its institution, and from
what S. Paul intimates in the former place concerning it: That expression of
being baptized into the body of Christ importing our being received by Baptism
within it, as the body of the Baptized is within those waters, wherein he is
immersed. Which will consequently make that Rite a true, and proper sign of Our
Union to Christ's Body, and that union therefore a thing signified by it.

Such are the things, which are by Baptism signified on the part of God, and
Christ, or (that I may speak in the language of our Church) the inward, and
spiritual Graces thereof. It remains that I also show the things signified by
it on the part of the Baptized, even an Abrenunciation of their former sins,
and a resolution to believe, and act, as Christianity obliges them to do. But
because both the one, and the other of these will be more clearly understood,
if they be handled apart, and whatsoever is to be known concerning each of them
laid as near together as may be; Therefore having begun to entreat of the
inward and spiritual Grace of Baptism, I will continue my Discourse concerning
it, and accordingly go on to enquire what farther relation the outward visible
sign of Baptism has to its inward and Spiritual Grace, or Graces, and first of
all to Forgiveness of sin.

PART V. Of Forgiveness of sin by Baptism.
The Contents.
Of the relation of the sign of Baptism to its inward, and spiritual Grace, and
particularly to Forgiveness of sin; Which is either that of a means fitted by
God to convey it, or of a pledge to assure the Baptized person of it. The
former of these relations more particularly considered, as that too with
respect to Forgiveness of Sin in the general, or the Forgiveness of all Sin
whatsoever, and Original Sin in particular. As to the former whereof is
alleged first the Scriptures calling upon Men to be Baptized for the
remission, or forgiveness of sin, Secondly the Church's making that Forgiveness
a part of her Belief, and Doctrine, Thirdly the agreeing opinions or practices
of those, who were either unsound members of it, or Separatists from it, And
Fourthly the Calumnies of its enemies. The like evidence made of the latter
from the Scripture's proposing Baptism, and its Forgiveness as a remedy against
the greatest guilts, and in special against that wrath, which we are Children
of by Nature. From the premises is shown, that the sign of Baptism is a pledge
to assure the Baptized of Forgiveness, as well as a means fitted by God for the
conveying of it.

NOW as the outward visible sign of Baptism has, beside that of a sign, the
relation of a means fitted by God to convey the inward, and spiritual Grace,
and of a pledge to assure the Baptized person of it; So being now to entreat of
its relation to that of the Forgiveness of sins, we must therefore consider it
under each of them, and first as a means fitted by God for the conveying of it.

In the handling whereof I will proceed in this method; First, I will show that
it has indeed such a relation to Forgiveness in the general, Secondly, that it
has such a relation to the Forgiveness of all sins whatsoever, and
particularly of Original.

That the outward visible sign of Baptism has such a relation to Forgiveness
in the general, will appear from the ensuing Topics.

I. From the plain, and undoubted Doctrine of the Scripture. II. From the
consentient Doctrine, and Belief of the Church. III. From the whether
practices, or opinions of the unsound members of it, or Separatists from it.
IV. From the Calumnies of the open Enemies thereof.
I. What the Doctrine of the Scripture is in this affair cannot be unknown to
any, who have reflected upon what S. Peter said to those Jews, who demanded of
him, and his fellow Apostles what they should do to avert the guilt they had
contracted, and what Ananias said to Paul, who was remitted to him upon the
same account. For to the former S. Peter made answer among other things that
they should be baptized Acts 2.38.
for the remission of sins; Which shows what Baptism was intended for, and what
therefore, if they were duly qualified, they might certainly expect from it: To
the latter Ananias, that he should arise, and be baptized, Acts 22, 16.
and wash away his sins. Which effect as it cannot be thought-to referr to any
thing but the preceding Baptism, and therefore neither but make that Baptism
the proper means of accomplishing it; So can much less be thought to exclude,
or rather not principally to intend the washing away the guilt of them: Partly
because (as was before observed) that is the most usual sense of washing away
sins, and partly because most agreeable to the disconsolate condition Paul was
then in, as well as to the foregoing declaration of S. Peter.

II. To the Doctrine of the Scripture subjoyn we the consentient Doctrine, and
belief of the Church, as which though it cannot add to the Authority of the
other, yet will no doubt conferr much to the clearing of its sense, and of that
Doctrine, which we have deduced from it. Now what evidence there is of such a
consent will need no other proof than the Doctrine of her Creed Creed in the
Communion-serv.
, and the use she made of the simple Baptism of Infants to establish against
the Pelagians the being of that Original Sin they called in question. For how
otherwise could the Church call upon Men to declare, that they believed one
Baptism for the remission of sins? Yea, though she thought it otherwise
necessary to inculcate Baptism, as well as remission, and the single
administration of it, as well as either. For beside that both the one, and the
other might have been declared by themselves, as well as in the tenor, wherein
they are now exhibited; Had it not been a thing otherwise certain that
remission of sins was an effect of Baptism, to have subjoined it to Baptism, as
it is now, would have been a means to render it uncertain, and consequently all
the hopes of a Christian together with it. Again, if there had been any the
least doubt in the Church concerning this relation of Baptism, I mean as a
means to convey remission of sins to the Baptized party; How could she have
made use of the simple Baptism Voss. Hist. Velag. li. 2. Part. 2. Antithes. 4.
of Infants to establish against the Pelagians the being of that Original sin,
which they called in question? For that Argument of hers proceeding upon the
supposition of remission of sins by Baptism, as that again upon the supposition
of something to be remitted in the party baptized, which in Infants could be no
other than that Original Sin, which she asserted; If Baptism had not been
certainly intended for the remission of sins, that argument of hers had been of
no force, yea rather weakened, than any way strengthened that Original Sin,
which she maintained: Especially, when it was a like certain, and accordingly
replied by the Pelagians, Voss. ibid. These. 4.
that Baptism had other uses, and for which it might be supposed to have been
conferred upon Infants, though they had nothing at all of sinful in them.

III. But beside the suffrage of the Church of God, which both published this
Doctrine in her Creed, and argued others from it; It is farther to be observed,
that those, who were none of the soundest members of it, nor indeed as yet
perfect ones, confirmed it by their opinions, and practices, as they also did
in some measure, who yet separated from it in this affair. Witness, for the
former, their deferring their Baptism to their death beds; Whether (as the
Fathers Tertul. de Poenitent. c. 8.
sometime charged them) that they might sin so much the more securely in the
mean time, or (as I rather think for the most part) because they were not well
assured of the like efficacious means for the forgiveness of them. For which
soever of these two were the occasion of that delay, manifest it is even from
thence, that they had a high opinion of the forgiveness of sin by Baptism, but
much more from the hazard they ran of going out of the World without it, and
the contrariety of that their delay to the practice of the first Christians
Acts 2.41.
, as well as to the sentiments Cod. Eccl. Vniv. can. 57.
of their own times concerning it. It being not to be thought, that Men of
ordinary prudence would run upon so great an irregularity, as well as danger,
unless they also believed, that if they happened to obtain Baptism, they should
obtain together with it so plentiful a forgiveness, as would make ample amends
for the other. And though we cannot so reasonably expect the like evidence from
Heretics, and much less from those, whose business was in a great measure to
depretiate the value of Baptism, as it is certain the Pelagians was; Yet as
even they (as was before Expl. of Bapt. Part 4.
observed) allowed the Baptizing of Infants into the same rule of Faith with
those of riper years, and consequently into remission of sins; So they denied
not, as to Men of riper years Voss. Hist. Pelag. li. 2. Part. 2. These. 4.
, that Baptism was efficacious toward it, and that as they were baptized into
the belief of remission of sins, so they received that remission by it.

IV. In fine, so notorious as well as prevalent was the Doctrine of forgiveness
of sin by Baptism, that the adversaries of the Church, and of Christianity took
occasion from thence to calumniate them for it, and made that Doctrine of
theirs one of their greatest crimes. Of which, to omit others, we have a
remarkable proof in Julian Orat. cui tit. (...) p. 53.
, who makes Constantius, or rather Christianity in him, thus to bespeak the
World. Whosoever is a corrupter of Women, or a Murderer, or impure, or
abominable, let him come with confidence. For having washed him with this
water, I will make him presently clean; And though he be afterward guilty of
the like crimes, yet I will take care to cleanse him from them, if he will but
smite his breast, and knock his head. The former part whereof is a manifest
allusion to Baptism, and its effects, the latter to the penitential discipline
of the Church. And it ought the rather to be taken notice of, because as it
bears witness to that forgiveness of sin by Baptism, which has been hitherto
our design to advance, so it will contribute in part toward the proving, what
comes next in order, even

That the outward visible sign of Baptism has that relation, whereof we speak,
to the forgiveness of all sins whatsoever, and particularly of Original Sin:
There being little doubt as to the formerof these, if (as Christianity is there
made to speak) adultery, and murder were washed away by the waters of it. But
so that Christianity it self taught, as well as was affirmed by this its
adversary to do, is not only evident from what has been elsewhere said Expl.
of the Creed. Art. The forgiveness of sins.
concerning its tendering forgiveness of sins indefinitely, and particularly in
the laver of Baptism, but from the quality of those criminals, whom it invited
to forgiveness by it. For thus we find it to have done those Jews Acts 2.38.
, whom it before charged Acts 2.23.
with the murder of our Lord, and him in particular Acts 22.16.
, who elsewhere 1 Timothy 1.13.
confesses himself to have been a blasphemer, a persecuter, and injurious, yea
was intent upon that execrable employment at the time he was first invited to
forgiveness. But therefore as I cannot either conceive, or allow of any other
abatement in this forgiveness, than that which is to be made upon account of
the sin against the Holy Ghost, and which what it is, has been elsewhere Expl.
of the Creed. Art. The forgiveness, etc.
declared; So I shall need only to take notice of the reference it has to that
Original Sin, which is the unhappy parent of all the rest. Not that there can
be any great doubt as to the pardon of that, where it appears that the most
heinous actual sins are pardoned, but because Baptism has been thought by our
Church See the Office of Bapt. and the Catechism.
to have a more peculiar reference to it, and because if it can be proved to
have such a reference to its forgiveness, it will be of signal use to show the
necessity of baptizing Infants, in whom that sin does alike predominate. Now
though it be hard to find any one Text of Scripture, where that forgiveness,
whereof we speak, is expressly attributed to Baptism; Yet will it not be
difficult to deduce it from that Ephesians. 2.1. etc.
, which I have before shown to entreat of our becoming the children of wrath by
nature, as well as by the wickedness of our conversations. For opposing to the
corruption, or rather deadness, which accrues by both, the quickening we have
together with Christ, and which quickening he elsewhere Col. 2.12.
as expressly affirms to be accomplished in us by Baptism; Affirming moreover
that quickening to bring salvation Ephesians. 2.5-8.
, and peace Ephesians. 2.14-17.
, and reconciliation Ephesians. 2.16.
(for so he discourses of it in the following Verses of that Chapter) he must
consequently make that quickening, and the means of it to tend to the
forgiveness of both, and particularly of natural corruption: Because as that
quickening is by him opposed to both, so it must in this particular be looked
upon as more peculiarly opposed to the latter, because that is more peculiarly
affirmed to make Men the Children of wrath, and vengeance.

Such evidence there is of the outward visible sign of Baptism being a means
fitted by God to convey that forgiveness, whereof we speak; And we shall need
no other proof than that of its being also a pledge to assure the baptized
person of it. For since God cannot be supposed to fit any thing for an end,
which he does not on his part intend to accomplish by it; He, who knows himself
to partake of that, which is fitted by God to convey forgiveness of sin, may
know alike, and be assured as to the part of God of his receiving that
forgiveness, as well as the outward means of its conveyance. For which cause in
my Discourse of its other inward, and spiritual Graces I shall take notice only
of that outward, and visible sign as a means fitted by God to convey them,
because its being also a pledge may be easily deduced from it.

PART VI. Of Mortification of sin, and Regeneration by Baptism.
The Contents.
Of the relation of the sign of Baptism to such inward, and spiritual Graces,
as tend to free us from the pollution of sin, or introduce the contrary purity;
And that relation shown to be no less than that of a means, whereby they are
conveyed. This evidenced as to the former, even our death unto sin (which is
also explained) from such Texts of Scripture, as make mention of our being
baptized into it, and buried by Baptism in it, or from such as describe us as
cleansed by the washing of it. The like evidenced from the same Scripture
concerning the latter, even our new birth unto righteousness; As that again
farther cleared as to this particular by the consentient Doctrine, and practice
of the Church, by the opinion the Jews had of that Baptism, which was a Type,
and exemplar of ours, and the expressions of the Heathen concerning it. The
Doctrine of the Church more largely insisted upon, and exemplified from Justin
Martyr, Tertullian, and S. Cyprian.

I Have considered the sign of Baptism hitherto in its relation to Forgiveness,
that Grace, which tends to free men from their guilt, and is for that purpose
conveyed by Baptism to us; I come now to consider it in its relation to those,
which either tend to free them from the pollution of sin, best known by the
name of a Death unto it, or to introduce the contrary righteousness, and is
called a new birth unto it. Where again I shall show in each of them, that as
the outward work of Baptism has the relation of a sign unto them, so it has
equally the relation of a means fitted by God to convey them, and where it is
duly received, does not fail to introduce them.

To begin (as is but meet) with that, which has the name of a Death unto sin,
because sin must be first subdued, before the contrary quality can be
introduced; Where first I will enquire what we are to understand by it, and
then what evidence there is of the sign of Baptism's being fitted to convey it.

For the better understanding the former whereof we are to know, that as Men by
the corruption of their nature are inclined unto sin, and yet more by the
irregularity of their conversations, so those inclinations are to the persons
in whom they are, as a principle of life to a living Creature, and accordingly
do both dispose them to act sutably thereto, and make them brisk, and vigorous
in it. Now as it cannot well be expected, that where such inclinations prevail,
Men should pursue those things, which piety, and virtue prompt them to, so it
was the business of Philosophy first, and afterward of Religion, if not wholly
to destroy those inclinations, yet at least to subdue them in such sort, that
they should be in a manner dead, and the persons, in whom they were, so far
forth dead also; They neither finding in themselves the like inclinations to
actual sin, nor hurried on by them, when they did. How little able Philosophy
was to contribute to so blessed an effect is not my business to show, nor
indeed will there be any need of it, after what I have elsewhere Expl. of the
Crced. Art. I believe in the Holy Ghost.
said concerning the necessity of the divine Grace in order to it. But as
Christianity does every where pretend to the doing of it, and (which is more)
both represents that effect under the name of a death unto sin, and compares
Men's thus dying with that natural death, which our Savior underwent, so it
may the more reasonably pretend to the producing of it, because it also
pretends to furnish Men with the power of his Grace, to which such an effect
cannot be supposed to be disproportionate. The only thing in question as to our
present concernment is, whether as the outward work of Baptism has undoubtedly
the relation of a sign unto it, so it has also the relation of a means fitted
by God for the conveying of it, and what evidence there is of that relation.

Now there are two sorts of Texts, which bear witness to this relation, as well
as to its having that more confessed relation of a sign. Whereof the former
entreat of this Grace under the title of a death unto sin, the latter of a
cleansing from it. Of the former sort I reckon that well known place to the
Romans, where S. Paul does not only suppose all true Christians Romans 6.2.
to be dead to sin, and accordingly argue from it the unfitness of their living
any longer therein, but affirm all, that are baptized into Jesus Christ Romans
6.3.
, to be baptized into that death, yea to be buried by Baptism Romans 6.4,
into it; to be planted together Romans 6.5,
by that means in the likeness of Christ's death, and to have their old Man Romans
6.6.
, or the body of sin crucified with him. For shall we say that S. Paul meant no
more by all this, than that the design of Baptism, and the several parts of it
was to represent to us the necessity of our dying, and being buried as to sin,
and that accordingly all, that are baptized into Christ, make profession of
their resolution so to do, but not that they are indeed buried by Baptism as to
that particular. But beside that we are not lightly to depart from the
propriety of the Scripture phrase which must be acknowledged rather to favor a
real death, than the bare signification of it; That Apostle does moreover
affirm those, whom he before described as dead, to be freed Romans 7.18.
from sin, yea so far Romans 7.18.
as to have passed over into another service, even that of righteousness, and
to have obeyed from the heart Romans 7.17.
that form of Doctrine, into which they had been delivered. Which supposed (as
it may, because the direct affirmation of S. Paul) will make that death,
whereof we speak, to be a death in reality, as well as in figure, and
accordingly (because Men are affirmed to be baptized into it) show that Baptism
to be a means of conveying it, as well as a representation of it. Agreeable
hereto, or rather yet more express is that of the same Apostle to the
Colossians Col. 2.11.
though varying a little from the other, as to the manner of expression. For
having affirmed them through Christ to have put off the body of the sins of the
flesh by a circumcision not made with hands, and consequently by a spiritual
one, he yet adds (lest any should fancy that spiritual Circumcision to accrue
to them without some ceremonial one) in the Circumcision of Christ, even that
Baptism, which, conformably to the circumcision of the Jews, he had appointed
for their entrance into his Religion by, and wherein he accordingly affirms, as
he did in the former place, that they were not only buried with him, but had
risen together with him by the faith of the operation of God, who raised him
from the dead. From whence as it is clear, that the putting off the body of the
sins of the flesh (which is but another expression for a death unto them) is
though accomplished by a spiritual Grace, yet by such a one, as is conveyed to
us by Baptism, so it becomes yet more clear by what he adds concerning Men's
rising with him in the same Baptism, even to a life contrary to what they had
before deposited, through the faith of the operation of God. For as we cannot
conceive of that rising with Christ as other than a real one, because there
would not otherwise have needed such a faith, as that, to bring it about; So
neither therefore but think the like of that death, which it presupposes, and
consequently that that Baptism, to which it is annexed, is a means of conveying
it, as well as a representation of it. But so we may be yet more convinced by
such Texts of Scripture, as speak of this death unto sin under the notion of a
cleansing from it. Of which nature is that so often alleged one Ephesians. 5.26, 27.
concerning Christ's sanctifying, and cleansing his Church with the washing of
water by the word. For as it appears from what is afterward subjoined as the
end of that cleansing, even that the Church might not have any spot, or
wrinkle, but that it should be holy, and without blemish; As it appears, I say,
from thence, that the Apostle speaks in the verse before concerning a cleansing
from the filth of sin, which is but another expression for the putting off the
body of sin, or a death unto it; So it appears in like manner from S. Paul's
attributing that cleansing to the washing of water, that the outward sign of
Baptism is by the appointment, and provision of God, a means of conveying that
spiritual Grace, by which that cleansing is more immediately effected, and that
death unto sin procured.

From that death unto sin therefore pass we to our new birth unto
righteousness, that other inward, and spiritual Grace of Baptism, and the
complement of the former. A Grace of whose conveyance by Baptism we can much
less doubt, if we consider the language of the Scripture concerning it, or the
Doctrine, as well as practice of the Church; The opinion the Jews had of that,
which seems to have been its type, and exemplar, or the expressions even of the
Heathen concerning it.

For what less can the Scripture be thought to mean, when it affirms us to be
born of the water Joh. 3.5.
of it, as well as of the spirit, yea so, as to be as truly spirit Joh. 3.6.
, as that, which is born of the flesh, is flesh? What less can it be thought to
mean, when it entitles it the laver of Tit. 3.5.
Regeneration, and which is more, affirms us to be saved by it, as well as by
the renewing of the Holy Ghost? What less, when it requires us to look upon our
selves as alive Romans 6.11.
unto God by it, as well as buried Romans 6.4.
by it into the former death, or (as the same Apostle elsewhere expresses it)
as risen with Christ in it Col. 2.12.
through the faith of the operation of God, who raised him from the dead? In
fine, what less when it affirms us to be sanctified with the washing Ephesians. 5.26.
of it, as well as it elsewhere does by the influences of God's Spirit. For
these expressions show plainly enough, that Baptism has its share in the
producing of this new birth, as well as the efficacy of God's Spirit; And
consequently that it is at least the conveyer of that Grace, by which it is
more immediately produced.

And indeed as, if men would come without prejudice, they would soon see enough
in those expressions to convince them of as much as I have deduced from them;
So they might see yet more (if they passed so far) in the doctrine, and
language of the Church, to confirm them in that Interpretation of them. For who
ever even of the first, and purest times spoke in a lower strain concerning
Baptism? who ever made less of it, than of a means, by which we are
regenerated? I appeal for a proof hereof to their so unanimously See Part 2.
understanding of Baptism what our Savior spoke to Nicodemus concerning the
necessity of men's being born again of water, and of the spirit. For as all men
whatsoever interpret that of our new birth unto righteousness, and, so far, as
the spirit of God is concerned in it, of the means, by which it is produced; So
they must therefore believe, that if the Ancients understood it of Baptism,
they allotted that its share in it, and consequently made it at least a
conveyer of that Grace, by which this new birth is produced. I appeal farther
to the particular declarations of some of the most eminent among them, and
which whosoever shall seriously consider, will wonder how it should come to
fall back to a naked, and ineffectual sign. For Justin Martyr Apolog. 2. p. 93,
94.
speaking concerning those, who had prepared themselves for Baptism, affirms
them to be brought by the brethren to a place, where water is, and there to be
regenerated after that way of regeneration, wherewith they themselves were.
Which what it was, and of how great force he afterward shows, by affirming
them thereunto to be washed in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as
that too conformably to what our Savior spoke concerning the necessity of
men's being born again, To what the Prophet Isaiah meant, when he said, Wash
you, make you clean, put away wickednesses from your souls; And in fine, to
procure their deliverance from that, whether natural, or habitual corruptions
they were under the power of. For these things show plainly enough, that as he
spoke of the Baptismal regeneration, so he spoke of it too as a thing, which
procured, as well as figured the internal regeneration of them. To the same
purpose does Tertullian discourse, and particularly in his Tract de Baptismo;
Witness his calling it, in the very beginning thereof, that happy Sacrament of
our water, wherewith being washed from the faults of our present blindness, we
are freed into eternal life; His affirming presently after, that we the lesser
fishes, according to that (...), or greater one Jesus Christ, are born in the
water, neither can continue safe, unless we abide in it; That we ought not to
wonder, if the waters of Baptism give life, when that Element was the first,
that brought forth any living creature; That, as the Spirit of God moved at the
beginning upon the face of waters, so the same spirit of God, after the
invocation of his name, does descend from Heaven upon those of Baptism, and
having sanctified them from himself gives them a power of sanctifying others.
For these and the like passages show as plainly, that that Author looked upon
the outward sign of Baptism as contributing in its place to the production of
our new birth, or sanctification, as well as to the representation of it. But
of all the Ancient Fathers, that have entreated of this affair, or indeed of
that Sacrament, which we are now upon the consideration of, there is no one,
who has spoken more, or more to the purpose than S. Cyprian, or whose words
therefore will be more fit to consider. Only, that I may not multiply
testimonies without necessity, I will content my self with one single one, but
which indeed for the fullness thereof will serve instead of many, and be
moreover as clear a testimony of our dying unto sin by Baptism, as of our
regeneration by it. For when (says he Epist. ad Donat.
) I lay in darkness, and under the obscurity of the Night; When uncertain and
doubtful I floated on the Sea of this tossing World, ignorant of my own life,
and as great a stranger to truth, I thought it exceeding difficult, as the
manners of Men then were, that any one should be born again, as the divine
mercy had promised, and that being animated to a new life by the laver of
salutary water, he should put off that which he was before, and whilst the
frame of his body continued the same, become a new Man in his heart, and mind.
For how (said I) is it possible, that that should be suddenly put off, which
either being natural is now grown hard by the natural situation of the matter,
or contracted by a long custom has been improved by old Age, etc. To these,
and the like purposes I often discoursed with my self; For as I was at that
time entangled with many errors of my former life, which I did not then think
it was possible for me to put off; So I willingly gave obedience to those
vices, that stuck to me, and through a despair of better things, I favored my
evils, as though they had been my proper, and domestic ones. But after that
through the assistance of this generating water the blemishes of my former life
were washed off, and my mind thus purged had a light from above poured into it;
After that the second birth had changed me into a new Man through the force of
that spirit, or breath, which I sucked in from above; Then those things, which
were before doubtful, became exceeding certain, and manifest; things; which
were before shut, were then laid open, and dark things made light. Then that,
which before seemed difficult, appeared to help, rather than hinder, and that,
which sometime was thought impossible, as possible to be done. So that it was
not difficult to discern, that that was earthly, which being carnally born did
before live obnoxious to faults, and that that began to be God's, which the
Holy Ghost now animated. You your self verily know, and will as readily
acknowledge with me, what was either taken from, or bestowed upon us by that
death of crimes, and life of virtues. Which as it is an illustrious testimony
of the force of Baptism in this particular, and with what reason we have
affirmed it to be a means of procuring the former death, and birth; So I have
the more willingly taken notice of it, because it comes so near even in its
expression to what our Catechism has represented as the inward and spiritual
Grace thereof: There being no great difference between a death of crimes, and
life of virtues, which is the expression of that Father, and a death unto sin,
and a new birth unto righteousness, which is the other's. And I shall only add,
that as the Doctrine of the Church must therefore be thought to bear sufficient
testimony to Baptism's being a means of our regeneration; So its practice is in
this particular answerable to its Doctrine, and though in another way proclaims
the same thing. Witness what has been elsewhere observed concerning its giving
Milk, and Honey See Part 3.
to the new Baptized person, as to an Infant newborn, its requiring him
presently after Baptism to say Expl. of the Lord's Prayer in the words Our Fa
he^. De vita B. Martini c. 1. Necdum tamen regeneratus in Christo agebat
quendam bonis operibus Baptismatis candida^um.
Our Father, etc. as a testimony of his Sonship by it; And in fine its making
use of the word regenerated to signify Baptized: As is evident for the Greek
Writers from what was but now quoted out of Justin Martyr, and from Sulpit^us
Severus among the Latins. Which things put together make it yet more clear,
that whatever it may be now accounted, yet the Church of God ever looked upon
the Sacrament of Baptism as a mean of our internal regeneration.

And indeed as it is hard to believe, that it ought to be otherwise esteemed,
considering what has been alleged either from Scripture, or the declarations
of the Church; So it will appear to be yet harder, if we consider the opinion
of the Jews concerning that, which may seem to have been both it is Type, and
exemplar. For as I have made it appear before Part 1.
, that even they were not without their Baptism, and such a one, as was
moreover intended for the same general ends, for which both their Circumcision
was, and our Baptism is; So I have made it appear also Ibid.
, that the persons so baptized among them were accounted as persons newborn,
yea so far, that after that time they were not to own any of their former
relations; In fine, that that new birth was looked upon as so singular, that it
gave occasion to their Cabalistical Doctors to teach, that the old soul of the
Baptized Proselyte vanished, and a new one succeeded in its place. For if this
was the condition of that Type of Christian Baptism, how much more of the
Antitype thereof? Especially when it is farther probable (as has been also
Part 2.
noted from the discourse of our Savior to Nicodemus) that he both alluded in
it to that Baptism of theirs, and intimated the conformity of his own Baptism
to it in that particular.

And though after so full an evidence of this relation of Baptism to
regeneration it may seem hardly worth our while to allege the expressions of
the Heathen concerning it; Yet I cannot forbear, for the conformity thereof to
the present argument, to take notice of one remarkable one of Lucian Lucian.
Philopatr. p. 999. (...).
, who brings in one Triepho thus discoursing after his scoffing manner. But
when (says he) that Galilean lighted upon me, who had a bald Pate, a great
Nose, who ascended up to the third Heaven, and there learned the most excellent
things (meaning, as is supposed S. Paul) he renewed us by water, made us to
tread in the footsteps of the blessed, and delivered us from the Regions of the
ungodly. In which passage under the title of renewing men by water he
personates the Christian Doctrine concerning their being regenerated, or
renewed by Baptism, and accordingly makes it the subject of his reproach.

PART VII. Of our Union to the Church by Baptism.
The Contents.
Of the relation of the sign of Baptism to our Union to the Church, and that
relation shown to be no less than that of a means, whereby that Union is made.
This evidenced in the first place from the declarations of the Scripture, more
particularly from its affirming all Christians to be baptized into that Body,
as those, who were first baptized after the descent of the Holy Ghost upon the
Apostles, to have been thereby added to their company, and made partakers with
the rest in the Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship, in breaking of Bread, and in
Prayers. The like evidence of the same Union to the Church by Baptism from the
declarations of the Church it self, and the consequences of that Union shown to
be such, as to make that also to be accounted one of the inward, and spiritual
Graces of that Baptism, by which it is made.

HAving thus given an account of such inward, and spiritual Graces of Baptism,
as tend more immediately to our spiritual, and eternal welfare; It remains that
I say somewhat of that, which though of no such immediate tendency, yet is not
without all, because qualifying us for the reception of the other: That Union I
mean, which we thereby obtain to Christ's mystical body the Church, and by
which we, who were before Aliens from it, as well as from God, and Christ,
become members of the Church, and partakers of the several privileges thereof.
Which Union if any Man scruple to reckon among the inward, and spiritual Graces
of Baptism properly so called, I will not contend with him about it; Provided
he also allow of it as a thing signified by it on the part of God, and Christ,
and as moreover a Grace, and favor to the person, on whom it is bestowed. For
as that is all I ask at present concerning the Union now in question; So what I
farther mean by it is being an inward, and spiritual Grace shall be cleared in
the process of this Discourse, and receive that establishment, which it
requires. In order whereunto I will show the outward and visible sign of
Baptism to be a means, whereby that Union is made, and then point out the
consequences of that Union.

That the outward visible sign of Baptism is in the nature of a means, whereby
we are united to the Church, will appear if we reflect upon what the Scripture
has said concerning it; or the agreeing declarations of the Church it self.
For what else (to begin with the former) can S. Paul 1 Cor. 12.13.
be thought to mean, where he affirms all whether Jews, or Gentiles, or of what
ever other outward differences, to have been baptized by one spirit into one
body? For as it is plain from the foregoing 1 Cor. 12.12.
verse, or verses, that S. Paul entreats of Christ's Body the Church, and
consequently that the baptizing here spoken of must be meant of our Baptizing
into it; So it is alike plain from what it was designed to prove, as well as
from the natural force of the expression, that it was set to denote also our
being united to it thereby. For as we cannot impose a more natural sense upon
Baptized into that body, than our being received by Baptism into it, as the
Baptized person is within the water, and consequently some way united to it; So
much less if we consider what it was intended to prove, even 1 Cor. 12.12.
that Christians, how many soever, are but that one body. For how does their
being baptized into it prove them to be that one Body, but that that visible
sign, by which they are so, unites them to one another, and to the whole? A
mere sign of Union, though it may show what the partakers thereof ought to be,
yet being no just proof of what they are, and much less (as S. Paul seems to
argue) that they are so by the means of it. And indeed, as it will therefore be
hard to make the sign here spoken of to be any thing less than a means of our
Union to the Church; So especially, if we consider what is elsewhere said
concerning those, who first after the descent of the Holy Ghost, were baptized
in the name of Christ: S. Luke not only affirming of those new baptized ones,
that they were added to Acts 2.41.
the Apostles, and their other company, (which he afterward expresses Acts
2.47.
by added to the Church) but that they were partakers Acts 2.42.
with the rest in the Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of
bread, and in Prayers. For this shows their having an interest in all the
privileges of that Body, and therefore much more their being united to it. But
so it appears that the Ancient Church esteemed of it, whose determination is of
the more force, because it is only about the supposed means of Union to its own
Body; Justin Martyr, after he had spoken of the baptizing of such as offered
themselves to the Christian Church (which he himself expresses, when so
baptized, by (...), or conjoined with themselves) affirming that they were
immediately brought where the brethren were assembled, there to partake with
them of the common Prayers, that were then offered up, of the kiss of peace,
and of the Lord's Supper. Which last particular I have the more confidently
represented the new baptized persons as then admitted to, because the same
Father does not only make no distinction between them, and the other brethren
in it, though he subjoyns the business of the Eucharist to the former Prayers,
and kiss of peace, but affirms the same Eucharist presently after to be lawful
to none to partake of, but those that believed their Doctrine, received the
laver of regeneration, and lived as Christ delivered. For as he intimates there
by the admission of those that believed, and were baptized, if they were also
such as lived as Christ delivered, which the new baptized were in reason to be
accounted, till they had given proof to the contrary; So there is reason to
believe from the use of Excommunication in the Church, that that addition of
living as Christ delivered was not made to bar the new baptized from it, till
they gave farther proof of such a life, but to intimate the exclusion of those,
who, after they had been admitted to it, lived otherwise, than Christianity
prescribed: So making the persons excluded the unbaptiz'd, or ill living
Christians, and consequently the contrary thereto admitted. I deny not indeed,
that the Rite of Confirmation did very anciently come between the receiving of
Baptism, and the Eucharist. I deny not farther, because of what was before
Expl. of the Sacrament in general. Part 4.
quoted from Justin Martyr concerning the particular Prayer that was made for
the new baptized person, that the substance thereof was then in use, even
prayer for grace for him to live as he had but now professed. But as the design
of Confirmation appears to have been to procure for the new baptized a more
plentiful effusion of God's Graces, which is no intimation at all of his having
been before no perfect Christian, or not perfectly united to the Church, so
Baptism may for all that be looked upon as the means of our Union to the
Church, which is all, that I have taken upon me to assert. For the farther
evidencing whereof I will in the next place allege a passage of Tertullian De
Bapt: c. 6.
, which will, though not so directly, prove the same thing; That I mean where
he says, that when the profession of our faith, and sponsion of our salvation
are pledged under the three witnesses before spoken of, there is necessarily
added thereto the mention of the Church, because where those three are, even
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, there is also the Church, which is the body of
the Three. For as it is evident from thence, that Men were even from his time
baptized expressly into the belief of the Church, as well as into the belief of
the Trinity; So it will not be difficult to infer, that they were also
baptized into the unity thereof, and made members of the Church by it: Because
as he affirms the Trinity to become Sponsors of our Salvation in Baptism, as
well as either Witnesses, or objects of our Profession; So he affirms those
Sponsors to be as it were embodyed in the Church, and consequently to exert
their saving influences within it, which supposes Men's being united to it by
Baptism in order to their partaking of the salutariness of the other. And
indeed, though in that form, which our Savior prescribed Matt. 28.19.
for Baptism, there is mention only of baptizing in the name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, yet inasmuch as he prescribed that very form for the
making of Disciples Ibid.
by, he must consequently be supposed to propose it for the aggregating them to
that body, which he had already begun to frame, and making them alike members
of it.

There being therefore no doubt to be made of the outward visible sign of
Baptism being a means of our Union to Christ's mystical body the Church, it may
not be amiss (if it were only to manifest the great advantages thereof, as to
that particular) to show the consequences of that Union. Which we shall find in
the general to be a right to all those privileges, which Christ has purchased
for it; More particularly to the partaking of its Sacred Offices, and in, and
through the means of them of those inward, and spiritual Graces, which those
Sacred Offices were intended to procure, or convey. For every member of a
Society being by that membership of his entitled to all the privileges, that
belong to it as such; He, who becomes a member of Christ's Body, the Church (as
every Man, who is united to it by Baptism, does) must in his proportion be
entitled to all those privileges, which Christ has purchased for it, and
particularly to the privilege of partaking of its sacred Offices, and in, and
by the means of them, of those inward and spiritual Graces, which those sacred
Offices were intended to procure, or convey. Which how great a commendation it
is of our Union to that Body, and consequently of that Baptism, by which it was
made, will need no other proof than the Scripture's assuring us that Christ is
the Savior Ephesians. 5.23.
of that Body, and the promises it makes to those Prayers Matt. 18.19, 20.
, that are made by it, and to that Eucharist Matt. 26.26, etc.
, which is administered in it; The purport of those promises being no other,
than the granting what is asked by it, and particularly all those benefits,
which Christ's Body and Blood were intended for the procuring of. And if these
be, as no doubt they are, the consequences of our union to the Church by
Baptism, yea so far (as I have elsewhere Expl. the Creed, Art. of The
forgiveness sins.
shown) that they are not ordinarily to be attained out of it; That very Union
may not improperly be styled one of its inward and spiritual Graces, because
leading to those, that are most strictly such, and indeed the only ordinary
means of obtaining them.

PART VIII. Of the Profession that is made by the Baptized person.
The Contents.
The things signified by Baptism on the part of the baptized brought under
consideration, and shown from several former discourses (which are also pointed
to) to be an Abrenunciation of sin, a present belief of the Doctrine of
Christianity, and particularly of the Trinity, and a resolution for the time to
come to continue in that belief, and act agreeably to its Laws. Our resolution
of acting agreeably to the Laws of Christianity more particularly considered,
and the Profession thereof shown by several Arguments to be the intendment of
the Christian Baptism. What the measure of that conformity is, which we profess
to pay to the Laws of Christianity, and what are the consequences of the
Violation of that Profession.

HAving thus considered the things signified by Baptism on the part of God, and
Christ, best known by the name of its inward, and spiritual Graces; It remains
that I give the like account of the things signified by it on the part of the
baptized, or the things the baptized person makes Profession of by it. Which,
as was before observed, are an Abrenunciation of sin, a present belief of the
Doctrine of Christianity, and a resolution for the time to come to continue in
that belief, and act agreeably to its Laws.

That something is signified by Baptism on the part of the baptized, as well as
on the part of God, and Christ, is evident from what was before said Of the
Sacrament in general, Part 2.
concerning the nature of a Sacrament in the general, and Baptism's Ibid.
relating as well to something to be performed by the baptized, as to those
divine Graces, or privileges which we expect from the other.

That the things before mentioned are the things thus signified by it, has
also been elsewhere Expl. of the Apostles Creed.
declared, and so, that it would not be difficult for a diligent Reader to
satisfy himself from thence. But because what I have said concerning them lies
dispersedly in my former Discourses, and would therefore require more pains,
than I ought to impose upon my Reader, to find it out, and apply it to the
present Argument; I will here, though very briefly, consider them anew, and if
not (which would be too tedious) repeat all that I have said concerning them,
yet point him as I go, to the particular places, from whence they may be
fetched.

That Abrenunciation of sin is one of the things signified by Baptism is not
only evident from the manner of administering it in the Primitive times, and
which together with the form of their Abrenunciation, and our own are set down
in my account of the Preliminary questions, and answers of the Catechism, but
also from the general tenor of that Religion, which Baptism is an initiation
into; That requiring the renouncing of all sin, and wickedness, and therefore
supposing the baptized person to do so, when he takes that Religion upon him.
For which cause as an express Abrenunciation was heretofore required, and
continues so to be to this very day; So it was signified, as by other Rites,
and particularly by the baptized persons putting off his clothes in order to
his Baptism, as putting off together with them the Old Man, and his deeds, so
by the Rite of Baptism it self: He, who submits to that, implying thereby his
looking upon sin as a Moral impurity, and which therefore for the future he
would not have any thing to do with.

The second thing signified by Baptism on the part of the baptized is his
present belief of the Doctrine of Christianity, more especially of the Doctrine
of the Trinity. As is evident from that Baptism's being commanded by our
Savior to be made in, or into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost. For to be baptized into the name of those persons importing the
owning of those persons as our Masters Expl. of the Creed. Art. I believe in
the Holy Ghost.
, and our selves as the Disciples of them; To be so baptized moreover importing
the owning of those persons as alike Ibid.
Masters of us, and consequently, because the Father cannot be owned in any
lower relation, as partakers of the same divine Nature, and Authority; Lastly,
to be so baptized importing the owning of them in particular by a belief of the
Christian Doctrine, that being the most signal instance of that Discipleship,
we receive by it; The belief of the Doctrine of Christianity, and of the
Trinity in particular must be looked upon as signified by Baptism on the part
of the baptized, and those baptized ones consequently as making profession of
that belief by it. For which cause as the rule of Faith, or the Creed Introd.
concerning Catechizing, etc.
was given to those to learn, who were willing to be initiated into
Christianity, so they were particularly interrogated Expl. of the Prel. Quest.
and Answers.
as to their belief of the Articles thereof, and then, and not till then
baptized into it, and the privileges thereof.

The third and last thing signified on the part of the baptized is a resolution
for the time to come to continue in the belief of Christianity, and act
agreeably to its Laws. Both which will receive a sufficient confirmation from
S. Peter's affirming Baptism to be the Answer, or stipulation of a good
conscience toward God, and from what I have elsewhere Ibid.
said concerning it. For as it is evident from thence, that Baptism signifies
on the part of the baptized a stipulation, or promise of somewhat to be done by
him; So it will not be difficult to infer from thence, that it signifies also
a stipulation, or promise to continue in that belief of Christianity, into
which he is baptized, and act agreeably to its laws. As will appear, whether we
consider that stipulation as having a good conscience toward God for the object
of it (in which sense I should think S. Peter ought to be understood) or, as I
find many others to do, as proceeding from such a conscience. For a good
conscience having a due regard to the several parts of that Religion, which it
makes profession to espouse; He, who with relation to Christianity stipulates
from a good conscience, or makes that good conscience the object of his
stipulation, must consequently be thought to stipulate, or make a promise of
answering the several parts of it, and therefore also (because they are parts
of Christianity) of continuing in its Faith, and acting agreeably to its Laws.
And hence, (as was before Expl. of the Sacrament in general, Part 1.
observed) this, and the other Institution of our Religion had of old the name
of Sacraments, as importing a Vow, or promise to Christ of believing in him, or
obeying him. And hence also, that the Ancients argued Ibid.
the unlawfulness of superinducing an humane, or military Sacrament upon a
divine one, and answering to another Master after Christ. Which we shall the
less need to wonder at, if we remember that that Baptism, whereof we speak, was
copyed from the Baptism of the Jews Expl. of Baptism, Part 1.
, and particularly from that of John the Baptist. For concerning the former of
these it has been observed Ibid.
, that those three men, that presided over it, leaned over the baptized persons
as they stood in the water, and twice explained to them some of the more
weighty, and lighter precepts of their Law. For what reason think we, but to
let them know, that they were baptized into the obedience of the one, and the
other, and that they accounted that Baptism of their's as a Profession of it?
And though we do not find the like affirmed concerning the Baptism of John the
Baptist, which because an extraordinary one, and immediately from Heaven, I
have distinguished from the other; Yet, which will come all to one, we find it
entitled the Baptism of Repentance Mark 1.4. Acts 13.14.
, and (which is more) that Baptist enjoining upon those Publicans Luke 3.12,
etc.
, who came to be baptized by him, to exact no more than was appointed them, as
upon those Soldiers, that came upon the like errand, to do violence to no man,
to accuse no man falsely, and to be content with their wages: Such affirmations
as these being pregnant proofs, that a resolution of living piously, and
virtuously was a thing signified on the part of the baptized, and that their
taking upon them the former Baptisms was a profession of it. Now if that
Profession were the intendment of the former Baptisms, and particularly of that
of John the Baptist, why not also of the Baptism of Christ? Especially, when
John's Baptism of Repentance was to prepare men for the Kingdom of Christ, and
to which therefore we may suppose a stricter piety to belong, and they, who
were baptized into that Kingdom, plunged more deeply into the Profession of the
other. I will conclude this affair, when I have added, that it appears from the
Institution of Baptism, that the design, and end of it was to make Disciples
Matt. 28.19.
unto Christ. For it appearing from other words of his, that they, and they
alone can be his Disciples, who take up their Cross Luke 14.27.
, and follow him, forsake all Luke 14.33.
for him, and in fine abide Joh. 8.31.
in his words; If the design, and end of Baptism were to make men Disciples
unto Christ, it must consequently oblige those, who take it upon them, to take
upon them also the performance of the other, as to which that Discipleship
obliges them.

Now though therefore there can be no great doubt concerning the baptized
person's making profession of acting agreeably to the Laws of Christ, yet there
may be as to the measure of that conformity to them, to which his Baptismal
Profession obliges him; That imperfect state, wherein we are, and the baptized
person's being from the beginning Expl. of the Lords Prayer in the words, Our
Father, etc.
taught to pray for the forgiveness of his Trespasses seeming to require an
abatement of it; And because too I have more than once obliged my self to
enquire, what keeping of God's holy Will, and Commandments, is incumbent upon
us from our Baptismal Profession, and that Christianity, which it enters us
into; Therefore for the farther clearing this part of our Baptismal Profession,
as well as for the answering my own obligations, I will now set my self to
enquire, what the measure of that conformity is, which we profess to pay to the
Laws of Christ, and what are the consequence of the violation of that
Profession.

As concerning the former of these I shall not doubt to affirm it to be
adaequate for the matter of it to the several species of those Laws, which
Christianity obliges us to; S. Paul having expressly told us Tit. 2.11, 12.
, that that Grace, which brings salvation, teaches men to deny all ungodly,
and worldly lusts, and to live righteously, godlily and soberly in the present
World. I shall not stick to affirm, Secondly, that that Conformity, which we
make profession of, ought to answer so far as we can carry it, the several
particularities of the Christian Laws, as well as the several species thereof:
Less than that being not to be supposed to be the Profession of those, who make
profession of a good Conscience toward God; A good Conscience, as such,
prompting him in whom it is to conform so far as he can to every particular of
his Law, to whom he professes an obedience. But neither Thirdly shall I stick
to affirm, that that conformity, which we make profession of, ought to be so
entire, and full, as not to be interrupted at any time by a wilful violation of
any Law, or a violation of them in scandalous instances; Such as those are,
concerning which S. Paul has affirmed Gal. 5.21.
, that they, which do such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: He
answering not the divine law, so far as he can, who proceeds to either of
those, because the Grace of Baptism, with a moderate care, must be supposed to
be of sufficient force to preserve men both from the one, and the other. Such I
take to be the Conformity, which Christianity obliges us to, and which
consequently the baptized person must be supposed to make profession of. And I
would to God, that as all Christians make profession of such a one, so their
lives, and conversations were more answerable to it, than the experience both
of our selves and others assures us it is. But as the contrary thereof is too
apparent to need any farther proof, so I think it therefore but reasonable, for
the better awaking of those baptized ones, to set before them in the next place
the consequences of the violation of their profession.

Whereof the first, that I shall assign, is, that so far as they depart from
that Profession of theirs, so far forth they sin against that very Baptism of
theirs, which was intended for their recovery from sin, and against that saving
Religion, into which it admits them: That Baptism, which enjoins upon them the
making profession of a good Conscience, enjoining consequently the answering
that profession by a suitable piety, as without which that Profession would be
but an hypocritical one. From whence as it will follow, that there will be
little reason to believe, that they shall enjoy the benefits of Baptism, who
answer not the Profeson of it; So much less if we consider what that was, that
made their Profession to be of any avail at the first, even the presumption it
gave, that the person, that made it, would (as occasion offered it self) give
suitable demonstrations of it. For if that presumption were the thing, which
made the Profession of a good Conscience to be of any avail at the first; Those
demonstrations failing, those benefits must be supposed to fail, which were
collated upon the presumption of them. But from thence it will follow Thirdly,
that they, who answer not their former profession, can much less promise to
themselves farther spiritual blessings here, or an interest in the other World;
They, who could not be admitted to the first privileges of Baptism but upon a
presumption of their future piety, being much less likely to be admitted to the
participation of others, after that presumption appears to be null. It will
follow Lastly, that they who answer not the Profession of Baptism by a piety
suitable to it, must consequently fail altogether of the benefits thereof, if
that Christianity, into which it entered them, had not provided them of a remedy
against the violations of their Profession. Which, though it will not make the
case of those violators desperate, yet will show it to be so dangerous, as to
oblige all, who have a care of their Salvation, to prevent what they may such
violations of it, or endeavor to repair them afterward by a speedy, and
severe repentance, and a more fixed, and settled piety: Lest, as it may some
time happen, they be cut off before they can make use of the remedy proposed,
or by reason of their former violations have not the grace given them to do it.

PART IX. Of the right Administration of Baptism.
The Contents.
After a short account of the Foundation of the Baptismal relation, and
reference made to those places from which a larger one may be fetched; Enquiry
is made touching the right Administration of Baptism, as therein again First,
Whether Baptism ought expressly to be made in the name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, Secondly whether Schismatics, and Heretics are valid
Administratours of it, Thirdly, to what, and what kind of persons it ought to
be administered, Fourthly, Whether it may be repeated. The two first of these
spoken to here, and first, Whether Baptism ought to be expressly administered in
the form proposed. Which is not only shown to be under obligation from the
express words of the Institution, but answer made to those Texts, which seem to
intimate it to be enough to baptize in the name of the Lord Jesus only. The
Baptism of Schismatics, and Heretics more largely shown to be valid, unless
where they baptize into a counterfeit Faith, and the several objections against
it answered.

I Have hitherto entreated of the outward visible sign of Baptism, of its
inward and spiritual Grace, or the things signified by it, and the farther
relation that outward sign bears to them. It folllows that I entreat of the
foundation of that relation, the Fourth thing proposed to be considered.

Now as the Foundation of that relation has been shown Expl. of the Sacrament
in general, Part 2.
to be no other, than the Institution of Christ, as that again not so much as
delivered by him, as applied to that water in which it is subjected; So I have
in the same discourse said Ibid. Part 2, 3.
so much concerning the Institution of this, and the application of that
Institution to the outward visible sign thereof, that I shall need to say the
less here. It may suffice briefly to observe from thence, that what the
Minister has prepared the water of Baptism by a declaration of the end of its
Institution, and by imploring the Holy Spirit on it, Christ, who has promised
to be with him in that ministration of his, gives it the relation of the
Sacrament of Baptism, and consequently makes it apt to convey the several
graces thereof to those, who are to partake of it. Which will leave little more
for us to consider, as to the Sacrament of Baptism, than the right
Administration of it, or what may without any violence be reduced to it.

Now there are Four things, which are especially to be inquired in order to the
clearing of that, which is now before us.

I. Whether Baptism ought expressly to be administered in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. II. Whether Schismatics, and
Heretics are valid Administratours of it. III. To what, and what kind of
persons it ought to be administered. IV. Whether it may be repeated.
I. The ground of the first of these, even whether Baptism ought expressly to be
administered in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
is not any the least doubt of those being the express words of the Institution,
or of their not admitting, considered in themselves, of any variation from it,
but the accounts we have from the Scripture of the administration of that
Sacrament either by the hands, or at the command of the Apostles, and other
such inspired men: Those seeming to intimate it to be enough to baptize in the
name of the Lord Jesus, as comprehending within it an acknowledgement of the
other two persons, and indeed of all other the substantial Articles of his
Faith, in whose name we are so baptized. For thus when those Jews, to whom S.
Peter Preached on the day of Pentecost, were wrought upon so far, as to ask
what they ought to do in order to their Salvation; S. Peter's answer was Acts
2.38.
that they should be baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus: Which accordingly
we may believe to have been done by those, that gladly received the word,
because it is afterward Acts 2.41.
said of them, that they were baptized, that is, as one would think, in that,
and that only name, which had been prescribed. Thus again it is said Acts 8.16.
of those, who had been baptized by Philip at Samaria, that they were baptized
in the name of the Lord Jesus, without any the least hint of their being
baptized in any other name: As in like manner Acts 10.47.
, that S. Peter gave order for the baptizing of Cornelius, and his company,
after that the Holy Ghost had by his preaching descended upon them. In fine
thus we find, that the Disciples of Ephesus Acts 19.5.
were, who it seems till that time had not only no gifts of the Holy Ghost upon
them, but not so much as any knowledge, whether there were any Holy Ghost, or
no. Which place is the more to be stood upon, because those Disciples having
before so little knowledge of a Holy Ghost, one would think he that told the
story of their taking upon them the Christian Baptism at the hearing of what
was said to them by S. Paul, should have expressed that Baptism of theirs by
their being baptized into the belief of the Trinity, and particularly of that
Holy Ghost, which they seem before to have been ignorant of. But as we are not
lightly to think, nor indeed without an irrefragable reason, that those first
Disciples of Christ made use of, or countenanced any other form of Baptism,
than what their Master had so clearly, and expressly prescribed; So there is
nothing of any such moment in the places before alleged to persuade their
making use of, or giving countenance to any other. On the contrary the Text
last mentioned, if taken in all its parts, seems rather to persuade those
Disciples having been baptized in the very words of the Institution, than only
in the name of the Lord Jesus. For S. Paul asking, as by way of wonderment,
unto what they had been before baptized, if they had not (as they said) so much
as heard of any Holy Ghost, seems to intimate that all, that then received the
Christian Baptism, could not but know from the very form of it, that there was
such a thing as a Holy Ghost. Neither will it avail to say, as was before
objected, that if that had been S. Paul's intention, or the certain form of
Baptism, S. Luke, who tells the story, should in reason have expressed it by
their being baptized into the Trinity, and particularly into the name of him,
whom they were before so ignorant of. Because S. Luke's business was not so
much to give an account of the form of their Baptism, as to acquaint us, that
whereas before they had been only baptized into John's Baptism, upon their
understanding from S. Paul, that John himself directed those, that came to it,
to believe on him that should come after him, that is on Christ Jesus, they
were then expressly baptized into the Baptism of Christ, or (as S. Luke there
expresses it) into the name of Jesus Christ: So opposing the baptizing into
the name of Jesus Christ not to the baptizing in any other form, and
particularly into the name of all the three persons, but to the Baptism of John
only, and as the name of Jesus Christ might discriminate their present Baptism
from it. And though it be true, that the like is not to be said as to the
foregoing Texts, because there is no opposition in them between the Baptism of
John, and that of Christ. Yet may a fair account be given, without supposing
that to have been the form of Baptism, of the Scriptures expressing those
primitive Baptisms by baptizing into the name of Jesus only; Because our
Savior was the immediate Author of that Religion, into which those Baptisms
were made, and the baptizing into his name therefore no improper expression of
a baptizing into the whole of it, and into every part, and particle thereof. I
will conclude this affair, when I have added that as it appears from Justin
Martyr (...). Apolog. 2. p. 94.
one of the Antientest Writers the Church has, that Baptism was in his time
administered in the name of the three persons; So all, that have mentioned the
Creed, have represented it as a thing given to those, who were to be baptized,
and into which therefore we are to think, that if men were not minutely, and
particularly baptized, yet they were at least into the capital Articles thereof.

II. It appearing from the premises, that Baptism ought expressly to be
administered in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
which is the first of those things we proposed to consider; Pass we on to
enquire, who are valid Administrators of it, or rather whether Schismatics,
and Heretics are. A question which will best be voided by considering the
force of those Arguments, which the condemners of their Baptism have produced,
and particularly which S. Cyprian their chiefest Champion has. Now those are,
that Schismatics and Heretics, are by that their Schism, and Heresy deprived
of the Spirit of God themselves, and cannot therefore be supposed Quis autem
potest dare quod ipse non habeat? aut quomodo potest spiritalia. agere, qui
ipse amiserit spiritum Sanctum? Ad Januarium. Ep. 70.
to conferr it upon others. That Schismatics, and Heretics, as such, are out
of the Church, and consequently can neither themselves enjoy any privileges
that belong Nam cum dicimus, Credis in vitam aeternam, and remissionem
peccatorum per Sanctam Ecclesiam, intelligimus remissionem peccatorum non nisi
in Ecclesia dari, apud Haereticos autem ubi Ecclesia non sit, non posse peccata
dimitti. Cypr. ubi supra, and alibi passim.
to it, nor be instrumental toward the procuring of them for others; That by
their Schism and Heresy they are sinners Sed and Baptizato quam precem potest
facere sacerdos sacrilegus, and peccator? Cum scriptum sit, Deus peccatorem non
audit, sed qui eum coluerit, and voluntatem ejus fecerit, illum audit. Cypr. Ib.
before God, and whom therefore we cannot suppose that God will hear for other
persons; In fine, that Heretics in particular deprave that Faith Vid. Cypr. ad
Jubaian. Ep. 73.
, into which Baptism is required to be made, and consequently must be supposed
to baptize into a false, and counterfeit one. But how little force there is in
these Arguments, as to the invalidating the Baptism of Schismatics, or
Heretics, will appear upon a more narrow inspection into them.

For be it first that Schismatics and Heretics are by that Schism, or Heresy
of theirs deprived of the Spirit of God themselves; Be it that they cannot
therefore be supposed to conferr it upon others: Yet will it not from thence
follow, but they may be valid Administratours of Baptism, and they, who receive
it from them, receive the Spirit of God with it. Because that Spirit of God,
which goes along with Baptism, is not conferred by them, but by him, whose
Institution Baptism is, and consequently no way depending upon their having the
Spirit of God themselves. All, that the Minister confers on his part toward the
procuring of that Spirit, is to prepare that Baptismal Water, which it is by
the Institution of Christ to accompany, and to administer it, when so prepared,
to those who are to be baptized with it. Which if the Minister does according
to the Institution of Christ, there is no doubt the Spirit of God will follow
of course, whether he, who administers Baptism, partake of that Spirit, or no.
Otherwise a sinful Minister would be as invalid an Administrator of Baptism, as
the most Schismatical, or Heretical one.

But it may be there is more of weight in Schismatics, and Heretics being out
of the Church, and as such in no condition either of enjoying in themselves
those privileges, that belong to it, or being instrumental toward the
procuring of them for others. And so no doubt there would, if they were fully,
and perfectly out of the Church, nor retained in any measure to it. But how
first, if Schismatics, and Heretics were fully, and perfectly out of the
Church, could S. Cyprian Ad Quintum, Ep. 70.
himself allow the receiving of such without a new Baptism, who had after their
Baptism in the Church fallen into Schism, or Heresy? These, as they were no
less Schismatics, and Heretics than those, that were baptized by Heretics,
and consequently alike out of the Church; So being, if to be received again, to
be received after the same manner, that is to say by a new Baptism. Neither
will it avail to say (as that Father Ibid.
pleads for himself) that those, who have been baptized in the Church, are to
be looked upon as wandering sheep, and as such, when they return, to be received
into the Fold, whereas the other are wholly aliens, and profane. For if
Schismatics, and Heretics be fully, and perfectly out of the Church, those
also, what ever they before were, must cease to be looked upon as Sheep, and
consequently, if admitted, be admitted as aliens, and profane, as well as
those, who were baptized out of the Church. And indeed as it appears by the
same Father Ad Quintum, Ep. 71.
, that those who opposed him, and the Bishops that took part with him, argued
the validity of the Baptism of Heretics from the Churches receiving those
without a new one, who had fallen after her Baptism into Schism or Heresy; So
if we will allow the Baptism of the latter, we must allow the Baptism of the
former, or find out some other reason to overthrow it. For if the rightly
baptized Schismatic, or Heretic were a Sheep, though a wandering one,
notwithstanding his Schism, or Heresy; The Schismatic, or Heretic, whom that
wandering Sheep ran after, might as well be a Pastor, though a wandering one too,
and consequently be in a condition, following the order of the Institution, to
bring new Sheep to the great Shepherd, and Bishop of our Souls. That, which I
suppose occasioned that Father's mistake (for so I hope I may now have leave to
call it, because the Church of God has generally done so since) but that I
say, which occasioned S. Cyprian's mistake, was his not distinguishing between
being fully, and perfectly out of the Church (which I should think none but
Apostates can be, if they also are) and being only partly, and imperfectly so,
as Schismatics, and Heretics are. For as Schismatics, and Heretics must be
supposed to retain so far to the Church, as they do not separate from it in
Communion, or belief; So it is but a just piece of charity to think that Christ
who knows men's infirmities, and prejudices, will not invalidate such acts of
theirs, as are purely charitable ones, and wherein moreover they consent with
the Church of God (whatever they may do as to other things) and with his his
own blessed Institution. I deny not indeed, but that to be even so out of the
Church, as Schismatics, and Heretics are, is a very dangerous thing, and does
without a special mercy of God make them liable to Damnation. But as I do not
therefore think, that we ought to look upon it as a desperate one; So there may
be so much of honest simplicity of mind even in them, and a readiness to
embrace the truth, whenever they are convinced of it, that Christ, who laid
down his life for the worst of men, may so far at least consider them, as to
give his blessing to those acts of theirs, which are both charitable in
themselves, and managed with a just consent to his own institution, and the
practice too of that Church, from which in other things they have departed.

And this answer, with a little variation, will furnish one to that objection,
which represents Schismatics and Heretics as sinners before God, and whom
therefore we cannot suppose God will hear for the person to be baptized. For
though I grant that such persons are sinners before God, yea that whatever they
do by way of separation from the Church, is to be looked upon as of the same
nature, and consequently that their very baptizing also may be; Yet as I do not
think that every thing, that is sinfully done, is therefore invalid (for so for
ought I know many true Churchmens good actions also might be) So Christ may
hear even such persons, when they act agreeably to his own Institution, both
for the regard he bears to that, and for that honest simplicity, and good
meaning, which is, if not in them that administer Baptism, yet in those that
join with them, and whose Minister I have before said Expl. of the Sacram. in
genesis Part 3
the Consecratour to be in that affair.

One only Objection remains on the part of Heretics, and that is their
depraving that Faith, into which Baptism is required to be made, and
consequently thereto, as is supposed, baptizing into a false, and counterfeit
one. And I no way doubt that, if Heretics baptize into a false, and
counterfeit Faith, their Baptism is null, because contrary to that Institution,
which gives validity to all. Upon which account we must look upon the Baptism
of those persons as null, who have baptized in any other form, than in the name
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Of which sort was that of the Heretics
spoken of by Irenaeus Adv. Haeres. li. 1. c. 18.
, who instead of baptizing according to the form of the institution, did
baptize their Disciples into the name of the unknown Father of all things, into
truth the Mother of all things, into him that descended into Jesus for the
union, and redemption, and communion of powers. To which others it seems added
certain Hebrew names, the better to amuse those, that were initiated by them.
The like may reasonably enough be thought of the Baptism of many other of the
Ancient Heretics, although we have not it may be so certain grounds from
Antiquity for their depraving the very form of Baptism. For being, as appears
from their tenants, Christians in name, rather than in reality, and beside that
advancing such uncouth, and monstrous ones, it is not easy to think they
should have such a regard to Christ, or his Institution, as to keep to that
form, which he prescribed. Which supposed, there is not the least difficulty in
giving an account of those 46 (...)
and 47 (...), etc.
. Canons of the Apostles, which do so far reprobate the Baptism of Heretics,
as to require a reiteration of it. For if the Heretics there intended were
such as are before described (as is not unreasonable to believe even from the
words of the Canons themselves) there is no doubt their Baptism was, and ought
to be looked upon as null, because deviating from that Institution, which gives
validity to all. But because it appears from a passage of S. Augustine Caeterum
quis nescit non esse Baptismum Christi, si verba Evangelica, quibus symbolum
constut, illic defuerint? Sed facilius inveniuntur haeretici, qui omnino non
baptizant, quam qui illis verbis non baptizant. De Bapt. contra Donat. li. 6.
c. 25.
, that whatever the antienter Heretics did, yet later ones, or at least for
the most part, kept to the words of the Institution; Therefore we must go on to
enquire, whether Heretics may not however, be presumed to baptize into a
false, and counterfeit Faith, even that which they themselves advance, and
consequently give such a Baptism as is null, and void. And to speak my mind
freely, though with submission to better judgments, I conceive such Heretics
may be presumed to do it, who advance a Heresy, that directly, and manifestly
contradicts the Faith of Baptism, and particularly the Faith of the Holy
Trinity. Which I do in part upon the Authority of the Nicene Council Can. 19.
, and in part also upon the Authority of Reason. For though there be not the
least presumption, that the followers of Paulus Samosatenus made use of any
other form of Baptism, than the Catholics did; Though there be some
presumption on the contrary, that they made use of the very same form, because
though they denied a Trinity of Persons, yet they asserted one, and the same
God to be rightly entitled by the names of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; Yet did
the Nicene Council notwithstanding, (because of their direct, and manifest
denial of the Trinity, and their affirming Christ to be a mere Man) so far
disallow their Baptism, as to require the reiteration of it. As indeed why
should it not, when those Paulianists did so directly and manifestly contradict
the sense of that form, whereby they pretended to proceed? That direct, and
manifest contradiction of theirs proclaming to the World, that though they
baptized in the same form of words with the Orthodox, yet in a perfectly
different sense, and consequently departed alike from that Institution, which
was to give force to it. I say not the same of the Baptism of the Arians, where
they made use of the same form of words, which the Institution prescribed, as
it is certain that many De Arianis, qui propria sua lege utuntur, ut
baptizentur placuit. Si ad Ecclesiam aliqui de hac haeresi venerint,
interrogent eos sidei nostrae sacerdotes symbolum. Et si perviderint in Patre,
Filio, and Spiritu sancto eos baptizatos, manus eis tantum imponatur, ut
accipiant spiritum sanctum, etc. Council. Arel. c. 8.
of them did; Partly because the Church received those, that had been so
baptized by them without any new Baptism; And partly because neither so
directly, and manifestly contradicting the Doctrine of the Trinity by their
own, nor varying from the prescribed form, as some other of them did, they may
be reasonably presumed to have left the form by them used to its proper sense,
whatever that was, and to what he, who prescribed it, did intend it. Which
supposed, what should hinder Christ from giving force to that Baptism which is
so administered by them? These, as they do not at all vary from the Institution
of Christ, so in this particular, even in the application of the Baptismal
water to the Baptized parties, acting not in their own, or in their peoples
names, but in the name of Christ, and who therefore may the rather be supposed
to give force and virtue to it. The result of the premises is this. A Heretic
is indeed obliged to baptize into the truly Christian Faith, neither can any
man otherwise promise force from that act of his. But if he baptize into that
faith (as he may even whilst he continues such) his Baptism is valid, neither
can any man doubt of a blessing from it, who comes prepared for it, and, when
he comes to know in what company he has been engaged, renounceth that, and
their Heresy, and both submits himself to the discipline of the Church, and
keeps to the communion of it.

PART X. Of the Baptism of those of riper Years.
The Contents.
To what, and what kind of persons Baptism ought to be administered; Which, as
to those of riper years, is shown to be unto all, that come duly qualified for
it. What those qualifications are, upon that account inquired into, and
Repentance, and Faith shown from the Sripture, as well as from our own
Catechism to be they. That Repentance, and Faith more particularly considered,
the definitions given of them by our Church explained, and established. The
former whereof is effected, by showing what Repentance does presuppose, what it
imports, and to what it does naturally dispose us: The latter by showing what
those promises are, which by the Catechism are made the object of our Faith, or
Belief, what that Belief of them does presuppose, what is meant by a steadfast
Belief of them, and what evidence there is of that being the Faith, or Belief
required to the receiving of Baptism.

III. BEing now to enquire, Question. What is required of persons to be
haptized?

Answer. Repentance whereby they forsake Sin, and Faith, whereby they
steadfastly believe the promises made to them in that Sacrament.


according to the method before laid down, to what, and what kind of persons
the Sacrament of Baptism ought to be administered, for my more advantageous
resolution thereof I will consider it first as to those of riper years, and
then as to Infants, and Children.

That I give the precedence to those of riper years, though such Baptisms as
those are little known among us, is because there is no doubt Baptism began
with them, and could not indeed have found any other entrance into the World;
The Baptism of Infants, in the opinion of those, who do most strongly assert
it, depending upon the Baptism of their Parents, or of those, who are in the
place of them. Of whom, if some had not been baptized in their riper years,
those Infants, that claimed by them, could not with reason have pretended to
it. Of those of riper years therefore I mean first to entreat, and show to
what, and what kind of persons among them the Sacrament of Baptism ought to be
administered.

Now as it is clear from our Savior's injunction Matt. 28.19.
of discipling, and baptizing all Nations, that none of what condition soever
are to be excluded from it, who are qualified, as Christianity requires, for
the receiving of it; So the only thing therefore farther necessary to be
inquired into on this Head, is how men ought to be qualified for it, or (as our
Catechism expresses it) what is required of them. For supposing those
praerequisites of Baptism, he who enjoins the discipling, and baptizing all
Nations, must consequently be supposed to enjoin the administering of it to all
such, in whom those praerequisites are.

Now there are two things again, as our Catechism instructs us, which are
required of all those, that are to be baptized; Repentance, whereby they
forsake sin, and Faith, whereby they steadfastly believe the promises made to
them in that Sacrament. And for these two things at least it has the
astipulation of the Scripture, and I may add also of that Profession, which is
made by the baptized person in Baptism, and which having before established, I
may now the more securely argue from. Witness, for the Scripture, S. Peter's
Acts 2.38.
enjoining those Jews, (who demanded of him, and the rest, what they ought to
do in order to their salvation) to repent, and so be baptized in the name of
the Lord Jesus; And Philip's replying upon the Eunuch, who asked what did
hinder him to be baptized, that if he believed Acts 8.37.
with all his heart, he might: Thereby more than intimating that, if he did
not, he could not be baptized at all, though all other things concurred to the
receiving of it. And indeed, what less can be supposed to be required of such
persons, when (as was before Expl. of Bapt. Part 8.
observed) the baptized person makes Profession in his Baptism of renouncing
all sin, and wickedness, and of a belief in that Jesus, into whose Religion he
is admitted? That Profession of his supposing Repentance, and Faith to have
been before in him, as without which otherwise he could not there make a
sincere Profession of renouncing sin, or of believing in the name of the Lord
Jesus. But so (that I may add that by the way) the Ancient Church appears to
have required, before she admitted, men to the participation of Baptism; Justin
Martyr, where he professes to give a sincere account of her doings in this
affair, telling those he wrote his Apology to, that such as were persuaded, and
believed that the things taught and said by the Christians were true (...),
Apol. 2. p. 93.
and moreover took upon them so to live, were taught to pray, and ask of God
with fasting the forgiveness of their former sins, and then, and not till then
brought by them to the place of Baptism, and there regenerated after the same
manner with themselves. Which is so clear a proof of the Ancients believing
Repentance, and Faith to be prerequisites of Baptism, that nothing need to be
added to it.

For the clearing of the first of which we are to know, that though Repentance,
in strict speech, be nothing else than a sorrow of mind for those sins we stand
guilty of before God; Yet as even so it presupposes a right apprehension of
those sins, as without which we could never be brought to a due sorrow for
them, so taking Repentance (as our Catechism, and the Scripture also sometime
does) as one of the two prerequisites of Baptism (For S. Paul in one place Acts
20.21.
makes that Repentance, and Faith the sum of his Preaching to the Jews, and
Greeks, and in another Heb. 6.1.
the foundation of our Christianity) it will be found to imply in it whatsoever
that sorrow for sin does naturally dispose men to, as well as that sorrow it
self: The same S. Paul elsewhere professing that he showed both to the Jews,
and Gentiles, that they should turn unto God, as well as Repent; and do works
meet for Repentance, as well as either. To attain therefore a due understanding
of this Repentance, as well as to clear that definition of it, which our
Catechism has given us, it will be necessary for us to enquire what this
Repentance does presuppose, what it imports, and to what it does dispose us.

That, which Repentance does most manifestly presuppose, is a right
apprehension of that sin, about which it is to be conversant; And may be
fetched in part from the dictates of our own reason, but more especially from
the declarations of Christianity concerning it. Such as are, that sin is the
transgression of a Law, and particularly of that of God, and that, as such, it
justly exposes us to his wrath, and indignation: Partly, as it is a violation
of his Authority, to whom we are naturally subject, and partly as an equal
affront to his goodness, who gives us our being, and all things else, and who
therefore ought more diligently to have been attended to. In fine, that it has
for its wages Death both temporal, and eternal, and under each of which,
without the mercy of God in Christ, the sinner must necessarily fall. For as
these are known in part, from the dictates of our own reason to be the
properties of that sin, whereof we speak; So they are much more known to be so
from the Doctrine of Christianity, and consequently to be known by us toward a
right apprehension of that, which ought to be the matter of our sorrow.

But from hence it will be easy to collect, what that sorrow for sin does
import, which is required of all those, that take upon them the Profession of
Christianity. Even that it imports such a sorrow of mind, as has a regard to
the violation of God's Authority and Goodness by it, as well as to the evils
which are like to arise to it from our selves; Our sorrow being in reason to be
suited to that, which is most considerable in the object of it. And indeed, as
otherwise it will be rather a sorrow for punishment, than sin, because sin, as
such, is a transgression of God's Law, and consequently our sorrow for it to
have a more especial regard to the affront, that is offered him thereby; So it
will much less deserve those titles, which are given it by the Scripture of
being a sorrow, or repentance toward Acts 20.21.
God (for so it is sometime styled) and a sorrow 2 Cor. 7.9.
according to God, or a Godly one, as it also is: That being neither toward
God, nor according to God, which has not a regard to that affront, which is
offered to him by sin, as well as to the evils, which are like to accrue unto
our selves.

But because even such a sorrow will not qualify us for Baptism, unless we add
thereto what the same sorrow does naturally dispose us to; Therefore to make
out more fully the true nature of Repentance, as well as to clear our Churches
definition of it, I will proceed to that, and show what those things are. Of
which nature I reckon first an ingenuous confession of sin, and earnest prayer
to God for the pardon of it; Sorrow for sin, when considered only with
reference to its appendant punishment, being likely enough to dispose us so to
confess, and ask pardon of it, if it were only to unburthen our selves, and
free our selves by that, and prayer from the punishment we have deserved. How
much more then, when considered as a sorrow for that affront, which we have by
means of our sin offered to God's both Authority, and Goodness? He, to whom
such an affront is matter of sorrow, being likely enough to be thereby disposed
so far to acknowledge that Authority, and goodness, as to own them upon the
postfact by confession, and prayer for pardon: He who confesses, and asks
pardon of God, acknowledging that God had, and has an Authority to command,
and punish him, as he, who does the latter, that God is of equal goodness, as
of whom otherwise it would be in vain for him to ask pardon for his offenses.
Whence it was, that when the Church proceeded by strict, and safe measures, she
not only taught those, that offered themselves to Baptism, to ask of God with
fasting the forgiveness of their forepast offenses, but (as we learn from
Justin Martyr Vbi supra.
added her own prayers, and fasts to theirs, so the better to encourage, and
give force unto the others. I reckon of the same nature secondly, a resolution
to forsake sin, and pursue the contrary virtues. Which I do not only upon the
Authority of the forementioned Father, who reckons that Loco prius citato.
also as a prerequisite to Baptism, but as it is a thing, to which sorrow for
sin, does alike naturally dispose us; He, to whom sin is so irksome, needing no
other motive, than that irksomeness, to oblige him to forsake it, and pay a
more perfect submission to that Authority, and goodness of God, which he has
before so shamefully violated. I reckon thirdly, as a thing, to which sorrow
for sin does equally dispose us, a present forsaking of those sins, which we
are under a temptation to commit, as well as a resolution to do so for the time
to come; There being the same force in a due sorrow for sin to dispose men to
that, as there is to a resolution of afterward forsaking it. For which cause
the Ancient Church did not only refuse such persons Baptism, as were of any
unlawful Profession Introd. concern. Catech. etc.
, till they actually abandoned it, but made proof Ibid.
also for a considerable time of the resolutions of others, and, till they had
given her such proofs, did not admit them to it. They finding no doubt by
manifold experience, that many that offered themselves to Baptism, made little
Conscience afterward of avoiding those sins, which they had before so solemnly
resolved against, and made public profession of abandoning. And though it do
not appear, that the Apostles themselves took this course, they baptizing men
immediately upon the bare profession of their Repentance, and a resolution
afterward to bring forth fruits meet for it: Yet as the reason of that possibly
might be, either because of that exuberance of Grace, which was then bestowed
upon their new Converts, or because, by means of their Ambulatory life, they
could not well deferr the Baptism of those, that offered themselves, till they
had made some considerable trial of them (which will exempt such Churches from
their example, where there is no such exuberance of Grace, and where moreover
they have settled Pastors to intend the affairs of them) So we cannot think the
Apostles would have ever given Baptism to such persons, as should before that
Baptism of theirs have fallen into those sins, which they erewhile made
profession of abandoning: Sorrow for sin, where it is hearty, and real, no
doubt disposing men as well to a present forsaking of it, as it does to a
resolution concerning it. Which will make the Repentance pre-required to
Baptism to be (as our Catechism expresses it) a Repentance, whereby as
occasion offers, we actually forsake sin, as well as resolve for the future to
abandon it.

An account being thus given of the first thing pre-requir'd to Baptism; and
our Churches definition of it both explained, and established; Pass we on to
that, which is alike pre-required to it, even that Faith, whereby we steadfastly
believe the promises made to us in that Sacrament. Where again I will enquire,
I. What those promises are, which we are so to believe. II. What that belief of
them does pre-suppose. III. What is meant by a steadfast belief of those
promises. IV. What evidence there is of that being the Faith, or belief, which
is pre-requir'd by Christianity to the receiving of that Sacrament.


I. Now though that Catechism, which I have chosen to explain, give no other
account of those Promises, than that they are such as are made to us in that
Sacrament; Yet is it not difficult to collect from thence, and from what is
before said concerning the Parts of a Sacrament, that the Catechism means no
other promises, than those which make a tender of its inward, and spiritual
Graces. For a Sacrament being before divided into an outward, and visible sign,
and an inward, and spiritual Grace as the only proper parts of it; And the
outward, and visible sign being in like manner represented in it as no farther
of value, than as conducing to possess us of the other: No other promises can
be supposed to be intended here, than such as make a tender of those inward,
and spiritual Graces, as which indeed are the only things considerable in it.
Which will consequently make the promises here intended to be those, which make
a tender for the present of remission of sins, and sanctification, and in the
end, of everlasting life.

II. Those therefore being the promises, which are to be the object of the
Catechumens Faith, and which accordingly he is steadfastly to believe; It will
not be difficult to show, what that belief of them pre-supposeth, which is the
second thing to be inquired into. For that belief of them must at least
pre-suppose a belief of all that, which is necessary to bring us to the belief
of the other. More particularly it pre-supposeth, as to our selves, that we
believe our selves to be naturally under a state of sin, and death, as without
which there could be no place for that sanctification, and remission, which is
promised in Baptism; And that we are yet farther off from any title to
Everlasting life, as which if we had, there would have been no need of a
Promise in Baptism of it. It presupposes again as to Christ, in whom all the
promises of God are Yea, and Amen, a like steadfast belief that there was such a
person as Jesus Christ, and that he was appointed by God to convey such graces
to us; That, agreeably to the predictions of the Scripture, and the will of God
concerning him, he took upon him our nature, and suffered in it to purchase
those Graces, and that he ever since intends the exhibiting of what he has so
purchased; The belief of these, and the like Articles of our Faith being as
manifestly presupposed to the belief of those Promises, which in this place we
are required to intend.

III. That which will it may be more concern us to enquire, is what our
Catechism means by a steadfast belief of them. For my more orderly resolution
whereof I will enquire first what it means by belief, and then by a steadfast
one.

Now by belief may be meant either a simple assent of the mind, and in which
fense there is no doubt it is oftentimes taken in Christian Writers; Or there
may be meant also a belief with affiance, and such as beside the assent of the
mind, or understanding to them, does also connote a trust in them, or in God
because of them. By virtue of which (as I have elsewhere discoursed Expl. of
the Decal. Com. 1. Part 3.
concerning the grace of trust) the heart, or will is prompted to desire, as
well as assent to the matter of the divine promises, and acquiesce in those for
the obtaining of it. And indeed if we may judge any thing by our Homilies, (to
which the Articles Art. 11.
of our Church do also particularly referr us in the point of justifying Faith)
this latter belief must be here intended; Because a belief, which has for its
end the remission of sins in Baptism, and consequently a justifying one. For
the right, and true Christian Faith (says one of our Homily of Salvation. Part
3.
Homilies) is not only to believe that the Holy Scripture, and all the
forecited Articles of our Faith, are true, but also to have a sure trust, and
confidence in God's merciful promises to be saved from everlasting damnation by
Christ. And it is not only, says another Hom. of Faith.
, the common belief of the Articles of our Faith, but it is also a sure trust,
and confidence of the mercy of God through our Lord Jesus Christ, and a
steadfast hope of all good things to be received at God's hands. In fine, says
the same Ibid.
Homily, the very sure, lively Christian faith is not only to believe all
things of God, which are contained in holy Scripture, but also to have an
earnest trust, and confidence in God, etc. Which supposed (as we may, because
we can have no more Authentic interpretation of it) to be the sense of the
belief here intended, it will not be difficult to show, what our Catechism
means by a steadfast one.

For considering the belief of these Promises as an Assent of the mind to them,
so a steadfast belief will imply that, which is free from all doubts, and which
the mind of man gives to those Promises without any the least fear of there
being any Collusion in them; Which the mind of man may well give, considering
whose those Promises are, and that they have both God, and Christ for the
Authors of them. On the other side, if we consider the belief intended as
including in it also an affiance, or trust, and by virtue of which the heart,
or will is prompted to desire, as well as believe the matter of those Promises,
and acquiesce in those Promises for the attaining of it; So this steadfast
belief will also imply such a one, as is firmly rooted in the heart, or will,
and can no more be rooted out of it by the force of temptations, than the other
by doubts, or scruples. And indeed, as I do not see how any other belief, than
that, can answer such glorious promises as are made to us in the Sacrament of
Baptism; so I see as little reason to doubt,

IV. What evidence there is of that being the Faith, or belief, which is
pre-requir'd by Christianity to the receiving of it. For though S. Luke may
seem to intimate by the account he gives of the Baptism of the Samaritans Acts
8.12.
, that they were baptized upon a simple belief of what Philip preached
concerning the things of the Kingdom of God; Yet he does much more clearly
intimate afterward, that Christianity required another sort of belief, and such
as was accompanied with an adherence of the will unto them: He making it the
condition of the Eunuch's Baptism afterward, that he should believe with all
his heart Acts 8.37.
; Which is an expression, that in the language of the Scripture referrs rather
to the will, and affections, than to the understanding, but however cannot well
be thought not to include them there, where the believing with all the heart is
required. And indeed, as I do not see, considering the Doctrine of our First
Reformers, why this notion of Faith should be so exploded, as it seems to me
lately to have been; As I do much less see why men should so boil at that
Justification, which was wont to be attributed in an especial manner to it: So,
if I live to finish the work I am now upon, I will in a Comment upon the
Epistle to the Philippians (which I have almost gathered sufficient materials
for) endeavor to clear both the one, and the other, that men may neither take
occasion from thence to discard good works as unnecessary, nor yet stay
themselves upon any other, than the promises of Christ, and on which the
holiest men upon earth, when they have been approaching near God's tribunal,
have found themselves obliged to cast themselves. In the mean time a little to
repress the youthful heats of those, who can hardly forbear smiling at such
antiquated notions, I will set before them the advice, which was ordered to be
given to sick persons, when good works to be sure were not without their just
repute. It is among the Interrogatories, which are said Field of the Church,
Append. to the 3d. Book p. 303.
to have been prescribed by Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, and particularly
after that, which prompts the Priest to ask, Do thou believe, that thou can
not be saved, but by the death of Christ, and the sick persons Answer, that he
did so. Go too therefore (as the Priest was taught to proceed) and whilst thy
soul remains in thee, place thy confidence in this death alone, and in no
other thing, commit thy self wholly to it, cover thy self wholly with it,
immerse, fix, and wrap thy self wholly in it. And if the Lord God will judge
thee, say, I put the death of our Lord Jesus Christ between me, and thy
judgment, otherwise I contend not with thee. And if he say that thou art a
sinner, say, Lord I put the death of our Lord Jesus Christ between me, and my
sins. If he say to thee thou have deserved damnation, say, Lord, I put the
death of our Lord Jesus Christ between me, and my evil deserts, and I offer the
same death for that merit, which I ought to have had, and have not. If he
continue as yet to say, that he is angry with thee, say, Lord, I oppose the
death of our Lord Jesus Christ between me, and thy displeasure. Words, which
show what kind of Faith was sometime thought to be a justifying one, and what
stress was laid upon it, before ever Fanaticism, or any thing of that nature
was heard of in the World.

PART XI. Of the Baptism of Infants.
The Contents.
What ground Infant Baptism has in Scripture, and particularly in what it
suggests concerning Christ's commanding his Disciples to suffer little Children
to come unto him. S. Paul's giving the Children of the faithful the title of
Holy, and the Circumcision of Infants. The concurrence of Antiquity therein
with the Doctrine of the Scripture, and that concurrence farther strengthened by
the Pelagians so freely admitting of what was urged against them from thence. A
brief account of that remission, and regeneration, which Infants acquire by
Baptism, and a more large consideration of the Objections, that are made
against it; More particularly of what is urged against the Regeneration of
Infants in Baptism, or their ability to answer what is prerequir'd to it on the
part of persons to be baptized, or is to be performed by them in the reception
of it. Where the Regeneration of Infants is more largely considered, and what
is promised for them by others shown to be both reasonable, and sufficient.

FRom the Baptism of those of riper years, Question. Why then are Infants
baptized, when by reason of their tender age they cannot perform them?

Answer. Because they prentise them both by their sureties, which promise, when
they come to age, themselves are bound to perform.


pass we to that of Infants, or Children, the only Baptism upon the matter now
celebrated, and therefore so much the more carefully to be cleared and
established. In order whereunto I will enquire, I. What ground it has in
Scripture. II. What countenance from Antiquity. III. What Infants acquire by
it. IV. What the principal objections against it are, and how they are to be
solved.


I. Now as it is plain to me both from Tertullian's De Baptismo c. 18. (...)
Dominus, Nolite illos prohibere (...) Veniant ergo, dum adolescunt, (...) quo
veniant docentur. (...) Christum nosse potueri^^.
arguing against that Text, and the Apostolical (...). li. 6. c. 15.
Constitutions alleging it, that the Ancient Church grounded the Baptism of
Infants upon Christ's Mark 10.13. etc.
commanding his Disciples to suffer little Children to come unto him, and
blessing those, that came; So I am yet more confirmed in it by the unprofitable
pains Tertullian took to take off the force of that Text, or rather the pitiful
evasion he made use of in order to it. For had not the Church laid great stress
upon that passage of the Scripture, why did not he, as the World has since
learned to do, wholly omit the mention of it, as a Text no way pertinent to the
business of Infant Baptism? Or, if he thought good to take notice of it, why
did he not turn the force of it another way, and say, as others have, that
nothing more was intended by it, than to let men know they must put on the
property of little Children, if they meant to enter into Christ's Kingdom? For
either of these certainly had been more proper, than what we find him to
allege in these words, as to the delaying of the Baptism of Infants. The Lord
indeed says, Forbid not Children to come unto me. Let them come therefore,
when they are grown, let them come when they may learn, and when they may be
taught whither they are to come. Let them be made Christians, when they may be
able to know Christ. For what is this to the purpose of our Savior, who
checked his Disciples for hindering those from coming to him, who were brought
to him before they were in a condition to learn, who in all probability were
brought to him in their Parents arms, and were both taken by him into his own,
and blessed by him even then? For if the Disciples were checked for going about
to hinder such Children, his meaning was that they should suffer such to come
unto him, and not keep them back from coming, till they ceased to be such. But
of such force it seems was that Text then thought, that some reply however must
be made to it; Or the deference men had for the Church, that urged it, would
have spoiled his device of delaying the Baptism of them, till they came of
years. Which will make it so much the more reasonable to enquire, what there is
in the Text it self, which might justify the confidence of the one, or give
occasion to the impertinent answer of the other.

For the better discovery whereof we are to know, that when certain persons not
named, but it seems who looked upon our Savior as a man of God, brought their
Children to Christ, that he might touch them, that is to say, as our Savior
expounded their meaning, that he might lay his hands upon them, and bless them;
His Disciples, whether as looking upon it as no way beseeming their Master to
concern himself about Children, Aret. in locum. Primum rem Christo indignam
judicare videntar; nam judicio, and ratione carent, Christum non intelligunt.
Deinde majorasunt, quae agat; adsunt enim turbae, quas docere debet. Major hic
fructue, major etiam and dignitas, and labor.
or that he had greater business then in hand, even the instructing of the
Elder sort, rebuked those that brought them for that their supposed
unseasonable desire, and offer. But as our Savior who better understood Aret.
ubi supra. Sed expendi debet Christi officium, qui pro omnium salute natus est
in hunc mundum. Deinde infantes etiam ad foedus dei pertinent; Nam Abraamo
dixit, Ero and tui, and seminis tui post te, Deus. Et quia una est ratio
salutis, unum ostium, una janua, debuit etiam infantum haberi ratio.
his own salutary office, and Childrens pertaining to the Covenant, did with as
much, or more displeasure rebuke them for that their rebuke, and signified it
both by his countenance, and voice; So he charged them, that they should by no
means hinder Children from coming unto him Aretius iterum. Est enim ratio cur
arcendi a Christo non sint: Quia talium est regnum coelorum, hoc est, sunt
haeredes vitae aeternae; ergo a Christo, qui janua est ad vitam, non debent
arceris Deinde cum talium sit regnum dei, ergo horum magis est, ad quorum
similitudinem alii, ut accipiant, iidem redire debent.
, because the Kingdom of God belonged to such as they: Thereby intimating, that
even those Children had a right unto it, and were not therefore to be hindered
from coming to him, who was the way, or rather the gate into it. For if the
Kingdom of God belonged to such as they, much more to those Children, to whom
elder persons ought to become like, that they might be in a capacity of
obtaining it. As indeed otherwise, what force is there in the reason alleged
for the suffering, and no way forbidding young Children to come unto him? For
they, who have in purpose of heart what the other have only naturally, may both
be invited to tend toward, and be possessed of the Kingdom of Heaven, though
the other be no way brought to Christ, nor receive any blessing from him. In as
much as their humility, and innocence is the result of God's spirit, and of
their own will, and consequently more likely to be acceptable, whereas the
other's is only the result of their constitution, and age. And I cannot
therefore but think, that the true reason of our Savior's making use of the
word (...), or such, instead of (...), or these (for of such, says our
Savior, is the Kingdom of heaven) was not in the least to exclude Children
from having a right to the Kingdom of Heaven, as who alone were directly, and
immediately concerned in the present Argument; But to let the World know at the
same time Aret. in Matt. 19.13, etc. Nec juvat quod aliqui hic urgent (...),
and non (...), talium, and non horum. Nam communem ostendit modum
justificationis, etc. Amplius igitur aliquid dicere voluit, and bos pueros
vitae haeredes esse, and ad illorum similitudinem nobis etiam redeundum esse.
, that elder men ought to put on the properties of Children to make them
partakers of it. As he afterward Mark 10.15.
more expressly signifies, when he tells them, that whosoever shall not receive
the Kingdom of God as a little Child, he shall not enter therein. Which
supposed a way is opened for the inferring of that Baptism of Infants, which,
this passage both now, and of old was made use of to evince. For it appearing
from the premises, that Infants have a right to the Kingdom of Heaven, and
upon, and by virtue of that right to be brought to Christ also; They must
consequently have a right also to those means, which are by the same Christ
appointed to put them into the possession of his Kingdom. Which Baptism
certainly being, and so, that, ordinarily at least, none can enter into that
Kingdom without Joh. 3.5.
being born again by it, it cannot without injustice be withheld from those
Children, to whom the other does appertain. Neither will it avail to say,
though the Objection be not to be despised, that by this rule our Savior
should either himself have baptized, or ordered his Disciples to baptize those
Children, that were now brought unto him for his blessing. For beside that one
Argument will not solve another, and much less hinder the matter thereof from
being true, or conclusive; There might be reason enough, though the premises be
allowed, for our Savior's not baptizing, or requiring his Disciples to baptize
those Children, who were now brought unto him for his blessing: Partly, upon
the account of the incompetency of those, that brought them, and who being not
Disciples themselves, but as is probable, of the multitude Mark 10.1. Matt.
19.2.
that followed him, could not claim from our Savior, nor he so regularly
bestow Baptism upon their Children; And partly to let the World see, that he
was not ti'd to any methods himself in the dispensing of the graces of that
Kingdom. For that our Savior, by that blessing which he gave them, gave those
Children rem Sacramenti, or the Graces of Baptism, and so showed yet more the
title Children have to it, cannot well be doubted of by any, who shall consider
how zealous he was for their being brought to him, as that too upon the account
of the title they had to the Kingdom of Heaven. For considering that zeal of
his, and the ground of it, what can be more reasonable than to think, that our
Savior agreeably thereto did by his blessing conferr upon them that
Evangelical regeneration, which was to fit them for the Kingdom of Heaven, and
without which considering the impurity of their nature, and the necessity of
being thus born anew, they could not regularly obtain it. And I have been the
more particular in deducing, and pressing the present argument; Partly because
led thereto by the mere force of the Text it self, and the Authority of the
Church that employed it, till by accident I fell upon those things I have
before quoted out of Aretius; And partly because I think it a better service to
the Church of God to strengthen one old Argument, than devise many new ones:
Such a course procuring the more respect to the Church's both opinion, and
practice, as showing it to proceed upon substantial Arguments, and such as in
themselves are not lightly to be refused.

My second Argument for the Baptism of Infants shall be taken from that
holiness, which S. Paul 1 Cor. 7.14.
attributes to the Children of Christian Parents (yea where only one of them is
such) upon the account of their descent from them. For S. Paul having before
persuaded the believing party to continue with the unbelieving one, supposing
that unbelieving one to be as willing to continue with the believer, as a
motive to the doing of it alleges, that the unbelieving party is sanctified
by the believing, and proves that sanctification again by the holiness of the
Children, that come from them, as which otherwise those Children could not have
in them, but the contrary. Now I demand what that holiness is, which S. Paul
supposes to be the property of those, who come from such a sanctified couple,
that is to say, whether an inward holiness, or an outward one? If they, who
would avoid the force of this Text as to the Baptism of Infants, say an inward
holiness, they say more than we desire, or can with truth be affirmed, because
though Original Sin be traduced from the Parents, yet inward holiness is not,
as being the product of the Spirit of God, and his instrument Baptism. But if
they do however attribute such a holiness to those Children, they say enough to
evince, that Baptism ought not to be denied to them. For who (as S. Peter spoke
Acts 10.47.
upon another occasion) can forbid the water of Baptism to those, who have
received the Holy Ghost, as to be sure all, that are internally holy, have? It
remains therefore, that if the Children of such matches be not internally holy,
they are externally so, and that external holiness therefore, if it may be, to
be investigated by us. Now I demand First, what external holiness can be
imagined in those Children, but such by which they come to belong to God in a
more peculiar manner, than the Children of other matches do? This being the
nature of all things, that are externally holy, whether by the voluntary
consecration of men, or the Institution, or choice of God. I demand secondly,
supposing those Children to belong more to God, than the Children of other
matches, whether by their thus becoming the peculiar property of God, they may
not be supposed to be more dear to him, than the Children of other matches are?
Every one naturally having an affection to such, as belong to him, suitably to
that nearness, wherein they belong to him. I demand Thirdly, supposing the
Children of such matches to be more dear to God than the Children of others,
whether we are not to think he will take a more particular care of them, than
of others? The care of any person being always suitable to the affection he
bears to those, who are the object of his care. I demand Fourthly, whether,
supposing such a particular care of the Children of such matches, he will not
take a more particular care of them as to their eternal welfare, than he does
of the Children of other men; All other care, without this, being of little
value to the party cared for, and, beside that (as experience shows) equally
extended by God to the Children of other matches, as well as to the descendants
of Christians. I demand Fifthly, supposing such a particular care as to their
eternal welfare, whether he will not also allow them more means toward the
compassing of it, than he can be supposed to allow to the Children of other
Parents? All care, where it is reasonable, and just, employing suitable means to
bring that care of its unto effect. Now what peculiar means does, or can God
allow to the Children of Christian Parents, as to the procuring of their
eternal welfare, supposing them to die before they come of years, as the
generality of them do, unless it be the Sacrament of Baptism? For as these, no
more than other Children, are capable of the benefits of the Gospel by the
graces of Faith, and Repentance; So they have no other way therefore, save the
Sacrament of Baptism, either to be delivered from the guilt of Original Sin, or
enstated in Christ's heavenly Kingdom. I conclude therefore, that the Children
of Christian Parents, or of either of them being holy, they do by that holiness
of theirs acquire a right to a greater holiness, I mean the holiness of
Baptism. And indeed however Tertullian could in his book Cap. 18.
De Baptismo argue the delay of Infants Baptism, as that too upon their no need
of it, or not being qualified for it; Yet as he could see enough elsewhere to
make him believe, that every soul is reckoned in Adam, till he be anew enrolled
in Christ by the receipt of the Sacrament of Baptism De anima c. 39. Hinc enim
and Apostolus ex sanctificato alterutro sexu sanctos procreari ait, tam ex
seminis praerogativa, quam ex institutionis disciplina. Caeterum, inquit,
immundi nascerentur, quasi designatos tamen sanctitati, ac per hoc etiam saluti
intelligi volens fidelium filios, ut hujus spei pignore matrimoniis, quae
retinenda censuerat, patrocinaretur. Alioquin meminerat Dominicae de
finitionis, Nisi quis nascetur ex aqua, and spiritu, non ibit in regnum Dei, id
est, non erit sanctus. Ita omnis anima eousque in Adam censetur, donec in
Christo recenseatur, etc.
, so he could see enough too in the Text I am now upon, to make him
acknowledge, that the Children of the De anima c. 39. Hinc enim and Apostolus
ex sanctificato alterutro sexu sanctos procreari ait, tam ex seminis
praerogativa, quam ex institutionis disciplina. Caeterum, inquit, immundi
nascerentur, quasi designatos tamen sanctitati, ac per hoc etiam saluti
intelligi volens fidelium filios, ut hujus spei pignore matrimoniis, quae
retinenda censuerat, patrocinaretur. Alioquin meminerat Dominicae de
finitionis, Nisi quis nascetur ex aqua, and spiritu, non ibit in regnum Dei, id
est, non erit sanctus. Ita omnis anima eousque in Adam censetur, donec in
Christo recenseatur, etc.
faithful are holy by the prerogative of their seed, as well as by the
discipline of their Institution, and by that holiness of theirs designed, or
marked out for a better holiness, and so for salvation. Which as it is the
holiness, that I have been all along enforcing, and endeavoring to evince from
thence Children's right unto another; So of what force it is toward the
inferring of it, will need no other light, than that, which we have from
Tertullian. For with what face can any man deny them the holiness of Baptism,
who are designed, or marked out for it by the prerogative of their birth, and
(as it may happen, and often does) can no other way attain that holiness, or
that salvation, which is consequent upon it? But because some men have advanced
another, and a more improper holiness, even that by which Children become the
issue of a lawful marriage, and not of an unlawful mixture; And because too
they have in part advanced that holiness upon the difficulty of comprehending,
how the unbeliever can otherwise be sanctified by the believer, than by making
the match between them two to be lawful; Therefore I will both set my self to
show, that the unbeliever may be otherwise sanctified by the believer, than by
making him, or her to be a lawful match to the believer, and that the holiness,
which S. Paul attributes to the Children of such a match, cannot be understood
of such a holiness, whereby they become a lawful, or legitimate Issue. And I
allege for the former of these the unbelieving Husband's, for instance, being
so sanctified by the believing Wife, as not only to become a lawful Husband to
her, but a Christian one, and so, as to entitle the Issue of them both to the
common privileges of Christianity. Which is brought about by the unbelieving
Husband's becoming one flesh, not any longer with an unbelieving Wife, but with
a believing, and Christian one, and from whom that sanctification is derived to
him. Even as the same S. Paul affirms 1 Cor. 6.16.
him, that converseth with an Harlot, to become one flesh with that Harlot,
with whom he does so converse, and so receive pollution from her. Neither will
it avail to say (as possibly it may be) that the believing Wife is as much one
flesh with the unbelieving Husband, as the unbelieving Husband is with her, and
may therefore be as unclean by him, as he can be supposed to be sanctified by
her. For neither first is the believing Wife as much one flesh with the
unbelieving Husband, as the unbelieving Husband is with her, unless it be as to
the use of, or power over one another's Bodies: Partly, because, where there is
so great an inequality in the match, the denomination is in reason to be taken
from the better party, which to be sure the believer is; And partly, because
that consent of mind from which this union proceeds, and by which it is to be
upheld, is more entire, and full upon the part of the unbelieving Husband, than
it is upon the part of the believing Wife. For whilst she consents to dwell
with him merely as the Partner of her Bed, and conformably to the offices of
such a one, of which she gave a sufficient proof by abandoning him as to his
Religion, and continues to do the like by the continuance of that abandoning;
The unbelieving Husband, on the other side, by being (as S. Paul expresses it)
1 Cor. 7.12, 13. (...).
well pleased to live with her notwithstanding, consents in some measure to
dwell with her as a Christian, and gives no contemptible indication of a
farther consent with her in that Religion: There being otherwise no great
likelihood of his continuing his Complacency, as well as cohabitation to her,
who had abandoned him as to his. But therefore as the believing Wife is not so
much one with the unbelieving Husband, as he is with her, and cannot therefore
be so likely to be polluted by him, as he is to be sanctified by her; So she
becomes yet less likely to be polluted by him, because communicating with him
in such Act, or Acts, as are not only lawful in themselves, but moreover the
indispensible duties of that marriage, which she had contracted, and which,
whilst he is thus pleased to dwell with her, she is by our Apostle himself
obliged to maintain. And indeed as from such a match there is more reason to
expect sanctification to the unbeliever, than there is of any fear of pollution
to the other; So there will be yet less doubt of it, if we consider the
sanctification here spoken of, not as an inward, but an outward one, and such
an outward one too, by which the party sanctified attains only the privilege
of being accounted of as a Christian Husband, and accordingly of conveying to
those Children, that descend from them both a right to the Sacrament of
Baptism. For what less can be expected from a merciful God, where the
unbeliever, though continuing such, yet takes pleasure notwithstanding that in
his Christian Consort? And she, on the other side, though abominating his
Infidelity, yet in compliance with that marriage, wherein Christianity found
her, cohabits with him notwithstanding, and no doubt both does, and will employ
all her kindness, and endeavors to gain him to a farther approbation both of
her, and of the Religion she has espoused? Which supposed, a way will be open
to give a clearer account of the thing intended, and withal of the force it is
of to persuade the believing Wifes continuing with the unbelieving Husband, if
he (as is supposed in the present case) is as willing to dwell with her: The
force thereof lying in this, that the believing Wife should in that case be so
far from being polluted by the converse of the unbelieving Husband (which was
no doubt these Corinthians fear, when they put this case to S. Paul) that on
the contrary the unbelieving Husband should be so far sanctified by her, as to
be to her in the place of a Christian one, and enjoy all the privileges of
such; The unbelieving Husband by becoming one flesh with the believing Wife
becoming so far Christian also, and so accounted of both by God, and the
Church. Of which they had this undeniable proof, that the Children of those
matches were not looked upon as unclean, or heathen (which they must have been
in part, if the unbeliever had not been some way sanctified, as well as the
believer) but accounted of as so far holy, or Christian, as to be admitted to
those privileges, to which the Children of Christian Parents were, and
particularly to that Baptism, by which a better holiness is conveyed. This I
take to be a fair, and clear account of the Apostle's words, and particularly
of that holiness, which he attributes to those Children, that descend from the
forementioned Parents. And I am yet more confirmed in it by the fondness of
that notion, which has been set up to supplant it, and by which the Children
of such matches become the issue of a lawful marriage, and not of an unlawful
mixture. For beside that they, who advance this notion, make the words Else
were your Children unclean, etc. to referr rather to the precept of the
believer's cohabiting with the unbeliever, than to the unbeliever's being
sanctified by the believer, to which last yet it apparently referrs, and is
assigned by S. Paul as a proof of; They suppose that in this notion of theirs,
which there is not the least ground for, and which indeed this very place does
sufficiently confute. For who ever said, or could say that the marriages of the
Heathen were unlawful, which yet they must have been, if there needed the
cohabitation of the faithful to make them lawful, and the Children that were
born of them to be legitimate? Nay who sees not that S. Paul supposes those
marriages to be lawful, when he requires the believing party to cohabit with
the unbeliever? For otherwise no doubt he would rather have advised to break
off all commerce with the Infidel, or proceed to a new contract. Both which yet
he is so far from, that he seems to me not very willing to allow of a perfect
breach, even when the unbeliever does depart from the believer. For though he
says 1 Cor. 7.15.
that a brother, or sister is not in bondage in such a case, and may therefore,
if they please, look upon themselves as loosed from the unbeliever; Yet he
tells them Ibid.
withal that God has called us to peace, and therefore, (as I understand him)
that breaches of that nature would be avoided as much as might be; And he tells
them too 1 Cor. 7.16.
, that if they would not be over forward to make use of that liberty, which the
unbeliever gave them by deserting them, there might be hopes of the unbelieving
Wife, or Husband being wrought upon by the believer's patience, and
forbearance, and reconciled both to them, and their Religion. However as there
is no pretense from this place of the believer's making the marriage between
the unbeliever and themselves to be a lawful one, as which was so before; Nor
therefore for making the holiness of their Children to be no other than a civil
one, and by which they only became a legitimate issue; So there is the more
reason still to understand the holiness of that match, and the issues of it, as
one that entitles them to the outward privileges of Christianity, and by which
the unbelieving whether Husband, or Wife, comes to be accounted of as a
Christian one, and the Children of both parties as having a right to that
Sacrament, by which all are to be initiated into Christianity, and partake of
its Regeneration and Remission.

My third and last argument for the baptizing of the Infants, or Children of
Christian Parents shall be taken from the Circumcision of those Infants, or
Children, which descended from the posterity of Abraham, and after which I do
not see what doubt can be well made of the other: Partly, upon the account of
the Analogy there is between Circumcision, and Baptism, and partly upon account
of the Children of Christian Parents having as good a right to the blessings
exhibited in them, as the Children of those, who were of the posterity of
Abraham. For supposing (as was before Expl. of the Sacram. in general. Part 4.
shown, and may hereafter Answ. to the object. against Infant Baptism.
be farther cleared) that Circumcision relates to the same spiritual blessings
with Baptism, and particularly to the righteousness of Faith; And supposing
farther that the Children of Christian Parents have as good a right to those
blessings, and that righteousness, as the Children of those, that were of the
posterity of Abraham; By the same reason that the Children of these were
entitled to that Circumcision, which was intended to exhibit those blessings,
and that righteousness among them, the Children of the other shall be admitted
to that Baptism, which was intended to exhibit them among us: Those Children,
which have an equal right to the blessings exhibited, having an equal right to
those means, which were intended for the exhibition of them. Now that the
Children of Christian Parents have as good a right to the former blessings, and
righteousness, as the Children of the Posterity of Abraham, will appear from
those Parents of theirs being equally the Children Romans 4.11.
of Abraham with those, that were of his posterity. For being equally his
Children, they must consequently be supposed to give their Children as good a
right to the former blessings, and the means that was intended to exhibit them
among us, as the posterity of Abraham did their Children to the like blessings,
and that means which among them was intended for the exhibition of them.

II. The Baptism of Infants being thus made out from the Scripture, and by such
passages thereof also, as cannot be easily avoided; Pass we on to enquire, what
countenance it has from Antiquity, as which if it be any thing considerable,
will the more firmly establish it. Where the first, that I shall take notice
of, is a passage of Justin Martyr, I do not mean what is commonly quoted out of
his Questions, and Answers, ad Orthodoxos Quaest. 56.
, it being questionable enough Vid. Coci Censur. quorund. Script. in Script.
Just. Martyr.
whether that Book were his, or at least as we now have it, but what may be
found in his second Apology Page 62. (...).
, and concerning which there is not any the least controversy in the Church.
In which Apology speaking of the excellency of the Christian Law above that of
any humane ones, in setting bounds to the carnal desires of men he has these
words. And there are many men, and women of sixty, and seventy years of Age,
who having from their Childhood been discipled unto Christ, have all their time
continued incorrupt, or Virgins; And I boast that I can show such among all
sorts of men. For why should we also speak of that innumerable multitude of
men, who have changed from intemperance, and so have learnt these things? For
Christ called not the just, or temperate to repentance, but the ungodly, and
intemperate, and unjust. Which words to an unbiast Reader cannot well signify
less, than Childrens being then baptized into Christianity; That Father not
only making mention of certain persons, who had from their childhood been
discipled unto Christ, which we know from our Savior Matt. 28.19.
to have been effected by Baptism, and continued too all their time incorrupt,
or Virgins (which yet is a competent proof of their being baptized, when
Children) but opposing them to such persons as had changed from intemperance,
and rather learnt that purity afterward, than been discipled into it at the
very first: That opposition of his making it yet more evident, that he meant
such persons as were discipled to Christ from their very childhood, and before
they were in a capacity of learning him, and his doctrine by instruction. To
this of Justin Martyr subjoyn we another of Irenaeus, which is yet more clear
for the Baptism of Infants. For Christ (says that Father Omnes enim venit per
semetipsum salvare: Omnes, inquam, qui per eum renascuntur in Deum, infantes,
and parvulos, and pueros, and juvenes, and seniores. Ideo per omnem venit
aetatem, and infantibus infans factus, sanctificans infantes, and in parvulis
parvulus sanctificans hanc ipsam habentes aetatem. Adv. haeres. li. 2. c. 39.
) came to save all persons by himself; All I say, who by him are born again to
God, Infants, and little ones, and Children, and Young Men, and Old. Therefore
he came in every Age, and was made an Infant to Infants, sanctifying Infants,
and a little one among little ones, sanctifying those of that age, etc. Where
we have him not only affirming Christ to have come to save Infants, as well as
others, yea to have been made an Infant himself to sanctify them, which shows
them in his opinion to have had a general right to the blessings of
Christianity, but speaking of several of them as born again unto God by Christ,
which is as much as to say baptized: That as it is the way, by which all are to
be so born, even by the Doctrine of Joh. 3.5.
our Savior, so the way too, by which the Ancients apprehended it to be
effected. For thus where Justin Martyr entreats of the Baptism of those of his
time, he tells us Apolog. 2. p. 93.4.
that they, who were to partake of it, were brought by the Christians to a
place where water was, and there regenerated after that manner of regeneration,
wherewith they themselves had been. And to the same purpose also this very
Irenaeus Adv. haeres li. 1. c. 18.
, because not only attributing the same regeneration to it, but representing it
as the Doctrine of the Gnostics, as to that Baptism which they set up against
our Savior's, that it was necessary for those, who had received perfect
knowledge, to be so regenerated into that virtue, or power, which is above all
things. Which passage, with the former one, makes it yet more manifest that
Irenaeus meant by such Infants, as were born again by Christ unto God, such as
had been regenerated by Baptism, and consequently that the Baptism of such was
no stranger in his days. I think I shall not need to insist upon the days of
Tertullian, because what the practice of that time was is evident from his
disputing against Infant Baptism, or at least advising to delay it: There being
no place for such a dispute, or advice, if the thing it self had not been then
in use, and in use too (as he himself intimates) in obedience to that precept
of our Savior, which enjoined the suffering little Children to come unto him
in order to their partaking of his blessing, and Kingdom. And indeed as Origin,
who lived not long after him, does not only assert the same practice of Infant
Baptism, but affirm In Romans 16.
the Church to have received it as a Tradition from the Apostles; So
Tertullian's Scholar, and great admirer S. Cyprian Epist. 59.
gives such an ample testimony to it, that I know not what need to be added to
it. For one Fidus having questioned him concerning the cause of Infants, who he
thought ought not to be baptized till the eighth day according to the law of
Circumcision, S. Cyprian in a Council of sixty six Bishops made this following
Answer to his demand; That he, and the whole Council that was with him, had
quite other thoughts of that affair, they universally judging that the mercy,
and grace of God was to be denied to none, that was born of men. And again,
that if remission of sins were upon the faith of the parties given to the
greatest Offenders, neither was any of them debarred from Baptism, and grace,
how much less ought a newborn Infant to be debarred of it, who had no other
sin to answer for, but what he drew from Adam, and who came so much the more
easily to receive pardon of sin, because it was not his own proper sins, but
those of others, that were to be forgiven him? For which cause the opinion of
the Council was, that no one ought to be debarred by them from Baptism, and the
Grace of God, and that, if that were to be observed, and retained as to all
persons whatsoever, it was much more to be observed, and retained as to
Infants, and newborn persons, whose very tears wherewith they entered the
World, seemed more to deserve it both from them, and the divine mercy. I omit
for brevity sake the many testimonies of S. Augustine to the same purpose, and
his affirming Aug. Sermon. 10. de verbis Apost.
in particular, that the Church always had it, always retained it, and received
it from the faith of it is predecessors; And shall content my self, as to this
particular, with his, and the Church's pressing the Pelagians Vossi. Histor.
Pelag. li. 2. part. 1 These. 5.
with the practice of Infant Baptism, and those Pelagians, how much soever
straightened by it, yet choosing rather to evade the force of it, than to deny in
any measure the truth of the thing alleged: It being not to be thought, that,
if there had been any the least suspicion of the Antiquity of Infant Baptism,
or indeed of its being derived to the Church from the Apostles, either the
Catholics would have so confidently alleged it against the Pelagians, or the
Pelagians so easily, and without any the least opposition have admitted it.

III. Now as if we allow Infants to be capable of Baptism, we must consequently
allow them the graces of that Sacrament, because Baptism was intended to convey
them; So I must needs say, I do not see why (supposing Original sin, which has
been before sufficiently established) we should scruple to attribute to them
the graces of that Sacrament, and particularly remission, and regeneration. For
if Infants are naturally under the guilt of Original sin, there is so far forth
place for, and a necessity of remission; And if the same Infants are naturally
under the pollution of it, or (as our Catechism expresses it) are by nature
born in sin, and the children of wrath, they are alike capable by Baptism of
being regenerated, or made the children of grace. Not that there is, or can be
even in baptized Infants any actual perception of, or adhesion to that, which
is spiritually good, but a disposition to both, and by virtue whereof the soul
is fitted, and inclined to each, when years, and opportunity invite: As the
same soul is to reason, and will, when it arrives at years of maturity, by
virtue of those natural faculties, that are from the beginning in it. Which is
a sort of regeneration, that is most suitable to the state of Infancy, and
beyond which therefore, whilst they continue in that state, we are not
reasonably to expect; But is withal as true a regeneration as that, which is
wrought in those of riper years, and by which the souls of the parties
regenerated actually perceive, and cleave to that good, which the other is only
disposed to: That actual perception, and adhesion being not so much any part of
their regeneration, or new birth, as the effects, or issues of it.

IV. But because how clear soever Infant Baptism may thus far seem, yet it
cannot be denied to be encumbred with many, and great difficulties, or at least
such as appear so to men of prejudiced minds; Therefore it will be but
necessary, before I leave this head, to select such of them as seem to be most
pressing, and return a satisfactory Answer to them: Whether they be such as
relate to the grounds, on which I have endeavored to establish it, or such as
strike more directly at the thing it self.

That, which is most to be considered of the former sort, is that See Jer.
Tail. Liberty of Proph. Sect. 18. number. 13.
which pretends to evacuate the Argument from the Circumcising of the Infants
of Abraham's posterity to the Baptizing of the Children of Christians. Which it
endeavors in part from Circumcisions being but a Type, or figure of Baptism,
and so either proving nothing at all without some express to signify such a
thing to be its purpose, or after the nature of such things, directing us
rather to a spiritual childhood in order to Baptism, than showing a natural
childhood to be a due subject of it; And in part also from Circumcisions being
not in all things a rule to the Christians Baptism, and particularly not in the
persons, that are to be baptized (Women as well as Men being confessedly the
subject of the latter) nor in the time of their receiving of it. For if
Circumcision be a sufficient direction for the baptizing of Infants, why not
also a like direction for the confining of it to the Males? And if it were to
be a direction as to the baptizing of Infants, why not also as to the baptizing
of them upon the eighth day (which was the day of administering Circumcision) as
that Fidus, whom S. Cyprian answered, seemed to be persuaded, and accordingly
argued it from the like administration of Circumcision.

As to what is objected concerning Circumcision's being but a type of Baptism,
and so either proving nothing at all without some express to signify such to
be its purpose, which is not pretended in the present case, or if proving any
thing as to the matter of childhood, yet directing rather to a spiritual, than
a natural one; I answer that as I see not why Circumcision should be looked
upon as only a type of Baptism, nor indeed as any type at all, unless it be in
a general sense, and as a thing that is like unto another may be looked upon as
a type of that, to which it is so, in which sense I my self have also used the
word, and allow it so to be, so we do not at all argue from Circumcision, as it
may be supposed to be a type of Baptism, but as a sign of the same
righteousness of Faith, of which Baptism is, and of the same gracious Covenant,
that assures it. And in this sense as nothing hinders us to argue from
Circumcision's being bestowed upon Infants then, that that which is a sign of
the same righteousness of faith under the Gospel is in reason to be extended to
the same persons; So there is this in particular to enforce it, that Christian
Parents would otherwise fall short, in the account of God, of the privileges
of the natural descendants of Abraham. Of which what account can be given, when
Abraham, from whom they both claim, is declared to be the Father of them both,
yea is said by S. Paul to have received the sign of Circumcision, not only as a
seal, or assurance to himself of that righteousness of faith, which he before
had, but a seal, or an assurance also of his being to the same purposes a
Father Romans 4.11.
of those that believe, though they be not circumcised, as well as a Father of
those that were.

There is as little reason to be staggered by what is alleged in the second
instance, that if Circumcision be a sufficient direction for the baptizing of
Infants, it may as well be a direction for the confining of it to the Males,
and for the confining of it too to the eighth day after the Infants birth.
Because first the Sacrament of Baptism has nothing in it to confine it to the
Males, as Circumcision had, but on the contrary is equally fitted to be
administered to both Sexes. And secondly because it appears from what was before
said Part 1.
concerning the Rite of Baptism among the Jews, that the want of Circumcision
was afterward supplied to the Females by Baptism, and they thereby even in
their Infancy initiated into the same Covenant with the other. For this shows
yet more, how little reason there is to argue from Circumcisions being confined
to the Males, that therefore Baptism ought to be so; Or rather how much more
reason there is to extend it both to Male, and Female, and so to all of the
same Infant estate. If therefore there be any thing to hinder our arguing from
Circumcision in this particular, it must be its not being pretended by our
selves to be a direction as to the day of its administration, as well as to the
persons, to whom it ought to be administered. But beside that there is a vast
difference between the persons, to whom any Sacrament is to be given, and the
precise day, on which it is to be so, and therefore not the like reason for
Circumcision's directing as to this, as there is for its directing as to the
other; What Circumcision directs as to the case of Infants is more a favor,
than a command, whereas what is directed as to the precise day is rather a
command, than a favor. Now it being a ruled case, That Favors are rather to
be enlarged, than restrained, especially under a Dispensation, which is so
manifestly gracious, as that of the Gospel is, there may be reason enough for
our interpreting what is said concerning the Circumcision of Infants to the
equal, or rather greater benefit of Infants now, and consequently that
Sacrament, which came in place of it, to be rather hastened, than deferred to a
day, to which possibly they may not arrive, but however to be given them as
soon, as a convenient opportunity presents it self. Add hereunto the difference
there is between Circumcision, and Baptism as to the trouble, or danger, which
may attend the administration of them to such tender bodies, as those of
Infants are. For there being a greater trouble, and danger to Infants from the
Rite of Circumcision, than there is from the Rite of Baptism; There might be
greater reason for the deferring of that to the eighth day, than there is for
the deferring of this. And what is therefore, as to that particular, directed
concerning Circumcision, not to be drawn into example in the matter of Baptism,
though other more material, and more advantageous circumstances are.

But leaving what is commonly urged against the Argument from the Circumcising
of Infants, because, as I suppose, sufficiently assoil'd by the foregoing
discourse. Let us take a view of such Objections as strike more directly at
Infant Baptism, or at least of the more material ones. Such as I take to be
first the want of an express command, or direction for the administering of
Baptism to Infants; Secondly, their being incapable of that regeneration, which
is the great intent and end of Baptism, or giving no suitable indications of it
afterward; Thirdly, their being as incapable of answering what is prerequired
to it on the part of the persons to be baptized, or is to be performed by them
in the receiving of it.

That which seems to stick much with the Adversaries of Infant Baptism, and is
accordingly urged at all turns against the Friends, or Asserters of it, is the
want of an express command, or direction for the administering of Baptism to
them. Which objection seems to be the more reasonable, because Baptism, as well
as other Sacraments, receiving all its force from Institution, they may seem to
have no right to, or benefit by it, who appear not by the institution of that
Sacrament to be entitled to it, but rather, by the qualifications which it
requires, to be excluded from it. And posbly more might be of the opinion of
the Objecters, if there had not been before an express Law for admitting
Infants to that righteousness of Faith, of which Baptism is a sign, and a means
of conveyance, and for admitting them too by such an outward sign, as that of
Baptism is. But such an express law having been before given by God, and that
law as notorious as any law in either Testament, there was no reason See
Stillingfleet's Irenicum. Part 1. cap. 1.. 3.
for God to give any such express law for the so administering of Baptism, or
for us to expect it from him: It being easy to collect from the Analogy there
is between the two Sacraments, and the great graciousness of the present
dispensation, that what was communicated to the Children of Abraham's posterity
by the sign of Circumcision, which was then the standing way of administering
it, was alike intended for the Children of those, who were to as good, or
better purpose the Children of the same Abraham, and intended too to be
transmitted to them by their particular Sacrament, and to which (as was before
observed) the great graces of the Gospel were annexed by our Savior Joh. 3.5.
himself. Which Argumentation is so much the more reasonable, because it
appears by what was but now suggested, that our Savior, whose Institution
Baptism was, gave a sufficient indication of his own kindness to that tender
estate, yea of his owning those, that were of it, to have a right to that
Kingdom of Heaven, to which Baptism by his own appointment was intended to
admit men.

The next great Objection against the Baptism of Infants is their supposed
incapacity of that regeneration, which is the great end, and intent of Baptism,
or giving no suitable indications of it, when they begin to be in a natural
capacity to exert it. The former whereof the Anabaptists argue from the
Scripture's speaking of it 1 Pet. 1.23.
as produced by the word of truth, and other such rational means; As the latter
by the little appearance there is of it in many of those, that are baptized,
after they arrive at the years of discretion: Especially where, as it often
happens in the Dominion of the Turks, they are taken away from their Parents,
before they come to be of any years, and bred up in the Mahumetan Religion. For
under this they are so far from giving any indications of a Christian
regeneration, that our Religion has no greater, or more implacable enemies,
than they.

As to what is argued toward the proof of Infants incapacity of regeneration
from the Scriptures speaking of it as produced by the word of truth, and other
such rational ways of procedure, I must needs say I do not see why it should be
alleged in this particular, unless it any where intimated, that there was no
other way of producing it, no not in the Souls of Infants. For the Scripture
speaking to, and of men converted from Judaism, or Heathenism to Christianity,
and consequently brought to it in a rational way; What is spoken of their
regeneration, is not to be drawn into example here, unless the same Scripture
did any where intimate that there was no other way of regeneration than that,
or it could not be otherwise produced. Which beside the affront it offers to
the omnipotency of God's spirit, and which even in men must be supposed to have
the chiefest stroke, will need no other confutation, than Gods creating man at
first after his own image without any concurrence of his, and producing in our
Savior, even in his conception, that perfect holiness, which was in him. For
why may not God produce in an Infant that imperfect regeneration, whereof we
speak, as well as he did that more perfect Righteousness, and true Holiness,
wherewith our first Parents were created, or that more excellent, as well as
more durable one, which he did in our Savior from the very beginning, and
which the Scripture it self attributes to the Holy Ghost's overshadowing his
Mother's Womb? But it may be, though Infants are not incapable of regeneration,
and so far forth cannot with reason be debarred the Sacrament of it; Yet there
is evidence enough upon the postfact, that no such thing is collated in their
Baptism, and that Baptism of theirs therefore not to be looked upon as a
legitimate one. For if the regeneration we speak of were collated in the
Baptism of Infants, it would, (because all Infants are alike qualified for that
Sacrament) be collated in some measure upon all of them, which yet the future
behavior of many of them does render justly questionable: Many of them being
untoward enough, when they first come of years, though advantaged by a suitable
education, and others (as was before said) taken away early from their
Christian Parents, and both educated in a contrary Religion, and made zealous
Proselytes of it. Which things how they should be consistent with that
regeneration, whereof we speak, is at least very difficult to apprehend. And
possibly these two things have stuck more with considering men than most of the
other Arguments that have been brought against Infant Baptism, and have perhaps
given as much trouble to all those, who have duly considered them. But whether
they are in truth of that force, which they seem to be of, may well be doubted
by those, who shall consider this regeneration as the state of Infants
requires, or at least makes it reasonable enough to do; I mean as a weak, and
imperfect thing, and rather as the seed of a more strong, and perfect
regeneration, than a thoroughly formed, and well settled one. For so if we
conceive of it, we shall find no great difficulty to apprehend first, that
where there is not only nothing of a Christian education to excite, and improve
it, but a contrary one from the very beginning, and such a one in particular as
Christian Children have from the Turks; So, I say, it will not be difficult to
apprehend, but it may be perfectly overwhelmed, and choked by it: As that seed
in the Parable was, that was sown among Thorns, or as that may be supposed to
be, that is covered over with rubbish, and hindered by it from sprouting forth.
And though I cannot say the same of the regeneration of such persons, as have
afterward had a Christian, and it may be a careful education to excite it (for
here one would think it should every where more forcibly exert it self) yet
this I may, which will be of equal force, that in that case it may equally fail
for want of those persons exciting it, in whom that seed is sown, or of their
answering by their care, and endeavor that education, which is made use of in
order to it. For Baptism (as has been often said) being in the nature of a
stipulation, or Contract, where somewhat is to be performed by the party
Baptized, as soon as he is in a capacity to do it, as well as by him, with whom
the contract is made; No wonder if, when the baptized person comes to be in a
capacity to perform his part, and does not, he with whom the Contract is made,
do first withdraw his blessing from that, which he has before sown in him, and
afterward the seed it self. For in either of these cases we cannot expect such
indications, or effects of the Baptismal regeneration, as otherwise we might,
and as do actually show themselves in many of those, who have been made
partakers of it. It may be enough that God has furnished such persons with a
regeneration, which during their minority will qualify them for, and secure
them to his Kingdom, and a regeneration too which, if well improved, will grow
into a more complete, and effectual one, and in fine bring them to a due
holiness, and unto God. If the baptized persons will, when they are in a
capacity to do better, neglect to excite it, or will oppose it, they must thank
themselves, if they miscarry, and not lay the blame upon any failure on
Christ's part, and much less deny his having conferred it on them.

The third, and last great Objection against the Baptism of Infants is their
being incapable of answering what is prerequired to it on the part of the
persons that are to be baptized, or is to be performed by them in the receiving
of it. Which incapacity they argue, as to the former of these, from the
Scripture's pre-requiring Faith, and Repentance to it, as the latter from that
stipulation, which Baptism involves, and which Infants are equally
incapacitated to make.

The Answer, which our Catechism makes to these difficulties, or at least to
the former, is, that they promise them both by their sureties, which promise,
when they come to Age, themselves are bound to perform. And possibly this
Answer might be better digested than it is, if the minds of those, who argue
against Infant Baptism, were more free, and unprejudiced, than they commonly
appear to be. Because first what is urged against Infant Baptism upon the
account of its being a stipulation, or Contract is equally of force against the
Circumcision of Infants, because that was equally a Covenant, or rather a sign
of it, and a means of entering into it. Which notwithstanding, the Infants of
Abraham's posterity were by the Command of God himself admitted to it, and
thereupon reckoned as in Covenant with him. Now if the Infants of Abraham's
posterity were by the Command of God admitted into Covenant with him; What
should hinder the Infants of Christians from Covenanting in like manner with
him, and so far forth from being admitted to the participation of that
Sacrament, which is a sign of the same gracious Covenant, and a means of
entering into it? Again Secondly, though Infants cannot in strictness Covenant
with God, because neither having reason enough to apprehend the terms of it,
nor will to determine themselves to the performance of them; Yet as they may by
favor be admitted to a partnership in a Covenant, and where God, or Christ is
the person, with whom they contract, obliged when they come of years to answer
their part in it, so by the same favor of him, with whom they contract, what
is done to them, or for them, may be interpreted as a promise on their part for
the performance of it. By which means though they should not be capable of a
strict, and proper stipulation, yet they may of that, which is interpretatively
such. The only farther doubt in this affair is, whether God accepts of such a
stipulation, which his accepting of it under the Covenant of Circumcision, and
from the Children of Abraham's natural posterity will easily remove. For the
Covenant of Baptism being no way inferior in it self to (or rather but the same
Covenant in a different dress with) the Covenant of Circumcision, nor the
Children of Abraham's spiritual seed inferior to those of the natural one; What
was accepted of under the Covenant of Circumcision, and from the Children of
Abraham's natural seed may as reasonably be presumed to be accepted of under
Baptism, and from the Children of his spiritual. How much more, when (as was
before shown) his Son, and our Savior Christ Mark 10.14.
has commanded Children to be brought to him for his benediction, and grace,
and his Apostle and our great Instructor S. Paul declared the Children of
Christians to be holy, yea where but one of the Parents is so? Thus we may
rationally answer what is objected against the stipulation of Infants, and
consequently against their taking upon them what is required of them in the
receiving of Baptism; Which will leave nothing to us to make answer to, but
their supposed incapacity for that faith, and repentance, which seem to be
pre-required to it, and which one would think they, that are to be baptized,
should bring with them in some measure, as well as make a promise of. But
beside that those Texts Mark 16.15, 16. Acts 2.38. Acts 8.37.
, which speak of these prerequisites, do all manifestly relate to adult
persons, and such as are brought to Baptism by the preaching of the Gospel, and
therefore not lightly to be urged in the case of Infants; There are these three
substantial reasons to make a difference between Infants, and Men as to this
particular. First, that Infants are not admitted to Baptism, and the graces of
it upon the account of any right in themselves, but of the right of their
Parents. Secondly, that they are admitted for the present to a lesser portion
of the Divine graces, than adult persons are, and such as are rather the seeds
of them, than any thoroughly formed, or well settled ones. Thirdly, that what
right they receive by their Baptism to future, and more perfect privileges,
depends for their actually attaining them upon their exhibiting that faith, and
repentance, which at the time of their Baptism they only made a promise of. For
if (as is alleged in the first reason) Infants are not admitted to Baptism and
the Graces of it, upon the account of any right in themselves, but of the right
of their Parents; What should hinder the Church from lending Accommodatillis
matter Ecclesia aliorum pedes ut veniant, aliorum cor ut credant, aliorum
linguam ut faceantur, ut quoniam quod aegri sunt alio peccante praegravantur,
sic cum hi sani sunt alio pro eis confitente salventur. Aug. de Verb Apost.
Sermon. 10.
, or Infants from borrowing from it the feet of other men, that they may come,
the heart of others that they (...) believe, the tongue of others that they may
confess, that because, in that they were sick, they were pressed down by
another sin, they may, when they are made whole, be saved by the confession of
another? If again (as is alleged in the second reason, and proved before in
the matter of regeneration) Infants are admitted for the present to a lesser
portion of the divine Graces, than adult persons are, and such as are rather
the seeds of them, than any thoroughly formed, or well settled one; Who can think
but that a like difference ought to be between them as to the prerequisites of
their Baptism, and that therefore not to be urged as to the case of Infants,
which was prerequired of the other? In fine, if (as is alleged in the third
reason) what right Infants receive by their Baptism to future, and more perfect
privileges, depends for their attaining of them, upon their exhibiting that
Faith, and Repentance, which at the time of their Baptism they only made a
promise of; It may be time enough, when that right is to be actuated, to
exhibit that Faith, and Repentance, and so make way for it, as they, who are of
years, do. Otherwise more shall be supposed to be required of Infants, than is
of adult persons themselves; Because that Faith and Repentance is not required
of the latter, till the full privileges of Baptism are to be bestowed upon
them. And I shall only add, that if care were taken that the Faith, and
Repentance of those, who were baptized in their Infancy, were as well inquired
into, and proved as their knowledge in the Catechism is, before they were
allowed to be confirmed; The Church would not only better discharge the trust,
that is reposed in her as concerning those persons, whose Faith and Repentance
were not before proved, nor could be, but more effectually stop the mouths of
the Anabaptists, than all the Arguments she, or her Sons offer for Infant
Baptism, will ever be able to do. For so she would make it appear, that though
she contented her self in their Baptism with the promise that was made for
them, or rather with that tacit stipulation, which their very Baptism involves;
Yet she was as mindful, when they came of years, to oblige them to the
performance of it, and to give due proofs in their own persons of all those
things, which Baptism in adult persons does either pre-suppose, or oblige to
the performance of.

PART XII. Whether Baptism may be repeated.
The Contents.
What the true state of the present question is, and that it is not founded in
any supposed illegitimateness of the former Baptism, but upon supposition of
the baptized persons either not having before had, or forfeited the
regeneration of it, or fallen off from that Religion, to which it does belong.
Whereupon enquiry is made, whether if such persons repent and return, they
ought to be baptized anew, or received into the Church without. What there is
to persuade the repeating of Baptism, and what the Church has alleged against
it. The Churches arguments from Ephesians. 4.4. and Joh. 13.10. proposed, but waved.
The Churches opinion more firmly established in the no direction there is in
Scripture for rebaptization in those cases, but rather the contrary, and in the
no necessity there is of it. The Arguments for rebaptization answered.

IV. THE fourth, and last question relating to the right Administration of
Baptism is whether it may be repeated. Which question is not founded in any
supposed illegitimacy of the former Baptism (for that is here taken for granted
to have been good, and valid) but upon supposition of the baptized persons
either having not before received, or forfeited the regeneration he acquired by
it, or fallen off altogether from that Religion, into which he was baptized. In
which cases, supposing the person to repent of his former either impiety, or
Apostasy, it is inquired whether he may be baptized anew, or received into the
Communion of the faithful without it.

Now though, if Men would abide by the Doctrine of the Church, this question
would be of easy resolution; S. Cyprian Epist. 71. Ad Quintum. Nos autem
dicimus eos, qui inde veniunt, non rebaptizari apud nos, sed baptizari. Neque
enim accipiunt illic aliquid, ubi nihil est, sed veniunt ad nos, ut hic
accipiant, ubi gratia, and veritas omnis est, quia and gratia and veritas una
est.
himself, who was so fierce for the rebaptizing of those, who had been baptized
by Heretics, yet advancing not that Assertion of his upon a belief of
Baptism's being to be repeated, provided it were a legitimate one, but on
supposition of the former Baptisms being no true, and genuine one; Yet will it
not be of so easy a resolution, if that Authority be laid aside, and the thing
in question weighed rather by Arguments, than suffrages. For what do they
differ in effect from Heathen, or Insidels, who either never before had, or
have fallen quite off from the regeneration, or faith of Baptism? And if they
differ not at all from them, why should they not, if they repent, and return,
be received as Heathen, or Infidels, I mean by the Sacrament of Baptism?
Especially, when in the ordinary dispensation of God the graces of the
Sacrament are annexed to the Sacrament, nor can be expected without it. For,
that supposed, why should not these men, being to begin their Christianity
anew, come a second time under that Sacrament, which is to enter beginners
into it, and give them the regeneration, and remission of it?

Of what force these Objections are, shall be afterward considered; The only
reason of my present mention of them is to show, that the question is not
without its difficulty, and that if we will satisfy our understandings so, as
to be able to satisfy others, we must enquire into the grounds of the Churches
opinion, as well as be satisfied, that the Church has been so persuaded. Which
we shall find the more reason for, because one principal Text, which has been
alleged, seems not to come up to it, nor indeed to have any relation to that
affair; That I mean, which suggests one Baptism Ephesians. 4.5.
as well as one Lord, and one Faith in him. For the design of the Apostle in
that place being to persuade the Ephesians to unity, and peace among
themselves, as that too, among other things by there being one Lord, one Faith,
and one Baptism, cannot so reasonably be thought to mean any other, than that
they all had one common Lord, to whom they related, one common Faith in that
Lord, and one common Baptism, or mode of initiating into it: That unity, as it
best agrees with that one hope of their calling, by which they are also pressed,
because declared to be one Ephesians 4.4.
, in which they were all called; So most naturally, and most immediately
enforcing that agreement with one another, for the inculcating whereof they are
all suggested. I say not the same, nor can of that unity of Baptism, which
imports only a single administration of it to one, and the same person; That
unity, though it may oblige the person to stick close to his Religion, and to
the profession he has made of it in that one Baptism of his, yet persuading
not any adhesion to, or unity with other Baptized persons, than as they may be
supposed to partake in common with him in it. But it may be there is more force
in what is alleged from our Savior, where he says Joh. 13.10.
, that he, that is washed, even by a more general washing, needs not save to
wash his feet. And so no doubt there is, if by the former washing be meant the
washing of Baptism, as some of the Ancients conceived, and as I have elsewhere
Part 2.
made it probable. But there is this exception against it, as to the thing we
are now about, that it seems to suppose the more general purity procured by it
to abide, and men's affections, or actions only to have some pollution in them.
Whereas those, concerning whose rebaptization we entreat, either never had, or
have forfeited their baptismal regeneration, or fallen off altogether from that
Religion to which it belongs.

Now that, which in my opinion ought to have the first place in our thoughts is
the no direction there is in Scripture for the repetition of Baptism, where the
like Apostasy, or impiety has happened, but rather a direction to a contrary
course. And I instance for the proof thereof in Simon Peter, after he had
denied, and forsworn his Master; And in Simon Magus, after he had proceeded to
so great a degree of impiety, as to offer the Apostles money for the gift of
the Holy Ghost. For to the former of these, even S. Peter, we find no other
washing directed, save that Luke 22.61.
of penitential tears; Nay we find him admonished Luke 22.22.
, as well as licensed after that conversion of his to set himself to the
strengthening of his brethren. Which in all probability he would not have been
without a foregoing Baptism, if our Savior had meant for the future, that
nothing but a new Baptism should be able to convert such Apostates to himself:
His passing over so great an Apostasy in a prime disciple of his upon his bare
repentance being apt to encourage other men to presume of the same unto
themselves. Neither will it avail to say, that this instance will not reach the
case, because it does not appear, that S. Peter was baptized before. For
supposing that he were not, which yet (as was heretofore Part 2.
observed) in all probability he was, the case of the Rebaptizers will not be
rendered better, but rather so much the worse for it. For if he was not
baptized before, there was the more reason he should be baptized now, if
nothing but a new Baptism generally can wash away Apostasy. The instance of
Simon Magus is yet more clear, and unexceptionable, where the regeneration of
Baptism has not been before received, or forfeited after the receiving of it.
For that Simon Magus either never received, or had now lost the Baptismal
regeneration, is evident from the words of S. Peter to him; That holy man not
only cursing him Acts 8.20.
for his offer of money, but telling him in express terms, that he had neither
lot, nor part in the matter Acts 8.21.
of Christianity, and that his heart was not right in the sight of God, in fine
that he perceived, that he was in the gall of bitterness Acts 8.23.
, and in the bond of iniquity. Which notwithstanding, the same S. Peter
directed him only Acts 8.22.
to repent of that his wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of his
heart might be forgiven him. Which how could S. Peter have done, especially in
so notorious a case, if a second Baptism had been necessary to wash away that
sinful estate, which the former Baptism had not purged, or at least which had
returned after it.

My second Argument against the repetition of Baptism is the no necessity of it
in either of the forementioned instances. As will appear whether we consider it
as a means of obliging us to that piety, which our Religion requires, or as a
means of conveying the graces of it. For in the former notion it is as really,
and effectually an obligation to a Christian life in an unsincere person, or
one who afterward apostatizeth, as if it had been never so heartily intended;
The obligation thereof arising not from the secret sentiments of the person,
that is baptized, or his constancy to his profession, but from the nature of
the thing it self, and the Institution of God, that prescribed it. Provided
therefore we take upon us the Sacrament it self, we tie our selves by it
without remedy, neither can there therefore be any need of our obliging our
selves by it a second time, unless he, who instituted it, should require it of
us. It is true indeed so far as we have departed from it whether by Apostasy,
or impiety, so far it will concern us to own it again to our Lord, and Master,
by our repentance of the breaches of it, and a repetition of the same vows unto
him; And it will concern us too, if the Church requires it, to satisfy that
also, that we do so repent, and will amend. But as both the one, and the other
may be done without the repetition of our Baptism, so a frank acknowledgment
with our mouths, together with the receipt of the Lord's Supper, may very well
serve for those purposes, because serving a like to declare them. But it may
be, the principal difficulty in this affair lies in what concerns Baptism as a
means of conveying the graces of it, and particularly our regeneration, and new
birth. And I must confess I was for some time at a loss what to think in it,
till I considered that the Sacrament of Baptism was not either a physical
cause, or conveyer of Grace, that we should think the grace of it could not be
in the receiver of Baptism, unless it were either presently produced in him, or
conveyed to him, but a moral instrument thereof, or a means to which God has
annexed the promise of it. For such a one by the favor of that God, who has
annexed the promise of his Grace unto it, may operate at a distance, as well as
in presence, and accordingly may convey it to the receiver of Baptism, as well
after his Baptism, as together with it, yea convey it after the baptized person
has lost it, as well as it did at first. Which supposed, the only remaining
difficulty will be, whether we may reasonably expect it from God, supposing the
baptized person to return, and repent. A thing, which they have little reason
to question, who believe God to allow a second Baptism upon it, and we shall
have far less, if we reflect upon the former instances of Peter, and Simon
Magus. For if God will allow of the remedy of a second Baptism upon repentance,
why not also allow the first Baptism to be the means of conveying his graces,
and our health, and soundness? Especially, when the breaches of it come to be
acknowledged, and the vow thereof renewed. And if God accepted of S. Peter upon
his bare repentance, and directed Simon Magus to no other remedy, than that,
and prayer; We may as well suppose, that if he accept us at all, he will accept
us upon that, and our old Baptism, and so make that cooperate to the
respective graces of it.

These I take to be sufficient Arguments against the repetition of Baptism, and
the more, because they also suggest as satisfactory answers to what has been
before alleged for it. For neither can they be looked upon as Heathen, and
consequently as standing in need of a new Baptism, who however they may have
renounced the old, whether by their Impiety, or Apostasy, yet ever were, and
ever will be under the obligation of it. And much less after their repentance,
and return can they be thought to want it toward the producing of that
regeneration, which they are without: Their former Baptism, through the favor
of him who annexed the promise of regeneration to that Sacrament, being as
effectual for that purpose, as any new Baptism whatsoever. Baptism is indeed
generally necessary to regeneration, it is so necessary that no man living can
promise it to himself without it; But if it be of as much value, as necessity,
it may, and no doubt will induce him, who is the dispenser of his own graces,
to confer it upon a former, as well as upon any new administration of it.

FINIS.
OF THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORD'S SUPPER.

For a Conclusion of an EXPLICATION OF THE CATECHISM OF THE Church of England.

By GABRIEL TOWERSON, D. D.

IMPRIMATUR

Liber cui Titulus, [ Of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, etc. By Dr.
Gabriel Towerson.] H. Maurice RRmo in Christo P. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a
Sacris.

October. 24. 1687.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVIII.

TO THE Right Reverend FATHER in GOD FRANCIS Lord Bishop of ELY.
My Lord,
I Am now at an end of a long, and laborious Work, begun and carried on in the
more prosperous times of our Church, but finished with no less Zeal for that
Religion, which she professes, and with an equal, if not greater regard to
Your Lordship, who to your own immortal Honor, and the satisfaction of all
good Men, have so firmly adhered to it.

The Argument, that is now before me, has (I doubt not) been handled by much
better Pens, and, if I may judge by those few Treatises which I have seen, in a
way worthy of the Age we live in, and of that Religion, which we have the
honor to profess. But whether any one Man has spoken to the several parts
thereof, which is my proper Business, is more than I my self have observed, or
received any intimation of from other Men. However, I have been so fearful of
transcribing the Conceptions of others, that I have avoided to look into many
things, which I my self might have profited by; As conceiving that a Man's own
natural thoughts, how slight soever, may be more useful, and acceptable, than a
repetition of far better ones of other Men. If, whilst I too eagerly pursue my
own thoughts, I sometime happen to stumble, they, who consider the honesty of
my Design, will, I hope, be more ready to pity, and pardon, than any way insult
over my Infirmities. Which hopes I am the more confirmed in, because I have all
along had the Scripture in my Eye, and particularly those parts thereof, which
give an account of the Institution of this Sacrament, and by which, if by any
thing, we must attain a due understanding of it.

If what I have offered upon this, and the other parts of our Churches
Catechism, may be so useful to its Members, as to furnish them with a General
Idea of the Doctrines it contains, and sufficient Arguments to confirm them, I
shall think my Pains to have been as profitably bestowed, as a Man of my
Circumstances was capable of employing them: That, which in my poor Opinion
has been the great Bane of the Church of England, being the necessity the
Members thereof have been under of laying the foundation of their Knowledge in
foreign Systemes, which have not only much alienated their Affections from the
Religion professed among us, but so prejudiced their Minds against it, as to
make them proof against the greatest Convictions, which the best of our Writers
have been able to offer to them. Which therefore if these my Labors may serve
in any measure to prevent, I have as much as I desire; But however, shall rest
satisfied in this, that I have done the best service I could to the Church of
England, and have therefore little left me to do, save to pray for the
Prosperity thereof, which is, and shall be the daily employment of

Your Lordship's Most Obliged, Most Obedient, and Most Humble Servant, GABRIEL
TOWERSON.
Wellwyn, March 6. 1687.
THE CONTENTS OF THE EXPLICATION OF THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORD'S SUPPER.
The Contents of the First Part.
Of the general Grounds of our Savior's instituting another Sacrament after
Baptism, and of his choice of that of the Lord's Supper in particular.
ENquiry first made into the ground of our Savior's instituting another
Sacrament after Baptism; And that shown to be, the Sacrament of Baptism's
leaving place for the entering in of new, and gross Errors, and which being not
so consistent with the Vow thereof, made it so much the more difficult to
believe, that there was any remedy to be had from the Graces of that Sacrament,
because forfeited by the violation of its Vow. The want of an undoubted remedy
from thence the occasion of providing a new, and, because the former was
apparent to our Senses, of a like outward, and visible one. The ground of our
Savior's choice of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper in particular shown at
large to have been a like usance among the Jews in their more solemn Festivals.
Page 157.

The Contents of the Second Part.
Of the Names anciently given to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, with the
Reasons of the Imposition of them.
THE Lord's Supper anciently one of the Names of this Sacrament, and Evidence
made from 1 Cor. 11.20. that S. Paul gave that Name to it, and not to those
Agapae, or Love Feasts, that accompanied it. The reason of that Name it is being
a Feast, though a spiritual one, instituted at Supper-time, and instituted by
our Lord. The Eucharist another Name of it, and of like Antiquity with the
former, which it received from those Thanksgivings, which were anciently made
over it, whether for the Fruits of the Earth, or the Blessing of our
Redemption. Breaking of Bread a third Name of the same Sacrament; One Species
thereof, and one noted Circumstance about it being by an usual Hebraism set to
denote the whole. Enquiry next made into such Names, or Titles of it, as are
most insisted on by the Romanists; such as that of The Body of Christ, an
Oblation, or Sacrifice, and the Mass. The first whereof this Sacrament is shown
to have had from the intimate relation there is between it and the Body of
Christ, which it conveys; The second from its containing in it a Thanksgiving
for, or Commemoration of Christ's Sacrifice of himself upon the Cross; The
third from that solemn dismission, which was given to those that attended at
it, after that Service was finished. page 163.

The Contents of the Third Part.
Of the Institution of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
THE Story of the Institution first set down out of the Evangelists, and St.
Paul, and animadverted upon in the several parts of it. Where, after an account
of the time of it, the consequents whereof are also declared, entrance is made
with the consideration of the Bread, and both the quality of that Bread, and
Christ's taking it, explained. This followed by a more ample declaration of
Christ's blessing it, and that Blessing both shown to have the Bread for its
object, and to consist in making it useful for the purposes of a Sacrament, or
rather in Christ's addressing himself to his Father to make it such. That
address of his thereupon carefully inquired into, and (because it appears from
St. Luke, and St. Paul to have been by Thanksgiving) enquiry also made what
benefits he so gave thanks for, what use that Thanksgiving was of toward the
procuring of the blessing desired, and whether it did not also contain some
express request to God for the granting of it. Of Christ's breaking the Bread,
its signification, and momentousness, as also of his giving it to his
Disciples, and requiring them to take, and eat of it. The words, This is my
body, next taken into consideration, and more particularly, and minutely
explained. Where is shown at large that by the word This must be meant This
Bread, and that there is nothing in the gender of the word (...) to hinder it;
That by body must be meant that body, which Christ now carried about him, and
was shortly after to suffer in, and that the sigurativeness of the proposition
lies in the word is. Upon occasion whereof is also shown; that that word is
oftentime figuratively taken; that it ought to be so taken here, and that
accordingly it imports the Bread to be a sign, and a memorial, and a means of
partaking of Christ's body. This part of the Institution concluded with an
explication of the words, which is given, or broken for you, and a more ample
one of Christ's commanding his Disciples to do this in remembrance of him.
Where the precept, Do this, is shown to refer to what Christ had before done,
or enjoined them to do; And they enjoined so to do, to renew in themselves a
grateful remembrance of Christ's death, or prompt other Men to the like
remembrance of it. That part of the Institution, which respects the Cup, more
succinctly handled, and enquiry made, among other things, into the declaration,
which our Savior makes concerning its being his Blood of the New Testament, or
the New Testament in it. Where is shown, What that is, which our Savior
affirms to be so, what is meant by his Blood of the New Testament, or The New
Testament in it, and how the Cup, or rather the Wine of it was that Blood of
his, or the New Testament in it. page 173.

The Contents of the Fourth Part.
Of the outward Part, or Sign of the Lord's Supper.
BRead and Wine ordinarily the outward Part, or Sign of the Lord's Supper, and
the Heresy of the Aquarii upon that account inquired into, and censured. The
kind of Bread and Wine enjoined, in the next place examined, and a more
particular Enquiry thereupon, Whether the Wine ought to be mixed with Water,
and what was the Ground of the Ancients Practice in this Affair. The same
Elements considered again with respect to Christ's Body and Blood, whether as
to the Usage that Body, and Blood of his received, when he was subjected unto
Death; or as to the Benefit, that was intended, and accru'd to us by them. In
the former of which Notions they become a Sign of Christ's Body and Blood, by
what is done to them before they come to be administered, and by the separate
administration of them. In the latter, by the use they are of to nourish, and
refresh us. Of the Obligation the Faithful are under to receive the Sacrament
in both kinds, and a resolution of those Arguments, that are commonly alleged
to justify the Romish Churches depriving them of the Cup. page 197.

The Contents of the Fifth Part.
Of the inward Part of the Lord's Supper, or the thing signified by it.
THE inward Part of the Lord's Supper, or the thing signified by it, is either
what is signified on the part of God, and Christ, or on the part of the
Receiver of it. The former of these brought under Consideration, and shown to
be the Body and Blood of Christ, not as they were at, or before the Institution
of this Sacrament, or as they now are, but as they were at the time of his
Crucifixion, as moreover then offered up unto God, and offered up to him also
as a propitiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of the World. The Consequences of that
Assertion briefly noted, both as to the presence of that Body, and Blood in the
Sacrament, and our perception of them. The things signified on the part of the
Receiver in the next place considered, and these shown to be, First, a thankful
Remembrance of the Body, and Blood of Christ considered as before described.
Secondly, our Communion with those, who partake with us of that Body, and
Blood. Thirdly, a Resolution to live, and act as becomes those, that are
partakers of them. The two latter of these more particularly insisted on, and
that Communion, and Resolution not only shown from the Scripture to be
signified on the part of the Receiver, but confirmed by the Doctrine, and
Practice of the Ancient Church. page 213.

The Contents of the sixth Part.
What farther relation the Sign of the Lord's Supper has to the Body, and
Blood of Christ.
THE outward Part, or Sign of this Sacrament considered with a more particular
regard to the Body, and Blood of Christ, and Enquiry accordingly made, what
farther relation it bears to it. That it is a Means, whereby we receive the
same, as well as a Sign thereof, shown from the Doctrine of our Church, and
that Doctrine confirmed by Saint Paul's entitling it the Communion of Christ's
Body, and Blood, and by his affirming Men to be made to drink into one Spirit
by partaking of the Cup of it. Enquiry next made, what kind of Means this Sign
of the Lord's Supper is, how it conveys to us the Body, and Blood of Christ,
and how we receive them by it. To each of which Answer is made from the
Doctrine of our Church, and that Answer farther confirmed by the Doctrine of
the Scripture. The sum of which is, that this Sign of the Lord's Supper is, so
far forth, a Mean spiritual, and heavenly; That it conveys the Body, and Blood
of Christ to us, by prompting us to reflect, as the Institution requires, upon
that Body, and Blood of his, and by prompting God, who has annexed them to the
due use of the Sign, to bestow that Body, and Blood upon us; In fine, that we
receive them by the Sign thereof, when we take occasion from thence to reflect
upon that Body, and Blood of Christ, which it was intended to represent, and
particularly with Faith in them. What Benefits we receive by Christ's Body, and
Blood, in the next place inquired, and as they are resolved by our Catechism to
be the strengthening, and refreshing of the Soul, so Enquiry thereupon made
what is meant by the strengthening, and refreshing of the Soul, what Evidence
there is of Christ's Body and Blood being intended for it, and how they effect
it. The Sign of the Lord's Supper a Pledge to assure us of Christ's Body, and
Blood, as well as a Means, whereby we receive them. page 219.

The Contents of the Seventh Part.
Of Transubstantiation.
THE Doctrine of Transubstantiation briefly deduced from the Council of Trent,
and digested into four capital Assertions. Whereof the first is, that the whole
substance of the Bread is changed into the substance of Christ's Body, and the
whole substance of the Wine into the substance of his Blood. The grounds of
this Assertion examined both as to the possibility, and actual being of such a
change. What is alledg^d for the former of these from the substantial changes
mentioned in the Scripture of no force in this particular, because there is no
appearance of the actual existing of those things, into which the change was
made at the instant the other were changed into them. As little force shown to
be in the words, This is my Body, and, This is my Blood, to prove the actual
change of the Sacramental Elements, whether we consider the word This in the
former words as denoting the Bread, and Wine, or The thing I now give you. That
supposed change farther impugned by such Scriptures, as represent the Bread of
the Eucharist as remaining after Consecration, by the concurrent Testimony of
Sense, and the Doctrine of the Ancient Fathers. Enquiry next made into that
Assertion, which imports, that the substances of the Sacramental Elements are
so changed, as to retain nothing of what they were before, save only the
Species thereof. Where is shown, that if nothing of their respective Substances
remain, there must be an annihilation, rather than a change, and that there is
as little ground for the remaining of the Species without them, either from the
nature of those Species, the words of Consecration, or the Testimony of Sense.
That the true Body, and true Blood of Christ, together with his Soul, and
Divinity, are under the Species of the Sacramental Elements, a third Capital
Assertion in this Matter, but has as little ground in the words of
Consecration, as either of the former. First, because those words relate not to
Christ's glorified Body, and Blood, which are the things affirmed to be
contained under the Species of the Sacramental Elements, but to Christ's Body,
as broken, and to his Blood as shed at his Crucifixion. Secondly, because
however they may import the being of that Body, and Blood in the Eucharist, yet
they specify nothing as to the modus of it, and much less intimate any thing
concerning their being under the Species thereof. That that Body, and Blood
(which is the fourth Capital Assertion in this Matter) are truly, really, and
substantially under the Sacramental Species, shown to be as groundless; and
Evidence made of the contrary by such Arguments from Sense, and Reason, as are
moreover confirmed to us by the Authority of Revelation. Some brief Reflections
in the close upon the Worship of Christ in the Sacrament, and more large ones
upon what the Romanists advance concerning the real eating of him in it. Where
is shown that that, which they call a real eating, is a very improper one, that
it is however of no necessity, or use toward our spiritual nourishment by him,
and not only no way confirmed by the discourse of our Savior in the sixth of
St. John's Gospel, but abundantly confuted by it. page 227.

The Contents of the Eighth Part.
Of Consubstantiation.
AN account of that Doctrine, which is by us called Consubstantiation, out of
the Augustan Confession, and Gerhard; And as it is founded by him, and other
the Lutheran Doctors in the letter of the words, This is my Body, and, This is
my Blood, so Enquiry thereupon made first, whether those words ought to be
taken in the literal sense; Secondly, whether, if so taken, Consubstantiation
can be inferred from them. That the former words ought to be taken in the
literal sense is endeavored by the Lutherans to be proved by general, and
special Arguments, and those Arguments therefore proposed, and answered. What
is alleged in the general concerning the literal sense of Scripture being for
the most part to be preferred before the figurative, willingly allowed; But
that no exception ought to be made, unless where the Scripture it self obliges
us to depart from the literal sense, shown to be neither true in it self, nor
pertinent to the present Texts, because there is enough in the words, that
follow them, to oblige us to prefer the figurative sense before it. The
Lutherans special Arguments next brought under Consideration, and First that,
which is drawn from the supposed newness, and strangeness of the Christian
Sacraments at the first, and which consequently required, that they should be
delivered in proper, and literal Expressions, as without which otherwise there
could have been no certain knowledge of them. Where is shown, that the
Christian Sacraments were neither such new, and strange things at the first
Institution of them, as is pretended (There having been the like under the Old
Testament) nor under any necessity, if they had been such, of being delivered
in literal, and proper Expressions, because figurative Expressions, with a Key
to open them, might have sufficiently declared the nature of them. What is
urged in the second place from the nature of a Testament, under the form of
which this Sacrament is thought from Luke 22.20. to have been instituted, shown
to be of as little force; Partly, because it is justly questionable, whether
what we there render Testament, ought not rather to be rendered a Covenant; and
partly because even Civil Testaments are shown to admit of figurative
Expressions. A short Answer made to what is alleged in the third, and fourth
place from the Majesty of him, that instituted this Sacrament, and from the
supposed Conformity there is between the several Evangelists, and St. Paul in
their accounts of the words in question; And a more full one to what is offered
in the fifth place to show the absurdity of a figurative Sense from the no
place there is for it either in the Subject, Predicate, or Copula. The Copula,
or the word [Is] thereupon made choice of to place the Figure in, and answer
made to what is objected against it from the Rules of Logic, and from the
Scripture. That the literal Sense is not, as is pretended in the sixth
Argument, the only one that can quiet the Mind, or secure the Conscience,
briefly shown; And Enquiry next made, whether though the literal Sense of the
words should be allowed, consubstantiation could be inferred from them. Which
that it cannot, is made appear from there being nothing in the word (...), or
This, to denote that complexum quid, which Consubstantiation advances. p. 249.

The Contents of the Ninth Part.
Of the foundation of that relation, which is between the outward and inward
parts of the Lord's Supper.
THE foundation of that relation, which is between the outward, and inward
parts of this Sacrament, shown from some former Discourses, to be the
Institution of Christ, not so much as delivered by him, as applied to those
Elements, that are to put it on, by the Minister's executing the Commands of
it, and Christ's fulfilling the Promises thereof. What is the foundation of
this relation, on the part of the former, the subject of the present Enquiry,
and his pronouncing the words, Hoc est corpus meum, and, Hic est calix, etc.
shown not to be it, from the insufficiency of those grounds, on which it is
built. What is urged in the behalf of those words more particularly considered,
and evidence made, that as there wants not in the Prayers, and Praises of the
Communion-Office, that which may tend to the founding of this Relation, so that
the words, Hoc est corpus meum, etc. neither now have, nor, when Christ himself
used them, had in them the power of producing it. What the true foundation of
this relation is, or what that is, which consecrates those Elements, which are
to put it on, endeavored to be made out from some former Discourses; And those
Elements accordingly considered, either as being to become a Sign of Christ's
Body, and Blood, or as being to become also a Means of Communicating that Body,
and Blood to us, and a Pledge to assure us thereof. The former of these
relations brought about by a declaration of those Purposes, for which the
Elements are intended, whether in the words of the Institution, or any other;
The latter by Thanksgiving, and Prayer. The usefulness of this Resolution to
compromise the Quarrels, that have arisen in this Argument upon occasion of
what the Ancients have said on the one hand for attributing the Power of
Consecration to the Prayers, and Thanksgivings of the Priest, and, on the other
hand, to the words of the Institution; Those Quarrels being easily to be
accommodated by attributing that Power to the Institution rather as applied,
than as delivered, and as applied also by Prayer, and Thanksgiving, more than
by the rehearsal of it. page 261.

The Contents of the Tenth Part.
Of the right Administration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
ENtrance made with enquiring, How this Sacrament ought to be administered, and
therein again whether that Bread, wherewith it is celebrated, ought to be
broken, and whether he, who administers this Sacrament, is obliged by the words
of the Institution, or otherwise to make an offering unto God of Christ's Body,
and Blood, as well as make a tender of the Sacrament thereof to Men. That the
Bread of the Sacrament ought to be broken, as that too for the better
representation of the breaking of Christ's Body, asserted against the
Lutherans, and their Arguments against it produced, and answered. Whether he,
who administers this Sacrament, is obliged by the words of the Institution or
otherwise, to make an offering to God of Christ's Body, and Blood, in the next
place inquired into, and after a declaration of the Doctrine of the Council of
Trent in this Affair, consideration had of those grounds, upon which the
Fathers of that Council establish it. The words, Do this in remembrance of me,
more particularly animadverted upon, and shown not to denote such an Offering,
whether they be considered, as referring to the several things before spoken
of, and particularly to what Christ himself had done or enjoined the Apostles
to do, or as referring only to that Body, and Blood, which immediately precede
them. In which last Consideration of them is made appear, that the word (...),
may as well, and more naturally signify make; That there is nothing in the
present Argument to determine it to the notion of Sacrificing, or, if there
were, that it must import rather a Commemorative, than Expiatory one. What is
alleged by the same Council from Christ's Melchizedekian Priesthood, etc. more
briefly considered, and answered; And that Sacrifice, which the Council
advances, shown in the close, to be inconsistent with it self, contrary to the
present state of our Lord, and Savior, and more derogatory to that Sacrifice,
which Christ made of himself upon the Cross. The whole concluded with
enquiring, To whom this Sacrament ought to be administered, and particularly,
whether it either ought, or may lawfully be administered to Infants. Where the
Arguments of Bishop Tailor, for the lawfulness of Communicating Infants are
produced, and answered, and particularly what he alleges from Infants being
admitted to Baptism, though they are no more qualified for it, than they are
for the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. page 267

The Contents of the Eleventh Part.
How the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper ought to be received.
THE receipt of this Sacrament supposed by the present Question, and that
therefore first established against the Doctrine of those, who make the
supposed Sacrifice thereof to be of use to them, who partake not Sacramentally
of it. Enquiry next made, How we ought to prepare our selves for it, how to
demean our selves at the celebration of it, and in what Posture to receive it.
The preparation taken notice of by our Catechism the Examination of our selves,
whether we truly repent us of our sins, steadfastly purposing to lead a new
Life, etc. and the both necessity, and means of that Examination accordingly
declared. The examination of our Repentance more particularly insisted upon,
and that shown to be most advantageously made by enquiring how we have gained
upon those sins, which we profess to repent of, and particularly upon our most
prevailing ones, which how they are to be discovered, is therefore inquired
into, and the marks, whereby they are to be known, assigned, and explained. A
transition from thence to the examination of the stedfastness of our Purposes
to lead a new Life, of our Faith in God through Christ, our remembrance of his
Death, and Charity; Where the necessity of that Examination is evinced, and the
Means whereby we may come to know whether we have those Qualifications in us,
discovered, and declared. How we ought to demean our selves at the celebration
of this Sacrament in the next place inquired into, and that shown to be by
intending that Service, wherewith it is celebrated, and suiting our Affections
to the several parts of it. The whole concluded with enquiring, in what posture
of Body this Sacrament ought to be received; Where is shown, first, that the
Ancients, so far as we can judge by their Writings, received in a posture of
Adoration, and particularly, in the posture of standing; Secondly, that several
of the Reformed Churches receive in that, or the like posture, and that those,
that do not, do not condemn those that do; Thirdly, that there is nothing in
the Example of Christ, and his Disciples at the first Celebration of this
Supper, to oblige us to receive it sitting, nor yet in what is alleged from
the suitableness of that Posture to a Feast, and consequently to the present
one: This, as it is a Feast of a different nature from common ones, and
therefore not to receive Laws from them, so the receipt thereof intended to
express the grateful resentment we have of the great Blessing of our
Redemption, and stir up other Men to the like resentment of it; Neither of
which can so advantageously be done, as by receiving the Symbols of this
Sacrament in such a posture of Body, as shows the regard we have for him, who
is the Author of it. page 289.

ERRATA
In the Text. PAge 158. line 36. r. they had. p. 160. l. antep. from of old. p.
174. l. 26. a Transubstantiation. ib. l. 34. too. p. 190. l. 1. for hardly r.
barely. p. 202. l. 38. after Savior add in S Matthew, St. Mark, and St. Paul.
p. 231. l. 45. r. opinion. p. 234. l. 4. for Blood r. what. ib. l. 5. for what
r. Blood. p. 241. l. 12. r. corporally. p. 242. l. 46. for door r. doer. p.
247. l. 21, 22. for ^e receive him with Faith r. when we receive it by Faith.
p. 265. l. 29. r. interlaced. p. 272. l. 19. after manner add with Christ. ib.
l. 22. r. which follows. p. 287. l. 25. for their r. the. p. 296. l. 2. after
he add thereby. p. 301. l. 37. r. had had.

In the Margent. Page 195. lin. 4. Sacraments. p. 242. l. 1. for 17. r. 7.

OF THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORD'S SUPPER.
PART I. Of the general Grounds of our Savior's instituting another Sacrament
after Baptism, and of his choice of that of the Lord's Supper in particular.
The Contents.
Enquiry first made into the ground of our Savior's instituting another
Sacrament after Baptism; And that shown to be, the Sacrament of Baptism's
leaving place for the entering in of new, and gross Errors, and which being not
so consistent with the Vow thereof, made it so much the more difficult to
believe, that there was any remedy to be had from the Graces of that Sacrament,
because forfeited by the violation of its Vow. The want of an undoubted remedy
from thence the occasion of providing a new, and, because the former was
apparent to our Senses, of a like outward, and visible one. The ground of our
Savior's choice of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper in particular shown at
large to have been a like usance among the Jews in their more solemn Festivals.

BEING now to enter upon the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, the only Sacrament
beside Baptism, that our Church allows, or indeed that Christianity knows, I
think it but necessary to premise something concerning the general grounds of
our Savior's instituting another Sacrament after Baptism, and of his choice of
the Lord's Supper in particular; Concerning the names, that were anciently
given to that Sacrament; And concerning the Institution of it: Each of these
being of use toward the discovery of the nature of that, which I am now upon
the investigation of.

That which seems to me to have been the general ground of our Savior's
instituting another Sacrament after Baptism, is that first Sacrament's leaving
place for the entering in of new, and gross Errors, and consequently a kind of
necessity, on the part of Christ, of new sensible means, and assurances of that
Grace, which is to remove them, and a like necessity, on our part, of such new
declarations of our renouncing our former Errors, and giving up our selves to
his Service. For though Baptism (as was before Expl. of Bapt. Part 6.
observed) profess to mortify our Corruptions, and regenerate our Natures;
Though it do it in such a measure as to make us Conquerours over the former,
and change the latter for the main into pious, and holy: Yet as it leaves place
Expl. of the Lord's Prayer, in the words, Forgive us, etc.
in the best of Men for new Errors to enter in, and which accordingly they are
enjoined to ask daily the forgiveness of; so it is equally apparent from the
experience of the World, and from the care the Scripture 2 Cor. 2.6. Gal. 6.2.
takes for the restoring of lapsed men, that Baptism does not so reform men's
Natures, but that through the prevalency of temptations, or their own
carelessness they may fall into great and scandalous Errors, and such as cannot
therefore be supposed to be consistent with that Holiness, which in Baptism
they made profession of. Now as in such a case it is easy to see, that men
would have been apt to despond, if they had had nothing but their Baptism to
trust to, because having by the breach of their Baptismal Vow forfeited their
title to the Graces of it: So it seemed therefore little less than necessary to
have some new Remedy assigned them, and such as should be as apparent to their
sense, as their former was, as which otherwise could not have been so
satisfactory to them. For by the same reason that it came to be thought needful
to make use of sensible means to convey, or assure to mankind God's Pardon, and
Grace upon their first conversion to Christianity; By the same, or a greater
Reason it must be judged to be so to make use of the like sensible means to
convey, or assure the same Grace, and Pardon, after men have in any measure
forfeited the interest they have in the other. By the same reason again that it
came to be thought needful to exact of us sensible declarations of our
renouncing the Errors of our unconverted estate, and giving up our selves to
Christ's service; By the same, or a greater Reason must it be judged to be so
to exact of us the like sensible declarations, after we have by our
disobedience departed from, and prevaricated the former ones. It is true indeed
Christ might, if he had so pleased (For no man dreams of any absolute necessity
of either) have conveyed, and assured to us the divine Pardon, and Grace by the
sole Ministry of his Word; And he might too have received us to both upon the
like verbal declarations from our selves: But as he might as well have done
both upon our first conversion to Christianity, and yet chose rather to do it
by the mediation of Baptism; So if there were any reason for the former (as to
be sure Christ does not act without one) there is equal reason for the latter,
and an equal necessity consequently of his instituting another Sacrament after
Baptism to supply those defects, which Baptism could not so well provide for.
Sure I am, whilst the Precepts of Christianity were yet fresh in the minds of
men, and they therefore as sensible of the least violations of them; such was
their opinion of the necessity of another Sacrament after Baptism, that they
passed immediately from that Justin Martyr, Apol. 2.
to the celebration of the Lord's Supper, and (which is more) were so intent
upon it, that no day passed them without the receipt of it, but however no day,
wherein there was an opportunity of assembling themselves for the public
Worship of God, and celebrating the other parts of it.

But because the former defects might have been provided for by other
Sacraments, and those defects therefore no proper ground of Christ's choice of
this particular one; Therefore it will be requisite for us to find out some
other ground of it, and which, all things considered, cannot better be fixed,
than in an usage of the Jews, and which being so, might with their better
liking be converted by him into a Sacrament, and more readily received and
embraced.

From Paulus Fagius we have it, as I find it both in himself Annot. in Deuteronomy.
8.10.
, and in Cassander Liturgic. in initio.
, that in the more solemn Feasts of the Jews the Father of the Family presently
after his sitting down with his Guests took a Cup full of Wine in his right
hand, praying over it in these words, Blessed be thou, O Lord our God, King of
the World, who createst the Fruit of the Vine. Which said, he first of all
tasted of it himself, and then reached it out to all, that sat with him.
Presently after he took a Loaf of Bread, and holding it with both his hands
consecrated it in these words, Blessed be thou O Lord our God, who bring
Food out of the Earth. Which said, he brake it, and after he had eaten a piece
of it himself, gave the like to each that sat with him. Thus that Learned Man
informs us, that the Father of the Family did at their sitting down at their
more solemn Feasts; As after the Feast was over, that he, or some other person,
to whom he committed it, taking a second time a Cup full of Wine into both his
hands, prayed, Let us bless him, who has fed us of his own, and by whose
goodness we live: Passing on from thence to other Blessings, and Prayers, and
particularly to bless God for the Food, which he had afforded to them all, and
for all the Benefits bestowed either on their Fathers, or themselves, and to
pray unto him in like manner for the state of their Nation, for the restoring
of Jerusalem, for the coming of Elias, and the Messiah, and particularly for
their Domestics, and Kindred. After which the same person began as before,
Blessed be thou, O Lord our God, King of the World, who createst the Fruit of
the Vine, and thereupon again drank a little of the Wine himself, and then gave
it in order to his Guests.

Now as it is easy to guess by the likeness there is between our Sacrament,
and this Usance, that our Sacrament, or rather the Author thereof took his
Pattern from thence, if that Usance be ancienter than the Sacrament it self; So
there is just ground to believe it was, both from what we find in St. Luke's
account of Christ's celebration of the Passover, and this Sacrament, and from
the manner wherewith this Sacrament was celebrated in the first Ages of
Christianity. For St. Luke in his account of the former Solemnities takes
notice of our Savior's taking a Cup, giving thanks over it, and distributing
it among his Disciples Luke 22.17, 18.
with this farther Remark, that he said he would not drink any more of the
fruit of the vine (the particular title here used) until the kingdom of God
should come. And the Ancients in their mention of the celebration of the Lord's
Supper, speak of the Symbols thereof as alike intended for memorials of their
thankfulness to God for the Blessings of this World, as well as for the
Blessing of their Redemption. For thus Justin Martyr first affirms the Bread of
the Eucharist to have been given by our Savior to us Dial. cum. Tryph. page
260. -- (...).
, that we might at the same time give thanks to God for having made the World
with all things in it, for the sake of Man, and for delivering us from the
evil, in which we sometime were, by him, whom he made passible for us. As
Irenaeus Adv. haeres. lib. 4. c. 32. Sed and suis discipulis dans consilium
primitias deo offerre ex suis creaturis non quasi indigenti, sed ut ipsi nec
infructuosi, nec ingrati sint, eum, qui ex creatura panis est, accepit, and
gratias egit, dicens, Hoc est corpus meum. Et calicem similiter, qui est ex ea
creatura, quae est secundum nos, suum sanguinem confessus est, and novi
Testamenti novam docuit oblationem, quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens in
universo mundo offert deo, ei qui alimenta nobis praestat, primitias suorum
munerum in novo Testamento.
in like manner, that Christ giving his Disciples counsel to offer to God the
First Fruits of his Creatures, not as to one, that wanted them, but that they
themselves might not be ungrateful, or unfruitful, he took Bread, and gave
thanks, saying, This is my Body. And the Cup in like manner, which is of that
Creature, which is according to us, he confessed to be his Blood, and taught a
new oblation of the New Testament. Which Oblation the Church receiving from the
Apostles, offers in all the World to God, even to him who gives us Food, the
First Fruits of his Gifts in the New Testament. Agreeable hereto is that of
Origin, though not so clearly expressed as the former passages were. For these
Reasons, says he Contr. Cells. lib. 8. p. 399. (...).
, Let Celsus, who knows not God, pay the testimonies of his thanks to Devils,
even for the Benefits of this World. But we being desirous to please the maker
of the Universe, eat even those Loaves, which are offered with Thanksgiving,
and Prayer over the things bestowed upon us, being now made by Prayer a certain
Holy Body, and one which sanctifies those, who use it with a good intention:
Plainly intimating by the opposition he there makes between Celsus's paying the
testimonies of his thanks to Devils for the Benefits of this World, and our
eating of the Eucharistical Bread with respect to the maker of the Universe,
that the Christians of old ate of it with regard to the Creation of the World,
and the Benefits thereof, as well as with respect to the redemption of it by
the Body of his Son. Now from whence, I pray, considering the no intimation
there is of any such thing in the Institution of Christ, or Saint Paul's
rehearsal of it; from whence, I say, that regard to the Creation of the World,
and the Benefits thereof, but from those Thanksgivings, which from old
descended to them from the Jews, together with the Institution of Christ? And
which being so will prove the Usance before remembered not to have been the
Usance of the latter Jews only, but of those, who were as old as our Savior's
time, and that Passover, which he celebrated among them. Add hereunto, what is
apparent from the Ancient Liturgies of the Church, the Prayers of the Eucharist
descending to such Intercessions for all sorts of men, as the Prayers of the
Jews over their Eucharist appear to have done. For these are a yet farther
proof of the Antiquity of that Jewish Service, and that our Savior copied his
own Institution by it.

What use these Observations may be of, will be more fit to declare elsewhere,
neither shall I therefore at this time set my self to the investigation of it.
At present I desire only it may be remembered, that in this Exemplar of the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper both the one, and the other Element thereof were
consecrated with Thanksgivings, and the Bread of it, though consecrated in the
mass or lump, was yet carefully broken off from it in order to a distribution
of it; That as the Cup, as well as the Bread had a place in that Eucharist, so
it was alike distributed among the Communicants, yea distributed at the end, as
well as at the beginning of that Solemnity; In fine, that the Ancient Fathers
looked upon our Eucharist as in part of the same nature with it, and
accordingly both represented it as an Eucharist for the Fruits of the Earth,
and professed to eat of the Bread of it, after it was become the Body of
Christ, as a testimony of their thankfulness to God for the other.

PART II. Of the Names anciently given to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper,
with the Reasons of the Imposition of them.
The Contents.
The Lord's Supper anciently one of the Names of this Sacrament, and Evidence
made from 1 Cor. 11.20. that S. Paul gave that Name to it, and not to those
Agapae, or Love Feasts, that accompanied it. The reason of that Name it is being
a Feast, though a spiritual one, instituted at Supper-time, and instituted by
our Lord. The Eucharist another Name of it, and of like Antiquity with the
former, which it received from those Thanksgivings, which were anciently made
over it, whether for the Fruits of the Earth, or the Blessing of our
Redemption. Breaking of Bread a third Name of the same Sacrament; One Species
thereof, and one noted Circumstance about it being by an usual Hebraism set to
denote the whole. Enquiry next made into such Names, or Titles of it, as are
most insisted on by the Romanists; such as that of The Body of Christ, an
Oblation, or Sacrifice, and the Mass. The first whereof this Sacrament is shown
to have had from the intimate relation there is between it and the Body of
Christ, which it conveys; The second from it is containing in it a Thanksgiving
for, or Commemoration of Christ's Sacrifice of himself upon the Cross; The third
from that solemn dismission, which was given to those that attended at it,
after that Service was finished.

THAT, which comes next in order to be considered, is the Names anciently given
to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, with the Reasons of the Imposition of
them. Both which I will the more accurately consider, because Names being
intended for the declaration of those things, which they are set to denote,
some light may accrue from thence toward the discovery of the nature of that,
which we are upon the investigation of.

Now the first Name I shall take notice of is that of the Lord's Supper,
because a name given to it by our selves, and by the rest of the Reformed also.
But with what regret of the Romanists, Baronius's Annal. Eccl. Ad. Ann. Christ.
34. Number. 45.
charging the Reformed with the abuse of it, and Maldonate's Not. in Mat. 26.26.
affirming it to be done without any Authority from Scripture, or Ancient
Authors, does sufficiently declare. How much Maldonate was out in what he said
as to Ancient Authors, I refer my self to Isaac Casaubon Exercit. 16. s. 32.
, who has said enough to wipe off that calumny. It shall suffice me to
establish that title of the Lord's Supper from the Authority of St. Paul, where
he tells his Corinthians 1 Cor. 11.20.
that what they did, when they came together, was not to eat the Lord's Supper.
For though that, which he reproves in them, even 1 Cor. 11.21.
every one's taking before other his own Supper, pertained not to the nature,
or substance of the Sacrament, and so may seem to refer the title of the Lord's
Supper, rather to those Agapae, or Love Feasts, that then accompanied it, than
to the Sacrament it self; Yet will it not from thence follow, but that we may,
and ought to understand St. Paul there of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper,
and the Corinthians violating it by that means.

That we may understand St. Paul there of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper,
and the Corinthians violating it by taking before other their own Supper, is
probable first from what St. Paul affirms, both here 1 Cor. 11.10.
and elsewhere 1 Cor. 3.4.
concerning their divisions, and from the proof they gave of it in their taking
before other their own Supper. For being divided into several factions, and
such as were each of them under their peculiar head, it is not unlikely but
they, who took before other their own Supper, took before other in their
respective parties the sacred Mysteries also, and so did yet more nearly offend
against the sanctity of that Sacrament, and gave occasion to St. Paul to tell
them, that that was not to eat of it. But let us suppose that that was not the
fault of the Corinthians, but only their taking before other their own supper
only; Yet will not that hinder but St. Paul might tell them, that that was not
to eat the Lord's Supper, yea though he understood only the Sacrament thereof.
Because, secondly, those Agapae, or Love Feasts (if it be lawful so to call the
Feasts of these Corinthians) being joined with the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, did by that very conjunction of theirs cast a blemish upon that
Sacrament, wherewith they were so conjoined. And what then should hinder St.
Paul from telling them, that that was not to eat the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, but rather contrary to it, because by that near conjunction of their's
offering a particular affront to it? Which reason will be yet more valuable, if
we consider, Thirdly, That the principal end of these Men's coming together in
the Church, yea to those very Agapae in it, was to celebrate the Sacrament, and
other such exercises of piety, and devotion. For being so, what was found to be
contrary to that end was so much the more necessary to be taken notice of, and
they, who were guilty of it (as they ought to be) reproached with it.

But why stand I so long to prove that we may understand St. Paul in that place
of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, yea though what is said concerning it
relate more immediately to the abuse of their Agapae? For there wants not
reason enough to believe, that we ought to understand St. Paul of it, as well
as have liberty to do so. Partly, because that title belongs not at all to
those Love Feasts, as being not instituted by Christ, but taken up, as is
probable, in imitation of the Jews, who celebrated their Eucharist at Feasts,
or in imitation of our Savior's celebrating his at the Feast of the Passover;
But more especially because St. Paul presses the Corinthians there with the
first institution of the Eucharist 1 Cor. 11.23.
, and calls upon them to reflect upon, and consider it. For to what purpose all
that, unless that were the Lord's Supper he spoke of before, and which he
affirmed their practice to be contrary to the due eating of? And I shall only
add, that as that notion of the Lord's Supper is the more reasonable to be
embraced here, because St. Paul but just before 1 Cor. 10.21.
represented this Sacrament as the Table of the Lord; So there was reason
enough for the imposition of that name upon it, whether we do consider it as a
Feast, a Supper-feast, or a Supper-feast of the Lord: Because intended as a
Communion of that Body, and Blood, by which we are to be nourished to eternal
life, instituted at first at Supper time, and both instituted by, and intended
for a Commemoration of our Lord.

Next to the name of the Lord's Supper, reckon we that of the Eucharist, or
Thanksgiving, for so the word Eucharist imports. A name thought to have been
given to it in the time of the Writel of the New Testament, but however
following close after it. For thus they are wont to interpret what we find in
St. Paul 1 Cor. 14.16, 17.
, where he disputes against praying in an unknown tongue. Else when thou shall
bless with the Spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned
say Amen at thy Eucharist, or giving of thanks, seeing he understands not
what thou say? For thou verily give thanks, or celebratest the Eucharist
well, but the other is not edified. Where we have not only the words (...), and
(...), which are made use of to denote what our Savior did to the Elements of
this Sacrament, but an intimation of that Amen, which we shall understand
afterward from Justin Martyr to be returned to the office of it. However that
be, most certain it is that this name of Eucharist followed presently upon
those times, as appears by the familiar use of it in Ignatius's Epistles. For
thus he tells us in one place Ep. ad Smyrn. page 5. ed Voss.
, That certain heretics abstained from the Eucharist, and prayer, because they
confessed not the Eucharist to be the flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ. And
presently after ib. page 6.
, Let that Eucharist be accounted firm, which is under the Bishop, or to whom
he shall commit it. As without whom (as it follows) it is not lawful to
Baptize, or celebrate a Love-feast, but only what he shall approve. In fine
(says the same Ignatius elsewhere Ep. ad Phil. page 40.
) endeavor therefore to use one Eucharist. For there is one flesh of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and one Cup for the union of his Blood. Agreeable hereto, that I
may not now descend any lower, was the language of Justin Martyr's time, as may
appear from these following testimonies; Where he does not only show this to
have been the name of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, but acquaints us with
the reasons of their so denominating it. After prayers (says he) Apol. 2. page
97.
are done, we salute one another. Then is offered to him, who presides over the
Brethren, Bread, and a cup of Water and Wine. Which he taking, sends forth
praise, and glory to the Father of the Universe, through the name of the Son,
and Holy Ghost, and makes a large Thanksgiving unto God, for that we have been
made worthy of these things by him. Having thus completed the prayers, and
Thanksgiving, all the people present signify their Assent to it by an Amen,
which in the Hebrew Tongue is as much as, So be it. After that the President
has thus given thanks, and the people answered Amen, they, who among us are
called Deacons, give to every one, that is present, of that Bread, and Wine,
and Water, over which thanks has been given, and carry it to those that are
absent. And this Food (says he) is among us called the Eucharist, to wit
because of the Thanksgivings before remembered. To the like purpose does the
same Father discourse elsewhere Dial. cum Tryph. Jud. page 259, etc.
, speaking still of the same Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. And that offering
of fine flower, which was delivered to be offered for those, that were cleansed
from the Leprosy, was a type of the Bread of the Eucharist, which Jesus Christ
our Lord commanded us to celebrate in remembrance of that passion, which he
suffered for those, that are cleansed in their Souls from all the wickedness of
Men; That we might at the same time give thanks, or keep an Eucharist to God
both for his having made the World, and all things in it for the sake of man,
and for his having delivered us from that wickedness, in which we sometime
were, and having perfectly dissolved Principalities and Powers, by him, who was
made passible according to his will. From which places it is evident, that as
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper had at that time the title of the Eucharist,
or Thanksgiving, so it received its name from those Thanksgivings, which were
used over the Elements thereof, and which what they were I shall in another
place have a more fit occasion to enquire. All I desire to observe at present
is, that the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper receiving one of its most noted
names from those Thanksgivings, that were used over the Elements thereof, we
are in reason to think that those Thanksgivings contribute in a great measure
to that saving nature, and efficacy they put on.

I may not forget to add, because that seems as ancient as any, that the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was also known by the name of breaking of Bread;
Not only the Syriack version, but reason also obliging us so to understand St.
Luke, where he tells us that the first Converts of the Apostles Acts 2.42.
continued steadfast in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking
of Bread, and in prayer; As again of the Disciples of Ephesus Acts 20.7.
, that they came together on the first day of the week to break Bread. For what
other breaking of Bread can we understand there, where it is joined with the
Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship, and prayers, and moreover made the special
business of the Assemblies of that day, which was from the beginning set apart
for the honor, and service of Almighty God? Agreeable hereto was the language
of Ignatius's time, as appears by this following testimony: He describing those
ep. ad Ephesians. page 29.
, who communicate with the Bishop, and his Presbytery in the exercises of
Religion, as breaking that one Bread, which is the medicine of immortality, an
antidote against death, and a means of living in Jesus Christ for ever. And it
had no doubt its original from the Hebrews manner of speaking, who (as I have
elsewhere Expl. of the Lord's Prayer, in the words, Give us this day out daily
Bread.
shown) under the title of Bread comprehended the whole of their
entertainments, and from the breaking of the Bread of the Eucharist's being one
special ceremony about it, and intended (as St. Paul remarks) 1 Cor. 11.24.
to signify the Breaking of Christ's body. After which, if any Man can think
fit to make use of such like passages to justify a Communion in one kind, he
may as well hope to show, that even the Feasts of the Hebrews (for of such I
have shown Expl. of the Lord's Prayer ubi supra.
the word Bread to be used) were dry entertainments, or that the (...) of the
Greeks were only drinking ones.

But because it cannot be denied that the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper had
other kind of names of old, and such as may seem to be of a higher strain, than
any I have as yet assigned; And because Cardinal Baronius Annal. Eccl. ad Ann.
34. n. 48. etc.
has insisted much on them to justify from thence the Doctrine of his Church
concerning it; Therefore I will instance in three, on which he seems to lay the
greatest stress, I mean those of the Body of Christ, an Oblation, or Sacrifice,
and the Mass.

That the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper had anciently the name of the Body of
Christ, several places are alleged out of Tertullian, and two in particular
out of his book de Oratione, cap. ult. Similiter and stationum di^bus non
putant plerique sacrificiorum orationibus interveniendum, quod statio solvenda
sit accepto corpore Domini. Ergo devotum deo, obsequium Eucharistia resolvit,
an magis deo obligat? Nonne solennior erit statio tua, si ad aram dei steteris?
Accepto corpore Domini, and reservato, utrumque salunm est, and participatio
sacrificii and executio officii.
which cannot be otherwise understood. And God forbid, that any should deny
that name to the element, which Christ himself has declared to be his Body.
But as the question is not, Whether the outward element either is, or has been
called by the name of Christ's Body, but in what sense we are to understand it
either to be, or to be so called: so what Tertullian meant, is evident from
what he says upon that argument against Marcion, who made our Savior's
natural body to have been a fantastical one Therefore (says he Adv. Marc.
lib. 4. c. 40. Professus itaque se concupiscentiu concupisse edere Pascha ut
suum (indignum enim ut quid alienum concupisceret Deus) acceptum panem, and
distributum discipulis corpus illum suum fecit, hoc est corpus meum dicendo, id
est figura corporis mei. Figura autem non suisset, nisi veritatis esset corpus.
Caeterum vacua res, quod est phantasma, figuram capere non posset.
) professing himself with desire to have desired to eat that Passover as his
own (for it were unworthy that God should desire that, which is another's) he
made that Bread, which he took, and distributed to his disciples, to be his own
Body, saying, This is my Body, that is, the Figure of my Body. Now it could not
have been a figure, unless the body were of truth. But an empty thing, such as
a phantasm is, could not be capable of any figure. Now can any Man think after
this, that Tertullian, when he called the Eucharist the Body of Christ,
understood it to be such in propriety of speech? Or that they do other than
transubstantiate his, and the Church's meaning, who make such an inference from
his words? His, I say, who made the words, This is my Body, to signify, This
is the figure of my Body, and argued against Marcion from that very figure, the
reality of that Body, of which it was one. How much more proper had it been for
Tertullian, if he had so understood this title of the Eucharist, or our
Savior's words, to have pressed him with the Eucharist's being in truth, and in
the sense of the Church his true and substantial body, and therefore also,
because the same with that, which was given for us, that that was a true, and
substantial one? or rather, how much more proper had it been for that Father
not at all to have argued from Christ's body there? Lest Marcion seeing no
true, and substantial body of a Man in it, he should have been more confirmed
in his opinion of Christ's having had only an imaginary one? But as it appears
from hence, that Tertullian had not so gross a conceit of that August Title,
which was given to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; So that Title had, no
doubt, its original from the intimate relation there is between the sign, and
the thing signified by it: It being not unusual, or improper to give unto the
sign the name of the thing signified, but especially to such a sign as is also
a conveyer of those Blessings it declares. For thus Baronius himself observes
out of St. Augustine De peccat. merit. lib. 1. c. 24. Optime Punici Christiani
Baptismum ipsum nihil aliud quam salutem, and Sacramentum corporis Christi
nihil aliud quam vitam vocant.
, That the Carthaginian Christians called Baptism it self health, or salvation,
and the Sacrament of the body of Christ, life. Which they could not be in any
other sense, than as the means of the conveyance of them, or (as St. Paul
expresses it concerning the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper) the Communion, or
Communication of them. For from whence (as the same St. Augustine Vnde nisi ex
antiqua, ut existimo, and Apostolica traditione, qua Ecclesiae Christi insitum
tenent praeter Baptismum, and participationem dominicae mensae non solum non ad
regnum Dei, sed nee ad salutem, and vitam aeternam posse quenquaem hominum
pervenire.
goes on) those titles of Salvation, and Life, but from an ancient and
Apostolical Tradition in the Church, That no Man can come to salvation, and
eternal life without the participation of those Sacraments; any more than he
can do to the kingdom of God?

But because the forementioned Baronius tells us that the Sacrament, whereof we
speak, had also the name of an Oblation, or Sacrifice, as that too because of
the offering there made for sin, or an expiatory one; Therefore it will be
necessary for us to go on to enquire into that name, and so much the rather,
because the same Author is so copious in his Quotations concerning it. And I
readily grant that this Sacrament is frequently so called by the Ancients, but
that it was called so for the reason alleged, is utterly denied, neither can
there be produced any convincing proof of it. The utmost, that is said by
those, who are the most ancient, is, that it is an Eucharistical oblation, as
that too for the blessings of this World, and particularly for the fruits of
the earth, as well as for the blessing of our Redemption. And to that purpose,
and no other are the sayings before quoted out of Justin Martyr, and Irenaeus,
and Origin. Which how they agree with their designs, who represent this
Sacrament as an expiatory Oblation, or Sacrifice, I shall leave to all
indifferent Men to judge. And though it be true, that some of those, who
followed, spoke in another strain, and represented it also as an oblation for
the benefit of the Offerers, and others, as well as an Eucharistical oblation
for benefits received; yet it is evident from Mr. Mede, Disc. on Mal. 1.11.
cap. 9.
that the Ancients meant no more by that Oblation, or Sacrifice, than a
Commemorative one, by that sacred rite of Bread and Wine representing to God,
and the Father, the expiatory Sacrifice of his Son upon the Cross, and as it
were putting him in mind of it, that so he would for the sake of that Son, and
the valuableness of his sacrifice be propitious to them, and to all those, whom
they recommended to his grace, and favor. And indeed as it is not difficult to
conceive, that they, who meant no more, when they called the Eucharist the body
of Christ, than its being a figure, and a memorial, and a means of its
conveyance, meant no more, when they entitled it a sacrifice, than a
Commemoration of that great one, which Christ made of himself upon the Cross;
So it is evident that St. Cyprian, (with whose authority Baronius begins his
proofs) meant no more, than such a Commemorative Sacrifice. For in that very
Epistle Ad Caecil. de sacr. Dom. Call. Vt calix, qui in commemoratione ejus
offertur, mixtus vino offeratur. -- Et quia passionis ejus mentionem facimus in
sacrificiis omnibus (passio est enim Domini sacrificium, quod offerimus) nihil
aliud, quam quod ille fecit, facere debemus: -- Quotlescunque ergo calicem in
commemorationem Domini, and passionis ejus offerimus, id quod constat Dominum
fecisse, saciamus. Epist. 63.
which he seems so much to stand upon, St. Cyprian affirms, That the cup of
that Sacrament is offered in commemoration of our Lord, and that, because we
make mention of his passion in all sacrifices (For the passion of the Lord is
the sacrifice, that we offer) we ought to do no other thing, than what he
himself did; And again, Therefore as often as we offer the cup for a
commemoration of the Lord, and his passion, let us do that, which it is
manifest that the Lord did. I will conclude this affair with the words of Peter
Lombard Lib. 4. Did. 12. G.
, because they not only show the former notion to have been the sense of the
Ancients in this particular, but make it evident also that that of an expiatory
Sacrifice is but a novelty in the Church of Rome it self. After these things,
says he, it is inquired, whether what the Priest does be properly called a
Sacrifice, or Offering, and whether Christ be every day offered, or only once.
To this it may be said in short, that that, which is offered, and consecrated
by the Priest, is called a Sacrifice, and Oblation; Because it is the Memorial,
and Representation of the true Sacrifice, and the Holy Offering that was made
upon the Cross. And Christ died once upon the Cross, and was there offered in
himself. But he is every day offered in the Sacrament, because in the Sacrament
a remembrance is made of that, which was once done. Whereupon St. Augustine: We
are assured that Christ rising from the dead does not now die any more, etc.
Yet lest we should forget what was once done, it is every year done in our
memory, to wit, as often as the Paschal Feast is celebrated. Is Christ then so
often killed? But only an anniversary Remembrance represents what was
heretofore done, and so causes us to be moved, as if we saw the Lord upon the
Cross. This, and more does that Author allege out of St. Augustine and
Ambrose, which shows what notion they, as well as he, had of this Sacrament's
being also a Sacrifice. And if they, who insist so much upon its having been
entitled a Sacrifice, will content themselves with this, and the former sense,
we will allow that they have the Fathers on their side, but otherwise to have
no title to them in this affair.

I shall not need to say much concerning the name Missa, or Mass, though that
has for a long time been appropriated to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper:
Partly, because anciently it was common to other services with it, and nothing
therefore, that is singular, to be inferred therefrom toward the clearing of
the nature of this; And partly, because it had its Original, not (as Baronius
would have it) from the Hebrew, or Chaldee word Missah, which he says is used
Deuteronomy. 16.10.
for that Free Will Offering, which the Israelites offered to God in gratitude
for the Fruits of the earth, but from the dismission of those, who pertain'd to
the same service, after that service was finished. For thus we read in Ancient
Authors Vid. Justel. in notis ad Cod. Eccl. univ. can. 123.
of the Missa Catechumenorum, as well as of the Missa Fidelium, of the Mass of
those, who were not suffered to be present at the Lord's Supper, as well as of
those, who were invited, and admitted to it. If in tract of time the word
Missa, or Mass came to be restrained to the service of the Lord's Supper, it
was in all probability because as the discipline of the Catechumens wore out
Cave's Primit. Christ. Part 1. cap. 9.
, so their Mass, or Service wore out also, and thereby nothing left to give
that title to, but that, which was of old entitled the Mass of the Faithful; Or
because the Mass of the faithful was the more eminent part of the Christian
service, and so in time came to appropriate to it self that name. And though
Baronius out of Reuchlin (for I find by Polydore Virgil De invent. rerum lib.
3. c. 11.
, that he was the first Author of that fancy) derive the word Missa, or Mass
from the Hebrew, or Chaldee word Missah, which, as they say, signifies a
free will Offering in the place but now quoted; yet is there in truth no ground
for such a conceit, if either the due signification of that word, or the text
it self be more nearly considered. Because the word Missah neither in that
place, nor in any other signifies a free will Offering, but only sufficientia
vid. Grot. in Deuteronomy. 16.10. and Lexicogr.
or quantum sufficit, and is in that particular place set only to denote that,
which might suffice, according to their respective abilities, for such a
Nibdath Jadeka, or free will Offering of their hand, as the Israelites were
then obliged to celebrate the Feast of weeks with. Whence it is, that the same
word is in the Chaldee Paraphrase frequently made use of to render the Hebrew
Dai, or sufficient, and the Septuagint express it here by (...), according as
thy hand shall be able. But therefore as that account of the word Missa, or
Mass must be looked upon as a very idle one, and only agreeable to those
dawning times, wherein it first appeared; So there is still the more reason to
believe what Polydore Virgil ubi supra.
, and after him many others have suggested, that it had its original from the
dismission, that was given to those, who pertained to any service, after that
service was finished. Which may the more reasonably be believed, because Ite,
Missa est, is the conclusion of the Mass even now, and which, considering the
place it has in this service, as well as the word Ite, to which it is joined,
cannot be thought to denote any other thing, than that the Deacon does by those
words of his, Missam, or Missionem facere, give leave to the people to depart,
and so justify yet more the account we have before given of the title of that
service. For when it is evident from the story of the Church, and particularly
from Dionysius the Areopagite Eccl. Hierarch. c. 3. (...).
, that the Catechumens, and others were formally dismissed the congregation upon
the finishing their respective service; When it is farther evident from the
present Canon of the Mass, that the faithful were alike dismissed after that
their service was over, and not only so, but by these very words, Ite, Missa
est, Depart you, for you have now a dismission, or free leave to do so: What
can be more clear, than that the word Missa, or Mass, had its original from
that dismission, and that the several services of the Church, and this of the
faithful in particular had that name, because they, who pertained to it, and
attended on it, were at the end thereof solemnly dismissed, and sent away to
their own home? Only if any be fond of that Rabbinical notion, which makes it
to import a voluntary oblation, because of the near cognation it may seem to
have to that sacrifice, which they are willing to advance; Let them in God's
name enjoy it, provided they look upon it as only an Eucharistical one (of
which nature the Missah in Deuteronomy was) or a commemoration of that
voluntary oblation, which Christ made of himself upon the Cross. For whatever
may be said against that Etymology of the word, nothing can be said from
Antiquity against the supposed sense of it; Because all Antiquity acknowledged
that, which has the title of the Mass, to be either an Eucharistical, or
commemorative Oblation.

PART III. Of the Institution of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
The Contents.
The Story of the Institution first set down out of the Evangelists, and St.
Paul, and animadverted upon in the several parts of it. Where, after an account
of the time of it, the consequents whereof are also declared, entrance is made
with the consideration of the Bread, and both the quality of that Bread, and
Christ's taking it, explained. This followed by a more ample declaration of
Christ's blessing it, and that Blessing both shown to have the Bread for its
object, and to consist in making it useful for the purposes of a Sacrament, or
rather in Christ's addressing himself to his Father to make it such. That
address of his thereupon carefully inquired into, and (because it appears from
St. Luke, and St. Paul to have been by Thanksgiving) enquiry also made what
benefits he so gave thanks for, what use that Thanksgiving was of toward the
procuring of the blessing desired, and whether it did not also contain some
express request to God for the granting of it. Of Christ's breaking the Bread,
its signification, and momentousness, as also of his giving it to his
Disciples, and requiring them to take, and eat of it. The words, This is my
body, next taken into consideration, and more particularly, and minutely
explained. Where is shown at large that by the word This must be meant This
Bread, and that there is nothing in the gender of the word (...) to hinder it;
That by body must be meant that body, which Christ now carried about him, and
was shortly after to suffer in, and that the figurativeness of the proposition
lies in the word is. Upon occasion whereof is also shown, that that word is
oftentime figuratively taken; that it ought to be so taken here, and that
accordingly it imports the Bread to be a sign, and a memorial, and a means of
partaking of Christ's body. This part of the Institution concluded with an
explication of the words, which is given, or broken for you, and a more ample
one of Christ's commanding his Disciples to do this in remembrance of him.
Where the precept, Do this, is shown to refer to what Christ had before done,
or enjoined them to do; And they enjoined so to do, to renew in themselves a
grateful remembrance of Christ's death, or prompt other Men to the like
remembrance of it. That part of the Institution, which respects the Cup, more
succinctly handled, and enquiry made, among other things, into the declaration,
which our Savior makes concerning its being his Blood of the New Testament, or
the New Testament in it. Where is shown, What that is, which our Savior
affirms to be so, what is meant by his Blood of the New Testament, or The New
Testament in it, and how the Cup, or rather the Wine of it was that Blood of
his, or the New Testament in it.

IT is very observable, Question. Why was the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper
ordained?

Answer. For the continual remembrance of the sacrifice of the death of Christ,
and of the benefits we receive thereby.


and was accordingly long since taken notice of by Isaac Casaubon Exercit. 16.
s. 28.
, That when Baronius was to give an account of the Institution of this
Sacrament, which three Evangelists, and St. Paul had carefully described,
instead of producing the words of those Scriptures, as he often does upon less
occasions, and bestowing (as was but reasonable) a just Commentary upon them,
he slubbers it over with this imperfect story Baron. Annal. Eccl. ad Ann.
Christi 34. number. 45.
shall I say, or rather with this perverse interpretation of it. In which
Supper (speaking of that of the Paschal Lamb) that ineffable Sacrament was
instituted, whereby Transubstantiation was made of Bread, and Wine into the
Flesh, and Blood of Christ, into the very body of Christ entire under both
species. Then also the Apostles, when the Lord commanded them to do the very
same thing in remembrance of him, were made Priests, and that very sacrifice,
which they should offer, was ordained. A Man would have thought that, whatever
interpretation he had afterward made of it, one, who pretended to be an
Historian, should at least have given a more particular, and perfect account of
that whole action, and, as near to as might be in the words of some of those
Holy Men, that had transmitted it to posterity. And so no doubt this Historian
would have done, if there had not been somewhat in the words of the
Institution, to which the practice of his Church had made a non obstante to be
necessary. But as he saw but too well how ill the practice of his Church
answered what was then done, and enjoined by our Savior; so he therefore chose
rather to give that imperfect, as well as insincere account of it, and
endeavor to supply what was wanting by an account of those names, which were
anciently given to this Sacrament, with the declarations of the Ancient Fathers
concerning them. God be thanked we of the Church of England are under no such
necessity of either slightly passing over, or any way perverting the Story of
this Holy Sacrament. And therefore being now by the order of my discourse to
entreat of the Institution of it, I will set down the Story thereof in the
words of those, that first delivered it, and bound my Observations by them.

Mat. 26. Mark 14. Luke 22. 1 Cor. 11. 26. And as they were eating, Jesus took
Bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said,
Take, Eat, This is my body. 22. And as they did eat, Jesus took Bread, and
blessed, and brake it, and gave to them, and said, Take, Eat, This is my body.
19. And he took Bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them,
saying, This is my body, which is given for you, This do in remembrance of me.
23. For I have received of the Lord that, which also I delivered unto you, that
the Lord Jesus the same night, in which he was betrayed, took Bread: 24. And
when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take; Eat, This is my body,
which is broken for you; This do in remembrance of me. 27. And he took the cup,
and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it. 23. And he
took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them, and they all
drank of it. 20. Likewise also the cup after Supper, saying, 25. After the same
manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, 28. For this is my
blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins.
24. And he said unto them, This is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed
for many. This cup is the New Testament in my blood, which is shed for you.
This cup is the New Testament in my blood. This do ye, as often as ye drink it,
in remembrance of me 29. But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of
this fruit of the vine, until that day, when I drink it new with you in my
Father's kingdom. 25. Verily I say unto you, I will drink no more of the fruit
of the vine, until that day I drink it new in the kingdom of God.

Now the first thing I shall take notice of in the History of this Sacrament is
the Time of the Institution of it. Which we learn from St. Paul to have been
the same night, in which he was betrayed, from the context of the several
Evangelists, at the Celebration of the Feast of the Passover, or rather toward
the close of it; It being whilst they were yet eating, that two of them affirm,
that he took the Bread of it, and blessed, and brake, and gave it, but so near
the conclusion of that Feast, that St. Luke, and St. Paul tell us, that it was
after Supper before he took the Cup, and gave thanks over it, and gave it to
his Disciples. And though I do not pretend to affirm, neither do I know any
sober Man that does, that there is any obligation upon us for celebrating it
after Supper, or any other Meal: Our Savior's celebrating it then being in
compliance with those Jews, whose Institution he now transcribed, and reformed,
and probably also to intimate its succeeding to that solemnity: Tho I
acknowledge it to have been an ancient usage Tert. de Cor. cap.3.
in the Church to celebrate it at their Meetings before day, and, where it was
not so soon, yet before Aug. Epist. 119. ad Janu.
their eating of any thing else, as that too out of respect to that Sacrament;
Yet I see as little reason to grant, that there is any more of religion in
receiving it fasting, than what the custom of the Church, or the Laws of
decency give it: It being not otherwise to be thought, that our Savior would
have instituted it at Supper time, or rather presently after it; And much less,
that St. Paul would have given it in command to the Corinthians 1 Cor. 11.34.
, that if any Man hungered, he should eat at home before he came to the
participation of it, and of those Agapae, that attended it.

From the Time of the Institution pass we to the Institution it self, and the
several things done, and said in it.

Where the first thing I am to take notice of is Christ's taking Bread, to wit
into his hands, and probably from off that table, on which it was placed;
Agreeably to that usance of the Jews, which he framed his own Eucharist by, and
where (as was before Part 1.
observed) the Father of the Family held it in both his hands, whilst he used
the words of Consecration, or Blessing over it. However, he so took it, to be
sure, as to separate it from what other Bread then was upon the Table, as which
the word took, in the most simple notion of it, will oblige us to believe; This
importing the choice of some particular Bread from out the rest, and leaving
the other to the ordinary uses of it. Now the Bread, which our Savior thus
took, was either some whole Loaf of Bread, answerably to the former usance, or
at least some larger, but entire piece of one, as appears by the breaking of it
into several pieces answerably to the several persons, that were to partake of
it. And it was also, agreeably to the time when it was made use of, unleavened
Bread, as the Latins have truly observed against the Greeks; It being upon the
first day of the feast of unleavened Bread, as three of the Evangelists Mat.
26.17. Mark 14.12. Luke 22.7.
have observed, that that Passover, which immediately preceded this Sacrament,
was celebrated, and consequently that this Sacrament also was. But why it
should be so far urged against the Greeks, as to make it the matter of a
quarrel, is a very unaccountable thing, unless there were somewhat either in
the words, or in the rites of the Institution, which directed to the use of
unleavened Bread only. For leavened, or unleavened matters not after the taking
away of that Law, which made the difference; And much less, where the present
Law requires only 1 Cor. 5.8.
the laying aside of the leaven of malice, and wickedness, and keeping our
Passover feast with the unleavened Bread of sincerity, and truth.

It follows in the Story, And Jesus took Bread, and blessed (as St. Matthew,
and St. Mark deliver it) or (as St. Luke, and St. Paul after him) gave thanks.
A thing, which will require a more accurate consideration, because of the
momentousness thereof; It being to that Blessing, or Thanksgiving probably that
we are to assign that both change in it, and effects of it, which are
afterward attributed to it. That therefore we may the better understand this
whether Blessing, or Thanksgiving, we will consider the words apart, and first
Christ's being said to bless, or bless it, even the Bread.

For the better understanding of which word we are to know, that though to
bless simply considered may as well refer to God, as to the thing, over which
that Blessing is made; Yet we are in reason to understand it here, as relating
to the Bread, as our Translators in the story of St. Matthew plainly do,
because adding the word it to blessed: And Jesus took Bread, and blessed it.
And my reason is first, because blessed being a transitive verb, it is by the
common rules of construction to refer to that noun substantive, that
immediately preceded it, even the Bread, and not to any remoter one, or to one
that is not expressed. How much more then if those verbs, which follow, even
brake, and gave do also refer to it, as they, who make Hoc est corpus meum the
words of Consecration, must necessarily allow? For what can be more congruous
than to believe, when the verb blessed is a transitive one, that it referrs to
the same noun substantive, even Bread, to which the foregoing verb took, and
the following ones brake, and gave do? But that, which is no doubt of much more
force in this affair, and will more determine the verb blessed to Bread, is the
use of the same word in St. Paul 1 Cor. 10.16.
, when applied to the Cup of the Sacrament, as it seems to be to the Bread
here. For by the same reason that the Cup is there affirmed to be blessed by
those, that administered it, and not only so, but intimated to be called the Cup
of Blessing for that reason; by the same reason are we to understand the word
blessed here to relate to the Bread of it, and that our Savior really blessed
it, as well as blessed God, or gave thanks to God over it. And thus far we have
the accord of the Council of Trent it self Sess. 13. cap. 1. Ita enim Majores
nostri omnes, etc. apertissime professi sunt hoc tam admirabi'e Sacramentum in
ultima coena Redemptorem nostrum instituisse, cum post panis, and vini
benedictionem se suumque ipsius corpus illis praebere, ac suum sang uintem
disertis, ac perspicuis verbis testatus est.
, because applying the Blessing here spoken of to the Bread, yea affirming our
Lord Jesus Christ to have blessed the Wine as well, as that.

Bread therefore being the thing, which our Savior is said to have blessed,
enquire we in the next place what is meant by his blessing it. Which must be
learned in part from the nature of that Blessing, wherewith it was blessed by
him, and in part also from the interest, which our Savior had in the bestowing
of it. Now what the nature of that Blessing was, wherewith the Bread was
blessed by him, will appear, if we consider for what end it was appointed by
him, who so took, and blessed it. Which we learn from the Institution it self,
and from St. Paul's Comment upon it, to be in an especial manner for the
communion of his Body. For the design of the divine Blessing being to make the
thing blessed to be useful for that end, for which it was appointed; If the
Communion of the Body of Christ was the end, for which the Bread of the Lord's
Supper was appointed, the Blessing, wherewith it was blessed, must consequently
consist in its usefulness for that end, or ends, for which it was so appointed
by him. Which will leave nothing more to us to account for, than the interest,
which our Savior had in bestowing that Blessing on it. Now, what that is may
appear from the word (...), or giving of Thanks, which St. Luke, and St. Paul
make use of to express the same thing, as St. Mark, and St. Matthew also do to
express the Blessing of the Cup. For the word (...), or giving of Thanks
importing him, to whom it is attributed, to address himself unto another, Our
Savior must be supposed to have acted in the blessing of that Bread, not as
one, who conferred that Blessing upon it himself, but as one, who addressed
himself to another for the bestowing of it, even to him, to whom he gave
Thanks. Which Particular may the more easily be believed, because when he only
blessed the five Loaves, and two Fishes, to give Nourishment to that five
thousand Men, whom he meant to refresh, he looked up to Heaven Luke 9.16.
at the very instant of it, which shows from whence he looked for the bestowing
of it, even from his Father, that was there. The result of the Premises is
this: Our Savior being now about to appoint the Bread of the Lord's Supper for
a Communion of his Body, and other such sacramental Purposes, addressed himself
to the Father (from whom every good and perfect Gift comes) to make the Bread,
which he now took, useful for those Purposes, or (that I may speak in the
language of St. Matthew, and St. Mark) to bless it for them. With what kind of
Address, or Addresses, will best be learned by that word, which St. Luke, and
St. Paul made use of to express that action of his, even the word (...), or
giving of Thanks, and which therefore I am in the next place to explain.

Now as the word (...) does undoubtedly signify giving Thanks, and is
accordingly so used both by profane, and sacred Authors; As it must farther
signify in this place (because our Savior in this particular instance could
have no other to give Thanks to) his giving Thanks to his Father, and ours; So
nothing more therefore will be required toward the understanding of it, than to
show 1. What Benefits he so gave Thanks for. 2. What Use that Thanksgiving was
of toward the procuring of the Blessing desired. 3. Whether it did not also
contain in it some express Request to God for the granting of that Blessing to
it.


1. What Benefits our Savior gave Thanks for is not expressed either by the
Evangelists, or St. Paul, and must therefore be learned by what they have
expressed, and particularly concerning the great End of the Institution of
this, and the other Element of this Sacrament. Which if we guide our selves by,
we shall find this Thanksgiving of our Savior to have been for the giving of
him to die for the Redemption of sinful Man, and other the like ends of his
Death. For requiring his Disciples afterward to do what he had done for the
remembrance of him, and particularly of the breaking of his Body for them, he
must consequently be supposed to have given Thanks to God for giving him for
those gracious Purposes, as which was the chief design of the whole, and which
could not be remembered, as it ought, without such a Thanksgiving for it. I
think it as reasonable to conclude, secondly, that our Savior gave Thanks also
for directing himself (who spoke, and did what he did by Authority from the
Father) to this Element of Bread for the Communion of his Body to his
Disciples, and Followers: This, as it was by the Institution it self to be a
means of the Communion of his Body, and so much the more comfortable one too,
because it was also manifest to their Senses; So being a like object of
thankfulness to him, who had espoused his Disciples interest as his own, and to
those Disciples that were to be profited by it, and consequently not to be
thought to have been forgotten by him. These two great Benefits I think, and I
suppose not without reason, to have been the Benefits our Savior gave Thanks
for, and possibly also such Benefits as were preparatory to our Savior's
Death, and particularly his Conception, and Birth. But other Benefits than
those I know no ground to believe, and much less the creation of this, and
other the Fruits of the Earth, and dispensing them to us by his Providence. As
because there is not the least ground in the Institution for such a
Thanksgiving unto God; So because this, and the other Element of the Lord's
Supper were appointed not for corporal, but spiritual sustenance, and to which
therefore our Savior's Thankssgiving, and ours may seem more properly to
referr, and because too there is appearance enough from what was before said
from St. Luke Luke 22.17.
concerning our Savior's taking a Cup of Wine, giving Thanks, and distributing
it among his Disciples immediately before the Institution of this Sacrament,
that he satisfied the Jewish Eucharist before, even that, which had for its end
the giving Thanks to God for earthly Benefits, and particularly for the means
of our Repast. If the Ancients (as it appears they did Part 1.
) represented this Sacrament as an Eucharist for the Fruits of the Earth, as
well as for the Blessing of our Redemption, and accordingly premised such kind
of Thanksgivings for it; I am apt to think it proceeded at first from its being
accompanied, or rather immediately preceded (as that, which our Savior first
celebrated, was) by the Eucharist of the Jews; And, when that Eucharist was
laid aside, from a Willingness in the Christians, that followed them, to
conform their own Eucharist so far to that of the Jews, so the better to gain
them to their Religion, or oblige them to keep closely to it. Till at length
what was done only out of compliance with the Jews, came to be looked upon as a
necessary part of the Christian Eucharist, and Men thought themselves obliged
to give Thanks to God in it for the Fruits of the Earth, as well as for the
Blessing of our Redemption. Which Opinion the Ancients were the more easily
persuaded into, because Christianity 1 Timothy 4.4.
, as well as Judaism taught them, before their several Repasts, to give God
Thanks for the Matter of them, and so sanctify the Use thereof unto
themselves. For that might tempt them farther to believe, that our Savior
premised such a Thanksgiving to his Eucharist, and consequently thereto that we
ought to do the like. If any Man can give a fairer account of the Ancients both
Opinion and Practice, I, who profess my self to have a just regard for them,
will be glad to receive it, and (which is more) will be as willing to
acknowledge my own Error in the former one. But till I see such an account, I
shall rest satisfied in this, and so much the more willingly, because they, who
urge such like Testimonies of the Ancients to establish the Sacrifice of the
Mass, insist as little upon this sort of Thanksgivings, as any of the Reformed
do.

2. But to return to that, from which I have diverted, even to that Eucharist,
or Thanksgiving, which our Savior used over the Bread of it. Where the next
thing to be inquired into is, what Use that Thanksgiving may be supposed to be
of to procure the blessing of the Bread. For if our Savior blessed the Bread
by the Thankssgiving, which he made over it, or rather addressed himself to God
by Thanksgiving for the blessing of it; That Thanksgiving must be supposed to
be of some use to procure the Divine Blessing on it. For the clearing of which
Difficulty they, who allege, as some do, that the word (...), or Thanksgiving
is set to denote Prayer, as well as that, and so far forth may be of sufficient
force to procure the Divine Blessing (For what is there, that can be supposed
to be denied to Prayer, and particularly to the Prayer of him, in whom God was
well pleased?) such Men, I say, allege that, which may perhaps be true, and
which I shall by and by endeavor to confirm. But withal they say that, which
will not reach the Difficulty, nor give any good account of two Evangelists,
and St. Paul's expressing this Address of Christ to his Father by (...), or
giving of thanks. For whatever else that word may be thought to include in it,
manifest it is, first, that Thanksgiving is the primary notion of it, and that
therefore in it self considered of a peculiar use toward the procuring of the
Divine Blessing, as which otherwise would not have been employed to denote the
whole Act. As manifest it is, secondly, that the Blessings Grot. in Mat. 26.26.
of the Jews before, and after their Meals were generally Thanksgivings, and
particularly that Blessing was, wherewith the Jews Eucharist was begun, and
closed. It is manifest, thirdly, that Thanksgivings have always had a great
part in the consecrating of our Eucharist, and is denied by no Man, that I know
of, that will allow Prayer to have any part in it. Which supposed, the Question
will still return, what use they may be supposed to be of toward the procuring
of the Divine Blessing, and which we must find out some other way to resolve.
In order whereunto I will consider these Thanksgivings first as to what is
common to them with all others, and then as to what is peculiar to them, as
preparatory to our partaking of what we so give Thanks for. That, which the
Thanksgivings of the Eucharist have common to them with all others, is, that
they contain that in them, which I have elsewhere Expl. of the Lord's Prayer.
Discourse 2. Introd.
shown makes Prayer it self to be so acceptable, even an acknowledgment of our
dependence upon God: He, who thanks God for the Benefits remembered in it, or
for this sensible conveyance of them, as much acknowledging his dependence upon
God, as he, who sues to him for those Benefits, or any other. And well may that
be thought to be of use toward the procuring of the Divine Blessing, which is
as much an acknowledgment of our dependence upon him, as any Prayer whatsoever.
Of such use are the Thanksgivings of the Eucharist toward the procuring of the
Divine Blessing on it, when considered as to that, which is common to them with
all others. How much more, when considered as to that, which is peculiar to
them as preparatory to our partaking of what we so give Thanks for? To give
Thanks by way of preparation to the partaking of any Benefit implying an
apprehension in him, that gives it, of the necessity of the Divine Blessing to
make it useful to him, and consequently thereto a Desire of, and Prayer to God
for the bestowing of it. By which means the Thanksgivings of the Eucharist, and
particularly those, which our Savior made over the Bread of it, will be though
not express, yet tacit Prayers to God for his Blessing on it, and consequently
of yet more force to procure that Blessing for it, and for those, that are to
partake of it. Only because the Blessings mentioned in the Scripture were
oftentimes Genesis 17.28. Number. 6.23.
Prayers to God for his Blessing, and it is hard to believe that, when our
Savior designed the Blessing of the Eucharist, he should not seek to God for
it by an express Prayer, as well as by Thanksgivings, and tacit ones, I think
it but just to enquire,

3. Whether our Savior's Thanksgiving did not also contain in it some express
Request to God for the granting of that Blessing, which he desired. For the
clearing whereof we are to know, that as it is not unusual for that word, which
signifies only one noted part of a thing, to be set to denote the other also
(For thus, as was before observed, the Bread of this Sacrament, and the
breaking of the Bread is set to denote the Wine, as well as the Bread, and all
that is done to both of them, as well as the breaking of one Element thereof)
so St. Paul 1 Timothy 4.4, 5.
, where he entreats of a like Argument to that, which we are now upon, because
of the means whereby the Creatures of God are sanctified, or blessed to us,
makes use of the word (...), or Thanksgiving, to denote (...), or Prayer, as
well as Thanksgiving; and again of the word (...), or Prayer, to signify
Thanksgiving, as well as that. Otherwise to allege, as St. Paul does, that the
Creatures are sanctified by the Word of God, and Prayer, could be no proof of
the lawfulness of receiving the Creatures with Thanksgiving, which is that he
designed to prove by it: Because it is certain that (...), or Prayer, in strict
speech is not (...), or Thanksgiving, nor (...), or Thanksgiving, (...), or
Prayer. But therefore as nothing hinders, but that our Savior's (...), or
Thanksgiving might contain in it as express a Prayer to God to grant the
Blessing he desired; So there are many reasons to persuade us that it did, and
that Christ sought this Blessing by Prayer, as well as by Thanksgivings. Of
which nature in particular was the momentousness of that Blessing, which he now
sought, and which may seem no way unworthy of an express Prayer to the Father
for it; The same Christ's also employing such Prayers on less weighty
occasions, as well as upon more momentous ones; But above all, Christ's
requiring us in the Celebration of this Sacrament to do as he did before us,
and St. Paul's pressing the Corinthians to conform to his Pattern, and content
our selves with the imitation of it: It being hard to believe that, when Christ
so often called upon his Disciples to sue to God upon all occasions, and to ask
Mat. 7.7.
, and seek, and knock, whenever they stood in need of his assistance, they
should be under no obligation to crave his Blessing, when the Bread, and Wine
in the Sacrament were to become the Communion of his Body, and Blood. Under
which obligation yet they must in no wise have been, if Christ, whom they are
required to imitate, offered no Supplications to his Father to procure from him
the working of so great a change in the outward Elements. I take no notice
here, because I may have a more proper place for it, of the Ancients sending up
Prayers, as well as Thanksgivings, when they set themselves to the blessing of
this Sacrament. And shall only add, That though Prayers, as well as
Thanksgivings had a place in this Affair, yet the latter might be both more
particularly inculcated, and more often mentioned, because more apparently
agreeable to that thankful Remembrance of Christ's death, which this Sacrament
was in an especial manner ordained for.

The next thing, that our Savior did, and we are accordingly to take notice
of, was the breaking of the Bread; For so it follows in the Story, And Jesus
took Bread, and blessed, and brake it, even the Bread: Not only our own
Translation obliging us so to understand the several Evangelists, and St. Paul,
by its supplying the word it, but the coherence of these words with the former,
and (which is more) the express Authority of Saint Paul 1 Cor. 10.16.
elsewhere; He there describing this part of the Sacrament under the title of
the Bread, which we break, and so showing Bread to be the subject of it. Now
this Bread our Savior brake partly in conformity to what was done to that of
the Jewish Eucharist, and partly that he might the better serve his own
purposes in this. For so careful were the Jews in the breaking of their
Eucharistical Bread, that whereas those thicker Loaves Cassand. Liturgic. in
initio.
, which they made use of, could not conveniently be broken in pieces, he, who
blessed the Bread did, before that Benediction of his, cut one part almost from
the remaining piece, but so, that it still stuck to it, and after that
Benediction of his, brake it off, and when he had again cut lesser Particles
out of that, took one himself, and gave the rest unto his Guests. In conformity
to which Custom as it is reasonable to believe, that our Savior in part
proceeded, when he brake that Bread, which he had before blessed; So more
especially, that he might the better serve his own Purposes in it, even the
distribution of it to his Disciples, and the representation of the breaking of
his Body upon the Cross. The former whereof St. Paul plainly intimates where he
asks, The Bread whith we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ?
The latter, when in his rehearsal of the words of the Institution he brings in
our Savior saying, This is my Body which is broken for you: There being not
otherwise any reason, why he should attribute the term of breaking to Christ's
Body, but that the breaking of the Bread, which was a Figure of it, was
intended to represent that violence, which was offered to his crucified one.
And though it be true that none of the Evangelists give any such hint of this
Mystery of the breaking of the Bread, because affirming only This is my Body,
as St. Matthew, and St. Mark do, or This is my Body, which is given for you, as
St. Luke; Yet as they all say enough to show, that this Sacrament of Bread and
Wine was intended for a Representation of our Savior's Passion, and the
violence that was then offered to his crucified Body; so they do thereby
sufficiently intimate, that the breaking of the Bread was intended as a
Representation of it: There being nothing in the Bread to represent this to us,
but only the breaking of it. This however is evident, that our Savior brake
that Bread, which he before took, and blessed. And that Rite of breaking was
afterward looked upon as so considerable, that it gave Name to the Sacrament
it self, and the whole of it from that one Rite, entitled, The breaking of
Bread.

Our Savior having thus taken, and blessed and broken Bread (for thus far to
be sure we have Bread, whatever we have beside) he proceeds to give it to his
Disciples; For so the three Evangelists assure us: Not that the Original of
those Evangelists has any thing in it to express the thing given, but that it
speaks of his giving somewhat to them, and which, considering the connection of
this Act of Christ with the former ones, cannot reasonably be understood of any
other than the Bread, which he had before taken, and blessed, and broken. And
though St. Paul take no notice of this Gift of our Savior's in the rehearsal
he makes of this his Institution; Yet he sufficiently intimates it, when he
brings him in saying, Take, Eat, This is my Body, etc. His willing them to
take, and eat, implying his parting with it, that they might partake of it.
This however is manifest from the Evangelists, that what our Savior before
took, and blessed, and brake, he gave to his Disciples, and I suppose to each
of the Disciples in particular, and by reaching it forth unto them; The former
being the manner of that Eucharist, by which he framed his own, Both the one,
and the other the Ancient Practice of the Church, whether by the Hands of him
that blessed it, or of those Deacons that ministered to him.

I will not spend time in animadverting upon the words Take, Eat, which he used
with the giving of the Bread. It may suffice to say as to the former of these,
that as it is, and always was the manner of Guests to take or receive into
their hands, or in some plate, which they held in them, what was given to them
by another; so the Ancients knew no other taking, or receiving of this Bread,
than that, which was performed by them. As little need to be said concerning
that eating, which our Savior subjoined to the Command of taking, or receiving
what he gave them; Unless there could be any doubt of that is being Bread, which
was now to be eaten by them. For as what it is to eat Bread is sufficiently
known, even after we have put it into our mouths to chew it there, and transmit
it from thence into our Stomachs for the nourishment of our Bodies; So that it
was Bread, which they were commanded to eat, St. Paul plainly shows in the
words 1 Cor. 11.26, 27.
, which he subjoins to the Institution of this Sacrament: He affirming the
worthy Receiver of the Eucharist to eat Bread, as well as the most unworthy one.

To go on therefore to those words, which our Savior subjoined to his Precept
of taking, and eating, even those most noted ones, This is my Body. Words,
which the wanton Wits of Men have transformed into many shapes, and those too
no less monstrous, than what they designed to infer from them. Whereas if they
were considered without any sinister Affections, they would (as Aretius long
since observed Com. in Mat. 26.26. Quomodo autem verae sint propositiones
illae, Panis est corpus Christi, Vinum est sanguis Christi, anxie disputatum
est, Res tamen sint affectibus simplicem habet intellectum. Verae sunt ut aliae
sacramentales loquutiones, Agnus est transitus, Circumcisio est foedus,
sacrificia sunt remissio peccatorum, Baptismus est ablutio peccatorum. In
quibus nemo est tam stupidus, ut nodos sibi quaerat. Sed ut symbola
sacramentalia hae res nominatae accipiuntur. Ita judicandum de his
propositionibus etiam puto.
have received a plain and simple Understanding, and which Men would otherwise
no more have bogled at, than at other Speeches of the like nature. For this is
my Body, and This is my Blood, are true, as other sacramental Speeches are. A
Lamb is the Passover, Circumcision is a Covenant, Sacrifices are the remission
of Sins, and Baptism the washing away of them. In which no Man is so stupid, as
to seek to entangle himself, or go about to create Scruples to other Men. For
these things are taken as sacramental Symbols, and so I suppose we ought to
judge of the former Propositions also. Only because there is no one particle in
the words, This is my Body, which has not, among prejudiced Men, ministered
matter for Dispute, I will be so much the more minute in my Explication of
them, and first of the word, This. This is my Body.

Now that, which unprejudiced Men would undoubtedly think to be intended by the
word This, was the Bread before spoken of, and which our Savior is said to
have taken, blessed, broken, and given to his Disciples with a design they
should take, and eat of it: Partly, because that was the thing manifestly
intended all along, and therefore by the common Rules of Construction to be
understood also here; And partly, because the demonstrative Particle This, must
by the natural importance of it, be thought to point out something certain, and
apparent to them, which hitherto nothing but the Bread of the Sacrament was.
Thus, I say, unprejudiced Men would be apt to think of the word This, though
they had nothing to direct them, but the words of the Institution. How much
more then, if they should reflect upon what St. Paul 1 Cor. 11.26, 27.
subjoyneth to, and infers from them in the account he gives us of that
Affair. For as often (says he) as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do
show forth the Lord's Death till he come. And again, Wherefore whosoever shall
eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of
the Body, and Blood of the Lord. For it appearing from the words of the
Institution, that the word This, referrs to that, which was given them to eat,
which St. Paul affirms to be Bread, it must consequently be thought to denote
not this Being, or Substance in common, or individuum vagum, or the like, but
this Bread, as St. Paul does twice express it. Conformable hereto, whether the
Romanists will, or no, is their own Opinion of the Bread's being
transubstantiated by the words, Hoc est corpus meum, and that
Transubstantiation not effected, till the last Syllable of meum is pronounced.
For if that Transubstantiation be not effected till then, it must be Bread
before the pronunciation of it, and the word This therefore denote no other
than that Bread, which our Savior before took, and blessed and brake, and gave
unto them. But is it then possible that so many wise Men should be otherwise
persuaded without very great reason to the contrary? And neither are they, as
they surmise, because the word, which we render This, is both in the Greek, and
the Latin of a different Gender from the word, which signifies Bread, and is
indeed of the same Gender with that Body, which it is afterward affirmed to
be, even the Neuter one. As if on purpose to let us know, that the word This
was intended to signify no other, than This is my Body even now, or was in an
Instant to be transubstantiated into it. But is there then no other account to
be given of the word This being in the Neuter Gender, when the Bread, which we
suppose it to referr to, is of the Masculine? Nay, is there not an easy, and
obvious one, if Men will take the pains to find it out? For is it so strange,
that the word, which we render This, should be of the Neuter Gender, even when
it is intended to represent a thing of another, especially in inanimate Beings?
Nay, is it at all strange to have the word This to conform rather to the Gender
of that, which is predicated of it, than of that thing, which it is set to
denote? There is in one single Text of Genesis an instance of each of these,
and many instances elsewhere of the latter of them. For where Genesis 28.17. (...).
Jacob is brought in saying, How wonderful is this place? This is no other than
the House of God, and this is the Gate of Heaven; Though the word, which we
render Place, be of the Masculine Gender, and the This, that is joined with it,
consequently of the same, yet when the Seventy come to translate This is no
other, than the House of God, they make use of the Neuter (...) to express it,
as again when to render, And this is the Gate of Heaven, they make use of the
Feminine (...) to express it, answerably to the Gender of the word (...), or
Gate, which is predicated of it. In like manner the same Septuagint, where they
give an account of what Adam said concerning the Woman, when she was first
brought to him, even This is Genesis 2.23. (...) --
Bone of my Bone, and Flesh of my Flesh, she shall be called Woman, because she
was taken out of Man; Though they speak of her before, and after in the
Feminine Gender, they make use of the Neuter (...) to express her, though one
would think that should be less answerable to the subject matter of what he
spoke. In fine, when the same Septuagint would describe to us Moses his Conceit
Exodus 16.15.
concerning the Manna before spoken of, and which they themselves entreat of
under the Neuter Gender; To the Israelites asking (...); or What is this? they
bring in Moses answering, (...), This is the Bread, which the Lord has given
you: Making the Particle This to answer rather to that Bread, which was
predicated of it, than either to the Israelites Question concerning it, or the
thing it was intended to denote. After this manner did the Greeks express
themselves, when they never dreamed of any such Mystery; And our Crackanthorp
Defens. Eccles. Angl. contra Spalat. c. 72.
, though aliud agens, has produced two like instances for the Latins, out of
those two great Masters of Language, Lactantius Instit. lib. 4. c. 40.
, and Cicero Orat. pro Cluent.
: The former whereof, after those words, Sola igitur Catholica Ecclesia est,
quae verum cultum retinet, which show what it is, whereof he entreats, has
these no less remarkable words, Hic est fons veritatis, hoc est domicilium
fidei, hoc templum Dei, etc. The latter, where he entreats of the Law, or Laws,
Hoc enim vinculum est hujus dignitatis, qua fruimur in republica, hoc
fundamentum libertatis, hic fons aequitatis. So that for ought that does
appear, it is both usual, and elegant to conform the Pronoun This rather to the
Gender of that thing, which is predicated of it, than to the Gender of that,
which it is intended to denote. And if so, (...), and Hoc est corpus meum, may
without any violence to the known Rules of Speech, yea with propriety enough,
import This Bread is my Body, which was the thing to be demonstrated by us.

The subject of the Proposition being thus found out, and shown to be no other
than the Bread which our Savior gave; The next thing to be explained is the
predicate thereof, or that which is affirmed of it, This is my Body. For the
better understanding whereof, I will enquire what our Savior meant by his
Body, and then what he meant by is, or how the Bread before spoken of was, and
is the Body of Christ.

In the accounts which I have seen in some of our own Church concerning these
words is my Body, I do not only find the words is and my Body commonly joined
together in their explanation of them, but I find it affirmed also (where they
enquire whether the predication be proper, or figurative) that it is
indifferent whether we place the Figure in the word is, or in the words my
Body. I must needs say, I do not think it so indifferent a thing, as they seem
willing to believe, whether we have a regard to the words my Body, as they lie
in the Text, or whether we have a regard to the consequents of a figurative
interpretation of them. For (that I may speak my mind freely, and clearly, as
every honest Man ought to do in a matter of so great importance) I do not see
how those words, my Body, can be otherwise than literally understood, even for
that Body, which he was now about to offer upon the Cross, and presently after
did offer up upon it for the Salvation of Mankind. For how could our Savior,
though he were never so disposed to describe that Body, how, I say, could he
more clearly, and plainly describe it, than by that Body, which was, or was
shortly to be given, or broken for them? Especially, when he immediately calls
upon them to do, what he had now taught them, in remembrance of himself? For do
this, says he, in remembrance of me. For was the Bread, which he affirms to be
his Body, however blessed or broken, the thing that was given for them, or
their salvation, and not rather that Body, which he now carried about him, and
was shortly after to suffer in? Nay, does not our Savior's subjoyning to This
is my Body, which is given, or broken for you, This do in remembrance of me,
farther show, that he meant that Body which was shortly to be given, or
crucified for them? It being the Lord's Death, as St. Paul himself interprets
it 1 Cor. 11.26.
that they were to show forth thereby, and consequently that they were to do
what they were now taught in remembrance of him, and that. And indeed, as I do
not therefore see, how we can honestly understand those words my Body of any
other, than that Body, which he now carried about him, and was shortly after to
offer; So I am farther confirmed in it by the evil consequences of a figurative
interpretation of them, which are these two especially. First, that we shall
thereby leave no clear account in them, nor indeed in any of the words of the
Institution, of the thing signified by the Sacrament, and which all Men
acknowledge to be the Crucified Body of Christ; And secondly, that we shall
give more countenance, than we are willing to do, to that propitiatory
Sacrifice, which the Romanists advance in this affair. For if by the words my
Body be meant the memorial of Christ's Body, I do not see why we should not in
like manner attribute to that memorial (as the Romanists do,) its being given,
or broken for us, and for our Salvation, and consequently make it a
propitiatory Sacrifice for us. Let it therefore be allowed, or at least till we
see better reason to the contrary, that as by the word This we ought to
understand This Bread, even the Bread, which our Savior gave to his Disciples,
so we ought in like manner to understand by the words my Body my Crucified one,
that which I now carry about me, and am shortly after to offer up. Which will
consequently leave nothing more to enquire, than what our Savior meant by the
word [Is], and how the Bread before spoken was, and is that Body of Christ.

And here I look for no other, than that those, with whom we have to do, should
triumph wonderfully, as supposing they have in part at least gained their
purpose; The Romanists by allowing in this Sacrament the crucified Body of
Christ, the Lutherans by our allowing of that, and of the Bread. But with how
little reason will appear, if, together with us, they will enquire into the
word [Is], and how that, whereof our Savior spoke, was, and is that Body of
Christ. For the better understanding whereof I will show 1. That the word [Is]
is oftentimes taken figuratively. 2. That it ought to be so taken here. 3. What
it imports in that figurative interpretation of it.


1. That the word [Is] is many times figuratively taken, is evident from what
is said concerning the seven Kine, and seven Ears Genesis 41.26, 27. (...) --
in Pharaoh's dream being seven Years, and the Bones in the Vision of Ezekiel
Ezekiel. 37.11. (...)
being the whole House of Israel; And (that I may not now name any more)
concerning the Sower, that sowed the good seed in a Parable of our Savior,
being Mat. 13.37. (...), etc.
the Son of Man, the Field the World, the good Seed the Children of the
Kingdom, and the like: These things, as they are linked together by the words
[Is] and [Are] according to their respective number, as This, and my Body are;
So by all Men understood not literally, but figuratively, and such as rather
signified, and represented the things they are said to be, than were in
propriety of nature such. Which supposed, the same word here may be taken in
the like sense, and we therefore under no necessity of allowing the
Transubstantiation of the Bread into the Body of Christ, or the
Consubstantiation of the Body of Christ with it.

2. But it may be though the word [Is] may sometime be taken figuratively, yet
there is no reason for taking it so here, or at least no necessity for it;
Therefore enquire we in the next place, whether it ought to be so taken here,
or rather (because I have already undertaken to demonstrate it) endeavor to
show that it ought. Which I shall make it my business to evince First, from the
impossibility of the Proposition's being true, if it be taken in the literal
sense; Secondly, from the sutableness of the figurative sense to the nature of
that, which is the subject matter of it; Thirdly, from the fitness of the word
[Is] to express it.

That the Proposition cannot be true, if the word [Is] be taken in the literal
sense, is evident from a known rule of Logic, and Reason, even that two
disparates, such as Bread, and a humane Body are, cannot properly be predicated
of one another. For neither can Bread, continuing such, be a humane Body, any
more than it can be a Stone, or a Serpent, or any thing else; Or than a Mouse
can be a Lion, or Elephant, or the like. Which is so true, and confessed, that
they, who stand for the proper, and literal signification of the words, do not
only some of them acknowledge it in express terms, but indeed also both
Romanists, and Lutherans offer a greater violence to them, for the avoiding of
such an absurdity: The one by denying the word This to signify This Bread,
though that (as was before said) were the only thing before spoken of, and the
thing too, that was given to the Disciples to eat, upon the pronouncing of it;
The other, by representing the sense of it as being rather in this, or under
this Bread is my Body, than This is my body, as the words import.

But beside that the Proposition cannot be true, if the word [Is] be taken in
the literal sense, and therefore of necessity to have a figurative one assigned
to it; The figurative sense is extremely suitable to the nature of that, which
is the subject matter of it. For what is it (as was before observed) that our
Savior affirmed to be his Body, but that Bread, which he had before taken, and
blessed, and broken? As that too not considered in its own natural being, or
use, but as a Sacrament, or sacred sign of something else, and particularly of
the Body of Christ? Now what sense, where there is any doubt of the meaning of
a Proposition concerning that, can be more suitable to it, than a figurative
one? What more easy, or more adapted to the nature of it? And if there be none,
what more reasonable to be pitched upon, or indeed more necessary to be affixed
to it? The sense of words being no doubt to be fitted to the nature of those
things, which they are employed by the speaker thereof to denote.

But that, which will put the thing in controversy yet more out of doubt, at
least among unprejudiced Men, is the fitness of the word [Is] to express that
figurative sense, which we have affixed to it. For be it that the word [Is]
denotes essence, or being, which is the utmost that can be made of it, by
those, who are for the proper signification of it, and the other words; Yet is
not that essence, or being to be adapted to the nature of that, to which it is
affixt? Now wherein consists the essence, or being of such a relative thing, as
a sacred sign, but in the relation which it bears to the thing signified, and
consequently in its signifying that, which it is appointed to mark out? And if
the essence, or being of a sign consists in the relation, which it bears to the
thing signified, may it not, as such, be said to be that thing, which it is
intended to signify? For who, if asked concerning this, or that Picture (as,
for instance, the Picture of Alexander, or Julius Caesar) would describe it by
a piece of Paper, or Cloth, or Wood, so, and so Painted, but as such, or such
a person, who did such admirable things in the World? Nay who is there that,
when he sees this, or that Picture, though he knows them to be but inanimate
things, does so much as ask, What it is, but Who? So naturally, and almost
necessarily do Men take the very being of such a thing to consist in its
relation to the person it represents, and accordingly do as naturally express
themselves in that manner concerning it. And if that be the case as to other
signs, why not in like manner as to this Sacred sign of Christ's Body, the
Bread? Especially if (as I shall by and by show) it has a yet nearer relation
to it. In order whereunto I will now proceed to show,

3. What the word [Is] imports in that figurative sense, whereof we speak. And
here in the first place it is easy to observe, that the word [Is] imports
that, to which it is attributed; even the Bread of the Sacrament, to be a sign
of that Body of Christ, which it is affirmed to be. Which I do not only affirm
upon account of the notion that all Men have of it, but upon account of the
likeness there is between the Bread broken, and the Mortifying of our Savior's
Body, and upon account also of the same Body's being affirmed by St. Paul in
his History of the Institution to be broken for us: There being otherwise no
ground for that expression as to the Body of Christ, but that the breaking of
the Bread was intended to signify, or represent the injury, that was offered
to Christ's Body, and consequently that that Bread was so far forth intended as
a sign of it. Which is no more, than the Romanists themselves, and particularly
Estius, have said in this affair, and therefore I shall not need to insist upon
it. I say, secondly, that as the word [Is] imports that, to which it is
attributed, to be a sign of Christ's Body, so also to be such a sign in
particular, as was intended to bring Christ's Body, and the Crucifixion of it
to our own Minds, or the Minds of others, or, in a word, to be a memorial of
it: The former being evident from our Savior's enjoining his Disciples,
presently upon these words, to do what he had now taught them in remembrance of
himself; The latter from St. Paul's telling his Corinthians, that as often as
they ate that bread, and drank that cup, they did show the Lord's death till he
came. I say, thirdly, and lastly, that the word [Is] does likewise import that,
to which it is attributed, to be a means of our partaking of the Body of
Christ, as well as a sign, or a memorial of it. Which we shall the less need to
doubt, when St. Paul 1 Cor. 10.16.
does in express terms represent the Bread, which is broken in the Sacrament,
as the Communion, or Communication of the Body of Christ, and the Cup of
Blessing, which is blessed in it, as the Communion of his Blood. Now if a sign,
even where it is hardly such, may be said to be that, which it signifies; How
much more such a sign, as is also by the Institution of Christ a means of its
conveyance, and of which whosoever does worthily partake, shall as verily
partake together with it of the Body of Christ, and of the Benefits that accrue
to us thereby?

I may not forget to add what St. Luke, and St. Paul have added to the words
This is my Body, even This is my Body, which is given for you, as the former;
which is broken for you, as the latter: Both to the same purpose, though in
different expressions, even to mark out to us more clearly how we are to
consider that Body, that is to say, as a crucified one; The giving of Christ,
or his Body being sometime expressed by giving him for our sins, Gal. 1.4.
and at other times by giving him Tit. 2.10.
to redeem us from them, which we know by the same Scripture to have been
compassed by his death. As indeed under what other notion can we conceive the
giving of his Body, when it is not only considered apart from his Blood, but
that Blood afterward affirmed to be shed for the remission of sins, and
accordingly so required to be considered here. The expression of St. Paul,
which is broken for you, is yet more clear, because more manifestly pointing
out the violence, that was offered to Christ's Body; With this farther
advantage, as was before said, that it does not obscurely intimate the breaking
of the Bread to have been intended to represent what was done unto his Body,
and under what notion we are to consider it. Though, to put it farther out of
doubt, St. Paul, after his account of the History of the Institution, affirms
both the one, and the other Element of this Sacrament to relate to our
Savior's Death, and consequently to respect his Body as mortist'd, as well as
his Blood as shed: He relling his Corinthians, that he that did eat that Bread,
as well as he, that drank that Cup, did thereby show forth the Lord's Death
till he came. Only if it be inquired why our Savior should even then represent
his Body as broken, or given, when it was not to be so till the day after the
Institution of this Sacrament; I answer partly, because it was very shortly to
be so, but more especially because he intended what he now enjoined as a
prescription for the time after his Death, as his willing his Disciples to do
this in remembrance of him does manifestly imply: That importing the thing to
be remembered to be past, and gone, as which otherwise could not be capable of
being remembered.

It follows both in St. Luke, and St. Paul, Do this, and Do this in remembrance
of me. Words, which the Romish Church has picked strange matters out of, even
no less (as was before observed out of Baronius) than the Priesthood of the A
postles, as which was collated upon them by these words, and the Sacrifice of
the Mass. For then also (says that Author) the Apostles, when the Lord
commanded them to do the very same thing in remembrance of him, were made
Priests, and that very Sacrifice, which they should offer, was ordained. By
what Alchymie the Apostles Priesthood, and the Sacrifice of the Mass are
endeavored to be extracted out of these words, must be considered in another
place, where such kind of questions will be more fit to be debated. At present
it may suffice to say, that as it does not appear from the Institution, that
our Savior made any other Offering of his Body in the Symbol of Bread, than
what he did to his Disciples, nor indeed how he could, unless he meant both to
prevent, and vacate the future Offering of himself upon the Cross, by which yet
(as the Author to the Hebrews Heb. 10.14.
instructs us) he perfected for ever them, that are sanctified; So it can much
less therefore appear, how the doing what Christ had before done, or taught
them to do, could make the Apostles Priests, or the Celebration of this
Sacrament to be a Sacrifice. All, that can be fairly deduced from the words Do
this, and Do this in remembrance of me, is, that they should for the future
take Bread, bless it, and break it, and, when they had done so, both eat of it
themselves, and give it to others to eat of in remembrance of him, and of his
Death. Or, if we should think that the words Do this ought to have a nearer
Antecedent, that they should take, and eat what had been before taken, and
blessed, and broken, and given to them by the Consecrator of it in remembrance
of him: That, as it is the thing, and the only thing just before enjoined upon
the Disciples (For what he says concerning the thing given them being his Body
does rather point out what regard they ought to have in the eating of it, to
that Body, of which it was a Symbol, than any new injunction, or precept
concerning it) so it is the thing, and the only thing therefore, which he
immediately referred to, when he said, This do in remembrance of me. Which St.
Paul does yet more clearly insinuate, when immediately after the History of the
Institution, and which he closes in each Element with This Do in remembrance
of me, he adds, as by way of explication of that passage, For as often as ye
eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lord's death till he come.
This I take to be a clear, and natural account of what Christ enjoined the
Disciples to do, and not any intimation at all either of the Apostles
Priesthood, or of the Sacrifice of the Mass. And what he adds concerning their
doing what he now enjoined them in remembrance of him, agrees as well to it,
because (as appears from the words but now quoted) they were to eat of that
Bread, as well as drink of that Cup with reference to him, and to his Death, or
(as St. Paul expresses it) to show it forth. Which will consequently leave
nothing more to be considered upon this Head, than what our Savior means by in
remembrance of him. Do this in remembrance of me.

Now as there cannot well be any doubt concerning the Object of this
Remembrance, partly because Christ does here represent himself as the Object of
it, and partly because he represents himself throughout this whole Sacrament as
giving himself to Death for us, and consequently he to be considered as such in
our remembrance of him: So I shall therefore need only to enquire what that
remembrance of him does import, and how the thing enjoined to be done serves to
the exciting of it.

Now there are two things again, which the word (...), or remembrance
signifies, and which we shall find upon enquiry that it signifies also here;
The recalling that to our own mind, which is the Object of it, or recalling it
to the mind of others: The former of these, as it is the most simple, and
obvious notion of the word, so no doubt principally intended here, if Christ's
giving his Body to death for us be the thing, wherein we are to remember him,
because we are required to take, and eat the Bread exhibited to us as a Symbol
thereof. But therefore as we are to understand by doing what we do in
remembrance of him, and of his Death, or (as the Greek (...).
would perhaps be more commodiously rendered) for the remembrance of him, of our
celebrating this Holy Sacrament, so the better to recall him, and his Death to
our own Minds; So it is alike evident from what St. Paul subjoins as a kind of
Comment upon these words, that we ought to do the same thing to recall it to
the Minds of others, and prompt them to reflect upon it: St. Paul declaring
thereupon, that as often as we eat that Bread, and drink that Cup, we do show
forth, or declare, or preach his Death till he come. Only, as it is not to be
thought, that our Savior would have instituted this Sacrament simply to bring
the thing signified by it to our own, or others Minds, but to stir up in them,
and us affections suitable to the thing remembered; So we are consequently to
think (because the thing signified by it was Christ's giving his Body to Death
for us, and for our Salvation) that it was designed to stir up us, and other
Men to remember his Death, and the benefits thereof with a thankful Mind, with
a Mind sensible of so great a favor, and ready to express that sense of its by
all the ways it can possibly devise. This I take to be that (...), or
remembrance, for which our Savior required his Disciples to do, as he himself
had before directed, and enjoined them. And how well fitted that whole Ceremony
is to excite such a remembrance in us, and others, will appear if we consider
that remembrance either as a simple remembrance of Christ's Death, and the
Benefits thereof, or as also a grateful one. For it serves to the former of
these by the representation it makes to our Eyes of the violence, that was
offered to his Crucified Body, and by the known Laws, and ends of the
Institution of it. And it serves in like manner to the latter of them by
representing that Death of his to our Eyes, not in bloody, and cruel Rites (as
the ill usage of some of the Heathen Deities were sometime represented) but in
the innocent, and useful, and comfortable Elements of Bread, and Wine, and
which whilst the Partakers thereof reflect upon, they cannot but at the same
time read in them the both usefulness, and comfortableness, as to themselves,
of that Body, and Blood, which they were intended to represent, and be thereby
excited to a joyful, and thankful remembrance of them both, and of the
benefits, that accrue to them thereby.

An account being thus given of the Bread of this Sacrament, and of all that
was said, or done about it; It remains that I entreat of the other Element
thereof represented to us by the three Evangelists, and St. Paul, under the
name of the Cup. Whether it were that they could not otherwise well express
what they were first to mention, even our Savior's taking it, and giving it to
his Disciples (because liquid things cannot well be taken by our selves, or
conveyed to others but by a Cup) or by an usual Metonymy of the continent for
the thing contained in it, set to denote the Wine, wherewith it was
replenished; This Cup (as we shall afterward understand) being given them to
drink of, and (as appears from what our Savior subjoins in the close of St.
Matthew's, and St. Mark's account of this matter) of the Fruit of the Vine, or
Wine. Now this Cup, as he had done before with the Bread, he in like manner
(...). Luke 22.20. 1 Cor. 11.25.
, after he had supped, took into his Hand, or Hands, as the fashion was in the
Eucharistical Cup of the Jews, but however so took (as was before observed
concerning the Bread) as to separate it from what other Wine then was upon the
Table, and appropriated it to his own purposes.

The Cup being thus taken by our Savior into his Hands, and held by him there
till he gave it to his Disciples, Two of the Evangelists tell us he gave thanks
over it, and (as appears by what was said before in the matter of the Bread,
and by St. Paul's elsewhere 1 Cor. 10.16.
entitling it the Cup of blessing, which we bless) by that Thanksgiving and
Prayer blessed it, or rather recommended it to the Father to be blessed by him,
and made useful for those purposes, for which it was designed, and particularly
for the Communion of his Blood. Which Blessing there is no doubt the Father
granted thereupon, and fitted it for that, for which it was so separated, and
recommended to him: As because he readily promised the like, or a greater
Blessing to the Blessing Number. 6.23, etc.
of the Jewish Priests, and may therefore be presumed as ready to grant this to
the Blessing of his well beloved Son; So because our Savior, when he gave this
Cup to his Disciples, told them even then, that it was his Blood of the New
Testament, and St. Paul, that being blessed by such as himself, it was the
Communion of Christ's Blood, which it could not have been in either instance
without the Blessing of the Father.

Our Savior having thus taken, and given thanks over the Cup, or blessed it,
gave it to his Disciples, saying, Drink ye all of it. But whether (as was said
before in the matter of the Bread) he gave it into each of his Disciples Hands,
or to him only, that sat next to him, and by him to be handed to the next, is
not material, neither will I therefore concern my self about it. Sure it is,
that, by the words accompanying that Gift, he signified it to be his Mind, that
they should all drink of it, and St. Mark in particular tells us, that they all
drank of it. Upon the strength of what Motive, is in the next place to be
inquired, but which we shall not need to go farther than St. Matthew for, or at
least not for the general notion of it. For this (says he in our Savior's
name) is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the
remission of sins. The thing, which I now offer you, is my Blood of the New
Testament, and it is upon that account I both invite, and oblige you all to
drink of it. And if it was, even when he offered it to them to drink, his Blood
of the New Testament, one would think it should need no new Blessing, or
Consecration to make it such, and much less, that those words, by which he
declared it to be so, should be that blessing, or Consecration it self. But be
that as it will at present (for the fuller discussion of these things belongs
to another place) most certain it is from the other Evangelists, and from St.
Paul, that our Savior when he gave the Cup to the Disciples, made use of
these, or the like words, upon what occasion soever they were employed by him.
And as certain it is from the Controversies now on foot, that the words
considered in themselves will require an explication, to which therefore I
shall now address my self; In order thereunto (as I did before in the matter of
the Bread) enquiring what the subject of this Proposition is, what the thing
predicated of it, and what the importance of the word [Is], which is made use
of to join them together.

And here in the first place it is easy to see, that whatever difficulties the
word (...), or This may be encumbred with, when set to denote the Bread,
because of a different Gender from it both in the Greek and the Latin, yet it
is encumbred with no such difficulties here: Because even in St. Matthew, and
St. Mark, where it has no Substantive affixed to it, it is of the same Gender
with the (...), or Cup before spoken of, and which they were also commanded to
drink of, as well as with the (...), or the Blood that follows it. It is alike
easy to see, secondly, that whatever pretense may be made for the word (...),
or This in the former Proposition having respect to some individuum vagum, yet
there is not the like pretense here: Because though St. Matthew, and St. Mark
add no Substantive to it, yet St. Luke, and St. Paul, in their History of the
Institution, add (...) to it, and so show This Cup, even the Cup before spoken
of, to be the thing whereof our Savior spoke. And indeed, as the rules of
Construction require us so to understand it, even where the (...), or Cup is
not expressed, and much more where This is my Blood is assigned as a motive to
the Disciples drinking of the Cup (For how could it otherwise be any motive to
it, if that Cup were not the Blood here spoken of?) So our Savior's commanding
his Disciples to drink of that Cup in order to their partaking of his Blood,
and his afterward describing it by the title of the Fruit of the Vine, shows
the (...), or Cup to be set to denote the liquor, that was contained in it, and
particularly the Blood of the Grape. Which is a proof that figurative
expressions are no such strangers to the Doctrine of a Sacrament, because one
is of necessity to be allowed in the subject of this important Proposition, and
is accordingly allowed by the Romanists themselves.

The subject of the present Proposition being thus found out, and shown to be
no other than the Cup before spoken of, or rather the Wine of it; Let us in the
next place take a view of the thing affirmed of it, and wherein indeed there is
some variety even between those, who give an Historical account of this affair:
St. Matthew, and St. Mark representing the Cup here spoken of as Christ's Blood
of the New Testament, or Covenant, which was shed for many for the remission of
fins; but St. Luke, and St. Paul as the New Testament, or Covenant, in his
Blood, which was shed for them. For which cause I will consider the thing here
affirmed under each of these notions, and first as Christ's Blood of the New
Testament, or Covenant, which I conceive to be the clearest, and most proper
declaration of it. Because it appears even by that St. Paul, who makes use of
the other expression, that the Blood of Christ is the principal thing signified
by it, even in that very Chapter, where he entitles it the New Testament in his
Blood. For not only does he before 1 Cor. 10.16.
entitle the Cup the Communion of his Blood, as he does the Bread in the same
verse the Communion of his Body, but, immediately after the words of the
Institution, declare him, who eats that Bread, and drinks that Cup with due
preparation, to show forth the Lord's Death till he come, as him, who eats,
and drinks unworthily, to be guilty of his Body, and Bloody.

The Blood of Christ therefore being the thing principally signified, and
consequently the principal thing predicated of the Cup, by the one, and the
other, reason would that we should enquire what our Savior meant by it, that
is to say, whether that Blood, which now ran in his Veins, and was shortly
after to be shed, or only a memorial of it. A Question, which will soon be
voided not only by what I have before said concerning the Notion of Christ's
Body, but by the Adjuncts of that very Blood, whereof we speak: The Blood of
the New Testament, or Covenant (as appears by a Text of the Author to the
Hebrews Heb. 9.14, etc.
, and by what I have elsewhere Expl. of the Sacrament in general, Part 2.
discoursed upon it) being no other than that Blood, which the Mediator of it
shed at his Death, (For that Author tells us, that neither that, nor any other
Testament, or Covenant can be firm without it) And the Blood, that was shed for
remission of Sins, the very same: It being by means of the same Death, that the
Redemption of Sins against the First Testament, or Covenant is procured, which
is but another Name for the Remission of them. And I shall only add, for the
better explanation of those words, even the Blood of the New Testament, or
Covenant, that as of old God would not enter, nor did enter into the First
Covenant with the Israelites, till he was atoned, and they sprinkled by the
Blood of their Sacrifices; So neither would he enter into the New, till he was
first atoned, and we sprinkled by the Blood of the Sacrifice of his Son, and
that Blood therefore, conformably to what was said of the Blood of the First
Covenant, styled the Blood of the New.

There will be no great difficulty, after what I have said of the Blood of the
New Testament, or Covenant, as to the meaning of that New Testament, or
Covenant in Christ's Blood, which St. Luke and St. Paul bring in our Savior as
affirming the Cup to be: Because thereby must consequently be meant that New
Covenant, which was brought about by the Blood of his Cross, even that, by
which the same Saint Paul elsewhere Col. 1.20.
tells us, that Christ made Peace between us, and God. Which will consequently
leave nothing more to us to enquire into upon this Head, than the importance of
that [is], which joins the subject, and the foregoing predicates together, and
how the Cup of this Sacrament was, and is his Blood of the New Testament, or
Covenant, and how the New Testament, or Covenant in his Blood.

For the understanding whereof though it may suffice to remit my Reader to what
I before said upon the account of the Bread's being Christ's Body; because that
mutatis mutandis may be applied to the Particle [Is] here; Yet I shall add ex
abundanti, that there cannot well be any doubt of its being taken figuratively
here, either in the one, or the other predication concerning it: Because the
Cup of this Sacrament cannot literally, and properly be both his Blood of the
New Testament, or Covenant, and the New Testament, or Covenant in it, which yet
in some, or other of the Sacred Writers it is affirmed to be. Which, as it will
make it so much the more reasonable to allow of that figurative Sense here,
which we have attributed to the same Particle Is in This is my Body; So
consequently make it reasonable to understand by This is my Blood of the New
Testament, which answers directly to the other, This is a Sign, and a Memorial,
and a Means of its conveyance, as well as the Bread is of my Body. And indeed,
as the Cup, or rather the Wine of it may well pass for a Sign of that Blood, as
for other Reasons, so for that effusion, which is attributed to it; So that it
is both a Memorial, and a Means of its conveyance, is evident from St. Paul's
bringing in our Savior subjoining the words, Do this, as often as ye drink it,
in remembrance of me, to the Story of the Cup, and elsewhere representing the
same Cup as the Communion of his Blood.

This I take to be a fair account of the Particle [Is], as it is made use of to
connect the Cup, and Christ's Blood of the New Tescament, or Covenant. And it
will be no less easy to give as clear an account of it, as it is made use of
to connect the same Cup, and the New Testament, or Covenant in his Blood: That
Cup representing to us God's exhibiting together with it Christ's Blood, and
the Merits of it, and our receiving that Blood, and the Merits of it with that
thankfulness, which does become us, and a Mind resolved to walk worthy of those
Benefits we receive by it.

I will conclude this long Discourse concerning the Institution of this
Sacrament, when I have lightly animadverted upon that, which St. Matthew, and
St. Mark bring in our Savior subjoining to all he had said concerning the
Elements thereof; To wit, that he would not any more drink of this Fruit of the
Vine (for so St. Matthew expresses it) until he should drink it new with them
in his Father's Kingdom. For though it should be granted, what Grotius contends
for out of St. Luke, that these words were spoken just before the Institution
of this Sacrament, and only placed here upon the account of Christ's being
again to speak of the Cup; Yet thus much must be granted to St. Matthew, and
St. Mark's placing it here, that it was the Fruit of the Vine, that our Savior
gave them, and they accordingly drank of, even in this Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper: There being no more reason (nor so much neither, considering that that
is the immediate Antecedent) to deny this Fruit of the Vine's referring to what
our Savior gave his Disciples, and they all drank of, than there would be to
deny its relating to that Cup, which he took into his hands, and blessed. Which
if we should, there would be no proof either here, or elsewhere of the Fruit of
the Vine's being one of the Symbols of this Sacrament.

PART IV. Of the outward Part, or Sign of the Lord's Supper.
The Contents.
Bread and Wine ordinarily the outward Part, or Sign of the Lord's Supper, and
the Heresy of the Aquarii upon that account inquired into, and censured. The
kind of Bread and Wine enjoined, in the next place examined, and a more
particular Enquiry thereupon, Whether the Wine ought to be mixed with Water,
and what was the Ground of the Ancients Practice in this Affair. The same
Elements considered again with respect to Christ's Body and Blood, whether as
to the Usage that Body, and Blood of his received, when he was subjected unto
Death; or as to the Benefit, that was intended, and accru'd to us by them. In
the former of which Notions they become a Sign of Christ's Body and Blood, by
what is done to them before they come to be administered, and by the separate
administration of them. In the latter, by the use they are of to nourish, and
refresh us. Of the Obligation the Faithful are under to receive the Sacrament
in both kinds, and a resolution of those Arguments, that are commonly alleged
to justify the Romish Churches depriving them of the Cup.

THE way being thus plained to the Consideration of the present Sacrament, and,
if I mistake not, such a Foundation also laid, as may support a better Fabric,
than I am likely to superstruct upon it, I will now pass on to a more
particular handling of it in the method before observed in the Sacrament of
Baptism, as well as in the Sacraments in general. In order whereunto I will
enquire, I. What is the outward Part, or Sign of the Lord's Supper? II. What is
the inward Part, or thing signified by it? III. What farther relation, beside
that of a Sign, the outward part, or Sign has to the inward part, or thing
signified? IV. What is the Foundation of those Relations? V. How, and to whom
this Sacrament ought to be administered? VI. How it ought to be received?


Question. What is the outward part, or Sign of the Lord's Supper? Answer.
Bread, and Wine, which the Lord has commanded to be received.
or Sign of the Lord's Supper, which our Catechism declares to be Bread and
Wine, which the Lord has commanded to be received. For my more advantageous
handling of which Answer, I will again enquire, 1. What Evidence there is of
Bread and Wine being the outward part, or Sign of the Lord's Supper? 2. What
kind of Bread and Wine we ought to make use of in it? 3. Wherein the Bread and
Wine were intended as a Sign? 4. What Evidence there is of Christ's commanding
us to receive them?


1. That Bread, and Wine are the outward part, or Sign of the Lord's Supper is
so evident from the Story of the Institution, and the account I have already
given of it, that it would be but lost labor to go about to prove it. It may
suffice here to add, that as Bread, and Wine, were the Matter of that Jewish
Eucharist, which in all probability was the Pattern of the Christian one; So
the Practice of the Church of God has been always conformable to it, neither
have any Persons willingly varied from it, I will not say that have not been
branded for Heretics, but that have not also been looked upon as either
stupidly ignorant, or blotches of the Church, rather than any part of it. Of
which nature were those Aquarii mentioned by St. Augustine De haeres. c. 6. Ed.
Dan.
, and before him written against by St. Cyprian Ad Caecil. Ep. 63.
, that offered Water in the Cup of the Sacrament instead of that, which all the
Church does. Whether that they condemned the Creation of God, as several of the
ancient Heretics did, and accordingly abstained wholly from Wine, as well as
from some other things; Or (as I rather think for the most part) by way of
exercise upon, and mortification of themselves, of which sort of Abstinences
out of the Sacrament there are frequent Instances in the Ancient Christians:
Little considering that Obedience is much better than such Sacrifices, though
they were otherwise of far greater worth, than they will be found upon
examination to be. For if St. Paul 1 Timothy 5.23.
could admonish Timothy, even for his Stomach's sake, and his often
Infirmities, not to drink any longer Water, but to use a little Wine; I doubt
he would not have heard with any patience of his, or other Men's abstaining
wholly from the Cup of the Sacrament, or using Water instead of it out of a
Principle of mortification and self-denial. I do not say the same as to the
outward part, or Sign of the Lord's Supper, where one of those Elements is not
to be had, or at least not without much difficulty, as to be sure in many
places the Wine of the Sacrament is not. For as I find by Cassander Liturg. c.
14.
, that the Armenians in India, where Wine is not to be had, do beforehand steep
dried Grapes in Water, and the next day press out the Juice of them for the use
of the Sacrament; So I do not see, but where neither the one, nor the other is
to be had, Men may lawfully make use of other generous Liquors for the same
purpose: I do not say only upon the account of Necessity, to which all positive
Laws must yield, but because (as I shall afterward show) they are equally
fitted to represent to us those things, for which the Fruit of the Vine was
here ordained. Only let not Men make a Necessity where there is none, nor think
themselves excused in the use of other Liquors, where the Fruit of the Vine,
though not the Product of their own Country, yet may well enough be had from
abroad. For where our Savior has annexed a Blessing to the use of such, and
such Creatures, I do not see how we can expect it without, where we have not a
just Necessity to excuse it, how convenient soever those other Creatures are,
which we substitute in the room of them.

2. But because question may be made, what kind of Bread, and Wine we ought to
make use of in this Sacrament, as well as whether Bread, and Wine be the
ordinary Matter, or Sign of it; Therefore I shall admonish, as to the former of
these, that I see little reason to doubt, but that the Bread of the place we
live in may suffice, provided it be of the better, and more nutritive sort, or
at least as good as we are in a capacity to provide. For our Savior having not
prescribed any thing as to the Grane, whereof it is to be made, and all sorts
of Bread being in their Nature sufficiently fitted for those Sacramental
Purposes, to which they are to be applied, it is a needless superstition to be
sollicitous about the kind of it, or indeed about any thing else of that
nature, farther than the Laws of Decency, or the general Nature of the
Sacrament may seem to exact of us. The same is to be said, and for the same
reasons as to the kind of the Wine, though the Wines of Palestine were
generally Red Psalm. 75.8. Prove. 23.31. Isa. 27.2. 63.2.
(for which cause it is not improbable that they were styled the Blood Deuteronomy.
32.14.
of the Grape) and those therefore the most apt to represent the Blood of our
Savior. For whatever the Color thereof may be, they may serve by the
Liquidness thereof, and the pouring of them from one Vessel to another, to
denote the shedding of his Blood, which is all that the Institution obliges us
to reflect upon. Upon which account I shall in this place confine my self to
enquire, whether it ought to be mixed with Water, or no, as which seems to me
to be the only material Enquiry in this Affair.

And here indeed they, who think it enough to make use of pure Wine, may seem
to be hardly pressed, whether we do consider the Antiquity of the contrary
Usance, or the Reason, which is alleged for it: For it appears from Justin
Martyr Apol. 2. p. 97.
to have been carefully practiced in his time; And it appears too not only to
have been pleaded for by St. Cyprian Ad Caecil. Ep. 63.
(even where he disputes against the forementioned Aquarii) but to such a
degree also, as to represent the Sacrament as imperfect without it: The mixture
of Wine and Water being, as he says Quando autem in calice aqua vino miscetur;
Christo populus adunatur, and credentium plebs ei in quem credidit, copulatur,
and conjungitur. Quae copulatio; and conjunctio aquae, and vini sic miscetur in
calice domini, ut commixtio illa non possit ab invicem separari -- Nam si vinum
tantum quis offerat, sanguis Christi incipit esse sine nobis; si vero aqua sit
sola, plebs incipit esse sine Christo. Quando autem utrumque miscetur, and
adunatione confusa sibi invicem copulatur, tunc Sacramentum spiritale, and
coeleste perficitur.
, intended to signify the conjunction of Christ and his People, and that we
can therefore in the sanctifying of the Lord's Cup no more offer Wine alone,
than we may presume to offer Water only. These things to those, that have a
regard to Antiquity, cannot but appear very considerable, and I must needs say,
they weigh so much with me, as to believe, that the Wine of the Sacrament might
have been from the beginning diluted with Water, yea that that very Wine might,
which our Savior consecrated into it. But this rather with respect to the
Custom of the Eastern Country, and the generousness of their Wines (which might
be but needful to be tempered, where the same Liquor was to be the
Entertainment of their Love Feasts, as well as the Matter of a Sacrament) than
out of any regard to the Sacrament it self, or that particular Mystery in it,
which St. Cyprian thought to be intended: Because there is not any the least
hint either in the Evangelists, or St. Paul, of such a mixture, or Mystery, but
rather an intimation of Christ's employing only the Fruit of the Vine, and his
having a regard to the sole Properties thereof, and of that Blood of his, which
he shed for our Redemption. If there were from the beginning any Mystery in
such a mixture, it may most probably be thought to have been intended to make
so much the more lively a Representation to us of that Blood, which it was
designed to remember, and which we learn from St. John Joh. 19.34.
to have issued from his side attended with Water, and accordingly particularly
remarked by him. Upon which account though I cannot press a mixture of Wine,
and Water as necessary, yet neither can I condemn it, or those Churches, which
upon that reason think fit to retain it, and enjoin on their respective Members
the due observation of it.

3. But because there neither is, nor can well be a more material Enquiry, than
wherein the Bread, and Wine of this Sacrament were intended as a Sign;
Therefore it may not be amiss to pass on to the resolution of it, and employ
all requisite diligence in it. For my more orderly performance whereof I will
consider those Elements of Bread, and Wine, with respect to Christ's Body and
Blood, whether as to the usage that Body, and Blood of his received, when he
was subjected to Death for us, or as to the Benefit, that was intended, and
accrued to us by them.

If we consider the Elements of Bread and Wine with respect to Christ's Body,
and Blood, as to the usage they received, when he was subjected to Death for
us; So we shall find them again to be a Sign of that Body, and Blood, by what
is done to them before they come to be administered, or by the separate
administration of them, when they are. For in the former of these Notions the
Bread manifestly became a Sign of Christ's Body by our Savior's breaking of
it; For which cause (as was before observed) St. Paul in his rehearsal of the
Institution, attributes that breaking to Christ's Body, and describes its
crucifixion by it. And not improbably the Wine of the Sacrament became a Sign
of Christ's Blood by its being poured out of some other Vessel into that Cup,
which he took, and blessed, and gave to his Disciples; There being not
otherwise any thing in it to represent the shedding of Christ's Blood, which it
appears by the several Evangelists, that our Savior had a particular respect
unto. Neither will it suffice to say (though it be true enough) that we do not
read either in the Evangelists, or St. Paul, of our Savior's before pouring
the Wine of the Sacrament out of some other Vessel into that Cup, which he made
use of for that purpose, and consequently cannot with equal assurance make the
Wine to be a Sign of Christ's Blood by any such effusion of it. For whether we
read of it, or no, such an Effusion must of necessity precede (the use of a Cup
being not to keep Wine in, but to drink out of, after it has received it by
effusion from another) and that effusion therefore, and the particular mention
there is of the effusion of that Blood, which is acknowledged to be signified
by the Wine, no unreasonable intimation of that Effusion's being one of those
things, wherein the Wine of the Sacrament was intended as a Sign or
Representation of the other. By these means the Bread, and Wine become a Sign
of Christ's Body, and Blood, as to what is done to them before they come to be
administered. And we shall find them in like manner to be a Sign of the same
Body, and Blood, by the separate administration of them, when they are. For as
our Savior's Body, and Blood were parted by Death, and accordingly required to
be considered, the one as broken, and mortified, the other as shed, or poured
out of it; So our Savior did not only appoint diverse Symbols to represent
them, but administered them apart, and by themselves, and (if there be any force
in Do this in remembrance of me) commanded them to be so administered
afterward. By which means they become, even by that separate administration, a
yet more perfect, and lively Representation of Christ's Body, and Blood, as to
the usage they received, when he, whose they were, was subjected to Death for
us.

But because the Body, and Blood of Christ are considered in this Sacrament as
to the Benefit, that was intended, and accru'd to us by them, as well as to the
usage they received (For This is my Body, which is given, or broken for you,
say St. Luke, and St. Paul, and This is my Blood of the New Testament, or the
New Testament in it, which is shed for you, say all the Evangelists upon this
Argument) Therefore enquire we wherein the Elements of Bread, and Wine, are a
sign of his Body, and Blood, as to that Benefit, they were so intended, and
given for. Which will soon appear if we consider what the proper use of those
Elements is, what we are required to do with them, and what is elsewhere said
concerning that Body, and Blood, when considered with respect to our welfare,
and advantage; These several things making it evident, that they become a sign
of Christ's Body, and Blood, by the use they are of to nourish, and refresh us.
For as we cannot lightly think, but that when our Savior made choice of such
things, as those, to represent the usefulness of his Body, and Blood to us, he
made choice of them for that purpose with respect to their proper usefulness,
as which is both most notorious in them, and most apt to affect the Mind of
him, to whom they are suggested; So much less can we think otherwise of them,
when he moreover requires us to eat of the one, and drink of the other, which
are the ways by which we are to receive that nourishment, and refreshment,
which we have said them to be so useful for. Otherwise any thing else might
have been as proper for the purpose, as Bread, and Wine; Or if God, who may no
doubt make use of what Methods he pleases, thought good however to make choice
of Bread, and Wine, to represent Christ's Body, and Blood, yet he might have
contented himself to have enjoined upon us the casting our Eyes upon them, and
not, as we find he does, prompted us to eat, and drink of them, as that too in
remembrance of him, and them. For what need would there be of eating, and
drinking those Elements in remembrance of his Body, and Blood, or indeed what
aptness in so doing, to call them to our own Minds, or the Minds of others?
were it not that there were somewhat in them to represent the usefulness of
Christ's Body, and Blood, which was not to be drawn from them, or so sensibly
perceived in them, as by eating, and drinking of them. This I take to be a
competent evidence of Bread, and Wine's becoming a sign by the use they are of
to nourish, and refresh us; But I am yet more convinced of it by what is
elsewhere said concerning Christ's Body, and Blood, when considered (as they
are here) as to our Benefit, and advantage. Even that his Flesh, or Body was
food (...).
indeed, and his Blood drink indeed Joh. 6.55.
, and that accordingly except his Disciples ate that Flesh of his, and drank
his Blood, Joh. 6.53.
they could have no life in them, but if they did Joh. 6.54.
they should have eternal Life; In fine, that the flesh Joh. 6.51.
, which he should give for the life of the World, was in the nature of Bread to
them, and so represented by him throughout that whole Discourse. For if
Christ's Body, and Blood be in the nature of Food, and drink to us; If they be
so far such, that we are required to eat, and drink of them, and so also, that
we cannot promise our selves life without them: That Bread, and Wine, which in
the present Sacrament are appointed to signify, and represent them, cannot be
thought by any more proper way to be a Sign, or Representation of them, than by
their usefulness as Bread, and Drink to nourish, and refresh our Bodies, to
maintain them in their present beings, and fill them with joy, and gladness.

4. The fourth thing to be inquired as concerning the Bread, and Wine of this
Sacrament is, what evidence there is of Christ's commanding us to receive them.
A question, which one would think might soon be voided by the words of the
Institution it self; Take, Eat, This is my Body being the voice of our Savior
concerning the Bread, and Drink ye all of it, and This do ye, as often as ye
drink it, in remembrance of me, being the words of the same Jesus in St.
Matthew, and St. Paul concerning the Cup, which one would think to be
sufficient expresses of Christ's command concerning it. But as nothing is
enough to those, who are prejudiced against any Doctrine, as it is apparent
that the Church of Rome was against the use of the Cup, when this business came
to be debated in the Council of Trent; So that Council did not only determine,
that whole, and entire Christ is contained under either species, and
particularly under the species of Bread Sess. 13. cap. 3.
, but that the faithful are not obliged by any command of the Lord to receive
both species Sess. 21. cap. 1.
, and that accordingly, if any shall say that all, and singular the faithful
people of Christ are obliged to take both species, either by virtue of any
command from God, or as of necessity to Salvation ib. Can. 1.
, he ought to be anathematized for it, or rather has already incurred it. For
which cause it will be necessary for us to show, that the faithful are obliged
by the Command of Christ to receive the Cup, and then answer the principal
reasons, that are brought against it.

And here in the first place I would gladly know, whether there be, or ever
were any command from Christ for the receiving of the Cup, whether by the
Apostles at first, or the Priest that consecrates now, whatsoever become of
simple Laymen, or the Priests, that do not officiate, and are therefore so far
forth reckoned in the number of the other. The ground of which question is,
because the Council of Trent does not say, that there is no command from Christ
for the faithful's receiving the Cup, but that the faithful are not bound by
any command of his to the taking of both species; and again, that if any shall
say that all the faithful ought to take both species by virtue of any command
of God, let him be Anathema. For possibly (for ought that does appear from the
words of that Council) there may have been a Command from Christ for all the
faithful's receiving the Cup, but which it is in the power of the Church (as we
are not ignorant of the asserted plenitude thereof) to cassate, or dispense
with it. And possibly too there is no command for any either Lay, or Clergies
receiving either the Cup, or the Bread, and so, if the Church pleases, we may,
and ought to bid Farewell to the Sacrament it self, as well as to the Cup of it.
For that I make no unreasonable supposition here, is evident from Fisher the
Jesuite's See his Answer in White's Reply on Point 7. page 473.
questioning, whether Christ gave any precept at all in the matter of the Cup,
and his distinguishing between precept, and institution, which will avail as
well against the Bread, as against the Cup. Which things being not first
decided, it will indeed be to no great purpose to argue with them about the
faithful's obligation to receive the Cup, or for them to put us upon the proof
of it; Because the true Question may perhaps be, whether there be any Command
at all for any sort of Men's receiving the Cup, or indeed the Sacrament it self
in any part of it. Which if it be, both Clergy, and Laity are under the same
Condition, and the Question ought to be, Whether the whole matter of the
Eucharist were not matter of Advice even to the Apostles themselves, rather
than any thing of a Command. But as we cannot but think, that Take, Eat, and
Drink ye all of this, are express Commands to some Persons, or other, because
they run in the same form with Tell it to the Church, and Obey those that have
the Rule over you, upon which kind of Texts all Ecclesiastical Authority is
founded; so we shall therefore take it for granted, that the matter of the Cup
is a Precept, and accordingly go on to enquire, for whom this Precept was
intended, and to whom it was directed by our Savior.

Now as if this Precept was intended for any, to be sure it was intended for
our Savior's Disciples, because the Persons to whom it was immediately given;
So it must consequently be intended for them, either in their personal
capacity, and so, that it was to reach no farther than themselves, or as they
were the Representatives of others also. If the Romanists say the former, they
do not only alter the state of the Question, and make the future both Laity and
Clergy in the same Condition as to this particular, but make it as indifferent
too, as to any thing of a Command from Christ, whether the future Clergy, or
Laity partake of the Sacrament at all, even in the Bread of it. Which how
unreasonable it is, may appear from St. Paul's pressing the Corinthians with
the Institution of Christ in the matter of the Eucharist, and particularly with
the Precept, Take, Eat, and Do this in remembrance of me. For by that it should
seem that what was enjoined upon the Disciples, at least as to the Element of
Bread, was enjoined upon them, as the Representatives of others also. And if
the Bread was so, why not also the Cup, that went along with it, and concerning
which the words of our Savior in S. Matthew are as express, Drink ye all of
this, and St. Mark tells us, that he alike gave them, and they all drank of it?
And I know of nothing, that can look like the shadow of an Objection against
this way of reasoning, unless it be what some have vainly objected, that St.
Paul does not deliver it as a Precept from Christ, that the Apostles, and after
them others should drink of it, but that, when they did drink of it, or as
often as they did, they should do it in remembrance of him, as if there were
nothing absolute concerning the Cup. But as the contrary is plain enough from
St. Matthew, who brings in our Savior enjoining them to drink all of it, and
as it happens too without the addition of doing what they did in remembrance of
him, lest any should satisfy themselves with so vain a subterfuge; So there
was reason enough for St. Paul, after his accurate rehearsal of the whole
Institution of the Bread, and of our Savior's Command concerning it, to
content himself with saying, Do this, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of
me: Partly, because this form of Speech, or Command was enough to confute, and
discountenance that unworthy partaking of the Lord's Supper, which was so rife
among the Corinthians, and for the discountenancing whereof this account of
Christ's Institution was given; But especially, because that (...), or in like
manner the Cup, wherewith St. Paul ushers in that part of the Institution,
which respected it, did sufficiently imply Christ's doing alike to, and
enjoining alike concerning the Cup, as he had before affirmed him to have done
to, or concerning the Bread, so far as the different nature of the Elements did
permit. Otherwise we must suppose St. Paul to have thought the blessing of the
Cup as indifferent a thing, as the Romanists make the use of it to be, which
yet it is evident from this Epistle, that he did not: He representing that
Blessing as a thing of so great concernment, as to give denomination to the Cup
1 Cor. 10.16.
, and not only so, but intimating it to be of like use to make it to become the
Communion of Christ's Blood.

The Cup therefore, or rather the Command concerning the use of it being
manifestly intended for the Disciples of Christ, not in their personal capacity
only, but as they were also Representatives of others; Enquire we in the next
place, whether it was intended for them as Representatives of all the faithful
whatsoever, or as Representatives of the Clergy only, and particularly of such
of them, as were to consecrate the Bread, and it. A Question, which one would
think might easily be answered by considering that, when the Sacrament was
first instituted, the Disciples had no hand at all in the Consecration of the
one, or the other Element, but he, by whom it was instituted. For our Savior
making no use of their Assistance in consecrating the Cup, or Bread, they are
to be looked upon rather as Laymen, than Clergymen as to any thing they were
then enjoined; Unless the thing enjoined could be otherwise made appear to be
proper to Clergymen as such. Even as it is apparent that the Romanists
themselves look upon such of their own Clergy, as do not consecrate the
Eucharist, and accordingly withhold the Cup from them, as well as from the
meanest Layman. Now what is there in the receipt of the Cup, that we should
think it to be proper to the Clergy? What in the Command of Christ concerning
it to intimate any such thing? what in the reason of the thing enjoined to
persuade it? For as there is no difference, so far as we can see, between Take,
Eat the Bread, and drink ye all of the Cup, that we should think one to respect
the Clergy, any more than the other; So one would think the reason assigned by
our Savior in St. Matthew for their drinking all of it, even because it was
his Blood of the New Testament, which was shed for many for the remission of
Sins, should concern the Laity, as well as the Clergy that consecrate, and
consequently that Precept also, which it was intended to enforce. Unless we
should think, or indeed could, that the Laity, and fuch of the Clergy, as do
not consecrate, have no interest in Christ's Blood, or the Benefits thereof, or
at least that they were no way obliged with due thankfulness to remember it.
But beside that our Savior's Disciples had no interest in consecrating that
Eucharist, which he celebrated with them, and were therefore so far forth to be
looked upon rather as Laymen, than Clergymen, and consequently Representers
of those, that were such, where there was nothing enjoined upon them, that was
not manifestly peculiar to them as Priests; St. Paul, where he repeats the same
Institution of Christ, does not only make no difference between Priest and
People as to this particular, but rather suppose the Cup to be common to all,
and accordingly both warns all to beware of such an unworthy receiving of it,
as they had been before guilty of, and exhorts them as indifferently, after
they had well examined themselves, to drink of the Cup, as to eat of the Bread:
Thereby farther intimating, that they were all alike concerned in the thing it
self, I mean as to the receipt of it. So that, for ought that hitherto does
appear, we must not only look upon the receipt of the Cup as a thing under
Command, but under such a Command too, as respects People, as well as Priest,
yea as well as that very Priest that consecrates it, and the other Element.
Which will consequently leave nothing more to enquire upon this head, than
whether as the receipt of the Cup, even by the Faithful, be a thing under
Command, so those Faithful are under the obligation of it, and bound by it to
the receiving of the Cup.

Now though a Command, as such, does naturally oblige, and consequently they,
that are under it, are obliged by it, and to that, which is the matter of it;
Yet because question may seem to have been made by the Council of Trent rather
concerning Men's being bound by any Precept of Christ to receive the Cup, than
concerning the Precept it self, therefore I will set my self more particularly
to the resolution thereof, and, together with that, of those Objections that
are made against it. In order thereunto asserting, first, that if there be such
a Command, as we have before evinced, they, for whom that Command was intended,
are generally obliged by it to that, which is the matter of it: This being no
more, than what the very nature of a Command enforces, and the Credit of the
Author of it persuades. For as it is of the nature of a Command to oblige, and
consequently they, that are under it, generally obliged by it, as without which
otherwise that Command would not have its end; So it is not for the Credit of
him, that gave it, either to prescribe that, which cannot generally be
observed, or not to hold those, that can, to the obligation of it: This opening
a way to the contempt of his Authority, and not only to reject this, or that
particular Command, but all. From whence as it will follow, that it must be
only as to some Persons, and some Cases, that the Precept of the Cup must be
thought not to oblige, if indeed it do not; So that alone being granted, the
depriving of whole Towns, and Provinces, and Kingdoms of the Cup, will admit of
no Excuse, which will be enough to justify us for separating from the Church
of Rome in this Affair, and to condemn the Church of Rome for usurping so much
upon the World against a Divine Institution, and Command: Only to dispense with
a Law, as to the Major part, being rather to destroy, than dispense with it;
How much more then to hinder the Major part from the observance of it by
contrary Decrees, and by Anathema's upon those, who shall not acquiesce in
them? But because all we have hitherto said tends only to show, that the
generality of Christians are obliged to the receipt of the Cup, which is an
intimation, unless we proceed farther, that some Persons, and in some Cases,
may be exempted from the Obligation; And because the Church of Rome pretends
that she is not without reasons to show, that there is no Obligation upon all,
and singular the Faithful, to receive it; Therefore I will now proceed to
consider the reasons of that Pretense, and show whether, or no, and how far
they ought to be admitted.

And first it is pretended that there are some Countries in the World, which
are not furnished with Wine, nor can, it may be, with any Convenience furnish
themselves from other places, or at all for public, and general Communions.
And I will not deny but such places there may be, and that they cannot
therefore (because no one can be tied to that which is impossible) be obliged
either to celebrate, or receive the Eucharist in it. But as this signifies
nothing to the defense of those, who forbid it where it may be had, and is
therefore very frivolously alleged in the present Case; So I shall upon the
strength of what I have before said, refer it to Consideration, whether some
other generous Liquor, which I suppose few Nations want, may not be substituted
in the place of Wine, and so the Cup be preserved, though that specifical
Liquor cannot.

It is pretended, secondly, (which I doubt not might give the first occasion to
the taking of it away) that there would be great danger of irreverence
otherwise by shedding the Liquor of it either in the Church by carrying it to
the Communicants there, or in carrying of it, especially over the Mountains in
Winter, to sick Persons; By the hanging of some part of it in the Beards of the
Laics, wheresoever it was delivered to them, or by its growing sour by being
kept. For to these, and the like Purposes did some of the Fathers of the
Council of Trent discourse Hist. of the Council of Trent li. 6. p. 521.
, and as it should seem too out of Gerson the learned Chancellor of Paris. But
a Man would wonder, first, that if these were just Reasons for abridging the
Laity of the Cup, they should not have prevailed with our Savior (who
certainly knew all, that might hereafter happen) not to admit them to it at the
first, but however that they should not have taken him off from enjoining them
to drink of it. A Man would wonder as much, secondly, why there should be
thought to be so great a danger of shedding in carrying about the Cup in the
Church, when among us, who practice it in great Congregations, no such danger
does appear, and when that danger may in a great measure be prevented by
bringing those, that are to receive, to the Rails of the Communion Table, to
take it from the Priest there. And a Man would wonder no less, thirdly, why so
much ado should be made about the carrying of it to sick Folks, and the danger
that attends it, especially when it is over Mountains. Because if Men were
prompted, as they ought, to a frequent Communion in the public Assemblies,
there would be the less need of carrying it to them, when sick; Or, if it were
thought meet however, that they should receive the Communion, when sick, it
might be consecrated, as well as administered to them at home, and a reasonable
number of Communicants provided to receive with them, as it is with us. Or, if
that were not thought fit neither, but that they must by all means be debarred
the Cup, because of the danger of the Liquors growing sour by being kept for
them, or of its shedding in the carriage; yet is there no imaginable reason why
they, that are whole, and come to it, instead of expecting its being brought to
them, should be therefore deprived of it even in the Church, because it may not
be convenient to be brought to their Houses, it may be, once. These things, I
say, a Man might well wonder at, but especially when they are urged, as they
are, for a total removing of the Cup. But a Man would more than wonder,
fourthly, if he did not know the force of Prejudice, and Custom, that the
hanging of the Liquor in the Laymen's Beards should be made so great a
difficulty, and danger, as to debar them of the use of it. For not to say that
it is strange that, if that were so considerable a thing, neither our Savior
should be aware of it, when he instituted the Cup, nor the Church in so many
Centuries of Years take care to prevent it, especially when Beards were more in
Fashion, than they have been of late; A Man would think, that if the Blood of
Christ, and the observation of a Command of his were a matter of as great
moment, as the fear of the loss of any of that Blood in the Laymens Beards; A
Man would think, I say, that in such a Case both the Priests should have
enjoined the Laity, and the Laity for that time have willingly submitted to the
shaving of their Beards, rather than have suffered themselves, for the sake of
such an excrement, to be robbed of Christ's Blood, or go against his
Institution, and Command: To take away the Cup of the Sacrament for such like
Fears as these, being somewhat more extravagant than Lycurgus King of Thrace's
cutting down all the Vines of his Kingdom for fear of the ill use that might be
made of the Fruit of them. In fine, a Man might wonder (if such like things, as
these, were an affront to the Holy Sacrament, and, as such, of sufficient force
to remove the use of the Cup) why our Savior should not have found out some
more decent place, than the Stomach of the Faithful to bestow one Element of
the Sacrament in, or than the Stomach of the Priest to bestow them both; They,
who are acquainted with the inside of that, knowing it in that respect, to be a
more unseemly place for one, or the other Element to be lodged in, than many of
those, which they seem to be so jealous of, and for fear of any pollution by
which they deprive the Faithful of the benefit of the Cup, and of that, whether
Wine, or Blood, that is contained in it.

The third thing pretended for depriving the Faithful of the Cup is, that
whole, and entire Christ is contained under one only Species Trid. Conc. Sess.
21. cap. 3.
. Which the Council of Trent does so peremptorily affirm, that it pronounces
an Anathema upon any one that shall deny ib. Can. 3.
, that whole, and entire Christ the Fountain, and Author of all Graces is
received under the only Species of Bread. For, if that be true, what need is
there of the receipt of the Cup by them, or indeed what presumption of Christ's
having given any Command concerning it? But are they so sure, as they would be
thought to be, that whole, and entire Christ is contained under the sole
Species of Bread? Or, if it were, that it were therefore indifferent, whether
we received the Cup, or no? Nay, is there not sufficient reason to believe that
whole, and entire Christ is not contained under it, but under the one, and
other Species? For beside that our Savior, by making choice of two distinct
Elements to become them, made as manifest a separation between his Body, and
Blood in the Sacrament, as he did upon the Cross, and may therefore be presumed
to give them (if he gave them at all in their sense) not conjunctly, but apart,
and in that separate estate, in which he had put them; Beside that he required
not only two distinct, and separate Acts (those of eating, and drinking I mean)
but two Acts, that were distant in time toward the partaking of that Body, and
Blood, and may therefore be yet more presumed to give them not conjunctly, but
apart, and agreeably to those Acts, which he enjoined for the partaking of
them; If the Body, and Blood of Christ are contained under, and received with
the sole Species of Bread (as to be fure they must, if whole, and entire Christ
be) It must be either by virtue of those words, Hoc est corpus meum, This is my
Body; or by virtue of those words, and the words that follow, even This is my
Blood of the New Testament (As one would think that they, who lay so much
stress upon those words, should readily grant either the one, or the other) or
by virtue of that natural Connection and Concomitancy (to speak the words Sess.
13. cap. 3.
of the Trent-Council) whereby the parts of the Lord Christ, who is now risen
from the dead, no more to die again, are joined together between themselves. If
they, who maintain whole Christ (and consequently his Body; and Blood) to be
contained under the Species of Bread, affirm that to be by the sole virtue of
those words, Hoc est corpus meum, or, This is my Body; They must consequently
make them signify, This is my Blood, as well as my Body, as without which,
even in their own opinion, so omnipotent an Effect is not to be produced. Which
supposed, I would fain know whether they signify so much always, or only when
the Sacrament is administered in one kind, and to those alone, to whom it is so
administered. If the words, Hoc est corpus meum, signify so always, (and the
like will follow, if the Body and Blood of Christ be by any means brought
together under the Species of Bread) then is there no necessity, nor ever was
of any Man's receiving the Cup, whether he be Priest, or private Person,
Consecrater of the Bread, and it, or only a simple Communicant. Then every one
too, that heretofore did, or now does receive in both kinds, does in one, and
the same Eucharist receive the Blood twice, once in the Species of Bread, and
again in the Species of Wine. In fine, by the same Rule, and their affirming
whole Christ to be contained under either Species, Hoc est corpus meum may be
as proper to make a Transubstantiation of the Cup, as it is a
Transubstantiation of the Bread. The two former whereof render our Savior's
injunction concerning the receipt of the Cup perfectly unnecessary; The last
gives us occasion to wonder, why our Savior (who to be sure affected no change
of Phrase) did not make use of the same Hoc est corpus meum to make an
alteration of the Cup, especially when, if he had, it might have so aptly
hinted to us the sufficiency of one only Species to possess us of his Body, and
Blood. These I take to be the natural Consequences of making Hoc est corpus
meum to signify at all times, This is my Body, and Blood, and by virtue
thereof to possess the Receivers of that, over which they are pronounced, of
whole, and entire Christ. And if, on the other side, they with whom we have to
do, make those words to signify so only, where the Sacrament is administered
but in one kind, and only to those, to whom it is so administered, they must
consequently make the very same words, Hoc est corpus meum, to signify one
thing to the Layman, who receives but in one kind, and another to the Priest,
that consecrates, and receives in both. Which beside that it will make the
signification of those words to be arbitrary, and according as the Priest shall
intend them, will make them vary from the signification they had in the
Institution of Christ, which is, and ought to be the Pattern of all: Our
Savior, as he both instituted, and distributed the Sacrament in both kinds, so
to be sure making the words, Hoc est corpus meum, to signify only This is my
Body apart from my Blood, as which latter he both appointed a distinct Element
for, and (as they love to speak) converted that distinct Element into by words
equally fitted for such a Conversion. I think, I shall not need to say much to
show the Bread of the Sacrament not to be converted into Christ's Body, and
Blood, by the force of the words, This is my Body, and, This is my Blood, as if
the latter extended to the Species of the former, as well as to its own proper
Sacrament, even the Liquor of the Cup: Both because those words are not applied
even by themselves to the Bread, but to the Cup, and cannot therefore in reason
be thought to have any operation upon the former; And because our Savior in
that Eucharist, which he consecrated for his Disciples, gave them the Bread of
it to eat, before he proceeded to the Consecration of the Cup, and before
therefore it could be supposed to receive any influence from those words, This
is my Blood, as which were not till some time after, pronounced by him. One
only Device remains to bring Christ's Blood, as well as Body under the Species
of Bread, called by the Schoolmen Concomitancy, but ought rather by the
Romanists explication of it, and indeed by the words natural connection before
used by the Council of Trent, to be termed, a real Union. By virtue of which if
Christ's Blood, and Body are brought together under the Species of Bread,
Christ's Body in the Sacrament, even that, which the words, Hoc est corpus
meum, produced, is no more that Body, which was broken upon the Cross, at least
considered as such (for that to be sure was separated from his Blood) but his
Body entire, and perfect. And then farewell not only to the natural
signification of Hoc est corpus meum, and quod pro vobis frangitur, but to the
Sacrifice of Christ's Body in the Eucharist, which yet they have hitherto so
contended for, as not to think it to be such only by a Figure or Memorial of
it. Such reason is there to believe, how confidently soever the contrary is
affirmed, that Christ's Body and Blood are not contained under the single
Species of Bread. And yet if that could be proved, it would not therefore
follow, that it were an indifferent thing, whether we received the Cup, or no.
For the design of the several Species, and our receipt of them 1 Cor. 11.26.
being to show forth to others the Lord's Death, as well as to possess our
selves of his Body, and Blood; If that be not to be compassed without the
receipt of the Cup, it will make the use of it to be so far necessary, what ever
we may gain by the Bread alone: He satisfying not his Duty, who complies with
one end of any thing to the neglect of another, as that too which tends
apparently to the Honor of the Institutor, as to be sure the Commemoration of
our Savior's Death, and Passion does. Now that the Death of our Savior cannot
be otherwise shown forth, or at least not as he himself represented it, without
the receipt of the Cup, as well as Bread, may appear from his own representing
his Death as a thing effected by the shedding, or pouring out of his Blood (For
so it is in the several Evangelists) as well as by the breaking of his Body;
Blood shed, or poured out of a Body being not to be represented in a Sacrament,
but by a Species at least distinct from the Species of that Body, nor we
therefore in a capacity so to represent, or show it forth by our receiving, but
by the receipt of such a distinct one. Add hereunto, that as it is agreed among
all Men, that the Death which we are to represent, or show forth, has the
nature of a Sacrifice, and the Eucharist it self for that reason represented by
the Romanists as such; So it is alike certain, and agreed, that there is
nothing more considerable in the Sacrifice of Christ's Death, than the shedding
of his Blood, as to which he himself peculiarly attributes the Remission of
Sins. Which Sacrifice therefore whosoever will show forth; as to that
particular, by the receipt of the Sacrament of it, he must do it by the receipt
of such a Symbol, as may represent the Blood of Christ as separated from his
Body, which nothing but a Symbol distinct from that of the Body can, and
therefore neither (because there is no other here) but that Cup, whereof we
speak.

I may not forget to represent as a fourth Pretense, because suggested by the
Council of Trent Sess. 21. cap. 2.
that the receipt of the Cup is not of the substance of the Sacrament, and may
therefore by the Church be either granted, or denied, as it shall seem most
expedient to her. But as if any thing be of the substance of the Sacrament, the
doing of that must be, which tends most apparently to set forth the Sacrifice
of Christ's Death upon the Cross, as which was one great end of its
Institution, and the most clearly expressed in it; So nothing does, or can tend
more apparently to the setting forth of that, than Men's partaking of that Cup,
which was by our Savior himself intended to represent the Blood of that
Sacrifice of his, as poured out for our Expiation, and Remission.

PART V. Of the inward Part of the Lord's Supper, or the thing signified by it.
The Contents.
The inward Part of the Lord's Supper, or the thing signified by it, is either
what is signified on the part of God, and Christ, or on the part of the
Receiver of it. The former of these brought under Consideration, and shown to
be the Body and Blood of Christ, not as they were at, or before the Institution
of this Sacrament, or as they now are, but as they were at the time of his
Crucifixion, as moreover then offered up unto God, and offered up to him also
as a propitiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of the World. The Consequences of that
Assertion briefly noted, both as to the presence of that Body, and Blood in the
Sacrament, and our perception of them. The things signified on the part of the
Receiver in the next place considered, and these shown to be, First, a thankful
Remembrance of the Body, and Blood of Christ considered as before described.
Secondly, our Communion with those, who partake with us of that Body, and
Blood. Thirdly, a Resolution to live, and act as becomes those, that are
partakers of them. The two latter of these more particularly insisted on, and
that Communion, and Resolution not only shown from the Scripture to be
signified on the part of the Receiver, but confirmed by the Doctrine, and
Practice of the Ancient Church.

outward Part, or Sign of the Lord's Supper being thus accounted for, Question.
What is the inward part, or thing signified.
and that shown to be no other than Bread, and Wine, which the Lord has
commanded to be received; Reason would, as well as the Method before laid down,
that I should entreat of the inward part thereof, or the thing signified by it.
Answer. The Body, and Blood of Crhist, which are verily, and indeed taken, and
received by the Faithful in the Lord's Supper.
Which on the part of God, and Christ, is that Christ's Body, and Blood; As, on
our part, a thankful Remembrance of them, our Communion with those, who partake
with us thereof, and a Resolution to live, and act as becomes those, that are
partakers of them.

That which our Catechism obliges us especially to consider, is that which is
signified on the part of God, and Christ, and which accordingly it declares to
be that Christ's Body, and Blood. A thing, which considered in the general,
admits of no dispute, because the plain Assertion of the Scripture, as well as
the Acknowledgment of all sorts of Men, however otherwise divided about the
Sacrament thereof, or the presence of that Body, and Blood in it: They all
agreeing, as they must, that the Body of Christ is that, which is signified by
one of its Signs, and the Blood of Christ, which is signified by the other. But
as it is not so well agreed under what Notion we are to consider that Body, and
Blood, nor, for ought that I have observed, much attended to, which is, it may
be, the principal Cause of all the Controversy in this Particular; So I shall
therefore, for the farther clearing of the thing, or things signified by this
Sacrament, enquire under what Notion we ought to consider them, which (if we
have a due regard to the words of the Institution) will not be so difficult to
unfold. For from thence it will appear, first, that we ought to consider
Christ's Body, and Blood here, not in the state wherein they were at, or before
the Institution of this Sacrament, or in that more happy one, to which they are
now arrived, but as they were at the time of our Savior's Crucifixion; To wit,
the one as given to Death, or broken, and the other as shed for us. Which St.
Paul farther confirms, when he tells his Corinthians 1 Cor. 11.26.
, that as often as they ate the Bread of this Sacrament, and drank the Cup of
it, they did show forth the Lord's death till he came. The consequent whereof
will be, secondly (because that Death of Christ is represented by the
Scriptures as a Sacrifice) that we ought to look upon that Body, and Blood of
Christ, which we have said to be signified by this Sacrament, as offered unto
God by him, and as such to be considered in it. Which they of all Men have the
least reason to refuse, who do not only affirm Conc. Trid. Sess. 22. cap. 1.
with us, that this Sacrament was intended for a Memorial of the Sacrifice of
Christ upon the Cross, but that the Body, and Blood of Christ is even now Ibid.
offered up to God in it under the respective Species thereof. It is as little
to be doubted, thirdly, That as we ought to consider the Body, and Blood of
Christ here as offered up to God for us, so we ought to consider them as
offered up as a propitiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of those Persons, for whom
it is offered. Which is not only evident from the words of the Institution,
because representing the Cup of this Sacrament as the Blood of the New
Testament, which is shed for many for the Remission of Sins, but abundantly
confirmed by the suffrage of those Men, with whom we have most to do in this
Affair; They not only representing the Sacrifice of the Mass, as they are
pleased to call this Sacrament, as one and the same Sacrifice with that, which
our Savior offered upon the Cross, but as a truly propitiatory one Ib. cap. 2.
, and which accordingly is of force for the sins of the quick and the dead, and
tends to the remission of them.

Of what use these Considerations are, will more fully appear, when I come to
entreat of that relation, which the outward Signs of this Sacrament have to the
inward part thereof, or the things signified by them. At present it may suffice
briefly to note, that the Body and Blood of Christ considered as broken, and
shed upon the Cross, having now no Existence in the World, nor any more capable
of having such an Existence, than that, which is past, can be recalled; They
cannot be substantially present either to the Sacramental Elements, or to the
Person that receives them, nor be substantially eaten, and drunken by him,
that eats, and drinks the other; That they must therefore be present to the
Sacramental Elements in a Figure, or Mystery, and to the Receiver by their
respective Virtue, and Efficacy; That being (as was before said) to be
considered as offered up to God to atone his Wrath, and to procure the
remission of our Sins, and all other Graces, they must consequently be looked
upon not as the immediate producers of those Effects, which are attributed to
them, but as meritorious Causes thereof, and disposing God, who is the giver of
every good and perfect Gift, to produce them; That therefore if the Body, and
Blood of Christ strengthen, and refresh the Soul of the Receiver, as the
Sacramental Signs thereof do the Body of him, that receives them, they must do
it in the way of a meritorious Cause, and such as disposes God to grant to the
worthy Receiver of the Sacrament the pardon of his Sin, which is that, which
especially refreshes the Soul, and Grace, whereby he may be strengthened with
might by his Spirit in the inner Man; In fine, that the Body, and Blood of
Christ cannot otherwise be eaten, and drunken, than by the Mind meditating upon
the Merits, and Satisfaction of that Offering, which our Savior made of them,
and relying wholly upon them for that Salvation, which it expects.

But leaving these things to be discussed in a more proper place, where I shall
also have an occasion to add farther light and strength to them; Let us in the
next place reflect upon that, which I have said to be signified on our part by
the Signs of the Lord's Supper, which are these three especially: First, a
thankful Remembrance of the Body, and Blood of Christ considered as before
described; Secondly, our Communion with those, who partake with us thereof;
Thirdly, a Resolution to live, and act, as becomes those that are partakers of
them.

Of the first of these, little need to be said after the account I have given
of it in my Explication Part 3.
of the words of the Institution. It may suffice here to observe from thence,
that as the words of our Savior are express, that we should do what is
enjoined as to the outward Elements of this Sacrament, for a thankful
Remembrance of the offering up of his Body, and Blood; So what is done by the
Priest to those Elements, and our receiving them from him in that state, is a
lively Representation to our Minds of the offering up of Christ's Body, and
Blood, and a thankful Remembrance thereof therefore not unreasonably looked
upon as one of those things, which are signified on our part by the Sacrament
thereof.

The second thing signified on our part by the outward Elements of this
Sacrament is our Communion with those, who partake with us of Christ's Body,
and Blood. A thing which St. Paul does not only fairly intimate, where he
affirms 1 Cor. 10.17.
, that we being many are one Bread, and one Body, because we all partake of
that one Bread, which he had before affirmed to be the Communion of Christ's
Body; But points us to those things, by which this Communion of ours is
signified, even the unity of that Bread, which is one of the Elements of this
Sacrament, and our partaking together of it. For as there can be no better
account given of St. Paul's calling us one Bread, and one Body, than that we
our selves, though many, are yet one mystical Body, as that Bread though made
up of several Granes, is one Loaf, and ought accordingly to be thereby
admonished of that intimate Communion, which ought to be between us in all
Offices of Christian Love, and Friendship; So there is nothing more usual with
the Ancients, than to represent that Unity of the Bread, and Wine in the
Sacrament as a Symbol of ours, and of that Communion, and Fellowship which
ought therefore to be between us. For by this Sacrament, says St. Cyprian Ep.
63. ad Caecil. de Sacr. Dom. Calicis. Quo and ipso Sacramento populus noster
ostenditur adunatus, ut quemadmodum grana multa in unun collecta and commolita,
and commixta, panem unum faciunt; Sic in Chrislo, qui est panis coelestis, unum
sciamus esse Corpus, cui conjunctus sit noster numerus and adunatus.
, Our People is also showed to be made one, that as many Grains collected into
one, and ground, and mixed together, make one Loaf; so in Christ, who is the
heavenly Bread, we may know there is one Body, to which our number is conjoined
and united. And again, Finally, says the same Father Denique unanimitatem
Christianam firma sibi atque inseparabili charitate connexam etiam ipsa
dominica sacrificia declarant. Nam quando Dominus corpus suum panem vocat de
multorum granorum adunatione congestum, populum nostrum quem portabat indicat
adunatum; Et quando sanguinem sunm vinum appellat de botris atque acinis
plurimis expressum, atque in unum coactum, gregem item nostrum significat
commixtione adunatae multitudinis copulatum. Epist. 76. ad Magnum de Bapt.
Novatianis, etc.
, the Sacrifices of our Lord do also declare that Christian Unanimity, which is
connected to it self by a firm, and inseparable Charity. For when the Lord
gives the title of his Body to that Bread, which is made up of the Union of
many Granes, he shows our People, whom he carried, to be united together: and
when he gives the title of his Blood to that Wine, which is pressed out of many
Bunches and Grapes, and gathered into one, he also signifies our People coupled
together by the commixture of an united multitude. Thus St. Cyprian, and other
of the Ancients argue from the Unity of the Bread, and Wine, that Union, and
Communion, which ought to be between the Faithful, and consequently show that
Communion to be one of those things, which are signified, on our part, by the
Elements of this Sacrament. And St. Paul, without any Comment upon him, will
help us to infer, that the same Communion is signified by the Faithful's
partaking together of them, where he declares us to be one Bread, and one Body,
for that we all partake of one Bread. For if barely to eat, and drink together
be a Symbol of Love, and Friendship, and accordingly often employed both by
Jews, and Heathen See a Discourse concerning the true Notion of the Lord's
Supper, by R.C. cap. 6.
as a Ceremony, whereby they declared their entering into Covenant, or being at
Peace with one another; How much more may we affirm the same, after so clear an
Affirmation of St. Paul, of Men's partaking of the same mystical Bread, and
Wine? Even of that mystical Bread, and Wine, which was instituted by him, who
above all other things enjoined upon his Disciples the Love of one another, and
gave that as the great Characteristick, whereby they should be known to be so.
Sure I am, the Ancients were so persuaded of this Communion's being a thing
signified by this Sacrament, that (as I have elsewhere Expl. of the Creed. Art.
The holy Catholic Church.
shown from Irenaeus) the ancient Presbyters of Rome, in Testimony of that
Communion, sent the Mysteries of this Sacrament to the Presbyters of those very
Churches, that differed from them about the observation of Easter; And the like
was done by other Churches, as appears by the fourteenth Canon of the Council
of Laodicea, till it was forbidden by that Council, because of the
inconveniences thereof.

The third thing signified, on our part, by the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper
is a Resolution to live, and act as becomes those, that are partakers of
Christ's Body, and Blood. For the evidencing whereof we are to know, that as
this Sacrament has been shown to be a Sign of the New Covenant Expl. of the
Sacraments in Genesis Part 2.
, which, as such, implies a Profession of something to be done on the part of
God; So the taking of this Sacrament must consequently imply our Covenanting to
perform whatsoever that New Covenant obliges us unto. Which what it is, will
need no other Proof, than what I have shown in another place Expl. of the
Prelimin. Quest. and Answ. etc.
to be the importance of that Sacrament, whereby we enter into it. For if that
Sacrament import the Profession of a good Conscience toward God; That new
Covenant, of which it is a Sacrament, must consequently have the same good
Conscience for the Object of it, and therefore also make the like Profession of
it to be the Duty of that Man, who takes this other Sacrament thereof. And
though it be true, that this part of the signification of the Lord's Supper is
not so clearly expressed in the Stories of the Institution of it; Yet as they
give us to understand, that we ought to take the Elements thereof in
remembrance of Christ's giving his Body, and Blood for us, so they do
consequently imply our taking them also with a Resolution to live, and act as
becomes those, that are partakers of them: That Remembrance, as it can be no
other than a thankful one, because the remembrance of such Benefits, as do
above all others require such a Remembrance of us, so connoting, as such, a
readiness to walk wellpleasing unto him, by whom those Benefits are bestowed.
Agreeable hereto is the both Language, and Practice of the Ancient Christians,
as appears by that account, which I have before given of them; Expl. of the
Sacr. in Genesis Part 1.
They not only giving this Institution as well as Baptism, the Name of a
Sacrament, in consideration of that Obligation they supposed it to lay upon the
Persons, that took it, but obliging themselves by this Sacrament, not (as too
many have since learned to do) to the perpetrating of any notorious wickedness,
but to avoid all Thefts, and Robberies, and Adulteries, the falsifying of their
Trusts, or the denying of any thing, that was committed to their Custody, when
they were called upon by the true Owner to restore it. For that those words of
Pliny are to be understood of this Sacrament, is not only evident from its
being represented as a constant Attendant of the Christians public Assemblies,
and particularly of their Assemblies before day, which the Eucharist is known
to have been Tert. de Cor. Mil. c. 3.
, but from the no mention there is in Ecclesiastical Story of any other
Sacrament in them.

PART VI. What farther relation the Sign of the Lord's Supper has to the Body,
and Blood of Christ.
The Contents.
The outward Part, or Sign of this Sacrament considered with a more particular
regard to the Body, and Blood of Christ, and Enquiry accordingly made, what
farther relation it bears to it. That it is a Means, whereby we receive the
same, as well as a Sign thereof, shown from the Doctrine of our Church, and
that Doctrine confirmed by Saint Paul's entitling it the Communion of Christ's
Body, and Blood, and by his affirming Men to be made to drink into one Spirit
by partaking of the Cup of it. Enquiry next made, what kind of Means this Sign
of the Lord's Supper is, how it conveys to us the Body, and Blood of Christ,
and how we receive them by it. To each of which Answer is made from the
Doctrine of our Church, and that Answer farther confirmed by the Doctrine of
the Scripture. The sum of which is, that this Sign of the Lord's Supper is, so
far forth, a Mean spiritual, and heavenly; That it conveys the Body, and Blood
of Christ to us, by prompting us to reflect, as the Institution requires, upon
that body, and Blood of his, and by prompting God, who has annexed them to the
due use of the Sign, to bestow that Body, and Blood upon us; In fine, that we
receive them by the Sign thereof, when we take occasion from thence to reflect
upon that Body, and Blood of Christ, which it was intended to represent, and
particularly with Faith in them. What Benefits we receive by Christ's Body, and
Blood, in the next place inquired, and as they are resolved by our Catechism to
be the strengthening, and refreshing of the Soul, so Enquiry thereupon made
what is meant by the strengthening, and refreshing of the Soul, what Evidence
there is of Christ's Body and Blood being intended for it, and how they effect
it. The Sign of the Lord's Supper a Pledge to assure us of Christ's Body, and
Blood, as well as a Means, whereby we receive them.

What farther relation, beside that of a Sign, that outward Part, or Sign of
the Lord's Supper has to the inward part, or thing signified, and particularly
to the Body, and Blood of Christ. Where first, I will declare, and confirm the
Doctrine of our own Church concerning it, and then enquire into the truth of
those Relations which the Church of Rome has advanced on the one hand, and the
Lutheran Churches on the other.

Now as our Church has defined a Sacrament to be such an outward, and visible
Sign of an inward, and Spiritual Grace, as is also ordained as a means whereby
we receive the same, and must therefore be supposed to have the same opinion of
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; So it has said enough both in its
Catechism, and elsewhere concerning that Sacrament, to show this to have been
its opinion of it. For it gives us to understand Catechism.
, that the Faithful (for whom, to be sure, this Sacrament was principally
ordained) do verily, and indeed receive the thing signified, even the Body, and
Blood of Christ, as well as the Signs of them, and that they do verily and
indeed receive that Body and Blood in the Lord's Supper, which, one would
think, were a competent Evidence of that is being a Means, whereby we receive
them. It, consequently thereto, teaches us to pray Pray. of Cons. in the
Commun. Service.
, which one would think to be of equal force as to this Particular, that we
receiving God's Creatures of Bread and Wine according to his Son, and our
Savior Jesus Christ's holy Institution, may be partakers of his most blessed
Body and Blood. In fine, it gives us to understand Art. of Rel. 28.
, (which is yet more express) that to such as rightly, worthily, and with a
true Faith receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, the Bread, which we
break, is the partaking of the Body of Christ, and likewise the Cup of
Blessing, a partaking of the Blood of Christ. For what more could have been
said (unless it had made use of that particular Expression, which yet it does
use where it declares the general nature of a Sacrament) what more, I say,
could have been said to show, that this Sacrament is no naked, or ineffectual
Sign of the Body, and Blood of Christ, but such a Sign as is also ordained as a
Means, whereby we receive the same, and so sure, and certain a one, that, if we
rightly, and worthily receive that Sign, we do as verily receive the Body and
Blood of Christ, as we do the Sacrament thereof.

How well the Scripture agrees with the Doctrine of our Church in this
Particular, will not be difficult to show, whether we do consider its making
use of the most emphatical Phrase which our Church does concerning this
Sacrament, or the Effects, which it attributes to it. For it is St. Paul 1
Cor. 10.16.
, as well as our Church, that affirms, that the Bread, which we break, is the
Communion of the Body of Christ, and that the Cup, which we bless, is the
Communion of his Blood. Words, which considering the place they have in that
Chapter from whence they are borrowed, cannot admit of a lower sense, than that
the elements of this Sacrament are at least a Means of that Communion, because
alleged by him as a proof, or at least as an illustration of their really
having fellowship with Devils, that partook of the Sacrifices, that were
offered to them. For if the Bread, and Wine of the Sacrament were not a Means,
as well as a sign of the Communion of the Body, and Blood of Christ; Neither
could the Gentiles Sacrifices be a Means of their, or other Men's Communion
with those Devils, to whom they were offered, and therefore neither charge them
with any real fellowship with Devils, but only with a sign, or semblance of it.
Which how it agrees with St. Paul's charging the partakers of those Sacrifices
with having fellowship with Devils, as that too upon the account of the
Gentiles Sacrificing to Devils, and not to God, I shall leave all sober Men to
judge. Such evidence there is from that one place of St. Paul concerning the
Lords Supper being a Means, as well as a Sign, whereby we come to partake of
the Body, and Blood of Christ. And we shall find it no less confirmed by an
effect, which the Scripture attributes to one of its Symbols, and which is in
that place by an usual Synecdoche set to denote the whole Sacrament; That, I
mean, where St. Paul affirms 1 Cor. 12.13.
, that we have been all made to drink into one Spirit. For as the foregoing
mention of Baptism makes it reasonable to believe, that these words ought to be
understood of the Cup, or Wine of the Lord's Supper; So we cannot without great
violence to the words, understand less by being made to drink into one Spirit,
than our partaking, by Means of that Cup, of the Blood of Christ, and the
Benefits thereof, of which the Spirit of God is, no doubt, one of the principal
ones: To be made to drink into that Blood, or the Spirit of God importing
somewhat more, even in common understanding, than to receive a naked sign of
them. And though I know that some of the Reformed Churches, and particularly
those of Zuinglius, and Oecolampadius's institution have been charged with
meaner thoughts concerning the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; Yet whosoever
shall take the pains to peruse what our Cosins Hist. Transubstant. Papal. cap.
2.
has collected upon this Argument, and particularly what he quotes from Bucer
ibid.
, will find that they always thought, or at least now do, that Christ's true
Body, and Blood are truly exhibited, given, and taken, together with the
visible signs of Bread, and Wine, as well as signified by them.

But because the question is not so much at present concerning this Sacrament's
being a Means, whereby we receive the Body, and Blood of Christ, as what kind
of Means it is, how it conveys to us the Body, and Blood of Christ, and how we
receive them by it; Therefore enquire we, so far as we may, what our Church
delivers in these particulars, and what evidence there is from the Scripture of
our Churches Orthodoxy therein.

Now though we may not perhaps find in any Monument of our Church a distinct,
and particular Answer to the questions before proposed; Yet we may find that in
the eight and twentieth Article of our Church, which may serve for a general
Answer to them all, and for a particular answer too to the last of them: The
Doctrine thereof being, that the Body of Christ (and the same, mutatis
mutandis, must be said of his Blood) is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper
after an heavenly, and spiritual manner only; and again, that the mean whereby
the Body of Christ is received, and taken in the Supper, is Faith. For if the
Body, and Blood of Christ be given, taken, and eaten, or drunken in the Supper
after a heavenly, and spiritual manner only, that Supper must so far forth be a
means purely heavenly, and Spiritual, the conveyance thereof of the same
heavenly and spiritual nature, and the reception of it also. And if, again, the
Mean, whereby the Body, and Blood of Christ are received, and taken in the
Supper, is Faith, then do we in the opinion of our Church receive them by
Faith, which will serve for a particular answer to the last of the questions
proposed. To all which if we add our Churches teaching us to pray to God, even
in the prayer of Consecration, that we receiving the Creatures of Bread, and
Wine according to our Savior Jesus Christ's Holy Institution, may be partakers
of his most blessed Body, and Blood, so we shall be able to make out a more
particular answer to the questions proposed, and such as we shall find reason
enough to allow.

For it appears from the premises, and particularly from the prayer of
Consecration, that the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is such a spiritual Mean,
as depends, for the force of it, not upon any virtue that is infused into it,
and much less upon any natural union there is between that, and the Body, and
Blood of Christ, but upon our receiving it, on the one hand, according to our
Saviors Holy Institution, and God's bestowing, on the other hand, Christ's
Body and Blood, upon such a reception of it. It appears therefore that the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper cannot any other way convey Christ's Body, and
Blood to us, than by prompting us, by the representation it makes to us of the
offering of that Body, and Blood upon the Cross for us, to meditate upon it,
and rely upon it for our Salvation, and by prompting God, who has annexed that
Body, and Blood to the due use of the Sacrament, to confer that Body, and Blood
upon us. In fine, it appears from the premises, and from a passage, or two For
as the benefit is great, if with a true penitent heart, and lively faith we
receive that Holy Sacrament, for then we spiritually eat the Flesh of Christ,
etc. And above all things ye must give most humble, and hearty thanks to God
the Father, etc. for the Redemption of the World by the death and passion of
our Savior, etc.
in our Church's exhortation to the Communion, that we receive the Body, and
Blood of Christ in the Sacrament, when we are thereby prompted to reflect with
a penitent, and thankful heart upon the offering Christ made of that Body, and
Blood of his upon the Cross for us, and to rely upon it for our Salvation.
Which several assertions what foundation they have in the Scripture, is in the
next place to be inquired, and the Doctrine of our Church therein established
by it.

In order whereunto we are to know, that the Body, and Blood of Christ in the
Lord's Supper, as well as out of it, are in the opinion of the Scripture not
corporal, but spiritual food, and as such therefore to be looked upon, and
owned by us. For St. Paul affirming of the Ancient Jews, that they received in
their Eucharist of Manna, and Water of the Rock, the same spiritual Meat 1 Cor.
10.3, 4.
, and drink, which we also do, and which he afterward 1 Cor. 4.
declares to be Christ, must consequently suppose what there is of Christ in
our Eucharist to be of the same spiritual nature, and because the Body and
Blood of Christ is that, which we receive by it, that that also is Spiritual
Meat and Drink, and as such to be looked upon, and owned by us. Now as if the
Body, and Blood of Christ in the Eucharist are Spiritual Meat, and Spiritual
Drink, they must consequently be communicated rather to the Soul, than to the
Body, as which alone is qualified to taste of them, and be nourished by them;
So they must be communicated to the Soul by such ways, and means, as are proper
to possess the Soul of them, and received by the same Soul by such act, or acts
thereof, as are proper to apprehend them. Which things being granted, it will
not be difficult to make answer, what kind of Mean the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper is, how it conveys to us the Body, and Blood of Christ, and how we
receive them by it. For if the things, which this Sacrament professes to
convey, be Spiritual Meat and Drink, such as are proper for the nourishment of
the Soul, and accordingly communicated to it; Then must this Sacrament, so far
forth, be a Spiritual Mean also, as which alone can make way for such Spiritual
nourishment to enter into the Soul. If again the things, which this Sacrament
conveys, must be conveyed to the Soul by such ways, as are proper to possess
the Soul of them; Then must this Sacrament convey them to it, either by
prompting the Soul to reflect, as the Institution requires, upon that Body, and
Blood of Christ, which it was intended to represent, or by prompting God, who
has annexed that Body, and Blood to the due use of it, to confer that Body,
and Blood upon us: These being the only ways by which that Spiritual repast can
be communicated to that Soul, for which it was intended. In like manner, if the
things, which this Sacrament conveys, are to be received by such Act or Acts of
the Soul, as are proper to apprehend them; Then, if the Soul do receive the
Body, and Blood of Christ by means of the Sacrament, it must do it by taking
occasion from that Sacrament to reflect, as the Institution requires, upon that
Body, and Blood of Christ, which it was designed to represent, and particularly
with Faith in that Body, and Blood, as which is of all other things most
required to apply them to us. And though it be true, that the Church of Rome
has found out another sort of food, and another sort of receiving it, as shall
be more fully declared, when I come to the handling of it; Yet as the
Tridentine Fathers have been forced to confess, that our Savior required this
Sacrament to be taken Sess. 13. cap. 2.
as the spiritual food of Souls, by which they are nourished, and strengthened;
So they have in like manner acknowledged, that it ought to be spiritually taken
ib. cap. 8.
, as well as Sacramentally, in order to our profiting by it.

But because our Catechism, Question. What are the benefits, whereof we are
partakers thereby? Answer. The strengthening, and refreshing of our souls by
the Body, and Blood of Christ, as our Bodies are by the Bread, and Wine.
where it entreats of the faithful's receiving the Body, and Blood of Christ,
proceeds to ask, as is but reason, what are the benefits we partake of by it,
and makes answer, that they are the strengthening, and refreshing of our Souls
by the Body, and Blood of Christ, as our Bodies are by the Bread, and Wine;
Therefore it will be but needful, before we pass any farther, to reflect upon
those Benefits, and accordingly enquire, 1. What is meant by the strengthening
and refreshing of the Soul? 2. What Evidence there is of the Body, and Blood of
Christ being intended for it? 3. How the Body, and Blood of Christ effect it?


1. Now as Strength and Refreshment are things, which relate rather to the
Body, than the Soul, and must therefore receive their Explication from thence;
So the former, when applied to the Body, signifies an ability for those
operations, for which it is intended, as the latter a freedom from all
heaviness, and lumpishness. And they are brought about especially by the Food,
which we receive, and particularly by that Food, which was made choice of for
the present Sacrament; Bread, as the Scripture speaks Psalm. 104.15.
, being that, which strengthens the Heart, and Wine that, which chears Judge.
9.13.
, and refreshes it. By Analogy to which, as the strength, and refreshment of
the Soul must signify in like manner an ability for its proper operations, and
particularly for such as Christianity obliges it to, and a freedom from all
trouble, and disquiet; So that, which is said to strengthen, and refresh it,
must consequently furnish it with such an ability, and freedom, and both enable
it to do those things, which God requires of it, and deliver it from those
troubles, and disquiets, which its own guilt, or any thing else might be apt to
fill it with.

2. This therefore being that strengthening, and refreshing of the Soul, which
it is said to receive by the Body, and Blood of Christ; Enquire we in the next
place what Evidence there is of their being intended for it. Which will soon
appear from their being intended by Christ as the Meat, and Drink of the Soul,
and particularly as such Meat, and Drink, as Bread, and Wine are to the Body.
For Meat, and Drink being intended for the strengthening, and refreshing of
Men's Bodies, and particularly such Meat, and Drink, as are the outward part of
the present Sacrament; If the Body, and Blood of Christ were intended as such
to the Soul, they must be consequently intended for its strengthening, and
refreshing. Now that the Body, and Blood of Christ were intended as Meat, and
Drink to the Soul, and particularly as such Meat, and Drink, as Bread, and Wine
are to the Body, is evident for the former of these from several passages of
the sixth of St. John's Gospel See Part 3.
, where it is so declared in express terms; and for the latter from our
Savior's making use of Bread, and Wine to represent them, and (which is more)
calling upon us to eat, and drink of them in remembrance of Christ's giving
that Body, and Blood of his for us: This, as it farther shows them to have been
intended as our Spiritual Meat, and Drink, so to have been intended too in a
Spiritual manner to be eaten, and drunken by us, and so made yet more
subservient to our strengthening and refreshment.

3. Now this the Body, and Blood of Christ effect first, and chiefly, as the
meritorious cause of that Grace, by which that strengthening, and refreshing is
immediately produced; Or secondly, as stirring up the Minds of the Faithful to
contemplate the meritoriousness thereof, and, in the strength of that, to
grapple with all Difficulties, and bear up under all Troubles, and Disquiets.
For beside that the Body, and Blood of Christ, as was before observed Part 5.
, are to be considered in this Sacrament under the Notion of a propitiatory
Sacrifice, and which, as such, does rather dispose God to grant us that
strength and refreshment, which we desire, than actually collate them on us;
There is nothing more evident from the Scriptures, than that it is the Spirit
of God Ephesians. 3.15.
, and his Graces, by which we must be immediately strengthened with might in
the inner Man, and that it is by him Acts 9.31.
, that we receive comfort, and consolation. For which cause our Savior gives
him the title of the Comforter, and professes to send him to supply his own
place in that, as well as in other particulars. From whence as it will follow,
that it is to the Spirit of God, and his Graces, that we are immediately to
ascribe that strength, and refreshment, which we expect; So that we ought
therefore to look upon Christ's Body, and Blood as conferring to it, not so
much by any immediate influence thereof upon the Soul, as by their disposing
God to grant that Spirit, by which both the one, and the other are produced.
Upon which account we find St. Paul, where he attributes the several Graces of
a Christian to the immediate Influences of that Spirit, affirming those, that
partake of this Cup, to be made to drink into the same Spirit, as that which is
the immediate Author of them. This I take to be in an especial manner that
strengthening, and refreshing, which our Catechism, and the Scripture prompts us
to ascribe to the Body, and Blood of Christ; Neither can I think of any other,
than what the contemplation of the meritoriousness thereof may infuse into the
Soul of him, who seriously reflects upon it: That, I mean, whereby the Soul
becomes so confident of the Divine Assistance, and Favor, as neither to doubt
of his enabling it to do what he requires, nor despair of his delivering it
from all its fears, and troubles.

I will close this Discourse, when I have added, that as the Sign of this
Sacrament has the relation of a Means, whereby God conveys, and we receive the
Body, and Blood of Christ; So it has also the Relation of a Pledge to assure
us thereof, or, as our Church elsewhere expresses it Art. 19.
, a certain sure Witness of it. A Relation, which is not more generally
acknowledged, than easy to make out from the former one. For what is ordained
by Christ as a Mean for the conveying of his Body, and Blood, being as sure to
have its effect, if it be received, as it ought to be; He, who so receives what
Christ has thus ordained, will need no other Proof, than that, of his
receiving that Body, and Blood of Christ, which it was so ordained to convey.

PART VII. Of Transubstantiation.
The Contents.
The Doctrine of Transubstantiation briefly deduced from the Council of Trent,
and digested into four capital Assertions. Whereof the first is, that the whole
substance of the Bread is changed into the substance of Christ's Body, and the
whole substance of the Wine into the substance of his Blood. The grounds of
this Assertion examined both as to the possibility, and actual being of such a
change. What is alleged for the former of these from the substantial changes
mentioned in the Scripture of no force in this particular, because there is no
appearance of the actual existing of those things, into which the change was
made at the instant the other were changed into them. As little force shown to
be in the words, This is my Body, and, This is my Blood, to prove the actual
change of the Sacramental Elements, whether we consider the word This in the
former words as denoting the Bread, and Wine, or The thing I now give you. That
supposed change farther impugned by such Scriptures, as represent the Bread of
the Eucharist as remaining after Consecration, by the concurrent Testimony of
Sense, and the Doctrine of the Ancient Fathers. Enquiry next made into that
Assertion, which imports, that the substances of the Sacramental Elements are
so changed, as to retain nothing of what they were before, save only the
Species thereof. Where is shown, that if nothing of their respective Substances
remain, there must be an annihilation, rather than a change, and that there is
as little ground for the remaining of the Species without them, either from the
nature of those Species, the words of Consecration, or the Testimony of Sense.
That the true Body, and true Blood of Christ, together with his Soul, and
Divinity, are under the Species of the Sacramental Elements, a third Capital
Assertion in this Matter, but has as little ground in the words of
Consecration, as either of the former. First, because those words relate not to
Christ's glorified Body, and Blood, which are the things affirmed to be
contained under the Species of the Sacramental Elements, but to Christ's Body,
as broken, and to his Blood as shed at his Crucifixion. Secondly, because
however they may import the being of that Body, and Blood in the Eucharist, yet
they specify nothing as to the modus of it, and much less intimate any thing
concerning their being under the Species thereof. That that Body, and Blood
(which is the fourth Capital Assertion in this Matter) are truly, really, and
substantially under the Sacramental Species, shown to be as groundless; and
Evidence made of the contrary by such Arguments from Sense, and Reason, as are
moreover confirmed to us by the Authority of Revelation. Some brief Reflections
in the close upon the Worship of Christ in the Sacrament, and more large ones
upon what the Romanists advance concerning the real eating of him in it. Where
is shown that that, which they call a real eating, is a very improper one, that
it is however of no necessity, or use toward our spiritual nourishment by him,
and not only no way confirmed by the discourse of our Savior in the sixth of
St. John's Gospel, but abundantly confuted by it.

BUT because whatever Sacramental Relations our Church may content it self
with, yet it is certain, that that, which calls it self Catholic, has
advanced one of a far different nature, and those of Luther's Institution
another, before I pass any farther, I will examine both the one, and the other,
the grounds upon which they are built, and the supposed Reasonableness thereof.

That, which I intend to examine here, is the relation which the Church of Rome
advances, by which (as the Council of Trent. Sess. 13. c. 4.
instructs us) the whole substance of the Bread is changed into the substance
of Christ's Body, and the whole substance of the Wine into the substance of his
Blood; There remaining no more, after that, Can. 2.
of the Bread, and Wine, saving only the Species thereof, and the Body, and
Blood of Christ, together with his Soul, and Divinity, coming in the place of
those Elements, and truly, really, and substantially Can. 1.3.
contained under the Species of them. By which means the same Christ comes to
be worshipped with divine Worship in the Sacrament of the Eucharist Can. 6.
, and to be really Can. 8.
eaten in it, as well as either Spiritually, or Sacramentally.

Now as such Assertions as these, had need to be well proved, because
apparently contrary to Sense, and Reason; So especially such of them as are the
Foundations of Transubstantiation, which are these following ones, 1. That the
whole substance of the Bread is changed into the substance of Christ's Body,
and the whole substance of the Wine into the substance of his Blood. 2. That
those Substances of Bread, and Wine are so changed into the substances of
Christ's Body, and Blood, as to retain nothing of what they were before, save
only the Species thereof. 3. That the true Body, and true Blood of Christ,
together with his Soul, and Divinity, are under the Species of those Elements.
4. That they are truly, really, and substantially contained in, or under them.
Which four Assertions I will consider in their order, and after I have examined
the grounds upon which they stand, oppose proper Arguments to them.


1. That, which is first to be considered, is, that the whole substance of the
Bread is changed into the substance of Christ's Body, and the whole substance
of the Wine into the substance of his Blood. An Assertion, which though it
require as substantial a Proof, yet has nothing of moment to support it,
whether as to the Possibility, or actual Existence of it. For though the
Scriptures of the Old, and New Testament make mention of substantial changes,
and from which therefore we may infer a Possibility of the like (For thus we
read of Moses's Rod being changed by the Divine Power Exodus 4.3.
into a Serpent, and from a Serpent again Exodus 4.4.
into a Rod, of Lot's Wife being turned Genesis 19.26.
into a Pillar of Salt, and of Water Joh. 2.9.
into Wine) Yet is there no appearance of their being changed into things, that
had an actual Existence at the instant, when they were changed into them, which
is the change, that Transubstantiation imports. If there be any change of that
Nature to make out the Possibility of this, it must be that, which is made of
the Nourishment we receive, into the substance of our Body, and Blood. But
beside that this is a change by augmentation, and must consequently be either
preceded by an impairing of Christ's glorious Body, which is not so consistent
with that estate, or make it in time grow into a monstrous one; It is a change,
which will not do the Business of Transubstantiation, even to bring whole, and
entire Christ Conc. Trid. Sess. 13. cap. 3.
under either Species: A change by augmentation being a change of the Object of
it, not into the whole substance of that, into which it is changed, but only
into a part of it.

But it may be, there is better proof of the actual being of the change we
speak of, than there is in any thing else of the possibility thereof; As indeed
such a stupendous change, as this, ought to be without Example. Be it so; But
let us at least see so clear, and express a Proof, that our Faith may acquiesce
in it, if our Reason cannot; let us see it affirmed by him, to whom so great a
change is ascribed. And neither are we without one, if the words, This is my
Body, and, This is my Blood, may pass for such a Proof, as they have been
hitherto represented to us. I will not now say, because I have elsewhere shown
it Parts 3-8.
, that there is much more reason to believe, that they ought to be figuratively
taken, and cannot therefore be any ground for such a change, as is sought to be
established by them. I shall choose rather for once to allow, that they may be
literally taken, and leave it to those, that can, to infer such a change from
them. For whether by the word This, in This is my Body, be meant the Bread
before spoken of (As indeed how the change of the substance of the Bread into
the substance of Christ's Body can be proved from those words, which profess
not to speak of that Bread, is as hard to conceive as Transubstantiation it
self) But whether, I say, be thereby meant the Bread before spoken of, or The
thing, which I now give you, there is no appearance in the proposition of any
substantial change, and much less of such a substantial change, as is intended
to be inferred from them. All that the words profess to say (supposing them to
mean Bread by the Particle This) is, that one thing is the other, but in what
manner, or by what kind of change, they do not in the least pretend to affirm.
And if the Text do not determine either, where is that clear, and express proof
of such a substantial change, as they profess to speak of? Or where our either
stupidity, or infidelity for not being convinced by it? But it will be said, it
may be, that (literally speaking) one thing cannot be another, unless it be
substantially changed into that, which it is said to be, and therefore if the
Bread be Christ's Body, it must be substantially changed into it. To which I
answer, that they, who say that (literally speaking) one thing cannot be
another, unless it be substantially changed into that, which it is said to be,
do either mean, that it cannot be so standing the ordinary Laws of Nature, or
that it cannot be so, even by the extraordinary Power of God. If the former of
these be their meaning, they say nothing, that can be of force to persuade,
that one thing can be another, even by being substantially changed into that,
which it is said to be; Because, standing the ordinary Laws of Nature, at the
same time any thing is substantially changed into another, it is no more that,
which it sometime was, and cannot therefore in propriety of speech, be said to
be that, which it is substantially changed into. On the other side, if they,
who say that, literally speaking, one thing cannot be another, unless it be
substantially changed into that, which it is said to be, mean thereby that it
cannot be so, even by the extraordinary Power of God; They do not only take
away from themselves the power of pressing upon our Belief, the contradictions
of Christ's corporal Presence in the Sacrament upon the score of God's
extraordinary Power (For it should seem by that, that there are things, to
which even an extraordinary Power cannot reach) but leave us at liberty, where
the like impossibilities occurr, to order our Interpretations of Scripture
accordingly, and consequently, if the literal sense of a Text lead to them, to
abdicate that, and impose upon it a figurative one. Which if we do, we shall
find a necessity of putting a figurative sense upon those very words, which are
the subject of the present Consideration. For how is it more impossible for God
to make Bread, continuing Bread, to be Christ's Body, than it is to make that
Body, continuing a Body, to be circumscribed, and not circumscribed, as it must
be, if it be whole, and entire in this, or that particular Sacrament, and yet
at the same time be in ten thousand others, and as many more, as they shall be
pleased to consecrate. So little reason is there to believe, that if by the
word This in This is my Body be meant the Bread of the Sacrament, any
substantial change of it can be inferred from them. And there is as little
reason to believe it, if by the word This, in This is my Body, be meant the
Thing which I now give you. For either our Savior meant the Bread by it, and
then the former exceptions will recurr, or there are no footsteps in the words
of any change whatsoever, and much less of that substantial change, which is
endeavored to be inferred from them.

But beside that the change, we speak of, has no ground in the former words,
though they should be literally understood; There is enough to oppose against
it from other places of Scripture, and particularly from those, which represent
the Bread of the Eucharist, as remaining after Consecration: Such as they are,
that mention it as eaten by the Communicants 1 Cor. 11.26, 27, 28.
, and as the Communion 1 Cor. 10.16.
of that Body, which it was intended as a Symbol of. For how is that eaten in
the Sacrament, which has not now any existence? or how the Communion of
Christ's Body, which has no being of its own? But it may be, for all St.
Paul's naming it Bread, he meant nothing such, but either the Body of Christ
under the species of Bread, or only those species themselves. I will not now
say, though I might, that the Scripture will be a very uncertain thing, if such
forced interpretations as these be easily admitted. But I say, that neither of
these interpretations alone will fit the texts we speak of, and that there is
as little reason to admit them both. For thus, for instance, though we should
allow the word Bread to signify the Body of Christ under the species of Bread,
where the Scripture makes mention of its being eaten by the Communicants; Yet
can we not allow it the same signification, where it is affirmed to be the
Communion of Christ's Body: Because that, which is the Communion of any thing,
must be a distinct thing from that, which it pretends to be the Communion of.
On the other side, though we should allow the word Bread to signify only the
species thereof, where the Scripture makes mention of its being the Communion
of Christ's Body; Yet can we not with the like reason allow it the same
signification, where it is said to be eaten by the Communicants: Because it is
such Bread, as makes the unworthy eaters of it to be guilty of Christ's Body 1
Cor. 11.27.
, which, according to the Doctrine of the Romanists, nothing but the eating of
that Body it self can do. If any thing be to be said in this particular, it
must be, that the word Bread is sometime to be taken for the Body of Christ
under the species of Bread, and sometime also for those species themselves. But
beside that (as Tully sometime spoke concerning those that assigned Atoms a
motion of declination) this is, as it were, to allot words their respective
Provinces, and prescribe them what they shall signify in this, or that
particular place; I do not see how either of these senses can, without great
violence to the text, be imposed upon those words of St. Paul, The Bread, which
we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ: Because if, as is
probable enough, the Bread were then broken, as it was in our Savior's
Eucharist, before the words, This is my Body, passed upon it, no other Bread
can be meant by it, even in the opinions of the Romanists themselves, than
true, and proper Bread, and not either the Body of Christ under the species of
Bread, or the species of Bread separate from the substance of it.

Agreeable hereto is the testimony of Sense, and which is the more considerable
here, because it has not only no clear revelation against it, but, as appears
from the premises, has plain revelation for it. For whatever pretense may be
made against the testimony of Sense where there is any just surmise of
revelations being against it; Yet can there not certainly be any, where there
is not only no such surmise, but as plain, and express revelation, as can be
reasonably desired: To question our Senses in such a case, being to question
revelation also, because concurring with the Testimony thereof. Only, if any
think that revelation not to be clear enough, because (as has been sometime
suggested) St. Paul may as well give the title of Bread to that Body of Christ,
which was made of it, as Moses Exodus 7.12.
did that of a Rod to those Serpents, which arose from them; It will not be
difficult to make answer, that that notion can have no place, where St. Paul
makes it his business (as he does, where he recites the Institution) to awe Men
into a reverential receipt of this Holy Sacrament: To think that St. Paul would
so often call that Bread, which was a thing infinitely above it, when his
Design was to awe Men into a reverential receipt of it, being to think, he
either knew not how to suit his Expressions to it, or that he basely, and
invidiously betrayed it.

I will conclude what I have to say against the substantial change of the
Sacramental Elements, when I have shown from the Ancients, that such a change
was unknown to them. Which I shall endeavor to evince first from what they say
concerning their continuing in the same nature, in which they were before, and
then from what they say concerning their being Types, and Symbols and Images of
that Body, and Blood, into which the Romanists affirm them to be
transubstantiated.

That the Ancients represented the Sacramental Elements as continuing in the
same nature, in which they were before, will appear, first from what I have
elsewhere said Part 1.
concerning their representing our Eucharist as an Eucharist for the things of
this World, and particularly for the Fruits of the Earth, as well as for the
Body, and Blood of Christ, and professing to eat of the Bread of it, even when
become the Body of Christ by Prayer, as a Testimony of their Thankfulness for
the other. For how is that an Eucharist for the things of this World, and
particularly for the Fruits of the Earth, which is now all Heavenly, neither
has any thing of an earthly sustenance remaining? Or how we said to eat of the
Bread of it in token of such a Thankfulness, if there be nothing at all in it
of what we profess to give thanks for? All other Offerings, beside this, having
some affinity with that, which they pretend to be Offerings of Thanks for.
Neither will it avail to say, which is all that can be said, that our Eucharist
may become such, even for earthly Boons, by the remaining species thereof. For
beside that the Ancients make no mention of any such separate species, and we
therefore not to interpret what they say of Bread, and other such substantial
things, concerning the bare species thereof; It is plain from what was before
quoted out of Irenaeus, that that, which was tendered unto God in this
Eucharistical offering, was the creatures of Bread, and Wine, and from Origin,
that the Eucharistical Offering consisted in eating of what was tendered to
him, as well as in the tendry it self. So that if they were the Creatures of
God, that were tendered to him, and not only the species thereof, they were the
same Creatures, and not only the species thereof, that were in their opinion
eaten, and drunken by them, and consequently by which they gave thanks to God
for the Fruits of the Earth, as well as for the great Blessing of our
Redemption.

But of all the things, that are said by the Ancients to show their belief of
the Sacramental Elements continuing in the same nature in which they were
before, nothing certainly is of more force than the use they make of that
relation, which is between them, and Christ's Body, and Blood, to show against
the Apollinarians, and Eutychians, that the divine, and humane nature, however
united in the person of Jesus Christ, yet are not so made one, as to be
confounded, and mixed together, as the Apollinarians taught his divine nature,
and flesh to be; or the humane nature to be swallowed up into the divine, as
the Eutychians did. For to confute each of these, and to show the distinction
there is between the two natures of Christ, the Ancients alleged the near
relation there is between the Sacramental Elements, and Christ's Body, and
Blood, but which, how near soever, does not confound, or destroy the truth of
their respective natures, but preserves both the one, and the other of them
entire. For thus St. Chrysostom, in his Epistle to Caesarius lately published
Appendix to the Def. of an Exposit. of the Doctrine of the Church of England
against de Meaux.
, against the Doctrine of the Apollinarians. As before the Bread is sanctified,
we name it Bread, but, the divine Grace sanctifying it through the mediation of
the Priest, it is freed from the title of Bread, and thought worthy of the
title of the Body of the Lord, although the nature of Bread remains in it,
and it is not said to be two Bodies, but one Body of the Lord; So also here the
divine nature being placed in the Body, they both together make up one Son, and
one person, but without confusion, as well as division, not in one nature, but
in two perfect ones. So that as surely as the two natures of Christ continue
distinct, and unconfounded, so the Sacramental Elements, and the thing
signified by them do, because made use of to illustrate the distinction of the
other. To the same purpose, though more clearly, and fully, does Theodoret
discourse in his Dialogues against the Eutychians. For taking notice in one
place Dial. 1. c. 8.
of our Savior's calling Bread by the name of his Body, and in like manner his
Flesh by the name of Meat, he proceeds to give this reason of that change of
names; To wit, That he intended thereby to prompt those, that partake of the
divine Mysteries, not to attend to the nature of the things, that are seen, but
by that change of names to give belief to that change, which is made by grace.
For he that called his natural Body Meat, and Bread, and again named himself a
Vine, the very same person honored the Symbols, that are seen, with the title
of his Body, and Blood, not changing their nature, but adding grace to nature.
And again Dial. 2. c. 24.
, after he had acknowledged to the Eutychian, that the gift, that was offered,
was called by its proper name before the invocation of the Priest, but the
Body, and Blood of Christ after the sanctification of it; and the Eutychians
replying thereupon, that as the Symbols of the Lord's Body, and Blood, are one
thing before the invocation of the Priest, but after that invocation they are
changed, and become other things; so the Lord's Body, after its assumption, is
changed into the divine essence, He has these very emphatical words, You are
caught, says he, in those nets which you your self have weaved. For neither do
the mystical Symbols, after their sanctification, go out of their own nature.
For they abide in their former essence, and figure, and fashion, and are
visible, and palpable as they were before. But they are understood to be Blood,
they have been made, to wit, Symbols of Christ's Body, and what and believed,
and reverenced as being what they are believed. In like manner the natural Body
of Christ, which is the Archetype thereof, has its former form, and figure,
and circumscription, and in a word the essence of a Body. But after the
resurrection it became immortal, and above corruption, and was thought worthy
to sit at the right hand of God, and is worshipped by every creature, as being
called the Body of the Lord of nature. So that if the two natures of Christ
ought to be looked upon even now as two distinct, and different ones, and not
one nature swallowed up into the other; We also, in the opinion of this Holy
Man, ought to look upon this Sacrament, and the thing of the Sacrament, as two
distinct things, and upon the Sacrament in particular, however dignified with a
noble relation, yet as of the same nature, and figure, and form, as it was
before it was advanced to it. For Theodoret arguing the distinction of Christ's
two natures from the distinction there is between the Sacrament, and the thing
of the Sacrament, and particularly from that Sacrament's continuing in its
former nature, and essence, must consequently suppose that to have been a thing
then known, and confessed, as from which otherwise he could not reasonably have
argued the other. I am not ignorant indeed, that even these passages have met
with subtle evasions, and such as show in some measure the art of those, that
framed them. But as whosoever shall compare them with those words, to which
they are applied, will find them to be rather subtle, than solid; So they put
such a sense upon the words of their respective Authors, as if they should be
admitted, would make them look rather like Sophisters, than Fathers of the
Church, like Men, who intended to impose upon their Disciples, rather than to
enlighten them in the Truth. For what other would it have been in Theodoret to
have argued against the change of Christ's Body into the divine essence, from
the continuing of the Symbols of it in their essence, and figure, and form, if
he had meant no more thereby, than that they remained what they were in their
outward appearances, as the Romanists are willing to understand him, or (as
they are sometime pleased to phrase it) in their outward substance? For so the
Body of Christ also might have remained as to the outward appearances thereof,
and yet have been as substantially changed into the divine essence, or nature,
as the Bread of the Sacrament is said to be into the substance of Christ's Body.

But beside that the Ancients represent the Sacramental Elements as continuing
what they were, and thereby sufficiently impugn that substantial change of
them into Christ's Body, and Blood, which this first Assertion imports; They
represent them also as Types, and Symbols, and Images thereof, and (as we
should therefore think) as distinct things from them: No like being the same
with that, to which it is said to be like, nor indeed any more capable of being
so, than that, which is the most different from it. Now how, standing the
substantial change of the Sacramental Elements, can these titles be admitted?
Or what is there to build that Typicalness or Symbolicalness, or resemblance
on; Certainly no other than those aerie species thereof which in the opinion of
those, that maintain them, have themselves no subject to uphold them. But as it
does not appear that the Ancients believed any such species, and one August.
ep. ad Dardan. 57. Toll ipsa corporae qualitatibus corporum, non erit ubi
sint; Et ideo necesse est ut non sint -- Veruntamen si moles ipsa corporis,
quantacunque vel quantulacunque sit, penitus auseratur, qualitates ejus non
erit ubi sint, quamvis non mole metiendae sint.
of the Learnedest of them denied the possibility thereof; So they sometime
place the Symbolicalness of the Sacramental Elements in such properties
thereof, as can belong to no other, than their respective substances. For thus
they apparently do, when they represent them as Symbols of Christ's mystical
Body upon the account of their being made up of the substance of sevelal
granes, and several Grapes, as that Body of Christ is of the respective members
of it; This importing the union of several substances into a Mass, or Body, and
consequently that that is much more a substance, which is made up of an
aggregation of them.

2. It appearing from the premises, how little ground there is to believe,
that the whole substance of the Bread is changed into the substance of Christ's
Body, and the whole substance of the Wine into the substance of Christ's Blood;
We shall the less need to concern our selves in the examination of that, which
follows, even that those substances of Bread, and Wine are so changed into the
substances of Christ's Body, and Blood, as to retain nothing of what they were
before, save only the species thereof. For if they can in no sense be said to
be substantially changed, how much less to such a degree as to retain nothing
of what they were, save only the species thereof? But as this Assertion,
whatever it is, has something peculiar in it in the common understanding of
the World; So it may not therefore be amiss, especially when the Council of
Trent seems to have made a peculiar Article of it, to consider it apart, and
both enquire what grounds it has to support it self, and oppose proper reasons
to it. In order whereunto I will consider it as importing first, that nothing
of the substance of Bread, and Wine remains, and secondly as importing that the
species, or accidents thereof do.

If they, who affirm that nothing of the substance of the Bread, and Wine
remains, mean no more thereby, than that nothing thereof remains in the form,
or essence of Bread, and Wine, as one would think they should not, by their
affirming them to be changed into the substance of Christ's Body, and Blood;
They may then be thought to say somewhat, which may seem to have some
foundation in those words, This is my Body, and This is my Blood, because those
words make no mention of any thing else, but them. But then as they must also
suppose, that the matter thereof remains, though in another form, or essence,
because otherwise the substance thereof will not be changed, but annihilated;
So they must suppose too an addition made thereby to the substance of Christ's
Body, because a new accession of matter to it. Which being granted, the change
will be made, not into the whole substance of Christ's Body, and Blood, as
Transubstantiation was before said to import, but only into that part thereof,
into which they are affirmed to be changed. On the other side, if they, who
affirm that nothing of the substance of Bread, and Wine remains, mean thereby,
that nothing remains in the form of Bread, and Wine, or any other substance;
They then do not only destroy the change of them into the substance of Christ's
Body, and Blood, because that change supposes the former matter of them to
abide, though in another form, or essence, but take away all pretense of
founding that Assertion of theirs in This is my Body, and This is my Blood. For
though those words may assure me, that the Body, and Blood of Christ are there,
where I discern the species of the Sacramental Elements to be, and consequently
that, naturally speaking, the substances of those Elements cannot; Yet as they
do not so much as hint, that the substances of those Elements neither are, nor
can be there by the extraordinary power of God, so they say nothing to let us
understand by what means they are conveyed away, if they do not remain there.

But because this Assertion imports as well the remaining of the species, or
accidents of the Sacramental Elements, as the not remaining of the substances
thereof; Therefore enquire we, so far as we may, what the grounds of that part
of the Assertion are, and, if there be any need of it after such an enquiry,
oppose proper Arguments to it. For the truth is, that as those accidents are
forced to subsist without a subject, so they seem to have no other support,
save what the necessity of a bad cause, and a confident asseveration can give
them. For is there any thing in the nature of an accident to persuade us, that
the thing is so much as possible, and that though the substance of the
Sacramental Elements remains not, yet the species, or accidents thereof may? On
the contrary they, who believe any such thing as an accident, make the inhering
thereof in a subject to be of the very essence of it, and that at the same time
it cease to inhere (as it must do, when the subject thereof is removed) it
also cease to be. Is it then, that those separate species, or accidents have
any thing in the words, This is my Body, and This is my Blood, to afford them
any support? But alas, as the words my Body, and my Blood are so far from
giving any countenance to them, that they rather bid defiance to them, because
professing to contain nothing less in them than the August Body, and Blood of
Christ; So the word This is as much afraid of owning them, for fear it should
injure the substances thereof, and instead of betokening the conversion of
those into the substances of Christ's Body, and Blood, proclaim the conversion
of the species, or accidents thereof into them, and so bid a far greater
defiance to our already too much offended Senses. Shall we then (which is all
we have to trust to at the last) appeal to the testimony of our Senses for
them? But beside that no wise Transubstantiator ought to give any belief to his
Senses, as which will tell him farther, if he listen to them, that there is the
substance of Bread, and Wine under them; Those Senses of ours do never
represent those species as things distinct from their proper substances, and
much less as separate from them, but as inherent in them, and proper characters
of them, and so leading us more to the contemplation of their respective
substances, than to that of their own particular natures. So little reason is
there to believe the being of such Species, or Accidents, after their proper
Substances are removed. And there is this substantial Reason against it, that
the admission of such Species, or Accidents in the Sacrament would render the
Testimony of our Senses uncertain in other things: Because whatever Pretense
there may be from Revelation for the being of Christ's Body, and Blood in the
Sacrament, yet there is no Pretense at all from that for the being of any such
separate Species, or Accidents, and we therefore as much at liberty to believe
them elsewhere, as there, and so boggle at any farther notice, that may be
supposed to come to us by the Species of any thing whatsoever.

3. The third Assertion, on which the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is
founded, is that the true Body, and true Blood of Christ, together with his
Soul, and Divinity, are under the Species of the Sacramental Elements. An
Assertion, which the Romanists seem to be so confident of, from the words, This
is my Body, and, This is my Blood, that they make no end of inculcating it, and
think all Men either blind, or obstinate, who will not as readily assent to it.
But with how little reason, and how much against it also, will soon appear, if
we compare them together, whether as to that Body, and Blood of Christ, which
they both profess to entreat of, or as to the being of them in the Sacrament;
There being a manifest difference in each of these between the Assertion I am
now upon, and those words from which they profess to deduce it. For first,
whereas the Body, and Blood of Christ in the words of our Savior are his Body,
and Blood, as broken, and shed at his Crucifixion, and not as they were at the
time of our Savior's uttering those words, or since his resurrection from the
Dead; The Body, and Blood of Christ affirmed to be contained under the Species
of Bread, and Wine, are the Body, and Blood of Christ in that glorious estate,
wherein they now are, now no more to fall under those Accidents, which they
sometime underwent. For it is no way repugnant (says the Council of Trent
Sess. 13. cap. 1.
) that our Savior himself should always sit at the right hand of the Father in
Heaven according to a natural manner of existing, and yet nevertheless be
Sacramentally present to us by his substance in other places after that way of
existing, which though we can scarce express in words, yet we believe to be
possible to God. And again Ib. cap. 3.
, which shows it yet more to speak of Christ's glorified Body, the Faith of the
Church has always been, that presently after the Consecration, the true Body,
and true Blood of Christ, together with his Soul, and Divinity, are under the
Species of Bread, and Wine; But the Body indeed under the Species of Bread, and
the Blood under the Species of Wine by virtue of the words; but the Body it
self under the Species of Wine, and the Blood under the Species of Bread, and
the Soul under both by virtue of that natural Connection, and Concomitancy, by
which the parts of Christ our Lord, who is now risen from the Dead, now no more
to die, are coupled among themselves. Than which what can be more plain, that
it is the Body, and Blood of Christ, as they now are, which they affirm to be
contained under the Species of those Elements, and not as broken, and shed for
us? It is true indeed, that when the same Tridentine Fathers come to entreat of
the Sacrifice of the Mass, and the Propriety of that Sacrifice, they may seem
to sing another Song, because (as was before Part 5.
observed) representing it as the very same Sacrifice with that, which he
offered up upon the Cross. But as they sufficiently unsay it again, when they
represent it as an unbloody Sacrifice, and as an Oblation that is made of
Christ's Body, and Blood under the Species of Bread, and Wine; So they thereby
ascribe the breaking, or shedding of this Sacrifice, rather to the Species,
under which they are offered, than to the Body, and Blood of Christ under them.
But beside that there is a manifest difference between the Assertion I am now
upon, and our Savior's words, as to that Body, and Blood of Christ, which they
both profess to entreat of; There is no less signal a difference between them,
as to the existence of that Body, and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament, which
will be a yet farther prejudice against the inferring of this Assertion from
them. For whereas the utmost, that our Savior's words can be thought to
import, is the simple existence of his Body, and Blood in the Sacrament, the
Assertion we are now upon proceeds to affirm, that they exist under the Species
of the Sacramental Elements, as that too not only under the Species of their
proper Element, but under the one, and the other of them. Which how different
it is from the importance of our Savior's words will not be difficult for
those to see, who can discern any difference between a simple affirmation of
any thing, and that, which proceeds also to determine the modus of it. But it
will be said, it may be, that though our Savior's words do not expressly affirm
the existing of his Body, and Blood under the Sacramental Species, yet they say
that, from which it may by just consequence be deduced. If they do, I willingly
yield they say enough to justify the present Assertion; But I say withal,
that there is nothing in them, which can give countenanee to such a Surmise.
For beside that they make no express mention of those Sacramental Species,
under which this Body, and Blood are supposed to exist; If they say any thing,
which may be thought to concern those Species, it must be the conversion of
them also into that Body, and Blood, into which their respective substances are
changed: That, which our Savior pronounced the words over, being, no doubt,
Species, as well as Substances, and those Species therefore, as well as their
Substances, to fall under the same change, if those words were intended to
effect one.

4. Now though these are Difficulties enough to choke any indifferent Man's
Belief, if they do not also trouble the Belief of those, who pretend to be the
most zealous Asserters of Transubstantiation; Yet, lest either they, or we
should want any thing to exercise it, or improve the meritoriousness thereof,
they proceed to assert in express terms, that this true Body, and true Blood of
Christ are as truly, really and substantially contained in, or under those
Species, under which they are affirmed to exist. I will not as yet allege any
of those Difficulties, wherewith this Assertion is encumbred, because it may be
time enough to do that, when we have inquired into the grounds of it. But as
those Difficulties are apparent enough to make any Man stand upon his guard,
when such Assertions as these are endeavored to be imposed upon him; So one
would think they should prevail so far with those, who pretend to advance them,
as to see that they have sufficient ground for their Confidence in it. Which
whether they have, or no, let those Persons judge, who consider first (what can
never be too often inculcated) that whatever ground there is for a substantial
Presence in the words, This is my Body, and, This is my Blood, it is for the
substantial Presence of a Body broken, and Blood shed (for so the very Letter
of the Text informs us) and not for the substantial Presence of glorified ones.
Neither will it avail to say, that they also affirm them to be broken, and shed
in their respective Species, and ought not therefore to be debarred the use of
those words for the proof of that substantial Presence, which they advance. For
as it is evident that they mean no more thereby, than that those Species are
broken, and shed, as appears from their representing the immolation of Christ
himself as a bloodless one; So it is alike evident therefore that they mean not
such a Body, and Blood as the Text advances, and ought not therefore to argue
the substantial Presence thereof from it. But let us suppose that our Savior,
and the Tridentine Fathers meant one and the same Body, and Blood, I mean
Christ's glorified ones, and consequently that so far forth they have a right
to make use of the present words; yet how does it appear that any substantial
Presence of that Body, and Blood can be inferred from them? What is there in
the Words themselves, that can give any countenance to it? If there be any
thing in the words, This is my Body, and, This is my Blood, that may be thought
to look that way, it is manifestly that [Is], which connects the Subject, and
Predicate together, because the word, which the Romanists themselves make use
of to press us with the Belief of that substantial Presence, which they
inculcate. But what reason have they to take that for a proof of a substantial
Presence of Christ's glorified Body, and Blood, which in their own opinion does
not reach it, because having a respect only to that whether Body, or Blood, to
which it is prefixed, and not (as it must, and ought to be, to betoken a
substantial Presence of a glorified Christ) to both of them together. For
though the Tridentine Fathers assert, that the glorified Body, and Blood of
Christ are contained indifferently under the Species of either Element, yet
only the Body under the Species of Bread, and the Blood under the Species of
the Wine by virtue of the words; And the word [Is] therefore not of sufficient
force to prove any substantial Presence of them. Because Christ's glorified
Body, and Blood, though they may be vertually, and objectively present to us,
when considered apart, yet cannot be substantially present, but by a real
Union, and Connection, as they themselves have taught us to believe.

Now as, where there is so little ground for the belief of a substantial
Presence, there may be place for alleging Arguments against it both from Sense
and Reason (For though Sense, and Reason should be of no force against the
certain Revelations of God, yet nothing hinders but they may be, where no such
Revelation does appear) so especially, if we find that the Arguments, which
they offer, are such as are confirmed to us by Revelation, and in a manner put
into our mouths by it. For such I account that, which Sense offers us for
that is being Bread, and not a humane Body, which is put into our Hands, or
Mouths, and from thence transmitted to our Stomachs; Our Eye, and Touch, and
Taste assuring us that it is Bread, and not the Body of a Man under the Species
of Bread, and much less that glorified Body, which the Romanists would persuade
us into. For what other is that Argument, for the substance thereof I mean,
which our Savior sometime offered to his Disciples to prove the Body, in which
he appeared to them, to be a real Body, and not a Spirit under the appearances
of one? For, handle me (says he Luke 24.39.
) and see; For a Spirit has not Flesh, and Bones, as ye see me have. For
there, as well as we here, our Savior appealed to the Senses of his Disciples
for the reality, and substantialness of that Body of his, which then presented
it self to their Eyes; And there too, as well as we do here, he appealed to the
Testimony of the same Senses, that it was not a thing different from a body,
even a Spirit. Which last particular is the more to be taken notice of, as
because, according to that, the Testimony of Sense may be a sufficient Evidence
of the not being of a thing, that appears not, as well as of the being of a
thing, that does; So because (as the Romanists order the matter concerning the
glorified Body of Christ in the Sacrament) there is no material difference, if
any at all, between that glorified Body of his, and what our Savior in the
place before quoted calls a Spirit: They representing that Body as present in
an invisible, and impalpable manner, which is the very presence of a Spirit. By
the same reason therefore that our Savior might argue from his own falling
under their Eye, and Touch, that that substance, wherein he presented himself
to them, was a Body, and not a Spirit; By the same reason may we argue that
that, which our Senses assure us to be Bread, is really such, and not such a
Body as, according to the Romanists, is an invisible, and impalpable one, and
so far forth of the nature of a Spirit. Of the same force, as well as nature, I
judge the Arguments, which Reason offers against the substantial Presence of
Christ's Body in the Sacrament, and particularly that, which it offers to us
from the impossibility of a Body's being in so many places at once, as the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation obliges us to believe concerning the Body of
Christ. For what other is that Argument, which the Angels offered to the Women
Mat. 28.6.
, that sought Christ in the Grave after he was risen from it? He is not here,
for he is risen, as he said; Come, see the place, where the Lord lay. For by
the same reason, that Christ's Body could not be in the Grave, because he was
risen, and departed from it; By the same reason it cannot be in this, or that
particular place on Earth, now it is departed from the whole of it to Heaven,
and sits at the right hand of God there. And I must needs say, I could not
therefore but wonder, when I read in the Council of Trent Sess. 13. cap. 1.
that they were things no way repugnant to each other for our Savior to sit
always at the right hand of the Father in Heaven after a natural manner of
existing, and yet in many other places be sacramentally present to us by his
substance. For as they thereby sufficiently intimate, that even the glorified
Body of our Savior cannot be in Heaven, and here after its natural manner of
existing; So setting aside the disguise of the word Sacramentally, that Council
says nothing at all to hinder our belief of its falling into that very
absurdity it self. For understanding by Sacramentally no other than
substantially, and which accordingly they just before express by the same term,
as well as in other places Ib. Can. 1.
of that Session, they must consequently (because it is a corporeal substance,
whereof they speak) be thought to mean corporally also, which is certainly its
natural manner of existing. For if to be substantially present be no other,
than to be present after the manner of a substance; to be substantially
present, when applied to such, or such a sort of substance, must be to be
present after the manner of such, or such a substance; and consequently, if we
speak of a corporeal substance, to be coporally present, or after the manner of
a Body, and not after the manner of a Spirit.

These four Capital Assertions being thus destroyed, and shown to be both
without Reason, and against it, we shall not need to concern our selves much
about the other two, as being only the Consectaries thereof, and therefore
falling together with them. For if the Body, and Blood of Christ be not
substantially in the Eucharist, there can be no ground, even in the opinion of
the Romanists, for worshipping Christ with Divine Worship in it; And there can
be as little Pretense for his being really eaten in it, as well as spiritually,
and sacramentally. Only because these two Assertions are as much stood upon as
any of the other, and the former is also of pernicious consequence, I think it
not amiss to say somewhat to each of them, and first to the worshipping Christ
with Divine Worship in it.

And here in the first place, I cannot but observe, that however the Tridentine
Fathers may in some places seem to confine this Divine Worship to Christ as
present in the Sacrament of the Eucharist (For so they do both in the Reason
they Sess. 13. cap. 5. Nam illum eundem deum praesentem in eo adesse credimus,
quem pater aeternus in orbem introducens, etc.
give of the Divine Worship of the Host, and in the Canon Can. 6. Si quis
dixerit in sancto Eucharistiae Sacramento Christum, etc. non esse cultu latriae
etiam externo adorandum, etc.
they make against those, that shall deny it) yet do they also extend it to
that Sacrament, in which they suppose him to be present, and, as we should
therefore think, are guilty of gross Idolatry in it, though Christ should be
allowed to be worshipped with Divine Worship in it. For as the title of that
Chapter Cap. 5. De cultu, and veneratione huic sanctissimo Sacramento exhibenda.
, which professes to entreat of this Matter, is concerning the Worship, and
Veneration, which is to be exhibited to this most holy Sacrament; So the
Chapter it self begins with these express words Nullus itaque dubitandi locus
relinquitur, quin omnes Christi fideles pro more in Catholica Ecclesia semper
recepto, latriae cultum, qui vero Deo debetur, huic sanctissimo Sacramento in
veneratione exhibeant. Neque enim ideo minus est adorandum, quod fuerit a
Christo domino, ut sumatur, institutum.
, There is therefore no place for doubt, but that all Christ's faithful ones,
after the manner always received in the Catholic Church, ought with Veneration
to exhibit to this most holy Sacrament that Worship of Latria, which is owing
to the true God. For neither is it therefore the less to be worshipped, because
it was instituted by Christ our Lord to be received. For can there be any thing
more plain (especially when the very next words Nam illum eundem Deum
praesentem in eo adesse credimus, quem pater aeternus introducens in orbem
terrarum dicit, Et adorent eum omnes Augeli Dei, etc.
speak of the very same God being present in it) than that the Tridentine
Fathers meant by the former words the Sacrament properly so styled, even those
species, under which they elsewhere affirm Christ to be, and that accordingly
they required divine worship to be given to them? And, if that was their
meaning, that they thereby required divine worship to be given to Creatures,
yea the most imperfect ones, and such too, as because not inhering in that Body
of Christ, which is said to be under them, cannot be supposed to be personally
united to him? Than which what can be said, that does more entrench upon the
divine honor, yea upon the honor of that Christ, whom they pretend to worship
in this Sacrament? Those species, though no part at all of him, being yet
joined in equal honor with him; that, which is in effect but the shadow of a
mere Creature, with the great Creator, and Redeemer of the World.

But let us suppose that those Fathers meant no more by the word Sacrament,
than Jesus Christ in it, and consequently that so far forth there is no
pretense for the charge of Idolatry in this affair; Yet how will the Romanists
acquit themselves from it, supposing (as we often may) that the Elements are
not rightly consecrated, and no real presence therefore of Christ's Body, and
Blood under the species of them? For in that case their worship must be
terminated on the Bread, because there is nothing else to receive it. Now that
the supposition I before made is no way unreasonable, will appear from their
affirming that the intention of the Minister to do at least, what the Church
enjoins, Sess. 17. can. 11.
is required to the making of a Sacrament. For what if the intention of the
Minister, when he comes to the words of Consecration, wander from the matter in
hand? Or, if not so, yet does not aim to do what the Church does, as they, that
believe not Transubstantiation, certainly cannot, of which number See Pref. to
the Discourse of the Holy Euch. etc.
there are not a few? Or (which is worst of all) as a Priest is sometime said
to have directed his Meric Casaub. Necess. of Res. p. 75.
for seven, or eight years together, be set upon doing honor to the Devil,
rather than to our Lord Jesus Christ? In each of these cases certainly there
can be no real conversion of the Elements into the Body, and Blood of Christ,
and therefore they, that pay adoration to them, rather worshippers of the
Creature, than of him, who was the Institutor of this Sacrament. And I know not
of any tolerable evasion in this affair, save what is said to have been
suggested by Gerson, even by worshipping the host conditionally, and upon
supposition of its being the Body of Christ. But as that is a sort of
worshipping, which few of the unlearned are acquainted with, and which can do
no great good to those, that are; Such an uncertainty, as that, being as likely
to take off the edge of their devotions, as to help them in the directing of
their intentions; So that cannot however hinder the external act from being
fixed upon the Creature, and consequently cannot but make the door of that
external act guilty of material Idolatry, though not of any formal one. Which
material Idolatry, though it may not perhaps reflect upon the worshipper,
because of his invincible ignorance in this affair; Yet, which is worse, will,
if supposed, reflect upon God for not providing against it in so many cases as
may happen: Especially, if the like intention be either wanting, or perverted
in the person, that baptized, or ordained the Consecrater, because then all he
does at any time will be null. For how is it consistent with the honor, or
goodness of that God, who was in their opinion so gracious to his Church as to
furnish it with an infallible guide, not to provide against so many members of
it paying their external adoration to a piece of Bread, at the same time they
desired, and intended to address it to his Son?

I will conclude my discourse of this assertion when I have taken notice of one
piece of Sophistry, which is employed by the Romanists to save themselves from
the imputation of Idolatry, though there should be no such thing as
Transubstantiation in the World; That I mean, which they allege, and our
Taylour Liberty of Proph. Sect. 20. number. 16.
in their behalf, concerning their directing their worship, not to Bread, which
they believe not to be present, but to the Body, and Blood of Christ, or rather
to Christ in person, whom they conceive to be corporally present in it. But as
they do not, I confess, intentionally direct their worship to Bread, or at
least not to Bread, as such, because they believe it not to continue, where
they direct their worship; So I do not see how that hinders their directing it
indeed, and in truth to Bread, supposing that not to be transubstantiated into
Christ's Body: Because as their outward worship is manifestly directed to that
substance, which is under the species of Bread; So believing, as they do, that
that Substance is Christ's Body, they must consequently be thought to direct
their inward worship also to it, and, if therefore there be nothing else there,
to simple Bread. And I know of nothing, that can excuse them in this point,
unless it be their own mistake, which how far it will avail them in this
particular, I, for my part, shall not take upon me to determine. But as that
mistake of theirs will not however change the nature of the action, or make it
cease to be the adoration of a Creature; So it will not change it in the sight
of God, if the mistake be gross, and affected, which they have just cause to
look after, who have so little ground from Scripture for the belief of that
Transubstantiation, which is the foundation of it, and so much against it from
the same Scripture, and Antiquity, and Sense, and Reason, which are all the
Topics we can argue from.

Next to the worshipping of Christ as present in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, consider we our really eating him in it, as well as either
spiritually, or sacramentally. A thing, as the Romanists themselves confess,
which depends upon his being substantially there, and must therefore fall of
course with that substantial presence, which I have before destroyed. But as
this Assertion is not without weakness of its own, and would therefore be
considered apart; So I think it therefore but reasonable to be more particular
in the handling of it, than would otherwise be necessary for me to be.

And here in the first place I cannot but observe, that where the Council of
Trent entreats of this affair, it opposes real, as well as sacramental
manducation to that, which is spiritual, as if the latter, though undoubtedly
the principal, were an imaginary one. But as we gain thus much by it, that that
Council by real must consequently mean a corporal one, so I shall therefore
make no farther use of that opposition at present, than to enquire into the
truth of that real manducation understood as is before described.

In order whereunto that, which I shall in the next place take notice of, is,
that the word manducare, which the Council makes use of, signifies primarily,
and properly chewing, and consequently, where intended to denote a corporal
manducation, ought to be understood of such a one, as is made by the breaking
of the thing eaten by the Teeth. And indeed, as this is the true corporal
manducation, and which alone therefore deserves the name of a real one; So the
Church of Rome appears to have been heretofore of the same mind by the
recantation it put into the Mouth of Berengarius: The words thereof, so far,
being Baron. Annal. Eccl. ad Ann. 1059.
, that he believed the true Body of Christ to be sensually, not only in
Sacrament, but in truth handled, and broken by the hands of the Priest, and
ground in pieces by the Teeth of the faithful. And thus if the Romanists were
still persuaded, they might pretend to a real manducation indeed, and such as
had some title to that name, which they bestow upon it. But as they saw such a
manducation to agree but ill with that glorious Body, to which they ascribed
it, and have not therefore failed to set a brand upon those words, which were
made use of to express the Churches mind; So they now put off that manducation
to those Capernaites, to whom our Savior discoursed in St. John concerning
eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, and make that to be the very eating,
which our Savior faulted them for the imagination of, and not that more
refined one, which they themselves advance.

But what then is that real manducation, or eating of Christ, which the
Romanists advance? What is that, which they think fit to give that name unto?
Nothing, for ought that I can discern, save the receiving of him with their
mouth, and transmitting him from thence into their stomachs. If there be any
thing else, that looks like manducation, the poor species are fain to bear it;
For that is the Sum, and substance of their eating Christ in them. But in
conscience can this manducation of Christ look like a real one? Is this
answerable to that literal sense, which they seem to be so fond of in other
things? For why, if the letter of the text persuades that the very Body of
Christ is in the Sacrament, as that too not figuratively, or spiritually, but
properly, and substantially, should not the same letter persuade, that it is
eaten as literally, and properly, and not only spiritually, and sacramentally?
Especially, when they themselves advance a real manducation, as well as a
sacramental, and spiritual one. But as they, who contend so eagerly for the
very Body of Christ being in the Sacrament, and (which is more) will have it to
be substantially there, do yet arbitrarily enough assert its being only
spiritually there, or after the manner of a Spirit; So out of the same mere
will, and pleasure they assert also a real manducation, and yet at the same
time make that real manducation to be no other than Men's receiving Christ's
Body into their Mouths, and transmitting it from thence into their Stomachs. As
if our Savior had given them an absolute Empire over his words, and empowered
them to give those words a proper, and improper Sense, as best suited with
their own Hypotheses, and interests. For if the letter of the words will
prevail so far as to make us understand the eating enjoined of such an eating
as is performed by the Mouth, I do not see, without the Empire before spoken
of, why they should not understand it of such an eating, as is also performed
by the Teeth, and profess (as Berengarius was taught to do) that the Body of
Christ is sensually, not in Sacrament, but in truth handled, and broken by the
hands of the Priest, and ground in pieces by the Teeth of the Faithful.

Beside, to what purpose any corporal eating at all? To what purpose our so
much as receiving Christ with our Mouths, and transmitting him from thence into
our Stomachs? when, for ought appears by the Council of Trent it self, this
Sacrament of Christ's Body, and Blood was intended not for the corporal
nourishment of our Bodies, but for the spiritual nourishment of our Souls: That
Council where it professes to entreat of the Reason of the Institution of this
most holy Sacrament Sess. 13. cap. 2.
, affirming only, that our Savior would have this Sacrament to be taken as the
Spiritual Food of Souls, whereby they are nourished, and strengthened, living
by the Life of him, that said, He, that eats me, even he shall live by me.
For such as the Food is, such in reason ought to be that eating, by which it is
to be received; And therefore, if the Body of Christ in the Sacrament were
intended for the Spiritual Food of our Souls, to be spiritually eaten also, and
not after a corporal manner. But that, which will show yet more the no
necessity there is of this corporal eating of Christ's Body, any more than of
that Body's being really, and locally present in the Sacrament, is what is
assigned by Mons. Claud Resp. au ^. Traite de la Perpet. c. 4.
, where he entreats of the no necessity of the latter, and which because I know
not how to do better, I will express in that Author's words; To wit, that the
Flesh, and Blood of Christ are indeed a Principle of Peace, and Life, and
salvation to our Bodies, and Souls, not in the quality of Physical Causes,
which act by contact, and by the position of their substances, but in the
quality of meritorious Causes, which act morally, or of Causes Motives, which
do not only operate, and produce their Effects being absent, but when they
themselves are not as yet in being, as appears by the Examples of the Ancient
Patriarchs, who were saved by the virtue of Jesus Christ, even as we. For what
necessity can there be of any corporal eating of Christ's Body, when that Body
is not a Principle of Life to us in the quality of a Physical Cause, but of a
meritorious, and moral one? And when moreover they, who were antienly saved by
it, as well as we now are, were not in a capacity so to eat of it, because
that, which was to be the matter of it, had not at that time a being in the
World?

Agreeable hereto is the discourse of our Savior in the sixth of St. John's
Gospel, and after which it is a wonder that any Man should think of eating
Christ's Flesh after a corporal manner. For when they, who were present at it,
desired him evermore to give them of that Bread Joh. 6.34.
, which he had but just before affirmed to give Life unto the World, he not
only declared to them in express words, that he Joh. 6.35.
was that Bread of Life, but sufficiently intimated that the way for them to
attain it, and that Life together with it, was by coming to him, and believing
on him. For he that comes to me (says our Savior Ibid.
) shall never hunger, and he that believes on me, shall never thirst. And he
farther confirms that sort of eating, by suggesting, as he goes, that it was
the Will of his Father, that every one, which sees the Son Joh. 6.40.
, and believes on him, should have everlasting Life, and that he, that
believes on him Joh. 6.47.
, has everlasting Life. For how was that either pertinent to the account he
gave of his being the Bread of Life, or but consistent with what he afterward
says, that except Joh. 6.53.
they ate his Flesh, and drank his Blood, they had no Life in them, if that
belief in him were not the thing intended by the eating of him, and that eating
therefore a spiritual, rather than a corporal one? In like manner, when some of
his Disciples conceiving he intended another sort of eating, were offended with
that Discourse of his, and represented it as an hard Joh. 6.60.
, and unnatural one; After he had asked them, What if they should see the Son
of Man ascend up Joh. 6.62.
, where he was before, whether the more to enhance the Difficulty before he
resolved it, or, by the mention of his ascending into Heaven, to take them off
from understanding him in a carnal sense, he has these following words Joh.
6.63.
, It is the Spirit, that quickneth, the Flesh profits nothing; The words,
that I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they are Life. The most plain, and
obvious meaning of which words is, that it was the spiritual eating, and not
the carnal one, that availed unto Life, and that it was of such an eating, that
he had spoken all along, as the only one from which eternal Life could be
expected. And indeed, as the latter part of the words cannot well bear any
other sense, because words cannot be Spirit, and Life, unless it be as to the
sense, and meaning of them; So I do not see how any other sense can answer that
Design, for which these, and the former words were produced, even the softning
of that hard saying, which the Disciples were so offended at: To say, as the
Romanists Annot. in loc. in Verse. de Mons.
do, that our Savior intended thereby, that it was his Spirit, or Divinity,
which made that Flesh of his to be such living Food, and not any Property of
the Flesh considered, as separated from it, answering in some measure what
scruple they might have concerning its giving eternal Life to those, that eat
of it, but answering not at all the scruple they had concerning the possibility
of that Flesh of his being divided among so many, or the lawfulness of their
eating of it, though it could be so divided. For so far is the sense of the
Romanists from answering the latter of these Scruples, that it makes it yet
more painful, by how much more unnatural it is to eat the Flesh of him, that
was God-man, as well as a living one, than that of a mere Man, and one that is
also dead. Sure I am, St. Augustine was so choked with the literal sense of
that, which Christ's Disciples, and the Jews are said to have been offended at,
that he took occasion from thence to assert De Doct. Christ. li. 3. cap. 15. Si
autem [praeceptiva locutio] flagitium, aut facinus videtur jubere, aut
utilitatem, ant beneficentiam vetare, figurata est. Nisi manducaveritis,
inquit, carnem filii hominis, and sanguinem biberitis, non habebitis vitam in
vobis: fa^inus, vel flagitium videtur jubere. Figura est ergo praecipiens
passioni Domini esse Communicandum, and suaviter, atque utiliter recondendum in
memoria, quod pro nobis caro ejus Crucifixa, and vulnerata sit.
, not only that that, and other such like Precepts, as seem to command any
great wickedness, ought to be looked upon rather as figurative, than proper,
but resolved the meaning of what is said concerning the eating of Christ's
Flesh, and drinking his Blood to be, that we ought to communicate with his
Passion, and sweetly, and profitably to lay up in our Memory, that his Flesh
was crucified, and wounded for us. Conformably to which he elsewhere In Joh.
Tract. 26. and En. in Psalm. 98.
understands by those words, They are Spirit, and they are Life, They ought to
be spiritually understood, and will be Spirit and Life to those, which have
that understanding of them. And therefore, as I cannot but wonder that the
Romanists should think to free themselves from the Carnality of Christ's
Disciples, and the Jews, because they do not understand our Savior here of
tearing his Flesh with their Teeth, as the other are thought to have done (For
to take that Flesh into their Mouths, which is their avowed opinion, and
transmit it from thence into their Stomachs, though it look like an improper
eating, yet will hardly pass for a figurative, or spiritual one, as the
Scripture, and St. Augustine, represent the eating here enjoined) so I cannot
forbear with the same St. Augustine to admonish, even with respect to the Body
and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament Nolite parare fauces, sed cor. Inde
commendata est ista coena. Ecce credimus in Christum, cum fide accipimus. In
accipiendo novimus quid cogitemus. Modicum accipimus, and in cord saginamur.
Non ergo quod videtur, sed quod creditur, pascit. De verbis Dom. Sermon. 33.
, that we prepare not our Jaws, but our Heart, because the commendation of that
Supper is, that it was prepared for the latter. Behold we then believe in
Christ, we receive him with Faith. In receiving we know, what we ought to think
upon. We receive a little, and are fatned in the Heart. It is not therefore
that, which is seen, that feeds, but that, which is believed.

PART VIII. Of Consubstantiation.
The Contents.
An account of that Doctrine, which is by us called Consubstantiation, out of
the Augustan Confession, and Gerhard; And as it is founded by him, and other
the Lutheran Doctors in the letter of the words, This is my Body, and, This is
my Blood, so Enquiry thereupon made first, whether those words ought to be
taken in the literal sense; Secondly, whether, if so taken, Consubstantiation
can be inferred from them. That the former words ought to be taken in the
literal sense is endeavored by the Lutherans to be proved by general, and
special Arguments, and those Arguments therefore proposed, and answered. What
is alleged in the general concerning the literal sense of Scripture being for
the most part to be preferred before the figurative, willingly allowd; But that
no exception ought to be made, unless where the Scripture it self obliges us
to depart from the literal sense, shown to be neither true in it self, nor
pertinent to the present Texts, because there is enough in the words, that
follow them, to oblige us to prefer the figurative sense before it. The
Lutherans special Arguments next brought under Consideration, and First that,
which is drawn from the supposed newness, and strangeness of the Christian
Sacraments at the first, and which consequently required, that they should be
delivered in proper, and literal Expressions, as without which otherwise there
could have been no certain knowledge of them. Where is shown, that the
Christian Sacraments were neither such new, and strange things at the first
Institution of them, as is pretended (There having been the like under the Old
Testament) nor under any necessity, if they had been such, of being delivered
in literal, and proper Expressions, because figurative Expressions, with a Key
to open them, might have sufficiently declared the nature of them. What is
urged in the second place from the nature of a Testament, under the form of
which this Sacrament is thought from Luke 22.20. to have been instituted, shown
to be of as little force; Partly, because it is justly questionable, whether
what we there render Testament, ought not rather to be rendered a Covenant; and
partly because even Civil Testaments are shown to admit of figurative
Expressions. A short Answer made to what is alleged in the third, and fourth
place from the Majesty of him, that instituted this Sacrament, and from the
supposed Conformity there is between the several Evangelists, and St. Paul in
their accounts of the words in question; And a more full one to what is offered
in the fifth place to show the absurdity of a figurative Sense from the no
place there is for it either in the Subject, Predicate, or Copula. The Copula,
or the word [Is] thereupon made choice of to place the Figure in, and answer
made to what is objected against it from the Rules of Logic, and from the
Scripture. That the literal Sense is not, as is pretended in the sixth
Argument, the only one that can quiet the Mind, or secure the Conscience,
briefly shown; And Enquiry next made, whether though the literal Sense of the
words should be allowed, Consubstantiation could be inferred from them. Which
that it cannot, is made appear from there being nothing in the word (...), or
This, to denote that complexum quid, which Consubstantiation advances.

IF Transubstantiation be a hard word, and such as will not easily down with
the Romanists themselves; That, which the generality of Men call
Consubstantiation, but the Lutherans themselves Confess. August. Art. 10. and
Cons. Cassand. ad dict. Art.
a true, real, and substantial Presence of Christ's Body, and Blood, will be
found to be of no very easy digestion by those, that shall take the pains to
consider it. For though it does not pretend to annihilate, or transform the
Sacramental Elements, and therefore neither offer that violence to our Senses,
and the Scripture, which Transubstantiation does; Yet, which is hard enough to
believe, it professes to teach Gerhard. Loc. Commun. Tract. de Sacr. Caena
cap. 10.
, that the Body of Christ is so united to the blessed Bread, and the Blood of
Christ to the blessed Wine, that together with that Bread we receive, and eat
the Body of Christ by one Sacramental Manducation, and together with that Wine
receive, and drink the Blood of Christ by one Sacramental Draught. By which
means Christ's glorious Body is not only contrary to the nature of a Body, made
to be present to many places at once, even to Heaven, and as many other, as
this holy Sacrament is celebrated in; but (for ought that I can discern)
jumbled together into one Physical Mass with those Sacramental Elements, to
which it is affirmed to be united, which is that Consubstantiation, which they
seem so desirous to avoid: This Union, as it is in their own opinion an union
of Substances, and of corporeal Substances also, So, so strait a one, as to
occasion their own affirming, that the Body, and Blood of Christ are given in,
with, and under their respective Elements, which how they should be without the
former Consubstantiation, is not easy to imagine.

Now as this opinion of the Lutherans is founded by themselves upon the literal
sense of the words, This is my Body, and, This is my Blood, and must therefore
stand, or fall with it; So I shall therefore think it enough to enquire 1.
Whether those words ought to be taken in the literal sense. 2. Whether
supposing that they should be so understood, that, which we call
Consubstantiation, can be inferred from them.


1. That the words This is my Body, and This is my Blood, Vid. Gerhard. ubi
supra.
ought to be taken in the literal sense, is affirmed by the Lutherans, as well
as by the Romanists, and both general, and special Arguments alleged for it.
Whereof the former are, that the literal sense, because the first, and most
natural, is generally to be preferred before the figurative one; That this ought
especially to be observed in the Interpretation of the Scripture, unless the
Scripture it self oblige us to depart from it, but most of all in divine
Precepts, Promises, and Articles of Faith: Partly, because of the danger there
may be of running into great errors, if the literal sense should not generally
be adhered to, and partly because it is pretended that there is nothing of the
former nature, which in some place of Scripture, or other is not delivered in
plain, and literal expressions, and by which judgment may be made of what is
elsewhere delivered in figurative ones. And I willingly grant that the literal
sense, because the first, and most natural, is generally to be preferred before
the figurative; And I grant too, that this ought especially to be observed in
the Interpretation of the Scripture. But that no exception ought to be made
from this general rule, unless the Scripture it self oblige us to depart from
the literal sense, is a thing I see no reason for, where the matter entreated
of is a proper matter of Reason, or of that law of Nature, which is conducted
by it: Partly, because in such a case Reason, and Nature may be presumed to be
competent judges of the thing entreated of, and consequently may prescribe
against the literal sense of such expressions, as shall be found to be
manifestly contrary to the dictates of it; And partly, because the great design
of Scripture being to direct us in supernatural things, it may well enough be
presumed to leave things of the former nature to be judged of, for the main, by
that Reason, to whose cognizance they do belong. Thus, for instance, because
the preservation of those natures, which God has given us, is a thing proper
enough for the cognizance of Reason, and Nature, and manifestly prescribed by
the dictates of it, not only we, but all Christians whatsoever think themselves
licensed, if not obliged, to put a figurative sense upon those words, which
command the pulling out an offending eye, or cutting off an offending hand, yea
though there should not be, as perhaps there is not, any so express precept of
Scripture against the mutilation of our selves. But let us examine yet more
nearly the purport of the former Argument, as it relates to such divine
precepts, and promises, as may seem to have a more particular regard to the
life to come, and so may be rather reckoned to supernatural truths, than moral
ones. For neither here is it so clear that the literal sense is to prevail,
unless some text be produced, which shall oblige us to the contrary; Neither,
if it were, would it be of force to conclude against a figurative
interpretation of those words, for which this Argument is alleged. I instance
for the former of these in what was but even now Part 7.
quoted out of St. Augustine concerning our looking upon that as a figurative
expression, which enjoins the eating of Christ's Flesh, and drinking his Blood
in order to eternal life. For as that Father thought it enough to prove that
expression to be such, because it seemed to command a great wickedness, without
so much as taking notice of any Scripture, that represented it as such; so I do
not see what text can be produced, that is so express against the eating of
humane Flesh, and drinking humane Blood, as this is for the eating, and
drinking them in the present instance. In which case, that wickedness, which
St. Augustine affirms the former precept to lead to in the literal sense, must
be pronounced as such by the law of Reason, and Nature, and no necessity
therefore of sticking to the literal sense of any Scripture, till we can find
as express a text elsewhere to take us off from the embracing of it. But let us
suppose that the literal sense is to prevail, till some text of Scripture can
be produced, which shall oblige us to a contrary one; Yet will it not therefore
follow, but that the words, we are now upon, may, and ought to be figuratively
taken, because there is enough in those, that follow, to oblige us to it. I
allege for this purpose our Savior's representing the things he gave as his
Body broken, and Blood shed, which his natural Body, and Blood were not at the
Institution of this Sacrament, nor can now be since his Resurrection from the
dead. For if the Body, and Blood of Christ were not then broken, or shed, nor
can be so since his Resurrection from the dead, what our Savior then gave, or
we now receive, cannot be that Body, and Blood, and therefore to be understood
rather as Signs, and efficacious Means of conveying the Merit of that Body, and
Blood to us, than (as the letter of the words seems to import) that Body, and
Blood it self. The same is yet more evident from our Savior's requiring his
Disciples to do that whole action, and particularly to eat, and drink the
things given in remembrance of him, and of his death? That which is designed as
a memorial of any thing, being in reason to be looked upon as a thing distinct
from that, which it was intended as a memorial of, and designed to supply the
place of. Neither will it avail to say (as it is in my opinion idly enough)
that if the last suggestion were true, Christ's Body, and Blood must have been
absent from that Sacrament, which our Savior celebrated with his Disciples,
which it is certain from the Story, that they were not. For as that Sacrament
it self was principally designed for the times succeeding our Savior's
passion, and the word (...), or remembrance, in all probability made use of
with a particular relation to them; So Christ's Body broken and Blood shed were
as much absent from that Table, and Sacrament, as they are from our Sacramental
Tables, or any other.

Those general Arguments of the Lutherans being of no more force, let us cast
our eyes upon their special ones, or at least upon such of them, as seem most
worthy of our regard. Whereof the first, that occurs, is taken from the nature
of a Sacrament, which (as they say) being a thing perfectly new, and
accordingly unknown to all Men, till it come to be revealed, is in reason to be
delivered in proper and literal expressions, as concerning which otherwise
there can be no certain knowledge. Which supposed, the words, that declare this
Sacrament, must be concluded to be such, and as such understood, and asserted.
A Man would wonder to hear Learned Men argue at this rate concerning the
Sacraments of our Savior, when it appears by what I have elsewhere Expl. of
the Sacr. in Genesis Part 4.
said, that there were several such things before, and by which St. Paul tells
us, that the Jews did all eat the same spiritual meat with us, and drank the
same spiritual drink, even Christ; Yea though the natural Body, and Blood of
Christ were not then in being, and consequently could not literally be eaten,
or drunken. For how come our Sacraments to be such new, and unknown things,
when there were the like long before? Or how under a necessity of being
delivered in literal, and proper expressions, when there were not only such
like Sacraments to give light to them, though figuratively delivered, but the
Doctrine of those Ancient Sacraments delivered even by St. Paul in those very
figurative expressions, which are thought to be such absurdities in ours? For
however we may be thought literally to eat, and drink Christ's Body, and Blood;
yet they, to be sure, cannot be thought to have done so, who lived before that
Body, and Blood of Christ were in being. Though granting that our Sacraments
were at first as new, and unknown, as it is pretended that they are; Yet will
it not therefore follow, but that they might be delivered in figurative, as
well as in literal expressions: Because figurative expressions, according to
themselves may be easily enough understood, if there be but a Key to open them.
Now whether there be not such a Key to open the figurative expressions of the
present Sacrament, I shall leave to those to judge, who shall reflect upon our
Savior's representing the Symbols of this Sacrament as his Body broken, and
Blood shed, and willing us moreover to eat, and drink of them in remembrance of
him, and of his crucifixion; Those two things being enough to assure us, that
the things given by our Savior were rather Memorials of that Body, and Blood
of his, and conveyers of the Merits of them, than either the substance of that
Body, and Blood, or the Means of communicating it to the Mouths, and Stomachs
of those, who were to partake of them.

But it may be there is more force in what they argue from the nature of a
Testament upon occasion of those words of our Savior, This is my Blood of the
New Testament, or The New Testament in it, which is shed for many for the
remission of Sins. For since it should seem by those expressions, that that
Sacrament was instituted under the form of a Testament, the words whereof ought
in reason to be taken in the literal sense, as without which all Testaments
would be very uncertain, and litigious; Therefore the words of this Sacrament,
and particularly such of them as respect the principal Legacies in it, ought to
be taken in the literal sense, and not in a figurative one. If a Man should
make answer, as I have elsewhere Expl. of the ^^^r in Genesis Part ^.
done, and I think too not without great reason, that what we render Testament
ought to be rendered a Covenant, all that argument would be spon'd, and whatever
the promoters of it have brought concerning Testaments, out of the Body of the
Civil Law, or the Interpreters thereof. But I will however allow for once the
usual rendering of the Word, and answer directly to that Argument, which is
formed from it. As indeed what should hinder me, when those very Laws, which
they pretend to, do not prove what they are designed for? For such I look upon
that Ille, aut ille D. de legate. and fidei commiss.
, which says, that, when there is no ambiguity in the words, there ought to be
no question made concerning the Will of the Testatour. For who will allow these
Men to suppose, that there is no ambiguity in the words of the present
Testament strictly, and literally understood, and particularly in those words,
that are the subject of the present controversy? As little force is there in
that Law L. Non aliter D. de legatis, etc.
, which says, that we ought not otherwise to depart from the natural
signification of words, than when it is manifest that the Testatour meant
somewhat else, than what seems to have been expressed in them. For one would
think, that should consider what impossibilities, and contradictions the
literal sense of, This is my Body, and This is my Blood, involves, one would
think, I say, that those alone should make it manifest enough, that the
Testatour meant somewhat else, than what the literal sense of the words will
necessarily lead Men to. So little reason is there to believe, that there is
any thing even in the Civil Law to persuade a strict, and literal
interpretation of all, that a Testament contains. And they, who produce the two
former Laws to persuade such an Interpretation, are the more inexcusable in it,
because if they had pleased to read on to the paragraph Titius in the latter of
them, they would have seen enough to make them ashamed of their pretensions;
Because it is there affirmed in express terms, that we are not in a cause of
Testaments to descend to a strict definition of words, since for the most part
Testatours speak abusively, neither do they always use proper Names, and
Titles. All which things I have said, not as constrained thereto by the force
of the present Argument (For I know no reason why the sense of the New
Testament should be judged of by the niceties of the Law) but to let the World
see, how partial Men are in the allegations of such proofs as they think to be
of use to them. For beside what was before quoted from the Law concerning
Testatours speaking abusively, and improperly, the same Law gives us to
understand L. ex facto D. de haered. institu. Paragr. Rerum aubem Italicarum.
, that the will of the deceased does all, and that L. Siquis ^ta. D. de
adimendis, vel t^ansferendis, etc. Par. Condit. Legati.
his sense is more to be regarded, than the words. Which could have no sense in
it, if Legitimate Testaments were always to be taken in the strictness of the
letter; For then the will, or sense of the Testatour, and the words of his
Testament would be perfectly the same.

The next argument for the literal sense of the words in question is taken from
the Majesty of him, that instituted this Sacrament, and from all those glorious
Attributes, that make it up. Such as are his Truth, and the place he holds
under God of our Instructor, his being the very wisdom of the Father, and
omniscient, his being nigh unto death, when he instituted this Sacrament, and
so much the more likely still to weigh all the words he uttered in this
important affair; as, in fine, his being so far from giving any indication of
other than a literal Interpretation of the present words, that, when he was
advanced to Heaven, he revealed the Doctrine of the Eucharist in the very same
words, wherein he had before exhibited it. Things, which for the most part,
must be acknowledged to be duly attributed to Christ; but which have no force
at all to conclude the thing in question. For what if Christ be true, and
appointed by God to be our Instructor? Will it therefore follow, that we must
understand all he says in the Letter, though we want not sufficient
Indications, even from some of his own words, that we ought to understand him
in a figurative sense. All that they, who press us with Christ's Truth, and the
Place he holds under God, seem to pretend to, is, that we ought to hear him,
and be guided by him in our Belief. Which I suppose they do to very good
purpose, who submit their Belief to that, which, all things considered, they
are firmly persuaded to be his Mind, and Will. But it is farther alleged, that
Christ is the very Wisdom of the Father, and one who could therefore express
his Mind clearly, and plainly, and in proper and literal Expressions, as well
as in figurative ones. And whoever doubted of it, or could doubt of it, who
looked upon him but as an ordinary Prophet, and not as one, who was also of the
same Essence with the Father? But as the Question is not, What Christ could do,
but, What he has done? So we find no reason to grant, but that our Savior
has spoken plainly enough to those, that are willing to understand him. The
Argument goes on to allege, that our Savior was omniscient, and as he could
not therefore but know what Contentions would arise about this part of heavenly
Doctrine to the certain destruction of Souls; So it is not at all likely that
he would so far contribute to it, as of set purpose to wrap the true, and
certain meaning of this holy Mystery in the dark coverings of figurative words.
But as I do not find any necessity to grant, that Christ was bound to do all he
could, to prevent the Contentions that might afterward happen, because (as St.
Paul spoke 1 Cor. 11.19.
concerning Heresies) this Good might accrue by them, that they that were
approved, might thereby be made manifest; So I see as little reason to grant,
that Christ did any way contribute to those Contentions, or the ruin of Souls
by them, by those figurative Expressions, which he made use of in the present
instance: Those Coverings, wherein the Doctrine of the Sacrament is supposed to
be wrapped up, being not so thick, or obscure, but that they may be seen through
by Men of unprejudiced Minds. I know not why it is added, unless it be to fill
up the number of its forces, that our Savior was near to death, when he
instituted this Sacrament, and therefore no doubt well weighed beforehand what
he spoke concerning it. For who, but a blasphemous Heretic, ever thought, or
said, that our Savior under any Circumstances knew not what he spoke? And
therefore I shall only take notice of that, which concludes the present
Argument, even that our Savior was so far from giving any indication of other,
than a literal interpretation, that, after he was advanced to Heave, he
revealed the Doctrine of it in the same words, wherein it was at first
delivered. For not to say any thing at present to the latter part of this
Allegation; Our Savior (as was before shown) gave sufficient Indications of a
figurative Interpretation, when he represented the things given as his Body
broken, and Blood shed, which they were not then nor can be now, and moreover
willed his Disciples to partake of what he gave them in remembrance of him, and
of his death.

A fourth Argument for the literal sense of the words in question, is the great
Conformity there is between the several Historians of the Institution, as to
the words we are now upon; It being not to be thought, but that, if they had
been to be taken in other, than a simple, and proper sense, one, or other of
those holy Men would have added an Explication of them. But neither is there
that Conformity between them as to the words, whereof we speak, neither can it
be said, that none of those Historians have given an Explication of them. For
though, for instance, This is my Body, is indeed in all of them, and we so far
forth obliged to acknowledge a Conformity between them in their account of the
present words; Yet St. Luke, and St. Paul add to those words, which is given
for you, and which is broken for you, which are not only Additions, but (if
what I have elsewhere said Part 5.
be well weighed) due Explications of them also, and such as show them not to
be capable of that literal Interpretation, which they are so willing to put
upon them. There is as little truth in what is added, that none of those
Historians have given any explication of them. For not to repeat what was but
now said concerning the words, which is given, or broken for you; St. Luke, and
St. Paul take care to remark, that our Savior enjoined his Disciples to eat
what he gave them in remembrance of him, and of his Death, which is no obscure
Indication of those words being to be figuratively understood.

The fifth Argument for the literal Sense, is the supposed Absurdity of the
figurative; Which the better to evince, it is pretended that there is no place
for any Figure either in the Subject, Predicate, or the Copula, that ties them
together. And if there be no Figure in either of these, there is no Figure at
all, and the Propositions therefore, that are composed of them, to be literally
understood. Now as I have elsewhere Part 3.
affirmed the figurativeness of these Propositions to consist in the word [Is],
as which I have there shown to be the same in sense with signifies, and
accordingly so used in Speeches of the like nature; So I shall therefore
content my self to return an Answer to what is objected as to the
figurativeness of that word, whether it be from Logic, or from the Scripture.

Now the first thing, that is objected from the former of these Heads, is, that
the Copula or the word [Is] is no part of a Proposition according to Aristotle,
and others, and therefore the figurativeness of the whole not to be placed in
it. I will leave it to the Sophisters to answer to Aristotle's Authority,
because I think that Office is fitter for them, than for a Divine; It shall
suffice me to make answer, that as a Man of good natural Understanding would
take that to be a part of a Proposition, without which in many Propositions the
Subject, and Predicate could have no connection, nor any more constitute a
Proposition, than Stone, and Timber, and other Materials do a House, till they
are united to one another, and compacted into a Building of that Shape, and
use; So men, that have had a Name for this Art of Reasoning, have been of a
quite different opinion from the Objectors, and not only not looked upon the
word [Is] as no part of the Proposition, but as the very Soul of it. For the
Copula (says Petrus a Sancto Joseph Idea Phil. Ration. li. 2. Art. 4.
) is to the Subject, and Predicate, as the Form is to the material parts of any
thing, and gives them the Essence of a Proposition; After the same manner as
the formal part of a House is not the Stones, and Timber of it, but that, by
which they are connected. And Burgersdicius, an Author better known, and as
terrible a Man at the Art of Reasoning, is not only of the same Mind with the
former as to the word [Is] being part of a Proposition, but tells us moreover
Instit. Log. li. 1. cap. 27.
, that it is a part of the Predicate, and indeed the very Form, and Soul of it.
Which he proves by a thing, that is agreed on among the differing Parties, even
that the word [Is], when included in another Verb, is part of the Predicate.
For if (says he) the word [Is] when included in another Verb is part of the
Predicate, why shall it not be a part of the Predicate, when it is set by it
self? Which, with the Instance, which he subjoins, and another Reason for it, I
shall leave to the Logicians of the other side to answer. But beside that more
remote Objection of the Copula's being no part of a Proposition, and therefore
the figurativeness of the present ones not to be placed there; It is farther
added, that this Copula, or the word [Is] is a word of no certain signification
in it self (For I forbear the mention of that hard Name, which the Logicians
give it) whereas Tropes, and Figures can have place only in words of certain
signification, because altering them from their native signification to a
foreign one. And it must be granted, that the word [Is] is so far forth of an
uncertain signification, that it may, and is wont to be applied to several
sorts of Predications, and particularly to such as are only accidental, as well
as to those that are essential. For thus we may, and do affirm, that Socrates,
for instance, is of this, or that Color, which denotes only an Accident, as
well as that he is a reasonable Creature, which points out the very Essence of
him. But as the word [Is] has this certain signification in the general, as to
point to somewhat that naturally belongs to the Subject, to which it relates,
whether it be of the Essence, or only an Accident thereof; So it may so far
forth be capable of being altered from its native signification to a foreign
one, which is the thing this Argument was intended to impugn.

But leaving such Niceties, as these, to such as take more pleasure in them,
that so we may with more freedom apply our selves to the Consideration of the
Scriptures; Let us, as is no doubt more for our Profit, consider what they
allege from thence to impugn the figurativeness of this so much controverted
word [Is]. Where the first thing, that occurrs, is, that in those words, which
respect the Cup, the word [Is] in the original Greek is wanting in St. Luke;
For, whatever is pretended, it is not wanting in S. Paul, though it be out of
its usual order. And this, for ought I can see, is made one of those potent
Arguments, which confounded Piscator, and caused him; after he had many years
stoutly defended the Figurativeness thereof; to retract his Opinion in that
Particular. But as I see no such force in this, or the other Arguments to
occasion any change of Opinion; So the word [Is] is so often understood, that
St. Luke might, upon that account, take the less care to express it, especially
having before made use of it in the matter of the other Element. And I shall
only add, that if there be any thing, which seems to press hard upon the
supposed figurativeness of the word [Is], it must be that the Hebrew, for ought
appears, has no word to express [Is] or Are, and our Savior therefore, when
he pronounced the present Propositions, to have uttered them without any word
to answer to it, only mentioning, This my Body, and, This my Blood, as the
Scripture speaks in the like Cases. Which supposed, one would think, the
figurativeness of those Propositions should not be placed, where we have done
it, and (because there seems nothing else to place it in) to be utterly
banished from them. But as it is plain from the Evangelists translating those
words, This is my Body, and, This is my Blood, that the word [Is], though not
expressed, yet was always understood by the Hebrews; So to suppose the
contrary, is to destroy the literal Sense, as well as the figurative, because
there can be no Sense at all, unless it be either expressed, or understood. By
the same Reason therefore that they, who advance the literal Sense of those
Propositions, place that literal Sense in the word [Is], though it be rather
supposed, than expressed; By the very same Reason may we place the
figurativeness thereof in it, and interpret those Propositions by it.

One only Argument remains, if yet it deserve that Name, that the literal sense
is the only one, that can bring Men to a setledness in the Doctrine of the
Eucharist, or give us any good Assurance, when we come to appear before
Christ's Judgment Seat; They, who run after Tropes, and Figures, knowing not
where to fix, as appears by the differences, that are between them, and much
less likely to stand in the day of Temptation, or in that more terrible day of
the Lord Jesus. But as it is now pretty evident, that they, who follow a
figurative Sense, are neither so uncertain in themselves, nor so different from
one another Vid. Cosins. Hist. Trans. Papal. cap. 2.
, that any Man can with Reason reproach them upon that account; So they, who
pretend to follow the literal Sense, are so far from coming to any settledness
in this Affair, that they cannot agree what that literal Sense is, and ought
not therefore to be more confident of their own future standing at the day of
Trial, than a sincere pursuit of the Truth, and a belief they have it will be
able to give them. Which, as it is not denied to them by us, so will, it is
hoped, be as easily granted to us by them, when they consider more calmly of
our Opinions, and the grounds of them.

2. But let us suppose that the words in controversy were to be taken in the
literal sense, and whatever can be fairly deduced from thence to be the genuine
issue of Christianity; Yet how does it appear that that, which we call
Consubstantiation, and they, though improperly enough, a true, real, and
substantial Presence of Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament, can receive
any countenance from it? For not only do the Lutherans maintain a simple
Presence of them in the Eucharist, but so intimate a Presence also, that they,
and the Sacramental Elements make up one compound; By means whereof, as the
Person of Christ by the union of his Divine and Humane Nature may be said to be
either God, or Man, so that, which is made up of the Sacramental Element, and
the thing of the Sacrament may by that union of theirs be in like manner
affirmed to be either the one, or the other, without any kind of impropriety,
or figure. Consequently whereto, as our Savior called this Compound thing by
the Name of his Body, and Blood, so St. Paul might as well give it the Title of
Bread, or Wine, where he speaks so often of its being eaten, or drunken by both
the worthy, and unworthy partakers of it. Now what is there in the letter of
the words, This is my Body, and, This is my Blood, to found such a Doctrine on?
What is there in them, that they themselves can think of any moment to infer
it? Nothing, for ought that I can discern, but the Neuter (...), or Hoc, and
which because it agrees not in Gender with (...), or Bread, must be taken not
adjectively, but substantively, and consequently for that complexum quid, or
compound thing, which they advance. But if the Particle (...), or Hoc being of
the Neuter Gender, do not hinder its referring to the Bread; If it be so far
from being any impropriety in construction, when so referred, that it is
agreeable to the use of the best Authors both in Greek, and Latin; Lastly, if
the Particle (...), or Hoc may as well be rendered This thing, meaning the Bread
before spoken of, as this Compound of the Sacrament, and the thing of the
Sacrament, as has been heretofore Part 3.
declared at large; Then is all this Presence, and Union without any kind of
foundation in the Text, and they must either believe, as we do, that Christ
meant no more by This is my Body, and Blood, than, This is the Sacrament
thereof, Or, that that Bread, and Wine, which he gave to his Disciples, is by
his Almighty Power transubstantiated into his very Body and Blood, Or that his
Body, and Blood are in the Sacrament, but after what manner they are utterly
ignorant, and are not curious to enquire, and much less of Courage enough to
determine. For as for whatever else they advance upon this Head, it is either
founded upon this supposed Union, or tends only to show that there is a real,
and substantial Presence of Christ's Body, and Blood in the Sacrament, and
which, because I have already sufficiently considered, I think it not worth the
while to speak again unto. And I shall only add, that as it does not appear
that our Savior meant any compound thing by that, which he affirmed to be his
Body, and much less such a compound thing, as answers to that, which arises
from the Union of the two Natures in Christ, without which they themselves
confess, that it could not be affirmed to be Christ's Body; So St. Luke, and
St. Paul give this great presumption against it, that when they come to speak
of the Cup, they do not set the simple word (...), or This to express the
Subject of this great Predication, but add (...), or Cup to it. For beside that
that makes it yet more probable, that they meant no other by it, than that Cup,
which they before affirm our Savior to have taken, and which to be sure did
not then contain that compound thing, which the Lutherans advance; St. Paul,
where he entreats of the end of Men's drinking of it, opposes this (...), or
(...) to (...), or This Bread, and so offers a yet greater presumption against
our understanding it of any other.

PART IX. Of the foundation of that relation, which is between the outward, and
inward parts of the Lord's Supper.
The Contents.
The foundation of that relation, which is between the outward, and inward
parts of this Sacrament, shown from some former Discourses, to be the
Institution of Christ, not so much as delivered by him, as applied to those
Elements, that are to put it on, by the Minister's executing the Commands of
it, and by Christ's fulfilling the Promises thereof. What is the foundation of
this relation, on the part of the former, the subject of the present Enquiry,
and his pronouncing the words, Hoc est corpus meum, and, Hic est calix, etc.
shown not to be it, from the insufficiency of those grounds, on which it is
built. What is urged in the behalf of those words more particularly considered,
and evidence made, that as there wants not in the Prayers, and Praises of the
Communion-Office, that which may tend to the founding of this Relation, so that
the words, Hoc est corpus meum, etc. neither now have, nor, when Christ himself
used them, had in them the power of producing it. What the true foundation of
this relation is, or what that is, which consecrates those Elements, which are
to put it on, endeavored to be made out from some former Discourses; And those
Elements accordingly considered, either as being to become a Sign of Christ's
Body, and Blood, or as being to become also a Means of Communicating that Body,
and Blood to us, and a Pledge to assure us thereof. The former of these
relations brought about by a declaration of those Purposes; for which the
Elements are intended, whether in the words of the Institution, or any other;
The latter by Thanksgiving, and Prayer. The usefulness of this Resolution to
compromise the Quarrels, that have arisen in this Argument upon occasion of
what the Ancients have said on the one hand for attributing the Power of
Consecration to the Prayers, and Thanksgivings of the Priest, and, on the other
hand, to the words of the Institution; Those Quarrels being easily to be
accommodated by attributing that Power to the Institution rather as applied,
than as delivered, and as applied also by Prayer, and Thanksgiving, more than
by the rehearsal of it.

outward Part, or Sign of the Lord's Supper, of the inward Part, or thing
signified by it, and of the Relation, that is between them; My proposed Method
obliges me to enquire, What is the Foundation of that Relation, or (that I may
speak more agreeably to the Language of the Church) What that is, which
consecrates the Bread, and Wine of it, and makes them become the Sacrament of
Christ's Body, and Blood.

Now though that has in a great measure been satisfied already, and so may
seem less necessary to be considered a second time; Yet because what I have
said upon it lies dispersedly in several Discourses, and will therefore require
more pains to put it together than will be fit for me to impose upon my Reader;
And because too many things may, and must be added to it, to give the World a
more distinct knowledge of this Affair; I shall (though so much the more
briefly) repeat what has been elsewhere said, and add farther light, and
strength to it.

In the general I observe from what I have elsewhere Expl. of the Sacr. in Genesis
Part 2, 3.
discoursed, that the Foundation of that relation, which is between the
outward, and inward part of the present Sacrament, is the Institution of
Christ, not as delivered by him (For so it has no more influence upon the
Bread, and Wine of the Lord's Supper, than upon those of our ordinary Repasts)
but as applied to those particular Elements, that are to put on the relation of
a Sacrament. I observe farther, that the Institution of Christ consisting of
Commands, and Promises, to make it effectual to the producing of this
Sacramental relation in the Elements, it must be applied to them by a due
observation of those Commands, and by a like Completion of its Promises. The
Consequent whereof will be, thirdly, that it must be applied to them on the one
hand by the Stewards of this Mystery, as to whom belongs the execution of its
Commands, and, on the other, by Christ himself, as to whom alone belongs the
Completion of the other. That though that application, which is to be made by
Christ, is no doubt of the most Efficacy toward the producing of this
Sacramental Relation, and, in strictness of speech, the only one, which can
make those Elements the Sacrament of Christ's Body, and Blood; Yet that that
application, which is to be made by the Stewards of this Mystery, is in order
of Nature before it, neither can Men expect that Christ should convert those
Elements into a Sacrament, unless what he enjoins concerning them be first
observed by the other. I observe lastly, that when question is made in this
particular, what is the Foundation of this Sacramental Relation, or (that I may
speak more agreeably to the Language of the Church) what that is, which
consecrates the Sacramental Elements; The meaning thereof is, what is the
Foundation of that relation, on the part of the Stewards of this Mystery, and
what is required of them to dispose Christ to perform his part in this Affair,
and cause those Elements, which in themselves are no way fitted for it, to
become to all intents and purposes, the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood.

The Romanists, as is very well known, make the words, Hoc est corpus meum,
etc. to be the words of Consecration, and that it is to them, and them only,
that this great relation is owing, and (which is more) a substantial change of
the Elements into the very Body, and Blood of Christ. For though the Council of
Trent is no way clear in this particular, as may appear to any, that shall take
the pains to consult it Sess. 13. cap. 1.
; Yet as it is the general opinion of their Writers, and the only one, that can
safely be maintained among them, so it is that, which the Roman Missal does
sufficiently confirm: Because entitling those words, and those alone, the words
of Consecration. A man would willingly see something like a Reason for this
Assertion, that so he might return something like an Answer to it. But if you
look into the Master of the Sentences Lib. 4. Did. 8.
, or his great Commentator Aquinas Sum. tert. part, qu. 78. Art. 1.
, you shall find no other than this, that in the other parts of this Service
there is only Praise given to God, or Prayer made unto him; But when this
Sacrament comes to be made, the Priest does not then use his own words, but the
words of Christ himself, therefore the word of Christ [even Hoc est corpus
meum, etc.] makes this Sacrament. I say nothing at this time that this
Argument, such as it is, is drawn from the Service of the Church, and not (as
one would have thought, and had been but reasonable) from the words of the
Institution, or from some other words of our blessed Savior, and his Apostles.
But I say, which will be enough, that let the Service of the Church be as
legitimate as may be, yet there is nothing in it to persuade what is
endeavored to be inferred from it. For what, though in the other parts of the
Service, there is nothing but Praise given to God (including therein, as I
suppose, the giving of Thanks) and Prayer to God? Yet how will it thence
follow, that there is nothing in it tending to the Consecration of the
Elements? For it appears by St. Luke, and St. Paul's making use of the word
gave Thanks, for what the other Evangelists express by blessed, that our
Savior blessed by giving Thanks. And why might not he then, or we now bless
the Sacramental Elements in like manner, and by that blessing change them into
a Sacrament, which is as much as to say, Consecrate? And it appears also, that
as little as the Romanists seem to esteem of Prayer in this particular; Yet as
there is even in their own Missal a Prayer to God, that he would vouchsafe to
make their Oblation a blessed One, etc. that it might become to them the Body,
and Blood of his Son, So Prayer it self, so far as Man is capable of blessing,
is no contemptible one, yea such a Blessing, as God himself thought no improper
one for a Priest, or rather Number. 6.23. etc.
for the High Priest himself. But it may be, there is more in what they
allege, that when this Sacrament comes to be made (For still they will take
that for granted) the Priest does not then use his own words, but the words of
Christ himself; The Priest (as Aquinas afterward Vbi supra.
tells us) speaking as it were in the Person of Christ, to let us understand,
that in the perfection of this Sacrament he does nothing but pronounce the
words of Christ. But first, if the Priest's using not his own words, but the
words of Christ, be that, which makes what he says, to have the force of
Consecration; How comes it to pass, that his using the words, Accipite, and
manducate, which are as certainly the words of our Savior, comes to have no
part in it? Especially, when Hoc est enim corpus meum (for so they express it
in their Missal) do so manifestly referr to the former, and are as manifestly a
Reason of what is exhorted to in them. I say secondly, that though it be true,
that the Priest does not then use his own words, but those of Christ himself;
Yet he does not use them as one speaking in the Person of Christ, as Aquinas
would insinuate, but as a bare reciter of them, and a reciter of them too as
spoken the Night before he suffered, and with respect to that particular
Eucharist, which he gave to his Disciples. Which how it should convert the
Elements then before him into the Body, and Blood of Christ, is a thing as hard
to be understood, as that conversion it self; Words being in reason to be
construed with relation to that, and that alone, to which they are applied by
the Author of them. Neither will it avail to say, that though the words
considered in themselves respect only that particular Eucharist, which our
Savior gave to his Disciples, yet as applied by the Priest to the Elements,
that are before him, they may affect them also. For if they are any otherwise
applied to them, than to show what our Savior intended this Sacrament for, and
consequently what we may expect in those Elements, which we set apart for it,
if we follow his directions in the Consecration of them; They are no more the
words of our Savior Christ, but of the Priest, who so applies them, and from
which therefore no such effect can be expected.

This I take to be a sufficient Bar against placing the Power of Consecration
in those words, yea though, when uttered by our Savior, they should be thought
to have had that force in them. How much more, if even so they were rather
declarations from Christ of what the Elements were already become, than any way
productive of a Sacramental relation in them? For neither could our Savior
have truly said, This is my Body, unless at that instant, when he spoke those
words, it were really such; And much less could that have been any reason, why
he should exhort them to take, and eat what he then offered them, as both the
tenor of the words, and the Hoc est enim corpus meum in the Roman Missal does
yet more plainly declare: Because if the words, Hoc est corpus meum, make the
change, it must have been Bread, and not his Body, which our Savior offered
his Disciples before he uttered them, and willed them to take, and eat of.

But not any longer to insist upon the destruction of that sort of
Consecration, Let us enquire, if it may be, after a more legitimate one, and
such as shall not only be free from the like Exceptions, but better answer
those Sacramental relations, which it is to give birth unto. In order
whereunto, I will consider the Sacramental Elements first, as being to become a
Sign of Christ's Body and Blood, and then as also a Means to communicate that
Body, and Blood to us, and a Pledge to assure us thereof.

If we consider the Sacramental Elements as being to become a Sign of Christ's
crucified Body, and Blood, and accordingly to represent them both to our own
Minds, and those of others; So it cannot but be thought necessary to declare,
whether by the words of the Institution, or others, for what purposes they are
designed, and what they were intended to represent. For those Elements Expl. of
the Sacr. in Genesis Part 2.
being not so clear a representation of the things intended by them, as by
their own force to suggest them to the Minds of those, for whom they were
intended; Being much less so clear a representation of them, as to invite those
to reflect upon them, who are either slow of understanding, or otherwise
indisposed to contemplate them, such as are the generality of Men; It cannot
but be thought necessary, even upon that account, to call in the assistance of
such words, as may declare to those, that are concerned, for what ends, and
purposes they were appointed. Otherwise Men may either look upon the whole of
that Sacrament as a purely civil Action, or (if the Person, that administreth
it, and other such like Circumstances prompt them to conceive of it as a
religious one) yet fancy to themselves such ends, and purposes, as are either
different from, or contrary to the due intendment of it. And though it be true,
that in that Eucharist, which our Savior celebrated with his Disciples, there
appears no such declaration of the ends of Christ in it, till he comes to
admonish them to take what he gave as his Body, and Blood, which supposes them
to have been made so before; Yet as it is clear from thence, that he thought
such a declaration to be necessary to manifest his ends in it, so it is no way
unlikely, but rather highly probable, that he interlaid that Thanksgiving, and
Prayer, wherewith he is said to have blessed the Elements of this Sacrament,
with a declaration of those ends, for which they were designed by him: It
appearing not otherwise how that Thanksgiving, and Prayer, could have fitted
the matter in hand, or stirred up the Minds of his Disciples to intend it with
that devotion, which the importance thereof required.

On the other side, if we consider the Sacramental Elements as being to become
a Means of communicating that Body, and Blood to us, and, which is but
consequent thereto, a Pledge to assure us thereof; So it is as little to be
doubted, but that it must be brought about by Thanksgiving to God, on the one
hand, for giving him to die, whose crucified Body, and Blood this Sacrament was
intended to convey; and by Prayer to him, on the other, to make those Elements
become the Communion of them: The former, because Thanksgiving appears to have
been the Means by which our Savior blessed them, and moreover, the principal
design of this Sacrament toward God, and which therefore unless we comply with,
we cannot reasonably hope for the Benefits of; The latter, because (as has
been elsewhere shown) Prayer was a part of that Thanksgiving, and because it is
undoubtedly the general Means appointed by Christ for the obtaining of all
Benefits whatsoever. Which things, how momentous soever, I have thus lightly
passed over, because I have spoken to them sufficiently elsewhere, and
particularly, where I entreated of the Institution of this Sacrament, and of
that Thanksgiving, by which our Savior is affirmed to have blessed it.

That, which in my opinion ought more especially to be considered, is the
usefulness of the former Resolution to compromise those Quarrels, which have
for some time been raised in this Argument. For whilst some contend earnestly
for Consecration by Thanksgiving, and Prayer, as they have reason enough to do
upon the account of our Savior's being affirmed to consecrate by it, and of
Justin Martyr, Origin, and several others representing the Elements of this
Sacrament, as becoming what they were intended by the force of those
Thanksgivings, and Prayers, which were made over them; And whilst others again
contend as earnestly, that they are made such by the words of the Institution,
and allege with the same heat Irenaeus his affirming Adv. haeres. li. 5. cap.
2.
the mixed Cup, and broken Bread to become the Eucharist of Christ's Body, and
Blood by receiving the Word of God, and St. Augustine's more celebrated saying,
that let the Word come to the Element, and it becomes a Sacrament: They say
things, which will be easily made to agree with each other, if they, who
allege them, will but hear one another speak. For it is the word of the
Institution applied, as that Institution directs, which consecrates the
Elements into those several relations, which they assume. And it is the same
word of Institution declared, which contributes more particularly to the making
of those Elements become a Sign of Christ's Body, and Blood. But then as it is
applied by Thanksgiving, and Prayer (because they are a part of its Commands)
as well as by a declaration of the whole; So that Thanksgiving, and Prayer
contribute to those relations, which do most ennoble them, even those, by which
the Elements become the Communion of Christ's Body, and Blood, and a Pledge to
assure us thereof: Not by any force, which is in the Letters, and Syllables
thereof, as Aquinas makes Hoc est corpus meum, and Hic est Calix sanguinis mei
to do, but by the force of that Institution, which prescribes them, and by
their natural aptitude to dispose God, to whom alone such great Effects are to
be ascribed, to give the Elements of this Sacrament those most excellent
relations, and efficacy.

PART X. Of the right Administration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
The Contents.
Entrance made with enquiring, How this Sacrament ought to be administered, and
therein again whether that Bread, wherewith it is celebrated, ought to be
broken, and whether he, who administers this Sacrament, is obliged by the words
of the Institution, or otherwise to make an offering unto God of Christ's Body,
and Blood, as well as make a tender of the Sacrament thereof to Men. That the
Bread of the Sacrament ought to be broken, as that too for the better
representation of the breaking of Christ's Body, asserted against the
Lutherans, and their Arguments against it produced, and answered. Whether he,
who administers this Sacrament, is obliged by the words of the Institution or
otherwise, to make an offering to God of Christ's Body, and Blood, in the next
place inquired into, and after a declaration of the Doctrine of the Council of
Trent in this Affair, consideration had of those grounds, upon which the
Fathers of that Council establish it. The words, Do this in remembrance of me,
more particularly animadverted upon, and shown not to denote such an Offering,
whether they be considered, as referring to the several things before spoken
of, and particularly to what Christ himself had done or enjoined the Apostles
to do, or as referring only to that Body, and Blood, which immediately precede
them. In which last Consideration of them is made appear, that the word (...),
may as well, and more naturally signify make; That there is nothing in the
present Argument to determine it to the notion of Sacrificing, or, if there
were, that it must import rather a Commemorative, than Expiatory one. What is
alleged by the same Council from Christ's Melchizedekian Priesthood, etc. more
briefly considered, and answered; And that Sacrifice, which the Council
advances, shown in the close, to be inconsistent with it self, contrary to the
present state of our Lord, and Savior, and more derogatory to that Sacrifice,
which Christ made of himself upon the Cross. The whole concluded with
enquiring, To whom this Sacrament ought to be administered, and particularly,
whether it either ought, or may lawfully be administered to Infants. Where the
Arguments of Bishop Tailor, for the lawfulness of Communicating Infants, are
produced, and answered, and particularly, what he alleges from Infants being
admitted to Baptism, though they are no more qualified for it, than they are
for the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.

Catechism, which I have taken upon me to explain, proceed to that, which is
the last in order, even to show, What is required of them who come to the
Lord's Supper. But because, unless it be rightly administered, it cannot be
rightly received, or at least not with that advantage, which men might
otherwise promise to themselves from it: And because those with whom we have to
do in this Affair, differ as much from us about the Administration of this
Sacrament, as they do about the Nature of it; I think it but reasonable, so far
forth as those differences, or the nature of the thing shall lead me to it, to
make that also the subject of my Discourse, and accordingly enquire first, how
it ought to be administered, and then to whom it ought to be so.

I. Now there are two things again, which will be necessary to be inquired
into, as concerning the manner of its Administration, 1. Whether that Bread,
wherewith this Sacrament is celebrated, ought to be broken. 2. Whether he, who
administers this Sacrament, is obliged by the words of the Institution, or
otherwise, to make an Offering unto God of Christ's Body, and Blood, as well as
make a tender of the Sacrament thereof to Men.


1. Whether that Bread, wherewith this Sacrament is celebrated, ought to be
broken, is a Question between us, and the Lutherans, who look upon the breaking
of it as no otherwise necessary, than as the Bread, which we employ, may make
it to be so for the distribution of it. Agreeably to which Opinion of theirs,
they furnish themselves with such small round Wafers, as require no breaking at
all, and communicate both themselves, and their People with them. We, on the
other side, led thereto, as we suppose, by the Institution of Christ, have a
quite different opinion of it, and do not only think it necessary for the
distribution of larger Loaves, but, so far forth at least as a divine Precept
can make it such, necessary also as a Sacramental Act, and for the better
representation of the usage of that Body of Christ, which it was intended to
denote: Which Opinion of ours we are farther confirmed in by what we learn from
the care, that was used by the Jews in the breaking of that Eucharistical Bread
of theirs, which seems to have been the Exemplar of ours; By the Scriptures,
and the Ancients representing the whole of this Sacrament under the title of
breaking of Bread, and by S. Paul's intimating the Bread, which they brake, to
be as much the Communion of Christ's Body, as the Cup of Blessing, which they
then blessed, was the Communion of his Blood.

A Man would think that they, who stand out against the force of these
Arguments, should be provided of sufficient Answers to them, and not only so,
but of sufficient Arguments too, to strengthen their own Opinion. But whether
either the one, or the other are of that force, which they are supposed to be
of, shall be permitted to judgment, after I have taken a view of them.

To begin with the Answers Vid. Ge^^. hard. Loc. Theolog. Tract. de Sacr. Coen.
cap. 14.
, which they return to the former Arguments, and particularly with what they
answer to what is urged from the Institution of Christ. Where they tell us in
the first place, that though Christ brake the Bread, and may so far forth
perhaps be thought to prescribe the like to those, that were to administer the
Sacrament after him; Yet it was rather in order to the distribution of it (the
Bread then used requiring him so to do) than to represent the breaking of his
own Body. But beside that what they affirm in the former part of it is said
without any other proof, than that the Bread then used required breaking, in
order to the distribution of it (For, as to any thing they advance to the
contrary, Christ might break the Bread for representation, as well as for
distribution) St. Paul has said enough to show, that Christ brake the Bread of
this Sacrament to represent the ill usage of his Body; There being not any
tolerable reason, why St. Paul should, in the very History of the Institution,
attribute so improper a term as that of breaking to Christ's Body, but that the
breaking of the Bread, which was a Figure of it, was intended to denote that
violence, which was offered to his crucified one. That Answer not succeeding,
they fly unto another, and tell us that the words, Do this, referr principally
to what the Apostles were to do in the present Action, amongst which the
breaking of Bread being not then to be, because the Bread was before broken to
their hands, the Command of, Do this, is not to be thought to extend properly,
and principally to the breaking of the Bread, but to the taking, and eating of
it. It is a strange thing to see how Prejudice will cast a mist before wise
Men's Eyes, and prompt them to say that for the defense of their Opinions in one
thing, which will do them as much mischief in another. For the very same
Argument, mutatis mutandis, will serve alike to overthrow that blessing of the
Bread, which they, as well as we, think themselves obliged to maintain, as
without which indeed it can be no part of the present Sacrament. For if the
words, Do this, are to be thought to extend no farther, than to what the
Apostles were to do in that Sacrament, which they celebrated with our Savior,
then are they of as little force to conclude the blessing of the Bread before
we eat it, because the Bread was at that time, as much blessed to their hands,
as it is affirmed to have been broken to them. But beside that that Answer is
as much of force against themselves in the blessing of the Bread, as it can be
supposed to be against us in the breaking of it; It has nothing in it, which
can conclude against the force of those words, from which the breaking of the
Bread is inferred. For whether principally, or less principally, if the words,
Do this, referred to somewhat else, than what the Apostles were then to do,
then might they referr also to the breaking of the Bread, and consequently the
breaking of the Bread be inferred from them, as well as the eating of it. And
indeed as he, who suggests this Answer, lays the necessity of blessing the
Bread Gerhard ubi supra. cap. 13. Sect. 149.
in Christ's commanding us to do the same thing, which he did, which if he did
in any words of the Institution, it was in the present ones, and thereby shows
them to extend to somewhat else beside eating; So if they relate to succeeding
Sacraments, as well as to what our Savior celebrated with his Disciples, as is
evident from his adding in remembrance of me, they must consequently relate to
all that, which was necessary to make the Bread, which he enjoined us to eat,
to become the Sacrament of his Body, because the Bread, which he commanded his
Disciples to eat, was represented by him as such. From whence as it will
follow, that somewhat else was referred to by the words, Do this, than that
eating, which was just before enjoined upon the Disciples, even that Blessing,
or Thanksgiving, which Christ is said to have premised to this whole Action; So
it is but just to believe, that that breaking also was, which followed
immediately upon it, and which appears from what has been said to represent
the breaking of that Body, which the Bread they were commanded to eat, was
intended as a Representation of. I say thirdly, and lastly, that how
confidently soever it is affirmed, that the words, Do this, relate principally
to the eating next before enjoined, yet is there no reason to believe, that it
related more to eating, than to any of the foregoing Actions, otherwise than as
that eating was the Complement of the whole, and consequently presupposed all
the former Actions to have been performed. Partly, because if eating in it self
considered, had been the principal thing designed, the repetition of the same
word eat would have better fitted the end of the Speaker; And partly, because,
setting aside those general words, Do this, there would have been nothing in
the Institution to express with any clearness that Blessing, and distribution
of the Bread, which they, as well as we, think to be enjoined upon us in the
administration of this Sacrament. One other Answer they have, if it be lawful
so to call it, that if we will argue from what Christ did in this particular,
to what we our selves are to do, we must either show that action to be
otherwise necessary, or find our selves obliged to celebrate this Holy
Sacrament in the like posture, and time, and place, wherein we read our Savior
to have done it. But beside that we do not argue simply from what our Savior
did in this particular, but from that Action of his being placed between two,
that are confessed to be intended by the words, Do this, and so in all reason
to be looked upon as alike enjoined by them; We cannot but think that it has
farther evidence for the necessity of it from its so well representing that ill
usage, which our Savior's Body received, that St. Paul, when he came to speak
of that usage of it as a thing commemorated in this Sacrament, expressed it by
the breaking of it.

The Argument from the Institution being thus secured, and vindicated from the
Exceptions of its Adversaries, we shall the less need to concern our selves
about what the Lutherans answer to those, that follow, as which we our selves
make use of rather to strengthen our Assertion, than that we think them of
themselves to be a just foundation of it. Only that it may appear, that even
they are not without their weight, I shall, though very briefly, reply to what
is answered to them.

Now as that, which the Lutherans answer upon all occasions; is, that that
breaking, which was made use of by our Savior, and his Apostles, was rather
for the better distribution of the Bread they used, than for any significancy
in it; So when we press them with the Jews breaking their Eucharistical Bread,
which in all probability gave occasion to the Institution of ours, they tell
us, that as the Bread, which the Jews made use of, was more easy to be broken
than ours, as being made not so thick as ours now is, but broader, and thinner,
and indeed rather like Cakes, than Loaves; so the only end of that breaking was
to distribute the Bread they used among those, that were to partake of it. But
as whatever is to be said concerning the usual Bread of the Jews, yet if I can
understand the account, that is given by Cassander out of Paulus Fagius (For I
have not Fagius his discourse upon this Argument to consult) the Bread the Jews
both heretofore, and now make use of in their Eucharist, was cast into so thick
a mass, that it could not well be broken in pieces; so this Ceremony of
breaking was, and is so religiously observed in the present instance, that
though they almost cut off from the whole that part, which they are to make use
of, yet they leave so much of it uncut, as may serve still for the breaking of
it, which shows that there was somewhat else in it.

The next thing alleged by us to strengthen the present Assertion, is this
Sacrament's being described both in the Scripture, and the Ancients by the Name
of breaking of Bread, which we suppose it would hardly have been, if that had
not been accounted a considerable Action in it, and much less, if it had been
accounted so indifferent a one, as the Lutherans are willing to have it
thought. But as, where they can, they endeavor to turn those Expressions to
another sense, but with how little reason the places before quoted Part 2.
will show; So the burden of their Song always is, that the breaking there
mentioned, had no other design, than the distribution of the Bread among those,
that were to receive it, which few impartial Men will believe, who find St.
Paul representing the Bread which our Savior brake, as that Body, which was
broken for his Disciples.

I find nothing of moment returned to what is before alleged by us concerning
St. Paul's intimating the Bread, which we break, to be as much the Communion of
Christ's Body, as the Cup of Blessing, which we bless, is the Communion of his
Blood. And therefore I shall only add, that though I do not pretend to infer
from thence, that the breaking of the Bread ought to be ranked in the same
order with the blessing of the Cup; Yet I can hardly think, that if St. Paul
had thought it so inconsiderable a thing as the Lutherans seem to do, he would
have made use of no other Epithet, than that of broken to denote that Bread,
which he intimated to be as much the Communion of Christ's Body, as the Cup
that is blessed, is the Commnnion of the other. For to make the words which we
break to signify no other, than what we give, or distribute (which is the
common Answer to all Difficulties) is without any foundation in the present
place; Because what St. Paul affirms of the Cup relates to that, which makes it
to be a Sacramental one, and not to the delivery of it to those, that are to
partake of it.

But it may be their Arguments are better than their Answers, and so they had
need to be to give any strength to their Opinions. But whosoever shall take the
pains to consider them, or indeed, but to look over them, will soon be
convinced of the contrary. For to say nothing at all to what they allege
concerning this Ceremony of breaking being without any divine Command, because
the contrary thereof has been shown already; How absurd is it to say, that it
is repugnant to the nature of the New Testament to have any thing in it to
represent another, when not only the Waters of Baptism, and their cleansing
quality are a manifest Image of a better Purification, but the plunging the
baptized Party in them, and his rising from thence was thought to be so clear a
one of our being buried, and rising after a spiritual manner, that St. Paul
describes the former by being buried with him by Baptism into death Romans 6.4.
, and by being planted together in the likeness Romans 6.5.
of it? But it may be there is more reason in that which it follows, even that
the breaking of the Bread cannot be thought to be a representation of that in
the Body of Christ, which is expressly denied of it; For so they think that
breaking to be, where it is said Joh. 19.26.
that they brake not his Legs, according to a Prophecy Psalm. 34.10.
, that went of old concerning him. But as they ought to have remembered that St.
Paul, notwithstanding that, affirms Christ's Body to have been broken, and in
that very place also where he speaks of the breaking of the Sign of it, which
shows that he thought all breaking of Christ's Body not to be denied; There is
no necessity that that, which is intended to be represented, should strictly,
and literally answer what was designed as a representation of it. Otherwise the
spiritual things of the New Testament will hardly pass as things represented by
the sensible ones of the Old Testament, which yet these latter being affirmed
to be Figures Heb. 9.24.
of the former will oblige us to believe. It is enough in things, that are of a
very different nature, that there is some general resemblance between them, and
such as that difference, which is between them, will allow. Which supposed,
there may be enough in our Savior's Body, though not capable of a strict, and
proper breaking, to answer that breaking, which St. Paul attributes to it, and
the breaking of that Bread, which was designed to represent it; Our Savior's
Body having had thus much of a breaking in it, that an equal violence was
offered to it, and the continuity thereof dissolved in several parts of it by
those Nails, and Spear, that pierced it. The same persons go on to object, that
if the breaking of the Bread be necessary to design the breaking of Christ's
Body, the pouring out of the Wine will be as necessary to mark out the shedding
of his Blood. Which latter being not to be pretended, because of the silence
there is of it in the Institution, the former has as little reason to be
believed, or asserted. But as it appears from what has been elsewhere said
Part 4.
, that there are very fair intimations of that pouring out of the Wine, which
is here so expressly denied, and the significancy of the breaking of the Bread
not to be denied upon that account; So the Argument alleged against the
necessity thereof proceeds upon the supposition of our thinking it to be
necessary in it self, and so, that the Sacrament cannot be salv'd without it.
Whereas all, that we pretend to affirm, is its being necessary by a Divine
Precept, and otherwise convenient enough to mark out that violent usage of him
upon the Cross, which the whole Sacrament was confessedly intended for a
Memorial of. Both which things may be affirmed without inferring any necessity
of the pouring out of the Wine, or of our Savior's giving Command concerning
it. For if even the breaking of the Bread, abstracting from the Command of
Christ, be rather convenient, than necessary, the pouring out of the Wine can
be no more than such; And if neither of them be necessary, Christ may, no
doubt, command one, and not the other, and what he has therefore said
concerning the breaking of the Bread of no force to conclude, that there ought
to be the like Command for the pouring out of the other Element. It is objected
yet again (For what is wanting in strength, men commonly endeavor to make up
by the number of their forces) it is objected, I say, that if Christ should
have instituted this Sacrament to represent the breaking of his Body, and the
shedding of his Blood, by the breaking, or pouring out of those Elements, that
were intended to represent them, he should have made choice of a more obscure
Figure to come in the place of a clearer one, which is not to be supposed of
him: There being no doubt, but the killing of the Paschal Lamb, was a more
lively Image of what was done unto our Savior, than what is done to the
Elements of this Sacrament. But as it becomes not us to dispute what was most
proper for God, or Christ to do, where they have at any time declared their own
will and pleasure; So Christ might have reason enough to prefer the
Representation he here made use of, though perhaps not so clear, before that
which he made choice of among the Jews: As because that People, by reason of
the grossness of their Understandings, stood in need of clearer Figures, than
we our selves do, to insinuate into their Minds the things intended by them; So
because whilst he taught them upon the matter only by Types, and Figures, he
teaches us for the most part by plain Declarations, and from which therefore,
if there be any need of it, we may easily collect what is the intention of the
other. It is objected lastly (For so low at length do their Arguments run) that
our Doctrine concerning the mystical signification of the breaking of the Bread
savours of Popery, and ministers to Socinianism, though how it should do both,
considering the contrariety of those two Hypotheses, is not so easy to
apprehend. But as I see not how that Doctrine savours at all of Popery, because
the signification we give to the breaking of the Bread is of a quite different
nature from what the Papists suggest, and indeed no other than the Institution
it self offers to us (For we, no more than the Lutherans, believe that the Host
ought to be broken into just three parts, or for the reasons, that are given by
them for it) so I see as little, how our Doctrine ministers to Socinianism,
even in the point, that is now before us; Because though we declare the
breaking of the Bread to have been intended for a representation of our
Savior's crucified Body, yet we do not believe, as they do, that that was the
sole intendment of that, and other the usances of the present Sacrament, but
that as Christ meant we should show forth by them what he suffered in his Body,
so we should also thereby be made partakers of it, and of the Benefits thereof.

2. But not any longer to insist upon the breaking of the Bread, because, as I
suppose, sufficiently cleared; Let us go on to enquire, because a Question of
far greater moment, whether he, who administers this Sacrament, is obliged by
the words of the Institution, or otherwise, to make an Offering to God of
Christ's Body, and Blood, as well as to make a tender of the Sacrament thereof
to Men: The Council of Trent, as is well known, avowing that to be the
importance of the words, Do this in remembrance of me, and that the Apostles
were by the same words appointed Priests to offer them. For my more
advantageous resolution whereof, I will show, 1. What they, who advance this
Offering, declare concerning it. 2. The vanity of those Grounds, upon which it
is built, and 3. Oppose proper Arguments to it.


1. That, which the Council of Trent teaches concerning this pretended
Offering, is, that it has for the matter of it, the Body, and Blood of Christ
Sess. 22. cap. 1, 2. and Can. 3.
, or rather Christ himself under the Species of Bread, and Wine; That the
Offering, which is made of it, is no simple tender of it to the Father, but the
offering of it up by way of a Sacrifice, and accordingly he himself sacrificed,
or slain in it, but after an unbloody manner; That this Sacrifice is not only
an Eucharistical, or Commemorative Sacrifice, but a truly propitiatory one for
quick, and dead, and by which God is so far appeased, as to grant Pardon, and
Grace to the one, and a Refrigerium to the other.

2. How well these things agree either with one another, or with that
Sacrifice, which Christ made of himself upon the Cross, shall then be
considered, when I come to oppose proper Arguments to it. My present Business
shall be to examine the Grounds, upon which it is built, and show the vanity
thereof. Where again I will insist upon no other Grounds, than what the same
Council of Trent offers for it, and which therefore those of the Roman
Communion must think themselves obliged either to stand, or fall by.

Now that, which the Council of Trent principally founds it self upon in this
Affair, is on the one hand the conversion of the Bread, and Wine of the
Sacrament into the Body, and Blood of Christ, as without which there could be
no Pretense for the offering of them up under the Species of the other; And, on
the other hand, those known words of Christ to his Apostles, and their
Successors, Do this in remembrance of me: These words, as that Council tells
us, having been always understood and declared by the Catholic Church as a
Command of Christ to them, to offer up his Body, and Blood. But as enough has
been said already Part 7.
to show the unsoundness of the former of these grounds, and that therefore no
just foundation of the offering of Christ's Body; and Blood in the present
Sacrament; So we shall find there is as little solidity in that supposed
Command of Christ to his Apostles, and their Successors in the words, Do this
in remembrance of me. For neither can those words be fairly drawn to signify
the offering up of Christ's Body, and Blood, neither does it appear, whatever
is pretended, that the Catholic Church has had that understanding of them.
That the words themselves cannot be fairly drawn to signify the offering up of
Christ's Body, and Blood, will appear if we consider them either as referring
to the several things before spoken of, and particularly to what he himself had
done, or enjoined them to do, or as referring only to that Body and Blood,
which immediately precede them, and in which sense they are supposed to
signify the sacrificing, or offering of them. If we consider the words, Do
this in remembrance of me, as referring to the several things before spoken of,
even those, which Christ himself had done, or enjoined them to do; So there is
no appearance of their being a Command to the Apostles, or their Successors to
offer up his Body, and Blood, unless there had been any precedent mention of
Christ's offering them up himself, or any kind of intimation of his enjoining
them to do it. The latter of which two, as it is not to by affirmed by those,
who make the words, Do this in remembrance of me, to be those, which
constituted both the Sacrifice, and the offerers of it; So I see as little
reason for the affirming of the former, how confidently soever the Church of
Rome advances it. For what mention can we expect, for instance, of Christ's
offering up his Body under the Species of Bread, when till he had spoken the
words, This is my Body (which was not, till he had done all appertaining to
that Element) there was no such thing under the Species of Bread for Christ to
offer up, because not to be, till those words had passed upon it. But it may
be, there is more force in the words, Do this, as referring to that Body, and
Blood, which immediately precede them, in which sense they are supposed to
signify the sacrificing or offering of them. And so no doubt there is, or they
will be found to have little force in them. But what if we should say first,
that there is as little appearance of their referring to the words, Body, and
Blood, as what St. Paul subjoineth to them, and the very Canon of the Mass
persuades? For St. Paul inferring upon those words, that as often as they ate
that Bread, and drank that Cup, they did show forth the Lord's death till he
came; And again, that whosoever should eat that Bread, and drink that Cup of
the Lord unworthily, should be guilty of the Body, and Blood of the Lord, He
does not obscurely intimate, that when our Savior said with relation to each
Element, Do this in remembrance of me, his meaning was, that they should do
what he had before enjoined them concerning each in remembrance of himself, and
particularly that they should eat, and drink them with that design. Which they
of all Men, ought not to refuse, who are taught by the Canon of the Mass to
look upon the words, Hoc est enim corpus meum, and, Hic est enim calix
sanguinis mei (for so the Roman Missal expresses them) as a Reason of what is
before enjoined, and particularly of the Disciples eating, and drinking the
things given to them. For if those very words referred to what was before
enjoined, and particularly to their eating, and drinking the things given to
them; The words, Do this in remembrance of me, ought in reason to referr to the
same eating, and drinking, and no otherwise to the Body, and Blood of Christ,
than as that was an inducement to them to do what they did in remembrance of
Him, and of his Death. But let us suppose however, because some of the Roman
Communion will have it so, that the words, Do this, etc. referr to the Body,
and Blood of Christ, and that it must therefore be somewhat about those, that
this Precept of Christ must be thought to enjoin. Yet how does it appear, which
is the only thing, that can advantage them, that we are to understand thereby,
Sacrifice, or make an Offering of them? For though I grant that if the word
(...) be considered with respect to Christ's Body, and Blood, it must have
another sense, than we are wont to put upon it; Yet why should it not signify
make, as well as sacrifice, especially when that sense is both the most
natural, and the most obvious one? For so it will yet more agree with the
opinion these Men have of their converting the Bread, and Wine of the Sacrament
into the Body, and Blood of Christ, and accordingly producing that Body, and
Blood out of them. And indeed as one would think that they, who give the Priest
the privilege of making his God, should be willing to understand the words in
that sense, because, setting those aside, there is nothing else from whence
that Power can be colourably deduced; So one would think too, that they should
secure to themselves that Power, before they pretend to offer him, as without
which there can be no place for it. But let that Notion also, how natural
soever even in their own opinion, be laid aside with the rest, if it be only to
make way for that other of sacrificing, or offering; Yet how will it appear
that this latter one ought to have place here, or if it has, that it denotes
such a sacrificing, or offering, as they advance? For though the word (...),
agreeably to the notion of the Hebrew word (...) does sometime signify to
sacrifice, or offer, (for so it does Lev. 15.15-30. and in other places
according to the Septuagint Version (...), etc. -- (...) --
) Yet as even there it comes to have that sense, rather from the matter
entreated of, than from any natural signification of the word; So there is
nothing in the present Argument to determine it to that sense, or oblige us to
such an understanding of it. Though if that also should be allowed, which yet
there is not the least necessity of doing, yet will not the words, (...), reach
that Sacrifice, which is intended to be superstructed upon them: Because he,
who commands Men to sacrifice, or offer in remembrance of himself, does rather
enjoin a Commemorative, than Expiatory one, and consequently not that
Sacrifice, which is intended. So little is there in the words themselves, how
favorably soever considered, to oblige us to understand them of such an
Offering, as the Church of Rome advances. And we shall find them to signify
as little, though we take in the sense of the Catholic Church upon them, how
conformable soever the Council of Trent affirms it to be unto its own: Because
though the Ancients did all agree upon a Sacrifice, and, which is more, looked
upon those words as either directly, or indirectly obliging to the offering of
it, yet (as has been elsewhere Part 2.
shown) they advanced other kind of Sacrifices, than what the Church of Rome
now does, and consequently cannot be supposed to give any countenance to it.
And I shall only add, that though Justin Martyr Dial. cum Tryph. p. 259, etc.
represented that Offering of fine Flour, which was offered for those, that
were cleansed from the Leprosy, as a Type of the Bread of the Eucharist;
Though he moreover applied the word (...) to that Bread, and, if any of the
Fathers therefore did, affirmed Christ to command us to make, or offer that
Bread to God; Yet he adds, that he commanded us to do so in remembrance of that
Passion, which he suffered for those, that were cleansed in their Souls; And
again, that we might at the same time give thanks to God for his having made
the World, and all things in it for the sake of Man, and for his having
delivered us by Christ from that wickedness, in which we sometime were, and
dissolved all noxious Principalities, and Powers. Which shows him not to have
thought in the least of our being commanded to offer Christ's Body and Blood,
under the Species of Bread, or indeed of any other Sacrifice, than a
Commemorative, or Eucharistical one.

The principal Argument of the Tridentine Fathers being thus discharged, and
the Sacrifice of the Mass so far forth deprived of its support; We shall the
less need to concern our selves about those, which are of an inferior rank,
and in truth rather Assistants to the former Argument, than any proper proofs
of the Sacrifice it self. For what boots it to allege that our Savior's
Priesthood, like that of Melchizedek, being not to be extinguished by death, we
are in reason to presume, that upon his departure hence, he appointed his
Apostles, and their Successors, to offer up continually that Offering, which
Melchizedek first, and after him, our Savior offered. For beside that there is
no appearance of Melchizedek's offering up Bread and Wine, and we therefore not
to argue from the Bread, and Wine, which he brought forth, that our Melchizedek
was either to offer, or appoint any such Sacrifice; Our Melchizedek was to
abide for ever, as well as his Priesthood, yea, he was to abide in his
Priesthood for ever, as well as in his Person. Witness not only the Psalmist's
affirming, that he was to be a Priest for ever, but St. Paul's affirming also,
that Heb. 7.23, 24.
whereas the Aaronical Priests were of necessity to pass over their Priesthood
from one to another, because no one of them could continue by reason of Death,
our Melchizedekian Priest, because he was to abide for ever, was invested with
an unchangeable Priesthood, and such as should not pass away from him. For what
was this, but to say, that he should keep his Priesthood in his own Person, and
should not therefore either need, or be in a capacity to appoint other Priests
in his room, or furnish them with any Sacrifice to employ them?

There is as little force, if it be duly considered, in what the same Fathers
allege from the Prophet Malachi Mal. 1.11.
, where it is said, that from the rising up of the Sun, unto the going down of
the same, God's Name should be great among the Gentiles, and that in every
place Incense should be offered unto his Name, and a pure Offering. For though
it be true, that the Ancients applied this Text to the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, and thought that to be the pure Offering, which was to be offered up
unto God; Yet as they, who did so, applied it rather to the Sign, than to the
thing signified (for so Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, and Origin apparently do) but
however represented it as an Eucharistical, or Commemorative Oblation, and not
as an Expiatory one; So they, who follow the Ancients too nearly, will find
themselves obliged by the present words to offer up Incense unto God, as well
as that Oblation, whereof they speak. For by the same reason that a strict, and
proper, and material Oblation is to be understood, by the same reason a true,
and proper Incense is to be understood also, because equally foretold by the
Prophet, and coupled with the other. It is enough to salve the Prophecy, that
God should have his public Worship among the Gentiles, and a Service as
notorious, and more acceptable than the Jews Incense, and Oblations were. And
he, that makes the Prophecy to import any thing more, may as well argue from it
the continuance of the Jewish Service among the Gentiles, because, if we take
the Prophecy in the Letter, it cannot be thought to denote any thing else, than
the offering of the same Incense, and Oblations, that the then Jews did, though
more free from impurity than theirs. If the Prophecy had a more particular
relation to the Eucharist, as it should seem by the Comments of the Ancients
that it had, I should think it was rather because it was an eminent part of the
Christian Service, and because of those Prayers, and Thanksgivings, which
attended it, than for any formal Oblation of the Signs of it, or of that Body,
and Blood of Christ, which it was signified by them. Which Justin Martyr
(though elsewhere Dial. cum Tryph. p. 260.
seeming to referr it to the very Oblation of the Bread, and the Cup of the
Eucharist) gives no small countenance to, when in answer to Trypho the Jew Ib.
p. 345.
, who, it seems, interpreted this Prophecy of the Prayers of the Jews in their
dispersion among the Gentiles, he says, that such Prayers, and Thanksgivings,
as were made by worthy Men, were acknowledged by him also to be the only
perfect Sacrifices, and such as were well-pleasing unto God; And that these
were the only things, which the Christians had received to do, even in the
remembrance of their both dry, and liquid Food, wherein also is commemorated
that Passion, which the Son of God suffered by himself, as our Mede has well
mended that latter Clause of the words. For if Justin Martyr thought, as he
professes to do, that Prayers, and Thanksgivings were the only perfect, and
acceptable Sacrifices, and that they too were the only things, which the
Christians had received to do, or offer in the Eucharist it self; Then did not
the present Prophecy, either in his, or other Christians opinion, referr more
particularly to the Eucharist upon the account of any proper Oblation of the
Sign^ of it, and much less upon the account of any propitiatory Sacrifice, that
was there made of the Body, and Blood of Christ, but upon the account of those
Sacrifices of Praise, and Thanksgiving which attended it, and were indeed the
principal part of that Service.

The Council of Trent therefore, not daring to trust too much to this Prophecy
of Malachi, goes on to suggest, that the Sacrifice, which it advances, is not
obscurely intimated by St. Paul, where he tells his Corinthians 1 Cor. 10.21.
, that they, who are polluted by partaking of the table of Devils, cannot be
partakers of the Table of the Lord, understanding in both places by the word
Table, an Altar; And consequently (because every Altar must have its Victime)
that the Table, of which the Christians partook, had its Victime also, even
that Body, and Blood of Christ, which they professed to partake of, and which
he himself had before affirmed the Bread, and Cup of the Eucharist to be the
Communion of. It is very well said by the Council, that the Sacrifice, whereof
it entreats, is intimated by those words of St. Paul; For, to be sure, they are
no plain, and express declarations of it. But that it is not obscurely
intimated by those words of his, is a thing which we can by no means grant,
because we cannot grant that, which is the foundation of their Argument, even
that St. Paul by Table, understood an Altar. For beside that it is not easy to
be thought, that even the Heathen Deities did so far forget the place they had
usurped, as to admit their Worshippers to their own proper Tables (for so I
take the Altars of those Deities to have been) but only to have allowed of
their receiving by the hands of their Priests some Portions from their Altars,
and eating of them at Tables purposely prepared for them; It is manifest by the
description, which Virgil Aeneid. li. 8. v. 103, etc. and v. 172 --
gives us of this Affair, where he entreats of the Sacrifice of Hercules, that
though the Gentiles partook of those Meats, which were offered to their Idols,
and might so far forth also be said to partake with their Altars, and them, yet
they did not eat of them at the Altars of their Idols, but on Tables prepared
for them, for that purpose. Which supposed, neither St. Paul's Table of Devils,
nor his Table of the Lord, will be found to be Altars, and no Argument
therefore to be made from thence, that that Table of the Lord, imports the
offering up of that Lord upon it, or that we are under any Obligation to make
such an Offering of him. The utmost, that can with reason be inferred from St.
Paul's arguing from the one to the other Table, is, that as both of them
presuppose a Victime, or Sacrifice, so they in like manner suppose our Victime,
or Sacrifice to be exhibited on that Table, which we Christians are to partake
of. Which though it may be no proof of the offering up of Christ's Body, and
Blood upon it, yet may seem to be some proof of the Presence of that very Body,
and Blood upon it, which Christ sometime offered upon the Altar of the Cross.
But as whosoever shall consider, that it was only a part of the Victime, that
was brought from the Idols Altar to the Table of his Worshippers, will find
himself obliged to confess, either that there is no exact similitude between
the Devils Tables, and ours, or that we, no more than the Heathen, can expect
the whole of our Victime upon them, which is expressly contrary to the Doctrine
of the Romanists; So supposing the similitude between them not to be exact (as
no similitude, they say, runs upon all four) there may be place for partaking
of our Victime by means of that Bread, and Wine, which is prepared for us, as
well as for the Heathens partaking of their Victimes by means of those parts
thereof, that were set before them: Because how far soever that Bread, and Wine
may be in themselves from being parts of our Victime, or Sacrifice, or
possessing us of the Benefits thereof; Yet they may, by the appointment of God,
become a means of exhibiting that Victime, or Sacrifice to our Souls, and
possessing us of the happy Fruits of it.

I know not whether I ought to take notice of what is added in the close, That
this is that Oblation, which is figured by the several Oblations of former
days, as well those which prevailed in the time of Nature's Law, as those which
were in use under that of Moses. Because it does not appear to me (which is the
proof the Council of Trent gives of it) that it contains in it all those good
things, that are signified by the other, as the consummation, and perfection of
them. For neither (for ought that does appear from the Roman Missal) does it
any way contain in it an Atonement for the unconverted World; Neither does it
contain in it what it does, as the consummation, and perfection of those
Sacrifices, or Oblations, which were made in ancient times: This (as I shall by
and by show) being the Privilege of that Sacrifice, which our Savior made of
himself upon the Altar of the Cross, and no other way belonging to the
Eucharist, than as a means appointed by God to convey to us the Benefits of the
other.

3. Now to make it appear to the World, that we are no more without Arguments
against this pretended Sacrifice, than we are unprovided of Answers to what the
Romanists allege in its behalf, I will make it my Business to show, 1. That
this Sacrifice, as explained by them, is inconsistent with it self. 2. That it
is contrary to the present state of our Lord, and Savior. 3. That it is
extremely derogatory to the dignity of that Sacrifice, which Christ made of
himself upon the Altar of the Cross.


That this Sacrifice, as explained by those that advance it, is inconsistent
with it self, will need no other proof, than that unbloody Immolation, or
Offering, which is attributed to it. For how is that an Immolation, or Offering
(understanding it as they do of a propitiatory Sacrifice) which is without any
shedding of Blood, when both the Old, and the New Testament assure us, that it
was the Blood, which was to make the Atomement, and that without shedding of
Blood there is no Remission? For what is this, but to say that it is a
Sacrifice, and no Sacrifice, that it is a truly propitiatory Sacrifice for the
quick, and dead, and yet has nothing of that, which is to make a Propitiation
for them? It is true indeed that an unbloody Immolation, or Offering, is an
Expression that may pass well enough, where it is attributed to that, which is
rather the Commemoration of a Sacrifice, than any true, and proper one. But to
attribute such an Immolation, or Offering to a Sacrifice properly so called, is
to deny it to be what we affirm it, and indeed rather a piece of nonsense, than
any legitimate Predication, or so much as a witty one.

But beside that this Sacrifice, as explained by the Romanists themselves, is
inconsistent with it self, and as such therefore might be reasonably rejected;
We shall find it to be as inconsistent with the present state of our Lord, and
Savior, and indeed directly contrary to it. For if there be any kind of
Propriety in the Immolation, that is offered to it, it must betoken some kind
of violence to be offered to that Body, which is the subject of it, and
consequently of a glorious Body, make it an inglorious one. Which they of all
Men ought not to refuse, who do sometime tell us of the bleeding of the Host,
and so turn this unbloody Immolation into a bloody one. Neither will it avail
to say, as the Council of Trent does, and their Authors commonly gloss this
Immolation, That this Body of Christ is offered under the Species of Bread, and
Wine, and again under the visible Signs. For whether under the Species, or no,
yet still according to them Christ is truly immolated; Neither is there any
more difference between the Immolations, than there would have been between the
murdering of an Infant covered over with Meal, as the Heathen in Minutius Felix
charge the Primitive Christians to have done, and the murdering of one under
no such disguise. For as the Murder is the same in both, so the Immolation must
be so too, and those Species can no more privilege our Savior's Body from
violence, than the Meal, wherewith an Infant is covered, can hinder the
violence that is offered to it, to be really a Murder, or those, that offer it,
from being really guilty of one.

But that, which is most to be considered in this Affair, and is in truth the
greatest prejudice against this pretended Sacrifice, is, that it is extremely
derogatory to the dignity of that Sacrifice, which Christ made of himself upon
the Altar of the Cross. For whereas it is the peculiar Privilege of this
Sacrifice to be so perfect, as not to need to be repeated, whilst those of the
Levitical Law daily were (For every Priest, says the Author to the Hebrews
Heb. 10.11, etc.
stands daily ministering, and offering oftentimes the same Sacrifices, which
can never take away Sins. But this Man, after he had offered one Sacrifice for
Sin, for ever sat down on the right hand of God, From henceforth expecting till
his enemies be made his footstool) The Sacrifice of the Mass does at the best
pretend to repeat that Sacrifice, and, though in another way, to offer it up
again, yea, makes our Savior himself to do it by the Ministry of his Priests.
Whereas, again, it is the Privilege of that Sacrifice, which our Savior made
of himself upon the Cross, to procure eternal Redemption for us Heb. 9.12.
, and such a Redemption too Heb. 9.15.
, as should draw after it the receipt of an eternal Inheritance, in the mean
time so perfecting for ever them, that are sanctified Heb. 10.14.
, that they should not only not need any more offering for Sin, but have
boldness by the Blood of it to enter into the Holiest; The sacrifice of the
Mass, by pretending to be a truly propitiatory one, makes the redemption of
that former Sacrifice to be imperfect, as without which there could have been
no need of a farther propitiatory one, and much less of the frequent offering
of it. Neither will it suffice to argue, as the Council of Trent seems to do,
that that cannot be thought to derogate from Christ's Sacrifice upon the Cross,
which is taught by themselves to be a Means, whereby the fruits of the other
are most plentifully conveyed. For either it is such a Means, as does also
propitiate God, and then it will however derogate from the Propitiation, and
Redemption of the other, or it is not such a Means, and then it is not a
Propitiatory Sacrifice at all. If there be any thing to hinder this pretended
Sacrifice from entrenching upon that of the Cross, it must be by attributing to
it another, and a lower sort of Propitiation, than they think to be due unto
the other. But as the Council of Trent seems so far from allowing that, that it
professes to believe that God is so far appeased with the Oblation of this
Sacrifice, as to grant Repentance and Pardon of Sin upon it, and (as one would
think too by the Reason annexed) with little difference from what is granted
upon the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross (For it is, says that Council,
one, and the same Host that is offered, it is one, and the same Person, that
now offers it by the ministry of his Priests, who then offered up himself upon
the Cross, only after a different manner of offering) so the great Trust their
People are prompted to repose on this Oblation, even when they do not
communicate at it, as that too upon the account of its being offered up for all
the Faithful, and for those in particular, that are mentioned by name in it,
gives cause enough to believe, that they think not much otherwise of it, than
they do of that Oblation, which Christ made of himself upon the Cross, if yet,
because of the more particular application of it to themselves, they do not
entertain a higher opinion of it.

II. The manner of the Administration of this Sacrament being thus accounted
for, and consideration therein had of what is most in controversy in it; It
remains that I enquire, To whom it ought to be administered. Which in the
general are such, as have given up their Names to Christ, for so our Savior
first administered it, and no doubt therefore intended that it should afterward
be: More particularly those of them, who are qualified by their Understanding,
and Life, to partake worthily of it, to do what they do in remembrance of
Christ, and to the comfort and benefit of their own Souls, the salvation
whereof was thereby intended. Which both general, and particular
Qualifications, Justin Martyr seems not obscurely to insinuate Apol. 2. page 97.
, when immediately after the account he gives us of the Administration of this
Sacrament in his time, he tells us, that the Eucharistical Food thereof was
lawful for none to partake of, but him that believed those things to be true,
that were taught by them, who was moreover washed in that Laver, which was
appointed for remission of Sins, and lived also as Christ delivered to us. If
there be any considerable difficulty in this Affair, it is about the
Administration of this Sacrament to Infants, and which as some Ages of the
Church seem to believe to have been necessary, so one Jer. Taylor's Worthy
Communicant, cap. 3. sect. 2.
among our selves has taken upon him to defend, as to the lawfulness thereof.

As touching the necessity of its Administration to Infants, little needs to be
said, because it is manifestly built upon a Text, which considered without
prejudice, cannot tend in the least to the support of it. That, I mean, where
it is said, that, unless we eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his
Blood, we can have no Life in us. For it appearing from the Text it self, and
from what I have elsewhere Part 7.
said upon it, that this Passage relates not to a Sacramental Manducation, but
rather to a Spiritual one, the Communion of Infants is so far from being
established by it, that the Communion even of elder Persons cannot be concluded
from it.

But because the Question is not so much at present concerning the necessity of
administering this Sacrament to Infants, as concerning the lawfulness thereof;
And because he, who professes to deny the one, has taken upon him to defend
the other, and the Practice of several of the Ancients in it; I think it not
amiss to make that also the subject of my Discourse, and both show why I look
upon it as a thing no way lawful, and examine the Arguments, that are brought
in the behalf of it.

That, which makes me look upon it as no way lawful to administer this
Sacrament to Infants, is their being not in a capacity to answer what is
required on the part of Communicants, whether before, or in the receiving of
it. For neither can they, as St. Paul requires, examine themselves before they
address themselves to this Sacrament, neither can they (which is more material,
and required by Christ himself) do what they do in it in remembrance of Christ,
and of his Death. By which means as they must be looked upon as no way
qualified for it, so, as such, therefore excluded from the participation of it
by him, who was the Instituter thereof. Neither will it avail to say, as the
forequoted Author objects, that the former of these Precepts concerns those
only, that need an examination, and have an ability for it, and consequently
cannot concern Infants, in whom no such need, or ability is. For as I willingly
grant, that that Precept does not concern Infants, so I think therefore that
they have as little concernment in that Sacrament, to which such an Examination
is prerequir'd: He, who cannot do that, which is prerequir'd to the receiving
of any Sacrament, being to be looked upon as one, for whom that Sacrament was
never intended, and consequently as one, who ought not to be admitted to it.
Otherwise we must suppose Christ to have intended his Sacraments for those, who
are not in a condition to perform such things, as are prerequir'd by himself to
the partaking of it. I am yet less concerned at what the same Author seems to
answer to what our Savior enjoins concerning the doing what we do in this
Sacrament in remembrance of him, and of his Death. For as all the Answer he
makes to it is, that one may show forth Christ's Death, by the very Act of
Communicating, and consequently that Infants, because capable of that Act, may
show forth Christ's Death also; So that Answer is defective in this, that it
supposes the showing forth of Christ's Death to others to be all, that our
Savior required by doing what we do in remembrance of him. The contrary
whereof is evident, because he commands the Communicant but just before to take
what is given him as his Body, and Blood, and his Apostle St. Paul adjudge some
Communicants to condemnation for not discerning in themselves the Lord's Body.
Both which Passages suppose that the Communicant ought to reflect in his own
Mind upon the Death of our Lord, and Savior, as well as show it forth to other
Men. If therefore the Communion of Infants receive any relief, it must be from
those Arguments, that are alleged in its behalf, and which accordingly I come
now to consider.

And first it is alleged that the Sacraments of the Gospel are the great
Channels of the Grace of God; Which is willingly granted, if it be understood as
to those Persons, for whom they were intended. But whether this in particular,
was intended for Infants, is a thing which, for the Reasons before mentioned,
may very well be made a Question, but ought however to be otherwise made
appear. Which it will hardly be by alleging, as it is in the second place,
that that Grace does always descend upon them, that do not hinder it: Because
if God require some positive qualifications in him, that receives the
Sacrament, the not putting a bar to the Grace of it will not suffice the Party
for the receiving of it. There was therefore but need of adding thirdly, that
to Baptism there are many acts of predisposition required, as well as to the
Communion, and yet the Church, who very well understands the obligation of
those Precepts, supposes no Children to be obliged to those predispositions to
either, but fits every Commandment to a capable subject. The meaning of which
Argument, setting aside what is there said of the Church, is, that if the want
of such Dispositions, as are prerequir'd to Baptism, do not hinder Infants from
being admitted to it, neither ought the want of the like predispositions to the
Communion to debar them of that, or hinder us from believing that our Savior
did intend it for them. And I willingly grant there would be the same reason
for both, if there were the like presumption of God's dispensing with his own
Law in both, and admitting Infants, notwithstanding those wants, to the
participation of the Lord's Supper, as there is for his admission of them to
Baptism. Which that there is not, will appear as from the Arguments I have
elsewhere produced for the Baptizing of them, so from the necessity there is of
the one, above what there can be of the other. For whereas there is a necessity
of Baptism to bring Infants out of their natural estate, and give them a title
to his Kingdom. (For except a Man be born again, says our Savior Joh. 3.5.
, of Water, and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven) There
cannot be the like necessity of their receiving the Lord's Supper, because
before delivered from that their natural estate, and entitled to his heavenly
Kingdom. Whereas again the Grace of Baptism, ordinarily speaking, is absolutely
necessary, so that no one can without that be presumed to be in a salvable
estate; The Lord's Supper may seem to be only conditionally so, and on
supposition See Part 1.
of our falling into new Errors, and so needing a new Remedy against them, and
a new assurance against the guilt of them. Which new Errors falling not upon an
Infant estate, neither can there be any such need of that either Remedy or
Assurance, and therefore neither of that second Sacrament, which was intended
to convey them. Though therefore God should admit Infants to Baptism without
the previous dispositions of it, because of the necessity of that Sacrament;
Yet there is not the like Reason to presume, because there is no such necessity
of the Sacrament it self, of his so admitting them to the Lord's Supper, and
therefore neither for arguing from the administration of Baptism to Infants,
that we may as well administer to them the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper also.
It is alleged, fourthly, That whereas in a Sacrament there is something done
on God's part, and something on ours, what belongs to us obliges us then,
when we can hear, and understand, but not before; but what is on God's part, is
always ready to them that can receive it. Which Allegation is indeed true, but
no way pertinent to the matter in hand, unless it could be proved, which has
not as yet been, that this Sacrament belongs to Infants, either as to its
Obligations, or Graces. It is alleged, fifthly, and with as little pertinency,
That though Infants cannot come alone to Christ, yet the Church their Mother
can bring them in her Arms. For though the Church can bring them in her Arms,
yet she will bring them with little effect, if she bring them to other
Sacraments, than Christ has appointed for them. It is alleged, sixthly, That
they, who are capable of the Grace of a Sacrament, may also receive the Sign,
and therefore the same Grace being conveyed to them in one Sacrament, may also
be imparted to them in the other. But as I do not see how Infants are capable
of the Grace of the Lord's Supper, because intended to supply those defects,
which the neglect of the former has occasioned; So I see as little what need,
or expectation there is of their receiving that Grace by a second Sacrament,
which has been already imparted to them by a former. It is alleged,
seventhly, That as Infants can be born again without their own consent, so they
may be fed by the hands of others, and what begins without their own actual
choice, may be renewed without their own actual desire. Both parts of which
Allegation suppose that Infants stand in need of Spiritual Supplies, which I
for my part, see no necessity to grant, nor indeed any reason to believe:
Because till they come to years, they are out of the reach of those
temptations, which occasion our spiritual decays. It is alleged, eighthly,
That if upon pretense of figurative Speeches, Allegories, and Allusions, and
the Injunction of certain Dispositions, the holy Communion be denied to
Infants, there may be cause enough to fear that a gap may be opened upon equal
pretense to deny them Baptism. The latter part of which Argument as I have
already returned a sufficient Answer to, so I shall leave it to those, who
trade in figurative Speeches, and Allegories, and Allusions to answer to the
former. It is alleged, ninthly, which looks somewhat more like an Argument,
than many of the former, That since the Jewish Infants being circumcised, is
used as an Argument, that they might be baptized, their eating of the Paschal
Lamb may also be a competent Warrant to eat of that Sacrament, in which also,
as in the other, the sacrificed Lamb is represented as offered, and slain for
them. But as the Parallel is not so clear in the Scripture between the Paschal
Lamb, and the Lord's Supper, as it is between Circumcision, and Baptism, and we
therefore not to argue with the same freedom from the Paschal Lamb to the
Lord's Supper, as we do from Circumcision to Baptism; So it is much farther
from being clear, that the Jewish Infants partook of the Paschal Lamb, which is
that, upon which the present Argument proceeds. For all that is said in the
Book of Exodus, is, that it was to be eaten by the Household Exo. 12.^.
, of which the younger Infants, to be sure, were no way capable; And it appears
from a Passage in Josephus Jud. Antiqu. li. 12. cap. 4. -- (...), etc.
, that no one, that was born, was to taste of any Sacrifice, till he came to
the Temple, which we learn from the instance of our Savior Luke 2.42. and
Grot. in loc.
, not to have been till they were twelve Years of Age. At, or after which time
they might be in a capacity to enquire into the meaning of their Paschal
Service, and receive a due information concerning it. Which, instead of
justifying the communicating of Infants, will rather overthrow it, and persuade
the deferring of it, till they be of understanding to consider the nature of
the Sacrament, and prepare themselves in some measure for the receiving of it.
One only Argument remains for the administering of this Sacrament to Infants,
even the long, and general practice of the Ancient Church in this particular,
and the like general practice at this day of the Greeks, Aethiopians,
Bohemians, and Moravians. All which to condemn of Error may seem a little
hard, as we must do, unless we will at least allow of the lawfulness of the
Practice, whatsoever we do of the necessity thereof. But as I must needs say,
that I do not see, how we can acquit them for Error, considering what has
been before said against the Communion of Infants; So I a little wonder how he
should stick at the condemnation of the thing it self, who so freely
acknowledged the Practice to be built upon a Text, which he himself confesses
to have been mistaken by them. The utmost, in my opinion, that is to be said in
behalf of the Ancients, and accordingly of those Churches, which derive their
Practice from them, is, that the Communicating of Infants was an Error of
their charity toward them, and whom whilst they were willing to deliver from
that Original Corruption, wherein they were born, and bring them to Christ's
Kingdom, and Happiness, they did not only conferr upon them the Sacrament of
Baptism, which they had learned from the words of our Savior Mark 10.13.
, the Doctrine of St. Paul 1 Cor. 7.14.
, and the Circumcision of the Jewish Infants to be but proper for them, but
mistaking what our Savior spoke in St. John concerning the necessity of eating
his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, for the necessity of a Sacramental
Manducation, gave them this Sacrament also, so the better to secure them of
eternal Life, and Heaven. For as for that Salvo of the Council of Trent Sess.
21. cap. 4.
, that the Ancients gave them the Sacrament of the Eucharist out of some
probable, and temporary Reasons, and not out of a Belief of the necessity
thereof unto Salvation; or the like Salvo of Mr. Thorndike Epil. to the Trag.
of the Chapter of Engl. li. 1. cap. 23.
, who, agreeably to the same Opinion, makes them look upon that Text in St.
John as sufficiently answered by the Sacrament of Baptism, and their partaking
of Christ's Body, and Blood in it; It is so contrary to the Doctrine of the
Ancients, and particularly to that of St. Cyprian Cypr. Test. ad Quirin. li. 3.
cap. 27.
, Pope Innocent Epist. 93. apud August.
, and St. Augustine in many places of his Works, that it is not a little to be
wondered at, that so learned a Man as Mr. Thorndike could advance so groundless
an Assertion. For though it be true that St. Cyprian, where he makes it his
Business to show that none can enter into the Kingdom of God, unless he be
baptized, and born again, does not only allege that Text for it Joh. 3.5.
, which does more immediately concern it, but that unless Men eat Christ's
Flesh, and drink Christ's Blood, they shall have no Life in them; Yet that he
did not intend thereby their receiving that Body, and Blood in Baptism, but in
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and only made use of that Text as proving
Baptism a fortiori, because enforcing the necessity of a Sacrament, which was
to be administered after it, is evident from his beginning his next Testimony,
or Christian Doctrine with these very words, That it was a small matter to be
baptized, and receive the Eucharist, unless a Man profit in good Works. For how
comes the Eucharist to be joined with Baptism in Testimonies, that depend so
upon one another, but that he had spoken of it just before, and consequently
meant no other than that Eucharist by eating Christ's Flesh, and drinking his
Blood, according as is but just before alleged? In like manner, though Pope
Innocent, to show the foolishness of the Pelagians, in affirming that little
Children could have eternal Life without Baptism, make use of these very words
to prove it, For unless they shall eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink
his Blood, they shall have no Life in them; Yet whosoever shall consider what
he says, as it is worded by himself, will find that he did not at all intend
their receiving the Flesh, and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament of Baptism, but
in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and that he esteemed that Sacrament to be as
necessary as the former, and intended to prove the necessity of Baptism by the
necessity of that Sacrament, which was to follow it. For thus he in his Epistle
to the Fathers of the Milevitan Council. Now that, which your Brotherhood
affirms them to preach, that little Children may have their rewards of eternal
Life even without the Grace of Baptism, is extremely foolish. For unless they
shall eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, they shall not have
Life in them. For what was this but to say, that they should be so far from
having eternal Life without the Grace of Baptism, that they could not, by the
Dispensation of the Gospel, attain that Life without the Grace of the Eucharist
also? Agreeable hereto is the Doctrine of St. Augustine, as appears from this
following Testimony De peccat. merit. and Rem. li. 4. cap. 24.
; Where having said, that by an Ancient, and Apostolical Tradition, as he
thought, the Churches of Christ were intimately persuaded, that without
Baptism, and the participation of the Lord's Table, none could come to the
Kingdom of God, and eternal Life, and confirmed that Opinion of theirs, and his
own by Scriptures peculiar to each Sacrament, and particularly as to the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper by that so much celebrated saying of our
Savior, Unless ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, etc. he has these
following words: If therefore (as so many, and so great Divine Testimonies do
agree) neither Salvation, nor Life can be hoped for by any one without Baptism,
and the Body, and Blood of Christ, in vain is it promised to little Children
without them, even without those two Sacraments, which he had before entreated
of, and which he affirms in the next words, the guilt of that sin in Children
to be loosed by, concerning which the Scripture affirms, that no one is free
from it, though his Life be but of a days continuance.

PART XI. How the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper ought to be received.
The Contents.
The receipt of this Sacrament supposed by the present Question, and that
therefore first established against the Doctrine of those, who make the
supposed Sacrifice thereof to be of use to them, who partake not Sacramentally
of it. Enquiry next made, How we ought to prepare our selves for it, how to
demean our selves at the celebration of it, and in what Posture to receive it.
The preparation taken notice of by our Catechism the Examination of our selves,
whether we truly repent us of our sins, steadfastly purposing to lead a new
Life, etc. and the both necessity, and means of that Examination accordingly
declared. The examination of our Repentance more particularly insisted upon,
and that shown to be most advantageously made by enquiring how we have gained
upon those sins, which we profess to repent of, and particularly upon our most
prevailing ones, which how they are to be discovered, is therefore inquired
into, and the marks, whereby they are to be known, assigned, and explained. A
transition from thence to the examination of the stedfastness of our Purposes
to lead a new Life, of our Faith in God through Christ, our remembrance of his
Death, and Charity; Where the necessity of that Examination is evinced, and the
means whereby we may come to know whether we have those Qualifications in us,
discovered, and declared. How we ought to demean our selves at the celebration
of this Sacrament in the next place inquired into, and that shown to be by
intending that Service, wherewith it is celebrated, and suiting our Affections
to the several parts of it. The whole concluded with enquiring, in what posture
of Body this Sacrament ought to be received; Where is shown, first, that the
Ancients, so far as we can judge by their Writings, received in a posture of
Adoration, and particularly, in the posture of standing; Secondly, that several
of the Reformed Churches receive in that, or the like posture, and that those,
that do not, do not condemn those that do; Thirdly, that there is nothing in
the Example of Christ, and his Disciples at the first Celebration of this
Supper, to oblige us to receive it sitting, nor yet in what is alleged from
the suitableness of that Posture to a Feast, and consequently to the present
one: This, as it is a Feast of a different nature from common ones, and
therefore not to receive Laws from them, so the receipt thereof intended to
express the grateful resentment we have of the great Blessing of our
Redemption, and stir up other Men to the like resentment of it; Neither of
which can so advantageously be done, as by receiving the Symbols of this
Sacrament in such a posture of Body, as shows the regard we have for him, who
is the Author of it.

Question. What is required of them, who come to the Lord's Supper?

Answer. To examine themselves, whether they repent them truly of their former
sins, steadfastly purposing to lead a new Life, have a lively Faith in God's
mercy through Christ, with a thankful remembrance of his Death, and be in
charity with all men.


is, How this Sacrament ought to be received? Which Question I have proposed in
those terms, partly that it may come so much the nearer to the last Question of
our own Catechism, and partly because there is no one sort of Men, that does
expressly deny that it ought to be received by all, that are qualified for it,
as well as administered by those, who are the proper Stewards of it. For though
the Socinians, out of a belief of Baptism's being proper only to Jewish, or
Gentile Converts, have thrown off that Sacrament altogether, and (which is
more) have represented the showing forth of Christ's Death as the only design
of this; yet they have thought fit to retain the use of it, as a thing enjoined
by our Lord himself. Though the Tridentine Fathers have also in a great measure
transformed this Sacrament into a thing of another nature, and accordingly
pointed out other ways for Men to receive benefit by it, beside their
communicating at it; Yet they have declared an Anathema Sess. 13. Can. 9.
against any one, that shall deny all, and singular the faithful People of
Christ to be obliged, when they come to years of discretion, to communicate
every year, at least at Easter, according to the Precept of holy Mother the
Church. Only because those Fathers seem to found even that single Communion
upon the Precept of the Church, or at least, do not represent it, as enjoined
by any Divine Law; And because though they elsewhere profess to wish that they,
who assist at their several Masses, did also Sacramentally communicate at them
for their receiving greater benefit by them Sess. 22. cap. 6.
, yet they represent even those, where the Priest alone Communicates, as common
to them that do not; I think it not amiss to premise something concerning the
obligation of the Faithful to receive this Sacrament, as well as to assist at
the celebration of it, and examine what those Fathers allege for their loosing
the Faithful from it.

That the Faithful are under an obligation of receiving this Sacrament, as well
as of assisting at the celebration of it, is so evident from the words of the
Institution, that I know not how our Savior could have more expressly enjoined
it. For, Take, Eat, says he, concerning the Bread of it; And, Drink ye all of
it, says the same Jesus concerning the Cup: With this farther Reason, as we
learn from the Hoc est enim corpus meum, and, Hic est enim calix sanguinis mei
in the Roman Missal, because the one is his Body, and the other as certainly
the Cup of his Blood, as that Missal expresses it. So that if a Command, with
so substantial a Reason annexed, may be concluded to be obligatory, the receipt
of this Sacrament is; And we can no more be freed from doing it, than we can be
freed from believing that it is Christ's Body, and Blood, that is tendered to
us, or, believing it, than we may reject so signal a Blessing as that is, which
was either broken, or shed for our Redemption. For what is this, but (as the
Author to the Hebrews speaks Heb. 10.28, 29.
) to despise not Moses's Law, but one, the transgression whereof is worthy of a
sorer punishment, yea, to tread under foot the Son of God, and count the Blood
of the Covenant, wherewith we are sanctified, an unholy thing, and as such
contemptuously to reject it? Neither will it avail to say, as possibly it may
be, that they cannot be looked upon as despisers of Christ's Body, and Blood,
who do, even when they avoid the partaking thereof, humbly, and devoutly adore
them. For whatever may be said of that adoration of Christ's Body, and Blood;
To adore them, is not to eat, or drink of the Symbols of them, and that Law
therefore, that enjoins both the one, and the other, as much despised, as if
they adored them a thousand times, and, together therewith, that Body, and
Blood, which it so graciously enjoins us to partake of. Agreeable to this
Command of our Savior concerning eating, and drinking the Sacramental
Elements, is his own subjoyning to the mention of each of those Acts 1 Cor.
11.24, 25.
, that they should do them in remembrance of him, and of his death, which is a
farther inculcating of the former Command of Christ, and of the Faithful's
doing honor to him by the observation of it. And to the same purpose is St.
Paul's reckoning that eating, and drinking in the number of those things,
whereby we are to show 1 Cor. 11.26
forth Christ's death (For so the connection of those words with Do this in
remembrance of me, persuades); His cautioning the Corinthians thereupon against
an unworthy 1 Cor. 11.27.29
eating, and drinking, and willing them, after they had examined themselves, so
to partake 1 Cor. 11.28.
of the Sacramental Elements; In fine, his supposing the Christians, when they
came together to the places of their Assemblies, to come together to eat 1 Cor.
11.20.33.
the Lord's Supper. For what are these but so many several Proofs, that he
looked upon that eating, and drinking, not only as things enjoined by Christ in
this Solemnity, but the principal end of their meeting at it, and the very top,
and perfection of it?

A Man would think that these Arguments were of sufficient force to show our
receipt of the Sacramental Elements to be a thing ordinarily enjoined upon us,
and without the doing whereof therefore we cannot expect to reap the benefit of
them. But the Tridentine Fathers tell us another story, and as they have
transformed a Sacrament of Christ, into a Sacrifice of their own making, so
they tell us that that Sacrifice, though the Priest alone partake Sacramentally
of it, is common to those that do not, Partly, because the people communicate
spiritually in it Sess. 22. cap. 6.
, and partly because it is celebrated by the public Minister of the Church,
not only for himself, but for all the Faithful, that pertain to Christ's Body.
It is very well, though I think not very agreeably to their own Principles,
that they make the commonness of such Masses, or Sacrifices, to consist partly
in the Peoples communicating spiritually in them; For so some kind of
communicating will appear to be necessary, whatever the Sacramental one is,
which I do not see how the Dead are capable of. But certainly, Take, Eat, or
(as the Roman Missal reads it) Take, and eat ye all of this, and, drink ye all
of this, betoken a Sacramental eating, and drinking, as well as a Spiritual
one. Otherwise those words will be ill employed to prove that corporal
manducation and drinking of Christ's Body, and Blood, which the Romanists so
studiously advance. Now if Christ himself require a Sacramental communicating
at the celebration of the Lord's Supper, or (as the Romanists are pleased to
phrase it) at the celebration of the Mass, I doubt a bare Spiritual
communicating at it will hardly obtain the benefit thereof for those, who do so
communicate, when they may pass to a Sacramental one. This I take to be a
sufficient Answer to what is alleged in the first place for those Masses, at
which the Priest only communicates, being common to the People with him. And I
think it will be as easy to answer to what is alleged for it in the second
place, from those Masses being offered up by the public Minister of the
Church, not only for himself, but for all the Faithful, that pertain to the
Body of Christ. For granting such an Offering, as is pretended, yet can they
not expect the benefit of it, who partake not of it as he enjoined, who was
both the Instituter, and Exemplar of it; The Sacrifice of the Cross of Christ
being no farther available to any, than it is apprehended, and applied, as he,
who offered it up, appointed.

But to return to that, which is the proper subject of this Enquiry, even to
show how this Sacrament ought to be received by us; Where again I will enquire,
1. How we ought to prepare our selves for it. 2. How we ought to demean our
selves at the celebration of it. 3. In what posture to receive it.


1. It is the first of these, which our Catechism speaks to, even how we ought
to prepare our selves for it. Which it affirms to be by examining our selves,
whether we repent us truly of our sins, steadfastly purposing to lead a new
Life, have a lively Faith in God's Mercy through Christ, with a thankful
remembrance of his Death, and be in Charity with all Men.

That we ought to examine our selves about the truth of our Repentance is
manifest, on the one hand, from the necessity thereof toward the procuring of
that Pardon, which this Sacrament is intended to convey, and on the other from
our aptness to be deceived in it. For, generally speaking, every little sorrow
for sin, though it be occasioned only by what we are likely to suffer by it,
passes with us for true Repentance; And provided we lament our sins, upon what
account soever it be, we think our selves truly penitent, and as such therefore
duly qualified for that, or any other religious performance. But as it appears
from what I have elsewhere said Expl. of Bapt. Part 10.
, that the Repentance, which the Gospel requires, is a repentance toward God,
and a sorrow according to God, and must therefore proceed from a due sense of
the affront we have offered, whether to his Authority, or Kindness; So the
best, and most certain way to know whether our Repentance be such, is by the
amendment it produces in us, and particularly as to those Errors, that prevail
most in us, and which the Scripture entitles 1 Kings 8.38.
the plague of a man's own heart. For he, that finds himself to gain upon
these, needs not suspect the truth of his Repentance, because nothing else, but
a due sorrow for Sin, can carry a Man to abandon that, to which the bent of his
own nature does forcibly incline him. Upon which account I should advise that,
instead of running over a long catalogue of sins, which few Men have leisure
for, and does however but divert them from the main, they would endeavor to
find out their most prevailing sins, and examine the truth of their Repentance
by their conquest over them. In order whereunto, I shall lay down three (...),
or marks, whereby those prevailing sins may be known.

Now the first (...), or mark, whereby we may come to know them, is to consider
with our selves, what that particular sin is, into which we most frequently
fall. For as he is in reason to be looked upon as our Lord, and Master, to whom
we yield our selves Servants to obey, and we therefore may conclude that God is
our Master, if we conform to his Precepts, but Sin, if we perform the Lusts
thereof; So if we have different sins, that that is our Chief, to whom we do
most often pay obedience. And this (...), or mark I do the rather allege,
because it is one of the most infallible, and one too of the most plain, and
obvious. It is one of the most infallible, because it has express Scripture to
warrant it; Because not only teaching us, that out of the abundance of the
Heart Luke 6.45.
Men do both speak, and act, and that out of it Pro. 4.23.
are the issues of life, and death, but also commanding us to judge of this
Root by the Fruit it bears Mat. 7.20.
, of the Heart of Man by the actions it produces. For it being evident from
thence, that our outward actions are the proper, and genuine issues of our
Hearts, as our Hearts must be concluded to be corrupt, or evil, if the Fruits,
that proceed from them, are such; So to be most infected with that particular
corruption, which most shows it self in our Life, and Conversation. Even as
when any Water carries in it the taste of Sulphur, or any such mineral
substance, we do not only conclude it to have passed through a tainted Earth,
but through such particular Veins, where those mineral substances abound, the
scent, or taste of which those Waters do most partake of. Again, as the
forementioned (...), or mark, is one of the most infallible ones, I mean that
whereby we judge of our prevailing sin by giving most obedience to it, so it is
also one of the most plain, and obvious, and which indeed lies open to the view
of all Men whatsoever. For though, as the Scripture speaks Prove. 20.5.
, the Heart of Man be a great depth; Though, as the same Scripture expresses
it Jer. 17.9.
, it be deceitful above all things, as well as desperately wicked, and
consequently the windings thereof not easy to be traced, even by the thoughts
of that Heart it self; Yet the actions of Men, by which we are before taught to
judge, are apparent, and obvious, they are evident to our Sense, as well as to
our Understanding: And though we cannot otherwise so well tell what kind of
Plague is within, yet surely we may tell in what kind of Spots, or Blotches it
most breaks out, and what Parts, or Members it most seizes on.

But as we may know our prevailing Sin, by our often commission of it, more
than of any other, so also by our great unwillingness to hear of it, and our
equal disgust of those Discourses that are made against it. For it is with
every particular Soul, that is not devoid of all goodness, as the Scripture
tells us, it was with Herod Mark 6, 16, etc.
. We can hear John Baptist, or any other such sour Preacher of Repentance,
with a great deal of Complacency, when he touches upon some sins, and those
too, which perhaps we our selves are not altogether guiltless of. But when the
same person comes to touch upon others, when he comes to tell us of marrying
our Brother Philip's Wife, then our Hearts rise both against the Preacher, and
his Doctrine, and that Voice, which (as the Prophet Ezekiel speaks Ezekiel. 33.32.
) was before as a lovely Song of one, that has a pleasant Voice, and can play
well upon an Instrument, does now sound as harsh as the croaking of a Raven, or
the groans of one departing out of the World. Of which difference, as was
before intimated, what reason can be given, but that it is our beloved sin, the
dear Plague of our own Heart: And indeed, so far are we from brooking a Reproof
from another, of the sin we do most indulge, That we cannot so much as endure
to hear of it from our selves, or commune with our own Hearts about it. A
Character, which I choose rather to insist upon, as because it is somewhat of
kin to the former, so because even they, who avoid communing with their own
Hearts, cannot but observe, and take notice of it. For though a Man may avoid
the considering what the plague of his own Heart is, yet he cannot but see what
that sin is, which he most flies the thought of, which is enough to show him
what the plague of his own Heart is. And it brings to my Mind the observation
of Tacitus, touching the Effigies of Brutus and Cassius, not appearing in the
Funeral of Junia. For as it is affirmed by him, that Brutus and Cassius shone
so much the more, because their Images were not seen at it; So our prevailing
sins cannot be made more conspicuous, than they are by our studious suppressing
the thought of them: Inasmuch as we would not do so, but that we should thereby
be constrained to give them a Bill of Divorce, which shows how nearly linked we
are to them in our Affections.

The third, and last (...), or mark, whereby to judge of our prevailing sin, is
our Constitution, Age, or course of Life; Those sins, which do most symbolize
with these, being most commonly our prevailing ones. For as it is easy to
suppose, that the Devil will most assault us there, where he finds us most
easy to be overcome; So also because the business of Sin is to gratify our
Passions, and Inclinations, that the evil of our Hearts will mostly run out
that way, whereto those unruly Guides lead us. Thus if Choler, and an angry
Temper predominate in us, our reigning sin is Malice, and Revenge; If a soft
and effeminate one, Lasciviousness, and Uncleanness, with all other the works
of darkness. If we are of a meek, and humble temper, our prevailing sin is want
of courage in executing the Commands of our Creator. If of a bold and confident
one, Pride, and Haughtiness, and the despising of all those, that are below us.
The same is to be said concerning the different Ages of Men, and particularly
of Youth, and old Age. For, according to these, Men's prevailing sins are many
times diverse, not only from other Men's, but from their own. For thus Youth is
generally tainted with the sins of Pleasure and Vanity, and such other sins, as
best suit with their green, and giddy thoughts; Whilst the prevailing sin of
old Age, is an excess of love to the World, and taking more care for the short
remainder of their Life, than they did before for a much longer one. Lastly
(that I may speak somewhat of that also, as being an excellent means to come to
the knowledge of our prevailing sin) if our course of Life lead us to converse
in Courts, our prevailing sin is generally Luxury, and Vanity; If in a City, or
other place of Trade, Deceit, and Covetousness; If in a mean estate any where,
repining, and murmuring; If in a more honorable one, oppressing, or Lording it
over other Men. By one, or other of these marks, a Man may come to know his
prevailing Sin, and, knowing it, to know also the truth of his repentance for
them, and others. For if he finds himself to get ground on such sins, he shall
not need to doubt of the truth of his Repentance, because there cannot be a
better proof of that, than its leading Men to abandon their sins, and
particularly such of them, as have the greatest force with the committers of
them, and are therefore the most difficult to be overcome.

And though it be true, that all Men neither have, nor can have that proof of
their Repentance (For they, who have but lately begun to make a strict search
into themselves, must of necessity be without it, how true soever their
Repentance is) Though they ought not therefore, if they find no other reason to
question the truth of it, to condemn, or doubt of that their Repentance,
because true Repentance must of necessity precede the Fruits of it: Yet I think
they will act most safely for themselves, and most for the comfort of their own
Souls, I do not say, if they stay so long from the participation of this
Sacrament, till they can have the Fruits of their Repentance to justify the
sincerity thereof, but if, when they may, they think betimes and often, what
Repentance they are to bring with them to this Sacrament, and accordingly set
themselves as early to improve what they have, and bring forth the fruits of it
in those instances, wherein they have been most peccant, and are by their
natural inclinations most likely to be so still. For so they shall be able to
see by the event, what the nature of their Repentance is, and accordingly be
stirred up to labor after a more sincere one, or be satisfied by the fruits
they have brought forth, that they are so far duly qualified for the partaking
of this so excellent a Sacrament.

Having said thus much concerning the examination of our Repentance, which I
judge of all other things to be most necessary to be inquired into, I shall
need to say the less concerning that, which follows, even the examination of
our steadfast purpose to lead a new Life, as well as of the truth of our
Repentance. For as it is evident from what has been said elsewhere Part V.
, that that ought to be inquired into, because the thing we are to make
profession of in the receipt of this Sacrament; So he, who is satisfied of the
truth of his Repentance by the fruits, which it has produced, may by the same
fruits satisfy himself of the stedfastness of his present Purpose, to abandon
his former sins, and pursue the contrary Graces: There being no great
likelihood of his departing from his present Purpose, who knows himself to have
already produced those good fruits which he now resolves upon, as that too, out
of the Conscience of his own obligation to them, and the just sense he has of
his former aberrations, and the Affront he offered to his both Authority, and
Kindness, to whom he now devotes himself anew. Only, if any Man find not in
himself this most sure proof of the stedfastness of his Purpose, and yet find
in himself a disposition thus to show forth his Savior's death, and a desire
to partake of the several Graces, and Benefits of this Sacrament; Let him see
whether he can by his own earnest Prayers, and reflections, and God's Blessing
upon them both, bring himself to resolve as well against the particular ways,
and means, whereby he was formerly trained into sin, as against the sin it
self, and upon such particular ways, and means also, whereby it is most
certainly prevented. For so I do not see why he should not look upon his
Resolution as steadfast, and such as God will both accept of in the present
case, and add farther strength to by the participation of this Sacrament: those
Resolutions, which prove in the event to be uncertain, and tottering, being for
the most part only general ones, and such as descend not to those particular
ways, and means, whereby men come to be ensnared, or whereby that seduction of
theirs may be certainly prevented Thus, for instance, if a Man, who has
heretofore given himself more liberty in drinking, than the Laws of Temperance
will allow, should reflect so far upon his former failings this way, as not
only to resolve against the like intemperance for the future, but against such
Company too, so far as he may, by which he has been drawn into it, or to keep
however within such measures, that there can be no danger for him of offending,
I do not see why that Man may not look upon such a Resolution as a steadfast
one, and which God, the giver of all Grace, will add farther firmness, and
stedfastness to, and make it hold out, even against those temptations, which at
present it may be, it is not in a condition to grapple with.

The Catechism goes on to tell us, That we ought to examine our selves in the
third place, whether we have a lively faith in God's mercy through Christ; As
well it way, when he, who was the Institutor of this Sacrament, prompts us to
receive the Elements thereof as that Body of his, which was broken for us, and
as that Blood, which was shed for the remission of our sins: That, as it
supposes that we ought to look upon the mercy of God, as conveyed to us by
Christ's death, and accordingly expect that mercy by it, and trust upon that
death for it, which is that our Church understands by Faith See Expl. of Bapt.
Part 10.
, so supposing too, that we ought to approach this Sacrament with such a sorrow
for sin, and resolution against it, as so great a Benefit requires, which will
convert this Faith, or trust into a lively, and operative one. Now whether we
have such a lively Faith, or no, we may easily satisfy our selves by its being
attended, or not attended with that sorrow, and resolution, and which how they
are to be known, I have already accounted for.

I shall hardly need to say any thing concerning examining our selves in the
fourth place, whether we have a thankful remembrance of Christ's death. Partly,
because that thankful remembrance is one of the principal things enjoined in
the celebration of this Sacrament, and we therefore to bring that with us to
the due receiving of it; And partly, because it will not be difficult for us to
discover, whether we have such a Remembrance, or no: That being to be judged in
part by our own desire of receiving the present Sacrament, but more by the care
we take to prepare our selves for it, as by other ways, and means, so by an
earnest reflection upon the Benefits of that Death, which this Sacrament was
intended to commemorate. For he, who carefully reflects upon that Death, will
find enough in it to incite him to a thankful remembrance of it, yea, to intend
it with all his might, when he receives the Sacrament thereof.

But of all the things, which we ought to examine our selves about, when we
think of approaching this most holy Sacrament, nothing certainly more imports
us to enquire, than whether we are in Charity with all Men, as our Catechism
expresses it, and particularly with those, that are of the same Household of
Faith. For one great design of this Holy Sacrament Part 5.
being to testify our Communion with one another, and with all, that are of
the same holy Family, it can be no other than a flat contradiction to it, to
come to this Holy Sacrament without so necessary a Grace. But because what the
peculiar properties of this Grace are, and what particular actions it obliges
to, is more proper for the discussion of those, who entreat de industria of
this, and other preparatories to this Sacrament, than for a general discourse
concerning them; It shall suffice me to admonish, that to be in charity with
all Men, and particularly with all Christians, is to have a Mind ready to
oblige all Men, that shall stand in need of our assistance, with such supplies
as we are able to afford them, whether of our Prayers, or Purses, or
Endeavors; That we ought much more, if we pretend to any thing of that Grace,
to be free from giving them any just offense, and as willing, and ready to make
amends for it, if we are conscious to our selves of it; That if others break
this most excellent band of Charity with us, yet we do not imitate them
therein, nor return railing for railing, but contrariwise, blessing; That we be
as ready to forgive injuries, as to pass by affronts, and actually do so, where
the injury may be born, but however where the offending Person returns, and
repents; That, when necessity obliges us to seek a satisfaction, we rather
seek a satisfaction for the damage we sustain, than of our own vindictive
humor, and pursue our satisfaction by such ways, and means, as are rather
necessary for us, than vexatious to them; In fine (which is the sum of all, and
is perhaps the most useful, as well as the most general advice, that can be
given in this Affair) that we show forth such charity to others, as we our
selves would expect in the like Circumstances, or shall look for from God, and
Christ at the great day of retribution. Which it will not be difficult to bring
our selves to, if we reflect as we ought upon the instances God gives us even
now of his immense love toward us, or the need we shall stand in at the last
day of a far greater Charity, how careful soever we are to approve our selves
unto him. And I shall only add for the sake of those, who may perhaps be dazzled
with so glorious a Light, the resolution of two Cases, which I have met with in
the course of my Ministry, and which others, it may be, may be as much
staggered by. Whereof the former respects the Love of Enemies, the other that
perfect Charity, which our Liturgy Exhort. to the Commun.
seems to require of all that approach this Sacrament.

It is sometime thought by well-meaning Persons, for want of understanding the
true nature of the Love of Enemies, that the Love, which we ought to have for
them, ought not only to be such, as will dispose us to pray for them, and do
good to them, but such as will alike dispose us to take them into our bosom, or
at least to converse with them with that freedom, and cheerfulness, as we do
with other Men, with whom we have had no such difference. Which Love therefore,
whilst the forementioned persons find not in themselves, they begin to think
they are so far forth without that Charity, which is requisite for the
Communion, and upon that account exclude themselves from it. And I willingly
grant that their scruple were reasonable enough, if they had to do with such
Enemies, as had returned, and repented, and given them due proofs of it. For
not to admit such persons into their former state at least, is in truth to
retain some part of our displeasure against them, and consequently, not so much
as to forgive them perfectly, but however not to forgive them, as we desire,
and expect to be forgiven by God. But that we should have such a Love as this
for Enemies, continuing such, is a very great mistake, and such as not only, no
Law of Christ requires, but no example of God, or Christ does. For the clearing
whereof we are to distinguish of a twofold Love, whereof the former for
distinction sake, may be called a Love of Complacency, and Delight, the other a
Love of good Will, and Compassion. I call that a Love of Complacency, and
Delight, which is between Friends, and such as disposes them to desire, and
delight in each others conversation, or to be troubled at the want of it;
Whilst that of good will, and compassion prompts us only to desire, and
endeavor the good of those we have to do with. Now as the former of these is
the Love, that is now in question, because described as such as disposes us to
take Men into our bosom, or at least to converse with them, with the same
freedom, and cheerfulness, as we would do with those, with whom we have no such
difference; So we are not in the least to think that any such Love is due to
Enemies, because having nothing in them to engage it, but rather to stir up an
aversation for them. And we may know it more perfectly from hence, that God, by
whose example we are taught to love our Enemies, does not so love his, even the
evil, and unjust. His delight is in his Saints, and such as are after his own
Heart, both in the Piety of their Minds, and the Holiness of their Lives. But
for the evil, and the unjust, whilst they continue such, he rather hates, and
abhorrs them, and indeed, considering the Purity of his Nature, cannot be
supposed to do otherwise. Only as the hatred he bears to such persons, hinders
him not however from desiring their welfare, and pursuing it, that so he may
make them his Friends, and love them as such; So that that is all the Love,
which either he himself shows to his Enemies, or requires of us, is evident
from those very Scriptures, which profess to give an account of that Love of
his, and of our imitation of it: They representing it as such a Love, as
disposes him to cause his Sun to arise on the evil, and the good, Mat. 5.45.
and to send Rain on the just, and unjust. Which Love of Enemies therefore, if
we comply with, we have all that God can be thought to require of us, I do not
say by his Precepts, but even by his own blessed Example.

But because some persons, as they conceive, find in themselves some
indisposition, even to this latter sort of Love, because not exerting the acts
of it with that pleasure wherewith they should, though at the same time, as
they themselves confess, they are infinitely troubled at it, and both pray, and
strive against that their indisposition; And because they look upon that their
indisposition, as irreconcilable with that perfect Charity, which our Liturgy
mentions, and which, as they think, the Scripture requires Mat. 5.48.
, when it commands us to be perfect, as our heavenly Father is perfect;
Therefore I think it not amiss to add, That Charity may be said to be perfect
two manner of ways, To wit, either as excluding all wilful uncharitableness, or
as excluding also involuntary aversations, or disgusts. In the former sense
there is no doubt, every Man ought to be in perfect Charity, neither is there
any thing in the former Case to persuade, that the persons before described are
not. For they certainly, who do not only exert the proper acts of Love, but are
troubled that they cannot do it more readily, and cheerfully, have nothing of
wilful, or affected uncharitableness in them. All that is to be said of such
persons, is, that their Charity is not so perfect as to exclude all involuntary
aversations, or disgusts. Which, who has, or can have, where there is such a
thing as Flesh, and Spirit, and between which, the Scripture tells us, there
will be a perpetual Combat? It is enough, and, perhaps, as much as can be
expected from us, to strive against those natural risings of our own Hearts,
and so, as to do those things, which Charity requires of us, notwithstanding
them; Being moreover troubled that we cannot do what we do more cheerfully, and
readily, and both asking God pardon for it, and desiring a farther assistance
of his Grace in order to it. Which, as they are the qualifications of the
persons before described, so seem to me, to be a better proof of the truly
charitable temper of the Parties, than they dare challenge to themselves.
Because I do not see how any one can both do the things, which Charity requires
of him, and lament his not more cheerfully performing them, if he had not in
him a sincere, though imperfect Charity toward those, that are the Objects of
it.

2. I have little to return by way of Answer, to what is inquired in the second
place, concerning our Demeanor at the Celebration of this Sacrament; Unless it
be that Hoc age, which the old Romans premised to the offering of their
respective Sacrifices. For then shall we demean our selves, as we ought, at the
Celebration of this Sacrament, when we make our thoughts, and affections go
along with the Priest's words, and actions, neither suffer any thing, how
useful soever, to possess our Minds, which they do not suggest to us.: Because
as the whole of that Service was intended for our Instruction, and Edification,
so the main of it consists of such Prayers, and Praises, as are offered up in
our name, and which therefore we cannot expect the benefit of, unless our
Thoughts, and Affections say an Amen to them all the way, as well as our Voice
does at the conclusion of them. If the distribution of the Sacramental Elements
leaves any void places for our private Devotions (as it cannot well do
otherwise, where there is any number to partake of them) they are, and may be
so filled up with those Meditations, and Ejaculations, which our printed
Manuals of Devotions furnish, that it will be in vain for me to offer any thing
toward the supplying of them. Only amidst those transports of joy, and
thankfulness, which the remembrance of Christ's Death, or our own Meditations
upon it, may suggest unto us, let us not forget, that we meet together to
oblige our selves by the present Sacrament, as well as to receive benefit from
it, and accordingly, to vow to God, the abandoning of those sins, by which we
have been heretofore ensnared, and particularly our most beloved ones.

3. The third, and last Question remains to be discussed, even in what posture
of Body, we ought to receive this holy Sacrament. A Question, which I should
hardly have thought fit to propose, had not the singularity of some among our
selves, represented the Posture of sitting, as the only allowable one. I call
it a Singularity, first, because, so far as we can judge by their Writings, the
Ancients always received it in a posture of Adoration. And I appeal for the
proof hereof to Justin Martyr in the first place, as being not only one of the
most Ancient, but one too, who gives the most accurate account of this
Solemnity. For though it be true, that that Father makes no express mention of
the posture, wherein this Sacrament was received; Yet as he takes particular
notice of the whole Assemblies rising up to Prayers after the reading of the
Scriptures, and the Bishop's Exhortation out of them, so he takes no notice at
all of their changing their posture afterward, either in the Service of the
Eucharist, or the distribution, or reception of it. Which is to me a probable
Argument, that they continued in the same posture, and consequently received
the Sacrament in it. And indeed, as it is not to be thought, that they should
use any less reverent posture in the Prayers, and Thanksgivings of this
Sacrament, than they did in the Prayers, that preceded it, which shows that so
far, to be sure, they continued still in the posture of standing; So that
Father's subjoining immediately to that Service, that the Deacons thereupon
gave, or distributed the Elements so blessed, to each of those, that were
present, and carried them away to those, that were absent, makes it farther
probable, that they, who were to communicate, did not come up to the Table, and
there sit, and receive with the President, or Bishop, which they must have
done, if they had kept to the posture now contended for, but continued where
they were before, and in the same reverential Posture, wherein they but now
were at Prayers. For to imagine them sitting in their proper places, and so
receiving, is not only without any the least ground in that Father, but without
any ground also from the reason of that posture in the Sacrament, even its
being, as they tell us, the posture of a Feast. For how does it agree to a
Feast, for those, that are invited to it, not to approach that Table, upon
which the Feast is set, or at least some other, that is placed near to it. But
beside the Probabilities we have from Justin Martyr, of the Churches anciently
receiving in a posture of Adoration, and particularly, in the posture of
standing; It is not to be despised, that the same Ancients had a very venerable
esteem for the Sacramental Elements, which makes it yet more probable, that
they received them in such a posture, as was agreeable to so venerable an
esteem. For we do not, says the same Justin Martyr Apol. 2. p. 98.
, receive these things as common Bread, and common Drink. But as Jesus Christ
our Savior, being incarnate by the Word of God, took both Flesh and Blood, for
our Salvation, so also we have been taught that that Meat, which is made
Eucharistical by the Prayers of that Word, which came from him, and by which
our Flesh, and Blood are nourished through the conversion thereof into them, is
the Flesh, and Blood of Jesus Christ incarnate. And that they had not a less
venerable esteem for the same Sacramental Elements in the succeeding times, may
appear from Tertullian's Despectac. cap. 25.
giving them the title of Sanctum, or the Holy thing, and from the Bishop, or
Priest's delivering them with these words Tert. ib. cum notis Rigalt.
, The Body of Christ, or The Blood of Christ, and the Peoples receiving them
with an Amen, or So be it Iterum. and Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. li. 6. cap. 43. cum
notis Valesii.
; So praying, that what was intended by Christ, and accordingly delivered by
his Minister, as the Communion of Christ's Body, and Blood, might prove such
effectually to them. For who can think after all this, unless there were some
presumption of their receiving the Elements in any other posture, but that they
received them in such a one as was suitable to such thoughts, and such
practices, and not in one, which has no affinity at all with them? Especially,
if there appear any express proof near those times of their receiving them in a
posture of Adoration, and particularly in the posture of standing. Which that
there is, is evident from an Epistle of Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria, to
Xystus, Bishop of Rome. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 7. cap. 9.
For speaking therein of one, who had been long admitted among the Faithful,
but beginning to doubt of the truth of his Baptism among Heretics, was
importunate with him, to Baptize him anew, he tells Xystus, that he, for his
part, did not dare to do it, and therefore answered the Person, That that long
Communion, which he had in the Church, sufficed him for that Purpose. For how
could he have the confidence to renew him again, who had oftentimes heard the
Service of the Eucharist, and with the rest of the Congregation, answered Amen
to it, who had stood by the Table, and stretched out his hands to receive the
holy Food, in fine, who had received that holy Food, and for a long time been
partaker of the Body, and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ?

But beside that the Ancients received in a posture of Adoration, and they
therefore, who represent sitting, as the only allowable one, so far forth
guilty of singularity; It will be hard to find any among the Moderns, who do
not receive in a posture of Adoration, or at least, do not believe it to be
lawful, which is a farther proof of the others singularity. For the Bohemian
Churches, who were the first that reformed from Popery, in those poor remains
of them, that yet continue, receive kneeling Durel. View of the Gov. and publ.
Worsh. etc. Sect. 1. Par. 57.
to this day, and (which is more) when they joined with those of Polonia Major,
and Lithuania, agreed unanimously, to forbid the receiving of the Sacrament
sitting, as a Custom, which was brought in by the Arrians. The Reformed
Churches Durel. Sermon. of the Liturg.
of France, so long as they continued, received standing, and the great Men
thereof (as a reverend Person of our Nation Hammond. View of the New Direct.
etc.
informs us) made a low Cringe, before they took it into their hands. Both
French, and Dutch, in fine, when they gave their Opinion concerning the Gesture
used by the Bohemians, did also deliver it as such, That every Church ought to
be left to its own liberty Ham. L'Estrange Alli. of Div. Offic. Cap. 7. in
Annot.
in this particular. All which things considered, it will appear, that, if they
among us, who advance sitting at the Sacrament, be not therefore guilty of
singularity, yet they must be for advancing it as the only allowable one, as if
their Reasons were good, they must be thought to do.

But because how singular soever this Opinion of theirs may be, yet it is
pretended, that it has Christ, and his Disciples example on its side, together
with the suffrage of Reason; Therefore it will be but just to examine those
Pretenses, and see what there is of strength in them.

And first it is pretended, that our Savior Christ, and his Disciples sat at
the receiving of this Sacrament, or at least, used such a posture, as was
answerable to sitting among us, even lying along upon Beds, as the fashion of
those Countries was. And it is not to be denied, that there is sufficient
ground from the Scripture, for their using that Posture at the Passover, and
not unlikely neither, that they held it on at the Celebration of the Lord's
Supper. But will it therefore follow, that we ought to look upon no other
Posture than that, or one of the same nature, as allowable? For beside that
things, which are but probable, may be false, and things, improbable, true;
Beside that things probable, for that very reason, cannot conclude the
Conscience of any Man, and ought much less to be made use of to conclude the
Consciences of others; If Christ, and his Disciples practice in this
particular, were as certain, as it is supposed to be probable, yet could it not
be of force to conclude ours, unless there were some Command to oblige us to
follow it, or some cogent Reason in the Practice it self, to show the necessity
thereof: Because Example, considered in it self, is no Rule of humane Actions,
in as much as it rather shows what others have done before us, than what we our
selves are to do in any Affair. Which is so true, as to that very Example,
which we have now before us, that they, who insist upon it in the posture of
receiving, do yet without any hesitancy depart from it in other Circumstances,
and such too, as are more certain than the posture of receiving is. For they,
no more than we, think themselves obliged to receive either in the Evening, or
in an upper Room, or in unleavened Bread, all which Christ, and his Disciples
must be acknowledged to have done in that Supper, which he celebrated with
them. But therefore, as if they will have this Example of Christ and his
Disciples, to be obligatory, they must find out some Command obliging us to
follow it, or some cogent Reason in the practice of it self to show the
necessity thereof; So, if we stay till that be done, we may stay long enough,
because there is no just Pretense for the one, or the other of them. For what
shadow is there, for instance, of any Command to follow Christ, or his
Disciples Example in this, as there is for the taking of the Sacramental
Elements, and eating, or drinking of them? Unless they should perhaps urge the
Command of, Do this, as a Command that extends to the Circumstances of the
things then done, or enjoined, as well as to the Actions themselves. But
beside, that the words, Do this, do in their own nature referr rather to the
things then done, or enjoined, than to the Circumstances thereof; If the words,
Do this, extend to the Circumstances of the things then done or enjoined, as
well as to the things themselves, they must alike extend to the time, and
place, wherein this Sacrament was celebrated, and to the quality of that Bread,
wherewith it was. Which when we shall see them alike insist upon, we shall
think of another Answer, but till then acquiesce in this. If there be any thing
to make the posture of our Savior, and his Disciples to be obligatory, it must
be some cogent Reason in the practice it self, to show the necessity thereof.

And indeed, as the advancers of this Posture, are forced to come to this at
length, which shows how weakly our Savior, and his Disciples mere Example is
urged in this Affair; So they think they have reason enough on their side,
because the posture of sitting, is more proper for the Lord's Supper, than any
other posture is. I will not now say, though I might, that if that posture be
only more proper, than any other, there may be place upon occasion for other
postures beside that, which shows it, even in their own Opinion, not to be the
only proper, or necessary one; But I say, that it cannot be concluded to be the
more proper one in the present instance, unless the Supper of the Lord were of
the same nature with common ones, or at least, with that of the Paschal Lamb,
the Design whereof was to feed the Bellies of its Guests, as well as the
desires of their Souls. Now is there any thing in the Lord's Supper, that looks
that way? Nay, does not the instituting of it, after that of the Paschal Lamb,
proclaim the contrary, and direct Men to look after a spiritual Satisfaction,
rather than a natural one? And may Men then prescribe Rules to such a Feast,
from the modes of those of another nature? Or, because sitting is most suitable
to those, conclude it is also such to this? Would not one rather think (if we
speak only of more, or less proper) that some other posture would be more
proper for this Feast, even such a one, as does more bespeak the reverence of
those, that are invited to feast with, and upon so great a Person as Christ?
Especially, when one great Reason of its Institution was to express by the
receipt of it the grateful Remembrance we have of the inestimable Benefits of
his Death? And I know of nothing, that can be replied against this way of
Reasoning, unless it be the presumption there is, that Christ, who certainly
knew what was most proper in this Affair, gave it to his Disciples sitting, or
lying along. For if he thought the ordinary posture of a Feast to be the most
proper, why should we represent another as such, unless we would be wiser than
he that instituted it? And I no way doubt, supposing our Savior to have given
it to his Disciples in the ordinary posture of a Feast, that he thought it the
most proper at that time, and that we must have always looked upon it as such,
if he had enjoined the use of it for the time to come. But does it therefore
follow, though there be no such Precept for it, that we ought always to look
upon it as such? Or think, because it was then the most proper one, that it
must ever be so? For possibly the making use of that posture then, was not so
much out of a Belief of its being in it self the most proper one, but more
proper for that time, and place, because more agreeable to the Ceremonies of
that Solemnity, from which this Sacrament was borrowed, and where it appears
from Paulus Fagius Liturgic. Cassand. in initio.
, That the Father of the Family, and his Guests sat, or lay down to Meat,
before he either blessed, or they received that Eucharist from him. Possibly
also, though Christ, and his Disciples lay along during that whole Action, yet
they did otherwise express, whether by the bowing the Head, or lifting up their
Eyes, the regard they had to that God, by Thanksgiving to whom that Solemnity
was begun: I do not say only, because it was intended as a Sacrifice of Praise
to God, for the blessing of our Redemption, but because it was intended also to
show it forth to others, and excite them to the same grateful, and honorable
Remembrance of it, and of his Death, by whom it was to be accomplished; That
being not very advantageously to be done, where the posture of receiving the
Symbols of it is not at least intermixed with something, that has in it a
different Air from that of an ordinary Feast. Which supposed, it will not be
difficult to show in what posture of Body this Sacrament ought to be received.
For, for ought that I can see by the very nature of the Sacrament it self, and
the practice of the Ancients, a posture of Adoration is the most proper for the
receipt of it, and, as such, to be preferred before any other whatsoever. That
provided the posture made use of, be a posture of Adoration, it matters not in
it self, what kind of one is made choice of, because there is no Command for
any particular one. That both standing, and kneeling, therefore must be looked
upon as proper ones, because both of them postures of Adoration, and as such,
accordingly made use of in several Ages of the Church, and by several Churches
of the same. That by how much the more any posture is removed from a posture of
Adoration, so much the more improper is it for the receipt of this Sacrament,
and that sitting at it therefore, is of all others, the most unsuitable one. In
fine, that if sitting were more proper, than indeed it is, yet being not under
any Divine Command, it ought in reason to give place to that posture, which
has the general practice of the Church to warrant it, and the particular
Commands of those, whom God himself has obliged us to obey.

FINIS.

