Theologia Theologiae, THE TRUE TREASURE; OR A Treasury of holy Truths,
touching GODS WORD, and GOD the WORD.

Dug up, and drawn out of that Incomparable Mine of unsearchable Mystery,
HEB. 1.1, 2, 3.

Wherein the Divinity of the holy Scriptures is asserted, and applied.

By JOHN TRAPPE, M. A. Pastor and Preacher of GODS WORD, at Weston upon Avon in
Glouceste-shire.

Tertullian, Sitanti vitreum, quanti verum ma^garitum? LONDON, Printed by R.B.
for George Badger, in S. Dunstane's Churchyard, at his shop turning up to
Clifford's Inn. 1641.

TO THE Right Honorable, my singular good Lord and Patron, LIONELL, Earl of
Middlesex, all the blessings both of Heaven and of Earth.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
MY first adventure into the World, I presumed to present, some three years
since, to your most Noble and Virtuous Consort, for a Consolatory. This next,
being my first fruits, at Your Lordships Weston, I knew not to whom more fitly
to address, than to your Honorable self; who may lay as good claim to the
Man, as to the Manor. The One yields You an annual increase, a goodly
income. And the Other hates to be held either barren, or not busy in the Lords
Vineyard; whether You have so freely and fairly sent ^im, and set him awork.
King Solomon had a Vineyard at Baal-hamon; He let it out to keepers: Every of
them, for the fruits thereof, was to bring a thousand silverlings. Solomon had
his thousand, and those that kept the fruit thereof two hundred, Cant. 8.11,
12. I spare to expound, or apply so plain a Text to your Lordship, who can
soon see (without my showing) Your Noble-selfe in Solomon, and unworthy Me
Your meanest keeper. To come in with Your thousand, and yet reserve to my self
two hundred, I cannot. But if your Lordship be (as I doubt not) of David's mind.
Psalm. 119.72.
The Law of thy mouth is better to me than thousands of gold and silver; my
rent is ready; and I here tender it in a Treatise of Gods Word, and God the
Word. All my fear is, lest the Divinity of the Scriptures (herein asserted and
applied) should sustain some detriment from the utter insufficiency of him
that handles it. But what mean I, or what need I to fear? Psalm. 52.1.
The goodness of God endures yet still. He once accepted a handful of meal
for a Sacrifice, and a gripe of goates-haire for an Oblation. And for men, Si
desint vires tamen est laudanda voluntas, Hac ego contentos auguror esse deos.
The wise Jeweller cares not though the Ring be not so bright, so the Diamond,
that is set therein, have a right sparkle. As for the Many, (...), Plutarch.
and especially the Malevolent, they know my mind already, in a former
advertisement. If that satisfy not, I have no more to say to them: Nihil ad
nos attiner, quid homunculi sentiant. Lact. Mark 14.31. Satis est Equitem mihi
plaudere, Hor.
but have learned from our Saviors parle with Peter, not (childishly) to
strive for the last word. May I but enjoy your Lordships approbation, and
encouragment, I shall, of such, crave no favor, seek no farther, say no more,
than shut up with that Apostolic perclose, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
be with your spirit. Amen.

Stratford upon Avon, this 25 of January, 1641. Your Lordships in all due
observance most humbly devoted, JOHN TRAPPE.

The Contents of the following Treatise.
CHAP. 1. The Text analyzed and opened, p. 2 CHAP. 2. That the Scriptuurs are
of God proved by testimonies Humane and Divine, and these both Outward and
Inward. p. 10 CHAP. 3. The manifold Uses, and Praises of the Scriptures, p. 40
SEC. 1. Of the Antiquity and Authority of the Scripture. p. 41 SEC. 2. Of the
Dignity and Excellency of the Scriptures. p. 63 SEC. 3. Of the Power and Purity
of the Scriptures. p. 85 SEC. 4. Of the Perfection and Sufficiency of the
Scriptures. p. 99 SEC. 5. Of the Verity and Integrity of the Scriptures. p. 122
SEC. 6. Of the perennity and perpetuity of the Scriptures. p. 139
CHAP. 4. Condemns those that offer abuse or violence to the holy Scriptures.
p. 146 SEC. 1. Against those that seek to debase and vilify the Scriptures.
p. 146 SEC. 2. Against those that allege Scripture for maintenance of Errors.
p. 158 SEC. 3. Against those that allege Scripture for countenancing of
Enormities. p. 167 SEC. 4. Against those that carpe at the homeliness of the
style. p. 170 SEC. 5. Against those that cavil at the harshnesse of the
matter. p. 179 SEC. 6. Against those that jest at the Scripture, or out of it.
p. 182 SEC. 7. Against those that abuse the Scripture to spelles and Charms.
p. 192
CHAP. 5. A sharp Reprehension of the Ignorant. SEC. 1. p. 198 A sharp
Reprehension of the Incredulous. SEC. 2. p. 206 A sharp Reprehension of the
Disobedient. SEC. 3. p. 210
CHAP 6. An Exhortation to Ministers to open and apply the Scriptures with all
Assiduity and earnestnes. SE. 1. p. 214 An Exhortation to Ministers to open and
apply the Scriptures with all Fidelity and boldness. SE. 2. p. 225 An
Exhortation to Ministers to open and apply the Scriptures with all Integrity
and holiness. SE. 3. p. 244
CHAP. 7. An Exhortation to all sorts to be thankful for the Scriptures: and
1. to God that gave them, SEC. 1. p. 257 An Exhortation to all sorts to be
thankful for the Scriptures: and 2. to the Jews that kept them. SEC. 2. p.
287
CHAP. 8. An Exhortation to read the holy Scripture. p. 300 SEC. 1. Motives to
the reading of the Scriptures. p. 301 SEC. 2. Rules: Read though you yet
understand not. p. 312 SEC. 3. Meditate on that you have read. p. 315 SEC. 4.
Pray for understanding; yea, pray with tears. p. 319 SEC. 5. Confer,
propound doubts, and seek satisfaction. p. 325 SEC. 6. Attend upon the Word
preached. p. 328
CHAP. 9. An Exhortation to rest and rely upon the Scriptures for direction of
life. p. 340 CHAP. 10. An Exhortation to rest and rely upon the Scriptures for
consolation both in life and in death. p. 356
Erratis v^n^am poscenti^ reddere sas est
PAGE 2 l. 25. for, to a threefold, r. under a fourefold, p. 7 l. 7. it is
worthily agitated, r. unworthily exagitated, p. 56 l. 4 dese verse p. 80 l. 2
Jacob r. Isaac, p. 94 l. 6. ^. note, p. 178 l. 6 ^. holy, p. 194 l. 26 r.
(...). p. 220 l. 7 r teach, p. 2^ p l. 5 r. enclosure. p 274 l. 1^ r. swe^^e p.
283 l. 25 r. ^enoti. p. 286. l. 19 r. wherefore forasmuch, p. 330 l. 25 r. bark
p. 358. l. 2^ r. bethought, p. 304 l. 23 r. Not, not, not p. 5^4 l. 24 r. Nots.
p. 368. l. 22 for her, r. his.

THE True TREASURE: OR, A Treasury of holy Truths, Touching God's Word, and God
the Word.
Dug up, and drawn out of that Incomparable Mine of unsearchable Mystery,
HEBREWS 1.1. God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in time
past unto the Fathers by the Prophets. HEBREWS 1.2. Has in these last days
spoken unto us by his Son; whom he has appointed heir of all things, hy
whom also he made the worlds. HEBREWS 1.3. Who being the brightness of his
glory, and the express image of his person, and upholding all things by the
word of his power; when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the
right hand of the Majesty on high.
CHAP. I.
THE blessed Author of this excellent Epistle (whether Paul, or Apollo, or
Cephas, (...).
I strive not) mainly seeks to set up Christ the Lord, in his threefold
office; as shadowed out of old in the types of the Law, and exhibited now
alate, in these days of the Gospel. It seemed a hard saying to the Hebrews,
Durus est hic sern^, Ioh. 6.
that the Gospel should have the better hand of the Law, Jesus of Moses. He
therefore makes it his first work to set a difference, and to prove a
precellency of the New above the Old Testament: which albeit they concur in
the Author of both, God; yet come they to a threefold difference: whether we
look upon 1. the Preachers; there, his servants the Prophets; here, his son
and heir. Or 2. the Hearers; there, the Fathers; here, Us, for whom some
better thing was provided. Heb. 11.40.
Or 3. the manner of Revelation; there, (...).
in many pieces, and after diverse fashions; here, fully and lastly, together
and at once. Or 4. the time of dispensation; there, of old, or long since;
here, (...).
in these last days, (...).
which cap. 2.5. he calls the world to come.

The next thing he does, is, to advance Messiah above Moses (whom yet he names
not, Ne limine impingat.
for avoiding offense at the first entrance:) and that because he is preferred
by God himself above the very Angels; as he proves by many plain testimonies:
And there-hence afterward infers, that the doctrine of Christ is far more
attentively to be heard, (that is, to be believed and obeyed) than the speech
of Angels, Gal. 3.14.
(that is, than the Law ordained by Angels in the hand of Moses a Mediator.)

Now the commendation he there gives our Savior, stands in a stately
description of his sacred person, his threefold office and stupendous works,
which he did, either as God; And these are creation, (for he made the worlds,)
and preservation, (for he upholds all things by his mighty Word:) Or secondly,
as God with us: whether we consider him in the state of Humiliation, he purged
our sins by Himself; or of Exaltation, he sat down on the right hand of
the Majesty on high.

Thus our Apostle wadeth at first into that Profundum sine fundo, that
fathomlesse depth of Divinity, giving his Hebrews a brief of the whole ensuing
business, in these three first verses; and purposely beginning his Epistles
with mention of God, of the Fathers, and of the Prophets (the very names of
whom, he knew well, were precious and pleasant to Hebrew ears) the better to
insinuate and get within them.

At sundry times.] The lively voice was ever in the Church, from the beginning
of the world to the death of the Apostles. The sum also and substance of the
Law and Gospel was one and the same in all ages, which made Saint Paul say,
Act. 26.22.
that he spoke no other thing than what the Prophets and Moses spoke before
him. Only things were delivered at first more darkly and briefly; afterward
more plainly and plentifully, 2 Timothy 1.10.
life and immortality being brought to light by the Gospel, so that a man may
run and read, Habac. 2.2. The cloud went before the people, while Moses led
them: which, under Joshua, vanished. The veil was upon them in the reading of
the Old Testament: But we all with open face behold as in a glass the glory of
the Lord, 2 Cor. 2.14, 18. Mark 4.11.
To us it is given (above those of old) to know the mysteries of the kingdom
of heaven; that great mystery, for instance, God manifested in the flesh. 1 Timothy 3.16.
To Adam was promised it should be the seed of the woman, but whether of Jew or
Gentile, not a word was told him. Abraham after this (the Hebrew) was given to
know, that of his seed should come the Messiah, but of what Tribe, nothing was
revealed. To Jacob indeed it was showed, that of the Tribe of Judah should
Shiloh come, but whether male or female, (...) Tranquillator, salvator, a (...)
unde (...) tranquillitas. Vnde Latinum ^alvere, salvus salvare: Amama.
nothing certain. David was assured that a son of his should sit upon his
throne for ever, but till Esaias, it was not known that he should be borne of a
pure Virgin; that a woman should compass a man. Behold a Virgin, that famous
Virgin (the Original sets it forth with an accent) spoken of Genesis 3.15. shall
conceive and bear a son. Ier. 31.22. Isai. 7.14.
The very place of his birth was not set forth till Michah, Mich. 5.2. Dan.
9.24.
nor the just time till Daniel. Thus by degrees and peece-meale, (as I may so
say) God spoke of old to our Fathers by his servants the Prophets. Every age
almost brought forth some new thing touching the Babe of Bethlehem (^apt up in
the swath-bands of the holy History) either in express and evident terms and
testimonies, or else in mirrours and miracles. John Baptist, Fibula legis and
gratiae. Chrysolog.
the buckle of the Law and Gospel, as one styles him, pointed Christ out with
the finger. And although he sent his Disciples to ask him the question, Art
thou he that should come? etc. (for the which is it unworthily agitated by
Tertullian in three several places,) yet this he did, not for his own
satisfaction, much less out of envy and ambition (as that Father mistook it)
but for their better information. Matthew 11.9.
Between John that was more than a Prophet, and Malachy the last of Prophets,
the Jews place cathimath cazon, the sealing up of prophecy. In stead whereof
succeeded (say they) Bath-qol the divine Echo or Oracle, whereby, after
prophecy ceased, future things were revealed from heaven. But Malachy (whom
Tertullian calls the limit and landmarke of both Testaments) prophesied about
400. years before our Saviors birth: Malach: Limes inter Vetus and Novum Test.
Zachary and Haggee much about 500: Daniel and Ezechiel 600: Esaias and Jeremy
700. (as the divine Chronologer computes it) Jonas and Hoseas 800: ^ncholcer.
Elias and Elishah 900: Solomon 1000: David 1100: Sampson 1200: Gideon 1300:
Joshuah 1400: Moses 1500: Joseph 1600: Jacob 1700: Isaac 1800: Abraham plus
minus 2000. As before him, Heber, Sem, Receptior sententia est Melchis. non
alium fuisse quam Shem, etc Quod tamen Chananaeus suerit, etc. plures habet
assertores and textum multo faventiorem. D. Pride. Lect. p. 95.
(who perhaps was Melchisedech) Noah, Enoch, and the rest of the Anti-diluvian
Patriarchs, up to Adam. Scarce was there any age that afforded not some or
other holy man of God, extraordinarily inspired and enabled to deliver the
doctrine of divine truth from the immediate mouth of God: Although there were
intermissions other-whiles, as the history shows, and the Church complains,
Psalm. 74.9

In diverse manners.] Three several ways (as is well observed) God revealed
his will to mankind: 1. By the light of nature, imprinting in man certain
principles, common notions, (...).
or small sparks and spinthers of divine light. 2. By the books of the
Creatures, whereby he blew up those sparks, and kindled them into a flame.
Hence Tertullian; Praemisit Deus Naturam magistram, subm^ssurus and prophetiam;
quo facilius credas prophetiae d scipulus Naturae.
God first set us to school to dame nature, that being entered there we might
more readily understand, and better believe the Scriptures. For, when by man's
fall the two former failed, and proved insufficient, God revealed himself
(lastly) by his Word but after a diverse manner, as the text here has it.
Sometimes mouth to mouth, as to Adam, and those Ancients; sometimes by the
ministry of others, whether Angels or men; and to these, either in dreams or
visions, representing to their senses, or otherwise imprinting upon their
minds, and so imparting to the world whatsoever he would have understood and
uttered, Number. 12.6. Job 33.15, 16. sometimes, lastly, by his son Jesus Christ,
in humane shape of old, but in these last days, in a true humane nature,
revealing unto us all, and all at once, and no more by pieces and parcels.
Hence these times, 1 Cor. 10.11.
wherein Christ and the Apostles lived, are called here the last days, and
elsewhere the ends of the world, though so many ages before the worlds end;
because there shall be no more alteration in Religion, nor any more additions
made to that which Christ has taught by himself and his Apostles; Rev. 21.14.
who are therefore also said to be the foundations of the new Jerusalem, Ephesians.
2.20.
and of the whole Scriptures (as now) whereupon the household of God is built,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone. God spoke unto the
Fathers, God spoke to us etc. Note hence that It is God that speaks in the
holy Scriptures of both old and now Testament. mind of God that is there set
forth unto us, Prove. 1.23. the express pattern and platform of that truth
that is originally in God the fountain of all truth. It is the very voice of
the Almighty, coming, as it were, out of his secret seat, out of his
unapproachable light, and disclosing to his creatures his ineffable essence,
his unsearchable counsel.

All Scripture is divinely inspired, 2 Timothy 3.16.
says Saint Paul. And holy men spoke it, (...). 2 Pet. 1.21.
as they were acted and carried thereunto by the holy Ghost, says Saint Peter.
Luc. 1.70.
God spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which have been since the world
began, says Zachary in his Canticle. And, (...).
we speak (says that great Apostle for himself and his fellows) not in the
words which man's wisdom teaches, 1 Cor. 2.13.
but which the holy Ghost teaches: whose not only matter, as verse. 12. but
words they are also, that we utter. These are the very sentences, yea notions
that were written (as I may so say) of old in the mind of God, and are now
clothed with his own very terms, and expressions: though by some of his
servants he has uttered himself more loftily, by some in a lower language,
according to the several abilities of the speakers, and capacity of the
hearers. But it was God that did dictate unto them both matter, and words, 2
Cor. 13.3.
it was Christ that spoke in them.

How prove you that? may some say.

Saint Augustine answers, Confess. l. 6. c. 5. Piscatoribus credimus, non
Dialecticis. Ambros. Fidei Christianae mysteria melius credendo intelliguntur,
quam intelligendo creduntur. Ruperius Abbas Tic ciensis.
Credo, non probo; I believe it, I need not prove it. That the Scripture is
Gods own word, is a principle of faith, and therefore cannot be demonstrated a
priori, as they call it. We believe and know, says Peter. Principles of faith
are apprehended by faith: and this faith, howsoever it brings with it
certainty, yet does it not clearness: whether you look upon the matter, which
are things not seen, Heb. 11. or the manner, it being through a glass darkly,
1 Cor. 13. And here the Schools lay down two remarkable propositions: the one,
Tho. Aquin. 1. p^t. q. 1. art. 8.
that Divinity is not argumentative to prove her principles, but only to prove
her conclusions. The other, that against one which absolutely denies her
principles, and namely the Scriptures, one cannot proceed probando but
solvendo, that is, not by proving the truth thereof, but by dissolving the
reasons brought to the contrary.

But for arguments a posteriori, (as they call it) there is and may be enough
and enough said, to settle weak consciences, and to silence all such wicked
Atheists and adversaries, as whose mouths the devil has borrowed at any time
to call the matter into question. The venerable Antiquity, matchless majesty,
lively efficacy, beautiful harmony, incorrigible purity, invincible perennity,
and continuance of the Scriptures, notwithstanding the injury and iniquity of
times and tyrants, who have sought to suppress them, do all plainly evince
them to be the undoubted word of God. Besides the confirmation by miracles,
confession of Martyrs, destruction of oppugners, fulfilling of prophecies,
consent of Churches, yea assent of enemies. As 1. of heretics, who in
oppugning of Scripture do yet allege Scripture; so fighting against God with
his own forces, Irenaeus l. 3. adv. haer. c. 11. Tertull. lib. de praescrip.
adv. haer. cap. 15.
as Jehu did against Jehoram his master; with his own sword, as David did
against Goliath the Gittite, but (with unlike success) to their own utter
destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16.

2. Of Jews, Aug in Psalm. 56 p. 384.
Gods Library-keepers, as Austin calls them: for to them were committed the
lively Oracles, the books of the Old Testament, which they studiously read,
and curiously kept, by a singular providence of God, for our behoof and
benefit. As for the New Testament, those Jews of Italy complain they can never
see it. That Italian translation which they had, is now called in, and taken
from them by those of the Inquisition, alleging that they will have no dispute
in matter of Religion either way. Sands his Relation of west. Religion.
Much like to an Edict set up at Dole by the Jesuits, forbidding any talk of
God either in good sort or in bad. This though it be unjust in them, yet is
just in God upon the Jews, for depraving Christ's miracles as done by I know not
what superstition of the word Shemhamphoresh: Alsted Lexic. Theolog. Evangelium
hodie vocant Aven-gelaion, volumen vanitatis.
And for his Oracles, they have scornfully rejected the Gospel, as a volume of
vanity, stumbling at that passage especially, where it is said, that neither
did his brethren believe in him, Blunts voyage into the Levant. 115.
John 7.5. not knowing faith to be the gift of grace only. But their
Ancestors (which yet were no Christians) bear us witness, that Jesus Christ
was famous for his wisdom, and wonders, was slain by the people, Joseph. lib.
18. cap 14.

Contra Appion. lib. 1. non ita proculab initio. Dan. 5.25. Mean mean techel
upharsin. They were the Samaritan characters, therefore the Babylonians could
not read them? nor could the Jews understand them, though they knew the
characters, because they understood not the Chaldee tongue, as Daniel did.
Weemse.


rose again the third day, etc. All this, and more, Josephus the Jew: who also
testifies that the books of the Old Testament were the very word of God.
Which is further also confirmed by the Samaritane Bible (the Copy whereof was
brought by one Petrus de Valle from Damascus Anno Domini 1626.) wherein (though
written in a different character from the Hebrew) yet for the matter they as
much agree, as the Jews and Samaritanes did utterly disagree.

3. Heathens also not a few have sealed to the truth of the Scriptures by their
testimonies, and confirmed them to be divine. Porphyry in his fourth book
against Christians bears this record of Moses, that he had written the
history of the Jews truly. Numenius the Pythagorist recites Moses his history
almost word for word, testifying of him that he was a great Divine, Lawgiver,
and Prophet. Diodorus Siculus affirms that Moses gave a Law to the people of
Israel, which he had received of JAH, for so says he, do they call the God
whom they worship. Geogr. lib. 15.
And Strabo writes that Moses having rebuked the Egyptians for their vanities
and superstitions, withdrew himself from among them that he might serve God. In
Vandalicis lib. 2. Calunmiae hae binae olim in Tingitana visendae. Seldom de
Diis Sir. proleg. cap 2.
Procopius tells of two marble pillars in Numidia, wherein are engraven these
words in the Phenician tongue, We be those that fled from the robber Joshuah
the son of Nun. The mighty deeds of Hercules are held to be fained out of the
doings of Sampson, and the vow of Agamemnon out of Jephtaes vow, Orpheus his
forfeiting his wife (whom he had fetched from hell) by unseasonable looking back
upon her, out of the history of Lots wife, Virg 4. Georg.
who turned her but, and she was turned: Nisus robbed of his golden hair,
Metamorph. l. 8. Janus Oenotrius is Noah, lapetus, lapheta, and lupuer Hammon
that gelded his father Saturn, is Ham that discovered his fathers nakedness,
etc

Ex Henochi historia originem sumpsit (...) Ethnicorum.


and betrayed by Scylla, out of Sampson and Dalilah. It was the devil,
doubtless, that found out these fictions, in an apish imitation of the sacred
history, and for a cunning elusion of divine truths. Who was it else that set
Herodatus aworke to write that Sethon King of Egypt and Priest of Vulcan, being
invaded by Senach^r^^ King of Assyria with a formidable army, and seeking help
of his god, was admonished in a dream to encounter his adversary, though with
unequal forces, and to expect help from heaven? Sethon did accordingly, and
the night before the armies should meet, an innumerable company of Mice and
Rats were sent into the ^amp of the Assyrians, which so ^nawed as^under their
quivers, bucklers, bridles, and other harness, that they were forced to fly
with the ^osse of many of their bast soldiers, the King himself being shortly
after slain at home. Herodotus adds further, that even in his time there was
yet to be seen in Vulcans temple in Egypt the picture of Senacherib holding a
Mouse in his hand, with this inscription, (...). Herod. lib. 2.
Learn by me to fear God. This was a mere sleight of Satan that loud liar,
shamelesly seeking by the Egyptian priests to elevate the truth and authority
of the holy Scriptures, and to transfer upon himself the glory of so great a
work of God. But Demetrius Phalareus disciple to Theophrastus, told Ptolomy
Philadelph King of Egypt, that the Bible of the Hebrews was the only book
that was divine indeed, who therefore at his great charge caused it to be
translated into Greek by the seventy Seniours. Which when the King had read,
and marvelled that of so many things, and so worthy of remembrance, there was
little or no mention made by the Historians and Poets of Greece, Demetrius
Phalereus answered him (as both Josephus and Eusebius report it out of
Aristaeas, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 12. cap. 2. Hus^b praep-Evang. lib. 8. c. 1
a Chamberlain of King Ptolomies) that it was a divine Law, given of God,
which ought not to be touched but with clean hands. And that if any profane
persons had presumed to meddle with it, he was sure to smart for daring to
defile those holy matters with the gloss of their own inventions. Moreover he
told the King that Theopompus a Scholar of Aristotle's, Aristaeas in in calce
libelli de 72. legis Hebr. interpretibus, p. 512.
for attempting to disguise the Scriptures of the Jews with Greek eloquence,
was stricken with amazedness for above thirty days together. And that
Theodates a Tragoedian having intermingled some Scripture-matters with his
Tragedies, suddenly lost his sight: which was afterward restored again to him
upon his prayers, when he once dame to a sight of his sin.

Thus for Humane Testimonies of the Authority and Divinity of the Scripture, we
have heard sufficient both from) friends and foes, heretics, Jews and
Gentiles. But we have better testimonies than these, and those are Divine,
which are of two sorts, 1. Outward, 2. Inward.

That without us (first) is the Scripture, testifying of it self, and we know
its testimony is true, because it is the word of that God that can as soon dye
as lie. Hence hear we so often in Moses, I am the Lord; in the Prophets, Thus
says the Lord; in the Gospels, Jesus said; in the Epistles, 1 Cor. 11.
I have received of the Lord that which I delivered unto you, etc. And the
truth is, the best proof of Scripture is to be fetched out of it self, whence
it is also called Light, Psalm. 119.105. because it discovers it self; and the
Testimony of the Lord, because it bears witness to it self. And this it does
not authoritative only, by an unartificiall argument, as abovesaid; but
ratiocinative, by sound reasons, whether we look to the Penmen of the
Scripture, the subject matter, or the admirable effects thereof.

The Penmen (besides their divine vocation, mission, inspiration) were plain
men, poor men, shepherds, neat-herds, fishers, publicans, etc. neither
eloquent Orators, nor cunning-headed Politicians, Romani sicut non acumina ita
nec imposturas habent. Bell. (...). Act. 4.13.
to art out an imposture; nor witty enough to deceive, as Bellarmine says (but
how truly?) of his Italians. The Rulers and Elders took them for no better
than unlearned and ignorant persons.

Add hereunto their unpartiall faithfulness in relating the naked truth,
enough to the discredit (as it might be deemed) of themselves and their best
friends. Adulatione enim multa celat aut velat: imo and palam aliter norrat.
Ald. Manut. Ne amori erga suum parentem nimium aliquando indulserit, nonnulli
hand leviter suspicantur. Degrees. When. in Method. In quamlibet partem nimius odio
and amore, gratia and simultate: and quoniam pecuniam amabat, etc. Mel. Canus.
Paterculus is an honest faithful Historian (says one) till he comes to the
Caesar's: but then he smoothes and smothers many foul facts through flattery;
yea plainly falsifies in many particulars. Anna Comnena, daughter to the
Emperor Alexius Comnenus, wrote a Chronicle of the noble acts of her father,
and called it Alexias. But being over-borne by natural affection, she reports
not matters so sincerely as many could have wished. Paulus Jovius the Historian
was too much carried by love and hatred to some particular persons, and because
he loved money well, in writing his history also he was the slave of money. In
that famous battle at Belgrade, where Mahomet the great Turk was foiled and
driven out of the field, Capistranus the Friar Minorite, Bucholcer. Index
Chronol. De quo ita Sylvius exclamat: Ingens dulcedo gloriae facilius
contenmenda dicitur, quam contemnitur. Exulat a Pontificiis talis ingenuitas,
quae Dei dona in host agnosceret. D. P^ideaux cont. Eudoem Ioh. Facit Annals,
non scribit.
and Hunniades were chief commanders. Both of these wrote the history of that
battle, without once making mention the one of the other, each one assuming the
entire honor of that days work to himself. Bellarmine in his book of
Ecclesiastical writers, ^ath not the honesty to name any one of our side,
notwithstanding it is certain that he picked up the best crumbs that he has
under their tables. And Baronius writes not Annals, but frames them, says
learned Scaliger. Not so the Penmen of holy Scripture. Moses reports the sin
and doom of his grandfather Levi, of his brother Aaron, and sister Miriam, nay
of himself, how he sinned and was sentenced at the waters of strife. David
shames himself in his preface to the 51. Psalm. Isay tells the world of the
wickedness of Ahaz and weakness of Hezekiah, Esaias 7. and 39.
his natural Princes. Ezekiel makes honorable mention of Daniel his
coetaneus, Ezekiel. 14.14. and 28.3.
and Peter of Paul, 2 Pet 3.15. with Gal. 2.11 1 Timothy 1.13.
who yet took him up publicly for halting at Antioch. I was a blasphemer, an
oppressor, a persecutor, says that blessed Apostle. This shows the Scripture
to have been indicted, and the Penmen guided by some higher Spirit, it being
so free from partiality or flattery.

From the Men, come we next to the Matter of the Scripture, the majesty
whereof is such (besides the stately plainness of the style) as far
surpasses the creatures capacity, the fathom of flesh, the reach of reason.
There is no jot nor tittle of it that savours of any earthlinesse. But as
Xenophon said of Cyrus his Court, (...). Cyrop. l. 8.
that though a man should seek or choose blindefold, he could not miss of a
good man there: so neither can you miss of a good text in the whole Bible.
Every word of Gods mouth is pure, De Thucidide Cicero scribit eum esse adeo
plenum vefert^mque rebus, ut prope verberum numerum ^umero rerum ex^equ^t.

Si animalibus (dixit Xen^phanes) pingere daretur, Deum proculdubio sibi
similem fingerent, quia nihil animal animali supertus cogitare potest. Mornaeus
de veril. rel.


precious, and profitable, not a syllable superfluous. The very majesty of the
sentence is such as cannot be conceived, and yet is it always more powerful
in matter than in words. It sets forth such an admirable concurrence of Gods
Mercy and Justice in man's redemption, by the man Christ Jesus, as no creature
could possibly contrive: or if they could, yet certainly would not. Not good
men or Angels, for they would never have put upon the world such a notorious
imposture. Not evil men or devils, for it crosses and controuleth their
contrary courses, and condemns them to the pit of hell. It utterly over turns
the devils kingdom, who therefore sharply eggeth and edgeth all his
instruments against it: yea and tempts better men, other whiles, to doubt of
it. Whereas if it were forged and false he would (like a liar as he is) foment
and fight for it, promote and propagate it, as he does Tur^isme, Paganism, and
other falsehoods abroad the world, though never so absurd and impious.

Thus we have seen how the holy Scripture, by the divine matter of it, proves
it self to be no less than divine: and that as plainly, and with as much
evidence of truth, as if it should say to us, as the Angel did to John, Rev 21
^. Rev. 22.6. John 21.24.
These words of God are true. And again, These words are faithful and true.
Look how we learn not Grammar, but by Grammar; see not the Sun, but by the
light of the Sun; and as a learned man proves himself to be learned: So do
the Scriptures prove themselves to be the undoubted Word of God, Ad probandani
veritatent (...) efficacius testimonio adversariorum. Greg. Arch. Nazar. Libros
Scripturae canmicos esse divin^s, praeter argumenta alia, etiam haberi ex
Scriptura ipsa. lib. 1. cap. 2. de Verbo Dei.
the Wisdom of God in a mystery, and Wisdom is justified of her children,
nay of her enemies.

Bellarmine impudently affirms in one place, that it cannot possibly be proved
out of Scripture, that any Scripture is of God. But in another discourse,
forgetting what he had elsewhere said, he gives himself the lie, telling us,
that among other arguments tending to evince the divinity of the Canonical
books of Scripture, there is sufficient said in the Scipture it self.

Lastly, look we upon its admirable effects, and irresistible power to effect
the thing whereunto it is appointed, to break the stubborn, bind up the
brokenhearted, etc. not only to inform, as other writings, but to reform,
yea transform the soul from glory to glory, till it be wholly conformed to
that heavenly pattern. 1 Cor. 24, 5. Number. 24.17. Christ shall unwall (or cast
down the walls) of all the children of Seth, is by the Gosp. Rev. 6.2.
Gods Word is his arm to gather his Saints about him out of the world, his
power of salvation to as many as believe, his mighty weapon of war to cast
down strong holds, his chariot of state, whereon the King of glory rides
triumphantly into the hearts of his chosen. Upon those white horses (his holy
Apostles) the Lord Christ rode with a crown on his head, Britannorum inaccessa
Romany loca, Christo vero subdita. Advers. Iudaeos cap. 7.
and another in his hand, conquering, and to conquer. Tertullian tells the
Jews that those places among the Britains that the Romans could never come
at, were soon subdued by Christ. De not. door. Britanni hospitibus feri. Hor.
carm. l. 3. od. 3. Hospi^es mactabunt pro hostia. Acron: Vt a sole long
distabant, etc. Bond in loc.
Tully tells us that the Britains in his time were every whit as barbarous and
brutish as the Scythians. S. Hierome makes frequent mention of this our
Island, but so, as he ever opposes it to some other well-ordered country.
Wild our forefathers were, and wicked above measure, fierce, and inhospitall,
not further remote from the Sun, than from the Sun of righteousness, yea from
all civility and humanity; little better than those poor people of Brasil, who
are said to be sine fide, sine lege, sine rege, without religion, law, or good
government; till Christ the King came with his bow in his hand (to wit, his
mighty Gospel) wherewith he wounds his elect to conversion, his enemies to
confusion. But as we were of the first that received the Gospel, so likewise
among the first that fell from the purity thereof, putting our necks under the
yoke of Antichristian tyranny and bondage. Among all those authentic Records
of the Popes usurpations, Hist of Trent by Laugh. pres. It was truly and trimly
said by Pope Innocent 4. Ve^ e enim hertus deliciatum Papis fu^^ tum Anglia and
put^us mexhaustus.
none more woeful tragedies are found of his cruelty, than such as were acted
upon our stage, no higher trophies erected to his ambition than here, no more
rare examples of a devout abused patience than ours. England was called the
Popes Ass, for bearing his intolerable burdens, and became at length his
feudatary, so leaving Gods blessing for the warm Sun, Posiquam Deo, ut dixi,
reconciliatus, me ac mea regna (prob dolor!) Romanae subjeci Eccl^siae, nulla
mihi prospera, sed omnia adversa evenerunt. ^ex Io^^n.
as King John found it to his cost, and complained, but without remedy.
Nevertheless this we retain still to the glory of our Nation, that as we
were the first of those ten Kingdoms, Rev. 17. in defection, so were we first
in reformation: and that such as the former age had despaired of, the present
admires, and the future shall be amazed at. The establishing of this
reformation wrought amongst ^s by the mighty Word of Gods grace, to be done by
so weak and simple means, yea by casual and cross means, Sands Relation
(as one speaks) against the force of so potent and politic an adversary
(the beast whom all the world wondered after) this is that miracle that we are
in these last times to look for. As Joshuah subdued Jericho by Rams-hornes,
Gideon the Midianites by lamps and trumpets, Jehosaphat the Ethiopians by
musical instruments: so Christ, by the only sound of his word, without
drawing weapon, subdued us to the faith. Those Angels, the first Reformers,
were set and sent to fly in the midst of heaven with the everlasting Gospel,
and to cry, Fear God, and give glory to him, by abdicating and abrenoun^ing
those your heretical tenets, and doctrines of devils, that you may receive the
truth in love, and be saved, Rev. 14.7.

And this is somewhat to prove the point in hand. But there is yet a further
mighty work of the word, whereby it well appears and approves it self to be
the very word of God: and that is the effectual conversion of a sinner from
the error of his way. Not from the error of his mind only, but of his
manners also. For the mind may be thoroughly convinced, and yet the man not
truly converted. A pagan or papagan, for instance, must give two turns, ere he
turn indeed. As corn must not only be threshed out of the straw, but
afterward winnowed out of the chafe: so must a Papist turn not only from
his popery, but from his profaneness: Pacian in epist. ad Sempton.
he must have Catholic for his name, and Christian for his surname: not only
be no Papist, but a zealous Protestant: he must be of those valiant ones in
Esaias, (...) Matthew. 11.12. Arripiunt, vel diripiunt, ut citatur ab Hilar.
Metaph. A castris aut arce quapiam quae irrumpentibus host^bus diripitur.
and of those violent ones in the Gospel, that take Gods kingdom by maine
force, as those do that take a strong castle, or a defenced city, or as the
people of Israel invaded and surprised the promised land. There are that rest
in a careless indifferency, or a negative goodness at the best, as it is said
of Ithacius, that the hatred of Priscillianisme (so now adays of Popery) was
all the virtue that he had Hooker ex Sulpitio.
. But the Scripture gives more grace, says Saint James, James 4.
more than conviction of the judgment, Acts 20.32.
it gives inheritance among them that are sanctified, says Paul. It converts
the soul, says David. Psalm. 19.7.
It quickens those that were dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2.1.
as a savor of life; for it is, hear, Isai 55.3.
and your souls shall live. And when the spirit feels it self dead and
decayed (as in a relapse into some foul sin) this good Word revives it, as the
breath of God did those dry bones in Ezechiel, Ruth 4.15.
as Boaz is said to be a restorer of the old age of Naomi. The words that I
speak unto you, John 6.63.
they are spirit and life, says Jesus, Non cum Jesus itis quippe itis cum
Iesuitis. Heidfeld. E societate Jesus suit, qui illum nefarie prodidit. Psalm.
119.68.
not a brute and dead thing, as the Jesuits basely slander it, but quick and
powerful, as our Author has it. The Word both has life and gives life, as
David says of God the Author of it, Thou art good, and do good: as the
Sun both has light and diffuseth light. And as the beams of the Sun
beating upon a fitly disposed matter, beget life, and make a living creature:
so does this Word of God, applied to the consciences, make a new creature.
Mannah was but a small thing, but of great virtue, so is the word. I can speak
it by experience, says Erasmus, Expertus sum in meipso patum esse fructus ex
Evangelia siquis oscitanter and persunctorie legate. etc. Praefat in Lucam.
that there is little good to be got by the Gospel, if a man read it cursorily
and carelessly: but if he exercise himself therein constantly and conscionably,
he shall feel such a force in it, as is not to be found again in any other
book whatsoever. Humane writings may show some faults to be avoided, but give
no power to amend them: but the fear of the Lord is clean, Nemo adeo f^rus
est, qui non micascere possit, Si modo culturae patientem accommodet aurem. Hor.
says David: and, Now are ye clean by the word that I have spoken unto you,
says our Savior. Sanctify them by thy truth, thy Word is truth, Philosophy
may civilize, Abscondit vitia non abscindit. Lactan. Siresipuit a vino suit
semper tamen temu'entus sacrilegio. Ambr. de Elia and jejunio, cap. 12.
not sanctify; hide some sins, not heal them; cover, not cure them; barb and
curb them, not abate and abolish them. Ambrose says well concerning Poleme,
who of a drunkand by hearing Xenocrates became a Philosopher: Though he
forsook his wine-bibbing, yet he continued drunk with superstition. Porphyry
says, it was pity such a man as Paul should be cast away upon our religion.
Plato came thrice into Sicily to convert Dionysius the tyrant to moral
Philosophy, and could not. But Peter by the foolishness of preaching converted
his thousands, Hieron. de clar. scriptorib.
and Paul his ten thousands. And as Scipio was called Africanus, Da mihi virum
qui sit iracundus, maledicus, effraenotus, paucissimis Dei verbis tam placidum
quam ovem reddam. Da cupidum, avarum, tenacem, jam tibi eum libera'em, dab^,
etc. Da libidinosum, crude'em, injustum, continuo and aequue and castus and
clemens, etc. Nunquis haec Philosophorum aut unquam praestitit, aut praestare
potest? Lactant. l^b. ^. Inst t. cap. 86.
another Numantinus, a third Macedonicus from the countries they conquered: so
had this worthy Warrior his name changed from Saul to Paul, for a memorial
(likely) of those first spoils he brought into the Church of Christ: not the
head, but the heart of that noble Sergius Paulus. After whose conversion he
began to be known by the name of Paul, and not till then, Act. 13.9. So
then, the efficacy and virtue of the Scripture to produce the love of God, and
our enemies, to purify the heart to pacify the conscience, to rectify the
whole both constitution and conversation of a man, to take him off from the
delights of the world and flesh, to make him glory in afflictions, sing in the
flames, triumph over death: all these and more, do necessarily conclude the
divine authority of the Scriptures. What words of Philosophers could ever make
of a Leopard a Lamb, of a Viper a Child, of a leacher a chaste man, of a Nabal
a Nadib, of a covetous carle a liberal person? Isay 23.18. Tyrus turning to
God, and receiving the Gospel, leaves hoarding and heaping her wealth, and
finds another manner of employment for it, viz. to feed and cloth the poor
people of God. Two or three words of Gods mouth (says that Father) work such
an evident and entire change in a man, Pauca Dei praecepta sic t^tum hominem
immutant, ut non cognosca^ eundem esse. Lactant. ubi supra.
that you can scarce know him to be the same, as in Zacheus, Paul, Onesimus,
and others.

Neither need we wonder hereat, considering that Dei dicere est facere, Gods
words (where he pleases to speak home to the heart) are operative, and carry
a virtue in them: together with his Word there comes forth a power, as his
bidding Lazarus arise and came forth, caused him to do so. And as in the
Creation he said, Let there be light, and there was light: so in the new
creation; see 2 Cor. 4.6. As there the spirit moved upon the face of the
waters, and there-hence hatched the creature, so here he spoke unto them, (...)
Genesis 1.2.
and at the same time breathed on them the holy Ghost, Job. 20.22. It is said
Luke 5.17. that as Christ was teaching, the power of the Lord was present to
heal the people, so is it still in his Word and Ordinances. As for me, this is
my covenant with them, says the Lord, My spirit which is upon thee, Isay 59.21.
and my words which J have put in thy mouth shall not depart out of thy mouth,
nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says
the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. The Word and Spirit run parallel in
the soul, as the veins and arteries do in the body. The veins carry the
blood, and the arteries carry the spirits to beat forth, and to quicken the
blood. Hence 2 Cor. 3.6. spirit is put for the Gospel, in and with which it
works: and grace in the heart is elsewhere often likened to seed in the
womb, because it is first formed there, by an admirable coition of the Word
and Spirit, till Christ be formed in us. It is the work of the Spirit to make
the seed of the Word prolificall and generative; (...). Iam. 1.21.
to make it an inbred Word, as Saint James calls it, not only able but
effectual to save the soul. Surely as the earth is made fruitful when the
heavens once answer the earth: Hos. 2.21. Romans 7.4.
so are our hearts, when the Spirit works with the Word, causing us to bring
forth fruit to God. And this, doubtless, is that real testimony given by the
Spirit to the Word, that it is indeed the Word of God.

Neither is he wanting in his vocal testimony (that inward divine testimony
abovementioned) which yet is heard by none but Gods own household, and is
confined to the communion of Saints, whose consciences he secretly persuades
of this truth, and sweetly seals it up to them. This is promised, Esaias 52.6.
They shall know in that day that I am he that does speak, behold it is I. And
Joh. 7.17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether
it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. And as it is promised, so is it
performed too; for he that believes, has the witness in himself; 1 John
5.10. Cant. 2.8. Cant. 5.2. 1 Cor. 2.15. 1 John 2.20, 27. Isay 53.1. Matthew.
13.11.
so that he can safely say, It is the voice of my beloved that knockes. The
spiritual man discerns all things, for he has the mind of Christ, and an
unction within, that teaches him all things; to him is the arm of the Lord
revealed, and to him it is given (that which is denied to others) to know the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven: So that he no sooner hears, but he
believes, Ephesians 1.13.
and is sealed with that holy spirit of promise, whose inward testimony of the
truth and authority of the Scriptures, is ever met by a motion of the
sanctified soul, inspired by the same spirit, more steadfastly resting it self
in that testimony, 1 Cor. 12.3. 1 Cor 14.37.
than if he should hear from heaven, as Austin did, Sae penume^o m^ceum
cogitans unde tam sitadibilis sit haec scriptura, unde tam potenter instuat,
etc. Vide an id sit in causa quod persuasi sumus, eam a pr m^ veritate
sluxisse: Sed unde sumus ita persuasi nisi a ^ ipsa? etc. Becan^ baculus page
104.
Toll, lege, take and read this book of God: or than if some Angel should
bring him a Bible and say, This is the very word of the living God. For such a
voice might happily be suspected for a delusion of the devil, who can easily
transform himself into an Angel of light. But this testimony of the Spirit
we know to be true, Joh. 14.17. because he is both a Spirit of truth, and a
searcher of the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. Only it must be remembered,
that this inward witness is not to be pretended or produced for confirmation
of doctrine to others, or for confutation of adversaries; but that every one
for himself might be hereby certified and satisfied in his very conscience,
that the holy Scriptures are of God. The Churches testimony without this is of
little value or validity with us; Testatu^ Ecclesia, sed ut index, non ut
judex. Ephesians. 2.20. Lib. contra ep. Fundam. cap. 5.
it being merely informativum and directivum, non certificativum and
terminativum fidei. And whereas Austin says, I should not believe the Gospel,
but that the authority of the Church moved me thereunto: we must know that he
speaks there of himself as then unconverted to the faith, and so not
acquainted with the Spirits testimony. Testificatio Ecclesiae potest apud
infidel s esse occasio ut credere incipiant, at nihil facit ad fidei (...).
Alsted. syst. Th.
Now what wonder if such be moved by the consent and authority of the Church,
which is to them an introduction whereby they are better prepared to believe
the Scriptures, yea inclined at first to think them to be the Word of God, and
so made willing to read and hear them. This is all that that Father intends,
and as much as the Scripture allows. As for the Papists, that are all for
their holy Mother Church in this business, they plainly proclaim hereby that
they are an adulterous generation, a bastardly brood. (...) spuria soboles.
whereas the babes of Christ know their Father, 1 John 2.13. and that the
excellency and authority of his Word is above all both men and Angels, Gal.
1.8. how much more above that Church malignant which they resolve, at last,
into the Pope, whom they say to be the Church vertuall. Illud nescio an sit
argumentum omnibus argumentis m jus: quod qui vere Christians sunt, ita se
animo divinitus affectos esse sentiant, ut praecipue quidem propter nullum
argumentum, sed propter supernaturalem divinam revelationem, etc. Greg. de
Valentia de analysi fidei, lib. 1. c. 20.
But how can I better shut up this part of my discourse, than with that of a
famous Jesuit subscribing to this truth. I know not, says he, but that this
is an argument above all arguments, that they that are Christians indeed, find
themselves so affected from heaven toward the Scriptures, that they believe
them to be divine, for no other argument so much, that can be drawn from their
antiquity, efficacy, number of Martyrs, confession of adversaries, etc. as for
a supernatural divine revelation, that strongly persuades them thereunto.

CHAP. III.
THe Doctrine of the Scripture has as many uses at the Scripture it self has
offices, 2 Timothy 3.16.
and those, according to S. Paul, are four. 1. To teach or inform our
judgments. 2. To reprove and refute errors. 3. To correct ill manners. (...),
omnibus numeris absolidus.
4. To instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect,
thoroughly furnished, or every way accomplished unto all good works.

First then by way of Inference and Information, this Doctrine sets before us
diverse irrefragable truths touching 1. the Antiquity and Authority of the holy
Scriptures: 2. their dignity and excellency: 3. their power and purity: 4.
their perfection and sufficiency: 5. their verity and integrity: 6. their
perpetuity and perennity.

Sect. 1.
FOr the Antiquity, first, of the sacred Scriptures, they are the words of the
Eternal God, the conceptions and expressions that were, before all beginnings,
in the mind of the Most High, Verbum Patris id^o dictum est, quia per ipsum
innotescit Pater. Aug. de fide. c. 3.
Prove. 1.23. Jesus Christ that came out of the bosom of his Father, and is
both the Essential and Enunciative Word, Dan. 8.13.
he alone is that Palmoni hammedabber, that excellent speaker in Daniel, that
knows all the secrets of his Father as perfectly, and uttors them as readily
as if they were numbered before him (as the word there imports.) He it was that
went of old and preached by Noah unto the spirits now in prison: 1 Pet. 3.19.
that spoke in times past to the Fathers by the Prophets, or otherwise, and
afterward, in the days of his flesh, revealed to the world those things that
he had heard of the Father, Joh. 8 26. This was his office, as Mediator and
Archprophet, and this he faithfully fulfilled from the beginning of the world.
The Father never spoke or appeared immediately, but in the baptism and
transfiguration of the Son. For this is a rule in Divinity, (...) Theolog.
Rules, out of I^^^^^s and Tertull^^.
that where the Old Testament brings in God appearing and speaking to the
Patriarchs and Prophets, we are to understand it always of the second Person;
Rev. 1.14.
whose head and whose hair (when he delivered the Revelation to his servant
John) are said to be white like wool, yea as white as snow, denoting his
venerable Antiquity or rather Eternity. Mark 16.5.
The Cherubims were framed and the Angels ever appeared in the form of young
men: not so the Ancient of Days, Dan. 7.9. He it was that had no sooner made
man upon the earth (and is then first styled Jehovah Elohim) but he rejoiced in
the habitable part of Gods earth, Genes. 1.
that Microcosme Man, that miracle of daring Nature, as the Heathen called him:
(...) Trismegist. in P^nuvidio.
his delights were with the sons of men, ( Prove. 8.31.) to whom he appeared,
and with whom he parled in Paradise. After the fall he gently called them to
account, and reasoned it out with them: which he would not deigne to do for
the Serpent, but presently doomed him, not once asking, What have thou done?
He preached the first Gospel to them, and there delivered them that grand
Charter of their and our salvation, Genesis 3.15. 1 John 3.8.
The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head, dissolve the devils
work, as S. John expounds it. By immediate revelation from him it was that
Adam taught his sons to sacrifice, Genesis 4.3. and 26.
and his nephews to call publicly on the name of the Lord. Yea out of the
mouth of Adam (divinely-directed) as out of a fountain, issued all the
profitable doctrine, discipline, knowledge, and skill that is in the world.
Josephus tells us, that by Adam and Seth two tables or pillars were made and
erected, Antiq. l. 1.
the one of brass, the other of stone, and that therein was written the word
of God, and certain prophecies, whereby that word was preserved for the use of
the old world. De civ. Dei lib 15. cap. 24.
Austin thinks it may be proved out of the Epistle of Saint Jude, that Enoch
wrote something. To me truly, says that divine Chronologer, it seems
probable, Bucholcer. Chron.
that Moses in his Genesis collected and contrived into an entire and just body
of a continuate History, such things as had been occasionally noted, and here
and there observed by the Fathers, and left to posterity. For Moses himself
(says he) makes mention of the Book of the wars of the Lord. Numb. 22.
Josh. 10.13.
And Joshua his disciple cites the book of Jasher, Hieron. in Ezekiel. 18. Parcus
proleg^m. in Genes.
which Hierome will have to be Genesis, but others of good note dissent and
doubt of it. It is not unlikely that even before Moses his time there were
extant some remains of ancient Records and Annotations: the diligent perusal,
and careful collection whereof, (together with a most profitable addition of
other as yet unwritten verities (to the knowledge whereof he came either by
Revelation or Tradition) was committed by God to his servant and Secretary
Moses, for the support and comfort of his poor people (then groaning under the
Egyptian bondage, or wandering in the wilderness) and of succeeding ages. The
late Jews make such reckoning of Genesis, that they have numbered the very
letters of it, which amount to 4395. Those three first Chapters thereof are the
fountain of all the following Scriptures, and the common Catechism of the
Churches of both Testaments; in explaining and applying whereof, are spent all
the Sermons and other labors of the Prophets and Apostles. The time between
the Creation and the Flood, Varro (that great Antiquary, and the most learned
of the Romans, as Saint Austin holds him) calls it (...), Degor. Whear. Method
p. 25.
or obscure and uncertain, which to us out of Moses is (...), clear and well
known. A very ancient Priest of Egypt (that had read Moses, likely) told Solon
the Athenian Lawgiver, (...) Plato in Timaeo.
You Grecians are all boys and babies in matter of Antiquity, neither is there
one old man amongst you. The Athenians brag of Cecrops the founder of their
City, and the Thebanes of their King Ogyges: and of them they term all ancient
things Cecropian and Ogygian. Eras. Chiliad.
And peradventure they will tell us that at that time folk bred out of the
earth in the country about Athens, as though they spoke of Mush-romes and
Grasshoppers. Long time after this came their gods, and Oracles; insomuch that
all the Greek History is, as you would say, tongue-tyed for many hundred
years after; like a brook that loses it self within thirty paces of its
first spring. There is not any notable thing in that story of the Greeks before
the captivity of Babylon. Ezra is the latest, one of them, in the canon of the
Hebrew writers; and yet he lived before the time that Socrates taught in Athens,
about three thousand and six hundred years after the Creation, and before any
Chronicles of the world now extant in the world. Diod^rus Siculus confesses
that all Heathen Antiquities before the Theban and Trojan wars, are either
fabulous narrations, or little better. Eusebius and Clemens Alexandrinus show,
that whatsoever in Plato savours of Divinity, he borrowed it from Moses; whom
he means always, as some guess, by this phrase, (...), Clem. Alex, Strom,
^^. 1.
as the old saying has it. Hence also he was called by Num^nius the
Pythagorist, Moses Atti^us. Pythagoras bade his Scholars search till they came
to Unity in every thing, (...). etc. Pythag. Deuteronomy 6.4. Iliad 4. (...). Proleg,
in Genesin.
pointing thereby (as is thought) to the one God; according to that of Moses,
Jehovah thy God, Jehovah is one. Homer says, parents must be honored, that
we may be long-lived. Socrates in his Apology, I love and embrace you, says
he, O ye Athenians, but yet I will obey God rather than man. David Chytraus
affirms the moral writings of Philosophers to be nothing else but a
commentary on the Decalogue. Which of the Poets or Philosophers, says
Tertullian, has not drunk at the Well of Moses and the Prophets? Whereupon
Theodoret rightly calls Moses the great Ocean of Divinity, (...). Sermon. 2 de
prm.
out of which, all the Prophets and Apostles, to the last of them, have watered
their several gardens. What piece soever of holy Scripture follows this, is
but a commentary upon this, says Pareus in the perclose of his commentary upon
Genes^. After Moses comes Joshua, and gives record to Moses. The Judges succeed
Joshua: Samuel, the Judges: Kings and Chronicles, Samuel: and the Prophets
succeeded them all. Among that goodly fellowship of Prophets, Samuel is
reckoned the first after Moses, Act. 13.20. God indeed is said to have come to
Balaam, Abimelech, Laban, and some other profane persons before and after, but
he never concredited his Word to these, as he did to the holy Prophets, which
have been since the world began; of whom it is said, that the Word of the
Lord came unto them, like as it did to Moses the man of God. None of them ('it is
true) conversed so familiarly with God as he did, whom God spoke with face to
face, Exodus 33.11.
as a man does with his friend. Yet ought not the Prophets writings to be
rejected, as they were by the brain-sicke Sadducees, whom therefore our Savior
refutes out of Moses only. Math. 21.31.
Neither yet to be slighted (in comparison) as they are by the Jews at this
day, who in then Church Liturgy read one lesson out of the Law by some chief
person, Sands his Relation of the West. Relig.
and another out of the Prophets by some boy or mean companion. For they will
in no sort (says mine Author) do honor, neither attribute that authority to
any part of the Bible that they do to their Law. But this is to have the
glorious faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons. Iam 2.1.
For was it not one God, that spoke by the mouth (as of one) of his holy
Prophets, (...). Luke 1.70.
which have been since the world began? In other cases I grant, that
antiquissimum quodque est verissimum, adulterinum quod posterius, truth is more
ancient than falsehood: that classicke Authors are to be preferred before
modern; and that of Aristotle holds true of humane witnesses, (...). Rhet. l.
1. Vinum quo magis tran funditur, evanesi it magis, tandemque fit vappa. Degor.
Whear.
The ancientest are most to be credited, as less corrupted. For as wine the
oftener it is poured from vessel to vessel, the more it loses of its spirits
and sparkinesse: and as a picture that is taken at the lively image loses
somewhat of its nature: that which is taken at the pattern, somewhat more: and
so from one to another, they vary, in the end, so far from the original, that
there is scarce left any resemblance. (...). Nihil mihi antiquius, i. potius.
This may be true in humane testimonies, and transactions. But for the several
parts and pieces of holy Scripture, may we not ask of them, as the Prophet in
another case, Who is their Father? 1 Samuel 10.12. Malach. 2.10. Esaias 9.6.
Have they not all one Father? even the Father of eternity, to whom a thousand
years (by reason of the vastness of his being) are but as yesterday, Psalm.
40.4.
when it is past? Were they not all dictated and indicted by the same Spirit,
and are therefore of equal antiquity and authority? Come they not all from so
authentical an Author, as is the Author and finisher of our faith, the Alpha
and Omega, the first and the last?

I speak not here of Apocryphal books, which were neither penned by the
Prophets or Apostles, Omnes literae quibus Christus prophetatus est, apud
Iudaeos sunt. August in Psalm. 56.
nor written in Hebrew, and kept among the Jews, neither yet have they in them
the print of the Spirit, which the spiritual man discerns, but contain some
things frivolous, and some things false, not dissonant only, but repugnant to
the holy Scriptures. Read them fruitfully we may for moral instruction, and
for the better understanding of the story of the Church, but read we must
with judgment and choice, and where we find them contradicting the
Scriptures, we must kill the Egyptian, and save the Israelite. But for the holy
Prophets, take that of our Savior, Math 10 41.
He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets
reward. We cannot now receive them into our houses, into our hearts we may and
must, as the Church of God has ever done before us. Who the penmen were of
those books that are called by the Hebrews Nebim Res^onim, the former
Prophets, that is, Joshua, Judges, Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles, and of those
other among the Hagiographa, (...)
whose Authors are not expressed, there needs no great enquiry. When Letters
come from the King, says Gregory, Regiis epistolis acceptis, quo calamo
scriptae sint, ridiculum est, quaerere. Greg.
it were an odd thing to be much inquisitive with what pen they were
written. It is not altogether improbable, that Ezra, that perfect Scribe,
either himself, or with the help of other his holy colleagues, did, by the
immediate motion and inspiration of the holy Ghost, compile those books of
Joshua, Judges, Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles, out of diverse ancient and
honorable Records, charily kept by the Church, as written by the Prophets of
those several ages: ( David's acts are expressly said to have been set down by
Gad and Nathan) and that he or they digested and disposed them in that order
that now, of a long time, the Church has had and read them. For it is not
likely that Samuel himself, when he should relate the words of Saul, seeking
to him for advice about the Asses, that he, I say, should preface thus, He that
is now-adayes called a Prophet, was anciently called a Seer. No, Scultet.
Annal. Epist. dedic.
but they sound rather in any man's ears, like the words of another, that
reports things done long before.

As for the later Prophets, as they call them, Isay, Jeremy, and the rest,
Calvin tells us (and he gathers it out of Habac. 2. and Esaias 8.) that after the
Prophets had preached to the people, their manner was to set down a brief
sum of their Sermon, and to fasten it to the doors of the Temple, that all
men might know and take more notice of the Prophecy. Calvin. in Isai. praefat.
Which when it had hung there for a certain number of days, as long as was
thought fit, the Priests office was to take it down, and lay it up safe in the
Treasury, that it might there remain for a perpetual monument. And hence he
conceives the books of the Prophets to have been made up, and notes it for a
singular providence of God, Iunius in orat. de Test. Vet.
that the Priests (which yet were often ill-minded men, and professed enemies to
the Prophets) should be used as Gods instruments to conserve and convey the
prophecies entire, as we have them, to posterity.

Now for the writings of the Apostles, Nulli ne ipsis quidem Prophetis tam
ampliter contigit, insallibilitatis privilegium, ac Apostolis: quippe cum his^e
perpetuum illud fuerit, illis vero saepius intervallatum, and f^re non extra
ipsos prophetandi paroxysmos durans. Tailor and B^o^ius contra Maximum, ex
Gatake^o.
besides that privilege of Infallibility wherewith they were endued even above
the Prophets, as some are of opinion: no wise man doubts (says Scultetus)
but that the Disciples of our Savior recorded and registered his daily Oracles
and miracles in their day-books and private annalls; out of which afterward
the Evangelicall history was extracted, composed, and compiled.

Saint Luke is reputed the first of the four that wrote the Gospel; what
others attempted only, (...). Luke 1.1. (...).
he effected, Luke 1.1. The Fathers held (many of them) that he received his
Gospel from Saint Paul: but himself tells us he had it from those that were
eyewitnesses, which Paul was none. Saint Ambrose rightly preferres him for
setting down things more distinctly and orderly than the rest, according to
his promise to his most excellent Theophilus, Chap. 1 verse. 3. And as he does
it orderly, (...). cohaerenter. Bez. (...).
and coherently, as the word signifies so originally, and from the very first
verse, or from a high, as himself speaks. For he begins his history, not at
the works of our Savior, as Saint Mark, nor at his birth only, as Saint
Matthew, but at his conception. Yea, at the conception and parentage of his
forerunner. Saint John indeed soareth higher, even to our Saviors Divinity,
and is therefore called the Divine, (...). Hieron. in Ezech. 1.10. Greg Mag.
Hom. 4. in Ezech. Glos. ordin. and interl^n.
and has the Eagle for his ensign assigned him by the Ancients. But of him
more in his place.

Matthew of a publican, by a gracious call from Christ, became an Apostle and
Evangelist. Publicans were officers for the Romans, to take toll and tribute
of the Jews, and were therefore extremely hated among them, and not altogether
undeservedly. For they were (most of them) notoriously unconstionable griping
fellows, as we see in Z^ch^us. A faithful Publican was so rare at Rome it
self (how much more in the remoter Provinces?) that one Sabinus, for his
honest managing of that office, in an honorable remembrance thereof, had
certain images erected with this superscription, The honest Publican. (...).
Suet. in V^spasiano.
But that the hatred born them by the Jews (ever impatient of foraine
exactions, and bragging of their freedom, John 8.
when most in bondage) was greater than there was cause, is apparent in the
Gospel. Iudaei, quibus olim publicani tantopere exosi fucrunt, hodie sunt
Turcarum publicani, admrabili quodam Dei judicio. Beza in Math. 5.46.
Now see the just judgment of God upon them. They that so much hated Publicans
of old, are now turned Publicans to the Turks, whose revenues of the sea they
rent at this day, as those of old did of the Romans. But this by the way
only. Luke 5.29. (...). Ad verbum, acceptionem magna^; quod passim in co omnes
accipiantur. Annot. Er^^nus ex Athenaeo splendidum epulum (...) vocari.
It is more to our present purpose, that, as much was forgiven this blessed
Apostle, so he loved much, and sealed up his love by a liberal feast, for joy
of his conversion: which while the other Evangelists relate, they conceal^ the
name of Matthew, whereby he was best known, and call him Levi ^ but he, by a
gracious simplicity, freely and plainly reports his own more common name,
Omnipotenti medico nullus insanabilis occurrit morbus. Isidor.
and the nature of his offense, that the greater the cure was, the more honor
might accrue to Christ that cured him; and as a confirmation of the cure called
him to so high an office in his Church.

After him comes Saint Mark, and abridgeth him, yet ever with usury, and some
singular addition, for the most part. Whether he wrote his Gospel at Peter's
mouth, which is the common opinion, or otherwise, I have not to say. But if he
did, who can believe that either Peter himself, or Mark his Notary, would
ever have past over in silence that famous Tues Petrus, thou art Peter, Math.
16.
etc. that the Papists so brag of, and build on, if he had held it (as they
do) to have been the foundation of the Catholic Church. Peter's denial this
Evangelist sets down more expressly and amply than any other.

Lastly, for Saint John, there is an Ecclesiastical tradition, and Eusebius
records it, Hist Eccles. lib. 3 cap. 21.
that the three former Evangelists being presented to him by the Saints at
Ephesus, that he might peruse them, and by his testimony recommend them to the
Churches reading, he well approved and ratified what they had written. Only he
thought meet that something more should be added concerning such of our
Saviors words and works as did clearly evince and evidence his Deity; which,
even in those purer times, began to be oppugned by Ebion, Cerinthus, and other
odious heretics and apostates. Wherefore at the instant request of the Church,
but chiefly by the instinct and motion of the holy Ghost, who set him a work,
he undertook in his old age the writing of this fourth Gospel, that now bears
his name. That lofty and lively beginning thereof, I doubt not, says Mercer,
Mercer. in Prove. Amelius Platonicus apud Cyrill. Alex. lib. 8. contra Julian.
Apostat.
but he took out of Prove. 8.22. A certain Philosopher lighting upon it by
accident, cried out, Hic barbarus, etc. This barbarian has heaped up more
matter in three words, than all we have done in so many volumes. The learned
and judicious Junius confesses, In vita sua.
that he was converted from Atheism by the serious reading of this first
Chapter. Never could any man say better than this beloved Disciple, both of his
Gospel, and of his Revelation, 1 John 1.1, 3.
That which we have heard and seen with our eyes, etc. of the word of life,
declare we unto you. The Alogians recited all Saint John's writings, the
Valerians all the Gospels but Saint John's. Some other pieces of the New
Testament have been questioned by some, but causlesly; as likewise in the Old
Testament, the Anabaptists reject the book of Job as a tragicomicall fiction,
Canticles as a love-song, Ecclesiastes as a doctrine of liberty, and door to
Atheism. But this nothing elevateth or diminishes their worth and authority
with the sound and sober-minded. Ob.
If here it be objected, that counterfeit writings might be published and put
upon the Word under the name of the Apostles. I answer with M. Perkins, Sol. In
ep. ad Galdt.
If they were in the days of the Apostles, they by their authority cut them
off. And therefore Paul says, If any teach otherwise, Evangelium, quod tum
praeconiaverunt, poslea in Scripturis nobis tradi lerunt. Iren. Cum credimus,
hoc primum credimus, nihil esse quod ultra credere debeamus. Tertul. Rev.
22.18. (...). G^d. 3.
let him be accursed. And as they faithfully committed to writing what they had
preached for a pillar and foundation of our faith, so they provided that no
cou^terfeits should be foisted under their names after their departure. And
hereupon John the last of the Apostles, concludes the New Testament with this
clause, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the
plagues that are written in this book. The Scripture foresaw (as Saint Paul
has it) there would be forgers and fa^furies, and that Antichrist would
usurp authority to chop and change, to foist in and force upon the Church, for
doctrines the devices of men: to coin and obtrude new articles of faith, as
they have lately done in their Trent-conventicle. God therefore has spoken it
with his mouth, and made it good with his hand upon them, 2 Chronicles. 6. 15
(as Solomon phraseth it in his prayer) by adding to them the plagues written
in this book: that one above the rest, the noisome and grievous ulcer, falling
upon the men that have the mark of the beast, after the first and fifth Angel
had poured out his vial, Revel. 16.1, 2, 10. These Angels are (according to
most Interpreters) the Preachers of the Gospel, and those renowned Reformers:
that sore and grievous ulcer is, as some will have it, the French disease,
Bullingerus, Are us, alti:
but, as others better, the devils disease of envy and evil will to the
Gospel, Pareus. 2 ^hess. 3.1.
which (maugre their malice) runs, as the Apostle speaks, and is glorified.
This these wicked Popelings see and are grieved, Psalm. 112.10.
they gnash with their teeth, and melt away: yea they gnaw their tongues for
pain and torment of their sores, Rev. 16.9, 10.
they blaspheme the Name (that is, Invidia Siculi non invenere tyranni Majus
tormentum.
the Word) of God which has power over these plagues, and repent not to give
him the glory. Sed in hoc ulcere non ero unguis: it shall suffice to have
pointed at it.

Section 2.
SEcondly, is it the very Word of God that we read in the Bible? and is He
the undoubted Author thereof? this then informs and advertiseth us of the
surpassing dignity and supereminent excellency of that thrice-sacred Book,
above all humane writings whatsoever. That which David said of Goliahs sword,
may be fitly applied to the sword of the Spirit, 1 Samuel 21.9.
there is none to that. And as of the river Pison in Paradise, that compasses
the land of Havilah, it is recorded that there is gold, and with an emphasie,
Genesis 2.11, 12.
the gold of that land is good: There is also Bdellium, and the Onyx stone. The
other three rivers have nothing said of them in comparison of this first,
though they doubtless had their several commendations: So stands the case
between this and all other Books, though suo genere never so praiseworthy.
Prove. 31.
Many daughters (so Authors) have done virtuously, but this excells them all.
There was not such a man as Job, Job 1.
nor can there be such a Book as this in all the earth. Hence it is called
the Bible that is, the Book, by an excellency, as the only Book, Auferantur
de medio chartae nostrae, procedat in medium codex Dei. In Psalm 57. Ego odi
meos libvos, and saepe opto e^s in crire, etc. Luther. in Genes. 1 4. Evanges^i
libri sunt and Apostolici, an iqu^^ilque Prophetarum oracula, quae nos
manifesto ^^siruunt, etc. suscipiamus igit^ ex sermonibus divinitus inspiratis
quaestionum solutionem. Chemnit ex Theodo^et.
And the Word is that which should be ever sounding in our ears; and the
Scriptures as being to all other writings, as Joseph's shea^e was to his
brethrens, or as the Sun to the lesser Stars. Hence that of Saint Austin,
Away with our writings, that room may be made for the Book of God. And that
of Luther, I heartily hate mine own books, and could wish them out of the
world, because I fear they keep men from spending so much time in reading
Gods Book, the only fountain of al true wisdom. And that of Constantine the
Great, wherewith he opened the Council of Nice; Ye have the New Testament and
the Old, which plainly instruct us what to judge in divine matters. Out of
these therefore let us fetch answers to al questions that shall be moved
amongst us; as the High Priest did, of old, at the Oracle; for they have God
for their author, and are the platform of that wisdom that is in God
himself, 1 Cor. 2.6, 7. Excellent things are in Scripture Phrase said to be
things of God, as tall trees, high mountains, famous cities, I have wrastled
with my sister, with wrastlings of God, Genesis 30 ^.
said Rachel, that is, with great wrastlings, and have prevailed. How much more
may the Bible be said to be of God (which sets forth its precious and
peerlesse worth) since he uttered some of it with his own mouth, and so might
say as Joseph did once to his brethren, Behold you see that mine own mouth
speaks: and wrote other some with his own finger, as the Decalogue, Deuteronomy.
5.22. and so might say as Paul to Philemon, I Paul have written it with mine
own hand, verse. 19. That one short Epistle to Philemon (since we are fallen
into the mention of it) though about so low and abject an object, so poor and
petty a matter, as the receiving again of a fugitive bondslave, yet with what
admirable pithinesse and powerfulness of speech is it set forth. Plena
lacertorum and roboris epistola, Scultet. observat.
singulis fere verbis singula argumenta, says one. Not a word but has its
weight, not a syllable but has its substance. Those Epistles written, as is
pretended, by Paul to Seneca, they have his name indeed, but not the least dram
or drop of his spirit, they savor not of his Apostolical majesty and gravity,
which shines even in this the least of all his Epistles. Paulum quatiescunque
lego, videor mihi n n verba audire, sed tonitrna. In brevitate verborum est
luxuries rerum. Origin.
As often as I read Saint Paul, says Hierom, me thinks I hear not words but
thunders. In fewness of words he has all fullness of matter, says Origin,
and sets a grace and a gloss upon mean matters, in his manner of handling
them. How much more when he treats of Predestination, or any such profound
mystery; as in that lofty and lively Epistle to the Romans, which Melancthon
was wont to call the confession of our Churches, and thought it time well spent
to go over it a matter of ten several times in his ordinary Lectures. The
truth is, it is such as never could any man think speak or write sufficiently
of its worth and excellency. M. Perkins advises in reading the Scriptures,
first to begin with the Gospel of Saint John, and this Epistle to the
Romans: after, with the Prophet Esaias; because these three books be as the
keys to open the right understanding of the rest. Saint Jerome doubts not to
affirm of that prophecy of Esaias, Quicquid est sanctarum scripturarum,
quicquid potest humana lingua proferre, aut sensus concipere, in e^ volumine
continetur.
that whatsoever other piece there is of holy Scripture, whatsoever man's mind
can conceive, or tongue express, is contained in this one book. Esaias himself
calls it a great Book, wherein but little was written, chap. 8.1. We may
safely call it a little book, wherein great things are written: even those
mirabilia of the Law, Hos. 8.12.
and magnalia of the Testimony or Gospel, for so that Prophet in the same
chapter divides the holy Scriptures into the Law and Testimony, Esaias 8.20.
as into its integrall parts. To the Law, says he, and to the Testimony. Now
the Gospel is often called the Testimony (by Saint John especially) because it
testifies of Christ, (...).
whose very name, Jesus, is a short Gospel, the very sum and substance of all
the good news in the world. The nativity, preaching, persecution,
apprehension, death, resurrection, ascension of our Savior, yea and latter
coming to judgment, is lively set forth by this one Prophet Esaias: whence he
was called by a Father the Evangelicall Prophet. The Babe of Bethlehem is wrapped
up, as it were, in the swathing-bands of both Testaments. Christ is both the
subject and object, the Author and matter of the Scriptures. This makes much
to the setting forth of their worth and excellency: for he is the chief of ten
thousand, Cant. 5.10.
and we (if ever we will profit by hearing, teaching, reading) must have our
eye turned toward Christ, as the faces of the Cherubims were toward the
Mercy-seat. For this he is called the Word, (...) Propter articulum ad filium
Dei refero.
not only by Saint John often, but by Saint Luke also, Chap. 1.2. because he
is the matter and mark of the Word; scarce a leaf or line in the Bible, but
some way leads to Christ, as the Star did the Wisemen, and even point him
out, as John Baptist did, with an Ecce Agnus Dei, Behold the Lamb of God which
takes away the sins of the world. In the Old Testament we have books
Priestly, Princely, and Prophetical. As in the New, the Gospels are regal,
showing that Christ was King of the Jews: the Epistles more Sacerdoticall,
beginning and ending with praises and prayer, (those sacrifices of the Gospel)
and the Revelation is merely prophetical. Hence that of our Savior, Search
the Scriptures, John 5.
for they are those that testify of me. Now Christ is the most excellent and
praiseworthy person in the world, the fairest among men, 2 Samuel 18.3.
worth ten thousand of us, as the people said of David. Look upon him as he
stands described in the Text. For his nobility, he is Gods own Son; for his
riches, he is heir of all things; for his wisdom, he made the worlds; for his
eminency, he is the brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express image
of his person; for his might, he upholdeth all things by the word of his power;
for his merits, he has by himself purged our sins; for his preferment, he
sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high. Lo this is He whom the
Scripture treats of, yea this is he who treats with us in the Scriptures; and
has therein made us a pithy and perfect draught and description of himself.
Saint Chrysostom falling occasionally into the commendation of S. Paul, Ne
tanti viri lauds oratione sua elevaret magis quam exornaret.
feared much, lest with the slenderness of his style he should rather lessen,
than to the life set forth the worthy praises of so praiseworthy a person. And
Gregory Nazianzen speaking of Basil the Great, There wants but his own tongue,
says he, to commend him with. An exact face, says the Orator, Picto es
pulchra absolutamque faciem raro nisi in pejus effingunt.
is seldom drawn but with disadvantage: and therefore great Alexander forbade
his portraiture to be painted by any other than Apelles, or carved by any but
Lysippus, men famous in those faculties. But here there is no such thing to be
feared, because Christ the Matter is also Author of the holy Scripture: whence
it is call d the word of Christ, Coloss. 3.16.
Let the word of Christ dwell richly in you in all wisdom. Any the least
relation to the Lord Christ, is that which innobleth and raises the worth of
any thing. Bethlehem, where he was borne, is therefore, though the least, yet
not the least among all the cities of Judah, Mat. 2.6. with Micah 5.2. And Rev.
7. of those that were sealed, as among the sons of Leah, Judah has the
pre-eminence, for alliance to Christ according to the flesh; so among those of
Rachels side, Nephthali is first reckoned for his dwelling in that tribe at
Capernaum; which is therefore also said to be lifted up to heaven, Math. 11.
because there he dwelt, and there he preached this word of the kingdom,
Math. 9.
yea of Christ the King: which should therefore familiarly dwell in us, (...).
Coloss. 3.16.
as a household guest; yea it should in-dwell in us, as the word there
signifies, and as Paul bids Timothy, 1 Timothy 4 15. (...).
Be thou in these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting may
appear to all. (...).
Yea it should in-dwell in us richly in the best room, as a welcome and
well-knowne guest. Entertain it not in the ear only, (...). 1 Thessalonians. 2.12.
as in the porch or out-roomes, but let it lodge, yea dwell worthy of Christ
(whose Word it is) in your minds, memories, affections, conversations. Get a
Bible stamped in your heads, and the counterpane thereof engraven in your
hearts, Heb. 8.10. that ye may be manifestly declared to be the epistle of
Christ, (which is the crown of all commendation, and that which actuates, with
acceptance and life, all other good parts and practices) written not with
ink, 2 Cor. 3.3.
but with the Spirit of the living God, not in tables of stone, but in fleshly
tables of the heart. Romans 6.17. (...).
This is to be delivered up to the form of doctrine delivered unto us in the
holy Scriptures: this is to be cast into the mould of the Word (as the
believing Romans were) and were therefore famous for their faith throughout
all the world. Romans 1.8.
This is to let the Word of Christ dwell richly in us, in our very hearts, (as
the two tables were laid up in the Arc of the Covenant) and that in all
knowledge, which the Scripture counts and calls the only riches wherewith the
heart should be stored, as a rich man's house is fraught with stuff in every
corner. I counsel thee, says Christ, Rev 3.18. Prove. 23.23.
to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may be rich: buy this truth,
but sell it not, says Solomon: and the Queen of Sheba took his counsel. She
prized his wisdom above gold, and therefore presented him with abundance of
gold: sweeter it was to her than the sweetest odours, 2 Chronicles. 9 1.
and therefore she came to him with Camels laden with the best spices. Dearer
it was to her than the dearest gems and jewels, therefore she found in her
heart to part with the most precious stones and ingots, in exchange for it. She
had learned, belike, out of Salomons works, ere she saw him, that wisdom is
more precious than rubies. But say there may be something named that is better
than rubies: Tanti vitreum? quanti verum margaritum? Tertull.
why all the things thou can desire are not to be compared unto her, Prove.
3.15. But where is it to be had? and how to be achieved? by digging in the
Mine of the mystery of Christ crucified: the doctrine whereof is by an
excellency called wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.24. even the wisdom of God in a mystery,
1 Cor. 2.7. And like as men by studying the Statute-booke, become worldly-wise
and politikes, so by searching the Scriptures, truly wise to salvation: and he
is the wiseman indeed that makes sure of that. As on the other side, the wise
men are ashamed, says the Prophet, they are dismayed and taken (to wit, in
their own craft.) (...). 1 Cor. 3.19. Ier. 8.8, 9.
But what may be the reason? Behold they have rejected the word of the Lord,
and what wisdom is in them? Of that Queen of Sheba the Chronicles of
Ethiopia report, that her name was Mackedae, that she had a son by Solomon,
whom she called David, and made him heir of that great Empire now called
Prester John's country, and that she took back with her twelve thousand
Jews, of every Tribe a thousand. And because the noblest men of that land do
vaunt themselves to be of the blood of Israel, Phil. Momaeu^ de verit. rel.
Christ. cap. 26.
although they have received the Gospel, yet retain they circumcision; not
that they think it necessary to salvation (say they) but to keep still the
prerogative of their blood. But what prerogative had the Jew? and what profit
was there of circumcision? Much every way: chiefly because unto them were
committed the Oracles of God. This is set forth with a (...), Romans 3.2.
a prime privilege, and precellency of preferment to the Jews above all other
nations, (...). Ephesians. 2.12.
who are therefore said to be without God in the world, because without the
word of God; as elsewhere Israel is, one time, said to have been without God,
2 Chronicles. 15.2.
because without the Law, and a teaching Priest to expound it. Some few sparks
stolen from Scripture have cast such a luster on the writings of Heathens, as
has made them seem divine. And those, among the Philosophers, as had walked
within the warmth of this Sun, and were but tanned a little therewith, have
been esteemed most excellent. As Pythagoras, who is said to have had
conference in mount Carmel; Strabo lib. 16.
Phocylides, whose verses are plainly translated out of Moses; (...). In
Epinomide. (...), etc. In The oeteto p. 176. In Timoeo.
Plato, who affirms that the most divine Word made the world; that a
conformity to God is the blessedness of a man; that this conformity consists
in knowledge, righteousness, and holiness; that God made time together with
the world; that he will dissolve the world when he pleases; that in the
revolution of so many years, men shall be just in the same state wherein they
had been, while alive. He had heard of and hammered at that (...), the
Resurrection, spoken of, Math. 19.28. and called elsewhere the restoration of
all things. (...). Acts 3.21.
As for those Philosophers that lived in these last days, (as the text calls
them) the days of the Gospel, though they renounced not their superstitions,
but remained obstinate Heathens, yet they are noted for more divine than those
of their sect that went before them. This is to be seen in Seneca, Magnus, and
magni anim^ille vir fuit, and hunc certe lectoribus suis infundit.
of whom Lipsius writes thus: A brave man he was, surely, and of a brave
spirit, and infuseth the same into them that read him. The like may be said of
Pliny, whose natural History is, in Erasmus his judgment, a rich treasury,
Thesaurus, imo vere mundus rerum cognitu dignissimarum.
yea a very world of things that deserve to be known of all men. And for
Plutarch, he so excells his fellows, that when the question was propounded to
that learned Theodorus Gaza, what author he would chiefly choose to read, if
it were so that he must be confined to one; he answered, Plutarch. Something
might here be said (though somewhat out of place) touching Sibylla's verses
concerning Christ, whereby Marcellinus and Secundianus are reported to have been
converted to Christianity; Satis constat Secundianum pictorem and Marcellinum
oratorem Sibyllae versibus consideratis, Christianos factos esse. Ramus in
Virg. E^log. quartam.
as diverse were from Popery, in those dark times, by the writings of Chaucer
Acts and Monum. Bifield on the Coloss. fol. 217 Neand. Chronicon. p. 1. Munster
Cosmog. lib. 2.
. It is no absurdity to grant, says one, that some of the Sibyls were stirred
up by the holy Ghost extraordinarily to prophecy of Chirst among the Gentiles.
And Japhet scattered, in his Europe (says another) the doctrine of the
promised seed, which when it began once to slip out of men's minds, was
collected and conserved by the Sibyls. And hence the Heathen Sages, says he,
fetched whatsoever they held aright touching God, the immortality of the soul,
the continuance of Empires, etc. Suidas tells us that Phocylides his verses are
merely stolen out of the Sibylls. And of what esteem they were of old among
the Romans, is known as well by that relation in Gellius, Gell. noct. Attic.
l. 1. cap. 19.
of an old woman that brought first nine of her books, which she styled divine
oracles, to Tarquinius Superbus, and requiring an unreasonable rate for them,
was turned off with disdain; but after she had burnt six of them, received
the whole price for the three that remained. As also by their consulting with
them upon any important affair of state, and their care to keep them close in
their Archivi, Gellius ibid.
appointing fifteen select men to that office, as an office of honor to them
in that State. How much more was it then to the Jews above all nations, that
to them were committed the Oracles of God, (...). Act. 7.38.
those lively and life-giving Oracles? He showed his word unto Jacob, his
statutes and his judgments to Israel. He dealt not so with other nations, etc.
Psalm. 147.19, 20. They had other blessings, as gold and silver in abundance,
but this they want, that is better than both, Psalm. 19.10. Like as Ismael had
twelve Princes to come of him, Genesis 17.20, 21
but with Jacob will I establish my covenant. This was a mercy worth having,
this was the Temple that sanctified the gold of the Temple, Math, 23.17.
all other privileges whatsoever. The mercy-seat was no larger than the Arc
wherein were the two tables of the Testimony, to show that Gods special mercy
is ordinarily confined to such as have his Word and Ordinances. Exodus 25.10. 10
17.
Hence those holy Levites recount and reckon it for a high favor to the people
of Israel, that God came down also upon mount Sinai, and spoke with them from
heaven, giving them right judgments, Neh. 9.13.
true laws, good statutes, etc. This was a worthy gift indeed, one of those
good gifts and perfect givings that came from above from the Father of lights,
and should therefore be highly prized, as a principal favor. Prove. 22.20.
Have not I written to thee excellent things, in counsel and knowledge, says
God? the word signifies precious and princely things, sweet and singular,
amiable and admirable, Principalia, ducalia, (...) proprie nomen dignitatis,
tertius a rege, Mercer. Cant. Psalm. 219.24. Prove. (...). Melchior Adam de vit.
Ger. Theol.
such as might well become the greatest States on earth to study and strive
after. The King himself might be held in these rafters. David made Gods
statutes the men of his counsel. Solomon bids, establish thy thoughts by this
counsel, and calls his Proverbes Master-sentences, such as should rule and
sway in the whole course of our lives. George Prince of Anhalt carried ever
carefully about him Solomon and Siracides, as his Vade mecum. Andronicus the
old Emperor of Constantinople, being in a deep distress, betook himself
for counsel and comfort to the Psalms of David, which S. Basil fitly calls a
common storehouse of divine doctrines; horreum ex quo hauriatur, a treasury of
heavenly comforts, such as no good can match, no evil over-match. Theodosius
the second is reported to have written out the books of the New Testament with
his own hand, and out of it he read every day, praying with his wife and
sisters, and singing of Psalms. Deuteronomy. 17.19.
The King of Israel was not only commanded to read, but to write out the Law:
yea the Jews say, that if Printing had then been found out, (as it was, say
some, long since among the Chinois) yet was the King bound to write out two
copies thereof with his own hand; Weemse his Exercit. page 118.
one to be kept in the treasury, and another to carry about him continually, as
a companion fit for a king. The Persians have a custom at this day to present
a rich Alchoran (which is their Bible) to the Princes, Turk. hist.
to whom they send Ambassadors. Charles the fifth, when he was baptized at
Gaunt in Flanders, had seven princely gifts bestowed upon him at the Font. His
father gave him the Duchy of Lutzenburg, Bucholcerus, ex Zenocaro.
another a silver head-peece, another a golden sword, etc. the Abbats gave him
a fair Bible with this inscription, Scrutamini Scripturas, Search the
Scriptures. Bishop Latimer, among others of his make that gratified King Henry
the eighth with a New-yeares gift, according to the custom, when some sent
gold, some silver, some a pursefull of money, some one thing, some another, he
presented a New Testament, with a napkin, having this posie about it, Acts and
Mon. fol. 1594.
Fornicatores and adulteros judicabit Dominus, Whoremongers and adulterers God
will judge. The Scriptures, he knew, would deal plainly with him, and tell
him that which others durst not. Sphinx philos.
Alphonsus King of Spain and Naples, was wont to bewail the case of Kings for
this, that they, hearing with other men's ears, could seldom hear truth, and
therefore he held himself happy in his Muti Magistri, his books; his Bible
especially, which he is reported to have read over fourteen times in course,
together with Lyra's and other men's notes upon the Text. Averr^^s the
Philosopher so madly admires his master Aristotle, that he affirms there is no
error at all to be found in him: Alsted. Chronol. p. 460.
that his tenors were the chief truth, and his judgment the utmost bound and
extent of humane understanding: that Aristotle was the rule and sample that
dame Nature invented, whereby to set forth man's utmost perfection. Yet
Aristotle denies, Gods particular providence, teaches the worlds eternity,
permits women to make abort other whiles, to cast out their misshapen babes,
Iohnstonus de Naturae constantia, p. 117.
to keep those lascivious pictures of the gods that had been confirmed by
custom, etc. Cyprian was wont to call to Paulus Concordiensis his Notary for
Tertullians works, with a Da magistrum, Reach me hither my master. Strinxit
calamum adversus Orthodoxos, Alsted. Chronol. page 432.
Yet Tertullian was a man, and had his errors: toward his later time he fell
into Montanus his heresy, and wrote sharply against the better side. Good
therefore is the counsel of our Savior, Math. 23.10. 2 Cor. 8.5.
Call no man master upon earth, for one is your master, even Christ. Give your
selves up to God, as the Macedonians did, and unto his unerring Apostles and
Prophets by the will of God. Justify his Word with the Publicans, Luke 7.29.
Sanctify it by sanctifying all by the Word and Prayer, as the Apostle speaks
of meats and marriage: (...): 1 Timothy 4.5. (...). Esaias 6 5.9. Nehem. 8.5. Luke
4.16.
Glorify it, as they did, Act. 13.48. or as some copies read, receive it with
joy and admiration, for then there is a blessing in it. Set your selves to show
your high esteem of it, when it is read: as the people stood up in Nehemiah,
and our Savior, for our example, at Nazareth: yea, as Eglon that Heathen,
though a fat unweildy man, yet, for reverence sake, he stood up to hear the
Lords message: and this he had learned, belike, Judges 3.20. Numb. 23.18.
from the custom and practice of Gods people.

Sect. 3.
THirdly, are the Scriptures of God? this may further inform us of their purity
and power. Every word of God is pure, says Solomon, Prove. 30.5. Psalm. 12.6.
yea purer than silver seven times tried in a furnace, says David. And the
Gospel is the power of God to salvation, Roman. 1.16. Iam. 1.21.
says Paul: such as is able to save your souls, says James, maugre the
malice of all the powers of darkness. Yea, the Word of God, says our Author,
is lively and powerful: and it shall well appear too, for it is sharper than
any two-edged sword, Heb. 4.12, 13.
piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, (and that cuts very
near) of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents
of the heart, which man's law meddles not with, further than they are some way
discovered: as in a Gentleman of Normandy, put to death by the Parliament of
Paris, for an intent he had to kill king Francis the second, French hist.
which he had revealed to his Confessor. Otherwise thought's free from the
censure of earthly Courts and Consistories. But this pure and powerful Word of
God searches the heart, risseth the reins (those seats of lust, and most
abstruse remote parts in all the body) yea it rippeth up soule-secrets, Ioh.
4.29.
it tells a man all that ever he did, as she said of our Savior; it ferrets
corruption out of its lurking-holes, 2 King. 5.26.
and tells false Gehezi of his Olive-yards, and other purchases, which he had
only meditated. It searches Jerusalem with lights, it descends into the Iowest
holes of the heart, and discryes it to be, as Adonibezeks table was, a palace
of pride, a dungeon of darkness, Judge. 1.7.
a dunghill of uncleanness, a world of contemplative wickedness, a very
pesthouse of all sorts of paltrement. In this sea there is not only that
Leviathan (some familiar Devil that plays Rex) but creeping things
innumerable, Psalm. 104.25, 26.
crawling bugs and baggage vermin, vain thoughts, which are very sins, Ier.
4.14. carnal intentions, which this spiritual Law takes hold of, and
interprets for executions. As in Balac, who is said to arise and fight with
Israel, Sed fieri dicitur, quod tenta^tur, aut intenditur, Ribera in Amos 9.5.
Josh. 24.9. which yet he did not, because he durst not, but his will was good
to it, therefore he did it. And the Heathens saw something of this by the dim
light of Nature, as appears by him who judged that Antiochus therefore died
loathsomely, Incesta est, and sine stupro quae stuprum cupit, Senec: in decla.
Quae quia non licuit, non sacit, illa facit, Ovid.
because that he had a good will to burn Diana's temple. But behold the Word
of God goes further; for it marks and meets with a nocturnall pollution, an
obscene dream, yea an involuntary evil motion, or ere it come to consent,
though it only pass through the soul, as a post by the door, or as a flash of
lightning in the air, or as a Dive-dapper on the water: Though it be but as a
dream only, not as Pharaohs dream, which he could remember in the morning, but
as Nebuchadnezzars dream, which he had utterly forgot. Well therefore might
our Apostle proceed and say, Neither is there any creature (no not of the
heart) that is not manifest in its sight, that is, in the sight of this divine
Word; (for so I would read the text.) Thoughts are infinite, nimble, quick and
in a secret place; yet are all these things (...) naked for the outside, and
for the inside, (...).
dissected, quartered, and as it were cleft thorough the backbone (as the word
there signifies,) before the eyes of it, wherewith we have to deal. It is
recorded of Moses, that being sent on his foster-fathers quarrel against the
King of Ethiopia, (whose daughter he afterward married, and was therewith
upbraided by his brother and sister) to the end that he might make a speedy
onset, he took his journey through the wilderness, wherein were flying
Serpents very deadly; which to expel he trained certain birds, in whose
nature he discerned an antipathy with those serpents, Huet of Constable. ex Iosepho.
whereby he scoured the coast, and so suddenly surprised the City. Such
cockatrice eggs are hatch t in our hearts, whence issue a brood of deadly
stinging lusts: which to dispell, we have Gods holy Word to clear the passage
that the King of glory, with the troops of his royal graces, may enter the
fort of our souls. John 15.3.
Now are ye clean by the word that I have spoken unto you, says our Savior
to his Disciples; and to his Father in their behalf, Sanctify them by thy
truth, thy Word is truth. John 17.17. Psalm. 19.8.
The fear, that is the Word of the Lord is clean, and makes all clean within
and without, being as a dagger in the throat of wickedness, to let out the
life-bloud thereof. Psalm. 119.11.
Thy Word have I hid in my heart, as an amulet, that I might not offend against
thee. It drives out corruption, as the East wind did the locusts of Egypt into
the sea, and dispossesseth that unclean spirit that had entrenched himself in
the heart, setting up there his se^nces, (...). 2 Cor. 10.3. (...). 1 Pet.
2.11. Luke 10.18. Math. 12.43.
and billeting his soldiers there, to fight against the Soul. It makes him
fall as lightning from heaven, as our Savior says, from the heaven of men's
hearts, to walk sad and solitary in dry places, seeking rest, (...).
but finding none. All places to him are dry and desert (though otherwise never
so pleasant and populous) where he may not be suffered, by this mighty Word
there preached, to rest and roost in the hearts of the inhabitants: neither
takes this foul feind any more content to be there, than men do to walk in a
wast and waterlesse wilderness. The legion therefore besought him much, Mar.
5.10.
that though he had cast them out of the man; yet he would not cast them out
of that coast: for that were as bad as to command them to go into the deep,
Luke 8.31.
that is to confine them to hell (since it is their heaven to do hurt) but
suffer them to be thereabouts, because the knowledge they had got of that
country men, would be a more compendious way and course to destroy them, than
if they should be forced to go further, where they had no such intimate
acquaintance. H ram denast^cam arae dom^^scae praeferunt. Petrus Blesens.
Immundus di^itur. 1 Affectione, quia diligit immunda. 2 Persuasione, quia
suadet immunda. 3 Habitatione, inhabitat cord^ immunda, Iaco. de Vorag.
Now therefore if among profane Gergesites (that prefer a swinesty before a
sanctuary) they find a house (that is, a heart) empty, (to wit of Gods holy
Word, that should have been laid up therein as a sovereign preservative) and
swept (of graces, but) garnished (with vice) for he is a foul spirit, and
solaceth himself in spiritual sluttishnesse) thither he resorts, and there he
resides, holding the castle in peace, saving that sometimes the Word coming in
the power of it, disquiets him, gashing and goring the evil conscience, with
unquestionable conviction and horror: The law was given on mount Sinai that
gendreth to bondage, a place full of bushes and briars (whence also it has its
denomination) and not unfitly, because like thorns, it pricketh and vexes the
spirits of evill-doers, with a spirit of bondage. It was also given in fire,
and that fire is still in it, and will never out. Hence those terrors which it
eft-soones flasheth in the faces, and startleth the souls of such, as are not
altogether (...) arrived at that dead and dedolent disposition, Ephesians. 4.19.
that those living Oracles ( Act. 7.38.) cannot possibly pierce them. If the
conscience be not utterly cauterized, (...) Romans 8. (...). 2 Timothy 1.7.
the Law will convince the judgment (it is the Gospel only that can convince
the affections) and engender in it a spirit of bondage and fear. See this in
Herod, who heard John, and did many things, or as other coppies read that
text, he doubted much, (...)
was exceedingly amused, amazed, knew not what to think, or which way to look,
when the word came so close, and did eat upon his conscience as a moth, Psalm.
39.11. This set him at a stand, and stickled sorely with him. Now if after
conviction men run away with the bit in their mouths; as Herod did, and will on
in sin whatever come of it; their sin abides, John 9.41.
as our Savior said to the Pharisees; and conscience, though now silenced,
will have a time to tell them their own. It was not long ere Herod saw John
Baptists head, which he had lately cut off, in our Saviors fame, as
Theodoricus that tyrant did the head of Symmachus, whom he had slain, in the
mouth of the fish that was set before him, Math. 14.1. At that time Herod heard
of the fame of Jesus, (...)
and he said to his boys. This is John Baptist, he is risen from the dead.
The Jews of that time, (and he it seems for company) had embraced that dotage
of the Pythagoreans touching the transmigration of souls out of one body into
another. (...).
Therefore John, says he, is surely revived in Jesus. This might be his
opinion then, and more that he tells the trouble of his mind to his servants for
a secret, hoping, belike, the world should be nere the wiser. But it fell out,
we see, somewhat otherwise; for that which he spoke then in secret, is now
preached on the housetop. This was but one of the Devils anodynes, and would
not do the deed. He betakes him therefore to another course, and will be a
Sadducee another while: a sect that denied the Resurrection of the body, and
the immortality of the soul; that so he might blunt the sting of his awakened
conscience, that haunted him like a fury, for the slaughter of the innocent
Baptist. Thus much may be gathered out of Matthew. 16.6. compared with Mark,
8.15. Haec est enin^ vis Verbi Dei, says Beza on that text. This is the mighty
work of the Word on an exulcerate conscience. God smites the earth, that is,
earthly-minded men, that are no better than earth, earth, earth, when they
hear the Word of the Lord; with the rod of his month, Is. 11.4.
and with the breath of his lips does he slay the wicked. Those pharisees,
Math. 22.15.
for instance, that were toties puncti and repuncti, (...).
minime tamen ad resipiscentiam compuncti, as one speaks; for why? they had
made void the counsel of God, when they heard our Savior refusing to be
reformed, hating to be healed; whereas diverse of the common sort, who had by
their instigation crucified the Lord of glory, when the Word came close, and
found them out in their sins, were pricked at heart, (...). Act 2.37. Prove.
23.32.
thy felt their sins as so many stings of an adder, pricks of a dagger, yea as
so many bearded arrows in their flesh, (...);
and were added to the Church. To the former, 2 Cor. 12.7.
Gods Word was a savor of death to death the axe thereof laid to the root of
their rotten consciences, out them down as fuel to hel-fire. To the latter,
Math. 3.10. 2 Cor. 2.16.
it became a savor of life unto life, a seed of immortality, an effectual
instrument, not of conviction only, but of conversion also. Iam. 4, 5, 6.
For think ye (says S. James) that the Scripture says in vain, The spirit
that is in you, etc. does it show you your natural corruption, and no more?
Not so: for it says not only, that is, convinces, but it gives more grace,
it converteth also. It brings not only to the birth, as Ephraim that foolish
child, Hos.
but carries the soul thorough the narrow womb of repentance into the light
of eternal life. And this is the powerful and proper effect of the good Word
of Gods grace, ever good to them that are good, Mic. 2.7. or that but wish to
be good, Psalm 119.4, 5, 6. It is indeed like the water of jealousy, Number.
5.27, 28. For when it is received into a good and honest heart, it cleares it
and makes it fruitful: as when into a corrupt heart, it rottes it and makes it
worse. Abigails speech smote Nabal into a qualme that caused his death, when
the same tongue blessed David and drew blessing from him. Rahab was melted with
that message wherewith the King of Jericho was hardened. Mannah to the rebels
turned into putrefaction and stank. Moses his rod while he held it in his
hand, budded and brought forth fresh almonds; the same rod when he cast it from
him, turned into a Serpent. The living words of dying Prophets took hold of
those refractaries in Zachary, Zach. 1.6.
and slew them. Those two witnesses are by some interpreted to be the two
Testaments, the Old and the New. Gods giving power unto them, is the
authorizing of them. They are clothed in sackcloth, that is disguised and
obscured, hidden from the vulgar, they spet fire, as it were, and plague their
enemies as the Arc did the Ekronites. But who are they? Saint Austin answers:
Ad^ersarius est nobis quamdiu sumus and ipsi nobis: quamdin tu tibi inin i^ us
et inimicum habebis sermenem Dei, Aug.
The Word of God is adversary to none, but such as are adversaries to
themselves, and such as shall (in that name) have him for their utter enemy at
length, who shall come in flaming fire rendering vengeance to all that know not
God, 1 Thessalonians. 1.8. Math. 11.20.
and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Then shall he shake such
off, as dust off his feet, when they come to him for salvation, and worthily;
for they have prejudged themselves already unworthy of eternal life, Acts
13.46.
because they have put away from them the Word of lift, which they ought to
have pulled to them, rather with both hands earnestly, as David did; Psalm. 119
48.
and is therefore now triumphing in heaven, as one that did not the will only,
but the Wills of God: Acts 17.^2.
when others chose rather to do not the will, but wills of the flesh, (...)
Ephesians 2.2.
and do therefore of the flesh reap corruption, Gal. 6.8. Surely as the rain
comes down, and the snow from Heaven, and returns not thither, but waters
the earth, and makes it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the
sower, and bread to the eater: So shall my Word be that goes forth out of my
mouth: it shall not return unto me void: but it shall accomplish that which I
please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereunto I sent it, Esaias 55.10, 11
says the Lord.

Section 4.
FOurthly, are the Scriptures of God? This may further inform us of their
perfection and sufficiency to our salvation, as proceeding from God
All-sufficient, from whom comes every good gift and perfect giving. All
Scripture as it is given by divine inspiration, so is it profitable to all
purposes, to teach truth, convince error, correct vice, direct to virtue,
comfort under the cross, that the man of God (Minister or other) may be
perfect and entire, wanting nothing. The Law of the Lord is perfect, says
David: 2 Timothy 3.16. Iam. 1.4. Psalm. 19.7.
the whole book of God is perfect, with an essential perfection, and every
part thereof with an integral perfection. This cannot be said of the law of
nature or book of the creature, as now since the fall. The heave^s indeed
declare the glory of God, etc. as real postilles of the Divinity, and that
which may be known of God is manifest in them as in a mirror or theater, Romans
1.19. (...).
even his eternal power and Godhead. Cusanus could say, that the World was
Deus explicatus, God unfolded, of the divine nature, as it were, coppied out,
and exemplified at large. But the knowledge hence gotten is slender, and
unsufficient to salvation. Our eyes, alas, are now so dazeled, that the
creatures are unto us as a clasped book, (...). Acts 17.27.
or as a thing written in ciphers. The Philosophers could only grope after God
by the dim light of Nature, but in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom
knew not God, 1 Cor. 1.21. but did service to them that by nature are no gods:
Gal. 4.8. Vtinam tam facile veram religlonem invenire possim quam fulsam
convincere, de not. deor.
Tullyes wish was, that he could as easily discern the true God, as disprove
the false. But that he might sooner wish than attain, without the help of holy
Scriptures. For as the Sun is not seen but by the light of the Sun; so neither
is God known but by the Word of God. And as the Sun cannot be seen in rota, (as
the Schools speak) in the circle wherein it runs, but the beams of it only,
nor those neither but as they are made visible by reflection: So neither can
we see God in his Essence; in his Word we may: his train at least with Esaias,
his back-parts with Moses; we can see no more and live, we need see no more
that we may live. Now if we knock at the creatures door for this knowledge,
the depth must say, Job 28.14.
It is not in me, and the sea, It is not with me, etc. If they say otherwise,
they lie as fast as Rabshakeh did for his master. Quia impossible erat sine
Deo discere Deum, per verbum suum docet hom nes scire Deum. Sic Hilarious, Hoc
solum de Deo been credi in elligamus, ad quod dese crededam ipse sibi restis
and ^^ hor extitit.
For no creature has seen God at any time but the Son, and he to whom the
Son reveals him, says our Savior. And because it was impossible to know God
without God, he therefore brings men by his Word to the knowledge of himself,
whom to know is life eternal, says Irenaeus. Some few blind Notions, I deny
not, are yet left in corrupt Nature, and to be found still in some few that
have not already torn them out, that they may sin without control, or at
least lock them up in restraint; as the Philosophers that held the truth
prisoner in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. But these common principles are now,
alas, so depraved, defaced, and, as it were, covered over with cobweb, and
other dross, (like the carved stones in the rubbish of a ruined Palace) as
that they serve, but to render us inexcusable. Especially since in men of
corrupt minds, Gods image is wholly wiped out, and those remnants or footsteps
thereof utterly extinct. When wine is powered out of a cup, the sides are yet
moist, but when it is rinsed and wiped, there remains not the least taste or
tincture thereof: Even so that glimmering of Divine light left in the natural
man is so put out by obstinacy in an evil course, that not the least spark
thereof appears. (...) 1 Cor. 2.14.
He that is no more than a mere animal, that has no more than pure nature in
him, perceives not the things of God, as having neither sight nor light, organ
nor object illuminated: as the true Christian, who has his eyes in his head,
Eccles. 2.14. and God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness shining
upon his heart, 2 Cor. 4.6.
in the face of Jesus Christ. The Chinese use to say of themselves, Descript.
of the World: cap. of China and Cathaia.
that all other Nations of the World see but with one eye, they only with two.
Sure it is that natural men have but one eye, wherewith some thing they may
see, that transcends not the light of reason. But for spiritual things they
are acute obtusi, Lusciosi siquando oculorum aciem in^endunt minus vident, Lud.
Viv.
more blind than beetles. To the Law therefore and to the Testimonies, for if
any speak not according to these it is because there is no light in them. The
Law is a light, Lex, Lux. Prove. 6 23. Psalm. 119. 2 Pet. 1.
says Solomon, a lamp and lantern, says David, a light shining in a dark
place, says Peter. And the Grace of God (that is, the doctrine of Gods grace
the Gospel) has appeared, (...). Tit. 2.11, 12.
as a Beacon on an hill, or as the Sun in heaven, teaching us, the whole and
sum of a Christians duty; viz. that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts,
saying peremptory nay to all such importunate suitors, we should live soberly,
Haec tria perpetu^ med tare adverbia Pauli. Haec tria sint vitae regula sancta
tuae.
righteously, and godly in this present evil world, Lo, here is our task in
three words, such as the Scripture only can teach, and give us to perform.
Diodorus Siculus tells us, that among the Egyptians, when any good man dyed, his
holiness, righteousness and soberness were wont to be commemorated and
commended by his surviving friends. (...).
But these, alas, were but seeming virtues in those poor Ethnicks, or rather
shining sins, beautiful abominations, Heb 9.14.
dead works, as our Apostle calls them, because they proceeded not from a
principle of life, Ephesians. 4.18.
that life of God, or godly life, to the which they were mere strangers
through the ignorance that was in them of Gods holy Word, the rule of
righteousness. Hence it was, that all they did must needs be defective and
insincere, and that not only quoad fontem, (as I have said) but quoad fimm
too. For the utmost end they aimed at in all they did, was to be seen and to be
talked of. All was theatricall, histrionicall, hypocritical. And so, they
might excel (to see to) those that are truly sanctified, in moral virtues,
and outward performances, as Actors upon a Stage may (for the outward
resemblance) go beyond them whom they personate, and whose acts they represent:
witness those hypocrites in Esaias, the Pharisees in the Gospel, Esaias 58. Math. 6.
and that proud Patriarch that first affected the name of Universal Bishop,
who was for his frequent fasting surnamed Nesteutes, Johannes ille, qui
Gregorii Magni tempore, nomen Vniversalis Episcopi affectabat, a jejuniis
Nesteutae nomen obtinuit, Vssierus. Mercedem suam non Dei, Hiero.
or the Faster. But this was neither of God, nor for God, and therefore they
have their reward; such as it is, their own reward, not Gods, says Hierom,
they have what they look for. Egregiam vero laudem, a poor reward God knows,
but it is that they have chosen. How much better David, In keeping thy Law,
says he, there is great reward, Psalm. 19.11. After he had once well waighed
this insufficiency of that bigger book of the Creature (whereof there are three
large leaves only, Heaven, Earth, Sea, as Clemens Alex. speaks, and three
dark lessons only, as Hugo has it, Hugo de Sancto Vict. lib. 2: de arca. cap.
3.
Accipe, Read, Fuge; Receive Mercy, Return Duty, Hy Punishment: but how to do
any of these, it shows not) the Prophet wisely turns him to that lesser, but
better book of the Scripture; which after he had highly commended for perfect
and right, and pure and sure, and clean and true, etc. he subjoynes (for his
own and others encouragement) that for elder people that are all for profit,
Gods Word is more to be desired than gold; and for the younger sort that are
all for pleasure, it is sweeter than live-hony, dropping from the comb. If any
find it otherwise, its because their mouths are either out of taste, or fore.
(...). Alex. Aphrodys. Problem. Mel vulnera purgal, ulcera mordel.
Honey causes pain to exulcerate parts, though of it self it be sweet and
medicinal. Hence children will not suffer it to come near their cankered
lips, which when they are well, they are well apaid of. So is it here: Oh, how
sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea sweeter than honey to my mouth. David
found fatness and sweetness in Gods house, a feast of fat things full of
marrow, of wines on the lees well refined and purified. Antichrist, Esaias 26.
I confess, has turned, what in him lies, these wines into water, and this
water into wormwood. He has fed Gods people with wormwood, and given them
water of gall to drink: Ier. 9.15. Rev. 8.11.
so that not a few have dyed of the waters, because they were made bitter, ever
since the falling star, (that notable Apostate) has fallen upon the fountains
of Israel, the holy Scriptures, which they have disparaged and corrupted; yea
ever since that third Angel powered forth his vial on the Sea; that is, say
some, Ibid. Psalm. 68.26.
upon the Council of Trent, it is become as the blood of a dead man, so that
every living soul dyed in that Sea. Look how the fish dyed in Nilus, Exodus
7.21.
and the river stank when it was turned into blood, so that the people could
not drink of it: So has it fared with that Sea of Rome, since they have
attempted to deprave and debase the Scriptures by that heathnish decree of
Trent: wherein they have every way equalled, (if not preferred) the Apocryphal
books to the Canonicals, their Vulgar Translation to the Originals, their
unwritten Verities to the written Word, and their traditions to the Scriptures.
Not content with one Transubstantiation, (which yet is monstrous) they have
endeavored to bring in another, and worse: which is to change Articles of
Faith into Fables; and again, Fables into Articles of Faith. For the
Scriptures, says Eckius, Hosius, So said the Lieutenant of Lions concerning S.
Paul's Epistles, Fox fol. 826.
and Hermannus Coloniensis, as touching the sense of them, are no more to be
regarded than the fables of Esop, without the authority of the Church: The holy
Ghost himself, says one, is not to be heard, (according to their Tenet)
albeit he produce a testimony out of the Scripture, D. Prideaux lect. de
Testibus.
unless he can withal produce a testimonial from the purple whore. The word
written, say they, Coster. Enchiri. page 44.
is a deaf and dumb Judge, a black gospel, Colloq. Wormac. Anno 57.
inkhorne divinity, a dead letter, Lesbian rule, nose of wax, matter of strife,
Hosius, Tom. 1 op. adv. Brentii Proleg. page 530 Pigg. l. 1. Hier. Eccles. c.
2. page 8
seed-plot of controversies, and book of heretics. Anno Domini 1523. It was
objected by Doctor Bennet Chancellor of London, against one Richard Butler,
that diverse times you erroneously and damnably read in a great book of heresy,
certain chapters of the Evangelists in English, Fox Martyrolog. fol. 735.
containing in them diverse erroneous and damnable opinions, and conclusions of
heresy. Thus have the Heathens changed the truth of God into a lie: Romans 1.
Articles of Faith into fables, or worse; and so they have also fables into
Articles of Faith. Witness those twelve new-coyned articles, gathered by the
authority of Pope Pius the fourth, Ex Sulla jurameuti de professione fidei in
Onuphrio.
Anno 1564. out of the Council of Trent, and added to the Nicene Creed, to be
received with oath, See these 12 Art. in the Ep. dedic. to B. Jewels works.
as the true Catholic faith, to be believed by as many as shall be saved.
Tindal reasoning with a great Doctor of those times, drove him to that issue,
that he burst forth into these words; we were better be without Gods Laws,
than the Popes. Fox Martyrol. fol. 982.
The Popes interpretation, says Hosius, what ever it be, yea though it seem
never so much to oppugn the Scriptures, yet is it the very word of God. And
again, That which the Church teaches is the express word of God, Hosius de
expresso Dei verbo. page 99.
says he, as that which is taught against the sense and consent of the Church
(of Rome) is the express word of the Devil. Thus for their Church, with its
pretended Head: but what for every hedge priest? Cardinal Tolet says, Tolet.
cas. consc. lib. 4. cap. 3.
The people may merit at Gods hands, in believing an heresy if their teachers
propound it, for their obedience is meritorious. And Stapleton, They must not
regard Quid, but Quis, says he, not what is the matter, but who is the man
that delivers it. If a Priest therefore teach any thing, Cade of the Church p.
68.
be it true, be it false, take it as Gods Oracle. Thus he. A little before
Luther stirred, their Sermons were ordinarily stuffed out with Legendary lies,
and old-wives fables, as how Vespasian was freed from Waspes by Veronica's
napkin, Trajan fetch out of hell by P. Gregory's prayers, Sybylles conference
with Augustus, Anno Domini. 1517.
etc. Tecelius persuaded the common people in Germany, that as soon as ever
their ten shillings (that was the price of an Indulgence) tinged in the basin,
any friend they would name, should be immediately delivered out of Purgatory,
etiamsi per impossible, Matrem Deivitiasset. In a word, all places were so
full fraught with superstition, that the Abbot of Neuhuse in Germany doubted
not to say, that if that unlucky Luther had not started up, Scultet Annal. Tom.
1. page 13 ex Chytraei Chron.
we might easily have persuaded the people to have eaten hay and stabble. And
indeed they fed them with no better, as they basely gloss upon that text in
Job; The Oxen, that is the Priests, were plowing; and the Asses, Tu et Asinus
unum estote, Disci. de temp ser. 121.
that is, the People, were feeding by them feeding hungerly upon thistles, and
husks, and fainting at the head of every street. The children asked bread but
no man brake it unto them, Lam. 4.4. for bread, they had stones; for fishes,
scorpions. Acts and Monuments, fol. 1109. Thyrraeus de Demon. cap. 21.
What a Devil made the to meddle with the Scriptures? said Steven Gardner to
Marbeck: and of another they tell us, that by reading the Bible, he became
possessed with a Devil. A very strange business Athanasius says, that evil
spirits are expelled and driven away by that 68. Psalm. Exurgat Dominus, etc.
But this is true of the whole book of God, one part as well as another. Father
Abraham sends the rich man's brethren to Moses, and the Prophets, for defense
against the Devil: and our blessed Savior when he beat the Devil on his own
dunghill, as it were, made the Word his only weapon, choosing out of that one
book of Deuteronomy, and almost out of one chapter thereof, as out of a
preciously purling current, all those stones wherewith he prostrated the
Goliath of hell. Now if there be so much sufficiency in one book, in one
chapter, what may we conceive of the whole?

But it will, happily, be here objected: If Moses his writings were so full,

I answer: Moses, yea that one book of Genesis was sufficient to the salvation
of such as then lived. The Prophets were added for explanation of the Law: the
New Testament for clearing and applying them both. Those things that were there
more darkly delivered, are here more plainly and plentifully set forth, Hab.
2.2.
so that a man may even run and read them. Now we have a more clear and
perfect direction than they had under the Law. Thence their light is compared
to the light of a candle that shines in a dark place, ours to the daylight, 2
Pet. 1.19. 2 Cor. 3.18.
Now we all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same image from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord.

But how is it then that the Scriptures are yet still so obscure and difficult,

Sublime they are, the Father of lights, and are lighted up to be our candle
in this world, says S. Austin, Tract. 35. in Johan. (...). protreptic. p. 25.
(...), Hom. 3. de Laza.
that we walk not in darkness: a common light that shines to all, says
Clemens Alexandrinus, so that every man of himself by reading them may learn
the things therein delivered, says Chrysostom, This is to be understood of
the doctrinall foundation of Faith and Manners: in setting down whereof, the
Scripture is most plain and easy. Bellarmine himself is forced to say, De
verbo Dei, lib. 1. cap. 2.
Scripturis nihil notius, Nothing is more manifest than the Scriptures. Esaias
8.1. Inclinavit Scripturas Deus ad insantium and tactentium capacitatem, In
Psalm. 8.
Write, says God, in the roll with a man's pen, that is, clearly, that the
simplest may conceive so much as concerns him to Salvation, God has fitted
the Scriptures, says Austin, to the capacity of the meanest. So that if our
Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that perish. If men understand it not, the
veil is not drawn over it, but over their hearts, 2 Cor. 3.15. which the Lord
does more and more remove, dispell and disperse the darkness of the minds of
his elect by his holy Spirit. The book was open in the Angels hand, Rev. 10.8.
It had been shut and sealed, but S. John had got it open by his prayers and
tears, and by his more diligent search, and seeking to the Angel to instruct
him. Gods Spirit in his servants is heroic, they are whetted on by difficulty
to a more diligent enquiry, as Sampson bound with new ropes, went out and shook
himself. Prove. 26.13.
A Lion in the way may fright a sluggard, not a Sampson, or an Alexander, who
meeting with a hard encounter, said; Iam par periculum animo Alexandri.
This is an enterprise worthy of great Alexander. It cannot be denied, but that
the Scripture in many places is dark and difficult: and the penmen thereof as
in some things like those Angels in Jacobs vision, they descend to the
^^^plicity of the m^^^est, so in other things they transcend the sublimity of
the learnedest. Mare est Scriptura divina, habens inse sensus profundos Ambros.
Ep. 44. agnus peditet and elephantus natet, Ep. ad Leand.
The Scripture is a great Sea, says Ambrose, the Lamb may wade, the Elephant
may swim in it, says Gregory. And there is such a depth therein, says Austin,
that a man may daily profit in the knowledge thereof, Si eas sotas maximo otio,
summo studio, meliore ingenio conarer addiscere, Epist. 3. ad Volusian.
though he studied nothing else all the days of his life, yea, as long as the
days of heaven shall last, without any intermission or remission of his utmost
endeavor. And in another place; Not only, says that Father, in innumerable
other things am I guilty of much ignorance, Multo plura nescio quam scio,
Epist. 119. c. 21 Job 26.14.
but in the Scriptures also (my profession and chief study) there are many
more things that I know not than that I know. How little a thing does man
understand of God, says he in Job, the greatest part of our knowledge is but
the least part of our ignorance. Nondum hoc scio quod nihil scio.
This only I know, said the wisest of the Philosophers, that I know nothing.
Another comes after him, and adds neither know I yet so much as that, that I
know nothing. Natures best secretaries cannot with all their skill give us a
convincing reason of the perennity of Rivers, of the ebbing and flowing of the
Sea, of the colors of the Rayne-bow, of the heat in the stomach, that
consumes all other things, and yet not the parts about it. Pythagoras assigns
no other cause of earthquakes, Conventus mortuorum, Aelian. lib. 4. ridicule.
than the meeting together of those that are dead. Pliny wonders at the Gnat so
small a creature, and yet making so great a buzze. Not. hist. lib. 11 cap. 9.
He also mentions one that spent threescore and eight years in searching out
the nature of the Be, and yet fell short of his desire. (...): 2 Pet. 1.9.
Now if in finding out Natures secrets, the accutest are so sand-blind and
cannot see far off; what marvel is it, if (further than we are all taught of
God) we see no farther into the sense of the Scriptures? Legumobscuritates non
assignemus culpae scribentium, sed inscitiae non assequentium, Sex: Cecil. apud
Gell.
If refusing to plow with his heyfer, we understand not his riddles? Riddles
they are, not in themselves, but to our shallowness. The obscurities of the
Law, says that Civilian, are not to be imputed to the fault of the writers,
but to the ignorance of the Readers. How much more is this true of Gods Law? We
many times unskilfully lay the blame where we should not: as she in the holy
History, that laid the death of her child to the presence of the good Prophet:
Or rather as she in Seneca, Fatua subito videre desiit and nescit essecoe came,
ait domum esse tenebrosa^, Senec. Epist. 50.
that bad open the windows (at noone day) when her self was smitten with a
sudden blindness. What we cannot conceive, we should admire, and say of the
Bible, as Socrates of a worse book; That I understand is good, so I believe is
that I understand not. Plain places are for our nourishment, hard places for
our exercise: or these are to be masticated as meat for men, those to be drunk
as milk for babes: by the latter, out hunger is staid; by the former, our
loathings. Some things in Gods Word are folded up in obscurity, to tame the
pride of our natures, and to sharpen the edge of our industry, in searching the
Scriptures, and seeking out the sense, by comparing one place with another.
This those holy Levites, Neh. 8.8. red and gave the meaning of the Scripture,
by the Scripture; as Junius renders it. Thus also S. Paul is said to have
confuted the Jews, (...) Acts 9.22.
by laying one Scripture to another. A Metaphore, says Beza, from
hand-crafts-men; that being to frame and fit one part of their work to another,
compare piece with piece, that all may be brought to a suitablenes and
uniformity. The Lapidary brightens his hard diamond with the dust shaved from
it self; so must we clear hard Scriptures by parallel Texts, which, like
glasses, set one against another, cast a mutual light. Thus (for a taste,)
Luke 18.19. compared with John 3.19. Ephesians. 4.9. with Psalm. 139.15. Math.
16.19. with John 20.22, 23. 1. Pet. 4.8. with Prove. 10.12. And this is so
clear a truth, In Apocalips. Not. 4. cap. 14.
and beyond all exception, that Ludovicus Alcasar; a Spanish Interpreter, is
forced to confess, that in S. Peter's Epistles are many difficulties, that
ought to be explained out of the Epistle of Saint Jude. Note this against
other Popish Doctors, who deny that Scripture is to be interpreted by
Scripture, but loft to the judgment of the Church. Whereas the Lord, when he
dwelt between the Cherubims, he set the candlestick on his right hand, and the
table with shewbread on his left, Weemses exercitat.
to teach us, says one, that the Scriptures are to be preferred still to the
Church; their excellency and authority being above all both men and Angels,
Gal. 1.8. It was the Spirit of the Lord, and none other, that anointed and
appointed Jesus, the Mediator of the new Testament, to preach the Gospel, Luke
4.18. out of Esaias 61.1. Our Saviors text at Nazareth. Now, that the preaching
of the Gospel is the immediate effect of the holy Ghost, does greatly serve to
set forth the incomparable excellency, authority, certainty and sufficiency of
the Gospel. Had it proceeded from the incorrupt and unerring humane nature of
Christ only, this had been a high commendation; how much more now that it comes
from it, no otherwise than it was dictated thereunto by the holy Ghost. Had
Adam continued in his integrity, yet had he been no fit man to give divine
Laws to the Church, because a man. Nay, that the very Angels were not meet for
such a business, appears, in that they stand amazed at the mystery of
Christ, and look intently into it, wondering, 1 Pet. 1.12.
as the Cherubims in the Law did into the propitiatory. Christ the Lawgiver
was for wisdom able, and for love to his people, willing to set them down a
plain and perfect direction. And albeit he obscure himself in some passages,
and make darkness his pavilions, yet this is but among other reasons, to make
us make higher account of those men of God the Ministers, whose office is to
expound and apply the holy Scripture, 1 Timothy 3. ult.
whereby they themselves are perfected thoroughly furnished unto all good
works: it self must therefore needs be much more perfect.

Sect. 5.
FIfthly, are the holy Scriptures of God? this may fitly inform us of their
verity and integrity, since the Author of them is Amen, the faithful, Rev 3.14.
1 ^et. 2.22.
and true witness, as he styles himself, neither ever was the least guile
found in his mouth. Hence we may and must have a full assurance both of
understanding, Coloss. 2.2. and also of assent, Luke. 1.1. upon Gods bare Word
and sole authority, without doubting or reasoning against the same: because he
will not suffer his faithfulness to fail, Psalm. 89 33.
nor alter the thing that is gone out of his mouth; God is All-sufficient, most
perfect, As he is (...): so he is (...).
absolute, and independent, and as none can contribute to his being, so neither
to his truth; If he have said a thing, it is proof sufficient, it is surety and
security enough. For this is a principle grounded upon the light of Nature: let
a man but grant a God, and he must needs grant his authority to be authentike,
and that absolute credence is to be yielded unto him. Hence those Heathen
Lawgivers would needs seem to derive their laws from some Deity, from such a
god or goddess, as the story reports of Numa, Lycargus, Mahomet, etc. so the
false Prophets and Impostors, when once they could make show of some relation
to God, and entitle their fancies and fopperies to him, it went for current
that they uttered. For, God is true and every man a liar. Romans 3.4.
Upon this ground, Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for
righteousness, Romans 4.3. And he that thus believes not God, 1 Ioh. 5.10.
has made him a liar, because he believes not the record that God gave of
his Son: since these things were purposely written, that men might believe, Ioh.
20.31.
and that believing, they might have life through his Name. Hence that of S.
Peter, John 6.69.
we believe and have known that thou art that Christ: And that of S. Paul, we
believe and know the truth: 1 Timothy 4.3.
Believe and know? A man would think this were a preposterous course. In other
sciences we first know and then believe, but here it is otherwise. We must first
beleev the truth and integrity of the Scriptures, because they are of God, and
then we shall know whether these things are of God or not. And why should this
seem so unreasonable to any man? Mahomets dictates may not be disputed, on
pain of death. The Pope though he draw thousands to ^ell with him, yet no man
must dare say so much as what do thou? The Friars, though their Governors
command them a voyage to China or Peru, Sands his Survey of West. p. 18
without dispute or delay, they are presently to set forward. Sicum Angelo
iniissescolloqutii, avocame Superiore actutu nest obtemperandum. Si B^ata Virgo
sua praesentia freter. ulum dignaretur, interpellante vel suo inseriore, non
debut manner. D. Pride. in Eudaemond Ioh. ex Epist. ad fratres in Lusitan.
To argue or debate on their Superiors Mandats were high presumption, to
search their reasons, proud curiosity, to detract or disobey them, breach of
vow equal to sacrilege. Such authority do these men usurp, such absolute and
blind obedience do they exact of their Vassals, and votaries. Oh give God the
glory of believing and obeying him simply and only because he speaks it, Romans
4.20. Deo agnito and collaudato, ut Luc. 17.18.
and for his bare words sake. This is to glorify God indeed, as Abraham did
being strong in faith and not doubting of the promise. This is to set to our
seal, that God is true; This is to give him a testimonial, as it were, Joh.
3.33. (such as is that, Deuteronomy. 32.4. A God of truth and without iniquity, just
and righteous is he) than the which I know not what greater honor can be done
the Creator by the creature, or befall the creature from the Creator. Contrary
to Iam. 3.1. Math. 23.8.
Those Masters of opinions (as Magistri nostri Parisienses, for so they will
needs be called) are to be exploded, that seek to obtrude upon Gods
inheritance their conceits and placits, the brood of their own brain without
sound proof of Scripture. We should sooner believe even a layman, says
honest Panormitan, affirming any thing according to Gods word, than a full
Council determining besides or against the word. Let us stand, says S. Basil,
Stemus arbitratui inspiratae a Deo Scripturae, and apud quos inveniuntur
dogmata divinis oraculis consim^, illis veritas adjudicetur sententia. Epist.
8^. (...) Acts 17.11. Heb. 5.14. 1 John 4.1. 1 Thessalonians. 5.20. Math. 23.8.
to the arbitrament of holy Scripture, and let them be thought to have the
truth on their side, whose opinions are found agreeable thereunto. The Beraans
would not trust S. Paul's doctrine till they had tried it, and are therefore
commended as more generous (or better-descended) then those of Thessalonica
that did not so. Those dull Hebrews also are sharply censured by our author,
for not having (all that while) their senses better exercised to discern good
and evil, to try the spirits, to prove all things, and hold fast that which is
good. Christ is the only Rabbin, the irrefragable Doctor, Prove. 8.8. Rev. 5.5.
Math. 7.24.
the Ipse dixit, all the words of whose mouth are right words. He only was
found worthy to open the seals of the book, he taught with authority, and not
as the Scribes. All the confirmation he used against all their corrupt glosses
set upon the Law, was, Verily, verily, I say unto you: It has been thus and
this said of old, etc. But I say unto you Sometime (it is true) he prooved his
doctrine by Scripture, but this was either for the weakness of those whom he
instructed, according to that, these things speak I (not for any other need,
but) that ye may be saved, John 5.34. whence he called the Law, which he
alleged, their Law; John 8.17.
or else to confirm to them the authority of the Scriptures, and leave us an
example, John 13.15. For otherwise, if he but say to the righteous, It shall go
well with him, Isay 3.10, 11.
and but say to the wicked, the reward of his hands shall be given unto him, it
is suerty and security enough. H. b. 6.13.
As he swears by himself, because he has none greater by whom to swear, so
he affirms of himself, and needs not confirm it by any other: his naked
assertion is selfe-sufficient, his authority most authentike, his bare word to
be taken, without any further proof or pawn. Thus it ought to be with all;
but thus, alas, it is not, with most men now-adayes; who deal with the
faithful God, as they would do with some slippery persons or patching
companions, trust him no further than they see him, or than they can see cause
or reason to yield unto him, such of his precepts as cross their carnal
humors, and corrupt dispositions, they give no credit to, but are ready to rise
up against them, as a Horse against his rider, and to reply with Pharaoh, who
is the Lord, that I should obey him, 1 Samuel 25.11.
or with Nabal to David's servants, shall I take my bread, and my water, and my
flesh, and give it to men I know not? they will needs turn scholars to their
own reason, though they are sure to have a fool to their Master: they look
upon Gods Jordan, with Syrian eyes, as Naaman, John 3.
and after all ask with Nicodemus, How can these things be? The like we may
say for the menaces of Gods mouth, those terrible threats of the Law against
men's loose and lewd practices: these they think to put off, as those miscreants
in the Gospel, Luc. 20.16.
with a God forbid. They take up bucklers straight against the strokes of the
Spirits sword, and boldly bless themselves when God curses: Deuteronomy. 19.19.
which is that enraging sin that God cannot speak of with any patience: but
is therefore absolute in threatening, because he will be resolute in punishing.
And deal not many as ill with him in the matter of his promises? which, be
they never so faithful sayings, and therefore worthy of all acceptance, 1 Timothy 1.15.
yet either they be above ordinary belief (as Gods plenty in Samaria was to
that infidel Prince of Ahab) or, 2 King. 7. 2.
not presently performed as soon as ever the word is out of his mouth, they
distrustfully cry out, where is the promise of his coming? 2 Pet. 3.4. 2 King.
6.33.
What should J wait for the Lord any longer? Surely GOD has forsaken the
earth, forgotten to be merciful, etc.

But is it fit to prescribe to the Almighty? Psalm 78.41.
to limit the holy one of Israel? to send for God by a Post, and to set him a
time, or else he comes too late, as those Bethulians in Judith did? The Chinois
whip their Gods when they come not at a call, help not at a pinch. Deal not
these men as coursely with the Lord, upon the matter? whom they eftsoons
distrust, and basely withdraw from, (...) Steal from his Captain. Heb. 10.38.
by unbelief? which they would not do, had they but to deal with a
sufficient man, or a creditable person. Let but an Astronomer tell them, that
the Sun will be such a day in the Eclipse, they will believe him straight
(though they see no reason for it) because he is a learned man, and skillful
in his Art.

Now who, and where is he amongst us that can convince God of untruth, or his
word of falsehood? The promises are ancient, Tit. 1.2. so are the threats and
precepts: and hitherto they never faild, or fell to the ground (any tittle of
them) because they are the issue of a most faithful, and righteous will, void
of all insincerity or guile. God, the author of them, is eternal, and so one
and the same without alteration. The Eternity of Israel cannot lie. 1 Samuel
15.29.
He is also simple, without composition, and so without contrariety. Besides
he is unchangeable, and repents not. But whatsoever he speaks, When God is
said to repent, it is not a change of his will, but of his work: Mutatio
reinon De^ effectus, non affectus; facti, non consilij. Repentance with man is
the changing of his will: Repentance with God is the willing of a change. Gatak.
as he speaks from his heart, so being I am that I am, he will not be off
and on with us; but as Pilate said, What I have written, I have written: so
does God: what I have spoken, I have spoken, it shall surely stand. Heaven and
earth shall pass, but a jot of the Law shall in no wise pass. The grass
withers, the flower fades, but the word of the LORD stands firm for ever.
Neither may we once imagine that he can forget what he has spoken, as men
many times: for he has the Jdea of all things in himself, and every thought
is before his eyes long before. Psalm. 139.16.
Ahashuerosh may forget Mordecai; the Butler, Joseph; the preserved City,
Eccles 9 15.
the poor man that saved it. Heb. 6.10.
But God is not unrighteous to forget your labor of Love, or his promise of
retribution. Holy men (that have but a spark of Gods flame, Psalm. 15.4.
but a drop of his Ocean) will stand to their word, though it turn to their
loss. They are children that will not lie, Esaias 63 8. Zeph. 3.13.
neither is a deceitful tongue found in their mouth: how much less in his,
who can as soon dye as lie, 2 Timothy 2.13.
or deny himself? Certainly if he say us any good, we may safely seal to it,
seem it never so improbable, never so impossible: especially, since we have
for our security not his word only (which yet were sufficient) but his hand to
show for it, yea his covenant, his oath, Ephesians. 1.13. Romans 4.11.
his seal, both that privy seal of his spirit, and that broad Seal of
heaven in the Sacraments, not in wax white or red, but in the precious blood of
CHRIST who is white and ruddy as of a Lamb undefiled, Cant. 5.10. 1 Pet. 1.19.
and without spot. For which cause also the book (among other things) was
sprinkled with the blood of the sacrifice: that by all these immutable things,
Heb. 6.12.
in the which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have strong
confidence in him who is so true of his word, so firm in his promises, so sure
in his performances. An admirable pattern of faith in Gods faithfulness we
have in that Reverend old couple Abraham and Sarah. He having once heard from
heaven, (...) Rom 4.18, 19.
so shall thy seed be, staggerd not at the promise through unbeleefe: cared
neither for the dryness of his own body, nor the deadness of his Wives, but
looked with the one eye on Gods promise, and with the other on his power, and
was fully assured. Likewise also Sarah though at first she faultered, and
laughed at the unlikelihood; yet afterward (when she had better bethought her
self) she judged him faithful who had promised: and though past age, and
hope, yet by the force of her faith she conceived, and was delivered. Heb.
11.11.
Be not therefore unbeleeving, but believe: Ioh. 20. 27. 2 Chro. 20.20. Isay
7.9.
believe the Prophets, and ye shall prosper. If ye will not believe, surely
ye shall not be established. If I say the truth, why do ye not believe me?
Which of you convinces me of sin? John 8.46. Pro. 8.8.
Is there any thing perverse or froward in Wisdoms words?

It may seem so, Sic Doctor quidam Sorbouicus, and Grangius Jesuita apud
Sharpium in Symphonia prophet: and Apost. ep. dedic. Sic Rabuenabi refert
sapientes Hebraeos veteres cogitasse Ecclesiastem librum occultare, ^uod
repugnantia continerit, and alijs libris contraria. Pro. 8 9. Ora and Lahora.
James 1.5. Wilsons Theolog. Rules.
say some, and that one place contradicts another: and this they think to
prove out of Ezechiel 1. To this Wisdom answers in the very next words. They
are plain to him that understands, and right to them that find knowledge,
and that they may find, beg and dig for it, as the Wiseman bids, Prove.
2.3, 4, 5. Beg it, I say, of him that gives it richly, and hits no man in the
teeth. Thus did Daniel the Prophet, and John the Divine, and that Heroical
Luther. It was the saying of a godly Minister that he profited in the knowledge
of the Scriptures more by Prayer in a short space, then by study in a longer.
And we will give our selves (said the twelve) continually to prayer, and to the
ministry of the word, divide our whole time betwixt these two duties. Prove.
30.1, 2. Cathedram in coelo habet, qui corda docet. Aug.
Run therefore to Ithiel and Vcal, as Agur did, take unto you the words, and
say as He. Surely I am more brutish than any man, and have not the
understanding of a man in me. I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge
of the Holy: Psalm. 1 19. Platonici lumen mentium esse, dixerunt ad discendum
omnia eundem ipsum Deum a quo facta sunt omnia: Aug. de civ. Dei.
Teach me good judgment and knowledge: open thou mine eyes, that I may behold
the wonders of thy Law. The very Platonists could say that the light of the
mind, whereby we learn all things, is that very GOD that made all things.

But then, as you must beg, so dig too, says Solomon: dig for
understanding as for silver, search for her as for hid treasure. Do herein as
the Wise Merchant or Metallary, who finding a rich Mine of gold or silver, is
not contented with the first oar that offers it self to his view, but digs
deeper and deeper till he be owner of the whole Treasure. So neither should we
ever give over in this search after knowledge of the Scriptures, till we have
gotten all the degrees and dimensions of it here attaineable. Never had men
better means, or more encouragements hereunto then now. Good books at home,
good Sermons at Church, good society every where; and conference, I can tell
you, has incredible profit. But here is the misery of it, some men are so shy
and shame-fac't, others so stiff: and stout minded, that they will rather continue
ignorant, then reveal their ignorance, and seek information: Men will at no
hand be beholden this way one to another. But as in Alcibiades his army, all
would be leaders, Scholiast: in Thucydid.
none learners: so is it here. Most men love to bear fruit to themselves, with
Ephraim that empty Vine, Hosea 10.11.
and choose rather to remain needy then discover their poverty.

As for good books (another special help) never did any Age abound with them
more then this, nor any Country, then ours. Those English fugitives that have
written on the Popes side, have in show of wit and learning gone beyond not
only all former, but all other of this age: See Cade of the Church. Preface.
so that Bellarmine takes most out of them, in the points whereof they have
written, as Sanders, Allen, Stapleton, etc. These went out from us, because
they were not of us. But for those that are, and have written on the holy
Scriptures, how many hundreds are there extant in our our own language, of
whom it may be as truly said, as he did once of Calvin's institutions, Praeter
Aposlolicas, post Christi tempora, Chartas, Huic p^perere libro saecula nulla
parem. Paul Melissus. Buxtor fij iberiada, omnis miratur and mirabitur semper,
quoad stabit hic mundus, eruditio. Dieslius de ratione stud. I heol.
that since the Apostles times, scarce any book can equal it: or as another of
Buxtorfes Tiberius, all learning does and shall admire it, while the world
stands. This is certain, that what shows of uncertainty, and difference
soever may appear in holy writ, either in numbering of years, or circumstance
of History, or in any point of doctrine, they are so fully and apparently
reconciled by those that have labored therein, that there can be no just
color of exception.

But for real contradictions, never dream there are any such to be found in
the word of truth. In every part and parcel whereof there appears such an
admirable sutablnesse concent and harmony of all things, though written at
sundry times, in sundry places, by several persons, and on several occasions
and arguments, as plainly speaks it to be the Word of God. The books of
Scripture are not like the books of our Astrologers, that reform one another
calculations, and control one another prognostications: but as they shoot
all at one mark, so they agree all in one truth. There are above two hundred
places of the old Testament cited in the New: so that almost in every needful
point, the harmony is expressed. The Psalms are cited fifty three times.
Genesis forty two times, Esaias 46. times, etc. This shows the wonderful
agreement betwixt the books of both Testaments. Especially since the
testimonies of the old Testament cited in the New, are cited not only by way of
Accommodation, but because they are the proper meaning of the places: so that
they all agree as if they were but one writing, yea one sentence, yea one word,
yea as if uttered by one mouth, so do they sound all one thing. Luke 1.70.
Hinc Basilius Scriptura^ (...) appellat.
This should exceedingly knit our hearts to the holy Scriptures, as the most
delightful Music (far surpassing that which Pythagoras dreamed to be in the
air among the spheres) and teach us when we meet with doubts and objections,
or seeming contradictions, to condemn our own ignorance, and to rest assured
of this, that there is an infallibility in the promises, and a truth in the
Scriptures, though we do not yet see so much.

Section 6.
LAstly are the holy Scriptures of God? Then can they not possibly be
abolished, or brought to naught. If this counsel be of God, said that grave
Counselor Gamaliel, Acts 5.32.
ye cannot overthrow it, least happily ye be found even to fight against God.
There have been a generation (of men shall I say, or monsters rather?) that
have attempted to take arms against Heaven, thinking utterly to have razed and
rooted out Gods Name and Book from under Heaven: but all in vain. Manasseth
and Amon, to draw the people to Idolatry, had suppressed the book of the Law;
but in the days of Josiah, it was found again, even in the ruins, and rubbish
of the Temple. Jeremy 36.32.
Iehoiachim cut in pieces and burnt Ieremies prophecies, but the Lord himself
set forth a second edition hereof with an addition. Antiochus Epiphanes (alias
Epimanes)that little Antichrist, commanded that all the holy writings should be
burnt, 1 Machab. 1.59. Yet shortly after there were copies found that had been
rescued from the fire, doubtless, by good people, as young Joas was by
Iehoiadah from his bloody Grandmother. And within a while the Scriptures being
by the seventy Seniours, Aristaeas.
at the request of Ptolomy King of Egypt, translated into Greek, were
published a great part of the world over. Since that Dioclesian, the Emperor,
commanded by proclamation the holy Scriptures to be burnt, where ever they
were found throughout the Roman Empire. Eusebius. lib. 8. c. 3.
And what bonefires of Bibles the Papists have made in this kingdom, who knows
not? Before all this, Apocryphal Esdras tells us (and many of the Ancient
Fathers believed him) that when the Temple was burnt by the Babylonians in
Ieremies time, all the holy Copies also were then burnt: and that they were
restored again by himself, who being a perfect scribe, could perfectly
remember, and renew them. But this narration of his is altogether unlikely to
be true. For. 1. There Is no mention of any such thing in the Canonical
Scripture, as neither in Josephus, Philo or Athanasius, in synopsi de libris
Mosis, who would not have passed it over. 2. Who can reasonably imagine that
those good figs, Ezechiel, Daniel, and the rest of the Religious captives at
Babylon, or, that Jeremy, Gedaliah, Ebedmelech, and other holy men at home,
could have been without the books of the Law for seventie years together? Its
sure that Daniel had the Bible, and therehence collected the number of the
years of the captivity to be now expired. Chap. 9.2. and verse 13. he says,
as it is (not was) written in Moses. 3. Besides Ezra himself chapter 6.18.
testifies that the captives that returned to Jerusalem had the law, and read in
it. This was the Lords own doing, and is (justly) mavelous in our eyes. Many
a time have they afflicted me from my youth, may the Scripture now say. Psa.
129.1, 3.
Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, yet have they not prevailed
against me. The plowers plowed upon my back, etc. The righteous Lord has cut
asunder the traces of the wicked. The rage of Tyrants has overflowed it, and
yet they could neither drown, nor deface it; condemned it has been to the
fire, yet could never be consumed by the fire: rejected by the world, yet lives
and reigns in despite of the world. Other books of what authority or
excellency soever (as Tully de Republica, Origens Octapla) are utterly lost,
others that are come to our hands, are woefully maimed and mangled many of them.
Not so the holy Bible, any part of the Canon. The book of Iehu and the rest
that are perished, were not Canonical, but (as the Chronicles of England)
civil records of events of things in that kingdom of Israel: penned they
were, says Saint Austine, Non tam inspiratione divina, quam humana diligentia.
Aug. de civ. Dei. lib. 18. cap. 38. Non ad authoritatem religionis, sed ad
virtutem cognitienis. Jb.
not by divine inspiration, but by humane diligence, and thereupon he well
inferres, that these Volumes did not appertain to the proving or propagating
Religion, but to the promoting, and enlarging of good literature among the
Jews. But admit that devilish attempt of Tyrants had been effected, and all
the Bibles in the world abolished, yet the word of God could not be destroyed,
because the Archetype, the platform, the Original draught of it is in the
eternal God. For ever, O Lord, Psalm 119 1 Peter 1.
thy word is stablisht in heaven, says David, and thy word of the Lord
endures for ever, says Peter: it remains firm, as mount Sion, that can
never be removed; and like the faithful witness in heaven, it stands fast
till time shall be no more. So that if all the power on earth should make
war against the very paper of the Scriptures, they cannot possibly destroy
it: but the Word of God written will be to be had to the worlds end, Maugre
the malice of earth, and hell. What God has written, he has written, and it
shall stand inviolable, when heaven shall pass away with a great noise, 1
Peter 3.
and the earth with its works shall be burnt up. Man, had he never fallen
from his first integrity, must have lived by the same law that we do now. His
children should have met, says one, at the Tree of knowledge, as at an Altar
or Temple, Bucholc. Chronol. p. 40.
and there have solemnly performed, on the Sabbath day especially, the great
business of Religion, repeating the History of their Creation, worshipping and
praising God, their Creator, propagating his word, etc. Saint Paul also rapt up
into the heavenly Paradise ceased not to profit in the doctrine of the Law and
Prophets: though there he had heard words unspeakeable. 2 Cor. 12 4. Paulus in
tertiu usque coelum raptus non destitit tamen proficere in dectrina legis and
prophetar^m Calv.
He knew and saw that they live by no other law in Heaven then we do. And
albeit some special duties of certain commandments shall cease, when we come
to Heaven, yet the substance of every one remains for ever. For seeing the
Image of God stands in righteousness and holiness, which are the two
branches of the moral Law, it must needs tie us with an everlasting bond, who
were first made in that likeness, and whose perfection in heaven is to be fully
and wholly renewed thereunto. And this perpetuity and perennity of the moral
Law, was not obscurely noted by the engraving of it in stone, Exodus 34.27. 2
Cor. 3.7. etc.

CHAP. IV.
FOr a second Use of this point: Are the Scriptures GODS own word and a part
of his Name, Acts 9.15. and 21, 13? This mainely meets with and makes against
such as seek either to debase and oppose it, or to pervert and abuse it:
especially since God has magnified his word above all his name. Psalm 138.2.


Section I.
OF the first sort, (besides those monstrous tyrants above mentioned that
sought to extirp and extinguish it, and those other Heretics ancient and
modern, Saduces, Manichees, Marcionites, Anabaptists, etc. That rejected the
holy Scriptures, either wholly or in part,) the men we are most to deal
withal here, are our adversaries the Papists; who besides those forementioned
terms and titles of dishonor they have blasphemously bestowed upon the Book
of God, Melius consultum fuisse Ecclesia, si nulia unquam extuisset Scriptura,
Tilen. Syntag p. 17.
one of no mean rank among them fears not to say, that had it bin better
with the Church, had there never been any Bible. Others of them refer the
rise and Original of the Scriptures, not to the Holy Ghost, as Saint Peter
does, ad fortuitas quasdam occasiones a Prophetis and Apostolis (...) arreptas
referunt. lb.
but only to certain occasional events, and accidental occurrences,
befalling the Prophets and Apostles, as it happened. They tell us that Saint Paul
wrote his Epistles, not for the common use of the Churches of all succeeding
ages, but only for the particular uses of those particular places whereto,
Pareus in 1. Cor. 1.1.
and times wherein he wrote: that he was so transported with pangs of zeal
and eagerness in most of his disputes, that there was no great reckoning to be
made of his assertions; Relation of West. Religion by Sir Edw. Sands, an ear
witness.
yea that he was dangerous to read, as savouring of heresy in some places and
better perhaps he had never written. Oh tongues worthy to be pulled out of
their heads with hot burning pincers, cut into gobbets, and driven down their
throats, those open Sepulchers, wherein they thus shamelesly seek to entombe
the name, and Word of God! It has been seriously consulted among them, says
mine Author, to have censured by some means, and reformed Saint Paul's
Epistles, Jdem, Ibid.
whom they teach in the Pulpit not to have been secure of his preaching, but
by conference with Saint Peter; nor that he durst publish his Epistles till
Saint Peter had allowed them, prodigious blasphemy! but what better can we
expect from those that hold and teach that the Apostles were men as others are,
Piggbius lib. 1. Hier. Eccles. c. 8. page 8.
and therefore might err, lie and forget (as others) deceiving and being
deceaved. As for Saint Paul, Annal. Tom. 1. Anno Christi 51. Number. 39.
Baronius sticks not to withstand him as stoutly as ever Paul did Peter, and
dares defend it that Peter was not to be blamed, but Paul a great deal too
busy rather. As Johannes Mollinus also was with the Pope and Cardinals, when
disputing before them out of Saint Paul, concerning Original sin, Fox
Martyrol. fol. 855.
Justification by faith, free will, etc. when they could not refell his
doctrine, they sent him away with this answer, that it was truth which he
affirmed, but not meet for this time: for that it could not be taught or
published without the detriment of the Apostolic Sea. Wherefore he should
henceforth abstain from the Epistles of Saint Paul (as delivering dangerous
doctrine) and so return again safe to Bonony: Lectio Bibliorum citius
haereticum Lutheranum quam Catholicum Romanum faciet. Apud Hassenmull: Hist.
Jesuit. c. 9.
and there profess Philosophy. Reading the Bible, says a Jesuit, will sooner
make a Lutheran Heretic, then a Roman Catholic. At a public Assembly of the
States of Germany, one Albertus (Bishop of the people there called Vindelici)
lighting by chance upon a Bible, and reading therein, when one of the
Counselors asked him what book that was? D. Prideaux Orat: inaug. p. 17. ex
Luthero.
I know not, said he, what book it is, but this I know, that whatsoever I
read in it, is utterly against our Religion. So John Bishop of Misnia
confessed, that reading the holy Bible, he found therein a Religion much
differing from that that was then established, Scultet: Aanal:
which was Popery. The Bishop of Dunkelden in Scotland stoutly said, I thank
God, that I never knew what the old and New Testament was, Fox Martyrol. fol.
1153.
neither care I to know more then my portuise and Pontifical. Go your way,
Deane Thomas, and let be all these fantasies. Tindall told a Doctor, Ibid. fol
^82. Vide Be^man: de Origin: L^^g: Lat. in dissert.
with whom he disputed, that if God gave him life, ere many years, he would
cause a boy that drives the plough to know more of the Scriptures then he did.
In his prologue before the books of Moses he testifies, that the Priests of
his time (many of them) were so rude, and ignorant, Jdem ibidem.
that they had seen no more Latin then that only which they read in their
Portesses, and Missals. And when for their and others use, he had translated
the Bible into English, they raged extremely, some affirming that it would
make the people Heretics: Others, that it would cause them to rebel. They
scanned and examined every title therein so narrowly, that if but an i lacked a
prick over his head, they noted and numbered it to the ignorant people for an
Heresy. Ibidem fol. 983.


The Parson of Rocking in a Sermon at Queen Mary's first entering to the
Crown, Ibid. 1720.
exhorted the people to believe the Gospel, for it was the Truth; and if not,
they should be damned. An. Dom. 1525 Berlini Monachus qui l'aulum mendacij
arguerat, sub. ito in suggestu extinctus est apoplexia, die, Stephani. Buchol
Ind. Chro.
But in a second Sermon he turned tippet and preached, that the Testament was
false in forty places. The Schoolmen make little mention of Scripture in any
of their disputes. Aristotle was their Patriarch, and Logical axioms their
prime proofs. Philosophers they cite often, seldom the Apostles: tho ancient
fathers if they call in for confirmation of any thing, they make them of equal
authority with the Scriptures, Lomb. lib. 2. sent. distinct. 34. and l. 2.
distinct. 9. and passim.
and doubt not to hoour their writings with the name of Scripture. Their
Richard de sancto Victore, Lucifer-like, sets himself, for skill in Divinity,
above the Prophets and Apostles. Paraeus, Hist. Eccles. medul. p. 344.
And that graceless Gratian blusheth not to reckon the decretall Epistles of
the Bishops of Rome among the Canonical Scriptures: which who so believes
not, Tilen: Sent: page 38. Jbid. p. 28.
says Pope Nicolas, is guilty of blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. A
senseless sentence, worthy of such an Author, and deserving such an answer as
his successor Benedict the eleventh had from the Ambassadors of the Counsel
of Constance. Jn histor: Council: Constant:
When the Pope laying his hand on his bosom cried with a loud voice, Hic est
arca Noae, they tarily, but truly replied. In Noah's Arc, were few men, but
many beasts, intimating that there were six abominations, and seven (as the
Scripture speaks,) lurking in that breast, wherein he would have them believe
that all right and Religion were lodged, and locked up: Or such as Philip the
Fair, King of France returned to Pope Boniface requiring homage of him, Anno
1924.

Alsted: Chronol. page 359.

Agnosco te primogenitum Diaboli:


Sciat tua maxima Fatuitas, Be it known to your egregious foolishness. A
title too good for such as account the Gospel foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.20, 23.
and the Bible a fable: as that first borne of the Devil Leo the tenth, who
admiring those huge masses of money, which he had raked together, in Germany
with wrench and wile, by his indulgences, is reported to have said to Cardinal
Bembus, see what a deal of wealth we have got by this fable of Christ. And
when the same Bembus brought him a place of the new Testament to comfort him,
A^age has nugas de Christo. Dan: Parei Medull. Hist: Eccles. page 402.
now lying upon his death bed, Away, said he, with these bawbles concerning
Christ. But I am weary of stirring any longer in this abominable sink,
although I might further set forth, how this stiff necked generation, Acts
7.51.
and uncircumcised heart and ears do always resist the Holy Ghost: as their
fathers did, so do they, by defacing the first Commandment of the moral Law,
disannuling the second, dispensing with the third. Holliensis cap. 4 Potest de
injustitia lacere justitiam, ex ^hi^o aliquid, ex virtute vitium. Bell. l. 4.
de Pont. Romans
The Canonists stick not to say that the Pope may dispense against the Law of
God, and of nature, against Paul, and all the commandments, of New and Old
Testament, which they commonly, to this day, slander of obscurity and
ambiguity, to the Laity, sending such to learn of dumb Images, those teachers
of lies, Hab. 2 18.
and shutting them up close prisoners in the Popes dark dungeon of heathenish
Ignorance, which they commend to the people for the best mother of devotion;
and that it is not necessary for the common sort to know more than the Articles
of the Creed. Commenti^ia pericula, and Panica terricula quibus pontificij
tanquam Gorgone objecta a Scripturae lectione suos absterrent. Tilen: Matthew. 23.
As for the Scriptures, it is heresy to read them, says one: it was the
invention of the Devil, says another: A husbandman reading the Bible was
possessed, says a third. Thus seduce they silly souls, laden with lusts,
putting out their eyes, as the Philistims did Sampsons, and taking from them
the key of knowledge, as the Pharisees did of old. The Fawlkner knows he can
better rule his Hawke or tassell, Paene peccatu^ putant Scripturas legere, ne
sic fiant haevetici: Espencaeus in Tit. c. 1. p. 104.105.
when he has hooded him: so do Popish Fawlkners, Priests and Jesuits deal,
by their misled and muzzled proselytes, whom they therefore keep in the dark.
They suffer not any to read the Scriptures, no though he have taken degrees in
Schools, without a special license from his Ordinary: and then they tie him
too to the Vulgar Latin Translation, D. Pride: Lect. ex Greg. de Valentia.
that Idol of Trent, which they have made authentical, and where it differs,
says the Jesuit, in all Copies from other editions, the Hebrew, Chaldee, etc.
those other are rather to be corrected out of it, then it out of them. The best
learned Papists do know and yield the Original Greek and Hebrew fountains
to be pure and incorrupt: affirming, that though some slips of Printers or
Writers may be found in letters or words, yet they hurt not the sense, nor
derogate at all from their authority. Thus Bellarmine, Sixtus Senensis, Veterum
librorum fides de Hebruis voluminibus examina^da: novorum veritas Graeci
Sermonis normam desiderat. Gratian: ex August.
Ribera, Acosta, yea Gratian himself yields to this truth, alleging a place
to the same purpose, out of Austin. But Francis Xinnenius, Cardinal of Toledo,
was of another judgment. For in his preface before the Bible, set out at
Complutum in Spain, he says, that he set the Vulgar Latin between the
Hebrew and Greek, as Christ was set betwixt two Thieves. A proper comparison,
and well becoming so grave a Cardinal ^ How well may it be said of these,
that so magnify the Vulgar, as that Chian servant said of his Master who sold
the Wine, and drank the Lees, whilst they had good, they sought for that which
was naught. But wot you what was the reason? The Protestants in the Reformation
began to search the Originals, and charged their Adversaries thence to produce
their proofs. The Papists to obviate this, decreed in the Counsel of Trent,
that the Vulgar Latin should be holden for the Original: which some of them
prefer before the Hebrew and Greek, that is, the foul channel before the
fair fountain. Gretser says, sufficit aequatio, non praelatio. Its enough
indeed, and more than enough. But bad wares love dark shops, Cameli lutulenta^
aquas captant, puras resugiunt, etc. Solinus. c. 63.
and Camels trouble the clear waters with their feet, when they drink, that
they may not see therein their own deformities. Plutarch tells of a Painter
that had illsavouredly proportioned a Hen, and therefore chased away the living
Hens, lest his evil workmanship should be perceived. So do these bunglers,
these Lucifugae Scripturarum, as Tertullian calls them, deal by the truth of
God, revealed in the Scriptures: they wipe out Verbum Dei, Fox Martyr^l. fol.
1338.
as the Painter in Queen Mary's days, and as they have wiped out Origens
Commentary upon the sixth of John, as fearing it should confute their error
touching the Eucharist: they think to dance naked in a not, and none shall see
them when their shame lies open to all the world, Jbidem.
as Master Philpot long since told them in open Convocation. Some men's sins, go
before to judgment: and they that are otherwise then good, cannot be hid, 1 Timothy 5.24, 25.

Section 2.
SEcondly, this doctrine condemns such of detestable wickedness, as do not
indeed openly oppose, yet ordinarily abuse the good Word of God, which they
ought to tremble at: And this either in point of judgment or matter of
practice.

Of the former sort are such as for the confirming of errors, or countenancing
of enormities, wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction, 2 Peter 3.16.
wilfully misalledge or misinterpret them, as all heretics do: and they have
it from their father the Devil, who came not without his Scriptum est, his
Bible under his arm, when he set upon our Savior. In imitation of whom we
know who they are that argue thus out of Scripture: The Pope is Monarch of the
Christian Commonwealth, Pasce oves meas: id est, supremum in Ecclesia dominium
tibi assere. Baron t'Regio more impera. Bell. (...) sometimes signifies to
govern (usually to ^eed) but (...) (twice used in the Text) always to feed.
because Christ said, when I am lifted up, I will draw all men to me, John
12.32. He may challenge supreme dominion over the Church, says Baronius, rule
like an Emperor says Bellarmine, because Christ bad Peter feed his sheep. He
may kill and slay whom he pleases, because it is said, Acts 10. Arise Peter,
kill, and eat Sententia Baronij super excom. Venet, Council. Trid. oratione
Cornelij Episcopi Bipontini sub Paulo tertio.
: triumph over and trample upon Princes, because it is said, upon the Asp and
Lion shall thou tread, etc. That saying of our Savior, I came a light into the
world, John 12.45. (He means not a light by participation, as the Apostles
were lights of the world, but by nature, as God is only) was detestably
ascribed and applied to the Pope in the Counsel of Trent. So in the Lateran
Counsel, thus they blasphemously bespake the Pope. Thou art all and over all:
All power is given to thee in Heaven and earth. The Pope replies, Peace I leave
you, my peace I give unto you. He, (say other of his claw-backe Canonists)
takes away the sins of the world, rules from Sea to Sea, is the root of
David, Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Savior of the world, Tu merito in terris,
diceris esse Deus Fran. Zabar: Rev. 13.1, 2. 2 These. 2.7.
God upon earth, etc. Is not this the beast (judge you) that has a mouth like
a Lion, and speaks great things and blasphemies? Is not this the very same
whose true name is blasphemy, his pretensed name, Mystery? A mystery indeed
of iniquity, as Saint Paul has it, and as Josephus says of Antipater, that
his life was a very mystery of malice. (...) Joseph.
Adrian the sixth (before he was Pope) taxed many errors and abuses in the
Court of Rome (so did Pius secundus) which being afterward pressed to reform,
now that he was in place, and had power in his hand, his answer was, when I
was a child, I spoke as a child, etc. Sphinx Philos.
but being now a man, I have put away childish things. So when Philip King of
Spain. out of a bloody zeal, suffered his eldest son Charles to be
murdered by the cruel Inquisition, because he seemed to favor our Religion:
that mouth of blasphemy the Pope gave him this panegyr, He spared not his own
son, but delivered him up for us. Hier: Catina.
So in the holy War, as they called it, against the Waldenses, (whither the
King of France sent his eldest son in person) the Popes great army took one
strong populous City, and put to the sword 60000. among whom were many of
their own Catholics. For Arnoldus the Cistercian Abbot being the Popes Legate
in this great War, commanded the Captains, and Soldiers saying, Caesarius
Heisterbachensis Hist: lib. 5. cap. 21.
Caedite eos: novit enim Dominus, qui sunt ejus. Kill them up one among
another, for the Lord knows who are his. So, Give not holy things to dogs, 2 Timothy 2.19.
that is, the Scriptures to the ignorant. Staphysus in Apolog. Ledesma de div:
scrip cap. 22.
Our Savior closed the book after he had read a few verses, Luke 4. therefore
Divine service is not to be said in a known tongue. Roffensis adver: Luther.
Acts 16. Tyrabosco Patriarch of Venice: Via tutae. page 164.
Give us this day our daily bread, therefore we must communicate in one kind
only. There are seven Sacraments, because Christ brake and divided to the
people five loaves, and two fishes; Greg. de Valen. de Jdolol. c. 7.
some Idolatry is lawful, because Saint Peter condemns the unlawful service
of Idols, 1 Peter 4.3. Jn Colloquio Ratish. apud Polycar. Lyser: Si^ ex Jacob
5. and Marc. 6.13. Male intellecto pro pa^toribus Ecclesia habuit unguentarios,
and pigmentarios. Bern. Confess.
The Bavarian Colloquutours exclude all women out of Heaven that have lived
before Christ's Incarnation, and allege Scripture for it. Not that there is any
such thing there to be found: but that they factiously contend to fasten their
own conceits upon God; and like the Harlot in the holy History, they take their
dead and putrified fancies, and lay them in the bosom of the Scripture, as of
a mother: Aristotle tells us of one Antipheron Orietes that thought he saw his
own shape and picture still going before him. So in diverse parts of Scripture,
where these men walk, they will easily believe that they see the shadow of
their own opinions, wherewith they come prepossest. Chemnitius de Theologia
Jesuitarum. p. 48.
What was it else that made Thammerus disputing of the word (...) (so often used
by the Apostle in the 4th to the Romans) to think that because it comes of
(...) which signifies Reason, Item quia (...) a Varino explicatur quod sit
(...), ideo Tham. contendit ex Rom 3.24. operibiu nostris reddi debitam
mercedem: Ibid.
therefore the righteousness of faith must be such as a man may comprehend by
natural reason? What else should make the Turks to be of opinion that as
Moses did allude to the coming of Christ, so Christ did foretell somewhat of
the appearing of Mahomet? whereupon it is ordinarily received amongst them
(says Archbishop Abbots) that when Christ in Saint John's Gospel I said, that
although he dep^rted, Geograph. p. 149.
he would send them a Comforter, it was added in the Text. And that shall be
Mahomet; but that the Christians in malice toward them, have razed out those
words: Semblably Montanus the Heretic gave out, that that promise made by our
Savior at his Ascension, Acts 1.8. Beza in locum.
Ye shall receave the power of the Holy Ghost coming upon you, was (next after
the Apostles) fulfilled in him and his Philumena. Some such thing Epiphanius
relates of Simon Magus, and others of Novatus. Now what is this else but to
torment a Text, Caedem Scriptur: facere ad mate riam suam Ter. depiasc. adv.
haer.
as one calls it? to slaughter the holy Scriptures to serve therewith their
own purposes, as Tertullian terms it? what is it self but to speak
perverse or distorted things, (...). loquitur Lucas ut de membris a suo cerpore
crudeliter avulsls, pergens in eadem translatione. Acts 20.30.
that they may discerp, or violently dragge Disciples after them as Saint Paul
foretold it? What is it else but afferre sensum ad Scripturas, non refer, as
Hilary has it; to give unto the Scripture, and not to receive from it the
sense; to impose it, and not to expect it? Lastly, what is it else but to
stretch Gods word to their sinful purposes, as shooe-makers do their greasy
over-leathers with their teeth? which Polydor Virgil long since observed and
complained of to be the trick of Popish Canonists. Non secus ac sutores solent
sordidas dentibus extendere pelles-de invent: rer: lib 4. c. 9.
Neither can we here excuse the Jews, who to countenance their conceit of the
ineffability of the name Jehovah, misallege that text Exodus Galatinus. Prove.
8.22. (...), isti lege^unt (...) creavit.
3.15. This is my name (legnolam) for ever, which they read Legnalam, to be
concealed. Much worse the Arrians, who to disprove the Deity of Christ, by
changing of one little letter, corrupted the Text, and carried it a clean
contrary way to its own meaning. The Nestorians also abused that Text, Heb.
2.9. (reading (...) without God, for (...), by the grace of God, to prove that
he that suffered for us, was not God. And is not the like liberty, (or
Legerdemaine rather) in use among Papists? As in stead of, Non habent Petri
haereditatem qui Petri Fidem non habent, they print qui Petri Sedem non habent,
ex Jnd: expurg:
Make they not over-bold in this kind, not with men's writings only, but with
Gods also? Harding to prove satisfaction, allegeth, 2 Cor 7.1. seeing then we
have these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, making perfect our satisfaction in the fear
of God. Where mark that the Doctor has chopped the word satisfaction into the
Text for sanctification, Answer to Jew. Apol. part. 2. c. 16. fol. 117.
and so quite altered the Apostles meaning. So Cardinal Hosius for the same
doctrine of satisfaction alleged (with like honesty) that Romans 6.19. Confess.
Petri: c. 48. de Sacram: p^nit: fol. 127.
Let us yield our members to serve justice unto satisfaction. Saint Paul says
sanctification, but they are willing to mistake him, that so they may seem to
make their adulterate coin good silver. Somewhat like hereunto is that, Vnus e
millibus, Job 33.23. which their Vulgar Version corruptly reads Vnus e
similibus. Lightfoots Miscel. p.62.
The Septuagint also are said to have translated against their will: sure it is
we have but slipperie doings from them, Job 2. they help Jobs wife to scold,
adding there a whole verse of female passion. I must now, says she, go
wander, and find no place to rest in. And whereas Jonas 3.4. it is, Yet forty
days, and Niniveh shall be destroyed, the Septuagint reads, Yet three days,
etc. Besides that, Tailor and Beotius cont Morin
diverse of the clearest prophesies concerning Jesus Christ they have utterly
perverted: which therefore the Apostles allege out of the Hebrew verity, and
not out of the Septuagint: if at least this be the Septuagints Translation,
that is now taken for it. Weemses exercitat.
Origin never saw it, as appears by his Hexapla: for it was burnt by
Diocletian (as some hold) in the Library of Alexandria: or (as others) by
Julius Caesar when he burnt Serapion.

Section 3.
But (to speak forward) a second sort of delinquents against Gods holy Word
come here to be convinced of singular impiety, and they are such as misuse it
in matter of practice. Now of these, there are sundry sorts of sinners against
their own souls.

First, those that wickedly produce and plead it for defense of wickedness.
See an instance hereof Eccles. 4.6. Leo Judae. in Annotat.
Better is a handful with quietness, says the sluggard, then both the hands
full with travel, and vexation of spirit. This in its true meaning is not
far different from that, Prove. 17.1. Si det oluscula me^sa minuscula pace
quieta, Ne pete grandia lantaque prandia lite repleta.
Better is a dry morsel, and quietness therewith, then an house full of
sacrifices (or good cheer) with strife. But this Scripture is here ill applied
by the idle person. For it is as if he should say: A little with ease is best:
Better is a penny by begging, then twopence by true labor. So Eccl. 8.15.
Then I commended mirth, because a man has no better thing then to eat and
drink, and be merry, etc. This is the judgment of the flesh, as that in the
former verse is of the spirit. Wicked men make ill conclusions of good
premises, and perverse applications of wholesome precepts, as the Spiders suck
poison out of the most fragrant flower, or as a soul stomach turns good food
into ill nourishment. See this Eccles. 9.7. Go thy way, eat thy bread with
joy, drink thy wine with cheerfulness, etc. Pemble in locum Quia nihil
distat sors pio^is and impiorum, ede, bibe lude, post morte^ nulla voluptas, ut
sentit Sardanapa^icus greae. Leo Judae ad locum. Sardanapalus successoribus
post obitum suum inscribi in Sepulchro hanc vocem mandasse dicitur.
The use that carnal men make of the point of Gods providence is sensuality
and Epicurisme. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do (either in matter of profit or
pleasure) do it with all thy might. As who should say: spare for no pains,
care for no cost, but make much of one, and be merry. Why? For there is no
work nor device, etc. in the grave whither thou go, as who should say;
After death there is no more to be done, or desired. Let us therefore eat and
drink, for to morrow we shall dye. These be evil words, (...).
(though they pretend Gods Word for their ground) that corrupt good manners.
Neither are they the better to be liked, that think to excuse their evil
courses by the sins of Gods Saints set down in the Scripture. Did not DAVID
swear, say they, commit adultery, make Vriah drunk, make him away, etc. So
for Noah, Lot, Peter, others. Holy men are called a cloud of witnesses, Heb.
12.1. In things praiseworthy and imitable, they are as the cloud that led Gods
Israel, and conducted them in their way to Canaan. But in things unwarrantable,
in their faults and failings, they are as the black of that cloud, which who
so follows, with the Egyptians, is like to be drowned, as they, in the
bottomless lake. Briefly and in a word; to all these wicked God says, what
have thou to do to declare my statutes for defense of thy sins, or to take
my covenant in thy mouth, Psalm. 50.16, 17.
thou that hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee? High words are
as unfit for a fool, as a gold ring for a Swines snowte: the Lepers lips
should be covered according to the Law. To allege Scripture in favor of
sin, is to entitle God to that which he hates worse than the Devil; it is to
make him a patron and pattern of wickedness, Number 15.30, 31
and his word a sword for satan his sworn enemy; it is a kind of blasphemy.

Section 4.
HOw much more then is it (in the second place) an abominable abuse to the
sacred Word of God, to carp and cavil at it, as some do. And first, at the
homeliness of the style: secondly at the harshnesse of the matter.

Of the former sort are the wits of the world, the Minions of the Muses, Donsa.
Mentemque habere queis bonam, Et esse corculis datum est, our cunning and
curious critickes that deliver their words by weight, drive their clauses to an
even cadencie, eschew nicely the meeting together of vowels, the harsh sound of
sillables, are careful to speak no more than may breed admiration of their
wit and worth. Their discourses are so curiously coucht, so neately starcht and
set, their words so ranked and meetly marshalled, as if they were a kin to
him whose name is six hundred sixty six. As for the contemptible coursenesse
of Scripture phrase, it grates their delicate ears, it offends their queasie
stomachs, which cannot away with these wholesome (because not toothsome) words,
2 Timothy 1.13. (...).
They scorn the grave eloquence, the stately plainness, the rich poverty,
that humble majesty that shines in the simplicity of the Scriptures, which they
are no way able to peise or praise. Such a one was Politian, who being asked
whether ever he had read over the Bible? D Pezel. part 2. Postill: Mclanct.
Yea once, said he, but it was the worst time that ever I spent. He preferred
Pindars Odes before David's Psalms, like a wretch as he was, and spent his time
(which he counted cast away, so much as he laid out upon once reading over the
Scriptures) in scanning whether a man should pronounce Vergilius or Virgilius,
preimus or primus, etc. (which was laborious loss of time, as the Philosopher
calls it.) And if he had any further leisure, L. Vives. (...) Aristot.
he spent it in making some Greek Epigram, in commendation of leachery and
Sodomy; being delivered up by God (and justly for contempt of his holy Word) to
an injudicious mind as those Heathens were, (...) Romans 1.28.
Romans 1. Such another was that Countryman of his, P. Mornaeus de ver. Relig.
Chr. cap. 26.
Domitius Calderinus, who seriously dissuaded young men, that studied
eloquence, from looking into the Bible: But what goodly matter then should they
read? forsooth his Comment upon Virgils Priapus: Vixit Calderinus Anno 1477.
a book which a lmen, that have not altogether put off manhood, are abashed to
speak of. A grave judgment, in sadness, for men to set their minds upon. But
what greater inducement to a good heart to honor the Scriptures, then that
such persons despise them? as one said once, that religion must needs be the
right that Nero persecuteth. Surely, says Austin, where J understand the
Prophets and Apostles: De doctrina Christia. l 3.
J never met with any thing, not only more wise, but more eloquent then they
are. What a deal of imparallell Rhetoric is to be read in that twelfth of
Ecclesiastes, all the former part of it? how bravely and exquisitely does he
pursue the allegory! Quot lumina, imo flumina orationis ibi exserit, says one?
Heidelseldius.
See a like lofty passage in Moses his song, Deuteronomy. 32.6. So what a deal of
confidence and eloquence, of humility and majesty, of reasons and affections,
is there in the Prophecy of Esaias? What comparison betwixt the rowlings of
Demosthenes, or Cicero's flattering insinuations, with childish excuses of
ignorance, and the lively and lofty entrances of Esaias? betwixt the Orators
long periods, the which he harkneth to so devoutly, P. Morn. de verit. relig.
c. 6.
and the others pi^rceing paragraphs: and pressing discourses, which are so
many thunderstrokes doubled and redoubled, able to daunt the stoutest stomach
upon earth? Never any man came near him (certainly.) Whether ye look to the
evidence of his vision or the eloquence of his style til Paul set pen to paper.
Audire mihi videor, non verb v^sed tonitrua. Hieron.
He indeed thundered as often as he spoke; When he spoke to Elymas the forcerer
especially; he set his eyes upon him says the Text, as if he would have looked
thorough him. After which lightning, followed that terrible thunder clap. Acts
13.9, 10.
O full of all subtilty and mischief, thou child of the devil, etc. so when
he unstarcht the Orators speech (as one phraseth it) before Faelix, Acts 24.
and again, Acts 26.
when he pleaded his own cause in the presence of Agrippa, De Cicerone non
nemo.
Raptare eum judicem credas, involvere, praecipitem agere: noc incendere
auditorem modo, sed ipsum putes ardere, etc. Oh what an Orator was he when he
listed I Pericles himself could never have been more powerful or persuasive.
His adversaries, the false Apostles, gave out against him, that his letters
were weighty, but his bodily presence weak, and his speech contemptible.
Whereunto he answers. Let every such one think this, that such as we are in
word by letters, 2 Cor. 10.10, 11.
when we are absent, such are we indeed, when present. And how is that? In
brevitate verborum est luxuries rerum, says Origin. Verborum parcus,
sententiarum dives. Lud. Vives.
In fewness of words there is fullness of matter. Spare he is of words, rich
in sense, as one says of Livy. Densus and brevis and semper instans sibi
Thucydides: ait Quintil: l. 10. c. Astrictus and profluens. subtilis and
clarus, sine cura illa accuratus. Do Q. Curtio Lipsius. Hoc ipso ornati quod
ornamenta negligerent. Cic.
Thick and short, pithy and patheticall, brief and yet full, concise and yet
clear, careless and yet accurate. Tully tells us of the books of his friend
Atticus, that this was their chief ornament, that they neglected ornaments.
This is properly true of this book of books: no part whereof is without a grave
eloquence, such as none could ever attain to. The Apocrypha-writers that
endeavor it, are yet but cold, and even barbarous in comparison. Wherefore
Marcilius Ficinus and JOHANNES Earl of Mirandula (the honor of ITALY and of
his age for skill in all sciences) having read all the good authors in the
world, Mornaeus.
came at length to rest themselves in our Scriptures, and were in the end out
of liking with all others; but as for these, they could never have their fill
of them. De Q. Curt^^ Colerus epist.
For indeed, Lectorem citius defatigatum qua^ satiatu^ dimittunt: of these
living waters the more we drink, the more we may, (...). Isoc.
the deeper the sweeter. In all other things is satiety, not of this. Other
books like insidiating Iael, may allure men with the blandishments of their
style, blanched over with the title of eloquence, till they have destroyed
them. Wanton wits hunt only after pompous and painted words, rarities and
nicities of speech, high strains, a soaring sublimity of phrases and choice
composures; such as they may meet withal in Apuleius and Sidonius, who speak
nothing almost without a figure, but abound with continual Metaphors and
circumlocutions. These Balaams see not such Angelical luster in holy writ as
in the unhallowed writings of their so much magnified Magnificoes, and do
therefore disdain them. Res grandes ornate dicere, pucrile est. Cicero. Ornari
resipsae vetat, contenta doceri. Horat.
But they must be told, that Summa ornari nolunt, true beauty needs no paint:
the native comeliness of the Scriptures scorns the unnatural drugs of these
bewitching Iezabels. God would please these men well, should he deal by
inductions, as Plato, or Syllogismes, as Aristotle, or pretty sleights as
Carneades, or outcries as Cicero, or fine conceits, as Seneca does. They could
be content he would utter his words by weight, that they might fall in just
measure and sound, and that he would interlace some farre-sought words, some
allegorical matters, some strange devices wherewith common use is
unacquainted. What is this but sus Minervam? twere pity surely, but those men
were pleased, and GOD, instructed how to deliver his mind a little better. Paul
the babbler will not down with these Athenians, that hunt after novelties, and
curious speculations. But my speech and my preaching, (...). 1 Cor. 2.4.
Tertullian.
says he, is not with the perswasible words of man's wisdom, but in
demonstration of the spirit and in power. The Valentinians had a trick to
persuade before they taught: but the only pen men persuade by teaching, they
do not teach so much by persuading, some of them (as I have said) are wondrous
eloquent above all humane authors whatsoever, God thereby shows that he
could, if it had pleased him have fretted, as it were, the whole volume with
excellency of words; Yet generally it is carried with a lower phrase of speech;
which nevertheless savours not of any earthly mould, but makes one even in
despite of himself, to admire it. Thy testimonies are wonderful, Psalm.
119.129, 130.
says David, and yet the very entrance into them shows light, fermentum
cognitionis ets magis inesse quam bracte as eloquetiae deprehendas De
polyhistore suo Solinus.
gives understanding. Besides that, under an humble and abject simplicity of
words, it puts forth a divine virtue, whereby it lively affects the minds of
men, above all the master-peeces of the most polite and Elaborate Orators in
the world. But to such enough (if not more than enough) as stumble at the style
of holy Writ: We have a second sort to deal with.

Section 5.
ANd they are such, Durus est hic sermo, Ioh. 6.
as are misgrieved at the matter of the word, as if it were a hard word, and
God the Author of it an austere Lord, Luke 19.21.
for requiring of them (as once he did of the rich Pharisee) such things as
they are not willing to perform. Prove. 19.^.
The wickedness of a man perverts his way, and (when he has no other way to
ease himself) his heart frets against the Lord: he rises up against his
precepts as the horse casts his rider and rises up against him. Romans 7.12.
The Law is holy and just and good, founded upon so much right reason, that if
God had not enjoined it, yet had it been our best course in (selfe-regard) to
have observed it. Howbeit by accident and through our singular corruption, this
good Law irritates naughty nature and makes bad men worse, as the message of
dismission did Pharaoh. The waves do not beat or roar any where so much as
at the bank which restraines them: nor would the vapor in a cloud make that
fearful report, if it met not with opposition. Corruption when checked, grows
mad with rage, and asks, who is the Lord? Let us break his bonds, say they,
Psalm. 2. and live by the laws of our own lusts: Let us eat and drink and
rise up to play, Exodus 34.
for as for this Moses, we cannot tell what is become of him: and as for his
Man, Luke 19.14.
we will not have him to rule over us, neither will we submit to the laws of
his kingdom. But who art thou, O man, that thus chattest against GOD, (...), ex
ad^erso responsus. Romans 9.20.
and quarrellest with his word? Gods will therein revealed is the supreme rule
of right: the Kings standard, as it were, and the Kings beam; and is not
therefore to be regulated or corrected by any other, but to determine and
overruled all. But these Yokelesse Belialists snuff at it as over-strict, and
say in effect to it, as the Sodomites to Lot.

Base busy stranger, come thou hither thus
Controller-like to preach and prate to us? Sylvesters Du-Bartas.

There is in Peter Lombard this sentence cited out of Austin de vera innocentia
cap. 56. The whole life of an Infidel is sin, neither is any thing good
without the chiefest good. At this truth Ambrose Spiera a certain postiller
shoots his fools bolt, saying, Crudelis est illa sentencia. This is a cruel
sentence. The like censure passes many a wicked Atheist upon the righteous
Oracles of God, imputing to them falsehood, unlikeliehood, iniquity, extremity,
what not? warding off (as well as they can) Gods blow, motting themselves up
against his fire, not suffering his terrors to seize upon their souls, like
Lots sons in Law, till at last (all too late) they feel them sticking in
their souls and flesh, Job 6.4. Psalm 15.5.
as so many venomed arrows of the Almighty, throughout all eternity.

Section 6.
ANother intolerable abuse in daily practice offered to Gods holy word is, In
his Vltimis and pessimis temporibus. Bern.
when profane persons take liberty to jest at it or out of it: a course too too
common in these last and loosest times of the world. Scurrility and foolish
jesting in any kind is flatly forbidden by the Apostle, (...) Arislot: (...)
appella^ Ephesians. 5.4. (...) Ibid.
as unseemely for a saint, reckond among those things that are not convenient,
or conduce not to the maine end. How much less lawful is it to frame jests
out of Scripture? Since the greater any good is, the greater the abuse, and the
heavier will be the doom, when the Righteous Judge shall be reveald from
Heaven with thousands of his Saints, (...).
to convince the ungodly (to set them down, and stop their soul mouths, as
the word signifies) of all their hard speeches, (...) Jude 15.
dry wipes, slye taunts, bitter jeares and salt jests, that ungodly sinners
have utterd against him and his truth. This was that, that Henoch the seventh
from Adam preached of old to those spirits now in prison, then in jollity, 1
Peter 3.
that jeared when they should have feared, like those in Ezechiel: that scoffed
at Gods threats and said, Let the word of the LORD come, that we may see it.
And of the same stamp were their nephews in Noah's time. He, as a Preacher of
Righteousness, spared for no pains in foretelling the flood, but to little
purpose. They looked upon him, as one drowned in a deep melancholy: they said,
sure he dreamt (not of a dry summer but) of a wet Winter. Many a bitter flout
they give the good old man whilst he is building his Arc and ask, what this
mad fellow means to make such a vessel? whether he intended to sail on the
dry land, or to make a Sea, when he had made his Ship? They held him in that
work no wiser than the Prior of Saint Bartholmewes in London, Hollinshead in
Anno 1524.
who upon a vain prediction of an idle and addle-headed Astrologer, went and
built him an house at Harrow on the Hill, to secure himself from a supposed
flood, that that Astrologer foretold. And therefore though he clapped and
called early and late, proposing their danger, and pressing them to provide for
their own safety, Psalm 1.1.
yet (being now sat down in the seat of the scornful) they stird not a
whit, neither abated an ace (as they say) of their loose and lewd living. But
they ate, they drank, (...). Asyn deton ^leg^ntiss: Luke 17.27.
they married, they gave in marriage, they remitted nothing, but passed,
without intermission, from eating to drinking, from drinking to marrying, from
marrying to planting, and providing for posterity, and would know nothing, that
is, would take no knowledge of any thing, but lay buried in deep and desperate
security, till the very day, says our Savior, that the flood came, and buried
them all in one universal grave of waters. Then might the old Preacher (had he
had any mind to it) as fitly have sat and gibed at them, as they once foolishly
did at him. Now Jubal, let us hear one of your merry songs. Now, Iubal, whether
is the wiser work, the building of Tents, or the building of an Arc? Now sirs,
you that are such men of renown, you that were the brave gallants of the
earth, now tell me who is the fool, and who is the Wiseman now? By this time,
from the tops of the mountains they descry the Arc, and behold that with
envy, which they erst beheld with scorn. Surely, Prove 3 34.
GOD scorneth these scorners, that spend their biting girds, and bitter jests
upon holy things. GOD himself will laugh at their destruction, Prove. 1.^6.
Plaime 52.6.
and mock when their fear comes. The righteous also shall see it and fear,
and laugh at such: as they did in Julian the Apostates time, that notable
scoffer, that would smite Christians, in contempt, on the one cheek, and bid
turn the other also. He resused to hear their complaints of injuries, because
Christ bad them patiently suffer, nor would he pay them their wages that they
might be poor in spirit, ^ibanius sophista
and so sitted for the kingdom of Heaven. One of his bosome-birds tauntingly
asked of them, what the Carpenters son was now in framing? whereunto they
replied, Septem libros in expeditione Parthica adversus Christum evomuit: Et
Galilaeum statim in praelio sensit, and mercedem linguae putdissimae, conto in
^^^js perfossu^, accepit. Hieron.
He is making a Coffing for Julian: And it fell out accordingly: for he was
slain shortly after, with an arrow of Christ's shooting, and dyed raveing with
Vicisti Galilaee in his mouth This was Julian. And the like befell Hanun King
of the Ammonites, that sent away David's servants, with shaven beards and short
garments, in derision of their law (likely) that forbad them both these. But
was there not bitterness in the end? had he not sour sauce to his sweet
jests ere he was a year elder? The holy oil might not be put to a profane
use on pain of death, Exodus 30.32. No more may the holy word, on pain of Gods
displeasure, which is worse than death. 2 Peter 2.3.
Surely their damnation stumbreth not, says Saint Peter, of his scoffers, may
we say of ours. David points them out for the worst of sinners, in that
excellent gradation of his, Psalm 1.1. these Rhetorical mockers as one
translates that word, (...).
those pests or botches of humane society, as the Septuagint render it. These
are the merry Greeks of our time, that had rather loose their God then their
jest: those facetious and fantastical companions, that dare play with
edge-tooles, and rather than want mirth will call in GODS Word (which they
ought to tremble at, Judges 16.25.
and not to toy with) as the Philistims did Sampson, to make them pastime.
These are worse than Pilate who when he heard but the name of the Son of God,
was afraid: John 19.^.
but these fear nothing more, then not to be held witty and conceited, like
Sir Thomas Moore, of whom the Chronicler doubts, whether to call him a
foolish wiseman, Edw Hals Chronicle.
or a wise foolish-man. And why? He thought nothing, says he, to be well
spoken except he had ministered some mock in the communication. And qualis vita,
finis ita, as he lived a mocker, so he ended his life with a mock in his
mouth. A thing too too common among the French, who are said to be great
scoffers in matters of Religion, even upon their death beds, some of them. A
Gentleman lying at point of death, when the Priest had persuaded him, that the
Sacrament of the Altar was the very body, and blood of Christ, refused to
receave it, D. Heylins Geog. page 77.
because it was Friday. Another seeing the Host brought unto him by a lubberly
Priest, said that CHRIST came unto him (as once) riding upon an Ass. What is
this else but (...), as Nazianzen calls it, to play with mysteries, to make
jests in high matters, then which what can be more absurd and unseemely. And
hitherto may be referred, As the Heath^^s called the Jews Asinarios, and the
Christians cruciarios sarmentitios. Motive 48.
that the Papists in scorn call us Evangeli^os and Scripturarios, Gospellers
and Scripturists, thinking thereby to jeare us out of our weak and false
Castle of holy Scripture, into the plain fields of Councels and Fathers, as
their Bristow advises them. It is notoriously known, says Doctor Fulke,
Annot: in Rhe^^ Test. on Acts 11 Sect. 4. ex Christoph Franch: Coll: Jesuit: in
sine.
that the most honorable name of Christian is in Italy and at Rome a name of
Reproach, and usually abused to signify a Fool or a dolt. This is properly
blasphemy in the second Table; for it reflects upon GOD Himself, who will not
suffer it to go unpunished; as little as he did in Domitian the Emperor, who
to break a jest upon Christ the Lords Anointed, and upon John his servant,
Pareus in Apoc. 1.9.
who had written, ye have an unction from the father, etc. is said to have cast
him into a vessel of scalding oil; out of which when he came forth unhurt and
more fresh then before, Domitian banished him into the I^e Pathmos where he
received the Revelation, and whence he was called back, after that the
persecutor had received his guerdon from the righteous hand of GOD. Now
therefore be not ye mockers, (at holy things especially) least your bands be
made strong. Esaias 28.22. Discite justitiam moniti: Virg.
Let it never be said, that Religion is not more a matter of form then of
scorn amongst amongst us. Josephus.
Appion a Grammarian of Alexandria scoffing at the Jewish worship, and
especially at Circumcision, had an ulcer the same time and in the same place.
And one John Apowell, in Queen Mary's days standing by William Maudon as he
was reading on a Primer at Greenwich, mocked him after every word with contrary
gawde^, Acts and Moni. fol. 1906.
and slowting speeches unreverently, insomuch that he could no longer abide,
but turning to him said; John, take heed what thou do, thou mockest not me,
but God in his Word, though I be simple that read it. He mocked on, till
Mawdon reading, Lord have mercy upon us, Christ have mercy upon us, the other
with a start said suddenly, Lord have mercy upon me. With that, Mawdon turned
about, and said, what aileth thee, John? He said, I was afraid. Whereof? said
Maudon: nothing now, said the other. After this, he asked him again, who
answered: When you read that, Lord have mercy upon me, me-thought the hair of
my head stood upright with a great sear that came upon me. On the next day he
ran mad, and was bound in his bed. After that he lay almost day and night,
never ceasing to cry out of the devil of hell, etc. It seems he was possessed
of an evil spirit. A fair warning for such foul mouths, which shall one day
smoke for it, as Divesses did. And then, Nestorij lingua vermious exesa. Euagr.
l. c. Psalm 5^.
what reward shall be given thee, thou godless tongue? even sharp arrows with
hot burning coals, yea those very coals of hell from whence thou were
enkindled. Then woe to our mirth-mongers that laugh now, laugh themselves fat;
that are altogether set on the merry pin, jearing and gibing at that which
they should hear and fear, Luke 6. Te miror, quorum ^alla imitaris, eorum
exitum nonperhorrescere. Cicer^ Anton. in Philip.
and do no more so, as the Scripture speaks. These shall one day howl as
fast, says our Savior, there where is wailing and weeping and gnashing of
teeth. Can we hear of such men's sins, and not tremble at their torment?

Section 7.
LAstly such come here to be convinced of notorious impiety, and indignity to
the Scriptures, Ignatij conclave
as abuse them to spells and charms The first verse in Saint John's Gospel is
always employed in popish exorcismes, and the Lords prayer to cure persons
forespoken (as they call it) and ayred. So to find things that are lost, there
are that will have a seive, and a pair of she^res, and repeat a place of
Scripture. This is an horrible way of perverting God's Word, and prosaning his
Name. This is to serve the Devils turn with the Scriptures, and to make them
as it were, Sacraments to the Devil, than the which what greater abuse can be
possibly offered unto them?

Ob.
Tell me not here in defense of this abomination, that the words then used
are Gods Words: for, as thus abused, Sol.
they are not Gods, but the Devils, who hereby insensibly possesses himself
of men's souls: and every one that by seeking to such consults with Satan, as
Saul did, worships him, though he bow not as he did: that evil spirit desires
no other reverence then to be fought unto: Satan seeks to such in his
Temptations, they seeeke to him in their consultations: and now that they have
mutually found each other, if they ever part, it is a miracle. Say not again:
Ob.
How can there be so much hurt in words so good? Sol.
I tell thee that Samuel himself could not have spoken more gravely, more
severely, more divinely then the fiend did to Saul, then when he preached Saul's
funeral, Oration funebris Sauli dicta a Diabolo. Buchol.
as one calls it. When the Devil himself puts on gravity and Religion, who
can wonder at the Hypocrisy of men? Had not Elymas (that child of the Devil)
called himself Bar^eus as if he had been son to but Savior, or of his very
near alliance, Acts 13.6. Acts 13.6. Filium nominis i. viris celebrem.
where the Syriack has it Bur-shuma, a some of renown, a famous person. And
did not Simon the Sorcerer give out himself to be some great matter? he so
bewitched the Samaritans with a semblance of extraordinary holiness, (...)
Acts 8.9. unde (...).
he so amazed them therewith, that he had gained them, they were more his then
their own, as the word signifies. Justin Martyr, who was borne at Samaria, and
lived near those very times, tells us, that this varlet had an image set up in
honor of him with this superscription, Simoni Deo sancto, to Simon the holy
God. Epiphanius also has left recorded, that this Hell-hound called himself
GOD the Father and Son, and his Helena (I abhor to relate it) the Holy Ghost.
But to speak forward: When Saint Paul came to Ephesus a place too too much
addicted to these damned studies, (which gave occasion to that Proverb, (...)
Ephesian learning, for the black art, Saint Luke speaks the best of them,
when he calls them (...) Curiosities) certain of the vagabond Jews,
exorcists, took upon them to adjure evil spirits by the name of Jesus whom
Paul preaches. Here were good words, we see, but out of an ill mouth, and for
ill purposes: and therefore with as ill an issue to the speakers, who were glad
to fly out of the room naked, and wounded, as hardly bestead, and scarcely
scaping with their lives. Whereupon the Name of the Lord Jesus was magnified,
the number of Christians increased, and the curious conjuring books, though
never so costly, burnt up and abolished. Acts 19.13, to 21.
Those were good words that the Pythonisse cried after Paul, and his
fellow laborers at Thyatira, These men are the servants of the most high God,
which show unto us the way of salvation. Acts 16.17, 18.
What could Lydia her self have said more in their commendation? Yet Paul was
grieved at it, and cast out the Devil that spoke it. So, what could any Peter
have spoken better of his master CHRIST, then the Devil spoke? Jesus thou
son of the living God, etc. But where was his calling? What commission had he
to confess Christ in that sort? Surely none. Therefore he hears, (...), Be
dumb. Our Savior Halters him up, and will hear him no further. No more will
he have any such doings, Leu. 20.6. Deuteronomy. 18.10.
as this we speak of amongst his people: but will find out both them, and
such as seek to them: yea their sin will find them out. Gods word, for
certain, is no fit means for any such purpose, as we see in those Ephesian
Exorcists. Neither can it be of faith for want of a promise, and is therefore
sin, yea a sin of a double dye, Romans 14. (...).
of a crimson color, such as nothing can fetch out, but the blood of Christ,
or the fire of hell.

Say not to me, Ob.
in the last place, we have received good by these men, and as for the Devil,
we defy him, and will have nothing to do with him.

If any Jew had yielded himself to Rabshakehs lure, Sol.
had he not gone with him to Senacherib his master? so do these to the devil,
by resorting to his instruments. As the fisher catches the fish by the baits,
so does Satan hook in men's souls, by those smaller kindnesses. Esaias 39.
And as the Babylonish Ambassadors brought Hezekiah some petty presents but to
carry away all: so is it here. The sheep is never in so much danger of the Fox
as when he comes upon her in sheep clothing. If thy deadliest enemy drink to
thee, -- tim^o Danaos and dona serentes. Virg.
though in a cup of gold, would thou take it for any better than rank
poison? such are the Devils cutthroat kindnesses this way. Lastly (besides the
hurt done to the Charmer, who is hardened hereby, in his wickedness, whereas
without such customers his trading would fail) God sustaines a double injury.
1. In his glory, as if he were not able or ready to help his, but there must
be trudging to Endor or Ekron. 2. in his word thus wretchedly abused, 2 Kings
1.
as has been already discoursed.

CHAP. V.
Section 1.
THe third use is for reproof. And so, Is it God that speaks in the Holy
Scriptures? This serves deeply to shent and shame us for our first brutish
ignorance, secondly, barbarous unbelief, 2 Peter 1.17.
thirdly, inexcusable disobedience to that divine voice that came from the
excellent glory. This is my beloved son, in whom J am well pleased, Hear ye
Him.

For the first: how justly and unanswerably may the Lord renew the quarrel of
his covenant, and take up his old controversy against us, that there is no
knowledge in the land, Hosea 4.1. Hosea 8.12.
that he has written for us the great things of his law, and we have counted
them a strange thing, that whereas for the time we might have been teachers,
we have yet need to be taught the first principles of the Oracles of God, we
have need of milk, Heb. 5.12. (...). 1 Peter 2.1. Esaias 66.11. Prove. 14.6.
and not of strong meat? Was it not reasonable milk that we have sucked in
from the breasts of Consolation, the two Testaments? Is not knowledge easy,
and obvious to him that is willing? Are ye also ignorant? says our Savior to
his Disciples: Ioh. 3.10.
Art thou a Doctor in Israel, and know not these things which thou have read
so much of in Ezekiel and elsewhere? What? Owls abroad in so bright a
firmament? blind as beetles, in a land of light? dark in Goshen, amidst so
many means and mercies? in the land of uprightness do ye deal unjustly,
and not behold the Majesty of the Lord? Isa. 26.10.
O generation, see ye the word of the Lord: Have I been a wilderness to the
house of Israel? a land of darkness, and of the shadow of death? Ie. 2.31.
How is it then that ye are still sottish children without understanding? wise
to do evil, but to do good, ye have no knowledge. Jeremy 9.3. 2 Chronicles. 13.5.
Ought ye not to have known? as Abijam said to Jeroboam, and all Israel?
should ye not all know the Lord from the least to the greatest? Hab. 2.14.
Should not the earth be silled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters
cover the Sea? These are the times, if ever, wherein God has powered forth his
spirit upon all flesh; Joel 2.28.
stretched forth his hands to us all day long, Prove. 1.
lifted his voice in the high places of the City, caused the Candle of his
Gospel to shine full fair upon this kingdom for so long together, Matthew. 11.
so that we have been lifted up to Heaven, as Capernaum in the abundance of
means, and plenty of outward privileges. In the time of Pope Clement the
sixth, when as Lewis of Spain was chosen Prince of the Fortunate Islands, and
was gathering an Army in Italy and France, the English Ambassador then
resident at Rome together with his company, gat them home, as not doubting but
that Lewis was set up against the King of England, Robertus Avisburiensis.
than which they could not imagine there was any more fortunate Island under
heaven. Was it so then overspread with Egyptian darkness? what would our
forefathers have judged, had they had our happiness to live in these glorious
days? of Alexandria in Egypt, Ammianus Marcellinus observes, that once in a
day the Sun has been continually ever seen to shine over it.

In the Island of Lycia, the sky is never so cloudy, says Solinus, Vnde Horat:
came claram vocat.
but that the Sun may be seen. Semper in sole sita est Rhodos, The Rhodes is
ever in the Sunshine, says Aeneas Sylvius: And Tacitus tells us, that here
in Britany the Sun in Summer neither rises nor falls, but does so lightly
pass from us by night, In vita Agricolae
that you can hardly put a difference between the end and beginning of the
light. This is indeed chiefly true of us, in respect of the bright and
beautiful sunshine of the truth. Other Countries sit in darkness and shadow
of death, like the Valley of Sci^ssa near the Town called Patrae, Locus
radijs solis ferme invisus ^ce aliam ob causam memorabilis. Solin. c. 12
which being shaded by nine high His is scarce ever visited by the beams of
the Sun: But to us, (as to Zabulon and Nephtali) is a great light risen, Matthew.
4.16. Now when a master sets up his servant a great light to work by, he
looks to have it done both more, and better. Nihil in Hispania ^tiosum, nihil
ster^^^ Solin: cap. 36.
So here. Surely it should be with us as they say of Spain, that there is
nothing idle, nothing barren there. But a less it falls out far otherwise:
for some have not the knowledge of God, 1 Cor. 15.34.
to their shame be it spoken, but are as bard and rude every whit in very
fundamentals, and have the same bald and base conceits of God and his will as
the blind Heathens had. Let me tell you a Pulpit-story (and that is no place to
lie in) of an old man above sixty, who lived and dyed in a Parish, where
besides the word read, continually, there had been preaching almost all his
time, and for the greatest part twice on the Lords Day, Pembles Sermon: Misch^^fe
of Ignorance.
besides at extraordinary times. This man was a constant hearer as any might
be, and seemed forward in the love of the Word. On his deathbed, being
questioned by a Minister, touching his faith and hope in God, you will wonder
to hear what answers he made. Being demanded what he thought of God? he
answers, that he was a good old man. And what of Christ? that he was a towardly
young youth. And of his soul? that it was a great bone in his body. And what
should become of his soul after he was dead? That if he had done well, he
should be put into a pleasant green meddow. These answers astonished those
that were present, to think how it were possible for a man of good
understanding, and one that in his days had heard, by the least, two or three
thousand Sermons, yet upon his death bed in serious manner thus to deliver his
opinion in such maine points of Religion, which infants, and sucklings should
not be ignorant of. Oh who can sufficiently bewail and expiate the gross
ignorance found in the greater number, as rude and raw in Scripture matters, as
if they were not reasonable creatures, though in other things wondrous acute
and apprehensive. And for the better sort, that run to and fro to increase
knowledge: Dan. 12.4.
some smattering skill they have got, but its woefully indistinct and ill
bottomd. It would puzzle them shrewdly (after so much teaching) to give a good
account of their faith. Surely as Lactantius wittily said, that there was never
less wisdom in Greece then in the time of the seven wisemen: so may it be
justly complained of the extreme want of knowledge in the abundance of so many
means of knowledge. That little, men have got, is for most part, ineffectuall,
and has little influence into their hearts and lives. They use it (as some do
artificial teeth) more for show then service; or as the Athenians are said to
do their coin, to count and gingle with only: striving more to an ability of
discourse then to an activity of practice, to talk of it, then to walk by it.
The very entrance of Gods word gives light, etc. Psalm 119.1^ John 3. In
agris Sard^ reperitur animal perexigu^ simileque araeneis sorma, solifuga
dicta, quod diem sug at. Solinus, c. 1 Acts 28.27.
But this is condemnation, that is hell above ground that light is come into the
world, etc. like the creature called solifuga, the day is to the^ as the shadow
of death. These men's ignorance is not merely privative, as was that in our
Savior as man only, nor natural, as in infants: nor invincible as theirs that
lived in the midnight of Popery; but wilful and affected, Vt liberius peccent,
libenter ignorant, says Bern. they wink with their eyes, as the Pharisees:
they shut the window lest the radiant tresses of the sun should trouble them in
their sleep: they are wilfully ignorant, 2 Peter 2. Psalm. 50.
with those in Peter, whiles they cast Gods word behind them and bespeake him
in their language, Job 21, 14.
Depart from us, we will none of the knowledge of thy ways: being as glad to
be rid of him as the Philistims were of the Arc, or as the Gadarens were of
Christ. Now how righteously shall CHRIST regest one day upon all such profane
Gadarens Discecite, Depart, I know you not? be just as strange unto them then,
as they will needs be now to him? fill these back-sliders in heart with the
fruit of their own ways, Prove. 14.14. and since they have loved darkness,
give them their belly full of it, cast them into outer darkness, that
darkness beyond a darkness, the dungeon of darkness, (...).
where they shall never see the light again, till they be lightened by that
universal sire of the last day. Psalm 95.
They that know not Gods ways revealed in his word, he has sworn they shall
never enter into his rest: and although they always wander in heart and err
not knowing the Scriptures, yet can they not go so far wide as to miss of
Hell. An ignorant person is that Leper in Leviticus, his plague is in his head,
Lev. 13.44.
he is utterly unclean, and is therefore utterly to be excluded. See 2 These.
1.7.

Section 2.
SEcondly this, that the Scriptures are of God, serves sharply to reprove our
hateful infidelity. Many amongst us believe the Bible no otherwise then they
do humane Histories, or not the strange wonders there related, or no more
thereof then they can see cause for, or then suites with their carnal humors,
(...). Chrysostom.
or not the menaces, or not the promises, or apply them not, neither
individuate the same to themselves: but rather, put all off, as if it nothing
concerned them, and dispose of it to others. Is this to mingle the word with
faith? to melt, Ier. 31.18.
with Josiah? to smite upon our thighs as Ephraim? to examine our ways with
David, by Gods Word, Psalm 1^9.59. Prove. 9.12. Esaias 1. Esaias 55.^2.
and finding our selves far wide, to turn our feet to his Testimonies? Is
this to be wise for our selves? to consent and obey? to buy and beat? Many
men come to the word as they do to feasts, where they lay liberally on other
men's trenchers, let their own lie empty: they read the Scriptures as they
do news out of a far Country as not pertaining to themselves. Whereas the
Bible should be read, as we read the Statute-booke, (wherein every man holds
himself as much concerned, as if his name were there written) and should
therefore turn short again upon himself and say, what have I done? Jeremy
8.6. Rev. 10.9. Prove. 25.10.
what case am I in? what may I do to be saved? This is to take the book and
eat it, as John did: this is to feed upon the honey that we have found, as
Solomon bids: this is the way, Esaias 66.1.
to tremble at the Word, whilst men dwell upon it, till their hearts ache and
quake within them. As for those that do other wise, I may fitly say to them, as
our Savior said to the Jews concerning John: what went ye out into the
wilderness to see? a Reed shaken with the wind? Matthew. 1 1.
so what take ye in hand the book to read, or come to Gods house to hear? an
idle song? an old-wives tale? a foolish History? a frivolous interlude? Or, if
it be God that speaks in the Word read and preached, how is it that ye
believe him not? (...). Luke 7.30.
why seek ye (with the Pharisees) to make void the counsel of God concernning
your selves? Christ that by his absolute power can do any thing, (...). Mark
6.5.
by his actual power can do no great matter for these unbeleevers, more than
wonder at them. Verily, Verily faith our Savior to Nicodemus, John 3, 11.
we speak what we know, and testify that we have seen, and ye receave not
our witness. Lo, he joins himself with the Prophets which Nicodemus had
read, so cursorily and carelessly, as not to have there-hence learnd the
doctrine of Regeneration. This sin is now the greater, because as the Law and
the Prophets, Heb. 4.2. so the Gospel much more was written that men might
believe, John 20, 31.
and that believing they might have eternal life, which now they cannot enter
because of unbelief: Heb 3. ult.
but being cut off from Christ, Romans 11, 22. Revel. 21, 8.
they are lest without among dogs and devils, without heaven, I say, but far
within hell: whether they are sent and set as freeholders, to whom other
sinners there are, but Tenants or inmates, (...) Matthew. 24, 51.
and are therefore said to have their part with hypocrites and unbeleevers.

Section 3.
THirdly does the Lord himself speak to us from Heaven in the holy
Scriptures? and is he our Maker and master? Malachy 1.6.
how is it then that he is no better obeyed? that his word has no more place
in us or power over us? that it swayes not in our hearts: that it rules not in
our lives? Shall he stretch out his hand to a disobedient people? do we
provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger then he? Job 9.4.
has any ever waxed fierce against God and prospered? Shall we sit like sots
under the sound of his word, and not be sensible? or shall we feel his axe at
the root of our consciences, and be smitten with some remorse, and yet go on
in sin? What became of Pharaoh that would not hearken to Moses though he came
with a message from heaven? of the rich glutton that made no more reckoning of
Moses and the Prophets? Luke 16. ult.
of Lots sons in Law that counted their fathers fore-warnings a mere mo^kage?
Acts 13.41.
Behold ye despisers, and wonder, and perish: for I work a work in your
days, a work which you shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it unto
you. Which to prevent, precious and worthy of all acceptance is that counsel
of our Author. Heb. 11.25.
See that ye refuse not him that speaks from Heaven: see that ye shift him
not off, as the word signifies, (...) ^er. 2, 8.
or send excuse as those recusant guests in the Gospel did. When the truth
stands at the door of your Conscience, and pleads for admittance, say not as
he did to his friend that came to borrow two loaves, Come to me to morrow; or
as Felix to Paul, at a more convenient time I Will send for thee. For if the word
spoken by Angels only was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience,
that is, every commission and omission received a just recompense of reward,
how shall we escape if we neglect (he says not, if we deny, betray, oppugn,
but if we neglect, (light, let slip) so great salvation, which as first began
to be spoken by the Lord, etc. Heb. 2.2, 3 Where our Author, making use of
the Doctrine delivered in the Text, presses Obedience to the Gospel from the
danger of doing otherwise, far more probable and more importable then of
those that despised Moses Law, Hebr. 10, 28.
(who yet dyed without mercy.) 1. By comparison of the instruments that
deliverd it. 2. From the manifold confirmation the Gospel had, by testimony
both humane, verse 3. and Divine, ver. 4. (...). Chrysostom. (...) interpretatur, ne
pere^mus.
And thereupon firmly argues, therefore surely we ought to give the more
diligent heed to what we have heard from Christ's mouth, lest at any time we
should leake, or as Chrysostom interprets it, lest we utterly perish, lest we
become as water spilt on the ground, that cannot be gathered up again. Psalm
58, 8. 2 Samuel 14, 14. 1 Samuel 15.23. Esaias 30.8.
Rebellion is as witchcraft; its a sin that God bids be written in a book
(above all other sins) for the last day. Yea, for ever and a day. His usual
course is to give up such as obey not the truth, but refuse to be reformed to
strong delusions, vile affections, just damnation. 2 These. 2, 20. Romans 1, 26. 2
These. 1.8. Iere. 5, 13.
That word which they have held for wind only, with those in Jeremy, shall
prove a fire in their bones. And although they have made some sorry shift to
shake it off and slight it, as an empty ring, a vain sound, a dead letter,
etc. it shall lay fast hold upon them, Zach. 1.6. John 12, 48. Matthew. 3, 10.
Matthew. 24, 14.
judge them at the last, and cut them down as fuel to the fire. The Gospel
is preached for a testimony against worlds of people that contemn it. And for
the Law, they that will not have the direction thereof, must and shall have the
correction. Aut fatiendum certe aut patiendum: there is no avoiding of it. They
that tremble not in hearing, shall be crushed to pieces in feeling, Bradford.
as that Martyr said.

CHAP. VI.
Our last use is of Exhortation, and first to Ministers, Jeremy 2.8.
whose office it is to handle the Law, Mar. 16, 15. (...). 2 Timothy 2, 15. Ephesians.
4, 11.
to preach the Gospel, to divide Gods Word aright, to speak as the Oracles of
God, for the perfecting of the Saints and the building up of Christ's mystical
body: It highly imports all such, as they will answer it to him whose person
they bear, whose stead they stand in, whose work they wait upon, to fulfill
their ministry, Col. 4.17.
by discharging their duty therein. 1. With all assiduity and earnestness. 2.
With fidelity and boldness. 3. With integrity and unblameablenesse.

Section 1.
FIrst, what ever thy hand finds to do in this weighty work of the Lord, do
it with all thy might, as David danced, as Baruc builded, 2 Samuel 6, 14. Neh. 3,
20. Genesis 31, 40. Acts 20, 31. 2 Timothy 4.2.
as Jacob served, as Paul preached night and day with many tears and
temptations, and as he charged Timothy in preaching to be instant, to stand to
the work, yea to stand over it, (...).
and that both in season and out of season, as knowing the worth of a soul,
Jeremy 48, 10.
and the terror of the Lord, who has bitterly cursed the careless, and sent
the idle servant packing to his place in hell. Be not ye therefore idle nor
unprofitable, 2 Peter 1.
but as any has received the gift, minister the same to others, as good
stewards of the manifold grace of God. 1 Peter 4.
Christ the good Samaritan brings the hurt and wounded sinner into the Inn of
his Church, where he delivers to the Host, (I mean the Minister) those two
pence of his Word and Sacraments, with charge to see him safe and well look^
to, till his return. Now if there be either no balm in Gilead, Jeremy 8.22.
Job 13, 4.
or no Physician there, If those that are there be Physicians of no value;
either have no healing medicines, Ier. 30.13. or no care of the cure, but,
gather temporalls by themselves, sow spiritualls by others, In Mat. 10, 16.
(as Albertus Magnus complained of the Pastors of his time) eat the flesh, and
wear the fleece, Ezekiel. 34, 3.
but feed not the flock, nor heal the sick, as Ezekiel has it: what then
will they do when the Arch-shepheard rises up? Job 31, 14.
and when he visits, what will they answer him? woe to the Idol-shepheard
that leaves the flock, Zach. 11, 17. Zach. 11, 15.
or that wen he comes has only forcipes and mulctram (those instruments of a
foolish shepherd) look only after lac and lanam, does the work by others (as
Peter Martyr complained of some in those days) reap the profits by
themselves, and as it is in the book of Job, Com: in 1 Samuel 12.
says he, Boves arant, and asini pascuntur. How shall our Savior shake up
such loose or lazy Pastors, that look not to the flock (over whom he had
made them over seers) as Eliab did David, Acts 20.
with what make thou here? and with whom have thou left those few sheep in
the Wilderness? 1 Samuel 17, 18.
I know thine idleness, and the naughtiness of thine heart. The careful
Levite makes haste home, Judges 19, 5. Procul ab agro suo dissitus, jacturae
vicinus. Columella. Domini vestigia sunt fimus optimus in agro. Aust. Occon.
lib. 1. cap. 6.
when called abroad about his necessary business. His heart is where his
calling is; and by how much the more sacred his charge, by so much the more
attendance, he knows it expects. When therefore he is from home, he is like a
fish in the air: his heart cleaves to his people, as a fathers to his
children: his daily thoughts and cares run upon them; he fears nothing more
than that any Martha should say unto him: Domine, si tu bio fuisses, frater
meus non fuisset mortuus. And forasmuch as where vision fails, the people
perish, Prove. 29, 18.
he gladly takes all opportunities and advantages of preaching publicly, of
instructing privately. The love of Christ so wrought in Doctor Tailor Martyr,
that no Sunday, nor Holy Day passed, Act: and Mon:
or other time when he might get the people together, but he preached to them
the Word of God. Ibid. 1457.
Master Bradford even during his imprisonment preached twice a day constantly
unless sickness hindered him. This was according to the example of our
Savior, Matthew. 13.1. In the same day wherein he had consuted and confounded
the Pharisees, (as it may seem) in the morning, he taught the people out of
the ship in the afternoon. Bishop Ridley also preached every Holy Day and
Sunday for the most part, Ibid. 1559.
except he were let by some weighty businesses. To whose Sermons the people
resorted, swarming about him like Bees, and coveting the sweet juice of his
heavenly doctrine. He well understood that praedicationis officium suscipit,
quisquis ad sacerdotium accedit, Jn ^astora^.
as Gregory the Great has it. And his successor Gregory the third who sat
Anno 731. Funccius in Chronol.
preached frequently to the Clergy and people of Rome (an extraordinary
example) and was held so well insighted into the Scriptures, as no man of his
age came near him. The Roman Generals when they had once ridden in triumph,
were wont to take their case ever after. But Cato is commended for this, Pomp:
Lab: Comp: To. Hist: lib. 2.
that he still continued his care for the Commonwealth; after he had obtained
that honor of triumph. Neither is this great Bishop less to be praised, if
that be true especially, that was spoken by Doctor Bassinet a Iacobine Friar,
Act: and Mon: fol. 862.
that at Rome it was as great a wonder to hear a Bishop preach, as to see an
Ass flee. The common Praedicants they bind heavy loades upon. Sands his
Relation: page 27.
For the custom of Italy is for the same man (in their greater Cities
appointed) to preach every day in LENT without intermission, if their strongth
do serve them. Saint Chrysostomes (...) shows, he preached every day
ordinarily. So did Origin, mostly, though never above an hour, sometimes not
halse an hour, as appears by his Homilies. The like is reported of Master
Calvin, and of Melancthon, Tres labores afstrinavitesse difficil: regentis,
docentis, partus rientis. Melch. Adam Ger: the. 359.
who also was wont to say that None under wont such pains as Preachers,
Rulers, and women in travail. Luther also says that a Master of a family has
somewhat to do, a Magistrate strate more, a Minister most of all. And he
afterward adds, that if he were now to choose or change his calling, Idem.
Jbid.
he could with far more ease dig and delve, and so sweat out a poor
living than preach and preach the Gospel. (...) prout rustici laborant. 1 Cor.
15.10. (...). 1 Cor. 4 1. (...) mancipia ad remos damnata, ab (...) remigo.
(...) from (...) torostrale or beat, as the bird does the shell fish.
Ministers are called laborers in harvest, their pains is as great as of
those that cleave wood, or that are fast chained to an oar. They are the
peoples servants for Jesus sake, and ought to labor even to lassitude, as the
foul does to get the fish out of the shell to spend themselves without spare,
yea, to spend and be spent, as Paul; whose pertinacy in Preaching, at Ephesus
especially, was admirable; where besides other ministerial offices, he
disputed every day with the Jews in the School of one Tyrannus, and that from
the fifth to the tenth hour, five hours together, as one ancient Greek Copy
has it. (...). Acts 19, 9. Bez.
The High Priest whithersoever he turned him, was to be heard by the sound of
his bells, upon pain of death. The staffe-rings were to continue upon the
Arc, the Kohathites shoulders felt. Wherefore. The best was, the Lord helped
the Levites that bare the Arc of the Covenant: 1 Chro. 15, 26.
and so he will do us, if we can but seek him, out of a sense of our utter
insufficiency to these things, and do our utmost to look to the Ministry that
we have received of the Lord, that we fulfill the same. Col. 4.17.
How this is done see Acts 6.4. Let others be appointed over the business,
but we will give our selves continually to prayer and preaching: we'll beg
and dig, and dig and beg as that good Vine-dresser did, whose mattocke kept
off the Masters Axe. Luke 13.8.
It was a foolish pride in Montanus to overween his Pepuza and Tymium two
pelting Parishes in Phrygia, and to call them Jerusalem, Eusebius lib. 5. cap.
17.
as if they had been the only Churches in the world. But this is the
commendable zeal of every true Pastor, to adorn his own lot by a redoubled
diligence. Verbi Minister es, hoc age, D. Ward: pref. in Perk: probl.
was Master Perkins his Motto. It is a whole man's work, and a good one too:
entangle himself he need not with the affairs of life. 2 Timothy 2 4. Canon:
tert:
The Council of Chalcedon flatly forbids Ministers the care of outward things.
Some care they must needsly take, but let it be as little as may be. Saint Paul
dispatcheth his own private business with Philemon in one word, Prepare for me
a lodging, etc. verse 22. His maine care and labor was for the welfare of
Onesimus, whom he had begotten to Christ in his bonds. A Ministers chief
study must be how to save himself and those that he are him. 1 Timothy 4.16.
Our Saviors threefold Pasce to Peter imports as much, and he did it to the
utmost. I will not be negligent, says he, as long as I am in this Tabernacle
to stir you up. His Lord had charged him, Feed my sheep (with golden fleeces
on their back) yea do it (...) mihi, as the Syriack has it. Let my love
constrain thee to do thine utmost at it, till such time as thou shall no
longer gird thy self, and walk whither thou will, but another shall gird thee,
or rather cord thee, fetter thee, John 21.17, 18.
and carry thee whither thou would not. Master Calvin being much weakened by
uncessant pains in the Lords work, was toward his latter end advised by his
friends to take care of his own health. Quid? vultis ut Dominus veniens me
otiosum inveniret? Beza in vitae ipsius.
To whom he replied, not without some indignation, what? would ye have the
Lord, when he comes, to find me idle? Bishop Jewel riding to preach at Lacocke
in Wiltshire, a Gentleman that met him, perceiving the feebleness of his body
advised him, for his healths sake, to return home again. His answer was,
Oportet Episcopum concionantem mori. And so he did. D. Humphrey in the life of
B. Jewel.
For presently after the sermon, he was by reason of sickness forced to his
bed, from whence he never came off till his translation to glory. The like is
reported of Bandisius a Dutch Divine. Faciam of ficium dum pot^ro, etiamsi
mo^lem mihi concionando accelcrem. Melch. Adam in vitae.
I will do my duty, said he to his friends (that otherwise advised him) while I
can; yea though I hasten my death by preaching. And of a certain Scotch
Minister the same Author relates, that a little before his death he offered to
rise out of his bed, sick as he was; and being asked the reason, he
answered, that all that night he had been wholly taken up with the meditation
of CHRIST'S Resurrection, and now he was desirous to go into the Pulpit, that
thence he might comfort others with the same comforts wherewith he had been
comforted. Melch. Adam de Theol: exter: page 139.
He showed his good will to have spent his last breath in preaching, according
to Saint Austins wish, that Christ when he came might find him aut precantem
aut pradicantem, praying or preaching. O happy is that servant, whom his Lord,
when he comes, Mat. 24.46, 47.
shall find so doing! Verily, I say unto you, that he shall make him ruler
over all his goods.

Section 2.
SEcondly, let Ministers be called upon and exhorted, to deliver the Word (since
it is Gods Word) with all faithfulness, 1 Cor. 4, 1. 1 Cor. 3, 10. 2 Timothy
2.15. 2 Cor. 6, 1. Rev. 19, 10, and 22, 9.
as good stewards, as wise master builders, as workmen that need not be
ashamed, as co-workers with God and fellow laborers with the Angels, in the
matter of man's salvation. Tit. 1, 4. 2 Cor. 2, 17. (...). Or, it is a metaphor
from deceitful Vintners who for gain mix water with Wine. 2 Cor. 4.2.
Hold fast the faithful word, yet not concealing, nor corrupting it, not
handling it deceitfully, or Huck-stering it (as men do their wares, caring
rather to beguile then benefit the buyer) but by manifestation of the truth,
commending themselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God. He that
has my word, let him speak my word faithfully, Jer. 23.28. 1 Cor. 4.2: Heb.
3, 2. Ezech. 13, 12, 22 Romans 16, 17. 2 John 10.
And in Stewards, it is required that they be found faithful, as Moses was
faithful in all Gods house. Deliver they must the will of GOD, his whole will,
nothing but his will, neither pleasing, or false, or strange doctrine, nor for
vain glory, contention, or envy, Phil. 1.14, 15.
but purely, sincerely, seasonably, giving to every one his own portion: Not
as he in the Emblem, that gave straw to the dog, Theologus Gloriae dicit
malum bonum, and bonu^ malum. Luther.
and a bone to the Ass, not calling good evil, and evil good, not walking in
craftiness, but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God, speaking
in Christ. 2 Cor. 2.17.
Let Saint Paul be our pattern for fidelity in his ministry. What he delivered
to others he first received of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.23. And as he received what
he delivered, so he delivered what he received, he kept nothing back, Acts
20.17. of all the Counsel of God. This has many particulars in it. 1. Those
ministers that would be found faithful, must deliver the truth only. Aarons
Bells were of pure gold, not of copper or other baser metal. 2. Wholly, not
budging for any man's greatness, nor balking any thing necessary to be known.
Acts 20.24. 2 Timothy 4.5.
3. Plainly to the capacity of the Hearers, Mar. 4.33. John 16.12. not in a
stately style, or Roman English, Acts 22.2.4. Powersully, and with all
authority, as Christ did, Tit. 2.15. (...).
compelling men to come in, charging and commanding them to consent and obey'
that Gods house may be full. 5. Constantly, being ready for to teach, (...) as
Saint PAUL, Acts 26.29.
the more and the less, laying down line after line, precept after precept,
Isa. 28.10.
prooving if at any time, God will give men Repentance, 2 Timothy 2.25.
that they may awake, etc. Holy Zachary took not his dumbness for a
dismission, but stayed out the eight days of his course: though he ceased to
speak, yet he ceased not to minister. 6. Lastly, and chiefly, the man of God
must preach his Word boldly, as Isay who was very bold, Romans 10 20. (...). q.
(...). Acts 4.13.
as Peter, and John who used great freedom of speech, as Michaiah who after
he had seen GOD on his throne, feared not before 2. Kings in their Majesty.
Not budging a whit nor yielding an hair, no not for an Angels authority, as
Paul: but witnessing a good confession, Galath. 1, 8. 1 Timothy 6, 13.
as the Master did before Pontius Pilate, and keeping his Commandment without
spot, 1 Timothy 6.13, 14. unrebukeable, which is: Be strong, and of a good
courage, Josh 1, 4.
have not I commanded thee? be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed, for the
Lord thy God is with thee: he will not fail thee nor forsake thee. Psalm 45.
Philippians 2. Esaias 3, 10, 11 Esaias 58.1, 2.
Ride on therefore, because of the word of truth: hold forth the word of life
amidst a perverse and crooked generation. Tell the wicked from God, it shall go
ill with them: show the people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob
their sins. I know men are naturally sick of a Noli me tangere: the earth
would gladly sit still and be at rest, that they might go down to hell
without disturbance; Zach. 1, 11. Amos 5, 10.
they bate him that reproves in the gate, as Ahab hated Michaiah because he
never spoke good to him. It is probable, that Michaiah was that disguised
Prophet, who brought to Ahab the fearful message of displeasure and death for
dismissing Benhadad. And Ahab hates him, and has him fast in prison ever
since. From thence he is now sent for, and solicited by the way to speak good
to the King. But he was at a point, for that, to speak whatsoever the Lord
should say unto him though he were sure to kiss the stocks for his stoutnesse.
The other Prophets prophesied placentia, like Squirrels they had a trick to
build evermore, and have their holes to the Sunshine to keep themselves on
the warmer side of the hedge, Ad latus navis saelicius, pro temporum ratione,
sese inelinant. Buchole.
to incline to the happier side of the ship, to hold in with Princes and great
ones, howsoever.

But, Ezekiel. 13.10, to 15. God threatens to rent the wall of security, which
those caementarij Diaboli (as one calls them) the Devils dirt-dawbers had
dawbed with untempered mortar, Non ad veritatem solum, sed etiam ad opiniones
eorum qui audiunt, accomodanda est oration. Cicer: Partit:
and there shall be an overflowing shower in his fierce fury, to consume both
it and them that dawbed it. Rhetoricians have a rule, to fit their speech not
to the truth of things only, but to the opinions and fancyes of them that hear
them. This is by no means to be practiced by a Preacher. Saint Austin repented
him of nothing more than that being young he preached ut placeret, non ut
deceret, more to delight the care, then to smite the heart. Vt (...) qui ab
omnibus gratiam inire cupit: quem quidam per incum placentam dixit.
For if I yet please men (as once when I was a Pharisee) says Paul, I am no
more the servant of Christ. Men, be they pleased or displeased with divine
errands, GOD that sends us on them must not be displeased. But he has
excluded the fearful, and will not employ a white-livered Soldier so far as
to break a Pitcher or to bear a torch. Thou therefore (as a good Soldier of
Jesus Christ) suffer hardship, do the work of an Evangelist, Galat. 1.10. Rev.
21.8. Judges 7.3. 2 Timothy 2.3.
do it thoroughly, do it boldly, do it sharply, if need be, rebuke them
cuttingly, that they may be sound in the faith. Tit. 1.13. (...). Chirurgos
misericordes esse non oportet.
It is a metaphor from Chirurgions, who must not be merciful says Celsus, but
have Lions hearts, least their mercy prove as great cruelty, as his, that
should forbear to draw a drowning man out of the water, for fear of pulling
off some part of his hair. Great is our charge to declame against sin, yea to
proclaim hellfire against it, if men amend not; upon every opportunity to use
all importunity for the rousing of sinners out of that dead Lethargy whereinto
Satan and an evil custom has cast them. (...). 2 Pet. 2.13.
Cry aloud, says the Lord, cry in the throat, Esaias 58.1. Ier. 1.17.
spare not, lest I confound thee before them; lift up thy voice like a trumpet.
Cast away the inverse Trumpets of Furius Fulvius, which sounded a retrait, when
they should have sounded an alarm. It is a treacherous slattery to sooth men
up in their sins, and to make all fair weather before them, when the storm
of Gods heavy displeasure is ready to burst out upon them, such a storm as
shall never be blown over. If Ministers must be mannerly in the form, yet
in the matter of their message they must be resolute. It is probable Joseph
used some preface to Pharaohs Butler in reading him that destiny, Genesis 40,
19. Chap. 4.19.
such as was that of Daniel, My Lord, the dream be to them that hate thee,
etc. or as Philo brings him in, with a, Vtinam tale somnium non vidisses, etc.
I would thou had not dreamt such a dream. But for the matter, he gives him a
true, though sharp interpretation. Bitter truths must be told, however they be
taken. If men hate us, they do it with as good justice, as if some fond people
should punish the Herald, or accuse the trumpet as the cause of their war. If
they exclaim against us, they show as much madness, as if the widow of Naims
son should have raild upon our Savior for offering to raise him from the dead.
If they deride our message, and command us ad quercum dicere, Livy.
se interim alia acturos, as a Governor of the Aequi in Italy bad the Roman
Ambassadors, to speak to the walls, they have something else to do then to
regard us: we must take the boldness to answer them again, as they did him.
Et haec sacrata quercus audiat saedus a vobis violatum. Let these stones of the
wall, and beams out of the house-sides, yea let Heaven and earth witness your
intolerable contempt, wherein ye have not despiled man, but God. 1 These. 4, 8
What are we that ye have murmured against us? says Moses, your murmurings are
not against us, but against the Lord, Exodus 16, 7, 8
who will justly punish it. Thus must Ministers contest against the raging
world, and contend for the doctrine of faith once received, not loving their
ease, no not their lives unto the death, Acts 20.
that they may fulfill their course with joy. Itching ears would have clawing
Preachers, and these are the times foretold by the Apostle, 2 Timothy 4, 3.
wherein men cannot abide wholesome doctrine. Briars and thorns be with thee,
says God to Ezekiel, such as a man can hardly handle: he that touches them
must be fenced with iron, and with the staff of a spear. 2 Samuel 2, 6
But fear them not, nor be dismayed though they be a rebellious house. And that
he might not, behold the spirit took him up, and he heard behind him a voice
of a great rushing, saying, Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.
Ezekiel. 4.12.
Hereby his heart was fortified against all affronts of the people, and
afflictions of the world; whether they would hear, or whether they would
forbear, yet he should find there was a reward, for the righteous, a God that
judges in the earth, and pleades for his faithful servants (when they little
think of it) in the hearts of their greatest enemies. Jeremy 9.3.
A godly man that is valiant for the truth, and refuses to praise the wicked,
but when he has cause, will contend with them, and not be like a troubled
fountain, or a corrupt spring, well he may for the time receive ill words
from the wicked, but their hearts are afraid of him, and their Consciences
admire him, Prover. 24.25, and 28.4. Saint Paul standing before Faelix, (who
had more regard to gain then Justice,) and Drusilla a Iewesse, yet married,
against the Law, to an uncircumcised person, takes occasion in a certain kind
of grave wisdom, joynd with great liberty of speech, to discourse and dispute
before them of Justice, Temperance, and the judgment to come, till Faelix
trembled, Acts 24.25.
and could hear him no longer. The like spirit was found in Athanasius, that
eye of the World, as one calls him: Of whom Nazianzen reports that he was
Magnes and Adamas, In Encom: Athanas:
a loadstone in his sweet gentle drawing nature, and yet an Adamant in his
resolute stout carriage against those that were evil, Pueris illa
terriculamenta proponenda sunt sc. exilia, supplicia, etc. Greg Naz. de laud:
Baesi^ij.
were they never so great. And how did Saint Basil despise the menaces of
Valens the Arrian Emperor, and so daunted him with his presence, that he
reeld and had fallen, had he not been upheld by those that stood next him. Who
has not read or heard how freely Ambrose dealt with Theodosius? Tripar: hist.
lib. 9. cap. 30.
B. Ridley offering to preach before the Lady Mary, and receiving a repulse,
being brought by Sir Thomas Wharton her servant to the Dining place, he was
desired to drink. Which after he had done, he paused a while, looking very
sadly; and suddenly brake out into these words. Surely I have done amiss. Why
so? quoth the Knight. For I have drunk, said he, in that place where Gods word
offered, has been refused. Whereas if I had remembered my duty, I had departed
immediately, and shaken off the dust of my shoes for a testimony against this
house. These words were by the said Bishop spoken with such a vehemence, Fox
Martyr: fol. 1270.
that some of the hearers afterward confessed the hairs to stand upright on
their heads. So Arch^: Grindall by cunning practices of his adversaries, lost
the Queens favor, because he had condemned an unlawful marriage of Iulio an
Italian Physician with another man's Wise, Camdens Elis. transl. The Newlanders
cure by Sir Will: Vaughan: Ep: dedic.
Another learned Bishop admonished, that perelesse Q. Elizabeth in a zealous
sermon to think on her last end, by reason of her great age, which few Princes
had attained to, and of the Climacterical year of her life which happened at
that time, She took it so impatiently (Gods children wrangle sometimes with
their meat, as Asa did) that the Bishop, for his good intentions, was not
only distasted by her, but put for a time to some trouble. Yet God did ever
after so bless him (says mine Author) that few Bishops of this kingdom left
behind them to their wives and children such fair estates as he did. Neither
was the Lord behind hand with D. Parker (afterward Archbishop of Canterbury)
for his Sermon near Norwich before the Rebels in Kets conspiracy; Life of K.
Edw: 6. by S. Io. Hay: page 72.
wherein he touched them so near for their living, that they went near to
touch him for his life. says the Historian. And surely it is a hard hazard,
and a great disadvantage to deal in this kind with those that have thirty
Legions at command, as Phavorinus said of Adrian the Emperor. Necesse est ut
eum doctio^em omni^us ag^oscam qui triginta habet legiones. Ael. Spartian.
Periculosum est ei contradicere qui petest and aqua and ig^i interdicere. Kex
platonic. Eccles. 6.10. 2 Chronicles. 14.6.
Contend not with him that is mightier then thou, says Solomon. But when the
cause is not ours, but the Lords (as Iehosaphat told his Judges,) great heed
must be taken that we betray not the truth by a cowardly silence, under
whatsoever fair shows, and pretenses. Fear not men, says our Savior to his
Disciples, For there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, and hid
that shall not be known, Matthew. 10.26. As who should say, This and that may
be colourably pleaded and pretended in favor of your deceitful and slippery
handling Gods holy Word: but all will out at last, and it shall well appear
that you did it to decline the danger of plain dealing, and that you might
sleep in a whole skin: As Moses, who hung off a great while from going to
Pharaoh with a message of dismission, till God (who knew where it stuck, Exodus
4.19.
and what pad was in the straw) told him they were all dead that sought his
life. But fear not (says our Savior there) them that kill the body, But
cannot keep either the soul from bliss, or the body from a blessed
Resurrection. Rather fear ye him that can cast body and soul to hell, yea I
say unto you fear him. The second Commandment is the first with punishment,
that as one fire, so one fear may drive out another. The fear of God, if we
be not faithful in his work, the fear of mischief from men, if we be. Elias
for telling truth shall hear Troublere, Jeremy Traitor, Paul Pest, pratler,
trifler, news-carryer, Act: and Mon:
one that tells whatsoever men will have him for gain, or advantage: one that
will for a piece of bread say what you will wish him, as M. Rogers our
Proto-Martyr in Queen Mary's days expounds it. Epiphanius somewhere says,
that the envious Jews gave out that he turned Christian merely out of
discontent: because he could not obtain to wife the High Priests daughter. But
this calumny he could shake off lightly enough, who loved not his life to the
death for the name of Jesus. Zacharias lost his life for his plain dealing, so
did John Baptist, our Lord Christ, his servants in former ages not a few. As of
latter times, An Dom: 1125
Platina tells of one Arnulphus a godly Preacher in the days of Pope Honorius
the second, much admired by the Nobility of Rome, but treacherously slain by
the Clergy, Verbis vivis, animatis sententiis, and spiritus fervore
flagrantissimis. Sixtus Senens.
whose lasciviousness and covetousness he courageously cried out against.
The like is recorded of Hieren: Savanarola first cast into prison (where he
wrote those lively Meditations upon Psalm 51. now extant) and afterward burnt
for the testimony of Jesus, and for his bold invectives against the sins of the
times. William Farell, that precious man, that daunted by no menaces, Hic est
ille Farellus, qui nullis minis, convitijs, verberibus denique inflictis
territus, M^mpelgardenses, Aquileienses, Lausannenses, Genuenses,
Novocosmenses, Christo lacrifecit Melch. Adam. ext. Theol. p. 115
reproaches, stripes, banishments, gained 5. Cities with their adjacent
territories to Christ, coming to Geneva one of the five, and for attempting a
Reformation there, brought before Authority, he was thus rayled upon; What
make thou here, thou Arch-devill, troubling our Town with thy new fangled
opinions? He modestly answered, I am no such one as thou call me: but I
preach Christ crucified, and that whosoever believes in him shall be saved. I
am debtour to all men that are but willing to hear and obey the Gospel. And
for this cause came we hither, to see if any in this City would lend us
audience, being ready to render an account of the faith and hope that is in us,
and to seal it, if need be, with our dearest blood. Here one of the Assessours
stood up and cried out; what need we any further witness? Away with such a
fellow from the earth. Better ths one Lutheran be put to death, then the whole
Town be troubled. To whom Farell replied. Speak not in the language of
Caiaphas, Scult. Annal. page 384.
but in the Word of God. Here, being smitten on the face, and bid to go out,
till they should advise what to do with him, ho was shot at but not slain (as
God would have it) with a Pistol, and afterward driven out of the City. But
one of the chief Magistrates favoring him, he returned again, and
(notwithstanding all opposition) prevailed with them for a happy Reformation.
Whereupon money was forthwith coined with this posie on the one fide, Post
tenebras lux, Ibid. 474.
Light after a long darkness, and on the other side. Deus noster pugnat pro
nobis. Our God fights for us. Thus was it at first, and who but Farellus was
much made of and magnified, as their Reverend reformer. But not long after, as
John Baptist soon grew stale to the Jews, and S. Paul became enemy to the
Galathians, because he told them the truth: so when Farellus (as he was a most
zealous Preacher) cried down their evil courses, and pressed them to a better
life, Melch. Adam in vita Calvini.
they paid him the worlds wages, called him in question for his life, and both
designed and did such things against him, Anno 1553 as Calvin (his Colleague in
the Ministry) could have wished washed out with his own blood. As for Calvin
himself, Who passing through Geneva as a young student, and being bound for
Italy, was adjured by Farellus to settle there, and (under pain of Gods heavy
curse upon him and his pretended studies) charged to help the Lord against the
mighty; Judge. 5.23.
how coursely was he used, at first, in that City of Geneva? Some for Calvin
called him Cain; others in contempt of him, named their dogs Calvin: many kept
from the Lords Supper out of hatred to him, their painful Preacher: nec pauci
erant scelerati, says he on his death bed, a quibus indignissima multa sum
perpessus, there were not a few wicked person, who dealt most unkindly and
unworthily with me. At length being cast out of the Town by an ostracisme
(though afterward recalled) surely, said he, if I had served men, Certe si
homini bus servivissem est. Contra Wolsaeus semetipsum detestatus, est quod
Regi pocius qua^ Deo studusset placere, Seult. Annal. 332. (...).
I had been but ill requited for all my love and labor. But God be thanked, I
have served him, who never leaves his: but whiles they be preaching lustily on
earth, he is interceding instantly for them in heaven, Rev. 8.3. The spirit
also hemmes them, in as it did S. Paul, Act. 20.22. he comprehends and keeps
them, so that when a man's own strength would fall oose, this supernatural
strength stays and strengthens it. This M. Calvin felt, and confessed a little
before his death to his fellow Ministers, that came to visit him; that the Lord
so confirmed and comforted him, Calvin morteturi Oration ad collegas apud Melch.
Adam invita Calvini, page 106.
who was by nature timorous and faint-harted, that he was no whit daunted or
discouraged by the injuries and indignities of his greatest enemies: but
chearefully went on with the work of the Lord Jesus, who with the same right
hand raised his servant John, wherein he held the seven Angels of Asia. Rev. 1
17, 20.


SEC. 3.
LAstly, let Ministers (since it is Gods Word they handle, God's Ark they bear,
Gods Altar they wait at, Gods errand they go on) be holy and unreproovable in
their whole course, expressing God to the World as much as may be. Be clean,
ye that bear the vessels of the Lord, yet that are the vessels to bear his
holy Name to the people. Esav 42 11. Acts 9.15.
Let holiness to the Lord be written on your frontlets, nay on your pots, and
on the bridles of your horses. In the Leviticall Priests, nil plebeium
reperiebatur, nil populare, Zach. 14.20.
says Ambrose, nothing vulgar or ordinary was to be found. Special order was
taken that they should be neither bleare-eyed, nor blemished, nor any other way
deformed or defective. Neither might they at any time serve at the Altar, till
they had washed in the Laver, lest they dye. The very workmen were filled with
the spirit of wisdom, Exodus 30.20.
for the making of their vestments; the high Priests especially, who came forth
Os humerosque Deo similis like an earthly God, in his glorious and gorgeous
attire, every piece whereof was mysterious and significant. By his linen
breeches, there are that think he was minded and admonished of purity: Sunt
qui per feminalia ponti^icis, puritate^, etc. D. Predeaux, Lect. de vestibus,
page 38.
by his girdle (say they) he was taught discretion; by his embroidered coat
heavenly conversation, by his golden bells, sound doctrine; by his pomgranats,
godly living: by his humerall, patience in bearing other men's infirmities, by
his Rational, or brestplate, carfulness for the faithful: by his Mitre, a
right intention: and by the plate thereof, an open profession of holiness.
Remarkable it is that when Aaron and Miriam had murmured against Moses, and
were both alike in the transgression, Miriam only was smitten with leprosy,
and not Aaron. Chrysostom says, (...), Homil. in Coloss. 3.
it was for the holiness and honor of the Priesthood, and lest the leprosy
on his person should redou^d to the dishonor of his Office. How much more
careful should such then be of sin, which defiles much worse than any leprosy
or jakes whatsoever, as our Savior shows in the Gospel? Mat. 15.18, 19
How should they see to it that their doctrine, though it be carpt at, yet it
may be sound speech that cannot be condemned, and for their persons and
practices, though they be nibbled at, yet both may be unrebukable. (...), Tit.
2.8. (...), 1 Timothy 6.24.
Ministers should be as the Cedars of Libanus, Cant. 1.17. tall, and that admit
not of any worm; that of covetousnes especially, 1 Timothy 6.10.
which boareth thorough the conscience. Yea, as the tree of Paradise, sweet for
taste, and fair to look upon; as Absalom in whom there was no blemish from head
to foot: as Saul higher by head and shoulders, in goodness than the rest of
the people: as Daniel, who could be found no fault with, save in the matter of
his God: as John Baptist, who lived so strictly, that by some he was taken to
be the Christ: yea as Christ himself, that imparallell pattern of
perfection, who lest us a copy, says S. Peter, that we should write after, in
that he did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. (...). 1 Pet. 2.21.22.
He preached many times (it is Theophylacts observation upon Math. 5.2.) when yet
he opened not his mouth, viz. by his holy life and wounderfull words. So must a
Minister: (...).
Every thing in him had need be edificatory and exemplary. He should go before
the flock, John 10.34. The custom of the Eastern Country, it seems, was for
Shepherds, not to drive their Sheep, but go before them. Let no man despise
thy youth, says Paul to Timothy. How shall I help it, 1 Timothy 4 12. (...)
Ignat. ad Mign. (...).
if they do, might he say? Why, be thou an example of the believers in word
and conversation. The word rendered example, signifies, such a thing as makes
the stamp upon the coin, or the mould for the bullet. The Ministers life is
the life of his Ministry, and Teachers sins are the teachers of sins. For the
people are led more by their eyes than by their ears; the eyes of their
Understandings, like Jacobs sheep, being too firmly fixed on such
party-colored objects, Malac. 2.
as say well and do worse; cause their affections to bring forth spotted
fruits. But God will cast dirt in the faces of irregular and irreligious
Levites, that cover foul sins, as Elies sons did, under a white Ephod, that
have Vrim without Thummim on their brest-plates, bells, without pomgranates on
the borders of their garments, that (Pharisee like) speak by the talent,
Merito praese^t Cic^ro, Catone, Socra^^, quon^^ hujusdecta, illius facta
laudantur. De amicitia.
work by the ounce, that (Lizard-like) make prints with their feet, dash them
out with their tail, and (as the Lap-wing) cry aloft, as if their affections
were there fixed, which yet are fashtned here below. these resemble coin,
which is white in it self, but draws a black line after it: Or water in great
men's kitchins, which having cleansed other things, is it self fit only for the
sink. Unsavory salt is hardly fit for the dunghill, nor a wicked Minister for
any place, but hell. Certainly he is the worst creature upon Earth, and who
are Devils in Hell now; but such as once were Angels in Heavens. Pop. Romans
Carbone pollicente quipiam and addente jusjarandum cum exsecratione, vicissim
juravit se illi nom credere. Suadet loquentis, vita non oration.
Neither helps it any whit that their tongues are so smooth in speaking good
Divinity, while their hands are so rough with Esau, in uttering false. The
Bethshemites fare the worse, for being a City of Priests, their privilege
doubled their offense, 1 Samuel 6.19, And God would not permit Aaron the passions
of another man, because he was a Priest. It was at the funeral of his two sons
that he is forbidden to weep. Levit. 10.6.
He must not so much lament the judgment, as magnify Gods Justice, in the
deserved death of those two drunken priests. They coming off their alebench,
likely, brought strange fire and by fire they perish. Immediately thereupon
charge is given to Aaron and his sons that they drink not wine nor strong
drink, Verse 9.
when they go into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, lest they dye. Moreover
Moses said to Aaron, This is that which the Lord has spoken, Verse 3.
I will be sanctified in all them that draw near unto me. How sanctified? may
some say: Austin answers, Aut a nobis, aut in nos: Either by us, while we
preach painfully, live hoilly: or else, on us, by our just and utter
destruction. Seldom do loose-lived Ministers escape the visible vengeance of
God, forasmuch as they stumble with the Lantern in their hands, and the words
of reproof in their mouths, therefore will he seed them with gall and
wormwood. Ier. 23.15.
By living otherwise then they teach, they teach God to condemn them: they
carry Vriahs letters, and put a sword into Gods hand, as it were, wherewith to
undo the^. Balaam, Satan's spelman (as one calls him) though he blessed Gods
Israel, and wished well to their heaven; yet for his contrary courses and
counsel to Balack, he was so far from inheriting with them, that he was cut
off by them. Hophni and Phineas, because they made the service of God to stink,
by their stinking courses, so that men abhorred it for their sakes (like as the
Donatists pretented to do the Church, for the evil life of Cecilian) an ill
end befell them. Commonly God sensibly rejects such even in this life: either
rooting them out by death, and making their places spue them out, or else by
blasting their gifts, Zach. 11.17.
drying up their right arms, putting out their right eyes, causing the night
to come upon their divination, and utterly refusing to be glorified by them.
Well it may be, that they may live long, as Saul did, after his rejection; and
the Pharisees after they had fallen into the unpardonable sin. The Devil also
gave them many thanks, as he is said to have done the Popish Priests in
Hildebran's time Anno 1072, Math. Paris. Hist.
for furnishing Hell so fast with so many souls as had perished by their
default. Rasis sac^ificulorum verti^ibus, and magnatum galeiss stratum inferni
p^vimentum esse prover^ b.o screbatur.
And better he would thank them (doubtless) when he should meet them in hell,
the pavement whereof was commonly said to be pitched with shavelings skuls, and
great men's crests. But surely Christ's will chashiere them as the Tirshata did
those turncoat Priest, Ezra 2.61. 62, 63. Matthew. 7.
and wash his hands of them for ever: Yea though they can produce and prove
that they have prophesied in his name, and by his name done great Miracles, if
nevertheless they be workers of iniquity; and albeit they have taught others,
Yet themselves have not done the Will of his Heavenly Father. (...) Ministers
may as files, (...) others, themselves remain rough, and as Cariers bear bags
of many for the use of them, to whom they are sent.
A blind man may bear a torch to the lightning of others; and a stinking
breath sound a Trumpet with great commendation. The lifelesse Heaven gives
life, and the dull whetstone sharpeneth Iron. Noah's Carpenters that made the
Arc, perished in the stood, and Aeneas his Pilot saved the ship, Medijs,
palinurus in ^ndis etc.
and was drowned himself. The Toades-head may yield a precious stone
(Busonites) of great virtue, Medicorum tituli ^edicamenta si^^ pyae des, ve^ena
^^ctant.
and wholesome sugar be found in poisoned cane. Saint Paul gives us to know
that a man may Preach profitably to others, and yet himself be a castaway:
Nolite igitur magis eloqui magna quam vivere, D. Bed. concio ad C^^^.
says One. Vivite concioninibus, concionamini moribus. Let your lives be a
transcript of your Sermons, your Precepts enlivened by your practice, which
should be as a visible comment on the audible Word. A Minister, of any man, had
need to be godly, Mal. 2.5, 6. Acts 11.24. 2 Timothy 2.15. Else, profaneness
will easily go out from the Prophets of Jerusalem, Ier. 23.^5.
throughout all the Land, as Jeremy has it. In him that is sent to win
souls, says a Divine, his mouth, eyes, hands, feet, gesture, conversation,
all had need be exact and exemplary. Mention is made in the Ecclesiastical
History of one Bonnus a Churchman, Sosom. lib. ^. cap. 28. Hominis vita magno
om^itum consensu probatur: j^m id non leve praejuditi^^ est quod nec ^^stres
repe^tant, quod c^l^umn^entur, de Luthero, Erasmu^. Acts and Monuments.
who was never seen by any man to be angry, or heard to swear, lie or utter
any thing rash light or unbeseeming himself. And M. Bucer, whiles he was here
in England brought all men into such admiration of his integrity, that neither
could his friends sufficiently praise him, nor his enemies in any point find
fault with his singular life and sincere Doctrine. The like is reported of
Master Bradford. Now what a thing was this to slaughter Envy, to stop an open
mouth, Acts and Mon.
to rejoice his friends, and to cloth his enemies with their own shame. This
was to shine as a light in the dark World, yea as the Sun in his strength:
which although some men curse (as the Atlantes) because it scorcheth them;
others hate sometimes, because it discovers their deeds of darkness, Atlantes
solemn Orientem Occidentemque dira imprecatione contucatur, ut exitialem ipsis
agrisque, Plin. lib. 5. cap. 8. Godwins Heb. Antiq.
yet are they so convinced and dazeled with its beauty and brightness, that
few can, forshame, speak against it. The High Priest was the chief God on
Earth: and therefore, during his life, the Offendour was confined to the City
of refuge, as to a Prison. And David, when he was hunted from the Prophet, sled
to the Priest; as one that knew, that Justice and Compassion should dwell in
those breasts, if any where. Venerable Beda tells us, that the Ancient British
Bishops rejected Austin, the Popes Legate, because he showed not himself
gentle and humble amongst them (as became a Minister) at the first meeting. And
holy Hooper, though his life was so pure and good, that no kind of slander
could fasten any fault upon him; Yet there is mention made of a certain
Citizen, who having in himself a conflict of conscience, came to Master
Hoopers door for counsel. But being abashed, Acts and Mon. fol. 1366.
says mine Author, of his austere behavior, durst not come in, but departed;
which he afterward by the help of Almighty God, did find and obtain. This
might be no fault in him, but in the other that should have sought to him. But
hereby we see how much it behooves Ministers, to be curiously observant of
their whole deportement, that they may lay forth themselves, and the talents
concredited unto them, for the best advantage of their Lord and Master;
becoming all things to all men, that they may win some. And this the rather,
because the World expects from such (though unjustly) Angelical perfection,
and looks round about us, to see if they may find ever a hole in our coat,
thorough which, they may evade and slip the cords of our doctrine.

CHAP. VII.
A Second Exhortation is now to be addressed to all of all sorts, and that is
to stir men up to a thr^efold duty. 1. To be thankful to God that gave us
his Word, and to his ancient people the Jews, by whose hands he conveyed it
to us Gentiles. 2. To read it diligently. 3. To rely upon it confidently, both
for counsel and comfort.

Sect. 1.
BE thankful first, and chiefly to God for entrusting us with this true
treasure, for concrediting unto us these lively Oracles, for drawing so near
us, and dealing so familiarly with us, as he hardly ever did with any before
us. For what nation is there so great, that has God so nigh unto them, Deuteronomy. 4
7, 8. Mich. 6.7, 8. Esaias 5.
and that has statutes and judgments so righteous, etc. He has showed thee,
O England, What is good, and may justly demand, as of old, what cold I have
done more for thee that I have not yet done? Deu. 33.29, 32.
Happy art thou O Israel! who is like unto thee, O people saved by the Lord,
etc. Before the Covenant with Abraham, all nations were alike respected: but
after it was said; J will be thy God, Genesis 17 7.
and the God of thy Seed; the Church was divided from the rest of the world, as
light was from darkness in the first Creation, as the Sabbath from other
days by divine consecration, Act. 14.16.
as Goshen was from the rest of Egypt in that wonderful separation. All other
Nations he suffered to walk in their own ways, to sit in the dale of
darkness and shadow of death: but in Judah was God known, his name was great
in Israel. Psalm. 76.1, 2.
In Salem was his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Sion. Hence that
beautiful Land (though part of the Continent) is called an I Will, Esaias 20.6.
Deuteronomy. 7.6. (...)
as separate from other peoples (...) and the inhabitants thereof are called
Gods peculiar, his enclosures the people of his purchase that comprehended, as
it were, all his gettings, the sheep of his pasture, yea his son, his
firstborn, to whom he gave (for a childs-part) right judgments and true
Laws, Hos 11 34. Exodus 4.2^.
good Statutes, and just Commandem^nts, Nehem. 9.13. He showed his word unto
Jacob, his acts unto the children of Israel. He has not dealt so with my
Nation, etc. Psalm. 147.19, 20. By the dim light of nature they might get some
glimpse of God as a Creator, not as a Redeemer, of his eternal power and
Deity, rendering men without excuse, not of the riches of his patience leading
men to Repentance. Hence David, Psalm. 93.5. Having declared the testimonies of
the power of God, Romans 1.20. Romans 2.4.
that are to be seen in the very waves of the Sea, concludes the Psalm with,
Thy testimonies, O Lord, are very sure: intimating, that there is no certain or
comfortable knowledge of God to be got, but only thence. Nevertheless those
poor Ethniks, for their unthankfullnesse for that little they had, and because
that when they knew God (after a sort) they glorified him not as God, Romans 1.20.
neither were thankful, God gave them up to a reprobate sense; as likewise he
did the idle servant to the tormentour for not improving his one talent. O then
what will he do, or rather what will he not do to us, that have made so little
of so many advantages: Psalm 8^.15. Cant. 2.12. Psalm. 84.
that have heard the joyful sound, the voice of the Turtle so long in our
Land: that have seen the face of God so frequently and familiarly in his
Ordinances, had the everlasting Gospel so puerly and powerfully preached
amongst us, even the revelation of the mystery that was kept secret since the
world began, but is now made manifest, and by the Scriptures of the Prophets
according to the Commandment of the everlasting God made known to all Nations
for the obedience of Faith. To God only wise be therefore glory, through Christ
Jesus for ever, Romans 16.25, 26, 27.

The greatness of this inexplicable benefit will the better appear to us if
we consider it as clothed with these ensuing circumstances.

First, that this good Word of God is come to our hands (after so many ages) so
perfect and entire wanting nothing, that no part of the holy Canon is perished,
not a hair of this sacred head missing.

Next that we have it so exactly and exquisitely rendered and translated into
the vulgar tongues. A privilege that our Forefathers wish^ well to, but
obtained not. It were a great grace, says Lambert the Martyr, if we might have
the word of God diligently and often read and sung unto us, in such wise that
the people might understand it. Then should it come to pass that Crafts-men
should sing spiritual Psalms, Acts and Monuments, fol. 1015.
sitting at their work, and the Husbandman at his Plow, as wishes S. Hierome,
Bugenhagius a famous Divine of Germany was so joyful of the Dutch Bible, in
translating whereof out of the Hebrew and Greek Originals, he and some other
learned men had labored together with Luther; Melch. Adam in vita Bugenhagij.
that every year he invited his friends on that day of the Month, whereon the
work was finished, and called it the Feast of the translation of the Bible.

Thirdly, that we have the whole will of God in so little a room, in so
portable a Volume. Jn reading many books there is no end, Eccles. 12.12.
and much study is a weariness to the flesh. It duls the spirits, wearies the
body, marres the eyes (those Musarum perspicilli, Diestius.
as one terms them) wastes the marrow, spends the time, shortens the life, but
brings no sound satisfactory knowledge. He that loves reading (of humane
Authors, I mean) shall not be satisfied with reading, Eccles. 1.8.
as the Eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the Ear with hearing: As those
that have a flux, though they take in much, yet are neither fuller, nor fatter.
Multi propter arborem screntie amit^unt arborem vitae.
And which is worse, many for the tree of knowledge sake, loose the tree of
life, as one says: Like Jsrael in Egypt, they are scattered all over the Land
to pick up straws to load themselves with thick clay, Habac. 2.6.
not minding that which mainly concerns them, the knowledge of the Scriptures,
Discamu^ in terris quorum scientia perseveret nobiscum in coelis, Hierom.
the learning of that out of the Bible here on Earth that may stick to them for
ever in Heaven. These seek after asses with Saul, after servants with Shimei,
and loose themselves therewhile: They drink deepest of those Authors, whereof
to sip were sufficient; since we may sooner surfeit, than satiate our selves of
such, The epitom^ of Tostatus upon Matthew contains above a thousand pages i^
folio.
I speak not only of those fabulous and frivolous fancies. But books of better
note and use there are not a few in this scribbling age, which yet by their
intolerable prolixity are over-tiresome and tedious to the intelligent Reader;
Salmeron has his twelve volumes upon the Evangelists Sixth Senens. Bibl l. 4.
Occiditque legen do plurima potius quam optima scrib.
the gains will not pay for the pains. As voluminous Tostatus, trifling
Turrion, and Salmeron, that wearieth and well nigh kills his Reader with
infinite discourses De verbis Dominae, that is, Of the words that the Virgin
Mary spoke to the Angel, and to her cousin Elizabeth, Ex cutab. Nundini
Autumn. A. 1671. -- tenent insanabile nultos Scribendi caco^thes, Iuven.
twelve Books distinguished into two tomes were printed at Venice Anno Dom.
1617. Paleattus Archbishop of Bonony made a great Book of the shadow of
Christ's body in a Sindon, and it was commented upon by the Professor of
Divinity there; Wolphius mem. lect.
pity it were that he had had not written something of that holy relic, the
tail of that ass whereon our Savior rode, which they show at Genua, and adore
with great humility. Amidst all which mass and multitude of books wherewith the
world is now-adaies pestered, who sees it not a sweet mercy, and just matter of
thankfulness, that we have so much in so few; the whole will of God compacted
and contrived into so little a volume, that we may make it our vade mecum, our
constant companion and counselor, Melch. Adam de vit. Ger. theol.
as Plato did his Sophron, George Prince of Anhalt his Siracides, Cr nmer his
new Testament, which he learn^d by heart in his voyage to and from Rome, Act.
and Mon.
whither he was sent by King Henry the eighth about the divorce. Especially,
since it is of so excellent and exquisite use, good for all occasions, and in
all things necessary; so plain and perspicuous, that we need seek no further;
so full and perfect that it is able to make not the Vulgar only (as Bellarmine
somewhere grants) but the man of God thoroughly furnished, that is, the
Minister himself; who in Francis Junius his judgment, needs no more books in
his study besides the Bible, but Cevallerius, his Hebrew Grammar, Calvin's
Jnstitutions, and Beza's Confession: And yet he is both to know and declare the
whole counsel of God. For if Varro the Roman upbraided the Heathen Priests
(and worthily) that there were many things in their rites and Religions, Vivi^
in Aug. de civ. Dei, lib 4 cap. 1.
whereof they were ignorant: How much more unseemly is it in a Minister of the
Gospel, that has so large a direction in so little a volume, not to preserve
and present knowledge to the people?

Fourthly, who sees not a mercy in this that we have the Scriptures so well
digested and distinguished by Books, Chapters and Verses, whereby (with the
help of Tables and Concordances especially) we can easily and readily turn to
any place we need or desire. In the Apostles times, (...).
all they could say for the help of the hearer was, It is written, or it is
contained in the Scripture, as 1 Pet. 2.6. without particular quoting the place
where. After this they had their partitions, Lege Casaub. Not. in Mat. 1.
sections, special portions of Scripture, set out, but Chapters were not heard
of (as now) till the year of grace, 1195. nor verses, till alate devised by
Robert Stevens that learned French Printer: Scultet. Annot. in Marc.
a great ease both to the Preacher and Reader.

Fifthly, that it comes to us so light cheap, is cause of thankfulness; which
our godly Ancestors so hardly got and gladly bought at so dear a rate; some
of them gave five marks, some more, some less for a Book in King Henry the
eigths days, some gave a load of hay for a few Chapters of Saint James or of
Saint Paul in English. Act. and Monfol. 756.
To see their travells, charges, earnest seeking, burning zeal, readings,
watchings, sweet assemblies, love, concord, etc. may make us now, in these our
days of free profession, blush for shame. Plato for three books gave thirty
thousand florens. S. Hierom^ learnt Hebrew with the hazard of his life. Capnio
paid a Jew that read Hebrew to him at Rome, for so many hours so many crowns
in gold. The Book of books, the best of all Authors comes now to us upon
easiest terms and rates, so exactly translated, Iohnst. de Naturae constan.
Neand Chron, pa. 144.
so fairly printed, as was never seen before.

Add hereunto in the sixth place, that God (in these last days especially)
has sent and stir^d up many burning and shining lamps, many diligent and
dexterous interpreters to lay all level and plain before us, to break the
shell, that we may come at the kernel, Judge. 7.15.
to roll away the stone from the Wells mouth, to remoove rubs and difficulties,
to clear dark and doubtful places; so that not only Jacob and his sons
(Scholars and Ministers) but also the cattle and the sheep, that is the
illiterate and ignorant may drink freely of these waters of the Sanctuary; as
Origin allegorically expounds it. Origin. contra Celsum.
The Jews also had their Interpreters. Hence that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.20.
Where is the wise? that is, the teachers of traditions: Where is the Scribe?
that is, the textmen that stuck to the litterall interpretation: Where is the
disputer of this world? that is, the teachers of Mysteries and Allegories,
which minister Questions rather than edifying which is in Faith, 1 Timothy 1.4.
and are no better, faith one, at best, then the froth of the Scriptures. But
how weakly and corruptly these exercises were performed by those slubbering
Priests, and blind Pharisees of old, our Savior partly shows and confates in
the Gospel: And how poorly and slenderly by the Friars and postillars alate,
is well to be seen in their writings at this day extant. Scarce was there any
Commentary on the Bible for many hundred years better than the gloss of
Orleans, Hugo de sancto Claro, and Peter Comestor, by all which the Scriptures
were as a clasped Scriptures were as a clasped book even to the simpler sort of
their Clergy. Certain Monks there were that took it for a singular glory to
write upon the Revelation, but such wretched Note, as Thomas and Nicholas, and
(after them to mend the matter) Passavantius made upon that excellent Work, De
civitate Dei; Whereby they have bemired and utterly marred the sense of it, as
Erasmus shows in the Proverb. Asinus ad paleas. Scultet. Annal. dec. 2 p. 117.
Apocalypsis, says Faber the Augustinian, comes of Apo re, and clipsor, velo.
And Alexius Grad the Dominican, as Bucer relates it, said that he had read
somewhere in the Dictionaries that Cephas signifies a head, and that therefore
Peter was head of the Church. This buzzard saw not what the Evangelist had so
plainly set down, that Cephas signifies a Rock, to be skillful in the Greek
tongue was in those days superstitious, but to be an Hebrician, was little
less then heretical. Latin was so ill understood of many of their Priests,
that he held himself sufficiently well excused from paving the Church Way with
the rest of his neighbors that could allege for his purpose that of Jeremy.
Paveant illi, Alex. Cook.
ego non paveant. Another for Sumpsimus read Mumpsimus, and because he had long
used it so, would not alter it, for any admonition. Parens when he was young
(begging an alms according to a superstitious custom of those times) had this
answer from a Friar: Becman de Orig ling lat.
Nos pauperi fratres, nos nihil habemus, an piscimus, an caro, an panis, an
misericordia habemus. And if any went about to show them their bard and
barbarous mistakes, they shrouded themselves under that of Gregory. In vita
Parei operib praefix.
Non debent verba coelestis or aculi subesse regulis Donati. Now God has
graciously removed this Remora to the profitable reading of his sacred word, by
stirring up studious men to labor after learning which was almost banished out
of the world, and all places ore-spread with baseness and barbarism. Look how
in the first plantation of the Gospel in Europe, he shipped the Arts before
into Greece; that they might be Harbingers unto it (as Tertullian speaks) or
(as Hierom) the munition to batter the sorts of the wise, meaning of send the
soldiers soon after: So in the reviving of the Gospel, in the late
Reformation, there seemed to go before it a general resurrection of all humane
learning, and the effectual means of all this, that nob^e invention of
Printing; which seems reserved to the waightiest times of the Church, even the
revealing of the Western Antichrist: Melancth. Chron l. 5.
Whereunto that Eastern Antichrist has lent us his hand: I mean the Turk,
that never did any good to Christendom but this, and this against his will, in
sending the Greek tongue (by the sack of Constantinople, and ruin of Greece)
into these Western climates. Thus canes lingunt ulcera Lazari. Gods will is
done by the wicked though beside their intention. He has given gifts to men,
even to the rebellious, Psalm. 68.18.
common gifts of illumination, interpretation, etc. That he may dwell on Earth,
to wit, in his Religion and Worshippers, who being wise Merchants, besides the
pearl of price, seek also other goodly pearls: Mat. 13.45, 46.
make much of common gifts bestowed many times upon unsound and unsanctified
Interpreters for their behoof and benefit. It is well said in the Law that
apices iuris non est ius. It is as true in Divinity, that the letter of the
word is not every where the Word of God; but the right meaning thereof. Gods
Word foolishly understood is none of his, Verbum Dei stolide intellectum non
est verbum Dei.
says Theodoret. The occasion, scope, phrase of the Holy Ghost, coherence,
consent with other places is well to be weighed. For our help hereunto, and
that we may read with judgment, Christ in his wonderful Ascension gave gifts
to men, some Apostles, Romans 10.14. Gal. 3.2. Act. 8.30. Mal. 2.7.
some Prophets, etc. with charge not only to propound to his people the word in
gross, but also fruitfully expound it, rightly divide it, fitly apply it, be
as so many speaking Commentaries upon it, non libro, sed labro conservantes
scientiam, bringing forth new and old store, as good Scribes, and speaking home
to men's hearts to edification, exhortation and comfort, 1 Cor. 14.13. This,
this is to do the work of an Evangelist, for every sound is not Music, nor
every Pulpit-Discourse, preaching) and is therefore perhaps, termed prophesying
by Saint Paul, because the matter of Preaching in those days was the
Scriptures of the Prophets, in opening whereof the Servants of God were then
especially conversant. As also now the Church (blessed be GOD) abounds with
those that want for no parts, that spare for no pains; but as Candles waste
themselves to give light to others, and as clouds sweet themselves to death
for common benefit, lay forth their talents to the utmost, that they may lay
all knots and cragges level, pave men a pathway to Christ, and so give them
the knowledge of Salvation by the Remission of their sins. Luke 1.77.
Thus Paul reasoned with the Jews of Thessalonica out of the Scriptures,
opening and alleging, etc. laying it before their eyes, as the word signifies,
and making it as clear as the noonday light, by express testimony of the
word and due deduction therehence, Acts 17 3,4. (...) ob oculos ponens i^ tam
maniseste exponens quam cernimus quae spectanda proponuntur, Beza.
that this Jesus whom J preach unto you, says the Text, is Christ. And this is
still the guise of all godly Preachers to ground their Discourses upon the
written word, pressing the people either with the very direct words or firm
consequences, as our Savior dealt by the Sadduces, Math. 22.32. And Saint Paul
by the Corinthians, 1 Ep. 7.10. To the married J command, yet not J, but the
Lord, let not the wife depart from her husband. In so many words the Lord has
not said it, but plainly for the sense, when he said, Therefore shall a man
leave Father and mother, and cleave to his wife. And again, That which God
has joined together, let no man put asunder. Now that which the Ministers in
this sort, spek out of the word, is the word: and must be so reputed and
received: according to that in the Gospel, He that hears you hears me. And
again, J am with you to the end of the world. And that of the Prophet Esa
59.21. where God makes a covenant with Christ that those words of his which he
put into his mouth should not depart out of the mouth of his seed, nor out of
the mouth of his seeds seed for ever.

Lastly, stir up your selves to thankfulness for this, Romans 10.6, 7, 8
that Gods Word is so nigh us, even in thy mouth and in thine heart, and that
is the Word of Faith that we preach; So that we need not say, who shall go up
to Heaven or down to the deep for it. We need not travel hundreds of miles as
the Queen of Sheba, or ride abroad to hear the Prophet, 2 King. 4.23.
as the good Shunamite did customarily every Sabbath and new moon. We need not
send down to Egypt with old Jacob for that Bread of Life, wherewith we are
daily and daintily fed; or go on Pilgrimage to Palestina and Syria for it with
the seduced Popelings. See Hist. of holy war. Dan. 12.
We need not run too and fro to increase knowledge, as those in Daniel, nor
trudge from place to place, as our godly Forefathers in times of persecution.
George Eagles surnamed Trudge-over. Act. and Mon. Rev. 6.6.
These be not those unhappy days (praised be God) of the black Horse, wherein
there is but a small measure of wheat for a penny, and three small measures of
barley for a penny. Wisdom has killed her beasts amongst us: she has mingled
her wine, Prove. 9.2. Hist Aethiop. chap. 137. In all the vast continent of
Afrique, there is not any region entirely possessed by Christians, but the
kingdom of Habassia, Sands.
she has also furnished her Table. Alvarez tells us in his History of Aethiopia
that at his being at the King of Habassiars Court, there were Ambassadors sent
out of Nubia, to entreat for a supply of Ministers to instruct their Nation,
and to repair Chistianity that was gone to ruin among them, but they were
rejected. A doleful case doubtless, when the children come to the womb, and
there is none to deliver, or cry for bread and there is none to break it unto
them: They run too and fro to seek the Word of the Lord, Amos 8.12.
and cannot find it. But this is not our case (God be thanked) we never yet
tasted of that Famine of the Word, nor have bin forced to wander for it from
Sea to Sea: but as in Egypt every city had their Barns and Storehouses, Genesis
41.48.
so is it here. And as Manna fell at their very doors, it was but stepping out
and taking it up, so is it with us; all the fear is lest God cut off this
Manna from our mouths for loathing it, lest he send in the Assyrians to drink
up our milk, Ezekiel. 25.4. lest he call for his love tokens back again which we
have set light by, and then follow utter desertion and desolation: Good turns
aggravate unkindnesses, and our offenses are increased by our obligations.
Abused mercy turns into fury, Laesa patientia fit suror.
as Moses staff cast from him into a Serpent; and as Ajax his Sword given him
by Hector, so long as he used it against his Enemies, served for help and
defense: but after he began to abuse it to the hurt of hurtlesse Beasts, it
turned into his own Bowels. When the old world would not be warned by Noah's
preaching, but grew foul and stanke, God saw it but time to wash it with a
flood. Genesis 6.11.
When neither Lots godly admonitions, nor their own late deliverance from
Kedar-laomer and his company could mend or melt the sinful Sodomites. God
rained down Hell from Heaven upon them. The Land of Shinar, where they built
Babel, was part of the Garden of Eden (as most Geographers think,) whereof
though the amenity and chief beauty were destroyed by the deluge, Plin. lib 6.
c. 26 Herodot: l. 1. c. 19^. Cecidit rosa mansit spina, Bucholc. (...) Herod
Ier 51 9. Isa 13.21.
yet is it still fruitful above beeleefe, and returns the seed beyond
credulity. Nevertheless, because GOD would have healed Babylon, but she was
not healed; therefore was it made not only a place of Nettles and Salt Pits,
but also of Dragons and Devils. The Sword, Famine and Pestilence, were but the
beginning of sorrows to the Jews for their hateful unthankfullnesse and
contempt of the Gospel: Mat. 24.8.
This was it that filled up the measure of their sins; Mat. 23.32.
and brought Gods wrath upon them to the utmost. Pererius the Jesuit
commenting upon those words, 1 These. 2.16.
The sins of the Amorites are not yet full, If any ask, Genesis 15.
says he, why England continues to flourish notwithstanding the cruel
persecution of Catholics (execution of Traitors, he should have said) there?
Our answer is ready; because their sin is not yet full, sed veniet tandem
iniquitatis complementum, says he; but it will not be long ere their iniquity
be finished, and ere that be made up that is yet wanting to their just
weight, that God may fall upon them with his full weight: A blister on that
foul tongue! GOD fore-fend and prevent their long-lookt for day. Oh pray that
the Sun of that morning may never arise, or that Day be numbered to the
Months of the year, wherein it shall be said, that our Candle-sticke is
remooved, that the Arc is departed from our English Israel.

Ah ne diem illum posteri
Vivant mei, quo pristinum
Vertantur in lutum aurea
Quae nos bearunt saecula!
If any thing ever undo us, it will be our hateful unthankfullnesse for the
Gospel of peace, according to that Prophecy of Luther. Three things, says he,
Melch: Adam in vita Luth.
will destroy Christian Religion, carnal Security, worldly policy, and
forgetfullnesse of the benefits received by the Gospel. Of all things God
cannot abide to be forgotten. Therefore the Jsraelites were so often charged by
Moses not to forget the Lord in the good Land whither they were going; Deuteronomy.
6.12. and 8.11, 14. and 9.7, etc.
which because they did, Amasios meos Tremell. Hol. 2.8, 9.
the floodgates of Gods wrath was set open upon them to the utmost. Because
they say J will go after my sweethearts, and remembered not that J gave her
corn, and wine, and oil, etc. therefore I will take away my corn in the time
thereof, and my wine in the season thereof, etc. Ingratitude forfeits mercies as
Merchants do all to the King, by non-payment of Custom. Because Pharaoh says
the River is mine own, therefore says God, I will dry up the River, Ezekiel. 29.3
9. Esa. 19.5, 6. with Deu. 11.9, 10. The River Nylus waters Egypt, and makes
it fruitful. The Egyptians used in mockery to tell the Graecians, Creditur
Egyptus ca^uisse juvantibus arva. Imbribus at^ a^nis sicca utsse novem, Ov d
Vide Senec not. quaest. l. 4. c. 2.
that if God should forget to rain, they might chance to starve for it. They
thought the rain was of God, but not the River. God therefore threatens to dry
it up, and so he did. Tamberlane having overcome Bajazet, asked him whither
ever he had given God thanks for making him so great an Emperor, who confessed
ingenuously he never thought of it. L^unclav: in Annal: Turc.
To whom Tamerlane replied that it was no wonder so ungrateful a man should be
made a Spectacle of misery. To live under the sound of the word is a greater
favor, than (without it) to be made Monarch of the whole world. For four
benefits Plato was especially thankful, 1. That he was made a reasonable
creature, and not a beast. 2. That he was a man and not a woman. 3. That he
was a Grecian and not a Barbarian. 4. That he was borne in the days of
Socrates and bred a Scholar under him. How much more cause have we to bless
God that we were not borne Pagans or Papagans, but brought forth in these
glorious and golden days of the Gospel. (...). Plutarch.
Demarathus of Corinth was wont to say that those Grecians lost a great part of
the comfort of their lives that had not seen great Alexander sitting in Darius
his Throne. But Bucholcerus more truly pronounced those men unhappie, that
were Nati and Donati, borne and buried before the Reformation of Religion begun
by Luther: and himself he held most happy, Mel Ad. in vit. Ger theol page 550.
that his birth fell out in Melancthons time, a famous instrument of that
renowned Reformation. This is yet our case, and long may it be. Great heed is
to be taken that we force not God for our Vnthankfullnesse, to take his own and
be gone, as he did in Ezekiel; where he makes many remooves, Ezekiel 9, 10, 11
and ever as he went out, some judgment came in, as he did from those seven
once flourishing Churches of Asia, Rev 2, and 3.
now a habitation for Jim and Ohim, as he has not long since done from that
large region of Nubia in Affrique, S. Ed Sands Survey of West
which had from the Apostles time, as it is thought, professed the Christian
Faith, till somewhat above an hundred years since it has again forsaken it,
and embraced partly Mahometisme, and partly Idolatry, and merely through
Famine of the Word, and lack of Ministers. Lastly, as he did from our
Forefathers in Q. Mary's days. And will ye know the reason? hear it from a
Martyrs mouth. Acts and Mon:
Ye all know (says M. Bradford in a letter of his written out of prison) there
was never more knowledge of God ( viz. in the days of King Edward) and less
godly living, and true serving of God. It was counted a foolish thing to serve
God truly, and earnest Prayer was not past upon; Preaching was but pastime;
communion was counted too common; Fasting to subdue the flesh was far out of
use; Alms was almost nothing; Malice, Covetousness and uncleanness was common
every where, with swearing, drunkenness and idleness. God therefore now is
come, as ye have heard me preach, etc. God forgive me mine unthankfullnesse: It
is I Lord that have sinned against thee. It is my Hypocrisy, Ib. 1477.
vainglory, security, idleness, unthankfullnesse, self-love, and such like
which have deserved the taking away of our good King, of thy Word and true
Religion, of thy good Ministers by exile, prisonment and death, Hos. 14.2. Amos
4.1^.
etc. Thus he: and thus we should take unto us words and meet the Lord, if so
we may prevail, that he cause not our Sun to go down at noone and darken the
Earth in the clear day, as he threatens, Amos 8.9. The very course of the
Sun may well warn us of the course and progress of the Gospel, which went
first forth from the East (that is Judaea) to the South (that is Greece) and
from thence passed to the West, (that is the Latins) till now it is turned to
the North (which is the utmost angle of this Universe) even to us, and so it
has almost finished its course. Wherefore as much as it is the pitching time of
the day, 1 Ioh. 2.18. 2 Kings 4.27.
Judge. 19.9. it is the last hour, lay we hold upon our Lord Christ, as the
Spouse did, and although he make as if he would go further, constrain we him,
Luke 24.29.
as those Disciples did at Emaus, by our importunity, saying, Abide with us,
for it is toward Evening, and the day is far spent; why should thou be as a
stranger in the Land, Vespera nunc venit, nobiscum, Christ, maneto: Extingui
lucem ne patiare tuam.
as a wayfaring man that turns aside to tarry for a night only? Yet thou, O
Lord, art in the midst of us, and we are called by thy name, leave us not,
Jer. 14.8, 9.

Sect. 2.
But secondly, as we are bound to God for his Word, so to the Jews, Gods
depositaries and dispensers of his word, his treasurers, and, as it were the
keepers of his Cabinet, Act. 7.
to whom first were committed these lively Oracles, and by whom they were
transmitted and brought safe to our hands. Godw: Antiq: Hebr.
Their Masorites have carefully reckoned and summed up, not the verses only,
but all the words and letters of each book of the old Testament: Romans 15.27.
which as it is an argument of their industry, so is it an engagement on^our
part, since we are partakers of their spiritual things: and cannot minister
unto them of our carnal, yet to pity them and pray for them. Let Solomon (I
mean Christ) have his thousand of thanks. Cant. 8.12.
Let those also that have kept the fruit of his Vineyard (whereof we have so
freely fed) have their two hundred: thank we must the sender of this sweet
fruit, but withal pay the Messenger that brought it. Let it not be forgotten
that the Law came out of Sion, Esaias 2.3. Psalm. 110.2.
and the Word of the LORD from Jerusalem to all the ends of the Earth, that to
them pertained the Adoption and the Glory, Romans 9.4, 5.
the giving of the Law and the promises; that of them were the Fathers. Yea of
them as concerning the flesh came Christ, who is God blessed for ever, Romans
10.1.
Amen. Let our hearts desire therefore and Prayer to God for Israel be, that
they may be saved. They before the time of our calling, praid heartily for us,
as appears, Can. 8.8, and by sundry Psalms: and from them we received the word
and worship of God. John 10.34. and 15.25.
The Law is called their Law. And for the Gospel, if they had not rejected it,
we had never received it, Act. 13.46. Romans 11.11. and verse. 28. The poor, the
maimed, the halt and the blind had never bin admitted, if the guests that were
invited, had not refused to come, Luke 14.21. They refused Christ that came
into the world to save them, and shamefully nailed him upon the Cross, for the
which they are become a renegate people now 1600. years together; without
Church, without Commonwealth, without form or face of government good or bad,
their pleasant Land turned into a wilderness, their fruitful country into a
dry and barren desert. Strabo indeed spitefully depraves the country;
affirming it (at best) to have bin hungry and unfruitful, not much to be
envyed or desired of any. But (besides the testimony of holy Scripture, that it
was a Land flowing with milk and honey) Rabshakeh confesses, that it was a
Land of corn and wine, 2 King. 18.32.
a Land of bread and vine-yards, a land of oil olive and honey. Tacitus also
tells us, that it is a fat and fertile soil; Another, that it is sumen totius
orbis; Heidelseld.
the rocks yielded them honey, and flints, oil, Deuteronomy. 32.13. As for the
chief City Jerusalem, that City of God, the valley of vision, the vision of
peace. Pliny witnesses that it was the most famous of all the Cities of the
East, we may add of the whole world: because it was the Mother of us all, the
chief Church to the which all other Churches conformed themselves, and were
wont to resort for direction, and decision of their Controversies: Act. 15.2.
and from the which they all went, Act. 8.4, 5. and 11.19, 20.
that first carried the light of the Gospel to the Genetiles. Their debtors
therefore we are surely. Romans 15.27. neither may we hate their name and their
Nation, but love them and pray for them, yea weep and bleed over them as our
Savior did, Luke 19.41. And the rather because the unspeakeable miseries then
foretold by him are long since befallen them, ver. 34, 44. Vespasian is
reported to have broke in upon them, 1, at the brook Cedron, where they
apprehended Christ: 2, at the same Feast of Passover that Christ was taken at:
3, to have whipped them in the place where they whipped our Savior: 4, to have
sold thirty of them for a penny, Adricom. in Ach Apost. fol. 282. Lib. 7. bell^
Iud cap. 17.
as they bought and sold the Son of God for thirty pence. In that last
desolation by Titus, Josephus tells us of a thousand thousand of them slain,
and ninety seven thousand carried captive. Such affliction befell them then as
never had been from the beginning, nor shall be to the worlds end: so our
Savior had foretold it, Mar. 13.19. Ever since this, they have continued a
dispersed and despised people, abhorred of God and men, and exiled out of the
world, as it were, by a common consent of Nations, for their inexpiable guilt
in murdering their Maker. The first country of Christendom, out of which they
were cast, without hope of return was England, by King Edward the first, Anno
Dom. 1290. Breerewoods Enquiries.
Out of France, 1307. Out of Spain, 1492. Out of Naples and Sicily, Polyd.
Virgil. page 327.
1539. Out of Portugal, 1597. Their Messiah is expected of the Tribe of Judah,
which was settled in Portugal, where they boast still to have millions of their
race, to whom they give complete dispensation to counterfeit Christianity even
to the degree of Priesthood; Blounts voyage into the Levant, p. 121.
and that none are discovered but some hot spirits whose zeal cannot
temporize. The reverence to the Messiah makes them breed their children up in
Portugal speech, and make it their domestique tongue, where ever they dwell.
They remain to this day a very exceeding great people: So that in
Constantinople and Tessalonica there are esteemed to be about 160000 Jews. But
in Jerusalem there be not to be found at this time a hundred households of them,
says Breerewood; yet there are ten or more Churches of Christians there.
Adrian the Emperor, for their sedition under Captain Barchocab, drove the
Jews utterly out of Jewry; Funccij Chronol.
set a Sow of white Marble over the chief gate of Jerusalem in reproach of
their religion, and commanded them by Proclamation, Yet they afterward obtained
once a year to go in, and bewail the destruction of their temple, giving a
piece of money to the soldiers. And so they that bought Christ's blood, are
glad to buy their own tears, as S. Hierom notes. Tom. 6. p. 256. Funccius.
not so much as to look toward that Land from any Tower or high Mountain. In
Cyprus they are so hated for a bloody Massacre they made there of the
Inhabitants in Traians time, that its present death for a Jew to set foot on
that Island; yea though he be driven in thither by a tempest, or cast upon that
coast by ill accident, he is trussed up immediately. And albeit they have
endeavored from time to time to ingratiate and curry favor with Emperors,
Heathen, and Christian, yet they could never do it to any purpose. Titus
indeed would have preserved the Temple as a Wonder of the world, a Monument of
Magnificence, Josephus.
from being burnt, but could not; such was the outrage of the soldiers. And
Julian the Apostate, to spite the Christians, permitted the Jews and
encouraged them to reedifie their Temple of Jerusalem at his charge: Ammian.
23. Socrat 3. Theodoret. Bucbalc. Func.
howbeit attempting it, they were hindered from Heaven by a mighty Earthquake,
together with balls of fire issuing out of the foundation, and consuming the
builders. But Caius the Emperor cast them out with contempt, and would not
hear Philo their Countryman (an excellent Orator) making apology for them
against Appion of Alexandria, their deadly enemy. Whereupon Philo comforted his
colleagues and companions saying, Bono animo nos esse oportet quious iratus est
Caius: quia necesse est adesse divinum, ubi humanum cesset auxilium.
Be of good cheer, my friends; God will not fail to help, where man's help
fails. A pious speech, but not appliable to such a people; who were not now
to expect help from God, but from Caesar whom they had lately preferred before
the Son of God, and were therefore worthily now rejected of both. A couple of
their Rabbines also in the year 1530, R David Reubenita and R. Shelonioh Mol^u
set upon Charles the fifth, to persuade him to Judaisme: but with ill
success; for one of them was burnt at Mantua in Italy, Alsted Chronol. page
426.
and the other put to a cruel death in Spain, for that bold attempt. Beza in
Mat. 5.46.
Publicans they are at this day to the Turks, farmers of their customs and
tributes, and to the Christians where they are suffered to dwell, they serve
for hucksters and brokers to improve underhand their unlawful rents to the
utmost proportion, as being permitted to strain up their usury upon the
Christian (for among themselves they no where use it) to eighteen in the
hundred. But in Turkey, Sands his Relation of the West. Relig.
though every Vizier and Bassa of State is reported to keep a Jew of his
private Council, whose malice, wit, (for they are generally found to be the
most nimble and Mercuriall wits in the world) and experience of Christendom,
Blunts voyage into the Levant, p. 114.
with their continual intelligence, is thought to advise most of the
mischief, which the Turk puts in execution against us: Yet generally, they
are so hated of the Mahometans, that they use to say in detestation of a thing,
In execrationibus dicunt, Iudaeus sim si fallo. Sanctius in Zach. 8.13.
I would I might die a Jew then; or, Let me be a Jew, if I deceive thee. And
Biddulph tells us, that in Constantinople and Thessalonica (where are so many
thousands of them) if they but stir out of doors at any Easter-time between
Maunday-Thurseday at noone, and Easter-eve at night, the Christians, among whom
they dwell, will stone them; because at that time they derided, buffeted, and
crucified our Savior. Thus as they use to say (poor souls!) amongst
themselves, Moses Gerundinensis.
there is an ounce of the golden calfe in all the punishments that befall them:
so no doubt there is a pound of that direful and dreadful execration, His
blood be upon us and our children, for the which wrath is now come upon them to
the uttermost. They clothed themselves with a curse, Psalm. 109.18.
and it is come into their bowels as water, and like oil into their bones.
Their mouth is still full of cursing and bitterness. Romans 3.
They curse the Lord Christ in a covert abbreviature of his name, calling him
in relation to his death on the Cross, Iesum Iudaei corrupt and improbe
scribunt (...) adeoque, sub tribus literis abbreviatis intelligunt vocabula
(...) deleatur nomen ejus. Si transcas Iudaeu^ Zeloten, aud^es (...) ethnice
spurle: quod nuper Wormatiae petulant a lole cens praetereuntibus nobis
acclamabat. Par. in Romans 11.25.
the woofe and the warp. They curse also his servants, closing their daily
prayers with a Maledic Domine Nazareis, calling them Gentiles, nay bastard
Gentiles, nay devils in their salutations by craft, and under a show of
courtesy. Therefore also are themselves become a curse among the Gentiles, as
was fore-prophesied by Zachary, Zach. 8.13. as who should say, God make thee as
a Jew. The Turks (whom they call Ishmaelites) will not suffer them to turn
Turk, unless they will be baptized: as neither will the Papists suffer them
to turn Christians, unless they will quit all their goods to the Christians,
under pretense that those goods, They entertain Christians with Shedwilcom,
welcome devil. Hei Isord. Sands his Survey of West.
being gotten by usury, are part of the devils works. which in baptism they
profess to renounce. This is cold comfort to men of their mettalls, and a
maine means to keep them Jews still, stiff in their own religion, which
yet is part of their calamity. For they pay to the Pope and other Princes in
Italy a yearly rent for the very heads they wear. Ibid.
Besides other means to rack and wreck them in their purses at pleasure: they
being used as the Friars to suck from the meanest, and to be sucked by the
greatest. This is a pressure they grievously groan under, and do therefore
call so loud for their long-lookt-for Messiah, Tantis expos^unt ululatibus, D.
^rideaux Lect.
crying; Let thy kingdom come quickly and in our days. Bimberah. Beiamenu.
Lights Miscell
That earthly kingdom they mean that the Disciples of our Savior also (being
sowred with the leaven of the Pharisees) so dreamt and doted on; and wherein
they will not endure that Chrstians should have any share or interest. Rather
then any such thing should be, they would crucify their Messiah a hundred
times over, they say. And as for those few Jews that turn Christians in
Italy, they pretend that they are none of them, Blunts voyage.
but poor Christians hired from other cities to personate their part. Thus
has God to all other their plagues and punishments, Mat. 13.14. Mar. 4.12.
Luke 8.4. Ioh. 22 40. Act. 28.26. Romans 11.8.
added this worst of all, of a fat and hard heart: according to that of the
Prophet so often cited in the New Testament against them. He has given them
the spirit of slumber unto this day. Ezr. 10.2.
But yet there is hope in Israel concerning this: Act. 3.17. Ioh. 16.2. Romans
10.2.
for they have rejected the Gospel, not out of mere malice, but ignorantly,
out of a blind zeal. Besides, blindness is but in part happened to Israel,
Romans 11.25, 26. (it is not a total nor a final obstinacy) until the
fulness of the Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall be saved. This he
calls a mystery, because no man can conceive how it should be: But yet he would
not have us Gentiles ignorant of it, that remembering our engagement, Ioh 4.
and that salvation is of the Jews, we may further their conversion, by
crying day and night, Psalm. 14.7.
O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion, etc. and not hinder it,
as the Papists do by their abominable idolatries and exactions, and the
common protestants by their damnable oaths and blasphemies (a sin that they
very Turks punish, and the Jews assign for the cause, wherefore the Turks
have so prevailed against us.) And lastly, (as the best of us may do) by our
dullness to this duty of pitying and praying for them, and so promoting their
conversion: for the which neglect they have, I fear, an unanswerable action
against us.

CHAP. VIII.
SEcondly, is it God that speaks in the Scriptures and Writes to us these
great things of his Law, me thinks we should not need be exhorted, 1. To
read it diligently: 2. To rest upon it confidently for instruction and comfort.

Sect. 1.
Read it first, Quid est S. Script nisi quaedam Epistola omnipot. Dei ad
creaturam suam? Greg. Ovid.
for it is Gods Epistle for our sakes Written, 1 Cor. 9.10. for our Admonition,
1 Cor. 10.11. and Consolation, Romans 15.4. quid Epistola lecta nocebit? Study
it, for it is Gods Statute Book: Peruse it, for it is our Fathers Will and
Testament, wherein we may find our own names written, as David did, Psalm. 40 7.
In the Volume of thy Book it is written of me, that J should do thy will O
God: and as the Church in Hosea did, He found Jacob in Bethel, Hos. 12 4.
and there he spoke with us. So, what was said to Joshua, Josh. 1.8.
J will not leave thee nor forsake thee, was said to every good soul, Heb.
13.5. that shall read in the book of the Law, as he did day and night: that
shall esteem it above their necessary food with Job, Job 23.12.
who had rather miss a meal, then not read his task: that shall exhale and
spend his spirits, fainting and panting in continual sallyes as it were, Psalm.
119.97.
and egressions of affection to Gods Word, as David did: that shall understand
Gods Will by books as Daniel, Dan. 9.2.
who had learned the number of the years, out of Jeremy, and got light to the
interpretation of Nebuchadnezzars dream out of Ezechiel. Dan. 2. with Ezekiel.
31.3, etc.
Christ himself has honored Reading with his own Example: for he came to
Nazareth, and, Luk 4.16.
as his custom was, stood up to read the Scriptures. He has also bidden us,
Search the Scriptures, search here as for hid treasures, with delight and
diligence, as those noble Bereans. Not carelessly and cursorily, as the modern
Jews, Sr. Edw Sands.
who are as reverend in their Synagogues, Sic ut posset quivis animo advertere
quod servet illam pro con^uetudine potius quam pro^ religione, reverentiam.
Epist. 1. lib. 1. Nil obiter.
as Grammar boys are at School when their Master is absent. Not customarily,
and of form only, as Sidonius reports of Theodoricus, that he did his
devotions more of custom then of conscience. Not suddenly or in have; but with
preparation, pause and deliberation, ever having oculum ad scopum (which was
Lud: Vives his Motto) an eye to the maine intent of that Text we read. (...).
Not with hearts and thoughts distracted and dissipated, but called in and
concentred on the business in hand; as the Sunbeams in a glass, or as the
lines in the middle of a circle: Beseeching God to fix our quicksilver, and to
hold our hearts to the good abearance; Psalm. 119.12.
that we may hide Gods Word therein with David, melt at it as Josiah, lay it
up as the Virgin Mary; Sabellicus.
who is said to have spent a third part of her time in reading the Scriptures.
Sure it is, she was excellently well versed in them, as appears by her Song.
Neither she only, Contra Appl. on. lib. 2.
but any one of us Jews, says Josephus, being asked about any point of the
Law, can answer as readily as tell you his own name. Celebrantur seduli in
lectitandis sacris. Malcolm. in Act. 6.5.
Among those seven first Deacons, Acts 6. Prochorus, Nicanor, and Timon, are
famous for their diligence in reading the Scriptures. Of Anthony the Hermit it
is reported, that though he knew no letter on the book, yet he could readily
repeat the whole Scripture by heart: Aug de doct. Christ.
And of Johannes Gatius, a certain Divine of Sicily, Alsted Chronol. p. 267.
that he was so well skilled in the Bible, that he thought, if it were utterly
lost out of the world, he could (for a need) restore it. Of Nepotian S. Hierom
testifies, that by much reading and meditation of the Scriptures, Pectus suum
Bibliothecam Christi ^ffec^sset.
he had made his bosom that Library of Christ. As of Cecilia it is said, that
she carried always the Gospel of Christ in her breast. Eusebius. l. 6. c 3.
Origin was from his cradle inured to remember and recite the holy Scriptures;
Basil. epist. 74.
and Basil was taught them of a child by his nurse Macrina. Didymus
Alexandrinus. (though blind from his childhood, yet) was not only a good
Artist, but an able Divine; and wrote certain Commentaries on the Psalms,
Hieron, in Catalo. vir. illustrium. Initio dial. cum Tryphone. D. Pride Lect.
and Gospels; being now, says S. Hierom, above 83 years of age. Justine the
Philosopher, and Cyprian the Necromancer (as some conceive it) were converted
by reading. So were S. Austin, and Fulgentius; and of late Franciscus Junius
was turned from Atheism by reading the first Chapter of S. John's Gospel, In
vita operibus praefixa.
as himself confesses in his life. Others have hereby been notably prepared
for conversion, as the Bereans, Acts 17.11.
and other Jews; who were more easily wrought upon by the Apostles preaching,
because so well acquainted with the Scriptures, there was no need of quoting
the places to them; it was sufficient to name the words only. Reading with
attention and application, breeds both knowledge and conscience, Mat. 24.15.
Dan. 9.2.
teaches Gods holy fear, and transformeth us into the same image: as the
pearl by the often beating of the Sun beams upon it becomes radient as the
Sun; and as Moses by conversing with God, came down from the holy Mount with
his face shining. It seasons the heart that it be not drowned in earthly
vanities, illightens the judgment, helps the memory, comforts the conscience,
composeth the affections, keeps the King himself (who has more temptations)
from pride and selfe-confidence; Deuteronomy. 17.
It keeps out worldly cares, dulls carnal delights, strengthens faith,
inflameth love, directs the whole life secretly, yet sweetly draws a man
above the world, above himself, so that he converseth with God, is in Heaven
aforehand, he eats, and drinks, and sleeps eternal life. S. Jerome writes
of certain holy Women so devoted this way, In regula sa^ct.
ut caro esset paene nescia carnis; they seemed in place only remote, but in
affection to join with that holy company of Heaven. Hoscus de Expr. verb. Dei
Cyril. Alex. lib 6. Cont. Julian.
What means then that foule-mouthed Cardinal to affirm that a distaffe were
fitter for a woman then a Bible. Julian indeed the Apostate upbraideth the
Christians, that their women were medlers with the Scriptures. But Jerome
highly commends it in his Eustochium, Salvina Celantia, Paula, and her maidens,
whom she set to learn the Scriptures. And S. Chrysostom calls upon his
hearers to search the Scriptures, and sharply reprooves them for that they
could not say Psalms, Hom. 3. in Mat.
and other portions of Scripture by heart. It is a lamentable thing that most
people have either so much, or so little to do, that they can never find time
to look into the Scriptures, to any purpose. If they read, yet they profit
not; either because they are carnal, and savor not the things of the Spirit;
Among Jews, the Rabbi sat, termed (...) the Scholar (...) that lies along in
the dust, at the teachers seet. Psalm. 25.9.
or their hearts are yet stuffed with pride and passions, or cares and lusts; or
they sit not at Gods feet, as Paul at Gamaliels, as Mary at our Saviors to
receive his Word; or they read but now and then, or but here and there, and
not in order and with due observation; or they pray not, or they propound not
their doubts, and seek satisfaction. Some think it sufficient to say they are
not book-learn'd, neither can they skill of this Scripture-learning. (...).
Chrysostom. ibid.
This was the old excuse in Chrysostomes time, I am no Monk, I have not been
bred a scholar, I have wife and children to take care for, etc. But what says
he to this? Audite, obsecro, seculares omnes, Homil 9. in ep. ad Coloss.
comparate vobis Biblia, animae pharmaca; Hearken ye laymen, get ye Bibles,
the physic for your souls. If you cannot read, get others to read them to
you, as ye will do your deeds and evidences. Blessed are they that read and
(in case they cannot read) hear the words of this Prophecy. Rev. 1.3.
The Scriptures are called the Word, as if all the use of our ears were to
hear this Word. Get you Bibles therefore; and if you count it a shame not to
have fit furniture for your houses, decent attire for your bodies, or
attendance for your persons; think it much more shame to be without Bibles; or
having them, to cast them into corners, or toss them up and down the house,
Blunts voyage into the Levant.
as old Almanacks. The Jews in their Synagogues carry the Law in procession,
usually all about, at the end of Service, with many ornaments of Crowns and
Scepters, the children kissing it, as it passes by them. In their private
houses they never lay any other book upon the Bible: they wash their hands
before they touch it, they will not sit upon the bench where it lies; as often
as they open and shut it, they use to kiss it, and if it but fall to the
ground they institute a fast for it. Surely their excessive reverence to the
Word will rise up in judgment against our heathenish profaneness, and
hateful heedlesnesse. The very Turks at this day do so admire Moses, Parei
proleg. in Genes.
that if they light upon loose or torn papers, wherein any thing of his is
written, they take it up and kiss it. Their own Alchoran is to be read in
Arabike under pain of death, not to mistake a letter, Lightsoots Miscell. p.
127.
which is as easily done in this tongue, as in any. And amongst those
Mahometans of Morocco, Rel. of entert. of Mor. Emb. page 36.
the Talby or priest that cannot read the Alchoran all over on their
Good Friday at night, is held unworthy of his place, and preferment. Indeed
they require none to hear them but such as can well awhile. Turk. Hist.
But S. Chrysostom (besides what is done at home) will have his hearers make a
while to attend to the public reading of the Word, Hom. 28. in Genesis Obsecro ut
subinde huc veniatis, etc.
bringing their Bibles with them. See for this, Nehem. 8.3, 9. 2 Chronicles. 34.30.
Act. 13.15. and 15.21. 1 Thessalonians. 5.27. Coloss. 4.16. The Epistle to the
Colossians must be read in the Church of the Laodiceans; and not only so, but
the Colossians must read the Epistle from Laodicea.

But what Epistle was that,

Some think the Laodiceans wrote to the Apostle, Colossians: Bifield in coloss.
and therefore required that his answer may be compared with their doubts.
Other good books then may be read and publicly too: but especially the
Scriptures. (...)
The same word in Hebrew signifies reading and a Convocation or Assembly. And
another word in that tongue signifies to read and meditate: to show that we
must not read the Scripture as we do a History for delight, nor run it over
only as an Ephemeris or day-book, nor turn it over the thumb as a task, but
with pause and deliberation; (...) Coloss. 3.16.
never giving over, till it dwell richly in us, become familiar to us, and be
as well known of us, as those of the same house, yea as our own brethren and
sisters. Say unto Wisdom, thou art my sister, and call understanding thy
kinswoman, Prove. 4.7. He that knows not his own flesh and blood, we count him
a singular idiot; so does the Lord all such, as are unskilled in his Word. Who
would not think shame to be counted and called as rude as a horse, as ignorant
as an ass? Behold God esteems no better of such as are not skillful in the
Scriptures, Psalm. 32.9. Esaias 1.3. be they otherwise never so profound and
politic. Wherefore read and let him that reads understand, Mat. 24.15. And
that you may, take these directions in reading.

Sect. 2.
FIrst read though thou understandest not, Chrysostom. ser. 3. de Lazaro.
God may graciously drop some further light into thee (as he sent Philip to the
Eunuch) even whiles thou art reading, or some other time, when thou least
look for it. Joseph understood not his own dreams at first, till he saw
his brethren prostrate before him. Genesis 42.9.
Then Joseph remembered the dreams that he dreamed of them. J remember, says
Jehu to Bidkar, when thou and I rode after Ahab, 2 King 9.25.
the Lord laid this burden upon him. These things understood not his Disciples
at first; but when Jesus was glorified, then remembered they that these things
were written of him, and that they had done these things unto him. Ioh. 12.16.
Ioh. 2.22.
The Spirit came not upon Saul in the annoynting, but afterward, when he was
departed from Samuel. 1 Samuel 10.1, 6, 5.
My Beloved was gone, says the Spouse, my soul failed when he spoke, or
because of his speech, that he had uttered, Cant. 5.2-6.
but she for present either heard not, or heeded not; Open unto me my sister,
etc. Gods Word lies sometimes as the seed under a clod, or as the Sun under a
cloud, it appears not, affects not for the present (as John Baptists preaching
wrought not for diverse years after it was delivered, and then it did) till it
be seconded by some powerful Sermon, Ioh. 10 4^, 41.
as there, or some piercing cross, as Joh. 14.26. or unexpected accident, Acts
10.34, etc. Go on therefore constantly in thy Christian course of reading as
Job did, Chap. 23.12. and be not dismayed with any difficulties, as David, who
when he understood he should be put upon hard and hot service, it pleased him
well. 1 Samuel 18.2^. (...) Luke 1.3.
Only as S. Luke wrote, (so must you read) in an orderly manner; beginning at
the beginning of the book we undertake, and so continue reading till you come
to the end of it. Account not any part of this venerable Volume to be
superfluous or super-vacaneous, not inscriptions, says Chrysostom, not
iterations, say we, or expletives or any the least jot or tittle, says our
Savior, but all pure, precious and profitable. (...).
For if Hippocrates could say of his faculty of physic, that there was nothing
to be accounted little in it, nothing contemptible; Platonici in corporibus
coelestibus quendam veluti florem, in hisce inferioribus quandam veluti ^ae^em
esse dicebant, etc. Mureti Orat.
how much more may we say the same of the holy Scriptures. The Platonists
affirm that in the heavenly bodies is a certain flower, and quintessence, in
these inferior bodies a kind of dregs and sediment. Sure it is, that all
sciences whatsoever are but dross and dregs to the doctrine of Divinity
contained in the Scriptures: there is not a leaf nor a line, not a syllable nor
a particle, says S. Jerome, but has its sense and substance well worthy to be
weighed and observed.

Here some make question whether it be their part to read on in Chronicles,
Ezra and other places, where are nothing but names and Genealogies, which they
conceive to be to us (now) of no great use?

The resolution is, Pemble of the Pers. Monar.
that they must read on, if it be but to show their obedience to God, in
reading over all his sacred Word. But besides, there is much to be had out of
the Genealogies, and Chapters full of names to a wise and diligent Reader. And
what if we understand not, can pick nothing out of some such Chapters; yet we
must know that those places have in them an immanent power to edify, though as
yet it be not transient, conveighing the profit of it to us, till in some
measure we do understand it.

Sect. 3.
SEcondly, make the best of that you read, by serious and set meditation
thereupon. Psalm. 119 98, 99, 100.
David hereby became wiser then his Teachers, Elders, Enemies. And why? Psalm.
62.11.
when the Lord spoke once he heard him twice: to wit, by an after-meditation.
Reading and meditation are both expressed by one and the same word in the holy
tongue, pointing us to what we must do, if we will either understand what we
read, or retain what we understand. Meditation is a studious act of the
mind, searching the knowledge of an hidden truth by the discourse of reason. A
most sweet exercise to those that are any whit acquainted with it; who could
even wish themselves pent up (as Anchorets) in the voluntary prison-walles of
divine meditation. This, this is that, that makes a man see far into Gods
secrets, and enjoy both God and himself with unspeakeable comfort. We read of
Socrates that he would stand plodding of points of Philosophy, A. Gellius.
in the same posture of body, for diverse hours together, not sensible of any
thing that was done about him. And of Chrysippus, that he was so transported at
his study, that he had perished with hunger, had not his maid Melissa thrust
meat into his mouth. Democ. junior.
Creed mihi in Mathematicarum studijs etiam mo ri, dulcissimum esset. 'T were a
sweet thing, says one, to die studying the Mathematics, as Archimedes did.
Vir ingeniosa and prosunda meditatione, etc sine cibo and somno nisi que^
cubito innixus capiebat, per triduum totum. Thuan
Thuanus writes of one Franciscus Vieta Fontaneio a Frenchman, so close and
constant a student, that he would sit many times three whole days together in
a deep muse, without food or so much as sleep, but what he took a little now
and then leaning on his elbow. Valere est Philosophari, the study of Philosophy
is truly health, says Seneca, who therefore salutes his friend Lucilius thus,
si Philosapharis been est. Epist. 15.
But I say the only true health is to meditate with David, Horum meditatio
valetu^o mea, vita mea. Scultet Anno^. in Marc.
day and night on the Word of God. S. Bernard says, that he had once no other
masters but oaks and beech-trees; Author vitae Bern. lib. 1. ^. 4.
that among them he had got that skill he had in the holy Scriptures, that he
had profited more therein by meditation and prayer, Ascendamus meditatione and
oratione veluti duobus pedibus, etc. Bern.
then by reading the largest Commentaries. These two were the wings, whereby he
flew into Heaven, and had his hearts desire to be taught of God. Therefore
shall ye lay up these my words in your heart, Luke 2.13.
and in your soul, etc. Deuteronomy. 11.18. as the Virgin Mary did laying up what
she understood not, and chewing upon it: And as David did, Psalm. 16.7. Psalm 4
4. Psalm. 119.24. Act. 109, 10. Esaias 6.1, 2. Anno a d^^uvio 1540 Vide, quaeso
quam di versa siant ^oc anno in Ecclesia and extra Ecclesiam. Ethnici in
Graecia spectant ludos ^uos. Esaias in Judea contemplatur revelata Dei gloriam,
etc. Buchol. Chron. 541.
whose reins instructed him in the night season, whilst he communed with his
own heart upon his bed, and advised with Gods statutes as the men of his
counsel. So Eliah on Mount Carmel, Daniel by the river Vlay, Peter on the
leads, Isaac in the fields, Esaias among the Seraphims, seeing and setting forth
the Lord sitting upon his throne high and lofty, when the vain Graecians were
at the same time tumultuating and triumphing at their Olympic games. O quam
sordeant huius mundi (...) and (...) animo ad coelum erecto; D. Pride Lect.
O how vile are the tastlesse foolerics of earthly pleasures, or the best
contents that Philosophy can afford, to a mind lift up in heavenly meditation.
Such a man's thoughts feed hard upon the fairest objects: such as are those, set
down in that brief of the Bible, Iam. 1 21. (...) Plutarch says that
Corio^anus had so used her weapons, (...) that they seemed (...). In vita Cor.
Philip. 4.8. till he has turned them in succum and sanguinem, till the Word
become an ingrafted Word, settled on his soul, as the science on the stock, and
close applied as the plaster to the sore, that will surely heal.

Sect. 4.
THirdly, to Meditation join hearty prayer to the Father of lights for the
Spirit of Revelation, that unction from on high, that spiritual eye salve,
that so plowing with his heyfer we may understand his riddles. No man knows
the things of a man save the spirit of a man that is in him, Prove. 20.27. 1
Cor. 1.11. Romans 8.27.
(which is therefore called Gods candle searching all the inward parts of the
belly) Even so the deep things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God.
But as God understands the mind of the Spirit, so does the Spirit understand
the meaning of God, and we by the Spirit have the mind of Christ. 1 Cor 2. ult.
Read not therefore but pray first and last, that God would give us his Spirit
to instruct us; that he who commanded the light to shine out of darkness,
would shine into our hearts, that he would beat out windows in these dark
dungeons, and let in the light of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.
2 Cor. 4.6.
Prayer is as the Merchants ship to fetch in heavenly commodities, Prove. 31.14
2 Samuel 1.22. 2 Samuel 18.27.
as Jonathans bow that never returned empty of spoil, as Ahimaaz, that always
brought good tidings. When ever therefore you take up the Bible and open it,
cry, Psalm. 119.
Lord open mine eyes that J may see the wondrous things of thy Law. When you
are reading, think you see written over every line, Zach. 14.20. Sancte liber,
venerande liber, liber optime, salve.
Holiness to the Lord, and lift up some good requests. As when you shut the
book again, say, Lord who am I that thou should shut up thy mysteries in
such an earthen vessel, O animae nostrae Biblia, dimidium.
put such a precious pearl in a leatherne purse, commit such a rich talent to
me who am of saints the least, of sinners the greatest. Thus as Moses prayed
devoutly both when the Arc removed, and likewise when it rested again. And as
Paul begins, continues, and concludes his Epistles with holy prayers, Hoc
primum repetas opu^, hoc postremus omittas.
so must we our reading of the Scriptures if we mean to make any thing of it.
No sacrifice was without incense, so must no service be without prayer. Mar.
9.24.
Yea let us pray with tears, as he in the Gospel did, and sped. They are
effectual Orators with Christ, who found time to look upon the weeping
women, when he was in the midst of his agony, and in his way to the tree. Jacob
wrestled with him and prevailed by prayers and tears. The Prophets usually
received their Revelations besides rivers. Esaias 62.4. Cant 1.15. Cant. 4.1.
The Spouse (Christ's Cheptsibah) is said to have doves eyes, glazed with
tears. John the beloved Disciple wept and so obtained that the book should be
opened. Revel. 5.4.
Like as when Gods bottle was filled with Hagars tears, he opened her eyes,
and sent his Angel to show her where she might fill her bottle with living
water. Luther (that great instrument of Gods glory for the bringing of life and
immortality to light by the Gospel) was a man of prayer, 2 Timothy, 1.10.
and so ardent therein, that (as Melancton writes) they which stood under his
window, where he was praying, might see his tears falling and dropping down.
Scultet. Annal.
George Prince of Anhalt, though he saw something by Luthers light, yet being
not thoroughly convinced of diverse points then in controversy, besought God
with many tears to bend his mind to the truth, using often those words of
David, Psalm. 119.124.
Deal with thy servant according to thy mercy and teach me thy statutes. This
was the first and the only Prince of Germany that himself taught his subjects
the way to Heaven, Ibid.
both by lively voice, by printed books, and by his daily prayers for his
people, that he might save himself and those that heard him. Luke 6.12.
Our Savior, when he was to send forth his Apostles, spent a whole night in
prayer with strong crying and tears for a blessing on their Ministry, and was
heard in that he requested. The harp yields no sound till touched by the hand of
the Musician: nor can Paul prevail with Lydia till God open her heart.
Rebeccah may cook the venison, but it is Isaac that must give the blessing:
Paul may plant, etc. but God gives increase. The cause why the Word works no
more upon many men's hearts, when they read of hear it, is because they rest
too much upon it (as that Idolatrous Micah, who said, Judge 17.
J know God Will be merciful unto me, because J have got a Levite) and cry not
earnestly to God to come himself unto them in the fulness of the blessing of
the Gospel of Christ, Romans 15.29.
to strike a holy stroke by his powerful Spirit, to give us right judgment
and understanding, that we may approove things that are excellent. Pray
therefore with S. Paul, Phil. 1.
that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, would give unto us
the Spirit of Wisdom and revelation, the eyes of our understanding being
enlightened, etc. Ephesians. 1.17, 18 Rev 3. Rev. 5.
Pray him that has the key of David, and was found only worthy to open the
seven seals, to open our eyes that we may behold wondrous things out of his
Law, to irradiate both Organ and Object to give us sight and light: not that
outward light only that is in the Scriptures themselves, but that inward also
of his Spirit, the light of faith in our hearts. Aug de Civ. Dei.
The Platonists could say that the light of our minds, whereby we learn all
things, is no other but God himself, the same that made all things; say
therefore with David; Psalm. 119.12.
Blessed be thou, O Lord, teach me thy statutes. And with Zuninglius, I beseech
Almighty God to direct our ways; Deum O. M. precor ut vias nostras dirigat ac
sicubi simus Beleami in morem veritati pertinaciter obluctaturi, etc. Epist
lib. 3^. fol. 118.
and if Balaam-like, we shall wilfully withstand the truth, to send his holy
Angel, who, with the dint of his drawn sword, may so dash this Ass (our
blindness and boldness, I mean) to the wall, that we may feel our feet
(that is, our carnal affections) to be crushed, and our selves kept from
speaking ought amiss of the God of Heaven. Omnipotent sempiterne ac mi^ericors
Deus, cujus verbum, etc. Scultet. Annal p. 328.
His public Lectures on the Bible he always began with this prayer. Almighty,
everlasting, and merciful God, whose Word is a lantern to our feet, and a
light to our paths, be pleased to open and enlighten our minds, that we may
both understand these thine Oracles piously and holily, and also be transformed
into that we rightly understand, so that we may not in any thing displease thy
Majesty, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Sect. 5.
FOurthly, confer with those that are better able: propound to them your
doubts, and seek satisfaction as the Disciples did, Joh. 16.16. and the
Eunuch, Acts 8.34. and the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 7. But ever do this with a
desire to be resolved, and to yield to the truth revealed, Not like that
Nonesuch Ahab, 2 Chronicles. 18.14. or those perverse Pharisees, Ioh 18.38.
Mar. 8.12. or Pilate, that asked what is truth? but cared not to hear an
answer; or Herod who was desirous of a long season to see our Savior, Luke 23
8.
as hoping to have seen some miracle done by him (as by some base juggler) but
would never stir out of doors to fee him. Ier 42.19.
Not like Jeremies hearers that had made their conclusion before they came to
enquire of him, and were resolved upon their course: nor like those tatling
women in Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.7.
that are ever learning, but never knowing the truth. Luke 24.
But with an humble and honest heart, as those two going to Emaus: for such
shall know all Christ's mind, as they: Such shall be of his Court and Counsel,
Genesis 18.17.
as Abraham: to such will he look, Esa. 66.1, 2.
even to such with special intimations of his love and good liking, Luke 23.28.
as he did to the devout women; and spoke kindly to them, when proud Pilate
could hardly get a word of him. The stiff-necked Jews might ask our Savior
what he meant by that saying, After a while ye shall see me, etc. and receive
no satisfaction: but let his Disciples propound the same question to him, Ioh,
16.18, 19.
and he answers them to the full. So ready is Christ to satisfy the hungry
with good things, whereas the rich he sends empty away. When therefore you
come in company of Gods abler servants, (Ministers or others) trifle not out
the time in idle curiosities, nice and needless questions, unprofitable and
endless disputes, etc. but ask good things with the Disciples, seek with the
Spouse in the Canticles, knock at the door of their lips for a spiritual
alms, who as liberal housekeepers feed many. Prove. 10.21.
This is a high point of heavenly wisdom, and a course of incredible profit:
such as may beseem a Paul, (who would both give and receive some spiritual
gift from the believing Romans) or an Apoll^, Romans 1.11.
who though an eloquent m^n and mighty in the Scriptures, yet was taught the
way of God more perfectly by a couple of poor tent-makers. Acts 18.26.
Let our civil conversation be in Heaven, (...) Phil. 3.20. 1 Cor. 11.17.
and our meetings be for the better, not for the worse, that if Christ should
suddenly chop in amongst us, and ask us as he did those two going to Emaus,
what manner of communications are these ye have one with another, Luke 14.
we may give him a good account of that we have been talking of: and our very
speech may bewray us, as it did Peter, to be of his number and retinue; good
stewards of the manifold grace of God. 1 Pet. 4.10.


Sect. 6.
LAstly, despise not prophesying, but plant thy self under the droppings of
the preaching Ministry: for there (if any where) the doctrines of the
Scriptures are beaten out (as spices to the smell) and made familiar and plain
to us. Wait therefore daily, duly, diligently, at these posts of wisdoms
gates, Prove. 8.34.
wear out the threshold of Gods House, seek to the Sanctuary for satisfaction
in your doubts: as David did, when he met with a matter that was too hard for
him, he went to the house of God, and by the help of the public Ministry, he
got the right understanding of Gods providence, righteousness and wisdom in
ordering the disorders of the world, which by private reading or meditation he
could never attain to, Psalm. 73 13.
though himself were a Prophet. They are fools that say they know as much as
ere a Preacher of them all can teach them: Ioh. 4.
for the Law is a deep well, as Jacobs, and we want a bucket, and the Gospel
is a mystery, yea the wisdom of God in a mystery. 1 Cor. 2. Col. 1.26.
So that as a man may look on a trade, and yet never see the mystery of it, he
may look on artificial pieces, as pictures, watches, clock-works, that
wonderful globe of silver sent by Ferdinand King of Romans to Solomon the
Turk for a present, that did daily express the hourly passing of the time,
the motions of the planets, Turkish Hist. p 713.
the change and full of the Moon, the wonderful motions and conversions of
the whole celestial frame. This rare and curions devise, ever moving by
certain wheels and weights conveyed within it, and exactly keeping due time
and motion, a man might have looked on long enough, or ere he could conceive the
art whereby it was devised and perfected. So it is in reading many places of
Scripture. A man may look upon the letter, and never understand the sense, any
more then the Philistines did Sampsons riddles: there may be a well of water
hard by him, and he perceive it no more then Hagar did, till God had opened her
eyes. Have you not read? Mat. 12.3 and 19.14. and 21.16, 42.
and did you never read? says our Savior to the Scribes. Yes: none more: But
they searched not into the heart of the sense, but stuck in the back of the
letter, and died in their sins, because they would not hearken to his Sermons
and Expositions of the Law. The Mathematikes are not learned without a teacher,
Mathemat^ quod sine praeceptore percipi nequeant, dicta sunt.
and thence have their names no more are many Scriptures. How can I understand,
says the Eunuch, except some man guide me? Act. 8.31.
Our Savior expounded to those two, in all the Scriptures, Luke 24.27.
the things concerning himself. And shortly after, at his solemn inauguration
into his heavenly kingdom, when he ascended up on high, he led captivity
captive, and gave gifts to men. The Holy Ghost, in that expression, seems to
allude to the manner of the Roman triumphs; wherein (besides the captives
driven before the Chariot of State, bound and pinnion'd) the Generals used, in
token of their bounty, to cast abroad certain new pieces of coin to be picked
up by the people. Semblably, our blessed Savior triumphing gloriously over
finne, death, and hell on the chariot of his Cross, and having spoy^ed
principalities and powers, minds an open show of them, he also gave gifts to
men, and what are those? some Evangelists, some Prophets, etc. See therefore
that ye despise not prophesying, 1 Thessalonians 5.20.
lest ye wish you had not; as Saul did, who slighted Samuel while alive, and
would feign have heard him, and advised with him when he was dead: like some
drowning man that stretches out his hand to that bough, which he contemned
standing safe on the bank. But now (alas) it was all too late. As he lost
his kingdom by not discerning his time to sacrifice, and not staying for the
Prophet; so he lost his life (if not his soul) by not harkening to the
Prophet. Saul enquired of the Lord, but the Lord answered him not, 1 Samuel 28 6.
neither by dreams, Vrim, Flectere si nequeo sup^ros Acher^^ta movebo. Nescis
quid serus vesper vehat.
nor Prophets. The devil must now be his ghostly father, his Vrim darkness,
his refuge a Witch, his Prophet a Sprite. Walk therefore and work too, while
the light lasts. Today hear his voice, whiles it is called to day, Prove.
27.1.
for who knows what a great-bellied day may bring forth? Harden not your
hearts, but hasten to Gods house, as the waters to their place, as the doves to
their windows. Come, say ye, Esa. 60.8. Zach. 8.21. Esaias 2.2.
and let us go speedily to the house of the Lord, I will go also. And he will
teach us there of his ways, and we will walk in his paths. Neglect not any
opportunity of hearing: thou know not what light thou loosest, what a prize
thou forgoest. Thomas was absent but once from the holy meeting (and perhaps
about some weighty business) but we all know how woefully he was thereupon
be-blinded and hardened, Joh. 20.24.
to incredulity he ads obstinacy, to weakness wilfullnes, Joh. 20.24. (...) Heb.
10.25.
Forsake not therefore the assemblies of Saints as the manner of some is, but
cling close to Christ, as the chicke^s do to the hen that clucks them: such an
allusion there seems to be in the Original. Come carefully to the public
reading of the Word, there is a special blessing annexed, and to be expected.
Come to the preaching of the Word, that ye may hear and understand, Mat.
15.10. Esaias 55.3. 1 King. 19.11, 12.
yea that ye may hear and live. God was in the still voice, to show that he
had sanctified a voice to be the ordinary means of coming to his creature.
Diestius de rat. slud Theol.
Nescio quid in auscultatione divinum est, says one. I know not how, but there
is some divine and extraordinary matter in hearing the Word, for informing the
judgment, helping the memory, and reforming the life. Especially if we bring
Bibles to Church and turn to the proofs, as the noble Bereans did: Act. 17.
whereas otherwise we may be shamefully seduced. Socrates tells us of one
Sabbatius a Novatian Bishop, that reading this Text of the Gospel, Luke 22.1.
Now the feast of unleavened bread (which is the Passover) drew near, he
added of his own head, Socrat lib. 5. cap. 21.
Cursed is every one that keeps the Passover, without unleavened bread. And
by this falsification, many of the more simple Novatian Heretics were carried
away from the faith. Whereas on 'tother side, when by comparing the Text and
the gloss, we perceive the Preacher delivering nothing for truth, but what is
grounded upon the Word of truth, our hearts will be the better ballasted,
bottomed, rooted and stablish'd in the faith, like those trees planted by the
river of waters, and not like chafe which the wind drives away, Psalm. 1.3,
4. whiffled and tossed too and fro with every wind of doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14.
Mat 13.44. 1 Thessalonians. 2.23. Ier. 6.16. Coloss. 2.2.
We shall grow to a certainty in what we hold, yea we shall persevere and hold
fast that we have learned and heard, we shall obey what we know, and find rest
to our souls. Come therefore to Gods house, and come betimes, to be there with
the first, striving to out-runne one another, as Peter and John did not the
Sepulcher of our Savior. Homericum Nestoris sacrificium, suit matutinum. Ac
omnino matutinum tempus, quod (...), Antiqui sacrificijs idoneum putabant, quo
guide^ Deos assidere templis opinabantur. Stuchi. us de sac^. gentil.
The Philistines flock betime to the Temple of their god, so did other Heathens
besides. What a shame is it then for us to come lag to ours? does it not speak
us careless, if not contemptuous? Being there, set thy self reverently as in
the presence of God with Cornelius, look him full in the face with David, say,
This is the house of God, the gate of heaven, with Jacob. Keep silence before
him, as ye are bidden, (...).
Esaias 41.1. and as the watchword was in the Primitive times among Christians,
yea anciently among Heathens. Sleep not therefore, talk not, read not, gaze
not. Hoc age.
Origin chides his hearers for nothing so much as for their seldom coming to
the public meetings, Erasmus in vita Orig. operibus praefixa.
and their careless hearing that which they ought to listen too as for life.
Psalm. 45.10. Prove. 2.2. Divina eloquia tanto altius quisque intelligit qua^to
altius in ea intendit. Greg; (...) Luke 19.48. Cant. 1.1.
Hearken O daughter and consider, incline thine ear, etc. And Cause thine ear
to hearken, incline thy heart to wisdom and understanding. Hang upon the
Preachers lips (which are appointed to preserve knowledge, and to drop as
honey-combes) as the people did upon our Saviors: covet these kisses of
Christ's mouth with his Spouse: say, Speak Lord for thy servant hears. All
that the Lord shall say unto me, that will I do. I come hither resolved to
deny mine own reason, Mar. 10.2.
profit, pleasure, credit, friends, all, for the words sake: loving what God by
the Preacher promises, fearing what he threatens, hating what he rebukes,
embracing what he commends, lamenting what he aggravateth, De doctr^
Christian^^^ 4. ca. 12
as Austin sweetly advises. Thus if we dance when we are piped unto, weep
when we are mourned unto, Acts 20.31, with 37
as those Elders of Ephesus: If we lay down our selves at Christ's feet,
submitting to the Scepter of his Kingdom, Isa 16.1.
and sending a Lamb to the Ruler of the whole Earth. God will give us the
meeting in that Ordinance, and teach us things great and high that we knew not
before. Jeremy 33 3.
Only we must bring with us good and honest hearts, free from every root of
bitterness; such as are those mentioned, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. The pure in heart only
see God, as transparent bodies only let in light, and as the eye, unless it be
well affected, cannot discern the object. Psalm 25.14. Ezekiel. 46.9.
The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show them his
Covenant. But then they must not unmannerly turn their backs upon the
propitiatory, but stay out the last. Judas by departing before all was done, met
the Devil at the door. The carnal Capernaites conclude it was a hard saying
of our Savior, and went their way; whereas had they staid out the Sermon, they
might have heard that doubt resolved, that his meaning was spiritual, John
6.60, 63. The multitude thought Zachary long, yet, Luke 1.
though they could but see a far off, they would not away, till he returned
to bless them. In the Council of Agathon it was decreed, Canon: 32
that people should not presume to go out of the Temple before the Ministers
had blessed the Congregation. And in the 24. Canon of the fourth Council of
Carthage, it is said, Let him that goes forth of the Auditory, when the
Minister is speaking to the Congregation be excommunicated. Among the Romans,
none stirred out of the Temple, till the Priest had finished and cried Ex
Templo; Becman: de Originibus ling: Lat.
which because it was soon done, (every man hasting out upon the word spoken)
therefore is that word used to signify suddenly, quickly. This argues deadness
of heart and disaffection, when men are so weary of well-doing, when they are
so soon sated, and so easily entreated to depart. Psalm 16. Psalm 84.
These are far from David's desire to dwell in the house of the Lord, all the
days of their life: Neither would they be forward to beg his office out of his
hand of being some doore-keeper there. Revel. 4.
And what would such men do in Heaven, Where they rest not day nor night
praising God, but serve him uncessantly without intermission. The Jews when
they ended one Section of the Law in their public reading, they ever began
another, that they might show themselves unsatisfiable in serving God: And when
they had read thorough Moses, and began Joshua they called that Section,
Haphtorah latitiae legis, etc.

CHAP. IX.
SEcondly, Is it the word of Gods grace that we read and hear? then may we
safely rest and rely upon it for direction and consolation, establishing our
hearts thereon, and delivering up our selves thereto: When expounded and applied.
It is a sure Word of prophecy, 1 Pet. 1.20. more sure then some voice from
Heaven, for that might be a delusion: More sure then any words or writings of
men whatsoever; since all men are liars and may err and deceive, whether they
be bad men or better. For the former, the Church (by Gods, whether permission
or appointment for excellent ends and uses) has ever bin pestered with
Impostours, 2 Pet. 2.1. Acts 20.30. Speaking perverse things, and seducing
unstable souls, as with the cogging of a Dye. The Devil deals by such as the
Fisher does by the bait, (...)
he catches one fish with another, that he may make a prey of both.

Secondly, there are not the best, but if we have their persons in overmuch
admiration, or think of of them above that which is written, 2 Cor. 11.3. 1
Cor. 13.
they may corrupt our minds from the simplicity of Christ. Here they know but
in part, and therefore prophecy but in part: By means of those remains of
ignorance (mother of mistake) they may, if they speak not according to the
Oracles of God, taint our judgments and misguide us, as Nathan did David, as
Peter did Barnabas, as Saint Luke and the rest of the Brethren would have done
Saint Paul, Acts 21.12. We besought him not to go up, etc. Wherein if they had
prevailed with him, they had merely misled him (as the old Bethlehite did the
Prophet of Judah) to his singular disadvantage. 1 Kin. 13.
So that it is not safe trusting to any man's authority or bare testimony,
without just ground of Gods Word: there being none so venerable for height of
holiness, or depth of learning, but may step besides the way, Deceiving and
being deceived. But now, Pro 30. Psalm 1^.7, 8 expounded. Bis^on Colos.
Every Word of God is pure, says Solomon, there is no crookedness in it: And
the Law of the Lord is perfect, says David, good for all occasions, useful in
all our ways; such as answers all our needs and doubts.

Apochryphall Authors deliver themselves doubtfully; are not confident of
their own Relations, have some things beside, some things against the truth.
And as in notable burglaries, a hat, glove, or sword is often left behind for
discovery, so in the Apocripha, though more honest, some errors have escaped
to discover the Authors. These books were added to the Canon by the Jews of
the dispersion, called Hellenists, in their Greek Translations, as profitable
to be read, but yet with Judgment, Ie^ 15.19.
wisely seperating the precious from the vile, for what is the chafe to the
wheat, says the Lord?

The like we may say of other humane Authors, though never so Authentical.
Cuffes d^ffer: of ages.
Aristotle, the Patriarch of Philosophers, denies Gods singular providence,
affirms the worlds eternity, commends Revenge, Arist: Rhet: cap. 1. l 9.
etc. Hom^r the Prince of Poets is banished by Plato out of his Commonwealth,
as a teacher of vices, (...). 1 Pet. 1.18. De not: deor: l. 3. Stantibus
Hierosolymis, pacatisque Iudaeis, tamen is it orum religio sacroru^ a splendore
hujus imperij, gravitate nomini^ nostri, mai^rum institutis abhor rebat, etc
Cic^ pro L. Flacco.
by the example of their gods. Cicero, the chief Orator, refuses to be
reduced from the superstition received by tradition from his Forefathers by
any argument: And judges the Roman Religion, to be better than that of the
Jews, because more suitable to the splendour of the Empire, and customs of
their Ancestors, and because they prospered and were victorious, when the
Jews were their slaves and vassailes. Of those since our Saviors time, Seneca
jeares the Jews for casting away a seventh part of their time upon a weekly
Sabbath: And although he write many things divinely, Epist. 53
yet one thing execrably, Est aliquid, quo sapiens antecedat Deum: ille Naturae
beneficio non suo sapiens est. Tacitus is said to be Primus in Historia, yet
how basely does he speak of the Christian Religion, Tacitum Lipsiu^ immemore^
secumque pu^^^^ tem^ Tertu^ mendacioril loquac^ssimii ap^ellat, John's: d^ Not.
G^^enus. biblia irrisit, etc. ^. Pride:
and for other matters Lipsius shows how he forgets and thwarts himself in
many things: And Tertullian calls him, Mendaciorum loquacissimum, a loud and
lewd liar. Galen the chief Physician laughes at the Bible: Vlpian the chief
Lawyer by his impious whisperings, incensed Severus the Emperor against the
Martyrs. Porphyry the chief Aristotelean, and Plotinus the chief Platonist
wrote bitterly against Christianity. B. Andrews
So did Libanius and Lucian the chief Orators: And Julian made and published
false Dialogues between Christ and Peter to induce youth to the hatred of our
Religion.

Come to the Fathers, whom we worthily follow, 1 Cor. 11.1.
so far as they follow Christ, and Sait Paul requires no more. Non audiamus
Haec ego dico, haec tu dicis, sed haec dicit Dominus, Aug: de unit, Eccles c. 3
Hieron: non dubitat anathema illi denunciare qui dlxerit legis impletione^ esse
impossibilem ^ed quid visum sit Hieronymo, nihil moramur: nos quid verum sit
inquirimus, Calv: Scholastici vel hoc nomine non ta^ti sunt a nobis facie^di
quia in Iustifica^ionisarti^ulo, vix quicqua^ tradiderunt solidi, O Prideaux.
But they had their errors many of them, and will not pass (though current
gold) without their allowance. Jreneus affirms that our Savior dyed at the
age of fifty. Austin that the Communion ought to be given to Infants. Origin
that at length all (Devils and men) shall be saved. Hierome Anathematizeth all
that shall say, It is impossible to fulfill the Law, etc. After them the
Schoolmen sprung up a rotten Generation of dunghill Divines, in comparison
of the Fathers, from whom they would needs dissent, in the Article of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper especially, for the forming and fomenting of
their monster of Transubstantiation, the fountain of innumerable other errors.
Their whole time and pains is spent about foolish and unlearned questions, 1 Timothy 6.
for most part, and opposition of science falsely so called. About these they
Spider-like eviscerate themselves and wrack their wits, and all to weave a
curious network to catch a fly.

The like we may say of most of the Jewish Rabbines. Onkelos the Chaldee
Paraphrast (the same is held to be that Aquila that translated the old
Testament into Greek) is a work of good use: so are some of their Targums and
Commentaries upon Scripture. Sunt mala mixta bonis, sunt bona mixta malis. But
for their Talmud; besides that it has many things fabulous and superfluous,
the Jews make too much of it, as Cleopatra in Plutarch did of the viper that
destroid her: For they set it and their Kabbalah in equal Authority with the
holy Scriptures. After the sealing up of the Babylonish Talmud, that is, after
the years of grace 500. till the year 1000, there was little written among the
Jews by reason of their many calamities. Alsted: Chron: page 417 Ius Caronicum
voluminibus infinitis Canonistae declararunt, codemfere tempore quo
Talmudistaru^ celebrari coepit nomen apud Iudaeos, and apud Arabas Alchorant
valere caepit authoritas, Heidelfield. Buxtor: in Rab Bibliotheca. Alsted:
Chronol p. 447. It is written in Arabique verse in form of dialogue betwee^
the Angel Gabriel and Mahomet.
That which was, were some frothy Commentaries upon the Talmud, (as the
Schoolmen altogether almost upon Peter Lombard, and the Canonists upon their
Canon Law, neglecting the sacred Canon of the Scriptures) saving that they
delighted (as there is not a more vainglorious people under Heaven) to prefix
some stately titles before their books out of the Bible, as Caphtor uperach, An
Apple and a flower; out of Exodus 21.23, etc. But Josippus Ben-gorion is an
Ocean of Jewish Fables patched together by the Rabbines in the time of Charles
the great. The Turkish Alcaran is a very mixture and hodge-podge of froth and
filth, vanity and villainy, lies and lewdness. Yet they will need be the the
only Musulmans, that is right Believers. The Papists also will seem the only
Catholics, I am cast out with the Fathers: I defend the doctrine of the
Fathers: I transgress the not, etc.
as the Donatists did before them. They challenge all the Fathers as theirs, as
Dioscorus the Heretic did in the Council of Chalcedon. And let but some
bragadochio Jesuit soulder and piece together some sentences of the Fathers or
Schoolmen, so as the books may come forth in folio, with some goodly pictures
in the Frontispice, then Cedite Romani Scriptores, cedite Gray: Such a flaunt
is made in the world, as if there was never the like seen. They say that the
Empire of learning is within the territories of the Jesuits; Literarum
imperiu^ est penes Iesuita^, Causab ex Apologis^ a Sands his Relation
that Satan sent Luther, and God sent them to withstand him, that a Jesuit
cannot be an Heretic, that the Church is the soul of the World, the Clergy of
the Church, and they of the Clergy. Great Clearks we yield them to be for most
part, Paterculus.
great Politicians and Orators, such as was Caius Curio, ingeniose nequam,
wittily wicked. But withal we say, that in all the Shop of Hell there is no
anvile so well set, whereon to forge any choice piece of mischief as that man
that is both learned and lewd. Ten of their crew obviated and encountered Martin
Luther at once; Eiusde^ sarinae.
summo conatu, acerrimo desiderio, non vulgari doctrina, Tom: 1. Epist.
Relinquo priora ut in illis latre^^, sequor posteriora, ut and illis allatrent,
He put him in mind of Aeneas Sylvius, who changing his opinions becae of a
poor Canon of Trent, both Bishop, Cardinal and Pope. Also Bessarion of Nice,
who of a poor Caloyer of Trapezond, became a Renowned Cardinal, and wanted not
much of being Pope Hist of Conc of Trent, pa. 73 Heb. 11.37. they were tempted.
He ranks their using tongues with their terrifying sawes, (...).
with a great deal of heat, wit and learning, at his first setting forth. But
all in vain (so God would have it) Quo magis illi furunt (says he in a
certain Epistle) eo amplius procedo, etc. The more they rage, the more
resolved I am upon my course: I leave what is behind, for them to bark at: I
follow after that which is yet before me, that they may have further matter for
them to bark at. The more out-ragious were they, the more courageous was he.
Vergerius was sent to offer him a Cardinalship, would he relinquish his
opinions. But he answered, Contemptus est a me Romanus and favor and furor, I
care neither for the favor nor fury, the allurements nor aff^ightments of
Rome. Another time, there was a design of proffering him a great sum of
money, but one wiser then the rest, cried out, Hem! Germana illa Bestia non
curat aurum. That Beast of Germany cares for no money. In his book of the
Babylonish Captivity he professes that whether he would or no, he became daily
more learned, and insighted into matters of Religion; and whence those
Meditations came into his head, but from Heaven, he could not imagine. Yet in
the business of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, this brave man showed
himself to be but a man: And in a certain work of his professes, that he will
rather admit of Transubstantiation, Scultet. Annal^ tom. 1. p. 13.
then remit any thing of the Corporal Presence. Yea, that he might shift the
Arguments wherewith Zuinglius pressed him, In libro, quod verba Christi adhuc
firma stent.
he feared not once to affirm that our Saviors Body even before his Ascension
was in Heaven and in Earth, yea in all places at once. Zuinglius also himself
though he had the better end of the staff, yet, was he not so fully
enlightened in the point he defended. For in his answer to Jacobus Struthio, Res
enim externas internum hominem aliqua in re iuvare, vel fidem aug re no^ posse
among other things he affirms that the holy Supper was not instituted for the
confirmation or increase of Faith (for how could outward things any way help
the inward man, or tend to the increase of Faith?) But rather for a testimony
of our thankfulness, and for a Commemoration of the death of Jesus Christ,
till his coming again. So great need is there (we see) that we try all things
we are taught, before we trust any thing, 1 Cor. 14.32.
being neither over-censorious (Let the spirits of the Prophets be subject to
the Prophets) nor over-credulous (the fool believes every thing) but that we
prove all points (whither of Faith or fact) as Lapidaries do their stones,
Pro. 14.15.
as Goldsmiths their metals, by bringing them to the Test, that is to the
Testimony, Esa. 8.20. to the pattern of wholesome words, 2 Timothy 1.13. (as they
of old did to the pattern delivered in the Mount) to that sure word of
Prophecy, 2 Pet. 1^
that safe beam and balance of the Sanctuary. If here they hold weight and
prove approovcable, Hold fast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
account every parcel of truth precious, defend it to the death, Funccius Chro.
as the Barons of Polonia anciently professed to do, (...).
by pulling their Swords half out when the Gospel was read. As if you find it
to be a falsehood, Abstain, 1 Thessalonians 5.22, 23.
says the Apostle from all appearance of evil, that is, if it look but
ill-favouredly, Quicquid suerit male coleratu^.
as S. Bernard phraseth it, if it be either simply evil, or but seemingly so,
if it appear but hetorodox, or carry a suspicion of sin, abstain from it, as
you would do from poison in your meats, from a Serpent in your way, (...), Eusebius
as St. John sprang out of Bath where Cerinthus was, for fear of further
mischief. Ps. 93.5.
Thorough thy Precepts J get understanding, therefore hate J every false way,
though never so plausible. Thy testimonies are very sure, says David. And, the
Promise is sure to all the seed of Abraham, says Paul: Romans 4.16.
For therein we are sure we hear God himself speaking, and that it is the
Truth that we hear, because it comes immediately from God, the first truth.
And although it be translated by men, yet is there far less mixture of
humane ignorance and infirmity, then in the Sermon of any Preacher in the
world; which must be examined by it. Hence our Savior in token of Reverence
stood up to read, Luke 4.16, 20
but sat down to preach. The people also stood up all when Ezra opened the
book to read: But when they heard the Sermons they were wont to sit; My people
sit before thee, and hear thy words, Ezekiel. 33.31. The Word preached must be
prooved: but the Word read simply and absolutely obeyed, without making any
question; unless it be to be further informed or confirmed therein, as Genesis
15.8. Judge. 6.34, 37. 2 King. 20.8. Luke 1.34. with 45. that so we may yield
the obedience of Faith, Romans 16.26. to this word of Faith, Romans 10.8. to this
Faith of Truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. Psalm 119.31
Hold fast the faithful Word therefore, Tit. 1.9. Cleave and cling to Gods
testimonies that you be not confounded: (...), Ephesians. 5.15.
Stand strictly to them: Walk precisely by them; so may you safely say, Lord if
I be deceived, Ier. 20.7. Psalm 130.5. Psalm 119.
thou have deceived me. J have waited on the Lord, my soul has waited, and I
have trusted in his Word: Thy testimonies are my delight and my councillors.
These he found more faithful then Ahitophel, more certain then Polibius,
whose counsel while the Roman General followed, he prevailed, as where he
did not, Pro. 20.18.
he miscarried, if Pausamas may be believed. Establish thy thoughts by
counsel, says the Wiseman, q. d. conceive not a thought without warrant of
Gods word. Aim at it as an Archer at a mark, Psalm 119.15 Pro. 7.2. Pro. 2.11.
with David. Keep it in thy heart as the pot of Manna in the Arc unputrified:
Keep it as the apple of thine Eye, keep it and it will keep thee. 2 Thessalonians. 1.5
Veniat, veniat verbu^ Domini, and subm^^emu^ ei, sexcenta si nobis essent
colla. Baldassar in Epist: ad ^ecolamp.
Let it run through thy whole life, as the woofe runs through the web. Receive
it constantly, and with thy, as those Thessalonians did, though it cost them
many perils and pains, crosses and disgraces. In all thy ways acknowledge God,
and he shall direct thy steps, as the Angel did Israel in the Wilderness.
Only as they, so must we, Lord, says Nazianzen, I am an Instrument for thee to
touch.
follow him and the line of his Law, though it seem to lead us in and out,
backward and forward, as he did them there, as if we were treading a maze. Let
the watch of our will be set by the Sun-diall of his ward, let us yield our
selves up to him as instruments to touch. And if it be God that speaks in the
Scriptures, what remains but that we hear him with silence; obey him with
chearfullnesse in all things, as well as in any thing, Acts 3.22, 23* making
his Word thy Rule and Rudder, thy Lantern and Loadstarre to steer thy whole
course by. Eadem ratione hanc vitae vi^^ quaeri oportet qua in alto iter
navibu^ quaeritur: nisi aliquid ^oeli lumen observent, incertis ^^rsibus
v^gantur, Lactant: l: 6 c 8 Hunc audite, Matthew 17
A good man's way is like the Mariners guided by the heavens: his hand is on
the oar, but his eye on the star. And as the wisemen went no further then
the star, and the star no further then Christ: so does the godly Christian,
He follows the Lamb whersoever he goes, he hears him (according to the voice
from heaven) sticks to him as close as Elisha to his Master Eliah, lets falls
his plumes before him with the Angels, Magnus est animus, qui se Deo tradidit:
Pusillus, and degener, qui obluctatur, and deos mavult emendare quam se. Sen.
Ep. 107 Matthew 11.28
Eze. 1.24. casts down his crown at Christ's feet with the Elders, Rev. 4. sets
the Crown on Christ's head, with the Spouse, Cant. 3.11. puts a Scepter into
his hand by submitting to the Word of his Kingdom, by admitting of his
Government, by taking his yoke upon him, by learning of him to be humble and
holy, that he may find rest to his soul.

CHAP. X.
AND that is a second thing we were exhorting all to do. If it be God that
speaks rest upon his Word, and improove it for strong consolation, Heb. 6.
Psalm 56.4. Psalm 119.54
singing with David, In God will J praise his word, in the Lord will J praise
his word. Thy Statutes have bin my Songs in the house of my pilgrimage. He sang
away the time and trouble of his travel toward Heaven, as Pilgrims and
Passengers use to do: Rom: 15 4. 1 Cor. 9.10
And went on merrily, as Sampson sucking sweetness out of his hony-combe. The
Bible was purposely written that we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope. O take this book out of Christ's hand, and eat it
as John did. Rev. 10 9.
It will be bitter in the belly, by breeding godly sorrow, but sweet in the
mouth, when we come to chew the cud by the ensuing comforts. David found it so,
and therefore not only panted and fainted, but his soul even broke with desire
after it, and once cries out, Psalm 119.20, 40, 141. Psalm 51.8.
Make me to hear of joy and gladness, that the hones which thou have broken
may rejoice. Had it not bin for thy word, J had surely fainted in mine
afflictions. In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my
soul. (...) Psalm 94.19.
The word there used signifies thoughts so perplexed and inter-twined one
within another, that there is no way out almost. When a man is brought into the
briars, as Abraham's Ram was, Genesis 22.13. As our Saviors soul was, what time
he cried out, Lammah sabachtani. When a Christian is in the deep with David,
and all outward means are miserable Comforters, Physicians of no value, Job
16.11. Job 20 12.
God sends from on high and helps him out by dropping some sweet meditation
into his mind, by putting some sweet promise into his mouth, which he roles as
Sugar under his tongue, chewes, Psalm 62 11
digests, incorporates it into his soul, as it were by a second concoction.
Thus David when God spoke once, heard it twice: G^n^s. 32 9, 1^
And Jacob being in a great agony about himself with the Promise of God, which
he therefore repeats, and pleads twice in a breath, as tasting and taken with
its incomparable sweetness. Draw waters therefore with joy out of these Wells
of Salvation: Forget not the Consolations, Isa 12.3.
as those Hebrews had, Chap. 12.5. Heb. 4.1.
Take heed lest, not a Promise, bet a multitude of Promises being left us, any
of us should seem to fall short, Isa 66.11.
press and oppress those Breasts of consolation (laid forth on purpose that
we might suck them) till we express that reasonable milk, 1 Pet. 2 1.
that we may grow thereby fat and fair-liking. Why should the consolations of
God be small unto us? Why should wisdom furnish her table, and yet want
guests? Have thou found honey, Job 15.11 Pro. 9 1, 2. Pro. 25 6. Psalm 19
eat it, says Solomon. Lo the Promises are the hony-drops of Christ's mouth.
Oh hang upon his holy lips, as they, Luke 19. ult. as the little bird does on
the bill of the dam, as the sucking child on the mothers breasts, as the busy
Be upon the juycy flower. Nullus apibus, si per coelum licuit, otio perit
dies, says Pliny. Lib: 11. c 6.
No day passes the Be without some purveyance, if the weather hinder not. No
sooner is the Sun up, then she is abroad And being once lighted, will not off
till she has made somewhat of it: No more should we let go the word of
Promise, till we have extracted, yea extorted the Cordial comfort that is in
it. (...) Matthew 11 12 (...) Luk 16.16.
From the days of John Baptist (who paved a way to Christ) the Kingdom of
Heaven suffered violence, says one Evangelist, was preached, says another: And
men were so earnest and eager of hearing that good news, that they pressed upon
our Savior, they scarce left him leisure or liberty to eat or sleep. As for
themselves they cared not to continue three days together without Food, to
hear those sweet words which were better to them then their appointed Food.
John 6. Job 23. Isa 25.6.
There had they that Feast of fat things full of Marrow, of wines on the lees
well refined and purified. The Rock yielded them Butter, Deuteronomy. 32, 13. 1 Cor.
10.4.
and the flinty Rock powered them forth Rivers of Oil. This Rock was CHRIST,
who also bids them welcome, Cant. 5.1
with, Eat O Friends, drink, yea drink abundantly, O Beloved! But it
grieves him not a little, when either we make excuse with those, Matthew 22.
Psalm ^
Or fall not too lustily with David, but piddle for want of Appetite, or in the
pettishnesse of our spirits, Matthe^
Refuse to be comforted with Rachel: When like sullen children, we will not
eat our milk, because we have it not in the golden dish: Jonas 4.
Or wrangle with it at least, as Jonah did with GOD, by cavilling Objections.
When we turn the backe-side, and not the palm of the hand to the Promise;
which as a Staff would sweetly support us, and help us on, Genesis 29.1.
as Jacobs Staff did him in his way to Padan Aram. He lift up his feet and
went on lustily, after the Promise made him at Bethel: As a generous Horse
after a bait by the way. Nehemia 8 10
The Joy of the LORD was his strength: He scarce felt the ground he went on.
This is my Comfort in mine affliction, for thy Word has quickened me. Psalm
119.50 and 92.
This fetched him again, when ready to fainte. When the Promises were
apprehended and applied as Cordials, then he felt CHRIST'S left hand under him,
Cant. ^.6. Cant. 2.5.
and his right hand over him; then was he staid with flagons, and bolstered up
with apples, those apples of gold, with pictures of silver, those right words,
precious and pleasant words, savoury and saving words, that have a healing
property in them, to bind up the broken hearted, Pro. 25.11. Job 6.25. Eccl.
2.10, 11 (...). 1 Timothy 6.3. Rev. 3.1. Johan Bodin: de utilitate historiae.
and to strengthen the things that are ready to dye. Alphonsus is said to have
recovered of a dangerous disease by reading Q. Curtius, and others by reading
Livy, Aventinus, etc. But these were Physicians of no value to that of David:
Unless thy Law had bin my delight, Psalm 119.92
J should then have perished in mine affliction. That Psalm is made up of
experiments: And it is not unlikely that he speaks here of his distress at
Ziklag. The city was sacked and burnt, his wives and children carried Captive,
his soldiers imbittered, and his life in suspense; for they spoke of stoning
him, 1 Samuel 30.6.
but David comforted himself in the Lord his God. In the fail of all outward
comforts, he retired into his counting house, as it were, and finding there the
Promise firm for him, he was strong in Faith and glorified God: So he did
another time, when he was glad to hide himself from Saul in the Wilderness of
Judah. He said in his haste, all men are liars, Psalm 116.11
Prophets and all, who had promised him the Kingdom. But upon second thoughts,
and when better composed, when he had praid himself sober, and bethought
himself of Gods Promise to make him King, his soul was satisfied as with
marrow and fatness in that dry and thirsty Land, where no water was: Yea he
concludes the Psalm with, The King shall rejoice in God, he means himself. A
poor king he was at that time, but God had promised to make him a king, and
therefore he is confident: Psa. 63.1, 5, 11
But the mouth of all them that speak lies (as himself amongst the rest had
done, in saying all men are liars, Samuel and all) shall be stopped, and God
justified to be true of his word, notwithstanding all the roarings and
repinings of corrupt nature to the contrary. God may bring us into straits, as
he did David here, but he will not leave us in them to shift for our selves,
as the Priests did Judas, with what is that to us? Look thou to that: Or if he
leave us for a time to our thinking (as he may without breach of Promise, Psalm.
119.8.) yet he will not forsake us: For, he has said and it is five several
times repeated in Scripture for more surety, (...) Heb. 13.5.
as Pharaohs dream was) J will not leave thee, (or if I do, yet) J will not
forsake thee. So many Notes there are in the Original for our better
Assurance. Oh incomparable comfort! Who is then amongst you that fears the
LORD, and yet walks in darkness, and has noe light, let him trust in the
name of the LORD, and stay upon his GOD. But if this most savoury and saving
course please you not, Walk another while in the light of your own Fire, Esa
50.10, 11.
and in the sparks that ye have kindled: Not the fire of the Sanctuary, that
shadowed out the will and wisdom of God in his Word, but in the sparks of your
own tinder-boxes, of your own imaginations, and conceits, strange fire,
carnal plea's, the mis-givings of your unbeleeving hearts, Esa 55.1.
This shall ye have of mine hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow. The soul is
ready to hang her comforts on every hedge, to knock at the door of every
creature for relief, to use the means as Mediators, to shift and sharke in
every bie-corner for Comfort, and is hardly drawn to buy of CHRIT without
money, would gladly come with her cost; or if not so, then she stands off in
a sinful shamefac'dnesse. But this is not the way: Christ must be All and in
all; Ephesians 6.14. Revel 1.13 Charitatem de signat, Inter mamillas amoris seeds,
Cor. Pareus. 1 Pet. 1.13.
and it will never be well till we gird up the loins of our minds (with the
girdle of Truth, or rather with that golden girdle wherewith Christ is girt
about the pap^; which betokens his entire love to us) and trust perfectly on
the grace that by him is brought unto us. Satan deals by the soul, as Joshua
did by the men of Ai, gets it out of the city, out of the strong-hold of the
Promise, and then does what he will with us. Good therefore is the counsel of
Saint John; Little children keep home; 1 John 2.28. 1 Ioh. 3.^3. Heb. 6.13
if ye abide in Gods Commandments, ye abide in God. Now this is his
Commandment, that we believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and become
followers of them, who through Faith and Patience have inherited the Promises.
The Patriarchs in their tiresome and troublesome pilgrimages, lived by them,
died upon them, and would not be buried but where they had received them,
giving commandment concerning their bones. Father Latymer when he stood at the
Stake, ready to shed his heart-blood for the Truth (which was one of the three
things he so heartily praid for in the time of his imprisonment, and obtained)
he lifted up his eyes toward Heaven, with an amiable and comfortable
countenance, saying, 1 Cor. 10
Faithful is God, who will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able,
and so afterward shed his blood in the cause of Christ. The which blood, Acts
and Momuments, fol. 1579
says Master Fox, ran out of his heart in such abundance, that all the godly
that were present did much marvel to see the most part of the blood in his
body to be gathered to his heart, and with such violence to gush out, his body
being opened by the force of the fire. The same Author reports of Alice
Benden Martyr, that being kept in prison nine weeks with bread and water,
sequestered from her loving fellows, she continued in great heaviness, till on
a night as she was in her sorrowful supplications, rehearsing, Why art thou so
disquieted, O my soul, Ibid: fol. 1797
etc. And again, The right hand of the most high can change all this, she
received comfort in the midst of her miseries.

The like he relates of Mistress Joyce Lewis of Manchester, Martyr: that about
three of the clock in the morning before she was to suffer, Satan (who never
sleeps especially when death is at hand) began to stir himself busily,
shooting at her those fiery darts, Ibid: fol: 1826
which he is wont to do against all that are at defiance with him. But by
conference with Christian friends and especially by the sweet and precious
Promises of Christ, Satan was vanquished and she comforted. She overcame the
great red Dragon by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of her testimony,
(...)
she loved not her life unto the death, Revel. 12.11. Death is the king of
terrors, says Job, of all terribles the most terrible, says Aristotle.
Nature shrinks at the apprehension and approach of it, at the least motion or
mention of it, and her boldest champions that seem to out-brave death and to
dare it to a duel, calling for it as Gaal once did for Abimelech, Judge. 9.28,
^.
with, Increase thine army and come out, yet when death comes in good earnest,
they are not able to look it in the face with blood in their cheeks. Death
ceiseth on them as a merciless officer Ps. 55.15. as a cruel Landlord, as he
that took his fellow by the throat and threw him into prison, as Gods
executioner, as the messenger of eternal death, yea as the Devil himself.
Hence those unutterable anxieties, and anguishes, those doubts and
perplexities, those horrors and amazements, those terrors and tortures, those
convulsions of soul, that hell above ground, a very foretast and handsell of
eternal torments. This makes them catch as fast hold on the hints of life, as
Joab did on the horns of the Altar, play as loath to depart out of the world,
as Lot out of Sodom, willing to be slaves or any thing with the Gibeonites so
that they might live here, rather then to depart hence: Which if they must
needs and there be no remedy, they go out of life with as ill a will, as the
unjust steward did out of his office, as the Jebusites did out of their
Jerusalem, as Adam out of Paradise, yea as the Devil out of the demoniack,
raging, raving, rending, tearing, fuming, foaming. Yea, it is a just wonder how
any such can dye in their right wits that dye not partakers of the Promises,
Luke ^. Egredere o anima mea, etc.
that see not their own names written in them, as in Gods Book of life. This,
this is that, that will make a Simeon sing out his soul, an Hilurion chide it
out, a Bradford put off his cappe and praise God when the keepers wife came to
tell him he must be burnt the next day, a Taylour fetch a friske at the stake,
a Hawks clap his hands over his head in the flames, and others sing Psalms
till the fire and smoke had stopped their breath. A cordibus suis facti sunt
fug^tivi, Tertull.
When a Cain, cast out from Gods presence, and bereft of the comfort of his
Ordinances, becomes a fugitive from his own conscience, and thinks every bush a
man, and every man an Executioner, Isa. 7.2.
a butcher to do him to death. Ahab mournes and goes softly upon a message of
death; 1 Samuel 28.^0. 1 Samuel 15.37.
Ahaz and his company tremble as the trees of the wood, Saul faints and falls
flat upon the Earth, as a beast. Nabal lies dead in the nest like a block.
Adrian warbles out that doleful ditty, Carrion. Chron.
Animula vagula; blandula, Quae nunc abibis in loca, etc. Silly soul whether
art thou wending? Another seeing her dear children slain before her,
Cratificlia matter Cleomenis apud Plutar. in Cleom.
and her self ready to be served in like sort, uttered only this word, Quo
pueriestis profecti? Poor children what is become of you. Anxius vixi, dubious
morior, nescio quo vado, says a third: Careful I have lived, doubtful I dye,
whether I go, I wot not. 2 Cor. 5.1, ^.
But we know (says the Apostle for himself and his Corinthians) that when our
earthly tabernacle, (...).
our clayie cottage shall be dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not
made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. And for this we groan earnestly,
desiring to be dissolved, to loose from the shore of life, and to launch out
into the main of Immortality, forasmuch as we know (not we think or hope only,
but by the certainty of Faith grounded on the Promise, we are well assured)
that we shall be then at home with Christ, (...). Phil. 1.23.
which is far far the better. Look how the Disciples when they had bin tossed
all night before upon the Sea, A transcendent expr ssion. Ioh. 6.^1.
after they had once taken Christ into the ship, were immediately at shore. So
he that has founded his faith upon the word of Christ, which dwells
plentifully in him, what measure soever he has met with here, yet no sooner
takes he death (as conquered by Christ) into his bosom and bowels, but he is
immediately* landed at the key of Canaan, at the kingdom of Heaven. The
fore-thoughts hereof fills his heart with unspeakable and glorious joy:
fortifies his spirit against the fear of death; which he has learned out of
Gods word to be to him neither total nor perpetual, Romans 8.10, 11. (...)
(...). His Funeral preached by M. Rich. Stock.
and causes him to over-abound exceedingly with comfort, as S. Paul speaks.
O that joy! O my God, when shall J be with thee! said that heavenly spark, now
ready to be extinct, the young Lord Harrington. I am by the wonderful mercies
of God, says another upon his deathbed, as full of comfort as ever my heart
can hold, and feel nothing but Christ, with whom I heartily desire to be. M.
Rob. Bo^ton.
Another reverend Divine of our Church, the day before he died, called eagerly
for the holy Bible, with these very words, Come, O come, M. John Holland
Bachelour of Divinity.
death approaches, let us gather some flowers to comfort this hour. All other
comforts, he knew were but Ichabods without this: and therefore turning with his
own hands to that 8. chap. to the Romans, M. William Leigh B.D. and Pastor of
Standish in his Souls solace against sorrow
he gave me the book (says the Reverend man that relates it) and bad me read:
At the end of every verse, he made a pause and gave the sense in such sort and
with such feeling, as was much to his own comfort, but more to our joy and
wonder. Having thus continued his meditation and exposition for the space of
two hours or more; on the sudden he said, O stay your reading, what brightness
is this J see? have you light up any candles? To which one answered, no, it is
the Sunshine, for it was about five a clock in a clear Summers-evening.
Sunshine, says he, nay my Saviors shine. Now farewell world, welcome Heaven,
the Day Star from on high has visited my heart. O speak it when J am gone,
and preach it at my funeral: God deals familiarly with man. J feel his
mercy, J see his Majesty, whither in the body or out of the body, J cannot
tell, God he knows: but J see things that are unutterable. So ravished in
spirit, he shut up his blessed life with these blessed words, O what an happy
change shall J make? from night to day; from darkness to light; from death to
life; from sorrow to solace; from a factious world to an heavenly being?
Mistress Kath. Brettergh of Bretterhoult in Lancashire in her life annexed to
her funeral Sermon.
etc. One more yet, and that of the weaker sort and sex, but strong in Faith,
and ready in the Scriptures, wherein she used to read eight chapters a day at
least. This was her constant task in her health and the fruit thereof she reaped
and received in her sickness and at her greatest need. Once indeed, being
conflicted by a temptation of Satan, she cast her Bible from her, and said, it
was indeed the book of life, but she had read the same unprofitably, and
therefore feared it was become to her the book of death. But another time, when
the temptation was vanished, and comfort recovered, she took her Bible in her
hand, and joyfully kissing it, and looking up toward Heaven, she said that of
the Psalm, Ps. 119.71, 72.
O Lord it is good for me, that J have bin afflicted, that J may learn thy
statutes. The Law of thy mouth is better to me then thousands of gold and
silver. During the time of her sickness she rehearst for her comfort many texts
of Scripture, but especially the eighth to the Romans, and the 17. of S. John,
many times concluding and closing up that she read or repeated with prayer and
most comfortable uses and applications thereof to her self: crying out est-soon,
O happy am I, that ever I was born, to see this blessed day! O praise the Lord
for he has filled me with joy and gladness. O the joys! the joys! the joys,
that J feel in my soul! O they be wonderful! they be wonderful! they be
wonderful! O how merciful and mavelous gracious art thou unto me, O God,
etc. And this my soul knows right well, and this my soul knows right well:
which speech of her assurance she often repeated. Her last words were, My
warfare is accomplished, and mine iniquities are pardoned. Isa 40.1. Ps. 7 5.
Lord whom have I in Heaven but thee? and I have none in Earth but thee. My
flesh fails and mine heart also: but God is the strength of my heart, Vna
est, in ^^ pida mihire, medicina, ^e vaelor patri^^ o^ verax, (...) ^otensque,
man Nath. Chyt^
and my portion for ever. He that preserves Jacob and defends Israel, he is
my God and will guide me unto death. Guide me, O Lord my God, and suffer me not
to faint, but keep my soul in safety. And with that she yielded up the ghost, a
sweet Sabbaths sacrifice, on Whitsunday being the last of May, 1601 Now what
but the mighty word of God (which is his power to salvation) could have thus
filled the heart and mouth of a weak woman, at the time of death with such
unconceivable comfort? and who would not read and rest steadfastly on such a
word of Gods grace, ^^. 19.7. ^oh. 5.25. Ps. 119.50. ^ev. 12.11. ^oh. 8.31, 34.
^rov. 6.21. (...). 59.21.
as rejoices the heart and enlightneth the eyes, quickneth the spirit, and
comfort the conscience, armeth us against Satan, and subdueth sin,
preserves us from all evil, and abides with us for ever. O hide this word in
your hearts, Ps. 119.11. have it ready at your heads, as Saul had his spear
and pitcher: ^ Sam. 26.11. Prove. 6.22, 23.
let it lead you walking, watch you sleeping, talk with you waking. For the
commandment is a lamp, and the Law is light: yea every word of God is pure: he
is a shield to them that put their trust therein: we had better, says one,
Malemus carere ^^lo, terra, omni^^ elementis, etc. Se^^ecce. ^^s in Paedago.
^to Christians.
want meat, drink, the light of the Sun, we had better be without air, earth,
all the elements, yea life it self, then that one sweet sentence of our
Savior. Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, etc.

FINIS.

