Treason and Murder: Or, The Bloody Father-in-Lavv. Being a True and Perfect
Relation of a Horrible MURDER, Committed at HAM, near Stratford in Essex, on
the Wife of James Alsop, by her Husbands Father and Brother, one of which most
inhumanely Cut her Throat, as she lay fast asleep in her Bed, she being then
with Child. Together with the manner how they were severally taken, and
discovered also to be Clippers of Money, their Commitment to Chelmsford Goal,
and their Trials at the Assizes, March 25. 1673/4.

Where James Alsop the Husband of the Woman murdered, and his Mother were
also tried upon Suspicion, and cleared, but the said James Alsop the father was
found guilty of both Endictments, and William Alsop (going formerly by the Name
of William Toppham) pleaded Guilty to the same.

Whereupon they were both Condemned, the Father to be Hanged at Stratford, the
other at the Common place of Execution.

London, Printed by E. Miles.

THE BLOODY Father-in-Lavv, etc.
THough Custom has made a little preamble all most necessary to these small
Narratives, so to prepossess the Reader with the horror or novelty of what is
to be related, that his Curiosity may be engaged to think it worthy a perusal,
yet may we justly be excused from that troublesome impertinence, since what we
are here to recount is in it self so prodigiously Criminal and Barbarous, that
to go about with words and flourishes to agravate the guilt were to allay the
Fact which in it self is impious beyond expression.

At Ham, a small Villiage about 4 miles from London, but situated in the
County of Essex, there dwelt one Alsop, by Trade a Felmonger, whose Son James
Alsop sometimes since married with a Widow of good credit and competent Estate,
with 3 Children, one was a Girl, now about nine or ten years of Age: they
lived together with their father and mother for some time seemingly very
loving and comfortably) but some little differences) rarely, or never wholly
kept from the most Amorous Marriage Bed (afterward arising; the Devil always
busy to foment mischief, being naturally an enemy to Love and Peace, is ready
to blow those sparks of dissension into a flame of malice, not to be quenched
but with blood.

Nor can we exactly set forth the particular occasions that moved their spleen
against this Innocent woman's Life, any further than from, common fame grounded
on circumstances afterward discoverd, which speaks it thus, that the father
being a Clipper of money, could neither carry the business so privately and
cleverly, but the young woman had some Notice of it, nor induce her to join
Cordially therein, but that she would be perpetually representing to the grand
hazard and danger of such treasonable practices, and would be often (especially
upon any pet taken or small falling out) upbraiding the fame: hereupon it is
believed the plot was first laid to give her a remove out of the World,
Remembering that cursed Maxim in the School of Villainy.

Scelera Sceleribus Tuenda. Or as our incomparble Ben puts it into the Month of
Cataline:

The ills I have done cannot be safe without committing greater. Satan, no
doubt was ready to inspire the Old man with such suggestions as these; Will you
suffer your life to lie at the pleasure of another? must you not be be always a
slave to her? or else she can sacrifice you when she lifts, and that legally,
to her Revenge; is it not a most wretched life that is held by no other tenure,
but the Courtesy, and depends upon no better security than a Woman's silence,
whose natural vanity is such, that if malice should not discover it, yet the
humor of tatling and Gossiping, proper to her Six, will not let her conceal
it, but will quickly blab it abroad; consult then your own safety by her ruin,
put her into a condition past telling of Tales; remember self-preservation is
the first Article in Natures Charter: For the danger, it is nothing, I Will teach
thee a thousand ways to dispatch her, so far beyond the purblind sights of the
Law which requires Eyewitnesses, that the most Eagle-ey'd suspicions shall not
reach thee, etc.

The poor graceless man inclining too much to these hellish suggestions,
without fear of God or regard to his own soul, resolves at last upon the bloody
business, but still was Irresolute in what manner to accomplish it.

Some small time before her murder was really acted, her husband would have her
ride abroad with him, which she condescended to, but as they were coming home
in the evening, a Gentleman meeting them, drew his sword, but passing the
husband turned back, and run at the woman, when as providence ordered it,
passengers were heard coming on at a small distance at the same Instant; which
obliged this unknown Assasinate to ride away with what speed he could, having
done the woman no dangerous hurts, besides frighting her, and two small pricks
with the point of his Rapier, the one on her arm, and the other on her Breast.

A day or two after his Father had her abroad, and when they came home at
Night, he sent for some strong drink, but the Woman was afraid to drink,
alleging for an excuse that her Head aked exceedingly, and that Night told her
Daughter, who lay with her, that she was afraid her Father-in-Law would poison
her.

Hitherto providence had overruled the black designs, but now it is resolved to
accomplish the hellish murder. In order whereunto it is very industriously
reported up and down amongst the Neighbors, that the Woman was to go the next
morning into Yorkshire to visit some friends, and that she would continue there
a quarter of a Year, this was raised to prevent Peoples enquiry what was become
of her when she should be found missing, having concluded that very Night to
Ship her for Eternity, although 'tvvas known she was with Child.

Accordingly her Husband being gone a Journey not to return that Night, and she
innocently sleeping in her Bed with her forementioned Daughter: Behold! a
little after Midnight comes in a person with a black Gown on, and a Vizard on
his Face, with a Candle in one hand, and a naked Knife in the other. The Girl
happened to be awake, and being extremely frighted, crept over Head and ears in
the Bed: but the bloody murderer runs up to the Bedside, and seting down his
Candle, takes the Woman as she lay harmlessly sleeping, and most barbarously
and violently cut her Throat from the one Ear to the other, which so suddenly
dispatched her that she never spoke one word, but after a little struggling
expired. Having thus acted the bloody Tragedy, their next business is to
conceal it.

For though in readiness a Grave had been dug in the Orchard to put her in,
thinking that by giving out thar she went away on her Journey very early, all
might be hushed up without notice or suspicion, yet now a new difficulty arises,
for he knew not how to get her out of the Bed, but the Girl will discover it.
And here we may admite and bless overruling providence that preserved such
Inhumane hands from murdering her too, but the Lord would not suffer them to
proceed in their villainy.

But he resolves upon another trick, and takes down a whole panel of glass out
of a window near where the woman lay (being a low Room) to make it seem as if
they had been robbed, and that the Murder had been done by Thieves; Their men
lay up in another part of the house that used to be boulted in, and old Alsop
having so taken down the Glass, begins to set up a mighty Exclamation of
Thieves, Thieves, and with much seeming have and earnestness calls upon his men
to rise, who answered that they could not get out, whereupon he unboulted the
door, and said they were robbed, and some of them going into the Woman's Room,
found her all bloody. At which he seemed to be mightily sorry and amazed, and
would needs run for a Surgeon, whom he told that he was robbed, and that he had
lost twenty Guinneys, and that he feared his Daughter in Law was murdered by
the thieves.

In the mean time the Neighbors are Alarmed, and the poor Girl comes running
into the street all bloody with her Mothers blood, but knew not that she was
killed, for though she found her self wet in the Bed, yet by reason of her
fright she knew not that it was with blood, nor durst look up till people came
about her.

She told the people that she saw a man come in at the door in a black Indian
Gown, and a Vizard on his face, much about the tallness of her Grandfather,
whereupon, and upon some other words that the Woman had said a day or two
before to some Neighbors, it was thought fit to take him into Custody.

The rather, for that Providence willing so bloody a Deed should not go
undiscovered, had ordered the matter so, as to blast his politic Lie of
Thieves coming in at the VVindow, for looking up to it, they saw that it was
taken down indeed on the outside, but within all before the place, was a large
sheet of Cobweb, whole, and not broken in the least, whence it appeared
evidently no creature could have come in there.

Besides, he offered the Constable Ten Pounds to suffer him to escape, but he
honestly replied, he would not be Bribed in such a case for a World. His house
being searched, they found in a Trunck a Vizard-mask, as the Girl had
described, with the mark of a Bloody Thumb upon it, which he had made when he
took it off his face, after he had committed this Execrable Murder: They also
found several pair of Shears, wherewith to Clip Money: and Clipings of Money in
several places. Nor was that (as is supposed) all his Trade. For searching the
House, they found in a great heap of Wool, a very rich Suit of a Gentleman's:
Which being asked where he had it, he said he Bought it in Long-Lane: But it is
presumed used the High-Pad, or Robing on the Road, as well as Cliping.

The Officers demanding of the Old Woman, where the Young VVomans clothes were,
she said she had sent them before into Yorkshire; but they searched her Trunck,
and found all her clothes there.

Hereupon the Old Man and Woman were committed, and the Son, her Husband, being
then, (as was since proved) at Colchester, soon after returning, was bound
over, upon Suspicion, to the Assizes. During the time the Old man lay thus in
Prison, a Notable Stratagem is set on foot (as it is supposed) to clear him of
the Fact: for a report was raised that some High-way-men had confessed they
robed the house, and killed the Woman, and after much stir, a Portmantle and
Letter upon search of a House was found in London: The Letter spoke much to
that purpose, and that the Person was hastening away for Holland. In the
Portmantle was a bloody shirt, a strange (not Vizard-Mask) but) great
frightful Vizard: several Clipings and Fileings of Silver, etc. The Person that
ovvns this Portmantle was aot to be found: but ^e William Toppham, being very
much concerned in the business, and solicitous, he began to be suspected to be
some way concerned in the Guilt, and thereupon being Apprehended, after some
time he was discovered to be Old Alsop's own Son, and thereupon was likewise
Comited.

At the Assizes holden for the County of Essex, at the Town of Chelmsford,
March 23. 1673/4. Alsop the Father being Indicted both for Cliping of Money,
and Murdering his Daughter in Law, was brought in Guilty by the Jury; his
Wife and his Son James, upon a long debate of the matter, were acquitted, but
his Son William Alsop, alias Toppham, being Indicted in the same manner as his
Father was, of his own accord pleaded guilty to both Indictments, and
afterward begged for Transportation; which being denied, he there alleged that
he Pleaded guilty, only to take off the Crime from his Father, etc.

But it was then too late, whereupon both his Father and he Received Sentence
of Death:

The First to be Hanged in Chains at Stratford, near the Place where the
Villainy was Acted; the last at Chelmsford, at the Common place of Execution.

FINIS.



