Licensed,

November 27. 1676. Roger L'Estrange.

POEMS.

BY N. TATE.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. for Benj. Took at the Sign of the Ship in St.
Paul's, Churchyard, MDCLXXVII.

To The LEARNED and much HONORED Dr. Walter Needham OF Charter House.
A Dedication (according to the present Mode) must be an Harrangue on the
Accomplishments of the Person to whom it is Addressed; But, Sir, though your
general Acquaintance with the Sciences, and your happy Performances in the most
useful of them, invite me (on the first View) to embrace so excellent a Theme;
yet when I reflect how that on this occasion no Rhetoric can be Pardonable
that is not Extraordinary; and when I farther Consider how well your
Excellencies are known to the World, I find that my best Endeavors can prove
but an Impertinent Zeal. Besides, Sir, had I been able to do Justice to your
worth and Fame, yet I have Reason to believe, that my Silence on that Subject
would with you find better Welcome, than the most Elaborate Panegyric. As for
the following Poems (which I have published on Reasons Satisfactory to my self,
and my Friends) they are Fortunate enough, in having first been Pardoned, and
then received into your Favor. 'Twere Injury to the Public to Intrude on
those portions of your time that are employed in the Health of your Country;
but if the best products of my humble Fancy may have Access to your Leisure
Hours, it is the highest Ambition of,

SIR, Your devoted humble Servant, N. TATE.

THE CONTENTS.
THe Indisposed Page 1. On a Diseased old Man who Wept at Thought of Leaving
the World 4 To Mr. Flatman on his excellent Poems 8 On the Present Corrupted
state of Poetry 14 The Search 19 The Prospect 24 The Request 26 The Installment
27 The Penance 29 Laura's Walk 30 The Usurpers 32 The Amusement. Dialogue,
Strephon and Sylvia. 34 The Amorist 37 The Surprizall 38 The Vn-confin'd 39
Dialogue, Alexis and Laura 40 The Restitution 44 The Escape 45 The Politicians
47 The Vow-Breaker 48 The Tear 50 The Discovery 52 The Parting 55 On an old
Miser that hoarded his Money in a steel Chest and Buried it 57 The Vision
Written in a dangerous Fit of Sickness 58 Ode to my ingenious Friend Mr
Flatman. 67 The Banquet. 68 The Match. 69 The Disconsolate 71 Sliding on Scates
in very hard Frost 73 Strephon's Complaint on quitting his Retirement 74 The
Gold-Hater 78 The Ingrates 79 Disappointed 80 Some of Martials Epigrams
Translated and Paraphrased. From Page 81 to Page 87 The Confinement 87 On Snow
fallen in Autumn, and dissolved by the Sun 88 Melancholy 89 On a Grave Sir's
Retireing to write in order to undeceive the World 92 On a deformed Old Beldam
designing to have her Picture drawn 94 Advice to a Friend designing to publish
his Poems 96 The Ignorant 97 The Beldam's Song 98 The Inconstant. A Paraphrase
on the XV Epod of Horace 100 Of the Ape and the Fox. A Paraphrase on one of the
Centum Fabulae. 102 The Round 104 The Malcontent 105 The Dream 106 Amor
Sepulchralis 108 The 3 first Verses of the 46 Psalm Paraphrased 109 The
Midnight Thought 131 The Counter-turn 113 The Voyagers 114 The Choice 115 On
Sight of some Martyrs Sepulchers 116 Of the Few Adherents to Virtue 117 The
Requital 118 To a Desponding Friend Ibid. Disswasion of an Aged Friend from
quitting his Retirement 119 Recovering from a Fit of Sickness 120 The Challenge
122 The Cure 124 The Hurricane 131 The Grateful Shepherd 132
ERRATA.
PAge 68 line 8. for Dairie's store read Dairies store, p. 70. l. 5. for yields
r. yield. p. 71. l. 7. for sink r. sinks. p. 74. l. 3. for are restrained r.
are now restrained. p. 89. l. 14. for Egyptian r. t'Egyptian. p. 91. l. 19. for
springs in r. springs not in.

POEMS.
The Indisposed.
I.
WHat tho th'unweary'd Sun
Already has his Race begun?
Already summoned to their Pleasant Toil
The Inhabitants of the open Soil?
What Comfort in his Luster can I find,
If yet no cheerful Glimpse begin
A Glorious Morn Within,
But Mists and Darkness still oppress my Mind?
II.
What Entertainment can it be
To hear the Tunefull Birds from every Tree,
With Grateful Songs the rising Day salute,
Unless my Fancy with the Music suit?
If in my Thoughts I find no Harmony,
I shall (Alas!) as soon Rejoice
At th'Ominous Ravens doleful Voice;
Or be diverted with the Bell,
That Rings my Own, or dearer Friends untimetly Knell.
III.
Whilst in my Breast the Weather's Fair,
I never enquire the Temper of the Air:
So Reason over my Appetites bear sway,
I Am unconcerned what Planet Rules the Day.
If hushed and silent my fierce Passions lie,
The loudest Gusts that rend the Sky,
Invite Repose, and make my Sleep more sound:
The Tempest in my Breast
Alone can break my Rest;
Even Hurricanes abroad are sound
To Damage less than smallest Winds hatched Underground.
On a Diseased Old Man, who Wept at thought of leaving the World.
I.
Shame on thy Beard! That thou can Bug-bears dread!
Fear Death whom thou so often have seen,
So often his Guest at Funerals been;
Thy self 'ith' Better Half already Dead!
It Is strange to see that Frozen Head
Such Plenteous Moisture shed;
Whence can this Stream be fed?
The Tears were just, which at thy Birth did flow,
For then Alas! thou had t'engage
Life's Inconveniences, but now
Thou art allowed to quit the Tragic Stage,
Now to be careful to prolong the Scen^,
And Act thy Miseries over again,
Is Folly not to be forgiven in even thy Doting Age.
II.
Full Fourscore Years ( Bless us! a dreadful Space)
The World has used Thee ill,
Abused Thee to Thy Face;
And Doatard can Thou still
Solicit her Embrace?
In vain Thou covet'st to enjoy
This haughty Dame, when Age and Pains
Have shrunk thy Nerves, and chilled thy Veins,
Who to thy Flourishing Years, was so Reserved and Coy.
III.
Can Cramps, Catharrs, and Palsies be
Such ravishing Company,
That thou shou'd'st mourn the Loss of their Society?
What Pleasures can the Grave deprive
Thy Senses of? What Inconvenience give,
Which You Are exempted from Alive?
At worst thou can but have
Cold Lodging in the Grave;
Nor lie thou Warmer now tho covered over
In Furr, till thy faint Limbs can bear no more:
Thou sleep'st each Night in so much Sear-cloth bound,
Thou Would need no more were thou to take thy Lodging Underground.
IV.
Go; lay thy friv'lous Hopes of Health aside;
No longer Potions take,
No more Incisions make,
Let thy dull Flesh no more be Scarify'd:
Resign, resign thy Fated Breath,
Consult with no Physician more, but Death:
When all thy Surgeons Instruments prove vain,
His never-failing Dart
Will Bleed thee gently at thy Heart,
And let out Life, the Sourse of all thy Pain:
Let then thy Funeral Pile be made,
With Rosemary and Cypress graced,
Aloft on it thy Carcass placed;
Beside thee there thy Crutches laid:
Those Utensills will thus oblige thee more,
Fomenting the kind Flame, then when they bore
Thy Crazy and Decrepit Limbs before!
TO Mr. THOMAS FLATMAN ON HIS Excellent POEMS.
STrange Magic of thy Wit and Style
Which to their griefs mankind can Reconcile!
Whilst thy Philander's tuneful Voice we hear,
Condoling our Disastrous state,
Touched with a sense of our hard Fate,
We sigh perhaps, or drop a Tear;
But he the mournful Song so sweetly sings,
That more of Pleasure than Regret it brings,
With such becoming Grief
The Trojan Chief
Troy's Conflagration did relate,
Whilst even the Suff'rers in the Fire drew near,
And with a greedy Ear
Devoured the story of their own subverted state.
II.
Kind Heaven (as to her darling Son) to Thee
A double Portion did impart,
A Gift of Painting and of Poesy:
But for thy Rivals in the Painters Art,
If well they Represent, thy can effect
No more, nor can we more expect.
But more than this Thy happy Pencils give;
Thy Drafts are more than Representative;
For, if we will credit our own eyes, they Live!
Ah! Worthy Friend, could Thou maintain the State
Of what with so much Ease thou do Create,
We might reflect on Death with Scorn!
But Pictures like th'Originals decay!
Of Colors Those consist, and These of Clay;
A like Composed of Dust, to Dust alike Return!
III.
Yet it is our Happiness to see
Oblivion, Death, and adverse Destiny
Encountered, Vanquished, and Disarmed by thee.
For if thy Pencils fail,
Change thy Artillery,
And You Are secure of Victory;
Employ thy Quill, and thou shall still prevail.
The grand Destroyer greedy Time reveres
Thy Fancy's Imag'ry, and spares
The meanest things that bear
The Impression of thy Pen:
Though course and cheap their Natural Metal were,
Stamped with thy Verse, he knows they are sacred, then.
He knows them by that Character to be
Predestinate, and set a part for Immortality.
IV.
If native Luster in thy Theams appear,
Improved by thee, it shines more clear:
Or if thy Subject's void of native Light,
Thy Fancy need but dart a Beam
To guild thy Theme,
And make the rude Mass beautiful and bright.
Thou vary'st often thy Strains, but still
Success attends each Strain:
Thy Verse is always lofty as the Hill,
Or pleasant as the Plain.
How well thy Muse the Pastoral Song improves!
Whose Nymphs and Swains are in their Loves,
As Innocent, and yet as Kind as Doves.
But most She moves our Wonder and Delight,
When She performs her loose Pindarick Flight;
Often to their outmost reach She will extend
Her towering VVings to soar on high,
And then by just Degrees descend:
Often in a swift strait Course she glides,
Obliquely often the air divides,
And often with wanton Play hangs hovering in the sky.
V.
Whilst sense of Duty into my artless Muse,
The ambition would infuse
To mingle with those Nymphs that Homage pay,
And wait on Thine in her tryumphant Way;
Defect of Merit checks her forward Pride,
And makes her dread t'approach thy Chariot side;
For 'twere at least a rude Indecency
(If not Profane) t'appear
At this Solemnity,
Crowned with no Laurel Wreath (when others are.)
But this she will presume to do,
At distance to attend the show,
Officiously to gather up
The scattered Bays, if any drop
From others Temples; and with those,
A plain Plebeian Coronet compose.
This, as your Livery, she would wear, to hide
Her Nakedness, not gratify her Pride!
Such was the Verdant dress,
Which the offending Pair did frame
Of platted Leaves, not to express
Their Pride in the Novel-garb, but to conceal their Shame.
ON THE Present Corrupted State OF POETRY,
I.
WRite thy own Elegy Apostate Art,
Thou Angel once of Light;
But, since thy Fall, a Fiend of Night,
Mankind endeav'ring to pervert.
At first, to th'Altars Service thou were bound,
With Innocence instead of Laurel Crowned;
Anthems and Hallelujah's only did resound:
But now, forgetful of thy high Descent, meanly thou labour'st to foment
The Vanity and Vices of the Age;
Flattering in Courts, and Rev'lling on the Stage.
That Poesy, that did at first inspire
Devotion and Seraphick Fire,
Degenerate now her Art imploy's
In Recommending Sensual Joys;
Bawd-like, contriving to excite
The wasted Letcher's Appetite;
And with forced Heat sustain Love's languishing Desire.
II.
The wisest and most potent Kings of Old, did not disdain
To leave their Royal Names Enrolled,
With those of the Poetic Train:
They reapt more durable Renown
From Writing well,
Then when they did in Arms excel:
They prized their Poets Wreath above their Prince's Crown.
But then the Celebrated Nine,
Pious as Sybills, Chaste as Vestals were,
The Graces were not more Divine;
But now Deformed, and Bloated they appear;
Nyctimene sustained, no Change so fowl,
Transformed into a glaring Owl;
Or when the Audacious King a New-made Wolf did Houl.
III.
In Ages past, when Virtue was allowed,
The Dignity of Verse was Understood:
'Twas then employed t'embalm some Worthy 's Name:
Naught then could purchase Elogies but Fame.
But Poetry now is Mercenary grown.
Encomiums she will bestow
On Potentates, by their high Rank alone,
And singular Vices infamously known;
For, if no Paint or Varnish can disguise
Their gross Enormities,
Audaciously she will Praise their Vices too!
Thus none more largely share in her Applause,
Than some grand Murderer Of The Field,
That boasts of Myriads killed,
Regardless of the Justice of his Cause.
If to Destroy can challenge Fame,
Famines and Plagues the largest Trophies claim;
But these the Muses Peccadillo's are,
And cannot with their blacker Crimes compare:
Long since they were Immodest grown, and Vain;
But are (Oh! Heaven) at last become Profane!
Atheism and Blasphemy have dared to Preach,
Religion of Imposture to impeach;
Stiffling that Zeal, which first Themselves to the rude World did. Teach.
IV.
Time was when Pious Bards might safely Dream
By Helicon, or fair Pirene's Stream;
And fly their towering Wit at some Caelestial Theme:
But now, with Leaprous Fancies bathing there,
Those Springs so infamous are grown,
Chaste Souls fear to approach the Muses Air;
And sacred Theams the Poisoned Waters shun.
Nor has Heavens just Revenge regardless viewed,
The Enormities
Of these Apostate Votaries;
But them and their Confaed'rates too, with signal Rage pursued.
A constant Curse of Poverty attends
Th'Unfortunate Man, whom any Muse befriends.
All who in this deluding Art engage,
Set out with Pleasure, drooping reach their Stage;
Frollick in Youth, and Malcontent in Age!
Thus (near Learned Cam's fair Current Pensive laid)
Th'Ill-treated Cowley did his Muse upbraid:
Ah! who'd Credit that Surveys,
The Amors and Dalliance of their Youthful Days?
That ere this Peaceful Bard, and gentle Muse,
Could Bicker thus, and mutually accuse?
So, whilst some seeming Happy Pair
(who Hymen's Fetters wear)
In Public Fond as Turtles are,
The Unwed with Envy their Caresses View
But Ah! What would they do,
If (as they see their open Loves) their private Feuds
They knew?
The Search.
I.
COnfess Ingenuously O Man,
The Upshot of thy Toil and Pain,
The Product of thy Brain;
Since first thy buisie Race began.
Can thou produce one Evidence,
Or plausible Pretense,
Thy boasted Reason to Evince?
Yes -- Gradually each Age has been Refined
By the important Labors of Mankind;
The Labors of their Hand, and of their Mind,
Even Wilye Nature, with her Protean Shapes,
Rarely from their Inquisitive Search escapes;
Long she Resists; but strictly pressed,
Resigns the Arcanas of her Breast.
Bold Mortals Rob with Ease
Her Richest Cossers, be they laid
Deep in the Recesses of profoundest Seas,
Or to the Caverns of the Earth conveyed;
For rather than live Poor,
They Will dive in quest of Gemms that sleep
On Beds of Rock beneath the Deep,
And Travel Underground for Golden-Oar.
II.
Enough! -- If we will lay claim,
From these Performances, to Fame,
Where will the Catalogue of our Praises end?
For, thousand Instances beside
Will vindicate our Pride,
And still the Tryumphs of our Wit extend.
Such are the Conquests which we daily gain
On Learnings Undiscovered Parts:
Our active Fancies still Create New Arts;
Or, what is more,
Even from the Dead Restore
Arts, that in Ages Past have buried lain.
And yet it is feared, there is Reason to suspect
Our Glorie's Weight will fail,
And Vanity prove the Heavier Scale:
Impartially if we Reflect,
We shall perceive there is wanting yet
The Richest Crown our Tirumphs to Complete;
In vain we boast Discoveries,
Whilst we Return without the Master Prize;
The Art of Happiness still Undiscovered lies.
III.
Oh Happiness! (if Happiness be ought
Beside a wild Chimaera in the Thought)
To what close Nook ar't Thou confined?
What distant Continent or Isle,
That thou can still beguile
The restless Scrutiny of all Mankind!
Even in this Vale of Misery,
Some Rivulets of Bliss we taste;
But Riv'lets almost Dry,
And tainted with the Unsavory Grounds through which they past.
Ah! that some friendly Seraph would convey,
Or point me out the Way
To those glad Lands, where Happiness slows pure;
Where I might drink secure
At Pleasure's Fountainhead;
No Surfeit would I dread,
But quaff the Cordial Flood;
Till mingling with my Blood,
And circ'ling through each Part,
It should like Bals^m ease my Smart;
Like Nectar, Cherish my dejected Heart!
IV.
In various Ways deluded Mortals Toil,
All busi'd In The Discovery of Content:
This is the Game we All pursue,
But Hunt it still on a cold Scent;
The wary Prey nere comes in view,
But sculks Aloof, and leaves us at a Foil.
Yet where is the disappointed Man will say,
He now dispairs of being Blessed;
For tho at present unpossest
Of his dear Hope, He Is yet in a fair Way:
And now his Project wants but carrying on as it is Begun,
And then the important Task is done:
Done, say thou Credulous Man?
Yes! So the Babel Builders heretofore,
Raising to Heaven their proud Tower, lackt no more
Than carrying on the Work as they Began.
But, grant thy Years of Drudgery were past,
It Is odds but you are imposed upon at last:
Thou like the Syrian Husbandman of Old,
Conceiv'st thy self to hold
The Beauteous Rachell fast in thy Embrace,
Yet (tho th'Imposture last a Night)
Be sure the next returning Light
Shall fight thee with an unexpected Face,
When thou behold'st a Blear-eyed Leah in thy Rachell's Place.
The Prospect.
FRom a tall Praecipice on the Seaside,
A Reverend Hermit viewed the spreading Tide:
The Flood was curled with a becoming Wave;
But no Praesage of rising Tempests gave.
A goodly Ship was coasting by the Place,
Like a proud Courser foaming in her Pace;
With flattering Courtship, the Lascivious Gails
Her Streamers curled, and wantoned in her Sails.
The Waves divide to give the Pageant way;
Then close, and with raised Heads, the Pomp survey.
Whilst the grave Man this spectacle intends,
(Pleased with the sight) a sudden Storm descends.
The Winds grow rude, and rend the shaken Boat;
On the swollen Flood, the tattered Streamers float:
So, Blossoms with too violent a Breeze,
Are torn, and scattered round their shaken Trees.
Then, to his Cell returned, the Anchorite
Draws sage Remarques from this Disastrous sight
Of Earthly Grandeur, weighs the Uncertain state;
Which, in its gawdiest Bloom, and proudest Height,
Stands most exposed to th'Shock of sudden Fate.
The Request.
SO may you Spring, and so Heavens choicest Dew,
In Nightly-Show'rs, distill fair Plants on You;
As You on Me Your rankest Venom shed,
Whilst at Your Feet I make My grassie Bed.
And Thou O Goddess (whose Obliging Womb
Affords the Living Food, the Dead a Tomb)
Permit Me ere I dye, to dig my Grave;
It Is all My starved Ambition now will crave!
I Rob Thee not; for, tho My delving Spade
Dislodge thy Mould, yet there is no Trespass made:
For I the petty Damage shall Repay,
Filling the Vacant Ground with My own Clay.
The Installment.
I.
LOng have I Languisht in the Fire
Of an unquenchable Desire;
And will it not suffice thee Love,
That I thy patient Martyr am,
Unless thy Worship I promove,
And proselyte others to thy Flame?
If as a Laick-Lover ought I act,
What can thou more from me expect,
Who am not gifted for a Teacher in the Sect?
II.
My Gifts of Nature are too small;
I own it, and pretend no Call!
Beside, I Have found at last the Cheat;
The Flame that does thy Priests inspire,
(Pretended for Seraphick Heat)
Is mere Enthusiastic Fire.
When Heaven inspires the mind no Trouble knows;
But Love's wild Extasics (like those
That Raged in Heathen Priests) torment and discompose.
III.
And it is no more than their Desert,
That these Impostors thus should smart;
By whose false VViles we are betrayed
To Loves cursed Tyranny and Rage;
For they, when once Love's Captives made,
Their Griefs dissembling, Sing in the Cage:
Then from afar, the Credulous Flock repairs,
To Attend their soft and charming Aires;
And whilst they listening sit, are caught in unseen Snares.
IV.
But why fond Love will thou make choice
Of my untaught and grating Voice?
Fool, whilst amidst thy Gins I sing,
I shall not only fright away
Such as already are on Wing,
But those that were inclined to stay!
Consult thy Reason first deluded Boy,
Ere my rude Verse thou do employ;
Verse that will prove a Scarecrow, rather than Ducoy.
The Penance.
Nymph Fanarett, supposed to be
The Gentlest, most indulgent She;
(For what Offense I cannot say)
A Day and Night, and half a Day,
Banished her Shepherd from her sight:
Sure his Default could not be Light,
Or this Compassionate Judge had nere
Imposed a Penance so severe.
And lest she should anon revoke
What in her warmer rage she spoke,
She bound the Sentence with an Oath,
Protested by her Faith and Troth,
Naught should Compound for his Offense,
But the full Term of Abstinence.
But when his Pennance-Glass were run,
His Hours of Castigation done,
Should he deferr one Minutes space
TO appear, and be restored to Grace,
With sparkling threatening Eyes she swore,
That Failure would Incense her more
Than all his Trespasses before.
Laura's Walk.
I.
THE Sun far sunk in his Descent,
Laid now his Tyrant Rays aside,
When Laura to the Garden went,
To Triumph over Natures Pride.
II.
The Rose-Buds blushed with deeper Dye,
The envying Lillies paler grew;
The Violets droopt with Fear to spy
On Laura's Veins a richer Blew.
III.
She stoopt and gathered as she went,
But whilst she slaughtered sweetly Smiled;
As Angels tho for Ruin sent,
Appear with Looks Serene and Mild.
IV.
But now grown weary with her Toil,
She sits and flowery Wreaths she frames;
Thus with proud Trophies made of the Spoil,
Her Conquest ore the Flowers proclaims.
The Usurpers.
I.
USurping Passions held a long Contest
For the Supreme Dominion of my Breast;
But whilst in mutural Broyls the Tyrants raged
Whoso'ver by the Battle Gained,
I still the certain Loss sustained;
For they nere-fail'd whenever they Engaged,
To Wast the Province where the War was waged.
II.
Whilst such wild Havoc in my Breast was made,
Reason first came to tender me his Aid;
And sure with that puissant Prince Allied,
Had I but played the Man in the Fight.
My Passions had been put to Flight.
But I not only to Assist denied,
But Treach'rously fell off to the Enemies side.
III.
Then from the Powers of Love Redress I craved,
But was by that Alliance worse Enslaved;
For tho Loves Forces quickly did degrade
These proud Usurpers of my Breast,
Yet was I not hereby Redrest,
For Love himself proved false, when Victor made,
And seized the Province which he came to Aid.
IV.
But heavier now the Bondage I sustain,
Then during my tumultuous Passions Reign.
'Twere now no small Presumption to impore
The Indulgent Fates to set me free
As in my Native Liberty.
No! So it please their kind Powers to Restore
My former Tyrants, I demand no more.
The Amusement.
Strephon. WHy Weeps my Sylvia, prithee why?

Sylvia. To think my Strephon once must Die,
To think withal poor Sylvia may
When He Is removed, be doomed to stay.

Streph. Nymph you are too Lavish of your Tears,
To spend them on Fantastic Fears.

Sylv. No, for when I this Life resign,
(If Fate prolong the Date of Thine)
The Tears you will give my Funeral,
Will pay me Interest, Stock and all.

Steph. Not so, for should this setting Light
Never Rise again in Sylvia's sight,
Without a Tear in mine I Would view
Her Dying Eyes.

Sylv. It Is False!

Streph. It Is true.

Sylv. Not weep false Shepherd? Swear.

Streph. I Swear
I would not give thy Hearse a Tear.

Sylv. Break swelling Heart! Persidious Man!
Death! are you Serious? Swear again.
Yes! Swear by Ceres and by Pan.

Streph. Let then great Pan and Ceres hear,
And punish if I falsely Swear.

Sylv. Gods! can ye hear this and Forgive?
You may, for I have Heard and Live!
Half this Unkindness timely shown,
Had kept me Blessed, kept me my Own;
E're to your false embrace I came,
I could have quenched my kindling Flame;
I could have done't without Remorse,
Parting had then been no Divorce.

Streph. Rage not rash Nymph, for I Have Decreed
When Sylvia Dies --

Sylv. Speak, what?

Streph. To Bleed.
I Will drein my Lifeblood from my Heart,
But no cheap Tear shall dare to start.

Sylv. Kind Shepherd, could you Life Despise,
And Bleed at Sylvia's Obsequies?

Streph. To Ceres I appeal, for She
Knows this has long been my Decree;
And knows that I resolve it still.

Sylv. Since then you could your Vow fulfill,
Swear, Swear once more you never will.

The Amorist.
SEe where enammour'd Thirsis lies,
And cannot cease to gaze
On his Larissa's sparkling Eyes,
But takes Delight to see those Comets Blaze;
Whose Luster still is Fatal to the Swain,
Ore whom they Reign,
For by their Influence the poor Shepherd Dies,
Or (more to be Lamented) Lives in Pain.
The Surprizal.
In The narrowest walk of a close Grove,
Whom should I chance to meet but Love?
I seized the Elf, and said -- At last
I Have caught thee, and I Will hold thee fast.
Now by thy Mothers Doves and Sparrows,
I Will rob thee of thy Bow and Arrows;
I Will chain Thee up and clip thy Wings,
Or Strangle Thee in thy own Strings,
If thou refuse me to relate
The Grounds of my Olinda's Hate.
Then thus the Boy replied -- Fond Swain,
Vex not your self and me in Vain:
Your Love as noble is and brave
As ere this Bow and Quiver gave;
But that Olinda flights your Flame,
Nor Thou, nor I, nor She Is too Blame.
Weigh Circumstances, and you will find
She Is of Necessity Unkind:
She Is Mortal, therefore never can
Commiserate a suffering Swain;
For such refined Perfections shine
In Her, that could She but Incline
To Pity Men, She were Divine!
The Vnconfin'd.
BElieve me Nymph you strive in Vain
My Passion to Confine:
It Is noble, and must need repine
To wear the Slaves most Servile Badge, the Chain.
It Is more than all your Charms can do
To lay Restraint on Love;
But if you are disposed to prove
Your Beauties utmost Power, pursue
Some likelier Enterprise; but spare
Your vain Attempts to bind
What is by Nature Unconfined,
For Love's a Planet, not a fixed Star.
Dialogue. Alexis and Laura.
Laur. Alexis. --

Alex. Dear!

Laur. Take --

Alex. What?

Laur. A Kiss.

Alex. What means this Unexpected Bliss,
A Bliss which I so often in Vain
Have craved, and now unaskt obtain?

Laur. When to my Swain reserved I seemed,
I Loved him, Kissed him Less esteemed!

Alex. Dear Nymph, your Female Arts forbear,
Nor fondly thus new Ginns prepare
For one already caught i'th'snare.
You may impose a heavier Chain,
But none that surer will retain.
It Is Laura, an unjust design
To Treat so Plain a Soul as mine
With Oracles; with mystic sense
Religion may perhaps dispense,
But these Aenigmas mar Love's Joy,
As Clouds Gems in their worth destroy.

Laur. Then take it on your Peril Swain,
(Since you compel me to be plain)
The Kiss I gave you was in lieu
Of all Love-debts from Laura due,
To Swain Alexis, since the Hour
Of our first Entrance on Amor.

Alex. What Crimes can I have wrought t'enforce
This sudden and severe Divorce?
It Is, sure, impossible such Guilt
Should press my Soul and not be felt.

Laur. Recall false Shepherd what to day
I heard you to Dorinda say.
You said she did Noons Light outshine,
More than the Paphian Queen Divine.
You vowed respect to her Commands,
And (Heaven Forgive you) Kissed her Hands.

Alex. You wrong me Nymph, by Pan you do;
For if that Courtship you review,
You Will find 'twas Complement to you.

Laur. Yes, I was Sov'rainly respected
By Prayers to Another Saint directed.

Alex. Dorindas Graces, it is well known,
Bear such Resemblance with your own,
That when I made my late Address,
'Twas in that gentle Shepherdess
The sweetness of those Charms to taste,
Which so divinely Laura graced.

Laur. Weak Nymphs with Men contend in Vain,
Who thus can their Defaults maintain.
Wise Nature has her care expressed,
That neither Sex should be Oppressed;
For when to Us she did commit
Tyrannick Beauty, she thought fit
To Teach Men Wit and Arts to Allay
And Temper Beauties Absolute Sway.

The Restitution.
HEr keen Disdain pierct deep my Breast;
The gaping Orifice dismissed
The dearest drops my Heart contained:
I ventured to her and complained,
To ease my smart and still my Fears;
She wept and Bathed my Wound with Tears.
Blood will have Blood (they say) and be
Repaid in Kind. It Is false in Me.
For Sylvia wound me yet more deep,
If after you vouchsafe to weep,
(So much I prize your Tears) I Will own
You have not satisfied Alone,
But so ore-recompenct my wrongs, that I
Bleeding to Death shall Sylvia's Debtor Dye.
The Escape.
ON a Streams Bank I saw her stand,
A plyant Angle in her Hand.
I marked how she disguised the Hook,
And cast her Bait into the Brook.
The sport succeeded to her wish,
For strait she hung a pondrous Fish;
But too too eager on her Prey,
Resus'd to give the Captive Play
Till Tired, himself he would resign;
But trusting to her slender Line,
The struggling Animal enraged,
With the rude check soon Disengaged
His wounded Jaws; but whilst He thus Regains
His Liberty, the bearded wire remains
And galls his tender Gills with restless Pains.
II.
Is It not enough inhumane Maid,
That we are by thy Wiles betrayed,
But you your Treach'ry must employ,
The Floods Inhabitants to destroy?
This Fish has my hard fortune shared,
When first by thy false Charms Ensnared;
For so I gorged the Bait you threw;
Whilst (on your game too Eager) you
Came violently to seize your Prey,
Which with hard struggling broke away.
But to what purpose am I Free,
Living in painful Liberty.
In vain I boast, that I survive the Dart
Whose Venomed Pile lies festring in my Heart,
And (tho it kill not) galls with restless smart.
The Politicians.
HOw grossly do the Learned and Wise
Mistake in Loves State-policies!
If I and Caelia chance to jar,
They take our Feuds for open War;
So little they perceive the power
Of Quarrels to Improve Amor.
Do we not see how perfect are
The Loves of every Turtle Pair,
Yet they like us disguise their Bliss,
Cooing and murmuring while they Kiss!
Love's Fire like Lightning shines as fair
In Storms as in Serener Air.
Let none my Caelia judge the mode
Of our Amor, and call it odd;
But such as Love to our Degree
(If any more such Lovers be!)
Whose wedded Love persists the same,
As when we burnt in Virgin Flame.
Sometimes like parting Streams we stray,
And seem to Rove a sundry way,
But meet ere long, and so United move
Till we are lost in a full Sea of Love.
The Vom-Breaker.
CLose by a Mossie Fountains side,
A spacious Marble Basin stands;
Passing that way, Ardelia there I spied;
Oft-times, and often, she washed and dried her Hands.
Bless me! I could not choose but smile
At her Impertinent Toil;
For from her Arms the Waters purer fell,
Than when she took them from the Well!
So Vapors change their muddy Blew
(When raised aloft) to fairer Hue;
They Rise in Mists and fall in Dew.
II.
Ah! I Am Undone; the fear was just
That checked me when I gave my Heart
To this fair Nymph, who stormed at my Mistrust,
And Swore from the dear Pledge she would never part,
A while she lodged it in her Breast,
Where like a Turtle in its Nest
It slept, till she (would you believe she could?)
Imbrued her hands in its warm Blood!
Then, washing Here, designed to stain
The Innocent Fount, but strove in Vain,
Her Hands the Conscious Die Retain.
III.
Henceforth let none your Beauty prize,
But such as can be False as You;
You who admit no Hearts your Votaries,
Save what you make (like Mine) your Victims too,
It Is evident what you design
You Would be in Earnest thought Divine.
Then, Goddess, know your Rites amiss proceed,
Your Victims Burn before they Bleed;
But you Enjoin your own odd way
To Exercise your Absolute sway,
And try how Blindly we will obey.
The Tear.
I.
STay Iulia, let me watch that Tear,
Lest the rich drop glide from thine Eye,
The Meteor sparkles in its Sphaere,
But Fallen to impure Earth, twill Dye;
Yet where it is it cannot stay,
For see the Sunbeams come in swarms to Prey
And sip the rich delicious juice Away.
II.
Into this Viol let it fall --
See, Iulia, how it sparkles through?
Well may those Eyes prevail on All,
Whose Tears have Killing glances too.
If solid as a Gem it were,
No Gem could vie with this Transparent Tear;
The Eye that wept it only could compare.
III.
It shall be so, I will convert
This Tear to a Gem, it is Feazable;
For laid near Iulia's Frozen Heart,
'Twill to a Diamond congeal.
And yet if I consider well,
These Tears of Iulia's can fore-bode no Ill,
The Frost is Breaking when such Drops Distill.
The Discovery.
WHen first Love's Vot'rie I became,
(Charmed with the Luster of his Flame)
My Youth his God-like form admired,
And fondly thought his Priests inspired.
Among Them I proudly sought a Place,
And was by Chance allowed the Grace;
But once admitted to his Shrine,
That Love whom I esteemed Divine,
More terrible than Moloch stood,
His Altars stained with Humane Blood.
Of all Infernal Tyrant Powers,
None like this Demon of Amors.
None so severely Exercise
Their Rage on their poor Votaries!
The Wounded Lover lives in pain,
Lies neither Curable nor Slain
Till his keen Sword sheathed in his Heart,
Complete the Slaughter of the Dart.
Others to Quench this Calenture
Have taken a speedy Course and sure,
Whilst from some Praecipice's Brow,
They plunged into the Floods below.
To Deserts Others have Retired,
And pensive there in Caves expired,
What Place or Age or Sex is free
From this Usurper's Tyranny?
The populous City he frequents,
And pitches in the Camp his Tents.
In Courts and Palaces He Reigns,
And proudest Monarchs wear his Chains.
Yet He that thus the Scepter awes,
Disdains not to impose his Laws
On Cottages, and there destroys
The Nymphs and Shepherds native Joys.
Their purer Air methinks should be
From Love's severe Contagion free,
But all their Meads and Gardens bear
No Herb t'asswage this Feavour There!
Far from his Flock Alexis weeps,
Neglects to Feed, and rarely Sleeps;
His once sure Charm for every Grief,
The Pipe affords him no Relief;
Gasping at Sylvia's Feet he lies,
Whilst She for Scornful Strephon dies.
How wretched is the Lover's State,
Pressed on all sides with some hard Fate?
His Hopes alike it will destroy,
Not to Succeed or to Enjoy.
For if he Lawlesly Embrace,
He Is then Unhappy 'cause He Is Base;
And He that Honorably Love's
Less Wretched, but not Happy proves!
To him that waits his Nuptial Day,
The Hours pass Lazily away;
False Dreams of Bliss his Thoughts Employ,
Impatient therefore to Enjoy,
Rashly he bargains for a Wife,
And with her Weds the Cares of Life;
But wrought to Expectation's Height
His fancied Blisses Vanish strait,
For Leapt into the Marriage Bed,
Whith Briars and Thorns He finds it spread,
Repents too Late and Envyes the Unwed.
The Parting.
HEre do I fix my Foot, and Farewell Love!
I will no further move.
When first in Errour's Misty Night
I lost my self, and roved about,
This Ignis-fatuus found me out,
Before me rol'd with Wanton Play,
And begged to bring me on my Way.
Rashly I followed the seducing Fire
Through briny Floods of Tears,
Among Thorny Iealousies and Fears,
Over Praecipices of Despair,
And where no Passage did appear,
Often have I forced a Path, but now I Tire.
What Glympse was that which struck my Eye
From yonder Sky?
Welcome bright Harbinger of Day;
By thee I know the Sun is on his way.
What Desert's this? -- Alas! I fear I Am Strayed,
And after all my Toil and Fright
In this Tempestuous Night,
By my Officious Guide Betrayed.
Oh! when shall I arrive at the Abode
Of Happy Souls (since they that earliest strive
To reach that Stage, are late e're they Arrive)
I, who am Cumbred with so vast a Load
Of Vain Desires, and have alas!
So many a weary step to pass
Ere I redress my Stray's, and get into the Road.
On an Old Miser that Hoarded his Treasure in a Steel Chest, and buried it.
Can Thou in Dungeons smother up that Pelf
That Is dearer to thee than thy Self?
The ill-treated Prisoner is debarred the sight
Of its own cheerful Parent Light.
Do Thou in such strict Ward thy Gold retain,
As Pagans did their Idols Chain,
Lest some audacious Foe by Force should seize
Or charm away their Deities?
In Vain from Others Reach thou do confine
What is no Less reserved from Thine!
So Merchants rather than resign their goods
To Pirates, sink them in the Floods.
Dull Miser, naught of thy laborious Gains
Falls to thy share, beside the Pains.
Like the dull Ass thou Starv'st beneath a Pack
Of Provender that breaks thy Back.
Think not Thou do like Nature to Inter
Thy Gold, cause 'twas Interred by Her;
The Cell which Nature gave it, was a Womb
To Breed the Oar, but Thine its Tomb.
The Vision,
Written in a dangerous fit of Sickness.
Dissolved in Sleep near a complaining Stream,
My Fancy strove with an important Dream.
Me-thought I was with Violence born away
Through a dark Vault, whose Cavern did convey
To Death's sad Courts; the brazen Gates I past,
Which on my entrance were again made fast.
The dismal Cell with horror I surveyed,
For dead men's Bones in Piles were round me laid,
And Skulls of largest size the Pavement made.
The Sun to this dark Mansion darts no Ray,
But glim'ring Lamps make an imperfect Day:
By their faint Light I searched the Cave around,
And in each Nook amazing Objects found.
In a long Row stood Glasses stored with Sand,
Which of some Mortals years the Tale contained:
His or Her Name the bloody Letters spelled,
The Number of whose years the Hourglass held.
Grim Fate stood by to watch the hindmost Grain,
And cut the slender Thread of Life in Twain;
Then down the Tablet dropped t'a stream below,
Supposed from the Lethaean Lake to flow:
A while it floated 'till born Underground,
'Twas in the Abyss of deep Oblivion drowned.
Whilst into Fate's Arcanas thus I pried,
My own Name on a Tablet I descried.
But oh the Pangs and Agonies that rent
My panting Breast to find my Glass near spent!
The Tragic Scene begins (Forgive me Fate
That thy occult Proceedings I Relate.)
Strait was I summond to receive my Doom,
For Death with horrid Grace approacht the Room
Arrayed majestic in a mourning Robe,
A Dart his Scepter, and a Skull his Globe.
He sat, the Attendants on his Person stood,
All armed for Slaughter, and distained with Blood.
Diseases next were placed a numerous Train,
Producing each a Bed-roll of his slain.
No sooner were my scattered Thoughts restored,
But I with mental Prayers Heavens Aid implored;
Then thus with hollow Voice the Tyrant spoke --
In vain fond Youth Heavens succor you invoke,
Stand to the Bar, and hear th'Inditement read;
For ere Thou dy'st Thou art allowed to Plead:
Thy Charge is deep, but for thy self Reply,
Oh I am Guilty and deserve to Dye!
My years in Vanity's pursuit I spent,
Too often Transgrest, too rarely did Repent;
Some Vices (Heaven Assisting) I suppressed,
And lasting War proclaimed with all the Rest;
But often in the Combat I shrunk back and fled,
By Passions often surpised and Captive led.
But are this Courts Proceedings so severe,
That Youth can Challenge no Indulgence Here?
Had Fate my Life to Manlier years promov'd,
Perhaps my Skill and Courage had improved:
Mortal thy Doom already is decreed,
( The Judge replied) and Sentence must proceed!
This Court's Records with Instances abound
Of Younger Brows than Thine with Laurel crowned,
Approach ye Ministers of Fate, and bear
The Offender Hence to th'Region of Despair,
In Liquid Flames of Sulphur let him roll,
In sharpest Agonies of a Hell-wreckt Soul:
Thus let him howl Eternity Away,
Refresht with no short Glimps of Heavenly Day.
Confusion now my Tortured Bosom filled;
Cold Sweat adown my Lifeless joints distilled.
A Guard of Demons at the Tyrant's call
With hideous Yellings rusht into the Hall
Monstrous of Shape, of Size, Prodigious Tall.
In this Distress behold a Heavenly Ray,
Around me did his cheerful Light display.
The Lamps grew pale and shrunk into their Case,
The frighted Demons Vanished from the Place;
The haughty Tyrant's Self confused appeared;
Among the dead Bones a rattling Noise was heard,
As Summoned to the Universal Doom,
They justled with each other in their Tomb.
Not daring yet to hope Relief I spied
My Guardian-Angel smiling by my side;
A silent joy through all my Vitals ran,
Whilst Thus in Charming Language He began.
Rejoice my charge, for from Heavens Court I come
With gracious Orders to Revoke thy Doom.
Thy Sun is set, thy Life-glass almost run,
Thy Virtue's Race imperfectly begun.
But Heaven in Pity to thy sickly Pace,
Has Lincenc'd me or to contract the space,
Or on my Wing thy lingering Spirit convey
To Blissful Mansions of Eternal Day.
To Heaven and Him my Humblest Thanks I paid,
And begged to be to those glad Seats conveyed;
But first admit the Lot of all Mankind
And Leave (said He) that Load of Earth behind,
Prisoners Absolved, less gladly quit their Chain
Than I this Flesh that did my Spirit detain.
But when my Soul her naked Self Surveyed,
Leaprous and soul by Sin 's Contagion made,
She Blushed and sought to cover her Disgrace,
Retreating back into her Fleshy case.
The Guardian-Spirit her sond Attempr with-stood,
And straight with Hyssop dipped in Sacred Blood,
Baptized Her; and behold, whilst I inquired
The Intent of the Ceremony, I grew inspired
With mental joys, and now descried no more
Those Blemishes that stained my Soul before:
Thought of New Worlds my Mind had so ingrost,
That all Remembrance of the Old it Lost:
That Body too (which once I fondly thought
Could never be from my Remembrance wrought)
Had now quite escaped my Memory, till I spied
The pale and Lifeless Engine by my side.
Bless me (said I) what ghastly thing lies there?
Was this the Mansion where so many a year,
I lingered 'twixt successive Hope and Fear?
Was this the Thing I took such Care t'improve,
Taught it to Cringe, and in just measures move?
The thing that lately did in Business sweat,
That talked so much of being Rich and Great!
That sought with Verse to make its Love renowned,
And hoped ere long to see its Passion Crowned;
Behold where the designing Machine lies,
Prey to those Insects it did once Despise.
Suppose that Body now lay covered ore
In Persumes brought from Ormus Spicie Shore;
What courteous Female would vouchsafe the Grace
To Curl those Locks, or Kiss that ghastly Face?
Why is the Corpse so long detained from Ground,
It Is more than Time those Hands and Feet were bound;
Close the dull Eyes, support the falling Chin,
With grassie Turfs suppress the swelling Skin:
Go, let the Funeral Peal be Rung aloud,
In Winding-Sheets th'offensive Carcass shrowed
And in some Nook the Useless Lumber crow'd.
Insulting Thus I spoke, and more had said,
But was by my Assistant Angel stayed;
My Charge, said he, (these gloomy shades withdrawn)
Behold of Everlasting Day the Dawn:
At th'Entrance to the Elysian Land (a Grace
Conferred on Souls when first they arrive the Place)
The Blissful Throng are met to welcome Thee
To their fair World of Immortality.
He said, and strait his Threatening Wand up-heav'd,
The Neighboring Walls obeyed the Stroke and cleav'd;
Such was the Blow given by the Hebrew Guide,
When forcing his Foot-passage through the Tide,
The Waters there Congealed and stood in Walls,
The Building here like breaking Water falls.
But now the parting Stones brought Heaven in View,
When (Fatal Chance!) my rapturous Dream withdrew
The grateful slumber from my Temples fell,
Round me I viewed the Grove, and thought it Hell;
Aloud I called my Guide! Obligingly
The Ecchoing Rocks kept up th'expiring cry,
But the false Vision fled without Reply.
ODE.
To my Ingenious Friend Mr. Flatman.
AS when the famed Artificer of Greece,
With wondrous Art but ill Success
Contrived his own and Captived Son's Escape.
By Wings which He with inspired Craft did shape,
He taught the Youth how safely He might Glide,
And keep a Mean betwixt the Sun and Tide;
So you ( Learned Friend) with equal Art
To me the Wings of poesy impart,
Besore me through the spacious Sphaere
A steady Course you Steer,
There You securely Wonders act
And the Eyes of All Attract,
Whilst I Unfortunate,
Like Icarus Die, but with less glorious Fate!
He Soaring fell, I flag Below,
Where with damp Wings disabled to pursue
I yield me Lost, and plunging down
In deep oblivion Drown.
The Banquet.
DIspatch, and to the Myrtle Grove convey
Whatever with the natural Pallat suits,
The Dayrie's Store with Sallads, Roots and Fruits;
I mean to play the Epicure to Day!
Let naught be wanting to complete
Our Bloodless Treat;
But Bloodless let it be, for I Have Decreed
The Grape Alone for this Repast shall Bleed.
Sit worthy Friends -- But ere we Feed,
Let Love b'expell'd the Company;
Let no man's Mirth Here interrupted be
With Thought of any Scornful Little She!
Fall too my Friends. Trust me the Cheer is good!
Ah! (if our Bliss we Understood)
How should we Bless the Indulgent Fates!
Indulgent Fates, that with Content have stored
Our Rural Board,
A Rarity nere sound amongst the Cates
Of most Voluptuous Potentates.
The Match.
BY what wild Frenzy was I Led,
That with a Muse I needs must Wed?
Whose Dower consists of pop'lar Fame,
The short Possession of a Name!
Yet with what Trouble and Debate
The owner holds this poor Estate?
Where after long Expense and Toil
He Starves on the Ungrateful Soil.
The Fields and Groves which Poets feign
The curious Fancy Entertain,
But yields no nourishing Grain or Fruit,
The craving Stomach to recruit.
With Thirsty Tongue the Rhymer Sings
Of Nectar and Olympian Springs.
And such I fear the Faiery ground
Of their Elysium will be found.
A mere Fools Paradise, and fit
For such as will be Men of Wit.
Yet fain would I that Rhymer know,
That Raves not of the Shades below,
Whose Verse describes not there each Hill,
Each Flowery Vale and wandering Rill,
With such praecise particular Care,
As He had been a Native there;
When (maugre all his Art and Pains)
What are his Gay Elysian Plains
But an Imaginary Cheat,
Utopia's formed in the wild Conceit,
When with Poetic Calenture
It Is seized, and Death alone can Cure.
The Disconsolate.
MY laboring Soul no longer can sustain,
But sink beneath th'encreasing Pain;
I Wish, Contrive, Attempt, and Rage in Vain!
Down by these falling Springs I Will Lay
My weary Limbs, and Sigh my troubled Soul Away!
To these lone Fields my Griefs I will impart,
Oh my distracted Head! Oh my afflicted Heart!
Put stay, why should I mournfully recite
My Grievances, to Fright
The feathered Poets of these Streams?
To interrupt their Mirth and Peace,
Whilst philomel her querulous Song shall cease,
And from my sorrows, learn more Tragic Theams!
No! No! I will conceal my weighty Ills,
Seal up my Lips, nor loose them even to Pray,
But all my Plaints in Mental Prayers convey,
That shall to Heaven as silent rise as Dew from thence Distills.
II.
Dream I? or is it a real Prodigy?
For I descry
A Rent in that unclouded Sky;
The Azure Curtains are drawn wide
And to my View disclose
The Elysian Lands where happy Spirits Reside!
See where the Spring of Pleasure flows,
On whose fair Banks the Blessed take soft Repose.
Exempt from Sense or thought of Misery,
They Sing, and Smile, and Rove,
And Feast on Joys in every Grove;
Their Paradise has no Forbidden Tree!
Cursed that I am to View this glorious Scene
With a vast Gulf of Air Between!
So from a Rock the Ship-wreckt Mariner
Surveys the distant Shore with watery Eyes,
Reflects on the full Meals and Pastimes there,
But having framed his fancied Theater
Of Sports and rich Varieties,
Sits down Disconsolate, and Starving Dies.
Sliding on Skates in very hard Frost.
HOw well these frozen Floods now Represent
Those Crystal Waters of the Firmament!
Tho Hurricanes should rage, they could not now
So much as curl the solid Water's Brow;
Proud Fleets whose stubborn Cables scarce with-stood
The impetuous shock of the Unstable Flood,
In watery Ligaments are restrained
More strict than when in binding O oze detained.
But tho their Services at present fail,
Our selves without the aid of Tide or Gale
On Keels of polant Steel securely Sail
From every creek to every point we Rove,
And in our lawless passage swister move
Than Fish beneath us, or than Fowl above.
Strephon's Complaint on quitting his Retirement.
I.
BUsiness! -- Oh stay till I recover Breath,
Th'astonishing Word puts my mazed Spirits to Flight;
Business to me sounds terrible as Death,
As Death to Lovers on their Bridal Night.
Free as Air, but more Serene,
The Series of my Life has been;
But I uncustom'd to the yoke, must now
In stubborn Harness toil at the dull Plow.
II.
Then farewell Happiness, Repose farewell!
You come not where poor Strephon must Reside'
For you like Halcyons on calm Waters dwell,
But Business is a rough and troubled Tide.
Few Suns have risen since I was Blessed,
Of God like Liberty possessed;
But Slave t'Employment now without Repose
I Am (Ghost-like) hurried where my Demon goes.
III.
But Business to Preferment will direct,
And it is even necessary to be Great.
Ah have I then no more than this t'expect?
My stinted Hopes will starve on such thin meat.
Impertinents! Content I crave,
And wildly you of Grandieur Rave!
If Life's at best a tedious rugged Road,
What must it be with Grandieur's cumbring Load?
IV.
Condemned to the Town-Noise and Impertinence,
Where Mode and Ceremony I must view!
Yet were the sight all Strephon could dispense,
But He must there be Ceremonious too.
I fear my rural Soul's too plain
To Learn the Towns dissembling strein;
For whilst I practice the sly Courtiers Art,
I shall forget my self, and speak my Heart.
V.
When first the unwelcome Tidings I received,
Summoned to bid my peaceful shades Adieu;
Scarce was I by my Fellow-Swains believed,
'Till streaming Tears proved my sad story True.
Then pensive they my Doom resent,
As 'twere to Death or Banishment;
But oh my Panalthaea's passionate moan
Surpast her Sexes kindness, and her own.
VI.
Thus spoke She with a forced frown on her Brow,
Will you be gone? false Strephon, will you go?
Then go thy way; go, for I Hate thee now!
But tell me, are you serious Swain, or no?
This is some newfound wile to prove
(Ridiculous Jealousy!) my Love:
But whilst of mine this feigned suspect is shown,
You would suggest that you have renounced your Own.
VII.
Thy Love chaste Nymph deep in my Breast I laid,
When first the precious Pledge I did receive,
Nor have I thence the sacred store conveyed,
Here, force the Cabinet open and you will believe!
You Will see with what a bleeding Heart,
From these dear Shades and thee I part;
But rig'rous Fate -- then on her Virgin Breast
I leaned my drooping Head, and wept the Rest.
VIII.
Oh Floods and Groves, beneath whose sacred shade
I Have sat as Happy as first Mortals were;
For when Distractions did my breast invade,
Some rapturous Shepheard's Song redrest my Care.
But 'bove the Flights of other Swains
I prized my Astragon's soft streins;
For (Turtle-like) my pensive Astragon
Is sweetly Sad and charming in his Moan.
The Gold-hater.
WEll, I perceive the Antipathy
Is mutual now 'twixt Gold and Me;
For that flies me as fast as I
The false pernicious metal fly.
So wild a Prey why should I Trace
That yields no Pleasure in the Chase?
A Prey that must with Toil be sought,
And which I prize not when it is Caught.
Gold I contemn when rude in the Oar,
But in a Crown despise it more.
No Crown can any Temples fit
So well, but 'twill uneasy sit.
By an Eternal Law of Fate,
Vexations still attend on State;
Insep'rable by Humane Art,
A Crown'd-Head and an Aking-Heart.
The Ingrates.
DUll Mortals with the same prepost'rous breath
We bless Love's Darts, and Curse the shafts of Death.
The Author of our Ills, a God we style;
But the Redresser of those wrongs Revile.
Yet gentle Death (tho rudely treated) still
Persists in generous Charity to Kill
And Cure th'Ingrateful even against their Will!
Ah should he once in just Resentment give
Our Wishes, and permit us ever Live,
What should we do when Soul and Body jar
And Loath each other like an Ill-wed Pair?
Can envious Fiends a Penalty invent
That shall than Loathed Embraces more Torment?
But friendly Death absolves us from this Curse,
And when the Parties clash, makes a Divorce.
Disappointed.
I.
FRom Clime to Clime with restless toil we Roam,
But sadly still our old Griefs we Retain,
And with us bear (tho we out-rove the Main)
The same disquiet selves we brought from Home!
Can Nature's plenteous Board
Spread wide from Pole to Pole,
Sufficient Cates afford
To Satiate or Delude one Craving Soul?
Produce what wealth the Sea contains,
Or sleeps deep lodged in Indian Veins,
The Insatiate Mind will gorge the store
And call for more.
II.
The Food of Angels of immortal kind,
Alone can be designed
To Feast th'unbounded Appetite of the Mind.
To those bright Seats let me aspire
Where solid joys remain,
So firm they can sustain,
And stand the full Career of Chaste Desire.
Th'Enjoyments we pursue
So hotly here below,
Are Charming Daphnes in the Chase
And ( Daphne-like) Transforming, Fool us in the Embrace!
Some of Martials Epigrams Translated and Paraphrased.
Lib. 1. Epigr. IX.
FRom needless dangers timely to Retreat,
Speaks not our Courage small, but Prudence Great.
Thus Cato still was foremost in the Fight,
Whilst Victory (tho at distance) was in fight;
Yet often the Unequal Battle he would wave,
Wise in Retreat as in th'Engagement Brave.
Who of his Game, Advantage cannot make,
Is wise in plotting how to part the Stake.
Who pays his Blood for it, buys his Fame too dear
I would have Fame, but I Would enjoy it Here.
Who mingles Cypress with his Laurel Wreath,
Is poor, and Debtor for his Fame to Death.
Lib. 1. Epigr. XIV.
De Arria and Paeto.
WHen from her Breast Chaste Arria did unsheath
The reeking Sword, and led the way to Death'
The blushing Steel to her Loved Lord she gave,
And said -- Tho Wretched, let us still be Brave!
Ah that I might prevent thy Fate with Mine:
At my own Breast I Bleed, but Smart in Thine.
Lib. 1. Epigr. CX.
De Issa Catella Publij.
Issa much to be preferred
To Catullus amorous Bird;
Chaster Thou than Stella's Dove,
But fond as Girls when first they Love.
Issa worth both Indies Treasure,
Issa Publiu's Life and Pleasure.
Issa mourns if He complain,
Issa shares his Health and Pain.
All Night on his warm Neck She lies,
Nor stirs 'till He Is disposed to rise:
But if Digestion chance to call,
The cleanly well-bred Animal
Never harms the Bed, but lightly creeps
Over Publius Bosom while He sleeps,
Or wakes him with her gentle moan,
And motions to be handed down.
But passing other Virtues by,
Such is this Creatures Modesty,
She never could Love, tho daily Wooed
By Shocks of Quality and Blood.
But lest Death take her quite away
When time brings on her fatal Day,
(To Countermand Fate's rigid Law)
Publius did her Picture draw;
Where every Feature, every Hair
Is feigned with so much Art and Care,
It leaves you doubtful which to call
The Copy, which the Original.
In short, compare 'em both together,
And you will Swear Both have Life, or Neither.
Lib. 9. Epigr: VI.
Doll Swears she will have Raph -- The Wiser she!
Raph Swears he will not have her -- The Wiser He!
Lib. XI. Epigr. XCV.
Translated in Dialogue.
A. FRiend Giles and I had late a bloody bout.

B. Eternal Cronies how could you fall out?

A. Faith guess The Occasion.

B. Some fresh Doxie?

A. No,
Fools as we are, we have more Sense than So.
He that Asserts a modest Lady's Right,
(Tho soundly Drub'd) is a true Errant Knight;
But Whelps are they, who for such Carrion Fight.

B. When Toapt (which he is of course some twice a Day)
He Will rail on's Grandsire's Beard if it come in's way;
Perhaps mis-call'd you then, gave you the Lie,
Or in rude Language damned your Poetry.

A. Had Lillye to resolve the Quaere tried,
Even Lilly's self could not have guest more wide!
Don Critic nere could wound my thoughts so deep
As to beguil me of one minutes sleep;
Censures I still despise as things of course,
But the damage I sustain by Giles is worse.
The Rascal stole --

B. Your Poems?

C. No, my Horse.

Lib. XI. Epigr. XLIII.
There Is not a drowsy Alderman i'th'Town,
But I Will engage more nobly shall requite
Dull hobling Meeter on his Beard and Gown,
Than you the most elab'rate lines I write.
And yet your Worship still gives me strict charge
To write in Honor of your Patronage;
And that my thoughts upon the Theme be large,
And favoring of the smartness of the Age.
Troth Sir, you have less Conscience than a Turk,
To put an honest Muse on Conjuring Work,
To make Wesphalia Hams of English Pork.
The Confinement.
Often had I formed Ideas of Content,
But by Experience knew not what it meant.
At length I strove to Counter-plot my Stars,
And free my Soul by Stratagem from Cares.
In a cool Jess'mine shade my Lute I strung,
Where with divertive Aires I played and Sung;
The grateful Sounds composed my Cares to sleep,
Which over me now no Watch appeared to keep.
Thrice blessed (said I) this long expected Hour,
That frees me from my cruel Goalers Power.
I fled; but soon was by my jealous Guard
Pursued, o're-tane, and laid again in Ward.
Yet even this Disappointment I could bear,
Had Fate set bounds to my Misfortunes Here;
But since my Attempt t'escape I suffer more,
Than in my Hardest Bondage heretofore!
Like a Designing Captive now I Am used,
A Prisoners Common Courtesies refused;
Pressed with more Chains, awed by a stricter Guard,
From Sleep (the vilest Slaves Relief) debarred.
On Snow fallen in Autumn, and dissolved by the Sun.
I.
NAture now stripped of all her Summer-Dress,
And modestly surmizing, 'twere unmeet
For each rude Eye to view her Nakedness;
Around her bare Limbs wraps this Snowy Sheet.
II.
The wanton Sun the slight-wrought Shroud removes
To Embrace the naked Dame, whose fertile Womb
Admits the lusty Paramour's warm Love 's,
And is made big with the fair Spring to come.
Melancholy.
I.
MAlignant Humor, Poison to my Blood!
Bane of those active Spirits that glide
And sport within the circling Tide,
As Fish Expire in an infected Flood.
When all the Horizon of my Soul is clear,
And I suspect no change of Weather near,
Strait like a sudden Storm I find
Thy black Fumes gathering in my Mind,
Transforming All Egyptian Darkness there;
Darkness where naught occurs to Sight
But Flashes, more amazing than the Night;
And fiery Specter gliding through the troubled Air.
II.
Sleep that in other Maladies brings Ease,
Feeds and enrages this Disease;
For when my weary Lidds I close
And slumber, it is without Repose.
This Fury still into my Dreams will creep
To Hagg my timorous Fancy while I sleep;
Through Charnel Houses then I Am led,
Those gloomy Mansions of the Dead,
Where pensive Ghosts by their loved Relics stay,
And Curse the approaching Day.
By Merc'less Foes pursued and taken;
Often ship-wreckt on the Main,
Beneath the Floods I seem to Dive;
Often in Wild Sarra's Desert forced t'engage
Some Savage Monster's Rage.
Often (Typhon-like) beneath a Mountain's weight I strive!
III.
Might I the Book of Fate peruse,
To Read the Lot for me designed,
I should perhaps auspicious find
Those Planets I accuse;
But whilst for Information I
Consult the false Astrology
Of Melancholy Fear,
Dark and ore-cast my future Days appear:
All possible Misfortunes while I dread,
I draw all possible Misfortunes on my Head;
Whilst this solicitous Fear of Future Ill
My credulous Thought employs,
(Tho false its Augury, yet) it destroys
My present Rest, and still
Diverts me from pursuit of certain Joys.
Who seeks for Happiness with nicest Care
Must watch its Seasons, and frequent its Haunt.
Delight is a Rich tender Plant
That Springs in all Soils, and all the Year:
It Is like the Manna which in plenty lay,
If early sought, around
Each Hebrews Tent, but if till Heat of Day
Their Search they did delay.
The Ambrosial Food was no where to be found.
On a Grave Sir retiring to Write in Order to undeceive the World.
CErtis of all well-meaning Fools, thy Fate
Is most deplorably Unfortunate.
Had Thou Domitian-like in catching Flies
Employed thy Privacy, thou would past for Wise;
For what should hinder thee, but thou may catch
As fast as He, and be the Emperor's Match?
But whilst thy solitary Hours are spent
In scribbling tedious Systems, to prevent
The Worlds Mistakes, its Follies to Reform,
Thou may as well pretend to lay a Storm.
Go, cut the Caspian Lake a Road to The Ocean;
Contrive an Engine with perpetual Motion,
Make Machiavillians of the Red-Bull Rout,
Jilts Constant, Breakers Honest, Bawds Devout;
If these Adventures seem unfeazable,
At least enough to pose Don Sidrophel.
Then think how frantickly thou do devise,
To make this Hair-brained World grow staid and wise.
In Youth and Prime when likeliest to improve,
No Precepts this besotted World could move;
And will thou at these Years begin to School,
(Dull Moralist!) the crazy doting Fool?
Go dreaming Stoic, once again Retire;
And since thou art Ambitious to acquire
Repute for Judgment -- Set thy Works on Fire.
On a deformed Old Baw'd designing to have her Picture drawn.
I.
THy Picture drawn soul Beldame! Thine!
What Frenzy haunts thy Mind,
And drives Thee on this vile Design,
T'affront all Womankind?
II.
For whilst thy swarthy Cankard Face
Posterity shall view,
They Will loath the fairest of the Race,
For sharing Sex with You.
III.
To some forlorn Churchyard repair,
And Haggard Thou shall see,
The sternest Goblin will not dare
To stand the sight of Thee.
IV.
Those Ghosts that strike with Pannick-Fear
The Breasts of stoutest Braves,
At thy Approach will disappear,
And Burrogh in their Graves.
V.
Fix thy Effigies on the Shield
Of some bold Knight in Arms,
'Twill Aid him more to win the Field,
Than all his Lady's Charms.
VI.
Don Perseus with his Gorgon's Face
That Combatant would flee;
For Hagg Medusa (no Disgrace!)
A Beauty were to Thee.
Advice to a Friend, designing to Publish his Poems.
REclaim, rash Friend, your wild Resolves t'engage
A captious, and ill-natured Age.
It Is not enough the Verse you write be Good,
To Take, it must be Understood.
And to instruct the World, where you excel,
Is harder much than writing Well.
They Are different Tasks to write Well, and to Please;
The last (alas!) a Work of Ease.
Whilst Midas Umpire sits; let None admire
Pan's Pipe preferred to Phoebus Lyre.
The gawdiest Painting takes the Vulgar sight,
Whilst artfull Pieces less Delight.
In vain is Nature Represented Well,
If It it be not Gay, 'twill never Sell.
Hark in your Ear ('It Is a strange Mystery,
But a grand Truth), if Popular you would be,
Faith spare your Pains, and Write Ex-tempore.
The Ignorant.
AN Ignorant I am,
And Glory in the Name'
I wot not what of yore
Rash Furioso's did,
Nor what the dreaming Sages said:
I cannot run a List of Old Rome's Tryumphs ore.
'Twas Knowledge first to Ruin led us on;
For with this Mortal Itch possessed
The happy Pair Transgrest,
Needs must they Know, they Knew and were Undone!
And to this Hour our Mis'ries sole Relief
Consists in Ignorance of our Grief!
Then plodding Mortal cease
To boast your dear-bought Faculties;
For since with Knowledge Sorrow must increase,
Let such as on those Terms can Science prize,
Improve in Science; but for me,
So I may Ignorant and Happy be,
I Will never Repine or look with envious Eyes,
On the Unhappy Learned, and Miserable Wise.
The Beldam's Song.
APpear my Kib-welkin, dear Spirit appear
In the Shape
Of an Ape,
A Fire-spitting Dragon, or Clump-footed Bear.
Madge has whoopt me twice from her Ivy-bound Oak,
And twice have I heard the dull Night-Raven croak.
Let me stride thee my Welkin, and post it away
Ere the Moon
Reach her Noon.
For the Night is the Wey-ward Sister's Day.
Through the Air let us take our fantastical Round,
And sipp of the Dew
While it is New,
Ere the Honey-drops fall to the Ground.
But when we are mounted, and in our Carear,
Make neither Hault nor Stay,
And to none give the Way,
Tho Hecat her self should be rounding the Air.
For once I Will encounter,
And try to dismount her,
Pitch her Heels over Head
To some Quagg-mire below, and Reign Queen in her stead
Bustle, bustle my Kib, and be sure e're we part,
Thou shall Suck at the Dugg that is next to my Heart.
The Inconstant.
A Paraphrase on the XV. Epod of Horace.
PRecisely I remember All, 'twas Night,
Calm Sky, and the full Moon shone bright,
When first you Swore, that bleating Flocks should feed
With Wolves, nor other Keepers need;
That boistrous Winds hushed in Eternal sleep,
Should cease to Revel on the Deep;
You Vowed that these, and Prodigies more strange
Should fall e're your fixed Heart could change.
Yet (Woman-like) to your new Favorite now,
Unswear as often as you did Vow!
Ah! if I could (and sure if half a man,
Or some what less than half, I can)
Could I in just Resentment quit your Chain,
And with more caution choose again;
Nymph, you would Repent my wrongs, when flying Fame
Should publish to your grief and shame,
How your wronged Swain had found a Nymph more True
And equal in her Charms to You.
But Treacherous Rival, you that reap my Toils,
And Pride your self in my stolen spoils,
Should Fates and Stars Adopt you for their own,
And shower their richest Blessings down,
Naught should secure you from the sure Praesage
Of an Offended Poet's Rage.
The time shall come (and to inhance your sear,
Know, Wretch, that fatal time is near)
When you shall perish by the Inconstancy
Of Her that first learnt breach of Faith from thee;
Whilst from the safe shore your sad wreck I see.
Of the Ape and the Fox.
A Paraphrase on one of the Centum Fabulae.
TO his four-footed Subjects through the Nation,
The King of Bruits thus issues Proclamation,
Being well informed we have incurred Disgrace
By Harb'ring in our Realm a Scandalous Race,
A Sect that have No Tails; These Presents are
TO enjoin such Miscreants, All and singular,
Strait to depart our Land, or on Demurr,
Our Laws Grand-Treason Penalties incurr.
Sly Reynard strait sists out this state Design,
Turns Goods and Chattels All to ready Coin.
The unprojecting Neighborhood Admire,
And Flock, The Occasion of his March t'Enquire.
Where amongst the Rest the ceremonious Ape
Accosts him with Grimmace and formal Scrape.
Bon jour Monsieur! You pass for a prime Wit;
But in this Project give small Proof of it.
We of the Cur-tailed Tripe b'express Command
Of our great Cham prepare to quitt the Land;
But why Sir should you Budge, Whose Posterns bear
A Swashing Train well furrd to guard your Rear?
Had Nature lent me but an Inch of Dock,
A Tust to Shade, or Scutt to grace my Nock,
I should Presume I had no Obligation
From the late Act to take this Peregrination.
Then thus the Fox -- You Have spoke an Oracle,
Doubtless your Gravity reads Machiavill.
I must Confess I Have no pretense to rail,
Or Curse my stars for stinting me in Tail;
But grant my Train might with a Commet's measure,
Suppose withal that 'twere his Highness Pleasure
To say I Have None? which if he once Assert,
Nere doubt but he has Sycophants will swear't;
Thus charged, should I attempt my own Defense,
(To give his Lawless Tyranny Pretense)
It Is Odds but I am Dockt upon the Spott,
And then for want of Tail poor Reynard goes to Pot.
The Round.
HOw Vain a Thing is Man whom Toys Delight,
And shdadows Fright!
Variety of Impertinence
Might give our Dotage some Pretense;
But to a Circle bound,
We Toil in a dull Round:
We sit, move, Eat and Drink,
We Dress, Undress, Discourse and Think
By the same Passions hurried on,
Imposing or Imposed upon:
We pass the time in Sport or Toil,
We Plow the Seas or Safer Soil:
Thus all that we Project and Do,
We did it many a year ago.
We Travel still a beaten way,
And yet how eager rise we to pursue
Th'affairs of each returning day,
As if its Entertainments were Surprising All and New.
The Male Content.
Among winding Rocks (his swelling griefs t'allay)
The disappointed Thirsis took his way.
In the Wild Clifts a natu'ral Vaut he found
With woven Ivye Cheaply decked around.
He rusht into the Solitary Nook,
Where into these Pathetick Sounds he broke.
Oh when will Nature take the life she gave,
And Lodge me free from Trouble in the Grave!
Sleep there alone deserves the Name of Rest,
No frightfull Dreams the sleep of Death infest.
Whilst shrouded in this marble Cell I Lie,
What can be more Commodious than to Dye?
Each Object Here wears such a mournful Face,
That Dying seems the Business of the Place!
Here from the wrangling World I will Retire,
And as I Lived Unknown, Unknown Expire.
Then let that hanging Rock that shades my Head
Sink down, and shutt this Vaut when I am Dead:
Rude as it is, this Marble Cell would save
Th'expensive Rites that formal Burialls crave,
It self my Cossin, Monument and Grave.
The Dream.
BEneath the Syc'more shade,
Amyntas sat to sing and Play
On his shrill pipe i'th'Heat o'th Day;
His Amarill beside him laid:
Charmed with the Music of his Reed,
The listening Ewes forgot to Feed,
The sportive Lambs gave ore their Play,
And to their Master's Song attentive lay,
The Song as Soft and Innocent as They!
Mean while on the pleased Amari'll
A downy slumber fell,
'Till with a Sigh and Sudden start
She 'woke and Cried -- Heaven save my Swain!
Are you not hurt? -- I will provide a Dart,
And if the Bruit approach again,
I Will drench it in the Savage Monster's Heart.
What means ( Amyntas smiling said) This Rage?
I dreamt (said she) a ruthful Bear
Had broke into our Fold, and slaughtered there;
And whilst you rant' Engage
(Ah! why were you so Rash?) the unequal Foe,
The Ravenous Monster Seized on You!
Then to your Rescue I came in
And cast my self between,
But with the motion Waking, found the Dream Untrue.
Amor Sepulchralis.
IN a Large stately Cave (of old the Court
Of Rural Gods as neighbring Swains report)
Interred the dear Remains of Damon lay,
Converted now to their Original clay.
Each wishing Nymph the living Swain approved,
The Shepherd fair Emmoria only Loved.
Their mutual Passion's Kindling Flame was more
Then ere Inspired Consenting Hearts before;
But was with time Improved to that Degree,
That now 'twas Love no more, but Ecstasy.
Their linkt Affections Fate could not divorce,
Nor Rig'rous Death restrain their Intercourse:
The Nymph to living Swains did still prefer
Her Damon's Dust, and even that Dust Loved Her.
At Damon's Tomb the Chaste Emmoria kept
Perpetual VVatch, and ore his Ashes wept;
(Fit emblem of her grief) a sprigg of Yew
She planted there, the Branch took Root and grew.
This Cave to the Suns Rays Access denied,
No Rain or Dew the thirsting Plant Supplied,
Yet still it sprang, by Love's Miracu 'lous Power,
For the Ashes still Glowed with their Old Amor
Emmoria's Eyes wept a nere-Ceasing Shower;
This Heat and Moisture kept the Plant Alive,
And Tempring still each other, made it Thrive.
The three First Verses of the 46th Psalm Paraphrased.
I.
OUr Strength, is the Omnipotent;
We cannot therefore condescend to Fear,
Tho danger in its gastliest shape appear;
Tho Mountains from their marble Roots were rent,
And headlong to the Ocean hurld,
Their Violent Career might shake the World;
But our fixed Feet should keep their Ground,
No Tremour in our Breast be found;
Our raised Heads should o're-look the Floods, where
Hills lay Drowned.
II.
What tho the Sea, whose most capacious Womb
Gave the Subverted Hills a Tomb?
What tho it is raging Waters roar,
And swell in Mountains vast as those
Which the profound Gulf gorged before?
This most impertinently angry Main,
With its own Rocks fierce contest may maintain,
But can no more our Passions discompose,
Than when on a Serene and shiny day,
Some shallow Riv'let we survey,
Contesting with each Pibble for its Interrupted way.
The Midnight Thought.
NOw that the twinkling stars Essay
A Faint Resemblance of the Day,
Shown fairer now for being beset
With Night (like Diamonds in jett)
Let me Reposed within this Grove,
The Solemn season There Improve.
Restless alas! from Sun to Sun,
A Round of Business I have run:
Whilst others slept projecting Lay,
Yet since I THOUGHT how many a day!
How long since I did meditate
Of Life, of Death, and Future state?
Approaching Fate his Pace will keep,
Let Mortals Watch, or let them Sleep.
What Sound is That? -- a Passing Bell!
Then to Eternity Farewell!
Poor Soul, You Are at thy Crisis now,
And one short Hour thy Doom shall show,
Eternal Bliss, or endless Woe!
If Virtue's Lore Thou have despiz'd,
How Would That Virtue now be prized!
Or say, Thou did in our Loose Age,
On her forsaken Side Engage,
Would Thou the dear Remembrance now,
For the Worlds Monarchy Forgo?
What other Medicine can Thou find
T'asswage the Feavour in thy mind?
Now Wakened Conscience speaks at Large,
And envious Fiends inhance the Charge!
Let the bold Atheist now draw near,
Thy chill and drooping spirits to cheer;
His Briskest Wine and Wit to Thee
Will now alike Insipid be!
Where is the Lawless Hectring Brave
That from the Arrest of Death can save?
VVh' Attempt a Rescue Here, will fail,
And this grim Sergeant takes no Bail.
The Counter-Turn.
OBserve that Pile of skulls, but chiefly There
That mossye skull Survey:
Does the sage Front display
Plots, Projects, and nocturall Care?
Methinks it should, for once it did belong
T'a Machiavilian that could Shock a State,
And trusted He could Bastle Fate.
Who would have sought that Headpiece in this Throng?
The plotting Wight promised that skull a Crown,
In Lowest Earth He founded the Design,
With Heaven the Roof did join;
'Till with a sudden shock of Fate O're-thrown,
The Fabric fell on the Contrivers Head,
And crushed the aspiring Politician Dead.
The Voyagers.
WHilst Stemming Life's uncertain Tide,
Tossed on the Waves of Doubts and Fears,
If to frail Reason's Conduct we Confide
We strive in vain
The happy Port to gain,
For often as Clouded Reason disappears
We cannot fail to Rove afarr
Mistaking each false Meteor for our Starr.
How dismal are the Perils we engage
When (grown t'a Hurricane)
Our boisterous Passions Rouse the sleeping Main?
But ah! how Few have perished by the Rage
Of Storms, if numbered with the daily Throng
Whom Siren Pleasures as they fail along
Seduce to the dead shore,
Where They saw others wreckt before,
Yet still pursue though certain to be Lost;
For if from their cleft Boat they climb the Coast
They fall into the treacherous Sirens Power
Who Entertain them first, and then Devour.
The Choice.
GRant me indulgent Heaven a rural Seat,
Rather Contemptible than Great.
Where, though I Taste Life's Sweets, still I may be
Athirst for Immortality.
I would have Business, but exempt from Strife;
A Private, but an Active Life.
A Conscience bold and punctual to his Charge;
My Stock of Health or Patience Large.
Some Books I Would have, and some Acquaintance too,
But very Good, and very Few.
Then (if one Mortal Two such Grants may Crave)
From Silent Life I Would Steal into my Grave.
On Sight of some Martyr's Sepulchers.
HEre lies Dust Confusedly hurled,
But Dust that once shall judge the World!
Blessed Saints, when the quick Flames Enlarged
Your Souls, and from dull Flesh discharged,
The Ambitious Fires strove to Convey
Your Spirits on their tryumphant Way,
But winged with Glory They Aspird,
And lest the Flames behind them Tired.
Of the Few Adherers to Virtue.
THat Virtue Points our Way to Happiness,
Even the Profane in Cooler Moods Confess:
But 'Cause the Brave and generous are Few,
Thin Trains this Guide to Happiness pursue.
Who 'Vouch her Cause, must 'bett a Suffering side
Exposed to all the Outrages of Pride.
She Is Exiled now, and it is not strange to see
Mean Souls desert afflicted Majesty:
But when just Heaven (and sure that Time draws on)
Restores this Empress to her Starry Throne,
With Crowns She will enrich her Loyal Few.
Whilst Shame and Vengeance Crush the Rebel Crew.
The Requital.
VIle Infidel, that dare for Vice declaim,
And take vain pride to Publish thy own shame!
What can thy Patron Vice enough Conferr
On his officious zealous Orator?
He Will doubtless give his wonted Recompense,
And, Rot the Tongue that Pleads in his Defense.
To a Desponding Friend.
REpine not, pensive Friend, to meet
A Thorn and Sting in every Sweet;
Think it not yours or my hard Fate,
But the fixed Lot of Humane State.
Since then this Portion is Assigned,
By the great Patron of Mankind,
(Though nere so darkly Understood)
We should presume the Method Good.
Heaven does its tendrest Care express
Conducting through a Wilderness,
Lest Sluggards we should Take our Stand
And stop short of the Promised Land.
Disswasion of an Aged Friend from Leaving his Retirement.
IN Life's unactive Wane your shades forsake,
And into the World a Sally make:
Deluded Friend, what Surfett have you taken
Of Bliss, that now you long for Pain?
The Favorites of th'austere World are Few,
Yet They have their disasters too.
What therefore must your Entertainment be
That have professed Hostility?
You have not learnt to Flatter and Caress
The Great, for faithless Promises;
When Disappointed, Thankful to Appear,
And say, How much Obliged you are!
For Lucre you must Practice every Wile;
Defraud, and do it with a Smile.
Worldlings with many Vices must be fraught,
Which you my Friend were never Taught.
Well, you may Roam, but soon Return distressed;
Wounded and Maimed to your Old Nest.
Recovering from a Fit of Sickness.
I.
When late the tyrannous Malady
With intermitted Rage
Seemed to presage,
Or Sudden Health or Dissolution nigh;
False World (said I) that Steal'st my real Joys
Shuffling in stead thy changeling Toys:
Begone! I Will not be bribed at any Rate
To sell m'approaching Fate,
And Reassume that Toilsome Task to Live:
I prize not Grandieur, and I know
(Were I thy Favorite as I Am thy Foe)
What I affect, thou never can bestow:
I Would have Content, but That was never Thine to give.
Remove that Taper from my sight,
The impertinent Light
Presents no grateful Object to my View;
Even those Fair Eyes that Planets once appeared,
(The only Planets I revered)
To my dim sight, se^m now to have Lost their Luster too
II.
Thus Musing as I Lay, to my Bedside
(Attired in all his Mourning Pride)
The King of Terrors came;
Awful his Looks, but not d^formed and Grim;
He Is no such Bugbear as we seign of Him,
Scarce we our selves so Civilized and Tame!
Unknown the Doom assigned me in this Change
For full Crimes and imperfect Penitence,
(Though justly I might dread the Strickt Revenge
Of an Enraged Omnipotence)
Yet with my present Griefs distressed,
With curious Thoughts of unknown Worlds possessed
Inflamed with Thirst of Liberty,
Long Loved, but nere Enjoyed by me,
I^su'd for Leave the fatal Gulf to Pass:
My Vital Sand is almost run,
And Death (said I) will strike anon,
Then to dull Life I bid along Farewell;
But as the last grains fell,
Death faild my credulous Hopes, and Turned the Glass.
The Challenge.
YE Sages that pretend
In Science to Transcend
The dull illit'rate Crowd,
You that of Ignorance impeach,
(Ere your Pretenses be allowed)
Define that Prudence which you Teach;
I fear it is much above your Learning's Reach.
Prudence has no fixed Being, but depends
On Person, Time, and Chance,
And every petty Circumstance:
Actions directed to the Self-same ends,
May prudent the one, the other peccant be;
For what would prove Discreet in Thee
Perhaps were wild Extravagance in Me.
The Ants are Wise, that from their Summer Hoard
Supply their Winter Board;
And doubtless full as wise as They
The Grasshoppers that Play
And Revell all their Harvest Days away;
For 'twere in Them a Senseless Drudgery
To Toil for a Supply
In Winter's Dearth, that must ere Winter, Die.
The Cure.
A Dialogue.
Claius and Coridon. Claius COme Coridon, Sit by me gentle Swain;
Thy Cheek is pale: Speak Shepherd, where is thy Pain?

Cor. Say, Claius Priest of our great Pan (for you
Of Humane Science the utmost Limits know)
Is Physics power to the Bodies use confined,
Have you no Medicine for a troubled Mind?

Clai. Yes, for as Balsoms raging Pains appease
Sage Counsels to distempered Souls give ease,
Even Love is no incurable Disease.
Ha Swain! What meant that Sudden blush and start?
Have I guest right, and touched the tender Part?

Cor. I would Conceal't, but have not learnt to Feign --
You Have guest, and while you Named it, Wakt my Pain.

Clai. To Effect the Cure we'll take the Safest course,
And Trace the Malady to its first Scource:
Say then, what Female Gims and Baits were laid;
Or was your fond Soul by its self betrayed?

Cor. When from Severer Business I withdrew,
Twixt Love and Me a fatal Friendship grew:
Such was my Ignorance and his Craft, my Breast
Admitted the Impostor for its Guest;
With my Hearts Blood our Covenant we sealed,
A Solemn Contract nere to be repealed:
Then all Delights young Sorcerers Enjoy,
A While did my deluded Soul employ,
Love fed my waking Thoughts with glorious Theams,
And blessed my Slumbers with transporting Dreams.
When at an awful Distance I surveyed
My Nymph, Transported, to my self I said,
Ah Charming Fair! Oh Excellence Divine!
Whilst Love would Whispering Answer -- Swain She Is Thine.

Clai. Thus, Whilst from far our high-plac't Hopes appear,
(The Gulfs between Concealed) we deem them Near.

Cori. Yet boldly through all Obstacles I pressed.

Clai. Why therefore Shepherd are you not possessed?

Cori. Force not the Unwilling secret from my Breast,
There let it Lurk in Sympathizing Night,
And never roam from its dark Cell to Fright.
Let it suffice that on a Barren Soil
I Have Lost of many years the Expense and Toil.

Clai. Does the false Nymph --
The Wages you so dearly Earned refuse?

Cori. My self I cannot, will not her Accuse.
But my Releif must from your Counsels Rise:
Examine not good Claius, but Advise;
Bring your best Art (for 'twill your best require)
T'unspell my soul from Love's tormenting Fire.

Clai. Call Reason to your Aid, you will put to flight
The Foe not to be quelled by other Might.
Of happiest Love's Delights Sum up the Account,
And Learn to what the Total will amount;
Then in the Balance Love's Vexations Weigh,
How certain These, and how uncertain They.
Sordid his joys, and of delight so nice,
That Female Coyness only gives them Price.
Short-lived the warmest Amorist's Desires,
At Kindling Hymen's, often Love's Torch expires.
There are that from Large Dow'rs derive their Flame
And These in full Career pursue their Game;
They wreck their Wits, the Golden Prize to gain,
But dream not how that Gold is wrought into a Chain.

Cor. When late Love's false suggestions I Obeyed,
'Twas in Pursuit of Happiness I strayd.
My credulous Youth had seen no brighter Flame,
And Straight Concluded that from Heaven it came.
In Errour's Night Love's Fire shone bright and gay,
But at the approach of Reasons conquering Ray
The Meteor's lost in the full Blaze of Day.

Clai. Mistake not Swain, I would not Quench your Flame,
But slip your Passion at a Nobler Game.
Wave Sensual joys, and with a Flame refind
Court those Diviner Pleasures of the Mind.
To sacred Virtue next make your Address;
Confess you have no Regard of Happiness,
Or Live henceforth of Virtue's service proud,
The brightest Beauty and the best endowed.
She Will guard your Youth from Passions banefull Rage,
With peaceful Thoughts divert the Pains of Age.
But then in Largest Streams her Blessings Flow,
When Love grown Bankrupt can no more bestow.
When rig'rous Death shall check your Circling Blood,
And Life die stifled in the Frozen Flood,
Your pensive Nymph at large may tell her Grief,
But to your ravished Soul give no Relief;
'Twill lurk a pensive Ghost in Caves all day,
And to it is Relics Midnight Visits pay.
But pious Souls by Death are Gainers made,
By Virtue to the Elysian Seats conveyed;
There Mirth and Peace, and softest Transports reign,
Delights refind from all Allays of Pain;
The Grateful Soil untilled her Harvest yields;
Unclouded Skies and ever-verdant Fields.
There Aemulation no Dissension gives,
For Happy Each in others Blisses Lives.
No Cares of the Future their free Thoughts Employ,
The Business of the Place is to Enjoy.
That Swain is most Industrious held that best
Improves his Bliss, exceeds in Joys the Rest.
If Love can Bless beyond these Heights, Return
To dragg his Chain, and in his Feavour Burn;
Take Leave of blissfull Immortality,
Chide my impert'nent Zeal to set you Free,
And Court the Frowns of some imperious She.

Cor. Destroy not thus your generous Courtesies
By an unfriendly and unjust Surmize;
Heaven sends me Freedom, and to sell the Pledge,
Must Brand me with the foulest Sacrilege.
Against Love and Beauty I Will maintain the Fort
And fix a Guard of Virtues in my Heart.

Clai. If Beauty's Force too rashly you despise,
It Is Odds but you are ruined by Surprise:
Would you live free from Female Tyranny?
Nere Parley with the Tempting Sex, but Fly.
Their very Tears are Fuel to Desire,
And with their Sighs They Will Fan th'expiring Fire.
Their Mirth and Grief, their kindness and Disdain,
Are fatal All, and Work Poor Shepherds Pain!
Nature and Art Conspire to Arm the Fair;
For in the Charming, All things Charming are;
Their Glances Darts, and every Curl a Snare.

The Hurricane.
WHat cheer my Mates? Luff ho! We Toil in Vain!
That Nothern Mist forebodes a Hurricane.
See how th'expecting Ocean Raves,
The Billows Roar before the Fray,
Untimely Night devours the Day,
In The Dead Eclypse we Naught descry
But Lightnings Wild Capriches in the Sky,
And Scalye Monsters sparkling through the Waves.
Ply! Each a Hand, and furl your Sails.
Port, Hard a'Port -- The Tackle sails.
Sound ho! -- Five Fathom and the most.
A Dangerous Shelf! she has struck, and we are Lost.
Speak in the Hold -- She Leaks amain -- Give ore;
The Crazy Boat can Work no more.
She draws apace, and we approach no shore.
A Ring my Mates: Let Us join a Ring, and so
Beneath the Deep Embracing Go.
Now to new Worlds we steer, and quickly shall Arrive:
Our Spirits shall Mount as fast as our dull Corpses Dive
The Grateful Shepherd.
WHilst by his grazing Flock a gentle Swain,
His Vacant Hours to entertain,
Perused a Volumn whose each Tragic Page
Discoursed of some Intrigue of State,
Of Rebell-Insolence and Rage,
And some unhappy Monarch's Fate:
The Youth into these passionate sounds brake forth
What Virtue of my Ancestors
So much Obliged you ye indulgent Powers,
That in these Silent shades you gave me Birth?
You might have made me Fortune's Sport,
Doomed me to some Corrupted Court,
Where I this rural Bliss had never known;
My Cottage might have been a Throne,
My Crook a Scepter, and my Wreath a Grown:
Some Tyrant-Prince I might have been,
(By your Indulgence now a peaceful Swain)
My Chloris some proud Cruel Queen,
The tendrest Nymph of the Arcadian Plain.
When for these Blessings I forget to invoke
Your Powers, neglect to make your Altars smoke;
Then Ravished let me be
From this Secure Retreat,
And placed aloft on Grandieur's Seat,
An open Mark to the sure Darts of envious Destiny.
FINIS.

