DISLOYALTY OF LANGUAGE Questioned and Censured. OR, A SERMON Preached against
the licencious looseness of Seditious TONGUES. By Rich. Towgood B. D. one of
His Majesty's Chaplains, and Vicar of Saint Nicholas Church in Bristoll. Ian.
17. 1642. WITH A BRIEF COROLLARIE Now added, questioning and censuring
Rebellious Actions.

Tit. 3.1, 2. Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to
obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good work, to speak evil of no Man.

BRISTOLL, Printed for Rich. Harsell, and are to be sold by him in Bristoll,
1643.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, give me leave to acquaint thee concerning this Sermon
following, that as it was necessary discharge of duty that at first drew it to
the Pulpit, so it is vehement importunity that has now brought it to the
Press; of such foul Schism and Faction did our Pulpits ring of late, that it
was tedious to hear, grievous to remember. At last there was January 15. 1642.
on the words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 94.20.
brought into the Pulpit such a singular masterpiece of furious Sedition, that
my Act. 17.16.
spirit was stirred in me, Jer. 20.9.
I was weary with forbearing and could hold no longer, but took advantage of my
next Lecture-turn, which followed immediately thereupon, not to answer the
arguments, (which indeed were none,) but Si natura negat, facit indignatio
versum Qualemcunque potest. Iuvenal. Satyr. 1.
to show the iniquity of such disloyal, such unchristian invectives. The
Press being now brought to Bristoll has given opportunity to some, to press
me for publishing these Notes, with urgent importunity. Luke 11.8.
what will not importunity do? Lo, it has prevailed to make this short
discourse subject to thy view, liable to thy censure, yet intending both thine
and the public peace. Comptnesse of style and curiosity of words expect not;
A trim curious dress would have required either longer time or nimbler
abilities: such as it is be pleased favorably to accept and heartily to
interpret. If hereby any little profit may accrue to thee upon the perusal of
it, I shall abundantly be satisfied for all the wrath and displeasure that by
many was taken against me at the hearing of it. It is not to be expected, I
know, that all men should have a mind to embrace the truth, but be thou, good
Christian Reader, be thou satisfied, and I am,

Thine in the Lord Jesus Christ, RICH. TOWGOOD.

(...) (...) ly with his lips, which was (...) apprehended by the hearers a^
if Job had said, That his punishment was without desert of sinn^ or
transgression by him committed. Hereupon Elihu in thi^ Chapter, takes up the
Buckle^^ against Job, and undertakes (...) maintain and defend the Justi^^ of
God. Peruse the Chapte^ and ye shall easily perceive this (...) be the drift
and scope thereo^^ Among other expressions to convince Job, Elihu here uses a^
argument, a minore, etc. verse (...) 19. Is it fit to say to a King, the art
wicked? and to Princes, ye (...) ungodly? How much less to hi^ that accepts
not the persons (...) Princes, nor regards the rich m^^^ then the poor? which
is, as if (...) should have said, It is not fit (...) tax an earthly King, and
to sa^^ to him, Thou art wicked thoug^^ he be so, and therefore mu^^ more unfit
it must needs be to accuse God wrongfully, who is higher then all Kings. The
antecedent of this Argument is contained in verse 18. the former part whereof I
have now proposed unto you; Is it fit, etc. It is delivered by way of Question,
but to make it Argumentative, it must be reduced into a Proposition. Now ye
shall observe, that negative Questions are to be reduced into affirmative
Propositions, and affirmative Questions, that is, such as have no negation in
them, into negative Propositions; as for instance Nehem. 13.26. Did not Solomon
King of Israel sin by these things? that is, he did sin by these things: So
Isai 51.9. Art thou not it that has cut Rahab, and wounded the Dragon? that
is, thou art it; And Luke 17.17. Were there not ten cleansed? that is, there
were ten, etc. the Question in all these places being negative, but the
Proposition, a^ is obvious to every common capacity, affirmative; So again y^^
shall see on the other side, Ezekiel. 1^.13. He that is a Robber a shedder ^
blood, etc. shall he live? that is, (...) shall not live, and so it is
expounded in the same place. Again, I^^ 58 5. Is it such a fast that I have
ch^sen? that is, it is not such a Fast, and The questions here being affirmtive
without a negation, but ^ every eye sees, such as ought ^ be reduced into
negative Propositions. And indeed such negati^ Propositions are uttered by w^^
of Question, because Interrogations do more veh^ment deny. Thus, I say, It is
gen^rally throughout the wh^^ Scripture. This Question th^^ in the Text being
affirmative, it^^ to be reduced into a negati^^ Proposition, Is it fit, etc.
that (...) It is not fit. Thus then ye have the sense of this Scripture. As for
dividing it into parts, I forbear, as unnecessary to our purpose. There is one
main thing in the Text, and that only I shall commend unto you, and it is
this, being, ye see, the very sense of the Text, namely,

To speak bitterly and reproachfully of supreme Authority, it is a very unfit,
unwarrantable, and unlawful thing. The words in the Original are something
defective, but that this is the sense, and that some such word, as fit, or
lawful, or the like, is to be understood and supplied, is acknowledged not
only by our Translatours, but also by Beza in his Paraphrase on this Book,
thus rendering the words, Number dicere Regi fas fuerit? and so Lavater in his
Commentary on the place; An dicere licet Regi? is it lawful to say to a King?
Mercerus, a man very (...) Suitable hereunto is that charge given by the
Preacher, Eccles. 10.20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought. Curse not,
that is, Ne verbis eleues, extenues, aeprimas, ne leviter loquaris ut d^ re
abjecta. Lorin: in Locum.
ne ver^is eleues, etc. do not with thy words lighten his esteem, extenuate or
depresse it, speak not slightingly of him as if he were of no worth. This,
says the Preacher, thou may not do, no, not in thy secret heart; how much
less may it be lawful to be done openly, and in the hearing or others? And M.
Cartwright upon this place adds, ^ex in universum vetat, ne Principi quis
maledicat. Hujus autem loci circumstantia nos eo ducit ut ue de Rege quidem
injusto, and stulte regnum procuranti ex subdi^^ quispiam maledicat. Cartw. in
Locum.
Lex in universum vetat, etc. The Law of God does forbid, That any man should
in any case speak evil o^ his Prince; and the circumstance of this place leads
us so far, that it may not be lawful for any o^ the Subjects to speak evil o^
their King, no, though he be unjust, and do but weakly govern his Kingdom. Thus
far he: And if ye look upon the coherence of the Text with the foregoing
verses, ye shall easily perceive the truth hereof. For Eccles. 10.16. Solomon
shows the misery of a Land under a bad and vicious Governor, Woe to thee, O
Land, when thy King is a child, (that is, moribus, not aetate, not in years,
but manners) and thy Princes eat in the morning; that is, are given to riot and
untimely feasting in stead of hearing and debating matters of State, This
misery of a Land (after a short touch of the contary happiness under a
gracious King, inserted ver. 17.) this misery of a Land is amplified; first, by
the effect, which is ruin of the Kingdom, verse 18. set down by comparison
with an edifice or building, which if it be neglected, (...) ledge, the Word of
God teache^ me otherwise; for it is writter Thou shall not speak evil of the
R^ler of thy People. The place (...) aims at, when he says, It is wr^^ten, is
that in Exodus fore-me^^tioned; and here, by the way, y^^ may take notice, that,
that which is there called cursing, is here called evil speaking: ye see Sai^^
Paul's Practice, ye see his Judg^ment. He will not allow himse^^ to speak one
evil word to (...) Ruler, no though he be never (...) bad, and that because of
t^^ Commandment of God. Ca^ye have any thing more plai^^ And yet hereunto
Reason al^^ might be added, if need were.

For first, consider him wi^^ reference to God; (The Ruler (...) speak of, the
supreme Rule^^ Consider him, I say, with re^^rance to God, and he is Gods
Vi^^gerent. He is the Minister of Go^^ and the powers that be, are ordained of
God, Romans 13.1.4. they bear Gods name, they sit on his throne; his name they
bear; for to them it is spoken, I have said ye are Gods, Psalm. 82.6. And on his
throne they sit, for so it is said, Solomon sat on the throne of the Lord as
King, in stead of David his Father. 1. Chron. 29.23. And can it be lawful then
to speak bitterly, or reproachfully of them whom the Lord has thus exalted?
Surely this very thing is couched in the Precept forementioned, Exodus 22.28.
Thou shall not curse the Gods; this being intimated as a reason why they may
not be evil spoken off, because they are Gods, because they bear his name, and
sit on his Throne.

Secondly, consider him with reference to us, he is our Father. Abimelech (the
signification whereof is, my Father, the King was a title commonly given to the
Kings of Palestina, but may fitly indeed belong to all Kings. For who knows
not, that understands his Catechism, that the fifth Commandment in requiring
us to honor our father, does instruct us in our duty, as well toward our
Prince that is over us, as toward our natural Father that did beget us? and
this is the title that the Scripture gives unto Kings and Queens, They are
nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers. Isa. 49.23. Now as he in the Poet spoke
of a natural Son, and his carriage toward a natural Father, so may we say
in this behalf, Terent. Heauton. Act. 1. Scen. 2.
Quem ferret, parentem si non ferret suum? With whom should we bear, if not
with our Father? Look on the carriage of Jonathan toward King Saul his
Father. 1. Sam. 20.30.34. though his Father called him Rebel, See the Marg. of
our new Translat. 1 Samuel 20.30.
perverse Rebel, nay, Son of perverse Rebellion; that is, one wholly given to
rebel against him, and thereupon also cast a Javelin at him, yet ye shall not
find one evil word replied by Jonathan. Nay, and that all the world may know
that Jonathan continued in his duty and allegiance toward Saul, notwithstanding
all the harsh and cruel dealing of King Saul showed toward him, it is
recorded by the Holy Ghost, at the death of them both, that Saul and Jonathan
were lovely and pleasant in their Lives, and in their Death they were not
divided. Nothing could put Jonathan from his Duty and Faithfulness to a
Father, 2 Samuel 1.23. In a word what shall become of him, that will speak evil
of a Father; the Wiseman shows, The eye that mocketh his Father, etc. The
Ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and (...) young Eagles shall eat it,
Pro. 30.^^

Thirdly, and lastly, Consider the mischief that will fo^low, if Sovereign
authority b^ once made vile. Drus. Apophth. lib. 1.
Nisi esset me^^ regni, said Rabbi Hananiah, alt^^ alterum vivum devoraret. L^^
fear of authority be laid aside which must needs be when it ^^ made vile, and
confusion suddenly must be expected. It is wort^^ your noting that you read
Josh. ^^14. The Lord magnified Joshua in th^^ sight of all Israel, and they
feare^^ him. The wise God knows, tha^ authority the more it is honored, the
more also it is awed and reverenced by the people; and therefore did he
magnify Ioshu^ in the sight of all Israel, and the effect was answerable, they
feared him indeed. To the like purpose ye find, that after Saul had ^^mmitted
that great sin in sparing Agag the King of the Amalekites and the cattle, and
had therefore sharply been reproved by Samuel the Prophet, Saul at length
making some confession of his sin, and desiring the Prophet to go with him to
worship the Lord, though Samuel at the first refused, saying, I will not return
with thee, for thou have rejected the word of the Lord, and the Lord has
rejected thee, etc. yet upon a second request, when Saul says to him, yet
honor me now, I ^ray thee, before the Elders of my people, and before Israel;
Samuel now for the Common peace and public good, and to prevent the langerous
mischiefs that might ensue, if Sovereign authority, by such a man as he was,
should ^^^m in any measure to be slighted or dis-regarded, he does yield to the
Kings desire to honor him before the people, and turned again after Saul, 1 Samuel 15.25, 20, 30, 31.

Well then, these premises considered, that is, the charge and Commandment of
God more then once given, Saint Pau^^ judgment in the point, and practice
answerable, with these reasons out of Scripture thus manifested, we may well
infer thi^ conclusion, surely, It is not fit (...) say to a King, thou are
wicked; or (...) you will give me leave, from In his Comment on the Text.
L^v^ter a judicious and piou^ expositour, to borrow a few words, thus we may
express i^ sapiens and mentis compos non facildices Regi suo, etc. S. Hierom
also does count it a kind of madness. Simplex praeceptum aedificat audientes,
ne ira and fur^re superati in miledictum and in detractionem Regum and
Principum prorumpamus. Hieronym. in Eccles. 10.20.
A wise m^ and one that is well in his wits wi^^ not easily utter bitter, and
reproachful speeches concerning his King, the Lords anointed.

First then, to apply it, this may Lesson us of the Clergy, not to bring such
maledictions with us into the Pulpit; such evil speeches concerning supreme
Authority, neither directly nor indirectly. A naughty person, says Solomon,
winketh with his eyes, he speaks with his feet, he teaches with his fingers.
Prove. 6.12, 13. that is, by very nods and signs, he will make the bitterness
of his mind understood; but much more powerful are his words, though they be
but even indirect Glances. Oh how many young Divines have we, (I will not say
Cicer. de senectute.
Prodierunt Oratores novi, etc.) how many young Divines have we in these days,
that choose for the Pulpit such Theams, and frame for their Auditory such (...)
lumniate the doings of a Prince (...) De peccatis Principum apud plebem
conqucri, est seditionum Semina jacere, says Wolph. in 2 King. 12.7. fol. 291.
Tigur: excus. per Christoph. Froschon. Anno 1566.
Wolphius a Learned Divine, and Civilian both. To complain unto the People of
the Princes errors, is nothing else but to sow the seeds of sedition.

And Melancthon, that famous and Learned Divine, that was so great an assistant
unto Luther in the Reformation, does within the compass of two or three pages
in Octavo, no less then three several times, speaking of the Magistrate,
declare his judgment in this behalf. Scholia Phil: Melanct: in Coloss. cap. 2.
propefinem. extant Phil: Mel: and Scholia in Epist: ad Col^ss. and enarratio
Epist: ad Col.
Non minim^ part est honoris, errata little nostr^ Patientia tegere, sicut filii
Noae majores natu tegebant Patrem. It is n^^ little part of honor (says he,
speaking of the honor due to Magistrates) to cover their errour^ by our
Patience, as the elder So^^ of Noah did hide their Father^ nakedness; and
again a little after, Nihil est vulgarius quam de Magistratibus queri,
beneficia quae per illos accipimus nemo intelligit, vitia omnes vident, alius
negligentiam, alius saevitiam accusat, quemadmodum calumniabatur Patrem
Absolon. ibid.
Nihil est vulgarius quam de Magistratibus queri, etc. Nothing is more common,
then to complain of Magistrates; the Benefits we receive by them, no Man does
consider, their vices all Men behold; one Man accuses their negligence,
another their cruelty, even as Absalom did calumniate his Father. At ejusmodi
Querelas prohibet Scripturae, cum Inquit, Principi populi tui non maleledices.
But such complaints, says he, the Scripture does forbid, when it says, thou
shall not curse the Ruler of thy People. And yet again a little after, neque
vero est volunt as Dei ut criminatione aut seditionibus torum vitia emendentur;
It is not the will of God that either by crimination or sedition, we should go
about to amend their errors; thus he: And if this be a course universally
unwarrantable, how much less fit is it for Ministers and (...) thereunto
called. So did Elij^^ deal with Ahab. 1 King. 18.1^ and 21, 20. So did Azariah
t^^ Priest with King Vzziah, it p^^ taineth not to thee, etc. 2 Chr. 2^ 18. and
John the Baptist with Her^^ It is not lawful for thee to have (...) Brothers
wife, Mark. 6.18. A^^ if the Preachers at the Court o^^ any way fail, as
occasion shall (...) quire, to do their duty in this Behalf, they must expect
to gives account thereof unto Almigh^ God. But in the Kings absen^^ unto his
Subjects, behind h^ back, as the saying is, to spe^^ evil of him, this cannot
go for^ reproof, this can neither info^^ him, nor reform him, nor a^^ way tend
to his amendment, (...) is a mere reproach and calum^tion. Give me a Prophet,
(...) example of one Prophet, that (...) ever before the people reprehe^^ the
errors of a Magistrate the Magistrates absence, but only so far as the people
were involved in those errors, and became guilty by obeying their sinful
commands. Thus the Prophet Micha, cap. 6. when he says, verse. 16. A Scripture
much insisted on to countenance disobedience; though the Prophet does not
reprove them for passive obedience; neither have we (God be thanked) an Omri to
Reign over us.
The statutes of Omri are kept, does not so much blame the Prince for making
those Statutes, as the People for keeping of them: But give me a Prophet that
ever did to the people declaim of the errors of his Sovereign, as they were
simply his own errors. I will give you a Son of Belial that did so, that is,
Absalon, who slandered his Father, and spoke evil of his Government in his
Fathers absence; there is no man deputed of the King to hear thee, said he, 2 Samuel 16.3. ^ay, I will give you a Prophet and a Prophetess that did so too;
but whether they did well, or whether it be safe to tread in their stepps,
judge ye. Miriam (...) that Miriam who seems to have been chief in the
transgression, (for though she were but the sister, yet she is mentioned in the
first place, and set before Aaron the brother, ibid. verse. 1.) she, (...) say,
for this offense is smitten with leprosy, and though Moses himself did most
earnestly make intercession unto the Lord for her, yet could he not wholly take
of the punishment; for seven days at least she must endure the leprosy, and
be shut out of the Camp, ibid. verse. 10 -- 15. Let them that like the reward,
if they think good, follow the example.

True indeed, ye shall find sometimes how the Saints, especially in the
Psalms, do complain^ and make their moan unto th^^ Almighty God, concerning the
tyrany of ungodly Rulers, as, A Scripture that was likewise abused to disquiet
the people, though the Psalmist there speaks not of his own Sovereign.
Psalm. 2.2. The Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel
together against the Lord, and against his Anointed; and The seditious handling
of which words gave occasion to this Sermon.
shall the throne of iniquity have any fellowship with thee, which frames
mischief by a Law? Psalm. 94.20. Many other places might be mentioned of the
like nature, but generally ye shall observe, those complaints were made to God,
not to the People. David that goes by common repute for the Author of the Book
of Psalms, and was indeed the Author of the greatest part of them, though in
many places he complains unto the Lord of Saul's cruel dealing with him, yet
thereby to dishonor, and vilify King Saul before his subjects, this surely
was far from him; for look into the story, in the first Book of Samuel, and
there ye shall not find so much as one evil word uttered by David concerning
Saul, no not to his own dearest friends (...) thered, promising withal to gi^^
him Merab his elder daughter (...) wife, which yet as appears, h^^ had no
purpose ever to pe^^ form; the Gibeonites he slew co^^ trary to Public Oath,
and (...) Less then fourscore and five o^^ the Lords Priests did he cause
(...) one time barbarously to be m^^ thered, 1 Samuel 22.18. upon h^^ servants
did he bestow oth^^ men's fields and vineyards, 1 Sa^^ 22.7. as it was foretold
the (...) raelites before hand, should b^^ fall them by the King who^^ they
desired to have over the^^ 1 Samuel 8.14. he consulted wi^^ Witches, and many
other (...) besides was he guilty of; for (...) evil spirit was upon him, and
(...) must needs go whom the De^^ drives; and yet notwithstanding all this, in
that Epitaph or Fun^^ rall Elegy, David does not (...) much as touch upon any
one (...) his vices, only he takes notice of the good things that were in him,
and commemorates the happiness they enjoyed under him. Look upon the very
entrance of the Song, and thus it begins, The beauty of Israel is slain, 2 Samuel
1.19. this glorious title he gives unto Saul, because he was King, as bad as
he was; The Beauty of Israel: after this he proceeds to speak of his valor,
and other virtues, the sword of Saul returned not empty. etc. ibid. verse. 22,
23. and then at length he comes to the happiness the people lived in under his
Government; ye daughters of Israel, weep over Saul who ^athed you in Scarlet
with other ^^lights, who put on ornaments of ^^ld upon your apparel, verse. 24.
they for the general did live happily under him, though some few and endured
hard measure from him: and thus David ye see, when he has occasion unto the
people to speak of their Sovereign, he hides his vices, h^ commends unto them
his virtues; this becomes Prophets (...) Let us take him for our pattern.

I meddle not with that unhappy Difference between H^^ Majesty and So it was
then accounted among us.
His Parliament a business I tremble to think on^^ only my Prayers are, that
th^^ Most High God, the God o^^ Peace, who makes War t^^ cease, when he
pleases, in all th^^ world, would of his great mer^^ find out some
Reconciliation (...) and cause this unnaturali War^ cease, and settle once
again Pea^^ in our Borders; but this we ma^^^ observe in the language of th^^
Honorable House, they are mo^^ sparing of His Majesty then many particular men
of mean cordition. They charge His Majesty's evil Counselors, they seldom
ascend so high as to touch the Throne; but however, though This was spoken not
to justify the one, but to convince the other.
sometimes they do, yet who knows not what a vast difference there is between
that which goes for the whole representative Body of the Kingdom, and one
single private man? tibi privato ne mutire quidem concessum est. It is not
lawful for thee a private man so much as to open thy lips; says Cartwright on
E cles. 10.20. and he was wont to be of some esteem among us; and therefore let
that of Saint Jude forementioned ever be remembered by us, that for Seducers and
false-teachers by the Holy Ghost they are all esteemed, that despise Dominion
and speak evil of Dignities, that is, of the persons of those that are in
authority, as by the instance of Michael and the Devil in the next verse there
(...) extraordinary sins, for he did that which was evil in the sight of the
Lord his God, and humble^^ not himself before Jeremiah the Prophet speaking
from the Mouth of the Lord; and he also He was not then the supreme Magistrate,
but a Rebel against his Sovereign and had broken his oath of Allegiance, Ezekiel.
17.15, 16, 18.
rebelled against King Nebuchadnezzar who had made him swear by God, but he
stiffened his neck and hardened his heart from turning unto the Lord God of
Israel, 2 Chronicles. 36.12, 13. these were heinous sins, and therefore was the
Prophet Ezekiel extraordinarily stirred up by the Spirit of the Lord to give
him such an unusual sharp reproof

2. For the absence, he was a state-Preacher, and directed his Speech to the
King, and sent it from Babylon to Jerusalem by the Ambassadors, that were
Jer. 29.3.
come thither from Zedekiah; and so it was all one a^^ if he had delivered it
in presence before the King.

To the second, concerning that of our Savior to Herod, I likewise answer,

1. The Pharisees came to our Savior like Foxes and abused Herod's name, (as
the Kings name is sometimes falsely pretended) get thee out, say they, and
depart hence, for Herod will kill thee, Luke 13.31. this was a mere forgery of
theirs, for Herod had no such purpose, he being glad, as is mentioned
afterward, that he had an opportunity to see our Savior, whereof he had had a
desire a long season, Luke 23.8. and therefore it is conceived by Theophylact
and Euthymius, that our Savior directs his Speech to the Pharisees here
present, not to Herod; and that so much the rather, because (...) our own; and
He that goes about to persuade a multitude that they are not so well governed
as they ought to be, shall never want attentive and favorable heare^s. Hooker.
Eccles. Polit. lib. 1. the very first words.
nothing does please better in these days then bitter invectives against
miscarriages of Authority, and I will show you some reason for what I say,

1. The great concourse and flocking to such Preachers, from whom such
discourses are expected.

2. The diligent attention given to them; while Christian Duties are Preached,
that tend to salvation of Souls, how do some willingly give themselves to
sleep? how do others o^ the female sex especially, play with their Children?
but le^ there be some Bitter discourse against Sovereign Authority how do they
shake off all Drowsinesse? not suffer their Children to Quap? and lister with
all the best attention that possibly they can afford?

3. The applause that is given after such a discourse has been heard: An
excellent man, an admirable Sermon, sweet matter, would we might have more of
it; it was but too short, etc.

I cannot here but remember that of De Tranquil. anim. cap. 2.
Seneca, sunt ulcera quaedam quae nocituras manus appetunt. Some kind of
itching ulcers there are that love to be rubbed, when yet by the rubbing the
disease is increased. Such an itching ulcer there is in the ear of many
hearers of this kind, they love to hear of the failings of superior powers,
and the more they hear, the worse they are; the more does disloyalty and
forgetfulness of duty creep into their hearts. But, Beloved, let me put you in
mind of that of our Savior. Mark. 4.24. Take heed what ye hear, and Luk
8.18. Take heed how ye hear. First, be not desirous to hear that which is not
fit to be spoken, take heed what ye hear; o^ if unexpectedly ye do hear such
things, yet hear it not with delight, Take heed how ye hear; ye^ shall give an
acount of you^^ hearing, both what, and how ye^ have heard. This ye know, that
he who receives an evil repor^ against his Brother, his Equal, i^ not fitly
qualified to be reckoned among Detrahere, aut detrahentem audire, quid horum
damnabilius sit, non facile dixerim. Bernard. de Considerat. lib. 2. prope
f^^^m.
the Citizens of Zion. Psalm. 15.1.3. how much less he that receives a reproach
against his Superior, his Sovereign? and therefore stop your ears, take no
delight in hearing such contumelies against Authority; and surely, this will be
one means to further Peace. It is to be feared in this great difference there
are fomenters o^ both sides; There may be such on the Kings side, and how they
^re censured, that stir up the Kings of the earth to war, ye may ^ee, Revel.
16.13. unclean spirits like unto Froggs. Spirits, because by Profession,
spiritual; unclean, Because of their unwarrantable Practice; like Froggs,
because of their clamorous Loquacity; such (...) say, there may be on the Kings
side, and it is too evident there are those that stir up the People on the
other side, and why they may not receive the same censure I know not; but this
I ^m sure of, the withdrawing the ^are from such Preachers, is the way to make
contention cease, Take away the fuel and the fire goes out, Prove. 26.20.

Well, this is the first thing concerning the people, that they take no delight
in hearing such discourses.

The second is, that they take no liberty to vent concerning the King, evil
and dishonourabl^ speeches themselves. The argument in this case holds goo^
also; he that backbiteth h^ equal, shall be no Citizen o^^ Zion. Psalm. 15. how
much le^^ he that backbiteth or speake^^ evil of his Prince? A strang^
pronesse there is in our corrup^^ nature, if we conceive our selve^^ a little
wronged; or that we can not obtain things according (...) our mind, presently
to let loo^^ our tongues even against our betters, and not to spare Suprea^
Authority it self; nay, too ready hereunto some be, though the^^ be no cause
given them; such one was Shimei, who railed so bitterly on King David, Come out
come out, thou Bloody man, and the man of Belial, 1 Samuel 16.7. Davi^ had done
no wrong to him, only he took advantage of the times which then did favor
every on^ that was David's Enemy, and some wrong he conceived had ^een done by
David to his Cousin ^ing Saul; but mark what became of this man that so
inveigh^d against the King: David (...) deed pardoned him, 2 Samuel 19.^3. but by
the just hand and Pro^^dence of God he was brought to (...) Malefactors end, 1
King. 2.^6. ye know that of the wise ^an, The wrath of a King is as ^essengers
of Death, Prove. 16.14. ^^d whosoever provokes him to anger ^inneth against his own
soul, Prove. ^0.2. surely David had just cause to be wroth with Shimei, for
though he had unjustly shed some ^^nocent blood, yet he ought not still, and by
every one to be up^raided with it, and therefore though David pardoned him, yet
God made that wrath which David had so just a cause to conceive, to become as
Messengers of death unto him; and will not the Lord still make his own words
good? has he said, the wrath of a King is as Messengers o^ Death, and shall it
not be so? think upon that of our Savior, Heaven and earth shall pass away,
but my words shall not pass away, Matth^ 24.35. no, not one jot, or tittle
(...) it, but shall all be fulfilled, Matth^ 5.18. and therefore delight no^ to
hear, be not ready to spea^ any evil of the King, for a Brid of the air shall
carry the Voice, and that which has wings shall tell the matter, Eccles.
10.20. Such wa^ their care in those days, they durst not As is employed by
forbidding it to be done in the thought or bedchamber, in that Eccles. 10.20.
openly speak evil o^ the King: But see, strange way^ the Lord has to bring
this sin t^ light, though it be never so secret; and strange ways also (...)
has to bring it to punishment even when the King has As in that instance of
Shimei.
pardoned it.

Well then, to conclude; let us all both of Clergy and Laity, be careful to
observe that counsel, and to practice that Duty commended to us by the
Apostle, Fear God, Honor the King, 1 Pet. 2.17. Render unto Caesar the things
that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods, says our Savior,
Matthew. 22.21. Nay, we render not unto God the things that are Gods, unless for
his sake we render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's; and therefore let
Caesar have our honor and Reference, yea though in every point perhaps he may
not be such as we would have him to ^e. Si Magistrorum vita jure re^rehenditur,
oportet ut cos subditi ^iam cum displicent, venerentur, ^reg. Moral. lib. 25.
cap. 22. for Magistrorum put Magistratuum, and it will hold more strongly:
(...) the life of the Magistrate deserve justly to be blamed, yet ought he by
his Subjects, even when he please them not, still to be honored. We justly cry
out upon the Papists for abolishing the second, upon the Libertines for
nullifying the fourth; let us take heed, we be not guilty of the same sin in
making void the fifth commandment. Have there been any mistakes in our Dread
Sovereign, as there is no man living free from errors (and yet be certain
Relation of those that have well observed him, he is a Pattern of Piety to
those that are about him; but I say) have there been any? are there yet any
why, yet do not thou falie like wise to do thy Duty; Three things belong to
thee in this Behalf,

1. Pity him. Though we may deceive our selves in our own mis-apprehensions too
for who knows the Kings heart? and the best construction that may be, we ought
to make of every man's actions, much more of the Princes. But be it so, that
there be indeed real errors, yet thy duty is to pity him, not to revile him;
thou know not what strong temptations he has to wrestle with, Drus. Apoph.
lib. 1.
socium tuum priusquam ad locum ejus adveneris, ne judicato, said Rabbi Hillel.
Censure not thy Brother (much less thy Father) till thou have stood in his
place, and have tried the difficulties of his standing. The secret lets and
difficulties which in public proceedings are innumerable and inevitable, they
(meaning the multitude) have not ordinarily the judgment to consider, Hooker,
ubi supra.
High places are slippery places, and were it not (...) sion an happy
continuance o^ several gracious Princes, and for many years we have lived
under them in much happiness and prosperity no^ to be paralleld in other ages^
or by other nations. Deuteronomy. 32.15.
But I^^ surun waxed fat and kicked; ou^ long peace and great plenty has begot
abundance o^ pride, wantonness, excess, security, and other abominable
impieties: for these sins Go^ has a controversy with us (...) and through the
anger of God upon us for these sins have we not cause to believe that some
errors in Government may have been committed for our punishment? Oh, therefore
let us judge our selves, not speak evil of the King; let us condemn our
selves, not calumniate the Lords Anointed. If there be any thing amiss in him,
we have cause to suspect it is through our own default; and if there be any
thing we would desire should be reformed in him, it is to be done by our
Prayers, not by our criminations; by the amendment and Reformation of our own
ways, not by the malevolence and bitterness of our Tongues.

These things, Beloved, belong unto us. Let us 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.
study to be Quiet and do our own Business, namely ^^ose Duties that do
concern our ^elves; Let us not be Eagle-eyed broad, especially above us, and
^ot discern what faults there areat ^ome; Let no evil words against ^overaign
Authority upon any ^ther suspected or known error ^^op from thee, seeing by
that very act thou do attract upon ^^y Soul that very thing which (...)
eagerly thou reprehendest,

(...) A Corollarie that was not then delivered, but now added.
IF it be so unlawful to say to a King, thou art wicked, that is, to smite him
with the tongue; how is it much more unlawful to strike him with a sword or
bullet, or to take up Arms against him? With this Controversy indeed I meddled
not when the Sermon was Preached, but obvious it is to every mean
understanding, that of necessity this must follow.
The consequence is unavoidable; for as bitter words outwardly expressed are
sins of a higher nature then rash anger inwardly conceived, Matthew. 5.22. so are
bloody actions of the hand sins of a deeper die then malevolent speeches and
bitter words of the tongue. Saint Paul did indeed confess his error when in
words he had abused the High Priest; but when David by an injurious action had
wronged King Saul, the text says, his heart smote him, as intimating a more
then ordinary measure of sorrow for what he had done, 1 Samuel 24.5. and worth
your noting it is, that David there had but cut off a lap of the King^ Robe,
which a man would have thought had been no great injury^ and if for this David's
heart smot^ him, Oh! how would his hear^ have ak't, how would it have bled
within him, if he had offered any little violence to the Kings person? And
further it i^ to be taken into consideration that Saul at that time 1 Samuel
15.26.
was rejected from being King, 1 Samuel 16.12, 13.
David was chosen and anointed to b^ King in his stead; nay, and more the
hearts of the whole Kingdom were with David, both of the Country and of the
Court too for the Text tells us, that 1 Samuel 18.5.
he was accepted in the sight of all the people, and also in the sight of Saul's
servants: and again, ibid. v. 16.
all Israel and Judah loved David, and yet again, ibid. v. 30.
his name was much set by; so that we may justly say, That not only the
representative body, but the whole Kingdom it self were with David. Now lay all
these things together and see if there can possibly any fairer co^our be
imagined for rising up against any Prince then was here against Saul; so bad
and eminently vicious was he, that he was rejected of God, and (as we may
justly For known it was that David was designed to be his successor 1 Samuel
25.30.
conceive) publicly known so ^o be, Another chosen and anointed of God to
succeed him, the hearts and votes of the whole Kingdom likewise following and
applauding him, and yet so far is David from striking the King, that he does
not only prohibit (...) peoples hearts not only (...) Such as openly reprove
supposed disorders of state are taken for principal friends to the common
benefit of all Hooker, ubi supra.
think well, but also obstinately to persist in their good thought of them that
seditiously oppose Authority. Look upon that story, Numb. 16. Korah and those
rebellious Princes that were with him had not a few, but all the congregation
on their side, ver. 1^ and though the Lord made a new thing, and commanded the
earth to open her mouth and swallow up the Rebels and their houses, and after
that caused a fire to break out, that consumed two hundred and fifty more of
the same crew; yet on the very next morrow all the Congregation o^ the children
of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron^ saying, ye have And so now
they cry out, the Children of God are persecuted.
killed the people of the Lord, Numb. 16.41. so strongly opinionated were they
concerning the worth of Korah and his Accomplices; but let it not (...) so with
us, let us not be like unto these obstinate Israelites; ^umanum est errare,
incident it is ^o all mankind to err and be deceived, but wilfully and
desperately to persist in an error, this ^s scarce humanum, I forbear to
mention to whom this belongs.

Neither let any man say, we ^^e not yet convinced, and how ^hen shall we
change our minds ^or alter our course? Why, does not that which has been
spoken, convince thee of the unlawfulness of disloyal words? and if so, thou
can not but acknowledge much more the sinfulness of disloyal actions. But
yet a little more to further thy delivery out of this snare, give me leave, Oh
(...) pressed in many parts of divine Writ both of the old and new Testament;
as for instance, a plain precept, My son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and
meddle not with them that are given to change. For their calamity shall rise
suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both? Prove. 24.21, 22. Again,
another as plain and powerful, I counsel thee to keep the Kings commandment,
and that in regard of the oath of God. Be not hasty to go out of his sight:
stand not in an evil thing, for he does whatsoever pleases him. Where the
word of a King is there is power, and who may say unto him what do thou?
Eccles. 8.2, 3, 4. What need I mention that famous place, too plain to be
evaded, Let every soul be subject to the Higher powers: for there is no power
but of God. The powers that be are ordained of God, whosoever therefore
resists the power, resists the ordinance of God: and they that resist shall
receive to themselves damnation. Romans 13.1, 2. Lastly, to mention no more,
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be
to the King as su^ream, or unto Governors, as unto them, that are sent by him.
1 Pet. 2.13, 14. In all these Scriptures and many more that might be produced,
obedience to Sovereign Authority is plainly and expressly required, and in all
this we know, God speaks, and therefore we cannot be deceived.

On the other side, they that plead for the taking up of Arms, to stop the
mouth and stifle the sense of all these Scriptures, and to avoid the duty
therein required, they bring strange glosses, As between the man and the
Magistrate; between the Kings Person and His power etc. such a distinction did
the Jews use when they went about to stone our Savior, for a good work we
stone thee not. Ioh. 10.33.
newfound distinctions, and farfetcht expositions, but in all this

(...) 1. If the Jews had no such Privileges, how comes it to pass that we
should have any? were the Contrivers of our Government wiser then the Almighty
that Constituted theirs? Indeed it is true the Jews sinned in desiring a Kingly
Government over them, yet it is evident that the Almighty had a purpose before
hand to settle them into a Monarchy. The promise was long before made unto
Abraham, Genesis 17.6.
Kings shall come out of thee, which promise was principally to be fulfilled in
Isaac's seed; and therefore though the people sinned in asking a King, yet it
cannot be conceived that the Almighty in bringing his own purpose to pass,
would make it the less beneficial to them (for what if some did not believe?
Jacob used unwarrantable means in obtaining the blessing; yet forasmuch as the
Lord had before hand purposed that Jacob should have it, it was established
upon him in as ample manner as if he had not sinned in obtaining of it, Genesis 27.
shall their unbelief make the faith of God without effect? Romans 3.3.) or that
he would neglect in that government which himself framed, to make such
provision as might best secure the honor of his own name, the purity of his
worship, and the safety of his people from the tyranny of back sliding Princes;
surely, if the Lord in his wisdom had foreseen such a power in the people to
have been the best means to prevent the mischiefs that might have befallen that
nation, it cannot be conceived, he would have withheld, or have kept it from
them; and if he saw it not to be good for (...) and such an absolute Conqueror
did he show himself, even over our very Laws, that he made the Laws themselves
to learn another language, speaking in the Saxon tongue before, but ever since
in the French dialect. Some immunities and privileges were afterward by some
of his Successors granted to their Subjects; but a power to take up Arms
against themselves did never any of them grant. Indeed if both Houses in their
full number had unanimously agreed touching the real being of such a
Constitution; it would have caused some doubt in the hearts even of those who
of themselves had little inclination to believe it: but now when we see the
Houses in this Cause deserted by the greatest part of their own Members, what
can we imagine, but that by their departing, they disavow the thought of such a
Constitution?

4. If there were any such Constitution of our State, why should it now be put
in execution, when His Majesty has promised, and that with so many solemn
Vows, to maintain our Religion, and to preserve both our Laws and Liberties?
Nay, if there were any such secret Constitution of the State, does either it,
or any Law of necessity enable a wilful heady Party under pretense of
opposing innovation, by tyranny and assistance of a foreign Power, to change
the known Constitution of the State, and to introduce a foreign Government? If
Pareus himself were (...) Whether therefore we look upon the King, or whether
we look upon the Kings opposites, there is no need that this Constitution (if
any suc^ thing there be) should now be put in execution. If w^ look on the
King, he vows t^ preserve our Religion, Laws and Liberties; if we look o^ the
Kings Opposites, there i^ nothing can justly enable them to change that
Government that is not absolutely evil, and wherein Christian souls may
undoubtedly be saved: and why then is the sword unsheathed against him, to whom
properly i^ belongs to bear the sword^ If happiness here, and heaven hereafter
may be had without the sword, to whom may we think shall all these rivers of
Christian blood now shed, be imputed at that great and dreadful day?

See then, is not here enough to convince us of the unlawfulness of bearing
Arms against our lawful Sovereign? The Scripture does by the mouth of many
witnesses most plainly forbid it; there is nothing but strained
interpretations, and an imagina^ie Constitution left to warrant (...). And are
not these poor and ^^eak grounds for a Christian to ^enture his soul upon?

Yet one thing more there is, ^hereat many I know do stumble, and that is, the
multitude of so many judicious and godly men that walk that way; and surely
this must needs be acknowledged (...) be the principal part of the ^eavy
judgment that is upon us at this day, the strange division that is among us,
and that so great a number of able men (...) l^sse then And these two hundred
and fifty drew the whole Congregation after them.
two hundred and fif ^^ consumed by fire; such was the^^ number: and for their
eminency th^^ Text tells us, that they were famous in the congregation; Nay,
(...) is doubled, that we might tak^^ the more notice of it, men of renown.
Numb. 16.2. and if w^ look on Numb. 26.9. we shall find the Holy Ghost
speaking o^ some of them with an Emphasis. This is that Dathan and Abiram which
were famous in the Congregation; and for what were they so famous and renowned?
Was it not for their Religion and Piety, that is, for the external show of it
at least? do not the words of the Congregation intimate so much unto us,
calling them (...) Gods People, when they murmured against Moses and Aaron
saying, ye have killed the People of the Lord? well, as many as they were, and
as famously pious as they were, they were in (...) foul fault, and in terrorem
for ^ll future Ages, they received a ^^arfull punishment. I write not ^his to
cast an aspersion upon ^eligion, better it were my pen should cleave to my
fingers, but ^a^tly to warn us, That the con^ert of our religion draw us not
in^o the like transgression (for pride and self-conceit, as appears in the ^^me
Out of their pride they told Moses and Aaron, they took too much upon them.
instance, Numb. 16.3. are ^^incipall actors in sedition and (...) bellion) and
partly to show ^ow little cause we have to be ^wayed even by religious
mul^itudes, there being in them no ^^fallibility, though they be never ^o
famous for the profession of Piety.

And therefore if we have been deceived, let us yet return to our duty again.
It is good counsel given by Elephaz, Job. 15.31. Let not him that is deceived
trust in vanity; that which is our errou^ let it not be our 'Twas so with
Dathan and Abiram, their cause was bad, but their confidence was wonderful and
that even unto death. Numb. 26.27.
confidence; tha^ which is our sin, let it not be (...) steemed as the
principal part (...) our sincerity. Let us not preten^^ that we take up Arms
for th^^ Lord Jesus Christ; he is not wi^ling thus to be defended, he Matthew.
26.52.
rebuked Peter for drawing hi^ sword in his defense, and adde^ further a
general commination^ all they that take the sword, meaning against the
Magistrate, shall perish with the sword, Matthew. 26.52. And certainly if we look
over Histories, we shall find the event of things to have been agreeable to
this commination, even in all ages. Unnecessary Wars have seldom good
success, especially those that are taken up by Subjects against their
Sovereigns; They may prosper for a while, but the end is seldom blessed. See
what examples the Scripture it self does furnish us withal. The Sodomites
rebelled against Chedorlaomer and were taken cap^ive, Genesis 14. Zedekiah
rebelled against Nebuchadnezzar and be^des many other miseries, 2 King. 25.
had ^is eyes put out. 2 Samuel 18.
The confusion ^f Korah and his associates was ^entioned before. 2 Samuel 20.
And did not (...) Alsalon likewise come to a ^olefull end? Did it go well with
(...) Sheba or 1 King. 1. and 2.
Adonijah? had (...) Zimri peace? The Act. 5.36, 37. and 21.38. Joseph: Antiq:
Iudaic: lib. 18. cap. 1.
2 King. 9.31.
Gaulonites (...) Galibaeans that among the Ie^es ^ere so rebellious against
the ^^man Emperors, how many ^ultitudes of them came to an ^^timely death? and
among the ^^st some of them being at their ^^votion, Pilate came upon them ^^d
mingled their blood with ^^eir sacrifice, Luke 13.1. And ^^e Jews universally,
when uni^^rsally they Joseph: de bello Iudaic: lib. 2. cap. 17. etc.
rebelled against (...) Romans, they were wholly ruined and the N^tion rooted
out and scattered all the world over. Nay, there is a worse thing yet behind,
the Apostle tells us that they I^de v. 8.11.
who despise dominion and speak evil of dignities (being verse. 16.
murmurers and ^omplainers, that is, ambitiously factious, verse. 19
seperating themselves, as he there does further describe them) their doom is
to Though all Magistrates be not immediately by God himself set up, as Mos^s
and Aaron were, yet they that rise up against them, involve themselves in
Korahs sin, and draw upon themselves Korahs punishment, as in this place o^ the
Apostle appears.
perish in the gainsaying of Core, that is they immitate him in their sin, and
they shall partake with him in the condemnation. And yet once again to descend
as low as to words and speeches, the Israelites did but question with
themselves how King Saul could save them, and thereupon omitted to being
presents unto him, and this very thing was imputed unto them as a heinous
transgression, and themselves reputed for it no better then the Children of
Belial. 1 Samuel 10.27.

But on the other side, see what blessings God has in store for those, who in
all lawful things yield obedience to those that are over them The fifth Ephesians.
6.2.
Commandment is a Commandment with promise; the blessing of long life is
promised to them that keep it: And the Preacher tells us, that Eccles. 8.5.
whosoever keeps the commandment (speaking of the Kings commandment shall feel
no evil thing. A most notable example of Gods singular favor toward them
that are obedient in this kind, we may see in the Rechabites Ier. 25.18, 19.
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the (...) Here Is the lively Character of cursed
sedition, new Captains to lead them, and a merciless d^aling with all those
that dare gainsay or oppose them; yea though (...) be done never so sweetly
with most friendly advice, and most Christian Counsel for their own good. In
the relation of this mutiny it is said of Caleb, that he had another spirit
with him, verse. 24. He was not like to this seditious company; for he stilled
the people before Moses, cap. 13.30. And when he saw their Rebellion, he rent
his clothes, and spoke to all the company to dissuade them, though it were to
the hazard of his life cap. 14 6, 7, etc. Now behold th^^ reward both of the
one and o^ the other. All the seditious multitude are excluded, and Caleb only
with Joshua, who joined with him, are admitted into the Land of Canaan: And yet
that i^ not all, it was no little comfort and happiness, besides all this unto
Caleb, that the Lord was so graciously pleased to honor him with that high
title of being his servant, and with that singular commendations of having
another spirit; But my Servant Caleb had another spirit with him (and has
followed me fully) him will I bring into the land, where into he went, and his
seed shall possessent, v. 24. Thus were Caleb and Joshua (for that which is
spoken of one, is to be understood of both, as appears, Numb. 14.6, 7. and
32.12.) thus, I say, were they rewarded for their peaceable, quiet, and
dutiful behavior toward their superiors. I will add but one instance more,
and that is the Children of those seditious parents, that were kept out of the
Land of Canaan; they taking warning by the example of their Fathers, promised
better

(...)
