A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION UPON The four Evangelists, AND The ACTS of the
APOSTLES:

Wherein the Text is explained, some Controversies are discussed, diverse common
places are handled, and many remarkable matters hinted, that had by former
Interpreters been pretermitted.

Besides, diverse other Texts of Scripture which occasionally occur are fully
opened, and the whole so intermixed with pertinent histories, as will yield
both pleasure and profit to the judicious Reader.

By John Trapp M. A. Pastor of Weston upon Avon in Glocestershire.

Phil 1. 21. Only let your conversations be as becomes the Gospel of Christ.
Profecto aut hoc non est Evangelium, aut nos non sumus Evangelici. Thomas
Linaker Anglus. Athenienses, cum haberent aequissima jura, sed iniquissima
ingenia: moribus suis, quam legibus uti mallent. Valor. Maximus. LONDON,
Printed by A. M. for John Bellamie, at the Sign of the three golden-Lions near
the Royall-Exchange, M.DC.XLVII.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL His much honored Friend Colonel JOHN BRIDGES, Governor
of Warwick-Castle, Justice of Peace for the County of Warwick, and one of the
Honorable Committee for the Safety of that County.
Worthy Sir,
THis book of mine does at once both crave and claim Your Patronage, for I
cannot bethink me of any one that (all things considered) has better right to
it (...) me, then Yourself. I must never (...), how that being carried prisoner
by the enemies, You soon set me off by exchange: and after that, being by them
driven from house and home, You received me to harbor; yea, being driven out
of one Pulpit (where they thought to have surprised me) You presently put me
into another, where I had a comfortable imploiment, and a competent
encouragement. What hours I could then well spare from that pensum diurnum, of
praying and preaching, I gladly spent in these Notes upon the New (...).
Testament: as hating with the Athenians, (...), (...)
a fruttlesse feriation; and holding with Cato, that account must be given, not
of our labor only, but of our leisure also. For that two-years-space
(well-nigh) that I lived in Your Garrison, I think I may truly say with Seneca,
(...). epist.
(...) per otium exiit dies, partem etiam noctium studys vendicavi, that I
labored night and day (amidst many fears and tears for the laboring Church,
and bleeding State) Vt ad vitam communem aliquem, saltem fructum far (...).
possem; that I might be some way serviceable to the Public, Amos 6. 6.
and to You. And albeit I was even sick at heart sometimes (...)
of the affliction of Joseph; and even ready through (...) in Ezech.
faintness to let fall my pen, as it befell Hierom, when writing (...).
upon Ezekiel, he heard of the sacking of the City of Rome by the Goths: yet as
God (who comfort those 2 Cor. 7 6.
that are cast down) gave us any lucida intervalla (this last triumphant year
especially) I took heart afresh to set closer to the work, which now by Gods
grace is brought to some period: And because I have ever held ingratitude a
monster in nature, a solecisme in manners, a paradox in Divinity, an ugly sin
( yea, if there be any sin Camd. Elizab.
against the holy Ghost, it is this, said Queen Elizabeth in a Letter of hers
to the King of France) therefore I could do no less then dedicate this piece
of my pains unto You, to whom I owe so very much; it being penned (most of it)
within Your walls, and under Your wing, where I so long sat and sang, O
Melihaee, Deus nobis haec otia fecit.
Virg. Eclog.


The Stork is said to leave one of her young ones, where she hatcheth them: The
Elephant to turn up the first sprig toward heaven, when he comes to feed; both
out of some instinct of gratitude. The Egyptians are renowned in Histories
Diod. (...) lib 2.
for a thankful people: And the Israelites were charged not to abhor an
Egyptian, because they were once (...). 23. 7.
strangers in his land, and had tasted of his courtesies. The Luke 6. 35.
unthankful and the evil, are fitly set together by our Savior. And, Ingratum
dixeris omnia dixeris, said the Ancients. All that I can do by way of
retribution for Your many free favors is, to make this public acknowledgement
thereof under mine hand; that if any shall reap benefit by what I have written,
they may see to whom, in part, they are beholden. Now the good Lord that has
promised Mat. 10. 41.
a Prophets reward to him that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet; He
that ministers seed to the sower, and has said, That who so waters shall be
watered also himself: Prove. 11. 25.
Ipse pluvia (...), Kimchi.
He that is able to make all grace to abound toward You, that You may abound to
every good work: The same God All-sufficient multiply Your seed, and increase
the fruits of Your righteousness, 2 Cor. 9. 8, 10, 11.
being enriched in every thing to all bountifulness, which causes through us,
thanksgiving to God. This is, and shall be, Sr, the daily desire of

Your Worships, affectionately observant John Trapp.

The Preface to the Reader.
THe manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man 1 Cor. 12. 7.
to profit withal, says S. Paul. And, as any man has 1 Pet. 4. 10.
received the (...), so let him minister the same to others, says S. Peter. We
therefore learn that we (...) lela mmed Prove. (...)
may teach, is a Proverb among the Hebrews. And I do therefore lay in, and lay
up, says the Heathen, that I may draw forth (...) and com.
again, and lay out for the good of many. Synesius speaks of some, who having
(...) quae (...) (...) Eaque ad (...) excerpta, aut ad (...) aut ad exercituum
(...) rectores mirtebat, etc. Suet. l. 2 cap 88.
a treasure of rare abilities in them, would as soon part with their hearts, as
their conceptions: the canker of whose great skill shall be a swift witness
against them. How much better Augustus and Augustine! Of the former, Suetonius
tells us, that, in reading all (...) of good Authors, he skilfully picked out
the prime precepts and paterns of valor and virtue, sending the same to such
of his servants and underofficers for tokens, as he thought they might do most
good unto. And for the later, he accounted nothing his own, that he did not
communicate: and somewhere professes himself in the number of those, Qui
scribunt proficiendo, and scribendo proficiunt, That write what they have
learned, and learn yet more by writing. His last works are observed to be his
best: Joh. Manl loc.
And the reason is given by Melancthon, Quia docendo didicit, because com. p.
68.
by much trading his talent, he had much improved it. Of Melancthon (...).
epist. ded.
himself, one of his Contrymen gives this testimony: It appears (says he)
that Melancthon was on this wise busied abroad the world, that seeing and
hearing all he could, he made profit of every thing; and stored his heart, as
the Be does her hive, out of all sorts of flowers, for the common benefit.
(...) labor like Bees, but with this difference, Quod illae faciant cibos, hae
condant, That the Bees make their meat, the Pismires gather it: both have their
proper praise and profit. If I may be esteemed by thee (Courteous Reader)
either the one or the other, it is enough: And that I may, Enitar sane ( says
Gerson, and I with him) I will endeavor out of other men's good (...) Gerson de
laud Script.
and Collections, to frame to my self (but for thy use) some sweet honeycomb
of truth, by mine own art and industry, in mine own words and method: And then
envy it self cannot (likely) say worse of me (it cannot, truly, say so bad) as
one does of Hugo de Sancto Victore: Ivonis deflorator est ( says he) quem per
omnia fere Patric. Junij Notae in prim.
(...) sequitur, He has picked the best out of Ivo, and transcribed him word
for word almost. I never envied Zabarel, that arrogant Clementis ad Corinth.
epist.
brag of his, Hoc ego primus vidi, I was the first that ever found out this;
and yet I hate extremely to be held a plagiary. Remigius and Haymo seem to be
but two Friars under one hood. Cedrenus his Imperial Gesner.
History is read (a great part ofit) under the name of Joannes (...).
Curopalates: That Is a foul blur to one of them, but to which, I know Eralm in
Lact.
not. And that is no praise to Lactantius in Erasmus his judgment, that de
opificio Dei.
having read Aristotle and Pliny writing of the same subject that he did, and
borrowing much out of them, he never so much as once mentions them; as he
does Tully; whom he names indeed, but disparageth. Atqui candidius erat
nominare eos per quos profecit, quam eum Erasm. ibid.
quem notat, says Erasmus; I have not spared to profess by whom I have
profited, to tell out of whom I have taken ought: and that I hope shall excuse
me for that matter, with the more ingenuous; what fault else soever they may
find with me. Faults will escape a man betwixt his fingers, let him look to it
never so narrowly, says B. Jewel. Some plain solecismes, Jew. ag. Hard.
and harsh expressions have been found even in Tullies own works, as Augustine
notes. And Erasmus adds, Qualia nonnunquam excidunt, and horum temporum
scriptoribus, and in his mihi quoque. Our times are (as one well observes)
partly accurately judicious, partly uncharitably censorious. The one likes
nothing not exquisite, not sublimated; the other, nothing at all. Let them
please themselves for me: I am of Hieroms mind, Si cui legere non placet, nemo
compellit Erasm. ibid.
invitum. If any think good to read what I have written, let him: In ep. ad
Aug. (...).
if otherwise, let him do as he will; but let him know, That every man cannot
be excellent, that yet may be useful, Honestum est ei, qui (...).
in primis non potest, in secundis tertiisve consistere, says the Orator.
Cicero.
An iron key may unlock the door of a golden treasure: yea, ferrum potest, quod
aurum non potest. Iron can do some things that gold cannot. A little boat may
land a man into a large continent, and a little hand thread a needle, as well
as a bigger. Philadelphia had but a little strength, yet a great door opened,
Revel. 3. 8. Quintilian Una est de Gra^matici virtutibus. (...).
says, it is a virtue in a Grammarian, aliquid ignorare, to be ignorant of
some things: but say a man knew never so much, yet, in Plinies Non (...)
interdum est Oratoris tacere qua^ dicere. Plin.
judgment, it no less becomes an Orator sometimes to hold his tongue, then
to speak his mind. Apelles was wont to say, That those Painters were in a
fault qui non sentirent quid esset satis, that understood not when they had
done enough. And he is a good huntsman, Cic. de orat.
says Nannius, qui plures feras capit, non omnes, that can catch Petr. Nan.
some beasts, though he take not all. Lysippus, that famous (...), Not. in
Horat. Plut.
was wont to set forth his best pieces to public view with this underwritten,
Lib. 1. praefat.
(...), Lysippus has somewhat more to do at this work. Nihil perfectum, aut a
singulari consummatum industria, says Columella, Nothing can be perfected at
first. Let it be a praise proper to our Lord Christ, to be Author and finisher
all at once: and Heb. 12. 2.
out of the mouths of babes and sucklings to perfect praise. (...) Mat 21. 16.
first actions are usually but essaies and enterprises: review may (...)
things, and second thoughts mend that which former faulted in. But I (...).
cease to say more by way of Preface or Apology, having (as Octavius said to
Decius, a captain of Anthonies) to the understanding spoken sufficient, but to
the ignorant or ill-affected too much, had I said less. Appian.
Do thou (good Reader) but observe Epictetus his rule, to take (...) (...)
quemque (...) prebendas, qua commode teneri queat.
by that handle, whereby I may best be held, and then all shall be well betwixt
us. There is yet one thing more that I have to tell thee, before we part, that
what thou here read, are verba vivenda non legenda, AEgid. (...).
words that thou must live as well as read. Lest else some learned Linaker,
(...).
observing such a vast difference betwixt our laws and our lives, D. Stougbton.
break out again into this patheticall protestation, Profecto aut hoc non
epist. ad (...).
est Evangelium, aut nos non sumus Evangelici, For certain, either this is not
the Gospel, or we are not right Gospellers.

The Epistle to the Reader.
READER,
THE worth of the Author of this Book is already well known in the Church of
Christ, by same former labors of his which are extant: and they which are well
acquainted with him, (...) but know: and teftifie, that he is a man of singular
Prudence and (...), of (...) acute wit, of a sound judgment, and of an
indefatigable spirit, who (...) wholly devoted, and given up himself to the
service of Gods Church, and does naturally care for the good thereof: witness
his (...) preaching, even whilst the burden and care (...) a (...) School lay
upon him: and now in these (...) and bloody times, (...) he (...) suffered
(...), being driven from his charge, and forced to shroud himself in a (...) of
the Parliaments, yet notwithstanding his daily labors amongst the soldiers,
and in the midst of the noises of gunnes and (...), he has betaken himself to
writing of (...) upon the sacred Scriptures; and besides this present Book, he
has prepared for the Press some notes upon Genesis, and now by the good hand
of Gods providence, completed a (...) upon the whole new Testament; the first
volume whereof presents it self unto thee in this Book, and the later part is
hastening after it, which thou may expect with all expedition. I presume
that it will be superfluous for me to tell thee how useful and advantageous
(...) labors in this kind may be; for though we have many Comments in Latin,
yet but few in English; and (...) want thereof, and a right understanding of
the Scripture, daily (...) shows how woefully many persons are led aside into
(...) ways: For that which the Apostle Peter says of S. Paul's Epistles, is
true of all the word of God; 2 Pet. 3. 13. That therein some things are hard to
be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable pervert to (...) own
destruction. Bless God therefore for stirring up the hearts of those who are
pious and judicious, to lay forth (...) labors this way: and amongst others,
make use of this Comment, which by Gods blessing will prove no less pleasing
(...) profitable, in regard of the variety and excellency of the (...)
contained therein; as also it will give great satisfaction to (...) more
judicious in regard of his pains in noting all the Criticismes through these
his labors: which that it may do, his prayers shall not be wanting, who
subscribes himself,

Thine in the Lord SA. CLARKE.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION upon the GOSPEL according to St MATTHEW: WHEREIN
The Text is explained, some Controversies are briefly discussed, diverse
Commonplaces handled, and many remarkable matters hinted, that had been by
former Interpreters pretermitted.
CHAPTER 1.
VERSE 1. The Book]
THat is, a roll or register, a catalogue or calendar Genesis 5. 1.
(Heb. (...)) a cyphering and summing up. This is Sepher toledoth, (...), say
the Septuagint.


Of the generations]
That is, of the Genealogies, as touching his Humanity (St Matthews main
drift:) for as touching his Divinity (St John's chief scope and subject,) who
can declare his generation? Isa. 53. 8. What is his name? and what is his
sons name, if thou can tell? Prove. 30. 4. He is without descent or
pedigree, as Melchisedech, Heb. 7. 2.

Of Jesus Christ]
Jesus shows he was God (for besides me there is no Savior, (...). 45. 21.)
Christ, that he was man, the Anointed, for in respect of his manhood, chiefly,
is this anointing with gifts and graces attributed to Christ. The name of
Jesuits therefore favors of blasphemous arrogance. One of their own Rem
(...) e Christi (...), non (...).
gives the reason; because he has communicated unto us the thing signified by
the name Christ, but not by the name Jesus. And yet, it is notoriously known
(says Dr Fulke, out of another of their own Writers) that the most honorable
name of Christian, is in Italy and at Rome a name of reproach; and usually
abused, to signify a Fool or a Dolt. (...). on Act. 11. (...). (...). 4. cut
(...) (...). (...). Col le (...). in (...).


The son of David]
Gods darling, David amasius vel amabilis. (...), (...) Solomon dictus est
(...).
one that observed all his wills, Acts 13 22. and faithfully served out his
time, ver. 36.

The son of Abraham]
The friend of God, and father of the faithful, reckoned here (for honors
sake) as the next immediate father of Christ; whose day indeed he saw and
rejoiced, he laughed, yea leapt sor joy of this man-child to be born into the
world. Whose children we are, so long as we walk in the steps of his faith;
that Christ, being formed in us, may see of the travel of his soul, and be
satisfied: he may see his seed, and prolong his days upon earth. Such honor
have all his Saints, Psalm. 149. 9. Joh. 8. (...).


Verse 2. Abraham begat Isaac]
The fruit, not more of his (...).
flesh, then of his faith: Whence he is said to be born after the Spirit,
(...). 10. 11.
Gal. 4. ^9. Vere fuit Isaac beatae senectu^^ and (...) dei filius.


Isaac begat Iacob]
After twenty years expectance, and many an hearty prayer put up therewhile.
So, Adam lived an hundred and twenty years ere he begat Seth; whom God set as
another (...).
seed instead of Abel, Genesis 5. 3. with Genesis 4. 25. when Cains family Genesis 2^.
^1.
The Hebrew word is, to frequent and multiply prayer.
flourished, and grew great in the earth. God usually stays so long, that he
hardly finds faith, Luke 18. 8. till men have done expecting, and then he
does things that they looked not for, Isa. 64. 3. Wait therefore upon him who
waits to be gracious; and know this, that he is a God of judgment, Isa. 30.
18. that is, a wise God, one that chooses his times, and knows best when to
deal forth his favors. See Isa. 49 8. with Psalm. 69. 13. Every thing is Eccles
^. 11.
beautiful in its season, says Solomon.

Jacob begat Judah and his brethren]
Brethren in iniquity (the most of them) a part of their fathers punishment,
for that Genesis 17 ^^, etc.
threefold lie in a breath. Reuben was the beginning of his strength,
excelling in dignity and power, Genesis 45. 3. that is (says the Chaldee
Paraphrast) in the Principality and the Priesthood. Both which he forfeited by
his foul offense; the (...) to Judah, the later to Levi. Howbeit, upon his
return to God (though disinherited of the birthright, yet) he had this honor
of an elder-brother, that he was first provided for. But Judah was he, whom his
brethren Genesis (...). 8.
should praise (says Jacob) in allusion to his name, and in reference to his
privilege; for it is evident, that our Lord sprang (...).
out of Judah, Heb. 7 14. that branch from on high, Luke 1. 78. (...).
that Shiloh, which some interpret, His son: Others, Tranquillator, R David.
Salvator, the Prosperer, Pacificatour, Safe-maker, etc. Tranquillator, (...),
a themate Shalah, (...).
Others, the son of her secundines, which is the Tunicle that wrappeth the
child in the womb.

Verse 3. And Judah begat Phares and Zarah]
Hierome is deceived, that deriveth the pedigree of the Pharisees from this
Unde etiam lat. Salvere, Salvus, Salvare, (...).
Phares. They took their name either of Pharash, to expound, as Interpreters of
the Law, Romans 2. 18. Or of Pharas to separate, with a stand further off, for I
am holier then thou. Josephus says, That the Pharisees seemed to outstrip all
others, both in height of (...) de bell. (...). cap. 4.
holiness, and depth of learning. As for Phares, he was a breachmaker (whence
also he had his name, Genesis 38. 29.) He violently took the first-birth-right;
and became both a father of the Messiah, and a Type. For Christ by his strength
broke the power of death, and hell: he broke down also the (...) wall that was
betwixt the Jews and Gentiles: who when they shall be (...) born, then shall
the Jews (typified by Zarah, who thrust forth the hand first, as those that
willing to be justified by their works, and thinking to regenerate themselves,
had the (...) thread of the Laws condemnation bound upon their hands, which
therefore they drew back and fell from God,) then shall they, I say, come forth
again, Romans 11. 11, 12, 25. 26.

Of (...)]
A (...), but probably, a proselyte. The Jews, say, she was Melchisedechs
daughter the High Priest, and was (...) to be burned, Lev. 21. 8. But this may
well pass for a Jewish fable: Howbeit, that Melchisedech was a Canaanite, but
a most righteous King and Priest of the most high God, and was therefore not
molested or meddled with by Kidar-laomer and his accomplices, I judge, not
unlikely. This (...), out of desire, partly of revenge, and partly of issue,
fell into the sin of (...). Rahab was an harlot, Bathsheba an (...); yet all
these, grandmothers to our Savior: Who as he needed not to be ennobled by his
stock, so neither was disparaged by his Progenitors; but took flesh of these
greatest sinners, to show that we cannot commit more then he can (...): and
that by his purity he washes off all our spots; like as the Sun wastes and
wipeth away all the ill vapors of the earth and air.

And Phares begat Esrom,]
When he was but 14 years of age, Pareus in (...).
the year before they went down to Egypt, say some: Others assoil (...) in
(...). Com. Anno (...).
it otherwise. Let him that reads understand as he can. Christ (the
Arch-Prophet) when he comes again, shall teach us all things.

Esrom begat Aram]
While they sojourned in the Land of Egypt; a miserable home, where was nothing
but bondage and tyranny. And yet, in reference to it, Moses (who was likewise
born there) calls his son, Gershom, or a stranger there, because born in
Midian. The sons of Ephraim, about the birth of Moses, sought to break prison
before Gods jail-delivery: but this (...) a great mischief to themselves, and
no small heart-break to their aged father, 1 Chronicles. 7. 21, 22. Psalm. 78. 9.
Besides that, it gave occasion, likely, to that cruel edict of Pharaoh; Let us
deal wisely (St Stephen says, sophistically, subtly) lest they multiply
(...).
and join also to (...) enemies, and fight against us (as now they Acts 7. 19.
have fought against the Gittites, their own enemies, who detained from them
the promised Land, till their sins were full) and so get them up out of the
Land, as lately they had assayed to do. Therefore they d d set over them
taskmasters, to (...) them with their burdens, and to keep them from spawning
so fast, after the Exodus (...).
manner of fishes (as the word imports) which multiply beyond measure. But God
turned their wisdom into folly; they took a wrong course. For who knows not
that your laboring men have the most and the strongest children? And
notwithstanding this (...) Pharaohs craft and cruelty.

Verse 4. Aram begat Aminadab, and Aminadab begat Naasson]
Who was hanged up in the wilderness, among (...) rest of the Rulers, for
folly committed with their mistresses of Moab. Neither escaped the common sort
scot-free, for they fell in one (...) three and twenty thousand, says St Paul.
Four and (...) 1 Cor. (...). 8.
thousand, says Moses; whereof a thousand were the chief Princes, the other
were inferiors, provoked to sin by their example. But why does the Apostle
insist in the special punishment of the people? to show, says learned Iunius,
how frigid and slender their (...). lib 2. (...). 37.
defense is, how short their covering, who plead and pretend for their sins the
example of their superiors.

And Naasson begat Salmon]
Called 1 Chronicles. 2. Salmah. There was also a Mount of this name (as touching
the sound, though with difference of one letter in the Original) whither
Abimelech and his host resorted, Judge. 9. 48. And (...) the Psalmist speaks;
When the Almighty scattered Kings, they shall be white as snow in Salmon. Now
it is storied of Andronicus, the old Emperor of Constantinople, that, all
things going cross with him, he took a Psalter into his hand, to resolve his
doubtful mind: And opening the same, as if it were of that heavenly oracle to
ask Turk. Histo. fol. 164.
counsel, he lighted upon this verse, and was thereby comforted and directed
what to do for his greatest safety. To be white as snow Psalm. 68. 14. explained.
in Salmon, is to have joy in affliction, light in darkness. Salmon signifies
shady and dark: so this mount was with dens and glimnes; but made lightsome by
snow. Hoe (...) obiter.

Verse 5. And Salmon begat Boos of Rahab.]
This the Evangelist might have by tradition. Salmons genealogy is set down, 1 Chronicles. 2. Ruth. 4. but whom he married, nothing is reported.

And Boos begat Obed of Ruth]
Whiles Orphah wants bread in her own Country, Ruth is grown a great Lady in
Bethlehem; and advanced to be great grandmother to the King of kings. (...).
There Is nothing lost by Gods service.

And Obed begat Iesse]
A good old man, but not very famous. Retired it seems he was, and drawn much
up into himself; neither thinking great things of himself, nor seeking great
things for himself; (...), Vive tibi, quantumque, potes, (...) vita
but living among his own people; much of his son David's disposition, who loves
his hook the better since he saw the Court, and sings, Beatus ille qui procul
(...), etc.
Non vixit (...), qui natus (...) fellit.
He Is not the least happy that is least observed. (...).


Verse 6. And Iesse begat David the King.]
But that was not his chief title: He gloried more in stlling (...) the servant
of the Lord, Psalm. 36. 1: etc. So Theodosius esteemed it a greater honor, that
he was membrum Christi, then Caput Imperij. Numa etiam (...), existimabat. Numa
held the Plut. in (...).
service of God the highest honor.

David the King begat Salomon]
Whom Bellarmine reckons for a reprobate: but (besides that he was Gods
Corculum, and by him called Iedidiah,) he calls himself in his sacred
Retractations, Coheleth: which being interpreted, The Preacher, is a word of
the foeminine termination, and by some rendered Aggregata, where understanding
the substantive Anima, they conclude here-hence, that he was renewed by
repentance, and reunited to the Church.

Of her that had been the wife of Uriah.]
His best children he (...), (...) in (...). Aug.
had by this wife: (...) fruit of his humiliation doubtless. The barren women's
children are observed to have been the best, as Isaac, Samuel, John Baptist,
etc. for like reason.

Verse 7. And Solomon begat Roboam.]
A child of forty years old, a soft-spirited man, the Scripture notes him, a
(...), easily drawn away by evil counsel. Green wood will be warping. Of him
it might be said, as once it was of a certain Prince in Germany, Esset alius,
si esset apud alios. But a man would wonder, that (...).
by so many wives Solomon should have but one son, and him none of the wisest
neither. Heroum filij (...). He might (likely) bewail his own unhappines in
Rehoboam, Eccles. 2. 18, 19. as he is thought to do in Jeroboam, Pro. 20. 21.
His mother was an Ammonitesse: the birth follows the belly: the conclusion
follows the weaker proposition.

And Roboam begat Abiah]
A man not right, yet better then his father: and for this to be commended,
that he held and pleaded the true worship and service of God as the beauty and
bulwark of his Kingdom: relying also upon God, he discomfited Jeroboam; Deo
confisi, nunquam confusi.

And Abia begat Asa.]
A better son, sprung of the seed of bad Abia, of the soil of (...) Maachah,
whom St. Jerome makes to be a worshipper of that abominable idol Priapus,
otherwise called Baal-peor. For thus he translates that, 1 King. 15. Insuper
and Numb. 25. 5.
Maachan matrem (...) amovit, ne esset princeps in sacris Priapi, In 4 (...).
and in luco (...). Nos, pudore pulso, stamus sub Jove, coleis apertis, said
the worshippers of Priapus. The people that (...) D. (...) Apolog.
thereto (the sacrifice being ended) all stepped into a thicket, which was
always planted near the altar of this God; and there, like brute beasts, (...)
satisfied their lusts: thereby, as they conceived, best pleasing their God.
This villainy Maachah may seem to have been guilty of, and was therefore
worthily removed by her son Asa, from (...) Queen. Seeds prima, and (...) ima,
suit not well together. Dignitas in indigno est ornamentum in luto, says
Salvian. Honor in a (...) man, is as a jewel (...) Gold in a swines snout.
(...)


Verse 8. And Asa begat Josaphat.]
A godly King, but late (...).
witted: and therefore paid for his learning, twice, at least, in holy 2 Chronicles.
17.
history. One thing in the narration of his acts is very remarkable. He placed
forces in all the fenced cities: yet is it not said thereupon, that the fear of
the Lord fell on the neighbor Nations. But when he had established a preaching
ministry in all the Cities, then his enemies feared, and made no war:
Solidissima regiae politiae In (...).
basis, (says Paradinus) est verum Dei cultum ubivis stabilire: Alias, qui
potest aut Deus Reges bear, a quibus negligitur, aut populus fideliter colere,
qui de obsequio suo non recte instituitur. The ordinances of God are the beauty
and bulwark of a place and people.

And Jehosaphat begat Joram]
That lived undesired, and died unlamented. While he lived, there was no use of
him, and when he died, no miss of him: no more then of the paring of the
nails, or (...)
sweeping of the house. He lived wickedly, and died wishedly, as Dan (...). of
Eng. 14.
it is said of King Edwin.

And Joram begat Ozias]
Here Ahaziah, Joash and Amaziah Genesis 17.
are written in the earth, not once set down in the roll: perhaps it was,
because they were imped in the wicked family of Ahab. This Uzzias, though a
King, yet he loved husbandry, 2 Chronicles. 26. Thrift is the fuel of magnificence.
He was at length a leper, yet still remained a King. Infirmities may deform us,
they cannot dethrone us. The English laws (says Camden) pronounce, that
Camdens Elizabeth, fol. 8.
the crown once worn, quite takes away all defects whatsoever: Sure it is,
that when God once crowns a man with his grace and favor, that man is out of
harms-way for ever.

Verse 9. And Ozias begat Joatham.]
A pious Prince, but not very prosperous. Grace is not given to any, as a
target against outward affliction.

And Joatham begat Ahaz]
A sturdy stigmatick, a branded rebel. The more he was distressed, the more he
trespassed. This Humiliantar, and humiles non sunt, (...). in (...) 34.
is that Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28. 22. How many (now adays) are humbled, yet not
humble? Low, but not lowly? Qui nec fractis cervicibus inclinantur, as Hieron
complains: quos multo facilius In Epist.
fregeris, quam flexeris, as another has it. These are like (...), capi non
(...). Plin.
the (...) called Monoceros, who may be killed, but not caught. Plectimur a Deo,
says Salvian, nec flectimur tamen: corripimur, sed non corrigimur. But if men
harden their hearts against correction: God will harden his hand, and hasten
their destruction.

Ahaz begat Hezekiah]
Who stands betwixt his father Ahaz, and his son Manasseh, as a lily between
two thorns, or as a Fuller between two (...): or, as that wretched Cardinal
of Toledo in his preface before the Bible, printed at Complutum in Spain, said;
that he set the Vulgar Latin betwixt the Hebrew and Greek, as Christ was set
betwixt two thieves. Here observe (by the way) that Judah had some enterchange
of good Princes; Israel, none: and that, under religious Princes the people
were ever religious: as under wicked Princes, wicked. Most people will (...).
be of the Kings religion, be it what it will be, as the Melchites were of old,
and the Papists still, if M. Rogers (our Protomartyr in Q. Mary's days) may be
believed. The Papists, says he, apply themselves to the present state: yea, if
the state should change ten times in the year, they would ever be ready at hand
to change with it, and so follow the cry, and rather utterly forsake God, and
be of no Religion, then that they would forgo lust or living, (...). and Mon.
for God or Religion.

Verse 10. And Ezechias begat Manasses]
Who degenerates into his grandfather Ahaz, as the kernel of a well-fruited
plant does, sometimes, into that crab or willow, which gave the original to
his stock. This man was (till converted) as very a Nonsuch in Judah, as Ahab
was in Israel; Yet no King of either Judah or Israel reigned so long as he. It
was well for him that he lived so long, to grow better: As it had been better
for Asa to have died sooner, when he was in his prime. But they are met in
heaven, I doubt not: whither, whether we come sooner or later, happy are we.

And Manasses begat Amon]
Who followed his father in sin, but not in repentance. And thou his son, o
Belshazzar, have not Ban. 5. 22.
humbled thine heart, though thou (...) all this: But have lifted up thy self
against the Lord, etc. It is a just presage and desert of ruin, not to be
warned. This was a bloody Prince, therefore lived not out half his days. Q.
Mary's reign was the shortest of any since the Conquest, Richard the third
only excepted: Yet she was non nature a, sed (...) art ferox, say some.

And Amon begat Iosias]
Of whom that is true, that S. (...) writes of another, In brevi vitae (...)
virtutum multa replevit: Or as M. Hooker speaks of K. Edward 6. He departed
soon, but lived long: for life consists in action: In all these is the life of
my spirit, says Hezekiah, Isa. 38. 15, 16. but the wanton widow is dead while
she lives, 1 Timothy 5 6. That good King (...) se unius (...) rei paenitere dixit.
lived apace, and died betime, being (...) Orbis, as Titus was called: and
Mirabilia mundi, as Otho: having at his death (as it is said of Titus) one
thing only to repent of, and that was his rash (...) autem quid (...) non
(...), nec (...) certo novit. Dio in Tito.
engaging himself in a needless quarrel, to the loss of his life, and the
ruin of that state. (...) Epaminondas was once slain, his countrymen were no
longer famous for their valor and victories, but for their cowardice and
calamities. When Augustine departed this world, we feared, says one, the
worlds ruin, and were ready Nec (...) sed cladibus infignes Nea (...).
to wish that either he had never been borne, or never died. When God took away
Theodosius, he took away with him almost all the peace of that Church and
State: So he did of this, with Josiah, Orbis (...) timueramus.
that heavenly spark, that plant of renown, that precious Prince, Qui Regum
decus, and invenum flos, spesque bonorum, Paterculus.

Deliciae saecli, and gloria gentis (...).
Par. (...). (...).
as Cardanus sang of our English Iofiah, K. Edward the sixth.

Verse 11. And Josias begat Iechonias.]
Rob. Stephanus restores Ludovico. 12. (...), (...) est mutatio, (...) qui
prius digito coelum (...) vi (...), nunc (...) serpere, (...) esse (...) eres.
Budaeus.
and rectifieth the text thus; Josias begat Iakin and his brethren, and Iakin
begat Iechanias. For otherwise, the middle fourteenth, (whereby S. Matthow
reckons) would want a man. Iehoahaz, younger brother to Iakin had, after his
fathers death, stepped into the Throne, but was soon ejected. (...) prospers not.
Abimelechs head had stolen the crown, and by a blow on his head he is (...) at
Shechem. What got most of the Caesar's by their hasty advancement, nisi ut
citius inter ficerentur? Some think (...) Pedaiah (whose natural son Zorobabel
was, (...) Chro. 3. 19) should be (...) reckoned, though he be (...), (...) he
was (...) and died: obscurely in (...).
As one has it. Notandum, says the Chronologer, quod nullus Pontificum,
egregij aliquid a tempore Bonifacij tertij pro sedis Romanae tyrannide
constituens, diu supervixerit. Quod and huic Bonifacio accidit. It is
remarkable that no Pope, of any note for activity in his office, was long of
life.

Verse 12. And after they were brought to Babyton]
This the Evangelist (...), and rings often in the ears of his impious
Countrymen, as a notorious public judgment on a Nation so incorrigibly
flagitious, so unthankful for mercies, so impatient of remedies, so incapable
of repentance, so obliged, so warned, so shamelesly, so lawlesly wicked, quorum
maxima beneficia, (...), supplicia, as the Centurists (...) it forth. Abused
mercy (...) (...).
into fury. (...).


Iechonias begat Salathiel]
Neri begat him, naturally, Iechonias, (...).
legally; adopting him for his child, that was his nephew, 1 Chro. 3. Prefat.
(...) Centur. 5.
17.

And Salathiel begat Zorobabel]
Who brought forth the head (...). (...). 8. 9.
stone of the second Temple with shoutings, crying Grace, Grace, unto it. He
was a Chieftain in the first year of Cyrus, Ezra 2. 2. and he lived to see the
building of the Temple, about the sixth year of Darius Nothus, which is a (...)
of a hundred years between. (...) of the (...) Monarchy.
So he had a longer life then ordinary, which God grants to some, because he
has something to be done by them. A short life in some cases is a blessing, 1
King. 13, 14. as grapes gathered before they be ripe, are freed from the
violence of the winepresse: as lambs slain before they be grown, escape many
storms and sharp showers that others live to taste of. Some wicked live long,
that they may aggravate their judgment; others die sooner, that they may
hasten it. But they are blessed, that whether they live they live unto the
Lord, or whether they die they die unto Romans 14. 8.
the Lord, and in the Lord, their works following them. (...). (...). 13.


Verse 13. And Zorobabel begat Abind]
S. Luke says, (...): Hence the diversity of number and names. Matthew
descends by the posterity of Abiud: Luke, of Rhesa, down to Joseph.

And Abiud begat Eliakim, and Eliakim begat Azor, etc.]
These lived in (...) calamitous times of the people of God after the
captivity: and were not Kings and Captains, as being held under by other
Nations: but Lawgivers they were, as Jacob prophesied, and principal men
among that people, till Shiloh came, Genesis 49. 10.

(...) 14. And Azor begat Sadoc, and Sadoc begat Achim]
Of these and the rest, as the Scripture sets down nothing more then their bare
names, so neither is there any Jewish record, at this day extant, of their
acts. So many (...) they had, one in the neck of another, that little liberty
was left them to write: though I doubt not, but the posterity of David were
then carefully observed, by as many as looked for the consolation of Israel. But
among the (...), since our Saviors time, after the sealing up of the
Babylonish Talmud, that is, after the year of Christ 500. to the year 1000.
there was (...) or nothing written, by reason of the grievous calamities that
seized upon them.

Verse 15. And Eliud begat Eleazar, etc.]
These might be private (...), some of them, as Joseph and Mary were: it being
the care and endeavor of (...) Herod's, and those before, that (...) the Jews in
subjection, to suppress, as much as might be, the posterity of David: at least
to keep them in a low condition; for as much as it was a certain and received
truth among that people, that (...) the Prince, Dan. 9. 26. should shortly come
of that family. And this was that that held up the fainting hearts of the good
people of those sad times, (when prophecy failed them, and prosperity too,)
they looked for the Desire of all Nations, for the Consolation of Israel,
having little else to relieve them, for the external means: Unless it were
that (...), that echo heard in the Temple, they tell us of, which served them
for an oracle: And the miracle of the pool of Bethesda granted by God to
strengthen them in the true worship of God, under the persecution of Antiochus
and other tyrants, till the days of John Baptist, and the Lord Christ.

Verse 16. And Jacob begat Joseph,]
Whose genealogy is here recorded, and not Mary's: it being not the custom of
that people (...), to set forth the genealogies of women. As at this day, the
Blunts voyage into the Levant. p. 121.
Jews have an over-base conceit of that sex; saying that they have not so
divine a soul as men, but are of a lower creation, etc. and therefore they
suffer them not to enter the Synagogue, but appoint them a gallery without.

The husband of Mary, of whom was born Iesus]
This is the sum of all the good news in the world, such as surpasses the
joy of conquest, or of harvest, Isa. 9 3, 5, 6. and should therefore swallow up
all discontents whatsoever.

Who is called Christ]
The name of Jesus is mel in ore, melos in Bern.
aure, jubilum in cord: as it was to St Paul, who therefore names it nine
several times in the ten first verses of his first Epistle to the Corinthians,
as loath to come off it. Yet is not the name Jesus alone half so sweet, as when
Christ is added to it, as here. For Jesus Christ betokens such a Savior as
is anointed and appointed thereunto by God, consecrated to the office,
according to his Godhead, and (...) for it, according to his manhood: In both
(...) a Savior, and that ex professo (as you would say) and by (...) of all
three persons: The Son being anointed by the Father, (...) the Holy Ghost: And
as Sampson when clothed with the spirit, saved the people: so Christ much more.

Verse 17. So all the generations, etc. are fourteen generations]
(...) cades.
For memory sake, Matthew summeth up the genealogy of our Savior into three
fourteens: like as some of the (...) are, (...) the same reason, set down in
order of the Alphabet. Discere voluit (...). (...).
Socrates, (...) aliud esse quam (...), says Tully. Magis autem. Christi
meminisse debemus, quam respirare. The soul should be as the Ark of God, the
memory like the pot of Manna, preserving holy truths touching him that is the
Way, the Truth, and the life.

Verse 18. Now the birth of Jesus Christ]
(...) ad (...) transit. And being to relate a strange thing, and till then
never heard of, he elegantly stirs up the hearers mind with this preface.

Whenas his mother Mary was espoused]
An ancient and commendable custom. Adam took his wife the first day of their
creation, (she was espoused to him) but knew her not, till after the fall: Lots
daughters were espoused, yet had not known man, Genesis 19, 8, 14. See Deuteronomy. 22.
22. Yea, the very Heathens had their (...), Judge. 14. 1, etc. Placuit,
despondi: (...) hic dictus est dies, says (...) in Terence. We agreed, were
contracted, and the wedding day appointed.

To Joseph, before they came together,]
Espoused they were by a special providence. 1. That Mary might not be held an
harlot. 2. That being big, and needing (...) help, she might be provided for.
3. That the mystery of Christ might be made known by degrees.

She was found with child of the holy Ghost.]
This wonderful Mirari (...), (...) non licet.
conception of our Savior is a mystery, not much to be pryed into, and is
therefore called an overshadowing, Luke 1. 35. Where also, (...) any should
mistake this (Of) in the text, for the material cause: as if the holy Ghost
had begotten him of his own substance (as fathers do their children,) the whole
order and manner of this conception, so far as concerns us to know, is
declared by the Angel.

Verse 19. Then Joseph her husband (...) a just man]
And yet withal a merciful tender man of the Virgins credit. Hence that
conflict and fear within himself, lest he should not do right.

And not willing to make her a public example]
That is, to (...).
wrong her, as the same word is used and expounded by the Author to the
Hebrews of the Son of God, as here of the mother of (...) ipse eam (...)
paenis, nec (...), (...) risui exponere. Aret. in loc.
God. Heb. 6. 6. with Heb. 10. 29.

Was minded to put her away privily]
Which yet he could hardly have done, without blame to (...), and blemish to
her. So far out we are (the best of us) when destitute of divine direction.
How shamefully was that good Josiah miscarried by his passions to his cost,
when he went up against Pharaoh Necho, without once advising with Jeremiah,
Zephany, Huldah, or any other prophet of God then living by him?

Verse 20. But while he thought on these things]
And was not so well advised upon his course, God, who reserveth his holy hand
for a dead lift, expedites him. The Athenians had a conceit, that Minerva
(their goddess) drove all their ill counsels to Jun Emblem.
a happy issue. The superstitious Romans thought that an Idol, Ab erroribus
viarum Dea Vibilia liberat.
which they called Vibilia, kept them from erring out of their way. The divine
providence is our Vibilia, that will not suffer us to misearry, so long as we
have an eye to the pattern that was Arnob. adver. Gentes.
showed us in the (...), Exodus 25. 40. In the Mount will the Genesis 22. 14.
Lord be seen. Prove. (...). 26.


Behold, the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him]
As of old (...) in (...) (ait Rab. Solomon ex Talmud.
he had done to Daniel, being caused to flee swiftly or with (...) of flight
(as the Hebrew has it) with so good a will he did it, as thinking he could
never come soon enough. Hierosol.) i e. in rebus in quibus es slultus, aderit
tamen tibi Dominus.


Joseph, thou son of David]
Albeit a poor Carpenter. A man may be as high in Gods favor, and as happy in
russet, as in Tissue. I know thy poverty (says Christ to that Church,) but,
(...) nothing, thou art rich. (...). 9. 21.


Fear not to take unto thee) viz. From the hands of her parents, Rev. 2. 9.
who have, by all right, the dispose of their children, as a chief part of
their goods: Therefore when Satan obtained leave to vex Job, and to touch him
in his possessions, he dealt with his Job. 1.
children also.

For that which is conceived in her]
That holy thing, Luke 1. 35. that Holy of Holies wherein the Godhead dwells
bodily, that is, personally; and is called the Son of God, says the Angel
there. Yet not in respect of his humane nature, for then there should be in the
person of Christ two sons, viz. one of the Father, and another of the holy
Ghost. Besides, Heb. 7. 3. he is without father, as Man, and without mother, as
God. All that can be gathered out of that place in Luke, is, that he, that was
so conceived of the holy Ghost, (...) the natural Son of God. The union of
three Persons into one nature, and of two natures into one Person, (...).
these are the great mysteries of Godliness. The well is deep, Joh. 4. (...).
as she said, and we want wherewith to draw.

Is of the Holy Ghost.]
As the Efficient, not as the Material cause. The virtus formatrix, the
formative faculty which the Virgin had not, is ascribed to the power of the
Holy Ghost, framing and fashioning Christ of the substance of the Virgin
sanctified miraculously, and without man's help. But if no mother knows the
manner of her natural Conception; what presumption shall it be for flesh and
blood, to search how the Son of God took flesh of his creature? It is enough
for us to know, that he was conceived of the holy Ghost, not spermatically, but
(...), yet secretly and mystically, the Virgin her self knew not how.
Fearfully and wonderfully he was made, and curiously wrought in the lowest
parts of the earth. Psalm. 139. 14, 15. with Ephesians. 4. 9.

Verse 21. And she shall bring forth a Sonne]
Shiloh the Son of her secundines: that Son, that Eve made account she had got,
when she had got Cain: For, said she, I have gotten a man from the Lord. Or as
others read it (and the Original rather favors it) I have gotten the man, the
Lord. But how far she was deceived, the issue proved. (...) spes bona (...)
suo. Hope comes halting home many times.

And thou shall call his name Iesus]
Not of (...) to heal, as some Hellenists would have it: Although it be true
that he is Jehovah Rophe, the Lord the Physician, by whose (...) we are healed:
Exodus 15. 26.
But of Iashang, whence (...), Jesus. Two in the old Testament had this name.
The first when he was sent as a spy into Canaan, (...). 13. 16. had his name
changed from Oshea, Let God save, to (...), God shall save. Under the Law
(which brings us as it were into the wilderness of SIN) we may wish there were a
Savior: but under the Gospel we are sure of salvation, (...) our Iehoshuah
has bound himself to fulfill all righteoufnes, and had therefore this name
imposed upon him at his circumcision. For he assumed it not to himself (though
knowing the end of his coming, and the fulness of his sufficiency, he might
have done it) nor received it from men, but from God; and that with great
(...), by the ministry of an Angel, who talked with a woman about our
salvation, as Satan sometime bad done about our destruction.

For he shall save his people from their sinnes]
This is the notation and Etymon, or reason of his name, Jesus, A name above
all names, Phil 2. 9. (...), says the Heathen Orator, is a word so (...).
(...). (...) (...).
emphaticall, that other tongues can hardly find a word fit to express it.
Salvation properly notes the negative part of a Christians happiness: viz.
preservation from evil; chiefly from the evil of sin, (which is the mother of
all our misery:) from the damning and (...) power thereof, by his merit and
Spirit, by his value and virtue. Jesus therefore is a short Gospel, and should
work in us strongest affections, and egressions of soul after him, who has
saved us from the wrath to come. The (...) being 1 These. 1 10. (...).
set free but from bodily servitude, called their deliverer a Savior (...) in
vita Flamin.
to them: and rang it out, Savior, Savior, so that the fowls in the air fell
down dead with the cry. Yea they so pressed to come near him, and touch his
hand, that, if he had not timely withdrawn himself, he might have beseemed to
have lost his life. The Egyptians preserved by Joseph, called him Abrech, or
Tender-Father. (...) in his Annotat.
The daughters of Jerusalem met David returning from the slaughter of the
Philistims with singing and dancing. When the Lord turned again the captivity
of his people, they were like them that dream, Psalm. 126 1. And Peter enlarged,
could scarce believe his own eyes; with such an ecstasy of admiration was he
rapt, upon that deliverance. Oh then how should our hearts rejoice, and our
tongues be glad, Act. 2. 26? and how should we be vexed at the vile dullness
and deadness of our naughty natures, that can be no more affected with these
indelible ravishments? Jacob wept for joy at the good news, that Joseph was yet
alive. Ioannes Mollius, whenever Fox (...) f. 855.
he (...) of the Name of Jesus, his eyes dropped. And another Reverend Divine
amongst us, being in a deep muse, after some discourse M. Welse.
that passed of Jesus, and tears trickling abundantly from his eyes, before he
was aware, being urged for the cause thereof, confessed (...), it was because
he could not draw his dull heart to prize Christ aright. Mr Fox never denied
beggar that asked in Wards Sermon.
that Name: And good Bucer never disregarded any (though different in opinion
from him) in whom he could discern aliquid Christi: None but Christ, said that
blessed Martyr at the stake. (...) Lambert.
And another in the flames, when judged already dead, suddenly, as (...) Palmer.
waked out of sleep, moved his tongue and jaws, and was heard to Act. and Mon.
(...). (...).
pronounce this word, Jesus.

Here also we have an excellent argument of our Saviors divinity (...).
and omnipotency; forasmuch as the Angel ascribes unto C hristus autem non
Pater, (...) est (...).
him, that which the Psalmist affirms of Jehovah, that he shall redeem Israel
from all his iniquities, Psalm. 130. 8. with Hos. 13. 4.

Verse 22. Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled]
An Angels testimony is not to be taken, if it be beside or against the written
word. I am of them that keep the sayings of this book, says the Angel to the
Apostle. For ever, O Lord, thy word is settled Rev. (...). (...).
in Heaven, Psalm. 119. (...).

Verse 23. Behold, a Virgin, etc.]
(...), that Virgin, (...), that famous Virgin foretold, Isa. 7. 14. That he
should be the seed of the woman, was made known, to Adam, but not of what
Nation, till Abraham, nor of what Tribe till Jacob, nor of what sex, till
David, nor whether born of a virgin, till Esaias. Thus by degrees was that great
mystery of godliness revealed to mankind. If any Jew object, says
Chrysostom, How could a Virgin bring forth? Dic (...), (...) peperit (...) and
vetula? Ask him, How could Sarah, when old and barren, bear a child? The Bees
have young, yet know not marriage. The Phaenix, they say, has no parents. This
head-stone of the corner was cut out of the mountain (...). (...).
without hands: this flower of the (...), this rose of Sharon, has Heaven for
his father, and earth for his mother. Was it not as easy to frame this second
Adam in the womb, as that first Adam out of the mire? Herein see a miracle of
mercy, that the incomprehensible (...).
God, that circle (whose center is every where, whose circumference no where)
should be circled and cooped up for 9 months together, in the narrow womb of a
pure Virgin.

And shall bring forth a Son]
Who in the birth opened the womb, Luke 2. and so put her to pain, likely, as
other women. He hid the glory of his eternal nativity under a mean and
temporary birth, to purchase for us an heavenly and eternal birth. Whether the
blessed Virgin were Deipara, the Mother of God, raised great storms in the
(...) of Ephesus, and came to commotions in the secular part, and
excommunications among the Bishops; insomuch as the Emperor declared both
sides Heretics. But forasmuch as she brought forth a Son that was God, we
doubt not to style her the Mother of God; not Mall Gods maid, as one has
lately The female Glory.
slandered some of us in print. At Rome (it is said) was seen, at the same
time, about the Sun, the likeness of a woman carrying a child in her arms:
And a voice heard, Pan the great God is now (...) on the Creed.
about to be born, etc.

And they shall call his name Immanuel, etc.]
By a wonderful and unsearchable Union; the manner (...) is to be believed,
not (...); admired, not pried into: personal it is, yet not of persons: of
natures, and yet not natural. As soul and body are one man; so God and man are
one person, says Athanasius, And as every believer that is born of God, (...)
another, remains the same entire person that he was before, receiving
nevertheless into him a divine nature, which before he had not: So Emmanuel,
continuing the same perfect person, which he had been from eternity, assumeth
nevertheless a humane nature, which before he had not, to be born within his
person for ever. This is so much the more wonderful, because the very Angels
(which are far greater in glory then man) are not able to abide the presence of
God, Isa. 6. 2. But this is our ladder of ascension to God, Ioh. 3. 12. Faith
first lays hold upon Christ as a man; and thereby, (...) by a mean, makes way
to God, and embraces the Godhead, which is of it self a consuming fire. And
whereas sin is a partition wall of our own making, denying us (...), God is now
with us: and in Christ, we have boldness and access Ephesians. 2. 12.
with confidence by the faith of him. Christ's humanity serves as a skreen to
save us, from those everlasting burnings; and as a conduit, to derive upon us
from the Godhead, all spiritual blessings in Ephesians. 1. 3.
heavenly places. If any (...) invade us, we may cry as they Isa. 8. 8.
of old, The stretching out of his wings does fill thy Land, O Immanuel; and we
shall have help.

Verse 24. Then Joseph being raised from sleep, did as the Angel, etc.]
As well assured that it was of God, whom he was ready pressed to obey without
sciscitation. Jussa sequi, tam velle mihi, quam posse, necesse est.
Laelius Caesari apud Lucan.
If some Princes will not endure that subjects should scan their laws, but
require absolute obedience: If Generals excuse not in a soldier In (...)
mortis (...) obire, non impetrata a superiore, (...).
the neglect of their commands, but severely punish even prosperous disorders:
If Jesuits exact blind obedience of their wretched novices (our Throgmorton
durst not give up the ghost till he had obtained leave of his Superior) should
not we much more (...) God in his commands, counsels, promises, prohibitions,
comminations, De Pride. (...) Eudaem.
all?

Verse 25. And knew her not till she had brought forth.]
We think hardly of him that takes to wife the widow and relict of another,
that is left great with child, before she has laid down her burden; how much
more in this case? Besides this might be part of the Angels charge to him: that
after she had brought forth her Son Jesus: she continued still a virgin, (...):
but it is neither Article of our Creed, nor principle of our Religion. But that
she vowed virginity, is both false and absurd. For how (...) she promise
virginity to God, and marriage to Joseph: sure it is, the blemish will never be
wiped off from some of the Ancients, who, to establish their own Idol, of I
know not what virginity, have written most wickedly, and most basely of
marriage, which both Christ honored with his first miracle, and the holy
Ghost, by over shadowing the (...) virgin. As for the Papists that disgrace it,
they appear herein more like devils then Divines. If the 1 Timothy 4. 1.
same God had not been the author of virginity and marriage, he had never
countenanced virginity by marriage, as he did in the Virgin Mary.

CHAP. II.
Verse 1. Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem.]
THe house of bread, that bread of life that came down from Joh. 1. 14.
Heaven, and dwelt amongst us in this City of David, otherwise called Ephrata,
that is, fruit-bearing; and situate (they say) in the very navell and center of
the earth, because in him all Nations should be blessed: Here was Jesus born,
by mere accident, in regard of his parents, (who were brought hither by a
tyrannical edict of the Emperor, forcing all, even great-bellied women, to
repair to their own City, to be taxed, though it were in the deep of winter)
but by a sweet providence of God, to fulfill the Scripture, and to settle our
faith.

In the days of Herod the King]
When the Scepter was departed from Judah, and the times were grown deplored
and desperately wicked. Josoph found his brethren in Dothan. 1. in defection:
so did Christ, when he came: Scarce were there four, or fewer found, that
waited for the consolation of Israel. Then also, when among the poor Gentiles,
a plentiful harvest, a very great number of elect were ready ripe. Mat. 9. 37.
Luke 10. 2. Joh. 4. 35. Then, when cuncta (...) continua totius generis humani
aut pax fuit, (...) Plot. (...) lib. (...).
pactio, then came the Prince of peace into the world, when all was at peace
thorowout the world.

Behold there came wise-men]
Neither Kings nor cunning men, but sages of the East, (...), contemplative
persons, Philosophers, (...)
interpreters of the Laws of God and men. The tale of the (...)
three Kings of (...) is long since exploded.

To Jerusalem]
So misreckoning of a point, they mist the haven, and had like to have run upon
the rocks. Had they met with the Shepherds of Bethlehem, they had received
better intelligence, 1 Cor 1. 27, (...).
then they could from the learned Scribes of Jerusalem. God has August.
confess lib. 8. cap. 8.
(...) the weak of the world to confound the wise. Surgunt indocti and rapiunt
coelum, and nos, cum doctrine is noctris, (...) in Gehennam. None are so far
from Christ, many times, as knowing men. Some of the Scribes and Pharisees were
very Atheists, for they knew neither the Father nor the Son. Uspian the chief
Lawyer, Galen the chief Physician, Porphyry the chief Aristotelean, Plotinus
the chief Platonist, Libanius and Lucian the chief Orators of that age, were
all professed enemies to Christ. No Church (...)
was founded at Athens, Acts 17. which yet Demosthenes calls the soul, sun and
eye of Greece, Euripides, the Greece of Greece, Thucydides and Diodorus, the
common school of all men, the Mart of good learning, etc. The greatest Clerks
are not always the wisest men in the affairs of God. Howbeit, learned
Nathanael, Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus, masters in Israel, were Disciples
to our Savior: lest if he had called simple men only, it might have been
thought, quod fuissent ex simplicitate decepti, that they Joannes de (...).
were deceived out of (...) simplicity, says one.

Verse 2. Saying Where is he that is born King of the Jews?]
As Luke 17. 23.
presupposing a common notice. But the Kingdom of God comes not by
observation, neither is it of this world. Christ is somewhat an obscure King
here, as Melchisedech was; and his Kingdom consists Romans 14.
in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, which Prove. 14. 10.
the stranger worldling meddles not with: The Cock on the dunghill esteems not
this Jewel.

For we have seen his star in the East]
Some rumor of the (...) of Jacob they had heard and received, (...), either
from (...) prophecy, Numb. 24. 17. who was an East Countryman: Hugo Postill.
fol. 15.
Or from the Chaldean Sibyl, or from the Jews in the B. by lonish captivity,
and now they make their use of it. But the Scripture gives more grace, Ium. 4
6. Only take heed, that ye receive not the grace of God in vain, 2 Cor. 6. 1.

And are come to worship him]
With a religious worship: to kiss at his mouth, as the word signifies: and
as Pharaoh said to (...).
Joseph, they shall all kiss at thy mouth. Woe worth to us, if we kiss not the
Son with a kiss of faith and love: since he is now so Psalm. 3.
clearly revealed unto us, not by the sight of one star only, as to these, but
by a whole Heaven bespangled with stars, though not in every part, yet in every
zone and quarter of it, as one says of our Church. We have a word of Prophecy
(how much more is this true of the holy Gospel?) more sure (...) the (...) that
came from Heaven (...). 1. 15.
in the holy mount (says St Peter,) whereunto we shall do well to take heed,
as unto a light shining in a dark place. Besides the works of God, those Regij
professores, as one calls them, those Catholic Preachers, Psalm. 19. 2, 3.
those real Postilles of the Divinity; Christ is purposely compared to sensible
objects, as to the Sun, Stars, Rose, Rock, etc. that through the creatures, as
so many Optic glasses, we might see him that is invisible, having the eyes of
our mind turned toward Christ, as the face of the Cherubims were toward the
Mercy-seat.

Verse 3. When Herod the King heard these things, he was troubled.]
At that wherein the Sages and Shepherds rejoiced. It is fair weather with the
Saints, when foulest with the wicked. Abraham stands upon the hill, and sees
the smoke of the Cities ascend like a furnace. Behold, my servants shall (...),
but ye shall be ashamed: my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall
cry for sorrow of heart, etc. and ye shall leave your name for a curse Isa. 65.
14, 14.
unto my chosen. AElian compares tyrants to swine, which if a man Hist or.
animal
but touch, they begin to cry, as dreaming of nothing but death; forasmuch as
they have neither fleece nor milk, nor any thing else, but their flesh only to
forfeit: But si praesepe vagientis (...) tantum terruit, quid tribunal
judicantis? says one: If Christ in the earth were so terrible, what will he be
on the tribunal?

And all Jerusalem with him]
Perhaps to comply and (...) with the tyrant (as the Arabians, if their King be
sick or lame, they all feign themselves so,) Or, as homines ad servitutem
Tacitus.
(...): so Tiberius called the Romans, who gave public thanks for all, even
the wicked acts of their Emperors: or as fearing some new stirs in the state,
as the burnt child dreads the fire.

Verse 4. And when he had gathered all the chief Priests]
The true picture of Popish Councels, who propound grave questions, as this
was, Where Christ should be born? and pretend to worship Christ, but intend to
worry him: The Council of Trent was carried, against the simplicity of Christ,
with such infinite guil and craft, as that themselves will even smile in the
triumphs of their own wits (when they hear it but mentioned) as at a
masterstratageme. It passed in France in manner of a Proverb, That the modern
Council had more authority then that of the Apostles, because Hist. of (...).
of (...), (...). 8 22.
their own pleasure was a sufficient ground for the decrees, without admitting
the holy Ghost.

Verse 5. And they said unto him, In Bethlehem]
Lo, how readily and roundly, out of the Scriptures, they could answer to this
capital question; giving such signs of the Messiah, as did evidently agree to
Jesus Christ. Yet were they for their obstinacy so infatuated, that when God
showed them the man to whom their own signs agree, they cannot allow of him.
Unless the Lord give a mind as well as means; sight, as well as light, and
irradiate the organ as well as the object, we grope, as blind men in the
dark; we Isa. (...). 10.
err in heart, as not knowing Gods ways: yet cannot wander so (...). (...).
wide, as to miss of hell; to original blindness, we add actual
stubbornness, the devil holding his black hand (as it were) before our eyes,
that we may not see and be saved, Acts 26. 19.

Verse 6. And thou Bethlehem, in the Land of Judah, art not the least.]
Thou art the least, says Micah, viz. in comparison of Mic. 5. 2.
greater Cities, yet not the least, says Matthew; because out of thee shall
come a Governeur, etc. In Scripture, the place of holy men's birth is remembered
and registered: God loves the very ground his servants tread on. The Lord shall
count, when he numbreth up Psalm. 87. 6, 7.
the people, that this man was born there: how much more the man Christ Jesus?
Any interest or relation to him, ennobleth whatsoever place or person; and may
justly comfort us against whatsoever troubles. The Prophet Micah, whose words
are here cited, opposes the birth of this babe of (...), to all the troops and
troubles Mic 5. 1, 2.
of Assyria.

For out of thee shall come a Governour]
No sooner is this child Isa. 9. 6.
born, this Son given to us, but the government is laid upon his shoulders; as
the key of the (...) of David was upon Eliakims, Isa. 22. 22. send ye therefore
a Lamb to this Ruler of the Land, Isa. 16. 1. do him all hearty homage and
fealty.

That shall rule my people]
Or feed them; for the art of feeding (...).
and ruling are sisters. David was taken from following the (...). (...). (...).
ews, to feed Gods people; so was Moses, in whose absence, how (...) Hom.
soon was Israel, as silly sheep, gone out of the way? Christ is the Arch
(...), that feeds his people daily, daintily, plentifully, 1 Pet. 5. 4.
pleasantly, among the lilies, (...). 2 16. yea, in his garden of spices, Cant.
8. 14.
in green pastures of his word, and by the still waters of his Sacraments,
Psalm. 23. 8, 3.
where we go in and out, and (...) pasture, Joh. 10. 8. such as breeds (...),
and life in more abundance, ver. 10. We lie down in peace, Ier. 23. 4. and need
not fear the spiritual Assyrian, Micah 5. 5. Whiles we keep us within the
hedge, and run to the foddering places; submitting to the Ministers, those
under-shepherds, Cant. 1. 7, 8. who are charged to feed Christ's sheep, his
sheep with golden fleeces; yea to do it ((...) as the Syriack has it) Joh. 21
16.
for me, for my sake (says our Savior) to whom Peter cannot exp unded.
better seal up his love, then by taking care of his Cure. I know how
Bellarmine glosseth that text, Feed my sheep, that is, Regio more impera, Rule
like an Emperor: Supremum in Ecclesia (...) tibi assere, says Baronius;
Domineer over the Church: because the word here used (and so in John)
signifies as well to govern (...)
as to feed. But what will they say to (...), the other word there twice used
by our Savior; which always signifies to feed, and not at all to govern? But
these men catch at government, let go seeding: although the Fathers took the
text only of feeding by doctrine, and that they beat upon, and urged altogether.

Verse 7. Then Herod, when he had privily called the wise men, (...).
enquired of them diligently]
The children of this world are wise (...). and (...).
in their generation, but so (...) Serpents, Foxes, etc. to the which the
Churches enemies are often compared. He thought by this means to have made all
sure, but in the thing wherein he dealt proudly Exodus 18. 11.
and politikely God was above them, as old Jethro has it. There is neither
power nor policy against the Lord; who ever waxed fierce against him, and
prospered? Job 9. 2.

Verse 8. And he sent them to Bethlehem.]
It was a (...) he went not himself, or sent not some Assassine under hand, to
dispatch Deus quem (...), demen (...).
the child immediately. But God befoold him. The (...) have a proverb, Where
God intends to blind any man, he first closes (...).
up his eyes. So the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 19. He takes the wise, the (...).
finest and choicest wits of the world, the rare and picked pieces: (...) Cor.
3. 19. exp.
Mentemque habere que is bonam
Et esse corculis datum est:
(...), (...), and (...)
These he takes; he catches and keeps as beasts in a gin (so the word
signifies) and that in their own craft: when they have wrackt their wits, and
wrackt their fortunes, to effect their fetches; (...)
when they have done their utmost (as the word imports) to bring about their
devilish devices. In (...). E. (...)


That I may come, and worship him]
When he meant to worry him. O base dissimulation! such was that of those
Incendiary (...) Iesulum non (...) sed tollere, non (...), sed (...).
sugitives of Rhemes, Giffard, Hodgson and others: who at the same time, when
they had set up, and set on Savage to kill Q. Elizabeth, they put forth a book,
wherein they admonished the English Catholics, not to attempt any thing
against their Prince. In Cambden.
like sort Rob. Parsons (that Arch-traitour) when he was hatching (...). (...).
an horrible treason against his natural Prince, and native country, he set
forth his book of Christian Resolution; as if he had been wholly made of
devotion. So Garnet (a little before the Powderplot was discovered) wrote to the
Pope, that he would lay his command upon our Papists, to obey their King, and
keep themselves quiet. Herod here, when he was whetting his sword, yet promised
Quando gladium (...), devotionem pro (...).
devotion, says Chrysostom. A fair glove upon a foul hand. The Panthers skin
is fairest, but his friendship is fatal, and his breath infectious. The
abovementioned Garnet, upon a treatise of Equivocation (...). cap. 27.
plaistered on this title, A Treatise against lying, and fraudulent
dissimulation.

Verse 9. And lo the Star,
A Star either new created, or, at leastwise, strangely carried: for it stands
(...) while, moves another, appears in the lower region, is not obscured by the
beams of the Sun: Angelus in (...) syder is (...). (...). r.
so that some have thought it was an Angel. It moved slowly, as might be best
for the pace and purpose of these Pilgrims.

Till it came, and stood over where the young child was.]
They (...) still at (...) a little hole over the place where our Savior was
born; through which, the Star fell down to the ground. Fullers History of Holy
War.
But who will not conclude, but there was a vertigo in his head, who first made
a Star (...) to the falling sickness?

Verse 10. When they saw the Star]
The sight whereof they seem to have lost, when they turned out of the way (it
led them to Jerusalem. But this text is excellently paraphrased and applied by
Bishop Hooper, Martyr, in a letter of his, written to one Mrs Anne Wareup, in
these words: Such as iravelled to find Christ, followed (...). and (...).
only the Star: and as long as they saw it, they were assured they were in the
right way, and had great mirth in their journey. But when they entered into
Jerusalem (whereas (...) Star led them not thither, but unto Bethlehem) and
there asked the Citizens the thing that the Star (...) before: As long as they
tarried in Jerusalem, and would be instructed where Christ was born, they were
not only ignorant of Bethlehem, but also lost the sight of the Star, that led
them before. Whereof we learn in any case, whilst we be going to seek Christ,
which is above, to beware we lose not the Star of Gods word, that only is the
mark that shows us where Christ is, and which way we may come unto him. But as
Jerusalem stood in the way, and was an impediment to these wise men: so does
the Synagogue of Antichrist (that bears the name of Jerusalem, that is, the
vision of peace, and among the people now is called the Catholic Church) stand
in the way, that pilgrims must go by, through this world to Bethlehem, the house
of saturity and plentifullnesse; and is an impediment to all Christian
travelers. Yea, and except the more grace of God be, will keep the pilgrims
still in her, that they shall not come where Christ is adored. And to stay them
indeed, they take away the Star of light. viz. the word of God, that it cannot
be seen, as you may read that other Star was hid from the wise men, while they
asked of the Pharisees at Jerusalem, where Christ was born. You may see what
great dangers happened to these wise men, (...) they were a learning of liars,
(...) was Christ: first, they were out of (...) way, (...) next, they lost
their guide, etc.

Verse 11. And when they were come into the house]
Not a (...) (...).
Palace prepared for the purpose, as the Porphyrogeniti in Constantinople had,
(...) in an Inn was Christ born, as ready to receive all (...). contra Tryph.
that come unto him, and in a hole of the earth, an underground (...) 51.
Eusebius.
den, as Justin Martyr, Epiphanius, Eusebius and Origin (...). In (...) terrae
foramine (says St Hierom, ad Marcill. tom. 1.) de (...) (...).
(...) conditor natus est, hic involutus pannis, hic visus a pastoribus, Orig.
(...). 1.
hic adoratus a (...), hic circumcisus, etc. In this cell or (...) Celsum.
hole was the worlds Creator born, swathed, visited, adored, circumcised.

They saw the young childe]
For this Ancient of days, by joining his Majesty to our vileness, his power to
our (...), suspended and laid aside his own glory, wherewith he was glorified
with the Father before the world began, and voluntarily abased himself to the
shape and state of a poor, feeble, helpless infant, that we might come to the
fulness of the age in Christ. (...). (...).


With Mary his Mother]
Without any other assistance or attendance. Joseph happily was at work, or
otherwise absent, lest the wise men should mistake him for the true father of
the child.

Ana when they had opened their treasures, they presented unto him gifts]
No great matters to make him rich: for then, what needed the holy Virgin, at
her Purification, to have offered two young Pigeons, as a token of her penury,
that could not reach to a Lamb? Yet something it was; gold, frankincense and
(...), (sent them in by a special providence of God) to help to bear their
charges into Egypt, whither they were now to flee.

Gold, frankincense and myrrhe]
The (...) commodities of their (...), doubtless: thereby (as by a
Pepper-corn, in way of homage or chief-rent) they acknowledged Christ to be the
true Proprietary and Lord of all. Of the Elephant it is reported, that coming
to feed, the first sprig he breaks, he turns it toward Heaven. Of the Stork
Pliny tells us, that she offers the first fruits of Lib. 10 cap. 23. Hinc (...)
cultrix a Latinis (...), (...) ab (...).
her young ones to God, by casting one of them out of the nest. God is content
we have the benefit of his creatures, so he may have the glory of them: this is
all the loan he looks for: and for this as he indents with us, Psalm. 50. 15.
so the Saints restipulate, Genesis 28. 22. But he cannot abide that we pay this
rent to a wrong Landlord, whether to our selves, as Deuteronomy. 8. 17. or to our
fellowcreatures, (...)
as they to their sweet hearts, Hos. 2. 5.

Gold, frankincense and myrrhe]
Aurum, thus, myrrham, regique, hominique, Deoque. A (...) of each, as Genesis 43.
11. Lycurgus made a law that no man should be over-costly or (...), (...).
(...).
in his offering of sacrifice, (...) at (...) he should grow (...) of the
charge, and give God over. Ought we not (says one) often in soul to go with
the wise men to Bethlehem, being directed by the star of grace, and there
fall down and worship the little King: there offer the gold of charity, the
frankincense of (...), the myrrh of pae (...): and then return, not by cruel
Suttons Disce vivere.
Herod, or troubled Jerusalem, but another way, a better way, unto our long and
happy home?

Verse 12. And being warned of God in a (...), etc.]
Thus were they pulled, by a sweet (...), out of the Lions mouth, as Paul was:
as Athanasius (...) (...) (...): as Luther also, and 2 Timothy 4. (...).
Q. Elizabeth of famous memory: for whose execution a warrant Englands
Elizabeth.
once came down under seal, Gardner being the chief engineer. And when, through
a sea of sorrows, she had swom to the crown, Cambdens Elizabeth, (...).
treasons there were every year so many, that she said in Parliament, she
rather marvelled that she was, then mused that she should not be. But no man is
master of his own life, much less of another, as our Savior told Pilate: See
(...). 24. 22. My times are in thy hands, says David, Deliver me from the
hands of mine enemies, Psalm. 31. 15.
and from them that persecute me. So Q. Elizabeth at Woodstock, after a great
deliverance, Lord, look upon the wounds of thy hands, said she, and (...) not
the work of thy hands. Thou have written Englands Elizabeth.
me down in thy book of preservation with (...) own hand. Oh read thine own
handwriting, and save me, etc. And God heard her, and hid the silver thread of
her precious life, in the endless maze of his bottomless mercies. M. Fox makes
mention of one Laremouth, alias Williamson, Chaplain to Lady Anne of Cleeve, a
Scotchman, to whom, in prison, it was said, as he thought, (...) and go thy
ways; whereto when he gave no great heed at first, the second time it was so
said; upon this, as he fell to his prayers, it was said the third time likewise
to him, which was half an hour after. So he arising upon the same, immediately
a piece of the prison-wall fell down: And as the officers came in at the
outer-gate of the prison, he leaping over the ditch escaped. And in the way
meeting a certain beggar, changed his coat with him, and coming to the
seashore, where he found a vessel ready to go over, was taken in, and escaped
the search, which was straightly laid for Act. and (...). (...). (...).
him all the country over.

Verse 13. Behold, the Angel of the Lord appears to Joseph in a dream]
Angels cannot inlighten the mind, or powerfully incline the will (that is
proper to the holy Ghost to do) but, as (...) and instruments of the holy
Ghost, they can insinuate themselves into the fantasy (as here to Joseph)
stir up phantasmes of good things, propound truth to the mind, advise and
persuade to it, as Counselors, and inwardly instigate, as it were, by
speaking and doing after a spiritual manner, suggesting good thoughts, as the
apostate Angels do (...). How often had we (...), had not these guardians
hindered (as Michael opposed Satan) by removing occasions, Jude 9.
or casting in good instincts into us, either asleep or awake, etc.

Take the young child, and flee into Egypt.]
Perhaps through Deuteronomy. 8. 15.
that terrible and roaring wilderness of (...): However, this was a part of
his passion; for, from his cratch to his cross, he (...) many a little death
all his life long. And as it is said of that French King, That he acted more
wars, then others ever saw: so Hen 4.
our Savior suffered more miseries, then we ever heard of. Banished he^ was
betime, to bring back his banished to Paradise that is above, their proper
country; toward the which we groan and aspire, as often as we look toward
Heaven: waiting, as with stretched out (...).
Romans 8. 19.
necks, for the manifestation of the Sons of God: and saying with Judge 5. (...).
Siseras mother: Why is his chariot so long in coming? why tarry Cant. 8. 14.
the wheels of his charets? Make haste, my beloved, and be like a Roe or young
Heart upon the mountains of spices.

For Herod will seek the young child to destroy him]
The (...) in Herod, Rev. 12. 4. So Rev. 2 10. The Devil shall cast some of you
into prison, etc. Is the Devil become a Justicer, to send men to prison? by his
imps and instruments, (such as Herod was, that abuse their authority) Satan
exercises his malice against the Saints, lending them his 7 heads to plot, and
his 10 horns to push; but all in vain, Psalm 2 5.

Verse 14. When he arose, he took the young child, etc.]
Whither God leads, we must cheerfully follow, though he seem to (...) est a
nimus (...) se Deo (...). Senec.
lead us, as he did Israel in the wilderness, in and out, backwards and
forwards, as if we were treading in a maze: although we were to go with him
into those places -- pigris (...) nulla campis
Arbor aestiv a recreatur aur a: Hor. lib. 1. (...). (...).

Quod (...) mundi nebulae, malusque Jupiter urget.


And departed into Egypt]
A country, for its fruitfullnesse and abundance, anciently called, publicum
Orbis horreum, the Worlds (...) unde haureatur.
great granary or barn: And to this day, so far as the River waters, (...).
Mela.
they do but throw in the seed, and have four rich harvests in less Blunts
voyage into the Levant page 37.
then four months, says a late traveller. Hither flees the Son of God, as to
a sanctuary of safety. And some say, that at his coming thither, all the Idols
fell to the ground. Sure it is, that when the love of Christ once comes into
the heart, all the idol-desires of the world and flesh, fall to nothing. Hosea
14. 8.

Verse 15. And was there, till the death of Herod.
Which was a matter of two or three years at least. For Christ was born in the
(...) vult hec bien.
32 of Herod's reign, fled when he was about two years old, or soon after his
birth (as others are of opinion) and returned not till Herod (...) natum (...).
was dead, after he had reigned 37 years.

That it might be fulfilled, that was spoken etc.]
When the old (...) is cited in the New, it is not only by way of
accommodation, but because it is the proper meaning of the places, both in the
type and in the truth.

Verse 16. Then Herod when he saw that he was mocked]
He had mocked them, and yet takes it ill to be mocked of them, to have his own
measure: He never takes notice of this, that God usually makes fools of his
enemies; lets them proceed, that they may be frustrated; and when they are gone
to the utmost reach of their tedter, pulls them back to their task, with shame.

Was exceeding wroth, and sent forth and (...)]
In their anger they slew a man, says Jacob of his two sons, Cursed be their
anger, for it was fierce, etc. Genesis 49. 6, 7. It is indeed the fury of the
unclean spirit, that old manslayer, a very beast within the he art of a man; a
short (...), as we see in Saul, whom the Devil (...) by this passion, Ephesians. 4.
17. in Lamech, who slew a man in his (...), and Gen (...) (...).
boasted of it: as Alexander Phereus consecrated the Javeling wherewith he slew
Polyphron: in David, who swore a great oath what he would do to Nabal, by such
a time: And when Uzziah (...) Chron. 15. 2.
was smitten, for his carting the Ark, how untowardly spoke he? (so did (...)
too) as if the fault were in God, (dogs in a chafe (...) bark at their own
masters.) Lastly, in Theodosius at Thessalonica, where being enraged at the
slaughter of certain Judges, (...) by sedition, he did to death at hand of
seven thousand men. Anger (...) (...) non (...), (...) esse (...) quod
suaserit, and (...), Horat
begins in rashness, abounds in transgression, Prove. 29. 22. ends in
repentance. Jonathan therefore rose from the table in fierce anger, 1 Samuel 20.
34. and to prevent further mischief, went into the field to shoot: And
Ahashuerosh, to slake the fire of his wrath conceived against Haman, walked
into his garden, ere he pronounced any thing against him, Esth. 7. 7.

All the children]
His own son also: which Augustus Caesar Melius est (...) esse (...), Macrob.
(...)(...). (...).
hearing of, said, It were better be Herod's swine then his son. So Philip King
of France, ventured his eldest son twice in the wars against those ancient
Protestants, the Albigenses, at the siege of Toulouse. And Philip K. of Spain,
(...) his eldest son Charles cap 4.
to be murdered by the cruel (...), because he seemed to favor (...).
Lutherans: For which, that mouth of blasphemy, the Pope (...).
gave him this panegyr, Non pepercit filio (...), sed dedit pro nobis, He ^.
spared not his own son, but gave him up for us.

According to the time which he had diligently enquired]
Some think, the wise men came before the Purification, but (...) will have it
well-nigh two years after. (...) was curious in the search, that he might make
sure work: but God (...) him. I kept the ban-dogs at staves-end (says Nicol.
Shetterden, Martyr) not as thinking to escape them, but that I would see the
foxes leap Hieron Catina.
above ground for my blood, if they can reach it, etc.

Verse 17. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken]
Fulfilling Beza.
of Prophecies is a-convincing argument of the divinity of the Act. and Mon.
Scriptures. Mises had foretold, that God should dwell between (...). 1523.
Benjamins shoulders. This was fulfilled 440 years after, when the Deuteronomy. 33.
(...).
Temple was set up in the Tribe of Benjamin: so the prophecies of the coming of
Christ, and of Antichrist, and others in the Revelation, which we see daily
accomplished.

Verse 18. Lamentation, weeping and great mourning]
How impatient was Jacob in the loss of Joseph, David of (...), etc? Grief for
sin (then which (...) more deep and soaking) is set forth by this unparalleld
lamentation. Zech. 12. 10. (...). 5. 4. (...) are they that mourn, as men do at
the death of their dearest (...).
children. But let such say to God, as St (...) advises a friend of his in
like case, Tulisti liberos, (...) ipse (...): non contristor Ad Julian.
quod recepisti: ago (...) quod (...): Thou have taken away whom thou had
given me: I grieve not that thou have taken them, but praise thee, Lord, that
was pleased to give them.

Rachel weeping]
That is, (...), in the way whereto Rachel died in childbirth, and was buried,
Give me children, or (...) I die: Give her children, and yet she dies.

For her children]
Those dear pledges and pieces of our selves; Lambin. in Menech. (...), (...).
Act. 1. (...).
called Chari by the Latins, and (...) by the Greeks, darlings, in whom is all
our delight, Ezekiel(...) 24. 25. yet are they certain cares, but uncertain
comforts. 1. (...) cum charis (...).


And would not be comforted]
This confutes him in Plautus, that said, Mulier nulla (...) cordicitus ex
animo. These mourned Filius (...) (...).
beyound measure, utterly refusing to be comforted by any fair words of the
murderers, excusing the matter (likely) to the miserable mothers, and
promising amends from the King by some other means, or by any other way. But
immoderate sorrow, for losses past hope of recovery, is more sullen then
useful: our stomach Mic. 6. 9.
may be bewrayed by it, not our wisdom: and although something Lento (...).
Ipsa (...) verenda (...) (...)
we may yield to nature, in these cases, yet nothing to (...).

Because they were not]
A just judgment of God upon them for their unnaturallnesse to the Son of God,
whom they shut our into a stable. The dullness and (...) of these (...)
required thus to be raised and rowsed up, as by the sound of a Ant. (...) 17.
Trumpet, or report of a Musket. Happy for them, if they had hearts Sylla (...)
it a ut (...) (...) (...). In (...).
to hear the rod, and who had appointed it. But we many times mistake the cause
of our misery, groping in the dark as the Sodomites, crying out upon the
instrument, seldom reflecting; our minds being as ill set as our eyes, we turn
neither of them inwards.

Verse 19. But when (...) was dead]
Not long after this butchery at Bethlehem, he fell into a foul and (...)
disease, whereof he died: so did Sylla that bloody man before him: so did
Maximinus (...). (...).
and others after him; John de (...) a cruel (...) and Inquisitioner, (who
used to fill (...) boots with boiling grease, and so putting them upon the
legs of those whom he examined, to tie them backward to a form with their
legs (...) down over a small fire, etc.) was smitten by God with an incurable
disease, so loathsome, that none could come nigh him, so swarming with vermin
and so rotten, that the slesh fell away from the bones by peece-meal, etc.
Twiford (who was executioner of Frith, Bayfeild, Act. and (...). (...). 860
Bainham, Lambert and other good men) died rotting above Ibid 11 46.
ground, that none could abide him. So did Alexander the cruel (...) of
Newgate, and John Peter his son in law, who commonly, when he would affirm any
thing, used to say, If it be not true, I pray God I rot ere I die. Stephen
Gardner rejoicing upon the news of the Bishops burnt at Oxford, was suddenly
ceized by the terrible hand of God as he sat at meat; continuing, for the
space of 15 days, in such intolerable torment, that he could not void by
ordure, or otherwise, any thing that he received; whereby his body being
miserably inflamed (who had inflamed so many good Martyrs before) was brought
to a wretched end; his tongue Acts and Mon.
hanging out all black and (...), as Archbishop (...) did (...) fol 10 22.
him, But to return to Herod: when he saw he should die indeed; that there
might not be no mourning at his funeral, he commanded the (...) Nobility (whom
he had (...) for that purpose in the Castle of (...)) to be all (...) as soon
Josephus.
as ever he was dead. And being at point of death, he (...) his son Antipater
to be executed in the prison, whom but a (...) before, he had declared heir of
the Kingdom. In November 1572. appeared a new Star in Cassiopeia, and continued
16 (...). Theodor Beza (...) applied it ((...) Mr (...)) to that Star at
Christ's birth, and to the infanticide there, and warned Charles (...). (...).
transl. fol 165.
(...) 9th to beware in this verse, Tu vero, Herodes sanguinolente, time.
The fifth month after the vanishing of this Star, the said Charles, after
long and grievous pains, died of exceeding bleeding. Constans Act. and Mon.
(...).
fama (...) illum, dum e varijs corporis (...) emanaret, in lecto saepe
volutatum, inter horribilium (...) diras, tantam sangninis vim projecisse,
(...) post hor as mortuus (...): (...) (as they say of the Devil) go out with a
(...). Arius (says one) voiding out his guts, sent his soul, as a Socrat. lib.
1. cap. 15.
harbinger to hell, to provide room for his body: He was brought to confusion
by the prayers of Alexander the good Bishop of Constantinople, and his death
was precationis opus, non morbi. So, likely, was (...).

Behold, an Angel]
Glad of an office to serve the Saints, Heb. 1. 14. They rejoice more in their
names of office, then of honor: to be called Angels, Watchmen, etc. then
Principalities, powers, etc. Dan. 4. 23.
It was long (...) Joseph heard from (...), but Gods time, he knew, (...)
was the best, And allthough he leave his people, to their thinking, yet he
forsakes them not. Not (...) he does (...), says the Author Heb. 13. 5.
to the Heb.

Verse 20. For they are (...), which (...) the young (...) Isa. (...). (...).
life]
God hid him as it were, for a little moment, until the indignation was (...).
So he did (...), Baruch, (...), Luther in his Pathmos, (as he used to call the
(...) of (...),) where when the Pope (...) excommunicated him, and the Emperor
proscribed him, the Lord put into the heart of the (...) of Saxony to hide him
for (...) months. In which (...) the (...) dyed, the Emperor had his hands
full of the French wars, and the Church thereby obtained an happy Halcyon. At
which (...) a pretty spectacle it was to behold Christ striving with Antichrist
for (...). For whatsoever the Pope and his Champions could do to the contrary,
all fell (...) rather, as (...) Philippi, unto the (...) of Phil. 1. 12.
the Gospel. So was it here in Q. Maryes time: do what they could, the
Christian Congregation in London were, sometimes forty, sometimes a hundred,
sometimes two hundred. I have heard of one (says M. Fox) that being sent to
them to take their (...), Act. and Mon. 1881.
and to espy their doings, yet in being among them was converted, and cried
them all mercy. (...) hearing that the (...) lay Ibid. (...).
a dying, hasted home from London to burn those six that he had in his cruel
custody. Those were the last that were burnt. Many others escaped by the Queens
(...).

Verse 21. And be arose andd. and (...) into the land of Israel]
Ezekiel 20. 7, 8.
Glad they were got out of (...) a hell (...) Egypt: (...) the Israelites
having been for a time, (...) with them a golden Calse: (...) brought home two;
and these good (...) could not but get and gather (...) or (...). Hence David's
(...) Psalm. 120. 5.
at (...), (...) (...) at (...), (...) wish (...) in the wilderness, (...) and
(...) Jet (...) 2.
(...), those (...) (...), of (...) it might (...), as Aaron of (...) people,
that they were (...) upon (...), Exodus 32. 22. 1 (...). (...). 19. (...) some
of the (...) ((...) (...) the (...)) and (...) Act. and (...) fol. (...).
(...), that, if it (...) may (...) Egypt.

Verse 22. But when he heard that Archelaus]
Neither good egg, nor good bird, as they say. Caracalla, (says Dio) nihil
(...) boni, quia id non didicerat, quod ipse fatebatur: never thought of any
good, for he had never learned it. No more had this Archelaus. Pope Paul the
third, when his son Farnesis had committed an unspeakable violence on the
Person of Cosmus Chaerius Bishop of Fanum, and then poisoned him, held himself
excused, that he could say, Haec vitia, me non (...), didicit: He never learned
this of the father. But Archelaus though he could never attain to his fathers
craft, yet he had learnt his cruelty. Feirce he was, but foolish; savage, but
silly, a slug, a (...), an evil beast: wherefore the Jews soon rebelled
against him; and Augustus (after ten years abuse of his authority) (...) him
to Vienna, or, as others say, to Lions in France: setting up in his stead his
brother Herod, the same that derided and set at (...) our Savior at his
passion, as St Hierome writes.

Verse 23. And (...) came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth]
Hence an opinion among the people, that he was borne there, and so could not
be the Messiah, as the Pharisees on that ground persuaded: Joh 7. 42.
for can any good come out of Nazareth? The devils also, though they confessed
him the Holy One of God, Mark. 1. 24. 25. Yet they cunningly call him Jesus of
Nazareth, to nourish the (...) of the multitude, that thought he was borne
there, and so not the Christ. When one commended the Popes legate at the
Council of Basil, Sigismund the Emperor answered, Tamen Satan aliguando
verax, saepius mendax, semper (...).
(...) est. So let the devil speak true or false, fair or foul; yet he is a
devil still: beware of him.

That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophets]
For the book of Judges was written by (...) Prophets, in several ages. And
there be very grave Authors of opinion, that Ezra (that skillful scribe,)
either himself alone, or with the help of his colleagues godly and learned men
like himself, inspired by the holy Ghost, compiled and composed those books of
(...), Judges, (...), and Kings, out of diverse Annals, preserved by the
Churches of those ages, wherein those things were acted.

He shall be called a Nazaren]
That great Victory, whereof (...) and the rest of his order were but (...) and
shadows. The very name signifies one separate and set apart from others, as
(...) was separate from his brethren, Genesis 49. 26. And it is (...) to three
sorts of men, usually set above others, (as Divines have well observed.) 1. To
such as are set apart to (...) sanctimony, as the High Priest, whose crown is
called Nezer, Exo. 29. 6. 2. To such as in dignity and authority are set above
others, as Kings, whose diadem is called Nezer, 2 Samuel 1. 10. 3. To such as
were separated by some religious vow, as to the order of the Nazarites, whose
hair increasing on their heads, as an external sign of their vow, was called
Nezer, (...). 6. 18. As for our Savior, it is not likely that he (...) his
hair; (...) the (...) says (in 1 Cor. 11. 14.
that age) it was uncomely for men to (...) long hair. It was enough for him,
that he was a (...), in the truth and substance of that Law; and a singular
comfort it is to us, that although we have broken Genesis 28 20, etc.
our vows, and so deeply gashed our consciences, as Jacob did, with chap. 31.
17.
yet so long as it is of infirmity and forgetfulness, not of obstinacy and
maliciousness, this famous Nazarite, this arch-votary, has expiated our
defaults in this kind; (...) through him we are in Gods sight, as Ierusalms
Nazarites, Lam. 4 7. Purer then the snow, and whiter then the milk. And
therefore since God thinks not the worse of us, let not us think the worse of
our selves, for the involuntary violation of our vows.

CHAP. III.
Verse 1. In those days came John the Baptist.]
WHom Chrysologus fitly calls, (...) legis and (...), the bond or buckle of
both Testaments. He stands, as that Angel, with one foot on the sea (the law)
and with the other foot Revel. 10. (...).
on the land (the Gospel.)

Preaching in the wilderness of Judea,]
A place, wherein we find six cities with (...) villages, Josh. 15. 61. But
called a wilderness, because more thinly inhabited. In which sense we may say
of Germany, that Acheldama or field of blood, and many other once rich and
fertile countries, that they are become a wilderness, war being a tragedy
that always (...) eth the stage whereon it is acted: but for the wickedness of
them that dwell therein (...) 107 (...).
it is, that a (...) full land is turned into (...) wilderness, says David.
(...) est (...).
And the Heathen (...) says little (...), when he tells us that the ruin and
rubbish of Troy, are set by God before the eyes of Herodot.
(...), for an example of that rule, that, Great (...) have great punishments.
Now alterius perditio sit tua cautio, says an Ancient, Isidor. soliloq
Not to be warned by others, is a sure presage of ruin. Scipio beheld and
bewailed the downfall of Rome, in the destruction of Carthage. And when
Hannibal was beleaguering Saguntum in Spain, the Romans were as sensible
thereof, as if he had been then Live.
beating upon the walls of their Capitol. A storm, oft-times, begins in one
place, and ends in another. When the sword rides circuit (as a Judge) it is in
commission, Ezekiel. 14. 17. Ier. 47. 6, 7. And, When I begin (says God) I will
make an end, 1 Samuel 3. 12. We cannot but foresee a storm, unless we be of
those in Bernard, who seek straws to put out their eyes withal. If we Qui
(...), (...) (...).
break not off our sins by repentance (that there may be a lengthening of our
tranquillity) a removal of our Candleslick may be as certainly foreseen and
foretold, as if visions and letters were sent Dan. 4. 27.
us from heaven, as once to the Church of Ephesus. God may well say to us, as
to them of old, Have I been a wilderness unto Jer. 2. 31.
Israel, a land of darkness? Or, as Themistocles to his Athenians, Are ye
weary of receiving so many benefits by one man? Bona a tergo formosissima. Our
sins have long since solicited an utter dissolution and desolation of all; and
that we should be made a Jer. 49. 2. and 25. 9.
heap and a hissing, a waste and a wilderness: Quod Deus ave^tat.

Verse 2. And saying, Repent ye]
Change your minds now at Ad mentem redite. Erasm.
the preaching of the Gospel, as they changed their garments at the
promulgation of the Law, Rent your hearts and not your garments, As the
Prodigal came to himself, who till converted, had been beside himself.
plough up the fallows of your hearts; grieve for your sins, even to a
transmentation, as those Corinthians did, and as Simon Peter counseled Simon
Magus, that snake that had cast his coat, but kept his poison. For although he
ca^ried the matter so cleanly and cunningly, that Philip took him for a true
convert, and See a like phrase, 2 Chro. 6. 37
baptized him; yet Peter soon saw that he was in the gall or venom of
bitterness (for the word used, Deuteronomy. 29. 18. whereunto the Act. 8. ^^, 23.
Apostle alludes, signifies both) and therefore prescribes him an (...)
Antidote, the very same that John does here, this generation of (...)
vipers, Repent, if perhaps the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee. His
wicked thought is called (...), the godly change of mind that the Apostle
persuades him unto, is called (...), he that by some mischance has drunk
poison, must cast it up again as soon as he can, ere it get to the vitals.
Repentance is the souls vomit, which is the hardest kind of physic, but the
wholsomest. Happy is he, that by the dung-port of his mouth (in Nehem. 3. 14.
a sorrowful confession) can disburden himself of the sin that Heb. 12. 1.
both clogs and hazards his soul to death eternal. We r^n from God by sin to
death, and have no other way to return, but by death to sin.

For the kingdom of heaven is at hand.]
q. d. Ye have a price put into your hands, a fair opportunity of making your
selves for ever. Will ye (like the vine and olive in ^othams parable) not leave
Judge. 9. 9.
your sweetness and fatness, your dilecta delicta, beloved sins, although it
be to reign, yea and that in Gods kingdom? Know Romans 2. 4.
thou not that the goodness of God should lead thee to repentance? Psalm. 130.
4.
Is there not mercy with God therefore, that he may be Joel 2. 12.
feared? should not men rent their hearts, because God is gracious, Isa. 55 7.
and turn to the Lord, because he will multiply pardon? To argue from mercy to
liberty, is the devils logic; and makes God repent him of his favors to such,
as David did of his kindness to Nabal. Rather we should argue from mercy to
duty, as Joseph did to his master in a temptation: from deliverance to
obedience, with David, Psalm. 116 8, 9. And therefore return to our fathers
house, with the Prodigal, because there is bread enough; therefore repent,
because his Kingdom is at hand, and would be laid hold on. As John Baptist was
Christ's forerunner into the world: so must repentance be his forerunner into
our hearts.

Verse 3. For this is he which was spoken of.]
Whether these be the words of the Baptist, or of the Evangelist, it appears
not, skils not. The most say, of the Evangelist concerning the Baptist.

By the Prophet Isaias.]
Thus one Testament infolds another, as those wheels in Ezekiel: And the Law
preaches faith in Christ, as well as the Gospel, Romans 10. 6. 7.

The voice of one crying]
Loudly and lustily; lifting up his voice (...), Boa^^^, Vociferant^^. (...).
as a trumpet, or as the sound of many waters. Semblably S. Paul was ordained
to be a crier, 1 Timothy 1. ^1. and so is every faithful Preacher, 2 Timothy 4. 2.
He must cry, and be instant, stand to the (...).
work, and stand over it; Sta cum diligentia, says the Syriack there,
clangite, clamate, Jer. 4. 5. Ye have to do with deaf men, dead men, living
carcases, walking sepulchers of themselves. Isa. ^8. 1.
Now therefore as our Savior lifted up his voice, when (...).
he said, Lazarus, come forth: So must Christ's Ministers (when they speak to
such as lie rotting and stinking in the graves of their corruptions) cry aloud,
Awake thou that sleep, and stand up (...). (...). 14. (...).
from the dead, that Christ may give thee light. Ecclesia (the Church) is a
word in use among the Athenians, and signifies an Assembly of Citizens, called
out of the multitude (as it were) by name, or in their ranks, by the voice of
the public Crier, to hear some speech or sentence of the Senate. The Church in
like sort is a company called out of the kingdom of Satan, by the voice of
Gods Ministers, as it were criers, to hear the doctrine of the Gospel revealed
from heaven. There are that observe, that John Rolloc. in Joh. 1. 15.
Baptist entered upon his calling in the year of Jubilee, which used to be
proclaimed by a Crier with the sound of a trumpet, and that in allusion
thereunto, he is called, The voice of a crier.

Prepare ye the way of the Lord.]
(...) the terrors of the Lord to seize upon your souls: take not up bucklers
against the strokes of Gods Law: bring not your buckets to quench the motions
of his Spirit, knocking at your hearts by the hammer of his Word: Make much of
the least beginnings of grace, even those they call repressing; since they
prepare the heart for conversion. Open the everlasting doors, that the King of
glory may come in, that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. As Esther
leaned upon (...) two maids, when she came before the King: So let the soul
(...) upon attrition of the Law, and contrition of the Gospel: so (...) the
King of glory stretch out the golden Scepter of his grace, and we shall live.
As John Baptist was Christ's forerunner into the world: so must repentance be
his forerunner into our hearts: for he that repents not, the Kingdom of God
is far from him: he cannot see it, for his lusts that hang in his light.

Make his paths straight.]
Walk exactly, precisely, accurately, (...).
(...) line and by rule; walk as in a frame, make straight steps to Heb (...).
Isa. 40. (...) and oculis (...).
your feet, or else there is no passing the strait gate: so strait, that as few
can walk in it, so none can halt in it, but must needs go upright. Plain
things will join in every point one with another; not so (...) and rugged
things. In like sort, plain spirits Obstant enim offect (...), etc. Erasm. in
(...).
close with Gods truths, not those that are swollen, etc. The old heart will
never hold out the hardship of holiness.

Verse 4. And the same John had his raiment of Camels hair.]
Bradford.
Suitable to Elias (in whose spirit and power he came) who was Ephesians. 5. 15.
thus habited. So those worthies, of whom the world was not worthy, wandered
about in (...)-(...) and Goat-(...): but they Heb. 11. 37.
were like the Ark, without, covered with Goats-hair, within, Saepe sub (...)
latitat sapientia (...).
all of pure gold. God clothed our first parents in leather, when there was
means of better clothing, to humble them, (...): Vestes sunt peccati testes.
and to shame all such as are proud of their clothes, which are the ensigns of
our shame, and came in with sin, as it is (...). Vestium curiofit as
deformitatis mentium and morum indiciu^ est. Bern.


And a leathern girdle about his (...).]
So had Elias, and God takes notice of it, and records it: when the pomp and
pride of many Monarchs lie hid in obscurity, buried in oblivion. Such love
bears the Lord to his people, that every thing in them is remarked and
registered. He thinks the better of the very ground they go upon, Psalm. 87. 2,
3, 4, 5, 6. their walls are ever in his sight, and he loves to look upon the
houses where they dwell, Isa. 40. 16.

And his meat was locusts.]
These creatures have their name in (...)
Greek from the top of the ears of (...), which, as they fled, they sed upon.
That they were man's meat in those Eastern Countries appears, Levit. 11. 22. and
Pliny testifies as much. Course meat Lib. 11. cap(...). Hieron. in ep.
they were: but nature is content with little, grace with less. Cibus and
potus sunt divitiae Christianorum, says that Father. Greenham.
(...) and water with the Gospel are good cheer, says another. Horat. Opponit
panem libis and placent is, lib. 1. epist. 10.
(...) Savior has taught us to pray for bread, not for manchet (...) junkets,
but down right household bread: and himself gave thanks for barley-bread and
broiled fishes. A little of the creature will serve turn to carry thee through
thy pilgrimage. One told a Adulator est qui (...). Becman.
Philosopher, If you will be content to please Dionysius, you need not feed
upon green herbs. He replied, And if you can feed upon green herbs, you need
not please Dionysius; you need not flatter, Holus ab (...).
comply, be base, etc. The Ancients held green herbs to be good Prisci (...)
obsonij sibi deesse (...) deesset (...).
cheer: and accounted it wealth enough, (...), not to be (...), nor cold, says
(...). But what (...) were (...) Jews that for (...), locusts, read (...),
sweetmeats, as Epiphanius notes against the Ebionites. The best, we see, are
liable to be belied.

And wild honey,]
Such as naturally distilled out of trees; as did that which Jonathan tasted
with the tip of his rod, called honey of the wood, 1 Samuel 14. 27. God made (...)
suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock, Deuteronomy. 32. 13. Hence
Judea was called, Sumen totius orbis. And Strabo, that spitefully (...).
affirms it to be a dry, barren country, had not so much ingenuity Lib. 16.
as that railing Rabshakeh, 2 King. 18. 32.

(...) 5. Then went out to him Ierusalem]
Hitherto the prosopography of (...) Baptist: Follows now the resort that was
made unto him; for by his divine doctrine and austere life, he had merited
among many to be taken for the Messiah, Joh. 1.

And all Iudea]
That is, very many, as the word ( All) is many See Wilsons (...).
times elsewhere taken in the new Testament.

And all the (...) round about Jordan.]
Stirred up by the noise of that new preacher. So sundry amongst us will be
content (...) hear, if there, go a great report of the man; or, if he deliver
some new Doctrine; or, deal in deep points, as Herod, Lu. 23. 8. But these soon
grow weary, and fall off, as those Jews did from John, for the which they were
justly taxed by our (...). Joh. 5. 35.
Math. 11.


Verse 6. And were baptized of him in Jordan.]
Baptizing of (...) was in use among the Jews, before the days of John
Baptist. From this custom (says Broughton) though without commandment, and of
small authority, Christ authoriseth a In Daniel 9.
seal of entering into his rest, using the Jews weakness as an allurement
thither. As from bread and wine, used with the Paschall Lamb, being without all
commandment of Moses, but resting upon the common reason given by the Creator,
he authoriseth a seal of his flesh and blood.

In Iordan]
At Bethabara, Joh. 1. 28. that is, at that very place, where the people of
Israel passed over Jordan, and (...) the Land. Baptism then was there first
administered, where it had been of old fore-shadowed. Here also we see, that the
acts of (...) and Jesus took their happy beginning, at one and the same place.
And like as the people, after they had passed over (...), (...) circumcised,
before they received the Land by lot of inheritance: So, after we have been
baptized, and thereby enrolled among the Citizens of the new Jerusalem, the
(...) of (...). 1. (...).
sin, and super fluity of (...) must be daily pared off by the (...). (...)
to the (...) and (...) of the (...).
practice of mortification ere we can come to the Kingdom of Heaven.

Confessing (...) sins]
In token of their true repentance. For as only the man, that is wakened out of
his dream, can tell his dream; so only he that is wakened out of his (...), can
clearly (...) them. (...)
And this confession of sin, joined with confusion of sin (without Est (...)
and clara (...). (...).
the which, confession is but wind, and the drops of contrition, water) is
that which in baptism we restipulate. Not the putting away (...).
of the (...) of the (...), but the (...) answer of a good conscience toward
God, 1 (...). 3. 21. A (...), (...) conscience, a heart (...) from wickedness
in this (...) of regeneration, the baptism of repentance, the washing of the
new birth, the being baptized with the holy Ghost and with fire, this saves,
says S. Peter. Not as the efficient cause of salvation, for that is Christ
alone: nor yet as a (...) instrument, for that is faith alone: but only as a
(...) of the saved, and a pledge of their salvation. As on the other side, God
will not own a viperous brood, though baptized, that bring not forth fruits
meet for repentance. To such, baptism is not the mark of Gods child, but the
brand of a fool, that makes a vow, and then breaks it, Eccles. 5. 3. For the
font is Beersheba, The well of an Oath: and there we swear (as Psalm. 119. 106.
David did) to keep Gods righteous judgments. Now, if Zedekiah Isa. 10.
and (...) paid so dear for their (...), for their fast and loose with men; how
will God revenge the quarrel of his Covenant? The Spanish converts in Mexico
remember not any thing of the (...) enquiries (...) Ben.
promise and profession they made in baptism, save only their name, which many
times also they forget. In the Kingdom of Congo in Africa, the Portugals, (...)
their first arrival, finding the people to be (...), (...) God, did enduce
them to a profession Archb. Abbots.
Geog p. 179.
of Christ, and to be baptized in great abundance, allowing (...) the
principles of religion; till such time as the Priests pressed them to lead their
lives according to their profession: which the most part of them in no case
enduring, returned again to their Gentilisme. Such renegadoes we have amongst
us, not a few; Augustine.
that give themselves up to Christ, Quoad Sacramenti perceptionem, by external
profession, but when it comes once ad (...) sanctificationem, to (...) of
(...), there they leave him in the open field, forsaking their colors,
renouncing their baptism, and running away to the enemy. Now for such there is
but one law, and it is Martial law, Heb. 10. 39. If any with draw, or (...)
(...).
Heb. 10. 38.
from his Captain (as the military (...) there used imports) he does it to
perdition; he is even a son of perdition, as (...); who was (...) indeed, as
well as Peter, but better he had not. Mark. 14. 21.
As it had been better for him, never to have been born, so, being born, never
to have been circumcised, and thereby bound to the Law. Unregenerate Israel is
as (...), Amos 9. 7. And it had been happy that font water had never been spilt
on that face, that is afterward hatched with impudent (...), Ier. 3. 3, 4. 5.

Verse 7. But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadduces.]
De his lege Joseph de bello.
Two leading sects among the Jews, but notable hypocrites, yet (...). (...) 2.
c. and Antiq (...) l. 13. cap. 17.
pressing to the ordinances. A Doeg may set his foot as far within the
Sanctuary as a David, and let him. He may be caught, as those catch-poles sent
to apprehend our Savior, as Saul's messengers coming to Naioth were turned from
(...) to Prophets: Come (says Latymer) to the holy Assemblies, though thou
come to (...); for God, perhaps, may take thee napping.

He said unto them, O generation of vipers]
Or adders, which are outwardly specious, inwardly poisonous: so are all
hypocrites a mere outside: but God will wash off their paint with rivers of
brimstone. Of the viper it is said, that when he has (...) a man, he makes
haste to the water, and drinks or dies for it. So did these Pharisees to
baptism, hoping, by the (...) done, to avoid the wrath to come, But a man
(...) go to hell (...) font-water on his face: unless with the water of
baptism he have grace to quench the fiery darts of the devil: as that holy
(...) de qua. dam sancta (...) quae quo (...), non nisi (...) nabat, (...),
Christiana sum. (...) enim bost is statim (...) baptismi and (...), and fugit
ab ea. Luther.
virgin, whereof Luther reports, that she beat back Satan's temptations with
this only argument, I am a Christian. The enemy quickly understood (says he)
the (...) of baptism, and the value of that vow, and fled from her. There are
that boast and bear themselves bold on their Christendom; but has not many a
ship, that has been named Safeguard and Good-speed, miscarried at sea, or
fallen into the hands of pirates? This generation of vipers conceited
themselves to be Abraham's seed: so do many of the Serpents seed now adays,
because of their baptism; but all in vain, unless they walk in the steps of
that faith of our father Abraham. The old Serpent has slung them, neither is
there any antidote for such, but the flesh (not of the biting viper, but) of
the slain Messiah, fore-shadowed by the brazen Serpent. See Romans (...).
(...) derived (...) (...) a viper.
Isa. 27. 1. God has promised to break for us the Serpents head, who has so
deeply set his lims in us: yea, with his sore, and great and strong sword, to
punish Leviathan that piercing Serpent, and to (...) the dragon that is in the
sea.

Who has forewarned you?]
Who has privily and underhand, (...). (...) and (...).
as it were, showed you, and set you in a course of avoiding the danger, that
hangs over your heads, as by a twined thread. The wrath of God is revealed from
heaven, and hell has enlarged her self, and even gapes for you: who gave you
an inkling thereof, and sent you hither for help, etc?

From the wrath to come]
Called the damnation of hell, Chap. 23. 23. which has torments without end,
and past imagination. Psalm. 90. 11.
For, Who knows the power of thine anger, says David? Even according to thy
fear, so is thy wrath. That is, as I conceive it, Let a man fear thy wrath
never so much, he is sure to feel a fair deal more thereof, then ever he could
have feared. When but a drop of Gods displeasure lights upon a poor soul in
this present world. What intolerable pain is it put to? The spirit of a man may
sustain Prove. 18. 14.
his infirmity, says Solomon, q. d. some sorry shift a man may make to rub
through an outward affliction, and to bear it off by head and shoulders, But a
wounded spirit who can bear? q. d. the stoutest cannot possibly stand under it:
there is no proportion between the back and the burden; (...) able to crush and
crack the mightiest amongst us. Judas chose an halter rather then to endure it:
and well he might, when as Job (with whom God was but Job 7. 15.
in jest, in comparison) preferred strangling, and any death before such a
life. But all this (alas) is but present wrath, and nothing at all to the wrath
to come. A phrase of speech that involves and carries in it stings and
horrors, woe and alas, flames of wrath, and the worm that never dies,
trembling and gnashing of teeth, seas of vengeance, rivers of brimstone,
unutterable and unsufferable tortures and torments. We read of racking,
roasting, hanging, stoning, putting men under harrows of iron, and saws of
iron, scratching off their flesh with thorns of the wilderness, (...). Heb.
(...)
pulling their skins over their ears, and other exquisite and unheard of
miseries that men have here been put unto. But what is all this to the wrath to
come? not so much as a flea-biting, as a prick with a pin, or fillip with a
finger: no, though a man should go through a thousand cruel deaths every hour,
his whole life thorowout. Oh bless and kiss that blessed Son of God, that
bore for us the brunt of this unsupportable wrath, even Jesus that delivered us
from the wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. And shun sin, that draws hell at the
heels of it. Is it nothing to lose an immortal soul to purchase an ever-living
death?

Verse 8. Bring forth therefore fruits]
q. d. You cannot wash your hands in innocence, wash them therefore in tears:
there is no way to quench hell flames, but by the tears of true repentance; to
prevent the wrath to come, but by bearing those fruits of righteousness that
are by Christ Jesus to the glory and praise of God, Phil. 1. 11. Optima and
(...) est nova vita, says Luther. Which saying, though condemned by Pope Leo,
is certainly an excellent (...).

Meet for repentance.]
That weigh (...) as much as repentance, that may parallel, and (...) it to be
right, (...) and evidence it to be a repentance never to be repented of. There
is no grace but Cor. 7.
has a (...). See therefore that your graces be of the right stamp, an
effectual faith, (...) love, patient hope, etc. as the Apostle (...) These. 1
3.
has it. See that your performances and whole course be such as becomes
repentance, and may justify it; as may bear (...)
weight in the balance of the sanctuary, and amount to as much (...) 64 6.
as repentance comes to. And (...) your righteousnesses be but 1 (...).
as a (...) clout, and your works at best (if tried by the fire (...). 13.
(...).
of the Word) would burn (which made (...) Nehemiah to pray for pardon of his
reformations) yet upon your true repentance for the evil that cleaves to your
best works, your (...) may be saved from the wrath to come; yea they are such
as accompany salvation, and comprehend it, as the (...) Scholiast expounds that
Heb. 6. (...).
text. Labor there fore to (...) a heart full of goodness, as those (...), i.
e, (...)
Romans, Chap. 15. 14. and a life full of good works, as Tabitha, Act. 9. 33.
such as may beseem amendment of life.

Verse 9. And think not to say within your selves.]
Hypocrites are never without their starting-holes, out of (...) they must be
ferretted. There are infinite turnings and windings in the heart of man,
studious of deceiving it self by some paralogisme. Therefore the Apostle so often
premiseth, Be not deceived, when he reckons up (...).
reprobates, 1 Cor 6 9. Ephesians. 5. 6 etc.

We have Abraham to our father]
What of that? so had Ishmael (...). (...). (...).
an (...), Esau a castaway, etc. External privileges profit not, where
nothing better can be pleaded. (...) the fool was of the line of faithful
Caleb, Qui (...) post me, Followed me fully, (...) God, Numb. 14. 24. Virtue is
not, as lands, inheritable. Why should these men brag they had Abraham to their
father, when they might have observed, that God had raised up of this stone, a
son to Caleb?

God is able]
His power is, 1. Absolute, whereby he can do more then he does. 2. Actual,
whereby he does that only that he wills. Some things he can do, but will
not, as here, and (...) 26. 53. Romans 9. 18. Some things he neither will nor
can, (...) lie, to die, to deny himself. 2 Timothy 2. 13. (...). 1. 3. Heb. 6. 17.
for these things contradict his (...), and imply impotency. But whatsoever he
(...), without impediment he (...), Isa. 46. o Psalm. 115. 3.

Of these stones to raise up children to Abraham.]
This he could do, though he will not. And yet he does as much as this, when
he takes the stone out of the heart: when of carnal he makes us a people
created again, Psalm. 102. 18. when cut of a hollow person (one as empty and
void of heart, as the hollow of a tree is of (...)) is fetched out heart of oak,
and of a wild asse-colt-born, Job 11. 12.
is made a man: See both these similitudes, Job 11. 12. It was a expounded.
strange change that Satan mentioned and motion'd to our Savior of turning
stones into bread. But nothing so strange as turning stony hearts into hearts
of flesh. This is a work of Gods Almighty power, the same that he put forth in
raising Christ from the dead, Ephesians. 1. 19. (where the Apostle, the better to
set forth the matter, (...) a six-fold gradation in the Original) and in
creating the world, (...). 51. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 17. The Prophet Isaiah (...). 51.
16.
tells us, That he plants the heavens, and lays the foundation of the earth,
that he may say to Zion, Thou art my people. And although Isa 42. 5, 6.
man's heart be an emptiness, as in the Creation, as herbs in Winter, or as a
breathless clod of earth, yet that hinders not, (...) the Prophet.

Verse 10. And now also is the axe laid to the root of the tree.]
q. d. God is now taking aim where to hit, and how to fell you: as a man lays
his axe at that very place that he intends to to smite at) he sees well enough
that all his patience and pains Luke 13.
in digging, in dunging, and in dressing you, is to no purpose. Ultimae
desperationis (...) est, quoties securis admovetur radici.
He comes seeking fruit from time to time, but finds none, Luke 13. 7. Now
therefore he has laid down his basket, and taken up his axe, as resolved to
ruin you, unless present course be taken. Neglect not the present Now, lest
ye be cut off for ever. God Eras. Annot.
will not always serve you for a (...)-stock. Since ye have a Preacher, repent
or perish. Let this spring distinguish between dead and living trees.

Every tree that brings not forth good fruit.]
So God is graciously pleased to style our poor (...); in every of which (...).
there is something of his, as well as something of our own. That which is his,
he accepts: that which is ours he pardons. But good it must be, quoad fontem,
the Spirit of God: and quoad finem, the glory of God. Negative (...) serves no
man's tur, M. (...) ex (...)
to save him from the axe. It is said of (...), that the (...) of the
Priscillian heresy, was all the virtue that he had. The evil servant did not
riot cut his talent: those reprobates, Mat. 25. robbed not the Saints, but
relieved them not. Moab and Ammon (...). 23. 4.
were bastardized and banished the sanctuary to the tenth generation, for a
mere omission, because they met not Gods Israel with bread and water in the
wilderness: And Edom is sore threatened, (...).
for not harboring them when scattered by the (...). Take we heed that live in
the last age of the world, lest God hasten the calling of the Jews, and cast us
off for our unfruitfulnesse, Romans 11.

Verse 11. I indeed baptize you with water to repentance.]
There (...).
is a two fold baptism, Heb. 6. 2. the doctrine of baptismes, viz, 1 (...). 3.
21.
(...) and flaminis, external and internal, the putting away of the pollution
of the flesh, and the answer of a good conscience (purged from dead works) to
Godward. When these two meet, when men are baptized with water to repentance,
then baptism saves, 1 Pet. 3. 21. that is, it effectually assures salvation,
whenever by the Spirit and faith, the baptized comes to be united to Christ,
and to feel the love of God shed abroad in his soul, whereby is wrought in him
a spirit of (...), a grief (...) sin, as it is an offense against God. And
hereupon S. Peter (...).
says, Baptism saves, in the present tense: implying that it is of permanent
and perpetual use; effectual to save and seal up the promises, whenever we
repent. From which happy time, Zech. (...). 10. with 13. 1.
baptism once received, remains a fountain always open for sin and (...)
uncleanness, to those that mourn over him, that bled over Ezekiel. 36. 25.
them; a laver of regeneration, a washing of the spirit, who (...) clean water
upon them: ridding and (...) them from all their sins, past, present, and
future. Provided, that they stand A patrum lect ione, (...) evolvisset D.
Piscator, sibi (...): (...) dicere, Vix ullum (...) usum and effica (...)
ratione (...).
to the Covenant and order of baptism, in a continual renovation of faith and
repentance, as occasion shall be offered. This doctrine of baptismes (now
cleared by Divines) diverse of the ancient Doctors understood not: which
disheartened Piscator from spending much time upon them.

He that comes after me.]
Whose Harbinger and Herald (...) am, whose Prodromus and Paranymph, friend and
(...) I am, as the morning-starre, (...)-runs the Sun, with whose light it
shines.

(...) mightier then I]
And will easily out-(...) me: He must increase, but I must decrease; and this
is the complement of my Theolog.
joy, Ioh. 3. 29, 30. To rejoice in the good parts of others, though it
eclipseth thy light, and that from the heart, this is indeed to be able to do
more then others: this is to excel others in any excellency whatsoever, if
this be wanting.

Whose shoes I am not (...) to bear.]
Christ thought (...) worthy to lay his hand on his holy head in baptism, who
thinks not himself worthy to lay his hand under Christ's feet. The more fit any
man is for whatsoever vocation, the (...) he thinks himself. Non (...) in aliis
(...) rebus multa me late^t. etc. (...). 119. cap. 21.
Who am I? said Moses, when he was to be sent to Egypt: whereas none in all the
world was comparably fit for that embassage. Not only in innumerable other
things am I utterly unskilful, faith S. Augustine, but even in the holy
Scriptures themselves (my proper profession) the greatest part of my knowledge
is the Ego in parvo tuguriolo, cum (...), i. e. (...) meis, de (...) non audeo
Epist. ad August.
least part of mine ignorance. I, in my little cell, says Hierom, with the
rest of the Monks my fellow-sinners, dare not determine of great matters. This
is all I know, that I know nothing, said Socrates: and Anaxarchus went further,
and said, that he knew not that neither, that it was nothing, that he knew.
This is the utmost of my wisdom (said David Chytraeus) that I see my self to be
without all wisdom. And if I would at any time (...) se (...), (...), quod
nihil sciret. (...) 3. Melch. Adam. 694.
delight my self in a fool, says Seneca, I need not seek far, I have my self
to turn to. Thus the heaviest ears of corn stoop most toward the ground:
Boughs the more laden they (...), the more low they hang: and the more direct
the Sun is over us, the less: is our shadow: So the more true worth is in any
man, the less Siquando (...) delectari volo, non long mihi (...) est, me
video. Sen. Quod (...) ex part (...) didicerim, tamen in (...), (...)
intellexisse (...). Baldus (...). Tanti (...), quanti tibi (...).
self conceitednesse; and the lower a man is in his own eyes, the higher he is
in Gods. Surely (...) Baptist lost nothing by his humility and modesty here:
for our Savior extols him to the multitude, Math. 11. and there are that doubt
not to affirm (where they have it I know not) that for his (...) on earth, he
is dignified with that place in heaven, from whence Lucifer fell. Sure it is,
That he that humbles himself shall be exalted. If men (...) us as we set
selves, God values us according to our abasements. The Church was black in her
own eyes, fair in (...), Cant. 1. 5 -- 15.

With the holy Ghost, and with fire.]
That is, with that fiery holy Ghost, that spirit of judgment and of burning,
wherewith the filth of the daughters of Zion (...) washed away, Isa. 4. 4. that
they may escape that (...) fire, mentioned in the verse next following. This
fire of the spirit must be (...) from heaven, Lumen (...).
de lumine, from the father of lights, who gives his spirit to H nc (...)
dicitur, (...).
them that ask it. It must be a coal from his altar, which when you have once
gotten, your heart must be the hearth to uphold it; your hands, the tongs to
build it; Gods ordinances, the fuel to (...) it; the Priests lips, the bellows
to blow it up into a flame: So shall we find it (according to the nature of
fire) 1. To illighten whatsoever is of the spirit is spirit, that is, nimble
and Joh. 3.
active, full of life and motion. A bladder is a dull lumpish thing, so is a
bullet: but put wind into the one, and fire to the other in a Gun, and they
will flee far. Fire is the most active of all other elements, as having much
form, little matter; and therefore (...) quasi (...) ignis, id est, frigidus,
(...). Tardis (...) non facile (...). Cic.
the Latins call a dull dronish man, a firelesse man, which God cannot away
with, What thou do, do quickly, said our Savior to (...): So odious to him
is dullness in any business. Baruch, full of the spirit, repaired the wall of
Jerusalem earnestly, Nehem, 3. 20. Se accendit, he burst out into heat, and so
finished his part in shorter time, I press toward the mark, says Paul, (...),
I persecute it, Phil. 3. 14. Never was he so mad in persecuting the Saints,
Act. 26. 11. as after his conversion, he was judged to be, the other way, 2
Cor. 5. 13. -- Paulus in omnia (...), De (...) Lucan. (...). Phars.

Nilactum credens, cum quid superesset agendum.


3. To assimulate: As fire turns fuel into the same property into the same
image from glory to 2 Cor. 3. ult.
glory, as the Sun (that fire of the world) by often beating with its beams,
upon the pearl, makes it radiant and orient, bright and beautiful like it
self. 4. To elevate and carry the heart heavenward, (...) 6.
as fire naturally aspireth, and the spark flees upwards, Heb. 12. 1.
to kindle our Sacrifices, and make us heavenly-minded; to break The least
spark of fire (...) endeavor to rise above the air: so the Spirit.
out at length, though for a while it lie under the weight of sin, that does so
easily beset us: as fire may lie puffing and blowing under green wood, as
almost smoothered. 5. To purify us (as fire does metals) from our dross, and
to take away all our sin, (...). 1. 25. 1 Cor. 9. 11. For he is like a
refiners fire, and like fullers soap, Mal. 3. 2. whereby we are purified, by
obeying the truth, unto unfeigned love of the (...), 1 Pet. 1. 22. 6, And
that is the holy Ghost and of fire (that I now insist upon) Congregat (...),
segregat heterogenea; it unites them to 2 Cor 6.
(...), and separates them from sinners: for what communion has light with
darkness? It makes division from those of a man's house, if not of his heart;
and yet causes union with Gentile, Barbarian, Scythian, if truly Christian,
Coloss. 3. 11. Oh'get this fire from heaven: So shall you glorify God, Matthew.
5. 16. and be able to dwell with devouring fire (which hypocrites cannot do,
Isa. 33. 14.) get warmth of life and comfort to your selves, give Zech. 2. 5.
light and heat to others, walk surely as Israel did by the conduct of the
pillar of fire, and safely, as walled with a defense of fire. Revel. 11. 5.
And if any man shall hurt such, fire shall proceed out of their (...) to
devour them. So that a man were better anger all the witches in the world, then
one of those that are baptized with the holy Ghost and with fire, etc.
especially if they be much mortified Christians, such as in whom this fiery
spirit has done with the body of sin, as the King of Moab did with the King of
Edom, Am. 2. 1. burnt its bones into lime.

Verse 12. Whose fan is in his hand]
Though the devil and wicked men mightily strive to wring it out of his hand;
for what, say they, need this shedding and this (...)? This distinguishing and
differencing of men into Saints and sinners? Are not all the Lords people holy?
Is there any man lives and sins Numb. 16. 3.
not? but yet there is as wide a difference between sinner and sinner, as is
betwixt the bosom of Abraham, and, and the belly Luke 16. 26.
of hell. 1. The godly man projects not sin as the wicked does; but is
preoccupated by it, against his general purpose. 2. He (...).
(...). (...). 1.
arts not the sin that he acts: he sins not sinningly; he is not transformed
(...)
into sins image, as the wicked are, Mica. 1. 5. His 1 (...). 3.
scum rests not in him, he works that out by repentance, that he Ezekiel. 24. 11.
committed with reluctance. 3. He is the better for it afterward. His very sin
(when be wailed and disclaimed) makes him more heedfull of his ways, more
thankful for a (...), more merciful to others, more desirefull after the
state of perfection, (...).
etc. Whence grew that paradox of M. John Fox, That his graces did him most
hurt, and his sins most good. Whereas wicked (...) of (...).
men grow worse and worse, Deceiving and being (...), 2 Timothy 3. 13.
till at length by long trading in sin, being hardened by the deceitfulness
Heb. 3. (...).
thereof, they are utterly deprived of all (even passive) power of recovering
themselves out of the devils snare; which is a conformity to the devils
condition. This their covering therefore 2 Timothy 2. 23.
is too short. Christ's fan is in his hand to take out the precious from the
vile; and the Ministers of Christ must separate (as the Jer. (...).
Priests of old did) the clean from the unclean, drive the chaff one way, and
the wheat another: For what is the chaff to the wheat, Ier. (...) 28.
says the Lord? See this enjoined them, Isa. 3. 10, 11. Zuinglius, as in his
public lectures, he would very sharply (...) sin; so ever and anon he would
come in with this proviso, Scultet, arnal.
Probe vir, haec nihil ad te, This is nothing to thee, thou godly man. He knew
that he could not beat the dogs, but the children would be ready to cry, whom
therefore he comforted.

And he will thoroughly purge his floor]
That is, his Church, called Isa. (...). 10.
Gods threshing floor in Isaias, because usually thresht by God with the flail
of affliction. That is one way, whereby the Lord Christ does purge his people,
and separate between the Son that he loves, and the sin that he hates. This
he does also by his Word and Spirit: Sanctifying them by his truth, (...) Word
is truth, Joh. 17. And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are
justified, but 1 Cor. 6. 11.
ye are sanctified in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of
our God. Thus Christ purges his floor here incoatively and in part, hereafter
thoroughly and in all perfection. In all which we may observe (says a Divine)
this difference between Christ and the tempter. Christ has his fan in his
hand, and he fanneth us: the devil has a sive in his hand, and he sifteth us.
Now a fan (...) out the worst, and keeps in the best: a sive keeps in the
worst, and casts out the best. Right so Christ (and his trials) purges chaff
and corruption out of us, and rourisheth and increases his graces in us.
Contrariwise, the devil, what (...) soever is in us, he confirms it; what
faith or other good thing soever, he weakneth it. But Christ has praid for his
(...). 22. 31.
(though never so hard laid at) that their faith fail not, and gives (...),
(...).
them in time of fanning, to fall low at his feet, as wheat, when the wicked,
as light chaff, are ready to flee in his (...), as murmuring at their hard
measure, with those miscreants in the wilderness.

And gather his wheat into the garner]
Mali in area nobiscum esse possunt, in horreo non possunt. The wicked may be
with us in the floor, they shall not, in the garner: for there shall in no wise
(...) into the City of the lamb, any thing that defiles, or that August.
works abomination; Heaven spewed out the Angels in the first (...). (...).
(...).
act of their Apostasy; and albeit the devil could scrue himself into (...) of
(...), (...).
Paradise, yet no unclean person shall ever enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
Without shall be dogs, and evildoers; no dirty dog Rev. 21. 8.
does trample on that golden pavement, no (...) is with that gold, no chaff
with that wheat; but the spirits of just men made perfect, amidst a panegynis
of Angels, and that glorious (...), Heb. 12. 22. In the mean while, (...) ego
(...) (may every Ignatius.
good soul say, with that Father) I am Gods wheat: And although the wheat be as
yet but in the ear, or but in the blade, yet when the fruit is ripe, he will
put in the sicle (because the (...) is Mark. 4. (...). 29.
come,) and gather his wheat into his barn, into his garner. It does the
husbandman good at heart to see his corn come forward, Spes alit agricolas, sed
(...) mea messis in (...) est.
though the harvest be not yet.

But will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.]
In reference to the custom of those countries, which was, to cast their chaff
into the fire. But this (alas) is another manner of fire then that. A
metaphorical fire doubtless, and differs from material fire. 1. In respect
of the violence, for it is unspeakable, 2. Of the durance, for it is
unquenchable; 3. Of illumination, for though it burn violently to their
vexation, (...) it shines not to their comfort. 4 Of operation, for it consumes
not what it burns; they ever fry, but never die; vivere (...), (...); they
(...) death, but (...) it not, as those Rev. (...). A just (...) of God upon
them; that they that once might have had life, and (...) not, now would have
death, and cannot.

Verse 13. Then comes Jesus from Galilee.]
Our Savior came far to seek his baptism. Let not us think much of any pains
taken, that we may (...) of the Ordinances. The Shunammite went (ordinarily) 2
King 4. 23.
every Sabbath and new mood, on horsback, to hear the Prophet: The good people
in David's time, passed (...) the valley Psalm. 84. 6.
of Baca, from strength to strength, to see the face of God in Sion, though but
in that dark glass of the ceremonies. And in Daniels Dan. (...). 4.
time, they ran to and fro to increase knowledge. In (...) days, the
inhabitants of one City went to (...), saying, Let (...) go speedily to pray
before the Lord, and to (...) the Lord of host: Zech. 8. (...).
I will go also. Our Savior took it ill, that men came not as far to Mat. 12.
hear him, as the Queen of Sheba did, to hear (...). The (...) Acts 8.
came as far to worship in the Temple. And of our forefathers in K. Henry the
eights time, M. Fox (...) thus: To see (...) travels, earnest seeking, burning
zeal, readings, watchings, sweet assemblies, Act and Mon. sol. 750.
love, concord, godly living, faithful marrying with the faithful, may make
us now in these our days of free profession to blush for shame. George Eagles,
Martyr, in Q. Mary's days, for his great Ibid. 18 23.
pains in traveling from place to place to confirm the brethren, was surnamed,
Trudge-over-the-world, etc.

To be baptized of him]
Not for any need he had (for he was a Lamb without blemish of natural
corruption, and without spot of actual transgression, 1 Pet. 1. 19.) but
merely for our benefit, to sanctify baptism to us, and to grace his own
ordinance for us.

Verse 14. But John for bad him[
Flatly forbad him, and kept (...) (...) e (...); ad vim (...) (...) (...).
him out of the water, with both hands, earnestly; not out of disobedience, but
reverence; though faulty and erroneous. The very best have their blemishes.
Omnibus malis punicis inest granum putre, dixit Crates: And the fairest
Apple Tree may have a fit of barrenness. But for involuntary infirmities, and
those of daily incursion, there is a pardon of course, if sued out. And
although Satan stood at the right hand of Jehoshuah the high Priest, because
(as some will have it) his accusation was as true as vehement, and so Satan
seemed to have the upper hand of him: Yea although he was so ill clothed, yet
he stood before the Angel. Christ did not abhor his presence, nor reject his
service. Zech. 3. (...)


I have need to be baptized of thee]
There can be no flesh without filthiness, as a grave Divine notes upon this
text. Neither the D. (...).
supernatural conception, nor austere life of John could exempt him from need
of baptism.

And come (...) to me?]
Amica (...), a friendly falling out, but quickly made up. Most of our jarrings
grow from mistakes. Be swift to hear, slow to wrath; easily satisfied. Not
(...), which being once broken, cannot be peeced again. Quae modo pugnarant
jungunt sua (...).
Ovid.


Verse 15. Suffer it to be so now]
Or, Let be, now: for the Baptist Consent (...) est, (...).
seems to have laid hands upon Christ, to keep him off. Our Savior assents to
that John had said, but yet shows cause, why he should suffer it so to be, for
present.

To fulfill all righteousnesse]
Not legal only, and of equality, (...).
but that of his present condition also, and of equity; to the end, that all
kind of sinners might have all kind of comfort in Christ, an absolute and
all-sufficient Savior.

Then he suffered him]
The wisdom from above is gentle, and (...).
easy to be persuaded, when better (...) is alleged: as in Peter, Jam. 3. 17.
Joh. 13. 8. first peremptory, but, after conviction, pliable. An humble man
will never be an heretic; show him his error, and he will soon retract it.
Joannes Bugenhagius (a Reverend Dutch Divine) lighting upon Luthers book de
captivitate Babylonica, and reading some few pages of it, as he sat at supper;
rashly pronounced him the most pestilent and pernicious heretic, that ever the
Church had been troubled with, since the times of Christ. But, a few days
after, having seriously read over the book, and well weighed the business, he
returned to his Collegioners, and recanted what he had said amongst them;
affirming and proving, that Scultet. Annal.
Luther only was in the light, and all the world besides in gross darkness,
so that many of them were converted by him to the truth. Ioannes (...) (a
learned Bavarian) held this heresy, That no man or Devil should be damned
eternally, because God wills that all should be saved; and Christ says,
There shall be one shepherd, and one sheepfold. (...).
But, being an humble minded man, he was convinced and converted by
Oecolampadius, and died of the plague (but piously) at Basile, Anno (...). Of
(...) the heretic, because Non defuisse (...), (...) copul regula (...).
he praid ardently, and lived unblameably, Bucholeerus the Chronologer was wont
to say, that his heart was good, but his head not well regulated. But how that
could be, I see not, so long as he lived and (...) in his detestable opinions,
and would not (...) them. If the (...) were gotten into the head, the Priest
was to pronounce such utterly unclean, Levit. 13 44. And the Prophet
pronounces (...) soul, that is lifted up with pride and pertinacy, not to be
upright in him. Habak. (...). 4.


Verse 16. And Jesus when he was baptized.]
Many of the Ancients held, that the day of Epiphany, was the day of our
Saviors baptism. But that, I think, is but a (...). The Habassines, a kind
of (...) in Afrique, baptize themselves every year on that day in lakes or
(...); thereby to keep a memorial Breerwoods
of (...) Saviors baptism in Jordan. This is (as (...) was wont (...).
to say of a like matter) to pass by the provision, and lick the signe-post.

Went up straightway out of the (...)]
And stood upon the shore, apart from the company, that all might see and hear
what Luke 3. 21.
was now to be done. St Luke adds, that he fell thereupon his knees and
prayed; thereby teaching us, with what deep devotion, we are to receive the
Sacraments: Which are given us of God, to signify, as by sign, to assure, as
by seal, and to convey, as by instrument, Jesus Christ and all his benefits:
the Father, Son and holy Ghost are there one in covenanting and working thy
salvation. (...) up thy self therefore to hope and faith at the Sacrament:
speak to thy faith, as Deborah did to her self, Awake, awake, Deborah, Judge. 5.
12.
(...) a song: Give glory to God, lay claim to the covenant: lean on Christ's
bosom at that supper, and be think thy self, with Hesther at the feast, what
suit thou have to commence, what Haman to hang up, what lust to subdue, what
grace (chiefly) to get growth in, etc. But, for most communicants, urge them to
prayer before, in, and after Sacrament, and they must say (if they say truly,)
as David did of Saul's armor, I cannot go with these, for I have not been (...)
1 Samuel 17. 39.
omed to them.

And, lo, the heavens were opened unto him]
As he was praying; for prayer is the (...) of heaven, wherewith we may take
out of Gods treasury plentiful mercy for our selves and others. He (...)
possibly be poor, that can pray, Romans 10. 12. One said of the Pope, that he
could never want money, so long as he could hold (...) pen in his hand; of the
faithful Christian it may safely be affirmed, He cannot want any good thing,
while he can call to God for it. If he can find a praying heart, God will
find a pitying heart, and a supplying hand. Now, he is worthily miserable that
will not make himself happy by asking. The Ark and the Mercy-seat were never
separated. God never said to Israel, Seek ye me in vain: The Isa. 45. 19.
hand of faith never knocked at Heaven gates, but they were opened, and the
Spirit, descended, though not so visibly as here, at the baptism of our
Savior, nor a voice heard so audibly from Heaven as then, yet, as truly and
effectually to the support of the poor suppliant: Who while he prays in the
holy Ghost, Jude 20. (...) new supplies of the Spirit, Phil. 1. 19. and is
sweetly, but secretly, (...).
sealed up thereby to the day of redemption. (...). 1. 13.


And he saw the Spirit of God descending]
From the Father, 2 Pet. (...). 16.
(who spoke from the most excellent glory) upon the Son, who stood upon the
shore, so that here was concilium augustissimum, a most majesticall meeting of
the three Persons in Trinity, about the work of man's redemption, as once about
his creation, Genesis 1. 26. Let us make (...): The Hebrews interpret it, I and my
Iudgementhall; (...).
by which phrase, the Trinity, of old, was implied. For (...) (...)-Hall in
Israel consisted of three at least; which, in their close manner of speech,
they applied to God; but their posterity understood it not. And as in the
matter of man's creation, and redemption, so likewise of his (...); (...) is
that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 45 67. where the (...) of gifts are said to be
of the Spirit: the diversities of ministeries (whereby 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6. exp.
these gifts are administered) of the Lord, that is, of Christ, and the
diversities of operations ((...) by the gifts and ministeries) to be of God,
the Father.

Like a dove, and lighting upon him]
This was shadowed, of old, by Noah's dove lighting upon the Ark: and serves to
denote (...). (...).
Christ's innocence, purity, love to his little ones, (...), says Aristotle.
And another thus; (...) columba caret, rostro non (...), and ungues
Possidet (...), puraque (...).
That was more then ridiculous (nay it was (...)) that those Pilgrims, that
went to (...) to fight in the Holy war (as they (...). (...) 5.
called it,) did carry a goose before them, pretending it to be the Annal.
holy Ghost. These were drunk with the wine (...) the whore of Babylons (...):
and not filled with the Spirit, as St Stephen was, and Barnabas, and others of
old; as of late, among many, that famous Beza; de quo (...) saepe (...), (...)
Melch. (...). in (...).
vivere. And himself reports of (...), and his colleagues, in an Epistle to
Calvin, that, disputing (...) a Spanish Jesuit about the Eucharist, the (...)
(says he) called us vulpes, and (...), and serpents, foxes, apes, serpents.
My answer was this, Non magis nos credere, quam (...). So that Angel John
Bradford (as one calls him) when he (...) with (...) a Castro; the Friar was
in a wonderful rage, and spoke so high, that Act and (...).
the whole house rang again, chasing with om and cho, says (...) Fox. But
Bradford answered him with (...) of wisdom, and, Isa. 8. 6.
like the waters of Siloe at the (...) of (...), ran (...). He had been
baptized with that holy (...) that (...) Savior, who received not the spirit
by (...), but had a (...), not of abundance only, but also of (...), (...). 1.
14

Verse 17. And (...), a (...) from (...)]
Whereupon (...) Peter foundeth the certainty of Christian faith and doctrine, 2
Ep. 1. 17. especially since we have amore (...) word of prophecy: for that
(...) (...) (...). (...). (...).
former might have been slandered, or suspected for an imposture.

Saying, this is my beloved]
My (...), he on whom my love rests; so that I will seek no further. Zeph. 3.
17. when the earth was founded, Christ was with his Father as his daily
delight, sporting, or laughing, always before him, risum (...) acconsilium,
Prove. 8. 30.

In whom I am well pleased]
The beloved, in whom he has made us accepted, Ephesians. 1. 6. Gods Heptsibah, so
the Church is called, (...). 62. 4. the dearly beloved of his soul, Jer. 12. 7.
Or (as the Septuagint (...).
render it) his beloved soul, over whom he rejoices, as the bridegroom over
his bride, Isa. 62. 5. (...) he will rest in his Dedi (...) meam.
love, as abundantly well pleased, he will joy therein with singing. So well
thinks God of his Son Christ, and of us through him; as Vulg r.
some of the Ancients rendered this word, (...), In quo (...) (...). 3 17.
(...)
sensi. So (after Irenaeus) Tertullian, Cyprian and Augustine interpret Graecis
dicuntur celebres, and de (...) est opinio. Eralm.
it. And yet, as well as he thought of his only Son, he spared him not, but
delivered him up for us all, Romans 8 32. whereupon St Bernard thus cries ont, O
quantum dilecti, prae quo filius ipse (...) non dilectus, (...) neglectus? God
so loved his Son, that De temp.
he gave him all the world for his possession, Psalm. 2. but he so loved Joh. 3.
16.
the world, as he gave Son, and all, for its redemption. One Ephe. 3 18, 15.
(...) this an (...), an excess of love, a miracle of mercy, a (...) without a
sicut. God (...) loved the loved, so infinitely, so (...), so incomprehensibly,
as that there is no similitude in nature, whereby to express it. Abraham (Gods
friend) showed his love to him, in not withholding his only Son Isaac: but what
was (...) to Christ? or what was Abraham's love to Gods? He did that (...) and
voluntary, that Abraham would never have done, but upon a command. Besides,
Isaac was to be offered up after the manner of holy sacrifices; but Christ
suffered, after the manner of (...). And yet further, (...) was in the hand of
a (...) and compassionate father: but Christ died by the wicked hands of
barbarous and blood-thirsty enemies; that thereby he might (...) the enmity,
and reconcile us to God: so making peace, and paving Ephe. 2. 15, 16.
us a new and living way, with his blood, to the throne of grace, (...).
(...) he has made us accepted in the beloved, Ephesians. 1. 6. (...) saw the
features of his friend Jonathan, in lame Mephibosheth, and therefore loved him.
He forgave Nabal at Abigals intercession: and was pacified toward (...), at
(...). (...) (...) Jacobs house, for Joseph's sake: Shall not God do us much
more for Jesus sake? Joseph was well pleased with his brethren, when they
brought Benjamin: Bring but the child Jesus in our arms (as, Simeon did, and
as (...) did the King of Persines child) and he cannot but smile upon us.
(...) he never so much displeased before, yet upon the sight of this his
wellbeloved Son, in whom he is well pleased, all shall be (...) and quiet, as
the sea was, when once Jonas was cast into it.

CHAP. IIII.
Verse 1. Then was (...) led up]
LEst happily the people, hearing that testimony from Heaven should come and take
him by force to make him a King, as Ioh. 6. 15. to try their loves also to him,
who was thus overclouded, as the Sun in his first rising.

Led up of the Spirit]
The better to fit him thereby for the ministry. (...) in (...) est, valetudine
(...), and (...) non (...), (...): (...) accidere semper, cum (...) quippiam
(...) dixit. Melchior Alam de Ger. Theol. page 154. Act. and Mon. fol. (...).
Luther observed of himself, that when God was about to set him upon any
special service, he either laid some fit of sickness (...) him beforehand,
or turned Satan loose upon him; who so (...) him (eft-soones) by his
temptations, ut (...), (...), nec sensus, nec vox superesset, that neither
heat, nor blood, (...) sense, nor voice remained: The very venom of the
temptations drank up his spirit, and his body seemed dead, as (...) Jonas, that
was by, and saw it, reported (...) him in his Epistle to Melanchton. Hence also
it was that in his Sermons, God gave him such a grace (says M. Fox) that when
he (...), they that heard him thought, (...) one, his own temptations to be
severally touched and noted. Whereof when signification was given unto him by
his friends, and he demanded how that could be? Mine own manifold temptation
(says he) and (...) are the cause (...): For from his tender years he was much
(...) and exercised with spiritual conflicts, as Melanchton in his life
testifies. (...) (...) Wellerus, scholar to the said, M. Luther records,
that (...) oftentimes heard Luther his Master report of himself, that he had
been assaulted and vexed with all kind of temptations ((...) only It appears
by S. (...), that no men (...) in this (...), but (...).
with that of covetousness,) and was thereby fitted for the work of the Lord,
Whence also he was wont to say, that (...) things make a Preacher, (...),
Prayer and Temptation.

Into the wildernesse]
Likely the wilderness of (...), where Moses and Elias had (...) before. These
three great fasters, met afterward in mount (...): God (...) to turn his
peoples Mar. 1. 13. (...)
(...) into feasting, Zech. 8. 19. The devil took advantage of (...) Mat. 17. 2.
(...) here, to (...) our Savior in the desert, but was beaten on (...) own
dunghill; that we might overcome through him that (...) us, Romans 8. the
(...)-being already foiled by Christ.

To be tempted of the devil]
No sooner was Christ out of (...) water of Baptism, then in the fire of
Temptation. So David, (...) his anointing, was hunted as a partridge upon the
mountains. (...) is no sooner out of Egypt, then Pharaoh pursues them: (...) no
sooner had kept that solemn (...), then Sennacherib comes up against him. St
Paul is assaulted with (...) temptations after the (...) of his revelations:
And Christ teaches us, after forgiveness 2 Cor. 12.
of sins obtained, to look for temptations, and to pray against Mat. 6. 13.
them. Whiles Jacob would be Labans drudge and packhorse, all was well; but
when once he began to flee, he makes after him with all his might. All was
jolly quiet at Ephesus before Acts 19. 23.
S. Paul came (...), but then, there arose no small stir about (...). All the
while our Savior lay in his fathers shop, and meddled only with Carpenters
chipps, the devil troubled him not. But now, that he is to enter more publicly
upon his office of Mediatourship, (...) of (...), (...) pierce through.
the tempter pierces his tender soul with many sorrows, by (...) to sin. And
dealt he so with the green tree, what will (...) do with the dry? Temptations
(besides those that come from God, which are only probationis, not perditionis,
as the other) are (...) two sorts: for either they are of seducement, Iam. 1.
15. or of (...), vel (...).
(...) and grievance, 2 Cor. 12. 7. either of allurement or affrightment. In
the former we are pressed with some darling corruption, whereto our appetites
by nature or most propense: In the later, we are dogged with foulest lusts of
(...), Idolatry, (...), murder, etc. that Nature startles at: In these the
(...) tempts alone, and that so grossly, that the very flesh is ashamed (...)
it. But in the former, that came more immediately from the flesh, the devil only
interposeth himself, and speaks his good word for them: whence they are called
(...) of Satan, 2 Cor. 12. and Ephesians. 4. 26. we are said in anger to give place
to the devil: and in resisting of lusts, we resist the devil, Jam. 4. 7.

Verse 2. And when (...) had fasted (...), etc.]
All (...) actions are for our instruction; not all for our imitation. We may
not imitate the works miraculous of Christ, and proper to him as (...). The
ignorance of this caused some to counterfeit (...) Christ's: as one Moor in K.
Edward the (...), and one Hacket in Q. Elizabeth's time, David George and sundry
others, according to Mat. 24 24. Neither need we seek to imitate him in his
infirmities, which (though they were not (...), but only natural, and
therefore unblameable) yet import a weakness (as that he was hungry, weary,
sleepy, etc.) and so, though they be in us, yet we need not strive the
attainment of them. But we must (...) the Lord Christ in all his imitable
graces and actions: showing forth the praises or virtues of him that (...)
called us out of darkness (...).
into his mavelous light. The word signifies to preach them ^.
abroad: for we should practice those (...) so (...), that our (...).
lives may be as so many Sermons upon the life of Christ. It is a dishonor to
a dear friend, to hang his picture in a dark hole, and not in a conspicuous
place, that it may appear we rejoice in it, as an ornament to us: Think the
same of Christ's image and graces, show them forth we must, and express them to
the world; walking in Christ, Col. 2. (...) yea, as Christ, 1 John 2. 6. who
therefore left us a (...).
copy that we might write after it, a sampler that we might work (...) o (...).
by it, a pattern that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2. 21. And although we
cannot follow him passibus aequis, yet we must show (...).
our good-wills, stretching and (...) our utmost, as St Paul did: (...). (...).
13.
striving what we can to resemble him, not as a picture does a man in outward
lineaments only, but as a son does his father (for he is the father of
eternity, Esa. 9. 6,) in nature and disposition: and as servants, laboring to
do as our Lord, Ioh. 13. 15. Who therefore washed his Disciples (...), to give
us an example of humility; as he did likewise of meekness, Mat. 11. 29.
patience, 1 Pet. 2. 21. obedience, Heb. 12. 2. diligence and fidelity in his
function, Heb. 3. 1, 2. fewness of words, yet boldness of speech, going about
and doing all possible good, beneficence (...) the poor Saints, (...) Cor. 8.
9. constancy in profession, 1 Timothy 6. 13. forgiveness (...) others, and love
to the brethren, Ephesians. 5. 2. (...) therefore followers herein of Christ as dear
children, not (...) your selves according to the former lusts in your
ignorance, (...), which has called (...), is holy, so be ye (...) in all (...)
of (...). 1 (...). 1. 14, 15.

He was (...) a (...).]
Our Savior was tempted all Luke 4. 2.
that forty days space, says St Luke: but these three worst assaults were
reserved to the last. So deals the devil with the Church (which is Christ
(...):) He never (...) tempting, though 1 Cor. (...).
never so (...); and (...) called (...) as (...) will have it, the Lord of
flies, because the fly is noted for an impudent (...). (...) apud Homerum pro
valde impudente: quia (...) pervicaces sunt, etc.
creature, that will soon return to the (...), though beaten away but erewhile.
Hence those many bickerings and buffetings we meet with all our life long: and
hence those sharpest (...) and terrible conflicts many times at the hour of
death. The Israelites met with many trials and troubles in the wilderness:
Amalec and the Amorites, sore thirst, and fiery serpents, etc. Coel. lib. 9
(...). 52.
but were never so put to it, as when they came to take possession of the
promised land, for then all the Kings of (...) combined to keep them out. So
the devil, furious enough at all times, most of all bestirrs him at last cast,
because he knows his time is but (...).
short, Apoc. 12. 12. For death sets a Saint out of his gunshot. Satan may
compass the earth, but not enter the lists of heaven. He tempted Adam in the
earthly Paradise, he cannot tempt in the heavenly. Hence his malice whiles he
may. Morientium nempe (...) violentiores sunt morsus, ((...) ille olim de (...)
Carthagine:) Beasts that have their deaths-wound bite cruelly, sprunt
exceedingly.

Verse 3. Then came unto him the Tempter]
So called, because (...).
he politikely feels our pulses which way they beat, and accordingly (...) us a
peny-worth. He setts a wedge of gold before covetous Achan, a courtezan Cozbi
before a voluptuous Zimri, a fair preferment before an ambitious Absalom: and
finds well that a fit (...) is half a victory. So dealt his agents with those
ancient (...), (...), they were sawn asunder, they were Heb. 11. 37.
tempted, says the Apostle; to wit, with the proffers of preferment, would
they but have renounced their religion, and done (...) to an Idol. So the Pope
tempted Luther with wealth and honor. But all in vain: he turned him to God,
Et valde (...) sum, says he, me nolle sic satiari abeo, he said flat, that God
should not put him off with these low things. Here was a man full Melch. (...).
of the Spirit (...) Christ. The tempter came to Christ, but found (...) in
him; that matter was not malleable. In vain shall the (...) strike fire, if we
find not (...): In (...) he knock at the door, if we look not out to him at
the window. Let us but divorce the flesh from the world, and the devil can do
us no (...). Ita cave (...), ut cave as (...). From that naughty man my self,
good Lord deliver me, said one.

If thou (...) the Son of God.]
As the (...) quarreled and (...) the Law given in Paradise, as naught, (...):
so (...) he here the voice from heaven, as a mere imposture. And this he did
out of deep and desperate malice; for he could not be ignorant nor doubtful.
Neither is his dealing otherwise with us (many times) who are too ready (at his
instigation) to doubt of our spiritual sonne-ship. We need not help the
tempter, by holding it a duty to doubt: this is to light a candle before the
devil, as we use to speak. Rather let (...) settle and secure this, that we are
indeed the sons of God, and heirs of heaven, by passing through the narrow womb
of repentance, that we may be born again, and by getting an effectual faith;
the property whereof is to adopt as well as to justify, viz. (...) objecti, by
means of Christ the object upon whom faith lays hold, and into whom it
engraffs the believer, after an unspeakable manner. Now ye are all the children
of God by faith in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3. 26. Ioh. 1. 12. who has both laid
down the price of this greatest privilege, Heb. 9. 15. Gal. 4. 5. and (...) it
up to us by his Spirit, crying Abba Father in our hearts, what ever Satan or
our own misgiving hearts objects to the contrary, Gal. 4. 6. Romans 8. 15. Ephesians.
1, 13.

Command that these (...) be made bread.]
And so distrust the providence of God for (...) thy body in this hunger; help
thy self by working a preposterous miracle. In this point (...) Gods providence
for this present life. Satan troubled David and Jeremy, and so he does many
good souls at this day; who can sooner trust God with their souls then with
their bodies, and for a crown then for (...) crust, as those Disciples, Matthew.
16. 8.

Verse 4. But (...) answered and said, It is written]
With this (...) sore, and great and strong sword of the Spirit, does the Lord
here punish Leviathan that crooked (...) serpent, Isa. 27. 1. With these (...)
out of Gods quiver, with these pibbles chosen out of the silver streams of the
Scriptures, does he prostrate the (...) of hell. The Word of God has a (...)
in it to quail and to quash Satan's temptations, far better (...) that wooden
dagger, that leaden sword of the Papists, their holy water, crossings, grains,
dirty relics, etc. It is not (...) of the cross, but the word of the cross
that overthrows Satan. He can no more abide by it, then an owl by the shining
of the (...). Set therefore the Word against the temptation, and the sin is
laid. Say. I must not (...) it, I may not, I dare not: for it is forbidden in
such a place, again in such a place. And be sure to have places of Scripture
ready (...) hand (as Saul had his spear and pitcher ready at his head, even
while he slept) that ye (...) resist the devil, steadfast in the faith, grounded
on the Word. Joseph (...) him by remembering the seventh Commandment: And David,
by hiding this Word in (...) heart, Psalm. 1 19. 11. Wicked therefore was that
advice of Motive 4 8
D. Bristow to his Agents, to labor still to get here: ikes out of their weak
and false Castle of holy Scriptures, into the plain fields of (...) and
Fathers. The Scriptures are our armoury (sarre beyond that of Solomon) whether
we must resort and furnish (...). (...) 4. (...).
One (...) sentence thereof shall do us more service, then all the pretty,
witty sayings and sentences of Fathers and (...), or constitutions of Councels.

(...) lives not by bread alone]
Though ordinarily, as having (...) property inherent in it, for such a
purpose: yet so, (...) that the operation and success is guided by Gods power
and goodness; whereon (as on a staff) this staff of life leans. A (...).
wise woman builds her house, Prove. (...). 1. As the Carpenter lays (...) of
the house in his head first, and contrives it: so does she (...)-cast, and
further the well-doing of her fam ly: and (...), except the Lord also build the
house, they labor in vain that build it, Psalm. 127. 1. So, the diligent hand,
and the blessing of God (meeting) make (...), Prove. 104. and 22.

But by every word etc.]
That is, by any thing else besides bread, (...) soever God (...) think good,
whatsoever he shall appoint and give power unto, to be nourishment. Therefore
if bread (...), feed on faith, Psalm. 37. 3. So Junius reads that text.
Jehosaphat (...)
found it sovereign, when all other help failed him. And the 1 Chronicles. 10. 6.
captive Jews lived by faith, when they had little else to live upon, and (...)
a good living of it, Habak. 2. 4. To this Text the Jews seem to allude in that
fiction of theirs, that Habakkuk was carried by the hair of the head, by an
Angel into Babylon, to carry a dinner (...) of (...) and the (...), Jer. 33.
Eliz (...). (...) and (...) 1 King. 19. 8. (...)-Chro nicle.
to Daniel in the den. It was by faith that he stopped the mouths of Lions, and
obtained promises, Heb. 11. 33. And by faith that she answered the pers
cutours, If you take away my meat, I trust God (...) away my stomach. (...)
made the ravens feed Elias that were more likely (in that famine) to have fed
upon his dead carcass: and, another time caused him to go forty days in the
strength of one meal. Merlyn was nourished a fortnight together with one egg a
day, laid by a hen that came constantly to Charissima (...) per (...) saut
author quae preciosa (...). (...) non, (...).
that hay-mow, where he lay hid, during the massacre of Paris. And who has not
read or heard, how by a miracle of his mercy, God relieved Rochel in a strait
siege, by an innumerable company of fishes cast in upon them? Faith fears no
famine: and although it be but small in substance and in show (as the Manna
was) yet is it great in virtue and operation. The Rabbis say, that Manna had
all manner of good tastes in it: So has faith. It drink to a man in a cup of
Nepenthes, and bids him be of good cheer, God will provide for him. The Bishop
of Norwich kept Robert Samuel, Martyr, without meat and drink; whereby he was
unmercifully vexed, saving that he had every day allowed him two or three
morsels of bread, and three spoonfuls of water, to the end he might be reserved
to further torment. How often would he have drunk his own water? But his body was
so dried up with long (...), that he was not able to make (...) drop of water.
After he had been famished with hunger two or three (...) together, he (...)
into a sleep, as it were one half in a (...). At which time one clothed in
white, seemed to stand before him, which ministered comfort unto him by these
words, Samuel, Samuel, be of good cheer, and take a good heart unto thee: (...)
after Acts and Monsol 15 17.
this day, thou shall never be either hungry or thirsty: For speedily (...)
this, he was burned: and from that time, till he should suffer, he felt neither
hunger nor thirst. And this declared he, to the end, as he said, that all men
might behold the wonderful work of God. He likes not to be tied to the second
ordinary causes, nor that (in defect of the means) we should doubt of his
providence. It Is true, he commonly works by them, when he could do without:
that we may not neglect the means, as being ordained of him. ( David shall have
victory, but by an ambush, 2 Samuel 5. 19 - 24. Men shall be nourished, but by
their labor, Psalm. 128. 2,) But yet so, as that he does all in all by (...)
means (he made grass, corn and trees, before he made the Sun, Moon and
stars, by the influence whereof they are and grow.) Yea to show himself
chief, he can and does work (other whiles) without means, 2 Chronicles. 14. 11. and
against means, suspending the power and operation of the natural causes; as
when the fire burnt not, the water drowned not, the Sun went back ten
degrees, the rock gave water, the iron swam, etc. And then when he works by
means, he can make them produce an effect diverse from their nature and
disposition, or can hinder, change or mitigate (...) 5. 17. 18.
their proper effect; as when at the prayer of Elias it rained not for three
years and a half: And he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth
brought forth her fruits. A man would have thought that after so long drought,
the roots of trees and herbs should have been utterly dried up, and the land
past recovery, (...) 2. 21.
But God heard the heavens (petitioning to him, that they might exercise their
influence for the fructifying of the earth) and the Heavens heard the earth,
and the earth heard the corn, the wine and the oil, and they heard Jezreel. Let
all this keep us, as it did our Savior here, from diffidence in Gods
providence; and make us possess our souls in patience, Luke 21. Hang upon the
promise, and account it as good as present pay, though we see not how it can be
effected. God loves to go away by himself, He knows how to deliver his, says
S. Peter, 2 Epist. 2. 9. and he might speak it by experience, Act. 12. 9. if
ever any man might. The King shall rejoice in God, says David of himself, when
he was a poor (...) in the wilderness of Judah, Psalm. 63. 11. But he had Gods
word for the Kingdom, and therefore he was confident, seemed the thing never
so improbable or impossible. We trust a skillful workman to go his own way to
work: shall we not God? In (...) 6. year of the reign of Darius Nothus was the
temple fully finished. That sacred work which the husband and son of an
Esther (...), shall be happily accomplished by a bastard. The (...) thought
that Moses should presently have delivered them, and he himself thought as
much, and therefore began (...) his time, to do (...) upon the Egyptian, whom
he slew and hid in the sand. But we see, God went another way to work: He sent
Moses into a far country, and the bondage was for (...) years (...)
exceedingly increased upon them; yet all (...). 8. 2.
this to humble and try them, and to do them good in their later end. He
crosses many times our likeliest projects, and gives a blessing (...) those
times and means, whereof we despair. He breaks in pieces the ship that we think
should bring us to shore, but casts us upon such boards as we did not expect.
(...) we then any particular means (says one) it is but the scattering of a
(...), the breaking of a bucket, when the Sun and the fountain is the (...).
But we (...) the most part (...) as Hagar did: when the bottle was spent, she
falls a crying, she was undone, she and her child should die: till the Lord
opened her eyes to see the fountain. It was near her, but she saw it not: when
she saw it, she D Preston
was well enough. If thou had been here (said Martha) my brother Lazarus had
not died. As if Christ could not have kept him alive, unless he had been
present. So if Christ will come and lay his hands on Iairus his daughter, and
Elisha stroke his hand over Mar. 5 (...).
Naamans leprosy, they shall be cured. So the Disciples believed (...). (...)
11.
that Christ could feed so many thousands in the wilderness, but (...). (...).
37.
then he must have two hundred penny worth of bread. But our Savior gave them,
soon (...), an ocular demonstration of this truth, That man lives not by bread
alone, etc. Dan. 11. 34 They shall be helped with a little help. Why a little?
that through weaker means we may see Gods greater strength.

(...) 5. Then the devil takes him.]
Not in vision only, or imagination, but really and indeed: as he was
afterward apprehended, bound and crucified by that cursed crew. Spiritual
assaults may be beaten back by the shield of faith: Bodily admit of no such
repulse. A (...) Abraham Luke (...). 16.
may be bound by Satan, A Mary Magdalen possessed, a Job (...), a Paul boxed,
etc. As for the souls of the Saints, (...).
they are set safe out of Satan's scrape. Shake his chain at (...) Cor. (...). 7.
them he may, muster his forces, Revel. 12. 7. which may band themselves, and
bend their strength against (...) Psalm. 61. 1.
and (...) Angels, Christ and his members: but they are bounded Psalm 31. 6.
by God, who has set his on a rock that is higher then they: So that the
floods of temptation (that the serpent casts out of his mouth after them)
cannot come so much as to their feet. Or, if it touch their heel, yet it can
come no Gen (...). 15.
higher. There is no (...) against Jacob, because God was a Numb. (...) 22, 23.
Unicorn, to take away the venom (says Balaam the sorcerer) as waters, when
the Unicorns horn has been in them, are no longer poisonable, but healthful.

Into the holy City.]
Things are called holy, either by nature, as God, who is truly, always, and
only of himself holy: or by separation, or being set apart to a holy use or
end: which Origin calls, sancta sanctificata, by accession of external
holiness (...).
from without: So Jerusalem is here called, holy, because the City Ho (...).
(...).
of God, where he was daily worshipped. And for the same cause was the ground,
whereon Moses and Joshua trod, called (...) ground, and Tabor, the holy Mount.
And when we stand in our 2 (...). (...). (...).
Churches, says Chrysostom, we stand in a place of Angels and (...) angels,
in the Kingdom of God, and heaven it self; which (...).
they that profane, may justly fear to be whipped, like dogs, out of (...) ad
(...) 14.
(...) haavenly temple, and City too. And surely it were to be wished, that
such profane Esaus now-adaies, as dare prate or sleep, or laugh and play the
parts of jesters, or do any thing else, unbeseeming the service of God, would
keep themselves from Gods sanctuary: or that we had such Porters to keep them
(...), as they had under the Law, 2 Chronicles 23. 19.

And sets him upon a pinnacle of the Temple]
Height of place gives opportunity of temptation. The longest robe contracts
the greatest soil: neither are any in so great danger, as those that walk on
the tops of pinacles. Even height it self makes men's brains to swim: As in
Diocletian, who not content to be Emperor, (...).
would needs be adored as a god: and Caligula, of whom it was said, That there
was never any better servant then he, nor (...) Chron.
worse Lord. Vespasian is reported to have been the only man, Vesp (...) (...).
that ever became better by the Empire conferred upon him. It is both hard and
happy, not to be made worse by advancement. (...) signifies both honor and
(...); Chabadh, (...): and honor; Honoro and onero show, that honor goes not
without a (...). Fructus (...) oneris, fructus honoris, onus. Pope Pius (...).
a lapide in (...). (...). (...).
Quintus said thus of himself: Cumessem religiosus, sperabam been ae salute
animae meae: Cardinalis factus extimui: Pontifex creatus, (...). When I was
first in orders, without any further ecclesiastical dignity, I had some good
hopes of my salvation: When I became a Cardinal, I had (...); since I was made
Pope, least of all: The same thoughts of himself had Clement the 8th his
immediate successor, says the same Author. Non insulse Author (...). moral.
cap. 12. Praepositioni quot accidunt? Unum. Quid? Casus tantum. Quot casus?
Duo. Qui? Accusativus, and abiativus. Haec enim Praelatum oportet timere,
accusari a crimine, and aufirri (...) in (...). ad (...). (...) (...) historiae
(...), de (...) (...), a (...) (...) so (...).
(...), and sic ignominiose cadere.

Verse 6. And he says unto him.]
The devil usually tempts by speech, inward or outward. Senarclaeus tells
of a plain Countryman at Friburg in Germany, that lying on his deathbed, the
devil came to him in the shape of a tall, terrible man, and (...) his soul,
(...), Thou have been a notorious sinner, and I am come to set down all thy
sins: And therewith he drew out (...) and (...), and sat down at a Table that
stood by, and began to write. The sick man answered, My soul is Gods, and all
my sins are nailed to the cross of Christ. But if thou desire to set down my
sins, write thus, All our righteousnesses are as a filthy rag, etc. The devil
set down that, and bad him say on: He did: But thou, Lord, have promised, for
thine own sake to blot out our iniquities, and to make our searlet sins white
as snow. The devil passed by those words, and was earnest with him to go on in
his former argument. The sick man said with great (...), The son of God
appeared to destroy the works of the devil. With that the devil vanished, and
the sick man departed.

If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self, etc.]
This is the devils Logic, Mica. 7. 3.
to argue from (...) to liberty, to do wickedly with both hands earnestly.
Whereas the Heathen could say; In maxima liberate Salvian.
minima licentia. And the Father, Ideo deteriores sumus, quia meliores esse
debemus: Therefore are we worse, because we ought to be better. Remember but
this, that (...) art son to a King (said one to Antigonus) and that will
(...) thee from base courses. (...).
Take thou those spoils to thy self (said Themistocles to his friend Plat.
that followed him) (...), for thou art not Themistocles, as I am: they are
poor things, far below me. Shall (...) 6 11.
such a man as I flee? Shall I do any thing to the dishonor of my Romans 6. 1.
heavenly father? and therefore sin, because grace has abounded? That is not
the guise of any of Gods children. They walk honestly, (...) etc.
bravely, gallantly, worthy of God, who has done so great things for them. The
more (...), the more engagements. Scipio, when a harlot was offered unto him,
said, Vellem, si non essem Imperator. It was an aggravation of (...) fall of
Solomon, that 1 King. 11. 9.
God had appeared unto him twice; and of Saul, That he fell, as if he 2 Samuel 1.
21.
had not been anointed: So it is of any of Gods Saints, to sin, as if they had
not been adopted.

Cast thy self down.]
Here our Savior is tempted to self-murder, by an old man-slater. And when
Moses, Elias, Jonas, and others of the best sort of Saints were in a fit of
discontent, and grew weary of their lives, wishing for death, Divines doubt not
but Satan gave a push at them with his ten horns, to dispatch, and ease (...)
of the present trouble, by cutting off their own days. A dangerous and hideous
temptation; yet such as may be all the best, and few escape it that live out
their time. But in all the book of God, we read not of any of the generation of
the just, that ever did it. That God who kept them, will (if we look up to him)
do as much Psalm 73.
for us. Only we must set against this bloody temptation with Gods (...) me,
and with Gods armor. The word and prayer are the (...) and power of God, and
(by his might) do (...) all the fiery darts of the devil. Oppose the
commination to the temptation. Herein Eve faultred (in her, lest ye die, though
she held the precept) and so fell.

For it is written.]
A vile abuse of sacred Scripture, to (...) thereby to (...), or (...) for it:
yet what more ordinary 2 Timothy (...). 8.
with men of corrupt minds and reprobate concerning the (...). (...). (...) my
(...) of the divinity of the (...), (...), The true (...)
says, Quicaedem (...) saciunt ad materiam suam, as Tertullian speaks: who
(...) the Scriptures to serve their own purposes? But of this more elsewhere.

He shall give his Angels charge over thee.]
Hitherto the old liar speaks truth. But, Satan etsi semel videatur verax,
millies est mendax, and semper fallax, says one. Satan (...)
though he may sometimes seem a true-speaker, yet he is a thousand times for it
a liar, and always a deceiver. Because our Savior had alleged Scripture, he
also would do the like, in a perverse, apish imitation, but marres the
masculine In (...), non in (...) (...).
(...), by clipping off that clause, They shall keep thee in all thy (...);
that is, in those courses that are appointed thee by God. But as the Israelites
in the wilderness, when they went out of Gods precincts, were out of his
protection: So are all others. As a bird that wandereth from the nest; so Prove.
27. 8.
is a man that wandereth from his own place, says Solomon. (...). (...). 6.
God made a Law that none should molest a bird upon her nest. Does God take
ear of birds? A King undertaketh the safety of his Subjects, (...) they
travel within due hours, and keep the Kings highway, else not: so does God.
He has given his Angels charge over us, whiles we hold his way, which is like
Jacobs ladder, where the Angels were ascending and descending. Oh the dignity
and safety of a Saint, in a guard so full of state and strength! Well might
David (after he had said, The angel of the Lord pitcheth his tent Psalm. (...),
8.
(...) about them that fear him) presently subjoyn. Taste and see how gracious
the Lord is, in allowing his children so glorious an (...).

And with their hands they shall lift thee up, lest, etc.]
As Parents (...), In (...): duct a ab iu, significationis origin, qui (...)
aliquod (...) in humeros. (...).
use to lift their little ones over rough and foul ways: Or, as (...) in an
house love to get up into their arms their young master. In Christ and for
Christ, they count it their greatest glory, to do us any good office for soul
or body: they save us from the foul fiends, that else would worry us. These
walk about as Lions to (...) us, whiles alive, and to hinder our passage to
heaven, when we die: the other, as guardians, to keep us here, and to convey
and conduct us through the devils territories (who is Prince of the air) when we
go hence to heaven, Luke 16. 22.
in despite of the (...) that would intercept us, Dan. 10. 21.

Lest thou dash thy foot against a stone]
Oh the tender care of our heavenly (...)! He is so kind, and (in the best
sense) fond over his little ones, that he cannot abide the cold wind should
How upon them (as we (...)) and has therefore commanded, That the Sun shall
not smite them by day, nor the Moon by night, yea, Psalm. 121 6.
which way soever the wind sit, it must blow good to his. Arise, (...). 4. 16.
O North, and blow, O South, upon my Beloved, that her spices may flow forth.
What so contrary as North and South-winde, cold and hot, moist and dry, etc?
Yet both must blow good to Gods beloved. Well might God (...) his love above
that of natural Parents, which yet is wondrous great, says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 103. (...).

Verse 7. Jesus answered and said, It is written again]
Christ rejects not the holy Scriptures ((...) alleged and (...) by Satan) but
opens them, by laying one place to another. So did those holy Levites in
Nehemiah, and (...). Paul in the Acts. Parallel texts (like gl (...)) (...) one
against another cast (...). 8. 7. Vide (...). (...). (...)
a mutual light. (...) as the (...) brightneth his hard diamond with the dust
snaved from it self: So must we clear (...).
hard Scriptures, by others that are (...) plain and perspicuous. (...) de
(...).


Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.]
Trust him we (...), tempt him we may (...). Now God (...), either when men are
too much addicted to the means, as (...): Or, when they reject them, as Ahaz;
who refused a sign, and ran to unlawful means, hiding all under this, I will
not tempt God. Heathens (...). (...). (...).
could say, Admota manu (...) est Minerva; and they noted him for a foolish
(...), (...) his Cart (...) fast, cried to his god, and moved his lips, but not
his hands to help himself. If thou call for knowledge (says Solomon) and
criest for understanding: There Is prayer to God. If thou seek her as (...),
and searchest for her as for hid treasures: There Is man's (...) in the diligent
use of the means. Then shall thou understand (...)
the (...) of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God: There Is the happy (...).
Ora and labora was an Emperors (...). S. (...) sets it down as a vanity of
(...) youth, that he prayed God to help him against some special sins,
whereunto he was strongly (...), but should have been full sorry, that God
should have heard him, (...) he was loath to part with them. How much better was
that prayer of (...) Thomas Moor, Domine Deus, fac (...) in (...) consequendis
operam collocare, pro quibus obtinendis soleo ad (...) are: Lord God, make me
to bestow pains in getting those (...)
things, for obtaining whereof I use to pray unto thee.

Verse 8. Again the devil takes him.]
This Master-fly (...), though beaten away once and again, yet returns to the
same place. (...) how (...) he is in renewing his temptations after a flat
repulse. He sollicits and sets upon our Savior again (as (...) wife did upon
Joseph, for all his many (...)) and is not (...)
only importunate, but impudent. Stand we therefore still upon (...). l (...)
victus (...). Ita (...).
our guard, and look for no ease here. The Roman Captains, when they had once
triumphed, took their ease ever after. So did not Cato, and is therefore highly
commended. So may not we, if ever we will be approved, as good soldiers of
Jesus Christ. (...) (...) (...).
Our whole life is a continual warfare, and we must look for the continual
hail-shot, hel-shot of Satanicall assaults and suggestions. When Xerxes fought
against theGreeks, The sea was full of ships (says the Orator) the earth of
soldiers, the air of arrows. So fares it with the Saints under Satan's
batteries: no truce, but continual (...). (...).
conflict. Ever since those two strong men fought, there is no (...) he (...)
of his (...) to (...) who (...), (...) (...). (...) 7, 8 Christ (...) est
(...), (...) and (...) and (...) nostras. (...) (...) Genes. 32.
more peace. S. Paul sounds the alarm, Arm, Arm, take the whole armor of God,
and be ever in your harness. And S. Peter gives the reason, Because your
adversary the devil, as a (...) lion, walks, and watches, night and day,
seeking whom (...) may devour. For our encouragement, as the devil is, Leo
(...), a roaring lion; so is Christ, Leo de tribu (...), (...), the lion of the
Tribe of Judah, that delivers us, and makes us more then Conquerours;
holding the crown of glory over our heads (as we are sighting) with this
inscription, Vincenti (...), To (...) that (...), will I give, etc. Fight
therefore and faint not: your (...) is (...), your armor is of proof. Get on
both those (...) of (...) (as the girdle of truth, breast plate of (...), shoes
of peace and patience, shield of faith, helmet of (...)) and those (...) of
offense; as the sword of the Spirit, and (...) of (...). And then resolve, with
that aged Citizen of Exeter in (...) Edward the 6. time; who when the Town was
besieged, (...) K Ed. 6 (...) S. (...). (...). p. 62.
(...), That he would feed on the one arm, and fight with the other, before he
would consent to yield the City to the seditious. It is said of (...) (...) the
siege of Byrrachium, that he so long resisted Pompeys Der (...) ylvam. Lucan.
(...), that he had 220. darts sticking in his shield, and lost one of his
eyes, and yet gave not over, till Caesar came to his rescue: And of Sr Thomas
Challoner (who died, anno 1566.) that he (...) in his younger time under
Charles the 5. in the expedition (...).
of Algier; where being ship wreckt, after he had swum till his (...) and his
arms failed him, at the length catching hold of a (...) with his teeth, he
escaped, not without the loss of some of his teeth. The like (and somewhat
more) is reported of Cynegiras Trogus. Herod.
the Athenian in the Persian wars. These did thus for a corruptible crown, or
temporary honor; what should not we Revel. 3.
do for an eternal? 1 Cor. 9. 25. Hold out, and hold fast that thou have,
that no man take thy crown from thee. Be of Queen Camdens Eliz. (...). 164.
Elizabeth's disposition, who provided for war, even when she had most perfect
peace with all men. Gods Spirit sets up a standard in the Saints, Isa. 59. 19.
And stronger is he that is in you, then he that is in the world. That old
serpent has his head so bruised and crushed by Christ, that he cannot now so
easily thrust in his mortal sting, though he (...) it never so often, unless
we dally with him and lay our selves open, unles we tempt Satan to tempt us, by
inconsideration, security, or venturing on the occasion. Vitanda est glacies.
si nolis cadere. He that tastes of the broth, will have a mind Numb. 6. 3.
to the meat. The Nazarites might not only not drink wine, but forbear to eat
of the grape, whether moist or dried.

(...) an exceeding high mountain.]
Whether mountains were Psalm. 90 2.
made at first, or cast up by the flood, there are that dispute. I think, made
at first. Yet is the earth round (as an apple is, notwithstanding some knots
and bunches in it.) And, that, being (...), and so, naturally apt for motion
(as the heavens are) it stands firm and unmovable, Eccles. 1. 3. this is
admirable. God has hanged it upon nothing, says Job, in the midst of the
heaven; (...) 26. 7.
(...) Archimedes his (...), (...) poized with it is own (...). But why took he
(...) Savior into so high a mountain? That he might thence have the sairer
prospect: And perhaps in (...) of God, taking up Mosos into the Mount. The
(...) be Gods ape, that he may, by counterfeiting the like to God, (...) his
holy Ordinances into disgrace. Thus the (...) their sacrisices, washings,
tithes, oracles, etc. (...) and others tell us, that the Temple of Diana at
Ephesus, and her (...) therein, were made of Cedar. So for Christ bruising the
(...) head, Satan has set up Hercules, killing the (...). Which (...) who
sees not plainly to have been hatched in (...), and (...) to the Poets, in an
(...) imitation of God, (...) to (...) his oracle? The like may be said of the
fable of (...) his wife, (...) snatched from him, for looking back (...) which
was made out of the story of Lots wife: So their (...) with his ten labors,
was the Scripture (...). And (...) (...) King of Egypt, and Priest of (...)
(who was helped from heaven by his God against Senacherib King of (...) (...).
(...).
that invaded him) who could it be else, but Hezekiah King of (...)? (...)
(operum Dei Momus) per AEgyptios hoc (...).
(...), ut (...) in (...) editum vilesceret, (...) and (...), and tanti operis
gloria ad (...) rediret. Thus the devil attempted by his Egyptians to transfer
the glory of a (...) miracle upon himself.

And (...) him all the Kingdoms of the earth]
In their (...) ^
and bravery. A bewitching sight, doubtless, and would have moved much with a
(...) heart. But here the devils fire (...) upon wet tinder, and therefore took
not. Gain and glory? rule and riches? Quis nisi mentis inops, etc. Set but a
wedge of gold (...), and (...) (that could stay the course of the Sun) (...)
stay (...) from lusting and laying hold on it. (...) Ass (...) fast enough
(...) preferment. And Zimri will have his (...) though he die for it. These
three Enchantresses, The (...) of the (...), the lust of the eye, and the pride
of life; Pleasure, (...) ^
and (...) (the worldly man's Trinity) whom have they (...), befooled,
bebeasted? S. John shows that a man may be (...) mortified, a father, and yet
wondrous subject to (...) world. Of the which, nevertheless, we may say (as
(...) (...) the people) it is wholly set upon wickedness: Or, as (...)
sometimes (...) of an Historian, Both the words and shows of it are full of
fraud. It promises (as the devil here) great (...), but (...), pro the sauro
carbones, in stead of mines, cole-pits. (...) Forbisher, in his voyage to
discover the Straits, being (...) up and down with foul weather, snows and
unconstant (...), returned home, having gathered a great quantity of stones,
which he thought to be minerals. From which, when (...) could be drawn neither
gold nor silver, nor any other metal, (...). (...). 89.
(...) seen them cast forth (says M. Camden) to mend the (...)-ways. How often
do the devil and the world give men (...) and serpents in stead of fish and
bread, even the bread of (...), (...). (...) 17.
that proves gravel in the teeth? How often are they disappointed that hunt
after lying vanities, and so for sake their own mercies, (...). 2. 8.
as Jonas freely acknowledged, for it had like to have cost (...) a (...)? What
got Balaam by running after his wages Numb. 31. 8.
of (...), but a sword in his ribs? Achan by his wedge, but (...) about his
ears? Judas by his thirty pieces, but the halter about his neck? Cranmer by his
subscription, but such a Adeo ut (...) spem (...), nec locum (...) fortunae
reliquerit. Ut jam nec (...) mori, nec vivere inhoneste liceret. Melch. Adam.
wretched condition, as that there was left him neither hope of better, (...)
place of worse, as Cole could say in a Sermon, at his recantation? Many of the
Romish runnagates, that run thither for preferment, what little respect have
they often times, and as little content in their change? Roffensis had a
Cardinals hat sent him, but his head was (...) off, before it came. Allin had a
Cardinals hat, but with (...) thin lining (means, I mean, to support his state)
that he was (...) called the starvelling Cardinal. Stapleton was made
Professor of a petty University, scarce so good as one of our freeschools in
England. Saunders was starved. William Rainolds was (...) to a poor vicarage
under value. On Harding his (...) D Featleys.
bestowed a Prebend of Gaunt, or to speak more properly, a (...). exploded.
(...) Prebend. Many others get not any thing, so that they wish themselves at
home again; and sometimes return in the same (...) in which they went.

And the glory thereof]
wherewith he hoped to dazzle our (...) eyes (those windows of the soul) and so
to imprison his affections. But he mistook himself. This heavenly Eagle had
(...) irretertum, nothing moved with these tempting objects. But (...) many are
there (alas) that have died of the wound of the (...)? that have fallen by the
hand of this vile strumpet, the world? who by laying forth her two fair breasts
of profit and pleasure, has cast down many wounded, as Solomon's harlot, Prove.
7. 26. And by the glistering of her pomp and (...), has (...); as the going
fire leads men into hedges and ditches: (...).
(...), as (...) (...), which when she cannot over take the (...), does with
her (...) and (...), so that they have no power to (...) away till she have
(...) them to death.

Verse 9. And he says unto him, All these things will I give thee.]
A great catch sure: even just nothing: for he showed out Savior only shows
and shadows, apparitions and resemblances (...).
of things. The word also used in the former verse for ( glory) (...) (...)
(...).
(...) an opinion or imagination. So St Luke styles all Agrippa's (...), but a
fantasy. David tells us, that man walks in a vain shadow. Now a shadow is
something in appearance, nothing in (...): So the Apostle calls all these
things, that the devil (...) our Savior, (...), an accidental mathematical
figure, 1 (...) 7. 31.
without solidity or substance. And further tells us, that this figure (...)
away, is ever in transitu, like the streams of a river, (...).
that (...) by the sides of a City, no man can stop: or if we could retain the
things of this life, yet not the world only passes away (says the Apostle)
but the lusts thereof. So that a man (...) 17.
(...) make his heart delight in the same thing still. (...) fastidio sunt. We
loath after a while what we lusted (...) (...)
(as Amnon did Tamar) and quickly find a satiety, yea an unsatisfy ingnesse in
the creature. For he that loves silver shall not (...). (...). 10.
be satisfied with silver, nor though he could heap up his hoards to the stars,
and ingrosse a monopoly of all the wealth in the world. Non (...) satiatur cor
(...), quam corpus aura. You may as soon (...) a bag with wisdom, a chest with
(...), or a circle with a triangle, as the heart of man with any thing here
below. All that earth can afford, is, fumus (...) (says one) (...) and (...),
(...).
says another: Vanity and vexation, says Solomon the (...).
wise: To whose impartial verdict (grounded upon so good (...)) (...). 1. 2.
we shall do well to subscribe, without believing the (...) crakes, or trying
any further conclusions. The Centurists (...), All these things will I give
thee, thus; I will make thee Pope. And indeed many Popes were advanced to that
Sea (...) by the devil, as Histories relate. Who, had they but (...) what is
usually done at their inthronization, would D (...) (...). (...) (...).
never have been so hasty. For before the Pope is set in his Chair, and puts on
his tripple Crown, a piece of row, or wad of straw is set on fire (...) him,
and one appointed to say, Sic transit (...), The glory of this world is but a
(...). This is only (...) of form and Ceremony: As is also that, that one day
in the year the (...) Almoner rides before him, casting abroad to the (...)
certain pieces of brass and lead, saying, Silver and gold have I none, but
such as I have I give you, Whereas that (...) holds a golden cup in her hand,
and her merchants that trade with her, are the Grandees of the earth, Revel.
18. and are (...) in Apo. 18.
(...) rich by her, verse. 15. The Cardinal of Toledo has a hundred thousand
pound a year coming in; The Archbishops of Germany are (...)-(...) (many of
them) and have revenues accordingly. Petrarch reports, that in the treasury
of Pope (...).
John the 22. were found after his death 250. tuns of gold. And Sphinx. Philos.
p. (...).
of Boniface the eighth it is storied, that when he was taken by Philip the
fair, King of France, and his palace rifled, there was more treasure found,
then all the Kings of the earth were able to (...).
show again. Otto, one of the Popes Mice-catchers (as the story It was (...)
and trimly (...) by (...) Innocent (...). Vere (...) deliciarum Papis suit tun
Anglia and (...) inexhausius.
(...) them) sent hither by Gregory 9. after three years raking (...) of money
by most (...) arts, at last departing (...), he left not so much money in the
whole Kingdom, as he either (...) with him, or sent before him. Judge by this,
what they did thorowout all Christendom. The Pope, says one, could never want
money so long as he could hold a pen in his hand. Thus it was then; but how
now? Bellarmine complains, that since by us the Pope was cried down for
Antichrist, his Kingdom (...) not Non (...), non crevit (...), sed (...) magis
ac (...) evit, (...). de Pap. (...) c. 21.
only not increased, but every day more and more decreased. And Cotton the
(...), That the authority of the Pope of Rome is incomparably less then it
was: And that now the Christian Church is but a diminutive. Hereupon also the
Cardinals (who (...) wont to meet oftener) meet but once a week, because the
(...) of the Court of Rome grow (...). And albeit the (...) Concla. ex Synta
(...) l. 15. c 4. (...) (...).
(...) good, and (...) blood, his honors and manners rose together; yet abates
he as little of his former pomp and pride, as the (...) does since his fall, in
taking upon him here to dispose of all the Kingdoms of the earth, as his: and
requiring our Savior (the Os (...) and (...), in eodem sunt (...) to. Sphinx
Phil. 601.
true Lord of all) to (...) down and worship him. The Cardinals he still
creates with these words, Estote fratres nostri and principes mundi. And, as
another (...) (who was the first that (...) that honor) he holds forth his
feet to be kissed, having the sign of the (...) shining with pearls and (...)
stones (...) (...), (...) crucem Christi derideat, says mine (...). In (...)
word, with his pomp and primacy, gain and (...), (...) and riches, fat
Bishoprics and Cardinalships, as he (...) Luther, and gain him to his side: so
he gets and (...) a (...) to that rotten religion. Pauper Lutherus (...), said
Erasmus; it being then the ready way to (...) to write and rail against Luther,
as Eccius, (...), (...) others found it. But Christ will one day whip such
(...), and their customers out of his house, as he did (...) the Gospel; chase
them out of his presence, as Nehemiah did (...) son in Law; Curse them with a
curse, that run (...) after the error of (...) for (...). Let the Romish ^
(...) offer as large as the devil does here, every one that has any thing of
Christ in him, will answer with that noble Italian (...) ( Galeacius
Caracciolus Marquess of Vico in (...)) who being tempted by a Jesuit to
revolt for money, (...) out, Let their money perish with them, who esteem all
the gold in the world worth one days society with (...) Christ, and his holy
Spirit. And cursed be that Religion for ever, etc.

If thou will fall down and worship me.]
Luke says, Worship before me. So that to worship before an Idol is to worship
the Idol, whatever the Romanist pretend and plead to the contrary. And not only
so, but to fall down, as the devil would have had our Savior here (though it
be not come to worshipping) is a grievous (...). 2. 8.
sin. St John had not yet worshipped the Angel, but only fallen down, as
desirous to worship, and is taken up by the Angel, for that idolatrous gesture.
Woe then to those Rimmonites, that plead for an upright soul in a protrate
body; and allege for their warrant, that of Apocryphal Baruc, Chap. 6.
Wherefore when ye see the multitude of people worshipping them behind and
before, say ye in your hearts, O Lord, it is thou that (...) test only to be
worshipped. Serve we God with our bodies also; and say with David and Christ,
Lord, a body have thou (...) (...) 8.
Lo, I come to do thy will therewith. But what a (...) (...).
and detestable boldness was it in the devil, to move speech (...) a sin as
this, to our Savior Christ? It was extreme sauciness in Satan to adjure our
Savior (whom he there calls, The Son of the most high God) not to torment
him, it was horrible Mark 5. 6, 7.
impudency. But nothing comparable to this in the Text, to worship the devil in
person: then which, what can be imagined more odious? We see then to what
execrable sins the best may be tempted. Capell of Ten.
A man is to expect (says one) if he live out his days, to be urged to all
sins, to the breach of every branch of the ten Commandments: and to be put to
it in respect of every Article of our Creed. Have you not been tempted (says
another) in (...) (...).
this or that kind? It is because God in mercy would not lead you into
temptation. Yea this is, in some sort, more to be acknowledged (...) victory,
when ye were tempted. For not to be tempted is more immediately from God, and
(...) in man's power, then to prevail against temptation. For nothing does
overcome us without our will: but without our will does God lead us into
trial: for he knows we would taste little of these, if we might (...). (...).
be our own carvers. Simon, Simon (says our Savior) Satan (...) (...).
has desired to have you to winnow you (that is, (...) trouble and hurt you,
says a Father) as a challenger desires to have one of the other side to
combat with: as Goliath called for a man to match him. Now either God denies
him, or delivers us, so that that evil one touches us not, viz. Tactu
qualitativo, with 1 (...). 5. 18.
a mortal touch, as Cajetan glosseth that Text, I have praid for thee, says
our Savior, that thy faith fail not. He praid for all, but especially for
Peter, because more violently tempted. As, (...). 4. (...). (...). 10 7.
because more shamefully foiled, therefore, Go tell my Disciples and Peter,
that I am risen; and that thereby he is justified. I have praid; so that the
remedy was ready made before the disease, the salve before the sore, or else it
might have come too late: As those that are stung by a scorpion, if they be not
presently anointed with oil of scorpions, die for it: and as those that have
drunk poison, if they take not an antidote immediately, ere it get to the
vitals, perish infallibly. God in Christ has all plasters and pardons ready
made and sealed. Else, we might die in our sins, whiles the pardon is providing.

Verse 10. Get thee hence, Satan.]
Avaunt, avoid, be packing. This was an indignity not to be endured, as great
every way, as if the (...) scoundrell upon earth should assault the chastity of
the greatest Empress. Our Savior therefore will endure him no longer, but
commands him out of his presence, with utmost indignation. And surely madness,
in case (...) Gods dishonor, is far better then meekness. Here, if (...)
besides our selves, it is to God, as Paul said to the Corinthians; and as he
did, when 2 Cor. 5. 13.
(...) dealt with Elymas that firstborn of the devil, when he saw ^.
him (...) the deputy, He set his eyes upon him, says the Text, as if he would
have run through him. After which lightning follows that terrible thunder-crack,
Full of all (...) and of (...), etc. So the Angel of Ephesus could not abide
those (...). (...), (...).
(...), Revel. 2. 2. Nor could David brook the workers of iniquity: he casts
down the gauntler of defiance against them, as his utter enemies, He hates
them with a perfect hatred. Hezekiah (...). (...), (...).
pulled down the brazen Serpent (when the people idolized it) and called it a
piece of brass. And Josiah would not let stand the horses of the Sun, and
other monuments of Idolatry, upon any entreaty. King Edward the 6th, being
labored by some of his best friends, to permit the Lady Mary his sister, to
have Mass in her house, answered, He would rather spend his life, and all he
had, then to agree and grant to that he knew certainly to be against Act and
(...) fol. (...).
the truth. And another time, in his message to the Rebels of (...): Assure
you, most surely, said he, that we, of no earthly thing under heaven, make such
reputation as of this one, to have our law obeyed, and this cause of God which
we have taken in hand, to be thoroughly maintained. From the which we will never
remove an hairs breadth, or give place to any creature living, much less to any
Subject; wherein we will spend our own royal Person, our Crown, Treasure,
Realm, and all our State, whereof we assure you of our high honor. Now Gods
blessing be (...) 1189
on that blessed heart, that (...) such a stomach against Gods dishonor; and
(...) entertain all wicked attempts and assaults with this Apage of our
Savior. And woe to them that cry Euge to such. Whether we may say to the
Tempter, as our Savior did, Get thee hence; and not rather as the Angel, The
Lord rebuke (...) 9.
thee, is questioned by some; because it is his only, to command the devil. But
that we may, and must say to him, no man doubts, as our Savior did to the
Pharisees, Why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites? Mat (...) 18.
as Naboth did to Ahab, God forbid me any such wickedness: As Solomon to his
mother, Ask the Kingdom also: As the 1 King 2. 22.
witch of Endor to Saul, Why seek thou to take me in a snare, to 1 Samuel 28.
9.
cause me to die? Thus, Resist, says Peter: Stand fast, says 1 (...) 9
Paul: Resist, and Satan will flee, he is but a coward. Stand, (...) 14.
and then Satan will fall. Not to yield, is to conquer: if he cast (...).
us not down, we are then accepted, as if we did cast him down. We do
ever-overcome, says that great Apostle, because in our Romans 8 37.
head Christ we overcome before we fight, and are sure of victory, Solomon G.
snerus apud Melch. (...).
Revel. 12. 1. Quare apage sis, Diabole, and tela tua in hoc semen mulier is
converte: hunc si viceris, me quoque viceris, said one, Devil, do thy worst to
Christ: conquer him and take all.

For it is written]
This two-edged sword our Savior had Isa, 6 (...). (...) is called (...)
found to be metal of proof, and therefore holds him to it. Only the
Scriptures scare the devil, as only faithful prayer can charm him. Athanasius
writes that evil spirits may be put to flight by a Charm.
that 68. Psalm, Let the Lord arise, and his enemies be (...). But this is true
of the whole word of God, which is armor of proof against the devil.

Thous shall worship the Lord thy God.]
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, says Moses. So Matthew. 15. 9. with Isa. 29.
13. See Psalm. 2. 11. Josh. 24 11. Heb. 12. 27. Solemon sets the (...) Prove. 1.
7.
of God as the basis and beginning of Gods work and worship, in (...). (...) 5.
the beginning of his works. And again, in the end of them, makes Deum (...)
parum (...), valde (...); (...) qui non (...), auget (...). Full (...).
it the end and upshot of all. For they that fear the Lord will keep his
Covenant, Psalm. 103. 13 -- 18. Yea, they will work hard at it, as afraid to be
taken with their tasks undone, Act. 10. 35. They will give him both the shell
of outward adoration, and the kernel of inward devotion; truly, without
halting, and totally without halfing; truly, both for matter and manner;
totally, both for subject and object; as David who did all the wills of God, and
(...).
with all his heart, all the days of his life. The Gentiles could Act. 13.
say, that God must be worshipped (...), either to our utmost, or not at all.
And Plutarch compares our duty to a certain fish, which eaten sparingly,
hurts; but being eaten up all, is medicinable.

And him only shall thou serve.]
With inward worship, as Stuchius de sacrific (...) 8. in (...) expedition
against Naples, came into the field like thunder and lightning, but went out
like a snuff: more then a man at first, less then a woman at last. Guicciard.
before with outward. And so, God only is to be served; for it supposes
omniscience, omnipresence and omnipotence, which are in none else but God. Sunt
qui colendi verbum, (...), dictum volunt, eo quod plerunque Dei hominumque
cultus cum adulatione and hypocrisi est conjunctus. Sic a (...), Gallicum and
nostrate flatter. Sic adorare quidam dictum volunt ab ore, tamet si mente
magis, quam ore vera fiat adoratio. Quinetiam adorare antiquis idem fuit quod
agere.

Verse 11. Then the devil left him.]
If Christ command him away, there is no abiding for him. Here he was foiled and
quelled, and, as it were, cast down and killed by Christ our Champion. He came
into the field like another Goliath, cracking and (...). l. 1 e (...) Nulla maj
r tentatio (...) ne (...).
calling craven, but ere he went thence, was made to hop headless, as he.
First a terror, afterward a scorn, as it was anciently said of those Chariots,
armed with sithes and hooks. Henceforth therefore, though we are ever to expect
temptations, till such time, as we have gotten that great gulf between the
devil (...) (...).
us, Luke 16. 26. Yet fear none of those things that ye shall suffer. Behold,
the devil shall (by his imps and instruments) cast (...) of you (not all) into
prison (not into hell) that ye may be tried (not destroyed) and ye shall have
tribulation ten days (so (...), (...). 2. 10.
and no longer.) Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will (...) thee a
crown of life. Satan can look for no Crown, he is in perdition already. His aim
and endeavor is, to draw us into the same condemnation. This we escape, if we
resist, steadfast in the faith: for then he perceives Christ, the chief Captain
of our salvation to be there; and therefore flees his presence, ever since he
felt his prowess. Chrysostom says, That by the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
we are so armed against Satan's temptations, that he (...) from us no otherwise,
then if we were so many leones ignem expuentes, lions that spet fire. It is not
silly peoples defying the devil, and spetting at his name, that avails any
thing: for (...) spet not low enough; they spet him not out of their hearts:
yea, they admit him thereinto by yielding to his suggestions; and are miserably
foolish, as if men should startle at the name of fire, and yet not fear to be
scorched with the flame thereof. Our (...) way is to run to Ithiel and Ucal, as
Agur did, to Christ, the Author (...). 30. 1, 2.
and finisher of our faith; who here gave the devil such (...) 12. 2.
an inglorious (...), trampled him in the mire, triumphed over him, and has
promised to tread him under our feet shortly, Romans 16. 20.

And lo, the Angels came and ministered unto him.]
Perhaps (...) King. (...). (...). 9. and 10 (...) Luk 1. (...). Act. 0 4. and
27 (...).
food to (...) body, as once to Elias; but certainly comfort to (...) soul, as
to Jacob, Hagar, Daniel, Zecharias, Joseph, Cornel us, Paul, etc. Socrates and
Theodoret tell us of one Theadorus, a (...), put to extreme torments by Julian
the (...), and (...) by him, when he saw him unconquerable (...) tells us, that
he met with this Martyr, a long time after this trial, and asked him, Whether
the pain he felt were not (...)? He (...), That at first it was somewhat (...)
after a while, there seemed to stand by him a young man in (...), who with a
soft and comfortable handkerchief, wiped off the sweat of his body (which
through extreme pain and anguish was little (...) then blood) and bad him, Be
of good cheer. Insomuch as that it was rather a punishment then a pleasure to
him to be taken off the rack, since, when the tormentours had done, the Angel
was gone. And how many unspeakable comforts ministered the good Angels to the
modern Martyrs in their prisons, at the stake, and in the fire? Christ indeed
was not comforted by them, till the temptation was over; but to us they
minister, many times, in the hour of temptation. They have power over the
devils, to restrain them: and (though invisibly and insensibly) are as ready to
help and comfort us, as the evil Angels to tempt and trouble us: else were not
our protection equal to our danger, and we could neither stand nor rise. An
Angel stood at Zecharies right hand, Luke 1. 11. (as the devil did at
Jehoshuahs ( Zech. 3. 1.) to show how ready and handy they are to defend and
support the Saints. It was as he was burning incense. The Angels are busiest
about us, when we are in Gods work: which to set forth, the hangings of the
Tabernacle of old were full of (...) within and without. He said unto him, Fear
not, Zechary. The blessed spirits (though they do not often vocally express
it, do pity our humane frailties, and secretly suggest comfort to us, when we
perceive it not. Always they stand looking on the face of God to receive
commandments, for the accomplishment of all designs for our good; which they
have no sooner received, then they readily dispatch, even with weariness of
flight, as Dan. 9. (...). with so much swiftness, as if they had wearied
themselves with fleeing. I read of a Friar that undertook to show to the people
a feather of the wing of the Angel Gabriel. A plume of whose feathers it might
better have become the Pope to send to (...) the Irish Rebel, then that plume
of Phoenix-feathers he sent to honor B. (...): (...). (...). of Gods (...), p
174.
and encourage him; had his holiness such command over Angels, as they say he
has, or did he not rather collude in one thing, as that Friar did in another.

Verse 12. Now when Jesus heard that John was cast into prison]
For Herodias his sake, though under pretexts of fear of sedition, because of
the great multitudes that followed and admired him, as Josephus has it. This
has ever been an ordinary (...) (...). l. (...). 7.
cast upon the most (...), to be (...) of sedition, and (...) of the State.
(...) (...) held and called a Traitor, Elijah a troubler of Israel, Paul a
pest, Luther, tuba rebellionis, (...)
the Trumpet of rebellion, etc. Iuvenies apud Tacitum quentatas accusationes
Majestatis: unicum crimen eorum qui Act. 14 5.
crimine vacabant, says Lipsius. There was some color of right, yea of piety
laid upon the French massacre, and by edicts, a fair cloak sought, to cover the
impious fraud, as if there had been some wicked conspiracy plotted by the
Protestants against the King, the Queen Mother, the Kings brethren, the King of
Navarre, Camd Elizab. fol. 163.
and the Princes of the blood. For there was coin stamped in memory of the
matter, in the forepart whereof, (together with the Kings picture) was this
inscription, Virtus in rebelle^. And on the other side, Pietas excitavit
justitiam. Not many years before this, Francis King of France, when he would
excuse to the Princes of Germany (whose friendship he then sought after) that
cruelty he had exercised against the Protestants, he gave out that he punished
Anabaptists only, that bragged of Enthusiasmes, and cried down Magistracy,
stirring up the people to sedition, as they had done, not long before in
Germany. This foul (...). Annal. vol 2 ^ 454.
aspersion cast upon true Religion, gave occasion to Calvin (then
a young man of 25. years of age) to set forth that incomparable work, called
his institutions of Christian Religion. Concerning which, Paulus Melissus long
since sang, Praeter Apostolicas post Christi tempora chartas,
Huic peperere libro saecula nulla parem.


Since Christ's and the Apostles time no such book has been written.

He departed into Galilee]
Succenturiatus prodit Ioanni, says a learned Interpreter. He therefore went
into Galilee (which was under Herod's government) to be, as it were, a supply
and successor to John, whom Herod had imprisoned. How well might the tyrant
say of the Church, as those Persians did of the Athenians, (...). We overturn
(...), (...)
them, and yet they fall not; we wound them, and yet they fear not. St Basil
bad the persecuted Christians tell the tyrants with a bold and brave spirit,
(...) If ye prevail again, yet surely ye shall be overcome again. For there is
neither power nor policy against the Lord. Charles the (...) in (...) 8.(...)
(...) in (...)
fifth (then whom all Christendom had not a more prudent Prince, nor the
Church of Christ (almost) a sorer enemy) when he had in his hand Luther dead,
and Melancthon and Pomera^, and certain other Preachers of the Gospel alive, he
not only determined not any thing extremely against them, or violated their
graves, but also entreating them gently, sent them away, not so much as once
forbidding them to publish openly the doctrine that Act. and Mon. 1785.
they professed. For it is the nature of Christ's Church, the more that
persecutours spurn against it, the more it flourishes and increases, as the
Palm Tree spreads and springs the more it Duru^ ut ilex tonsa bipennibus,
per damna, per caedes ab ipso Ducit opes animumque ferro, Horat.
is oppressed: as the bottle or bladder, that may be dipped, not drowned; as the
Oak that takes heart to grace from the maims and wounds given it, and sprouts
the thicker; as Fenugreek, which the worse it is handled (says Pliny) the
better it proves. This made Arrius Antoninus (a cruel persecutour in Asia) cry
out to the Christians, who came by troops to his tribunal, and proclaimed
themselves Christians (so offering themselves to death) O miseri, si libet
perire, number vobis rupes aut restes desunt? Tertul. ad Sca^ulam.
O Wretched men, of ye be so desirous to die, have you neither (...)
rocks nor halters, wherewith to dispatch your selves? Diocletian after he had
in vain done his utmost to blot out Christ's Name from under heaven, and could
not effect it (such was the constancy of the Primitive Christians, that no
sufferings could affright or discourage them, but that they grew upon him
daily, do what he could to the contrary) laid down the Empire in great
discontent, and betook himself (as Charles the fifth also did) to Bucholcer.
a private course of life. As Lambs breed in winter, and Quails Chronol.
Numb. 11. 31.
came with the wind: So good Preachers and people spring most in hard times.
No fowl is more preyed upon by hawks, kites, etc. then the Pigeon, yet are
there more doves then hawks or kites for all that, says Optatus. So the sheep;
and so the sheep of (...).
Christ, A little little flock, he calls it, but such as all the Wolves on
earth, and devils in hell cannot possibly devour. The Luke 12. 32.
Christians of Calabria suffered great persecution, Anno 1560. for being all
thrust up in one house together, as in a sheepfold, the Executioner comes in,
and amongst them takes one, and blindfoldeth him with a muffler about his
eyes, and so leads him forth into a larger place, where he commands him to
kneel down: Which being done, he cutteth his throat, and so leaving him half
dead, and taking his butchers knife and muffler all of gore blood, comes again
to the rest, and so leading them one after another, he dispatcheth them all, to
the number of 88. All the elder went to death more cheerfully, the younger were
more timorous. I tremble and shake (says a Roman-Catholike, out of Act. and
Mon. fol. 859.
whose letter to his Lord this is transcribed) even to remember how the
executioner held his bloody knife between his teeth, with the bloody muffler in
his hand, and his arms all in gore-bloud, up to the elbows, going to the fold,
and taking every of them one after another by the hand, and so dispatching them
all, no otherwise then does a butcher kill his calves and sheep.
Notwithstanding all which barbarous cruelty the Waldenses or Protestants were
so spread, not in France only their chief (...), but in Germany also, many
years before this, that they could travel from Collen to (...) of the Church,
p. (...).
Millain in Italy, and every night lodge with hosts of their own profession. It
is not yet a dozen years since Pope Urban the eighth (that now sits) upon
the surrender of Rochel into the French Kings hands, sent his Breve to the
King, exasperating him against Reliquias (...) in Gallica (...).
the Protestants in France, and eagerly urging, yea, enforcing the destruction
of all the heretics, stabling in the French vineyard, as his Inurbanity is
pleased to express it. But what shall be given unto thee? Or what shall be
done unto thee, thou foul tongue? Sharp arrows of the mighty with coals of
Juniper (Psalm. B. Halls answ. to Pope Urban his Inurbanity, etc.
120. 4, 5.) which burn vehemently, and smell sweetly. God shall shortly put
into the hearts of the Kings of the earth (and this King among the rest of the
ten) to hate the whore, to eat her flesh, and to burn her with fire, Revel. 17.
16. There are not Babylon altera adbuc stat, cito itidem casura, si essetis
(...).
many ages past, since one of his predecessors broke open the gates of Rome,
(...) the walls, dispersed the Citizens, and condemned the Pope to a dark
dungeon, lading him with bitter scoffs Petras. de rem. (...). fort. dial. 118.
and curses. There are not many years past, since the Realm of France was
ready, upon the Popes refusal, to reblesse K. Henry 4. upon conversion to
them, to withdraw utterly from the obedience Philip. le Beau.
of his Sea, and to erect a new Patriarch over all the French Sands his
relation (...). Relig.
Church. The then Archbishop of Burges was ready to accept it: and but that
the Pope (in fear thereof) did hasten his benediction, it had been effected, to
his utter (...) and decay. Before (...) of Toler. by Gabriel (...), p. (...).
he would do it, he lashed the King in the person of his Ambassador, after
the singing of every verse of miserere, until the whole Psalm was sung out.
Sed (...) Evangelij jubare, sagaciores, D. Prideaux contra (...).
ut spero, principes, adnutum hujus Orbilij non solvent subligacula, says a
great Divine of ours. King Henry the eighth and the French King (some half a
year before their deaths) were at a point to have changed the Mass in both
their Realms into a Communion: Also to have utterly extirped the Bishop of
Rome, etc. Act. and (...). Ex (...) Cranmeri, fol. 1135.
Yea, they were so thoroughly resolved in that behalf, that they meant also to
exhort the Emperor to do the like, or to break off from him. The same
Emperor to be revenged upon Pope Clement his enemy, abolished the Popes
authority thorowout all Anno 1526. Scult. Annal. Decad. 2. p. 2.
Spain, his native Kingdom, declaring thereby (the Spaniards themselves for
example) that ecclesiastical discipline may be conserved without the Papal
authority. The Eastern Churches (...) illius (...).
have long since separated; the other four Patriarchs dividing Basil. apud
Baron. Annal. (...). 4.
themselves from the Bishop of Rome, and at their parting using these or the
like words; Thy greatness we know, thy covetousnes we cannot satisfy, thy
encroaching we can no longer abide, live to Cade of the Church, ex D. Field,
Gerson, and Carleton.
thy self. Neither are the Western much behind, especially since all was
changed in that Church, manners, doctrine, and the very rule of faith in the
Trent-(...). Then (according to some Revel. (...). 3. Brightman. (...), etc.
Expositours) did the second Angel pour out his vial upon the sea (upon that
conflux of all sorts at Trent) and it became as the (...) of a dead man (those
deadly decrees are written with the blood of heretics) and every living soul
died in that sea, as once the fish of Egypt. For none that worship the beast
have their names written in the book of life of the lamb, slain from the
foundation of the world, Revel. 13. 8. Slain, I say, as in his fathers decree
and promise, as in the Sacrifices of the Law, and faith of his people; so in
his members and Martyrs, beheaded as John Baptist, or (...), semen Ecclesiae.
Tert.
otherwise butchered for the witness of Jesus, and for the Word of God. But
the blood of the Martyrs was the seeding of the Church. God was never left
without witnesses, as is seen in our Testes (...) per (...).
Catalogues; but although John was cast in prison, yea beheaded in the prison,
as if God had known nothing of him (quoth that D. Featleys Catalogue,
Protestants Calendar.
Martyr) yet there never wanted a Jesus to go into Galilee: And that guilty
Edomite Herod was sensible of it, Matthew. 14. 2. when he said to his servants,
This is John Baptist, he is risen from the Revel. 11. 10, 11.
dead. In like sort the Romish Edomite, after he had done to death Christ's two
ancienter witnesses, that ( Baptist-like) came (...) in Apo. 14. 6.
in the spirit and power of Elias, to confute and confound their (...) in that
language signifies a goose, (...) a swan, and John (...) at his death
prophesied it.
Baal-worships, yet to his great grief and regret, he has seen them revive and
stand upon their (...) again, in that heroical Wicliff, who is said to have
written more then 200. volumes against him, in that Goose of (...), that Swan
of Saxony (those three (...) Angels, That flew in the midst of heaven, (...)
the everlasting Gospel to preach to them that dwell on the (...). 1 (...) 6.
(...) pap.
earth,) together with those other noble Reformers in all Christian Churches.
By whom, ever since the Pope was declared to Rom cap. (...). (...) (...). page
(...).
be (...), his authority (says Bellarmine) has not only not (...), but daily
more and more decreased. The fourth (...) has lost a head, as Cusanus the
Cardinal had prophesied, Anno Domini 1464. and after him Trithemius the Abbot,
Anno (...).
1508. A sect of Religion, says he, shall arise once within this (...) years,
to the great destruction of the old Religions. It is to (...) that the fourth
beast will lose one of her heads. This he (...) in his book concerning Angels
and Spirits. What kind of spirit it was (black or white) that dictated unto
him this prophecy, which fell out accordingly, and was fulfilled (...) (...)
Luther, I cannot tell. But the godly learned (...) Bucholc. Chron.
it was from that evil spirit, who is said to have sung before, (...), tibi
subito motibus ibit amor.
As the Emperor Frederick is reported also to have foretold in this distich:
Roma (...) titubans, variis erroribus acta, (...) boc (...). 2. (...) p (...)
Philos.

Corruet; and (...) esse (...).


Verse 13. And leaving (...)]
Where he had had his conception and education; and did (...) in a special
manner affect them, and (...) their good, but they would not. For when (...)
have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim broke our, as the leprosy in
their foreheads, Hos 7. 1. they refused to be reformed, they hated to be
healed. Some few sick folk he healed there, and that was all he could do for
them, more then marvel at their unbelief. He could do there no mighty work,
says St Mark; and therefore left them, says St Matthew; then the (...). 6. 5,
6.
which he could hardly have done them a greater (...); For, woe be unto you, if
I depart from you, Hos. 9. 12. In the 9, 10, (...) 11. (...) of (...), God
makes diverse removes: And (...) as he goes out, some judgment (...) in, till
at length he was (...) gone out of the City, Chap. 11. 23. And then followed
(...) calamity in the ruin (...). O pray that the Sun of that dismal day
may (...) arise, wherein it shall be said, That our (...) stick is removed,
that our Sun is eclipsed, that the Revel. (...).
(...) is (...) from our English Israel, that Christ has turned his back upon
this our Nazareth, (...) preces and lacrymas, cordis logatos, says Cyprian.
Currat poenitentia ne praecurrat sententia, says Chrysologus. Wish we for our
Church, as (...) did for the Romish Synagogue, that we had some Moses to take
away the evils and abuses therein. Nam non unum (...) vitulum, sed multos
habemus. And then sing as another did, Ah, ne diem illum posteri
Vivant mei, qiso pristinum
Vertantur in lutum aurea
Quae nos bearunt saecula!


He came and (...) in Capernaum]
Happy town in so sweet and precious an Inhabitant! and is therefore said to be
lifted up to Heaven, Matthew. 11. 23. as Revel. 7. among those that were sealed
of the several Tribes Judah is first reckoned of all Leahs children, because
our Lord sprang out of Judah: and Nepthali (of all those of Rachels side)
because at Capernaum, in that Tribe, he Medes in Apocalypse.
dwelt, Ut utrobique superemineat Christi praerogativa, says an Interpreter,
That Christ may be all, and in all. Here he dwelt Sie (...) par. (...) 40. art
3.
in an house, either let or lent him: for of his own he had not where to rest
his head, Matthew. 8. Here he paid tribute as an inhabitant: juxta Hieron. in
Mat. 8.
and hither he resorted and retired himself, when he was tired at any time with
preaching and journeying, and was willing to take rest; which yet hardly he
could do, through the continual concourse, but was glad to get into a ship or
desert to pray, eat or sleep.

Which is upon the seacoast.]
That is, hard by the lake of Genesaret in Galilee of the Gentiles. Josephus
calls it a Town, (...), Joseph. in vita sua.
(...) it was without walls (belike.) For Strabo writes that Pompey had
commanded the walls of all (...) Cities in those (...) l. 16.
parts, to be pulled down. St Hierom also says it was a Town, Hieron in nom
(...).
and that it so continued till his times. But St Matthew, and St Luke name it a
City, wherein there was a Synagogue of the Jews, and a Garrison of Herod's
soldiers, because it bordered upon Arabia. It had fifteen thousand inhabitants
at least, there being no Town in Galilee that had fewer, says Josophus. The
inhabitants De bello Iudaico. l. 3. c. (...).
might be of the same mind with those of the Hage in Holland, who will not
wall their Town, though it has 2000. households in it, as desiring to have it
counted rather the principal village of Europe, then a lesser City.

In the borders of Zebulon and Nepthali.]
In the former whereof is Galilee, in the later this Galilee of the (...),
where stands the Town of Capernaum, and near unto it is a well of the same
name, and of apt signification. For Capernaum (says (...) in nom. (...).
St Hierom) is by interpretation, the Town of consolation. (...) was situate on
this side Jordan, over against (...) saida (otherwise called Julias) not far
from Tiberias, and Tarichaea, (...) places, lying like wise upon the lake.

Verse 14. That it might be fulfilled, etc.]
The two Testaments may be fitly resembled to the double doors of the Temple,
one whereof infolded another: The Old is the new enfolded; the new is the old
explicated. For there are above 260. places of the old Testament cited in the
new: so that almost in every needful point the harmony is expressed.

By the Prophet Isaias]
That Evangelicall Prophet, that speaks of Christ's nativity, preaching
persecution, apprehension, death, Bull (...) in (...). (...).
resurrection, ascension and second coming to judgment so lively as no
Evangelist goes beyond him.

Verse 15. The land of Zebulon, and the land of Nepthali, etc.]
In (...) were Nazareth, Beth saida, Tiberias, Cana (where our Savior (...)
water into wine) and Naim, where he raised the widows son; so that she was
twice a mother, yet had but one child. In Nephthali were the City of Abel
(where they asked (...). 10. 17.
counsel of old, and so they ended the matter) Harosheth the City of Sisera,
Riblah, Cesarea, Philippi and Capernaum. This borough was the seat of the
Evangelicall Kingdom; and it was (...) chosen for such a purpose, as that
which by reason of the wonderful wholsomnesse of the air, fertility of the
soil, (...) to the river Jordan, and lake of Genne sareth, neighborhood of
many great Towns and famous Cities, promised a plentiful increase and income
of the Evangelicall harvest. Here the corn was white unto the harvest (as at
Samaria) and solicited laborers. It is a Ministers wisdom to seat himself,
as near (...) may be, where most need is, and greatest likelihood of doing
good, as St Paul did often. No Church was founded at Athens, Come over into
(...), and help us. (...). 16, 9.
no good to be done there among those wits of Greece. The (...) at Ephesus,
whiles a door was opened, and then departed to other places. If thou perceive
thy self unfit to do more Thou have well done that (...) art come, Act. 10. 33.
good in any place, though it be not any fault of thine (says (...) grave
Author) away to another. If the commodity of the place prevail more with thee,
there to abide, then the promoting of Christ's Kingdom, to use thy talent
elsewhere, it is to be feared, thou will either lose thy gifts, or fall into
errors and herefies, Rolloc. com in Joh. 4. 44.
refies, or, at least, become a frigid and dry Doctor among such a people as
have once conceived an incurable prejudice against thee.

Galilee of the Gentiles]
So called, either because it bordered upon the Gentiles, or, because it was
given away by David to Hiram King of Tire, or, because it was inhabited by the
Assyrians, who carried the people captive, and dwelt in their room.

Verse 16. The people which sat in darkness, saw a great light]
Luke 1. 78.
For the dayspring from on high visited them, the bright Sun of (...). 4.
(...).
righteousness (which had all Palestine for his Zodiac, the twelve (...) for
his signs) stayed longest in (...) and (...): and (S. (...) observes) as these
two Tribes were first carried into captivity, and seemed furthest from heaven,
as bordering on the Gentiles, and in many things symbolizing with (...), having
learned their manners; so redemption was first preached in these Countries.
Physicians are of most use where diseases abound. The Prophets in Elisha's
days planted at Bethel. There was at once the golden calf of Jeroboam, and the
school of God.

(...) in darkness, and in the region and shadow of death.]
Note Joh. 3.
here, that a state of darkness is a state of death. This is condemnation,
this is hell-above-ground, and aforehand, that light is come into the world,
and men love darkness better then light, (...).
Ut liberius peccent libenter ignorant. Now surely they shall (...) 14 14.
one day have enough of their so much desired darkness. They Job 24. 16.
know not the light, says Job: They hate it, says our Savior: (...) 3. 0.
They (...) and (...) at it, says Solomon; therefore shall they be (...).
(...).
filled with their own ways, whiles they are cast into utter darkness: (...).
a darkness beyond a. d (...), as it were a (...) beyond a prison, where they
shall never (...) light again, till they be (...) Th (...). 1. 8.
enlightened with that universal fire of the last day, to their everlasting
amazement.

Light (...) sprung up.]
He (...) them out of darkness into his 1 (...). (...). Act. 8.
mavelous light. So he did the (...) by Phil ps (...) and miracles, whereupon
there was great (...) in that (...). So by the ministry of Farell, Viret,
Calvin, and others, he (...) the Genevians out of the dark midnight of (...).
In a thankful remembrance whereof, they coined new money, with this
inscription on the one side, Post tenebras lux, After darkness light (Their
posie till then had been, Post tenebras (...) (...). (...).
(...), taken out of Job.) And on the other side, Deus noster pugnat pronobis.
Our God fights for us.

Verse 17 From that time Jesus began to preach.]
So he had done before John was imprisoned, John 2. and 3. but now more freely
and (...), more manifestly, and all abroad, as when the day star has done
his devoir, the Sun (...) out to the Prove. 4.
perfict day.

And to say, Repent]
Both for sin by contrition, and from (...)
sin by conversion. Change your minds and (...), your constitution and
conversation, from worse to better: Recover (...), (...) and (...) post.
your lost wits with the Prodigal (who repenting is said to come to himself)
and become (...) after your folly. Pull down the very frame of the old man,
unmake your selves, as St (...) has Luk (...) 17.
it, 1 Pet. 2. 24. Undo what you had done before, and be ye (...) (...).
Romans (...). 2.
and metamorphosed by the renewing of your (...) (...).
For, Except a man be born again, not (...) (...), but (...), (...). 3. 3.
from above, but a (...) time (as Nicodemus understood our Savior) except he
go over all again that is past, rejecting it as unprofitable, and begin anew,
he cannot see the Kingdom of God; where old things are past, all things are
become new, 2 Cor. 5. 17. a whole new creation.

For the kingdom of heaven is at hand.]
See what is said to this whole verse, Chap. 3 2. For this was the sum and
substance of the Baptists, our Saviors, and his Apostles Sermons; and had need
to be daily pressed and preached, since it is our pensum diurnum, the first and
continual work of Gods Spirit in the faithful, who because they cannot wash
their hands in innocence, wash them in tears: and by renewing their repentance,
work and wear out all brackish and sinful dispositions, as sweet water will
do the salt sea, coming into it: as wine or honey casts out the (...), as
fast as it arises. Christ bids us as often to pray, Forgive us our
trespasses, as we pray, Give us this day our daily 2 Pet. 3. 9.
bread. He not only waits for repentance from the wicked, but would also have
his dearest children daily meet him, condemning themselves, Luke 13. 5. If ye
repent not also more and more, when ye see the examples of Gods wrath upon
others, ye shall likewise perish. Besides, some sins are past in time that are
not past in deed, if we dwell not in the undoing and reversing of them, Ezra
10. 11, 12. and 9. 15. They were to begin anew their repentance, because they
had not considered their marrying of strange wives.

Verse 18. (...) Jesus walking by the sea of Galilee]
Not for recreation sake, or to deceive the time (for he had a great multitude
attending upon him to (...) the Word of God, as St Luke notes) (...) as laying
hold on the opportunity of calling Peter and Andrew; and, after that, (...) and
(...) to the Apostleship. Our Savior knew that a well chosen season is the
greatest advantage of any action: which, as it is seldom found in haste, so is
it too often lost in delay. The men of Issachar were in great account with 1 Chronicles. 12. 32
David, because they had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought
to do, and when to do it. So are they in great account with the son of
David, who regard and improve (as he did here) the season of well-doing; which
they that lose are the greatest losers, and the wastfullest prodigals: For of
(...) other (...) two may be had together: but two moments of time (how much
less two opportunities of time?) cannot be (...) together. Some are semper
victuri (as Seneca says) ever about to do better: they stand futuring and
whiling out the time so long, till they have trifled and fooled away their own
salvation. Let us sit ready in the door of our hearts (as Abraham did in the
door of his (...)) to apprehend occasions of doing Prove. 25. 11.
good, as he to entertain passengers; to set a word or work upon Ecclel. 3. 11.
it is wheels, that it may be as apples of gold, and pictures of silver, Job 6
(...).
pleasant and profitable; for every thing is beautiful in it is season, and how
forcible are right words? As the Be (so soon as ever the Sun breaks forth)
flies abroad to gather honey and wax: So be thou ready to every good work,
waiting the occasions (...) 116. 16, 17 2 Cor. 6. 2.
thereof, Tit. 3. 1. Now, now, says David, and after him Paul; because (for
ought we know) it is Now or Never, to day, or not at all. Opportunities are
headlong, and, once past, irrecoverable, August.
Ex hoc momento pendet aeternitas. God has hanged the heaviest weights upon
the weakest wires. Be quick therefore, Prove. 27. 1.
and abrupt in thine obedience, Thou know not what a greatbellied (...) quid
(...) vesper (...).
day may bring forth: Yea, thou may the very next hour be cut off from all
further time of repentance, acceptance, and grace for ever.

He saw two brethren.]
He knew them and admitted them into his friendship well nigh a year before,
(...). 1 39. but now calls them from being fishers, to be fishers of (...).
Peter is famous for his first draught, Act. 2. whereby he caught and brought to
the Church three thousand souls.

Casting their net into the sea.]
God calls men when they Veteres Romani Agenoriam.
are busy; Satan, when they are idle. For idleness is the hour of (...) and
Strenam (...) pro (...).
(...), and an idle person the devils Tennis-ball, which he tosseth at
pleasure, and sets awork as he likes and lists. God has ordained that in
the sweat of his brow man should eat his bread. The Hebrew has it, In the
sweat of his nose; for he must (...) vero (...) urbem (...).
labor till the sweat run down his nose. Which, if (...) do, God has
promised, that manus molitans, the diligent, nimble handed Spec. (...).
man shall not stay long in a low place. He shall stand (...) Princes, as these
painful fishermen were to stand before the Genesis 3. 19.
Prince of Peace, and to be of his constant retinue. As till then, Prove. 10. 4.
their busy attendance on their calling was no less pleasing to Prove. (...).
(...).
Christ, then an (...) diate devotion. Happy is that (...), whom his Lord when
he comes (...) serving (...) and man with his fat and (...), (...) and (...) in
Iothams Judge. 9. 9.
Parable.

For they were fishers.]
(...) us, and (...) ((...) Beddingf.
one) sed (...) in (...), (...) dona dedit and ministeria. Christ sends forth
none to preach, but whom he gifteth: where the comfort is, that a small (...)
may thread a needle, and a little (...) do better in a small river, then a
great (...).

Verse 19. He says unto them, Follow me.]
And together (...). 5. 17.
with his Word (...) went forth a power inclining them to follow: whereby it
appears, that they were not only of the many that are called, but of those few
that are chosen. The Lord knows who are his, says St Paul. But this knowing
of his is carried secret, as a river under ground, till by (...) calling he
(...) them from the rest; (...) they can call upon the Name of the 2 Timothy 2. 19.
Lord, and depart from evil. This, when they are once (...) of Christ, they
must be acting; when he has tuned and touched us, we must make music; and
(...) the (...) embreaths us, we must turn about as the Mill: and (...). 14 4.
follow the Lamb wheresoever he (...), as these (...) did. (...). 5 (...)


And I will make you fishers of men,]
Of live men, as (...) (...)
desire to catch fish alive, because they are more vendible. An apt metaphor,
wherein, 1. The world is compared to the sea, for it is unsetlednesse, (...),
the oppression that is in it (the lesser fish being devoured of the greater)
the sway that Leviathan the devil bears there, Psalm. 104. 26. 2. The Church is
compared to a boat, because it is continually tossed with the waves of (...),
as Noah, Jonah, the Disciples, Paul and those (...) Ion. 1. 4.
men, Psalm. 107. 27. That stagger like a drunken man, and all (...). 8 24.
their cunning is gone. 3. The fish to be caught out of this sea, and to be
brought into this ship, are men. Nature has (as it were) spawned us forth into
this worldly sea; where we drink iniquity like water, wandering confusedly up
and down; till caught and cast into the fish-pool, for the masters use and
service. Unwittingly we are caught, and unwillingly we are kept, as (...)
labor to get out of the net, and would fain leap back out of the boat into the
water. 4. Ministers are fishers. A (...) profession, a toilsome calling; no
idle man's occupation, as the vulgar conceits it, nor needless trade, taken up
alate, to pick a living Hirons (...) fishing.
out of. Let Gods fisher men busy themselves as they must, sometimes in
preparing, sometimes in mending, sometimes in casting abroad, sometimes in
drawing in the net, That they may separate (...). 15 19.
the precious from the vile, etc. And no man shall have just cause Mat. 13. 48.
to twit them with idleness, or to say they have an easy life, and that it is
neither sin nor pity to defraud them.

Verse 20. And they straight way left their (...).]
As the woman of Samaria did her (...), Matthew his (...), and blind Bartimeus
his cloak, when Christ called for him. Look we likewise to this Author and
(...) of our faith; and for Heb. 12. (...).
love of him, cast away every clog, and the sin that does so easily (...)
beset or surround us. Divorce the (...) from the world, and there Heb. 12. 1.
is no great danger. Admire not overmuch, rest not in, dote not on, cleave not
to the things of this life (those nets and snares of Satan, whereby he
entangleth and encumbreth us) that we may attend upon the Lord (or (...) close
to him) without being haled away, (...)
or distracted by these lusts of life. The deeplier any man is drowned in the
world, the more desperately is he divorced from God, deadned to holy things,
and disobedient to the heavenly call, 1 Cor. 7. 35.
as the recusant guests in the Gospel. (...). (...).
God loves currist (...), not quarist (...), says (...).


And followed him.]
Immediately, and without sciscitation. When Christ calls, we must not reason,
but run, as Paul, Gal. 1. 16. not dispute, but dispatch, with David, Psalm.
119. 60. Go we know not whither, with Abraham; do we know not what, Isa. 21.
12.
with Gideon. If ye will enquire, enquire, says Isaiah, return, come. A quick
passage, and full of quickening. Like that of (...) Orator, Si dormis,
expergiscere; si stas, ingredere; si ingrederis, Cicer. (...) ad (...) 2. ep.
(...)
curre; si curris, advola. Courts have their cito, cito, quick, quick: and
(...) use to observe and improve their (...) tempora: So must Christians. God
is but a while with men in the opportunities of grace. He comes leaping on the
mountains, Cant 2. (...).
and skipping on the hills: and, being come, he stands at the (...) and knocks,
by the sound of his Word, and motions of his spirit. Revel. 3. 20.
He sits not, but stands: while a man is standing, we say, he is going. And woe
be unto us, if he depart from us. God has his season, (...). 9. 12.
his harvest for judgment, Matthew. 13. 30. And is now more quick and peremptory
in (...) men, then of old: For (...) Heb 2. 3.
shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation, as is now preached? (...) 8.
Our Savior would not suffer (...) man that said he would follow him, to let
so much time, as to bury his father. Excuses he takes for refusals, (...) for
denials. As Saul lest his Kingdom: so does many a man his soul, by not (...)
his time: And troops of them that forget God, go down to hell, Psalm. 9. 17.
Quare (...) mores and moras nostras. Let us up and be doing, (...) the Lord may
be with us.

Verse 21. He saw other two brethren, James, etc.]
Three pair of brethren, at least, our Savior called to the Apostleship; to
show what brotherly love should be found amongst Ministers; what agreement in
judgment and affection. There the Lord commands the blessing, and life for
ever more. As where envying (...). 133. ult.
and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work, Jam. 3. 16. Hence the
devil labors (all he can) to set Ministers at variance, and to (...)
dissension amongst them (as betwixt Paul and (...)) that the work may be
hindered. Divide and impera, Make division, and so get dominion, was a maxim
of Machiavil, which he learnt of the devil. What woeful tragedies has he
(...) alate betwixt the Lutherans and Zuinglians? What (...) have the Papists
composed out of the Churches tragedies? To foster the faction, they joined
themselves to the Lutherans in (...). (...), in (...), (...) tantum (...), etc,
(...) (...). 255.
that sacramentary quarrel: they commended them, made much of them, and almost
pardoned them all that loss they had sustained by them. This, that holy man of
God Oecolampadius bitterly bewaileth, in a letter to the Lutherans of Suevia.
The (...) says he, may be pardoned through faith in Christ, but the discord we
cannot expiate with the dearest and warmest blood in our Error condonari
potest, (...) fides adsit in christum: discordiam, (...) si sanguinem (...).
(...). (...).
hearts. They on the other side (in their syngrame or answer) handled that most
innocent man so coursely, Ut non objurgatione, sed execratione dignum sit,
says Zuinglius, that they deserved not to be confuted, but to be abhorred of
all men. This was as good sport to the Papists, as the (...) betwixt Abraham
and Lot were to the Amorites. But that one consideration (that we are (...))
should conjure down all disagreements (as betwixt them) and make us unite
against a common advesary. The (...) the English ( Anno 1587.) stamped money
with two earthern pots, swimming in the sea (according to the Camd Elis. 356
old fable) and wittily inscribed, Si collidimur, frangimur, If we clash, we
are broken. The Thracians, had they been all of (...) conventus. It a dum
singuli (...), universi vincuntur.
one mind, they had been invincible, says (...). And Cornelius Tacitus (who
had been here in (...) with his father-in-law Agricola) reports of our
forefathers, that they fell into the hands of the Romans, by nothing so much
as by their dissensions amongst themselves. Pliny tells of the stone
Thyrroeus, that though never so big while it is whole, it floteth upon the
waters: Tac.
but being broken, it sinketh. And who has not read of Silurus his bundle of
arrows? To break unity, is to cut asunder the very veins and sinews of (...)
mystical body of Christ, as the Apostle intimates, (...).
1 Cor. 1. 10. to hinder all true growth in godliness, Ephesians. 4. 16. (...), and
(...) contentione, (...) non apparuit. (...). (...).
and inward (...), Phil. 2. 1. to drive away God, who appeared not to Abraham
till the difference was made up, Genesis 13. 14, etc. and to undo our selves. As
the dragon sucketh out the blood of the (...): and the weight of the falling
elephant (...) (...) l. 8. c. 12.
the dragon, and so both perish together. To prevent all which, and to compose
all quarrels in this Egypt of the world, let it be remembered, as Moses told
the two striving Israelites, that we are (...). And oh how good, and how
pleasant it is for brethren Psalm. 133. (...).
(in the Ministry especially) to (...) together in unity.

Verse 22. And (...) immediately left the ship and their (...).]
These were (...) merchants, that (...) with all to (...) the pearl of price.
So did many Martyrs, and knew they made a savers bargain. Nicolas Shetterden
(...) in a (...) to his mother; What state soever your fathers be in, leave
that to God, and let us follow the counsel of his Word. Dear mother, (...).
sell. (...).
embrace it with hearty affection: read it with (...); (...) it be your
pastime, etc. So shall we meet in joy at the last day: or else I bid you
farewell for evermore. So Nicolas of Jenvile ((...) young man newly come from
Geneva) was condemned to die, and set in the Cart. His father coming with a
(...), would have beaten him. But the officers, not suffering it, would have
struck the old man. The son, crying to the officers, desired them to let his
father alone, saying, he had power over him, to do in that (...) 837.
kind what he would: but Christ was dearer to him then the dearest friend on
earth, etc. That of St Hierom is well known to most, and often alleged; If my
father stood weeping on his knees before me, my mother hanging on my neck
behind me, and all my brethren, sisters, children, kinsfolk, howling on every
side, to retain me in sinful life with them, I would fling my mother to the
ground, despise all my kindred, run over my father, and tread him under my feet,
thereby to run to Christ when he calls me. Reberies and Danvile, two French
Martyrs, having been sorely racked, at night rejoiced together. After that,
Reberies cried twice or thrice, Away from me, Satan. His fellow being in bed
with him, asked, why he cried, and whether Satan would stop him of his course?
Reberies said, that Satanset before Ibid. 842.
him his parents, but by the grace of God, said he, he shall do nothing against
me.

Verse 23. And Jesus went about all (...)]
Not (as the Circumcelliones of old) to make show of their holiness; nor as
the Jesuits (into whom the Pharisees have fled and hid themselves) to gain
proselytes and passengers, That go right on their ways, Prove. 9. 15. but he
went about doing good, says S. Peter. Act. 10. 38.
The chiefest goods are most active: the best good a mere act. And the more
good we do, the more God-like we be, and the more we draw nigh to the heavenly
pattern. Religion is not a name, goodness a word: but as the life of things
stands in goodness: So the life of goodness, in action. So much we live, as
we (...). Isa. 38. 16.
O Lord, by these things men live, says (...), and in all these things is the
life of my spirit. And he that keeps my Commandments shall live in them, as
the lamp lives in the oil, the flower in the earth, the creature by food. Nos
non eloquimur magna, sed vivimus, said the ancient Christians. And holy
Bradford (...) that hour lost, wherein he had not done some good, with tongue,
pen or hand. God has set us our time, and our task, Job 14. 5, 6, David is
said to serve out his time; and John Baptist, to finish his course, Act. 13. Up
therefore and be doing, that ye be Dies brevis est, and opus (...), and
operarij pauci, and pater-samilias urget.
not taken with your task undone. Fruitless trees shall be cut down: short
shooting loses many a game. The master is an austeer man, and looks for his
own with usury. It is an easy thing when the candle is out, and all still
without din, to fall a napping: which will prove to your cost, when God shall
send forth Rab. (...).
summons for sleepers.

Teaching in their Synagogues,]
Houses dedicated to the worship of God, wherein it was lawful (and usual) to
pray, preach, and dispute, but not to sacrifice, Act. 15. 21. The Temple at
Jerusalem was the Cathedral Church: The Synagogues, as petty Parish-Churches,
belonging thereunto. There were 480. of them in Jerusalem, as Manahen the Jew
Apud Genebr. in (...).
reports.

And preaching]
Which is a further matter then teaching, (...).
and is therefore set after it here, as an addition. It signifies to publish,
and (as a Herald) to deliver a matter in the hearing (...).
of a multitude with greatest majesty, constancy, fidelity, 2 Cor. 2. 17.
and liberty of speech: not budging or balking any part of Corrupting, as men
do by their false wares, or mixed wines.
the truth: not huckstering the Word of God, or handling it deceitfully; but as
of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God, speaking in Christ.

And healing all manner of sickness and disease,]
Both acute (...) (...) significat (...).
and chronicall. None came amiss to this Jehovah Rophe, the Lord that heals,
as he styles himself; This Sun of righteousness, that has healing under his
wings. To an Almighty Physician (...), (...) and (...).
(says Isidore) no disease can seem incurable. He healed with a wet finger (as
we say) such patients as all the Physicians in the Country cast their caps at,
and could not tell what to Exodus (...). 26.
(...) to. Mal. 4. 2.


Verse 24. And his fame went through all Syria.]
Fame follows (...) medico (...) occurrit (...).
desert, as a sweet sent the rose. This gave occasion to the Poets to feign,
That Achilles his tomb was ever garnished with green amaranth. A good name is
better then great riches, says Prove. 22. 1.
Solomon, And if I can keep my credit I am rich enough, said the (...) si
(...), (...). (...). Plaut.
Heathen. Blessing and good report are expressed by one and the same word in the
old Testament, Prove. 27. 21. to show what a ablessing of God it is. And it
could not but be a great comfort to David, that whatsoever he did pleased the
people. Cicero says, 2 Samuel 3. 36.
that perfect glory consists in these three things; If the multitude (...).
2. (...) (...)
love a man, if they will trust him, and if they hold him worthy (...) (...)
Jesus (...) and (...) cap. (...).
of admiration, praise and honor. Now none of these were wanting to our
Savior, as appears in this holy History, and as others have fully set forth.
Do worthily in Ephrata, and so be (...) in Bethlehem, Ruth 4. 11. (...)


And they brought unto him all sick people]
All that were in ill case and taking: For, Si vales, been est, says one. And,
Vita (...).
! (...).
non est vivere, sed valere, says another. The Latins call a sick (...).
man AEger, which some derive of (...), the voice of complaint and (...). And
the Stoikes when they affirmed, that to live agreeably to nature, is to live
virtuously and valiantly, although the body be never so out of order, they
perceived when their own turn came to be sick (says one) Se magnificentius
locutos esse (...). Wolf. in (...).
quam verius, that they had spoken more trimly then truly.

That were taken with diverse diseases and torments]
That (...).
were besieged and hemmed in on every side, as by an enemy straightened (...).
and (...), so that they knew not whither to look, only their eyes were toward
Christ.

Diseases and torments]
As of those that are put upon the (...): Pharaoh was so when God extorted from
him that confession, I have sinned: which (being gotten off) he soon bit in
again. The word here used in the Original, properly signifies the (...).
Test or Touchstone, where with gold is tried: and, by a borrowed kind of
speech, is applied to all kind of examination, and (peculiarly) to inquisition
by torture, so to any pain or painful diseases, as of the palsy, lunacy, etc.
in this text, and Chap. 8. 6. As also to the torments of hell, Luke 16. 23.
whereof sicknesses are but a beginning, a fore-taste, a very typical hell to
those that have not the fruits of their sickness. And this is all the fruits,
(...) Morbos (...) (...).
the taking away of their sin, Isa. 27. I blush not to confess (says a
great Divine of Scotland) that I have gained more sound knowledge of God and of
my self, in this sickness, then ever Non (...), (...), etc.
I had before. Happy (...), that draws the sick matter out of the soul.
Physicians hold, that in every two years, there is such (...). (...) (...).
(...). (...).
store of ill humors and (...) engendered in the body, that a vessel of one
hundred ounces will scarce contain them. Certain it (...), p. 23.
is, there is a world of wickedness and superfluity of naughtiness (that bed of
spiritual diseases) daily gathered and got together in the sinne-sick-soul:
which therefore we must labor to purge out Dan. 11. 35. and 12. 10.
by the practice of mortification; (...) God purge and whiten us to our sorrow,
by some sharp sickness: as he did Gehezi, whose white forehead had made him a
white soul, his disease cured him, as some are of opinion.

Possessed with devils.]
Such as whose minds and senses the devil perverted.

Those that were lunatike.]
Or such as had the falling sickness, (...) exerc.
as appears by those symptoms of this disease, set down Evan (...) 2 c (...).
(...). de orig. ling. (...).
by (...) Matthew, Chap. 17. 17. This is otherwise called Morbus sacer. For the
Priests of old (that they might thereby enrich themselves) feigned, that the
gods tormented men with this, among other sudden and fearful diseases.

Verse 25. And there followed him great multitudes.]
A good Psalm. 65. (...).
housekeeper shall not (likely) want company. O thou that hear prayers (and
so sollicitest suitors) to thee shall all flesh come. Christ's miracles drew
multitudes after him, then; and should still affect us with admiration and
strong affection to the Gospel, as the Author to the Hebrews shows, Heb. 2.
3, 4.

CHAP. V.
Verse 1. And seeing the multitudes,]
AS sheep without a shepherd, or as corn ripe and ready, falling, as it were,
into the hands of the harvest-man. The children cried for bread, and there was
none to break it. Lam. 4. 4.
His eye therefore affected his heart, and out of deep commiseration,

He went up into a mountain.]
This Mount was his pulpit, as the whole Law was his Text. It is said to be in
the Tribe of Nephthali, Hist, of holy war, f. 31.
and called Christ's mount to this day. As Moses went up into a Mount to receive
the Law: so did Messiah to expound it, and so must we to contemplate it. Sursum
corda. Wind we up our hearts, which naturally bear downward, as the poyes of a
clock.

And when he was set,]
Either as being weary, or as intending a longer Sermon. This at his first
onset upon his office, and that at his last (when he left the world, and went
to his Father, Joh. 14. 15, 16, 17.) being the longest and liveliest that are
recorded in the Gospel. He preached (no doubt) many (...), many hours together.
But as his miracles, so his oracles are no more of them written, then might
suffice to make us believe, and live through Joh (...)
his name: As the Prophets of old, after they had preached to the people, set
down the sum of their Sermons, the heads only, for the use of the Church in
all ages: So did the Apostles record in their day-books, the chief things in
our Saviors Sermons, out of which (...) (...). (...). (...).
they afterward (by the (...) and guidance of the Spirit of God) framed this
holy history.

His Disciples came unto him]
To sit at his feet, and hear his word. Among the Jews the Rabbi sat, termed
(...)' or the (...); (...) (...). (...).
the scholar (...), or one that lies along in the dust, a token of the
scholars humility, subjecting himself even to the (...) of his teacher. Thus
Mary sat at Jesus feet, and heard his word. Thus all Gods Saints are said to
sit at his feet, every one to receive Luke 10 39.
his Word. Thus Paul was brought up at the feet of (...). 3.
Gamaliel, a great Doctor in Israel. And this custom it Act. 22 2.
is thought Saint Paul labored to bring into the Christian Church, 1 Cor. 14.

Verse 2. And he opened his mouth.]
This phrase is not superfluous (as some may conceit) but betokens free and
full discourse, Ephesians. 6. 19. of some weighty and important matter, Psalm. 78.
26. uttered with great alacrity of spirit, and vehemence of speech.

And taught them, saying,]
He taught them sometimes (says Theodoret) when he opened not his mouth, sc.
(...); by his holy life and wondrous works. A mirror for Ministers, who as
they should open their mouths with wisdom (Heaven never opened in the
Revelation, but some great matter followed) so their lips should be consonant
to the tenor of their teaching, a very visible Comment on the audible word.
Timothy must be a stamp, a standard, a pattern, a president to the believers,
both in (...).
word and conversation. Aaron must have both bells and pomegranates (...) 4. 12.
on his vesture. And Ministers should (as Gideons soldiers) carry trumpets of
sound doctrine in one hand, and lamps of good living in the other. There should
be a happy harmony, a constant consent between their lips and their lives,
(...), that their doctrine and conversation may run parallel, as Isidor says
in one place; or (as he has it more emphatically in another) (...), that their
preaching may have life put into it by their practice. Nolite (says one) magis
eloqui magna, quam vivere. Vivite concionibus, concionamini moribus: (...): Sic
vocalissimi eritis praecones, etiam cum tacetis. Speak not, but live Sermons,
preach by your practice: the life of teaching is the life of the teacher.

Verse 3. Blessed.]
The word signifies such as are set out of (...), (...) (...). (...) ot.
the reach of evil, in a most joyous condition, having just cause to be
everlastingly merry, as being, beati re and spe, blessed in hand and in hope,
and such as shall shortly transire a spe ad speciem, for theirs is the Kingdom
of heaven. They are already (...) of it, as by turff and twig. There were
eighty opinions among Heathens about man's blessedness. These did but beat the
bush: God has given us the bird in this golden Sermon.

Are the poor in spirit.]
Beggars in spirit: such as have nothing (...). (...) and alij.
at all of their own to support them, but being nittily needy, and not having
(as we say) a cross wherewith to bless themselves, Qui suarum (...) agnolcunt
(...), (...) pauperes spiritu Homer.
get their living by begging, and subsist merrily upon alms. Such beggars God
has always about him, Matthew. 26. 11. And this the Poets hammered at, when
they feigned that Litae or prayers were the daughters of Jupiter, and stood
always in his presence. Act. and Mon.
Lord, I am hell, but thou art heaven, said Hooper, I am a most hypocritical
(...). 1508.
wretch, not worthy that the earth should bear me, said Ibid.
Bradford. I am the unmeetest man for this high office of suffering for Christ,
that ever was appointed to it, said sincere Saunders. Oh that my life, and a
thousand such wretches lives more (says John Careless, Martyr, in a letter to
M. (...)) might go for yours! Oh! Why does God suffer me and such other
Cater-pillars to live, that can do nothing but consume the alms of the Church,
and take away you so worthy a workman, and labourer Ibid. 1744.
in the Lords vineyard? But woe be to our sins, and great unthankfulness, etc.
These were excellent paterns of this spiritual poverty, which our Savior here
makes the first; and is indeed the first, second and third of Christianity, as
that which teaches men to find out the best in God, and the worst in
themselves.

For their's is the kingdom of heaven.]
Heaven is that true Macaria, or the blessed Kingdom: So the Island of Cyprus
was anciently called, for the abundance of commodities that it sends forth to
other Countries, of whom it craveth no help again. Marcellinus, to show the
fertility thereof, says, That Cyprus abounds with such plenty of all things,
that, without the help of any other foreign country, it is of it self able to
build a tall ship, from the keel to the top-sail, and so put it to sea,
furnished of all things needful. And Sextus Rufus writing thereof, says,
Cyprus famosa divitijs, paupertatem populi Rom: ut occuparetur; sollicitavit.
Cyprus, famous for riches, tempted the poor people of Rome to ceize upon it.
What marvel then if this Kingdom of heaven solicit these poor in spirit, to
offer violence to it, and to take it by force, since it is all made of gold?
Revel. 21. yea search is made there through all the bowels of the earth, to
find out all the precious treasure that could be had, gold, pearls, and
precious stones of all (...). And what can these serve to? only to shidow out
the glory of the walls of the new Jerusalem, and the gates, and to pave the
streets of that City.

Verse 4. Blessed are they that mourn]
For sin, with a funeral (...)
ex morte (...) (...).
sorrow (as the word signifies) such as is expressed by crying and weeping,
Luke 6. 25. such as was that at Megiddo, for (...) of Naim, as Jacob (...)
Joseph, as ` David (...) his (...).
the loss of good Josiah: or as when a man mourns for his only son, Zech.
12. 10. This is the work of the spirit of grace and of supplication: for till
the winds do blow, these waters cannot flow, Psalm. 147. 18. He convinces the
heart of sin, and makes There (...) was (...), (...) for. Isa. (...). (...).
it to become a very Hadadrimmon for deep-soaking sorrow, upon the sight of him
whom they have pierced. When a man shall look upon his sins as the weapons,
and himself as the traitor, (...). 12. 10.
that put to death the Lord of life, this causes that sorrow according to God,
that works repentance never to be 2 Cor. 7. 10.
repented of.

For they shall be comforted.]
Besides the comfort they find in their very sorrow (for it is a sweet sign of
a sanctified soul, and (...) 12. (...).
seals a man up to the day of redemption, Ezekiel. 9. 4.) they lay up (...)
themselves thereby in store a good foundation of comfort against the time to
come, that they may lay hold on eternal life, as the Apostle speaks in
another case, 1 Timothy 6. 19. These April showers bring on May flowers: they that
here so we in tears shall reap in joy; they that find Christ's feet a fountain
to wash in, may (...). (...). 1.
expect his side a fountain to bath in. Oh how sweet a thing is it to stand
weeping at the wounded feet of Jesus, as that good woman did! to water them
with tears, to dry them with sighs, and to (...) them with our mouths! None,
but those that have felt it, can tell the comfort of it, The stranger meddleth
not with this joy. When our merry Greeks, that laugh themselves fat, and light
a candle at the devil for lightsomenesse of heart, hunting after it to hell,
and haunting for it alehouses, conventicles of good fellowship, sinful and
unseasonable sports, vain and waterish fooleries, etc. when these mirth-mongers
(I say) that take pleasure in pleasure, and jeer when they should fear, with
Lots sonnes-in-law, shall be at a foul stand, and not have whither to turn
them, Isa. 33. 14. Gods mourners shall be able to dwell with devouring fire,
with everlasting burnings, to stand before the son of man at his second
coming. Yea, as the lower the ebb, the higher the tide: so the lower any has
descended in humiliation, the higher shall he ascend then in his exaltation.
Those that have helped to fill Christ's bottle with tears, Christ shall then
fill their bottle (as once he did Hagars) with the water of life. He looked
back upon the weeping women, and comforted them, that would not vouchsafe a
loving look, or a word to Pilate, or the Priests. Not long Joh. 16. 20, 1.
before that, he told his Disciples, Ye shall indeed be sorrowful, but your
sorrow shall be turned into joy. And further adds, A woman when she is in
travel, has sorrow, etc. comparing sorrow for sin, to that of a traveling
woman. 1. For bitterness and sharpness for the time, throws of the new birth.
2. For utility and benefit: it tends to the bringing a man-child forth into
the world. 3. For the hope and expectation that is in it, not only of an end,
but also of fruit; this makes joy in the midst of sorrows. 4. There is a
certain time set for both, and a sure succession, as of day after night, and of
fair weather after foul. Mourning lasts but till morning: Though I fall, I
shall arise; though Psalm. 30. 5.
I sit in darkness, the Lord shall give me light, says the Church. Micah 7. 8.
Jabes was more honorable then his brethren, says the Text, for his mother
bare him with sorrow, and called his name Jabes, that 1 Chronicles. 4. 9. 10.
is, sorrowful. But when he called upon the God of Israel, and said, Oh that
thou would bless me indeed, and enlarge my coast, etc. God granted him that
which he requested. And so he will all such Israelites indeed, as ask the way
to Zion, with their faces Jer. 50. 4, 5.
thitherward, going and weeping as they go, to seek the Lord, their God, he
shall wipe all tears from their eyes (as nurses (...) from their babes that cry
after them) and enlarge, not their coasts ( as Jabes) but their hearts (which
is better) yea, he shall grant them their requests, as him. So that as Hannah
(when she had praid, and Eli for her) she looked no more sad: yea, as David
when he came before God in a woe-case many times, yet when 1 Samuel 1. 16.
he had poured forth his sorrowful complaint there, he rose up triumphing, as
Psalm. 6. etc. So shall it be with such. They (...) Psalm. 126. 6.
forth and weep, bearing precious seed, but shall surely return with rejoicing,
and bring their sheaves with them; Gripes of M. (...).
gladness (said that Martyr) when Abraham the good householder shall fill his
bosom with them, in the Kingdom of heaven. Then as one hour changed Joseph's
fetters into a chain of gold, (...) rags into robes, his stocks into a
chariot, his prison into a palace, his brown bread and water into manchet and
wine: So shall God turn all his (...) sadness into gladness, all their
sighing into singing, all their musing into music, all (...) into triumphs,
(...) Hist.
Luctus in laetitiam convertetur, lachrymae in risum, saccus in sericum,
Christi.
cineres in corollas and unguentum, jejunium in epulum, (...) retortio in
applausum. He that will rejoice with this joy unspeakable, must stir up
sighs that are unutterable.

Verse 5. Blessed are the meek.]
Meekness is the fruit (...) mourning for sin: and is therefore fitly (...)
next after it. He that can kindly melt in Gods presence, will be made thereby
as (...), (...) (...), quod (...), (...). (...) ac (...). (...).
meek as a lamb: and if God will forgive him his ten thousand (...), he will
not think much to forgive his brother a few farthings. Hence the wisdom from
above is, first, pure, and then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, etc.
Jam. 3. 17. And love is said to proceed out of a pure heart, a good conscience
and 1 Timothy 15.
(...) unfeigned. And when our Savior told his Disciples (...) Luke 17 4, 5.
must forgive till seventy times seven times, Lord, increase (...) expounded.
faith, said they, Give us such a measure of godly mourning, as that we may be
bold to believe that thou have freely forgiven us, and we shall soon forgive
our enemies. David was never (...) rigid, as when he had sinned by adultery and
murder; and not yet mourned in good earnest. for his sin. He put the (...)
under saws and harrows of iron, and caused them to pass through the
brick-kilne, etc. which was a strange execution, and fell out, whiles he lay
yet in his sin. Afterward we find him in a better frame, and more meekned
and mollified in his dealings with (...) and others, when he had soundly soaked
himself in godly sorrow. True it is, that he was then under the rod; and that is
a main means to make men meek. The Hebrew words that signify (...) (...)
and meek, grow both upon the same root, and are of so great (...)
(...), that they are sometimes by the (...) rendered the one for the other, as
Psalm. 36. 11. Adversa, enim hominem mansuetum (...), says Chemnitius: And, how
ever it go with the outward man, The meek shall find rest to their souls,
Mat. 11. 29. Yea the meek in the Lord shall (...) their joy, Isa. 29. 19. And
for outward respects: Meek Moses complains not of Miriams murmurings, but God
strikes in for him the more. And he Joh. 8. 50.
that said, I seek not mine own glory, adds, But there is one that seeks it,
and judges. God takes his part ever that fights not for himself, and is
champion to him that strives not, but, for peace sake, parts with his own
right, otherwhiles.

For they shall inherit the earth.]
One would think that meek men, that bear and forbear, that put up and forgive,
committing 1 (...). 2.
their cause to him that judges righteously (as Christ did) should be soon
baffled, and out-sworn out of their patrimony, with honest Naboth. But there is
nothing lost by meekness and yeeldance. Abraham yields over his right of
choice: Lot takes it. And behold, Lot is crossed in that which he chose,
Abraham blessed in that which was left him. God never suffers any man to leese
by an humble remission of right, in a desire of peace. The heavens, even the
heavens are the Lords: but the Psalm. 115. 16.
earth has he given to the children of men: Yet with this proviso, that as
heaven is taken by violence, so is earth by meekness. And God (the true
proprietary) loves no tenants better, nor (...) longer leases to any, then to
the meek. They shall inherit, that Prove. 13. 22.
is, peaceably enjoy what they have, and transfer it to posterity, they shall
give inheritance to their childrens children. As on the other side,
frowardness forfeits all into the Lords hands, and he many times takes the
forfeiture, and outs such persons, (...) upon them with a (...) ejectione, as
upon (...), (...), and others. (...), said Plato. The Lord Treasurer Burleigh
was wont to say, That he over (...) will more by patience then pertinacy. His
private estate he managed with that integrity, that he never (...) any man, no
man ever sued him. He was in the number of those few (says M. (...)) (...)
Elik. (...). (...).
that lived and died with glory. For as (...) of heart (...) Act. and (...).
fol. 987.
make you high with God: even so meekness of spirit and of speech shall make
you (...) into the hearts of men, (...) M. Tindall in a letter of his to John
Frith, afterward his fellow-Martyr.

Verse 6. Blessed are those that hunger and thirst after righteousness.]
Iustiia
(...). (...)

The righteousness of Christ both (...). That is in Christ for us, being
wrought by his value and merit, and is called the righteousness of
justification. This is in us from Christ, being wrought by his virtue and
spirit, and is called the righteousness of sanctification. Both these the
blessed man must hunger and thirst after, that is earnestly, and (...) desire,
as Rachel did for children, she must prevail or perish, as David 1 Chro. 11. 18.
did after the water of the well of Bethlehem, to the jeopardy of the lives of
his three mightiest: as the hunted Heart, or (as the (...). Sept (...). (...)
animal. 16 c. 9.
(...) reads it) Hind braieth after the water brooks. The Philosophers
observe of the Heart or Hind, that, being a beast thirsty by nature, when she
is pursued by dogs, by reason of heat and (...). lib (...).
loss of breath, her thirst is increased. And in females the passions Oppian.
lib. 2.
are stronger then in males: so that she breaths and braies after the (...) 42.
1.
(...) 119. 10.
brooks, with utmost desire: so pants the good soul after Christ, it pants
and faints, it breaths and breaks for the longing that it has unto his
righteousness at all times. She faints with Jonathan, swooneth and is sick
with the Spouse, yea, almost 1 (...) 30. (...).
dead with that poor affamished Amalekite. And this (...) appetite and
affection arises from a deep and due sense and feeling of our want of Christ,
whole Christ, and that there is an absolute necessity of every drop of his
blood. There must be a sad and serious consideration of man's misery, and Gods
mercy. Whence will arise (as in hunger and thirst) 1. A sense of pain in the
stomach. 2. A want and emptiness. 3. An eager desire of supply from Christ,
who is the true bread of life, and heavenly Manna; the Rock flowing with honey,
and fountain of living water, that reviveth the fainting spirits of every true
Jonathan and Samson, and makes them never to thirst again after the worlds
tastlesse fooleries: Like as his mouth will not water after homely provision,
that has lately tasted of delicate sustenance.

They shall be satisfied.]
Because true desires are the breathings Psalm. (...). 17.
of a broken heart, which God will not despise. He pours not (...).
the oil of his grace, but into broken vessels. For indeed, whole vessels are
full vessels, and so this precious liquour would run over, The desire of the
slothful kills him, etc.
and be spilt on the ground. There may be some faint desires (as of wishers and
woulders) even in hell-mouth; as Balaam desired to die the death of the
righteous, but liked not to live their life: Prove. 21. 25.
Pilate desired to know what is truth, but staid not to know it: Mat. 19. 22,
That faint Chapman in the Gospel, that cheapen'd heaven of our Savior, but
was loath to go to the price of it. These were but fits and flashes, and they
came to nothing. Carnal men care not Carnales non curant quaerere, quem tamen
(...) invenire: cupientes consequi, sed non and sequi.
to seek, whom yet they desire to find, says Bernard: Fain they would have
Christ, but care not to make after him: as Herod had of a long time desired to
see our Savior, but never stirred out of doors, to come where he was, Luke 22.
But now, The desire of the righteous that shall be satisfied, as Solomon has
it, that shall be well filled, as beasts are after a good bait (as (...)
Saviors word Bern.
here signifies.) Desires, as they must be ardent and violent, such (...)
(...) dicitur de (...). Nam (...) est (...), out pabulum.
as will take no nay, or be set down with silence or sad answers (whence it is
that desire and zeal go together, 2 Cor. 7. 11.) So if they be right, they are
ever seconded with endeavor after the thing desired. Hence the Apostle
contents not himself to say, that if there be first a willing mind, God
accepts, etc. 2 Cor. 8. 12. but presently adds, Now perform the doing of it:
that as there was a readiness to will, so there may be a performance also,
that is, a sincere endeavor to perform: as a thirsty man will not long for
drink only, but labor after it; or a covetous man wish for wealth, but strives
to compass it. And thus to (...) is to attain, thus to will is to work, thus
to desire is to do the will of our heavenly father: who accepts of pence for
pounds, of mites for millions, and accounts us as as good as we wish to be. He
has also promised, To fill the hungry with good things, to rain down
righteousness on the dry and parched ground, to fulfill the desires of them
that fear him. So that it is but our asking, and his giving: our opening the
mouth, and he will fill it: our hungring and his feeding, our thirsting and his
watering, our open hand and his open heart. The oil failed not, till the
vessels failed: neither are we staitned in God, till in our own bowels. Dear
wife (says 2 Cor. 6. 12.
Lawrence Saunders the Martyr) riches I have none to leave behind, wherewith
to endow you after the worldly manner; but that treasure of tasting how sweet
Christ is to hungry consciences (whereof, I thank my Christ, I do feel part,
and would feel more) that I bequeath unto you, and to the rest of my beloved in
Christ; to retain the same in sense of heart always. Pray, pray: I am merry,
and I trust I shall be, maugre the teeth of all the devils in hell. I utterly
refuse my self, and resign me to my Christ, Act. and Mon. fol 1361.
in whom I know I shall be strong, as he sees needful.

Verse 7. Blessed are the merciful.]
They that from a compassionate (...).
heart (melting with sense of Gods everlasting mercy to it self, and yerning
over the miseries of others) extend and exercise spiritual and corporal
mercy. The former (which teaches a man to warn the unruly, comfort the
feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient toward all men, etc. The Schoolmen
thus, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.
Consule, castiga, solare, remitte, (...), ora, usually excels and exceeds the
later (which stirs a man up to feed the hungry, clothe the naked, visit the
sick, etc. (...). 25.
Vifito, poto, cibo, redimo, tego, colligo, condo.
) (...). 2 da, (...), (...). 32. (...). (...)
1. In the nature of the gift, which is more noble, 2. In the object (the soul)
which is more illustrious. 3. In the manner, which is (...), as being
spiritual. 4. In the kind, which is more heavenly, as that which aims at our
brothers (...) salvation. And (...) way the poorest may be plentiful, and
enrich the (...) with spiritual alms. As also the other way, something must be
done, by all the Candidates of true (...). They that labor with their hands,
must have something (...) give to him Ephesians. 4 28.
that needs; be it but two mites, nay a cup of cold water, it shall be
graciously accepted from a sincere heart, and certainly rewarded. And here the
poor Macedonians may shame (and many times do) the rich Corinthians, that have
a price in their hands, but not a heart to use it. For it is the love, and
(...) the lack of money, that makes men churls and misers. And hence it
Money-(...) have no quick silver, no current (...), Ward.
is, that the richer men are, many times, the harder, as Dives: being herein
like children, who when they have their mouths (...), and both hands full, yet
will rather spoil (...), then give any away. But do men give to Gods poor? Or,
do they not rather lend it to the Lord, who turns play master to such? Do
(...) not lay it out for him, or rather lay it up for themselves? The safest
chest is the poor man's box. Make you friends with the Mammon of
unrighteousness (God has purposely branded riches with (...) infamous
adjunct, that we might not over-love them) that (...) (...). 16 9. (...).
ye fail, they (...) receive you into everlasting (...), that is, either the
Angels, or the poor, or thy well-emploied wealth, shall let thee into heaven.
Only thou must draw forth not thy sheaf alone, but thy soul also to the hungry:
(...) bowels of Isa. (...). 10 (...).
mercy, as our Savior did, Matthew. 15. 32. to bleed in (...) wounds, and be
deeply and tenderly affected in (...). This is better then alms. For when one
gives an alms, (...) gives something without himself; but by compassion we
(...) another by somewhat (...), and from (...) selves. And (...) properly the
mercy, to which mercy is here (...), (...) to boot.

For they shall obtain mercy.]
Misericordiam, (...) mercodem, Mercy, not wages: it being a mercy (and not a
duty) in God, to render unto every man according to his works, Psalm. 62. 12.
how much more according to his own works in us? (...) mercy he shall be sure
of, that shows mercy to those in misery. His soul Prove 11. 25.
shall be like a watered garden. The liberal soul shall be made fat, Etiam
ipse (...) erit, (...) Kimchi. Insignis hyperbole, etc. (...).
says Solomon, and he that waters shall be watered also himself. Or (as
Kimchi expounds it) He shall be a sweet and seasonable shower to himself and
others. His body also shall be fat and fairliking. Thy health shall spring
forth speedily, and thy bones shall Psalm. 41. 3.
be made fat, Isa. 58. 10, 11. Or if he be sick, the Lord will strengthen him
upon the bed of languishing; he will make all his bed in his sickness. As he did
for that faithful and (...) Preacher of Gods Word (while he lived) M. (...)
Whately, Pastor of Banbury (whom for honors sake I here name) the most M.
(...). (...).
(...) Minister to the poor, I think (says a learned Gentleman, that knew him
thoroughly) in England, of his means. He M. Hen. Scud der.
abounded in works of mercy (says another grave Divine, that wrote his life)
he set apart, and expended, for the space of many years, for good uses, the
tenth part of his yearly commings in, both out of his temporal and (...) means
of maintenance. A rare example: And God was not behind hand with him: for in
his sickness, he could comfort himself with that precious promise, Psalm. 41.
1, 3. Blessed is he that considers the Aug. in Psalm. 103.
poor, Qui praeoccupat vocem petituri, says Austin, that prevents the poor
man's cry; as he did, for he devised liberal things, seeking out to find
objects of his mercy, and not staying, many times, till they were offered.
Therefore by liberal things (...) stood, as God had promised; his estate (as
himself often testified) prospered the better after he took that course
abovementioned. For (in the next place) not getting, but giving is the way to
wealth, as the (...) found it, whose barrel had no bottom: and as Solomon
(...) it, Eccles. 11. 1. The mercy of God crowns our beneficence with the
blessing of store. (...) Isa. 58. 11.
shall be exalted with honor, and thou (...) not (...). Say not Psalm. 112. 9.
Prove. 28. 27.
then, How shall our own do hereafter? Is not mercy as sure a grain as vanity?
Is God like to break? Is not your Creator your Creditour? Has not he
undertaken for you and yours? How sped Mephibosheth and Chimham for the
kindness their fathers showed to distressed David? Were they not plentifully
provided for? And did not the Kenites, that were born many ages after (...)'s
death, receive life from his dust, and favor from his hospitality? 1 Samuel 15.
6.

Verse 8. Blessed are the pure in heart.]
That wash their (...) from wickedness, that they may be saved, Jer. 4. 14.
Not their (...)
hands only, with Pilate, but their inwards, as there; How long shall thy vain
thoughts lodge within thee? These, however the world censure them (for every
fool has a bolt to shoot at that purity, which yet they (...), and pray for)
are the Lords darlings, that purify themselves (in some truth of resemblance)
as God is pure. Pura Deus men's est, pura vult mente vocari: Et puras jussit
pondus habere preces.


He will take up in a poor, but it must be a pure heart: in a (...), but it
must be a cleanly house: in a low, but not in a (...) lodging. Gods Spirit
loves to lie clean. Now the heart of man is the most unclean and loathsome
thing in the world, a den of dragons, a dungeon of darkness, a stie and stable
of all foul lusts, cage of unclean and ravenous birds. The Ambassadors of the
Council of Constance, being sent to Pope Benedict the (...), when In (...).
Council. Constant.
he, laying his hand upon his heart, said, Hic est Arca (...), Here is Noah's
Ark; they tartly and truly replied; In Noah's Ark were few men, but many beasts,
intimating, that there were seven abominations in that heart, wherein, he would
have them to believe, were lodged all the laws of right and religion. This is
true of every mothers child of us. The natural heart is (...) throne, he
fills it from corner to corner, Act 5. 3. he sits abrood (...). 104. (...),
26.
upon it, and hatcheth all noisome and loathsome lusts, Ephesians. 2. 2. There (as
in the sea) is that Leviathan, and there are creeping things innumerable,
crawling bugs and baggage vermin. Now as many as shall see God to their
comfort, must cleanse (...) 2 Cor. 5. 1.
from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and perfect (...). sse in the fear
of God. This is the mighty work of the holy Spirit, which therefore we (...)
pray and strive for: beseeching God to break Isa. 64. 1.
the heavens and come down: yea to break open the prison doors of our hearts by
his Spirit, and to cleanse this (...) stable. He comes as a mighty rushing
wind, and blows away those litters of lusts, as once the East-winde of God did
all the locusts of Egypt into the red Sea. And this done, he blows upon Gods
garden, the heart, and causes the spices thereof so to flow forth, that Christ
says, I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse: I have gathered (...).
(...). (...). and 5 1.
my myrrh with my spice, Cant. 5. 1.

For they shall see God]
Here in a measure, and as they are able: hereafter in all fulness and
perfection; they shall see as they are 1 Cor. 13. 12.
seen. Here, as in a glass (...), or as an old man through spectacles, (...).
but there, face to face: Happier herein then Solomon's servants, for a greater
then Solomon is here. A good man is like a good Angel, ever beholding the face
of God. He looks upon them with singular complacency, and they upon him to
their infinite (...). He sees no iniquity in them; they no indignation in him.
He looks upon them in the face of Christ: And although no man has seen God
at any time, yet God, who commanded Joh. 1. 18.
the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, says the
Apostle, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ. Pure glass or crystal 2 Cor. 4. 6.
has light coming through: not so stone, iron or other grosser bodies. In like
sort, the pure in heart see God, he shines through them: And as the pearl by the
beams of the Sun becomes bright and radiant as the Sun it self: so we all with
open face, beholding, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, (...) transformed
into the same image, from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord 2 Cor.
3. 18.

Verse 9. Blessed are the peace-makers]
There are, that like Salamanders live always in the fire, and like Trouts,
love to swim against the stream; that, with Phocion, think it a goodly thing
to dissent from others; and like Sampsons foxes, or Solomon's fool, carry about
and cast abroad firebrarnds, as if the world were made of nothing but discords,
as Democritus imagined. But, as St John 1 Ioh. 2. 16.
speaks in another case; these are not of the Father, but of the world. He
makes great reckoning of a meek and quiet (...), 1 Pet. 3. 4.
because it is like to his own mind, which is never stirred nor moved, but
remains still the same to all eternity. He loves those that keep the staff
of binders unbroken, Zech. 11. 7, 14. that hold Ephesians. 4. 3.
the unity of the spirit, and advance the bond of peace among others as much as
may be. The wicked are apt (as dogs) to enter, tear and woorry one another: and
although there be not a disagreement in hell (being but the place of
retribution, and not of action) yet on earth, there is no peace among the
workers of iniquity, that are trotting apace toward hell by their contentions,
Romans 2. 8. But what pity is it, that Abraham and (...) should fall out? that
two Israelites should be at strife amid the Egyptians? that John's disciples
should join with Pharisees against (...)? (...) 4.
that (...) (for their contentions) should hear carnal, (...). 3. 3.
and walk as men? that Lutherans and Calvinists should be at such deadly fewd?
Still Satan is thus busy, and Christians are thus malicious, that, as if they
wanted enemies, they flee in one another faces. There was no noise heard in
setting up the Temple: In Lebanon there was, but not in Sion: whatever tumults
there are (...), it is fit there should be all quietness and concord in the
Church. Now therefore, although it be, for the most part, a thankelesse office
(with men) to interpose, and seek to take up strife, to piece again those that
are gone aside, and asunder, and to sound an Irenicum: yet do it for Gods sake,
and that ye may (as ye shall be after a while) called and counted (not medlers
and busybodies, but) the sons of God. Tell them that jarre and jangle (upon
mistakes for most part, or matters of no great moment) that it is the glory of
a man to pass by an infirmity, and that in these ignoble quarrels, every man
should be a law to himself, as the Thracians were: and not brother go to law
with brother, because (...)
he treads upon his grass, or some such poor business, ubi and vincere (...).
inglorium est, and alteri sordidum. Now therefore there is utterly a fault
amongst you, because ye go to law one with another, says the Apostle. Not but
that the course is lawful, where the occasion is weighty, and the mind not
vindictive. But the (...).
Apostle disgraceth (in that text) revenge of injuries, by a word that 1 Cor.
6, 7.
signifies disgrace, or loss of victory: And a little before: I speak to your
shame, says he, Is it so, that there is not a wise man amongst you? no, not
one that shall be able to judge between his brethren, and compromise the
quarrel? Servius Sulpitius (that heathen Lawyer) shall rise up in judgment
against us, quippe qui ad facilitatem, aequitatemque omnia contulit, neque
constituere litium actiones, quam controversias tollere maluit, as Tully
testifies. Cicer. Philippic. 9.
Concedamus de jure, says one, ut careamus lite: And, ut habeas quietum
tempus, perde aliquid. Lose something for a quiet life, was a common proverb,
(as now amongst us) so of old (...) the Carthaginians, as St Austin shows. It
were happy August.
surely, if now, as of old, the multitude of (...) were (...), (...) 4. (...).
of one heart, and of one soul. And, as in one very (...)
ancient Greek copy it is added, that there was not one controversy or
contention found amongst them. (...).


For they shall be called the children of God]
They shall both be, and be said to be, both counted and called, have both the
name and the note, the comfort and the credit of the children of God. And if
any Atheist shall object, What so great honor is that? Behold, says St John,
what manner of love the Father has bestowed (...) Joh. 3 1.
upon us, that we should be called the sons of God. It was something to be
called the son of Pharaohs daughter, to be Heb. 11. (...).
son in law to the King, with David, to be heir to the Crown, with Solomon,:
but far more, that God should say of him, I will be his father, and he shall
be my son; and I will establish his Kingdom, 2 Samuel 7. 14. This is the happy
effect of faith: for to them that believe on his name, gave he power and
privilege to become (...).
the sons of God. Now faith ever works by love, and love covers (...) 1. 12.
a multitude of sins; not by any merit or expiation with God, 1 Pet 4. 8.
but by seeking and settling peace among men. And this is as sure and as sweet a
sign of a son of the God of peace, as the party-colored 2 Samuel 13. 18.
coats were, anciently, of the Kings children.

Verse 10. Blessed are they that are persecuted.]
To be persecuted (as simply considered) is no blessed thing; for then it were
to be desired and praid for. But let a man love a quiet life, and labout (...).
34. 13.
to see good days, said those two great champions, David and 1 Pet. (...). 10.
Peter, who themselves had endured a world of persecution, and paid for their
learning. The like counsel gives St Paul, and the Author 1 Timothy 2. 2.
to the Hebrews: For they felt by experience, how unable 1 These. 4. 11.
Heb. 12. 11.
they were to bear crosses when they fall upon them. It was this Peter that
denied his master, upon the sight of a silly wench that questioned him: And
this David, that changed his behavior before Abimelech, and thereupon gave
this advice to all that should come after him.

For righteousness sake]
This is it that makes the Martyr, a good cause and a good conscience. Martyrem
facit causa, non supplicium, says one Father; Not the suffering, but the cause
makes a (...).
Martyr. And, Multum interest, and qualia quis, and qualis quisque Greg.
patiatur, says another: It greatly skilleth, both what it is a man suffers,
and what a one he is that suffers. If he suffer as an evildoer, he has his
mends in his own hands: but if for righteousness Talia quisque luat (...)
quisque (...).
sake, as here, and if men say and do all manner of evil against you ( falsely
and lyingly) for my sake, as in the next verse, and for the (...)
Gospels sake, as Mark has it, this is no bar to blessedness. Nay, it is an
high preferment on earth, Phil. 1. 29. and has a crown abiding it in Heaven,
beyond the which mortal men's wishes cannot ^
extend. But let all that will have share in these comforts, see that they be
able to say with the Church, Psalm. 144. 21 22. Thou know, Lord, the secrets
of the hearts, that, for thy sake, we are ^
(...) continually. Upon which words excellently St Austin, Quid est, inquit,
novit occulta? quae (...)? etc. What secrets of the heart, says he, are those
that God is here said to know? Surely these; that for thy sake we are slain,
etc. slain thou may ^
see a man, but wherefore or for whose sake he is slain, thou know not, God
only knows. Sunt qui causa humanae gloriae paterentur, as that Father goes
on. There want not those that would suffer death (and seemingly for
righteousness sake) only for applause of the world and vain glory. As Lucian
tells of Peregrinus the Philosopher, that merely for the glory of it he would
have been made a Martyr. The Circumcelliones (a most pernicious branch of the
haeresie of the Donatists) were so (...) to obtain (by suffering) the praise of
Martyrdom, that they would seem to throw themselves down headlong from high
places, or cast themselves into fire or water. Al xander the (...) was near
martyrdom, Acts 19. 33. who yet afterward made shipwreck of the faith, and
became a bitter enemy to the truth, that he had profesled, 1 Timothy 1. 19 20. and
4. 14, 15. Faelix (...), an Anabaptist of (...), being put to death for his
obstinacy, and ill practices at Tigure, praised God that had called him to
(...). Annal decad 2. page 92.
the sealing up of his truth with his blood, was animated to constancy by his
mother and brother, and ended his life with these words, Lord, into thy hands I
commend my spirit. What could any hearty Hooper, trusty Taylour, or sincere
(...) have said or done more in such a case? It is not then the suffering, but
the suffering for righteousness sake that proves a man (...), and entitleth
him to heaven. The Philistims died by the fall of the house, as well as Samson;
sed diver so fine, ac fato, as one says. Christ (...).
and the thieves were in the same condemnation: Similis paena, sed aissimilis
causa, says Austin: their punishment was all alike, but not their cause.
Baltasar (...) the Burgundian that slew the Prince of Orange, 1584. Iun. 30.
endured very grievous torments: But it was pertinacy in him rather then
patience, stupidity of sense, D. (...) upon (...).
not a solidity of faith, a wretchlesse disposition, not a confident
resolution. Therefore no heaven followed upon it, because he suffered not as a
Martyr, but as a malefactor.

For theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven]
Surely, if there be any way to heaven on horseback, it is by the cross, said
that Martyr, Bradf.
that was hasting thither in a fiery charet. The Turks account all them, whom
the Christians kill in battle, Mohammedan Saints and Martyrs; assigning them a
very high place in Paradise. In some Turk. (...). sol. (...).
parts of the West Indies there is an opinion in gross, that the soul is
immortal; and that there is a life after this life, where, beyond certain
hills (they know not where) those that died in defense of Arch B. Abbots (...)
p. (...).
their country, should remain after death in much blessedness; which opinion
made them very valiant in their fights. Should not the assarance of Heaven make
us valiant for the truth? should we Jer. 9. 3.
not suffer with joy the spoiling of our goods? yea the loss of our Heb. 10.
34.
lives, for life eternal? should we not look up to the recompense of reward,
to Christ the author and finisher of our faith, who stands over us in the
encounter, as once over Stephen, with a Acts 7.
Crown on his head, and another in his hand, and says, Vincenti Rev. (...).
Dabo, to him that overcommeth will I give this. Surely this son of David will
shortly remove us from the ashes of our forlorn (...), to the Hebron of our
peace and glory: This son of Jesse 1 Samuel 32. 7.
will give every one of us, not fields and vineyards, but Crowns, Scepters,
Kingdoms, glories, beauties, etc. The expectation of this blessed day, this
nightlesse day (as one calls it) must (as it did with (...) Naz.
David's soldiers all the time of their banishment) digest all our sorrows, and
make us in the midst of miseries for Christ, to overabound exceedingly with
joy, as Paul did. Q. Elizabeth's government (...)
was so much the more happy and welcome, because it (...) upon the stormy times
of Q Mary. She came as a fresh 2 Cor. 7. 4.
spring after a sharp winter; and brought the ship of England from a troublous
and tempestuous sea, to a safe and quiet harbor. So will the Lord Christ do
for all his persecuted people. Ye see (said Bilney the Martyr, and they were
his last words, to one that exhorted him to be constant, and take his death
patiently) ye see, says he, when the mariner is entered his ship to sail on the
troublous sea, how he, for a while, is tossed in the billows of the same: but
yet in hope that he shall once come to the quiet haven, he bears in better
comfort the troubles that he feels. So am I now toward this sailing: and
whatsoever storms I shall feel, yet shortly after shall my ship be in the
haven, as I doubt not thereof by the grace of God, etc. Lo, this was that, that
held the good man's head Act. and Mon. sol 923.
above water, the hope of Heaven. And so it did many others, whom it were easy
to instance. Elizabeth Cooper, Martyr, being condemned, and at the stake with
Simon Miller, when the fire came unto her, she a little shranke thereat, crying
once, ha. When Simon heard the same, he put his hand behind him toward her, and
willed her to be strong and of good cheer: For, good sister, said (...), we
shall have a joyful and sweet supper. Whereat she being Ibid 1319.
strengthened, stood as still and as quiet, as one most glad to finish that good
course. Now I take my leave of you (writes William Tims, Martyr, in a letter
to a friend of his, a little before his death) till we meet in Heaven. And hie
you after; I have tarried a great (...) for you. And seeing you be so long in
making ready, I will tarry no longer for you: You shall find me merrily (...),
Holy, Ibid 1723.
holy, holy Lord God of Sabbath, at my journies end, etc. And, I cannot here
let slip that golden (...), wherewith those 40 Martyrs (mentioned by St Basil)
comforted one another, when they (...)
were cast out naked all night in the winter, and were to be burned the next
morrow. Sharp is the winter (said they,) but sweet is Paradise; painful is
the frost, but joyful the fruition that follows it. Wait but a while, and
the Patriarks (...) shall cherish us. After one night we shall lay hold upon
eternal life. Let our (...) feel the fire for a season, that we may for ever
walk arm in arm (...)
with Angels: let our hands fall off, that they may for ever be lifted up to
the praise of the Almighty, etc.

Verse 11. Bless are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you, and shall
say all manner of (...) against you, falsely, for my sake.]
(...) etc
There are tongue-smiters, as well as hand-smiters; such as malign and molest
Gods dearest children as well with their virulent tongues, as violent hands;
Such as will revile you, says our Savior, (...). (...)
(...) and upbraid you with your profession, hit you in teeth with your God,
(as they dealt by David, and that went as a murdering weapon to his soul) and
(...) your preciseness and (...) (...). (...). 10. (...) more (...). (...).
in your dish. This is the force of the first word. Further, they shall
persecute you, eagerly pursue and follow you hot-foot, as the hunter does his
prey. The word betokens a keen and eager pursuit of any other, whether by
law, or by the sword, whether by word or deed. For (...) also are persecutours,
as Ismael, and for such shall be arraigned, Jude 15. And cruel mockings and
Gal. 4. (...).
scourgings are set together by the Author to the Hebrews, as Heb. 11. 36.
much of a kind, chap. 11. 35. Especially, when (as it follows in the text)
they shall say all manner of evil against you, call you all to pieces, and
think the worst word in their bellies too good for you. Ephesians. 4. 31.
This is collateral blasphemy, blasphemy in the second table, and so Tit. 3. 2.
it is often called in the new Testament. God, for the honor he Col. 3. 8.
bears to his people, is pleased to afford the name of blasphemy to 1 Pet. 4.
4.
their reproaches, as importing that he takes it as if himself were 2 Pet. 2.
10.
(...). Thus the Israelites were, of old, called by the profane Heathens,
Apellae, and (...), as if they worshipped a golden -- Credat (...) Apella.
Asse-head, and in derision of their circumcision. As afterward Hor.
they called the Primitive Christians, murderers, Church-robbers, Tertull.
Apolog Si (...), (...), (...) sames, (...) lues, etc. Ib.
(...), traitouts to the state, etc. and if inundations, famine, or other (...)
calamities fell out, they presently cried, Christianos ad (...). So, in
aftertimes, the Arians called the Orthodox (...), Ambrosians, Athanasians,
Homousians, what not? The Pseudo-Catholikes ( speaking evil of that they knew S
(...)
not) (...) the professors of the truth by the names of (...), (...).
Waldenses, Huguenots, poor men of Lions, etc. Thus of Jude 10.
old; as of late, Heretics, New-gospellers, Puritans, all manner of evil they
speak against us, but ( falsely) that's our comfort; not caring what they speak,
nor whereof they affirm, so they may promote their Cacolick cause, and the
devils kingdom, which as it began in a (...), so by lies do they maintain it. A
Friar a liar, was anciently a sound argument in any man's mouth (says Thomas
(...) est (...). ergo (...): si (...) and (...), (...).
Walsingham) tenens tam de forma, quam de materia. (...) the Jesuits have
won the whetstone from all that went before them, for (...) and prodigious
lies and slanders. (...)-Joannes, that demoniack, blusheth not to (...), that
these are our (...) and doctrins: That no God is to be worshipped; that we must
shape our Religion according to the times: that (...) is (...): that we may
make the public cause a pretense to our private lusts: that a man may break
his word whenever he (...) good, cover his hatred with fair (...), confirm
(...) by shedding innocent blood. Salmeron the Jesuit has (...) to Contra
(...).
the world in his Comment upon the (...), that the Luth-rans (...) (...).
now make fornication to be no sin at all. And a little before the (...) 5
tract. (...).
(...) of Paris, the Monks slanderously gave out, that the (...) met together
for no other purpose, then (...) (after they had fed themselves to the full)
they might put out the (...) and (...). (...). (...).
go together promiscuously, as brute (...). (...) Bishop of Auranches wrote
against the Congregation of Christians at Paris, Act and (...). (...) 8, 8.
defending impudently, that their (...) were to maintain (...). The lives of
Calvin and Beza were (at the request Act and Mon (...). (...)
of the Popish side) written by Bolsecus a (...) friar, their (...) enemy: and
though so many lines so many lies, yet are (...) his (...) of (...).
(...) in all their writings alleged as Canonical. Wicliffe disallowed the
Invocation of Saints, whom he called servants, not gods. (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) of (...) page (...).
For the word, Knave, which he used, signified, in those (...), a child or a
(...); not as it does, in our days, a wicked varlet, (...) his (...) it;
Bellarmine for one, a man (...) of the English tongue. Hereupon the people are
taught to believe that the Protestants are blasphemers of God and all his
Saints: that in England, Churches are turned into (...): (...) people is grown
(...), and eat young children: that (...) (...). (...). (...).
they are as black as devils, ever since they were blasted and (...) with the
Popes excommunication: that (...) is a (...) sanctuary of rogery, etc. that the
fall of Blackfriars (where besides a 100. of his (...), Drury the Priest had
his Sermon and his brains knocked out of his head together) was caused by the
(...), who had secretly sawed in two the beams and other timber. With like
honesty they would have fathered the powder plot upon the Puritans, by their
Proclamations, which they had ready, to be (...) abroad immediately, had Faux
(...) fired the powder. And a (...).
certain Spanish Author has taken the (...), since, to aver, that they were
the authors of that (...) conspiracy. There is a book lately published, and
commonly sold in Italy and France, (...).
containing a relation of Gods judgments shown on a sort of (...)-haereticks
Author quidam (...), (...). (...), Lect p 317.
by the fall of a house in Blackfriars, London, in which they were (...) to
hear a Geneva-lecture, October. 26. 1623. And Dr Weston doubted not to make his
boasts to a Nobleman of England, that at the late conference and disputation D
(...) (...) page 189.
between Fisher and Featly (with certain others of both sides) our Doctors
were confounded, and theirs triumphed and had the day: insomuch that two Earls
and a hundred others were converted to the Catholic Roman faith. Whereas he,
to whom this tale was told, was himself one of the two (...), continuing sound
and Orthodox, and knew full well that there were not a hundred Papists and
Protestants (taken together,) present at that disputation. D. (...).
But this was one of their piae frauds, doubtless: (...) like Lect. p. 317.
their Legend of miracles of their Saints, which the Jesuit confessed to my
self (says mine Author) to be, for most part, false and foolish; but it was
made for good intention: and that it was lawful and meritorious to lie and
write such things, to the end the Spanish (...).
common people might with greater zeal serve God and his Saints, etc. So long
since, because freedom of speech was used by the Waldenses, in blaming and
reproving the (...) life and debauched manners of the Popish (...), Plures
nefariae (...) Cade of the Church.
(...) opiniones, a (...) omnino fuerant alieni, says Girardus, They were
cried out upon for odious heretics and apostates: Manichees they were (...) to
be, and to make two first (...) of things, viz. God and the devil. And why?
because they preached and maintained, that the Emperor depended not upon the
Pope. Moreover they were Arians too, and deuied Christ to be (...) in (...).
the Son of God, because (forsooth) they denied a crust to be
transubstantiated into Christ, as one speaks. But blessed be God, that
although they have in all ages spoken all manner of evil against D. (...).
(...). p. 316.
us, yet they have done it falsely, and for Christ's sake, wherefore we may take
up their books written against us, and Wear Bradf.
them as a crown. Do well and hear ill is written upon heaven Act and Mon.
gates, said that Martyr. Christ himself (says father Latymer) was
misreported, and falsely accused, both as touching his words, and meaning also.
Count it not strange to be traduced, disgraced, scandalized. Austere John has
a devil; sociable Christ is a winebibber, and the Scribes and Pharisees (whose
words carry such credit) say as much. Contra sycophantae morsum non est
remedium. It is but a vain persuasion for any child of God to think, by any
discretion, wholly to still the clamours, and hates of wicked men; who when
they think well, will learn to report well. In the mean, let our lives give
them the lie, confute them by a real Apology.

Verse 12. Rejoice and be exceeding glad.]
Leap and skip for (...) (...). (...) and Psalm. (...). (...) ficat (...). (...).
joy, as wantonizing young cattle use to do in the spring, when every thing is
in its prime and pride. Thus George Roper, at his coming to the stake, fet a
great leap. So soon as the (...) was about him, he put out both his arms from
his body, like a rood, and so stood steadfast ( the joy of the Lord being his
strength) not plucking his arms in, till the fire had consumed and burnt them
(...) pecudes (...) (...).
off. So, Doctor Tailour going toward his death, and coming within a mile or
two of (...) (where he was to suffer) he leapt (...) 8.
and (...) a frisk or twain, as men commonly do in dancing. Act. and (...).
fol 1629.
Why, M. Doctor, quoth the Sheriff, how do you now? He answered, well, God be
praised, good M. Sheriff: never better: for now I know I am almost at home. I
lack not past two styles to go over, and I am even at my (...). Likewise (...)
(...) 1386
White, going to the stake, whereas before he was wont to go stooping, or
rather crooked through infirmity of age, having a (...) countenance, and a very
feeble complexion, and, withal very soft in speech and gesture; now he went
and stretched up himself bolt upright, and bare withal a most pleasant and
comfortable countenance, not without great courage and audacity, both in (...).
1415.
speech and behavior. It were easy to instance the exceeding great joy of the
(...), Act. 5. 41. who went from the Council, rejoicing that they were so far
honored, as to be dishonored for the Name of Jesus; which Casaubon calls,
Elegantissimum (...). So Bradford, (...) forgive me (says he) mine
unthankfulness for this exceeding great (...), that, among so many Ibid 1484.
thousands, he chooses me to be one in whom he will suffer. And in a letter to
his mother; For Christ's sake I suffer, says he, and therefore should be merry
and glad. And indeed, good mother, so I am, as ever I was: yea, never so merry
and glad was I, as now I should be, if I could get you to be merry with me, to
thank God for me, and to pray on this sort, Ah, good Father, that (...)
vouchsafe that my son, being a grievous sinner in thy sight, should find this
favor with thee, to be one of thy sons Captains, and men of war, to fight
and suffer for his Gospels sake: I thank thee, and pray thee in Christ's Name,
that thou would forgive him his sins and unthankfulness, and make him worthy
to suffer, not only imprisonment, but even very death for thy truth, (...), and
Gospels sake, etc. Whether Bradfords mother did Ibid. (...).
thus or no, I know not: but William Hunters mother (that suffered under
Bonner) told him that she was glad that ever she was so happy, as to bear such
a child, as could find in his heart to (...) his life for Christ's Name sake.
Then William said to his mother, (...) (...).
For my little pain which I shall suffer, which is but for a little braid,
Christ has promised me a crown of joy: may not you be glad of that, mother?
With that his mother kneeled down on her knees, saying, I pray God strengthen
thee, my son, to the (...): yea, I think thee as well bestowed, as any
child that ever I bare. For indeed (as M. Philpot the Martyr said) to die for
Ibid. (...).
Christ, is the greatest promotion, that God can bring any in this vale of
misery unto: yea so great an honor, as the greatest Angel (...) (...). (...).
1. (...).
in heaven is not permitted to have. This made John Clerks mother of Melda in
Germany (when she saw her son whipped and branded in the forehead for opposing
the Popes Indulgences, and calling him Antichrist) to hearten her son, and
cry out, Vivat Christus ejusque insignia: Blessed be Christ, and welcome be
these marks of (...). Constantinus a Citizen of Rhone (with three other) being,
for defense of the Gospel, condemned to be burned, were put into a dung-cart,
who thereat rejoicing, said, that they were reputed here the excrements of the
world; but yet their Act. and Mon.
death was a sweet odor to God. When the chain was put about (...). (...).
Alice Drivers neck, Oh, said she, here is a goodly neckerchief, (...) 1858.
blessed be God for it. Algerius Christ's prisoner thus dated his letter, Ibid
857.
From the delectable Orchyard of the Leonine prison. And, Ibid. 1358.
I am in prison till (...) be in prison, said Saunders. And indeed, said Ibid.
(...).
Bradford, I thank God more of this prison, then of any parlour, yea then of
any pleasure that ever I had, for in it I find God, my most sweet God always.
After I came into prison (says Robert Glover, Martyr, in a letter to his wife)
and had reposed my self there a while, I wept for joy and (...) my belly-full,
musing much of the great mercies of God, and, as it were, thus saying to my
self; Lord, who am I, on whom thou should bestow this (...) 1553.
great mercy, to be numbered among the Saints that suffer for thy Gospel sake?
And I was carried to the Cole-house, says M. (...), where I and my six fellows
do rouse together in the straw, as (...), we thank God, as others do in their
beds of down. And, in another letter; I am now in the Cole-house, a dark and
Ibid. (...).
ugly prison, as any is about London: but my dark body of sin has well
deserved the same, etc. And, I thank the Lord, I am To the (...) (...).
not alone, but have six other faithful companions, who in our (...). (...).
darkness do cheerfully sing hymns and praises to God, for his great (...).
We are so joyful, that I wish you part of my joy, etc. Good brethren (says
William Tims, Martyr) I am (...). 726.
kept alone, and yet, I thank (...) he comfort me, past all the comfort of
any man; for I was never (...) in Christ. You shall be whipped and burned for
this gear, I (...) ((...) one M. Foster to John Fortune, Martyr) To whom he
replied: If you knew how these words rejoice mine heart, you would not have
spoken them. Why, quoth Foster, thou fool, do (...) rejoice in whipping? Yea,
said Fortune, for it is written in the (...), and Christ says, Ye shall be
whipped for my Names sake. And since the time that the sword of tyranny came into
your hand, I heard of none that was whipped: Happy were I, if I had the
maidenhead (...) (...) 41.
of this persecution. (...) Walsey was so desirous to glorify God with his
suffering, that being wonderful sore tormented in prison with toothache, he
feared nothing more, then (...). (...).
that he should depart before the day of his execution (which he called his
glad-day) were come. Anthony Person with a (...) Ibid. 1123.
countenance embraced the stake, whereat he was to be burned, and kissing it,
said: Now welcome mine own sweet wife, for this day shall thou and I be married
together in the love (...) peace of God. Lawrence Saunders took the stake, to
which (...) should be chained Ibid. 1632.
(...) his arms, and kissed it, saying, (...) the cross of Christ; Welcome
everlasting life. Walter Mill, Scot, being put to the stake, ascended gladly,
saying, Introibo altar Dei. John Noyes, Martyr, Ibid 1162.
took up a faggot at the fire, and kissed it, and said, Blessed be Ibid. 1831.
the time that ever I was born to come to this. Denly sang in the Ibid 1530.
Scultet. Annal.
fire at Uxbridge, so did George Carpenter the Bavarian Martyr: Decad (...).
(...). 1. 0.
so did Wolfgang us Schuh, a Germane, when he entered into the Act and (...).
(...).
place heaped up with fagots and wood, he sang, Laetatus sum in his quae dicta
sunt mihi, in domum Domini ibimus. Two Austin Monks at Bruxelles, anno 1523.
(the first among the Lutherans that suffered for religion) being fastened to
the stake to be burnt, sang, Te Deum, and the Creed. Others clapped their hands
in the Ibid. 1444.
flames, in token of triumph; as Hawks and Smith; and five Martyrs Ibid 1544.
burnt together by Bonner. Bainham at the stake, and in the Ibid 1688.
midst of the flame (which had half consumed his arms and his Ibid. 940.
legs) spoke these words, O ye Papists, behold ye look for miracles: here you
may see a miracle: For in this fire I feel no more pain, then if I were in a
bed of down: but it is to me as a bed of roses. Now what was it else whereby
these Worthies (of whom the world was not worthy) quenched the violence of the
fire, and out of weakness were made strong? Was it not by their heroical and
impregnable faith, causing them to endure, as seeing him that is invisible, and
having respect, as Moses, to the recompense of reward? Heb. 11. 26, 27.

For great is your reward in heaven.]
God is a liberal paymaster, and no small things can fall from so great a hand
as his. The L. (...).
Oh that joy! o my God, when shall I be with thee? said a dying Peer of this
Realm. So great is that joy, that we are said to enter Stock at his (...).
into it, it is too full to enter into us. Elias, when he was to enter (...).
25. (...).
into it, feared not the fiery charrets that came to fetch him, but through
desire of those heavenly happinesses, waxed bold against Contra horrenda audax
fuit, and eum gaudio, flammeos currus (...).
those terrible things, Atque hoc in carne adhuc vivens (it is S. B (...)
observation) and this he did, whiles he was as yet in the flesh. For he (...)
oculum in metam (which was Ludovicus Vives his Motto) his eye upon the mark, He
pressed forward toward Basil.
the high prize, with Paul; and looking through the terror of Phil. 3. 14.
the fire, saw heaven beyond it: and this made him so valiant, so violent for
the Kingdom. A Dutch Martyr, feeling the flame Act and Mon.
to come to his beard; Ah, said he, what a small pain is this to be sol. 813.
compared to the glory to come. Hellen Stirk, a (...)-woman, to her husband at
the place of execution spoke thus, Husband, rejoice; for we have lived together
many joyful days: but this day in which we must die, ought to be most joyful
to us both, because Ibid. 1154.
we must have joy for ever: Therefore I will not bid you good night; for we
(...) suddenly meet within the Kingdom of heaven. The subscription of
Mistress Anne Askew to her (...), Ibid 1. 30.
was this: Written by me Anne Askew, that neither wishes for death, nor
fears his might, and as merry as one that is bound toward heaven. Oh how my
heart leapeth for joy (said M. Philpot) that I am so near the apprehension of
eternal life. God forgive me mine (...) and (...) of so great (...). -- I have
(...) much joy of the reward prepared for me, most wretched sinner, that though
I be in place of darkness and mourning, yet I cannot lament, but, both night
and day, am so joyful, as though under no cross at all: yea in all the days
of my life, I was never so merry, the Name of the Lord be praised therefore for
ever and ever; and he pardon mine unthankfulness. Ibid. 1670.
The world wondereth (says he in another place) how we can be so merry, in
such extreme misery: but our God is omnipotent, which turns misery into
felicity. Believe me, there is no such joy in the world, as the people of
Christ have under the cross, I Ibid. 1668.
speak by experience, etc. To this joy all other being compared, are but
mournings, all delights sorrows, all sweetness sour, all beauty filth, and
finally all things counted pleasant, are (...). Great then, we see, is their
reward in earth, that suffer for Christ: they have heaven aforehand, they
rejoice in tribulation, with joy unspeakable and glorious, they have an
exuberancy of 1 Pet. 1. 8,
joy, such as no good can match, no evil over-match. For though I tell you
(said M. Philpot in a letter to the Congregation) that I am in hell, in the
judgment of this world, yet (...), I feel, in the same, the consolation of
heaven. And this loathsome and horrible prison, is as pleasant to me, as the
walks in the Garden in (...). 1663.
the Kings bench. What will it be then, when they shall have crowns on their
heads, and palms in their hands, when they shall come to that general
Assembly, (...). 12. 23. and have all the (...).
Court of heaven to meet and entertain them, When they shall follow the Lamb
wheresoever he goes, Revel. 14. 4. and have places given them to walk among
those that stand by, Zech. 3. 7. that Zech. 3. 7. expound.
is, among the Seraphims (as the Chaldee Paraphrast expounds it) among the
Angels of heaven; Alusively, to the walks and galleries that were about the
Temple? Majora certamina, majora sequuntur praemia, says Tertullian. Quisquis
volens (...) famae meae, nolens addit mercedi meae, says Augustine. The more
we suffer with and for Christ, the more glory we shall have with and from
Christ.

For so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you,]
(...).
Your betters sped no better: Strange not therefore at it, start not for it.
Persecution has ever been the Saints portion. How early did Martyrdom come
into the world? The first man that died, Act. (...). 25.
died for religion. And although Cain be (...) to his place, yet I would he
were not still alive in his sons and successors, who hate their brethren,
because they are more righteous, Et (...) (...).
(...) rubentem circumferunt, as one speaks. (...) that is not to be wished;
or at least, it is, Magis optabile quam opinabile, that ever a Prophet shall
want a persecutour, while there is a busy devil, and a malicious world. The
Leopard (...) said so to hate man, that he sleeth upon his very picture, and
(...) it: (...) does the devil and his imps, God and his image. The Tigre is
said to be enraged with the smell of sweet odours: so are the wicked of the
world with the fragrancy of Gods graces. Noah rose (...) --
up and condemned them by his contrary-(...), and therefore under-went a world
of calamities. Puritan Lot was an eyesore to the sinful Sodomites, and is
cast out, as it were by an ostracisme. His father Haran, the brother of
Abraham, died before his father No, (...), and (...). (...).
Terah, in Ur of the Caldees. The Hebrews tell us that he was cruelly burnt by
the Caldees, because he would not worship Genesis 11. 28.
the fire, which they had made their god. How (...) was Moses (...) Perse (...).
made (as (...) among the Romans) to plead for his life? And although David's
innocence triumphed in Saul's conscience, (...) l. 119. 109.
yet could he not be safe, but carried his life in his hand continually, as he
complains in that hundred and nineteenth Psalm; which was made (as is
thought) in the midst of those troubles, out of his own observations and
experiments. As for the Prophets that came after, which of them have not your
fathers slain? says our Savior to the Pharisees; whom hebids (by an Irony) to
fill up the measure of their fathers, and foretelling that they shall deal so
by the Apostles (whom he there calls, according to the custom of that
Country, Prophets, Wisemen and Scribes.) He Mat. 23. (...), 33, (...).
demands of those serpents and brood of vipers, how they can escape those
(...) and hoards of wrath they have been so long in (...)? They had a little
before delivered up John Baptist to Herod, and did unto him whatsoever they
would, Matthew. 17. 11, 12. Thereupon our Savior departed out of Judea into
Galilee, as John the Evangelist has it, lest he should suffer the same things
from them. For though Herod were Tetrarch of Galilee, and therefore it might
seem a (...) way for our Savior to keep from thence (after John was beheaded)
and to continue in Judea; yet forasmuch as he was but their slaughter-slave (as
(...) was to the rest of the Bishops of those days) Christ knew, that if he
did decline their fury, there was no such cause to fear Herod. Therefore when
some of the Pharisees (pretending good will to him) bad him pack thence, for
else Herod would kill him: he replied, Go Luk 13 31, 32, 33.
tell that fox, that I know both my time and my task, which he (...), (...),
qui pro Christo sanguinem suderunt.
would be doing at to day and to morrow (that is, as long as he listed) without
his leave. And the third day (when his hour was once come) he should be
sacrificed: but it must be in Jerusalem, and by the Pharisees: for it befell
not a Prophet to perish out of Jerusalem. There it was that Stephen was stoned,
James Bez.
(...) with the sword, Peter imprisoned, and destined to destruction, Paul
whipped and bound, many of the Saints punished often in every Synagogue, and
compelled by the Highpriests authority, either to blaspheme, or flee to
strange Cities, as appears in many places of the Acts, or rather passions of
the Apostles: for none (out of hell) ever suffered harder and heavier things
then they. See what S. Paul (...) of himself, and think the like of the rest, 2
Cor. 6. 5.

Verse 13. Ye are the salt of the earth.]
As salt keeps flesh from putrefying: so do the Saints the world; and are
therefore sprinkled up and down (here one and there one) to keep the rest from
rotting. Suillo pecori anima pro sale data, quae carnem (...).
servaret, ne putresceret, says Varro. Swine and swinish persons have their
souls for salt only, to keep their bodies from stinking (...) 15.
above ground. Christ and his people are somewhere called the (...). 89 (...).
soul of the world. The Sunts are called, all things; the Church, every
creature. Tabor and Hermon are put for East and (...): for God accounts of the
world by the Church, and upholds the world for the Churches sake. Look how he
gave Zoar to Lot and Act 27.
all the souls in the ship to Paul; so he does the rest of man kind to the
righteous. Were it not for such Jeho saphats, I would not 2 King. (...). 14.
look toward thee, nor see thee, said Elisha to Jehoram, says God (...). 6. 13.
to the wicked. The holy seed is, statumen terrae, says one Prophet, (...).
the earths substance or settlement: The righteous are fundamentum Prove. 10. 25.
Quia propter (...) est (...).
mundi, the worlds foundation, says another. I bear up the pillars of it,
says David. And it became a common proverb in the primitive times, Absque
(...) non staret (...): Merc.
But for the piety and prayers of Christians, the world could not (...). 75. 3.
(...). It is a good conclusion of Philo, therefore, (...), ut Lib 1. de
migration. Abra.
(...) in domo vir justus (...), ad calamitatum remedium: Let us pray that the
righteous may remain with us, for a preservative, as a pillar in the house, as
the salt of the earth. But as all good people, so good Ministers especially are
here said, (...) est: (...) a (...).
for their doctrine, to be the salt of the earth, and for their lives, The
light of the world. Salt has two things in it, (...) and (...).
saporem, sharpness and savourinesse. Ministers (...) (...) Tit. 1. 13.
men sharply, that they may be sound in the faith, and a sweet savor to God,
savoury meat, as that of Rebecca; a sweet meat-(...), meet for the masters
tooth, that he may eat and bless them. Cast they must their cruses full of
this holy salt into the un wholesome waters, and upon the barren grounds of men's
(...) (as Elisha once of Jericho) so shall God say the word that all be whole,
and it shall be done: No thought can pass between the receipt and the remedy.

But if the salt have lost his savor, etc.]
A loose or lazy Minister is the worst creature upon earth, so fit (...) no
place, as for hell: As unsavory salt is not fit for the dunghill, but makes
the very ground barren, whereupon it is cast. Who are now devils, but they
which once were Angels of light? Corruption optimi pessima, as the sweetest wine
makes the sowrest (...), and the (...) flesh is resolved into the vilest earth.
Woe to those (...) cleri, that, with Elies sons, cover foul sins under a
(...) (...). (...).
ephod: that neither spin nor labor, with the lilies, unless it be in their
own vineyards, little in Gods: that want either art or heart, will or skill, to
the work: being not able or not apt to teach; and so give occasion to those
black-mouthed Campians, to Campian. in (...).
cry out, Ministris eorum nihil vilius; Their Ministers are the vilest fellows
upon earth; God commonly casts off such, as incorrigible; for where with all
shall it be salted? there is nothing in nature that can restore unsavory salt
to its former nature. He will not only lay such by, as broken vessels; boring
out their right eyes, and drying up their right arms, i. e. bereaving them of
their former Zech. (...). 17.
abilities: but also he will cast dung upon their faces, Mal. 2. 3. so that, as
dung, men shall tread upon them (which is a thing not only calamitous, but
extremely ignominious) as they did upon the Popish Clergy: and the (...) shall
thank them when he has them in hell, for sending him so many souls, as
Matthew Paris Literas ex inferno missas commenti sunt quidam, in (...) satanas
omni (...) gratias (...) etc
(...) us he did those in the days of Hild brand, As for themselves, it grew
into a proverb, Pavimentum infernirasis (...) verticibus, and magnatum galeis
stratum esse, that hell was paved with the shaven crowns of Priests, and great
men's head pieces. God threatens to feed such with gall and wormwood, Jer. 23.
15. (...). Hist. Anno D. 1072.


Verse 14. Ye are the light of the world.]
And must therefore lead convincing lives, though ye incur never so much harred
of those (...), those Tenebriones of the world, that are (...) apaid so much
light should be diffused. But be ye blameless and harmless, the sons of
God, without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation (as the
Baptist was) among whom ye shine as lights in the world; as those great lights,
the Sun and Moon (so (...).
the word signifies) so that they that speak evil of you may be (...).
Phil. 2. 15.
judged as (...), as those Atlantes, that curse the rising Sun, because Plin.
it scorcheth them. Be as thestarres, at least; which are said to affect these
inferior bodies, by their influence, motion, and light. So good Ministers (as
fixed stars in the Churches firmament) by the influence of their lips, feed;
by the regular motion of their lives, confirm; and by the light of both,
inlighten many. And with such orient stars this Church of ours (blessed be
God,) like a bright sky in a clear evening, sparkleth and is bespangled,
though not in every part, yet in every zone and quarter of it. Rev. 17. 9.


A City that is set on a hill cannot be hid]
As that City that is (...).
mounted on seven hills, Roma Radix Omnium Malorum: and cannot be hid, but is
apparently discerned and discried to be that Rev. 18. 2.
great City Babylon: So Augustine and other writers call it; so Bellarmine and
Ribera the Jesuits yield it. Joannes de (...) in his Mare historiarum tells
us, that (...) the Emperor was once in a mind, to make Rome the seat of his
Empire, as of old it had been. And having built a stately Palace there, where
formerly had stood the Palace of Julian the Apostate, (the Romans being much
against it) he gave over the work. The (...), Zonaras and (...) report the
like of Constans, nephew to In Annal b.
Heraclius, 340 years before Otho. Now that these and the (...) took not (...),
Genebrard says it was a special pruvidence of God, to the end that the
kingdom of the Church foretold by Daniel, might have Rome for its seat. If he
had said, the kingdom of Antichrist foretold by St Paul, and likewise by John
the Divine, he had divined aright. (But to return from whence we are
digressed,) A Minister, whiles he (...) a private person, stood in the crowd,
as it were: but no sooner entered into his office, then he is (...) upon the
stage; (...) are upon him, as they were upon Saul, who was higher by head and
shoulders then the rest of the people. Now therefore as the tree of (...) was
sweet to the taste, and fair to the eye; and as in Absalom there was no (...),
from head to foot: so should it be with Gods Ministers. Singular holiness is
(...) of such; (...) those that quarter arms with the Lord Christ, whom they
serve (...) the Gospel. The Priests of the Law were to be neither (...) nor
defective. And the Ministers of the (...) (for the word, Priest, is never used
for such, by the Apostles, no nor by the (...) ancient Fathers, as Bellarmine
(...)) must be (...), (...) de (...). (...). (...).
stamps and paterns to the believers in word and conversation: every thing in
them is eminent and exemplary. The world (though unjustly) looks for Angelical
perfection in them: and as the (...) deviation in a star is soon noted, so is
it in such. (...) happy he, that, (with Samuel, Daniel, Paul and others) can be
acquitted and approved by himself, in private; in public, by others; in both,
(...) God: That can by his spotless conversation slaughter (...), stop (...)
open mouth, and draw (...) if not from the (...), (...) from the (...) of the
(...), of his (...) and (...). Mr Bradford the Martyr was had in so great (...)
and (...) with all good men, that a (...), (...) (...). (...). (...).
knew him but by fame, (...) his death: yea (...) number also of Papists
themselves wished heartily his life: And of Mr Bucer it is reported, that he
brought all men into such admiration of him, that neither his friends could
sufficiently praise him, nor his enemies in any point find fault with his
singular life, and Ibid.
sincere doctrine. Bishop Hoopers life was so good, that no kind of slander
(although diverse went about to reprove it) could fasten Ibid. 1366.
(...) morum (...), ut nec bostes (...). (...).
any fault upon him. And the man's life (says Erasmus, concerning Luther, whom
he greatly loved not) is approved of all men; neither is this any small
prejudice to his enemies, that they can tax him for nothing.

Verse 15. Neither do men light a candle, to put it under a (...), etc.]
Nor does God set up a Minister, and so light a lynk Of (...) comes (...),
(...) Lynk or Torch.
or torch (as the word here signifies) amongst a people, but for the diffusing
of the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ.
The heavenly bodies illighten not their own 2 Cor. 4 6.
(...) only, but send forth their beams far and near. The grace of (...)
Dicuntur (...) (...) repent (...) a oculos (...) in se convertunt. Chrysostom.
in 2 Timothy
God (that is, the doctrine of grace) that brings salvation, has appeared
(or shone-forth, as a candle on a candlestick, or as a beacon on a hill)
Teaching us to deny ungodliness, etc. The Priests lips must not only preserve
knowledge, but also present it to the people, who shall seek it at his mouth.
And (...) Baptist (that burning and shining light) was to give the knowledge of
salvation, not Tit. 2. 11, 12.
by way of infusion (for so God only) but by way of instruction. Luk 1. 77.
The same word (in the holy tongue) that signifies to understand, (...)
signifies also to instruct, and to (...). They that teach others what they
know themselves (as Abraham did those of his (...) Genesis 18. 19.
and family) shall know more of Gods mind, yea they shall Psalm. 25. 12.
be (as Abraham was) both of his Court and Council. But the Lord likes not such
empty vines, as (with Ephraim) bear fruit to themselves: Hos. 10. 1.
such idle servants, as thrust their hands into their bosoms, dig their talents
into the earth, hide their candles under a bed or bushel: living and lording it
as if their lips were their own: barrelling and hoarding up their gifts, as
rich cormorants do their corn: refusing to give down their milk, as cursed kine:
or resolving to speak no more, then what may breed applause and admiration of
their worth and wisdom, as proud self-seekers. The (...) 1 Cor. 12. 7.
of the spirit was given to profit withal. And the Philippians, (...)
Phil. 1. 7.
were all partakers (or compartners) of St Paul's grace; which 2 Cor. 1. 11.
he elsewhere calls the gift bestowed on us, for many, that we Gal. 5. 13.
may serve one another in love; yea make our selves servants to all, 1. Cor. 9.
(...).
that we may (...) some. Certainly the gifts of such shall not perish in the
use, or be the worse for wearing, but the better and brighter; as the torch by
tapping: they shall grow in their hands, as the (...) in our Saviors, as the
widows oil, as that great mountain of salt in Spain, de quo quaentum demas,
tantum (...), (...).
which the more you take from it, the more it increases: Or lastly (...)
Epist. (...) ad Eustath.
as the fountains or wells, which, by much drawing, are made better and
sweeter, as St Basil observes, and common experience confirms.

And it gives light to all that are in the house.]
He that allows his servant a great candle, or two or three lesser lights,
looks for more work. God sets up his Ministers, as candles on the candlestick
of his Church, to waste themselves (wax and week) for the lighting of men into
life eteruall. Let them therefore see to it, that they work hard, while the
light lasts, lest their candl:stick Rev. 2.
be removed, lest the night surprise them on the sudden, when none Joh. 12.
can work: lest they pay dear for those precious graces of his Spirit, in his
faithful Ministers, spent, or rather spilt upon them: (...) God cause the sun
to go down at noon, and darken the earth in the clear day, A mos 8. 9.

Verse 16. Let your light so shine before men.]
We use to (...) the picture of a dear friend in a conspicuous place, that it
may appear we rejoice in it, as an ornament to us: so should we the image of
Christ and his graces. And as pearls (though formed and found in the water,)
are like the heavens in clearness: so should all, but especially Ministers:
Their faces should shine, as Moses when he came from the mount: their feet
should be beautiful, Romans 10. 15. their mouths (as heaven in the Revelation)
should never open but some great matter should follow: their lives should be
(as one speaks of Joseph's life) caelum quoddam lucidissimis virtutum (...).
(...), a very heaven sparkling with variety of virtues, as with so many bright
stars. The High Priest of the Law came forth to the people, in habit, more
like a God then a man: And Alexander the great took him for no less, but fell
at Os (...) Deo (...).
his feet, meeting him upon his way to Jerusalem. There are that Virg.
hold, that by his linens, he was taught purity; by his girdle, discretion;
(...).
by his embroidered coat, heavenly conversation; by his golden bells, sound
doctrine; by his pomegranates, fruitfullnesse in good works; by his
shoulder-peeces, patience in bearing other men's infirmities; by his
breast plate, continual care of the D. (...).
Church; by his mitre, a right intention; and by the golden plate upon it, a
bold and wise profession of Holiness to the Lord. The Apostle also is exact,
in forming a minister of the Gospel: For he 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4. expounded.
must be 1. Blameless, such as against whom no just exception can (...).
be laid. 2. Vigilant, pale and wan again with watching and working. 3. Sober,
or temperate, one that can contain his passions, (...).
master his own heart, and keep a mean. 4. Modest, neat and (...).
comely in his bodily attire, neither curious nor careless thereof, but
venerable in all his behavior; and one that keeps a fit decorum in all
things. 5. Hospital and harberous. Quicquid habent (...).
Clerici, pauperum est, says Hierome. 6. Able and apt to Hier. ad (...) PP.
teach, as Bishop (...), Dr Taylour, and Mr Bradford; who (...).
preached every sunday and holyday ordinarily: and as (...), Origin and some
others, who preached every day in the week. 7. Not given to wine, no Ale-stake,
as those drunken (...).
Priests the two sons of Aaron, who died by the fire of God, for (...). 10.
(...). (...)
coming before him with strange fire. 8. No striker: neither (...).
with hand nor tongue, to the just grief or disgrace of any. 9. Not greedy of
filthy lucre, so as to get gain by evil arts; but honest, plain-dealing, and
(as it follows in the text) patient, or aequanimous: easily parting (...) his
right, for peace sake, and ever preferring (...).
equity before extremity of Law. 10. Not a brawler, or (...). (...).
common barretter, a wrangler, as Ismael. 11. Not covetous: not (...). 5 cap.
10. (...).
doting on his wealth, or trusting to his wedge. Not without money, but
without the love of money. The Apostle here distinguishes, greedy of filthy
lucre, which is in getting, from (...) which consists in pinching, and saving.
12. (...) that rules well So 1 Cor. (...). 10.
in his own house, etc. For the childrens faults (...) upon the parents, and
the servants sin is the masters shame. Besides, every man is that in
religion, that he is relatively; and so much true goodness he has, as he
shows at home. 13. Not a novice, a young scholar, rude and ungrounded: or a
tender-young plant in (...),
Christianity (as the word signifies) that may be bent any way: but a
well-grown oak, stable and steady. 14. Lastly, he must have ver. 7.
a good report of them which are without; which he cannot but have, if
qualified, as abovesaid. The same God which did at first put an awe of man in
the fiercest creatures, has stamped in the (...) hearts an awful respect to
his faithful Ministers: so as even they that hate them, cannot (...) but
honor them, as Saul did Samuel; Darius Daniel; Nebuchadnezzar the three
Worthies. Natural conscience cannot but stoop and do homage to Gods image
fairly stamped upon the natures and works of his people. So that when men see in
such that which is above the ordinary strain, and their own expectation, their
hearts ache within them, many times; and they stand much amazed at the height of
their spirits, and the majesty that shines in their faces. Either they are
convinced, as Nebuchadnezzar, Darius, and Diocletian (who laid down the Empire,
out of a (...) discontent and despair of ever conquering the constancy of
Christians by any bloody persecution:) or (which is better) they are converted,
and seeing such good works, they glorify God our heavenly father, as Justine
Martyr, who (...) etc (...) (...). 133.
confesses of himself, that by beholding the Christians piety in life, and
patience in death, he gathered their doctrine to be the truth, and glorified
God in the day of his visitation. For there is no Christian (says Athanagoras
in his Apology to the Heathens,) that is (...) Apolog.
not good, unless (...) be an hypocrite, and a pretender only to religion.
Vere magnus est Deus Christianorum, said one Calocerius a Heathen, beholding
the sufferings of the Primitive Martyrs. And it is reported of one Cecilia a
Virgin, that by her constancy and exhorations, before, and at her martyrdom,
four hundred were converted. Chrysostom calls good works unanswerable
syllogisines, invincible demonstrations to confute and convert Pagans. Julian
the Apostate could not but confess, quod Christiana religio propter
Christianorum erga omnes beneficentiam (...) est: Christian religion spread by
the holiness of those that professed it.

Verse 17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law]
As the Pharisees slandered him, only to bring him into hatred with the people.
And as, to this day, they maliciously traduce him in their writings. Rabbi
Maimonides in his Misnah, has a whole chapter Lib. (...) (...). de (...).
(...).
concerning the punishment of the false-Prophet, that teaches that he came to
destroy the Law: Calumniare audacter: aliquid saltem adhaerebit, said
Machiavel. A depraver (says Plato) is (...) nominis, a devil, says Paul. It
is the property of defamitions, (...) Tim. 3. 3.
to leave a kind of lower estimation, many times, even where they are not
believed.

I am not come to (...)]
Gr. To loose, dissolve, or unty the Law, as those Rebels, Psalm. 2. 3. sought
to do, but with ill success. (...)
For it tyeth and hampereth men, with an Aut (...), aut patiendum, Gal. 3.
either you must have the direction of the Law, or the correction: either do
it, or die for it. Thus the Law is a schoolmaster, and such a one as that, that
Livy and (...) speak of in Italy, that brought forth his scholars to (...); who
had he not been more merciful then otherwise, they had all perished. The
comfort is, that it is a schoolmaster to Christ, who became bond to the Law to
redeem us, that were under the Law, from the rigor, bondage, irritation and
condemnation thereof. So that the use that now we have of it, is only to be as
Paul's sisters son, to show us our danger, and to send us to the chief Captain
of our salvation, who came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it.

But to fulfill it]
To complete and accomplish it, for he fulfilled (...)
all righteousness, and finished the work that was given him Joh. 17. 4.
to do. A new commandment also gave he unto us, that we love one another:
which love is the complement of the Law, and the supplement of the Gospel.
Besides, Christ is the end of the Law to Romans 10. 4,
every one that believes: and commands us no more, then he (...). (...). 7.
causes us to do; yea, he does all his works in us and for us, says the
Church, Isa 26. 12. Thus Christ still fulfills the Law in his people; into
whose hearts he puts a disposition answerable to the outward Law in all
things: as in the wax is the same impression that was upon the seal. This is
called the law of the mind, Romans 7. and answers the law of God without, as
lead answers the mould, as tally answers tally, as Indenture, Indenture. Heb.
8. 8 9, 10. with 2 Cor. 3. 2, 3. Romans 6. 17.

Verse 18. For verily I say unto you.]
This is his ordinary asseveration, Capell of Tempt.
which he uses in matters of weight only. For a vain protestation comes to as
much, for ought I know (says a Worthy Divine) (...).
as a vain oath. Quasi bitumine ferruminata.


Till heaven and earth passe]
And pass they must: The visible 2 Pet. 3. 20.
heavens being defiled with our sins (that are even (...) unto them, Esse
quoque in fatis (...), etc. Metam. lib. (...). Cicer. de (...). deor.
as Babylons sins are said to be, Rev. 18. 5.) shall be purged with the fire of
the last day, as the vessels of the sanctuary were, that held the sin-offering.
The earth also, and all the works that are therein shall be burnt up. And this
the Heathens had heard of, and hammerd (...), propter (...); igni, propter
teporem (...). Ludolf. de (...) lib. (...). cap. 87.
at, that the world should, at length, be (...) with (...) as Ovid has it, and
Lucretius disputes it according to the natural causes. But Ludolfus of the
life of Christ does better; when he tells us, that of those two destructions
of the (...), the former was by water, for the heat of their lust, and the
later shall be by (...), for the coldness of their love.

One jot]
Which is the least letter in the Alphabet. (...) calls it a half-letter; and
Luther renders this text, Ne minima Nescit (...) breve (...) sacrae.
quidem litera, not so much as the least letter.

Or one tittle]
Not a hair-stroke, an accent on the top of an Hebrew Prove.
letter, the bending or bowing thereof, as a little bit on the top of a horn.
The (...) have summed up all the letters in the bible; to show that one hair of
that sacred head is not perished.

Shall in no wise pass from the Law.]
The ceremonial Law (...) a shadow of good things to come, says the Apostle:
this good (...) (...). 10. (...).
was Christ. When the Sun is behind, the shadow is before: when the Sun is
before, the shadow is (...). So was it in Christ, to them of old (says one.)
This Sun was behind, and therefore (...) Law or shadow was before. To us under
the Gospel, the Sun (...) before, and so now the (...) of the Law (those
shadows) (...) behind, yea vanished away. Before the passion of Christ
(wherein they all determined) the ceremonies of the Law were (...) dead nor
deadly, says Aquinas. After the passion, till such time (...) (...), (...).
the Gospel was preached up and down by the Apostles, though Non (...), (...).
(...), and (...).
dead, yet (for the time) they were not deadly. But since that, they are not
only dead, but deadly to them that use them, as the Jews to this day. As for
the (...) Law, it is eternal, and abides for (...) in heaven, says David.
And albeit some special duties of (...). 116. (...).
certain Commandments shall cease when we come to heaven; yet the substance of
every one remains. We live by the same Law (in effect) as the Saints above
do; and do Gods will on earth, as they in Heaven. God himself cannot dispenle
with the (...) of those laws, that be moral in themselves (because he has sin
by nature, not by precept only) such are all the ten Commandments, but the
fourth. The fourth Commandment (say Divines) is moral by precept, not by
nature: and so, the Lord of the Sabbath may (...) with the literal breach of
the Sabbath. Of all the moral (...).
Law, it is the opinion of some of our best Divines, that since the (...).
(...).
coming of Christ it binds us not, out of any foregoing (...), as delivered
to Moses in the mount; but as it is (...) to the Law of nature, which is common
to Jews and Gentiles: and as it was explained and confirmed by our Savior
Christ in the Gospel. To conclude, the ministerials of this Law shall pass
away, together with this life: the substantials shall (...) into our (...)
natures, and shine therein, as in a mirror for ever.

Verse 19. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these (...) Commandments.]
So the Pharisees called and counted these They deemed it as great a sin to eat
with unwashen hands, (...) to commit (...).
weightier things of the Law, in comparison of their tithings, Matthew. 23 23.
and traditions, Matthew. 15. 3. But albeit some Commandments are greater then
some, as those of the first table (in meet comparison) then those of the
second: yet that Pharisaicall diminution of Commandments, that idle distinction
of sins into Gnats and Camels, venial and mortal, motes and mountains, (...),
Jewish Antiq. page (...).
is by no means to be admitted. The least sin is contrary to Charity, as the
least drop of water is to fire. The least missing of the (...) quaedam peccata
adeo (...) in se and per se (...), ut factores, (...), nec (...), (...), nec
(...) exosos (...). (...) de (...).
mark is an error, as well as the greatest; and both alike for kind, though
not for degrees. Hence lesser sins are reproached by the name of the greater:
malice is called murder: lustful looks, adultery: sitting at idolatrous
feasts (though without all intent of worsh p) (...). See (...) 31. 27, 28.
Disobedience in never so small a matter (as eating a forbidden apple, gathering
a few sticks on the Sabbath Day, looking into, or touching the Ark) has been
(...) punished. Though the matter seem small, yet thy malice (...) presumption
is great, that wilt in so small a thing incur the Jesus t.
(...) so high displeasure. What could be a (...) Commandment (...)
(...) to abstain from blood? yet is their obedience herein urged (...).
with many words, and that with this reason, as ever they will have A (...) of
the mark, or (...) the rule.
God to do any thing for them or theirs. The whole Law is (say the Schoolmen)
but one copulative. Any condition not observed, (...) the whole lease; and any
Commandment not obeyed, subjects 1 Cor. 10. 14.
a man to the curse. And as some one good action has (...) Deuteronomy. 12. 22, 23,
24.
ascribed and assured to it, as peacemaking, Matthew. 5. 9. so he that shall
keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
of all. When some of the Israelites had broken the fourth Commandment, (...).
3. (...).
God challenges them for all, Exodus 16. 28. Where (...). 2 10.
then will they appear that plead for this Zoar, for that Rimmon? a merry lie,
a petty oath, an idle errand on the Lords day, etc. Sick bodies love to be
gratified with some little bit, that favors the disease. But meddle not with
the murdering morsels of sin; there will be bitterness in the end. Jonathan
had no sooner tasted of the honey with the tip of his rod only, but his head
was forfeited. There is a (...) fulness in sin, a lie in these vanities; give
Heb. 3. 13.
them an inch, they will take an ell. Let the serpent but get in his head, Jon. 2.
8.
he will shortly wind in his whole body. He plays no small game, but means
us much hurt, how modest soever he seems to be. It is no (...) then the
Kingdom that he seeks, by his maidenly (...) as Adoniah. As therefore we must
submit to (...), so we must resist the devil, without expostulation, 1 Pet. 5.
7. throw water on the fire of temptation, though but to some smaller sin, and
stamp on it too. Behold how great a matter a little fire kindles, Jam. 2. 5.
says St James! A little poison in a cup, a little leak in a ship, or breach
in a wall may ruin all. A little wound at the heart, and a little sin in the
soul may hide Gods face from us, as a cloud. Therefore Lam. 3. 43.
as the Prophet, when a cloud as big as a man's hand only appeared, knew that
the whole heaven would be overcovered, and (...) the King to betake himself to
his charret: so let us to (...) shelter; for a company comes, as she said, when
she bore her (...) Gad: After Jonathan and his Armor-bearer came the whole
host: and when Dalilah had prevai'ed, came the Lords of the Philistims. He that
is fallen from the top of a ladder, cannot stop at the second round. Every sin
hardneth the heart, and gradually disposes it to greater offenses: as lesser
wedges make way for bigger. After Ahaz had made his wicked Altar, and offered
on it, he brought it into the Temple; first setting it on the brazen Altar;
afterward bringing it into the house, and then lastly, setting it on 2 King.
16. 17, 13, 14.
the Northside of Gods Altar: Withstand fin therefore at first, and live by
Solomon's rule, Give not water passage, no not a little. Silence sin, as our
Savior did the (...); and suffer it not to solicit thee. If it be
importunate, answer it not a word, as (...) would not Rabshakeh: or give it a
short and sharp answer, yea the blew eye, that St Paul did. This shall be no
grief unto thee, hereafter, (...).
nor offense of heart, as she told David; the contrary way. 1 (...). 9. 27.
It repented St Austin of his very excuses made to his parents, being (...)
ividum reddo (...) meum. Aug.
a child, and to his schoolmaster, being a boy. He retracts his ironyes,
because they had the appearance of a lie, because they looked 1 Samuel 25. 31.
ill-favouredly. B. Ridley repents of his playing at Chesse, as wasting (...).
lib. 1. cap. 19.
too much time. Bradford bewaileth his dullness and unthankfullnesse, David's
heart smote him for cutting the lap of (...) Retract. lib. 1. cap. 1.
coat only; and that for none other intent, then to clear his own Act. and
(...).
innocence: that in which Saul commended him for his moderation. There are some
that would shrink up sin into a narrow scantling; and bring it to this, if they
could, that none do evil, but they that are in goales. But David approves his
sincerity by his respect Psalm. 18. 21, 22.
to all Gods Commandments, and has this commendation, that he (...).
did all the wills of God. Solomon also bidds, count nothing little Acts 13.
Prove. 7. 2.
that God commands, but keep Gods precepts as the sight of the eye. Those
venturous spirits, that dare live in any known sin, aspire not to immortality,
Phil. 2. 12. they shall be least, that is, nothing at all in the Kingdom of
heaven.

And teaches men so.]
As the Pharisees did, and all the old and modern heresiarches. In the year
1559. it was maintained by (...) paradoxon, quod (...) opera sint perniciosa ad
(...). (...). (...).
one David George (that Arch heretic) that good works were pernicious and
destructory to the soul. The Anabaptists and Socinians have broached many
doctrines of devils, not fit to be once named amongst Christians. The
Pneumatomachi of old, set forth a base book of the Trinity, under St Cyprians
name, and sold it at (...).
a very cheap rate, that the poorest might be able to reach it and read it, as
(...) complains. In those Primitive times, those In Apologet.
capital haeresies (concerning the Trinity, and Christ's Incarnation) (...) res
suit, esse Christianum.
were so generally held, that it was a witty thing then, to be a right
believer, as Erasmus phraseth it. All the world, in a manner, was Ingemuit
orbis, and miratus (...) se sactum esse Arianum.
turned Arian, as St Hierome has it. (...) tells us, that the (...) being
desirous to be instructed in the Christian religion, requested of (...) the
Emperor to send them some to preach the Hier.
faith (...). He, being himself an (...), sent them Arian Doctors, Iuslo
itaque (...) Valens a Gothis crematus est, quorum (...) anemis (...) errorum
virus (...).
who set up that heresy amongst them. By the just judgment of God therefore,
the same Valens, being overthrown in battle by the (...), was also burnt by
them in a poor cottage, whether (...) had fled for shelter. Heretics have an
art of pythanology, whereby they cunningly insinuate into men's affections, and
many times (...) wade before they teach, as it is said of the (...). It was
therefore well and wisely done of Placilla the Empress, Tertullian.
when her husband Theodosius senior desired to conser with (...) lib. 7. cap.
6, 7.
Eunomius, she earnestly disl (...) him; lest being perverted by his speeches,
he might fall into his haeresie.

Shall be least in the Kingdom of heaven]
That is, nothing at all there: as Matthew 20. 16. Either of these two sins here
(...), exclude out of heaven; how much more both? If single sinners that break
Gods Commandments, and no more, shall be damned, those that teach men so, shall
be double damned: If God will be avenged on the former sevenfold, (...) he
will on the later, seventy-fold sevenfold. When the beast, and the Kings of
the earth, and their armies shall be gathered together, (toward the end of the
world) to make war against Christ, the multitud shall (...) with the sword, the
poor seduced people, that were carried along, many of them, (as those
two-hundred that followed Absalom out of Jerusalem) in the simplicity of their
hearts, and (...). 15 11.
understood not the matter, shall have an easier judgment. But the beast was
taken and the false Prophet, and were both cast (...) (...) exitij (...), quo
(...) prae reliquis (...). (...) in loc.
(not slain with the sword, and so cast to the infernal vultures to be
devoured by them, as a prey; but) cast alive that they may feel those most
exquisite pains, into a lake of fire burning with brimstone, wherewith (...)
are encompasled, as fish, cast into a pond, are with water. Rev. 19. 20, 21.


But whosoever shall do, and teach them.]
First do, and thereby prove what that god, holy and acceptable will of God
is: and (...). 12. 2, 3.
then (...) others what himself has felt and found good by experience. Come,
and I will tell you what God has done for my Psalm 66.
soul. Come, children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear Psalm. 34.
of the Lord. I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way which (...). 51,
(...).
thou shall go: I will guide thee with mine eye. I will teach (...) Acts 24.
thy ways; and sinners shall be coverted unto thee. Charity Psalm. 32.
is no churl; but cries, I would to God that all that hear me Joh 1.
this day, were as I am. Andrew calls Simon, and Philip, (...): Joh. 4.
the Samaritesse, her neighbors: and those good souls, one another, Hos. 6. 1.
The love of Christ constrained the Apostles; 2 Cor. 5 11.
they could not but speak the things they had heard and felt: Act 5.
Luke 1.
as little as the holy Virgin, could conceal the joy she had conceived upon the
conception of God her Savior. They could not but be as (...) in building
stair-(...) for heaven, as these Pharisees were in digging descents to hell.
Blind guides they were of the blind, and both fell into the ditch, but the
guides fell undermost. By corrupt teachers Satan catches men, as a cunning
fisher by one fish catches another, that he may feed upon both. Here they
corrupted the Law by their false glosses, as our Savior sets forth. But where
they kept Moses chair warm, sat close and said sooth; All that Mat. 23. (...),
3.
they bid you observe, that observe and do, says he: for a bad man may cry a
good commodity; and a stinking breath sound a trumpet with great commendation.
Balaam, Satan's spelman, may be (for the time) Christ's spokesman, and preach
profitably to others, though himself be a castaway: as water, when it has
cleanfed 1 Cor. 9. ult.
other things, is cast into the sink. Hear such therefore, says our Savior,
but do not after their works, for they say and do not: they speak by the
talent, but work by the ounce; their tongues are bigger Odi (...) ignava
opera, (...) sententia. Ennius.
then their hands: their lives give the lie to their lips; they shun the way
themselves (with that Priest and Levite) which they showed to others, when
mercy should be showed to the (...). Arist. (...). Etbic. cap. penult.
wounded man: Out of their own mouths therefore will God condemn them. And it
is a fearful thing to fall into the punishing hands of the living God. As for
those burning and shining lights, that have Urim and thummim, bells and
pomegranates, trumpets of sound doctrine, in one hand, and lamps of good life
in the other, as Gideons soldiers; they shall be great in the Kingdom of
heaven. He that holds them in his right (...) here, shall set them at Rev. 1.
20.
his right hand hereafter; and give them to hear, as Ezekiel did, the noise of
a great rushing, saying, Blessed be the glory of the (...). 3. 4.
(...).

Verse 20. Except your righteousness shall exceed the (...) of the Scribes and
Pharisees]
And yet they went far, 1. In works of piety, for they made long prayers, etc.
2. In works of charity, for they gave much alms. 3. In works of equity, for
they tithed (...), anise and cummin. 4. In works of courtesy; for they invited
Christ often, etc. They were the most exact and (...).
accurate sect of that religion, as St Paul (who once was one of Acts 26. 5.
them) bears them witness. And so carried away the heart of (...) sum: i. e.
(...) sentio.
the people, that there was no holy man that was not termed a (...). And
therefore among the seven kinds of Pharisees in (...) Talmud (whereof one sort
was Pharisaeus Quid debeo facere, (...) tract, (...). cap. 3.
and faciam illud, such a one was he, Luke 18. 18.) they make Goodwins Heb.
Antiq. (...) 49.
Abraham a Pharisee of love, Job a Pharisee of fear, etc. Yea, it was commonly
conceited among the Jews, that if but two of all the world were to go to
heaven, the one should be a Scribe, and the other a Pharisee. And what high
opinions they nourished of themselves, may be seen in that proud Pharisee, Luke
18. Like unto whom, how many civil Justiciaries are there amongst us? who if
they can keep their Church, give an alms, bow their knee, say their prayers,
pay their tithes, and, once a year, receive the Sacrament (it matters not how
corrupt hearts, how filthy tongues, how false hands they bear) can thank God
for their good estate to Godward, and take up their seats, as it were, in
heaven aforehand. But our Savior says nay to it in this text; yea, sets a
double bolt (...).
upon heaven gates, to keep out such. And when they shall come Ye (...) not
(...).
knocking and bouncing, with Lord, Lord, open unto us, he shall say, discedite,
depart ye: or as once he did to their fellow-Pharisees,) Matthew. 7.
(...) are they which justified your selves before men; that God knew Luke 16.
15.
your hearts. And you shall now know (to your small comfort) that that which is
highly esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God. Civility
rested in, is but a beautiful abomination, a smooth way to hell. The world
highly applauds it, because somewhat better then outrageous wickedness; as a
cab of dovesdung was sold in Samaria's famine at a very dear rate, etc.

Verse 11. Ye have heard that it was said by them of old]
Antiquity (...)
it is venerable: and of witnesses, Aristotle witnesses, that the more ancient
they are, the more to be credited, as less corrupt. (...). (...). (...). (...)
New things are vain things, says the Greek proverb. And the Historian
condemns his countrymen, as despisers of old customs, (...). (...), (...),
non sine (...).
and carried after new. But as old age is a crown, if it be found in the way of
righteousness, Prove. 16. 31. and not otherwise: So may it be said of these
Kadmonin or the old Rabbis, later then Ezra, whom our Savior here confuteth.
Much might have been attributed to their authority, had they not rested upon
the bare letter of (...) Priscorum (...) porticus tempti, at cor (...) men
acus. (...).
the Law, and wrested it sometimes to another meaning. Antiquity disjoined from
verity, is but filthy hoarinesse: and deserves no more reverence then an old
leacher; which is so much the more odious, because old. And as Manna, the
longer it was kept, against the command of God, the more it stanke; so do
errors and enormities. Laban pretends antiquity for his god, in his oath to
(...) apists (...) much of (...), as once the Gibeonites did of old (...) and
moldy (...).
Jacob, The God of Abraham, says he, and the God of Nahor, the God of their
father judge between us. Bu Jacob swear by the (...) of his father Isaac. He
rises not higher (...) his father; and yet doubts not, but he worshipped God
aright. It Is no good (...) to say, we will be of the same religion with our
forefathers; (...) we can approve it right by the holy Scriptures. Plus valet
malum Gen (...). (...). (...) (...).
inolitum quam bonum insolitum: And that Tyrannus, trium literarum mos, too
often carries it against truth: The image that fell down from Jupiter (for
which there was so much ado at (...), (...) Act. (...).
Acts 19.) (...) said by the Town-clarke, to be (...) as could not be spoken
against with any reason. And why? because it was wonderful ancient (as Pliny
tells us.) For whereas the Temple (...) lib 16.
of Diana had been seven several times reedified, this image was cap. 40.
never changed: and thence grew the (...) great superstition, by the (...)
quissnunquam (...).
(...) of the Priests: as likewise the Ancilia among the Romans, and (...)
among the Asians. But what says a Noble writer? Antiquity must have no more
authority then what it can maintain. Did not our predecessors hold the torrid
Zone (...)? did they not confine the world in the Ark of Europe, Asia and
Africa, till Noah's dove Columbus discovered land, etc?

Thou shall not kill: and whosoever kills shall be in danger of judgement]
That is, it shall be questioned whether it be fit he (...) put to death or
not. Thus as Eve dallied with the command, saying, Ye shall not eat thereof,
lest ye die (when God had said, Ye shall surely die, whenever ye eat) and so
fell into the devils danger: In like sort, these Jew-doctours had corrupted the
very letter of the Law, and made that doubtful and questionable, which God had
plainly and peremptorily pronounced to be present death. Before the flood
indeed, some do guess and gather out of Genesis 9. that the punishment of
murder, and such like heinous offenses, was only excommunication from the holy
assemblies, and exclusion out of their fathers families, as Cain was cast out
from the presence of the Lord, that is, from his fathers house, where God was
sincerely served. Sure it is, that no sooner was the world repaired, then this
Genesis 9. 6.
Law was established; Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be
shed. And this reason is rendered; for in the image of God made he him. That
image (its true) is by the fall defaced and abolished; yet are there some
relics thereof still abiding, which God will not have destroyed. If any
object, Why then should the Object.
murderer be destroid, since he also is made in the image of God? The answer is
easy, because the murderer has destroyed the Answ.
image of God in his neighbor, and turned himself into the image of the devil.
Besides, God has indispensably and peremptorily commanded it. He that sheddeth
the blood of any person, hasteneth Prove. 28. 17.
to the grave, let no man hinder him. Say he (...) the stroke of humane
justice, yet the Barbarians could say (as of Paul, whom they took for a
murderer) that divine vengeance will not suffer Acts 28. 4.
him to live. Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their Psalm.
(...). 23.
days. Usually either God executes them with his own immediate hand, as it
might be easy to instance in many bloody persecutours and others: or he makes
them their own deathsmen, as Pilate: or sets some other aworke to do it for
them. As (among other examples of Gods dealing in this kind) (...) 1586. Walsh
Bishop of Osserey in Ireland, a man of honest life, with his two servants, were
stabbed to death by one Dulland an Irish old soldier, whilst he gravely
admonished him of his foul adulteries: And the wicked murderer escaped away,
who had now committed 45 murders with his own hand. At length, revenge
pursuing him, he was by another bloody fellow Donald Spaman, shortly Camdens
Elizab. fol. 191.
after slain himself, and his head presented to the Lord Deputy. Neither can I
here omit (that which I had almost forgotten) the just hand of God upon that
villainous parricide Alphonsus Diazius the Spaniard, who (after he had, like
another Cain, killed his own 1 John 3. (...).
natural brother John Diazius, merely because he had renounced Senarclaeus de
morte loan.
Popery, and became a professor of the Reformed Religion, and (...).
was not only not punished, but highly commended of the Romanists Anno. 1551.
for his heroical achievements) desperately hanged himself at Seipsum
desperabundus Tridenti de collo (...) suspendit.(...). Theatr. bist. p. 414.
Trent, upon the neck of his own mule, being haunted and hunted by the furies
of his own conscience.

Verse 22. But I say unto you.]
This is his teaching with authority, and not as the Scribes. To their false
glosses he (...) his own sole and single authority. He delivers himself like a
Lawgiver: but I say unto you, and you shall take it on my bare word, (...). lib
17.
without any further pawn or pledge. He that is (...), is likewise Lud. Rab.
part. 2. de martyribus.
(...). The Pharisees Phylacteries were not so broad, but their expositions of
the Law were as narrow; which therefore our (...).
Savior lets out and rectifieth. (...) 365. sect. 2.


That whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause]
Rashly giving way to unruly passion, and not taking reason into (...), cedo:
(...) cedit affectibus, a leo ut (...) in (...) non (...).
counsel, as the word here signifies. This is a degree of (...) that the (...)
dreamt not of, and a mortal sin, though the Papists conclude it venial from
this very text, because not threatened (as calling fool) with hellfire. But
judgment, counsel, and Gehenna, (...). in Romans 13. 4.
note not here different punishments, but only diverse degrees of the damnation
of hell, which is the just hire of the least sin. There is a lawful anger, as
that of our Savior, Mar. 3. 5. and Mat. 16. 22. Ephesians. 4. 26.
And we are bid be (...), and sin not. Now he that would be angry and not sin,
must (for the matter) be angry at nothing but at sin, and that, not so much as
it is an injury to us, as an offense to God. (...). 3. 19.
Next, for the measure, he must not be so transported with anger, as to be
unfitted and indisposed thereby, either for prayer to God, or pity to men.
Moses was very angry at the fight of the golden Exodus 32. 19 -- 31.
Calfe, yet could pray. Our Savior was heartily angry at the Pharisees, Mar.
3. 5.
but withal grieved at the hardness of their hearts. Jonas on (...).
the other side, through anger, thought to have prayed, but fell into Jonas 4.
1.
a brawle with God, quarreled him for his kindness; and had little pity on so
many poor Ninevites; though afterward he yielded to better reason, and showed
his submission, by laying his hand upon verse. (...).
his mouth, and saying no more. Anger is a tender virtue (says one) and such
as, by reason of our unskilfullnesse, may be easily corrupted and made
dangerous. The wrath of man (usually) works not Iam. 1.
the righteousness of God: nay it lets in the devil, that old (...), Ephel. 4.
16.
and is the murderer of the heart (as here) making way to the murder of the
tongue and hand. It is the match to receive the fire of contention, and the
bellows to blow it up, Prove. 15. 18. Now where strife is, there is confusion,
and every evil work, not murder Iam. 3. 16.
excepted.

And whosoever shall say unto his brother, Racha]
Anger (as fire) (...) le (...).
if smothered, will languish, but let out, will flame into further mischief.
Cease from anger, says David, for else thou will fret thy psalm 37. 8.
self to do evil. And if thou have done evil (or played the fool, as (...) Pro.
(...). 32, 33.
read it) says Agur, in lifting up thy self (and puffing against expounded.
thy (...), against whom in thine anger thou have devised some (...).
mischief) if thou have thought evil against him, yet lay thy hand upon thy
mouth: say not so much as Racha, utter not any so much as an inarticulate
voice, snuff not, snort not, spet not, as he, Deuteronomy. 25 9. stamp not with
clapping of the hands, as Balac, say not so Numb. (...). 10.
much as fie, to thine offending brother, says Theophylact; thou (...).
him not, says Chrysostom, call him not silly or shallow, one that (...).
(...)
wants brains, says Irenaeus, qui expuit (...), as the word signifies, (...)
pro (...).
if it signify any thing. Surely (says Agur, setting forth the (...) of his
former precept by a double similitude) the churning (...).
of milk brinketh forth butter, and the wringing of the nose brings forth
blood: so the forcing of wrath (the giving it its forth and full scope, and not
suppressing it when it first begins to boil in a man's breast) brings forth
strife. Let therefore the first heat of passion settle, and that darkness
pass, that has clouded the mind. Ut fragilis glacies, occidat ira mora.
Walk into the garden with Ahashuerosh, into the field with Jonathan, when his
father 1 Samuel (...). 24.
had provoked him to wrath: (against the Apostles precept.) Ephesians. 6. 4.
Divert to some other company, place, business, about something thou can be
most earnest at. Give not place to wrath, no not a little: Quid (...), diabole
nequissime, ad (...) civitatem perturbandam accessisti? dicit (...) Gul.
Farello.
(...) God before thy tumultuating passions, and so silence them; (...) worse
will follow.

But whosoever shall say, Thou Fool, etc.]
How much more, Rogue, Bastard, Devil, and other such foul and opprobrious
terms, not fit to be mentioned among Saints, yet common with many (...) as
would be counted so. What make thou here, thou archdevil troubling our City?
said the Bishop of Geneva to Farellus, seeking to set up the Reformed Religion.
And a Spanish (...) disputing with us about the Eucharist (says Beza) called
us vulpes, serpents and simias, foxes, serpents and jackanapeses. Contrarily,
in Epist. ad Calvin.
it is observed of Archbishop Cranmer, that he never raged so far with any of
his houshold-servants, as once to call the (...) of them varlet or knave in
anger; much less to reprove a stranger Act. and (...). 1692.
with any reproachful word; least of all did he deal blows among them, as B.
Bonner: who in his visitation, because the bells rung not at his coming into
Hadham, nor the Church was dressed up as it should, called Dr Bricket knave and
heretic: And there withal, whether thrusting or striking at him, so it was,
that he gave Sr Thomas Josselin Knight (who then stood next to the Bishop) a
good flewet upon the upper part of the neck, even under his ear: whereat he was
somewhat astonished at the suddenness of the quarrel for that time. At last he
spoke and said, What means your Lordship? Have you been trained up in Will
Summers his school, to strike him who stands next you? The Bishop, still in a
rage, either heard not, or would not hear. When Mr Fecknam would have excused
him by his long imprisonment in the Marshalley, whereby he was grown testy,
etc. he replied merrily, So it seems, Mr Fecknam; for now that he is come forth
of the Marsh (...), Ibid 1340.
he is ready to go to Bedlam. Our Savior here threatens a (...) place,
tormenting Tophet, the Gehenna of fire, to that unruly evil, the tongue, that
being set on fire of hell, fercheth words as far as hell, to set on fire the
whole course of nature. James 3. 6.


Shall be in danger of hell fire]
Gehenna, or the valley of Hinnom, was reputed a contemptible place, without
the City, in the which they burnt (by means of a fire continually kept there)
the carcases, filth and (...) of the (...), so that by the fire of Gehenna here
is intimated both the restless (...) of hell ( sc. by the (...)
bitter (...) and ejulations of poor infants there burnt to (...),) (...). out
of R. (...) in (...). 27. 13.
and also the perpetuity and endlessenesse of them. The Idol (...) or Saturn,
was represented by a man-like brazen body with the head of a Calfe. The
children (...), were (...) within the arms of this Idol: and as the fire
increased about it, the sacrifice with the noise of drums and other instruments
filled the air, that the pitiful cries of the children might not be heard.

Verse 23. Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the Altar]
To anger, our Savior here opposes Charity; (...) and is kind. Charity
envieth not, nor is rash, etc. But bears all things, believes all things,
hops all things, indureth all things. Strangers we must love as our selves,
Luke 10. 27, 28. but brethren, (...) Christ loved us, with a preventing
constant love, Joh. 15. 15 notwithstanding provocations to the contrary.

That thy brother has ought against thee]
As justly offended by thee: See the like phrase, Luke 7. 40. Rev. 2. 4. If
either thou have given offense carelessely, or taken offense causelessly. And
two (...) may as soon smite together, and not fire come out, as people converse
together, and not (...) fall out: Now if it be a great offense, a considerable
injury, to the just grief or disgrace of another, satisfaction must be given,
and reconciliation sought (at least) (...) the (...) can be accepted. For how
can we look our father in (...), or ask him blessing, when we know that he
knows, there is hatred or heart-burning between us and our brethren?

Verse 24. (...) there thy gift]
The fountain of love will not be (...) at with uncharitable hands. God
appeared not to Abraham, (...) Lot and he were agreed. Jacob reconciled to his
brother, first builds an Altar, and(...).

And go thy way, (...) be reconciled.]
(...) thou will lose thy labor, and (...), as Saul and Judas (...). God
prefers mercy before sacrifice, and is content his own immediate service should
be intermitted, rather then reconciliation be omitted. Confess your trespasses
one to another, says St James, your lapses and offenses (...), (...). 5. 10.
one against another, and then pray one for another, that ye may be (...): as
Abraham, after reconciliation, praid for Abimelech, and the Lord healed him. St
Peter would have husbands and wives 1 Pet. 3. 7.
live lovingly together: or, if some houshold-words fall out between Ephesians. 4 30,
(...).
them at any time, to piece again, that their prayers be not Si (...) est qui
(...) in gratiam put at redire posse, non nostram is perfidiam arguit, sed
(...). Cic. Epist. lib 2. ep. (...).
(...), as else they will be. Dissension and ill will will lie at the
wellhead, and stop the current. The spirit of grace and supplication will be
grieved by bitterness, anger, clamor; yea made thereby to stir with
discontent, and to withdraw, as loathing his (...).

First be reconciled to thy brother.]
And, as a bone (...) broken is stronger after well-setting, so let love be
after (...): that if it be possible, as much as in us lies, we may live
Menander tamen dicit, reconciliationes (...) lupinas amicitias.
(...) with all men. Let it not stick on our part howsoever, but (...) peace
and ensue it. Though it flee from thee, follow after it, (...) account it an
honor to be first in so good a matter. I do not see (says one) the Levites
father in law make any means for reconciliation; but when remission came to his
doors, no man entertaineth it more thankfully. The nature of many men is
forward to accept, and negligent to sue for; they can spend secret wishes upon
that which shall cost them no endeavor. But why should men be so backward to a
(...) of this nature? Almighty God beseeches sinners to be reconciled unto
him. And, as when a man 2 (...). 5.
goes from the Sun, yet the Sunbeams follow him, shine on him, warm him: so
does the mercy of God follow us all the days of our (...) 13. 6.
lives. Our Savior first sent to Peter that had denied him, and went to the
rest that had forsaken him. Aristippus (though (...) Heathen) went of his own
accord to AEschines his enemy, (...) said; Shall we not be reconciled, till we
become a table-talke to (...) the country? And when AEschines answered, he
would most gladly be at peace with him: Remember therefore, said (...), (...).
l. b. 2.
that although I were the elder and better man, yet I (...) first unto thee.
Thou art indeed, said AEschines, a far better (...) then I, for I began the
quarrel, but thou the reconcilement. (...) is (...) clamorous and implacable,
and none so (...) to reconciliation, as they that are most injurious: as he
that (...) ed his brother, thrust away Moses, saying, Who made thee a Ruler
etc. (...) thou kill (...)? etc. Acts 7. 27, 28.

Verse 25. Agree with thine adversary quickly.]
Habent (...) suum Cito, Cito. Gods work also must be done with expedition
(...) are headlong, delays dangerous. Let not (...) Si (...) est: at (...) as
(...). (...).
the Sun go down upon your wrath, lest it grow inveterate, as (...) proves in
many, who not only let the Sun go down, once or (...) but run his whole race,
ere they can find hearts and means to (...) reconciled. Cursed be their wrath,
for it is deadly. O my soul, (...) not thou into their secret. It were much to
be wished, that as (...) (...) 49. (...), 7.
vy has it, Amicitiae immortales, inimicitiae mortales essent, (...) ties were
mortal amongst us, amities immortal.

Lest thine adversary deliver thee to the Iudge]
By his (...) and moans to God, who is gracious (though thou art stiff) and
(...) pay (...) for thy pertinacy. Exodus 22. 26. (and him for his (...) tience)
with extremity of law. Compound therefore, and take (...) the suit before it
come to execution and judgment. Suffer it not, (...) husbands do, to run on,
and charges to grow from term to term lest we pay not only the main debt, but
the arrerages too, the (...) of Gods patience, etc.

Thou be cast into (...).]
Into hell, worse then any prison. Of Roger Bishop of Salisbury, the second man
from King Stephen, it is storied, that he was so tortured in prison with hunger
and other calamities accompanying such men, (...) vivere noluerit, mori
nescierit, live he would not, die he could not. This and much worse is the case
of (...) that are cast into hell, they seek death, but find it not, they (...)
it, but it flees from them, Rev. 96.

Verse 26. Thou shall by no means come out thence, till, etc.]
(...). (...) come out. Let our merit-mongers first go to hell for their sins,
and stay all (...) there: then afterward, if God will create another eternity,
they may have liberty to relate their good works, and call for their wages. But
the curse of the law will first be served of such, as (...) to be saved by the
works of the law, are fallen from Christ, these shall never come out till they
have paid the utmost (...). And when will that be? We read of a miserable
malefactor ( John Chambone by name) who had lain in the dungeon at (...) the
space of seven or (...) months. This thief, for pain and torment cried out of
God, and cursed his parents that begat him, being almost eaten up with lice, and
ready to eat his own flesh for (...); being fed with such bread as dogs and
horses had (...) to eat. So it pleased the goodness of Almighty God, that
(...) Bergerius a French Martyr, was cast into the fame dungeon: through whose
preaching and prayers he was brought to (...), learning much comfort and
patience by the word of the Gospel preached unto him. Touching his conversion
he wrote a (...) sweet Letter out of his bonds, declaring therein, that the
next day after that he had taken hold of the Gospel, and (...) himself to
patience according to the same, his lice (which he could pluck out before by
twenty at once (...) his fingers) now were so gone from him, that he had not
one. Furthermore so the alms of good people were extended toward him, that he
Act and Mon. sol. 828.
was fed with white bread, and that which was very good. His imprisonment, at
(...), lasted but while life: death as a jailer knocked off his shackles, and
set him into the glorious liberty of the Saints above. So the penitent thief in
the Gospel: and so that Rob. Samuel, Martyr, above mentioned. But not so, those
that are (...) up in the dark dungeon of hell. Their misery is as endless as
(...). A river of brimstone is not consumed by burning: the smoke of that pit
ascends for ever. A child with a spoon may sooner empty the (...), then the
damned in hell accomplish their (...).

Verse 27. You have heard that it was said to them of old, Thou shall not
commit adultery.]
This they corruptly restrained to the gross act, and made nothing of
contemplative filthiness, hearts full of harlortry, hot as an oven with
scalding lusts, very stews Hosea.
and brothelhouses, cages of unclean birds; besides eyes full of adultery,
hands defiled with dalliance, tongues taught to talk obscaenities (...).
and ribaldries, etc. But (...) could say, Incesta est, and sine (...) quoe
stuprum cupat, she is a whore, that would be so, had In (...).
she but (...): And the Romans put to death a (...) Virgin, for singing this
verse only, Foelices nuptoe! moriar ni nubere dulce est.
Has (...) so a (...) as.
St Paul's Virgin is holy, not in body only, but in spirit also, I Cor. 7. (...)
non licuit, non facit, illa facit: (...) for the avoiding (...) (...) (...).
of fornications (in the plural number, inward burnings as well as outward
pollutions) let every man have his own wife etc.

Verse 28. But I say unto you, that whosoever looks on a woman I Cor. 7 2.
to lust after her.]
Lusting is often the fruit of looking; as in Joseph's mistress, who set her eyes
upon Joseph, and David, who (...) in cum oculos, Genesis (...).
law Bathsheba bathing: lust is quicksighted. How much better Job, who would
not look, lest he should think upon a maid? And (...) Mo ses, vidit, (...):
sed (...) Pareus.
Nazianzen, who had learned (and he glories in it) to keep in his eyes from
roving to wonton prospects. And the like is reported of that heavenly spark,
the young L. Harrington: whereas those that have eyes full of adultery, cannot
cease to sin, says St Peter. (...)
And facti crimina lumen habet, says another. Sampsons eyes were the first
offenders that betrayed him to lust, therefore are they Niz a z.
first pulled out, and he led a blind captive to Gaza, where before (...) Pet
2. 1 (...).
he had lustfully gazed on his Dalilah. It is true, the blindness of (...),
(...) of the whore, as if she sat in the (...) eye.
his body opened the eyes of his mind. But how many thousands are there that
die of the wound in the eye: Physicians reckon 200 (...) that belong to it: but
none like this. for by these loopholes of lust and windows of wickedness, the
devil windeth himself (...)
into the soul. Death enters in by these windows, as the Fathers (...).
(...) (...) fibi eruit, quod (...) sine (...) non possit. Sed nihil (...)
secir quam quod
apply that text in leremie. The eye is the light of the body, says our
Savior, and yet by our abuse, this most lightsome part of the body draws
many times the whole soul into utter darkness. Nothing, I dare say, so much
enricheth hell, as beautiful faces: whiles a man's eye-beams, beating upon that
beauty, reflect with a new heat upon himself. Ut uidi, ut perij? Looking and
lusting differ (in Greek) but in one letter. When one seemed to pity a oneeyed
man, he told him he had lost one of his enemies, a very thief satuitatem suam
urbi manisestam (...).
that would have stolen away his heart: Democritus (but in that no wise man)
pulled out his eyes. And the Pharisee (little wiser.) Tertullian in (...).
would shut his eyes when he walked abroad, to avoid the sight of women:
insomuch that he often dashed his head against the Volupt atem vicisse (...)
olupt as est maxima, nec ulla major est victoria, quam ea que a cupiditatibus
re ertur. Cypr. de bon. pud.
walls, that the blood gushed out, and was therefore called (...) impingens.
How much better, and with greater commendation hid these men taken our Saviors
counsel in the following verses?

Verse 29. And if thy right ere offend thee, pluck it out]
That is; if it be either so natural or habitual to thee to go after the
fight of thine eyes (which Solomon assigns for the source of all Let thine
eyes (...) right (...), and let thine eyelids lock straight before thee.
youthful outrages, Eccles. 11 9.) that thou had as lieve lose thy right
eye, as not look at liberty; out with such an eye, (though a right eye:) (...)
it out, and rake in the hole where it grew, rather then that any filth should
remain there. Pluck it out of the old Adam, and set it into the new man. Get
that oculum irretortum, Prove. 4. 25.
that may look forth-right upon the mark, without idle or curious (...) Puellam
and (...) oculi significat. Plut. in Apopb
prying into, or poring upon forbidden beauties. A Praetor (said the Heathen)
should have continent eyes, as well as hands. And the (...) and worthily
ubraided a certain wonton, that he had not pupils but punks in his eyes. And
Archesilaus the (...), observing one to have wanton eyes, told him, that the In
a Sam 12. 4. there came a (...) to the (...), etc.
difference was not great, whether he played the naughty-pack with his upper
parts or his nether. Lot might not look to ward Sodom. And Peter Martyr
observes out of Nathans Parable, that lust, (...) Signifies both (...) eye and
(...); as it is the spring of sin, let it be of tears.
though it once prevailed over David, yet it was but a stranger to him: had
enough of that once, for it cost him hot water. His eye became a fountain, he
washed his bed which he had defiled (yea his pallet or under-bed) with tears.
So did Mary Magdalen, once a strumpet; her hands were bands, her words were
cords, her eyes as glasses, where into while silly larks gazed, they were
taken, as in a (...) quibus videmus (...) stemus.
day-not. She therefore made those eyes a fountain to bath Christ's feet in, and
had his blood a fountain to bath her soul in, Zech. 13. 1. To conclude: the
sight is a deceitful sense, therefore bind it to (...) (...), that (...) and
his servants were at a feast; she was at home as feigning her self sick. Pro.
25. 23
the good abearance: call it in from its out-strayes, check it and lay Gods
charge upon it for the future. Chaste Joseph would not once look on his immodest
mistress: she looked, and caught hold on him, and that when she was abed: but
her temptation fell like fire upon wet tinder, and took not. It must be our
constant care, that no sparkle of the eye flee out to consume the whole, by a
flame of lust: but upon offer of wanton glances from others, beat them back, as
the North wind drives away rain. A Kirg that sits in the throne of
judgment, and so any other man that sets seriously upon this practice of
mortification) scatters away all evil with his eyes, Prove. 20. 8. And this is
to pluck out, and cast a way the right eye that offends us, as being an
occasion of offense unto us. He that shall see God to his comfort, shuts his
eyes from (...) of (...). For wanton and wandering eyes (like spiders) gather
(...) (...). (...), (...).
out of the (...) flowers, and (like Jacobs sheep) being too firmly fixed on
beautiful (...), they make the (...), oft-times, bring (...) fruits.

For it is (...) for thee that one of thy members perish]
An eye is better lost then a soul. For every (unmortified) one shall be Mar. 9
49. expounded.
(...) with (...), (...) up, as it were, and preserved for eternal (...), and
every sacrifice (acceptable to God) shall be salted with salt of mortification
and self-denial,) Mark. 9 49 Romans 8 (...).
D (...) Ge. og page 156.


And not that (...) whole body should be cast into hell]
As otherwise it will be: For if ye live after the (...)-ye shall die, etc. In
(...)
Barbary, (...) present death for any man to see one of the (...): and for them
too, if, when they see a man, though (...) through a (...), they do not suddenly
(...) out. So here, a (...) and lewd eye hazards the whole to hell fire. And is
it nothing (...)
to lose an immortal soul? to purchase an everliving death? A man would be
loath to fetch gold out of a fiery crucible, because he knows it (...) burn him.
Did we as truly (...) the everlasting burning of that infernal fire, we durst
not offer to fetch either (...) or profits out of those flames. Bellarmine is
of opinion, that one glimpse (...) hells horror, were enough to make a man not
only turn Christian and sober, but Anchorite and Monk, to live (...) the
strictest rule that can be. And there is a (...) of one, that being (...)
vexed with fleshly lusts, laid his hands upon hot burning coals, to mind
himself of hellfire, that follows upon fleshly courses.

Verse 30. And if thy right hand offend thee etc.]
By wanton (...)
touches, by unclean dalliance; a farther degree of this sin, and (...) greater
incentive to lust; as we see in Joseph's mistress: when she not only cast her
eyes, but proceeded to lay hand upon him, she became (...)
much more inflamed toward him: and had not his heart been seasoned with the
true fear of God, there was so much the greater danger of his being drawn
thereby to commit, not that trick of youth, as the world excuses it, but that
great wickedness, The archers shot at Joseph, but his bovv abade in strength,
Genesis ^9. 24.
as he there counts and calls it. Visus, colloquium, contactus, osculum,
concubitus, are the whoremongers five descents into the chambers of death. Off
therefore with such a hand by all means: cry out of it, as Cranmer did of his
unworthy right hand, wherewith he had subscribed: And as John Stubbes of
LincolnsInne, Castus erat, non solum continens, ut Bellerophon, Scipio, alij.
having his right hand cut off, in Queen Elizabeth's time, with a cleaver driven
through the wrist with the force of a beetle (for writing a book against the
marriage with the Duke of Anion, entitled, The gulf wherein England will be
swallowed by the Camd Elizab. fol. 239.
French match, etc.) he put off his hat with his left hand, and said with a
loud voice, God save the Queen: So when God strikes a parting blow between us,
and our dilecta delicta, our righthand sins, let us see a mercy in it, and be
thankful: let us say to Isa. 30 22.
these Idols, Get thee hence, What have I to do any more with Idols? Hos. 14.
8.
that God may say, as there, I have heard him and observed him, I am like a
green fir tree; from me is thy fruit found; when he shall see thee pollute
those Idols, that thou wast wont to perfume, Isa. 30. 22.

And not that thy whole body be cast into hell.]
Our Savior is (...) abique de (...). Non enim (...) in gehennam incidere
gehennae meminisse.
much in speaking of hell. And it were much to be wished (says S. Chrysostom)
that men's thoughts and tongues would run much upon this subject: there being no
likelier way of escaping hell, then by taking ever and anon a turn or two in
hell by our meditations. A certain Hermit is said to have learned three
leaves, a black, red and white one: that is, he daily meditated upon the
horror of hell, Chrysostom.
the passion of Christ, the happiness of heaven. Mors tua, mors Christi, (...)
mundi, gloria coeli, and dolor (...) tibi.


Verse 31. It has been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, etc.]
This Moses permitted, as a Lawmakers, not as a Prophet, as a civil Magistrate,
not as a man of God: merely for the hardness of the men's hearts, and for the
relief of the women, who else might have been misused and mischiefed by their
unmannerly and unnatural husbands, Mal. 2. 13. Those hard-hearted Jews caused
their wives (when they should have been cheerful in Gods service) to cover the
altar of the Lord with tears, with weeping, and with crying out: So that he
regarded not the offering any more. A number of such Nabals there are
now-adaies, that tyrannize over, and trample upon their wives, as if they were
not their fellows, but Mal. 2. 15.
their foot-stools, not their companions and copesmates, but their slaves and
vassals: Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter unto them, Col. 3. 16. He
says not (as it might seem he should with respect to the former verse) Rule
over them, and show your authority over those that are bound to submit unto
you. But, love them, that their subjection may be free and ingenuous. Live not,
as Lamech, like lions in your houses, Quarrelsome, austere, discourteous,
violent, with high words and hard blows, such are fitter to live in Bedlam,
then in a civil society. The Apostle requires, That all bitterness be put
away, all, and in all persons: (...) P^^^^^, (...). conjug.
how much more in married couples? The Heathens when they sacrificed at their
marriage feasts, used to cast the gall of the beast sacrificed out of doors.
Vipera virus ob veneratio^em nuptiarum (...) 7
evomit: Et tu duritiem animi, tu feritatem, tu crudelitatem ob unionis
rev^rentiam non d^ponis? says Basil. I confess it were better be married to a
quartan ague, then to a bad wife (so (...) uxor mala, and non nifi (...)
says Simonides) for there be two good days for one bad with the one, not one
with the other. But that should have been looked to aforehand. A hard
adventure it is to yoke ones self with any untamed (...) (...) p. 199.
heifer, that bears not the yoke of Christ. And as grace, so good nature, a
courteous disposition, is a thing to be especially looked at in a wife, which
Eleazar Abraham's servant understood, and therefore singled out as a token of a
meet mate for his son, Let her offer me drink, and my Camels also, says he.
But Genesis ^4. 13.
what if it prove otherwise, and men by leaping unadvisedly into the marriage
estate, have drawn much misery upon themselves? (...).
Quid si pro conjugio conjurgium contraxerint? Varro answers, Qui (...),
(...) sibi (...) praesta^: qui tolerat, ipse se meliore^ redait.
Uxoris vitium aut tollendum aut tolerandum est. A wives faults must be either
cured or covered: mended, if we can; made the best of, if we cannot. If the
first, she is made better: if the second, we. Idem. ibid.
(Conjugium humanae divina Academia vitae est.)
Ovid de art. imperat: Aurelij vox est, (...), (...), (...).


And hence it comes to pass, that Quae modo pugnarant, jungant sua rostra
columbae:
Quarum blanditias verbaque, murmur habet.


As on the other side, where this meekness of wisdom is not made use of by
married folk, they are together in the house no otherwise then as two poisons
in the stomach, as live Eels in the pot, as two spanniels in a chain: their
houses are more like kennels of hounds, then families of Christians; or as so
many fencingschools, wherein the two sexes seem to have met together, for
nothing, but to play their prizes, and to try masteries. Job was not more weary
of his boils, then they are of their bed-fellows: cursing their wedding day as
much, as he did his birthday; and Leo (...), (...), (...).
thirsting after a divorce, as he did after death: Which, because it cannot be
had, their lives prove like the sojourning of Israel in Marah, where almost
nothing could be heard but murmuring and mourning, conjuring and complaining.

Verse 32. Saving for the caeuse of fornication.]
Taken in the (...) de originibus.
largest sense for adultery also. Adulterium est quasi ad alterum, aut alterius
locum. This sin strikes at the very sinew, heart and life of the
marriage-knot, and (...) it. Further, it directly fights against humane society
(which the Law mainly respects) and was therefore to be punished with death, as
a most notorious theft. Master (lay they) this woman was taken in adulery, in
(...).
the very act. In the very theft, says the original, to intimate, Joh. (...)
4.
belike, the great (...) that is in adultery, whiles the child of a stranger
carries away the goods or lands of the family. (...) may any (...) from our
Saviors words to that woman, ver. 11. ( N (...)) that (...) is not to be
(...); (...) more then he may, that inheritances are not to be (...), (...)
(who was no (...)) would not divide them, Luk 12. 14. The marriage bed is
honorable, and should be kept inviolable: (...) and the purity of posterity
cannot otherwise (...) amongst men; which is well (...) by (...) to be the
reason why adultery is named in the Commandment, under it all (...) being
forbidden; when yet other (...) are more (...), as Sodomy and bestiality.

Causes her to commit (...)]
(...) it is God that both makes and (...) the bonds or wedlock; which is
therefore called, The Covenant of God, Prove. 2. 17 (...) are either, 1. (...),
as when a man tieth himself by vow to God, to (...) such a sin, or do such a
duty. 2. (...), (...) man and man, as in our common contracts, bargains and
(...). Or, 3. Mixed, that are made partly with God, and partly with man. And of
this sort is the Marriage-Covenant: the parties (...) tie themselves first to
God, and then to one another. Hence it is that the knot is indissoluble, and
cannot be undone or recalled at the pleasure of the parties that make it,
because there is a third person engaged in the business, and that is God, to
whom the bond is made; and if afterward they break, he will take the
forfeiture. This David understood, and therefore upon his adultery, cried out,
Against thee, thee only (that is, chiefly) have I (...), and done this evil in
thy sight, Psalm. 51. 4. A sin it is against the father, whose Covenant is
broken; against the son, (...) members are made the members of an harlot, and
against the holy Ghost, whose temple is defiled, 1 Cor. 5.

Verse 33. Thou shall not for swear thy self.]
An oath is, (...), a hedge which a man may not break. It must not be (...)
without necessity. Hence the Hebrew (...) Nishbang is a passive, and (...) to
be sworn, rather then to swear. For if the doubt or (...) may be asloiled, or
ended by Verily, or Truly, or such naked (...), we are, by the example of our
Savior, to forbear an oath. But having sworn, though to his (...), a man must
not change, Psalm 15. 4. upon pain of a curse, yea a book full of (...), (...).
5. 3 4. It is not for men to play with oaths, as children do with nuts: to
slip them at pleasure, as monkies do their collars: to snap them asunder, as
Samson did his cords. It was an impious and blasphemous speech of him that
(...), My tongue has (...), but my mind is unsworn. And (...) (...).
who can but detest that abominable doctrine of the (...) of old, and their
heirs the Jesuits alate, Jura, perjura, secretum prodere noli.
(...).


God will be a swift witness against perjured persons, Mal. 3. (...), (...),
(...), all (...), (...) (...).
as those that villainously abuse his Majesty, making him an acceslary, yea a
partner in their sin, thinking him like themselves, and therefore calling him
to justify their untruths. Had Shimei peace, that brake (...) oath to Solomon?
Or (...), that kept not touch (...), (...).
with the King of Babylon? Or Ananias and Saphira, that but uttered an untruth,
swore it not? God punishes perjury with destruction, men, with disgrace, says
a fragment of the twelve Tables in Rome. The Egyptians and (...) punished it
with death. So did Philip Earl of Flanders, and others. But where men have not
done it, God has hanged up such with his own hands, as it were, as our Earl
Godwin: Rodolphus Duke of Suevia (...) (...).
that rebelled against his master Henry Emperor of Germany, (...).
to whom he had sworn allegiance: Ladeslaus King of (...), at the great battle
of Varna, where the raging Turk (provoked (...). (...) (...). 297.
by his perjury) appealed to Christ: Michael Paleologus Emperor of
Constantinople, who for his perjury, and other his foul and faithless
dealings, lies obscurely shrouded in the sheet (...) defame, says the
History. Richard Long, soldier at Calice, deposing (...). 144.
falsely against William Smith, Curate of Calice, shortly Act. and (...). fol 1
117.
after, upon a displeasure of his wife, desperately drowned himself. And within
the memory of man, Feb. 11. 1575. Anne (...) forswore her self at a shop in
Woodstreet, London, and praying God she might sink where she stood, if she had
not paid for the wares she took, fell down speechless, and with an horrible
stink died soon after. Thus God hangs up evildoers in gibbets, as it were,
that others may hear and fear, and do no (...).
more so.

But shall perform unto the Lord thine oaths.]
As David, I have (...), and I will perform, etc. Psalm. 119. 106. And yet David
was not always as good as his oath, as in the case of (...), Jacob pater
votorum (...) tur (...)
etc. Nor did (...) of a long time perform his vow, (...). 28 21 though once
(at least) admonished, Genesis 31. 13. till he was (...) arrouse, by the (...) of
the Shechemites, We (...) in (...), (...) by (...), as (...) friends.
and (...) own (...) danger, to go up to Bethel, and do as he had promised.
The font in baptism is Beersheba, the well of an oath, there we (...) swear
our selves to God, which S. Peter calls the stipulation of a good conscience.
This oath we renew, 1 (...). 3 21.
when we come to the other Sacrament: and often besides, when the Lord (...)
siege to us by some disease or other distress, what promises and protestations
make we, as Pharaoh and those votaries, Psalm. 78? But sciapato il morbo,
fraudato il Dio, as the (...) 78. 35.
Italian Proverb has it: the disease or danger once over, God is defrauded of
his due. See it in those, Jer. 34. who forfeited their fidelity, though they
had cut the calf in twain, and passed Vide Virgil. l. 8. (...), so lus (...)
Tatijque.
through the parts thereof (a most solemn way of sealing up Covenants) and are
sorely threatened for it, that God would in like sort cut them in twain, and
destroy them, which was the import of that Ceremony.

Verse 34. Swear not at all.]
Not at all by the creatures Dejurando (...) creaturas, contra (...), and de
juramenti (...), (...) Anabap:: videbis.
(which the Pharisees held no fault) nor yet by the name of God in common talk,
lightly, rashly and (...); for such vain oaths the land mourns. Oaths (alas)
are now become very interjections of speech to the Vulgar, and phrases of
gallantry to the braver. He that cannot swear with a grace, wants his (...)
in Jacob. 5. 12. page 228. and (...)
tropes and his figures, befitting a Gentleman. Not to speak of those
civilified complements of Faith: and Troth (which are counted light matters)
Who hears not how ordinarily and openly ruffianly oaths and abhorred
blasphemies are darted up with Sunt qui altius (...) in (...), quam (...).
hellish mouths, against God, and our Savior, whom they can swear all over,
and seldom name, but in an oath? (...) can these pray, Hallowed be that Name,
that they so daily dishallow? Some cannot utter a sentence without an oath,
yea, a fearful one, an oath of sound, if enraged especially; O the tragedies,
the blusters, the terrible thunder-cracks ot fierce and furious language,
interlaced with oaths, enough to make the very stones crack under them! Yea to
such an height and habitual practice hereof are some grown, that they swear
and foame out a great deal of filth, and perceive it not. Had these men such
distemper of body, as that their excrements came from them, when they knew not
of it, it would trouble them. So it would, I dare say, did they believe the
holy Scriptures, threatening so many woes to them, yea, telling them of a large
roll, ten yards long, and five yards broad, full of curses against the swearer,
yea, resting upon (...) house, Zech. 5 2, (...).
where he thinks (...) most secure; Brimstone is scattered (...) Job 18. (...).
the house of (...), says Job, as ready to take fire, if God but lighten upon
it. They walk, as it (...), upon a (...) of gunpowder: and it may be just in
God they (...) be blown up, when their hearts are full of hell, and their
mouths (...) big with hellish blasphemies. Surely (...) damnation (...): (...)
has Exodus (...).
vowed he will not (...) them (...), (...) these (...) shall (...). (...).
(...) enter into his rest. And for (...), those that (...) but any ingenuity,
abhor and shun their company. The very Turks have the Christians blaspheming of
Christ in (...), and will punish then prisoners sorely, when as through
impatience or (...) they burst out into them. Yea the (...), as their
conversion is much hindered by the (...) or the (...) (who (...) oftener then
swear) so in (...) speculations of the causes of the strange (...) of the
affairs of the world, they assign the reason of the Turks prevailing so against
the Christians, to be, their (...) his (...) of the (...).
oaths and blasphemies, which wound the ears of the very heavens. They can tell
that swearing is one of those sins, for the which God Hos. 4. 2.
has a controversy with a land. And I can tell what a great Divine (...).
(...). 10.
has observed, that the stones in the wall of Aphek shall sooner turn
executioners, then a blasphemous Aramite shall escape (...). So much does a
jealous God hate to be robbed of his D. Halls contempl.
glory, or wronged in his Name, even by ignorant Pagans (how much more by (...)
Christians?) whose tongues might seem no slander. Those that abuse earthly
Princes in their name and titles, are imprisoned, banished, or hanged as
traitors. And shall these go altogether unpunished? Hell gapes for such
miscreants, etc.

Neither by heaven]
As the Manichees and Pharisees did, and held it no sin. But God only is the
proper object of an oath, Isa 65. 16. Ier. 12. 6. The name of the creature (say
some) may be inferred, the attestation referred to God alone. But they say
better, that tell us, that the form of an oath is not at all to be indirect or
oblique, in the name of the creature. Albeit I (...), but he that (...) by
(...), swears by him that dwells in heaven, etc. And forasmuch as God
clotheth himself with the creatures, Psalm. 104. (...) fit for us to spit upon
the (...) royal robes, especially when they are upon his back? But forasmuch 1 Thessalonians. 5. (...).
as we must shun, (...) be shy of the very show and shadow of sin, they do
best and safest, that abstain from all oaths of this nature; They do very ill
that swear by this light, bread, hand, fire (which they absurdly call Gods
Angel) by S. Anne, S. George, by our Lady, etc. by the parts of Christ, which
they substitute in the room of God. The barbarous soldiers would not break his
bones, but these miscreants with their carrion mouths rent and tear (O cause of
tears!) his heart, hands, head, feet, and all his members asunder. Let all such
consider, that, as light a matter as they make of it, this swearing by the
creature, is a forsaking of God, Jer. 5. 7. a provocation little less then
unpardonable. ib. an exposing Gods honor to the spoil of the creatures, which
was the Heathens sin, Romans 1. 23. An abasing themselves below (...)
creatures, for men verily swear by the greater, Heb. 6, 16. And the viler the
thing is they swear by, the greater is the oath, (...) 8. 14.
because they ascribe thereto omniscience, power to punish, justice, Zeph. 1.
3, 4, 5.
etc. Besides a heavy doom of unavoidable destruction denounced against such.
They that speak in favor of this sin, allege, 1 Cor. Ob.
15. 31. But that is not an oath, but an obtestation, q. d. My Sol.
sorrows and sufferings for Christ would testify, if they could speak, that I
die daily. And that, Cant. 3. 5. where Christ seems Ob.
Sol.
to swear by the roes and hindes of the field. But that is not an oath neither,
but an adjuration. For he charge them not to trouble his Church. Or if they
do, the roes and hindes shall testify against them, because they do, what
those would not, had they reason as they have. In like sort Moses attesteth
heaven and Ob.
earth, Deuteronomy. 32. 1. and so does God himself, Isa. 1. 2. And for (...).
those phrases, As Pharaoh lives, As thy soul lives, etc. they (...)
are rather earnest vouchings of things, then oaths. And yet that phrase of
gallantry now so common, As true as I live, is judged to be no better then an
oath by the creature, Numb. 14. 21. with Psalm. 95. 11. And we may not swear in
(...), (...) in judgment, Ier. 4. 2.

For it is Gods throne.]
We must not conceive that God is (...) etc.
(...).
commensurable by a place, as if he were partly here and partly D (...) of Gods
(...).
there, but he is every where all-present. The heavens have a large place, yet
(...) they one part here, and another there, but the Lord is totally present
wheresoever present. Heaven therefore is said to be his throne, and he said to
inhabit it, Isa. 66 1. not as if b 22 14.
he were confined to it, as Aristotle and those Atheists in Job conceited (...)
Dei ad (...), (...).
it, but because there he is pleased to manifest the most glorious and (...)
signs of his presence; and there in a special manner he is enjoyed and
worshipped by the crowned (...) and glorious Angels, etc. Here we see but as in
a (...) obscurely, his toe, train, back-parts, footstool. No man can (...)
more and live: (...) (...). 13.
man need see more here, that he may live for ever. But there we (...). 6. 1.
shall see as we are seen, know as we are known, see him face to Exodus 33. 13.
face. Oh how should this fire up our dull hearts, with all earnestness (...).
60 1.
1 Cor. (...).
and intention of indeared affection, to long, lust, pant, faint after the
beatificall vision! How should we daily lift up our hearts and hands to God in
the heavens, that he would (...) from heaven and save us: send his (...), and
(...) deliverance (...) of Sion: yea, that himself would (...) the heavens and
come down, and fetch us home upon the clouds of (...), as himself ascended;
that when we awake we may be full of his image; and as we have born the image
of the earthly, so we may bear the image of the heavenly? St Paul, after he had
once seen God in (...) throne, being rapt up into the third heaven; (like the
bird of paradise) he never left groaning out, Cupio dissolvi, I desire to be
dissolved and to be with Christ, which is far far the better. And Pareus a
little before his death uttered this Swan-like (...) de Animalth
Song, Discupio solvi, tecumque, o Christ, manner: (...) A (...), (...) that,
3 Cor. 4. 17

Portio fac regni sim quotacunque (...).
Oh that I Were in heaven! Oh that I might
Be ever With the Lord! o bliss full plight!
Thus must our broken spirits even spend, and exhale themselves in Mi fine
(...) diem, vitam fine morte qui etam
continual sallies, as it were, and egressions of thoughts, wishings and
longings after God, affecting not only a union, but a unity with him. St Austin
wished that he might have seen three things, Romam in flore, Paulum in ore, and
Christum in corpore: Rome Det (...) fine (...), (...), (...) Deus.
flourishing, Paul discoursing, and Christ living upon the earth. But I had
rather wish, with venerable Bede, My soul desire^th to see (...)
Christ my King upon his throne, and in his majesty.

Verse 35. Nor by the earth, for it is his footstool]
A fault so common among this people, that S. James (...) cause to warn the
believing Jews of it to whom he wrote. They had taken up such a custom of
swearing by the creatures, that after conversion they could not easily leave
it, it is a poor plea to say, I (...). 5. (...).
have gotten a custom of swearing, and must (...) be born with. For who is it
but the devil (...) says to such, as the Jews to Pilate, Do as thou have ever
done? The Cretians when they Mar. (...) 8.
wished worst to any one, they wished that he might take delight (...)
in an evil (...). Break off (...) this ili use by repentance: and though you
cannot suddenly turn the stream, yet (...) against it, bite in thine oaths,
and with bitterness (...) them: swear to God, as David did, thou will swear no
more, and by degrees outgrow this ill custom.

For it is his footstool]
And should be ours. For he has put all things under our feet, Psalm. 8 6. He
says not, under our hands, but under our feet, that we might trample upon them
in a holy contempt, as the Church is said to tread upon the Moon; and the way
of the righteous is said to be on high, to depart from hell below. It is a
wonder, surely, that treading upon these minerals, gold, silver, precious
stones, etc. (which are but the guts and garbage of Aug.
the earth,) we should so admire them. God has hid them in the Rev. 12 1.
Prove. 15. (...).
bowels of the earth, and in those parts that are farthest off from the Church.
Where they grow, little else grows that is ought; no more does grace in an
earthly (...). But to return from whence we are (...); Earth is Gods footstool.
How ought we then to walk (...), that we provoke not the eyes of his glory.
There is an honor due even to the footstools of Princes, when they are in the
throne especially. (...), (...) thou in the fear of the Lord all Prove. 23. 17.
day long (says (...)) walk in the sense of his presence, and light of his
countenance. He is not very far from any one of us, Acts 17. 27.
says the Apostle, not so far as the bark from the tree, or the slesh from
the bones. This one God and father of all, is not only above all, and from his
throne beholds all that is done here below, but also through all, and in you
all, Ephesians. 4. 6. Therefore no corner can secret us, no cranny of the heart can
escape his eye: Al things are (for the outside) naked, and (for the inside)
open, dissected, (...).
quartered, and as it were, cleft through the backbone (as the (...), (...). 4.
(...).
word signifies) before the eyes of him with whom we deal.

Neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great King]
The place of his rest, the seat of his Empire, and they the people of his
praise, and of his purchase. Glorious things are spoken of thee, thou (...).
(...).
City of God. There was the adoption, and the glory, the (...) and the giving
of the Law, the service of God and the promises, etc. (...). 5.
(...) 9. 4.
Constantinople was acknowledged by Tamerlane to be, for her situation, an
Imperial City, and such as was made to command the world: Strasborough in
Germany, is called by some, compendium (...). (...).
Orbis, an abridgment of the world. But Jerusalem, by a better Author, is
styled Princess of Provinces, the joy of the whole earth, Lam. 1. 1.
(...). 482.
the pleasant land, etc. It must needs be pleasant, where God himself Dan 89.
(...). But how is the faithful City become a harlot? Isa. 1. 21, 22.
It was full of judgment, righteousness (...) in it, but now murderers. Her
silver is become dross, her wine mixed with (...). Bethel is become Bethaven,
and Jerusalem turned into Ierushkaker. It fell again into the power of the
Turks and Infidels, Anns 1234. (after that the most warlike soldiers of
Europe, had there, as it were, one common sepulcher, but an eternal monument
of (...) misguided valor) and so remains still, a poor ruinous City,
governed by one of the Turks Sanzacks and for nothing now more famous then for
the sepulcher of our Savior, again repaired Turkish (...). sol 101.
and much visited by the Christians, and not unreverenced by the Turks
themselves. There are not to be found there at this time 100. (...). Enquir. p
(...).
households of Jews, and yet there are ten or more Churches of Christians there.

Of the great King]
The Jews much admired the greatness of Si (...) ((...)) (...), (...) procul
(...) sibi (...) fingerent, quia (...) animal animali superius cogitat. (...)
and bomo (...),
Herod, and especially of the Romans, whose tributaries they were at this
time. Our Savior minds them of a greater then these, One that is great,
greater, greatest, greatness it self. Nebuchadnezzar styles himself the great
King, and brags of his Babel. The rich miser thinks himself no small thing,
because of his counerey of Corn. Ahashuerosh takes state upon him, because he
reigned from India to Ethiopia. Darius his flatterers held it meet, that no man
should ask a petition of any God or man, for thirty days, save of him.
Diocletian would needs be worshipped as a God, and was the first that held
forth his feet to be kissed, after (...). 1 Cor. 214
Amurath the third, Emperor of the Turks, styled himself Luk 12 16.
God of the earth, Governor of the whole world, the Messenger of (...), regio,
(...) (...), ager.
God, and faithful servant of the great Prophet. And the great Cham of
Tartary, is called by the simple vulgar, The shadow of (...).
spirits, and son of the immortal God: And by himself he is reputed (...).
to be the Monarch of the whole world. For which cause Turk. (...).
every day (if all be true that is reported of him) as soon as he has (...),
he caused his (...) to be sounded, by that sign giving Vide Sphy.
(...) p (...).
(...) to other (...) and Princes to go to dinner. These be the (...) Geog,
page 662.
(...) of the earth, and think no mean things of themselves. But compare them
with the Great King here mentioned, and what (...) of all their supposed
greatness? All Nations (...) are but as the dust of the balance, or drop of a
bucket. (...) tuistius guttae particula? says a Father: If all Sol reliqui
sidera occultat, (...) suum (...).
Nations are to God but as the drop of a bucket, oh what a small pittance must
thou needs be, how great soever, of that little drop? And as he is great, so he
looks to be praised and served according (...). lib. 2. c. 6.
to his excellent greatn sse. We should, if it were possible, fill up So does
the God of glory.
that vast distance and disproportion, that is betwixt him and us, (...) 7.
(...).
by the greatness of our praises, and sincerity, at least, of our services, in
presenting him with the best. (...) a great King, says Mal. 18. 14.
God, and he stands upon his seniority: Offer it now to thy Prince, will he
accept thy refuse braid-stuffe, etc. It is, verily, a most sweet meditation of
St Bernard: whenever we come before God in any duty, we should conceive our
selves to be entering into the court of Heaven, wherein the King of Kings
sits in a stately throne, (...) with an host of glorious Angels, and crowned
Saints. With how great humility therefore, reverence and godly fear, ought a
poor worm, crawling out of his hole, a vile frog, creepng Quanta ergo (...)
humilitate (...) debet e palude sua (...) and repens vilu (...)? Bern. de
diverse. 15.
out of his mud, draw nigh to such a Majesty? The Seraphims clap their wings on
their faces when they stand before God, Isa. 6. as men are wont to do their
hands, when the lightning flasheth in their faces: The nearer any man draws to
God, the more rottenness he finds in his bones. Abraham is dust and ashes,
Job abhors himself in dust and ashes, Isaiah, cries, Woe is me, for I am
Hab. 316.
(...): Peter, Depart from me, I am a sinful man. All these had right (...) of
Gods greatness, and this is that that is required so often in Scripture under
the term of magnifying God; when we get him into our hearts in his own
likeness, and enlarge his room there; when we take him into our thoughts under
the notion of a great King, when we get so far, as to conceive of him above all
creatures, far above all the glory that can be found in earthly (...) and
Potentates. Think of God, as one not to be thought of, and when you have
thought your (...), as (...) affirms concerning Socrates described by Plato,
and desires of his Readers concerning Lucius Crassus, that they would imagine
Un majus (...), (...). (...).
far greater things of them, then they find written: so assure your selves,
your highest apprehensions of God fall infinitely short of his incomparable and
incomprehensible greatness. And if he could add, If any think me overlavish
in their commendation, it is because he never heard them, or cannot judge of
them: How much (...)
more may we (...) the same of this blessed and only Potentate, the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords; Who only has immortality, dwelling in the light
which no man can approach unto, whom no man has seen, nor can see; to whom be
honor and power everlasting. (...).

Verse 36. Neither shall thou swear by thy head]
That is, by (...)
thy (...), (which is the life of our lives) say some: by thy life, say others,
which is a sweet blessing; for a living dog is better (...) (...).
men a d ad Lion: yea though full of crosses, yet why is living man sorrowful?
q d. it is a mercy, that amidst all his crosses, he (...) (...). (...) Orig
yet alive. (...) is yet alive, I have enough, says Jacob. They told (...) of
his honor, he speaks of his life. Life is better then honor, and is not
therefore to be laid to pawn upon every light occasion, as they that to often
use, As I live, and As true as I live: whereof something before.

Because thou (...) not make one hair, etc.]
God is great in (...) in (...), (...) in (...).
great things, says St Augustine, and not little in the smallest. What less
then an hair, yet in making a hair white or black Gods Aug.
power appears. The devil can as little create a hair of the head, as he
(...) of old a louse in the land of Egypt. There are miracles Exodus 8. 18.
(...) in man's body to fill a volume. It is the Image of God, and a (...).
little world, an epitome of the visible world, as his soul is of the
invisible. The Idea or example of the great world, which was in God from all
eternity, is as it were briefly and summarily expressed by God in man. Hence Man
is called every creature, Go preach the Gospel to every creature, Mark. 16. 15.
as if there were none to him, none besides him. A Philosopher could say, There
is nothing Nibil in terra magnum praeter bominem. Favorinus.
great in earth, besides man. And an Orator, The greatest thing in the least
room, is a good soul in a man's body. Man, says the Poet, is the masterpiece
of the wisest Workman: he is, says the (...), (...) etc. Isocr.
the fairest piece of the chiefest Architect, the very miracle of daring
nature, says Trismegist. Galen, a profane Physician, after (...). Eurip.
he had described the nature and parts of man's body, was forced to sing a hymn
to that God that he knew not. And St Augustine (...). Xeno. (...).
complains, that men can admire the height of the hills, the (...) of the
waves, the compass of the ocean, and the circumvolution of the stars, and yet
not once mark nor admire the power and (...)? 11. mand.
goodness of God, shining in their own souls and bodies, as in a mirror.
Fearfully and wonderfully am I made, says David, yea and curiously wrought in
the lowest parts of the earth; that is, in my mothers womb. Psalm. 139. 13, 14,
15. A council was called Gal. lib. 3. de usu (...).
in Heaven when man was to be formed, Let us make man, Genesis 1. 26. And were not
the birth of a child so common, should it fall Eunt (...) alta (...), ingenies
fluct (...) maris, (...), and gyres syderum, and (...) seipsos, nec (...). Aug.
out but once in an age, people would run together to see it, as to a miracle.
Pliny wondereth at the Gnat, so small a creature, yet making so great a buzz
ng: and so (...) at the (...). He also (...) mention of one, that spent 58
years in searching out the nature of the (...), and could not in all that space
attain to the full of it. What a shame is it for us, not to see God in every
creature, in our selves especially, and every the least part of us? There is
not a hair upon our heads white or black, but has God for the maker, (...).
(...) cap. 9. (...) Mart jurens, (...). (...). Purchase (...) (...).
and God for the Master too. Let those that pride themselves in their hair,
think what a heavy account (...) made to God for that sin. Long hair in women
is a token of modesty. But modesty grows short in men, as their hair grows
long, says one. And (...) speaking of the (...) and crisped youths of his
time, (...) us, (...) turbari malunt quam (...).
that they had more care of their locks then of their limbs, and had rather
the commonwealth should be disturbed, then their (...)
frizzled tresses disheveled. Pompey was taxed for this neat nicety, Unico
digitulo caput scalpit. And of Helen, too curious of her hair at her mothers
funeral, the Poet brings in one that says, (...). This is old Helen still;
no changeling in all this Sed sructus nullos (...) gerit.
space. The holy women of old, durst not adorn themselves with plaited or
broided hair, as St Peter testifies, but trusted in God, De cupresso Alciat.
(...) Pet. 3. 3, 4 5.
and decked themselves with a meek and quiet spirit. And does not nature it
self teach us, says St Paul, that it is a shame to a man, to (...) long hair?
It is objected, That the Apostle intends such (...).
(...), as is as long as women's. But it is answered, That Homer (...).
(...) the same word of (...) Greeks, calling them (...), and (...) they did
not wear (...) hair long as women's. But as it is a shame to (...) it, so it is
a sin to swear by it, whether long or short, white or black. (...) helps it, to
say, The matter is but small we swear by. For, first it is a forsaking of God,
and count (...).
you that a small matter? Compare Jer. 5. 7. with Jer. 2. 12, 13. (...).
(...), The more (...) and vile the thing is a man (...) by, the greater is the
oath, (...) he ascribes that to a vile creature, which is proper to God only,
so. to know the heart, to be a discerner of secrets, and an a venger of
falsehood. And if a man may (...) swear by his hairs, much (...) by his faith
and troth, that are much more precious: and to (...) by them so often and
ordinary, what does it argue, but that we are low brought and hardly (...)?
(...) who but a bankrupt will lay the (...) in his house to (...) for (...)?
(...), they are not ours to pledge: for (...) have plighted (...) already to
God. Lastly, He that pawneth them so often, will easily forfeit them at length,
as the pitcher (...) not so often to the well, but at last it comes broken
home. A man (...) soon swear away his faith and troth: and it is marvel if he
that often swears, does not too often forswear, and so forfeit all. Swear not
therefore at all in this sort. These petty oaths (as they count them) are great
faults, and to be refused in our talk, as poison Leviter volant,, (...)
vulnerant.
in our meat. The dishonor of them redounds to God, though he be not named in
them. But of (...) see more Verse 35.

Verse 37. But let your communication be, Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay.]
(...). Gemina (...) and nega tione (...), (...) Dei (...).
That is, as St Basil interprets it, Yea in speech, and Yea in (...), Nay in
speech, and Nay in heart: Or thus, let your common communication be plain, true
and sincere, that your bare word may be taken, without any further
asseveration. Not but that asseverations may be lawfully used, as Verily,
Truly, Indeed, etc, Sed, parcius ista tamen, not frequently or slightly, but
advisedly and seriously, as our Savior. If thou be a creditable person, and
(...) made faith of thy fidelity, with Quod dixi, dixi, thy word will be taken.
Or if it will not, that credit is dear bought, that is got by sin. Christ must
be obeyed, though no man will believe us. But Nec (...), nec (...).
a good man's oath is needless, a bad man's, bootlesse: for he that Firmus (...)
apud Augustine.
fears not an oath, neither will he scruple a lie, but credit will follow
honesty: Whiles therefore the communication is ours (as Christ here (...)) that
is, in our own power, and of our own Non ideo negare (...), ne periam, sed ideo
mentiri nolo, nec peccem; dixit faemina quaedam in equuleo apud Hieron.
accord, let (...) yea be yea, and nay, nay: and let it appear that ordinarily
and in common conversation, our word is as (...) to be taken as our oath. But
when, for the glory of God, and clearing of the truth, an oath is required of
us, then it is not our communication, but another. And in this case, for the
manifestation or confirmation of a needful but doubtful truth, an oath may be
safely and boldly taken, for an end of controversies, and satisfaction of
neighbors, Heb. 6. 16. yea we may lay it up among our best services, and
expect a blessing upon it (if rightly taken according to Jer. 4. 2.) as well as
upon hearing or reading, because it is an ordinance of God, Deuteronomy. 10. 20, Isa
65. 16 etc. Some of the Ancients, I (...), as Hierom, Theophylact, (...), were
in the error, that the Lord did only permit swearing in the old Testament (as
he did divorcement that he approved (...),) (...) that in this text our Savior
did quite take it away. But Christ came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill
it. Gods holy (...) is still to be (...), by taking a (...) oath, upon just
(...), (...). when (...) the Magistrate imposes it, or when some (...) will
(...) a (...) truth without an oath, and we cannot (...) demonstrate it. Thus
Jacob swear to Laban, Boaz to (...), Jonathan to David. And if it be lawful in
private betwixt two or more to admit God as a Judge, why may he not as well be
called as a witness? provided ever, that this be done (...) and (...), using
it not as food, but as physic, to Dan. Hist. contin. (...), (...). in 3d
(...). in (...).
help (...) in (...). Our (...) Henry 6. was never heard to swear an (...);
(...) greatest (...) being, Forsooth, Forsooth, Verily, Verily. I my self have
used (says Latimer) in mine earnest matters, to say (...) by St Mary; which
indeed is naught. (...), (...), the (...) the (...): qui (...), (...) (...),
malig. (...).


For whatsoever is more, comes of evil]
This is, of the devil. That which St Matthew calls the wicked one, chap. 13.
38. (the self-same word with that in this text) St Mark calls Satan, and St
Luke, the (...). Now can any good come out of such a Nazareth? Swearing is the
devils drivel, and swearers the devils drudges, acted and agitated by that
(...): And though they be not (...) drunk (...) they (...), yet are they not
their own men. For (...) ye not, says that great Apostle, that his servants
(...) 8.
ye are to whom ye obey? His work (...) do (as those Jews did (...).
in the Gospel) and his wages they shall receive, for they fall hereby (...) 5
12.
into hypocrisy, as some copies have it, Iam. 5. 12. whiles they (...).
daily pray, But deliver us from that evil one, and yet entertain him by this
sin. Or rather, as other copies and our Translation have it, they fall into
condemnation. And at the last day, when the master of the harvest shall gather
out of his kingdom all such botches and (...).
scandals, he will say to the reapers, Gather ye first the tares, and Mat. 13.
41, 30.
bind them in bundles (swearers with swearers, drunkards with drunkards, etc.
sinners of a kind with their fellow-sinners) and cast them into the fire,
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Good therefore is the counsel of
S. James. Above all things, my brethren, swear not, Whatever ye do, look to
that: it is a (...) sin, and that which makes the tongue to become, not a
City, not a Country, but a world of iniquity, Iam. 36 It is the devils hook
without a bait, as having neither profit nor pleasure (many times) to draw to
it; and that is no small aggravation. The (...) fell without a tempter, and are
therefore left without a Savior. Other sinners usually kill not till provoked,
steal not till (...), whore not till entised. But what has God done to these
monsti (...) men, that they should thus fly in his face, chop (as much as they
may,) his heart in (...), and upon (...) small occasion shoot such chain-shot,
as if they would make the windows of (...) to shake and totter? (...) Naboth
was said to have blasphemed, Iezabel proclaimed a fast. When our Savior was
accused of that sin, the High Priest rent his garments. When Rabshakeh had
(...) it indeed, Hezekiah fell to his prayers, and humbled himself before God.
Did these do thus for others, and wilt not thou do as much for thy self? God
has against thee, and is coming out armed with plagues and power. Oh meet
him, upon the way, with entreaties of peace, as Abigail did David, as Jacob did
Esau: quench his flames with floods of tears. Learn of Shimei (when he (...)
reproached David, and knew himself obnoxious) to be with God with the first, as
he was with the King, 2 Samuel 19. 18, 19, 20. and as Joseph's brethren
supplicated him for grace, whom they had (...) and misused, Genesis 50. 17. do you
the like. This do, or you are undone for ever. This do and do it seriously,
and God must either forswear himself, or forgive thee thy swearing, if thou
forgo it.

Verse 38. Ye have heard that it has been said, An eye for an Gellius (...).
(...). cap. 1.
eye, etc.]
This law of like for like (which also was in use among the ancient Romans)
the Scribes and Pharisees had abused and detorted from its proper sense of
public Justice, to private revenge: teaching the people to render evil for
evil, to pay their enemies in their own coin, and to give them as good as they
Neminem (...), nisi lacessu us and injurta affectus. Cicero.
brought. This is a dictate of corrupt nature, and her chief Secretary
Aristotle proclaims it. To be avenged of our enemies is held better in point
of honor, then to be reconciled unto them. Flesh I (...) ulcisci, (...) quam
ijs (...). Arist.
and blood (...) that it is matter of good metal to be quick of touch, as
forward in returning as others are in offering wrong. For if a man find his
enemy, will he let him go well away? said Saul. This is quite against the
principles of nature and common Rbet cap. 1. lib 9.
policy. To turn again, and revenge, is counted courage; which yet the word of
God calls cowardlinesse, disgrace, and loss of 1 (...). 24. 19.
victory. It is not manliness, but foolishness, Eccles. 7. 9. It Is (...)
brutishness; Anger a dog, and he will fly in your face: touch an Ass, and
(...) kick and winch. Its baseness, so to be led by our passions, as to be
able to bear nothing, as Simeon and Levi, brethren 1 Cor. 6. 7.
in iniquity, that in their anger slew a man, and in their selfwill (...). 49 6.
dug down a wall. Their father Jacob, heard that Dinah was defiled, and held
his peace; he reyned in his passions, by setting God before them: and so that
divine Proverb was made good in him: He that is slow to anger is better then
the mighty; and he (...). 34. 5.
that rules his spirit (as Jacob) then he that takes a City (as his (...).
16. 31.
sons.) It is a godly man's part, at some times, and in some places, to Tu
quidem (...) ut (...) interfici (...):
be deaf and dumb, as if he understood not, or as men in whose mouths are no
reproof. Which as David could skill of at some times, Psalm, 38 14. and in his
carriage toward Shimei, so at other * (...) (...) Cynico Vespafianus (...)
Dionem.
times (when the flesh prevailed) he could not, Psalm. 39. 2, 3. and in his
expedition against Nabal. But Peter must put up his sword, if he mean to be
Christ's Disciple. And Christians must not so much as grudge one against
another, unless they will be condemned: for behold, the Judge stands before
the door, as ready to right us. (...) 5. 9.
As if we retaliate we leave him nothing to do, unless it be to turn his
wrath from our enemy, on whom we have been avenged already, upon our selves,
for our sin of self-revenge. We use to say, if Pro. 24. 17, 18.
the Magistrate be not present, we may offend another, to defend our selves:
but if the Magistrate be present, there is no excuse. Now here the Judge
stands before the door, and cries out unto us with a loud voice: Dearly
beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather keep the Kings peace, and (...)
give place to wrath; that is, to the wrath of God ready to seize upon thine
adversary, if thou Romans 12. (...). expounded.
prevent it not by an overhasty revenge of the wrongs offered thee. For it is
Written, Vengeance is mine, mine office and royalty. Is it Psalm 94. (...), 2.
safe to invade his part? to justle the chief Justice out of his seat? (...) is
it fit that the same party should be both Accuser and Judge? Pope in his own
cause? depose the Magistrate? at least appeal from God to himself, as if he
would not sufficiently do his office? Shall not God avenge his own, that cry
night and day unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you that he will
avenge them speedily, says our Savior, I will repay it, says the Lord: but
upon Luke 18 7, 8.
this condition, that we wait his leisure, and praeoccupate not his executions,
says S. Augustine. Joseph accused by his lewd mistrisse, either pleads not, or
is not (...). He knew that though he suffered for a season, God would find a
time to clear his innocence, and he was not deceived. Moses complained not, but
was silent, when wronged by Aaron and Miriam: God therefore struck in for him,
and struck Miriam with leprosy: Aaron escaped by his (...). God is their
champion that strive not for themselves. (...) quid (...) quam (...)? Cart.
I seek not mine own glory, but there is one that seeks it, says Christ. He,
when he was (...), reviled not again; when he suffered, (...) threatened not,
but committed himself to him that judges righteously, and gives to every
transgression and trespass a just recompense of reward. S. Paul could not have
wished worse to (...). 8. (...).
Alexander the copper-smith, then the Lord reward him aeccording 1 (...). 2.
(...).
Heb. (...).
to his works. This was not (says an ancient Author) a cursing 2 Timothy 4 14.
or a reviling of him, but a praediction, befitting an Apostle, that (...).
Author (...) apud Just. Mart.
revenged not himself, but gave place to wrath, and delivered up his enemy to
God, as David did his adversaries, as Simon Peter did Simon Magus, and the
Primitive Church did Julian the Apostate. And surely it is a fearful thing,
when the Saints shall say to God, concerning those that malign or molest them,
as David sometimes said to Solomon, Thou know what Ioab and Shimei did unto
me: (...) therefore according to thy wisdom, and let not their hoar heads go
down to the grave in peace. If any hurt Gods zealous witnesses, there goes a
fire out of their mouths to devour (...) King. 2. 6.
them, as the fire from heaven did the first and (...) Captain sent Rev. 11. 5.
for Elisha: better anger all the witches in the world then such, because God
is for them. Little thought the Gibeonites, in David's time, that the Lord had
so taken to heart their wrongs, that for their sakes all Israel should suffer.
Even when we think not of it, is the righteous Judge avenging our unrighteous
(...).

Verse 39. But I say unto you, that ye resist not evil.]
For here to resist, is to be overcome, says S. Paul, Romans 12. 21. And in a In
rixa, is inferior est, qui victor est.
matter of strife or disagreement, he has the worst that (...) it, says S.
Basil. Yea Aristotle himself he yields, that of the twain (...).
it is better to suffer the greatest wrong, then to do the least. And it was a
heavy challenge and charge upon (...) carnal Corinthians, Arist. Ethic.
that had strife, divisions, and lawsuits amongst them; Why do ye not rather
take wrong? why do ye not suffer your selves to 1 Cor. 6. 7, 8.
(...) defrauded? Nay, you (...) wrong, and defraud, and that your brethren.
(...) be not deceived, says he, to wit, with vain hope of impunity, for Non
(...) mali est refer injuriam, (...) inserre (...).
God is the avenger of all such, as like the angry Be, care not to (...)
another, though it be to the loss of their own lives. Besides that, in
resisting evil, we give place to the devil, whom if by patience and forbearance
we could resist, he would sly from us. We wrestle Ephesians 6. 12.
not against flesh and blood (as we think we do, when we conflict (...)
infirmissimorum bominum injurijs? Dum haec (...) eminas project a frangamus, a
diabolo (...) Roloc. in locum.
with men (...) our selves, that have done us injury) but against (...) and
powers, etc. q. d. whiles we are basie in breaking those darts, that men shoot
from afar against us; we are oppressed by the devil nearer-hand us, Ephesians. 4.
26. Here by the way, Magistrates must be admonished to take heed how they
aggravate punishment upon a malefactor, out of private (...): Parents also and
Masters, how they correct in a rage and fury. For although they be public
persons, yet to give correction in a (...) mood, is to (...) their heart, by
way of revenge, it is a degree of resisting evil. The tyrant says, (...), it
is in my power to do it; the good Governor says, (...), it concerns me to
do it, in point of duty, quoth a Philosopher.

But whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek]
Socrates a Heathen, when (...) had received a box on the ear, answered, What
Quam (...) est (...) homines quando prodire debeant cum galea?
an ill thing is it, that men cannot fore-(...) when they should put on a
helmet, before they go abroad? And when he was (...) by another, If an Ass
should kick me, said he, should I spurn him again? (...) we have (...), that
(...) to be (...), lest they should seem to be Anabaptists, in taking two blows
for one, will give two blows for one, yea for none, sometimes; it is but a word
and a blow with them, as it was with Cain, Lamech, (...), who said, The days
of mourning for my father are at hand, then I will (...), (...).
(...) my brother Jacob. In which words he either threatens his (...) (as
Luther thinks) for blessing his brother, q. d. I will be the death of my
brother, and so cause my father to (...): Or else he threatens his brother (as
most Interpreters sense it) after his fathers head is once laid, without any
respect at all to his mother, whom he not so much as mentions. He took no
great care, how she would take it: and his deferring till his fathers death,
was more out of fear of a curse, then conscience of a duty. There are that read
the words by way of a wish, Let the days of mourning for my father draw nigh,
etc. And then it is a double (...). Sure we are, that as concerning his
brother, he comforted himself, (...) 42.
purposing to kill him. He threatened him, says the Septuagint, q. d. (...)
I will sit upon his skirts, and be even with him. The nature of (...).
ungodly men is vindictive, and rejoicing in other men's (...), (which is the
devils disease) especially if provoked by any injury or indignity, as smiting
on the cheek: But God will (...) them on the cheek bone so hard, as that he
will break the teeth of the ungodly; smite them in the hinder parts, where we
use to whip Dixit (...) cum ab (...). (...). (...). 3 7.
froward children, and so put them to a perpetual reproach. Neither only will
he smite upon their loins, but through them, yea he will crack their crowns,
cleave their (...), wound their hairy Psalm. (...). 6.
scalps, be their locks (...) so bushy, their looks never so (...) Deuteronomy. (...).
11.
and terrible, that count it courage to turn again, and revenge, Lacones (...)
ad (...).
which every Turk and Heathen, nay every bull and boar can do. The Lamb of God
gave his cheeks to the smiters, so did (...) Psalm. 68. 21.
the meek, Job the just, and Paul the patient; yet not so patient, Isa. 50. 6.
but he could set forth his privilege, when he was to be scourged, Joh. 18. 23.
and clear his innocence (...) meekness of wisdom: and so 1 King. 22. 24.
may we; yea, we may safely decline a likely danger, in some cases Acts (...)
2, 3.
Job 16 10.
especially, as our Savior did. Apud (...) serunt paucas (...) tites esse,
qued temere li (...).


Verse 40. And if any man sue thee at the Law, and take away thy coat]
Rather remit of thy right, and sit down by the loss, then suffer the trouble
of a vexatious lawsuit: Quiet is to be sought above (...): therefore Isaac
removed his dwelling so often, when the spiteful Philistims strove with him
about the wells he had (...). Not but that we may take the benefit of the Law,
and crave Acts (...). (...)
the help of the Magistrate, for preventing or punishing of wrong Acts (...).
(...).
(...): as Paul sent to the chief Captain, and appealed to (...). (...), (...),
(...), (...) potest. Owen. (...).
But this must be done, neither with a vindictive, nor a (...) mind, as the
manner is. Therefore after Who made (...) Judge? our Savionr presently adds,
Take heed of covetousness. He that complains of another to the Magistrate,
must 1. Love his enemies. 2. Prosecute, with continual respect, to Gods glory
and the public gnod. 3. Use the benefit of the law with charity Sordida (...)
quidam baud (...) quosdam (...): (...) exercent.
and mercy, without cruelty and extremity. 4. Use it as an utmost (...), when
it cannot otherwise be; lest strangers be filled with thy wealth, and thy
labors be in the house of a Lawyer, and thou mourn at last (with Solomon's
fool) when thine estate is consumed upon him: there being but few such as
Servius Sulpitius, of whom Tully reports, that he was not more a Lawyer then a
Justicer, referring all things to moderation and equity, and not stirring Colu
ella Leguletorum (...).
up suits, but composing them.

Verse 41. And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile,]
Under color of the Magistrates authority, which he abuses; rather then by
resisting thou should revenge thy self, go with him Philip. 9.
two miles, yea as far as the shoes of the preparation of the Gospel (...),
Persis (...) quos body (...) as (...).
of peace can carry thee. In the course of a man's life many wrongs are to be
put up, which whosoever cannot frame to, let him make up his pack, and be gone out
of the world: for here is no (...) 6.
being for him. Many pills are to be swallowed down whole, Qui (...) vivere; ut
Saul 1 Samuel 10 27.
which, if we should chew them, would stick in our teeth, and prove very
bitter. Patience is of cont nuall use to us at every turn: its as bread or
salt, which we cannot make one good meal Levius fit patientia (...) corrigere
est nesas.
without. Its a cloak, to keep off all storms; a helmet, to bear off all blows;
a paring-knife, that cuts the cross less and less, till it comes to nothing.
As there be two kinds of Antidotes against poison, viz. hot and cold: so
against tribulation and temptation, Cedamus, leve sit (...) fertur onus.
prayer and patience; the one, hot; the other, cold; the one, quenching; the
other, quickening, Dan. 6. 20. The King Pondus (...) inco (...) fit. S. n.
cried unto Daniel with a lamentable voice, verl. 21. Then Daniel talked with
the King, etc. with a voice not distressed, as that of the King was; for as by
faith he stopped the mouths of the lions: (...). 11.
so by patience he possessed his own soul, l. uk. 21. 19. he became master of
himself; which is the only true manhood. So patience Jam. 1. 4.
had her perfect work in Joseph: therefore he became, as St James has it,
perfect and entire, wanting nothing. Julius Caesar beholding the picture of
(...) in Hercules Temple at Gades, lamented that he had done no worthy exploit
at those years, wherein (...) had conquered the whole world. Joseph at thirty
showed more true virtue, valor, piety, patience, purity, policy, knowledge of
secrets, skill in government, etc. then either of them. Giles of Brussels, a
Dutch-Martyr, when the Act and (...). sol. 8. 1.
Friars at any time did miscall him, he ever held his peace at such private
injuries, insomuch that those blasphemers would say abroad, That he had a dumb
devil in him. And Cassianus reports, that when a Christian was held captive
of infidels, and (...) with diverse pains, and ignominious taunts, being
demanded by way of scorn; Tell us what miracle thy Christ has (...)? he
answered, He has done what you see, that I am not moved at all the cruelties
and contumelies you cast upon me. Godly people can bear wrongs best of any: and
although corrupt nature in them bustles eftsoons and bestir it self, yet they
soon club it down, they reason themselves patient, as David, and pray down
Psalm. 43.
their distempers, as Paul. And albeit, with those two sons of 2 Cor. 12.
thunder, they could find in their hearts to call for fire from heaven upon
their adversaries, yet they will do nothing without leave. As they came to
Christ, and said, Will thou that we command fire from heaven? etc. which when
Christ disliked and denied, Luke 9 54.
they were soon satisfied. We must take up our crosses, and when God bids us
yoke, he is the wisest man that yields his neck most Gal 6. 9
willingly. Our Savior gave Judas his mouth to be kissed, when Give such
before they ask, Psalm. 41. 1.
he came to betray him, leaving us a pattern of like equanimity and patience.
(...).


Verse 42. Give to him that asks thee.]
Yet with discretion, and choice of a sit object. Which having met with, be not
weary Aug
of well-doing; for in due season ye shall reap, if ye faint not. Rogers of
love, (...). (...).
Giving is compared to sowing, which, in good ground, is usually (...) Christi
est (...). (...) est, se vel tum (...), (...)-(...) aliquo munere
prosequeretur. (...)?
with increase. Therefore a worthy Minister, upon occasion, asking his wife,
whether there were any money in the house, she answered, that she knew but of
one threepence; well (says he) we must go sow, that is, give something to
the poor, knowing that to be the way of bringing in, Prove. 11. 24, 25. Deuteronomy.
15. 10. The mercy of God crowns our beneficence with the blessing of store.
Happy was the Sareptan that she was no niggard of her last handful. The more
we give, the more we have: it increases in the giving, as the loaves in our
Saviors hands did. Never did a charitable act go away without the retribution
of a blessing. How improvident therefore are we, that will not offer a
Sacrifice of Nunquan (...).
alms, when God sets up an altar before us? It were an excellent course,
surely, if Christians now, as they of old at Corinth, would (...) up weekly a
part of their gettings for pious and charitable uses; and that men would abound
in this work of the Lord, as knowing that their labor is not in vain in the
Lord (I speak of them that are able, for we may not stretch beyond our staple,
and In Basiliensi Concilio anno 1440 Amadeus (...) dux uxoratus, and duos (...)
ad pontificatum (...) (...).
so spoil all.) We read of a Bishop of Lincoln, that never thought he had that
thing, that he did not give. And of one Bishop of Rome (though that is a rare
thing) that was so liberal to the poor, that when he was asked by certain
Ambassadors, whether he had any hunting-dogs to show them, he answered, Yes.
And bringing them to a great sort of poor people, whom he daily relieved at his
table, These are the dogs (says he) wherewith I hunt Hi sunt canes quos alo
quotidie, quibus (...) me (...) glorian venaturum.
after heaven. Bishop Hooper also, had his board of beggars. Twice I was (says
M. Fox) in his house in Worcester: where in his common hall, I saw a table
spread with good store of meat, and (...) full of beggars and poor folk. And
this was his daily custom. And when they were served and catechized, then he
himself I am vero long (...). Pauperibus sua dat gratis, nec munera curat
(...) papalis, quod modo (...). Hic (...) legendo percipimus modo, etc.
sat down to dinner, and not before. Queen Anne Bullin carried ever about her
a certain little purse, out of which she was wont daily to scatter some alms to
the needy: thinking no day well spent, wherein some man had not fared the
better by some benefit at her hands. The Savoy, Bride-well, and another
Hospital, founded by King Edward the sixth, upon a Sermon of B. Ridleys, do
speak and testify both (...) tender heart, and his bountiful hand. Bonfinius
relates of Stephen King of Hungary (and the same thing is reported of Oswald
King of England) that Act. and Mon. 1368 and 1534
his right hand rotted not for a long time after he was dead. And well it might
be so (says he) that that hand should be kept See his life by Sir John Heyw.
p. 170.
from corruption, that never suffered any to beg, to hunger, to lie in
captivity, or any other misery. But these, alas, are the last and worst days,
wherein love is waxen cold: Men's hearts are Merito manus illa (...) expers esse
debuit, quae neminem mendicare, esurire, and in captivitate, (...) miseria
jacere, perpessa est.
frozen, and their hands withered up. A great deal of mouthmercy there is, as
in S. James his time, Go thy ways and be fed, clothed, warmed: but with what?
with a mess of words, a suit of words, a fire of words: these are good cheap:
but a little handful were better then a great many such mouth-fuls. We may now
a days wait for some good Samaritan to come and prove himself a neighbor: And
after all complain, There is no mercy in the land. Merciful men are taken
away, the liberal Hos. 4. 1.
man fails from among the children of men. Elias lacks his Isa. 57. 1.
Psalm. 12. 1.
(...) of Sarepta, and Elisha the Shunamite. Paul cannot find the Purpurisse,
nor Peter the Currier. Abraham we have not, and Job we find not. Captain
Cornelius is a black-swan in this generation, that gave to him that asked, and
from him that would borrow of him, turned not away, etc.

And from him that would borrow of thee, turn not away.]
Some are ashamed to beg and take alms, who yet, being (...) with great
necessity, could be glad to borrow. And a (...) kindness it might be, to lend
them a bigger sum, then to give them a lesser. Here therefore a good man is
merciful and (...) 112.
(...), he will lend, looking for nothing again: not looking that a poor
neighbor should earn it out, or do as much for him (...) other way. Nay, we
ought not in this case so to look for our own again, as that that be the chief
thing we aim at, but to obey Christ, and to do a poor man a pleasure. And what
if the wicked borrows, (...). 37. 21.
and paieth not again: let not others fare the worse for their fault. The godly
make great conscience of paying that they owe, as the son of the Prophets
that was so sorry for the (...) 2 King. 6. 5.
of the axe, Alas, master, it was but borrowed. And Elisha (...) the widow
first pay her debts with her oil, and then live of the (...). Now from such
borrowers turn not away: plead not excuse, (...) not (...) when it is in thy
hand to help them presently. He (...) Prove. 28. (...).
hides his (...) (in this case) shall have many a curse. Not (...) (...) 6. 9.
with Mark 3. (...).
do good (in this kind) is to do hurt; not to save a life, or (...) a poor
man's declining estate, is to destroy it. Carnal (...) will here stand up and
plead, as Nabal did, Shall I take my (...) 1 (...). 25 11.
and my fl sh, that I have provided for my shearers, and give it (...)
strangers? So, (...) I take my money or my means, which I have provided for my
children, and give it or lend it to such and such? Here then you must silence
your reason and exalt your faith. Consider how great an honor it is to be
Almoner to the King of heaven; that by (...) out upon such, you lay hold upon
eternal life; (...).
that the Apostle, 2 Cor. 8. 2. sets (...) liberality by a word (...)
signifies simplicity, in opposition to that crafty wiliness, that is in the
covetous, to defend themselves from the danger (as they think) of liberality:
that, the liberal man devises (...) 1 Cor. 6. 18.
things, and by liberal things he shall stand: When a man would think he
should fall rather, he takes a right (...) to stand and thrive: He lays up for
himself a sure foundation.

Verse 43. Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine (...).]
This later they drew, as an inference from the former, (...) the rule of
contraries. But Logic being the rule of reason, (...) now is corrupt, is it
self in some respect corrupt also. Sure we are, be it what Logic it will, it
is but carnal Divinity. Suitable it is to Consu'e (...) Logic. lib. 3 cap 2 p
5. 0.
(...) nature, but so much the more suspicious. The Pharisees taught (...), and
were applauded. The Papists also little better (for the (...) are fled and hid
in the Papists, as one says the ancient (...) are in the Monks) they teach,
that in two cases only we (...) bound to help our enemies, in the case of
extremity, and of (...). For other things, to love them, to pray for them, or
do them good in other cases, it is but a counsel our Savior gives, and (...)
commandment. If men can do it, its well; but if they cannot, (...) not
required. Thus say they, But what says Christ the Lawmaker, and so the truest
Interpreter thereof?

Verse 44. But I say unto you, Love your enemies]
A hard task, (...) must needs say, but hard or not hard, it must be done, be
it never (...) contrary to our foul nature, and former practice: The spirit
(...). 4. 5, 6.
(...) is in us lusts after envy, but the Scripture teaches better (...).
And what are those? To go no further then the present (...); 1. Love your
enemies, for the inside, be tenderly affected (...) them, as heartily wishing
their good every way; being (...).
glad of their welfare, and grieved when it falls out otherwise: (...) 35.
(...).
Thus David was a sorrowful man when his enemies were in affliction, and put
on sackcloth. 2. Seal up our love to them by all good expressions; which are
here referred to these three heads. 1. Bless them, that is, speak kindly to
them and of them, let them (...).
(...) your good word. 2. Do good, that is, be ready to help them and (...)
them, at all assayes. 3. Pray for them, that God would pardon their sins, and
turn their hearts. This is our Saviors precept, and this was his practice. He
melted over Jerusalem (the (...) house of his Saints and himself) and was
grieved at the hardness of their hearts. Next (for words) he called Judas,
Friend, not devil; and prayed, Father, forgive them. And (for Mark. 6. 5.
deeds) he not only not called for fire from heaven, or legions of Angels
against them; but did them all good for bodies and souls; for he healed Malchus
ear, washed Judas his feet, etc. like that good Samaritan, he was at pains and
cost with them, instructing them 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26.
with patience, and proving if at any time he might pull them out of the snare
of the devil, by whom they were taken alive at his pleasure: (...), (...)
alive, and in (...) by that (...) (...).
Which also he did. For he converted the thief on the cross (who at first had
reviled him,) and graciously received those three thousand souls that had
embrued their villainous hands in his innocent blood, Acts 2. Thus our Savior,
full of grace and truth. And of his fulness (of redundancy, of his
over-measure) we (...) (...). 1. 16.
all received, and grace for grace, as the child receives from (...) father
limme for limme, part for part, etc. He is the father (...) (...). (...). (...).
eternity, and all his children, in all ages of the Church, have (...) him
(somewhat) in this sweet property. Abraham (...) his nephew Lot, that had dealt
so discourteously (...) him. (...) (...) the wrong done him by Abimelech and
his servants, and forgiveth and feasteth them. Absalom inviteth (...) to a
(...), and Alexander, Philotus, to kill them thereat: but (...) I (...) does
it, to show there was no grudge, or purpose of (...) Jacob was faithful to
Laban, who changed his wages (...) times and ever for (...) worse. Joseph
entertained his (...) at his house. And whereas their guilty hearts (...) them,
that he (...) himself upon them thereby, he feasted them (...) purpose to be
reconciled unto them: As the Romans had (...) (...), to the which were invited
none but kinfolks to (...) (...). (...).
love, and to (...) reconciliation, if there had been any breach. (...) (...).
(...).
to (...) forward. Moses stands up in the gap for them that (...) so (...) him.
(...) marches all night, and fights (...) day for the (...) that had
deceived him. Samuel (...) (and God forbid he should do otherwise) for an
ungrateful people, that had rejected him. David put on sackcloth, he wept and
(...), when his enemies were afflicted; he spared Saul's life, and (...)
Shimeis, when Abishais fingers even itched to be (...) See (...) 7 5.
(...) their heads. (...) set bread and water before the (...) that came to
(...) him: and provided a table for them, ^.
that had provided a grave for him. The Disciples were (...) of the salvation
of the (...) that had accused them, at the same time, to our Savior, Mat. 15.
12. St Stephen prays beartily for his (...), and prevailed (as S. Austin
thinks) for Paul's conversion: And being reviled ((...) he) we (...), being
defamed (...) pray. Do my Lord of Canterbury a shrewd turn, und then (...) 1
(...). 4 (...) (...) and (...) (...).
may be sure to have him your friend while he lives: This (...) grown to a
common proverb concerning Archbishop (...). And Lawrence (...) the Martyr,
being sent to prison by (...) Gardner, Bishop of Winchester (who (...), Carry
away this (...), etc.) praised God for a place of rest and quiet, (...) (...).
13, 8.
to pray for the Bishops conversion.

Verse 45. That (...) may be the children of your father]
That ye may appear to be, and well approve your selves to be the sons of
(...). 3. 15.
God without rebuke amidst a perverse and crooked nation: Whilst (...)
resemble him, not in outward lineaments only, as an image does man, but in
nature and disposition, as a child does his father. Now God to make known his
power and patience, endures with much (...)-suffering the vessels of wrath,
fitted to destruction: such (...) Romans 9. 22.
devils, as march up and down the earth with heart and hands, Exodus 34 2.
(...) full as hell with all manner of mischief, lewdness and rebellion. (...)
does he (...) with them only, but gives them the Gospel (...) call them to
repentance, and strives with them by his Spirit, (...) they desperately resist,
yea despite, hardening their hearts (...) the nether millstone, (...) to be
reformed, hating to be (...); Neh. 9.
till at length they (...) all passive power also, of escaping the Act; 7.
(...) hell, (...) is a conformity to the very devils. This his dealing with
rebels and reprobates. Neither so only; but, (...) he might make known the
riches of his glory on the vessels (...), which he had before prepared to
glory; He loved his Romans 9. 23.
(...) not (...), nay (...); and effectually called them, (...) only not
deserving, but not so much as (...) it. For when Romans 5 10.
(...) were (...), we were reconciled to God by the death of his (...). God so
loved the world, the wicked and wayward world, (...) sent his only be gotten
Son, etc. Now, Qui (...) (...). de (...).
immisit spiritum, promisit (...), quid (...) tibi (...) est? He that (...)
thee his son, imparted unto the^e of his Nihil tandem (...) negasse (...) est
qui a l (...) hort (...) esum. (...).
(...), promised thee his favor, What will he deny thee? how shall (...) with
his Son give thee all things also? Romans 8 Oh let his (...) be our pattern, his
(...) our precedent, to love and (...) kindness to our greatest enemies. So
shall we force a (...), if not from the mouths, yet, at least, the consciences
of all, (...) the worst, that we are born of God, and do love him better (...)
our selves, when to please him, we can so much cross our selves (...) the
practice of this most difficult duty.

For he makes his sun to arise on the evil]
A sweet mercy, (...) not prized, because ordinary: as Manna was counted a
light (...), because lightly come by. But should we be left in (...), as were
the Egyptians, for three days together, so that (...) man stirred off the
stool he sat on, this common benefit would (...) better set by. The sun, is
(as it were) a (...) whereinto the Genesis 1.
(...) gathered the light, which, till then, was scattered in the whole (...)
of the heavens. This David beheld with admiration, Psalm. 8. (...) with
adoration, as those Idolaters that worshipped (...) Queen Jer 44.
of heaven (not so Job, Chap. 31. 26.) Truly (says Solomon) the light is
sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the (...) 11. 6.
sun: and S. Chrysostom wondreth at this, that whereas all (...) naturally
ascends, God has turned the beams of the Sun (...) (...).
the earth, made the light thereof to stream downwards. It is (...) ^
our sakes and service doubtless: whence also the Sun has (...) name in the
Hebrew tongue (Shemesh) a servant, as being the servant general of mankind;
whiles he shines indifferently (...) the evil and the good, and to both
imparteth light and heat.

And his rain to fall]
Not only upon flowers and fruit-(...), ^.
but also upon the briars and brambles of the wilderness. (...) bottles of
rain, the clouds, are vessels (says one) as thin as the liquor which is
contained in them: there they hang and (...) though weighty with their burden:
but how they are upheld, (...) why they fall here and now, we know not, and
wonder. This (...) know (and may well wonder) that God makes his Sun to shine,
and his rain to fall on the evil and unjust also. What so great (...) is it
then, if we light up our candle to such, or let down our (...) that they may
drink? This is our Saviors inference here. The D (...).
dew, we (...), falls as well upon the dayes-eye, and thistle, as upon (...)
551. (...) and (...), (...) con (...), (...), and.
the rose and violet.

On the just, and on the unjust]
Those whom S. Matthew (...) unjust, S. Luke calls (...). Ingratitude is an
(...) degree of injustice. God is content we have the benefit of his creatures
and comforts, so he may have the praise of them. This is (...) the rent he
looks for, and this he stands upon; he indents with (...) for it, Psalm. 50. 15.
and Gods servants, knowing how he expects (...). lib 2. de (...). cap 21.
(...). (...).
and accepts it, do usually oblige themselves to it, as that which pleases
him better then an ox that has horns and hoofs: And they have been careful
to return it, as the solid bodies that reflect the heat they receive from the
Sunbeams, upon the Sun again. But most men are like the Moon, which the fuller
it is of light, the Luke 6 (...).
(...) it gets off the Sun from whom it receives light: Like (...) 69 31.
springs of water, that are coldest, when the Sun shines hottest upon them:
Like the Thracian flint, that burns with water, is (...) with oil: or the dead
sea, that swalloweth the silver streams of (...) (...), and yet grows thereby
neither greater nor sweeter. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O ye foolish people
and (...). (...). 6.
unwise? Do ye thus rob him of his praise, and so run away with his rent? Is
this the best return we make him for his (...) (...) and miraculous
deliverances? Out upon our unthankfullnesse and unrighteous dealing! that can
devour Gods blessings as beasts do their prey; swallow them as. swine their
(...); bury them as the barren earth the seed; use them as homely as Rachel did
her fathers gods; yea abuse them to his dishonor; as if he had hired us to be
wicked; and fight against him with his own weapons, as Iehu did against (...)
with his own men, as David against Goliath with his own sword, as Benhadad
against Ahab with that life that he had given him. This injurious usage at the
hands of the sons of men, was that, that caused God to make a world, and unmake
it again, to promise them 120 years respite, (...) to repent him, so that he
cut them short 20 years of the (...) number; yea to perform the promised (...),
and to repent (...) of it when he has done, as Divid did of the kindness he
had (...) unworthy Nabal. Will not God take his own from such, 1 Samuel 15 21.
(...) be gone, Hos. 3. 9? turn their glory into (...), Hos 4. 7? (...) their
blessings, Mal. 2 2? (...) them after he has done them good, losh. 24. 20?
(...) them to serve their enemies in the want of all things, that would not
serve so good a Master in the (...) of all things, Deuteronomy. 28. 47? What (...) a
Prince do, (...) take a sword from a rebel? what should a mother do, but
(...) away the meat from the child, that (...) it? And what (...) the (...)
and just Lord do (...), then (...) off the meat from the months, and take
away his corn and his wine, his wool and his (...) from such as not only not
own him to it, but go after other (...) hearts with it, paying their rents to a
wrong (...)? (...) suos.
(...) 2. 5.
Thus he dealt by his (...) vineyard, Isa. 5. 5. by the unprofitable servant,
(...). 25 28. by the foolish (...) (for as the Chronicler speaks of (...)
Thomas Moore, I know not whether E (...) (...) (...) 1. 28.
to call them, (...) wisemen, or wise foolish men) that imprisoned the truth
in (...), and made not the best of that little light they had: God not only
made fools of them, but dilivered them up to a reprobate sense, and only for
their unthankfullnes, which is robbing God of his (...). O therefore what will
become of us, that so (...) to his daily dishonor, our health, wealth, wit,
prosperity, plenty, peace, friends, means, marriage, day, might, all comforts
and creatures, our times, our talents, yea the very Scriptures, the Gospel of
truth, the rich offers of grace, and our golden opportunities? Is not (...) ned
by many into a (...) formality, and policy? our ancient fervor and
forwardness, into a general (...) and unzealousnesse? And (besides the love
of many waxen cold) does not iniquity abound in every quarter and corner of the
land? which therefore even groaneth under (...) burden, and longs for a vomit
to spue us (...), as the most unthankful and unworthy people that ever Gods
Sun shone upon, and Gods rain fell upon (the Sun of Christ's Gospel especially,
and the rain of his grace) so fair and so long together? If there be any (...)
sin in the world, it is ingratitude, said that (...) (...), (...)
Q. Elizabeth in a (...) to Henry 4. King of France. The very Heathens judged
it to be the epitome of a levil: Call me unthankful, says one, you call me
all that naught is. Lycurgus would (...).
make no law against it, because he thought no man would fall so far below
reason, as not thankfully to acknowledge a benefit. Thus nature it self
abhorres ingratitude; which therefore carries so (...) inter (...). (...)
(...) (...). 44. 4
much the more detestation, as it is more odious even to them that have blotted
out the image of God. Some vices are such as nature smileth upon, though
frowned at by divine Justice: Not so this. Where fore have ye rewarded evil for
good? Genesis 44. 4.

Verse 46. For if ye love them that love you, what reward have you?]
The Greek and Latin word (say the Rhemists) signifies On Mat. 5. 12.
very wages or hire due for work; and so presupposes a meritorious deed. But
what will they say to S. Luke, who calls that (...), or grace, which S.
Matthew here called (...), a reward? It is a reward, but of mere grace (see
Romans 4) that God will give to (...), sed (...) (...) in Mat. 6.
them that love their enemies. If thine enemy be hungry, feed him, etc. For
thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head, and the Lord shall reward thee,
says Solomon, Prove. 25. 21, 22. A (...), and all little enough; 1. Thou shall
heap coals on (...) head, those coals are (as Austin interprets it) urentes
(...) gemitus, the scorching sighs of true repentance: q. d. Thou shall melt
these hardest metals, (as many of the Martyrs did their persecutours) thou
shall meeken their rancour, overcome their (...), cause them to turn short
again upon themselves, and, upon sight of their sin, shame themselves, and
justify thee, as Saul did David. 2. The Lord shall reward thee. (And all his
(...) are more then bountiful) yet not of merit (for what proportion betwixt
the work and wages? but first of mercy. Reward and mercy are joined together in
the second Commandment, and Psalm. 62. 12. Secondly, of promise, for our
encouragement,) (...) our labor is not in vain in the Lord. Briefly, it is
called a reward, not properly, but by similitude, because it is given after the
work done. Next, it is a reward, not legal, but evangelicall; promised in
mercy, and in like mercy performed. Whence it is also called the reward of
inheritance. Now an inheritance is not merited, but Col. 3. 24.
freely descends on sons, because they are sons. Let no son say, with
profane Esau, What is this birthright to me? or with the prodigal in the
Gospel, Give me here the portion that belongs unto me (such are those that
love their friends only, here they have love for love, and that is all they are
to look for) but look up to the recompense of reward, with Moses; and answer as
Naboth, God forbid that I should so far gratify the devil and mine own evil
heart, as to part with my patrimony, my hope of reward, for a little revenge or
whatsoever coin, bearing Satan's superscription.

Verse 47. What do ye more then others?]
Singular things are expected and required of such as have received singular
grace and mercy. As to be eminent in good works, to get above others,. to (...)
l it. 3 14.
(...) our feet where other men's heads are. The way of the righteous (...) on
high, says Solomon: he goes an higher way to work then Ephesians. 5. 15. (...).
ordinary, and walks (...), accurately, exactly: he gets even to the very top
of godliness, as the word imports. He knows that more then the common stint
is required of him, and that he must do that, that the world will never do:
as to be hot in religion, Rev. 3. 16, The carnal Gospeller says, Religiosum
oportet esse, non Gellius.
religentem, It is fit to be Religious, but not so conscientious. So, to be
zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14. but with discretion, says the (...). The
King of Navarre told Beza, he would launch Pelago (...) non ita commissurus
(...), quin quando liberet, pedem refer posset.
no further into the sea, then he might be sure to return safe to the haven.
Though he showed some countenance to religion, yet he would be sure to save
himself. So, to abound in Gods work; to have a heart full of goodness, as
those Romans, Chap. 15. 14. a life full of good works, as Tabitha, Acts 9. 33.
But this is to be Eccles. 7. 16. Cicero.
wise overmuch, says the flesh. Philosophandum, sed paucis. What need this
waste? said Judas. It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem, to worship,
said (...) to the people: take a shorter cut rather to the golden calves. They
are idle, they are idle, said Pharaoh of Gods busiest servants. So, God would
have his to walk precisely. This the mad world mocks at: To pluck out Ephesians.
5. 15.
their right eyes: this is a hard saying, says the sensualist: To offer Mat.
5. 29.
violence to Gods Kingdom; Fair and softly goes far; and its good keeping on
the warm side of the hedge, says the Politician: to (...) Gods (...) as the
apple of thine eyes; (...) how few are (...) that will not break the hedge of
any Commandment, so they may (...) a piece of foul way? Lastly, To love an
enemy, do good to them that hate us, and c. But this seems, to the most, (...)
and impossible. What? love those that (...) and (...) them? (...) daily rage
and rail at them, with such (...), as if they (...) been as far as hell, for
every word that (...) cut of their mouths against them, etc? Love this man?
Nay (...) love the (...) himself. They will rather die a thousand deaths, then
endure such a one: If they could love him, yet they would not. They are prime
Christians in these men's opinions, that (...) to Saul's measure, I will do thee
no hurt, my son David: If they pass him by, when he is in their power, as the
Priest and the (...) did the wounded man: if they fall not (...) upon him
(...), and retaliate injuries, they have gone far and (...): and such a
measure of charity, they hold little (...) then (...), (...) here attainable.
This is the voice and guise of (...) and (...). The spirit that is in us
lusts to envy, and prompteth us to (...) taunt with taunt, suit with suit,
blow with blow, and holds them fools that do not. But this is the wisdom from
beneath, and is earthly, sensual, devilish: whereas that (...). 3. 1. (...).
from above, is first pure, and then peaceable, (well assured of pardon of
sin, and peace (...) God, and thence) gentle or equable (...)
to men, and easily persuaded, full of mercy (to an offending brother) and good
fruits, (friendly expressions,) without wrangling (...)
or lawing, and without hypocrisy: such as can be heartily reconciled, and
love again without dissimulation, not in word, and in Romans 12 9. 1 John 3 (...).
tongue, but in deed and in truth. Not covering a pot-sheard with silver
dross, a wicked heart with burning lips. Seven abominations Prove. 16. 23, 24,
25, 20.
are in such a heart, and his wickedness shall be showed before the whole
Congregation, as Absoloms usage of Amnon. A godly man carries neither cruel
hatred, a desire to hurt whom he hates, as Esau; nor simple hatred, where there
is no desire to hurt, Prove. 19. (...). and 14. 20.
but a disdain to help: he forgives not only, but forgets, as Joseph, Genesis 50.
20. (For injuries remembered are hardly remitted.) And although he loves not his
enemies sins, yet he does their persons: striving to seal up his love, by all
loving usage, both in word and deed. And herein he does more then others; that
which is singular, and in the worlds account, seraphicall: that which (in
truth) is extraordinary, and above vulgar possibility, it is an high point of
Christian perfection: and let as many as are perfect, be thus minded. Benaiah
was honorable among thirty, but he attained not to the first three. A natural
man may be renowned for his patience and benificence; but the child of God
must herein go before all the wicked men in the world, and strive to be
conformed to the first three, the blessed Trinity.

Verse (...). Be ye therefore perfect, even as your father, etc.]
The M. Harris on Mat. 5. 9.
child (says one) is the father multiplied, the father of a second edition.
Of Constantines sons Eusebius reports, that they (...) Eusebius.
put on their fathers fashions, and did exactly resemble him. And of Irenaeus,
the same (...) tells us, that he expressed to the life the learning and
virtues of his master Polycarp. It were happy for us (and we must labor it) if
we could pass into the likeness of the (...) pattern. Our (...) bonum consists
in communion (...), and conformity to him; in keeping inward peace with God,
that he abhor us not because of the provoking of his sons and of his daughters,
(...). 33. 19. and in seeking and keeping (as much as may be) peace with all
men, and holiness; purifying our (...) as he is (...) (in quality, though we
cannot in an equality) 1 John 3. 3.
(...) the love of every (...) (the ground of all our wranglings, I am. 4. 1.)
but especially from the passions and perturbations of the heart; possessing our
selves in patience. For if patience have her (...) work, we shall be perfect
and (...), wanting nothing. Jam. 1. 4.
For ((...)) St Luke has it, Be merciful, etc. Cap. 6. 37.

CHAP. VI.
Verse 1. Take heed that ye do not your almes]
YOur justice, says the Syriack. For first, We do the poor but right when we
releeve them; for they have an interest in our goods, by virtue of the
communion of Saints: whereupon (...), Withhold not, says he, good from the
owners thereof: i. e. thy poor brethren. (...), the great Author and owner of
all, has (...) Prove. 3. 27. A leo (...) agimus, (...): (...), alier um. (...).
the rich (as his stewards, as his Almoners) with the wealth of this world. He
has entrusted them, I say, not lent it them, (to speak properly, for that
which is lent, is our own at least for a time) but put it into their hands
only, for this end, that their abundance may be a supply for others wants, 2
Cor. 8 9. that their full cups may overflow into others lesser (...), etc.
which if it be not done, they can bring in no good bills of account. It is
(...) Rapina est (...) non (...). (...).
justice then that we do the poor, and it is rapine or robbery (says S.
Chrysostom) not to relieve them. Secondly, Alms is called Justice, to teach,
that alms should be given of things well gotten. In the reign of K. Henry 8.
there was one accused (but very unjustly) Act. and (...) fol. 765.
of heresy, for (...) that (...) should not be given until it did sweat in a
man's hand. The Jews called their Almes-box, Kupha (...). (...).
shel (...), the chest of Justice: and upon it they wrote this abbreviate (...)
A gift in secret (...) wrath. Selymus the (...). (...). 14.
great Turk, as he lay languishing, (his incurable disease still increasing,)
leaning his (...) in the lap of Pyrrhus the (...) whom of all others he most
loved, I see, said he, O Pyrrhus, I must shortly (...) without remedy.
Whereupon the great (...), took occasion to discourse with him of many matters;
and amongst (...), that (...) would (...) to give order for the well-bestowing
of the great (...), taken from the Persian Merchants in diverse places of his
Empire; persuading him to bestow the same upon some notable Hospital for
relief of the poor. To whom Selymus replied; (...). (...).
Would thou, Pyrrhus, that I should bestow other men's goods, wrongfully taken
from them, upon works of charity and devotion, for mine own vainglory and
praise? Assuredly I will never do it. Nay rather see they be again restored to
the right owners; which was forthwith done accordingly; to the great shame of
many Christians, who minding nothing less then restitution, but making, ex
(...) locaustum, do out of a world of evil-gotten goods, cull out some (...)
fragments, to build some poor hospitals, or mend some blind way: A slender
(...) of their hot charity.

Before men to be seen of them.]
As those are, that act their part on a stage, and would please the
spectatours, that they may be applauded: He that gives, (...) S. Paul, Let him
do it with (...), Romans 12. 8.
with ingenuity, accounting it enough that he has God the witness of his
heart: Not but that men may see our good works, and their praise be sought,
modo tibi non quaeras, sed Christo (says Aretius.
one) so that you seek not your selves therein, but set up Christ, Let your end
be, that the light may be seen, not your selves seen, Matthew. 5. 16. A fool has
no delight in understanding (says Solomon) Tantum ut (...) captet. Mercer.
but that his heart may discover it self, i. e. that he may have the credit of
it. But he takes a wrong course. For honor (as Duntaxat ad (...). (...). in
(...).
a shadow) follows them that seek it not: as the Hittites told Abraham, he
was a Prince of God amongst them; when himself had said a little before, I am a
stranger and a (...) with (...) sua (...) inscripsit, non hist orias: Et hoc
ipso laudem veram meruit, quod salsam contempsit. Lipfius.
you etc. Gen 23. 4, 5.

Otherwise ye have no reward of your father, etc.]
Ye take up your wages all aforehand. Fruit by the way-side seldom rests
(...) it be ripe. The cackling hen loses her eggs, so does the vainglorious
hypocrite his reward.

Verse 2. Therefore when thou do thine (...)]
Unless thou set light by thy reward, as Esau did by his birthright: unless
thou hold (...) hardly worth having, and art of that carnal Card. Burbon.
Cardinals mind, who preferred his part in Paris, before his part in Paradise.

Do not sound a trumpet before thee]
As the Pharisees did, under a show of assembling the poor to take doal, but
indeed to (...) continent, minus (...). Sen.
notify (...) liberality. If they had been truly liberal, they had made no
(...) of it: Those vessels yield most sound, that have least liquor.

As the (...) doe]
From whom as the Saints differ in (...), so (...) should in practice: We
should have nothing (...) with them, no more then a chaste matron desires to
have with a (...), (...). 27. The spouse desires to know where Christ feeds,
that she may (...) to him: for why should I (...), (...), as one that turns
aside (or, that is covered and veiled, which was the habit of harlots, Genesis 38.
15, 15?) why should I be reputed a light houswife, whilst I turn aside by the
flocks of thy (...)? she would shun, and be shie of all appearance of
dishonesty; so should we of hypocrisy. Those Christians of Corinth, are much
condemned by the Apostle, that carried themselves so carnally, that a man could
hardly discern them from other men.

That they (...) have glory of men]
As Iehu, Come, see what a (...) I have for the Lord of hosts. Is thine heart
upright as (...)? Hos (...), qui omnia ostentant and (...).
etc. A gracious heart is not a blab of his tongue, but rests and (...) in the
conscience of a secret goodness. Not (...) the hypocrite, the (...), the
stage player, for so the word (hypocrite) properly signifies; such as though
little better then rogues, Sic Roscius (...), (...) AEneae (...) personam, cum
(...) non (...), (...) AEneas. (...).
yet sometimes represent the persons of Princes, and carry themselves with
other faces then their own, that they may have glory of men, that they may get
a (...). And here with agree all the former expressions; whatsoever these men
do is merely theatricall ((...)) hypocritical, histrionicall. They sound a
trumpet, as is usual on stages: they do their devoir in the Synagogues,
public assemblies and streets, as stage players act in open places, and by
drums and outcries get as much company together as they can. And as they can
act to the life those whom they personate, yea outstrip them in outward
actions, so do hypocrites, the true Christian. Does the Publican fix his eyes
on the ground? those hypocrites in Isaiah will hang down their heads like
bullrushes. Does Timothy weaken his constitution with abstinence? the false
Pharisee will not only weaken his constitution, but wither his complexion with
fasting. Does Zacheus give 1 Cor. 13 (...).
half of that he has to the poor? the pretender to piety and charity will
bestow all his goods to feed the poor, and besides give his body to be burned,
as Servetus did at Geneva, Anno 1555. And ^.
all for a name, for a little glory among men, which is but a breath, and yet
not able to blow so much as one cold blast upon hypocrites, when they shall be
cast into (...), when God (...) wash off their varnish (...) rivers of
brimstone. No natural face has so clear a (...) and red, as the painted. No
rush is (...) green and (...), as the bullrush. He is curious to a miracle
(...). (...), 58. 5.
that can find a knot in it: yet within is nothing but a useless and spongy
pith. Over fair shows are a just argument of unsoundnesse.

Verily I say unto you]
q. d. You would little think it, and themselves will hardly believe it: for
they are an impudent kind of people, and will not soon be said. But I assevere
and assure you of it, in the word of Amen, the faithful and true witness, Rev.
3 14. (...). (...). 5.
all the words of whose mouth are in righteousness, there is nothing (...),
(...). (...) in Discor.
froward or perverse in them, Prove. 8. 8. that this is the very truth, and time
will prove it so. (...) that have fed on hemlock, are so stupefied thereby,
that they lie for dead, and feel not till half their hides be hileded off: then
they rise, and run away with a (...) noise. So (...). (...), They (...) it as
their full pay: whence (...) an (...).


They have their reward]
Paid them down upon the nail in ready money, and have given their acquittance.
They take up all their wages before the years-end, they receive it now, and
leave none till hereafter. Its all they are ever like to have, and let them
make them merry with it. Egregiam vero laudem, and spolia ampla refertis. (...)
6. (...).
A poor reward, God wot; but it is that they would have. Virgil.
It Is their own reward, not Gods, says S. Hierom. As Judas went (...), non
(...), Hier.
to his own place, a place of his own providing; so these have their own
reward; much good may it do them: Here they have their Act. 1. 25.
consolation with Dives: Let them look for no further reward in the day of
refreshing: if they do, they are like to be disappointed, (...) the Judge. To
themselves they bore fruit, Hos. 10. 1. and shall therefore be turned off as
empty vines, ib. when the faithful Spouse that lays up her fruit for Christ,
Cant. 7. ult. shall hear, Hos. 14 8.
Thou art like a green firre-tree, from me is thy fruit found. And albeit in
her works of charity in (...), and without hope of reward from men, he may seem
to cast her bread upon the waters, (...) 11. 1.
down the river (as we say) or on the sea to feed fishes; yet after many days
he shall be sure to find it. That labor of love cannot be lost that we
resolve to cast away (as the world accounts it) upon Christ.

Verse 3. But thou, when thou do thine alms.]
The godly (...) (...). (...).
Christian must walk in a diverse way to a world of wicked people, as Noah did,
really reproving their darkness by his (...), their pride by his (...), their
vainglory by his (...), their ostentation by his (...) devotion: not only
(planet-like) keeping a constant counter motion to the corrupt manners of the
most, but also shining forth fair with a singularity of heavenly light,
spiritual goodness, and Gods sincerer (...), in the (...) mid night of (...)
impiety.

Let not thy left hand know, etc.]
A proverbiall speech, q. d. (...) thy self as much as may be, cast away the
vain affectation of humane (...). Let not thy left hand (if it had so much
skill) understand what thou give, and to whom, how much, how often, at what
time, etc. God sets down every circumstance in his book (...). (...). 18.
of remembrance; as our Savior (that true Archdeacon, as well 1 (...). 5. 4.
as Arch-shepherd) sat and viewed the estate, mind and gift of (...). (...)
41.
every one that cast money into the treasury: and as he took (...) observation
of those that came to hear him, how far they had come, how long they had been
there, how little opportunity they had of providing for themselves, and how
soon they might Mat 15. 32.
faint, if sent away empty, etc. In pugillaribus suis omnia notat. Revel. 2.
I know thy work, and thy (...), says Christ to that Church, so to us; I know
thine alms and thy privacy. Many give much, and are little noted or noticed. It
matters not, says our Savior, (...) captabat (...), and (...) AEgyptu^, (...).
though thy left hand should not know what thy right hand does: there is no
loss in that. Some talents are best improved by being laid up. A treasure that
is hid is safer from thieves. Steal we therefore benefits upon men, as Joseph
did the money into the sacks. And as he made a gain of the (...), and bought
Egypt: so (...) (...).
may we of the poor we relieve, and buy heaven, Luke 46. 9. Romans 2. 10.

Verse 4. Thy father that sees in secret.]
And best accepts of secret service, Cant. 2. 14. O thou that art in the
clefts of the (...), (...), (...) qu (...), (...). Bez.
rocks, let me see thy face, let me hear thy voice, etc. He is all (...), he
searches the hearts, and tries the reins, those most abstruse and remotest
parts of the body, seats of lust: And as he is himself a Spirit; so he loves
to be served like himself, in Spirit and in truth. He sets his eyes upon such
(as the word here signifies) he looks wishtly, fixedly, steddily; he sees
through and through our secret services, not to find faults in them (for so he
may soon do not a few, but those he winks at, where the heart is upright) but
to reward them, as a liberal play master, rich to all that (...) upon him, or
do him any other business. Who is there even (...) you, that shuts the door
for naught? that kindles fire upon mine altar (...) naught? Mal. 1. 10. that
gives a cup of cold water, and has not his reward? David would not serve God
on free cost; but was he not paid for his pains, and had his cost in again,
with (...), ere the Sun went down? Let him but resolve to (...) his sins, and
God (or ere he can do it) forgiveth him the (...). 32. 5.
iniquity of his sin, that in it, that did most gall and grieve him. (...)
him but purpose to build God a house, God promises thereupon (for his good
intentions) to build David an house for ever. So little is there lost by any
thing that is done or suffered for God. He sends a way his servants (that do
his work many times, and the world never the (...)) as Boaz did Ruth, with
their bosom full of blessings; as David did (...), with a royal (...); as
Solomon did the Queen of Sheba, with all the desire of her heart; as Caleb did
his daughter Achsah, with upper and nether springs; or as once he did Moses
from the Mount, with (...) face shining. He shone bright, but knew not of it,
yea he (...) his glorified face with a vail, and had more glory by his (...)
then by his face. How far are those spirits from this, which care only to be
seen? And sleighting Gods secret approbation, (...) only to (...) others eyes
with admiration, not caring for unknown riches? Our Savior (besides the vail
of his humanity) says, See you tell no man. Its enough for him, that he can
(...) to (...). 17 4.
his father, I have (...) thee on earth: I have finished the work that thou
gave me to do. His work he accounts (...) gift; (...) wages he looks for in
another world, verse. 5. He was content his treasures of wisdom should be hid,
Colos. 2. 3. And shall we fret our selves, when our pittances of piety and
charity are not admired? (...) it not enough for us that we shall appear with
him in glory, and (...). 3. 3.
then be rewarded openly?

Shall reward thee openly.]
I, but when? at the resurrection of Non (...) est (...) sub (...) sed (...)
and (...). (...). (...).
the just, Luke 14. 14. at that great assize and general Assembly, he will
make honorable mention, in the hearing of Angels and men, of all the good
deeds of his children: How they have fed the hungry, clothed the naked, etc.
that which they had utterly forgotten: not so much as once mentioning their
misdoings, Matthew. 25. Yea he shall take them to heaven with him, where the poor
men's hands have built him a house before hand, and they shall receive (...) in
caelis (...) pauperu^ (...). (...). (...). Jun.
him into everlasting habitations. But what shall he do in the me an while?
Feed on faith (as some read that text, Psalm. 37. 3.) (...) upon reversions.
(...), but while the grass grows, the (...) starves. But so cannot a merciful
man, for he shall have (...), Matthew. 5. 7. Such a mercy as rejoices against
judgment. Yea, he that can tender mercy to God, may challenge (...) from God
by virtue of his promise, as David does, Preserve (...), o God, for I am
merciful, Psalm. 86. 2. (...) he shall obtain, 1. In his soul, which shall be
like a watered garden, fresh and flourishing. For the liberal soul (...) be
made fat ( Prove. (...). 25.) and he that waters shall be watered himself. The
spirits of wealth distilled in good works comfort the conscience. 2. So they do
the body Prove. 11. 17. Isa. 58. 8, (...), 10.
too, when sick and languishing, Psalm. 41. 2, 3. Mercy is the best cordial, a
pillow of repose, a (...) remedy. For if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry,
thy health shall spring forth speedily, Isa. 58. 3. For his name, the liberal
are renowned in the earth, as Abraham that free-hearted housekeeper, or
peny-father; and Obadiah that hid and fed the Prophets by fifty in a cave.
Zacheus Act. 9. 39.
and Cornelius, Gaius and Onesiphorus, how precious are their (...). (...).
(...).
(...). (...) (...). Manus (...). (...) Christi.
names! How sweet their remembrance! Who honors not the memorial of Mary for
her Spikenard, and of Dorcas for her coats and garments? Whereas the vile
person shall no more be called liberal (in Christ's Kingdom) nor Nabal, Nadib,
the churl, bountiful. 4. For his estate: The most gainful art is
(...)-giving, (...) pau (...), (...) colligimus.
says Chrysostom. The poor man's bosom, and the Orphans mouth are the surest
chest, says another. Whatsoever we scatter to the poor, we gather for our
selves, says a third. What we give to the poor, we lend to the Lord, who
accounts himself both (...) and engaged thereby, Prove. 19. 17. Neither will he
fail to bless the liberal man's stock and store, Deuteronomy. 15. 10. so that his
righteousness, and his riches together, shall endure for ever, Psalm. (...) 2.
3. 5 Lastly, His seed shall be mighty upon earth, verse. 21. The son of such a
tenant, that paid his rent duly, shall not be (...) out of his farm, Psalm 37.
26. And that Proverb is proved false by ^.
common experience, Happy is that son whose father goes to the (...): (...)
il-gotten goods usually come to nothing: the third heir seldom enjoys them:
unless it be here and there one, that by repentance breaks off, and heals
his fathers sin by mercifulness (...) (...), (...). ^.
to the poor, that the property may be altered, and so his (...) lengthned. Oh
therefore that rich men would be rich in good (...), ready to distribute,
willing to (...) ^.
(which was a piece of praise used to be ascribed to the ancient Kings of
Egypt.) This, this were the way, To lay up for themselves a sure (...); yea,
to lay fast hold on eternal life; when those that withold their very crumbs,
(...) not obtain a drop with Dives, whom to vex and upbraid, Lazarus was laid
in the bosom of (...) (...).

Verse 5. And when thou praiest.]
A duty of that necessity, that neither the immutability of Gods decree, Dan.
9. 1. nor the (...) of the promises, (...) 36 37. (...) the effectual (...) of
our Lord Christ (who (...) his Disciples to pray) (...) with us, for not doing
it. The Jews accounted it an abomination of desolation, when the daily
Sacrifice was intermitted and suspended, as under Antiochus. Our Savior
perfumed his whole course, (...), his cross with this incense, and thereby
purchased (...) privilege, paved us this new and living (...) to the throne of
grace, (...). 16. 4. a sure and safe way to get mercy, (...). 23. The Ark was
never separated from the Mercy-seat, to show that Gods mercy is near unto such
as affect his presence. Some (...) he has reserved to this duty, that will not
otherwise be yielded, Psalm. (...). 23. Ezekiel. 22. 30. As when he is (...) to
ruinate a people or person, he silenceth (...), and forbids them to solicit
him any further; as he did Samuel interceding for Saul; and Jeremy for (...).
(...).


Be not as the (...).]
Who pretend to pray much, but indeed Romans 8. (...).
can do nothing at it, because destitute of the spirit of grace, (...). (...).
and of supplication; without whose help we know neither what, Mat. 26. 38.
(...) how to pray: Nay, Peter, James and John will be sleeping, when they
should be praying in the very hour of temptation. There may be good words and
wishes found in a worldlings mouth, Who will show us any good? But none but a
David can with faith, Psalm 4 6.
(...) and fervency say, Lord, lift up the light of thy countenance upon me,
etc. Balaam may break forth into wishes and woulds, (...) let me die the death
of the righteous, etc. But can he (...), as David in like case, Psalm. 26. 9. Oh
take not away my soul (...) nor my life with bloody men! An hypocrite may Hos 7
14.
tell a (...) for himself in earthly regards, or howl upon When God is (...)
his (...), he roars, (...) 27. 9.
his (...) in the (...) of outward comforts; (...) in extremity, as a (...) at
the (...), as a pig under the knife; or importune God (...) grace, as a bridge
to lead him to heaven; not for any beauty he (...), or (...) he finds in it.
But will he pray always, will Job (...). 10.
(...) light (...) in God? says Job, (...). 27. No surely; he neither does,
(...) can do it. When God defers to help at a pinch, 1 Samuel 13. 8,
as (...); when (...) and vexations increase, he frets and meddles non ore with
calling upon God, but (...) him, because he handles him not (...) his own
mind; and be takes himself to 1 Samuel 28. 7.
(...) other course. If God will not come at his call, and be at his 2 King. 1.
2.
beck, away to the witch of (...), with Saul; to the god of (...) si ne queo
superos, Acheronta movebo.
Ekron, as (...), to Baalim and Ashteroth, with the revolted (...). Wherein he
is like to those barbarous Chinois, that (...) their gods, when they answer
them not: or that resolute Ab Ekron, ubi colebatur Beelzehub, (...) videtur,
(...).
(...), that profanely painted God on the one side of his shield, and the devil
on the other, with this inscription, Si tu me nolis, (...): Or that desperate
King of Israel, (...) (says he) this evil is from the Lord, and what should I
wait for the Lord 2 King. 6 33.
any longer? Lo, this is the guise of a godless (...). Either he calls not
upon God (which is the description David gives of Psalm. 14. 4.
him) but is possessed, as it were, with a dumb devil, both in Church and
chamber. Or if by reading, or otherwise he have raked together some good
petitions, and strive to set some life upon them in the utterance, that he may
seem to be well-gifted; yet he does it not to serve God, but merely to serve
himself upon God, He draws not nigh with a true heart, Heb. 10. 13. uprightly
propounding Gods service in prayer, and not only his own supply and
satisfaction. He is not brought into Gods presence with love and desire, as
Psalm. 40. 8. He labors not with strife of heart to worship him with his faith,
trust, hope, humility, self denial, (...) well content that Gods will be done
however, and (...) seeking his glory, though (...) be not profited,
acknowledging the Kingdom, power and glory to be his, Matthew 6. 13. Lastly,
Working not by a right rule, from a right principle, nor for a right end, he
cannot undergo the strife of (...), as Jacob, who wrestled by might and
slight ((...) much the Hebrew word imports) much less can he continue long
in it, as David, he (...) (...). 32. 24, (...), 20.
soon sated, soon tired. If men observe him not, applaud him not, he gives
over that (...), as tedious and (...), that (...) 27. 4. and 119. 81, 82.
wherein he finds no more good relish, then in the white of an egg, or a dry
chip. And in any extraordinary trouble, instead of calling upon God, (...) runs
from him, Isa. 33. 14 as Saul did, 1 Samuel 28. 7.

For they love to pray standing, etc.]
Stand they might: (...) did the Publican. And when ye stand and pray, says
our Savior, Luk 18. 13.
(...). 11 25.
not (...) the gesture. It was commonly used among the Jews in the Temple,
especially, at the solemn feasts, what time there was such resort of people
from all parts, that they could hardly stand one by another. The Primitive
Christians also stood praying in their public Assemblies, betwixt Easter and
Whitsontide especially, in token of our Saviors standing up from the dead.
Whence came that Proverb amongst them, Were it not for standing (...) (...) non
(...).
prayer, the world would not stand. Other gestures and postures of the body in
prayer we read of. David and Eliah sat, and prayed. Tertul.
Peter and Paul kneeled, and prayed. Moses and Aaron fell 1 Chronicles. 19.
on their faces, and prayed. In secret prayer, there is more liberty 1 King.
19. 4.
to use that gesture that may most quicken us, and help the duty: Act. 9. 40.
Elias put his head between his knees in prayer (as one that would (...). 4. 13.
Numb. 16. (...).
strain every vein in his heart.) But in public our behavior must (...) 8. 2.
be such as may witness (...) communion and desire of mutual edification: 1
Cor 14. 40.
there must be a uniformity, no rents or divisions: and special care taken,
that our inward affection answer our external devotion: that we stand not in
the Synagogues, as these, with desire to be seen of men (as Saul was higher
then the rest by head and shoulders) for that is putid hypocrisy, hateful
even amongst Heathens. Tully taxes Gracchus for this, that he referred all his
actions, not to the (...) of virtue, but to the favor (...). quaest. l. 3.
of the people, that (...) might have esteem and applause from them.

That they may be seen of men.]
This was the wind that (...) winde-mill a-work, the (...) that made the clock
strike. (...) not. (...). l. 10. 19
(...) tells us, that the nightingale sings far longer and (...), when
men be by, then otherwise. If (...) had not seen C (...). l. (...). c (...)
(...) zeal that Iehu had for the Lord of hosts, he had been nothing (...) hot,
nor (in his own conceit) so happy. But Christian (...) Sed vox tu (...), (...)
nih l. (...). (...), esse aliquid (...) cupis, (...).
teaches a wise man, not to expose (...) to the fairest show, (...) rather to
seek to be good, then seem to be so. Not so, every (...) and (...): these, like
Ieroboams wife, never put (...) but when they are to speak with the Prophets:
(...) so holy, as at Church, and in the presence of those whole (...) they
reverence.

Verse 6. But thou when thou praiest, enter into thy (...), etc.]
Act. 10 9.
Act. 10 3.
The proper place for secret (...) (as the family is for private prayer, and
the Church for public, Luke 4. 16.) that being (...) from company, we may more
(...) descend into our own hearts, and be the freer from ostentation and
hypocrisy, and from discursation and wandering of mind ( Anima (...) fit
(...):) As also for the demonstration of our faith, whereby we believe the
omnipresence of God, Who sees in secret, and (...) openly. Daniel indeed
opened his windows, and prayed (...). in Dan. 6. (...).
in an (...) room; not to be more secret (as Pintus mistaketh it) but to be
more seen: and yet not of vain ostentation, but of Act. 5. 29.
(...) and constant profession. The King had forbidden it (so Sic (...) in
(...), (...).
did Henry the third, King of France, forbid householders to pray with their
families.) Daniel did it notwithstanding, as aforetime. God must be obeyed
rather then men, as not Scripture only, but nature teaches. He kneeled upon
his knees three times a day, and prayed; That had been his custom, and should
be. (...) also at morning, at evening, and at noon called upon God, and had his
set times for such devotions. But the devil, as it is probable, 2 Samuel 12. 2.
had caused him to come from his trench, and then (...) wound him. He knows well
enough that a Christians strength lies in his prayer (as Samsons did in his
hair) Ephesians. 6. 18.
that it buckleth all our spiritual armor close to us, and makes it useful:
that a Christian can never want help, whiles he can pray; as they were wont to
say, the Pope can never want money, so long as he can hold a pen in his hand,
to command and send for it: That secret prayer is a soul-fatting exercise, as
secret meals, we say, feed the body. The old Serpent feels himself charmed and
disabled to do hurt by these kind of duties. They have poured forth a charm,
when thy chastening was upon them, Isa. 26. 16. Yea, he is deeply wounded and
driven out of the field, by these Isa. 26. 16.
arrows of deliverance, as the King of Syria was, 2 King. 13. 17. which
therefore he keeps (what he can) from being multiplied 1 (...) 2. (...). (...),
(...).
and enlarged. Fervent prayers are the pillars of smoke, wherein the Church
ascends to God out of the wilderness of this world, (...) Pet 3. 21. (...),
(...). in (...), (...) electorum cum Deo (...). (...) Pasor.
and by an humble familiarity converseth, yea (...) with him, as Abraham and
Moses did (especially, when Satan, sin and conscience accuse) and stands,
as it were, upon interrogatories; such as are those, Romans 8. 33, 34, 35.

And when thou have shut thy door]
So to shut out distractions, which yet will grow upon us, do what we can. For
though the spirit is willing to wait upon God, all the while of the duty, yet
the flesh is weak. It being but partly mortified, draws away (...) Romans 7. 21.
thoughts many times; and puts us to St Paul's complaint, When I would do
good evil is present with me. Satan also will be jogging and interrupting us;
and will needs be talking to us when we are most busily speaking to God, as the
Pythonisse troubled St Paul, as he went to prayer, Act. 16 16. Worldly things
likewise are so natural to us, and so near our senses, heavenly things are so
supernall and supernatural, that we cannot without watching our senses, and
travel of soul, stay our spirits long upon them. Fratres (...) and (...) uti
vo (...), ne per (...), and (...) intentio
For help herein: S. Augustine (...) us, that the ancient Christans of Egypt
were wont to use only short and pithy prayers and ejaculations: such as was
that of Elias, when he contended with the Priests of Baal, charging God (in two
words) with the care of his (...), of his truth, and of his glory. Many other
helps there are for the curing and casting out (in a comfortable (...)) these
by-thoughts; these birds that would rob Abraham of his sacrifice; these swarms
of Egypt, that our hearts (...) be as so many Goshens; these creeping things
(...), as David has it. This among the rest, that our Savior here presenbeth,
to (...) into a secret place, as Abraham did into his (...) at Beersheba Genesis
21. 33.
planted for the purpose (though that was afterward abused by the Heathens,
and therefore forbidden the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 12. 3) (...) had his Oratory in
the fields, where he prayed with deep meditation or soliloquie, as the word
there signifies, Rebeceah upon the struggling of the babes, went to enquire of
the Lord, Genesis 25. 22. that is, she went to some secret place to pray, and
receive some revelation from God, say Calvin, Musculus, Mercer, others. Jacob
had visions of God, when he was all alone upon the way: Elias praid under the
Juniper, our Savior in the garden of Gethsemane, Acts 9, (...). Act. 10 10.
(...) (...) a (...), cum Deo colloquitur. (...).
and many times in the mount: Cornelius in some corner of his house, (...) on
the leads, where also he fell into an ecstasy or trance, and saw heaven open.
His soul was separated (after a sort) from his body for the time, whilst he
was talking with God, he was so transported and carried out of himself, ut
(...) esset paene nescia carnis, as S. Jerome testifies of certain devout
women of his time. For the place we pray in, no matter how mean it be, so it be
secret. Where there is a Jeremy, a Daniel, If ye will not hear me (...), (...)
me to my prison again among my (...) and froggs, which will not (...) me while
I talk (...) my (...) God. Peter (...).
(...), a dungeon, a Lions den, a whales-belly are goodly orators. Shut the
door to thee, remembering the weakness of thy flesh and the malice of the
devil, watching how. to distract thee. Covenant with thy senses, and bind them
to the good abearance all the while: look God full in the face, as David did,
Psalm. 57. 7. call in, and concenter thy thoughts, as men do the Sunbeams into
a burning glass: serve God with thy spirit, as Paul did, Romans 1. 9. say, All
that is within me praise his holy name. Have thy heart at thy right hand, with
Solomon's wiseman, lay Gods charge upon it to attend upon him: when it roves
and wanders, call it in, and Act. and (...). fol. (...).
(...) it; judge and shame thy self for thy distractions, and strive to do
better, so shall they never be imputed unto thee. To be Psalm. 13. 2.
wholly freed from them, is a privilege proper to the estate of perfection.
Eccles. 7.
Some diseases will not be cured near home, but men must repair to the Bath, or
City for help. This infirmity is not to be healeo, till we come to heaven. No
shutting of the door will do it, nor any thing else, till the everlasting
doors be opened unto us, till we Rev. 21.
enter in by the gates into the City of the living God.

Pray to thy father which is in secret]
There are no dumb children in Gods house; the least he has can ask him
blessing. All are not alike gifted, but every godly man prays unto thee,
says Psalm. 32. 6.
David: S. Paul was no sooner coverted, but he was praying presently, Acts 9.
11. The spirit of grace, is a spirit of supplication, and teaches to cry Abba,
father, or Father, Father. And this very Gal. 4. 5.
naming of the Name of God in prayer (though it be no more,) so it be done in
faith, entitles a man to heaven, 2 Timothy 2. 19. if withal he depart from
iniquity: When such as have the gift of Prophecy, and of doing miracles shall
miscarry, and be turned off at last day, because workers of iniquity, Matthew. 7.
And albeit Gods weaker children cannot utter their mind unto him in well
couched words, and variety of expressions, yet, (...) their broken (...) come
from a broken heart, it avails more then affectation of Rhetorike, without
affection of prayer. Men are better pleased with the stammering and lisping of
their own little ones, then with all the (...) speech of all the children in
the Town besides. Yea, because the soul is sick, the service is twice welcome.
As, if a sick child reach us up a thing, we count it more then to send another
of a (...) errand. I will spare them, says he, as a man spares his (...) (...)
3. 18.
son that serves him. The business of prayer is more dispatched by sighs
then speeches, by desires and groans of the heart, (...) our father which is in
secret, whether we can express them (...) words or no. The Spirit also helps
our (...) (he (...) (...) (...). (...). (...).
with us, and before us, as the word signifies) and makes (...) in us and for
us with groans unutterable. And be that (...) the hearts, knows what is the
mind of the spirit: As (...) hears us without ears, so he understands us
without our words. If we can but groan out, Ah father, it is an effectual
prayer. The voice is not simply required, Joh. 4. 24. There is great dispute
((...) D (...) of (...).
one) among the schoolmen, about the speech of Angels; (...) this they agree
in, that one Angel speaks thus to another, (...) any one has a conceit in
his mind of any thing, with a will (...) another should understand it, and
that God should understand (...) that is enough for the expression of it. So is
it with the spirit of man in speaking to God: for the spirit agrees to the
Angels. Yet we must pray for fit words also. Hos. 14. 2. and strive to be (...)
in all utterance, and in all knowledge, 1 Cor. 1. 5. get (...) (...)
habit of heavenly-mindednesse, let the heart meditate a good matter, and then
the tongue will be as the pen of a ready writer, Psalm. 45. 1. first prepare the
heart, and then stretch out the hands, Job 11. 13. The heart should be praying
a good while before the (...); (...) before the seven (...) were sounded at the
(...) (...)
(...) seal, there was half an hours silence in heaven. (...) if there be an
honest heart, and a good (...), an (...) of prayer usually is in us, though we
know it not; as a man may have money about him, and not know so much, till
(...) him willing to search, and glad to find it: Remember, (...), (...)
promise of the Spirits assistance, and Gods acceptance, and know, that as in
singing, so in praying, the pleasing melody is in the heart. The voice which is
made in the mouth, is nothing so sweet (...) 16.
(...) that which comes from the depth of the breast. As the deeper or hollower
the belly of the lute or violl is, the pleasanter is the sound: the fleeter,
the more grating and harsh in our ears.

And thy father which sees in secret]
And hears too: as Exodus 14. 15. (...) cord (...). Aug.
he did Moses when he cried to God, but said nothing; and (...), when she moved
her lips, but uttered not her self in an audible voice: and Nehemiah, when he
lift up his heart to God, as he spoke to the King: and as he does still his
praying people. His ears (...) into their prayers, says S. Peter, after David:
that though (...) Sam. 1. 13. (...). 2. 4.
their prayers are so weak, they cannot ascend to him, he will (...) (...). 3.
12. (...).
to them. He hearkened and heard, those good souls in (...), chap. 3 16. as loath
to lose any part of their precious language. Thus the eyes of the Lord are upon
the righteous (when they are praying especially) and his ears are open to their
prayers. Psalm. 34. 25.
He sees his Church when she is in the clefts of the rocks, (...). 2. 14.
when she is gotten into a corner and praying, he looks upon her with singular
delight, and with special intimations of his love (as Ahashuerosh dealt with
Esther) and says unto her, as he, what Esth. 5. 3.
(...) thy petition, and it shall be given thee? And oh that every faithful
soul, whiles it is sitting and feasting with God by secret prayer, and other
holy duties, would bethink it self what special boon it has to beg, what
Haman to hang up, what corruption to be subdued, what grace to be increased,
etc. How should they be gratified, and their request granted, even to the whole
of Gods kingdom? The truth is, they might have any thing: and that which (...)
said to his Courtiers flatteringly, God performs to his people really, The
King is not he that can do any thing against (...). 38. 5.
you. Luther was wont to say, that prayer was after a sort omnipotent: for
whatsoever God can do, that prayer can do. Of Luther Iste vir (...)?
himself, for his wrestling with God and prevailing (as he was De (...) Iustus
(...).
mighty and happy that way) it was said, That man can have any thing at Gods
hands. Isa. (...).


Will reward you openly]
Here in part, hereafter in all perfection. (...). 34. 6.
He never said to the house of Israel, Seek (...) me in vain. This poor man
(for instance) praid, says David, pointing to himself, and the Lord heard him,
and delivered him out of all his distresses. God is known by hearing of
prayers, it is one of his Titles, Psalm. 65, 3. it is his praise above all Heathen
gods, Isa. 45. 19, 20. By this Manasses knew him to be God, 2 Chronicles. 33. 15.
and all Israel, 1 King. 18. 37, 39. when it came to a matter of competition:
Verily, verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall (...) (...). (...). (...)
(...) father in my name, he will give it you. If we can find a praying heart,
he will find a pitying: if we open our mouths, God will fill them: and he is
worthily (...), that will not make himself happy by asking. Of some Heathen
Princes it is said, (...) they never (...) away their suitors sad or
discontented: this is most true of God; let a man bring right petitions, (...)
clear conscience, faith in the promises, and hope to wait the accomplishment,
and (...) shall not fail of the thing he asks, or a better: As when God (...)
David the life of the child, but assured him of his (...), I shall go to him,
etc. So he denied his Mother her particular 2. (...) 12. 23.
(...) for that time: and when his Disciples asked him: Joh. (...).
curious question, Will thou at this time restore the Kingdom (...) Acts 1. 7,
8.
Israel, etc? That Is not for you to know, says he; but a better thing I can
tell: you shall receive power after that the holy (...) (...). (...). 4.
is come upon you. But many times God is graciously pleased, not only to grant
a man's prayer, but also to fulfill his counsel; that is, (...) a Deo sertas
preces quam sine precibus (...) sum (...) Roll. (...). in Joh. 6. 23.
in that very way, and by that very means that his thoughts (...) on. But say
he do neither of (...); yet the very ability to pray (...) the (...) Ghost, is
a sweet and sure sign of salvation, Romans 10. 13. And a very grave Divine
writes thus: I cannot but prefer (...) prayers for some temporal mercy, far
before that mercy for which I pray. Yea I had rather God should give me the
gift of (...). in Luk 6. 12
prayer, then (without that gift) the whole world besides. As (...) that are
ita congregabiles (says another Divine of good (...)
note,) so very good-fellows, that they cannot spare so much time out of
company, as to seek God apart, and to serve him in secret, (...).
they sufficiently show themselves thereby, to have little fellowship (...)
or (...) with God, whom they (...) seldom come at.

Verse 7. But when ye (...), use not vain repetitions]
Babble (...). 10 14. (...) sub (...). (...).
not: bubble not, says the (...), as water out of a narrow-(...) vessel. Do
not iterate or inculcate the same things-(...) and ad nauseam, as Solomon's
fool, who is full of words (says he:) and this (...) of his (...) (...), in
his vain (...). A man (...) not tell what shall be, and what shall be after him
(...)? Such a one also was that Battus (to whom the (...) has relation,) an
egregious babbler. In common (...) a sign of (...), to lay on more words upon
a (...) then (...): how much more in prayer? Take we (...) we (...) not the
sacrifice of fools, God has no need of (...), 1 Samuel 21. 15. with Psalm. 5. 5.
He is in heaven, and thou upon earth, therefore let thy words be few, Eccles.
5. 2. Prayers move God, not as an Orator moves his hearers, but as a child
his father, ( your Father knows that ye have need of all these things, ver.
8.) Now a child is not to chat to his father, but to deliver his mind,
humbly, earnestly, in few, direct to the point. S. Peter (...) have men to be
sober in prayer, that is, to pray (...). 4. 7.
with due respect to Gods dreadful majesty, without trifling or vain babbling.
He that is (...) in spirit, prays much, though he speak little, as the
Publican, Luke 18. and Elias, 1 King. 20. 36. But as a body without a soul,
much wood without fire, a bullet in a gun without powder; so are words in
prayer without spirit. Now long prayers can hardly maintain their vigor: as in
tall bodies, the spirits are diffused. The strongest hand long extended will
languish, as Moses hand slacked against Amalec: Its a praise proper (...).
(...). 12.
to God, to have his hand stretched out still. Our infirmity suffers not any
long intention of body or mind. Our devotion will soon lag and hang the wing:
others also that join with us, may be tired out, and made to sin by (...) and
wanderings. In secret indeed, and in extraordinary prayer with solemn fasting;
or so, when the heart is extraordinarily enlarged, our prayers may and must be
like wise. Solomon prayed long at the dedication of the Temple, so did those
godly Levites, Neh. 9. Our Savior prayed (...) dies (...) ut minimum tres
horas, (...) aptissimas, (...) orationem (...) Vitus
all night sometimes, and rising up a great while before day, he went apart and
prayed, Mar. 1. 35. Of Luther it is reported, that he spent constantly three
hours a day in prayer, and three of the (...) hours, and fittest for study.
It was the saying of a grave and godly Divine, that he profited in the
knowledge of the word, more (...). in (...). (...) Melanchthonem. Wilsons
Theol. Rules.
by prayer in a short space, then by study in a longer. That which our Savior
condemns, is needless and heartlesse repetitions, unnecessary digressions,
(...) prolixities, proceeding not from heat of affection, or strength of desire
(for so, the repetition of the Dan. 9. 17, 18. Mar. 14. 39.
self-same petition, is not only lawful, but useful. See Psalm. 142. 1. and
130. 6.) but either out of ostentation of devotion, as Pharisees, or opinion of
being heard the sooner, as Heathens, when men's words exceed their matter, or
both words and matter exceed their attention and affection. See that these be
matches, and then pray and spare not.

For they think they shall be heard for their much speaking]
As Orpheus, in his hymns, and other Pagans: calling, as the Mariners in
Jonah, every man upon his God: and, lest they should not (...). (...).
hit the right, closing their petitions with that Dijque Deaeque omnes. (...).
lib. 1.
And as this was the folly and fault of Pagans, so is it also still of the
Papists, whom the holy Ghost calls Heathens, with whom (...). (...). (...).
(...).
they (...), as in many things else, so in their Battologies or (...).
vain repetitions: which are so gross, (...) the devil himself (had he any
shame in him.) might well be a shamed of them. In their Jesus-(...) (as they
call it) there are fifteen of these prayers, (...).
(...), Jesus, (...) have mercy on me. Jesus, Jesus, Jesus help me. Jesus, Jesus give
me here my purgatory. Every of which petitions are to be ten (...) times at
once said over for a task. So on their (...).
Church and Colledge-doors, the English fugitives have written in great golden
letters, Jesus, Jesus, converte Angliam, (...), (...). These be their weapons,
they say, prayers and tears. But the truth (...).
is, the (...) (the Popes bloud-hounds) trust more to the (...), then to their
prayers: like vultures, whose nests, as Aristotle says, cannot be found, yet
they will leave all games to follow an Army, because they delight to feed upon
carrion. Their faction is a most (...) sharp sword, whose blade is sheathed, at
pleasure, in the bowels of every Commonwealth, but the handle reaches to Rome
and Spain: They strive under pretense of long prayers, and (...).
(...) sanctity ((...) is double iniquity) to subdue all to the Pope, and the
Pope to themselves. Satan, they say, sent Luther, and God sent them to
withstand him. But that which (...) said of chariots armed with sithes and
hooks, will be every day Lib. 1. cap. (...).
more and more applied to the Jesuits: at first they were a terror, afterward
a scorn.

Verse 8. Be not ye therefore like unto them]
God would not have his Israel conform to the Heathens customs, nor so much as
once name their Idols, Exodus 23. 13. Psalm. 16. 4. No more should (...). (...).
Christians (as some are of opinion.) That of Cardinal Bembus is somewhat
gross, concerning their St Francis, quod in (...) Non (...). (...), (...) esse
(...).
Deorum ab Ecclesia Romana sit relatus. But this is like the rest: For if we
may believe Baronius, we may see their lustrall water, and sprinkling of (...)
in Iuvenals sixth Satyr: lights in sepulchers, in Suetonius his Octavius:
lamps lighted on Saturday, in (...) 96. Epistle; distribution of tapers among
the Baro. Annal. (...) 14.
people, in Macrob. Saturnals, etc.

For your heavenly father knows what things ye need etc.]
And therefore answers many times before we ask: as he did Isa. 65. 24.
David, Psalm. 32. He prevents us with many mercies we never sought him for;
that our praises may exceed our prayers. I am found of them that sought me not,
says God: but yet in the same place it is said, I am sought of them that asked
not for me. Importing, Isa. 65. 1.
that we never seek to him for grace, till effectually called by his grace.
Howbeit no sooner is any truly called, but he presently prays. Say not then,
if God know our needs, what need we open them to him? The truth is, we do it
not to inform him Non sane ut Deus (...), sed ut men's nostra (...).
of that he knows not, or to stir up mercy in him, who is all bowels, and
perfectly pitieth us: but 1. Hereby we acknowledge him as a child does his
father, when he runs to him for food. 2. We run that course of getting good
things, that he has prescribed Luke 11. 13.
us, Jer. 29. 11, 12. Which Moses and Elias knew, and Exodus 9.
therefore the former turned Gods predictions, the later his promises 1 King.
18.
into prayers. 3. Hereby we prepare our selves holily to enjoy the things we
crave: for prayer both sanctifies the creature, and increases our love and
thankfulness, Psalm. 116 1. 4. Prayer prepares us, either to go without that
we beg, if God see fit, as David, when he prayed for the childs life, and was
fitted thereby to bear the loss of it; or else to part with that we have got
by prayer, for the glory of God the giver of it. Those that make their requests
known to God with thanksgiving, shall have (at least) the peace of God that
passes all understanding, to guard their (...).
hearts and minds in Christ Jesus. They shall have strength in Phil 4 6, 7.
their souls, the joy of the Lord shall be their strength, the glory of Psalm
138. 3.
Nehe, 8. 10.
the Lord shall be their rereward. In their marching in the wilderness, Isa.
58. 8.
at the fourth Alarm, arose the standard of Dan, Asher and Nepthali; these were
the rereward of the Lords host; and to these were committed the care of
gathering together the lame, feeble and sick, and to look that nothing was left
behind. Unto this the Prophet Isaiah seems (in that text) to allude, and so
does David, Psalm. 27. 10. When my father and mother forsake me, the Lord will
gather me, And this comfortable assurance was the fruit of his prayer. As the
just must live by his own faith, so must he get his living by his own prayers.
1 Pet. 3. 7.


Verse 9. After this manner therefore pray ye]
Forms of wholesome words are profitable. A set form of prayer is held fittest
for the public; and for such weak Christians as are not yet able to express
their own desires in their own words. The utterance of wisdom is given to some
Christians only, 1 Cor. 12. 8. Your prayers. Hos. 14. 2.
yet are all to strive unto it, that the testimony of Christ may be confirmed
in them, 1 Cor. 1. 5, 6. God will take that at first, that afterward will not
be accepted. If words be wanting, pray that God, that commands thee to take
words and come before him, to vouchsafe thee those words, wherewith thou may
come before Prove 18. 23.
him. Speak, as the poor man does, supplications: so did the prodigal:
Forecast also (with him) what thou will say: Praemeditate of the matter,
disposing it in due order (as one would do that is to speak to a Prince: God
is a great King, Mal. 1. 23.) Some think we must never pray but upon the
sudden, and extraordinary instinct and motion of the spirit. This is a fancy,
and those that practice it, cannot but fall into idle repetitions, and be
confused; going (...), (...).
forward and backward, like hounds at a loss (says a good Divine) and having
unadvisedly begun to speak, they know not how wisely to make an end. This to
prevent, premeditate and propound to thy self fit heads of prayer: gather
catalogues of thy sins and duties by the decalogue; observe the daily straits
of mortal condition, consider Gods mercies, your own infirmities, troubles
from Satan, pressures from the world, crosses on all hands, etc. And as you
cannot want matter, so neither words of prayer. The Spirit will assist, and God
will accept, if there be but an honest heart and lawful petitions. And albeit
we cannot vary them as some can; our Savior in his agony, used the self-same
words thrice together in prayer; and so may we, when there is the same matter
and occasion. He also had a set form of giving thanks at meat; which the two
Disciples at Emaus hearing, knew him by it. A form then may be used, we see,
when it is gathered out of the Luke 24. 30, 31.
holy Scriptures, and agreeable thereunto. Neither is the spirit limited
hereby: for the largeness of the heart stands not so much in the multitude and
variety of expressions, as in the extent of the affection. Besides, if forms
were unlawful, then neither might we sing Psalms, nor join in prayer with
others, nor use the forms prescribed by God.

Our Father which art in Heaven]
Tertullian calls this prayer, (...), and (...) doctrinae (...)
a breviary of the Gospel, and compend of saving doctrine: It is framed in form
of the decalogue: the three former Petitions respecting God, the three later,
our selves and others. Every word therein has its weight. Our, there is our
charity: Father, there is our faith: In heaven, there is our hope. Father is
taken sometimes personally, as in that of our Savior, My father is greater
then I; sometimes essentially, for the Whole Deity, so here. Now, that God is
in Heaven, is a notion that heathens also have by nature: and do therefore in
distress, lift up eyes and hands thither-ward. And lest man should not look
upward, God has given to his eyes peculiar nerves, to pull them up toward his
habitation; that he might direct his prayer unto him, and look up, Psalm. Psalm
73.
5. 3. that he might feelingly say with David, Whom have I in Ut au (...) (...)
Adam. (...) vita.
heaven, but thee? Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, o thou that dwell in the
heavens. Behold, as the eyes of servants look to the hand of their Masters,
etc. Psalm 123, 1, 2. It is reported of (...), that he preached so powerfully,
that he seemed to thunder, and prayed so earnestly, that he seemed to carry his
hearers with him up into heaven.

Hallowed be thy Name.]
1. Honored be thy Majesty. According to thy Name, O God, so is thy praise,
Psalm. 48. 10. Now Gods Name is holy and reverend, Psalm. 111. 9. Great and
terrible, Psalm. 99. 3. Wonderful and worthy, Psalm. 8. 1. Jam. 2. 7. High and
honorable, Isa. 12. 4. Dreadful among the Heathen, Mal. 1. 14. and exalted
above all praise, (...). 9. 5. His glory is, as himself, eternally infinite;
and so abides, not capable of our addition or detraction. The Sun would shine,
though all the world were blind, or did wilfully shut their eyes. Howbeit to
try how we prize his glory, and how industrious we will be to promote it, God
lets us know that he accounts himself, as it were, to receive a new being by
those inward conceptions of his glory, and by those outward honors we do him:
when we lift up his Elevavit, evexit, conser, Isa. 5. 26.
Name as a Standard, saying, Jehovah Nissi, The Lord is my (...), Exodus 17. 15.
When we bear it up aloft (as the word used in (...) vex l. lum adgentes. (...)
ita inficit sermentu^ (...), (...) que^ tant is (...) tibus, nonut redem, torem
expect ant (...) pecca. to. sed exgentium temporali jugo. D. Pride. Lect.
the third Commandment, whereunto this petition answers, signifies) as
servants do their Masters badges upon their shoulders; Being confident (with S.
Paul) of this very thing, that in nothing we shall be ashamed (whilst we
hallow this holy God, Isa. 5. 16.) bue that with allboldnesse or freedom of
speech, as always, so now Christ shall be magnified in our bodies, whether it
be by life or by death, Phil. 1. 20.

Verse 10. Thy Kingdom come.]
Thy kingdom of power and providence: but especiaily, enlarge thy Kingdom of
grace, and hasten thy Kingdom of glory. The Jews pray almost in every prayer,
Thy Kingdom come, and that Bimheroch, Bejamenu, quickly, even in our days. But
it is for an earthly Kingdom: that which the Apostles also so deeply dreamt of,
that our Savior had very much ado to dispossess them. For most absurdly and
unseasonably many times, they would ask him foolish questions that way, when he
had been discoursing to them of the necessity of his own death, and of their
bearing the cross. (...), S. John (...) 9. 34.
very wisely interrupts him, one time among the rest, as weary of verse. 37, 38.
such sad matter, and, laying hold on something our Savior had said by the by,
tells him a story of another (...). They were besotted with an odd conceit of
(...) and offices to be distributed, here, among them, as once in David's and
Solomon's reign. And what shall we think of their opinion, that not content to
affirm, that (...) the fall of Antichrist, the Jews shall have a glorious
conversion, and the whole Church such a happy Halcyon, as never before; but
also that the Martyrs shall then have their first (...), and shall reign with
Christ a thousand years? (...) This they (...) on (...). el. (...) 4.
tor holds, they shall so reign in heaven. Alstedius not only says, they
shall reign here on earth, but begins his millenary about the year of our
Lord, 1694. Let our hearts desire and prayer (...) Romans 10. 1.
God for Israel oe, that they may be saved. Let us also (...) and pray for such
poor souls in Asia and America, as worship the devil: not inwardly only (for so
too many do amongst us) but with an outward worship. And this we should the
rather do, because Divines think, that when all Israel shall be called, and as
it were raised from the dead, Romans 11. 15, 26. when those two sticks (...) be
joined into one, (...). 37. 16. then shall many of those deceived souls, that
never yet savingly heard of God, have part and portion in the same resurrection.

Thy will be done.]
Gods will must be done of thee, ere his kingdom can come to thee. If thou seek
his kingdom, seek first his (...). 11. 12.
righteousness, If thou pray, Thy Kingdom come, pray also, Thy Sunt qui (...)
divinae distinctionem in revelatam and arcanam, quasi ipsius (...) au dent. Sic
Siguardin. (...). on. Christ.
will be done. Pray i, and do it; for other wise, Thou compassest God with
lies, as Ephraim did. Now the will of God is twofold, Secret and Revealed,
whatever Siguardus blasphemeth to the contrary. His revealed will again is
fourfold, 1. His determining will concerning us, what shall become of us,
(...) 1. 5. 2. His prescribing will, what he requires of us, Ephesians. 1. 9. 3.
His approving will, by the which he graciously accepts, and (...) regards those
that come to him in faith and (...), Matthew. 18. 14. 4. His disposing will, and
this is the will of his providence, Vide Pareum in Jacob. 4. 15.
1 Cor, 1. 1. Romans 1. 10. Now we should resign our selves over to his
determining will, as the highest cause of all things: rest in his approving
will, as our chiefest happiness: obey his prescribing will, as the absolutest
and perfectest form of holiness; and be subject to his disposing will, being
patient in all trials and troubles, because he did it, Psalm. 39. 9. David has
this commendation, (...).
that he did all the wills of God. And it is reported (says Act. 13. 22.
M. Bradford) that I shall be burned in Smith-field, and that very shortly.
Fiat voluntas Domini, Ecce ego, Domine, mitte me. The Act. and Mon. fol 1502.
will of the Lord be done, said those good souls in the Acts, when they saw
that Paul was peremptory to go up. This third Petition, Act. (...). 41.
Thy will be done, etc. was (...) text that ever M. Beza handled, Deficere
potius quam (...) visus est (...). Adam.
(...) died; and departed (rather then (...)) to do Gods will more (...) in
heaven, as he had done to his power on earth. They that (...) us do, and (...)
the will of God, are his (...), Isa. 62. 4. And (...) should be our constant
care so to apply our (...), that God (...) take pleasure in us, as in men after
his own (...), and say of us, as he did of Cyrus, He is the man of my will,
that executes all my counsel. This is to Isa. 45. 11.
set the crown upon Christ's head, Cant. 3. 11. Yea, this is to set the crown
upon our own heads, 2 Timothy 4 8. 9.

In (...), as it is in heaven.]
By those heavenly Courtiers: The Revel. 4. 8.
crowned Saints (...) no rest (and yet no (...),) crying, (...), holy, etc.
They (...) the Lamb wheresoever he goes, with (...), Domine? How long, Lord?
etc. Revel. 6. 10. Which words also were M. Calvin's symbolum, that he (...)
sighed (...) Adam. in vita Calvin. (...). 100.
out, in the behalf of the (...) Churches. As for the glorious Angels, though
they excel in strength, yet they do Gods (...), Psalm. 103. 20.
harkening to the voice of his Word. They rejoice (...). 18.
more in their names of (...), then of honor, and ever stand before Dan. 9.
(...).
the face of our heavenly father, as waiting a command for our good: and so
willing of their way, that Gabriel is said to have come to comfort Daniel with
weariness of flight. They do the will of God: 1. Cheerfully: whence they are
said to have wings, six wings (...), Isa. 6. 2. 2. Humbly: therefore with two
they cover their faces. 3. Faithfully without partiality: with two they covered
or harnessed their feet. 4. Speedily and (...): with two they flee abroad the
world upon Gods errand, and for the good of them that shall be saved, Heb. 1.
14. burning, and being all on a light fire, with infinite love to God and
Angeli igniti.
his Saints, their fellow servants, Revel. 22. 9. whence they are Shindler.
called Seraphims or burning-creatures. 5. Constantly: Jacob saw Job 38. 7.
them ascending, to contemplate and praise God, and to minister Heb. 8. 1.
unto him, Dan. 7 10. He saw them also (...) to dispense (...).
(...) benefits, and to (...) his (...), Revel. 15. 6. This they do. 1. Justly;
whence they are said ((...)) to be clothed in pure white linen. 2. Diligently,
and constantly: therefore they have their breasts girded. 3. (...), and with
faith in (...) Gods Commandments: (...) are (...) said to have golden girdles;
Go ye now, and do (...): otherwise ye may be as (...), for gifts and good
parts, and yet have your part with the (...) and his black Angels.

Verse 11. Give us this day.]
We have not a bit of bread of our own earning, but must get our living by
begging. Peter himself was to obtain his very bread by humble petition, how
much more his salvation? He that shall go to God, as the Predigall did, with,
Give me the portion that pertains to me, shall receive the (...) of sin,
which is eternal death. God gives meat in (...) (...). (...). (...).
(...).
(says Elihu) That thou give, they gather, says David. And (...), (...).
(...) 28
Thou give them their meat in due season. Now what more (...) then gift?
Beggars also pay no debts, but acknowledge their (...).
insufficiency, and speak supplications in a low language, as broken men: so
must we. Oh lie daily begging at the beautiful gate of heaven: look intently
upon God, as he did, Act. 3. upon (...).
Peter and John, expecting to receive something. And, because beggars must be
no chusers, ask as our Savior here directs, 1. (...) (...) opponit (...) libis
and (...), l. 1. (...). 10.
quality, bread only, not manchet or junkets, but downright household bread (as
the word imports) the bread of carfulness or sorrows, Psalm. 127. 2. which the
singing Psalms interpret, (...) bread. Our Savior gave thanks for
barley-bread: and his Disciples were glad to make a Sabbath-dayes-dinner of a
few ears of corn rubbed between their fingers. A very Philosopher could say, He
that can feed upon green herbs, need not please (...) se cum (...) esse de
(...), si aquam (...) and (...). AEhan.
Dionysius, need not flatter any man. And Epicurus himself would not doubt to
content himself as well as he that has most, might he but have a morsel of
course meat, and a draught of cold water, The Israelites had soon enough of
their quails: they had quails with a vengeance, because Manna would not content
them. They died with the meat in their mouths: and, by a hasty testament,
(...) a new name to the place of their burial, Kibroth-(...), the graves of
lust: Cibus and potus sunt divitiae Christianorum, (...).
says Hierom: Meat and drink are the Christian man's riches. (...).
Bread and cheese (says another) with the Gospel is good cheer, (...) is
content with a (...), grace with (...), says a third. (...) me (...) vel
(...). ei, (...). 30 8.
A godly man as he asks but for bread; so (2) for the quantity, (...) for
daily bread, the bread of the day for the day, enough to (...) him (...) with
Jacob, (...) much only as will bear his (...), till he (...) again to his
fathers house. He passes through I he (...) (...), (...) (...) (...) (...).
the (...), as Israel through the (...), content with his Omer (...) the day,
with his (...)-measure, with his fathers (...). As he journeyeth to the
promised land, he bespeaks the world, as Israel did Edom, through whose Country
they would (...). (...). 21. (...) and (...) (...), Ale.
(...): Let me pass through thy land. We will not turn (...) the fields nor
vineyards: neither will we drink of the water of thy Wells: we will go by the
Kings-high way, until we be past thy (...). (...).
And as a traveller when he comes to his Inn, if he can (...) ab Ar. (...) ad
facultates (...) accersitus, (...), (...), (...) (...) ep.
get a better room or lodging, he will: as if not, he is content, for he
considers it is but for a night: So the Christian pilgrim. If God (...) him in
a plentiful estate, he gladly makes (...) of it; (...) if otherwise he can
live with a little: and if his means be not (...) his mind, he can bring his
mind to his means, and live upon (...). Give him but (...), he stands not upon
(...). Give him but daily bread, that is, bread for necessity, (...) the
Syriack, so much as will hold life and soul together, says S (...) Panem
(...). Sir. Vitae conserva. (...) (...).
Brentius. Sufficient to uphold and sustain nature, says Beza (with the Greek
Scholiast) that where with our nature and (...) may be content, and he is (...)
apaid and (...): he cries out with Jacob, I have enough; and with David, The
lines are fallen unto me in afair place. A little of the (...) In Annotat.
turn to carry him through his pilgrimage: in his (...) house (...) esse possit
(...) and (...). (...).
he knows is bread enough, Luke 16. And on the (...) of that he goes on as
merrily, and feeds as sweetly as (...) did of his honeycomb, or Hunniades,
when he (...) with his shepherds. (...).


This day]
Or as S. Luke has it, by the day: for who is (...) of (...)? May not his
(...) this night be taken from him? We (...) (...), as Diogenes was wont to say
of (...): and should (as (...) speaks of the birds and (...)) in diem Tur.
(...): 10. (...)
(...); taking no further thought then for the present (...). (...) 20. (...).
The Turks never build any thing (...) for their own private (...), but
contenting themselves with (...) simple cottages, how mean (...), commonly say,
that they be good enough for the time of their short (...). Turk hist. f. 342.

Verse 12. And forgive us our debts, etc.]
Loose us (says (...)) and let us go free: for (...) sinners are in the (...)
bond of (...), as Simon (...); and (...) is called a (...), Romans 3 25. The
guilt of (...) is an (...), binding (...) over to (...). God has against us,
Matthew. 5. (...). (...) our handwriting, which is contrary to us, Coloss. 2.
14. This (...) (...) against himself, Psalm. 32. 5. and upon (...) prayer
obtained pardon. He only acknowledged the debt, and God (...) the book. God
crossed the black lines of his (...) with the red lines of his Sons blood.
Thou forgavest me (says David) the iniquity of my sin; the maliguity of it,
the (...) thing that was in it. For this shall every one that is godly pray
(...) thee, by mine example, and obtain like favor. For our God is (...)
sin-pardoning God, Nehem. 9. 31. none like him, Mica. 7. 18. He forgiveth sin
naturally, Exodus 34. 6. abundantly, Isa, 55. 7, constantly, Joh. 1. 27. He does
take away the sins of the world. (...) a perpetual act of his, as the Sun
does shine, as the spring does run, Zech. 13. 1. The (...) is not weary of
seeing, nor the ear of (...): (...). (...) 8.
No more is God of showing mercy. All sins, yea, and (...) shall be forgiven to
the sons of men, says our Savior: (...). (...).
as the sea covers not only small sands, but huge rocks. Christ (...) (...)
the propitiation or covering for our sins, are they how many, and 1 Ioh. (...).
how great soever, as was sweetly shadowed of old by the (...) Exodus 25. 17.
covering the Law, the mercy-seat covering the Ark, and the (...) (...).
Cherubims over them, both covering one another. In allusion (...), (...)
(...). 32. 1, (...).
whereunto, Blessed, says David, is the man whose transgression is forgiven,
whose sin is covered. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not sin.
A metaphor from merchants, who when they will forgive a debt, do not put it
into the reckoning, and so, do not impute it. Sin casts men deep into debt
and arrearages with God. It is called a debt of ten thousand talents. (...).
18. 24
It casts a man into a (...) condition, makes him So Luk 7. 47.
hide his face for shame, as Adam, causes a continual sound of Luke 13 4.
fear in his ears: so that he thinks every bush a bailiff, every shrub (...)
sergeant, etc. An evil conscience hunts him, follows him up and down so close,
like a bloud-hound, hot-foot, that he sometimes serves himself, as that Jesuit
in Lancashire, followed by one that had found his glove, with a desire to
restore it to him; but pursued inwardly with a guilty conscience, leaps over a
hedge, plunges into a marlepit behind it unseen and unthought of, wherein
Wards Sermon.
(...) was (...). This and worse is the case of a poor (...), (...) is caught
and (...) up in prison, laid fast in bonds and (...) of (...); and what can he
give in exchange for his soul? (...). 16 (...).
(...) the (...), nor (...) off the arrest: (...) or (...), (...) will serve
him with a writ to appear, and (...) at the great (...), (...) Gods tribunal.
(...) does (...) excuse him: for (...) is (...), whether a man know of (...) or
not, and will light so much the more heavily, by how much (...) is done upon
him more unexpectedly. Now there (...) no way in the (...) of discharging this
debt, but by the (...) of Christ (...), who has paid the utmost farthing for
(...) elect. This good Samaritan has discharged all for us: and (...) for
(...) sake accounts of our sins, as if they had never (...) committed. He
binds them in a bundle, (...) them up as (...), Dan. 9 24. and casts them
behind him, as old (...) into the bottom of the sea, and all, because mercy
pleases (...), Mica. 7. 19. This he does at first conversion, when he (...)
(...) 3. 2.
sinner, Romans 3. And whereas in many things we sin all, we (...) a pardon of
course for those weaknesses, that are of daily (...), included in that general
pardon, which we have upon (...) repentance. Only he looks we should sue out
our (...), by daily prayer for it. Entreat we God to remit our (...); and, since
he must be satisfied, to take it out of his Sons (...), who is become surety
for us; and says unto his Father in (...), as Paul to Philemon, If this
Onesimus of mine has wronged Philem. 18, 19.
(...), or (...) thee ought, put that on mine account.

As we forgive our debtours.]
Not as if God should therefore forgive us, because we forgive others; but this
is the argument. We do and can, by Gods grace, forgive them, therefore God can
(...) will much more forgive us; since all our goodness is but a spark (...)
his (...), a drop of his ocean. No article of our Creed is so (...) by Satan,
as that of the forgiveness of (...) by (...), which is the very soul of a
Church, and the life of good soul. All the former Articles of the Creed are
perfected in his, and all the following Articles are effects of this. Now one
(...) of (...) us in the sound (...) of the pardon of (...) own debts, (...),
if we can forgive our debtours. He that can put (...) all purpose of (...), and
freely forgive his brother, may with boldness ask and expect forgiveness at
Gods hands. For (...) rejoices against judgment; and our love to others is
but a Jam. (...). (...).
(...) of Gods (...) to us. It is a fruit of (...) faith, (...). 17. 4, 5. It
is (...) a sweet (...) of our (...), Col. 3. 12, 13, (...) an effectual (...)
of our (...). For (...) our (...) shall commend the righteousness of God, Romans
3. 5. both in (...) of his (...) in pardoning so great sins, and our
thankful acknowledging of that grace in walking (...) of it.

Now if any ask, Why the petition for pardon of sin, is set (...) (...).
that for daily bread? It is answered,

1. In (...) four former petitions we pray for good things: In (...).
the two later we pray against evil. 2. Our Savior (...) herein to our
infirmity, who (...) sooner trust God for pardon then provision, for a (...) a
(...). 3. That by an argument from the less to the greater, we (...) the more
boldly beg spirituals.
Verse 13. And lead us not into temptation.]
Here we beg sanctification, as in the former petition, (...): and are taught
after (...) of sins, to look for temptations, and to pray (...) them.
Temptations are either of (...) (and so God tempts men) or of perdition, and so
the devil. Both (...) great temptations began with one strain, (...), Get thee
(...), Genesis 12. 1. Genesis 22. 2. Here God led Abraham into temptation, but he
delivered him from evil: yea, he tempted him and proved him, to do him good in
his later end. His usual way is, to bring (...) (...). 8.
to heaven by hell-gates, to draw light cut of darkness, (...) of evil: As the
skillful Apothecary makes of a poisonfull viper, (...) triacle; as the cunning
Artificer with a crooked unsightly tool, frames a straight and beautiful
piece of work: (...) the Egyptian birds are said to pick wholesome food out of
the Serpents eggs: or as the Athenian Magistrates by giving to (...) hemlock (a
poisonous herb) preserved the Commonwealth. The devil tempts either by way of
seducement, (...). 1. 15. or grievance, 2 (...). 127. In the former he excites
our (...), rubs the firebrand, and makes it send forth (...) sparkles, carries
us away by some pleasing object, as the fish by the bait. Yet has he only a
persuading slight, not an enforcing might: our own (...) carries the greatest
stroke. In the later (those (...) of buffeting or grievance, horrid and hideous
thoughts of Atheism, Idolatry, blasphemy, (...), etc.) himself, for most part,
is the sole doer, to trouble us in our Christian course, and make us run
heavily toward heaven. The Russians are so malicious one toward another, that
you shall have a (...) hide some of his own goods in his house whom he hates,
(...) Geog. page 243.
and (...) accuse him for the stealth of them. Such is the devils dealing often
times with Gods dearest children: He darts into their (...) his (...)
injections, and then would persuade them, that they are accessory to the act.
Here our victory is, not to give place to the devil, but to resist steadfast in
the faith. Which that we may, pray we always with all prayer and supplication,
Ephesians 6. 18. pray as (...) Savior did, Father keep them from the evil, or from
wickedness, Joh. 17. 15. Pray as our Savior bids, Lead us not, etc. that is,
either keep us from occasions of sin, or carry us over them. Either preserve
us from (...) into sin, or help us to rise out of sin by (...): grant us to
be either innocent or penitent. Deliver us from those devoratory evils (as
Tertullian calls them,) such sins as might frustrate perseverance, 2 These.
3. 3. And from that evil or wicked one, that he touch us not, (...) (...) 5.
18. that is, (...) (as (...) expounds it) with a deadly touch, so as (...)
altar us from our gracious disposition. Howbeit, sin and temptation come both
under one name in this (...), to warn us and teach us, that we can no further
shun sin, then we do temptation thereunto.

For (...) is the Kingdom]
That is, all sovereignty is originally and (...) invested in thee. Other Kings
are but thy servants and (...), by thee they reign, Prove. 8. 15. and of thee
they (...) their power, Romans 13. 1. Where then will they appear, that say to
the the King Apostata, Job. 34. 18. that send messages Luke (...). 14.
after him, saying, We will not have this man to reign over us: that Exodus 2.
14.
bespeak (...), as that Hebrew did Moses, Who made thee a Prince and a Judge
amongst us? should they not rather send a Lamb to Isa. 16. 1.
this (...) of the earth? and bring a present to Fear? should they Psalm. 76. 11.
not (...) to his scepter, and confess his sovereignty?

And the power.]
Some have Kingdoms, that yet want power to help their subjects: as that King
of Israel that answered her, 2 King. 6. 17.
that had (...) her child, in that sharp famine of Samaria; where an Asses
head was worth four pounds: If the Lord do not help, whence shall I help? But
the King of heaven is never at such a Nonplus, He can do (...) he will; and
he will do whatsoever is meet to be done, for the good of his servants and
suppliants. Peter wanted power to deliver Christ, (...) wanted (...).
will, but God wants neither: what a comfort's that? Let us rest (...). (...).
on his mighty arm, and cast the laboring Church into his everlasting arms. He
is able to do more then we can ask or think, and will not fail to keep that
which we have committed unto him against that (...), 2 Timothy 1. 14.

And the glory]
To wit of granting our requests. Praises will follow upon prayers obtained,
Psalm. 50. 15. what a man winnes by prayer, he will wear with thankfulness.
Now who so offers (...).
(...), he glorifieth me, says God: And the Gentiles did not (...) God,
neither were thankful, Romans 1. 21, 28. But the 24 Elders ascribe unto him
glory and honor. And this is a most powerful (...). 4. (...).
argument in prayer, as are also the two former. And it pleases God well, to
hear his children reason it out with him (...), (...). 9, 10, 11, 12
as Jacob did, and the woman of Canaan. Because by showing (...). 15. (...),
(...).
such reasons of their requests, as our Savior here directs us, they show
proof of their knowledge, faith, confidence, etc. And befides they do much
confirm their own faith, and stir up good affections in prayer.

Amen.]
This Hebrew word, (...) remains untranslated in (...).
most languages, is either prefixed or proposed to a sentence, and (...) it is
a note of certain and earnest asseveration; or else it is affixed, and opposed,
and so it is a note either of assent or assurance. Of assent; and that either
of the understanding to the truth of that that is uttered, as in the end of the
Creed and four Gospels; or of the will and affections, for the obtaining of our
petitions, 1 Cor. 14. 16. how shall he say Amen at thy giving of thanks? Of
assurance next, as in this place, and many others. It is the voice of one that
believes and expects that he shall have his prayers granted. It is as much
as so be (...), yea, so it shall be.

Verse 14. For if ye forgive men their trespasses]
Our Savior resumeth, and inculcateth the fifth petition with a repetition;
because upon charity (which is chiefly seen in giving and forgiving) hangs,
after a sort, the restfull success of all our (...), 2 Timothy 2. 8. Malice is a
leaven that swells the heart, and (...) the sacrifice, 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8. Out with
it therefore, that we (...) keep the feast or holy day; that we may (as we
ought to do) (...)
keep a constant jubilee, nexus solvendo, and noxas remittende. (...) (...)
This, (...) and blood will not easily yield to. But we are not debtors to the
flesh, we owe it nothing, but the blew eye that S. Paul gave it. When Peter
heard that he might not recompense to any (...) for evil, but must studiously
seek his conversion and salvation. Lord, says he, how often shall my brother
sin against me, and I forgive him? till seven times, this he thought a mighty
deal; a very high pitch of perfection. Our Savior tells him, till seventy
times seven times, that is, infinitely, and without stint: yet he^ alludes to
Peter's seven, and, as it were, alludes it, and his rashness in setting bounds
to this duty, and prescribing, how often, to him that was the wiledom of the
Father.

This is when my brother returns, and says, It repents me: (...).
But what if he do not?

In forgiving an offendour, say Divines, there are three things. Sol.
1. The letting fall all wrath and desire of revenge. 2. A solemn Dikes Worthy
Communicant. p. 3. (...).
profession of forgiveness. 3. Reacceptance into former familiarity. The first
must be done however. For the second, If he say, I repent; I must say; I remit,
Luke 18. To the third, a man is not bound till satisfaction be given.

Your heavenly father will also forgive you.]
Yet is not our forgiving men, the cause of his forgiving us, but a necessary
antecedent. The cause is only the free mercy of God in Christ. He puts away our
iniquities for his own sake, Isa. 43. 25. Nevertheless, forasmuch as he has
(...) us this promise here, our forgiving others Annot in Luke 11. 4.
(says learned Beza) seems to have the nature of an intervenient (...), a
cause, sine qua non, of his forgiving us.

Verse 15. But if ye will not, etc.]
This is a matter much to be observed, therefore so often inculcated. Judgment
without mercy, Jam. 2. 13.
shall be to them that show no mercy. There Is but a hairs breadth betwixt him
and hell, that has not his sins pardoned in heaven. Such is the case of every
one that does not from his heart forgive his offending brother, Mat. 18. 35. or
that says, I will forgive the fault, but not forget the matter, or affect the
person. Men must forbear one another, and forgive one another, as Christ
forgave them; and that if any man have a quarrel against any, Col. 3. 13. for
(...).
else what thanks is it? The glory of a man is to pass by (...). Prove. 19. 11.
It is more comfortable to love a friend, but more honorable to love an enemy.
If thou reserve in thy mind any piece of the wrong, thou provokest and daily
prayest God to reserve for thee a piece of his wrath; which burns as low as
the nethermost Deuteronomy. 32. (...).
hell. Neither will it help any, to do as Latimer reports of some in his
days, who being not Willing to forgive their enemies, would not say their
Paternoster at all: but instead thereof, (...) our Ladies. Psalter in hand;
because they were persuaded, that (...). Sermon
by that, they might obtain forgiveness of their fins of favor, without
putting in of so hard a condition as the forgivenes of their enemies into the
bargain.

Neither will your Father forgive your tresp (...)]
And if (...) do not, who can give pardon or peace, says he in Job? The
Rhemists talk much of one that could remove mountains, God only can remove
those mountains of guilt that lie upon the soul. (...) may forgive the
trespass, God only the transgression. Against (...), thee only have I sinned,
says David: And, to the Lord (...) (...). 51. 4.
God belongs mercies and forgivenesses, says Daniel. Ministers (...). 9. 9.
remit (...) ministerially as Nathan did; God only (...), and by his own power.
If the Son set us free, we are free indeed, Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods pardoned ones? It is God that justifies. Or as S. Austin
reads the words interrogatively, shall God that justifies? No verily: that
were to dot and undo: he keeps no back-reckonings. Fear not therefore,
though the Devil or his imps, or our own misgiving (...) condemn us: as the
prisoner cares not though tha jailer or his fellow prisoners condemn him, so
long as the Judge acquitteth him.

Verse 16. Moreover, when ye fast.]
Fast then they must, (...) even after the Lords ascension, when Gods grace and
Spirit was poured upon them in all abundance, Luke 5 35. This exercise has
still the warrant and weight of a duty, as well from precepts as examples of
both Testaments, And he that blamed the Pharisees (...) 2. (...).
here for fasting amiss, will much more blame those that fast not (...). 22.
12.
(...) 9. 14, 15.
at all, The Israelites (besides other occasional) had their annual Acts
(...). 3.
fast appointed them by God, Lev. 23. 27. It was called a day (...) 7 5.
of Expiations or Attonements in the plural; because of their many and sundry
sins they were then to bewail and get pardon for. God had appointed them
sundry sacrifices for several sins: But for (...) as it might not be safe to
confess some sins to the Priest (as those that might bring them, by the Law,
in danger of death) of his grace he vouchsafed them this yearly fast, for
expiation of their secret sins, and making their peace with their Maker, by a
general humiliation. Now, albeit the circumstance of time be abolished, the
equity of the duty abides, and tieth us no (...) (if not more) then it did the
Jews. Heathen (...) practiced it: so did, in their superstitious way, the
Egyptian Priests, the Persian Magi, Indian Wizzards, Priamus in Homer, etc.
The Turks at this day have their solemn fasts, (as before the fatal assault of
Constantinople) wherein they will not so much as taste a cup of water, or wash
their mouths with water all the day long, before the stars appear in the
sky: which makes their fasts (especially in the summer, when the days be
long and hot,) to be unto them very tedious. In the year of grace 1030. Turk.
Hist. fol. (...), 777.
there arose a (...) of Fasters, that affirmed, that to fast on Saturdaies with
bread and water (as they called it) would suffice to Ex illa Syno. dica
conclusione, seria (...) jejunare constituerat, secta illa le junantium,
originem suam habuisse videatur. Funcc. Chronol.
the remission of all sins; so that men bound themselves to it by oath. And
many French Bishops voted with them: But Gerardus Episcopus Cameracensis
withstood and abandoned them. So great ignorance was there, even then, of the
merits of Christ among the governors of the Church. The Papists slander us,
that we count fasting no duty, but only a moral temperance, a fasting from
sin, a matter of mere policy: And out-brave us, as much as the Pharisees did
the Disciples with their often fasting. But, as we cannot but find fault with
their fasts in that; First, They set and appoint certain fasting-daies
howsoever, to be observed, upon pain of damnation, be the times clear or
cloudy, etc. Secondly, They fast from certain meats only, not all; which is a
mere mock-fast, and a doctrine of devils, 1 Timothy 4. 3. Thirdly, They make it a
service Cave, ne si (...) coeperis, te (...) esse sanctum! (...), non (...),
etc. (...), ad (...).
of God, yet consecrate it to the Saints. Fourthly, They make shameful sale of
it. Fifthly, They ascribe (as those older Heretics) merit unto it, even to the
mere outward abstinence, as these Pharisees did, and those hypocrites in
Isaiah, chap. 58. 3. Now as we cannot but condemn their superstition, so
neither is our forlorn oscitancy and dullness to this duty to be excused. God
has given us, alate especially (many gracious opportunities of public
Humiliations, more, I think, then ever before, since the Reformation: But
(...), how do many fast, at such times, for fashion, fear of Law, or of mere
form; so that they had need to send, as the Prophet speaks, for mourning
women, that by their cunning they may be taught to mourn, Ier. 19. 17? And for
private fasting, whether domestical with a man's family, Zech. 12. 12. 1 Cor.
7. 5. Acts 10. 30. or personal by himself, as here, Matthew. 6. 17. We may (...)
to have dealt with it, as the Romans with the Tarquines: they banished all of
that name for Superbus his sake. And as the Nicopolites are said to have hated
the braying of an (...), that, for that cause, they would not endure the sound
of (...): So many are departed so far from Popish fasts, (...) fast not at
all; and so open the mouths of the adversaries. But acquaint thy self with
this duty, thou that would be (...) with God. It is a fore-tast of eternal
life, (...) in holy practices we taste the sweetness of that heavenly Manna,
this Angels food, those soul-fatting viands, that makes us, for a time, to
forbear our appointed food. It is a help to the understanding of heavenly
mysteries, as Daniel found it, It fits us for conversion, (...) 9 (...).
Joel 2. 12. and furthers it, Acts 9. 9. Hence it is called a (...) of
Humiliation, or of humbling the soul, Lev. 16. because God usually by that
Ordinance gives an humble heart, to the which he has promised both grace, 1
Pet. 5. 5, and glory, Prove. 15. 33. It (...) out corruption, and is to the soul
as washing to a room, which is more then sweeping; or as scouring to the
vessel, which is more then ordinary washing. It subdues rebell-flesh, which
with fulness 1 (...). 9. 27.
(...). 16.
of bread will wax wanton, as Sodom, (...), (...). (...). 32. 15.
It testifies true repentance, by this holy revenge, 2 Cor. 7. 11. (...).
(...). (...).
whiles we thus amerce and punish our selves, by a voluntary forgoing (...).
of the (...) and commodities of life, as altogether unworthy, Psalm. 35. 13.
What shall I say more? Hereby we are daily drawn to more obedience, and love to
God, faith in him, and communion with him; a more holy frame of soul, and habit
of heavenly-mindednesse: Whence our Savior, after this direction for fasting,
immediately subjoins that of laying up for our selves, treasure in heaven, ver.
19, 20. And lastly our prayers shall be hereby edged, winged, and made to soar
aloft, which before flagged, sainted, and as it were groveled on the ground.
Therefore (...).
our Savior, here, next after matter of prayer, adds this of fasting, which is
a necessary adjunct of prayer (that which is extraordinary especially) as that
which very much fits the heart for prayer, Bern. (...). (...). 4.
and the severe practice of repentance. Hence it is, that else where, these two
fasting and prayer go coupled, for most part, as Luke (...). 37. Matthew. 17. 21.
1 Cor. 7. 5, etc. A full belly, neither studies, nor prays willingly. Fasting
enflames prayer, and prayer (...) fasting; especially, when we fast and weep,
Joel 2. 13. fast and watch, watch and pray, and take heed to both, Mark. 13. 33.

Be not as the hypocrites]
For they fast not to God, Zech. 7. 5, 11, 12. but to themselves, they pine the
body, but pamper the flesh, Quid (...) absti. (...), (...) super. bia? (...).
they hang down their heads, Isa. 58. 5. but their hearts stand bolt (...)
within them. Their fasting is either superstitious or secure; whiles they rest
in the work done, or with opinion of merit; whereas the Kingdom of heaven is
not in meat and drink. And whether we eat or eat not, we are neither the more
nor the less (...). 14. 17.
accepted of God, They fast for strife and debate, and to make (...). (...).
(...).
their voices to be heard on high: Whereas secrecy in this duty, is (...), 58.
4.
the (...) argument of sincerity. They loose not the bands of wickedness, nor
break off their sins by repentance: therefore God regards not (which they
repine at) but rejects their considence, and answers them according to the
idols of their hearts. When they fast, says he, I will not hear their cry,
Jer. 14. 1, 2. they are not (...) san. (...) as duplex iniquit as,
a button the better for all they can do. Displeasing service proves a double
dishonor; their outsidenesse is an utter abomination: they present the Great
King with an empty cask, with a heartlesse sacrifice, with a bare carcass of
Religion, as the Poets feign of (...).

Of a sad countenance]
Make not a sour face, look not grim (...), (...) oculis, and subductus
supercilijs (...) Chemnit. (...), Christus-alladit ad (...), quibus Mimi velati
in (...) prodibant, ut cum alias essent (...) sellive, ridiculi, repraesenta
(...) vultum (...). (...). Chemnit.
and ghastly, as the word signifies; so that one would be afraid to look on
them, they do so disfigure their faces, so wanze and wither their
countenences, so deform, and (as S. Ierom renders it) demolish their natural
complexions; pining themselves, to make their faces pale and meager, that they
may be noted and noticed for great fasters. Such a one was that Non-such Ahab,
and those (...) bullrushes, Isa. 58. 5. those hollow hypocrites, Ier. 14. 12.
that proud Patriarch of Constantinople, that first affected the style of
Universal Bishop; and is therefore pointed at by Gregory the great, as the
forerunner of Antichrist: yet by his frequent fasting, this proud man merited
to be surnamed Johannes Nestentes, John the Faster. Such pains men will put
themselves to for a Name, so far they will trouble themselves to go to hell
with credit. The Jesuits had set forth a Psalter, a little before the Arch.
Usher, Gravis. quest.
powder plot should have been acted, for the good success of a wicked
counter-Parliament. And to increase the iniquity, with wicked Iezabel, they
would color it with a fast: yea with blasphemous Rabshakeh, they would by
their hypocritical practices, bear Spec. bell sac.
the world in hand, that they came not up against us without the Lord.

That they may appear unto men to fast.]
There is a great deal of seemingnesse, and much counterfeit grace abroad. The
sorcerers seemed to do as much as Moses, the Pharisees to do more, this way,
then the Disciples. But bodily exercise profits little. Somewhat it may get
at Gods hands, as Ahab, for a temporary repentance, had a temporal
deliverance; such is Gods munificence, he is rich in mercy, to all that do him
any duty. But if the leaves of this (...) be so medicinable, what is the fruit?
If the shadow thereof be so (...), what the substance? If the shell so
profitable, (...).
what the kernel? Oh let us rather seek to be good, then (...) to be so: lest
the Lord say of our outward shows, as Jacob said of Joseph's coat, Genesis 37. 33.
the coat is the coat of my son, some evil beast has devoured him. So, the
outward form of their fasting, praying, practicing, is the form of my sons
and daughters, but some evil spirit has devoured them, that use it in
hypocrisy. Lest men also say unto such, as John Caepocius did to Pope Innocent
the third, preaching peace, and sowing discord; You speak like a God, but do
like a devil. You are fair professors, (...).
but foul sinners. And when the filthy sinner goes damned to hell, what shall
become of the seeming Saint? As the clown said to the Bishop of Cullen praying
in the Church like a Bishop, but as he was Duke, going guarded like a tyrant,
Whither think thou the (...) of (...).
Bishop shall go, when the Duke shall be damned?

They have their reward]
All they looked after, and all they are to look for. The Eagle though she fly
high, yet has an eye to the prey below all the while. So has the hypocrite to
profit, credit, or (...) other base respects, and let him take it, says our
Savior. Non equidem invideo, miror magis. -- Breath they have for breath; much
good do them with it.

Verse 17. But thou when thou fastest, anoint thine head, etc.]
Not but that a man is bound at such a time, to abridge (...) of (...) ^
comforts and delights of life, whence it is called a day of restraint, Joel 2.
15. and of afflicting the soul. The Ninevites sat in (...), as unworthy (...)
any covering. Others put ashes on their heads, in token that they deserved to
be as far (...), as now (...) were above ground. David lay on the (...), 2
(...). 12. 16. Daniel laid aside all delights of sense, as music, mirth,
(...), (...), etc. Our Savior fasted to the humbling of his soul, Psalm. 35 13.
weakening of his knees, Psalm. 69. 10. (...) and (...) of (...) body, Psalm. 109
24. And when (...) the (...) (...).
(...) him wine mingled with myrthe, to (...), and make him (...) sensible of
his pain, he received it not, (...). 15 23. To (...) us ((...) a (...)) in our
extraordinary humilations for our sins, to forbear all such refreshments as
might hinder the course of our just griefs. Let your laughter be turned into
mourning, and your joy into heaviness, Jam. 4 9. such (...).
a (...) as may be seen in the countenance, as the word (...). (...) and (...),
(...) comedere. (...), (...) vultus demis. sione. Budaeus.
But when our Savior bids, anoint the head, at such a time, and wash the
face, it is, as he expounds himself, that we may not appear to men to fast: In
a private fast, eschewing wholly the (...); in a public, not performing to the
show, or to this end, that we may be (...).

Verse 18. That thou appear not unto men to fast, etc.]
(...) (...). Ne te (...) extra.
(...) the glowworm, which seems to have both light and heat; but touch it,
and it has neither indeed. In the history of the World encompassed by Sr
Francis Drake, it is (...), that in a certain Island to the southward of
Celebes, among the trees, night by night did show themselves, an infinite swarm
of fiery-seeming worms, flying in the air, whose bodies no bigger then an
ordinary fly, did make a show, and give such (...) encomp. (...) S. Fr. (...).
(...).
light, as if every twig on every tree had been a lighted candle, or as if that
place had been the starry sphere. This was but a semblance, but an appearance:
no more is that of hypocrites, but a (...), but a flourish. A sincere man is
like a crystall-glasse with a light in the midst, which appears through every
part thereof, so as that truth within, breaks out in every parcel of his
life. There is in his obedience to God, 1. An universality, he does every as
well as any part and point of Gods revealed will, so far as he knows it. 2. An
uniformity, without prejudice or partiality, I (...). 5. 21. without (...) the
balance of one side, Inequality (...).
of the legs (...), and an unequal pulse argues bodily (...). (...). 104,
(...).
(...); so does an unsuitable carriage an unsound soul. 3. (...): (...) the
same at home as abroad; in the closet as in (...). 23 (...).
the (...); and minds secret as well as open (...): (...) (...) is (...) the
same in his masters house, in the (...) and at (...); (...) or (...), not like
the planet (...), that is (...) with good, and bad with bad. (...) is unfeigned,
1 Timothy 1. 5. his love (...), (...) (...). 3. (...). (...). ndissembled. (...).
3. 17. his repentance, (...)
a renting of (...) (...) 2. 12. his (...), an afflicting of the soul. with
(...), till (...) heart be as sore within him as the (...) (...) the third day
aster circumcision, Lev. 16. 31. and 23. 37. He truly (...) at pleasing God,
and not at byrespects. This is truth in the inwards, Psalm. 51. 6. this is that
(...) and truth, 1 Cor. 5. 8 that simplicity and godly sincerity, 2 (...). 1.
12. A dainty word: It is a Metaphor (says one) from (...).
such things as are tried by being held up against the beams of the (...).
Sun (as chap-men do in the choice of their wares) to see what faults or flaws
are in them, It is properly used (says B. Andrews) of (...) wares, such as we
may (...), bring forth, (...) her (...).
and show them in the Sun. And as a godly man is sincere, without wax, or
gross matter, as he is unmingled, and true of heart, so he does truth, Joh.
3. 21. he will not lie, Isa. 63. 9. that great real (...) mel. 1. (...).
lie especially. Hypocrites in doing good, they do lies (by their delusion, as
gross hypocrites, by their collusion, as close hypocrites.) Thus Ephraim
compassed God with lies. His knowledge was but a form, his godliness a figure:
his zeal a flash, all he did, (...). 11. 12.
a semblance: as these Pharisees only appeared to fast and do (...) (...) 2.
(...).
duties. But every fowl that has a seemly feather, has not the 2 (...). 3. 5.
sweetest flesh; nor does every tree that bears a goodly leaf, Luk 8. 18.
(...). 6. (...).
bring good fruit. Glass gives a clearer sound then silver, and many things
glister besides gold. A true Christian cares as well to approve his inside to
God, as his outside to the world: And it is a just question, whether the desire
of being, or dislike of seeming sincere, be greater in him. He (...) his worst
to men, and best to God (as Moses did, when going to the mount he pulled off
his veil; and shents himself often before God for (...), which the world applauds
in him. God he knows, sees in secret, there is no tempting him with Ananias and
Saphira, to try whether he tries the hearts or not. His sharp nose easily
discerns, and is offended with the stinking breath of rotten lungs, though
the words or outward actions be never so sented and persumed with shows of
holiness.

Thy Father, which sees in secret shall reward thee openly]
He is the rewarder of all that diligently seek him in this soul fatting (...):
Heb 10. 6.
which as it was seen and allowed by the Lord Christ, Luke 5. 33. so it was
never rightly used without effect: It is called the day of Reconciliation or
Atonement, and has most rich and precious promises, Joel 2. 13. to the 21.
Its sure, God will pardon our sins, and that carries meat in the mouth of it,
Psalm. 42, 1, 2. Its probable, that (...) leave a blessing (...) him (and the
rather, that we may therewith cheerfully serve him) even a meat offering and a
drink offering to the Lord our God: according to that of the (...); There is
mercy with thee that thou may be feared, i. e. served. Fulness of bread
was Sodoms sin, and in those sacrificing Sodomites, Isa. 1. 10. it was noted
for an inexpiable evil, Isa. 22. 14. They that fast not on earth, when God
calls to it, shall be (...) with gall and (...) in hell: they that (...) not
among men, shall howl among devils: whereas those that sow in Psalm. 126. 5.
(...) shall reap in joy, they that mourn in time of sinning, shall be Ez
(...). (...). (...).
(...) in time of punishing: and as they have sought the Lord (...) fasting, so
shall he yet again be sought and found of such with (...). 8 10.
(...) feasting; as he has (...) and performed to his people in Judge. (...).
all (...) of the Church, not an instance can be alleged to the contrary.
(...) 8 (...).
(...). (...).
(...) three great fasters met gloriously upon mount Tabor. (...). 4. (...).
The Israelites fasting (and not till then) were (...), Judge. 20. (...). (...).
26.
(...) was delivered, Esther and her people reprived, Daniel Acts 10. 30.
(...) visions from heaven, Ezra help from heaven. And surely if with fasting
and prayer we can wrestle with God, as Jacob, we need not fear Duke Esau, with
his 600 cutthroats coming against us. Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos. Numa
being told (...), (...).
that his enemies were coming upon him as he was offering sacrifices, thought
it sufficient for his safety, that he could say, At ego (...). (...).
rem divinam facio, but I am about the service of my God. When (...) had once
established a preaching Ministry in all the Cities of Judah, then, and not
till then, the fear of the Lord fell upon 2 Chronicles. 17.
the neighbor Nations, and they made no war; albeit he had (...), 8. 9.
before that placed forces in all the fenced Cities. Leotine Prince Ego, (...),
formido (...) eleemosynas (...) quam ejus copias. D Povvel, in sua Camb. (...).
of Wales, when he was moved by some about him to make war (...) our Henry
the third, replied thus; I am much more afraid of his alms then of his Armies.
Frederike the Electour of Saxony, intending war against the Archbishop of
Magdeburg, sent a spy to search out his preparations, and to hearken out his
designs. But understanding, that the Archbishop did nothing more then commit
Alius insaniat ut (...) inserat ei qui (...) se (...). Bucholc.
his cause to God, and give himself to fasting and prayer, Alius, inquit
insaniat, etc. Let him fight, said he, that has a mind to it: I am not so mad
as to fight against him, that trusts to have God his defender and deliverer. It
is reported, that at the siege of (...), the people of God, using daily
humiliation, as their service would permit, did sing a Psalm after, and
immediately before their (...) forth; with which practice the enemy coming
acquainted, ever upon the singing of the Psalm (after which they expected a
sally) they would so quake and tremble, crying, They come, they come, (...)
though the wrath of God had been breaking out upon (...), (...). (...).
them. The soldiers that went against the (...) (where God was sincerely
served amidst a whole Kingdom of Papists) told their Captains they were so
astonished, they could not strike. Some others said, that the Ministers, with
their (...) Act. (...). (...) (...).
and prayer, conjured and (...) them, that they could not fight. It was the
custom of this poor people, so soon as they saw the enemy to approach, to cry
all together for aid and (...) to the Lord, etc. while the (...) fought, the
rest of the (...) with their Ministers, made their hearty prayer to God, with
sighs and tears, and that from the morning to the evening: when night was
come, they assembled again together. They which had fought, rehearsed Gods
wonderful aid and succor, and so all together rendered thanks. Always he
turned their (...) into joy. In the morning, trouble and affliction appeared
before them, with great terror on all sides: but by the evening they were
delivered, and had great cause of (...) Ibid. 885.
and comfort.

Verse 19. Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth.]
This is the fourth commonplace handled here by our Savior, of casting away
the inordinate care of earthly things, which he presses upon all, by nine
several arguments, to the end of the Chapter. By treasures here are meant
worldly wealth in abundance, precious things stored up, as silver, gold,
pearls, etc. All (...) are but earth, and it is, but upon earth (...) they are
laid up. What is silver and gold but white and yellow earth? And what are
pearls and precious stones, but the guts and garbage of the earth? Dan. 2. 45.
The stone brake in pieces, the iron, the brass, the clay, and silver, etc. The
Prophet breaks the (...) order of speech, for (...)
clay, iron, brass, silver, etc. to intimate (as some conceive) (...)
that silver is clay, by an elegant allusion in the Chaldee, should Broughton.
we load our selves with thick clay? Surcharge our hearts with cares of this
life, Luke 21. 34? Genesis 13. 2. It is said, Abraham was (...) rich in cattle, in
silver and in gold. There is a Latin translation that has it, Abraham was
very heavy. And the original (...)
indifferently bears both: to show (says one) that riches are a heavy
burden, and a hinderance many times to heaven and happiness. They that have
this burden upon their backs, can as (...).
hardly get in at the straight gate, as a Camel or Cable into a needle, (...).
and that because they trust in their riches (as our Savior Mat. 19 23.
(...) expounds himself) and here plainly intimates, when he (...)
(...) of (...) up (...); providing thereby for hereafter, (...) to morrow (so
(...) word (...)) and thinking themselves (...) the safer, and the (...) for
their outward abundance, (...) the rich fool did, The rich man's wealth is his
strong City, says Prove 10. 15.
(...), his wedge his confidence, his gold, his god; (...) (...). 5 5.
(...). Paul calls him an Idolater, S. James an (...), because he (...), 4. 4.
(...) God of his flower, his trust; and goes a whoring after (...) vanities:
he sows the wind, and reapeth the whirlwinde: (...) treasureth up wealth,
but withal wrath, Jam. 5 3. and by (...) all sish that comes to net, he
catches at length, the (...) and all. Hence it is that S. James bids such (and
not (...) Atistoteles (...) (...). l 4 Ethic. ca 1.
cause) Weep and howl for the miseries that shall come upon them. (...) looks
upon them as deplored persons, and such as the (...) could call and count
incurable and desperate. For the heart (...) is first turned into earth and
mud, will afterward freeze and (...) into steel and adamant, The Pharisees
that were covetous (...) Luke 16. 14.
Christ, and perished irrecoverably. And reprobates are (...) by S. Peter to
have their hearts exercised with covetous practices, 2 Pet. 2. 14.
which they constantly follow, as the Artificer his trade, being (...). (...).
ab (...) illu (...) viduarum domos devorantibus
(...) apprentices to the devil, 2 Cor. 2. 11. Lest Satan should get an
advantage against us. or (...) us, as covetous wretches do (...) novices. These
as they have served an ill Master, so they shall receive the reward of
unrighteousness, and perish in their corruptions, 2 Pet. 2. 12, 13. Their
happiness has been laid up in the earth, nearer hell then heaven, nearer the
devil then God, whom they have forsaken, (...) shall they be written in the
earth, Jer. 17. 13.
that is, in hell, as it stands opposed to having their names written in (...).
3. 19.
heaven. Those that are earthly minded have damnation for their end. God to
testify his displeasure, knocks his fists at them, Ezekiel. 22. 13. as Balac did
at Balaam. And lest they should reply, Tush, these (...) but big words, devised
on (...) to (...) silly people: we shall do well enough with the Lord; he
adds, verse. 14. Can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong in the
days that I shall deal with thee? I the Lord have spoken it, and will do it.
Oh that cur greedy muck-moles (that lie rooting and poring (...) the earth, as
if they meant to dig themselves through it, a nearer way to hell) would consider
this before the cold grave holds their bodies, and hot Tophet (...) their souls
(...) the one is as sure as the other, if timely course be not taken, O (...)
nequam, says S. Bernard; O most wretched and (...) world, how little are thy
(...) (...).
beholden to thee; seeing thy love and friendship exposes (...) to the wrath
and (...) of God, which burns as low as (...) nethermost hell. How fitly may
it be said of thee, as (...) the river (...): they that know it at (...) (...)
it, they that have experience of it at last, do, not (...) cause condemn it?
Those that will be rich, are resolved to get rem rem, (...) modo rem, as he
says, these (...) necessarily (...) many noisome lusts that drown men in
(...): desperately drown them in remediless misery (as (...) word signifies;)
Christ must be praid to be gone, says that (...), (...).
lest all their pigs be drowned. The devil shall have his dwelling (...) (...).
gain in themselves, rather then in their pigs: Therefore to the (...) shall
they go, and dwell with him, etc. They feed upon carrion, (...) Noah's raven;
upon dust, as the Serpent; upon the worlds (...), as those in Job, They swallow
down riches, and are (...), as the Pharisees, Luke 11. 41. but they shall vomit
them (...) (...). and (...). fol (...).
again, God shall cast them out of their bellies. Their mouths (...) cried
Give, Give, with the horse-leech, shall be filled ere long (...)
with a shovell-full of mould, and a cup of fire and brimstone (...) (...).
down their wide gullets. It shall be worse with them, (...) it was once with
the covetous Chaliph of Babylon, who being (...), together with his City by
Haalon, brother to Mango the great Chan of T (...), was sit by him (...) the
midst of the (...) which he and his predecessors had most (...). heaped up
together, and bidden of that gold, silver and (...) stones, take what it
pleased him to eat, saying, by way of (...), That so gainful a guest should be
fed with the best, whereof he willed him to make no spare. The covetons
Caitiff, kept for (...). Hist. (...). 113.
certain days, miserably died for hunger, in the midst of those things whereof
he thought he should never have had enough, whereby he hoped to secure himself
against whatsoever dearth (...). (...) loves to confute carnal men in their
(...). They shall pass on hardly bestead and hungery; and it shall come to
(...), that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves, (...) their
King, and their God, and look upward. And they (...) unto the earth (where they
have laid up their (...), but now (...) their hopes) and behold trouble and
darkness, (...) of (...): and they shall be driven into darkness, Isa. 8. 21,
22. utter darkness; where their Never-enough shall be quitted with (...)
(...), but a black fire, without the least glimpse of light or (...).

Where moth and rust does corrupt, and where (...), etc.]
A (...) earthly-mindednesse, (...) the (...) of riches, (...) to a double
danger or waste. 1. Of (...) in (...). 2. Of violence from others; rust or
robbery (...) undo us. As the fairest flowers or fruit trees breed a worm
(...), that eats out the heart of them. As the Ivy kills (...) it; so, of the
matter of an earthly treasure (...) moth or rust that (...) it. (...) ward
things are of a (...) nature, they perish in the use, they melt away betwixt
our (...). S. Gregory upon those words in Job, Qui ingreditur in Job 38. 22.
(...) nivis? Who has entered into the treasures of the snow? (...), that
(...) treasures are treasures of snow. We see (...) children what pains they
take to rake and scrape snow (...) to make a snow-ball; which after a while
dissolves and (...) to nothing: Right so, the treasures of this world, the
(...) that wicked men have heaped, when God enters (...), come to nothing. He
that trusts to his riches shall fall, (...). 11. 28. as he shall that
stands on an hillock of ice, or heap (...) snow. David, when got upon his
mountain, thought (...) cock-sure, and began to crow, that he should never be
(...). But God (to (...) him) had no sooner hid his face, but Psalm. 30. 6, 7.
(...) troubled. What Is the air without light? The Egyptians had no joy of it:
no more can a Christian have of wealth without Gods favor. Besides, what hold
is there of these earthly things? more then there is of a (...) of birds? I
cannot say they are mine, because they sit in my yard. Riches have wings, says
Solomon, great Eagles wings to flee from us, says a Father; but to follow
(...) us, Ne passerinas (...), not so much as small sparrows Prove. 23. (...).
wings. Whereupon Solomon rightly argues, Will thou set thine (...) upon that
which is not? that has no real subsistence, that is, nothing, and of no more
price, then mere opinion (...) upon it? The world calls wealth substance, but
God gives that name to wisdom only. Heaven is said to have a foundation, earth
to be hanged Job.
upon nothing. So, things (...) said to be (...) heaven, as in a mansion, (...).
but on earth, on the surface only, as ready to be shaken off. Hence the world
is called a sea of glass, frail and fickle, mingled R. v. (...). 15. 2. a Pet.
3. 10.
with fire of temptations and tribulations. The very firmament (that (...) name
from its firmness) shall melt with servent heat, and the whole visible fabric
be (...) by the fire of the last (...). Solomon sets forth the world by a word
that betokens (...) (...). (...) (...)
for its mutability. And S. Paul, when (...) tells us, That (...) fashion of
the world passes away, uses a word of art, that signifies (...).
a bare external, mathematical figure, Cui very aut selidi nihil (...) says
an Interpreter, that has no truth or solidity in it at all Gilliner King of
Vandals, being conquered, and carried in (...) by Bellisarius the Roman
General, when he stood in the (...) field before the Emperor Justinian, and
beheld him sitting (...) (...) (...) 528.
his throne of State, remembering withal what an high pitch himself was fallen
from, he broke out into this speech, Vanity of (...), all is vanity. That was
Solomon's verdict, long since delivered up, upon well-grounded experience. But
men love to (...) conclusions; and, when they have done, What profit, says
(...) has a man of all his pains? what (...) and remaining fruit ((...) (...).
the word signifies) to abide with him? When all the (...) Eccles. 1. 3.
subducted (his happiness resolved into it is final issue and (...)) there
rests nothing but ciphers. A Spider (...) himself, and wastes his own bowels
to make a web to catch (...): so does the worldling for that which profits
not, but (...) in the use: Or say that it abide, yet himself perishes, when to
(...) the things he has gotten might seem a happiness, as the rich fool,
Alexander, Tamberlain, others. Most of (...) (...) gat nothing by their
adoption or designation, (...), ut citius interficerentur, that they might be
the sooner slain. All, (...) most of them till (...), died unnatural deaths,
and in the Jer. 17. (...).
best of their time. He that gettethriches, and not by right, (...) (...). 5.
15.
leave them in the (...) of his days, and at his end shall be a fool. God will
make a poor fool of him. As he came forth of his (...) womb, naked shall he
return, to go as he came, and shall take nothing of his labor, which he may
carry away in his hand. Say his treasure escape both rust and robber, death as
a thief will break in, and leave him not (...) a groat. Who would not then set
light by this pelf, and put on that Persian resolution, Isa. 13. 17. Not to
regard silver, nor be desirous of gold? Who would not tread (...).
in the steps of faithful Abraham, and answer the devil with his golder.
offers, as he did the King of Sodom, God forbid that I should take of thee so
much as a shoe-latchet? When great gifts were (...).
sent to Luther, he refused them with this brave speech, (...) me (...) fic
satiari a Deo, I deeply protested that (...) should not put me off with such
poor things as these. The Heathenish (...)
Romans had, for a difference in their Nobility, a little (...) in the form of
a Moon (to show that all worldly honors were mutable) and they did wear it
upon their shoes (to show that they did tread it under their feet) as base and
bootlesse. This is check to many Christians, that have their hands elbow-deep
in the world, and dote as much upon these earthly vanities, as Xerxes once did
upon his Plane-tree, or Jonas upon his (...). There is a sort of men that say
of the world, as Solomon's (...), It is naught, it is naught: but when he is
gone apart, he boasts and closes with the world. S. Paul was none of these:
for neither at any time, (...) he, used we flattering words, as ye know: nor
(...). 14.
a cloak of covetousness, God is my witness. No; he looked upon (...) a very
(...) of mortisication.
the world as a (...) dunghill, and cared to glory in nothing, save in the
cross of Jesus Christ, whereby the world was crucified to him, and he to the
world. So David, My soul, says he, is even (...) a weaned child, that cares
not to suck, though never so fair and (...) a breast. So Luther confesses of
himself, that though he were a (...) man, and subject to imperfections, yet the
infection of (...) Pully his (...).
never laid hold of him. Now I would we were all Lutherans in this, says One,
etc.

Verse 20. But lay up for your selves treasures in heaven]
That which you may draw out a thousand year hence. For in a treasure there are
three things; a laying up, a lying hid, and a drawing out for present use.
Riches reach not to eternity. Therefore whiles others lay (...) upon riches,
Lay thou hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 12. and that, by following after
righteousness, god inesse, faith, love, patience, (...). This, this is the
true treasure: this is to be (...).
rich, as our Savior speaks, toward God, and is opposed to laying up
treasure for himself, Luk 12. 21. as (...), laying up treasure in heaven, is to
that of laying up treasure in earth. (...) cannot be done, because the heart
cannot be in two so different places at once. The Saints have their commoration
on earth, but their conversation is in heaven. Here are their bodies, but their
hearts are, (...) Christ their head is. Sancti ibi sunt ubi (...) sunt, and non
sunt ubi sunt, says Chrysostom. The Saints are there, in their affections,
whether as yet they are not come in their (...). All their plowing, sailing,
building, planting tends to that life that is (...), supernatural: they run
(...) the high prize, they strive for the crown of righteousness, they breath
after the (...) vision, with, Oh when shall I come and appear before God! And ^
as the Athenians, when they were besiged by Sylla, had (...) hearts with him
without the walls, though their bodies were held within by force: So the
Saints, though detained here for a while in a far country, yet their hearts
are at home. They go through the world, as a man whose mind is in a deep study,
or as ^
one that has special haste of some weighty business; they wonder much how
men can a while to pick up sticks and straws with so much delight and
diligence. The time is short (or trussed up into a narrow (...)) the task is
long, of keeping faith and (...) ^
good conscience; hence they use the world, as if they used it not, as having
little leisure to trifle. There Is water little enough to run in the right
chanel, therefore they let none run beside; but carefully improve every
opportunity, as wise merchants, and ^
care not to sell all, to purchase the pearl of price. In a witty (...) (says
Broughton out os Rabbi Bochai) Kain and Abel contain in their names
advertisements for matter of true continuance and corruption. Kain betokens
possession in this world, and (...) betokens one humbled in mind, and
holding such possession vain. Such was his (...), sheep-kinde, the (...) of all
living beasts, and therefore the favor of God followed him. And the offering
of Kain was of the fruit of the earth, as he loved the ^
possession of this world, and the service of the body (which yet can have no
continuance) and followed after bodily lusts. Therefore the blessed (...)
favored him not. Kains chief care was to build Cities, that he might call his
Land after his own Name, Psalm. 49. 11. and make his son, Lord Enoch of Enoch.
Not so the better sort, Abel, Henoch, Noah, Abraham, they were content (...)
11. 10.
to dwell in tents, as looking for a City, which has foundations, whose maker
and founder is God. Abraham bought a piece of ground, but for burial only.
Ishmael shall beget twelve Princes, but with Isaac will I establish my
Covenant: and although he grow not so great as his brother (that man of Gods
hand, that had his portion (...). (...). 5.
here,) yet he shall make reckoning, that the lines are fallen unto him in a
fair place, that he has a goodly heritage. Esau had his Dukes, ^
and grows a great Magnifico: but Jacob gets first, the birthright for a mess
of red, red, which the hungry hunter required to be ^
(...) with, as Camels are fed by casting gobbets into their mouths (so the
word signifies:) And after this, he gets the blessing by his mothers means. And
when (...) threatened him, and had bolted out some suspicious words, she seeks
not to reconcile the two brethren, by making the younger yield again, what he
had got from the Elder; but prefers the blessing before Jacobs life, and sends
him away. This was to lay up treasure in heaven, for Partus (...).
her son, who took herein after the mother too. For if Esau will but (...)
him to settle in the Land of promise, a type of heaven; he will spare for no
cost to make his peace. Silver and gold he has none, but cattle good store:
550. head of them sends he for a present, to make room for him, as Solomon has
it. Let heaven be a man's object, and earth will soon be his abject. David
counts one good cast of Gods countenance, (...) better then all the corn and
oil in the country. Solomon craves wisdom and not wealth. Paul counts all but
dross, dung, and dogs-meat, so (...).
he may win Christ, and get home to him. Here we have but a Phil. 3. 8.
glimpse of those gleams of (...), we see but as in a glass obscurely; 2 Cor.
5. 6.
our life is hid with Christ in God, as the pearl lies (...), till the 1 Cor.
(...).
Colos. 3. 3.
shell be broken. Compare the estate of Prince Charles in his Queen-mothers
womb, with his condition at full age, in all the glory of his fathers Court;
there is not so broad a difference as betwixt our present enjoyments (albeit
our joys here are unspeakable 1 Pet 1.
glorious) with those we shall have hereafter. Sursum (...) cursum nostrum
dirigamus. Let therefore our affections and actions, our counsels and courses,
be bent and bound for heaven: our earthly (...) dispatch with heavenly minds,
and in serving men, let us serve the Lord Christ. The Angels are sent about
Gods message to this earth, yet never out of their heaven, never without the
vision of their maker. These earthly things distract not, if we make them not
our treasure, if we shoot not our hearts over-farre into them. The end of a
Christians life is (not as (...) dreamed of the (...) of man, to (...) the
heavens, but) to live in heaven. This he begins to do here by the life of
faith, by walking with God, as Enoch and Elias, those Candidates of immortality
Genesis 6. 9.
(so the Ancients called them) by walking before God, 1 King. 9. 4.
as Abraham and David by walking after God, as the Israelites Deuteronomy. 13. 4.
were bidden to do. With God, a man walks by an humble friendship and
familiarity; before him, by uprightness and integrity: after him by obedience
and conformity, by doing his will on earth, as it is in heaven. And this is, to
lay up treasure in heaven; this is, as the Apostle expresses, and interprets
it, to lay up in store for our selves a good foundation against the (...) to
come, that we (...) lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 19. There shall be
(...) of thy times, strength, salvation, wisdom and knowledge: for the fear of
the Lord shall be his treasure, Isai. 33. 6.

Verse (...). For where your treasure is, etc.]
i. e. Where your chief happiness is, there your affections will be settled;
Where the carcass is, there will the Eagles be also. Beetles delight (...)
muck-hils: but Christ's Eagles are never in their pride, till farthest off from
the earth: they are said (even here) to be set (...) (...). 2 6.
with Christ in heavenly places. The Church in the Canticles, has this given
her for an high commendation, That she had a nose like (...). 7. 4.
the tower of Lebanon, Siverborum faciem spectemus, says an Interpreter, ^
(...) poter it mag is dici ridiculum? The words at first sight seem somewhat
strange: for what so great a praise is it, to have (...) nose like a tower? But
by this (...) is notably set forth that spiritual sagacity and sharpness of
(...), whereby the Saints resent and savor the things above, being carried
after Christ the true carcass, with unspeakable desire and delight. The
earthlyminded, that have their bellies filled with Gods hid treasure, the (...)
(...) 17. 14.
of this world, and take it for their portion; these have their heads so stuffed,
and their eyes so stopped with the dust of (...), that they neither see nor
savor heavenly things. As they are of the earth, so they speak of the earth,
and the earth hear's them. As the (...). 3.
Grasshopper is bred, lives and dies in the same ground: so (...) terrigenae
fratres, these muck-minded men, are wholly earth in their whole (...). And as
the Grasshopper has wings, but flies not: sometimes she hoppeth upwards a
little, but falls to the ground again: so these have some light and short
motions to (...), when they hear a piercing Sermon, or feel a pressing
affliction, or see others snatched away by sudden death before them: but this is
not of any long continuance, they return to their former worldliness. The
devil has got full possession of them, as once of Judas by this sin, and could
a man (...) up their hearts, he might find there fair-written, The God of this
present world. He (...). 4. 4.
holds his black hand before their eyes, lest the light of the (...) Gospel
should shine upon them. We cry, O earth, earth, earth, Hear the Word of the
Lord: but the devil has made a path way (...) their hearts, so that the seed
cannot enter. Earth (...) cold and (...), so are earthly-minded men to any holy
duty. Earth is heavy and bears downward: so do earthly affections. Earth does
often keep down the hot exhalations, that naturally would ascend: so do those
holy motions and meditations. Earth stands still, and has the whole
circumference carried about it: so are Gods mercies and judgments about
earthly-minded men, and they are no whit moved thereat. Grace, on the other
side, as fire, is active and aspiring. And as Moses would not be put off with
an Angel to go before the people: he would have God himself, or none: so the
true Christian must have Christ, or nothing will give him content. Christ is
his treasure, and has his heart: all his cry is, None but Christ, none but
Christ. As the Sun draws up (...), so does the Sun of righteousness, the
affections of his people. And as the hop in it is growing, windeth it self about
the pole, always following the course of the Sun, from East to West, and can
by no means be drawn to the contrary, choosing rather to break then yield: so
the Saints (as well militant as triumphant) do follow the Lamb wheresoever he
goes; and being risen with Christ, and spiritualized by him, they seek the
things that are above: their thoughts feed upon the fairest objects (such as
are those set down by the Apostle, Phil. 4. 8.) and run with Dan. 12.
much content, upon that firmament, and those stars in Daniel, (...).
That inheritance undefiled and unfadable in Peter; those palms and 1 (...). 1.
4.
white robes in the Revelation. They take ever and anon a turn or two on Tabor,
and are there transfigured with Christ; or on Mount Olivet, where he was taken
up, and have thence continual ascensions in their hearts. And as our Savior
in the Interim between Act. 1. 3.
1 Ioh. 2 6.
his Resurrection and Ascension, whiles he walked here on the Psalm. 45. 1.
earth, spoke of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, and Nusquam
origenes non ardet, sed (...) est ardentior, quam ubi (...). mones (...)
tractat. (...).
waited for his exaltation into heaven: So the faithful Christian (that has
his part in the first resurrection) walks in his measure, (...) Christ walked,
talks as he talked, he speaks of the things concerning the King, and therein
his tongue is as the pen of a ready Writer. Of Origin it is said, that he was
ever earnest, but never more then when he treats of Christ. And of S. Paul it
is well observed, that when he speaks of heaven, he uses a (...), lofty
kind of language, his speech rises higher and higher, as 2 Cor. 4. 17. a
degree above the superlative: so Phil 1. 23. to be with Hic oration (...)
assurgit, etc. Rolloc.
Christ, is far far the better: so 1 Thessalonians. 2. 19. See how the Apostles mouth
is opened, his heart enlarged, he cannot satisfy himself, nor utter his
conceptions. This a Christian can do, he can sigh out a cupio dissolvi, I
desire to be with Christ: whom as he more or (...) here, in the same measure he
is merry; like as (...) never sing so sweetly, as when they are (...) in the
air, or on (...) top of trees. As when Christ with-draws his gracious (...) and
influence, he is all amort, you may take him up for a (...) man. (...) cries
after Christ, as idolatrous Micah did after his lost Judge 18. 14.
gods: And as King Edward the third having the King of (...) prisoner here in
England, and feasting him one time most (...), pressed him to be merry, the
French King answered, (...) can we sing songs in a strange land? So the good
soul is in great (...), while Christ absents himself, and never heartily (...),
till she get home to him, till she lay hold on him, whom her (...) loves.

Verse 22. The light of the body is the eye, etc.]
Here our (...) Savior illustrateth what he had said before, of laying up, not
(...) earth, but in heaven, by a fit similitude. Like as the eye is the light
of the whole body: so is the mind of the whole man. If (...). 4. 9.
therefore thine eye be single, that is, if thy mind be sincere: If (...)
(...). (...). 19.
have that one eye of the Spouse in the Canticles, that one heart promised in
the new Covenant, set upon God alone, and not divided, and as it were cloven
asunder (which is to have a heart (...) (...) Cor. 11. 3.
a heart) but minding the one thing necessary, as the main; and be not
double-minded, or corrupted from the simplicity of Christ; then shall thy whole
body, that is, thy whole, both constitution and (...) be lightsom, diaphanous,
transparent, as a (...) that has a candle in it, or as a crystal glass with
a light in the midst, which appears through every part thereof. There will be
an uniformity, aequability, ubiquity and constancy of holiness running through
thy whole course, as the warp does through the (...).
woof; when a double-minded man (that has not cleansed his (...). (...). 8.
heart, nor washed his hands of worldly lusts) is unstable and (...) Jam. 1 8.
in all his ways. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy mind, Luke
10. 27. And with my mind I serve the Law of God, says Paul, which he
acknowledged to be spiritual, though he were carnal in part, sold under sin.
The old man is still corrupt (...). 4. 22.
according to the deceitful lusts (which sometimes so (...) and beguile the
judgment, that a man shall think there is some sense in sinning, and that he
has reason to be mad) but be ye renewed (...) 23.
in the spirit of your minds, in the bosom and bottom of the soul, in the most
inward and subtle parts of the soul, and as it were the (...) of it. Reserve
these upper rooms for Christ, and be not ye conformed to the world (who mind
earthly (...). 3. (...).
things, and have damnation for their end) but be ye transformed Romans (...).
(...).
by the renewing of your minds, that ye may see and prove by good experience
(not by a National knowledge only) what that good, and holy, and acceptable
will of God is. Concerning the Eastgate of that Temple in Ezekiel, Thus says
the Lord; Ezekiel. 44. 2.
This gate shall be shut, and shall not be opened, and no man shall enter by
it, because the Lord God of Israel has (...) by it. Here through signifying,
says a Divine, that although the heart of a Christian, which is the temple of
the holy Ghost, may let many things enter into it at other gates, yet must it
keep the Eastgate, the most illuminate and highest power and part of it,
continually shut against all men, yea against all the world; and opened only to
one thing, I mean to God, who has already entered into it, and (...) it with
his Spirit. That as at the windows of (...) Ark, there entered in no mist nor
water, nothing else but one thing only which is light: so at this Eastgate, no
mist of humane errors, no water of worldly cares may enter in, but only the
light of heaven, and a sanctified desire to be fast knit, and perfectly united
by faith and love to God.

Verse 23. But if thine eye be evil, etc. If the light that is in thee be
darkness, etc.]
An evil eye is here opposed to a single eye, that looks on God singly
abstracted from all other things, and affects the heart with pure love to him
for himself, more then for his love tokens. These we may lawfully have, but
they may not have us. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not
in 1 Ioh. 2. 16.
(...). For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life, that is, pleasure, profit and preferment; these
three, like those three troops of the Caldeans (Job 1. 17.) fall upon the
faculties of the soul, and carry them away from (...) the right owner. The
mind is filled with greater darkness then (...) a non (...) dicitur: and
Mydas ecundum Etymologiam Graecam (...) est.
can be expressed. How great is that darkness? The Prince that (...)
understanding is a great oppressor: but he that hates covetousness, that
has not his eyes bleared and blinded with the dust of earthly-mindednesse,
shall prolong his days, Prove. 28. 16. So, Isa 56. 10, 11. His watchmen are
blind: And why? They are greedy dogs, which can never have enough, and they
are shepherds which cannot understand: they all look to their own way, every
one for his gain, from his quarter, Isa. 56. 10, 11. Of this sort were those
covetous Pharisees, that devoured widows houses: therefore blind, because
covetous, Luke 16. 14. the property of which sin is to besot and infatuate, as
it did Judas, who, though he wanted for nothing in our Saviors (...), but was
sufficiently provided for, yet for filthy lucre, basely sold his Master, and
(...) for thirty silverlings (the known and pitched price of the (...) slave)
and had the face after all, to ask, Master is it I? when he knew Christ to be
the true God, and to know all things. (...) Comets (though but Comets) as long
as they keep (...), shine bright, but when they decline from their pitch, they
fall to the earth. So, when men forsake the Lord, and mind earthly things,
they lose that light they had, and are dissipated, destroyed and come to
nothing. Good therefore is the counsel of (...), (...) 23 4. 5. (...) facies
(...) tuos in (...)?
Labor not to be rich: Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? Or as
Mercerus otherwise reads that text, Will thou darken (...) eyes upon them? As
those that walk long in the snow, or that (...) in a smoaky corner, can see
little at length. Whoredom and (...) Job 11. 17.
take away the heart, says Hosea, cap. 4. 11. as they did (...); Amos 4. 13.
they drew out his spirits, and dissolved his reason: so does covetousness. It
makes a man that he cannot see the net that is (...) before him, which every
bird can do, Prove. 1. 17. but whiles (...) Aves quae vident rete (...)
capiuntur, sed videntes periculum cavent. (...).
coveteth the bait, loses his life, as Shimei did by looking his servants: as
Lot, who had like to have run the same hazard, by (...) the plain of Jordan: as
Jonas, that suffered himself to be cast into the sea, that the ship with her
lading might come safe to shore. How many carnal minds, like (...) raven, fly
out of the Ark of Gods Church, and embrace this present world: and like the
Mariners, when they found out Jonas, yet fain they would have saved him: So
many will rather venture their own casting away, then cast their worldly lusts
overboard. How much better Joseph, who let go his garment to save himself, as
Elias did his mantle to go to heaven; and Bartimeus his cloak to come to
Christ? How much better Moses, who by faith seeing him that is invisible, and
having an eye to the reward; when he was come to years (as the text notes) and
therefore well knew (...). 21. 24, 25, (...),
what he did, for he was no baby, refused to be called the son of Pharaohs
daughter, and the worlds darling; and choosing rather the afflictions of Gods
poor people, then the pleasures of sin for a season, he esteemed the reproach
of Christ (the worst part of him) greater riches then the treasures of Egypt.
And why all this? For (...) had respect to the recompense of reward. He set his
foot, as it were, upon the battlements of heaven, and there-hence looked upon
Post quam in (...) assendertmus parva nobis and (...), and (...) etiam
videntur: sit parva videbantur otium gloria (...) cum coeium respicias.
these earthly happinesses, as base and (...), (...) and slender, waterish and
worthless. The great Cities of Campania seem, but small cottages to them that
stand on the top of the Alps: the Moon covers her self with a pale vail, and
shines not at all in the presence of the Sun: No more does the beauty and
bravery of the world (wherewith carnal minds are so bedazelled and (...)) to
a man that has been in paradise with Paul, that has already laid hold on
eternal life. The moles of the earth, that are blind and cannot see far
off, that have animam triticiam, a wheaten soul, with that fool in the Gospel,
and know no other (...). Hom.
happiness, (...) to have and to hold; these have their eyes blinded 15. ad
pop. (...).
by the god of this world, as Isaac had his wels stopped up with 2 Pet. (...).
9. (...), Muris (...) habentes, subterranei scilicet muris, hoc est, (...).
earth by the Philistines. And as a small dish being held near the eyes, hides
from our sight a great mountain: and a little hill or cloud, the great body of
the Sun, though it be far bigger then the whole earth: So these earthly
trifles being placed near men's (...), do so shadow and over-cloud those great
and glorious excellencies that are above, that they can neither truly behold
them, Gen 26. 15.
nor rightly judge of them. When men travel so far into the The Poets (...)
Plutus the god of (...) to be (...).
South, that the sight of the North Pole is at length intercepted by the earth,
it is a sign they are far from it: so is it, that men are far from heaven,
when the love of the earth comes in betwixt Divites facul. tatibus (...)
alligati magis (...) suspiciunt, quam coelum Minut Octan.
their souls, and the sight thereof. Earth-damps quench the spirits lamp. Much
water of affliction cannot quench that love, that yet a little earth may soon
do.

Verse 24. No man can serve two Masters, etc.]
The Mammonists mind must needs be full of darkness, because utterly
destituted of the Father of lights, the Sun of the soul: for ye cannot serve
(...) est cognatio (...) and (...).
two Masters, God and Mammon. By Mammon is meant earthly treasure, worldly
wealth, outward abundance, especially when gotten by evil arts, it comes to
be the gain of ungodliness, Genesis 37. (...).
the wages of wickedness, riches of unrighteousness, filthy (...). When
Joseph was cast into the pit by his bloody brethren, What gain (says Judah)
will it be if we kill him? The Chaldee there has it, What Mammon shall it be?
What can we make of it? What profit shall we reap or receive thereby? Now these
two, God and Mammon, as they are incompatible Masters, so the variance between
them is irreconcilable. Amity with the world is (...) with the Lord, Jam. 4.
4. Emnity, I say, in a sense both active and passive, for it makes a man both
to hate God, and to be (...) by God: so there is no love lost on either side. If
any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him; that is flat. But
the (...) any one is drowned in the world, (...) more desperately he is
divorced from God, who requires to be served truly, that there be no halting,
and totally, that there be (...) halving. Cambden reports of Redwald the first
King of the East. Saxons that was (...), that he had in the same Church, one
Altar for Christian religion, and another for sacrifice to devils, And (...).
(...). (...). (...) (...) Deo (...), (...), qui (...) vellet.
Callenucius, tells us of a Nobleman of Naples, that was (...) profanely to
say, that he had two souls in his body, one for God, and another for whomsoever
would have it. The Ebionites, (...) Eusebius, would keep the Sabbath with the
Jews, and the Lordsday with the Christians, as if they were of both religions,
(...) (...). (...). lib. 5. hist. (...).
in truth, they were of neither: So Ezekiels hearers sat devoutly before the
Lord at his public Ordinances, and with their (...) Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. (...).
showed much love, but their heart, meanwhile, was on their halfpenny, it went
after their covetousness. So the Pharisees heard Ezekiel. (...) 31.
Christ's Sermon against the service of Mammon, and derided him: Luke 16. 13.
and while their lips seemed to pray, they were but chewing of that
murthering-morsell, those widows houses that their throats (as an open
sepulcher) swallowed down soon after. Thus filled they up the measure of their
fathers, those ancient Idolaters in the wilderness, who set up a golden calfe,
(...) then caused it to be proclaimed, To morrow is a feast to Jehovah. And
such is the dealing of Exodus 32. 5.
every covetous Christian. S. Paul calls him an idolater, S. James an
adulterer, for he goes a whoring after his gods of gold and silver: And
although he bow not the knee to his mammon, yet with his heart he serves it:
Now obedience is better then sacrifice: Romans 6. 16.
and Know ye not, says the Apostle, that his servants ye are to whom ye obey
etc? Inwardly he loves it, delights in it, trusts on it, secures himself by it
from whatsoever calamites: Outwardly, he spends all his time upon this Idol, in
gathering, keeping, increasing, or honoring of it. Hence the jealous God
hates him, and smites his hands at him, Ezekiel. 22. 13. and has a special
quarrel against (...) that bless the covetous, whom the Lord abhors. As
for (...). 10. 3.
his servants, he strictly charge them to (...) their conversation without
covetousness, Heb. 13. 5. yea their communication, Ephesians. 5. 3. yea their
cogitation, 2 Pet. 2. 14. branding them for (...) children, that have so much
as their thoughts exercised that way. He will not have his hasten to be rich,
or labor after superfluities, (...) nor anxiously, after necessaries. For
worldliness ((...) not (...)) when men oppress themselves with multiplying of
(...).
(...), or suffer their thoughts and affections to be (...), (...) taken up,
with minding these things on earth, as a main hinderance from heaven: It fills
the heart with cares, and so unfits (...) deads it to divine duties. The
thoughts as wings, should carry (...) in worship even to the mansions of God,
which being laden (...) thick (...), they so glue us to the earth, that the
(...) of (...) word and ordinances cannot draw us one jot from it. The (...).
(...) is also hereby made like a mill, where one cannot hear (...), (...)
noise is such as takes away all intercourse. If conscience call (...) them to
take heed of going out of Gods way, they are at as little (...) to listen, as
he that runs in a race; who many times (...) with so much violence, that he
cannot hear what is said unto him, (...) it never so good counsel. And having
thus set their hearts, and (...) their hopes upon earthly things, if ever they
(...) them, as it (...) falls out, they are filled almost with unmedicinable
sorrows, (...) as they will praise the dead above the living, and wish they had
(...) been born, Eccles. 4. 1, 2, 3. Lo this is the guise and guerdom of those
Inhabitants of the earth, those viri divitiarum, as the (...) styles them,
those miserable muck-worms, that prefer Mammon before Messiah, gold before God,
money before mercy, earth before heaven: as childish a weakness as that of
Honorius ^
the Emperor, that preferred a Hen before the City of Rome. (...), says one,
is a monster, whose head is as subtle as the serpent, whose mouth is wide as
hell, eyes sharp as a Lizard, scent quick as the Vulture, hands fast as
Harpyes, belly insatiable as a Wolf, feet swift to (...), as a Lioness robbed
of her whelps. Ahab will have Naboths vineyard, or he will have his blood.
Judas was both covetous and a murderer, and therefore a murderer, because
covetous. He is (...) also a thief, and why a thief, but (...) a Mammonist.
(...) draws a man from See (...) (...).
all the Commandments, Psalm. 116. 36. And there want not those, that have drawn
the covetous person through all the Commandments, and proved him an Arheist, a
Papist, a perjurer, a (...) of Gods Sabbath, an iron boweld wretch, a
murderer, an adulterer, a thief, a false witness, or whatsoever (...) the
devil will. And can this man ever serve God acceptably? can he possibly please
two so contrary masters? No: he may sooner reconcile fire and water, look with
the one eye upward, and with the other eye downward, bring heaven and earth
together, and gripe them both in a fist (...) be habitually covetous and truly
religious. These two are as inconcurrent as two (...) lines, and as
incompatible as light and darkness. They who bowed down on their knees to
drink of the waters, were accounted unfit soldiers for Gideon: so are (...)
(...)
for Christ, that stoop to the base love of the things of this life: (...)
discredit it both his work and his wages: (...) Abraham would not, that ancient
and valiant soldier and servant of the most (...) God. For when Melchisedech
from God had made him heir of all things, and brought him bread and wine, that
is, an earnest, (...) little for the whole, etc. he refused the riches that the
King of Sodom offered him, because God was his shield, and his exceeding great
reward: His shield against any such enemies as (...) omer and his accomplices had
been unto him, and his exceeding great reward, for all his labor of love in
that or any other service, Gen 14. 18, 19, 23. with chap. 15. 1.
though he received not of any man, from a thread to a (...).

Verse 25. Therefore I say unto you, Take no careful (...), etc.]
This life is called in Isaiah, the life of our hands, because it is maintained
by the labor of our hands. Nevertheless let a (...) Isa. 57. 10.
labor never so hard, and lay up never so much, his life (...) not in the
abundance of the things that he possesses, says our (...), Luke 12. 15.
and therefore bids, take heed and beware of covetousness. There is in every
mothers-childe of us, a false presumption of selfsufficiency in our own
courses, as if we, by our own diligence, could build the house. The devils word
is proved too true. He said we should be like Gods: which as it is false in
respect of divine qualities resembling God, so is it true in regard of our
sinful (...): for we carry the matter for most part, as if we were petty gods
within our selves, not needing any higher power, This self-confidence, the
daughter of unbelief, and mother of carking care, and carnal
thought-fullnesse, our Savior (...) by many arguments (...) and (...). Take no
thoughtfull (...) for your life, what ye shall eat, etc. The word here used in
the (...).
original, signifies sometimes a commendable and Christian care, as 1 Cor. 7.
33, 34. He that is married cares how to please his wife: Likewise she cares
how to please her husband. It implies a dividing of the mind into diverse
thoughts, casting this way, and that way, and every way how to give best
content. And (...) should be all the strife that should be betwixt married
couples: This is the care of the head, the care of diligence, called by the
Greeks, (...). But there is another sort of (...) here spoken against, as
unwarrantable and damnable; the care of the heart, the care of (...), a
doubtful and carking care, joined with a fear of future events, a sinful
solicitude, a distracting and distempering care, properly called (...),
because it tortures and tears asunder the mind with anxious impiety, and
fretting impatiency. This makes a man, when he has done his utmost endeavor,
in the use of lawful means, for his own provision or preservation, (...).
to sit down, and with a perplexed heart sigh out. Sure it will never be: sure
I shall die a beggaer; be utterly (...), etc. Surely I shall one day perish by
the hand of Saul: were it not better for me to shift for my self, and to (...)
speedily into the land of the Philistims, 1 Samuel 27 1? A sinful
consultation, for had not God promised him both life and Kingdom after Saul?
Psalm. 1 16. (...).
but he said (very wisely) in his hasty fear. All men are liars, Psalm. 31. 21.
Prophets and all. And again; I said in my sudden haste, I am cut off.

What ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, etc.]
I would have you without carefulnes about these things, says the Apostle,
that (...).
ye may sit close to the Lord without distraction. And again, In nothing be
careful. How then? Why, make your requests known to 1 Cor. 7. 32, 35.
God in prayer, as children make their needs known to their parents, whom if
they can please, they know they shall be provided for. Little thought do they
take where to have the next meal or Phil. 4. 6. 7. (...).
the next new (...), neither need they.

(...) but we have praid, and yet are to seek. (...).
Sol.


Add to your prayer, supplication, says the Apostle there, strong cries out of
a deep sense of our pressing necessities, and then see (...), (...) (...) est
(...).
what will come of it.

I have done so to my poor power: and yet it (...).

To thy supplication add thanksgiving for mercies already (...), (...).
says he, Thanksgiving is an artificial begging. See (...) (...).
in thy most careful condition wherefore to be thankful. Praise God for what
you have had, have, and hope to have.

What will follow upon this? (...).
Sol


What? The peace of God (...) passes all understanding, shall (...)
keep as (...) a guard or (...) your hearts from cares, and minds from fears,
in Christ Jesus. This shall be the restfull success (...) your prayers and
praises. And is it not good that the heart be (...) with grace rather then the
body forced with meats. (...) (...)
brave letters, and how full of life, were written by Luther to (...),
afflicting himself with continual cares, what would be (...) issue of the
Imperial Diet held by Charles the fifth, and (...) States of Germany at
Ansborough, about the cause of (...) Gospel? Ego certe oro pro te, says he,
and doleo te, (...) simam curarum hirudinem, meas preces sic irritas facere. I
(...) for thee, and am troubled at it, that thou, by troubling thy self (...)
unnecessary cares, make my prayers of none effect for thee. (...) after many
sweet consolations, mixed with reprehensions, he (...) cludes. But I write these
things in vain, because (...) think to rule these things by reason, and
killest thy self (...) ^.
immoderate cares about them: not considering, that the (...) Christ's, who as
he needs not thy counsels, so he will bring about (...) own ends without thy
carefullnesse, thy vexing thoughts, (...) heart-eating fears, whereby thou
disquietest (...) self (...) measure.

Is not the life more then meat, etc?]
And shall he that has given us that which is greater and better, deny unto us
that which is less and worse? Shall we believe Gods promises in the (...), but
not Gods providence in the means: as the Disciples (...) they (...) forgotten
to buy bread, and as Abraham in the case (...) promise of issue of his body?
Excellent is that of the Apostle, He that spared not his own son, but
delivered him up for us all, (...). (...). 2.
how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? Whereupon (...). 8
32.
St Bernard, Qui misit unigenitum, immisit spiritum, (...) vultum, quid tandem
tibi negatur us est? And to like (...) ^.
S. Hierome: Never think, says he, that God will deny thee any thing, whom he
inviteth so freely to feed upon the fatted calfe.

Verse 26. Behold (or cast your eyes upon) the fowls of the (...).
ayr]
Look upon them (...), consider them wisely, learn of them carefully, to cast
away carnal caresullnesse, and to cast all your care upon God, who cares for
them, how much more for you? Ask now the fowls of the air, and they shall tell
thee, says (...) 12. 7.
Job, that there is a reward for the righteous, and a God that judges in the
earth. As he made them at (...) for his own glory (that we might admire his
workmanship in their multitude (...) variety of colors, (...) and taste, 1
Cor. 15 39.) and for our both use and (...): so he knows them all, Psalm. 50.
11. and maintains them: (...) both for their use, Ps. 147. 9. and delight,
Psalm. 104. 12. (...) us wisdom beyond them, Job 37. 11. and yet setting us to
(...) to them, to learn dependence upon God, both for (...) from evil, Matthew.
10. 29. and for provision of good, as here, (...) Job 39. 16. He takes care of
the Ostriches young ones, and of (...) young Ravens that cry unto him, Psalm.
147. 9. They are fed of God, when forsaken of their dammes, and left bare and
destitute: Aristot. hist.
(...) out of their dung, and carrion, brought before to the nest, (...) (...)
(...). 9.
a worm, which creeps to their mouth and feeds them. (...) 31.


They sow not, neither do they reap, etc.]
They take no care, nor (...) any to care for them, as Geese, Hens, and other
tame pullen; (...) yet they are provided for, we see. And oh that we would see,
(...) our Savior here enjoins us, and behold not only the fowls of (...) air,
but the clouds above them, and other heavenly bodies! (...) one asked (...),
where he could be safe and at quiet? (...) coelo, said he. And to Pontanus the
Chancellor of Saxony, Scultet. (...).
(...) propunds to be viewed and weighed by him, that most (...) arch-work of
heaven, resting upon no posts nor pillars, and yet In Epist.
(...) fast for ever and ever, merely upheld by the mighty hand Non decidentes,
(...) velut (...) nobis (...). Luth.
of God. The clouds also, as thin as the liqour contained in them; (...), says
he, how they hang and move, though weighty with their burden; they salute us
only, or rather threaten us, and vanish we know not whether. These things would
be thought on, that God may be the better rested on. (...) not ye of doubtful
mind, (...)
. says our Savior, live not in careful suspense, hang not as meteors in the
air, betwixt heaven and earth, uncertain whether to keep Luk 12 29. explained.
your standing, or sall to the ground, to trust God, or otherwise as (...)
volunt, quod (...), and quasi (...) teneant. (...) (...) de (...) eorum (...)
vero altquo modo (...) gisse Magir. (...).
you can, to make sure for your selves. Meteors are matters that few men can
tell what to make of. Aristotle himself (...), that he knew little of many of
them. And as little can the distrustful person (...), what to make of those
infinite projects, and discourses in the air, that he (...) frames for the
compassing of his desires. When, he needs but either to look up to the birds,
or down to the (...), and learn, that if God feed and cloth them without (...)
their care and pains, surely he will much more provide for his people that rely
upon him, and with their reasonable pains and moderate care do (...) his
providence. Shall the great housekeeper of the world, water his (...), prune
his plants, fodder his cattle, and not feed and cloth his children? Never
think it. God provided for the necessity and comfort of the unreasonable (...)
ere he made them: (...) for the beasts, and light for all (...) and moving
creatures, and all for (...), for the man in (...) especially. Compare P (...)
8. 45. with Heb. 2. 6, 7, etc. and it (...) appear, that whatsoever is spoken
there of man is applied to Christ; and so is proper to the Saints, by (...) of
their union with Christ. In which respect, says one, they are more (...)
(...). (...).
then heaven, Angels, or any creature: and shall these want food and raiment?

Verse 27. Which of you by taking thought, can add one cubite (...) stature?]
And as little able are we (though we take never so much care and pains) to
add (...) mite to that dimension of our (...), which God by his wise and
powerful providence (...) allotted unto us. Every man shall have his
statute-measure, (...) (...)
slint and proportion in his estate, as well as in his stature, to the (...) 12
(...). (...). (...). (...).
which he shall come and not exceed. All carking care therefore is bootlesse
and unprofitable. Men may eat up their hearts thereby, and trouble their
houses, Prove. 15. 27. (what with labor, (...) what with passion, a covetous
man and his household never live at (...), all is continually on a tumult of
haste and hurry) (...) cannot add any thing to their (...) or (...), much I
(...) to (...) spiritual growth, which is hereby exceedingly hindered and
hide-bound: as we see in the (...), the (...) young Pharisee, and those other,
that being called to be Christ's disciples, were so taken up with the care of
their worldly (...), that they could find no present (...) to follow Christ.

Verse 28. (...) the (...) of the (...).]
Contemplate (...), ^
says Luther: Understand them well, (...) Erasmus: Learn (...) they grow,
says Beza: Hang upon these fair flowers, with the (...) Be, till (...) have
sucked some sweet meditation out of them. (...) quomo. (...), etc.
God is to be seen and admired in all his wondrous works. A skilfall Artificer
takes it ill, that he sets forth a curious piece, and no man looks at it. There
is not a slower in the whole field (the ^.
word here rendered Lillies, signifies all sorts of flowers) but (...) sorth
God to us (...) lively colors. (...) to (...), is to incur the ^.
curse he has (...) against such, (...) regard not the work of the Lord, that
is, the first making, Neither consider the operation of his hands, that is, the
wise disposing of his creatures, for our (...) (...). 5. (...). explained.
and benefit. A godly Ancient being asked by a (...) Philosopher, how he could
contemplate high things, since he had no Anton. Erem. upud de (...) Clrist. l b
1. and(...). lib 8. c. 40.
books? Wisely answered, That he had the whole world for his book, ready open
at all times, and in all places, and that therein he could read things divine
and heavenly. A Be can suck honey out of a flower, that a fly cannot do. Our
Savior could have pointed us to our first parents clothed, and Elias fed, the
Israelites both fed and clothed extraordinarily by God in the (...). Never
Prince was so served in his greatest pomp; not Solomon in all his royalty, as
they. But because all men have not faith to believe that miracles shall be
wrought for them, he sends us to these more ordinary, and more easy
instances of Gods bountiful and provident care of birds and lillies; that in
them (as in so many optic glasses) we may see Gods infinite goodness, and be
confident.

They toil not, neither do they spin.]
This is the sluggards posie. Neque laborant, (...) Imp.
How much (...) that Emperor who took for his Motto, (...): Let us be doing.
God made not man to play, as he has done Leviathan, but commands him to
sweat out his living. This was at first Gods ordinance in paradise, that his
storehouse should be his workhouse, his pleasure, his task. After Genesis 2. 15.
the fall, it was enjoined as a punishment. So that now man Genesis 3. 19.
is born to travel, and must labor with his own hands, neither eating Job 5. 7.
the bread of idleness, nor drinking the wine of violence. That Monk Ephesians. 4.
28.
that labors not with his hands, is a thief, says an Ancient: Hist. Tripart.
Is a body-louse, sucking the blood of others, says a Neoterick: Ezekiel. 18. 18.
he shall die in his iniquity, says God, because he has not done good Hic
(...) est Vacia.
among his people, He buried himself alive, as (...) Vacia in Seneca, he shall
be buried with the burial of an Ass, when he is dead: Jer 22 19.
he shall hear, O thou wicked and slothful servant, when he rises again Mat.
25. 26.
at the last day. God puts no (...) between (...) and Nequaquam, an idle, and
an evil servant. This made M. Calvin answer his friends with some indignation,
when they admonished him, for his healths-sake, to forbear studying so (...),
Quid? Vultis ut Dominus (...) me otiosum inveniret? Beza in vita Calvin.
What? Would you that Christ when he comes should find me idle?

Verse 29. And yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his glory.]
In all his bravery, which doubtless was very great, in the day of his
espousals, especially, when his mother crowned him, (...). 3. (...). Herod's
cloth of silver did so dazzle the peoples eyes in a Sunshine-day, that they
deified him. Alcisthenes the Sybarites cloak, Act (...).
was sold to the Carthaginians by Dionysius for 120. talents. And (...).
Demetrius King of Macedon had a robe royal so stately and costly, that none
of his successors would wear it, for avoiding of envy. There is no doubt but
Solomon's roy all robes were very sumptuous, (...).
being so mighty and wealthy a Monarch. Great ones may go arraied according to
their state: and they that are in Kings houses (...) softs. Yet is it reckoned
as a fault in the rich man, Luk 16. 19. Mat. 11. 8.
(...). (...) (...). 18.
that he was often clothed in purple and fine linen; and God threatens to
punish even Princes, and Kings children, and all other such as are clothed
with strange apparel. The Jews for (...) the Chaldaean habit, were soon after
carried captive into Chaldea, Ezekiel. 23. 15. And what heavy things are thundered
against those curious dames of Jerusalem by the Prophet Isaiah, who being
himself a Courtier, inveighs as punctually against that (...) vanity, as if he
had lately viewed the Ladies wardrobes. (...) Savior finds fault with the
Scribes that loved to go in long clothing, Mark 12. 38. And S. James with those
Christians that would fawn upon a gold ring, and a goodly suit, Jam. 2. 2. In
the year 1580. great ruffs with huge wide sets, and cloaks reaching almost to
the ancles, no less uncomely then of great expense, were (...) as (...) and
(...) bern.
restrained here by proclamation, says M. Camden. And need we not the like
(...) now, when so many Prodigals turn rents into (...), and lands into laces,
Singulis auribus bina aut terna dependunt patrimonia, as Seneca has it, hang
two or three patrimonies (...). (...) (...). (...), (...) est (...) (...)
(...). (...).
at their ears, a pretty grove upon their backs, a reasonable Lordship, or
living about their necks. This is far from that humility, wherewith S. Peter
would have young men cloth themselves; and from that meek and quiet spirit,
wherewith, says he, the holy women of old adorned themselves, not with plaited
hair, and golden abiliments, 1 Pet 3. 3, 4. Cyprian and Austin say, that
superfluous apparel is worse then whoredom: because whoredom only corrupts
chastity, but this corrupts nature. 1 (...). 5. 5.


Verse 30. The grass of the field, which to day is, and tomorrow (...) cast
into the oven.]
A fit resemblance of all outward things, the subject of our carking cares,
likened (when they are at best) to the flower of grass, Isa. 40. 6. The Sun is
no sooner risen, says S. James, with a burning heat, but it withers the
grass, and (...). 1. 10, 11.
the flower thereof falls, and the grace of the fashion of it perishes: so
also shall the rich man fade away in his ways, his riches cannot ransom him.
But as grass, when ripe, withers, and is carried away, either by the teeth
of beasts, or hands of men: so are all, by impartial death. And as the sith
with a few strokes, mows down thousands of piles and forms of grass; so do
Gods judgments millions of men, Psalm. 9. 17. Prove. 11. 21. And as grass is to
day a flourishing field, to morrow cast into the oven: so are the greatest into
their graves (if not into that burning fiery furnace) then when they are in
their prime and pride, in their greatest flourish, in the ruff of all their
jollity: as the rich fool, therefore a fool, because he stuck his clothes with
these flowers of the field, these fading felicities, and thought himself
thereby become Act. 8. 9.
(as Simon Magus) some great one. Contrarily S. James makes it a sign of a
convert, that though of high degree in the Jam. 1. 10. expounded.
world, yet he is herein made low, that he has low thoughts of these low
things, which he sees to be mutable and momentary, as the flower of the
grass; and bids him rejoice in that he is exalted, Animo magno (...) magnum.
in that he is now made a greater man ever since; being converted he is become
too big for these petty businesses: As a man grown up, delights to deal in
lands, and lays by his Cherry-stones. But we pity that want of wit which
makes the mind run on bables, but never think on ought substantial.

O ye of little faith.]
Ye petty fidians, ye small faiths. Unbelief is that root of bitterness,
whence carfulness springs. Hence it was, that the Heathen so abounded in
it. Strive we therefore to a full assurance of faith and hope: so shall we roll
our selves upon God for all things needful to life and godliness. Faith fears
Fides famen (...).
no famine, it quelleth and kills (...) fear: but awful dread, it breeds,
feeds, fostereth and cherishes. When a man can say Hier. ex Tert.
with Abraham, God will provide, he will be out of fear and doubt: when he can
believe not only Gods promise, but his providence, as David, 1 Samuel 26. 10, 11.

Verse 31. Therefore take no careful thought, etc.]
From the forenamed grounds. Our Savior here resumeth and enforces the Cic.
Tusc. 4.
former exhortation. Sollicitudo est aegritudo cum cogitatione, says the
Orator. Carfulness is a tormentfull plodding upon businesses. It is, say
Divines, (...) act of fear and distrust, taking up not only the head, but
chiefly the heart, to the very dividing and disturbing thereof: causing a man
inordinately and over-eagerly to pursue his desires, and to perplex himself
like wise with (...) and (...) thoughts about success. Now our Lord Christ
would have none of his servants to care inordinately about any thing, but that,
when they have done what they can in obedience to him, they should leave the
whole matter of good or evil success to his care. To care about the issue of
our lawful endeavors, is to usurp upon God, to trench far into his
prerogative divine, to take upon us that which is proper to him. And it is no
less a fault to invade Gods part, then to neglect our own. Add hereunto, that
God out of his wise justice, cease caring for such an one, and because he
will not be beholden to God to bear his burden, he shall bear it alone, to the
(...) of his back, or it least, till he is much bowed and (...) under it. If we
(...) such as will put no trust in us, but love to stand upon their own ground,
we give them good leave: as contrarily, the more we see our selves trusted to,
(...) more (...) is careful for them that stay upon us. Thus it is with (...)
heavenly Father.

Saying, what (...) we eat? (...)]
Our Savior by these distrustful. Questions, graphically expresses the
condition of (...), their endless projects and discourses in the air. They are
full of words, and many questions, what they (...) do, and how they and theirs
shall be provided for? They haven ver done, either (...) themselves, or
consulting to no purpose, in things that either cannot be done at all, or not
otherwise. And so some (...)
understand that of our Savior, Luke 12 29. Hang not in doubtful suspences;
after he had brought in the rich fool, verse. 17. reasoning and saying, What
shall I do, etc. And Solomon brings in such (...) (...) (...), (...) See M
Harris on Mat. 5 7. And M. Pen. (...) on Eccl. (...). 1.
another fool, full of words, and he recites his words, A (...) cannot tell
(...) shall be, and what shall be after him, who can tell? Eccles. 10. 14. And
in the next Chapter, ver. 1. and so forward, he makes answer to many of these
men's (...) queries and (...), when moved to works of mercy. Old men specially
are (...) of this weakness, who are apt to cark, because they (...), says
Plutarch, (...); that they shall not have enough to keep them, and bring them
well home, as they call it; whence some conceive that covetousness is called,
The root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6. 10. because as there is life in the root, when
no sap in the branches: so covetousness often lives, when other vices die and
decay. It grows, as they say, the Crocodile does, as long as he lives.

Verse 32. For after all these things do the Gentiles seek.]
With (...) (...).
whom if you should symbolize in sins, or not exceed in virtue, it were a shame
to you. They studiously seek these things, they seek them with all their might;
as being without God in the world, and A (...) and busy kind of enquiry is
(...).
therefore left by him to shift for themselves. When we observe a young man
toiling and moiling, running and riding, and not missing a market, etc. we
easily guess and gather that he is (...).
fatherless and friendlesse, and has none other to take care for him. Surely
this immoderate care is better beseeming infidels (...). z.
that know not God, but rest wholly upon themselves, and their own means, then
Christians, who acknowledge God most wise and all-sufficient to be their loving
father. As we differ (...) Heathens in profession, so we should in practice:
and a gross business it is, that Jerusalem should justify Sodom, and it
should be said unto her, Neither has Samaria committed half af thy sins, but
thou have multiplied thine abominations more then they, Ezekiel. 16. 51. Such as
have hope in this life only, what marvel if (...) labor their (...) to make
their best of it. Now many of the poor Pagans believed not the immortality of
the soul, and those few of them that dreamt of another life beyond this, yet
(...) of it very (...), and scarce believed themselves. Socrates the wisest of
(...) meli (...) Dij immortales (...): hominem quidem arbitror soire ne (...).
Plato and (...).
Heathens spoke thus to his friends at his death: the time is now come that I
must die, and you survive: but whether is the better of these two, the gods
only know, and not any man living; that is mine opinion. But we have not so
learned Christ; neither must we do as Heathens and alients from the
Commonwealth of (...): (...) now in Christ (...), we who sometimes were far
(...). 2. 16, 18
off, are made nigh by his blood, and have an access through him by one
spirit, to the (...).

For your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all (...) things.]
Not with a bare barren notionall knowledge, but with a fatherly tender care to
provide for his own in all their necessities: which who so does not, he judges
him worse then an infidel. We need not be careful of our maintenance here in
our (...) and none-age, nor yet for our eternal inheritance, when we come to
full age. We are cared for in every thing that we need, and that can be good
for us. Oh happy we, did we but know our happiness! How might we live in a very
heaven upon earth, could we but live by faith, and walk before God with a
perfect heart? He made himself known to be our gracious and (...) father before
we were born. And did we but seriously consider who kept and fed us in our
mothers womb, Psalm. 22. 9, 10. when neither we could shift for our selves, nor
our (...) do ought for us, how he filled us two bottles with milk, against we
(...) the light, bore us in his arms as a nursing-father, Numb. 11. 13. fed us,
clothed us, kept us from fire and water, charged his Angels with us, (...) all
winds to blow good to us, Cant. 4. 16. all creatures to serve us, Hos, 2. 21,
22, 23. and all occurrences to work together for our good, how could (...). 8.
18.
(...) but be confident? Why art thou so sad from day to day? and what is it
thou (...) or need? Art not thou the Kings son said Jonadab to Amnon, say
I to every godly Christian. Profane (...). 13. 4.
(...) could go to his father for a childs portion; so could the Prodigal,
(...) a (...); and had it. Every child of God shall (...) a Benjamins portion
here, and at length power over all (...), Revel. 2. 26. and possession of that
new heaven and new earth; wherein dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. Either
(...) disclaim God for your Father, or else rest confident of his fatherly
provision. Certa mihi spes est quod vitam qui dedit, idem (...).

Et velit, and possit suppedit are cibum.


God that gives mouths, will not fail to give meat also.

Verse 33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his (...).]
That, as the end, (...), as the means: for grace is the way to glory, (...) to
happiness. If men be not (...), (...) no heaven to be had; as if they be, they
shall have heaven and earth too: for (...) the promise of both lives; and godly
men, in Scripture, ( Abraham, Job, David, others) were (...) then any: and so
men might be now, if they would be as Bonus (...) Constant. mag. (...).
godly. The good God had furnished Constantine the great with so many outward
blessings, as scarce any man durst ever have desired, says S. Austin. He
sought Gods Kingdom first, and therefore other things sought him: and so they
would do us, did we (...) run the (...) method. Riches and honors, delights
and (...), (...) and length of days, seed and posterity are all entailed upon
(...). The wicked, In the fullness of his sufficiency is (...), Job 20. 22.
when the godly in the fullness of their (...). 3. 16, 17.
straights are in all sufficiency. Oh who would not then turn spiritual (...).
28.
(...). (...). 2, (...).
purchaser, and with all his gettings, get godliness? Seek (...) animi.
ye first the Kingdom of God, says Divinity; Seek ye first the good things of
the mind, says Philosophy, Caetera aut aderunt, (...).
(...) certe non oberunt. But our (...) over-valuing of earthly things, and
underprizing of (...), is that that makes us so (...) careful in the one, and
so wretchlesly affected in the other. The lean kine eat up the fat, and it is
nothing seen by them. The strength of the ground is so spent in nourishing
weeds, (...), or corn of little worth, that the good (...) is pulled down;
choked or (...). Earthly (...) sucketh the (...) of grace from the heart, as
the Ivy does from the Oak, and (...) it (...). Correct therefore this ill
humor, this choakweed: cast away this clog, this thick clay, that makes us
like (...) woman in the Gospel, that (...) of a spirit (...) years could not
look up to heaven. And learn to covet Luke 13. 11.
(...) things, labor for the meat that perishes not. Lay hold (...) life,
what (...) you let go. (...) things are, Nec vera, nec vestra, (...) and
momentary, mixed and infected with care in getting, fear in keeping, grief in
losing: (...), (...) are insufficient and unsatisfactory, and many times prove
(...) of vice, and hindrances from heaven. Spiritual things (...) in (...)
facit (...) in (...)(...).
on the other side, are solid and substantial, serving to a life that (...)
supernatural and supernall. They are also certain and durable, (...) prodi,
nec perdi, nec eripi, nec surripi possunt. They are sound (...).
(...), a continual feast, (...), or the least (...); they serve to and
satisfy the soul; as being the gain (...). (...). (...).
of earth and (...), and of him that fills both. Seek ye therefore first,
etc. Our Savior, in his prayer, gives us but one petition for temporals, five
for spirituals, to teach us this (...). Scipio went first to the Capitol, and
then to the Senate, (...) (...) 26.
etc. (...). l. (...). c. 1.


And all these things shall be addod unto you.]
They shall be cast in as an overplus, or as those small advantages to the main
bargain, as (...) and pack-threed is given, where we buy spice and fruit, (...)
bargain. These follow Gods Kingdom, as the black guard do the Court, or as all
the revenue and (...) does some great Lady, that one (...) wedded. The night of
Popery shall shame such as think much of the time that is spent with and for
God: for in their (...) they were wont to say, Mass and meat hinders no man's
(...). It would be a great (...) of mind, if the King should say to us for our
selves, (...) same that David did to Mephibosheth, Fear not, for I will surely
show thee kindness, and thou shall surely eat bread at 1 (...). 9 7.
my table continually: Or if he should say to us for our children, (...) David
did to Barzillas the Gileadite concerning (...) shall go over with me, and I
will do to him that which (...) (...).
seem good unto thee: and whatsoever thou shall require of me, (...) I do
(...) thee; Has not God said as much here as all this, and shall we not trust
and serve him, cleave to him, and rest on him without fear or distraction?

Verse 34. Take therefore no thought for the morrow]
The Lord Christ, well knowing which way our heart hangs, and pulse (...),
beats much upon this string, drives this nail home to the head. When things are
over and over again repeated and inculcated, it imports. 1. The difficulty. 2.
The necessity of the duty. 3. Our utter (...), or at least, dullness to the
doing of it. How hardly we come off with God in this most necessary, (...) much
neglected duty, who knows not, feels not, bewails (...). The world is a most
subtle, sly enemy: and by reason of her (...) neighborhood, easily and
insensibly insinuates into us, and (...) the best hearts. Our Savior saw cause
to warn his Disciples of the cares of life: and where was Thomas, when (...)
appeared to the rest of the (...), the doors being shut, (...) either lurking
for fear of the Jews, (in probability) or packing up, and providing for one,
now that his Master was (...), and taken from him? What ever the cause was, the
effect was woeful, Joh. 20. 24, 25. And albeit in both Testaments (as (...)
observes) (...) in (...).
the Saints of God have been noted to be subject to diverse infirmities, yet
none tainted with this enormity of (...). Yet St John saw cause to say to those
that were Fathers also: Love not the world, nor the things that are in the
world. And ^.
David prays heartily, Incline my heart to thy Testimonies, and not (...). 119
36.
to covetuousnesse. Satan will be busy with the best this way, as he was with
our Savior himself: he knew it a most prevailing bait. And when this would not
work, he flees from him, as despairing of victory. Be sober therefore (in the
pursuit and use of these earthly things) and watch, for your adversary the
devil watches ^
you a shrewd turn by them. They are so near and so natural to us, that,
through Satan's policy and malice, when we think upon them (that we may the
better learn to flee, and slight them) they stick to our fingers, when we
should throw them away: they catch us when we should flee from them: they come
over us with fained words usually; 2 Pet. 2. 3. To hide our faults from the
view of others, or subtle thoughts and evasions, to blindefold the conscience,
with color of Christ, necessary care, etc. Whence it is called, cloked and
colored covetuousnesse, 1 These. 2. 5. A Christian-hath ever God for his chief
end, and will not, deliberately, forgo him upon any terms: He erres in the
way, thinking he may mind earthly things, and keep God too: so being ensnared
with these worldly lime-twigs: (like the silly bird) before he is aware, the
more he struggleth, the more he is entangled and disabled. All this, and more
then this, our Savior well (...): and therefore reiterates his exhortation,
and sets it on with so many Arguments. Care not for the morrow, etc. In a
letter to M. Philpot.
I will be careless according to my name, said that Martyr John Careless: for
now my soul is turned to her old rest again, and Act. and Mon. fol. (...).
has taken a sweet nap in Christ's lap. I have cast my care upon the Lord, who
cares for me, etc. And Bishop Hooper in a letter to certain good people taken
praying in Bow-Church-yard, and now in trouble, writes thus. Read the second
Chapter of Luke: there the shepherds, that watched upon their sheep all night,
(...) as they heard Christ was borne at Bethlehem, by and by they went to seek
him. They did not reason, nor debate with (...). (...).
themselves, who should keep the woolf from the sheep in the mean-time: but did
as they were commanded, and committed their sheep to him, whose (...) they
obeyed: so let us do, now we be called, commit all other things to him that
calls us. He will take heed that all things shall be well: he will help the
husband, comfort the wife, guide the servants, keep the house, preserve the
goods: yea, rather then it shall be undone, he will wash the dishes, and rock
the cradle. Cast therefore all your care upon God, etc. Judaea (as one has
well observed,) lay utterly waste for 70 years. Insomuch that after the
slaughter of Pemble, on (...). 7. 14.
(...), when all, man woman and child, fled into Egypt, there was not a Jew
(...) in the Country. Neither find we any colonyes sent thither, or any
displaced to make room at their (...). A wonderful providence, that so
pleasant a Country, left destitute of inhabitants, and compassed about with
such warlike Nations, was not invaded, nor replanted for 70. years (...): but
the Land kept her Sabbaths, resting from tillage, etc. and God kept the room
empty, till the return of the naturalls. Jeremy, immediately after he had
foretold the captivity, and the Caldeans were now besieging the City, was
bidden to buy a field of his uncles son; Which also he did, weighing him the
money, and (...) the evidences: for although it might seem an ill time to make a
purchase, yet he took no further care, then to trust God who had said, Houses,
and fields, and vineyards, shall be possessed again (...) this Land. Now Gods
promises, he knew, were the (...) freehold: Ier. 32. 15. So in every seventh
years rest, the people were taught to depend on Gods providence, by (...). For
though the owner of the field might gather, even on that year, for the
maintenance of himself and family, (...). 25. 6. yet he was neither to so we
his field, thereby to greaten his harvest, nor to hedge his field, or lock up
his vineyard.

For the morrow shall take thought for the things of it self]
That is: the providence that brings the day, shall also (...) new (...) to
comfort us over all the evils of the day. First, no man is sure of life till to
morrow, thou know not what this great-bellyed (...).
day may bring forth. Petrarch tells of a good old man, that being invited to a
feast the next day, answered: If you would have any thing with me now, here I
am: what is to be done to morrow, think on it you that have time before (...), Ego
enim, a multis annis, (...) non habui: For I have not had, for these many
years, (...) (...). (...). 3. (...). (...). (...). (...).
morrow to dispose of. Young men, he knew, may die, old men must die. (...)
mors in junuis, adolescentibus in insidijs, says Bernard. Old men may say as
Job 17. 1. My breath is corrupt, my days extinct, the graves are ready for me.
The young man, as Job 16. 22. When a few years (perhaps a few hours) are come,
I shall go the way whence I shall not return. Secondly, grant a man had a
lease of his life, as Hezekiah had, yet who sees it not to be extreme folly,
to anticipate (...) cares and combers before they come, yea even those of the
next day: seeing they will come time enough to our sorrow, though we send not
for them by our (...) fore. thoughts, and so redoubles our vexation? It is
possibe we may never feel the evils we fear. God may repent upon our
repentance, and (...) better to us then our (...). And therefore what a (...)
is it, to undergo certain trouble and care about (...)? Or if they shall
happen, we may have (...) to foresee them, but no power to prevent them: and
therefore to vex (...) selves before they come, is to be miserable before the
time. It is excellent (...), (...), that Solomon (...) us in this case: (...)
the (...) of God: for who can make (...) that he has made crooked? In the day
of prosperity be joyful, make the best of thy present comfort, but in the day
of adversity consider: God also has set one against the other, to the end that
Eccles. 7. 14.
man should find nothing after him, to wit, of those things that may come upon
him in the course of his life, and aftertimes. He cannot, by wit foresee, or
by policy prevent ensuing changes. Therefore it is a great part of his wisdom,
to let certain, and inevitable evils sleep, and keep in their (...) till the
time appointed; and not to make himself a thousand times miserable by one (...)
misery. Let us manage the affairs, and master the (...) of the present day;
and not, by too much fore-thoughtfulnesse, and painful preconceit, suffer
fained or future evils before (...) seize upon us. I grant that a (...),
Christian, provident care and forecast, is both convenient and commanded, both
for provision of (...), and prevention of dangers. See 1 Timothy 5. 8. 2 Cor. 12.
14. we read Revel. 6. 6. A measure of wheat (...).
(...) a penny etc. The word signifies properly, such a measure of (...), as
was usually allowed for a day to servants. Hence that speech of Phithagoras,
Super Chaenice non sedendum. Rest not in the provision that suffices for the
day; but take care for the (...). But this lawful care of necessaries, both
for our selves and ours after us, Prove. 13. 22. (such as was that of Jacob for
his own house, Genesis 30. 30. And that of the good huswife, Prove. 31. 15, 21.) is
not distresse-full, but (...), (...) by. God, who sends us to the pismire, to
learn this care of hereafter, Prove. 6. 6.

Sufficient to the day is the evil thereof]
The strongest mind and (...), idest (...). labor improb (...).
best composed, is weak enough to (...) the brunt and encounter of every days
(...). whereof he is sure to have his back-burden. Troubles without, and
terrors within, are the Saints (...) here. And what day shines so fair over
them, wherein they meet not with a sharp shower ere night? Since therefore every
day brings forth sufficient sorrow, and the heartiest man shall have his hands
full, what a base and unworthy weakness is it (says a reverend Divine) to
unfit and disable our already too weak minds, (...) a comfortable dispatch,
and digesting of daily uncomfortable (...), by such needless, fruitless,
(...) M. (...).
distractions, (...) of vanity, and Utopian peregrinations, etc.

CHAP. VII.
Verse 1. Judge not, that ye be not judged]
HOc verbum (...) induginem involvit. The word imports ^.
a kind of curious enquiry into other men's faults, (...) we may the more
severely censure and subject them to a (...) interpretation. It signifies
sometimes no more, I grant, then to ^.
(...) as Romans 2. 1. But this (so it were wisely done) (...) Savior would
never have reprehended. Thou shall not hate (...) brother in thy heart: but
(for prevention of such a (...)) thou shall (...) (not perfunctorily, or in
(...), bravery, (...) derision) rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon
(...) ^.
(as some read it:) lest thou suffer for his sin: or (as others) ^.
lift not up his sin over him as an ensign, blaze it not abroad (...) his
(...) grief and disgrace; but clap a plaster on the sore, and (...) cover it
with thy hand (as Surgeons use to do,) that the (...) may be never the wiser.
This were charity; which hides (...) her mantle a multitude of sins: yea
prepares covers and (...) for the infirmities of others as fast as they breed
them. And (...) ^.
neglect (...), the not giving vent to our hearts, by a wise (...) plain
reproof, causes abalienation of affection, dwelling (...) blind censures, a
very habit of misprision, and misinterpretation (...) all things, till men grow
rusty with rancour and malice, the (...) whereof would be soon drawn out by a
seasonable reproof. This, well and wisely done, were far better then judging
and (...) one against another: since it is, Judge not, that ye be not (...), and
Grudge not, that ye be not (...), (...). 5 9. The (...) ^.
of others we should hear of with indignation, fearfully and unwillingly (...),
acknowledge with grief, never speak of them but in (...) Ordinance, rather hide
them, as much as may be, with honest excuses, and make apology: as, that there
are infirmities in the (...), though we know them not, that as good gold, they
are happily of the lightest, may want a grain or two of their just weight: but ^.
give them their allowance, and they may (...) for current, etc. (...) not rash
in rejecting, or sour in censuring your fellow servants. That saying is (...):
Three things are not (...) to^ (...); the counsels of God, the holy Scriptures,
and the persons of men, Romans 14. 10.

That ye be judged]
Judge we must our selves, and God will not judge us. (...) from the bar
((...) (...), witnessed and pleaded guilty against thy self) to the (...), and
there pass sentence of condemnation, judging thy self (...) to be turned into
hell torments. Thus judge your selves (...) spare God. But judge not others,
viz. rashly, sinisterly, (...) and peremptorily, left ye be judged; both first,
of God, into (...) chair ye leap, (...) whose children ye condemn, even the
(...) of the just; as David once did, and befooled himself well-favouredly for
it when he had done. And second of men: I piter (...) coeli (...) juisset;
(...) sed (...) ipse suae. Sic, in (...).
Good men must suspect you, bad men scorn you, and all men shun (...), and
(...) to be rid of you, as unfit to live in a civil society. Therefore judge
nothing before the time, behold the Judge (...) at the door. It is the office
of Angels, to sever the sheep from (...) goats, the tares from the wheat, the
elect from the reprobate. Those that undertake (...) to determine of men's
final (...), (...), (...) censorem scriptorum, quidam (...). (...).
they know not of what pirit they are, with those sons of (...), they take too
much upon them, with those sons of Levi, (...) understand neither what they
say, nor where of they affirm, with those impostors in Timothy. Neither may
they escape here Sunt (...) in Ecclesia Catholica plurimi, mali, sed ex (...)
nullus (...) bonus, (...) de not.
(...), that for particular acts, or petty failings, take upon (...) rashly and
harshly to censure their betters many times: Job (...) Jeremy met with such as
watched-for their halting, (...) made (...) offenders for a word. These pry
into every particular more (...), then Laban did into Jacobs stuff; waiting
(as a dog for a bone) for any thing (...) beseeming the Saints, that they
Eccles l. 4 c. 13.
may fasten upon with their (...), that they may tear with their Number. 16. 7.
(...), and swallow down with those open sepulchers, their throats, 1 Timothy 1. 7.
the good names of others: censuring them deeply for humane (...), unchurching
and unbrothering them for unavoidable (...). It is hard measuring of a man by
his state and behavior in a pelt, in a passion, which are violent, and have
made the holiest, in their heat, little less then bestiall, 1 Samuel 25. 22.
Psalm. 116. 9. The like may be said of sins strengthened by ancient custom, or
natural (...), or herditary, the sins of our parents, or furthered by
multitude of (...) and enticements. Handle (...).
these (...) in the judgment of charity, and joint them again in Gal. 0 1.
(...). (...) suimus, aut (...) esse (...) est.
the spirit of (...), considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. It is
not to be liked, when men leap from the cradle of profession, into the chair of
censure, blinder then beetles at home, sharper then Eagles abroad. Charity and
humility would teach them to wink at small (...), as God does, and to pitch
upon that in another that is praise worthy. Our Savior is said to have loved
the rich young Pharisee, for that little good he found in him; and Bucer never,
rejected any, though different in opinion, in whom he discerned aliquid
Christi, any thing of Christ. S. Paul bidds us, consider one another, to whet
on to love: to pitch upon (...). 10. 24.
such good parts and properties as may engender love, and sway (...) to a good
opinion of our brethren. The wisdom from above, is full of mercy and good
fruits, without judging etc. But they shall (...). 17.
have judgment without mercy, that (...) no mercy in their (...). God shall
bring home their own dealings to their own doors: For with what judgment ye
judge, etc. Only our (...) is to be understood here of private and corrupt
judgment passed upon others, out of sinful curiosity and ill will (for (...)
curiosus quin malevolus) either to set up our selves above them, or by
condemning them to countenance our own evil (...). Magistrates may and must
judge between the righteous and the wicked. Ministers must take out the
precious from the vile, and (...). 11.
say to the wicked, it shall be ill with them, the reward of their (...) shall
be given unto them. Will thou judge them, Son of man, will thou judge them? yea
thou shall show them all their Ez. k. 22. 2.
(...). How often does our Savior call the Pharisees hypocrites, serpents,
vipers etc? And how roundly dealt St Paul with the sorcerer, Acts 13. 10. and
with the (...) person? 1 Cor 5.
Lastly, Though we may not be many masters, Jam. 3. 1. (...) and censorious.
etc. yet we may all judge the (...) by the fruit, call a spade a spade, a
drunkard a drunkard, etc. and, leaving his final doom to the searcher of all
hearts, judge and censure him, for the present, to be Gods enemy, and in a most
(...) estate. We both may and must condemn all sin in our selves and others.
But it is a fault to be itchingly inquisitive after other men's (...), (...) and
(...) (...) 2. (...). (...).
to be an eves-dropper, Eccles. 7 21. or to censure them, when they come to our
knowledge, unmercifully and above the royal Law. Let your (...), moderation of
utmost right be known to (...) men: The Lord is at hand, Phil. 4. 5.

Verse 2. For with what judgment ye judge, etc.]
Our (...) forth what he had said before by these two (...); as well known
among them as those amongst us: you shall sow as ye reap, drink as ye brew, be
(...) with the same sauce etc. Compare herewith those divine Proverbs, Isa. 33
1. (...) Rev. (...). 10. and (...). 6.
Prove. 12. 14. and 13. 2, 21. and 14. 14, 22. and 22. 8. Job 4. 8. Mark. 4. 24.
God delights to give men their own, as good as they brought, to pay them home
in their own coin, or as the text here, and the Hebrew proverb has it, to
remete them their own measure, Middah cenegedh (...).
Isa. 3. 10, 11. with the merciful to show himself merciful, and with the
froward to wrestle: he will be as froward as Psalm. (...). 26.
they for the hearts of them, beat them with their own weapons, overshoot them
in their own bows, shape their estates according to their own (...), and cause
others to write after their copies, as it fared with Pharaoh, Adonibezek, Agag,
etc. (...) sinned in fulness of bread, and it is (...) noted, that their
victuals Genesis 14 11.
were taken from them by their four Kings. Their eyes were full of
uncleanness, and they were smitten with blindness: they burned (...), and
were burned with fire: they sinned against nature, and, against the course of
nature, (...) and (...) them: Eglon stabbed into the guts, finds his bane the
same way with his sin; Sisera annoys Gods people with his iron (...), and is
slain by a nail of iron. Iesabels brains, that devised (...) against the
innocent, are strewn upon the stones: by a (...) to Iezreel she shed the blood
of Naboth, and by a letter from (...), the blood of her sons is shed.
Nebuchadnezzar destroid Solomon's Temple (that (...) years work of so many
thousands) therefore let him be turned a grazing, and seven seasons pass over
him, says the oracle, Dan. 4 16. The blasphemers in the Revelations, gnaw
their tongues through pain, and Dives (for (...).
like (...)) was tormented in that part chiefly. Appion scoffing (...)
Religion, and especially at circumcision, had an ulcer at the same time, and in
the same place. Phocas a wild, drunken, bloody, adulterous Cyprian. (...).
tyrant, was worthily slaughtered by Heraclius, who cut off his hands and feet,
and then his genitals by peece-meale. Zonaras.
The Donatists that cast the holy Elements in the Lords Supper to dogs, were
themselves afterward devoured of dogs. John Martin of Briqueras, a mile from
Angrogne, vaunted every where, that he Dikes Worthy Communicant.
would (...) the Ministers nose of Angrogne, but was himself assaulted by a
wolf, which bit off his nose, whereof he died mad. Act and Mon. sol. (...).
St (...) Elerker, Knight Marshall of Callice, in Q Mary's reign, being present
at the death of Adam Damlip Martyr, bid the exetioner dispatch, saying, that he
would not away till he saw the traitors heart out. Shortly after this Sr Rafe
was slain, amongst others, in a skirmish at Bullein, and his heart cut out of
his body (...). (...).
by the enemies: a terrible example to all merciless and bloody men, etc.
(...) no cause was known, why they should use such indignation against him more
then the rest, but that it is written, with what measure ye meat, it shall be
measured to you again: B. Ridley told Steven Winchester, that it was the hand
of God Ibid. 1232.
that he was now in prison, because he had so troubled others in his time. And
as he had inslamed so many good Martyrs, so he died miserably of an
inflammation, that caused him to thrust out his tongue all swollen and black, as
Archb. Arundell had died before (...). 1622.
him. The Archbishop of Toures made suit for the erection of a Court, called
Chamber (...), wherein to condemn the Protestants to the fire. He was afterward
stricken with a disease called The fire of God, which began at his feet, and so
ascended upward, Ibid 1911.
that he caused one member after another to be cut off, and so did miserably.
And there is mention made of one Christopher an unmercifull Courtier, who
suffering a poor Lazar to die in a (...) by him, did afterward perish himself
in a ditch. To return to Ibid. 1907.
the present purpose, Laurentius Valla censured all that wrote before him,
Erasmus comes after, and censures him as much: Beza finds as many faults with
Erasmus, and not without cause, as appears by that one passage among many in
his Annotations on Romans 7. 21. I find then a law, that when I would do good,
evil is present with me; Erasmus Originem secutus, scripsit Paulum hoc (...)
balbutire, quum ipse potius ineptiat. Scaliger the Hyper-critick gives this
absurd and unmannerly Scalig (...) Poet cap 16.
censure; Gothi belluae, Scoti non minus Angli perfidi, inslati, feri,
contemptoris, stolidi, amentes, inertes, inhcspitales, immanes. The Goths are
beasts, so are the Scots. English men are perfidious, proud, fierce, foolish,
madmen, slow-bellies, inhospitall, barbarcus. Another comes after him, and
says, His bolt, you see is soon shot, and so you may happily guess at the
quality of (...) Geog. (...) (...).
the Archer. Tacitus speaks reproachfully of both Jews and Christians; (...),
(...); (...) (...) appeliat.
and is paid his own as well, both by Tertullian and (...). If men suffer in
their good names, they may thank themselves, mostly. Contempt is a thing that
man's nature is most impatient of: those that are given to slight and censure
others, are punished with the common hatted of all. Imitation and retaliation
are in all men naturally, as we may see in every child. And that of Solomon is
in this sense found most true; As in water face answers to face; so does the
heart of a man to a man. None are so (...) and censured, as those that are most
censorious. The places they live in, groan for a vomit to spew them out.

Verse 3 And why beholdest thou]
Here Is the true method of preaching, by doctrine and use, explication and
application. (...) must (as our Savior in this text) bring hammers with their
nails, Jer. 23. 29. and drive them into the very head, yea goad men to the
quick, (...). 12. 11. that the peoples hearts may either break, as theirs, Act.
2. 37. or burst, as theirs, Act. 7. 54. A general doctrine, not applied, is as
a sword without an edge, not in it self, but to us, through our singular
sencelesnes: or, as a whole loaf set before children, that will do them no
good: the bellows will be burnt in the fire, but the dross remains still. A
garment fitted for all bodies, is fit for no body: and that which is (...) quod
siccum and (...) est. (...) anus (...) vertit.
spoken to all, is taken as spoken to none.

The moat that is in thy brothers eye]
The mote or straw: The word (beam) seems rather to have (...) to a straw, then
to a mote; And this is an evil desease that I have seen under the Sun, that
men (and those of the better sort sometimes) here nothing, talk of nothing so
willingly, as they do of other men's (...). (...). (...).
faults, Psalm. 50. 20. thou sit and speak against thy brother, etc.
There is no discourse that men will sit so long at, and be so taken with as
this. The words of the talebearer are as (...), and they go down to the bowels
of the (...): Many are never well, longer (...). 18 8.
then they are holding their fingers in other (...), amplifying and aggravating
their (...) and failings, not only most (...), but almost tragically; not once
mentioning their good parts and practices. These are like crows, that fasten
only upon carrion, Vultures ad (...) feruntur. Basil.
or the Horse-fly, that if he happen into a field that is (...) so full of
sweet flowers, yet if there be but a little filthy dung in it, his eye and sent
is only to that, and upon that only will he light. (...), (...) non in front
(...) in (...) habet. (...). (...) 14.
David compares such as these to the Aspe, that is quick of hearing but very
ill sighted (having his eyes not in his forehead, but in his (...)) weak but
full of poison. Herein only is the difference. That poison that Aspes vent to
the hurt of others, they keep within them, without hurt unto themselves. But
the malicious Non est (...); (...) (...).
censurer is his own worst enemy: for as he sets his mouth against heaven, and
his tongue walks through the earth Psalm 73. 9. so by misjudging, (out of an
inward hatred of another) all (...) actions and intentions, he pulls upon
himself, the hatred both of heaven and earth; for his trampling upon Gods
jewels, because a little (...). God does unwillingly see the faults of his
children, Numb. 6. 23, 21. yea he passes by their iniquity transgression and
sin, Micah 7. 18. with one breath both these are reported. The high places
were not removed, yet nevertheless Asaes heart was perfect etc. So 1 Pet. 3.
6. compared with Genesis 18 12. Sarabs whole sentence was vile and profane: not
one good word in it, but this, that she called her husband Lord. God of his
goodness takes notice of that word, and records it, by St Peter, to her
eternal commendation. He spyeth out and severeth gold, though but a dram,
from a mess of dross; good grain, though but a handful, from a heap of
chafe, cuts out that which is perished, (as men do out of a rotten apple) and
preserves the rest. Be ye (...). (...). 2.
therefore followers herein of God, as dear children: And walk (...) Cor. 13 5.
in love, etc. (...) thinks not evil, but believes all things, hops all
things, strains to hold a good opinion, where it has least probability to
induce it; rashly rejects none, in whom it sees signs of grace: according to
that of our Savior, See that ye despise not (...). (...), 10.
one of these little ones, neither for error in judgment, Romans 14. 3. 10. nor
for slips and infirmities in life and conversation, and that because God
despises them not, but guards them by his (...), verse. 10. and saves them by
his Son, whom he sent for the purpose, verse. 11. And 1 These. 1. 4. Knowing
brethren beloved, your (...) of God, viz. by your effectual says, laborius
love, (...) hope, verse. 3. although they were so compassed with (...). 3. (...).
infirmities, as he doubted lest the Tempter had rempted them, and his labor
had been in vain: he feared their utter Apostasy. So, Heb. 5. 10. he could not
but be persuaded of them better (...), and such as accompany salvation, though
he had justly and sharply reproved them for their dullness of hearing, and
slownesse of proceeding; (...) before their eyes that terror of the Lord upon
Apostles, to quicken their pace, and excite them to proficiency. I am black
(...) the Church, but comely, as the tents of (...) 1. 5.
Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon. The Kedarites dwelt in tents and open
fields, where all was exposed to the parching Sun in the (...); but in
Arabias (...), and they were very rich and glorious, (see Ezekiel. 27. 21. Jer.
49. 28, 29, Isa. 21. 13, 16, 17. full of precious jemms, gold, and pleasant
odours. Arabia looked (...), yet by searching it regularly, there were to be
found things of (...) price. So is it with many of Gods people, especially
(...) the scorching heat of temptation, desertion, or outward affliction, etc.
He that (...) his own conjecture, may condemn a deer child of God, and approve
a detestable heretic, as Philip did Simon Magus. If his eyes be too fast fixed
either on the Saints infirmities or the hypocrites fair pretenses. they may
bring forth, as Jacobs sheep did, spotted fruits.

But considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye]
Most men's minds are as ill set as their eyes: they can turn neither of them
inwards. They tell us of a kind of witches, that stirring abroad (...) apud
(...).
would put on their eyes, but returning home, they boxed them up again. The
Philosophers call upon us, to look to the hinder part of the wallet. And St
James says, Be not many (...) Jam. 3. 1, 2.
or teachers: and mark the reason, which he prescribes as a remedy: For in
many things we sin all. Now those that in the sense of their own sinfulness
are poor in spirit, will soon be meek and merciful to their fellow sinners:
they that have proved their own Gal. 6. 1, 2, 4.
works, and found all to be (not good and very good, as God did Jcr. 24. (...).
his, but) naught and stark naught, as the figgs in Jeremy, will be content to
bear one another burdens, and restore such as are overtaken in a fault with
the spirit of meekness, considering themselves, lest they also be tempted.
They will be as willing to lend Erratis veniam (...) par est.
mercy now, as they may have need to borrow mercy another time. And
consciousnesse of their own corruptions will make them compassionate toward
others in this kind. The (...) (...).
word, that signifies to censure, signifies also, and in the first place,
(...) arguo, (...) serior, post, (...). (...).
to be idle. Whereunto agrees that of St Paul, (speaking of (...) widows,)
they learn to be idle, wandering about from house to house: and not only idle,
but (...) also and busy-bodies, speaking of things that they ought not. Those
that travel not 1 Timothy 5. (...).
with their own hearts, have both leisure and list to be meddling with others.

Verse 4. Or how will thou say to thy brother etc.]
How impudent are hypocritical finde-faults, that can say such things to
others, when themselves are most obnoxious? whence is this, but either from a
secret desire of purchasing an opinion of freedom from the faults they so
boldly censure in others, or that they may thereby the sooner insiouate and
ingratiate with them they deal with? The Vulgar Translation reads here Frater
sine, etc. Brother, (...), (...).
let me pull out the mote that is in thine eye, etc. (...) lips and a wicked
heart, are like a potsheard covered with silver (...) 13. cap (...)
dross. When he speaks fair, believe him not: for there are seven (...). 26.
(...), (...).
abominations in his heart; but there lies a great beam of hypocrisy between
him and himself, that he cannot discern them. These are they, that by good
words and fair speeches deceive the ^
hearts of the simple, as the serpent did Eve. You would think, by their (...),
soothing hony-words, they were wholly set (...) seeking your good: when they
merely serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, as those Popish
flesh-flies. Faithful are the wounds of a friend, (fair they are and pleasant,
says the Chaldee here) but the kisses of an enemy are (...), as were those of
Ioab to Amasa, and Judas to Christ. (...) non (...). 27. 6.
(...) (...), says Philo. Love is not always in a kiss: there are that (...)
and kill. David would not taste of their dainties, nor endure that (...) should
pouer upon him the (...) ointments (as at (...) it was the custom among that
people, Luke 7. 46.) (...) if the (...) smite him, he would take it for a
singular (...). Let him reprove me, says he, it shall be an excellent oil,
and (...), (...).
shall soak into me, as (...) oil does into wooden (...). It shall (...) break
my head; my heart it may; and so make way for the (...) of Gods grace which is
not poured, save only into broken (...): for (...) whole (...) are full (...),
and so this precious (...) would run over, and be spilt on the ground, as
Bernard (...).

Verse 5. Thou hypocrite]
This is a dull generation, and must ^
be (...) sharply or cuttingly, that they may be (...) in the (...). And
Ministers, by our Saviors example here, must learn, so (...).
to instruct, as to sharpen and set an edge upon the word, so as it ^
may gore the (...) consciences of their hearers with smarting (...), that they
may hear and fear, and God may heal them, (...). 13. 15. Christ turns (...)
here to such, and bitterly (...) against them, as elsewhere likewise he (...),
but (...), (...). 23. of the Gospel, dragging them down to (...) by a chain of
eight (...), as so man, links, and closing up all with that (...), (...)
serpents, ye generation of vipers, How (...).
(...) ye (...) the (...) of hell? verse 33. and all to show us, how such kind
of (...) should be handled. As for those that are (...) proud and (...), that
none dare declare their way to (...), God will lay them in the slimy valleys
where are (...) like them, and more shall come after them: (...) they (...) be
brought forth to the day of wrath, and, ^
(...) they, here Ite Maledicti, go ye (...), etc.

Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam, etc.]
St James tells us, that the (...) from above is first (...), and then
peaceable, without judging without hypocrisy. And these two last are set It was
said of (...), (...) a (...), not (...). It (...) as truly (...) of the (...).
He hates (...) not sins These he (...), those (...). Dike. Act. (...) fol.
(...).
(...), to (...) us, that the greatest censurers, are commonly, the (...); and
as any one is more wise, he is more (...) of his (...). Hence also St Peter,
after he had said, Lay (...), guil, hypocrisy, envy, adds, and evil (...): to
note, that censuring, and all other evils of the tongue, are gendred of any of
the forementioned. For wicked men are apt to (...) as (...) use; as the
envious devil accused God to our first parents of envy; the covetous person
thinks all the world to be made of covetcusnesse. Caligula did not believe
there was any chaste person upon earth. And Bonner said to Mr (...) the (...), I
dare say that Cranmer would recant, if he might have his living again: so
measuring him by himself. Those that have a blemish in their eye, think the
sky to be ever cloudy: and such as are troubled with the (...), see all things
yellow: so do those that are (...) with malice and hypocrisy, think all like
themselves. Contrarily, Mary (...) thought the gardener should have had as much
good will to Christ as she had. Little did Jacob suspect that Rachel had stole
her fathers Idols: or the (...), that Judas had harbored such a traitor in his
heart, as (...) against his Master. They rather suspected (...) man himself
then Judas. And when our Savior bad him, what thou do, do John 13 26.
(...), they thought he had meant of making provision, or giving something to
the poor. Also when the woman poured the precious (...) upon our Savior, and
Judas (...) the fat as a waste, though he did it because he was a thief, and
cared not a pin for the poor, yet all the Disciples approved of what he said,
and (...). 26. (...).
are therefore made authors of his speech by one of (...); so little did they
perceive his (...) or his (...). True goodness is not (...), censorious,
quarellous. It is for an Esau to complain of his fathers store; Have thou but
one blessing? of his brothers subtilty; was he not rightly called Jacob? The
godly man casts the (...) stone at himself, and with Jacob (...) out, I am not
worthy Lord, the least of thy loving (...). Lo, I have (...), and I have done
wickedly, (...) these (...) what have they done? Let thine hand I pray thee be
against me, etc. said 2 Samuel 2. 7.
David, when he was come to himself; who before this, when he had (...) his
conscience with the stain and sting of (...), both (...) fact of the cruel rich
man (complained of by Nathan) with too much severity, even above the Law; and
shortly Ibid. (...). 31.
after tortured the miserable Ammonites without all mercy, putting them under
saws, harrows, and axes of iron, and making them pass through the brick-kilne,
etc. This he did before (...) conscience was awaked out of that dead Lethargy
(whereinto Satan had cast him) by the trumpet of the Law: before he was
convinced of sin by the sanctifying Spirit, and purged thereby from those
pollutions he had (...) wallowed in. But if God will but once more make him to
hear of joy and gladness, (...), 51. 8. 12, 13
that his broken bones may (...); if he will but restore unto him the joy of
his salvation, and stablish him with his free Spirit, then, instead of
censuring, and setting against others, he will teach transgressors Gods ways,
and sinners shall be converted unto him. He will no longer insult, but in
meekness: instruct those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give
them (as he had done him) repentance to the acknowledging of the truth; and
that they may awake (...) of the (...) of the devil, who (as the Ammonites were
by David) are taken captive 2 Timothy 2. 26.
by him at his pleasure. Put them in mind, says Paul, to speak Tit. 3. 2, 3.
evil of no man. And why? For we our selves also (even I Paul, and thou Titus)
were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, etc. and have yet still a world
of work within doors about the discovering and (...), the mortifying and
mourning over our own unruly lusts, and unchristian practices. A fincere heart
is ever most censorious and severe against it self. But it is set here by our
Savior, as a visible brand upon the face of the (...), that as he is ever
tampering and meddling with other men's motes; so he never has either leisure or
pleasure to look into his own rotten heart, and rebellious courses. Galileus
used (...), to (...) mountains in the Moon: so do these to find faults in
those that are far better then themselves; they can pierce beyond the Moon,
and spy the least moat in the Sun, the smallest infirmity in the most
glorious Saint; yea, some errors and exorbitancies that never had any (...)
but in their imagination, detesting those sins in others that they (...) in
themselves.

And then shall thou see clearly, etc.]
There is in every godly man an holy bashfulnesse, an ingenuous modesty, that
he would be foully ashamed to charge others with those crimes, which (...)
allow in himself. Not so every profligate (...), frontlesse Pharisee,
censorious hypocrite. These think, belike, to bind (...) their own bleeding
souls with a palliate cure, as they call it, by goring very bloudily into other
men's consciences, whereas they never yet purged their own. Thus dealt the
Priests (...).
and Elders with our Savior, the false Apostles with Paul, Porphyry Iisdem
(...) and (...). Arch. (...) in gravis. ques. In (...) and vita sunt boni
veraces in sermon, in (...): sed (...) est (...) and (...). Jacob. Lielensten.
(...).
(and others of the same brain) with the Primitive Christians, and the Papists
with the Waldensis; whose freedom of speech, in blaming and reproving the
dissolute manners, and actions of the Clergy, Effecit, ut plures (...) iis
(...) a quibus (...) alieni, says (...), was the cause that they were reported
to be Manichees, Catharists, what not? And yet a certain Dominican was forced
to confess, that (...) were good in their lives, true in their speeches, full
of brotherly love one toward another, but their faith, says he, is
incorrigible, and as bad as may be. And why? but because they maintained, that
the Pope was Antichrist, that the Court of Rome was intolerably corrupted, the
Clergy debauched, etc. Novum (...) Caie Caesar, etc. S. Paul was become the
Galathians (...), because he told them the truth, and so were these, the (...).
There was found a certain Postiller, that meeting with Omnis vita (...) est,
and nihil bonum (...) summo (...).
this (...) passage in S. Augustine. The whole life of (...) is (...); neither
is there any thing good without the chiefest good; (...) est (...) sententia,
said he, This is a cruel sentence. This was a sinful censure, say I, passed
by a man that was never truly Aug. de vera innocen. cap. 56.
humbled with the sight and sense of his own wicked and wretched (...) by
nature and practice; a stranger to himself, and therefore so uncharitable to
another. It is not evil to marry, says one, but good to be wary. So, it is not
(...) to reprove an (...), but let a man take heed he hear not; Physician
healthy self. (...), Nihil (...), (...), (...).
first pull the beam out of thine own eye. The Apostle after he had given rules
for reproving, Ephesians. 5. 11, 12, 13. (...), (...). 15. See that ye walk
circumspectly, or exactly, that none may (...) blame or blemish you, with any
foul fault. Infirmities are (...) (...) o (...), qui (...).
in the best, and will be, till they come to be the spirits of just men made
perfect, Heb. 12. 23. And this is a means to make them warn the (...) with more
feeling experience and compassion, Heb. 2. 17. But say they be (...) of gross
sins (as these (...)) though they should begin at home, and first cast out
the beam of their own eye, yet if they speak according to Gods Word, and the
thing be so indeed, hear them hardly, Matthew. (...). 2, 3. (...) by them. An
Angel may speak in an (...), and God by Balaam. The words do but pass through
him (as when (...). 13. (...).
a man speaks (...) a trunk) they are not polluted by him, because not his.

Verse 6. Give not that which is holy to dogs, etc.]
Having (...) (...) (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). (...).
showed How, here our Savior shows Whom we should (...), Give not holy things,
wholesome counsels or rebukes (called (...) where reproofs of life, precious
balms, excellent ointments, (...) may (...) a wound, but make none) to dogs,
that will not (...) by the (...); or swine, that if they light upon such a
(...), will only (...). and go their ways. Beware of dogs, beware of (...).
(...). (...).
evil workers, such especially (...) wrought so hard, walked so (...) and so
(...), that now they (...) set down to rest in the seat of (...). (...).
the (...). Beware of such botches; (...) no good to be (...) (...).
done upon (...), or to be gotten by them, but a great deal of danger. The
(...) admonished all they met; if men (...) not (...), they connted it an easy
loss, to cast away a few words upon (...). But our Savior prescribes us
prudence and caution. He will not have holy (...) spent and (...) upon (...),
his pearls trampled on by swinish (...). Mourn we Jer. 9 1.
may, with Jeremy for such mad dogs, as (...) flee in the face of them that
fairly tell them of their faults. Pray we must and (...) (...) So (...).
pity such (...) swine, such (...) and scurrilous wretches, as grunt against
goodness, and feed insatiably upon the garbage of carnal contentments. As
dogs and swine were unclean creatures and unfit for (...); so are those for
admonition, that would entertain it with cruelty (...). Speak not in the ears
of (...) (...). (...) 9. (...).
(...), says Solomon, for he will despise the wisdom of thy words. And again,
(...) not a scorner, lest he hate thee, rebuke a wise man, and he will love
(...). David prays for a friendly reprover, Psalm. 141. (...) 13. 23. (...).
(...). (...). (...).
5. Job (...), Make me to know my transgression, and my sin Hezekiah (...) at
that sharp and sad message. Jonah, though tetchy enough, lays his hand upon
(...) mouth, and seals up his prophecy with (...) after Gods (...). (...) licet
(...) perstricta. The Virgin Mary held her peace, Joh. 2. 5. when her son
took her up so (...) for her (...), before (...) company: So did S. Peter, when
S. Paul took him up for (...) at (...), Gal. 2. 14. and commends that
Epistle, (...) S. Paul had witnessed that reproof, among the rest, 2 Pet. 3.
16. The two Disciples going to Emaus constrained that (...).
stranger, that had chidden them for their unbelief, to abide and eat with
them. And luke warm Laodicea, so roundly reproved, and (...) with shameful
spewing out, repented, and was reformed; as some ground and gather from that
title our (...) assumes in the Preface to the Epistle, The beginning of the
Creation of God. Eusebius also testifies, that there was a (...) Post tam
(...) (...) haud (...) resipuit. (...).
Church there in his days. Next to the not deserving of a reproof, is the well
taking of it. No suggar can bereave a pill of his (...). None but the gracious
can say, Let the righteous smite me. Bees only pass by Roses and violets, and
sit upon Thyme, which is hot and biting. Most men, when we seek to fetch them
(...) of their sins, to awaken them out of the snare of the devil, they (...)
and snarl, as (...) that are wakened out of sleep are apt to do. They snuf and
take scorn, are as horse and mule, untameable, untractable, the more you rub
their galled backs, the more they kick. These stray-asses will not be brought
home, Exodus 23. 45. These old bottles will break with such new wine: The more
you touch these toads, the more they swell: the more you meddle with these
serpents, the more they gather poison to spit at you. Go about to cool them,
you shall but add to their heat, as the Smiths forgefries, when cold water is
cast upon it; and as hot water, if stirred, casts up the more fume. Joseph
(...) for his good will in this kind, hated of his brethren: (...) of Saul,
who cast a javelin at him: Micaiah of (...), Amos of Amaziah, Jeremy of his
(...) Contrymen, Christ of the Jews, Paul of the Galathians, John Baptist of
Herod. If (...) his white sin (and who will stand still to have his eyes picked
(...)) John must to prison. In other things he will dance (...) John's pipe; but
if his incest be meddled with, John must hop (...). Say to wrest that string in
tune, and it will snap, and break upon you. Now for such scoffing Ishmaels and
furious (...), that refuse to be (...), hate to be healed, let them read their
doom, Psalm. 50. 21, 22. and see (...) their destiny. Every good man is (...) to
pass by them as incorrigible, (...), and not to (...) them so much as a pull
out of the fire, so much as a (...) to prevent those curses (...) are coming
upon them. (...) he that is (...), muse be (...) still; he must wallow as
(...), (...) in his own corruptions; he must rage (...) mad dog, (...) run on
to the pit of hell, no body must offer to stop (...) him in his (...).

Verse 7. Ask and it shall be given you, etc.]
Whereas it might be objected, These are hard lessons, neither know we how to
quit our selves in the discharge of them. Our Savior answers, as Esaias did
before him, Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, (...). 55. 6.
call ye upon him whiles he is near: and as S James advises after him: Jam. 1
5.
If any man want wisdom, let him ask (...) of God. Ask says he, and it shall
be given you. Run to the great Doctor of the (...), as Agur did to Ithiel and
Ucal, Prove. 30. 1. and he will teach you: seek his face and favor, and ye
shall surely find it; Knock at the beautiful gate of Heaven with the hand of
faith, and it Act. 12.
shall open unto you (as the Iron gate did to Peter,) of its one accord.
Elishaes staff was laid (by his appointment) upon the dead childs face, but
(...) was neither voice nor hearing. He went therefore himself, and shut the
door upon them twain, and 2 King. 4 31, 33.
prayed unto the Lord. This staff he knew was long enough to reach up to
heaven, to knock at those gates, yea to wrench them open. Ask therefore that
your joy may be full. Hitherto ye have asked me nothing, says Christ,
disliking our dullness to this duty. Quidest cur nihil petis? pete (...)
privatus, de me queraris; said (...). in (...).
Severus the Emperor to his Courtiers, What meanest thou to ask nothing of me?
Ask, that thou may have no cause of complaint against me. And Pope Nicolas
the fifth (a great favourer of learning) When he was told of some in Rome that
made good verses: They cannot be good Poets, said he, and I not know them. Why
come they not to me, if good, Qui Poetis etiam (...) (...) in (...).
pateo, Who am a friend to Poets, though not so good? (...) so iciteth sutours,
and the Father seeks such to worship him, Joh. 4. 23. not for any thing he
gets by it, but merely for our benefit: as the Sun draws up vapors from the
earth, not for it self, but to moisten and fatten the earth therewith. And
although he come not ever at first call, yet be not discouraged with silence or
sad answers. He is nearest to such sutours as with Mary, cannot see him for
their teats and griefs: if, with her, they continue to seek him in humility, If
they rest not rapping and bouncing at his gates, he will open unto them, for
their importunity, Luke 18. 5, 7. The Saints (...) have present audience, as
Eleazer, Genesis 24. 15. Daniel, Chap. 9. 23. The Disciples, Act. 4. 31. And
(...), who came leaping out of his (...), with Vicimus, Vicimus in his (...).
But what if they have not? far be it from them, to think that God is asleep, or
gone a journey, as the Prophet jeareth at Baal: or that he wants ears, as the
Image of Jupiter did (...) imago. auribus carens. Plut.
at Creet. (...) he that bids us ask, means to give: as when we bid our
children say. I pray you father give me such a thing: We do it not but when we
mean to give it them. If he defer help, let it humble us, as it did David,
Psalm. 22. I cry in (...) day time, but (...) hear not, etc. But thou art
holy, etc. Others have prayed and sped, Our fathers trusted in thee, they cried
unto Psalm. 22. (...). 3, 4, 5, 6.
(...) and were delivered: But I am a worm and no man, yet will I call upon
him (not only in my sinking, but) from the bottom of the deeps. Let it also
quicken us to further fervency, as it did 2 Cor. 12.
S. Paul, and the Church, Psalm. 80. 3, 7, 19. never giving over the Luke 18. 11.
fuit (with the importunate widow,) till we have obtained it. He that prays,
moves God, not as an (...) moves hearers, but as a child, his father. The
end of oratory, is to speak perswasively, not always to persuade: but the end
of prayer is to prevail, and speed; Ye which are Gods remembrancers, give Isa.
62. 7.
(...) no rest, till ye have what ye beg. Ask, scek, knock: use an It shows
instantissimam necessitatem.
unwearied importunity: slip not any opportunity, pray without (...), pray
continually: set aside all for prayer, wait upon it, Aug.
(as the word signifies) Col. 4. 2. with Act. 10. 7. But must we (...) Colol.
4. 2.
never leave praying? (may some say) till we have our request granted? there
are other things to be done? True: and you must give over the words of prayer
for a season, but never the suit of Romans 12. 12.
prayer. A beggar (for example) comes to a rich man's gate, and tries Ob.
Sol.
for an alms, but none there answers him. He being a poor man, has something
else to do, then to beg: and therefore he sits him down, and knits or knocks,
or patcheth, etc. and betwixt whiles, beggs and works, works and beggs. So
should we, follow our necessary business, and yet continue our suit for grace.
And the rather, because beggars hold out to ask, where yet, they have no
promise it shall be given them: nay when (many times) they are frowned upon,
threatened, punished for begging. And whereas beggars come no nearer house, then
the porch or entry, and so know not whether the master of the house be
providing for them an alms or a cud gell. All Gods petitioners, that call upon
him in truth, are admitted into the parlour, as I may so say, into Gods
special presence. An hypocrite shall not (...) before him, Job 13. 16. Bat the
upright shall dwell in his presence, Psalm. 140. 13. He hides not his face from
such, but when they cry, he (...), Psalm. (...). 24.

And it shall be given you]
It is not said what shall be given, because the gift is above all name, says
Austin. Like as Amos 4. 12. Thus will I do unto thee: Thus? how? Non nominat
mala, ut omnia timeant, says (...) out of Hierom: No evil is named, that they
may fear all.

Verse 8. For every one that asks receives, etc.]
And he is worthily miserable, that will not be happy for asking. Prayer (says
Lambert the Martyr) is in Scripture much commended, and many great and
unmeasurable benefits are showed to (...): (...). (...) (...).
thereupon, that men should the more lustily give themselves thereunto. Thus
Jacob wrestling with God, both by might and (...)
(...), (as the word signifies) both by the strength of his body, and force of
his faith, he grounded his prayer upon Gods gracious (...); which he rolls as
sugar in his (...), and repeats it again (...). (...). (...), (...).
and again. See the same course taken, 2 Samuel 7. 25. 1 King. 8. 25. etc. Dan.
9. 2, 3, Psalm. 12. 5, 6, 7. Act. 4. 25, etc. Cast (...) of hope in the darkest
desertion, wait for day, and pray, as those in the shipwreck, Act. 27. pleading
that precious (...), Isa. 50. 10. This help if we use not, we shall either pray
(...), (...) without fire: or, as the Pharisee, proudly, or as the
Thessalonians, as men without hope: which is to deny our own prayers. He cannot
possibly be poor, that can pray in faith: because God is rich to all such, Romans
10. 12. and gives (...) to such as so ask, Jam. 1. 5. Never did the hand of
faith (...).
knock in vain at Gods gate. The AEdiles (or Chamberlains) amongst the Romans,
had ever their doors standing open, for all that had occasion of request or
complaint, to have free access to (...). Gods mercy-doors are wide open to the
prayers of his (...) people. The Persian Kings held it a (...) of their silly
glory, to deny an easy access to their greatest Subjects. It was death to
solicit them uncalled. (...) her self was afraid. But the King of heaven
manifests himself to his people, Joh. 14. 21. calls to his spouse, with, Let
me see thy face, let me hear thy voice, (...) 1. 14.
etc. and assigns her negligence herein, as the cause of her (...), The door
of the Tabernacle was not of any hard or debarring matter, but a veil; which is
easily (...). And whereas in the Temple none came near to worship, but only
the High Priest, others stood without in the outer-Court; Gods (...) are now a
(...) of (...), and are (...) to worship in the (...), and (...) the Alter,
Rev. 11. 1. Let us therefore draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of
faith; Let us come Heb. 10. 22.
boldly to the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and Heb. 4 16.
find grace to help in time of need.

Verse 9, 10. Or, what man is there of you, whom if his son ask (...). 1. 6.
(...), etc.]
By an argument from the less to the greater. Our (...). (...): sententijs
(...).
Savior (...) what he had said; that we may ask in faith, nothing wavering, or
being at an uncertainty, or at variance with himself, doubting whether he
should believe or not. Budaeus in Co^.
This is no less unpleasing to God, then unprofitable to us. God is the Father
of all mercies, and loves his, far more then any natural father does his
own child; then Abraham did Isaac, or David Absalom. And according to his
affections, such are his expressions: for as he knows their needs, so he
gives them all things richly to enjoy. He gives them not, as he does the 1 Timothy 6. 18.
wicked, panem (...), a stone for bread: he feeds them not Altera mann fert
lapidem, altera panem (...). (...). Genesis 47. 12. (...). Say the (...):
whereunto our Savior seems to allude.
(as we say) with a bit and a knock. He puts not into their hands. (...), (as
the Greek proverb has it, whereunto (...) Savior here alludeth) for a fish a
scorpion: No, he feeds them with the finest wheat, Psalm. 81. 16. and fills
them with fat things (...) of marrow, Isa. 25. 6. He nourishes them with the
best, as Joseph did his fathers household in Egypt, according to the mouth of
the little ones, or as so many little ones (says the Original) tenderly and
lovingly without their care or labor. And whereas some natural parents have
(monstrously) proved Luke 12. 42.
unnatural; as Saul to Jonathan, and those (...), Romans 1. 31. Not so God: as
himself is an everlasting father, Isa. 9. 6. So is his (...), Isa. 49. 14. Ioh.
13. 1. Men may hate their children whom they loved: but he rests in his love,
Zeph. 3. 17. they may cast out Psalm. 27.
(...) babes, but he gathers them. Father Abraham may forget us, and Israel
disown us, Isa. 63. 16. But thou O Lord art our never-failing Father, our
Redeemer, etc. The fathers and governors of the Church, may (out of an
overflow of their misguided zeal,) cast us (...), and for a pretense, say, Let
the Lord be glorified. But then shall he appear to your joy, and they shall be
ashamed, Isa. 66. 5. The fathers of our flesh (...) their children after their
own (...): but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness.
Heb. 12. 20.
He feeds his people sometimes with the bread of adversity, and the Ier. 30. 20,
water of affliction: or gives them (as it were) a thump on the back Psalm.
(...). 9.
with a stone, to drive them downwards, and makes them eat Ezekiel. 12. 18.
ashes for bread, as David; their bread with quaking, as (...) did: holds them
to hard meat (some of the Martyrs were fed with bread made, most part, of
saw-dust, and (...) with bread (...) 4. 15.
prepared with cow-(...)) He chasteneth them also, other-whiles, not only with
the rods of men, but with the severe discipline of scorpions: and this seems
not, for the present, to be joyous but grievous: Nevertheless, afterward it
yields the peaceable fruits of righteousness, to them that are thereby
exercised. They shall Heb. 12. 11.
sit down with Abrahram, yea in Abraham's bosom (as they used to lean at
feasts) in the Kingdom of heaven: and shall have (not a Benjamins (...) only,
but) a royal diet as Ieconiah had, every Matthew. 8. 11.
day a portion. Then shall the Lord stand forth, and say to those (...). (...).
34.
men of his hand, who had their portion here, and whose bellies he filled with
his hid treasure. (The Inne-keeper gives the best bits to his guests, but
reserves the patrimony for his children) Behold my servants shall eat, but ye
shall be hungry, etc. Isa. 65. 13.

Verse 11. If ye then being evil]
Even ye my Disciples also: (...) Never a (...) better (...).
For by nature there is never a better of us. But as the historian (...), that
there were many Marij in one Caesar, so there are many Cains and Judasses in
the (...) of us all. Homo est inversus decalogus, says one: whole evil is in
man, and whole man in evil; (...) in the devil, whose works (even in the best
of his Saints) Christ The (...) Cretians before conversion were liars, evil
(...), etc. (...) must be (...) rebuked that they may (...) in the (...).
came to destroy; to dissolve the old frame, and to drive out the Prince of
darkness, who has there entrencht himself. And although sin in the Saints
has received its deaths-wound, yet are there still in the best, (...)
stirrings, and spruntings thereof (as in dying creatures it uses to be) which
(without Gods greater grace, and the countermotion of the holy Spirit within
them) would certainly produce most shameful evils. This put S. Paul to that
pitiful outcry, Romans 7. 24. and made him exhort (...) (...) 1. (...).
(though he were a young man rarely mortified) to exhort (...) 1 (...). 5.
(...).
the younger women with all (...), or chastity; intimating, that, thorough the
corruption of his nature, even whilst he was exhorting them to chastity, some
unchaste motions might steal upon him unawares. A tree may have withered
branches, by reason of some deadly blow given to the root, and yet there may
remain some sap within, which will bud and blossom forth again. Or, as if some
wild fig tree, says a Father, that grows in the walls of a goodly building,
and hides the beauty of it, the boughs and branches may (...) cut or broken of,
but the root, which is wrapped into the stones of the building, cannot be taken
away, till the walls be thrown down, and the stones cast one from another: So
sin that dwells in us, has its roots so inwrapped and intertwined in our
natures, that it can never be utterly (...); but pride will bud, Ezekiel. 7. 10.
and the fruits of the flesh will be manifest, though we be daily lopping Gal.
5. 19.
off the branches, and laboring also at the root. Sin is an inmate, that
will not out, do what we can, till the house fall upon the head of it; an
hereditary disease, and that, which is bred in the bone, will never out of the
flesh; a pestilent Hydra, somewhat akin to those beasts in Daniel, that had
their dominion taken away, yet were their lives prolonged for a time, and a
season. (...). 7. 12.

How much more will your father which is in Heaven give good things]
Give the holy Spirit says S. Luke: for Nihil bonum Luke 11. 13.
sine summo bono, says S. Austin, when God gives his Spirit, he gives all good
things, and that which is more then all besides. For it is a Spirit of
judgment and of burning, of grace and of deprecation, Isa. 4. 4.
Zech. 12. 10.
of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord, of strength Isa. 11. 2.
and of might, enabling both to resist evil of sin, and to endure evil of
sorrow. And for good things, temporal, to trample on them; spiritual, to
reach after them. It is a free spirit, setting a 2 Cor. 3. 17.
man at liberty from the tyranny of sin, and terror of wrath; and oyling his
joints, that he may be active and abundant in the Lords work. This holy spirit
is signified by those two golden pipes, Zech. 4. through which the two
Olive-branches, the (...), empty out of (...) the golden oils of all precious
graces into the candle-stick, the Church. And how great a favor it is to have
the holy Spirit (...) inhabitant: See Joel 2. where, after God had promised the
former and latter rain, floores full of wheat, and (...) full of wine and oil,
a confluence of all outward comforts and contentments; he adds this as more
then all the rest, I will also Joel (...). 23, 28.
(...) out my spirit upon all (...). He will pour out, not drop down Psalm 51.
only sparingly and pinchingly as some penny-father, but pour (...) carni
(...), i. res praest antissima rei plane fragili, and caducae: quam tamen (...)
spiritus. sui munere. (...).
(...), like a liberal householder, as it were, by pailes or bucket-fulls. And
what? my spirit, that noble spirit, as David calls it, that comforter,
counselor, conduit into the land of the living. And upon whom? upon all
(...): spirit upon flesh, so brave a thing upon so base a subject. Next to the
love of Christ in dwelling in our nature, we may well wonder at the love of the
holy Ghost that will dwell in our defiled souls; that this spirit of glory and
of God will dain to rest upon us, (...) the cloud did upon the Tabernacle. How
glad was Lot of the Angels, Micha of the Levite, Elizabeth of the mother of her
Lord, Lydia of Paul, Zacheus 1 Pet. 4. 14.
of Christ, Obed-Edom of the Ark? And shall not we be as joyful and thankful
for the holy Spirit, whereby we are sealed (as merchants (...). 4. 30.
set their seals upon their wares, unto the day of redemption. If David for
outward benefits brake out into, What is man that thou art mindful of him?
and Job, for fatherly chastisements, (...) 4.
(...) 7. (...).
What is man that thou should magnify him etc? how should this best gift of
his holy Spirit affect and ravish us? since thereby all mercies are seasoned,
and all crosses sanctified; neither can any man say (experimentally and
savingly) that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost. 1 (...). 12. (...)


Give good things to them that ask him]
sc. If they ask in faith, bring honest hearts, and lawful petitions, and can
weight Gods leisure. Let none say here, as the Prophet in another case, I have
labored in vain, and spent my strength for naught: I have Isa. 49.
prayed and sped not, the more I pray, the worse its with me. The manner of our
usage here in prison does change (says B. Ridley in Act and Mon. fol. (...).
a (...) to Bradford) as sour ale does in summer: and yet who doubts but they
praid earn and earnestly, when they were in Bocardo, that College of Quondams,
when those Bishops were there prisoners? God is neither unmindfull nor
unfaithful, but waits the fittest time to (...) mercy, and will surely avenge
his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear Luke (...). 7.
(...) with them. The seed must have a time to grow downward, before it grows
upward: And as that seed which is longest covered, rises the first, with most
increase: so those prayers which seem lost, are laid up in heaven, and will
prove the surest grain: the more we sow of them into Gods bosom, the more
fruit and comfort we shall reap and receive in our greatest need.

Verse 12. Therefore all things what soever ye would etc.]
q. d. To wind up all in a word (for it would be too tedious to set down each
particular (...);) let this serve for a general rule of direction in common
conversation, and mutual interdealings one with another: whatsoever ye would
that men should do to you, (...) ye (...) so to them. This is the royal Law,
the standard of all (...) in this kind, a (...) weight and rule, according to
which we must converse with all men. Severus the Emperor had this sentence of
our Savior often in his mouth; and commanded it to be proclaimed by the Crier,
whenever he punished such of his soldiers as had (...) injury to others: For
there is no doubt (says Mr Calvin upon this text) but that perfect right
should rule amongst us, were we but as faithful disciples of active charity
(if we may so speak) as we are acute Doctors of passive; did we but love our
neighbor as our self. Charity (it is true) begins at home in regard of order,
but not in regard of time: for so soon as thou (...) to love thy self, thou
must love thy neighbor as thy self; neither may any man at any time hide his
eyes from his own flesh, that is from his neighbor, of the same stock Isa. 58
7.,
with himself.

For this is the law and the Prophets.]
i. e. This is as much as either of them have said touching love to our
neighbor. Yea, this is the sum of all that Christ and the Apostles have
spoken of it: For love (that seeks not her own things) is both the complement
1 Cor. 13. 5.
of the Law, and the supplement of the Gospel. Romans 13. 8, 10. Gal. 5. 14. Ioh.
15. 12. and v. 14. Christ makes love to our brethren, the same with keeping
the Commandments. So Acts 15. 20. St (...) in that sacred Synod gives this
suffrage, to lay upon the (...) Gentiles, no greater burden then these
necessary things: that they abstain from pollutions of Idols, and from
fornication, from (...) (...) in loc. (...).
things strangled, and from blood: And in certain ancient (...), as also by
Irenaeus and Cyprian, it is added, and what thing soever ye would not, that
others should do to you, that ye do not the same to them. Timothy naturally
cared for the Philippians, which was rare, Phillip. 2. 20. 22. So should all
Christians (...) for another, Gal. 5. 13. 1 Cor. 10. 24. Romans 15. 1, 2.
Self-lovers begin the black bed-role, 2 Timothy 3, 2.

Verse 13. Enter ye in at the straight gate]
Our Savior having Truth may (...) by the (...)
hitherto pointed out the right way of well-doing, and showed how to steer a
straight course to the haven of happiness; now gives warning of certain
dangerous rocks (against the which diverse have dashed, to their utter
destruction, and are therefore) carefully to (...)
be declined. Of these, the first he names is, the following of a multitude to
do evil, the joining hand in hand with the rude rabble that are running apace
toward the pit of perdition, which is but a little before them; the doing as
most men do, which is to be (...) undone for ever. The wicked (though never so
many of (...). 9. 17.
(...)) go (...) to hell, and whole nations that forget God: Hence Per (...)
ne (...). (...).
the gate thereto is grown so wide, and the way so well-beaten. But none that
go that way return again, neither take they hold of the paths of life. Enter
therefore in at the straight gate, says our Savior. Vive ut pauci, etc. Live
as those few live that enter In epist.
into life eternal, says Cassianus: for if you will needs imitate the Si
(...) imitari (...), inter (...) angustam viam (...).
multitude, says Austin, ye shall not be numbered among the living in
Jerusalem, Isa. 4 3, 4. Save your selves from this untoward generation, says
St Peter, shine amidst them, as lamps, says St Paul, as Abraham's lamp that
shone out in the smoaky furnace, as the wise-mens star, that showed it self in
the midst of Aug.
darkness, like the moon that holds on her course, though the dogs bark at her
never so long, never so loud; like the Sun that rejoices Plin.
as a bridegroom to run his race, though the Alantes (a certain people) curse
him at his rising, because scorched with his heat: 1 Pet. 1. 5. with (...). 3.
3. and 2 Timothy 3. 1, (...). Hos. (...). 13. Argumentum (...) est turba. Sen.
Esa. 6. (...). (...), Cosos. 2. (...).
Or rather like God himself, who then does his best works, when men are at
worst, overcoming our evil with his good, and not suffering men's perverseness to
interrupt the course of his (...). Swim not down the stream of the times as
dead fishes do; neither be carried along by the swinge and sway of the place
you dwell in. Let not your lips be polluted by living among a people of
polluted lips, with Esaias, swear not with Joseph, curse not with Peter, comply
not with the common sort, learn not the manners of the mad multitude. The worse
they are, the better be you; the more outrageous they, the more courageous you,
violent for heaven, and valiant for the truth; therefore walking exactly, and
therefore (...) the time because the days are evil, and most men walk at all
adventures. To walk with God (says Bishop Babington) is Levit. 26 In Genesis 6. 8.
a precious praise, though none do it but my self: and to walk with man, with
the world, with a town or parish in wicked ways, is a deadly sin, though
millions do it besides. And, it matters not (said Numerus (...) non (...), ubi
(...) pietas, nec (...), (...) impiet as, (...) epist. ad (...) Imp. (...).
(...) 2. (...)
Nicolas Bishop of Rome) how small the number be, if godly, nor how great, if
ungodly. Noah condemned a world of wicked people, by his contrary courses, and
became heir of the (...) which is by faith, Heb. 1 1 7. whilst he continued
righteous, even in his generation, and kept himself unspotted in so foul a
season. The Apostle tells us, that to live according to the common course of
the world, is no better then to be acted and agitated by the devil. But God
has promised to take this unclean spirit out of the land, Zech. 13. 2. Fiat,
Fiat. And when Christ bids us Enter in at the straight gate, we must know that
his words are operative, to cause us to enter, as when he said, Lazarus come
forth, and in the creation, Let there be (...). His word and Spirit go
together. He works all our works for us, Isaiah 26.

Verse 14. Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, etc.]
In Lollards tower, passing through six or seven doors I came to my lodging
(says Philpot Martyr) through many straits: where I called to remembrance,
that strait is the way to heaven. Act. and (...). fol 1 46.
The old copies read Oh how strait is the gate! by way of admiration, q. d. It
is wondrous strait. Not of it self, for Christ's yoke (...) i e. (...) (...),
(...)
is easy, and his burden light: but we make it so hard and heavy to our selves,
by our singular peevishness and perverseness. Besides, the Prince of darkness
and his black guard favor this way, that is called holy, as little as the
Philistim-Princes did David, yea says the (...).
they persecute it to the death, as Saul did, Act 9. Hence the way to heaven is
an afflicted way, a perplexed, persecuted way, crushed Non quia dura, sed (...)
molles (...).
close together with crosses (as the word imports) as was the Israelites way
in the wilderness, or that of Jonathan and his armor-bearer, (...) Pressa:
res enim compressione fiunt (...). (...). manibus pedibusque obnixe omnia
facere.
that had a sharp rock on the one side, and a sharp rock on the other. And,
whilst they crept upon all four, flinty stones were under them, briers and
thorns on either hand of them, mountains, crags and promontories over them,
sic petitur caelum, so heaven is caught, by pains, by patience, by violence,
affliction being our unseparable companion. The crosse-way is the high-(...) to
heaven, said that Martyr. And another, If there Terent.
be any way to heaven on horseback, it is by the cross. Q. Elizabeth Act. and
Mon.
is said to have swum to the crown, through a sea of sorrows. Engl. Elisab.
They that will to heaven, must sail by hell gates. They that will have
Knighthood, must kneel for it: and they that will get in at (...).
the strait gate, must crowd for it. Strive to enter in at the straight (...).
(...). 1.
gate, says our Savior. Strive and strain even to an agony (as the word
signifies.) Heaven is compared to a hill; Hell to a (...) (...).
hole. To hell a man may go without a staff (as we say:) the way thereto is
easy, steep, strawed with roses. It Is but a yielding to Satan, a passing from
sin to sin, from evil purposes to evil practices, from practice to custom,
etc. Sed revocare gradum, but to turn short again, and make straight steps to
our feet, that Bradford.
we may force through this strait gate, (so strait that as few can walk in it,
so none can halt in it, but must needs go upright,) (...) (...).
labor, hoc opus est, opus non pulvinaris sed pulveris, this is a work There
must (...) both stooping and (...).
of great pains, a duty of no small difficulty. Many I say unto you, shall seek
to enter, but seeking serves not turn: men must strive, and strive lawfully;
run, and run lustily, tug and take pairs till they sweat and faint, to get
through this strait gate, this perplexed way, as unpleasant to nature, as the
way to Niniveh was to Jonas, as rough and rugged as that was to the Church,
Hos. 2 6. as little traced and trod, as the high-(...) to Sion-hill, which were
overgrown with grass, because few or none came Lam. 1.
to the solemn feasts.

And few there be that find it]
So hard is it to hit, and as dangerous to (...). Many by-waies there are
(these are so many highwayes to (...)) (...) false-guides and back-biasses not
a few, to divert us. The devil with his false directions leading men hoodwinkt
to hell, as Elisha did the Syrians to Samaria. The world (...).
with it is allurements and affrightments: Oh how hardly escape we through the
corruptions that are in the world through lust! 2 Pet. 1. 7.
Our own hearts, how heavy are they to be drawn this way! a bear comes not so
(...) to the stake. It goes hard with a man when he must peremptorily deny
himself; when he must deny (...) (...). 2. (...).
all ungodliness and werldly lusts, as dear unto him as himself, and be (...)
to live holily, righteously and soberly in this present world; making
conscience of those duties which the most men's hearts rise at, as to be hot in
religion, servent in spirit, precise in his whole course, conscientious and
cautelous of the least sin etc. Heaven is a stately palace, with a narrow
portall, hence so few enter it. The proud man with his high looks cannot stoop
to it. The ambitious with his aspiring thoughts cannot bend to it. The
malicious is swollen too big for it. The covetous with his load of (...) clay
cannot get through it. The drunkard with his rotten lungs: the adulterer with
his wasted loins, can have no admittance into it. There can in no wise enter
any thing filthy, or loathsome, (...) (...) (...), (...).
abominable, or detestable, which a man would abhor for the ill savor, (as
the word signifies, Reve. 21. 27.) such as for the baseness thereof cannot be
(...) named, it is so noisome to the (...). As Soon may (...) men find (...)
swimming in a wood, (...)-trees growing in the sea, heaven in hell, as enter
into the (...) gate, not living strictly. Which (...) few can frame to, but
(...) those that do (counting and calling them as the Spaniards (...) (...).
(...) 63.
are said to do the Partugalls, pocosy locos few and foolish) therefore few are
saved. Our Savior calls his flock a little little (...), two diminutives,
Luk 12. 42. standing (as that small (...).
army (...) Israel in Ahahs time) like two little flocks of kids, when the
wicked, (as those Syrians then) (...) the country. Was it not (...), when
Hierome complained that the whole world was turned 1 King. 20. 17. (...), et
miratus est (...) factumesse (...)(...) Hier.
Arrian? and Basil cried out An Ecclesias suas prorsus dereliquit (...)? Has
God utterly forsaken his Church? etc. The love of many shall wax cold, but he
that endures to the end, etc. It is but a He in the singular that endures to
the end, the Many fall away from their former stedfastnes.

Verse 15. Beware of false Prophets which come to you etc.]
This is another dangerous rock, that the less careful may easily split
against. Take heed rherefore, lest whiles ye shun a shelf, ye fall not into a
whirle-poole. By corrupt teachers Satan catches men, as a cunning fisher by
one fish catches another, that he may feed upon both. He circuiteth the world,
seeks whom to devour, and (...) begins with violence and cruelty. If this
take not, then he puts off the frock of a wolf, and makes his next encounter
in sheeps-clothing. Now what havoc he has made by this means of silly souls
laden with lusts, who knows not? The old Church was pestred with false
Prophets, Deuteronomy. 1. 3. 1. 2 Pet. 2, 1. There were false Prophets among the
people, and there shallbe false teachers among you, who privily shall bring
(...) haeresies and many shall follow their pernicious ways. This was Peter's
prophecy: and Paul says the same, Act. 20. 30. Grievous wolves shall enter in
amongst you (in sheeps-clothing you must think) speaking perverse things
(whiles they pervert the scriptures to the defense of their own devices) to
draw away disciples after them. The word signifies to pull them limmeal, as
wolves use to (...)
do the sheep they seize upon. A like expression there is, Deuteronomy. 13. 13. where
these (...) men are said to thrust or drive away 2 King. 17 (...).
folk from the true God, as Jeroboam is said to have driven Israel from
following the Lord. This they do, not so much by (...) as by craft, by force as
by fraud: deceitful workers St Paul calls 2 Cor. 11. (...), (...).
them, transforming (...) into the Apostles of Christ, and Romans 16. 18.
ministers of righteousness, and by good words and fair speeches (...) the
hearts of the simple and (...). This they have learned of the devil that grand
jugler, who can soon transform himself into an Angel of light. St John in his
first (...) tells us of many petty Antichrists, even then gone out; who
professing 1 John 4. 1.
Christ's name, did yet oppose his truth. And in his (...), Revc. 13. 11.
that the beast, (which is the great Antichrist) has two (...) like the lambs,
but speaks like the Dragon. The locusts also (which are his limbs and agents)
have faces like women, insinuative and flattering. Tertullian tells us, that
the (...) Abduxit a (...) plures (...) versutia, quam (...) omnium (...)
saevitia. D. Pride.
haereticks had a trick to persuade before they taught, whereas the Truth (...)
by teaching, does not teach by persuading. And how much hurt Julian the
Apostate did by this art in the Church of God, is better known, then that I
need here to relate it. It was not therefore without good ground of reason,
that Placilla the (...), (when Theodosius senior desired to confer with (...)
the (...)) dissuaded her husband very earnestly: lest being perverted by his
speeches, he might fall into heresy; (...) S zomen, lib. 7. cap 6, 7.
knew their cunning and as it were, cogging of a dye, Ephe. 4. 14. where the
Apostle compares seducers to cheaters, and false (...) (...) auctum est a
(...).
gamesters, who have a device, by cogging of a dye, to deceive the unskilful:
and further tells us, that they are wittily wicked, by methods and crafty
conveyances, winding up and down, and turning (...).
every way, to get the greatest advantage. Neither was that (...) b. (...) sunt
(...).
good Empress ignorant, how catching we are this way and inclinable to the
worse side: as the Israelites soon forgot their God, and called for a Calf, as
the ten tribes were easily prevailed with (...) go after the two golden calves,
and as the whole world wondered and wandered after the beast. This to prevent, as
much as may be, God in delivering the law is most large in the second and
fourth Commandments, which we are most apt to transgress; that (...)
superstition, this, by profaneness.

Verse 16. Ye shall know them by their fruits]
That is, chiefly by their doctrines, which tend either to the infecting of the
judgment (...).
with error, or tainting of the life with uncleanness:, or both: and commonly
both, as those ancient Heretics, whose 2 Pet. 2 2.
(...) (or as other Copies read) lascivious ways many followed; Aug de civ.
by reason of whom the way of truth was evil spoken of. St Austin Dei. l 10. c.
51.
observes, that in the loose and lascivious Heretics, many Ne (...) nos ad
(...) -- (...) admove^t.
foul-mouthed men met with matter of blaspheming the Name of Christ, because
they also would needs be held Christians. And Epiphanius adds, that for their
sakes many Heathens would not so much as have any conversation with Christians,
or hear them speak. Who has not heard what a stumbling block and backbias
Epiphan.
to the conversion of the Jews is the Idolatry of the Papists, Joh. 9. 16.
and the blasphemies of other Christians? By their fruits they know such
persons not to be of God, as their Predecessors (...) of our Savior. This man
is not of God, because he keeps not the Sabbath day. The proposition here was
sound (had they not mistook themselves in the assumption) he that keeps not
the Sabbath is not of God. We may also safely reason in like sort. Such and
such deny or question principles, as the Antitinitarians, (...), Eutychians,
and others not a few in the Primitive Church, so pestered with arch-he (...),
that it was then as Erasmus has it) an ingenious thing to be a Christian. Had
these been of God, they would have hearkened to his Word ( (...). 8. 47.) which
is Mibicerte (...) quam diabolus erit, (...) Arianus, (...) Hilarious: qui (...)
vocavit (...), (...).
plain in principles, and commands to hate false heterodox opinions, Psalm.
119. 104. and those that broach them, buzzing doubts in men's heads, Romans 16.
17. Joh. 10 5. That heretic confuted by Junius took an ungain course for his
own satisfaction, who confessed that he had spent two and twenty years in trying
religions. He had been with Jews, Arians, Mahometans, and (...) sects; that at
length he might find truth among them: which is (as he says) Viam per avia
quaerere, to seek truth by wandering through all sorts of errors. But truth, 1.
is divine, grounded upon the Scriptures; wherein we have a most sure word, is
Peter has it, and self-sufficient, says Paul, for instruction in 2 Pet. 1. 19.
(...), to make the man of God perfect, thoroughly furnished unto 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.
all good works. So that it is impossible Gods elect should be finally Mat. 24.
24.
deceived (though for a time they may be fearfully miscarried, as the young
Prophet was by the old Bethelite, and Barnabas by Peter) because they are all
taught of God; they have an unction Isa. (...). (...).
within them, the holy Ghost that illighteneth both the Organ Ioh. 7 17.
and the object; and so teaches them all things, that they understand Ioh
(...). 20.
the Scriptures, and grow to a certainty, Psalm. 19. 7. Prove. Job 22. 28.
1. 4. All Christ's sheep are rational, and will not follow a stranger, Job.
(...). 5. though they are simple to evil, yet they are wise to that which is
good. If they be of any standing and worth their years (as we say) they have a
full assurance of understanding, Coloss. 2 2. and verse. 7. they are rooted and
stablished in the faith, and in the present truth, 2 Pet. 1. 12. so that,
though man or Angel should 1 Cor. 2. ult.
object against it, yet they would not yield to him, Gal. 1. 8, 9. Heb. 5. ult.
For he that is spiritual discerns all things, as having the (...) of
Christ, a spirit of discerning, and senses exercised to difference good Romans
12. 1.
from evil, being able to give a reason of that he believes, 1 Pet. 3. Romans
(...). (...).
15. to perform a reasonable service, even the obedience of faith, whence
flows and follows rest to his soul, (...). 6. 16. and (...) consolation,
Coloss. 2. 2. Say he cannot answer all the cavils of an adversary, yet he can
hold the conclusion; and though he cannot dispute, yet he can die (as that
Martyr said) in defense Romans 14. 5.
of the truth, whereof he is fully persuaded in his own Acris (...) su (...)
and (...) saepe (...) per inania se (...) brat nubila; ne (...) remigium
praecipitent (...).
mind, bottomed upon the Scriptures, and ballasted therewith, as S. Ambrose
says the Be is with a little stone, that she be not blown away with the
wind, 2. Secondly, Truth is single, one and the same, at agreement with it
(...). But error is manifold, dissonant, and contradictory to it self. How
often does Bellarmine deny that in one place, that he had affirmed in another?
That the Scripture is the very word of God, says he, it can by no means be
assured out of Scripture. But in another discourse Ambr.
(forgetting what he had said) he affirms, that among other (...) argumenta
alia, etiam habetur ex Scriptura ipsa. lib. 1 c. 2. de verbo (...). (...) de
remittendis (...) qui confitentur Deo non videtur ulla extare in (...) literis.
B (...). de justis l. 1. c. 21.
arguments of the Divinity of the Scriptures, there is sufficient proof to be
had out of the Scriptures themselves: So, he cannot bethink himself (if you will
believe him) where in all holy Writ, there is any promise made of pardon of
sins to such as confess (...) to God. Again, he teaches that the substance of
the bread in the Sacrament, is not turned into the substance of Christ's body
productive, as one thing is made of another: but that the bread goes away, and
Christ's body comes into the room of it adductive, as one thing succeeds into
the place of another, the first being voided. And this, says he, is the
opinion of the Church of Rome, himself being Reader of controversies at Rome.
But (...), Reader at Salamanca in Spain confutes Bellarmines opinion Cade of
the Church. 247.
terming it Translocation, not Transubstantiation; and says it is not the
Churches opinion. So the greatest Popish Clerks cannot determine how the Saints
know our hearts and prayers: whether by hearting, or seeing, or presence every
where, or by Gods B. (...) (...), (...) 2. cap. (...). sect. 1.
relating, or revealing men's prayers and needs unto them. All which waics some
of them hold as possible or probable, and others deny them, and confute them as
untrue. Thus these great master builders are confounded in their language, and
thus (...) it is to know what the Church Malignant holds: Her own dearest and
learnedest sons know not; God having 2 (...). 2.
delivered them up to the efficacy of error, which frets as a gangrene, (...)
Tim. (...). 17.
and spreds as leaven, sowring the whole lump. Look how the heathens were at a
mere uncertainty in their opinions and (...); as the (...) in Jonah prayed to
their (...) Gods, and bad him do likewise. Others of them usually closed (...)
(...). (...). (...).
up their prayers with Dijque Diaeque omnes. Lest happily they might mistake in
any one: so are (...). Having once stepped over the pale of truth, they know not
where or when they shall stop, (...) Tim. 3. 13.
or stay, but run on from bad to worse, (...), and being deceived. Bertius and
Barret, of Arminians become professed Papists: which differ no more, says a
learned man, then the Stoics Cameron.
of old did from the Cynicks, by the wearing of their cloaks only. If the
Lutherans admit of universal grace, the Huberians will thereupon bring in
universal election, the Puccians natural (...) Prideaux, Lect.
faith, the Naturalists (as that Cestercian monster lately (...) at London,
did) will explode Christ and the Scriptures. Apestilent sect there was not long
since in Arragon, (whose founders were a hypocritical crew of their Priests)
who affecting Sands his relation.
in themselves and their followers, a certain Angelical purity, fell suddenly
to the very counterpoint of justifying bestiality. These called themselves
Illuminati, as if they only had bin in the light, and all the world besides in
(...). So (besides the Irenaeus.
Gnostics, who held themselves to be the only knowing men) the Manichees
derived their name of Manica, because that whatsoever they taught, was to be
taken as food from heaven. Irenaeus tells of some that counted their own
writings to be gospels, And Dixerunt in Anabaptist arum (...) inveniri, (...)
sanctos esse.
the family of love set out their Evangelium regni. Anabaptists brag much of
their Enthusiasmes: and the Jesuits vaunt that the Church is the soul of the
world, the Clergy of the Church, and they of the Clergy: and yet for their
wickedness, though a man, says One, should declaim against them, t ll all the
sand of (...) Annal. Ignatius his conclave.
the Sea had run through his houre-glasse, he could not possibly want matter.
Can there any grapes be gathered of these thorns, The French have a berry which
they name (...) de spine, the grape of a thorn: but this were a (...) commodity.
any figs of these thistles? Our Savior makes use of these common proverbs, to
prove that this is so plain a truth, that none can be ignorant of it, if he
have but his eyes in his head, or do not wink wilfully, as those, Qui ut
liberius peccent, (...) ignorant, who are willingly ignorant, that they may sin
without control.

Verse 17. Even so every good tree brings forth good fruit.]
i e. All (...) doctrine tends to good life: and rotten opinions to wretched
practices. As, besides the old haereticks, we see in the Papists (...).
(their Priests especially) of whom the L. Audely (Chancellor (...) (...).
Martyr.
of England in K. Henry the eights time) said to 13. Callice men prisoners for
Religion, whom he discharged: For Gods sake, (...), beware how you deal with
Popish Priests: for I assure you, some of them be knaves all. After the one
thousand year of Christ, Act. and (...). (...) 1117.
there was no where less piety, then in those that dwelt nearest to Rome, as
Machiavell himself observed: who yet was himself Disp. de rep. (...) 1. cap
(...). De principe, (...).
none of the best, as is well known: for he professes Caesar (...) (not
withstanding all his villainies) as the only example for a Prince to imitate.
The Romish Pharisees, like the devils, are (...). (...). 6. cap. (...). In
(...) body (...).
then thought to do well, when they cease to do hurt, says Joannes
Sarisburiensis. In Popes (says Papirius Massonius, a popish writer, speaking
of those Popes that lived in the time of the (...)-council) no man now-adaies
requires holiness. They are thought to be very good, if not exstream evil: or
any thing Optimi put (...), si vel levi tur mali, etc. In (...). Pauli 3.
Bennio ait (...) brand: (...), adulteru^, (...), (...), (...).
better then the worst use to be. The Sea of Rome, says Another, has not
merited alate, to be ruled by any better then reprobates. Diverse Popes have
been (...), Atheists, Epicures, Monsters, as Bennio Cardinalis describes
Hildebrand: and Luitprandus reports of John the twelfth, that he Ordained
Priests in a stable among his horses, that he went into his fathers Concubines,
that he drank a health to the devil, etc. Benedict the twelfth had this Epitaph
set over him, Hic situs est (...), Laicis (...), vipera (...); Luit prand. lib.
6. de (...). gest is in Europa (...) tempore.

Devius a vero, turba repleta mero.


I am not ignorant what is the common put-off of Papists, when urged with these
and the like histories, viz. Luitprandi illud non est, sed (...) cujusdam,
(...) hoc historiae ipsius appenderit. Luitprandus (...) bist (...) cles. page
(...). Tertia classis continet papas, (...) (...). Alsted. Inde (...) esse,
illud non esse, (...) pro me (...) contra me. Faust. Manich ap.
never wrote any such thing, but some other namelesse Author, that has (...)
it to his history, says Bellarmine and Baronius: But who this namelesse
Author was, or when he lived, or how it may appear, that it was (...) indeed,
they say not a word. So if we cite Bemio Cardinalis. Imo potius Lutheranus,
says Bellarmine, and Florimund. How disdainfully they reject the Fathers when
they make against them, I need not here recite. I would sooner believe one
Pope, then a thousand Augustines, says a Jesuit: And yet, when they cannot be
heard, they are ready (...) to cry out, as that haeretike Dioscorus did Aug.
in the Council of Chalcedon. I am cast out with the Fathers, I defend Corn.
Mus in Romans 3.
the doctrine of the Fathers, I transgress them not in any point. If we
produce their own Doctors and Schoolmen as witnesses See Guild his popish
glorying, etc. page 59.
of the truth, these men, say they, are Catholic Authors, but they stand not
recti in curia, they must be purged. So witty are (...) rather to devise a
thousand shifts to delude the (...) Bellarm. says to (...), (...).
then once to yield and acknowledge it. They will not (...) the love of the
truth, (as the intemperate patient, will not be ruled by the Physician,) And
for this cause God delivers them up Eusebius, and Luther. I answer. (...)
manifesti (...) sunt. De Christo lib. 1. cap. (...)
to strong delusions, vile affections, base and beastly practices: as
committing and defending of Sodomy, and such like abhorred filth, not once to
be named amongst Christians. But some having put away a good conscience, as
concerning faith have made shipwreck, says the Apostle. A good conscience is
as it were a chest, wherein the doctrine of faith is to be kept safe: Matthew
(...) speaking of the Court of Rome, says, Hujus (...) usque ad nubes sumum
(...).
which will quickly be lost, if the chest be once broken. And they that turn
from the truth, will prove abominable, disobedient, and unto every good work
reprobate.

Verse 18. A good tree cannot bring forth evil (...), etc.]
Heretics then, and heterodoxes are not good honest men, as the vulgar (...)
them. For their pretended holiness, and counterfeit humility, Col. 2. 18. Were
they humble men indeed, they would Tit. 1. (...), 16.
soon yield to the truth discovered unto them, and relinquish their erroneous
opinions. (...) could not be a good man, as Bucholcerus judged him, so long as
he held fast his heresies, though he were much in the commendation of a new
life, and detestation of an evil: though himself praid much, and lived soberly.
He bewitched many with those magnificent words, and stately terms that he had
much in his mouth, of Illumination, Revelation, Deification: the inward and
spiritual man, etc. but in the mean while, he denied the humane nature of
Christ to be a creature; and called those that thought otherwise Creaturists.
He affirmed the Scripture to be but a dead letter: which they that held not, he
called them Scripturists. Faith he said was nothing else but God dwelling in
us, as Osiander after him. In a word, Lev. (...). 44.
he was a leper in his head, and is therefore pronounced utterly (...). An evil
tree cannot bring forth good fruit. That popish inquisitour (...) in (...) and
modesti, (...) in vestibus (...) sed fides eorum, est (...) and pessima. Arch
(...), (...) Gravis. quaest page 155.
was quite out, that said the Waldensian Haereticks may be discerned by their
manners and words: for they are modest, true, grave, and full of brotherly love
one toward another, but rank haeretikes. This was somewhat like Pliny, his
description of the Christians in that Province, where he was governor. And
here I cannot omit, that when the B. of Worcester exhorted M. Philpot the
Martyr (being brought to his answer,) before he began to speak, to pray to God
for grace. Nay, my Lord of Worcester said Bonner, you do not well to exhort
him to make any prayer: for this is the thing they have a singular pride in.
For in this point they are much like to certain arrant haeretikes, of whom
Pliny makes mention, that they sang antelucanos (...), (...). (...) Mon.
Psalms of praise to God before break-of-day. But had Bonner and his
fellow-buzzards but observed the burning zeal, sweet assemblies, watchings,
prayings, holiness of life, patience in death, etc. of those that served God
after the way that they called haeresy, they might well have seen and said as
much, as the Centurion did of our Savior, and they might have replied, as our
Savior did of himself. I have not a devil, but I honor my Matthew. (...). 54.
father, and ye do dishonor me. If I honor my self, my honor is nothing: It
is my father that honors me, of whom ye say, that he is Joh. 8. 49, 54
your God. Cenalis Bishop of Auranches, wrote against the Congregation of
Paris, defending impudently, that their assemblies were to maintain whoredom.
How much better, and with more ingenuity the Bishop of Aliffe; who preaching at
(...) in the time of that Council, Anno 1563. Spoke of the faith and manners
of the Catholics and herericks, and said, that as the faith of the Catholics
was better, so the heretics exceeded (...).
them in good life: which gave much distaste, says the Historian. But
Bellarmine (had he been then and there present) would not likely have been much
offended: For we, faith he, although we believe that all the (...) are to be
found in the Church: yet that any man may be absolutely said to be a member of
the true Church, defcribed in the Scriptures, we do not think that any
internal virtue is required of him: but only an external profession of the
faith, and such a partaking of the Sacraments, as is perceived by the outward
senses. A pretty description, and picture of a Papist: amongst whom if any be
virtuous, it is by accident, and (...) as they are members of that Church: As
(...) wittily said of the Epicures, that if any of that sect proved good, it
was (...) by the benefit of a better nature; for they taught all manner of
looseness and libertinisme, But for the most part, such as their doctrine is,
such is also their practice. The Friars (says One that had seen it, and so
could well avouch it) are a race of people always praying, but seldom with
sign of devotion: vowing obedience, but still contentious: (...) yet most
luxurious: poverty, yet ever scraping, and (...). And generally the devotions
of papists, says he, are prised more (...). (...) 8.
by tale, then by weight of zeal: placed more in the m ssy materiality of the
outward work, then purity of the heart, from which they proceed. They hold
integrity for little better then (...), and abjectnesse about Italy, and abuse
the most honorable (...) (...). Test. on Act, 11 sect 4.
name of Christian, usually, to signify a Fool, or a Dolt, as is before noted
out of D. Fulke. Are not these the fruits of a rotten religion, of trees
specious without, but putrefied and worm-eaten within, (as the word our Savior
here uses, properly signifies) (...) of (...), to (...), Suidas.
which appears at length by their rotten (...)? The true Christian will not
cease to bear good fruit, what weather soever come, Jer. 17. 7. The hypocrite
will either bear only leaves as Pulchra ac (...) est, sed fructu caret. (...).
the (...)-tree, or apples of Sodom, grapes of Gomorrah. Of such we may say, as
of mount Gilboah, no good fruit grows on them: or as Siratonicus says of the
hill Haemus, that for eight months in the year it was very cold, and for the
other four, it (...) (...).
was winter: Or as the Poet said of his country, that it was bad in winter,
hard (...) summer, good at no time of the year. Campian of St John's in Oxford,
(...) of the University, Anno 1568. dissembled the Protestants Religion: So did
Parsons in Balial, (...).
until he was for his dishonesty, expeld with disgrace Camdens Eliz. sol. 215.
and fled to the Papists; where caelum mutavit non animum, neither good egg,
nor good bird, as they (...).

Verse 19. Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, etc.]
Fruitless trees are cut down to the fire. Short shooting loses many a game.
The idle servant is delivered to the tormentours: Eusebius.
and unsavory salt is cast out to be trodden on, as Ecebolius (...). (...). 6.
8.
The (...) earth is nigh to cursing, whose end is to be burned. Pure gold
discovers deadly poison. For there will sparkle out of the cup, certain
rain-bowes, as it were, and there will be heard, (...) One, a fiery hissing of
the gold thrusting out the poison. Whereby is signified, says he, that God
threatens judgment Sphinx philos. page 622.
and hellfire, to those that corrupt and poison heavenly Doctrine. See more of
this above, chap. 3. 10. Let us study and (...) to (...) the tree of Paradise,
that was fair to the eye, and good to eat, and that tree of life. Rev. 22. 2.
That brings (...) every month, twelve manner of fruits, etc. And those
(...), Psalm 92. 13. that being planted in the house Psalm. 52. 8.
of the Lord, bring (...) fruit in their old age. I am like Cant. 1. 16. (...).
(...) 14. 7.
a green olive tree says David: our bed is of green cedar, says the Spouse.
Ephraim was like a green fur tree, fat and sappy, etc. Barrennes is no (...)
a fault then ill fruit.

Verse 20. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.]
See verse. (...). where the self-same words are used. Lest any, (...) pretense
of danger in hearing false prophets, should refuse to hear any though they come
with never so much evidence of truth: (...) Savior wills and commands here,
that examination and discretion go before both rejection of errors, and
receiving of truths. Try all things, hold fast that which is good. As the mouth
tastes meat, so the ear must try and taste words, Job. 12. 11. and 34 3. He is
a fool that believes every thing, nay any thing, that tends to the (...). 3.
27.
cherishing of corruption and carnal liberty, or the advancing (...) Sub (...).
corrupt nature, which is nothing else but a piece of proud flesh, and must be
abased to the utmost. Christians should (...) in knowledge Aug.
and in every sense, so as readily to discern things that differ: (...). 14 5.
and not to be wherried and whirled about with every wind (...) Ephesians. 4 14.
doctrine, as children, nor to be carried away as they are led, (...) Gentiles,
1 Cor. 12. 2. He that will take for true and trusty whatsoever any Impostor
puts upon him, shall be as foully deceived, (...) Jacob was by Laban. Search and
see whereto they tend, and (...) they drive at. If they would drive us from
God, as Moses expresses it, and draw us from the doctrine of godliness, that is
(...) upon the word, to the truth whereof we have found Gods (...) persuading
our hearts, and yielding us comfort in it. Ioh. 6. 45. 1 Ioh. 2. 27. Abstain
(or stand off) from all appearance of any (...) evil. Shun the familiarity of
seducers, that discredit the truth: hear them not, their mouths should be
stopped, Tit. 1. 11. and 3. 10. See how exceeding earnest the Apostle is in
this argument, 2 These. 2. 1, 2, 3. he knew well the danger: So Romans 16. 17. The
(...) and false Apostles would only have brought in a Jewish rite or two; yet
are (...) to subvert the Gospel, Gal. 1. 7. and the Apostle (...) they were
even cut off for it. Hymeneus and (...) denied not the Resurrection, but
affirmed it only to be (...) already, and yet they are said to overthrow the
faith of some, 2 Timothy 2. 18. And although we are wont to wonder at the (...) of
a contrary religion, and think a simple man may easily answer them: yet it is
certain, the grossest adversaries of the truth, are able to urge such reasons,
and use such persuasions, as have in them great probability of truth, and may
deceive the simple. Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before,
beware 2 (...). 3 17, (...),
(...) ye also, being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from 1
(...). 5. 5.
(...). 25. 9.
your own steadfastness. Which to prevent, Grow, says the same Apostle there,
in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord (...) Christ. Exact of your selves a
groth in every grace, in humility, howsoever growing downward at least, if you
cannot find so comfortable a groth upward. Humility is both a grace and a Nos
(...) magna, sed vivimus.
vessel to receive grace: for God will give grace to the humble, and teach the
lowly-minded. Grow also in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ: proving by
experience in your selves, what that good, that holy and acceptable will of God
is. Let your knowledge and practice run parallel, and be of equal extent.
Study to live rather then to dispute, to act rather then to contemplate: learn
and labor to feel in your selves the sweetness and goodness, the life and
power of that you know. The devil confessed Christ as well as Peter, Mark. 5.
7. Mat. 16. 17. but the devil with (...) knowledge, swimming in the brain,
Peter with a saving knowledge soaking to the heart root, and working upon the
affections, those immediate springs of action. This is that knowledge, not
apprehensive only but affective too, that makes the mind good, full of
incitations to good, glad of all occasions to do good, (...) from the stain
and reign of former lusts, inclinable to serve God and our brethren by love,
fearing the Gospel more then the (...), and Gods goodness more then his
justice. Now to grow in these graces and in this knowledge, is the ready way to
secure our selves from seducers, to approve our selves to have been
conscionable hearers of a sound Ministry, such as are founded upon a rock, and
are therefore unmovable, such as have gotten a knowledge so (...) and certain
as no haeretick can draw from us: And lastly, to save our selves from that
untoward generation, our Savior speaks Acts (...).
next of, in the subsequent verses, that have no more to show or say for
themselves then Lord, Lord, etc.

Verse 21. Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall (...), etc.]
Not every verbal professor, or forward pretender to me and my truth, shall
be saved. That son of perdition, called Christ Lord, Lord, yet (...) him which a
kiss; and is gone to his place. How many Judasses have we, that speak Christ
fair, but by their loose and (...) lives, deliver him up to the scoffs and
buffetings of his (...)? that bow the knee to him, and bid Hail King of the
(...), yet smite him on the face, and bid him prophecy who (...) him, that put
a reeden scepter in his hand, and make him a (...) Lord only, having no more
then a form of knowledge, Romans 2. 20. a pretense of piety, 2 Timothy 3. 5. and a
semblance of (...), Luke 8. 18. contenting themselves with the name of
Christians: As if many a ship had not been called Safe-gard, or Goodspeed and
yet fallen into the hands of Pirates. These are blots of goodness, botches of
the Church, as Augustus was used to term his three untoward children, tres
vomicas, tria carriomata, mattery (...). in Aug. cap. 65 (...) (...) (...)
(...). (...) 2.
impostumes, ulcerous sores. Epictetus complained that there were many would be
Philosophers, as far as a few good words would go; but were nothing for
practice. Socrates made no distinction between (...) and (...), knowing and
doing: so to know good as to practice it, and evil as to avoid it, this he
esteemed the only wisdom. Such as say well and do well, are to be embraced,
says Aristotle: but their very profession is to be suspected, (...) (...) cap.
4
that second it not with a suitable practice. Nesciunt insani (...), (...), qui
non vivunt honest, says another. There are that speak like Angels, live like
devils: that have (...) smooth tongue, but Esaus rough hands. Audi, nemo (...)
specta, nemopejus: Loquitur hic ut Piso, vivit ut Gallomus. (...) men admire
Tullies tongue, says S. Austin, not so his practice, (...) could give
excellent counsel to others, which himself did (...) take. He is much taxed for
flattery, luxury, covetousness, (...) and something he confesses hereof
(though covertly) in that sentence of his, in his book de Tranquillitate,
Necaegroto, (...), I am neither sick, nor found. Lillies are fair in show, but
foul (...) ^
(...). Coin is white in color, but draws a black line after it: (...) worms
seem to have both light and heat; but touch them only, (...) it will appear
they have neither. Livy says, that the (...) (...) war against Phillip of
Macedon with letters and words ^
So (...) many against the devil; they defy him with their (...) but (...) him
in their lives: they spit at his name, but admit (...) his suggestions: they
call Christ Lord, Lord, but in truth and (...) the matter, the devil is their
good Lord: for his servants they are (...) whom they obey. They lean upon the
Lord, and say, Is not (...) Lord amongst us? none evil can come unto us. But he
shall (...) (...). 3. 11.
them off with a discedite, depart ye. He likes not this Court-holy water, as
they call it, these fair professions and deep protestations (...) love, when
men's hearts are not with him, when there is not (...) power of religion, the
practice of godliness. The leaves of profession he dislikes not, for as they
are of medicinable use, Ezekiel. 47. 12. so they are good inducements to force a
necessity of more (...). But he looks for more then leaves: he goes down to
(...) garden to see how it comes forward, in righteousness, peace, (...) in
the holy Ghost: in meekness, tender-heartednesse, love: (...) patience,
humility, contentedness, in mortification of sin, moderation of passion, holy
guidance of the tongue; in works of mercy, truth and justice; in self-denial,
love of enemies, life of faith; in heavenly-mindednesse, sweet communion with
God, comfortable longing for the coming of Christ, etc. These be those fruits,
and that doing of Gods will, without the which our Savior here averreth
there is no heaven to be had, no though men profess largely, preach frequently,
pray ardently, eat and drink at his table, (...).
dispossess devils in his Name, etc. Judas did all this and was damned. Shall
thou to heaven that do no more? no nor so much? Woe to all careless
professors, and carnal Gospellers. The Lord will make all the Churches know
that he searches the (...), and will not be beguiled with the fig leaves of
formality. And for those that carry it more cleanly, as they conceive, and can
walk undiscovered; let them know, that God (that (...) may make the name of the
wicked to rot) many times so detects their (...), that their wickedness is
showed to the whole Congregation, Prove. 26. 26. Or if not so, yet certainly he
will do it at that (...) Judgment, that great Assize (as it follows in the
next (...)) when it shall be required of men, non quid legerint, sed (...)
Agapet.
(...) egerint, non quid dixerint, sed quomodo vixerint, not how (...) they
have talked of heaven, but how well they have walked (...) the way to heaven:
not a proffering of words, but an offering (...) works, as Agapetus has it.
The foolish Virgins were found with their sic dicentes: but the good servants
with their sic (...).

Verse 22. Many will say to me in that day, etc.]
That day of judgment by an appellative proper, called that day; or at the day
of death; for every man's deaths-day is his (...), Heb. 9. Then they shall come
bouncing at heaven gates, with Lord, Lord, (...) unto us: and make no other
reckoning but to enrer with the (...). Which shows, that an hypocrite may live
and die in (...); and miss of heaven, in the height of his hopes. He hanged
them upon nothing (as God has hanged the earth) they prove unto him therefore
as the giving up of the ghost, which is but cold Job 1 (...). 10.
comfort: and serve him no better then Absoloms mule did her (...) master in
his greatest need. What, says Job., is the hope of the Job 27. 89.
(...), though he has gained much, when (...) shall take away his soul? will
God hear his cry when trouble (...) upon him? Will his crying Lord, Lord,
rescue him in the day of wrath? No, no: God will pour upon him and not spare,
fire and brimstone, storm and tempest: this shall be the portion of his cup.
The just execution of that terrible commination, Rev. 3. 16. shall certainly
crush his heart, with everlasting horror, confusion and woe. Oh that this
truth were thoroughly thought on and believed! but men are wondrous apt to
deceive themselves in point of salvation. Therefore does the Apostle so often
premise, Be not deceived, when (...) reckons up reprobates, 1 Cor. 6, 9.
Ephesians. 5. 6, etc. Themselves they may deceive and others, but God is not
mocked. (...) seems, by his words and wishes, a friend to Israel: yet is he so
(...) from inheriting with them, that he is destroyed by them: this will be the
portion of hypocrites from the Lord. If their hearts be not upright with him,
he will never give them his hand, no though they follow him, as close as
Iehonadab did Iehu. Their hopes (...) 2 (...). 16. 15.
fail them, when at highest; as Esaus did, returning with his venison,

Have we not prophesied in thy Name]
A man may preach profitably to others and yet himself be a castaway, 1 Cor.
9. vlt. (...) Act and (...). (...). (...).
confirmed Saunders, and afterward turned tippet himself. Harding a little
before King Edward 6. died, was heard openly in his Sermons in London to exhort
the people with great vehemence after this sort; that if trouble came, they
should never shrink from the true Doctrine of the Gospel which they had
received, but take it rather for a trial sent of God, to prove them whether
they would abide by it or no. All which to be true, says Mr Fox, they can
(...) that heard him, and be yet alive: who also foreseeing the plague to
come, were then much confirmed by his words. In Q. Mary's days he turned
Apostate and so continued, notwithstanding an excellent letter of the Lady Jane
Dudley written to him, while he was prisoner: wherein she stirrs him up to
remember the horrible history of Julian of old, and the lamentable case of
Spira a late, and so to return to Christ; who now stretches out (says she)
his arms to receive you, ready to fall upon your neck and kiss you, and last
of all to feast you with the dainties and delicacies of his own precious blood:
which undoubtedly, if it might stand with his determinate purpose, he Act. and
Mon. fol 1292.
would not let to shed again rather then you should be lost. And so she goes on
most sweetly: sed surdo fabulam, she lost her sweet Ibid 1557.
words: as likewise did William wolsey the Martyr upon (...) Ibid (...).
the Smith of Wells in Cambridge-shire, and some others, upon Mr West Chaplain
to Bishop Ridley: who refusing to die in Christ's cause with his Master, said
Mass against his conscience. B. Latimer, in a Sermon before K. Edward, tells of
one who fell away from the known truth, and became a scorner of it, yet was
afterward touched in conscience for the same. Beware of this sin, says he,
for I have known no more but this that (...). Joannes Speiserus, Doctor of
Divinity and preacher at Ausborough in Germany, Anno 1523. began to teach the
truth of the Gospel, and did it so effectually that diverse common harlots were
converted, and betook themselves to a better course of life. But he afterward
Scultet Anual. page (...).
revolted again to the Papists, and came to a miserable end. Ibid.
The like is reported of Brisonettus Bishop of Melda, a town of France ten
miles from Paris. And who doubts but Judas the traitor was a great preacher, a
caster out of devils, and doer of many great works in Christ Name, as well as
other of the disciples? Nicodemus was nothing to him. He, (says one) was a
night-professour only, but Judas in the sight of all. He was a slow Dike of
(...). (...).
(...), Judas a forward preacher. Yet at last when Judas betrayed Christ in the
night, Nicodemus faithfully professed him in the day. Therefore will Christ
confess him before God, Angels and men, when Judas shall hear, avaunt, thou
worker of iniquity, I know thee not. Neronis (Quantus artifex pereo?) quadrabit
in te peritum et periturum. (...) in labris Suada, sed et fibris Gratia; quae
sola vere flexanima Suada, et medulla Suadae penetrantissima. D. (...) ep ad
(...).
Summopere cavendum divino praeconi, ne dicta, (...), erubescant. Let not the
preacher give (...) the lie, by a life unsuitable to his Sermons.

And in thy name have done many wonderful works]
By a faith of miracles, whereby a man may remove mountains, and yet miscarry,
1 Cor. 13. 2. And here such as work wonders may deceive themselves in the main
point of their own salvation: how much more may they deceive others in this or
that particular point of doctrine? The coming of Antichrist is after the
working of Satan with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with 2
These. (...).
all deceavablenesse of unrighteousness in them that perish. Lying wonders
they are called in regard not only of the end, which is to deceave, but of the
substance. For the devil cannot do a true miracle, which is ever beside and
against nature and second causes; (...) as whereof there can be no natural
reason possibly rendered, no though it be hid from us. The devil I say, cannot
do a (...). He may juggle and cast a mist. St Hierom writes that a certain
damsel was brought to Macarius by her father, who complained that his
daughter was, by witchcraft turned into a mare, Macarius answered that he
could see no such thing in her, nothing but humane shape; and that their eyes,
that thought and said so, were blinded by Satan, wherefore turning himself to
prayer, he obtained, that the mist might be removed from the parents eyes, and
(...) they saw their mistake. The like is reported of Mr Tindall the Martyr,
that being at Antwerp among a company of merchants, he hindered, by his presence
and prayers, a certain jugler, that he could not play his feats: so that he was
compelled openly to confess, (...)., 85.
that there was some man there at supper, that disturbed and (...) all his
doings. So that a man even in the Martyrs of these days (says Mr Fox) cannot
lack the miracles of true faith, if they were to be desired. Oye Papists (said
Bainham, in the midst ^
of the flame) (...), you look for miracles: here now you may see a miracle:
for in this fire I feel no more pain then if I were in a bed of (...), it is to
me as a bed of roses. But the devil is ashamed, (says Gretser the Jesuit) to
confirm Luthers doctrine with miracles. We could tell him and his fellows, of
(...) recovered out of a desperate disease by Luthers prayers, which Myconius
acknowledged for a miracle to his dying day. And of another young man of
Wittenberg that had sold himself to the devil, Act and (...) sol 788.
body and soul, for money, and sealed the obligation with his own blood: But was
delivered by Luthers prayers, out of the ^
danger of the (...), who was compelled (says Mr Fox) at last to throw in the
(...) at the window, and bad the young man take it unto him again. But he that
now requires miracles for the confirmation of his faith, is himself a great
miracle, says Austin. (...) when they came into Canaan; as if it would ^.
(...), ye need no miracles now you have means. The wonderful (...) of Luther,
that man of God, amidst so many (...) enemies, the publishing and carrying of
his doctrine, in the space of a month, throughout all Germany and some
foreign (...), as it were upon Angels wings, the establishing of the
Reformation to be done by so weak and simple means, yea by casual and cross
means, against the force of so puissant and public an (...), this is that
miracle which we are in these times to look for.

Verse 23. And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you]
No not when you professed most love to me, and did me (to see to) greatest
service, I knew you well enough for black sheep, or rather for reprobate goats,
I knew you for hirelings and hypocrites, but I never knew you with a special
knowledge of love, delight and complacency. I never acknowledged, approved and
accepted of your persons and performances, see Psalm. 1. 6. Romans 11. 2. Gods
sharp nose does easily discern, and is offended with the stinking breath of the
hypocrites rotten lungs, though his words be never so sented and perfumed,
though his deeds be never so mantled and masked, with shows of holiness. God
utterly disowns and disavows all such, for if any man have not the spirit of
God says Paul Romans 8. 9.
the same is none of his; be he whose he will be. And whereas he naturally
delights in mercy, yet he will by no means clear the guilty; Pro. 1. 26.
yea he will (...) at their destruction, and laugh when their (...) deus
loquitur cum (...) legas cum fletu, Aug.
fear comes. He will spue them out of his mouth. Ah he will ease him of his
adversaries: and be as well apaid thereof, as a man is that has rid his
stomach of the surfeit or sick matter that Reve. 3. 16.
clogged it. (...). 1. 24.


Depart from me]
Oh direful and dreadful (...) such as (...) reprobis, Ite, venite, probis.
shall make their very heartstrings crack (not their earest ngle only) and
their hearts fall asunder in their bosoms, like drops of water. Surely if the
gentle voice of God in the cool of (...) day were In aura diei. Genesis 3.
so terrible to our first parents: And if his sweet voice in the preaching of
the Gospel of grace be so formidable to the wicked, that Felix trembled, and
the stoutest are quailed, the edge of their fury is rebated, their hearts often
ache and quake within them: what will they do when the Lion of the tribe of
Judah shall roar out upon them, this fearful Discedite that breaths out
nothing but fire and brimstone, stings and horrors, woe and alas, seas of
vengeance and the worm that never dies, torments without end, and past
imagination? The desperate soldiers (that would not have dreaded to dare the
devil to a duel) fell before him to the ground, when in the state of his
humility, he said but, I am He: how will the wicked stand before him in his
Majesty? If Gideons torches and trumpets so daunted the proud (...), how shall
these abide the terror of the last day?

Ye workers of iniquity]
Ye that make it your trade and task; (...) me licinan (...) dicunt (...).
that do wickedly with both hands earnestly, that are wittily wicked, and can
art out iniquity; that dig in the devils mines, row in his galleys, grind in
his mill, and are not wearied: that live by your sins, as the labourer does
by his trade; and esteem it as the means of an happy life. Ye that, although ye
cannot be charged with any crying crime, but have Lord Lord in your mouths,
and a show of holiness in your lives, yet regard iniquity in your hearts: and
when you (...) most of all high-flowen have a leering eye upon some beloved
sin, as the Eagle has upon her prey below, when she soreth highest. Your
very preaching in Christ's Name Our (...) must be (...) of God, wrought from
God, for God, in God, according to God, (...) are but shining (...) (...) at
Paul's cross.
(if not for his name) is, with God a work of iniquity, and shall have the
wages of sin, which is death, when Christ comes to judgment. Then they that
would not obey those sweet commands, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at
hand, seek ye the Lord while he may be found. Believe in the Lord Jesus and
thou shall be saved, thou and all thy household, etc. shall have no other
commandment left them to obey, but this horrible Depart ye: which imports an
utter separation from the beatificall vision and fruition of God, and this is
the very hell of hell, etc.

Verse 24. Therefore whosoever hears these sayings of (...) etc.]
Here we have the conclusion of this, if not first, yet, certainly, fullest of
our Saviors Sermons; for matter most heavenly, and for order more then
methodicall. Most men think, if they sit out a Sermon, it is sufficient: when
the preacher has (...) done they have done to: Away they go, and (for any
practice) they leave the word where they found it, or depart sorrowful as he
in the Gospel, that Christ requires such things as they are not willing to
perform. Our Savior had four sorts of hearers, and but one good, that brought
forth fruit with patience. When St Paul preached at Athens, some mocked, others
doubted, a few believed, but no Church was sounded there (as at other places)
because Christ crucified was preached; unto the Jews a stumbling (...), Act. 17.
and to those Greeks foolishnes; whiles the Jews required a sign, 1 Cor. 1.
22. 23.
and the Greeks sought after wisdom. But what says the Prophet? (...). 8. 9.
Behold they have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them?
He is a wise builder, a (...) servant, a wise virgin, a wise merchant, (if our
Savior may be judge) that hears these sayings of his, and does them. And
behold (says Moses) I have taught you statutes and judgments: Keep therefore
and do them; for this is your wisdom, etc. A good understanding (...). 4. 6.
have all they that do thereafter. David hereby became (...). (...). (...).
(...) Act. 23. 1.
wiser then his teachers, ancients, enemies: and Paul counted it his chief
policy to keep a good conscience void of offense toward God and men: which
cannot be until it may be said of a man, as 2 Chronicles. 34. 16 Romans 2 12.
Shaphan said of Josiahs workmen, All that was given in charge to thy
servants, they do it. For not the hearers of the Law, but the Luke 11. 28.
doers shall be justified, says- Paul: shall be blessed, says our Savior
Joh. 13. 17.
often: shall be made thereby the friends of Christ, Ioh. 15. 2 Cor. 8. 23.
Isa. 62. 3.
14. the kindred of Christ, Matthew. 12. 50. The glory of Christ, a Cant. 3. 11.
royal diadem in the hand of (...); yea, such as have the honor to set the
crown royal upon Christ's head in the day of his espousals. Be ye therefore
doers of the Word, says S. James, and not hearers only, deceiving, or putting
paralogismes, tricks and fallacies (...).
(sophister like) upon your own souls. They that place religion in hearing, and
go no further, will prove egregious fools in the (...). (...). (...).
end. Which to prevent, look intently and accurately, says that (...).
Apostle, stoop down, and pry heedfully into the perfect law of (...) (as the
Cherubims did into the Propitiatory, as the Angels do into the mystery of
Christ, as the Disciples did into the sepulcher 1 Pet 1. (...).
of Christ) and continue therein, till ye be transformed thereinto, Joh. 20. 5.
Not being forgetful hearers, but doers of the work: so shall ye be blessed in
the deed. It is not enough to hear, but take heed how you hear. (...) with you
the loan of your former hearing. For to Mark 4. 24. explained.
him that has shall be given, and with what measure ye mete, it shall be
measured to you. As ye measure to God in preparation and practice, he will
measure to you in success and blessing: and every time that you hear, God will
come to you in the fullness of the (...) Romans 16.
(...).
of the Gospel of peace. See that ye shift not off him that speaks, (...). in
ep. ad (...).
(...). 12. 25. Veniat, veniat verbum Domini, and submittemus illi, sexcentasi
nobis essent colla, said a notable Dutch Divine. Let God 2 Cor. 8. 7.
speak, and we will yield, though it were to the loss of a thousand Romans 6. 17.
lives. The Macedonians delivered themselves up to God, and the Romans to the
form of doctrine that was delivered (...) them: they took impression from it,
as the metal (...) from the mould, or as the wax does from the seal. David
(...) up his hands to Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119. 48. he did all the wills of
God, who had Act. 13. 35.
set him both his time and his task. He sets all his servants a work, and
requires their pains, Hos. 10. 11. Ephraim was an heifer used to dance, and
delight in the soft straw, and could not abide to plow, but the Lord will make
him both bear and draw. Religion is not a name, says one, goodness a word; it
is active like fire, communicative like light. As the life of things stands in
goodness: M. Harris at (...) (...).
so the life of goodness in action. The chiefest goods are most active, the
best good a mere act. And the more good we do, the more God-like and excellent
we be, and the better provided against a rainy (...).

Which built his house upon a rock.]
This rock is Christ; and (...). 2. 10.
conscionable (...) are living stones built upon him. The Conies (...). 3. 5.
are a people weak and wise, says Solomon; and their wisdom Prove. 30 16.
herein appears; they work themselves holes and burrows in the bosom of the
earth, in the roots of the rocks. Learn we to do Luke 6. 48.
the like: and be sure to dig deep enough (as S. Luke has it) (...), sed (...).
which while the stony-ground-hearers did not, their blade was scorcht up, and
came to nothing. Some flashing joy they had upon the hearing of the Word, and
many meltings (according to the nature of the Doctrine delivered) but these
sudden affections, being not well bottomed, nor having principles to maintain
them, they were but like Conduits running with wine at the Coronation, or like
a land-floud, that seems to be a great sea, but is soon gone again. (...)
fluctum (...).


Verse 25. And the rain descended, and the floods came, etc.]
Many are the troubles of the righteous: they come commonly (...). (...) and
(...), brevior (...) Sen. (...) est proprie (...) a (...) seu (...). (...) a
(...) (...). (...).
thick and threefold, one in the neck of another, as Jobs messengers. The
clouds return after the rain, (...). 12. 2. there is a continual succession of
miseries and molestations, from the devil, the world, and the flesh, to them
that hear and do the words of (...): like the weather in winter, when a shower
or two do not clear the air, but though it rain much, yet the sky is still
over-(...) with clouds, which are (...) upon the Saints, sometimes in (...) and
lighter (...), as the smaller rain, sometimes in pressing and piercing
calamities, like storm and hail: The rain falls, (...) floods rise, the wind
blows, and many a sharp shower beats upon the Christians building; but like
Noah's Ark, it is pitched within and without: like Mount Sion, it abides for ever
immovable, (...) founded upon the Rock of ages. Si nos ruemus, ruet Christus
(...), Ille (...) mundi, said that noble Luther. If we (...), Christ shall fall
too, that Ruler of the world: and (...) him fall: I had rather ^.
(...) with Christ, then stand with Caesar. The devil stirs up a (...) against
Gods children, says Ambrose, Sedipse naufragium (...), but himself makes ship
wrack. The Church, according to that (...) Motto. Nec fluctu, nec (...)
movetur: and yet Venice has but one street (they say) that is not daily
over-flowed by the sea.

And it fell not.]
Saving grace is unleesable, though it may be impaired in the degrees, and may
recoyl to the root, as sap does in winter. Christ lives in the hearts of all
his Saints, Gal. 2. 20. and can die no more, Romans 6. 10. Die he may as well at
the right hand of his father, as in the heart of a Christian.

Object. A weak brother, for whom Christ died, may perish, 1 Cor. 8. 11.

Sol. No thank to us, if he do not; who, by scandalous courses offend and wound
his conscience: but Christ will not lose him so.

Object. There are that deny the Lord that bought them, Destrui potest, ex
part, per interveniens scandalum: quod and verbum (...) aliquo modo denotat,
non distrahi penitus ca^^^, etc.
2 Pet. 2. 1.

Sol. Bought they were by Christ in their own conceit, and in the esteem of
others, but it proved otherwise. Or, they were bought, that is, delivered, in a
general sense (so the word here used, often signifies) from their
superstition to the knowledge of salvation (I say not to saving knowledge)
whereby they might preach to others, themselves being cast-awaies. God has D.
Prideaux, Lect.
charged Christ, as Mediator, to see to the keeping of the bodies and souls of
all true believers, Joh. 6. 39. 40. And he faithfully performed it. Those thou
gave me I have kept, says he, and none of them is lost, Joh. 17. 12.

Christ makes exception of one that was lost, Ibid. Ob.


That shows he was never of his body: for can he be a Savior of Sol.
a son of perdition?

Why is he then excepted? Ob.


1. Because he seemed to be one of Christ's, by reason of his Sol.
office. 2. He speaks there in particular of the twelve: and to be an
Apostle, was, in it self, but an outward calling.
Christians may lose the things that they have wrought, Ob.
Joh. 2. 8.

1. Temporaries may, and do; and of them it may be understood, Sol.
verse 9. 2. True Christians may: 1. In respect of the praise of men: All their
former honor may be laid in the dust. 2. In regard of the inward sense and
comfort, as David, Psalm. 32. and 51. 3. In respect of the fullness of the
reward in heaven, their glory may be much lessened by their falls.
A righteous man may turn from his righteousness, and die, Ob.
Ezekiel. 18. 24.

From his righteousness imparted, or that of sanctification, he Sol.
may turn in part, and for a time, and die a temporal death for his offense,
as Josiah: Not so from his righteousness imputed, or that of justification, so
as to die eternally. Or the holy Ghost may Gal. 1.
so speak, as of a thing impossible: as, if an Angel from heaven should preach
any other Doctrine, etc. which cannot possibly be. So that this text concludes
not categorically. The Comforter shall abide with us for ever, Joh. 14. 16. It
is called an earnest, not a pawn. A pawn is to be returned again; but an
earnest is part and pledge of the whole sum.

What need then so many exhortations to perseverance? Quest.


1. True grace in it self is leesable, in respect of us, who Ans.
should fall from it, as Adam; but we are kept by the power and promise of God
to salvation; and we need Christ's lefthand to be under us, and his right hand
over us to clasp and hold us up. He keeps the feet of the Saints, and
preserves us 1 Samuel 2. 9.
from all such evil, as may frustrate our perseverance, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 3. 1 John
5. 18. 2. By these exhortations, as means, Gods grace is promoted, and
preserved in us. 3. We are but in part renewed, and are apt to backflide; if we
row not hard, wind and tide will carry us back again. Heed therefore must be
taken, that we look not back with Lots wife; Gen 37 3.
that our Jacobs-ladder may reach to heaven; that our oil fail not, Exodus 2^. 8.
till the bridegroom come; that our coat reach down to our heels, Exodus 29 12.
as Joseph's, and the Highpriests did; that we sacrifie the beast (...).
with the tail; that we keep in this fire of the Sanctuary; or, if it 2 ^^m. 1.
6.
slackt, that we rake it out of the ashes, and blow it up again into a flame;
that we turn not again, as we walk, with those living D^^^^ 33.
creatures, Ezekiel 1 12. nor be like Nebuchadnezzars image, that G^l 3.
began in gold, and ended in clay; that we begin not in the spirit, and end in
the flesh: that we go not backward, as Hezekiahs Psalm. 19 4.
Sun, nor stand at a stay, as Joshuah's, but rejoice to Prove. 4 18.
run our race, as David's; and go on to the perfect day, as,Ioshuah's ^.
etc.
Verse 26. And every one that hears these sayings of mine, and does them not,
etc.]
Which is the greater number of hearers. For most men hear to hear, and not to
practice. Some hear merely of form, or for fashion sake, or to save the penalty
of the Statute, or to find some Recipe to procure a sleep, or to still the
clamours of their consciences, or to make amends and purchase dispensation for
some beloved lust, as Herod. Or expecting from the preacher some choice
novelty, as (...). 3. 8. some deep point, (...). 12. 37. or dainty expressions,
as Ezekiel. 33. 32. Or they (...) and (...), Act. 17. 32. Hear and carp, as Doeg;
hear and resist the holy Ghost, Act. 7. Or at least are no whit wrought upon,
whether we pipe or lament to them. Or if they hear and admire, as Mat. 11. 17.
those. Matthew. 22. 22. yet they amend nothing, or but for a season, as the
stony-ground: they are hearers of forgetfulness, Jam. (...).
(...). 25. like hour-glasses, they are no sooner full, but (...) out again:
like nets or sives, they retain only the chaff or weeds, let go the pure water
and good corn. The Word runs (...) them, (...) water through a riven (...)
(that is the Apostles metaphor, Heb. 2. 1.) or as that which is written upon
moist paper, as others (...).
will have it. A general cause of our not practicing what we hear, is, that we
put this spiritual treasure into broken bags, this (...) liquour into leaking
(...). Whereas our souls should be as the Ark, and our memories, as the pot of
Mannah, to retain what we have received, that we may have it ready for (...),
as Saul had his cruse and spear at his head, and David his scrip and stones
ready by his side. A heavy ear is a (...) judgment, Isa. 6. 10. but a slow
heart, and a heavy hand, to conceive and do what we hear, paves a way to
remediless misery; besides the fool to boot, which the Judge here puts upon
him.

Shall be likened unto a foolish man.]
And he is a fool indeed whom Christ calls fool. Conscionable hearers are
counted good men (God wot) but simple, silly, and of no parts. But wisdom is
justified of her children. To walk precisely, is to walk wisely, (...). 5. 15.
And he that (...) and guides his feet in the way, is wife, Prove, 23. 19. And,
Who is a wise man amongst you, and endued with knowledge? Let him show out of a
good conversation his works, etc. Ja. 3. 13. All others are fools, because they
fail in the main point of their salvation: they are troubled about many
things(...) but neglect the one thing necessary: they trifle out their precious
(...), and in hearing or other services, they do worse then lose their labor,
(...) they commit sin, and heap up (...). Their house will down, as the spiders
house does, and all their building, plowing, planting sailing, come to nothing.

Which built his house upon the sand.]
Wherefore it soon sinks and shatters, as having not the loose earth thrown up
first, by the practice of mortification and self- denial. Men should first sit
down, and cast what it would cost them to build the tower of godliness, or ere
they leap into profession. They should put their hearts often to those grand
questions of abnegation. Can I (as all must, that will be Christ's Disciples)
deny my self in all my selves (for a man has many selves within himself, and
must utterly and absolutely deny them all) take up my daily cross ((...) (...)
Christianus (...).
every Christian is a (...) or crosse-bearer, says Luther: the rain will fall,
the floods flow, the winds blow, and beat upon his building, he shall have
many trials and temptations, that looks toward heaven, troubles without,
terrors within, his back-burden of both) and follow Christ through thick and
thin, by doing and suffering his whole will? Many will follow Christ in such
duties as suit with their humors, and no further, as the rusty hand of a
dial; they will break the hedge of his Law, to shun a piece of foul way: They
follow Christ, as the dog follows his (...), till he come by a carrion, and
then he turns him up. Orpha made a fair proffer of going along with Naomi, but
when she had better considered it, she turned again. Lots wife set fair out of
Sodom, but looked back. So do many forward hearers set their hands to Gods
plough, but (loath to plough up the fallow (...) of their hearts, and to lay a
good foundation in humiliation.) they start aside like broken bows, and steal
away, like cowardly soldiers, (...),
and so judge themselves unworthy of eternal life, and unfit (...). 10.
for Gods Kingdom. For the foolish shall not stand in his sight, Luke 9. 62.
he hates all the workers of iniquity. Caleb was not discouraged (...). 5. 5.
by the Giants, therefore he had Hebron given him, the place of the Giants,
when the spies and (...) were never suffered to enter: No more shall they that
hold not out to the death, obtain the crown of life.

Verse 27. And the rain descended, etc.]
The old heart cannot possibly hold out the hardship of holiness, nor bear the
brunt of persecution for well-doing. Like a Chestnut cast into the (...), if not
broken first on the top, it leaps out again; or like a false jade in a teem,
which being put to a stresse, turns tail and tramples. When the godly hearer
holds on his way to heaven, through all disasters; as those two kine of the
Philistims, that bore home the Ark, held on their way, though they had calves
at home, that might have made them turn back.

And it fell.]
The wiseman and fools house come under a double difference. 1. In the
foundation: this to see to, and above ground, is little discerned. The Temple
is said to be as low under ground, as it was high above. 2. In the building it
self. The unprofitable hearer is not cimented to Christ by faith, but laid
loose, as it were, upon a sandy foundation, and so slips beside the ground work
in foul weather. He is not set into the stock as a science, but only stuck into
the ground as a stake; and is therefore easily (...) up. Whereas the true
Christian is knit fast to 1 Pet. 2. 5.
Christ the Rock, by the ligament of a lively faith; and, as a lively stone, is
built up a spiritual house, growing up in the mystical body with so much
sweetness and evennesse, as if the whole Temple (like that of Solomon) were
but one entire stone, He that is joined to the Lord is one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.
17. So that although 1. Shakings and waverings in the very purpose of
holy-walking may befall a Saint by violent temptations, Psalm. 73. 2, 13. Yea,
2. Intermissions of the exercise of grace, as of life in a palsy or (...). 3.
Particular falls we are not exempted from. Peter himself, though a pillar fell
from his former steadfastness, in part; yet from (...), prolapsion, from utter
and irrecoverable falling away, they are (...), because founded upon a Rock,
which can never be removed: He is both the Author and finisher Heb. (...).
of their faith: He has prayed and procured, that it utterly Luke 22.
fail not.

And the fall thereof was great.]
Great and griovous, because irreparable, irreedifiable, as Hiericho and the
Temple at Jerusalem. God lays them aside like broken (...), of which there is
no further use; and since they will needs wallow again, as swine, in the filth
of their former pollutions, he proncunceth upon them that fearful sentence,
Let him that is filthy be filthy still; that unclean spirit enters him again;
and his dispositions to evil are seven times more enflamed then ever. He has
despised and despighted the Spirit Heb. 10. 26.
of grace, and is in the ready road to the unpardonable sin. The Apostate
cannot lightly choose unto himself a worse condition, Heb. 10. 26. He casts
himself into hel-mouth, Heb 10. (...). where the back slider in heart shall be
filled with his own ways; and have the Prove. 14. 14.
greater (...), by how much he fell from greater hopes and possibilities of
better; as (...) from his Monarchy, and as Cranmer from his high preferment to
so low a condition, as that there was left him neither hop: of (...), nor place
of worse.

Verse 28. And it came to pass, when (...) had ended these sayings.]
All this then was but one Sermon, though twice preached at several times, as
some collect out of Luke. A long Sermon it was, and yet the people staid it
out. So did not those (...), Joh. 6. and therefore fell away from Christ: So
did not Judas, and therefore met (...) devil at the door. It is a lamentable
(...) 13.
thing, that a winters-tale shall be heard with more patience and pleasure then
a powerful Sermon: that if a Preacher exceed his glass sometimes, (...) sit
at as little (...), as if they were in a fit of an ague: and others profanely
turn their backs upon the (...). 44.
Propitiatory, and depart without the blessing. In the Council Canon 32.
of Agathon it was decreed that none should presume to go out before the
Minister had blessed the Congregation. And in the fourth Council of Carthage,
Let him that goes out of the Auditory, when the Minister is speaking to the
Congregation, be excommunicated, Ite missa est, (...), were the old forms of
dismission. And although Zachary was long ere he came forth, yet the Luke 1.
people stayed his coming. But the Word of the Lord is to the wicked a burden,
Jer. 27. 33. cords and bonds, Psalm. 2. 3. Yokes and bonds, Jer. 5. 5. Hence
they are so soon sated, and their attentions tired out and jaded, as it were.

The people were astonished at his doctrine.]
They were strangely transported and rapt with an ectasie of admiration and
amazement. (...).
Ubi (...) quasi attonitus, (...), (...), sed apertis oculis (...) quietus
(...). Lyser.
They were at (...) a pass, that they could neither say nor do, but stood
amazed with their eyes set in (...) heads, as the word imports. And surely
the word never works so kindly, as when it is received with admiration: yet
may we not rest in that, as too many do; but get it mingled with (...) in our
(...), that works by love, holding fast the faithful word, as Paul bids
Timothy, that part of it especially that in hearing he is pleased to sweeten
unto us by the taste of his special goodness.

Verse 29. For he taught them as one having authority.]
Never man spoke as he spoke, said those Catch-poles that came to take him, but
were taken by him. For matter, his doctrine was not his own, but his Fathers
that sent him. For manner, this Prince (...). 7. 16.
of Preachers had the tongue of the learned: yet without (...) of learning, he
delivered himself so plainly, that the simplest (...) 50 4.
might conceive him, and so powerfully that his enemies could not but confess,
that he was true, and taught the way of God (...). (...). 22. 14.
And for end, he (...) sought his Fathers glory, in the salvation of men's
souls. A fair president for Preachers: who should Optimi ad (...) by sunt
(...), (...) Lutherus, qui pueriliter, trivialiter, populariter and
simplicissime (...). Melch. Ad. in vita.
thus seek to get within the people, and to maintain the credit of their
ministry, that their words may carry an authority, and command attention.

And not as the (...)]
Who first stuck in the bark of the law, and pierced not into the heart and
sense of it. 2. Delivered for doctrines the commandments of men about
washings, tithings, etc. 3. They sought not the glory of God, but praise of
men: and were therefore mad at our Savior, as one that bare away the bell from
them, for a powerful preacher. 4. They rejected (...).
Publicans and sinners, though penitent: So did not Christ. 5. They taught
coldly and carelessly: but he zealously, and imperiously, as the Lawgiver, and
not as an Interpreter only: as that Prophet like unto me, says Moses: yea
far beyond him. Epiphan lib. 1. (...).
or any other that ever spoke with a tongue. For he could, and did speak to the
hearts of his hearers: Together with his Scribarum doctrina erat (...), elumbis
(...).
word there went forth a power, as to heal the bodies of those, Luk 5. 17. so
the souls of his elect: he was a Minister of the spirit, and not of the letter
only, etc. Heb. 2.


CHAP. VIII.
Verse 1. Great multitudes followed him.]
MAny thousands, as Bondinus De claritate Christi proves, out of ancient
Writers. This drew upon our Savior the Quicquid non acquiritur dan number est.
envy of the Pharisees those cankerd carls, who Sejanus-like, thought all lost
that fell besides their own lips: as Nero, they spited Sen. de (...). Nero
(...). Ammian.
all those whom the people applauded; and Tigre-like, laid hold with their
teeth on all the excellent spirits of their times, as it is said of Tiberius.

Verse 2. And behold there came a Leper.]
This leprosy was Life of Sejanus by P. M.
(...) rife in our Saviors time: God so ordering, that Judea was sickest, when
her Physician was nearest. The (...) are still a nasty people: And this kind
of leprosy seems to have been (...) to them, as Plica Polonica, Morbus
Gallicus, Sudor Anglicus. No stranger in England was touched with this disease,
and yet the English were chased therewith, not in England only, but Life of K.
(...). 6. by (...) (...). (...). page (...).
in other Countries abroad: which made them like tyran's, both feared and
avoided, where ever they came. So were these Jewish lepers. Hence that fable in
Tacitus, that the Israelites were Turk. Hist. lib 5.
driven out of Egypt for that loathsome disease. This, said one Malevolent
Heathen, is the cause why they rest every seventh day. Bodinus observes it for
a special providence of God, that in Arabia (which bordereth upon Judea,)
there are no swine to be Summa Dei bonitate (...) sactum est, ne (...) ad
(...), (...) magis, (...) magis (...), (...). (...). (...). (...). (...). p.
354. (...) Jo. (...). loc. com. (...). (...). Ambr.
found, lest that most leprous creature, says he, should more and more infest
and infect that people, who are naturally subject to the leprosy. And another
good Author is of opinion, that God did therefore forbid the Jews to eat
either swines-flesh, or haresflesh: Quod ista caro facile in male (...)
corporibus putrescat, because in diseased bodies it easily (...) and turns to
ill humors.

And worshipped him.]
Which he would hardly ever have done happily, had he not been a leper. Diseases,
says S. Ambrose, are the shop of virtues. King Alfred found himself ever best,
when he was worst: and therefore prayed God, to send him always some
sickness: Gehezies leprosy cured him, his white forehead made him a white soul.

If thou (...), thou can, etc.]
So Another came with, If thou (...) do any thing, help us: We never doubt of
Christ's will to do us good, (says a great Divine) but, in some degree, we D.
(...).
doubt also of his power. True faith doubts of neither: but believes against
sense in things invisible, and against reason in things incredible. Sense
corrects imagination, Reason corrects sense, but Faith corrects both.

Verse 3. And Josus put forth his hand, etc.]
The law forbad contactum contagionis, non sanationis. The High Priest might
enter a leprous house, etc. We have not an high Priest that cannot (...). 4. 15.
be touched with the feeling of our infirmities. Better might he say, then S.
Cyprian, Cum singulis pectus meum copulo, maeroris and funeris pondera luctuosa
participo, cum plangentibus plango, cum deflentibus (...), etc. Then S. Paul,
Who is weak, and I am not weak? 2 Cor. 11. (...).
Who is afflicted, and I burn not? It (...) held a great condescension in King
Alphonsus, to use his skill for the recovery of one of his sick Subjects: What
was it here in Christ, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords?

Verse 4. See thou tell no man.]
Christ despised popular (...), accounting it no other then a little stinking
breath. Some do all for a name: But we have not so learned Christ. His
treasures were hid, Col. 2. 3. He sought not himself, but to set up him that
sent him, Joh. 8. 50.

Show thy self to the Priest]
That they may see that I am He that should come, that Jehovah the Physician,
that Sun of righteousness with health under his wings, etc. that I came not to
destroy the Law, as they slanderously give out, but to fulfill it, that God may
be glorified, and the mouth of malice stopped.

Offer the gift, etc.]
This is that pepper-corn we pay to God, who is content that we have the
benefit of his favors, so He may have the glory of them. Not lepers only, but
all sorts, after sickness, were bound to offer to God the ransom of their
lives, Exodus 31. Hezekiah made a song, and left it to posterity, for a seal of
his thankfulness. Heathens in this case, would consecrate something to their
gods, to their Teraphim. The very word in Greek that (...) to heal, (framed
from Teraephim) (...).
signifies first to worship and serve God: So showing us what they were wont to
do in case of cure. But now-adaies sciopato il morbo, fraudato il Santo, as
the Italian proverb has it. Sick men recovered, deal as ship-wrackt men
escaped: they promise God, as he in Erasmus his Naufragium did the Virgin, a
picture Eras. (...).
of wax as big as S. Christopher: but when he came to shore, would not give a
tallow-candle. This is a cursed kind of cousenage, Mal. 1. 14.

Verse 5. There came unto him a Centurion.]
Rarior est virtus veniens, e corpore raro. Soldiers are commonly fierce and
godless creatures. But this noble Centurion might well have made a Commander
in that Thundering Legion, and might well have (...).
had his hand in that Victoria Haleluiatica (as it was called) obtained by the
Orthodox Brittans, against the Pelagian Picts and D (...) de (...) Britan.
Eccles. primord p. 332.
Saxons here, Victoria fide obtenta non viribus, as the story tells us; a
victory got by faith, and not by force.

Verse 6. Lord, my servant lies at home, etc.]
Not thrown out of doors, not cast sick into a corner, to sink or swim, for any
care his master would take of him: No, (...) left to be cured at his own
charges. The good Centurion was not a better man then a master. So was that
renowned (...) Thomas Lucy late of Charlecott in Abners funeral by M. (...),
(...) in vulta gravitas and (...), sed (...) mitius ore.
Warwick shire; to whose singular commendation it was in mine hearing preached
at his Funeral, and is now since published, by my much honored friend, Mr
Robert Harris, that (among many others that would dearly miss him) a housefull
of servants had lost not a Master, but a Physician, who made their sickness
his, and his cost and physic theirs. Or (as mine Alter Ego, mine entire
beloved kinsman, (...) Thomas Dugard In quo (...) ing (...) a (...) modest
(...).
(expresses it in his eligant Epitaph.) His servants sickness was his
sympathy, and their recovery his cost.

Verse 7. I will come and heal him.]
Stupenda dignation: A wonderful condescending: that the Lord of Lords should
vouchsafe (...) caeli Dominus nequaquam de (...) ser (...).
to visit a poor (...), and restore him to health. It was a great favor that
Q. Elizabeth did Sir Christopher Hatton L. Chancellor (who died nevertheless
of grief of mind) that, when she had broken his heart with a harsh word, she
was pleased to visit and (...).
comfort him, though it were all too late. What was it then for (...). (...).
406.
the Lord Christ in the shape of a servant, to come down to the sick servants
pallet? Hunniades, when he felt himself in danger of death, desired to receive
the (...), before his departure: And would in any case (sick as he was) be
carried to the Church Turk. Hist. (...).
to receive the same, saying that it was not fit, that the Lord should come to
the house of his servant, but the servant rather to go to the house of his
Lord and master.

Verse 8. Lord, I am not worthy, etc.]
Fidei mendica manus: (...) is an (...) grace, and makes a man cry out with
(...): (...) non sum dignus, nihilominus tamen sum indigens. By (...) to (...)
him that is invisible. Now the more a man (...) of God, the less he sees by
himself: the nearer he (...) to God, the more rottenness he feels in his
bones. Lord I am hell, but thou art heaven, (said Mr Hooper Martyr at Act. and
Mon.
his death) I am swill and a sink of sin, but thou art a gracious God, etc.

But speak the word only, etc.]
The Centurions humility was not more low, then his faith lofty: That reaches
up unto heaven, D. Hall.
and in the face of humane weakness, descries omnipotency.

Verse 9. For I am a man.]
But thou Lord art more then a man: for the Centurion here makes comparison
with our Savior, both in respect of his person, and of his power, as of the
less with the greater. For his person, he says not, For I also (...), (...),
(...).
(...) a man, such as thou art, (as the vulgar here corruptly renders it) But I
am a man, a mere man; Thou art God also, very God. And for his power, though
subject to another, have soldiers at my beck and check, how much more have
thou, who art over all, an (...) power over sickness and death? The palsy. or as
some say, the Epilepsy was anciently called Morbus sacer, or the holy disease.
For the Priests, to enrich themselves, persuaded the superstitious people, that
this disease, as being sudden, hidden, and for most part incurable, was an
immediate hand of God, and could be cured by none but Priests. The medidicines
they gave, were much like that of the French Mountebank, who was wont to give
in writing to his patients, for curing all diseases, these following verses; Si
vis curari de morbo nescio quali, Becan. sum: theol. part 1. cap. 16.

Accipias herbam, sed qualem nescio, nec quam:
Ponas nescio quo, curabere nescio quando.
They are thus Englished by one. Your pain, I know not what, do not fore slow,
To cure with herbs, which (...) I (...) not know. Answer to D. Coal.

Place them, (well (...)) I know not where, and then
You shall be perfect whole, I know not when.


And I say to this man (...), and he goes, etc.]
King Ferdinands (...), being conducted into the camp of the Turks, wondered
Turk. Hist. sol 715.
at the perpetual and dumb silence of so great a multitude: the Soldiers
being so ready and attentive, that they were no otherwise commanded, then by
the beckning of the hand, or nod of their Commanders. Tamerlan, that warlike
Scythian, had Ibid. 216.
his men at so great command, that no danger was to them more dreadful, then
his displeasure.

And to my servant, do this and he does it.]
Such a servant is every Saint to his God; at least in his desire and
endeavor. Such a Centurion also is he over his own heart, which he has at his
right hand, as Solomon says: that is, ready pressed to obey God in all parts and
points of duty. There were seven sorts of Pharisees: Talmud. tract. (...). cap
3.
And one was Pharisaeus, Quid (...) facere, and faciam illud: So they would
needs be called. But the true Christian only is such (...) one in good
earnest, as the Pharisee pretends to be.

Verse 10. He marvelled, and said, etc.]
What can be so great a marvel, as that Christ marvelleth? So he wondered at
his own work in Nathaniel, Ioh. 1. 47. and at his own love to miserable
mankind, when he calls himself Wonderful, Counselor, etc. Isa. 9. 6. He
wondered not, as the (...) did, at the magnificence of the Temple: he was not a
whit taken with all the beauty and bravery of the world set before him by the
devil, as it were in a land-skip: but at the Centurions faith he much
marvelled, it being a work of his own almighty power, which he puts not (...)
but for great purposes, Ephesians. 1. 19. Where is easy to observe in the Original
a sixfold gradation.

Verse 11. Many shall come from the East]
They shall fly as a cloud, says Isay (speaking of the conversion of the
Gentiles) and so flock to the Church, as if a whole flight of doves, driven by
(...). (...). 8
some hawk or tempest, should scour into the columbary, and rush into the
windows. The Tyrians had a hand in building the Temple. The molten Sea stood
upon twelve Oxen, which looked toward East, West, North, and South. The new
Jerusalem has twelve gates: to show that there is every way access for all
sorts to Christ; Who is also fitly called the second Adam. The Greek letters of
which name (as S. Cyprian observes) do severally (...) A (...). M (...).
signify all the quarters of the Earth. He was born in an Inn, to show that he
receives all comers: His garments were divided into four parts, to show that
out of what part of the world soever we come, if we be naked, Christ has robes
to clothe us, if we be harbourlesse, Christ has room to lodge us, Iether an I
smaelite, may become an Israelite, 1 Chronicles 7. 17. With 2 Samuel 17. 25. and
Arannah the (...), may be made an exemplary (...), 2 Samuel 24. 18, with Zech 9.
7. Vide Iunium in (...).

Verse 12. But the children of the kingdom.]
Those that had made a covenant with God by sacrifice, Psalm. 50. 5. And
therefore held their heads on high, as already destinated to the diadem: Lo
these, in the height of their hopes and exspectancies, shall be excluded; A
foul and fearful disappointment. Surely the tears of hell cannot sufficiently
bewail the loss of heaven. (...) (...) Dom.
of Valoys, was Son, Brother, Uncle, Father to a King, yet himself 1286.
never was a King: So here.

Into outer darkness.]
Into a darkness beyond a (...): into (...). (...).
a (...) and beneath the prison. In tenebras ex tenebris, (...), infaelicius
excludendi, says Augustine. God shall surely (...) to these unhappy children of
the Kingdom, when he casts them into condemnation, as Aulus Fulvius said to his
traitorous son, when he slew him with his own hands, Non (...).
Catilinae te (...) sed patriae: I called you not but to glory and virtue,
neither to glory, but by virtue, 2 Pet. 1. 3. As you liked not the later, so
never look for the former. Every man is either a King or a caytiffe: and shall
either reign with Christ, or rue it for ever Aug.
with the devil. Aut Casar (...) nullus, as he said to his Mother: And as those
in tho Turks Court, that are born of the blood royal, but come not to the
kingdom; They must die either by the sword, or halter: so here.

Verse 13. And as thou have believed, etc.]
Faith has an happy hand: and never but speeds in one kind or other. It has
what it would, either in money, or moneys-worth. Apollonius, says Zozomen,
never asked any thing of God in all his life, that he obtained not. This man
says One concerning Luther, could have of God whatsoever he listed.

Verse 14. He saw his wives mother laid, etc.]
A wife then Peter had, and if a good wife, she might be a singular help to him
in his Ministry; As Nazianzens mother was to her husband, not (...). Naz.
a companion only, but in some respects, a guide to godliness. S. Ambrose
says, that all the Apostles were married men, save John and Paul. And those
Pope-holy hypocrites, that will not hear of Priests marriage, but hold it far
better for them to have, Act. and Mon. (...). 790.
and keep at home, many harlots then one wife, (as that carnal Cardinal (...)
defended) they might hear the contrary out Honestius est pluribus (...)
implicari, quam operte (...).
of their own Cannon-law, where it is written, Distin. 29. Si quis discernit
Presbyterum conjugatum, tanquam occasion (...) offerre non debeat, anathema
esto. And again Distinct. 31. Siquis vituperat (...), and (...) cum viro suo
fidelem and religiosam Ibid. 1054.
detestatur, aut culpabilem aestimat, velut quae regnum Dei Ibid. 1008.
introire non possit, anathemaesto. They might (...) to Paphnutius, a famous
Primitive Confessor: who, though himself an Hist. Tripar. (...). 2 cap 14.
Ruffin Hist. (...). lib. (...). cap 4.
unmarried man, mightily persuaded and prevailed with the (...) (...), that
they should not decree any thing against Priests marriage: alleging, that
marriage was honorable in all, and that the bed undefiled was true chastity,
They might (...) Si quis (...) vocet (...).
Ignatius, scholar to S. John the Evangelist, pronouncing all such as call
marriage a defilement, to be inhabited by that old Dragon the devil. But there
is a politic reason that makes these men deaf, to whatsoever can be said to
them by whomsoever; and you shall have it in the words of him that wrote the
history I (...) Epist ad (...).
of the Council of Trent, (a Council carried by the Pope, with such infinite
(...) and craft, that the Jesuits those (...), S. (...) Sands (...): (...)
West. rel. (...)(...).
Commeritricitegae will even smile in the triumps of their own wits, when they
hear it but mentioned, as a master-stratagem.) The Legates in Trent-Councell
(says (...)) were blamed, for suffering the Article of Priests Marriage to be
disputed, as dangerous: Because it is plain, that married Priests will turn
their affections and love to wife and children: and by consequence, to their
(...) and country: to that the strict dependence which the Clergy has upon
the Apostolike-sea would cease: and to grant Hist. of (...) of (...) (...). 680.
Marriage to Priests, would destroy the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, (...) make
the Pope, Bishop of Rome only.

Verse 15. And he touched her hand]
A speedy and easy cure of the fever; such as Hipocrates or Galen could never
skill of. They do it not but by many evacuations, long diet, etc. besides
that, much gold must be lavished out of the bag, as it is, (...). 46. 6. the
poor patient crying often out, (...), whence AEger, as some Becman.
think. Christ by his word and touch only, does the deed in an instant. As he
can blow us to destruction, Job 4. 9. nod us to destruction, Psalm 80. 16. so,
when Heman thinks himself free from Psalm. (...). 5.
the dead, free of that company, and the (...) begin to go about (...). 18. 5.
the streets, he can speak life unto us, and keep us that we go not Psalm. 30. 3.
down to the pit.

She arose, and ministered unto them]
Thereby to evince the truth of the miracle, and to evidence the truth of her
thankfulness.

Verse 16. When the even was come]
In the morning he sowed Eccles. 11. 6.
his (...), and in the evening he withheld not his hand. It is good to be doing
whiles it is day. Mr Bradford Martyr, held that hour not Act. and Mon. sol.
1457.
well spent, wherein he did not some good, either with his tongue, pen, or hand.

Verse 17. Himself took our infirmities]
The Prophet speaks of spiritual infirmities, the Evangelist applies it to
corporal. And not unfitly: for these are the proper effects of those: we may
thank our sins for our sicknesses, Rev. 2 22. She had stretched her self upon a
bed of security, she shall be cast, another while, upon a bed of sickness. Asa
had laid the Prophet by the heels; and 2 Chronicles. 16.
now God lays him by the heels, diseasing him in his feet. Sin is an
universal sickness; like those diseases which the Physicians say Isa. 1. 5, 6.
are (...) totius substantiae. And our lives are fuller of sins then the
firmament of stars, or the furnace of sparks. Hence all our bodily distempers;
which when we groan and labor under, let us reflect and revenge upon fin as
the mother of all misery. And when we are made whole, fin no more, left a worse
thing come upon us.

Verse 18. To depart unto the other side]
Either to retire, and repose himself after much pains (for Quod caret, alterna
requie, Levandi (...) sut causa voluores (...) ac libere volitant. Cicero. 2.
de (...).
etc. the very birds, when building their nests, flee abroad sometimes from
their work, for recreations sake.) Or else the better to edge the peoples
desires after him, now withdrawn. Luther gave this rule to Preachers, for
moderating their discourses. When thou see thine hearers most attentive, then
conclude; for so they will (...) vides (...) populum, (...): eo (...). Luth.
come again more cheerfully the next time.

Verse 19. Master, I will follow thee, etc.
As Sampson followed his parents, till he met with an honeycomb: or as a dog
follows his master, till he come by a carrion. Vix diligitur Jesus, propter
Iesum. But, as Isaac loved Esau, for venison was his meat, Genesis 25. 28. and as
Judah's Rulers loved with shame, Give (...), Hos. 4. 18. So do hypocrites: they
serve not the Lord Jesus Romans 16.
Christ, but their own bellies: they have his person in admiration Jude 16.
only for advantage: they can bear the cross with Judas, so they may bear the
bag, and lick their own fingers. Ephraim is a heifer that loved to tread out
the corn: because, whiles it treads, it feeds, Hos. 10. 11. But such delicate
self-seekers are rejected, as here: when those that have honest aims and ends
hear, Come and see. Ioh. 1. 46.

Verse 20. The Foxes have holes, etc.]
q. d. Exigua mihi sunt subsidia aut praesidia. Nudus opum, sed cui coelum
terraque paterent, as Ennius said of Archimedes. The great Architect of the
world, had not a house to put his head in; but emptied himself (...).
of all, and became poor, to make us rich, not in goods, but in grace, (...) 2.
7.
not in worldly wealth but in the (...) treasure. Say we with that 2 Cor. 8 9.
Father, Christi paupertas meum est patrimonium: prefer the reproach (...).
of Christ before the treasures of Egypt: and if, besides and Heb. 11. 26.
with Christ, we have food and (...), let us therewith rest content. Say we
have no house on earth, we have one in heaven not 1 Timothy 6. 8.
made with hands. Those good souls dwelt in dens and caves of Heb. 11. 37, 38.
the earth, yea wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins, that might have
rustled in their silks and velvets, that might ( (...)-like) have vaunted
themselves on their stately turrets and Palaces, if they would have let go
Christ. But that, they knew well had been to make a fools bargain.

But the Son of (...), etc.]
So he styles himself, either to note the truth of his humanity, or the depth
of his abasement, the Son of God became the son of man, which was, as one said
in a like case, to fall from the Court to the cart, from a Palace to a
gallows. Among all the Prophets, Ezekiel is most frequently styled son of man,
and that purposely; to keep him low amidst his many rare raptures and
revelations. The Heathen, when they would set forth a man miserable indeed,
they called him (...), thrice a man.

Verse 21. Lord, suffer me first to go and bury]
Old men's fear is (says Plutarch, and that makes them so gripple) that they
shall not have (...), those that will be careful to nourish them whiles alive,
and to bury them decently when they are dead.

Verse 22. Follow me]
Let go things less necessary, and mind the main: thy task is long, thy time
is short; opportunities are headlong, and must be quickly caught, as the Echo
catches the voice: there is no use of after-wit. Praecipitat tempus, mors atra
impendet agenti.
Sil. Italic.


Let the dead bury their dead]
The dead in sin, their dead in nature. Ungodly men are no better then
breathing ghosts, walking sepulchers of themselves. Their bodies are but living
coffins, to (...) a dead soul up and down in. The Saints only are heirs of
life, 1 Pet. 3. 7. and all others are dead, stark dead in sins and trespasses,
as the wanton widow, 1 Timothy 5. 6. as Terence says the (...): Sane hercle homo
voluptati (...) fuit dum vixit. Ter. in (...).
And of such dead corpses (as once in Egypt, Exodus 12. 30.) there is no house,
wherein there is not one, nay many.

Verse 23. And when he was entered, etc.]
Himself was first in the ship where they were to suffer. Like a good
shepherd, he goes before his (...), Ioh. 10. Like a good Captain, he goes
before his soldiers; and as it was said of Hannibal, that he first (...) the
Princeps (...), (...), excedebat. Live. (...)5. lib. 1. Isa. 41. 10.
(...), and last went out of the field, so is it with Christ the Captain of our
salvation. Fear not (says he) for I am with thee: be not afraid, for I am thy
God. Tua causa erit (...) causa, as that Emperor told Julius Pflugius, who had
been much wronged by the (...) of Saxony in the Emperors employment.

Verse 24. And behold there arose a great tempest]
Stirred up, likely, by the devil, to drown Christ (that male-childe of the
Church, Rev. 12. 5.) and his Disciples; as he brained Jobs children with the
fall of the house. This is still the endeavor of Satan and his instruments:
but to such we may, as Pope Pius 2. wrote to the great Turk. Niteris incassum
Christi submergere navem:
Fluctuat, at nunquam mergitur, illaratis.
And as the Poet said of Troy, so may we of the Church, Victa tamen vinces,
eversaque Troiare surges:
Obruit hostiles illa ruina domos.
Ovid. Fast.
Ambrose has a remarkable speech to this purpose: The devil Diabolus (...)
movet: sed ipse (...) fragium facit. Ambr.
stirs up a tempest against the Saints, but himself is sure to suffer
shipwreck. The Church, as a bottle, may be dipped, not (...): as the Diamond, it
may be cast into the fire, not burnt by it: as the Crystal, it may be fouled,
but not stained by the venom of a toad: as the Palm Tree in the Emblem which
though it have many weights at top, and (...) at the root, yet it says still
Nec premor, nec perimor. Lastly, as the North Pole, semper versatur, (...), as
St (...) observes.

Verse 25. Master, save us, we perish.]
Troubles drive us to God, (as bugbears do children into their mothers bosom,)
who delight to help those that are forsaken of their hopes. In prosperity,
(...) we pray not at all -- Rarae fumant felicibus arae, or but faintly,
yawningly, etc. (...) fine malis, est ut avis sine alis. But in a stresse, as
here, our prayers, like strong streams in narrow straits, run mightily upon
God, and will not away, without that they came for.

Verse 26. And he says unto them]
Christ first chides them, and then chides the winds and waves. Men are most
malleable in time of misery, Job 33. 23. Strike whiles the iron is hot: How
forceable are right words? Those that are melted in the furnace of affliction,
will easily receive impression. Hamper Manasses, and he will hearken to you.

O ye of little faith]
Ye petty-fideans: He calls them not nullifidians. Faith is faith, though
never so little of it. Credo languida fide, sed tamen fide, said dying
Cruciger. Our consolation lies much in the comparative degree; (...) our
salvation is in the positive. Much faith, will yield unto us here our heaven;
and any faith, if true, will yield us heaven hereafter. Now for fear; that
which is distrustful, faith quelleth and kills it: As that which is awful
and filial, it breeds, feeds, fostereth and (...).

Verse 27. Even the winds and the sea obey him]
He lays laws upon all creatures, which are his hoasts. The winds and sea
fought for us apparently in that Octogessimus octavus mirabilis annus:
(...).
So that the (...) Spaniards said, Christ was turned Lutheran. The like was
done by the winds for Theodosius, in that famous battle against Maximinus. The
soldiers that were then present told us, says St Augustine, that the winds
took their darts, (...) (...). (...) (...). (...).
as soon as they were out of their hands, and drove them violently upon the
enemy: as for those that were cast at us by the enemy, they were with like
violence carried back upon their own bodies, Hence sang Claeudian the Heathen
Poet in this sort concerning (...), O (...) dilecte Deo, cui (...) ether,
Et conjurati veniunt ad classica venti.


Verse 28. Coming out of the tombes]
There the devil kept them, the more to terrify them with the fear of death
all their lives long, (...). 2. 15. Appius Claudius (as Capella witnesses)
could not abide to (...) the Greek (...) (...), because it represented the
gnashing of the teeth of dying men. (...) gives another reason hereof, that the
devil hereby sought to persuade silly people, that dead men's souls were turned
into devils, and walked (as they call it) especially about tombs and
sepulchers. (...)(...). (...). (...) (...). (...). 99.
Thus he often appeared to people, in times of Popery, in the shape of some of
their (...) kindred, and haunted them till he had made them sing a (...) for
(...) and such a soul. Melancthon tells a (...) of an Aunt of his, that had her
hand burnt to a coal by the devil, (...) to her in the (...) of her (...)
husband. And Pareus relates an example (much like this poor demoniack in the
text) of a bakers daughter in their country, (...) and Par. in (...).
(...) up in a cave she had dig'd as in a grave, to her dying day.

Verse 29. What have we to do with thee?]
Horrible impudence? As if Christ were not concerned, when his members are
(...). David felt his own coat cut, and his own cheeks (...) in the coats and
(...) of his servants: And shall not Christ be as sensible of the abules done
to his? The (...) suffers in the (...): neither is it other then just, that the
arraignment of mean malefactors, runs in the style of wrong to the Kings Crown
and dignity.

(...) thou Son of God]
The devil speaks Christ's fair, but only to be rid of him: so (...) many by
Christ's Ministers, that rip up their (...), and so put them into an hell
above-ground. St Mark tells us, that they worshipped our Savior: St Luke, that
they adjured him. Satan (says one) does not always appear in one and the same
fashion. At Lystra he appeared like a Comedian, at (...) like a Philosopher, at
Ephesus like an Artificer, and here like an (...): as to Saul he appeared like
the old (...), who could not have spoken more gravely, severely, divinely then
the fiend did. But as, when one commended the Popes Legate at the Council of
Basile, Sigismund the Emperor answered, (...) Romanus (...): So when the devil
comes commended unto us under what name soever, (...) us cry out, yet he is a
devil; and remember still to (...) him, (...) in the faith, 1 Pet. 5.

Art thou (...) to torment us?]
To dispossess us. Lo it is another hell to the (...) to be idle, or otherwise
then evil-occupied. Should not we hold it our heaven to be well-doing. Learn
for shame of the devil (says Father Latimer) to be busy about the (...)
jugulent homines, surgunt, etc. Hor.
salvation of your own and other men's souls, which he so studiously seeks to
destroy. Athanasius (...) a conceit, that the (...) may be driven out of a body
by repeating the 68 Psalm. Origin says of devils, No greater torment to them,
then to see men addicted to the Scriptures: In (...) eorum omnis flammaest, in
hoc uruntur incendio. Orig, in Number. Hom. il. 27.
Chrysostom says, we may (...) and scourge the devil by fasting and prayer,
which the Prophet Isaiah calls a charm or enchantment, (...)
Isa. 26. 16.

Before the time]
For they are respited and reprived as it were, in respect of full torment, and
suffered, as free prisoners, to flutter in the air, and to course about the
earth till that great day; which they tremble to think on, and which they that
mock at, 2 Pet. 3. or make light of, are worse then devils.

Verse 30. A herd of many swine (...)]
Suille pecori anima Epicuri de grege (...) (...).
pro sale data, says Varro. Swinish Epicures also have their souls but for
salt to keep their bodies from putrefying. That was a rotten speech of
Epicurus, that life eternal was nothing else but an eternal gourmandizing and
swilling and swallowing of Nectar and Ambrosia. The kingdom of God is another
manner of thing then meat and drink, Romans 14. The devil desired to enter into
the (...), because of their (...). Eat not greedily, for this is Os porci
habere, as that Pope is said to have. Drink not to drunkenness: for this sin
robs a man of himself, and lays a swine in his room. No creature, besides
man, will be drunk, but swine: and not (...) neither, but as they are
conversant about men; for wild swine will not, they say.

Verse 31. So the devils besought him]
For threaten him they durst not, as little as the Gadarens, verse. 34. because
they found themselves overpowered. Time was when they had set upon our Savior
with (...) might and malice in the wilderness. The matter is well amended now.
The same power, when he pleases, can change the note of the Tempter to us. He
will tread Satan undet our feet shortly. That which Vegetius said of (...)
(...). 16. lib 1 cap. 24.
(...) with sithes and hooks will be applied to the devils; At first they were
a terror and after a scorn.

Suffer us to go into the herd of swine]
We may safely say, that the bristles of swine are numbered with God, says
Tertullian (...). de fuga.
much more the hairs of Saints: not one of them falls to the ground without
their heavenly father. Satan desired (...) have forth Possumus (...) quoque
(...) as (...) deum (...) as (...) capillos.
Peter to winnow: as Goliath desired to have an Israelite to combat with, he
could not command him. He could not make a louse, Exodus 8. 18. fire an house,
Job 1. 19. drown a pigge, without divine permission. Now we are more of price
then many pigs before God, as that Martyr well inferred. And if a legion of
devils Act. and Men. sol. (...).
had not power over an herd of hogs, much less have they over Christ's flock of
sheep; says Tertullian. (...) ut (...) dei (...).


Verse 32. And he said unto them, Go]
1. To show his sovereignty over the creatures: He is the great proprietary of
all, and (...) do, with his own as he lists. 2. To punish their sensuality in
feeding upon swines flesh, against the express letter of the law. Ex uno sue
quinquaginta prope sapores excogitantur, says Pliny. And there was a jolly
Pope (some kin, belike, to Pope (...) 3.
(...) surnamed Os porci) that being, (...) his gout, forbidden Act and Mon.
sol. (...).
swines-flesh by his Phyfitian, cried out to his steward, bring me my pork, al
dispito di dio in despite of God. 3. To try whether was dearer to these filthy
Gergesites, their swine, or their souls. They showed themselves to be of
Cardinal Burbons mind, who would not (...) with his part in Paris, for his
part in Paradise.

They went into the herd of swine]
That thereby Satan might win upon the souls of the Citizens (wedded and
wedged to their (...) substance) and he failed not of his purpose. A cunning
(...) of an old Quadruplator. Be not ignorant of his wiles. (...) the world
from the devil, and he can do us no hurt.

Ran violently down a steep place into the sea]
(...) (...) the Magician, being at point of death, called unto him a dog (a
familiar devil) that went about with him, and said Get thee gone thou cursed
creature, that have undone me. Whereupon (...) me perdita bestia quae me perdid
(...). Joh. (...). loc. com. page 136.
the dog presently departed, and cast himself headlong into the water.

And perished in the waters]
So will detestable drunkards in the bottomless pit; those that, as swine their
bellies, so they break their heads with filthy quaffing. These shall have a cup
of fire and brimstone powered down their throats, Psalm. 11. 6. and not obtain
one drop of water to cool their flaming tongues. For why? (...), (says one)
is a vice so vile, so base, so beastly, as that it transformes the soul,
deformes the body, (...) the brain, Hugo. de Sancto Vict
betrays the strength, defiles the affection, and metamorphoseth the whole
man: making the understanding ignorant, the strong staggering, the trusty
trothlesse, the virtuous vicious, and the (...) a pandar to the profanest sin.

Verse 33. And they that kept them fled]
So do Parasiticall Pastors leave their forlorn flocks to danger and
destruction: letting the devils hurry them to hell, and not caring whether they
sink or swim. They that go down into this pit, or suffer others to go down by
their default, cannot hope for Gods truth, Isa. 38. 18.

Verse 34. They besought him to depart]
This was a great madness, as (...) wish, because they had been (...) by the
Sun, they might see no more of it. And yet how many (alas) are there at this
day that cry out of this madness, and yet imitate it? How many, that prefer
haram dom sticam arae dominicae, as one long Petr. Blesensis.
since complained, a swine-sty before a sanctuary? We are now become Gergesites
said that Martyrin Q. Maryes days, that would rather loose Christ, then our
porkets. Take up your cross, is a hard saying: therefore Christ must be prayed
to be gone, lest all our pigs be drowned. The devil shall have his dwelling
again in many Act. and Mon. fol. (...). (...)
men's selves, rather then in their pigs. Therefore to the devil (...) they go
and dwell with him, etc. Thus Mr Bradford. And oh how (...), shall Christ
regest one day upon all unworthy (...), Depart from me, ye wicked?

CHAP. IX.
Verse 1. And he entered into a ship]
HE called not for fire from heaven upon those brutish Gadarens that were so
glad to be rid of him. Some wicked ones Christ punishes here, lest his
providence, but not all, lest his patience Aug. in Psalm. 30.
and promise of coming again to judgment should be called into question, says
Augustine.

Came into his own city]
Capernaum a colony of the Romans, where our Savior hired an house, and wore
a stole or long garment, as a citizen. Happy town in such an inhabitant, and in
this respect lifted up to heaven, Matthew. 11. 23. Indeed heaven came down to
Capernaum; for the Lord so delights in his servants (how much more then in
his Son) that their walls are ever in his sight, and he loves to look upon
the houses, where they dwell Isa. 49. 16.

Verse 2. They brought unto him a man (...), etc.]
Show we like mercy to our sin-sick friends, bring them to the ordinances,
present them to that Son of righteousness that has healing (...) his wings.
To an Almighty Physician no disease can be incurable. 1 (...).
He is as able and as ready still to heal those that are brought unto him, he
has lost nothing by heaven, be sure. But as Aaron, though he might not lament
over his dead sons, because as High Priest he entered into the Holy-place, yet
he still retained the affections and bowels of a father: So the Lord Christ,
though in heaven, is no (...) loving and large-hearted to his, then when he was
in the flesh. Bring therefore all your brethren for an offering to the (...).
66. (...).
Lord: and if they cannot or will not come otherwise, bring them as the Prophet
bids, upon horses, and in chariots and in litters: q. d. though sick, weakly;
and unfit for travel, yet rather in litters, then not at all.

Son be of good cheer.]
And well he might, when his sins were forgiven. This mercy is enough to make
a man everlastingly merry. Viscount Lisle, in Henry the eights time, died for
joy of an unexpected pardon from his Prince: how great then is the (...).
comfort of pardon from God? Such are bid to be glad, rejoice and (...) for
joy, Psalm. 32. 1, 11. And all others (...) forbid to take any comfort, Hos. 91.

Thy sins are for given (...)]
And yet his (...) remained upon him for some while after. Behold, He whom thou
love is sick, said they of Lazarus, Joh. 11. We must make a new Bible, (...)
we can necessarily conclude, that God is heavily offended, because we are
heavily afflicted. He that escapes affliction, may suspect his adoption, Prove.
3. 12.

Verse 3. This man blasphemeth.]
True, had he been but a man, and had taken upon him to forgive sins by his own
authority, as M. Ley his pattern of (...). 145.
Popish Priests do, to the subverting of some men's souls. I have known one
(says a reverend Divine) who neither by education nor affection was disposed
to Popery; who having the ill hap (when his conscience was perplexed) to fall
into the hands of a Popish Priest, became a Papist upon this reason, because
(as the Priest suggested) that religion afforded more comfort for the
conscience then ours; and therefore more comfort, because it had, and exercised
a power to pardon sin, which our Ministers neither did, nor durst assume unto
themselves.

Verse 4. Wherefore think ye evil, etc.]
Christ confutes their calumny, and proves himself to be God, and to have power
to pardon sin, by discerning and condemning their evil thoughts. I the Lord
search the heart, Jer. 17. Satan may give a shrewd guess: Bart. l. 1 de ver.
oblig.
and so may men too: as Bartolus writes of Doctor Gabriel Nele, that by the
only motion of the lips, without any utterance, he understood all men,
perceived and read in every man's countenance, what he meant, etc. But none can
certainly know the thoughts of man, but God alone. It is his royalty to know
what is in man, Joh. 2. 25.

Verse 5. For whether is it easier, etc.]
q. d. It is a work of one and the same Almighty power to pardon sin, and, with
a bare word only, to heal the sick, such as are counted past cure especially.
Think the same of the souls sicknesses, and say with that Ancient, Ego admisi,
Domine, unde tu damnare potes me, sed tu non (...), unde tu salvare potes me,

Verse 6. That the son of man has power, etc.]
And therefore is more then a man. The Rhemists tell us of one man that could
remove mountains. But none but the man Christ (...) could ever remit sins. He
only it is that blots out the cloud, and the thick cloud too, enormities as
well as infirmities: for this is a Isa. 44 22.
true Axiom, Peccata non (...) justificationem, though sins be different,
Justification is not. Take heed ye enterline not Gods Covenant.

Verse 7. And he arose and departed.]
He did as (...) was bidden; for he was healed on both sides, Mallem (...) quam
miracula facere, said Luther.

Verse 8. They marvelled and glorified God.]
When the proud Pharisees blasphemed and were hardened; and so voided the
counsel of God against themselves Suo (...).
( Luke 7. 30.) or to their own singular disadvantage.

Verse 9. A man named Matthew]
The other Evangelists call him Levi; so shrowding his shame under a name less
known. He plainly and ingenuously sets down his own more common name, and the
nature of his (...) (like as David does penance Psalm. 51. 1.
in a white sheet, as it were) which is an evident argument, both of the
Scriptures Divinity, and of the Evangelists gracious (...). If any should
upbraid him with his old evil courses, he could readily have answered, as
Austin did in like (...), Quae tureprehendis ego damnavi: or as Beza, Hic homo
invidet mihi gratiam Christi.

Sitting at the receipt of custom.]
These Publicans rented the revenue of the sea and rivers, of the Romans (as
now the Jews (...) of the Turks) at a certain rate. And that they might pay
their rent, and pick a living out of it, they were great gripers, and exacted
extremely upon the Jews; who therefore hated them, and held them furthest off
from heaven of any men. A faithful Publican was so rare at Rome it self, that
one Sabinus, for his honest managing of that office, in an honorable
remembrance thereof, (...) (...). (...) Ve (...).
had certain images erected with this (...), For the honest Publican. Of this
sort of sinners was Matthew, whom Christ (...) into an Evangelist: as he did
Paul the persecutour into an Apostle; Justin the Philosopher into a Martyr;
Cyprian the Rhetorician, and (as some think) the Magician into a famous (...)
of the Church. I was an obstinate Papist (says Latimer) as any was in England:
Insomuch, that when I should be Act and (...).
made Bachellour of Divinity, my whole (...) went against (...) Melancthon, and
his opinions, etc.

And he arose and followed him.]
(...) the Apostate cavils at this (...); as if either this were false, or
Matthew a fool to follow a stranger at the first (...). But this Ath is it knew
not the work (...).
of faith, nor the power of Christ's (...), when he calls effectually. If Maris
the blind Bishop of Bithynia had been by, to have heard this dead dog thus
barking, he would surely have shaped him such an answer, as he did once. For
when (...) said unto him, Behold O (...) A (...), (...) ago (...), ne (...),
(...) ad impietatem (...).
thou art blind: Does the Galilean thy God care for thee? He replied, O thou
wicked Apostate, I give my God thanks, that has made me blind, that I might
not see that wretched face of thine.

Verse 10. As Jesus sat at meat in the house.]
Matthew feasted Christ, for joy of his coversion. Yea, he made a feast, a
feast like Luke 5 29.
a King, a very sumptuous feast (as S. Lukes word imports) he (...) (...),
(...), (...).
kept open house, a table for all comers. As Princes at their (...) straw the
streets with coin, make the conduits run wine, release prisoners, etc. So
here, Kill the fatted Calf, and let Erasm. ex (...).
us be merry, said he at his sons return. When a sinner repents there are
gaudies in heaven: instruments of (...) are put into Luk 15.
the Angels hands, and songs into their mouths. How well apaid was Zacheus,
when salvation was come home to his house? When God was once reconciled to the
people in the wilderness, after their sin in setting up the golden Calf, to
testify their great joy and (...), they brought stuff more then enough to the
building of the Tabernacle. The Centurion, when he once became Luk 7.
a proselyte, built the Jewish Synagogues that had been thrown down by
Antiochus. And Tyrus converted finds another Isa. 23. 18.
manner of merchandise then formerly, viz. to feed and clothe Gods Saints with
durable clothing.

Verse 11. And when the Pharisees saw it.]
As envy is quicksighted. See Ovids description of it, (...). The wicked look
round about the Saints, seeking to pick a hole in their coats; they pore and
pry more narrowly then Laban did into Jacobs stuff. Walk circumspectly. Ephesians.
5. 15.


They said unto his Disciples.]
1. Not to him: where the hedge is lowest, there the devil leaps over soonest:
as he began his temptation with Eve, apart from her husband, Calumniare (...),
aliquid saltem adhaerebit, is a maxim in Machiavel. It is the property of
defamations, to leave a kind of lower estimation many times, where they are
not believed. 2. These hypocrites would seem to say this in pure pity to the
seduced Disciples, whom they saw to do the same with their Master. An ordinary
trick among make-bates. S. Austin had these two verses written on his Table,
Quisquis amat dictis absentum rodere famam, (...). in (...).

Hanc mensam indictam (...).
Here Is no room for railers.

Verse 12. But when Jesus heard that, he said]
Hence we learn, (...) Plato.
that although it be a servile business, as Plato calls it, and an endless
piece of work to make answer and apology to all slanders; yet where Gods glory
is interessed, and the salvation of other men's souls hazarded, we must
endeavor the clearing of our names, and the righting of our injuries and
indignities cast upon us. But let this be done with meekness of wisdom, with
weight of reason, not heat of passion, and rather in Gods words then in our
own, as here.

Verse 13. They that be whole.]
There are none such, but in conceit only. The civil (...) ails nothing,
complains of nothing, is as sound as a Roch: but no such sound heart can come
to heaven: as (in another sense) none but sound can come there: only sensible
sinners are capable of cure and comfort, such as see themselves Christ (...)
creatures.

Need not the Physician.]
And the Physician needs them as (...): he came not, oars not for them, they
have as much help from him as they seek. Presumption is as a chain to their
neck, and they believe their interest in Christ, when it is no such thing: They
(...) a bridge of their own shadow, and so fall into the brook; they perish by
catching at their own catch, hanging on their own fancy, which they falsely call
and count faith.

Verse 14. But goye, and learn what, etc.]
In the history of Jonas, Christ found the mystery of his death, burial and
resurrection. Rest not in the shell of the Scriptures, but break it, and get
out the kernel, as the sense is called, Judge. 7. 15. stick not in (...), the
breaking of the (...).
the bark, but pierce into the heart of Gods Word. Lawyers say, that Apices
juris non sunt jus, The letter of the Law, is not the Law, but the meaning of
it. John never rested, till the sealed book was opened. Pray for the spirit of
revelation, plow with Gods heifer, and we shall understand his riddles,
provided that we wait in the use of all good means, till God irradiate both
organ and object.

I will have mercy.]
Both that which God shows to us, and that which we show to others, spiritual
and corporal. Steep thy thoughts (says one) in the mercies of God, and they
will die thine, as the dy-fat does the cloth, Col. 3. 12.

I came not to call the righteous.]
Those that are good in their own eyes, and claim heaven as the portion that
belongs unto them. Scribonius writes of (...) Cedar, Quod viventes res
putrefacit Physic. lib. 2.
and perdit: putridas autem (...) and conservat: So Christ came to kill the
quick, and to quicken the dead.

But sinners to repentance.]
Not to liberty, but duty. Tertullian Tert de poenit.
speaks of himself, that he was born to nothing but repentance. This is not
the work of one, but of all our days, as they said, Ezra 10. 13. Some report
of Mary Magdalen, that after our Saviors resurrection, she spent thirty years
in Gallia (...), Adeo ut etiam lachryme out (...) genarum exederint.
in weeping for her sins: And of S. Peter, that he always had his eyes full of
tears, insomuch as his face was furrowed with continual weeping. Let not him
that resolves upon Christianity dream of a delicacy.

Verse 14. Then came to him the Disciples of John.]
These sided with the Pharisees against our Savior out of emulation and
self-love, the bane and break-neck of all true love: yea, they were first in
the quarrel. A doleful thing, when brethren shall set against brethren,
Hebrews vex one another, Exodus 2. and Christians as if they wanted enemies,
fly in the faces one of another. S. Basil was held an heretic, even of them
that held the same things as he did, and whom he honored as brethren: all the
fault was, that he out-shone them, and they envied him the praise he had for
opposing Arrianisme, which was such, as that Philostorgius the Arrian wrote,
that all the other Orthodox Divines were but babies to Basil. How hot was the
contention betwixt Luther and Carolostudius, merely out of a self-seeking
humor, and desire of preheminency? How extreme violent are the Lutherans
against the Calvinists. In the year, 1567. they joined themselves at (...) with
the Papists against the Calvinists. And Luther somewhere professes, that he
will rather yield to Transubstantiation, then remit any thing of
Consubstantiation.

Why do we and the Pharisees fast often.]
The Pharisees were perilous fasters, when they devoured widows houses, and
swallowed il-gotten goods, as Gnats down their wide (...), which therefore
Christ calls, (...), the inwards. Their fasts were mere mock-fasts: so were
those of John Archbishop of Constantinople, sir-named the Faster, who yet was
the first that affected the title of Universal Bishop, so much cried down by
Gregory the great. These Pharisees had sided with, and set on John's Disciples
in their masters absence, like as the renegado (...), to keep up that bitter
contention, that is between the Calvinists and (...), have a practice of
running over to the Lutheran Church, pretending to be converts, and to build
with them.

Verse 15. And Jesus said unto them]
He makes apology for his accused Disciples: so does he still at the right hand
of his heavenly Father, nonsuting all accusations brought against us, as our
Advocate, 1 John 2. 1. appearing for us, as the Lawyer does for (...), (...) to
(...). the (...) of the brethren (...) 12. 10.
his Client ( Heb. 9 24.) opening his case, and pleading his cause. He helps
us also to make apology for our selves to God, 2 Cor. 7. 11. and expects,
that as occasion requires, we should make apology one for another, when
maligned and misreported of by the world.

Can the children of the (...), etc?]
Our Savior seeing them to sin of infirmity, and by the instigation of the
Pharisees, who with their leaven had somewhat sowred and seduced them in their
masters absence, deals gently with them; to teach us what to (...) in like
case. A Venice-glasse must be otherwise handled then an earthen pitcher or
goddard, some must be rebuked sharply, severely, cuttingly, Titus 1. 13. but of
others we must bave compassion, making a difference, Jude 22. (...) (...)
(...): (...) (...), rigide. Erasm, (...). and ad (...).


Mourn as long as the Bridegroom, etc.]
Mourn, as at sunerals (so the word signifies.) This were incongruous,
unseasonable and unseemly at a feast. It was a peevishness in Sampsons wife,
that she wept at the wedding; since that is the day of the rejoicing of a man's
heart, as Solomon has it. Now Christ is the (...).
Churches Spouse. He has the bride, and is the bridegroom, as (...). 3 11.
their master the Baptist had taught them, Joh. 3. 29. and (...) over every
good soul, as the bridegroom rejoices over the bride, Isai. 62. 5. Should not
the Saints therefore reciprocate?

But the days will come.]
Our Savior (...) much, even many a little death all his life long: and yet,
till his passion, he accounts himself to be, as it were, in the bride-chamber.
Then it was especially that he alone (...) the wine press, and was roasted
alive in the fire of his Fathers wrath, etc.

When the Bridegroom (...) be (...) from them.]
As now your master the Baptist is from you; a just argument and occasion of
your grief and fasting, if possibly you may beg him of God out of the hands of
Herod. When the Duke of Burbons Captains had shut up Pope Clement 8. in the
Castle S. Angeto, Cardinal Wolsey being shortly after sent Ambassador beyond
seas, to make (...) and (...) of Card. (...) page 38.
means for his release, as he came through Canterbury to ward (...), he
commanded the Monks, and the Quire to sing the Letany after this sort, Sancta
Maria, ora pro Papa nostro Clemente. Himself also being present was seen to
weep tenderly, for the Popes calamity. Shall superstition do that, that
Religion cannot bring us to? Shall we not turn again unto the Lord with
fasting, weeping and mourning, if for nothing else, yet that our poor (...) may
find compassion? Which is Hezekiah's motive to the 2 Chronicles. 30. 9.
people.

And then shall they fast.]
Note here, 1. That fasting is not (...) with the Ceremonial Law, but still to
be used as a duty of the Gospel. 2. That times of heavines are times of
humiliation. 3. That our (...) here are but as marriage-feasts, for
continuance; they last not long: never look for it.

Verse 16. No man puts a piece, etc.]
Austerities of religion are not to be (...) upon new-beginners. God would not
carry the people to Canaan through the Philistims country (though it were the
nearest way) for discouraging them at first (...) out. Our Savior spoke as the
Disciples could Mark 4. 33.
hear. Discretion is to be used, and Christ's lambs handled with all tenderness.

Verse 17. Neither do men put new Wine.]
In the year of grace, 340. arose (...) heretics called Ascitae or (...),
(...), (...). (...). p. (...).
because they bare a bottle on their backs, (...) that they were no true
Christians that did not so: and alleging this text for themselves, as if they
were the only new bottles filled with new wine. So those districtissimi
Monachi, (...) (as one engli heth it) who made themselves wooden crosses, and
carried them on (...) backs, continually pleaded, Mat. 16. 24. to make for
them. This was, as M. Tindall says in another (...), to think to quench their
thirst by sucking the Ale-powl.

Verse 18. Behold, there came a certain Ruler.]
Jairus the (...) of the (...). (...) such came to Christ: but this man was
(...) of doors by the cross, as the wolf is out of the wood by hard hunger. It
was his only daughter of a (...)-year (...), that was now at point of death.
This makes him (...) out to (...). 8. 41.
Christ the best Physician. Men must be (...) ((...)) ere they find mercy (
Hos. 14. 3.) and a (...) people ere they will be brought to trust in the name
of the Lord, Zeph. 3. 12. The Haemorroisse came not to Christ, (...) she had a
halfpenny to (...) her self.

But come and lay thine hands upon her.]
He thought Christ could not otherwise cure her: this was (...) of faith, far
short of that of the Centurion, who yet was a Roman soldier; whereas Jairus
was a learned Jew. Knowledge therefore is one thing, faith (...): and the
greatest scholars, are not always the holiest men. Neither have all Gods
people a like measure of true faith. This should humble and (...) the weak, but
not discourage them in their (...): since the tallest Oak was once an (...),
and the deepest Doctor was once in his hornbook.

Verse 19. And Jesus arose and followed him.]
As tendering the Rulers infirmity, and not taking advantages, or turning him
off, for (...) to prescribe. Be we also ready to every good office, not (...)
quarrels, or pleading excuses.

Verse 20. And behold a woman, etc.]
This history and occurrence comes in here by a Parenthesis, and by a sweet
providence, for the exercise and increase of Jairusses faith and patience.
Iairus could have wished her far enough at that time, because she hindered our
Savior from making haste to his dying daughter. But she shall be dead
out-(...), the woman cured, and he thereby confirmed, ere his desire shall be
accomplished; that God in all may be glorified.

Which was diseased, etc.]
And had lavished money out of the bag Isa (...). 6.
for help, but had none. Nay, she had suffered many things of the Physicians,
(...) occidunt. Pet. (...). de (...). Dei.
who had well nigh officiously killed her, and had (...) exhausted her. This
made Chaucer take for his Motto, Farewell physic; and the Emperor Adrian cry
out upon his deathbed, Many (...).
Physicians have killed the King.

Came behind him.]
Either as abasht of her blushfull (...): or, because (...) could not come
before him for the crowd, etc.

Verse 21. If I may but touch his garment.]
This was a (...) says of hers, and not much inferior to (...) of the
Centurion. (...) us in like sort, when we feel the bloody flux of natural
(...), (...) at our eyes, mouths, hands, and other parts, repair to (...), and
touch him by faith: so shall we feel that there goes a (...) out from him, to
heal the seul. As fishes when they are hurt, heal themselves again by touching
the Tench, finding the slime of his body to be a sovereign salve: so must we,
when wounded with sin, have recourse to Christ, and our faith will make us
whole every whit.

Verse (...). But Jesus turned him about.]
To take notice of it himself, and to notify it to others, for these reasons,
says Chrysostom; 1. To free the woman from fear, lest her conscience should
call her Recreant, as one that had stole a cure. 2. To make up in her what was
wanting to her faith, if she should have any such thought to do so. 3. To
manifest her faith, for other men's imitation. 4. To make known his omnisciency,
and so his Divinity. 5. To confirm the Rulers faith, and so fit him for further
mercy. 6. To teach her and us, that, not his garment, but himself did the cure.
This makes against that Popish foppery in worshipping relics, as the Syndon
wherein Christ's body was enwrapped, of the virtue whereof Paleottus Archbishop
of Bonony, set (...) a great book, An. Dom. 1617.

And the woman was made whole, etc.]
That fable recorded by Eccles. bist. l 7. cap (...).
Eusebius is scarce worth relating; that this woman should set up at her door
in Cesarea Philippi, a statue of brass in honor of our Savior; near whereto
grew a certain herb good for all diseases. Irenaeus (far ancienter then
Eusebius) reproves the heretics, Act. and Mon. fol (...).
called Gnostici, for that they carried about them the Image of Christ made in
Pilates time, after his own proportion: using also for (...) of their affection
toward it, to set Garlands upon the head of it. And in Epiphanius his time
(who lived soon after (...) epist. ad (...). Sands his survey.
Eusebius) images and statues of Christ or the Saints were abhorred by (...).
The Turks will not endure any image, no not upon their coin, (...) of the
second Commandment: and the Papists for their imagery, they call Idolaters.

Verse 23. He saw the minstrels, etc.]
An Heathenish custom (...) is (...). (...). l. 4. Fast.
crept in among the (...), as many the like are now amongst the Papists, who
are therefore called Heathens, Revel. 11. 2.

The maid is not dead, but sleeps.]
Death is but a sleep to the Saints: and as the (...) of the laboring man is
sweet unto him, so Plato (...) (...) in Apol. (...).
is death most welcome to such, as have most suffered. See my Notes on Ioh. 11.
11.

Verse 24. And they have laughed him to scorn.]
This is daily done by the mad world, quite besides it self in point (...)
Gorg. (...) (...). c 35.
of salvation. They hear and (...). God will laugh at their destruction.

Verse 25. He took her by the hand]
As it were to awaken her (...) deep sleep. He (...) have raised her without
either (...) down, or (...) his (...) upon (...). But as Jairus (...) him, so
he did for him. Who now shall (...) to (...) the day (...) 4 10.
(...) of (...) things?

Verse 26. And the fame hereof went abroad]
Though Christ (...) charged the contrary, Mark. 5. 43. lest, being known too
(...), he should stand in the way of his own design. Howbeit, when he drew
nigh to his end, he raised the young man of Naim, and his friend Lazarus, in
the open view of the (...).

Verse 27. (...) blind men followed him.]
Misery makes unity. (...) two could the better agree to go together, because
their (...) were alike. Hooper and Ridly left (...), when they both were in
(...).

Thou (...) of (...).]
Thou that (...) a (...) Man, as we are; and (...) to say unto (...), as David
did to the men of Judah, ^.
(...) are my (...), my bone and my flesh, etc. Have mercy on us. So the Church
(...) (...), when (...) and (...) by the Assyrian, (...) out; The stretching
out of his wings (...) fill thy land O (...): q. a. O (...) that art also a
man, and have the heart of a man in thee, see to (...) safety. Necessity makes
men beg many times of mere strangers, vea of deadly enemies; as the Israelites
did of the Egyptians, as (...) did of Ahab, and as the poor (...) of the
Assyrians, Lam. 5. 6. How much more boldly should we beg of Christ our near
(...), etc?

Verse 28. And when he was come into the house.]
For till then, he (...) to (...) them, that they might the more earnestly
(...) him. He knows how to commend his benefit to us. (...) data, cito (...).
Things lightly come by, are lightly (...) by.

Verse 29. According to your faith.]
(...) (says a famous ^.
Divine) Justifying faith is not (...) Miraculous, in the sphere of its own
activity, and where it has warrant of Gods Word.

Verse 30. (...) charged them saying, see that no man, etc.] (...) ^.

He (...) them (...), (as the word (...) used imports) (...) they but (...)
their mouths to make it known to any man. Some (...) all for a name: Christ
(besides the vail of his humanity) says, nay thunders: See you tell no man.
How far are those spirit from this, which care only to be seen, and wish
only to dazzle others eyes with admiration, not caring for unknown (...)?

Verse 31. Spread abroad his fame.]
Wherein they sinned, no doubt, though of never so good an intention. Gods
Commandments Prove. (...)
must be kept as the apple of our eye: for else, we charge him with folly.

Verse 32. A dumb man possessed with a devil.]
Satan still gagges many to this day, that they cannot pray to God, (...) his
name, utter themselves to the good of others. The spirit of faith is no in
dweller, but sits in the door of the lips. I believed, 2 Cor. 4. 13.
therefore have I spoken. The Carthusian Monks speak together but once a week.
It is a shame to Christians that they speak not 1 Cor. 11.
(...) one to another, Mal. 3. 16. that they come together, not Epist (...)
(...).
for the better, but for the worse. Inveniar sane superbus, etc. modo (...) non
arguar, dum Dominus (...), says (...). Better I (...) counted (...), then be
sinfully silent.

Verse 33. The (...) marvelled, etc.]
(...) censured, a third sort tempted, a fourth applauded. What can we do, to
undergo but one opinion? To avoid variety of constructions?

Verse 34. Through (...) Prince of devils.]
There is a principal Devil then, Prince of this world. And there are Princes
and principal spirits in Countries and Nations under him, Dan. 10. 13. We read
of the Prince of Persia, hindering the matters of the Church. See more of
(...), chap. 12. ver. 24.

Verse 35. And Jesus went about, etc.]
He was not by any affronts or hard usages of the enemy, dishartened from
well-doing: but as the Moon continues her course, though dogs bark and leap at
her, En peragit cursus surda Diana suos: so did he, and so must we, For (...)
him that endured such contradiction of sinners against (...), lest ye be
wearied and faint in your minds, Heb. 12. 3. Tacilus.
Convitia spreta exolescunt.

Verse 36. He was moved with compassion.]
His (...) so affected (...)
his heart, (...) it (...) toward those silly souls, Ingemuit miserans
graviter, (...). Virgil.


As sheep without a shepherd.]
Their Pastors were Impostours, as Bernard complained of those in his time,
their Episcopi, Aposcopi, (as Espencaeus has it) their overseers by-seers.
That judgment was now befallen them, that Moses of old deprecated, Numb. 27.
17. And this troubled our Savior more then their bodily bondage to the Romans,
which yet was very (...).

Verse 37. But the laborers few.]
Such as will labor to lassitude, (...)
in preaching Christ crucified: few such.

Verse 38. Laborers into his harvest.]
Harvest-men, of all other, have the hardest labor, a sore sweating labor: So
have (...) Ministers. The householder has somewhat to do, said (...).
(...), the Magistrate more, but the Minister most of all. He labors more in a
day many times, then the husbandman does in a month: the sweat of the brow is
nothing to that of the brain: the former furthers health, the later impairs it,
wearying and waring out the body, wasting the vitals, and hastening old age,
and untimely death.

CHAP. X.
Verse 1. And when he had called the twelve.]
HE had set them to pray, and now he sets them to work. Ora (...) 9. 38.
and labora, is an old proverb. And (...) a manu invocanda est Minerva, said
the heathens. To pray to pray, is to mock God, and lose ones labor. Solomon
says, we must as well dig as beg (...) knowledge, Prove. 2. 3, 4. Else, to beg
is bootlesse. The talk (...) the lips only brings want, Prove. 14. 23. Christ
seemed here to say to his praying Disciples, as once he did to Moses: Why
(...). 14. 15.
cryest thou unto me? speak unto the children of Israel, that they go forward.

Verse 2. Now the names of the twelve, etc.]
Their names are registered and had in honor; when the Grandees of the earth,
those men of renown in their generation, (...) either buried in oblivion, or
wrapped up in the sheet of shame; their memory, happily is preserved, but stinks in
the keeping, as that rich glutton, Luke 16. who is not so (...) as named, as
poor Lazarus (...).

Peter and Andrew his brother, etc.]
I hey go coupled, two and two together. And this first for their own sakes,
Two are better (...). (...). 9, 10, (...). (...).
then one, (...) Solomon. For first if they fall, the one will lift up his
fellow, as that which is stronger, shoreth up that which is weaker. 2. If two
lie together, then they have heat. When Silas came, Paul burnt in spirit:
whiles Iehojada lived, Ioash was Act. 18. 5.
free and forward for God: he was the first that complained of 2 Chronicles. 24. 4,
5. 6.
the negligence of his best officers in (...) the Temple. Whiles Bradford was
alive, he kept up Ridley, and so did Latimer Cranmer, from thinking upon
revolt. 3. If one prevail, two shall withstand him. The enemy is readiest to
assault, where none is by to assist: and much of our strength is lost in the
loss of a faithful friend: Whence Paul so rejoiced, that Epaphroditus
recovered, Phil. 2. 27. For their own mutual help and comfort was it
therefore, Hom. Ilias.
that they were sent out by (...), (...), as the Divisae his (...) sed men's
suit (...), pavit ore Lutherus oves, flore (...) (...), (...)
Poet speaks of his Ulysses and Diomedes, sent to fetch in the Palladium.
Secondly for the sake of others, that the bad might be the sooner set down and
covinced; the better confirmed and settled in the truth; since in the mouth of
two or three witnesses, etc. For this it was, that God set forth those noble
pairs, Moses and Aaron, (...) and Jehoshuah, Paul and Barnabas; the two
faithful witnesses, Revel. 11. 3. Luther and Melancthon, Zuinglius and Oeco
lampadius, etc.

Verse. 3. Bartholomew.]
This, say some, was that Nathaniel, Joh. 1. He is by Dionysius quoted to have
said of Divinity, Et Magnam esse and minimam: that it was large in a little
room.

Matthew the Publican.]
See here, as in a mirror, Christ's free grace in such a choice, (...) Matthews
true grace in not dissembling his old trade, but shaming himfelf that God might
be glorified: and thankfully crying out with Iphicrates, (...), from how
sinful and (...), to how high and honorable a calling and course of life am I
advanced?

Verse 4. Simon the Canaanite.]
(...) a man of Cana in Galilee, (as Judas Escariot) that is, a man of Kerioth;
See Josh. 15. 25.) (...)
Simon the Zelot, St Luke calls him. Christ, when he called him (...). Cic. 5
Tusc. Hor. de art poet.
to the Apostleship, either found him, or made him (...): Tardis mentibus
virtus non facile committitur. -- (...) osse Poetis
Non Dij non homines, non concessere columnae.


Verse 5. (...) twelve Jesus sent forth]
Out of deep commiseration (...).
of those poor scattered sheep, that lay panting for life, and Mat. 9. (...).
well nigh gasping their last. Saul, that ravening wolf of Benjamin, and his
fellow-Pharisees, not only breathed out threatenings, Act. 91.
but worried Christ's sheep, that bore golden (...). Now, because he could not
go to them all himself in person, he sends out the twelve. There by also to
teach them and us, that no Minister is so thoroughly (...) to all good works, but
that he may need the 2 (...). 3. 17.
(...) and (...) of his fellow laborers. And this I conceive, was at (...) the
end of erecting Colleges and Cathedrals.

Verse 6. To the lost sheep]
This is the common condition of (...). 53. 6.
us (...). All (...) like sheep have gone astray. The Prophet says not, like
dogs: (...) these, though (...), will find their way home again. Nor (...)
swine: for these also when lugd, or against a storm, will (...) to their home.
But like sheep, that silly creature: then the which as none is more apt to
wander, so neither any more unable to return.

Verse 7. The kingdom of heaven is at hand.]
Repent therefore. Men will do much for a kingdom. And, nothing (...) then a
Kingdom, and that of Heaven, can buy men out of their sweet (...) How many
(...) we daily making answer to the motion of this (...) kingdom (...) them by
God, as the Olive and vine did in Jothams parable? Shall I leave my fat and
sweet sins (...) Paris (...).
to (...), though (...) God? And yet every man must be either a King or a
caytiffe: reign in heaven, or roar for ever in hell. And this the (...) were
bid, where ever they came to preach, not to sing mass, which is the chief
office of Priests among the Papists. And for the people, they are taught to
believe, that the (...) only is a (...) of duty: but the going to Sermons a
matter (...) convenience, and such as (...) left free to men's leisures, and
opportunities, (...).
without imputation of sin.

Verse 8. Heal the sick.]
God glorifies (...) by the fruits of our sin, and the (...) of his own wrath.
This great Alchimist (...) how to extract good out of evil. He can make golden
(...), 1 Pet. 1 7. medicinal (...); fetch his own honor out of the depths of
our (...), as wine draws a (...) virtue from the (...) of vipers, and as
scarlet pulls out the vipers (...).

Freely ye have received.]
And so have we in some sort, and in (...): since no pains we take, no cost we
are at, can possibly (...) so great a (...), as is (...) unto us.

Verse 9. Provide neither gold, etc.]
To wit, for this present (...) (for at other times our Savior had money, and
he put it (...) in a (...)-pouch, but in a bag so big, as that it needed a
(...)) (...) now (...) would (...) them, by experience of his (...) in feeding
and securing them, to trust him for ever.

Verse 10. Neither two coats]
That may be a burden to you.

Neither shooes]
But sandals, a lighter kind of wearing.

Nor yet staves]
Either for offense or defense: a dog shall not wag his tongue at you: Or not a
staff, that may cumber you. But take a staff (as St Mark has it) sc. that may
ease and relieve you Mark. 6. 8, 9.
in your hard toil and travel.

The workman is worthy of his meat]
Of his wages, says St Mark; of both, as laborers in Gods (...); of double
honor, says St Paul, both countenance and maintenance.

Verse 11. Enquire, who in it is worthy]
That is, faithful, as Lydia was, Acts 16. 15. and Philip the Evangelist, Acts
21. 8. and Mary the mother of Mark, Acts 12. 12. Lo here whither Ministers
should resort, and where should be their Rendevouz, Psalm. 26.4 and Psalm. 16. 3.
In the excellent ones of the earth should be their delight. I forget Lords and
Ladies, said good M. Fox, to remember Gods poor Saints.

Verse 12. And when ye come into an house,]
Into the Synagogues and other places of public meeting, our Savior sends
them not as yet, because they were but young beginners, and wanted (...) and
other abilities: but bids them teach privately, catechize from house to house,
and not stretch the wing beyond the nest, till better fledged, and fitted for
flight.

Verse 13. If that house be worthy]
The Saints are the only Worthies, of whom the world is not worthy. These shall
walk Heb. 11.
with Christ, for they are worthy. But the heart of the wicked is little Rev. 3.
worth, Prove. 10. 20.

Let your peace come upon it]
Christian salutations are effectual benedictions. We (...) you in the Name of
the Lord. Psalm. 129. 8.


Let your peace return unto you]
Something will come of your good wishes; if not to others, to your selves: you
shall be paid Isa. 49. 4, (...).
for your pains as the Physician is, though the patient dies; as the Lawyer
has his fee though his clients cause miscarry. God will (...).
reward his Ministers. though Israel be not gathered, secundum (...), non (...)
proventum, as Bernard has it.

Verse 14. And whosoever shall not receive you]
Two sure signs of reprobate goats, 1. Not to receive Christ's Ministers to
house and harbor, accounting themselves happy in such an entertainment. 2. Not
to hear their words. The most good is done by Gods Ministers commonly at first
coming. Then some receive the word with admiration, others are daily more and
more hardened: as fish, though fearful, stir not at the great noise of the sea,
whereunto they are accustomed: and as birds that build in a belfree, startle
not at the tolling of the bell.

Shake off the dust of your feet]
In token that you sought not theirs, but them, and that you will not carry
away so much as any of their accursed dust: that you will not have any
communion at all with them, wait no longer upon them: that the dust of those
feet (that should have been beautiful) shall be fatal and ferall to them;
that God shall hence-forward beat them here as small as dust with his heavy
judgments, as with an iron-mace, and that hereafter he shall shake them off as
dust, when they come to him for Psalm. 2.
salvation, at the last judgment.

Verse 15. It shall be more tolerable]
God can better bear any thing, then the abuse of his free grace in the offers
of mercy. Profligate professors and Profane Gospellers, shall one day wish, Oh
that I had been a Sedomite, that I had never heard a Sermon! or oh that I might
hear but one Sermon more, etc. Should Solemon forsake that God that had
appeared unto him twice? Good turns aggrauate unkindnesses: and nothing more
torments those in hell, then to think that they might have been happy, had they
been worthy their years, as they say.

Verse 16. Bebold I send you forth, etc.]
This might seem incredible to the Disciples, since they were sent among the
lost sheep of Israel. But strange though it seem, it is not so strange as true.
Look for it therefore. Behold. Christ was in no such danger from Herod that
fox, as from those wolves the Pharisees.

As sheep in the midst of wolves]
Who would make it their work to worry the flock, and suck their blood, as did
Saul that wolf of the Tribe of Benjamin, and the Primitive Persecutours.
(...). Chro. nol. page 333.
Under Dioclesian, seventeen thousand Christians are said to have been slain in
one month, amongst whom also was Serena the Empress. Those ten Persecutions
were so cruel, that St Hierom writes in one of his Epistles, that for every day
in the year were murdered 5000. excepting only the first day of January. St
Paul fell into the hands of that Lion Nero, qui orientem fidem primus Romae
cruentavit, as Tertullian has it, who therefore also calls him, Dedicatorem
damnationis Christianorum. All the rest of the Apostles are reported to have
died by the hands of tyrants, save only St John: who, in contempt of
Christianity, and of Christ (that is, by interpretation, Gods Anointed) was
cast by Domitian into a vessel of scalding oil, but came forth fresh and
unhurt, In dolum olei immissum ferunt ludibrij causa, quia Christiani a
Christo, and (...) (...) (...) (...). in Apoc. 1. 9. Funo. Chronol. In less
then four years they (...) the lives of 800. innocents here, to their Idols in
Q. Mary's (...).
by a miracle. After this, the Arrian heretics raged extremely, and made great
havoc of the innocent Lambs of Christ. Giezerichus an Arrian King of Vandals,
is said to have exceeded all that went before him in cruelty toward the
Orthodox side, of both sexes. In that Laniena Parifiensis 30000. Protestants
were basely butchered in one month, 300000. in one year. Stokesly Bishop of
London, boasted upon his deathbed, that he had been the death of fifty
heretics in his time. His successor Bonner, was called the common cutthroat,
and flaughter-slave general to all the Bishops of England. And therefore (said
a good woman that told him so in a Letter) it is wisdom for me, and all other
simple sheep of the Lord, to keep us out of your butcherly stall, as long as we
can. Especially, seeing you have such store already, that you are not able to
drink all their blood, lest you should break your belly; and (...) let them lie
still, and die for hunger. Thus she. But that above all is most horrid and
hateful, that is related of the Christians in Calabria, Anno 1560. For, being
all thrust up in oue house together Act. and Mon. sol. (...).
(says M. Fox) as in a sheepfold, the Executioner comes in, and among them
takes one and blindfolds him with a muffler about his eyes, and so leads him
forth to (...) larger place, where he commands him to kneel down. Which being
so done, he cutteth his throat, and so (...) him half dead. Then, taking his
butchers Act. and Mon. sol. 859.
knife, and muffler all of gore blood, he comes again to the rest: and so
leads them one after another, and dispatcheth them all, to the number of 88.
All the aged went to death more cheerfully: the younger were more timorous. I
tremble and shake (says a Romanist, out of whose Letter to his Lord all this
is (...)) (...) to remember how the (...) held his bloody knife between his
teeth, with the bloody mufler in his hand, and his arms all in gore blood up to
the elbows, going to the fold, and taking every one of them, one after another,
by the hand, and so dispatching them all, no otherwise, then does a butcher
kill his calves and sheep.

Be ye therefore wise as serpents, etc.]
Let (...) be mixed (...) (...).
with wariness, says (...), that it (...) be the meekness of wisdom, Jam. 3
13. We must be neither foxes, nor yet asses. Meekness many times brings on
injuries: a crow will stand upou a sheeps back, pulling off wool from her side.
Now therefore as we must labor for columbine simplicity, and be no horned
beasts, to pelt or gore others (as the word here signifies,) so for serpentine
(...).
subtilty too, that we cast not our selves upon needless dangers. The Roman
rule was, nec fugere, nec sequi, Christianity callethus not to a weak
simplicity; but allows us as much of the serpent as of the dove. The dove
without the serpent is easily caught: the serpent, without the dove stings
deadly. Religion without policy is too simple to be safe: Policy without
Religion is too subtle to be good. Their match makes themselves secure, and
many happy. A serpents eye is a singular ornament in a doves head.

Harmless as doves]
That neither provoke the hawke, not project revenge: but when pursued, they
save themselves, if they can by flight, not by fight. Sometimes they sit in
their dovecotes, (...) columba caret, roast to non (...), and (...) Possidet
innocuos, (...) grana (...).
and see their nests destroyed, their young ones taken away, and killed before
their eyes: neither ever do they offer to rescue or revenge, which all other
fouls do seem in some sort to do.

Verse 17. But beware of men]
Absurd and wicked men, says Paul, brutish men, skillful to destroy, says
the Prophet, Meneaters, 1 These 3. 2.
says the Psalmist, Cannibals, that make no more conscience Ezekiel. 21. 31.
to mischief Gods people, then to eat a meals meat when they are (...). 14. 4.
hungry. These be those Lycanthropi, those wolves mentioned in the former
verse. These are those mankind men, that St Paul met with at Ephesus, 1 Cor.
15. 32. He fought wiih beasts after the manner of men, that is (as some
interpret it) men fought with him, after the manner of beasts. Such a man was
that monster of Millain in Bodin: de Repub. Such were the Primitive
Persecutours, and such are the Pseudo-Catholicks of these times. A Act. and Mon
(...). 8 18.
Dutch-woman they buried alive for religion, with thorns under her. Another
they shamefully defiled in the sight of her husband, and then forced her to
draw a sword, and give her husband a deadly wound, her hands being ordered by
them. The Town of Bar in France being taken by the Papists, all kind of
cruelty Ibid. 1951.
was there used. Children were cut up, the guts and hearts of some of them
pulled out, which in rage they gnawed with their teeth. The Italians which
served the King, did for hatred of religion Ibid..
break (...) into such fury, that they did rip up a living child, and took his
liver, being as yet red hot, and eat it as meat. John Burgeolus President of
Turon, an old man, being suspected to be a Protestant, and having bought his
life with a great sum of money, was not withstanding taken and beaten cruelly
with clubs and staves. And being stripped of his clothes, was brought to the bank
of the river Liger, and hanged, his feet upward, and head downward in the
water, up to his breast. Then, he being yet alive, they opened Thuanus.
his belly, pulled out his guts, and threw them into the river. And taking his
heart, they put it upon a spear, carrying it with contumelious words, about the
City. Were these men? or rather devils in the shape of men? What should I
instance further in those late Irish unheard of cruelties, so well known, and
so much written of? such as whereof the devil himself might be ashamed, had he
any shame in him. Lithgow a Scot, after he had with K. James his letters
traveled through the greatest part of the known world, was, as he returned
through Spain, in the City of Maligo suprized by nine Sergeants, and carried
before the Governor. By whose appointment, they stripped him of his clothes,
robbed him of his money, put him into a dark dungeon, shackled him, starved
him, Lithgo^s Trav.
wounded him, etc. In ten hours, he received seventy several torments: At
last, all the Lords Inquisitours commanded him to receive eleven strangling
torments at midnight, and to be burnt body and bones to ashes, though they had
nothing against him but suspicion of religion. And yet after this, God
wonderfully delivered him: He was brought on his bed to our King, wounded and
broken, and made this relation to the face of Gundamor, the Spanish Ambassador.

They will scourge you]
John Fortune, a Martyr in Q. Mary's days, was thus threatened by one Mr
Foster: You shall be whipped Act. and Mon.
and burned for this year, I trow: His answer was, I should be full glad of
that. For it is written, They will scourge you in their synagogues. And since
the time that the sword of tyranny came into your hand, I heard of none that
were whipped. Happy were I, if I had the maidenhead of that persecution.

Verse 18. And ye shall be brought before Governours]
Yea they offered themselves to them, crying Christiani sumus, and so tyring
them thereby, that one of them in a great chafe cried out, O miseri, si libet
perire, number vobis rupes aut restes de sunt? Can Artias Antoninus apud Tertull.
ye find no other way to dispatch your selves, but that I must be troubled
with you?

And before Kings, for my sake. As Paul before Agrippa, and afterward Nero;
Luther before Charles 5. Lambert before Hen. 8.

Verse 19. Take no thought how, or what ye shall speak]
Be not anxious about either matter or manner of your apology for your selves.
Ye shall be supplied from on high both with invention and elocution.
Demosthenes, that great Orator, was many times (...), when he spoke to King
Philip, and sometimes so amated that he had not a word more to say. Moses, that
great scholar, feared he should want words when he was to stand before Pharaoh,
and professes, that since God had called him to that service, he found less
freedom of speech then before. Latomus of Lovain, a very learned man, having
prepared an eloquent Oration to Charles the fifth Emperor, was so confounded
in the delivering of it, that he came off with great discredit, and fell into
utter despair. No wonder therefore though the Apostles, being ignorant and
unlettered men, were somewhat troubled how to do when brought before Kings and
Kesars. Our Savior here cures them of that care, by a promise of help from
heaven: And they had it, Acts 2. and 4. and 5. and 7. And so had the
Confessors and Martyrs in all ages of the Church. Nescio unde veniunt istae
meditationes, says Luther of ^.
himself in a letter to his friend. And in his book of the Babylonish captivity
he professes, that whether he would or no, he became every day more learned
then other. How bravely did Anne Askew, Alice Dri^er, and other poor women
answer the Doctors, and put them to a nonplus? Was not that the spirit of the
Father speaking in them?

Verse 20. But the Spirit of your Father]
Who borrows your mouth for present, to speak by. It is he that forms your
speeches for you, dictates them to you, fills you with matter, and furnishes
you with words. Fear not therefore your rudeness to reply. There is no mouth
into which God cannot put words: And how often does he choose the weak and
unlearned to confound the wise and mighty, as he did Balaams Ass to confute
his master?

Verse 21. And the brother shall d^liver up the brother]
As (...) lib. 17.
Alphonsus Diarius did his own brother John at Neoberg in Germany. So, Doctor
London, made Filmer the Martyrs own Act. and Mon.
brother witness against him, cherishing him with meat and money, sol 1112.
and telling him he should never lack as long as he lived: etc. So, one Woodman
was delivered by his own brother into his enemies Ibid 1801.
hands. Of him and other Martyrs burnt with him, White, Bishop of Winchister
after Gardener, falsely affirmed in a Sermon, Ibid 1813.
Good people, these men deny Christ to God, and the holy Ghost to be God, etc.
In the civil wars of France, the sons fought against their fathers, and
brothers against brothers, and even women Hist. (...) of (...)(...) fol. 647.
took up arms on both sides, for defense of their religion. This is the effect
of the Gospel of peace, but by accident.

And the father the childe]
As Philip K. of Spain; who said he had rather have no subjects then heretics,
as he called them: And, out of a bloody zeal, suffered his eldest son Charles
to be murdered Hieron. (...).
by the cruel Inquisition, because he seemed to favor the Protestant-side.

Verse 22. And ye shall be hated.]
(...) perinde crimine incendij quam odio humani generis convicti sunt, says
(...) of those poor Christians, that by Nero wore haled to death for setting
the City of Rome on fire, which was done by himself. (...) Tertull. in Apolog.
tells us, that their name, and not their crime was punished in Christians.
So Luther complains that there was in his (...) body par est (...) uni and
(...) sacrilegio, (...). Evangelion Dei confiteri. Luth.
days no crime comparable to that, of professing the Gospel.

But he that endures to the end]
Apostasy loses the things that it has wrought, 2 John 8. Non quaeruntur in
Christianis initia, sed finis, says (...). It is the evening that crowns the
day, and the last scene that commends the interlude.

Verse 23. Flee ye into another.]
That is, make all the haste that Epist. ad (...).
! (...).
may be, as Cant. 8. 14. Fuge, fuge Brenti, cito, citius, citissime, Melch
(...) in vita (...).
so friendly did a Senator of Hala advise Brentius. He did so, and thereby
saved his life. There was one Laremouth, Chaplain to Lady Aane of Cleve, a
Scotch man, to whom in prison it was said, as he thought, Arise, and go thy
ways. Whereto when he gave no great heed at first, the second time it was so
said. Upon this, as he (...) to his prayers, it was said the third time
likewise to him: which was half an hour after. So he arising upon the same,
immediately a piece of the prison wall fell down; and as the Officers Act. and
Mon.
came in at the outer gate of the prison, he leaping over the ditch (...). 1945.
escaped. And in the way meeting a certain beggar, changed his coat with him,
and coming to the seashore, where he found a vessel ready to go over, was
taken in, and escaped the search, which was straightly laid for him, all the
country over. Tertullian was (...). de (...).
too rigid in condemning all kind of flight in time of persecution.

Ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel]
This is another comfort to the Apostles and their successors, that though
forced to (...) from city to city, yet they shall still find harbor, and
places of employment. They shall not have finished, that is taught and
converted all the cities of Gods Israel, both according to the flesh, and
according to the faith, till the Son of man be come to judgment, see Matthew.
24. 30. Luke 21. 27.

Verse 24. The Disciple is not above his Master]
Sweeten we the tartness of all our sufferings, with this sentence, as with so
Sub (...) Philosopho in Gallia, etc.
much sugar. Blandina the Martyr being grievously racked and tortured, cried
out ever and anon Christiana sum I am a Christian; (...).
and with that consideration was so relieved and refreshed, that all her
torments seemed but a pastime to her.

Verse 25. It is sufficient for the Disciple, etc.]
And a fair (...) too, Joh. 21. 18. Peter thinks much that himself should be
destined to die a Martyr, and not John. What shall he do? says Peter. Follow
thou me, says our Savior. I shall show thee the Non decet (...) sub capite
spinis coronato vivant membra in delicijs.
way to an ignominious suffering, what ever bocomes of John; though he shall
suffer his part too. For if the head be crowned with thorns, should not the
members feel the pain of it?

If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub]
That is (...).
Master-fly, such as Pliny calls (...). The men of Elis sacrificed lib. 10.
cap. 28.
to Jupiter Muscarius. He is otherwise called Jupiter stercorar (...).
us, this Beelzebub: as the Scripture calls all the vanities of Clem. Alexan.
the Heathen Gelulim, excrements, dunghill-Deityes: A name too good for them.
David would not do them so much honor, (...) once to name them. And Absit
(says Hierom) ut de ore Christiano (...).
sonet Jupiter omnipotens, and Mehercule, and Mecastor, and (...).
catera magis portenta quam numina. Beelzehub was the god of Ekron, that is the
devil of hell (for of Ekron comes Acheron.) How prodigiously blasphemous then
were these Miscreants, that called Christ (...)? Wonder it was, that at the
hearing thereof, the heaven sweat not, the earth shook not, the sea swelled not
above all her book.

How much more shall they call, etc.]
So they called (...) Sathanasius, Cyprian Coprian, Calvin Cain, (...), devil.
When he came first to Geneva, and began the Reformation there, he was haled
(...) the Bishop, and set upon in this sort: Quid (...) diabole (...) quissime
ad hanc civitatem perturb (...) accessisti? (...). (...). page (...) 6
What a devil meanst thou to meddle with the Scriptures (and Steven Winchester
to Marbeck) seeing thou art so stuborne and wilful, (...) and (...).
thou (...) go to the (...) for me. (...). (...) 09.


Verse 26. Fear them not therefore]
Be not reviled out of your Religion, but say, If this be to be vile, (...) yet
more vile. (...) morsum non est remedium, says Seneca. Didicit ille
maledicere, and ego contemnere, said he in Tacitus. If I cannot be master of
another man's tongue, yet I can be of mine own ears. Dion writes of Severus,
that he was careful of what he should do, but careless of what he should
hear. Do well, and hear ill, is (...)
written upon heaven gates, said that Martyr. Ill men's mouths are as open
sepulchers, says David, wherein good men's names are often buried: but the
comfort is, there shall be a resurrection as well of names as of bodies, at the
last day.

For there is nothing hid, that shall not be known]
q. d. Deal not unfaithfully in the ministry: conceal not the truth in
unrighteousnes, betray not the cause of God by a cowardly silence. For
(whatsoever you may plausibly plead and pretend for your falseplay) all shall
out at length: and well it shall appear to the world, that you served not the
Lord Christ, but your own turns upon Christ: and, so your selves might sleep
in a whole skin, let what would become of his cause and kingdom. Fearful men
are the first in that black bill, Reve. 21. 8. And God equally hates the
timorous as the treacherous.

Verse 27. What I tell you in darkness, etc.]
q. d. See that ye be valiant and violent for the truth: declare unto the world
all the counsel of God, which you have therefore learned in private that ye may
teach in public; not fearing any colors, much less stealing (...) steal from
his Captain.
from your colors, Heb. 10. 38, Quas non oportet mortes praeligere, quod non
supplicium potius far, immo in quam profundam Epist. tertia.
inferni abyssum non intrare, quam contra conscientiam attestari? (...)
Zuinglius. A man had better endure any misery then an enraged conscience.

Verse 28. And fear not them which kill the body]
That cruelly kill it (as the word signifies) that wittily tortute it, as those
(...).
Primitive Persecutors, with all the most exquisite torments that the wit of
malice could devise: that kill men so, that they may feel themselves to be
killed, as Tiberius bad. Odull Gemmet suffered a strange and cruel death in
France for Religion. For when they had bound him, they took a kind of (...)
which live in horsedung, Act. and Mon.
called in French Escarbots, and put them unto his navell, fol. 878.
covering them with a dish, the which, within short space, (...) into his
belly, and killed him. The tragical story of their (...) handling of William
Gardner Martyr in Portugal may be read in Mr Foxes Martyrologie, fol. 1242. At
th elosse of Heydelberg, Monsieur Millius an ancient Minister and man of God,
was taken by the bloody Spaniards, who having first abused his daughter before
(...).
him, tied a small cord about his head, which with (...) they wreathed about,
till they squeezed out his brains. So they (...) roasted then burnt many of our
Martyrs, as B. Ridley and others: neither would they let the dead rest in their
graves, as (...), whose bones they digd up and burnt: so they raged exceedingly
upon the dead body of Zuinglius, after they had slain (...) corpus (...) etc.
(...). (...).
him in battle, etc. Now these that cruelly kill the body we must not (...).
Our Savior says not that can kill the body, at their pleasure, for that they
cannot: but that do kill it, when God permits them to do it. And then too,
occidere possunt, (...) non possunt, as he told the tyrant: they may kill the
Saints but cannot (...) (...) (...) apud (...). in (...).
them, because their souls are out of gunshot. St Paul's sufferings reached no
further then to his flesh, Col 1. 25. his soul was untouched, he possessed that
in patience amidst all (...) perturbations.

But are (...) able to kill the soul]
As they would do fain, if it were in their power. David often complains that
they (...) after (...) soul, that they (...), etc. Now we commit thy soul to
the (...), said the Persecutors to John (...). The Popish Priests persuaded the
people here at the burning of the Martyrs, that when the gunpowder (that was
put under their (...) for a readier dispatch of them) gave a burst, then the
devil fetched away their souls. When (...) often cried in the fire Lord (...)
receive (...) spirit, a Spanish Monk ran to a Nobleman then (...) in (...).
(...).
present, and would have persuaded him that those were words of despair, and
that he was now entering into hell. Upon the patient and pious death of (...),
many of the people said, he died a Martyr, which caused the Bishop shortly
after to make a Sermon in the Cathedral, and therein he affirmed, that the
(...) Marsh (...).
was an (...), burnt like an heretic, and a firebrand in hell. Of Nicolas
Burton Martyr in Spain, because he embraced death for Christ with all gladness
and patience, the Papists gave out that the devil had his soul, before he came
to the fire, and therefore they said his senses of (...) were past already.
(...) 1866.


But rather fear him]
As one fire, so on fear drives out another. Therefore, in the second
Commandment, lest the fear of men's (...) should keep us from worshipping of
God, great punnishment is threatened, to them that worship him not. If I forsake
my profession, I am sure of a worse death then Judge Hales had, said that
Martyr. There is martial law for those that forsake their captain, or else
(under a color of discretion) fall back into the rereward. They that draw
back, do it to perdition, Heb. 10. 39. And is it nothing to lose an immortal
soul? to purchase an everliving death? Should servants fear their masters,
because they have power over the flesh, (...). 3. 23. and should not we fear
him that can destroy both body and soul in hell? Biron Marshall of France (...)
the Earl of Essex his piety at his death, as more befitting a silly Minister
then a stout warrier: as if the fear of hell were not Camd. (...). fol. (...).
a Christian man's fortitude; as if it were not valor but madness to fight
with a flaming fire, that is out of our power to suppress. This Biron, within
few months after, underwent the same death that Essex did, and then if he
feared not (...), he was sure to feel it.

Verse 26. Are not two sparrows, etc.]
Birds flying seem to be (...), (...) est (...).
at liberty, yet are guided by an overruling hand: they fly freely, yet fall
by divine dispose, and not as the fowler will: But we are better then many
(...). Gods providence is punctual, and particular, extending even to the
least and lightest circumstances of all our occurrances; whatever (...) thought
to the contrary, and Pliny with his Irridendum vero curam agere rerum lib.
(...). cap. 7.
(...) illud quicquid est (...): It is a rediculous thing says he to imagine
that God takes care of our particular affairs. How much better St Augustine,
Deus sic curat universos quasi singulos, (...) singulos, quasi solos. Gods
providence extends to every particular, both person and occurance.

Verse 30. (...) the very hairs of your head, etc.]
As things of price, and suce as God sets great store by. Hence he enjoined his
Numb. 6. 18.
Nazarites, when they had acomplished their vow, to shave their heads, and put
the hair in the fire, under their peace offering, for a sacrificeto the Lord.
The Ammonites paid dear for the hair they shaved off the heads and beards (...)
David's messengers. So has (...). Tomkins.
Bonner I believe, ere this, for the (...) beard he pulled off part Act. and
(...).
of it, causing the other part (...) to be (...), left his manly act (...) 1394.
should be seen to the world. The three Worthies were taken out of the fiery
furnace with their hairs in full number, not one of (...). 3. 27.
them singed.

Verse 31. Fear not therefore]
This is the third time in six verses, that they and we are bid to banish this
cowardly base passion, this causeless, fruitless, harmfull, sinful fear of
men. He that fears God, needs fear none else. Moses feared not Pharaoh, nor
Micaiah, Ahab, when they had once seen God in his Majesty. (...) will not budge
or alter his tale; as the Lion fiercely pursued, will not alter his gate, they
say, though he die for it. Doctor Tailour, Martyr, when being sent for by
Steven Gardener, his friends persuaded him not to appear, but fly, Fly you,
said he, and do (...) your conscience leads you, I am fully determined, with
Gods grace, to go to the Bishop, and to his beard to tell him that he does
naught. This he resolved to do, and this he did accordingly. For at his first
appearance, Art thou (...), thou villain, said the Bishop? How dare thou look
me in the face for shame? Know thou not who I am? Yes, I know who you are
(said he again) Doctor Gardener Bishop of Winchester, and Lord Chancellor,
yet but a mortal man, I trow. But if I should be afraid of your lordly looks,
why fear you not God the Lord of us all? How dare you for shame look any
Christian man in the face, seeing you have forsaken the truth, denied your
Master Christ, and his Word, and done contrary to your own oath and writing?
With what countenance will (...) appear before the Judgment seat (...). (...).
of Christ, and answer to your oath, etc? (...) 1. (...).


Ye are of (...) value then many sparrows.]
Yea then many other men, as one pearl is more worth then many pibbles, one
little Lark then many carrion-Kites. Noab found more favor with Psalm (...) 12.
God, then all the world besides. The Saints are called (...) things, Golos. 1.
20. Tabor and Hermon are put for the East and West (...) (...) 10.
the world, as if there were no world but Judaea, that pleasant Land, that Land
of delight, so styled, because in Judah, was God Psalm. 16 3.
known, and there were those excellent ones, in whom is all Gods delight. He
reckons of men by their (...), and (...). (...). 26.
accounts such more excellent then their neighbors, whomsoever (...) dwell by.

Verse 32. Whosoever therefore shall confess me.]
A bold and wise (...) of Christ is required of all his, who are therefore said
to be marked in their fore (...) (Revel. 7. 3.) an open place: And they that
will not profess him, shall be sorted with such as through (...) of pain, and
defect of patience gnaw their own tongues, Revel. 16. 10. Antichrist takes it
in as good part, if his bondslaves receive his mark in their hand only; the
which, as occasion serves, they may cover or discover, Revel. 13. 16. He lets
his, use what cousenage they will, so it may help to (...) his Kingdom. It was
a watchword in Gregory 13th his time in Q. Elizabeth's time, My son, give me
thy heart. Dissemble, go to Church, do what ye will, but Da mihi cor: be in
heart a Papist, and go where you will. Christ will endure no such dealing. He
will have heart and tongue too, Romans 10. 9. he will be worshipped truly that
there be no halting, and totally that there Ad (...) adorare ac sub Antiobristo
fidem occultare.
be no halving. We may as well (says Zuinglius) do worship at the altar of
Jupiter or Venus, as hide our faith for fear of Antichrist. He that is not with
me is against me, says our Savior. He likes not these politic Professors,
these neuterpassive Christians, that have fidem menstruam, as Hilary said of
some in his time, that have religionem (...), as Beza says of Baldinus the
French Apostate, that can turn with the times, comply with the company, be (as
the planet Mercury) good in conjunction with good, and bad with (...). These
are they that do virtutis stragulam (...), put honesty to an open shame, as the
Philosopher could say: (...) Pet. 1. 7.
And shall these men's faith (...) found to praise, and honor, and glory? It is
not likely.

Verse 33. But (...) shall deny me]
Not only utterly to renounce Christ, but out of (...) respects to dissemble
him, is to deny him. Peter denied his Master as well in saying, I wot not what
(...), as in swearing he never knew the man. The people of (...), (...) King.
18. 11. that held their peace only, when the Prophet had said, If the Lord be
God, follow him, are blamed, and worthily, for their detestable indifferency.
Indeed they spoke not against the Prophet, but they durst not speak with him.
Many such cold friends religion has now adays. This they will dearly (...)
and rue, when they come to give an account, with the world all on a light flame
about their ears, and the elements falling upon them, as scalding lead, or
running (...).

Him will I also deny before my Father]
And the Father will entertain none, but such as come commended to him by his
Son Christ. He will (...) cashier all others, as the Tirshatha did (...) proud
(...), that grew ashamed of their profession, and could not find their
register, Ezr. 2 62.

Verse 34. Think not that I came to send peace.]
Peace is twofold, Temporis and pectoris, of Country and of Conscience. This
later is Christ's legacy, and the Saints are sure of it. But the former, they
seldom find here; In the (...) ye shall (...) trouble, (...) Savior. Should
we look for fire to quench our thirst? says a Martyr: And as soon shall Gods
true servants find peace and favor Act. and Mon.
under Christ's regiment. This world is to the Saints as the (...). 1491.
Sea called Pacifique, then the which there is nothing more troublesome and
tumultuous: Or as the straits of Magellan, where, which (...) Geog. page 80
(...)
way soever a man bend his course, he shall be sure to have the wind against
him.

Verse 35. For I am come to set a man at variance, etc.]
By accident it fell out so, through men's singular corruption, causing them as
Bats to fly against the light of the Gospel, to hate it as thieves do a torch
in the night; or, as the Panther, which so hates man, that he tears his picture
wherever he finds it.

Verse 36. And a man's foes shall be they, etc.]
Nicolas of (...), Act. and (...).
a young man newly come from Geneva, was condemned and fol. 837.
set in the Cart. His own father coming with a staff, would have beaten him,
but that the officers kept him off. Julius (...), Martyr, coming to his mother,
and asking her blessing, (...) Ibid. 1761.
(...), said she, have Christ's curse and mine where ever thou go. John
Fetty, Martyr, was accused and complained of by his own Ibid 1864.
wife, and she was thereupon struck mad. Another like example Ibid. 1163.
there is to be read of an unnatural husband, witnessing against his own wife,
and likewise of children against their own mother, etc. So this saying of our
Savior is fulfilled. And it was not for nothing that Antigonus praid so hard
to be delivered from his friends; that Q (...) complained, That in trust she
had (...).
found treason.

Verse 37. He that loves father or mother.]
Levi said unto his father and his mother, I have not (...) him: neither did he
acknowledge Deuteronomy. 33. 9.
his brethren, in that cause of God, nor knew his own children. If the Lord
Christ call me to him, says (...), although my father should lie in my way, my
mother hang about my neck to hinder me, I would go over my father, shake off my
mother, etc. Nazianzen was glad that he had something of value (to wit, his
Athenian learning) to part with for Christ. Nicolas Shetterden, Martyr, in a
letter to his mother, wrote thus, Dear mother embrace the counsel of Gods Word
with hearty affection, read it with obedience, etc. So shall we meet in joy at
the last day; Act. and Mon fol. (...).
or else I bid you farewell for evermore. Away from me Satan, said Rebezies a
French Martyr, when Satan set before him his parents, Ibid (...).
to stop him in his course. And I know not by what reason, they so called them
my friends (said Borthwick, a Scotch Martyr) that so greatly labored to
convert (indeed to pervert me:) neither will I more esteem them then the
Midianites, which Ibid (...).
in times past called the children of Israel to do sacrifice to their Idols.

He that loves son or daughter, etc.]
As did Eli, who honored 1 Samuel 2. 29.
his sons above God. This the Lord took so hainously, that he swore that this
iniquity of Elies house should not be purged with 1 Samuel 3. 14.
sacrifice nor (...) for ever. (...), who brought the old Priest this (...)
tidings, was afterward unhappy enough in his two sons; and succeeded Eli in
his cross, as well as his place. It can hardly be imagined, that he succeeded
him in his sin, after so fair a warning. But good David was surely too fond a
father, and therefore smarted in his children, whom he cockered. God will have
us to hold him to be better to us then ten sons: and to bestow all our love
upon him, as most worthy. What he gives us back again, we may bestow upon
others; loving our friends in God, and our enemies for God. But the love of
Christ must constrain us to part with all, (...) never (...) dear and near unto
us, Act, and Mon.
(...) his sake. M. Bradford, whiles (...) was a prisoner, wrote earnestly fol.
1504.
to his mother to pray God to make him worthy to suffer, not only imprisonment,
but even very death for his truth, religion and Gospel. Femella (...), a (...)
godly woman, understanding that her son went heavily on to his death for
Christ, (...) him, and encouraged him, bidding him look up to heaven, (...).
and behold the Sun in his glory. Which when he (...) done, Geogr.
Know thou not, my son, said she, that thou shall shortly be in that
heavenly (...), and there outshine the Sun it self? (...) Hunter, the Martyrs
mother, (...) unto him, standing at the stake, That she was glad that ever she
was so happy, as to bear such a child, as could find in his heart to lose his
life for Christ's Name sake. Then (...) said to his mother, For my little pain
Act. and (...).
which I shall (...), which is but for a short braid, Christ has sol. 1396.
(...) me a crown of joy: May not you be glad of that, mother? With that his
mother kneeled down on her knees, saying, I pray God strengthen thee, my son,
to the end: Yea, I think thee as well bestowed, as any child that ever I bare.
John Clark of (...) in France, being, for Christ's sake, whipped three several
days, and afterward having a mark set in his forehead, as a note of infamy,
(...) mother beholding it (though his father (...) Christ us, (...). S. (...).
(...)
was an adversary) encouraged her son, crying with a loud voice, Blessed be
Christ, and welcome be these his prints and marks.

Is not worthy of me.]
viz. Because he holds not me worthy of more love, then his best friends.
Eli, for (...) to please his sons, Moses, his wife, had like to have lost a
friend of God, who had much ado to forbear killing him, Exodus 4. 24.

Verse 38. And he that takes not up his crosse]
Omnis Christianus crucianus, says Luther. Every Christian is sure of his
cross; but first it (...) be (his) cross, such as God has laid upon him, not
such as he has created to himself (as Baals Priests, who cut 1 King. 18. 2.
themselves with knives and launcers, the Circumcelliones of old, and the Monks
at this day, with their voluntary pennances, etc.) Next, he must take it, and
not stay till it be laid upon him; or then bear it, as an ass does his burden,
because he can neither will nor choose: But he must (...) active in suffering,
and take Gods part against himself. Nay he must (as he may) be cheerful under
his cross, and thankful for it, as a favor, an honor, Act. 5. 41. and 20.
24. The very beasts take blows from their keepers. Turks, when cruelly lasht by
their officers, give them thanks, and go their ways. Porters go singing under
their burdens, etc. Levius fit patientia quicquid corrigere est nefas. (...).


And follows after me]
(...) comes not behind me: and this (...)
not aloof off, as Peter, Mat. 26. 58. but close at heels, as Caleb, Numb. 14.
24. walking in Christ, Col. 2. 6. as Christ, 1 John 2. 6. putting I (...) post
me. Trem.
him on in his (...), as Constantines sons did their father, and preaching
forth his praises, 1 Pet. 2 9. He is a Savior to none, but those to whom he is
a samplar: neither have any his redemption, but they that take his direction.

Verse 39. He that finds his life shall lose it]
This is a strange expression, a riddle to the world, a seeming contradiction;
such (...).
as natural reason can never reconcile. But if the paradoxes of the Stoics
might be proved, much more may those of the Gospel. He that finds his life,
that is, redeemeth it with the forfeiture of his faith, with the shipwreck of
his conscience makes a (...) bargain, makes more haste then good speed; whiles
in (...) from death as far as he can, he runs to it as fast as he can.
Christ will kill him with death, (...). 2. 23. and sentence him, as an
apostate, unto double (...).

He that loses his life for my sake, etc.]
For else all is lost: since it is not poena, but causa that makes a Martyr.
Christ and the thieves were in the same condemnation: Samson and the (...) in
the same destruction, by the downfall of the house: (...) poena, dissimilis
causa, says Augustine. Martyrdom is a crown, as old age, if it be found in the
way of righteousness. One Martyr cried out, Blessed be God that ever I was
born to this happy hour. To another, when it was said, Take Julius Palmer.
(...); it is an hard matter to burn: Indeed, said he, it is for Act. and Mon.
him that has his soul linked to his body, as a thiefs foot in a pair of
fetters.

Shall find it]
For the line of his lost life shall be hid in the endless (...) of Gods
surest mercies. The passion-daies of the Martyrs, were therefore anciently
called, Natalilia (...), the birth days of salvation, the daybreak of
eternal brightness. Those poor seduced souls Hist. of holyWarre.
that lost theirlives in the holy Wars, as they called them, and were persuaded
that thereby they made amends to Christ for his death, were much to be pitied.

Verse 40. He that receives you, (...) me]
And who would not be glad to entertain the Lord Christ? (...) held it a great
matter that the mother of her Lord should come to her, Luke 1. 43. Behold
Christ comes to us in his servants, in his Ministers especially. Receive them
therefore, as so many Angels, yea, as Christ himself, Gal. 4 14. accounting
their very (...) (how much more their faces?) beautiful. We know with what
great respect Cornelius entertained Peter. Non tantus sum, ut vos alloquar,
said Tertullian to certain Martyrs. He tells us also that it was a custom of
some in those times, to creep to the (...) Reptare ad vincula (...) (...).
bonds in way of honor to them: which perhaps, was more then was meet.

Receives him that sent me.]
The Heathens held it a great honor to entertain their gods; and the Poets
tell us of much evil that (...) those that refused to do so. That which we have
heard 1 John 1. 3.
and seen, says S. John, declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship
with us. But what so great matter is that, might some say? You and your fellows
are but men of mean condition. True, says the (...), but as mean as we are,
our fellowship is with the Faether, and with his Son Jesus Christ, who will
also come in and sup with such, as receive his servants. And may they not be
glad of such guests?

Verse 41. He that receives a Prophet in the Name, etc.]
Though, happily, he be no Prophet. This takes away the excuse of such as say,
They would do good, if they knew to whom, as worthy.

Shall receive a Prophets reward]
Both actively that which the Prophet shall give him, by teaching him the faith
of the Gospel, casting pearls before him, etc. And passively, that reward that
God gives the Prophet, the same shall he give his host. Gaius lost nothing by
such guests as John; nor the Shunamite or Sareptan by the Prophets. Of such,
Christ seems to say, as Paul did of Onesimus, If he owe thee ought, put that in
mine account: I will repay it: And (...). 18. 19.
he, I can tell you, is a liberal play master. Saul and his servant 1 Samuel 9. 8.
had but five-pence in their purse, to give the Prophet: The Prophet, after
much good cheer, gives him the Kingdom. Such is Gods dealing with us. Seek out
therefore some of his receivers, some Mephibosheth to whom we may show (...).

He that receives a righteous man]
Though not a Minister, if for that he is righteous, and for the truths sake
that dwells in him, 2 Ioh. 2. The Kenites in Saul's time, that were born many
ages after Iethro's death, receive life from his (...), and favor from his
hospitality. Nay, the Egyptians, for harboring (and, at first, deallng
kindly with) the Israelites, though without any respect to their
righteousness, were preserved by Joseph in that sore famine, and kindly dealt
with ever after by Gods special command.

Verse 42. Unto one of these little ones]
So the Saints are called, either because but a little flock, or little in
their own eyes, or little set by in the world, or dearly respected of God, as
little ones are by their loving parents.

A cup of cold water]
As having not fuel to heat it, says Hierom, nor better to bestow then Adams
ale, a cup of water, yet (...). ad eceles Cathol. l. 4.
desirous some way to seal up his love to poor Christ. Salvian says, That
Christ is, mendicorum maximus, the greatest beggar in the world, as one that
shareth in all his Saints necessities. Relieve him therefore in them: so shall
you lay up in store for your selves a good foundation against the time to come;
yea, you shall lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 19. Of Midas it is fabled,
that whatever he touched, he turned into gold. Sure it is that whatsoever the
hand of charity touches, be it but a cup of cold water, it turns the same, not
into gold, but into heaven it self. He is a niggard then to himself, that is
niggardly to Christ's poor. If heaven may be had for a cup of cold water. what a
bodkin at the churles heart will this be one day? Surely the devil will keep
holy day, as it were in hell, in respect of such

Verily, I say unto you, he shall in no wise, etc.]
By this deep asseveration, out Savior tacitly (...) the worlds unbelief,
whiles they deal by him, as by some patching companion or base bankrupt, trust
him not at all, without there ready money, or a sufficient pawn. But what says
a grave Divine? Is not mercy as sure a grain as vanity? Is God like to break,
or forget? Is there not a book of remembrance written before him, which he
oftener (...), then Ahasuerus did the Chronicles? The Butler may forget Joseph,
and Joseph his fathers house: but God is not unrighteous to forget your work
and labor of love, which ye have showed toward his name, in that you have
ministered to the Saints, and do minister, Heb. 6. 10.

CHAP. XI.
Verse 1. He departed thence to teach, etc.]
NEver out of action: the end of one good work was with our Savior the
beginning of another. So must it be with Ministers: let them (...) look to
rest, till they come to heaven: but (as S. Paul, that Insatiabilis Deicultor,
as Chrysostom called him) teach Gods people publicly and from house to house,
(...) Act. 10. 20, (...).
warning every one night and day with tears, Dr (...) Act. and Mon.
Martyr, preached not only every Sabbath Day and holy day, sol. (...)
but whenever else he could get the people together. So did Bishop Ridley,
Bishop Jewel, etc. So did not their successors, once a year was fair with
many of them, (like the High Priest (...) the Law) as if they had concurred in
opinion with that Popish Bishop, that said, It was too much for any man, to
preach every Sunday, and that Bishops were not ordained to preach: but to Act.
and (...).
sing (...) sometimes, leaving all other offices to their (...). sol. (...).
It is as rare a thing at Rome, said Doctor Bassinet, to hear a Bishop preach,
as to see an Ass flee. Oh what will these (...) Job 31. 14.
(...) when (...) rises up? and when he visits, how will they answer him?
See my true Treasure, page 2, 4.

To preach in their Cities]
That is in the Cities of his twelve Disciples, in the causes of Galilee, while
they were doing the same in Jury. Maldonat the Jesuit will not have this to be
the (...), inquit, est (...).
sense of this text, and only because it is the sense that the (...), (as he
calls the Protestants) set on it. A goodly thing he holds it to dissent from
them, though in a manifest truth. So George Duke of Saxony was heard to say:
Though I am not ignorant, that heresies and abuses are crept into the Church:
Yet I will never obey the Gospel that Luther preaches. For hatred (...).
(...). (...) Lect. in Haggeum. page 41.
to the man, he would not hearken to the truth he taught. This is to have the
faith of Christ in respect of persons, J am. 2. 1.

Verse 2. Now when John had heard in the prison]
Put this fellow in prison, said Ahab of Micaiah; Who is thought to have 1
King. 22. 27.
been he that told him so barely of letting go Benhadad. So Ierenny that
Concionator admirabilis (as Keckerman calls him) was (...) Rhet.
for forty years pains and patience, cast into a deep and dirty dungeon:
Ecclesiast. cap. ult.
The Apostles were often imprisoned: so were the ancient (...).
Bishops under the ten first perseeutions. From the detectable orchyard of the
Leomine prison: So Algerius the Italian Martyr dates his letter. Within a few
days of Q. Mary's reign, almost all the prisons in England, were become right
Christian Schools and D o de Pomp o.
Churches: Bocardo in Oxford was called a College of (...), Act and Mon.
Cranmer, Ridly, Latimer, and others, being there kept captive. fol. (...).
This is merces mundi: look for no better dealing.

Verse 3. Art thou he that should come, etc.]
This question the Baptist moved not for his own sake, (for he was well
assured, and had sufficiently testified, Joh. 3.) but for his Disciples better
settlement and satisfaction. This, whiles Tertullian observed not, he has done
the Baptist palpable (...) in three several places; as if himself had doubted
of the person of Christ. Let not us be troubled to be in like manner mistaken
and misjudged.

Verse 4. Jesus answered and said, etc.]
Our Savior rated them not, chased them not away from his presence, though
zealously Gal. 4 17.
affecting their master, but not well, ( Joh. 3.) and envying for his 2 Timothy
(...). 24.
sake. The man of God must not strive, but be gentle, apt to teach, patient: In
meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, etc. Friar Alphonsus a
Spaniard, reasoning with Bradford Act. and Mon
the Martyr, was in a wonderful rage, and spoke so high, that the whole house
rang again, chasing with om and cho, etc. So that if Bradford had been any
thing hot, one house could not have held them.

Go and show John what things, etc.]
He gives them a real testimony, an ocular demonstration. This was the ready
way to win upon them, who might have suspected a simple assertion, not seconded
with such undeniable arguments. Let our lives as well as (...) lips witness
for us: Vivite concionibus, concionamini moribus, says one. Nos non eloquimur
magna, sed vivinous, said the Church of old. This is the way to slaughter envy
it self, and to (...) in the hearts of the righteous.

Verse 5. The blind receive their sight.]
Our Savior seems to say the same to John, that she did to Judas, Genesis 38. 25.
Discern I pray thee, whose (works) are these. The end of his miracles was the
proof of his majesty.

The poor have the Gospel, etc.]
Gr. are Gospelized: they (...).
not only receive it, but are changed by it, transformed into it.

Verse 6. And blessed is he, etc.]
This he adds, as correcting the preposterous emulation of John's Disciples,
who stumbled also at his (...). Howbeit our Savior says not, Cursed be ye for
being offended in me: But Blessed is he, etc. Gods tender lambs must be gently
handled. Evangelizatum, non maledictum missuses, said Oecolampadius to
Farellus, (...) was a most excellent Preacher, but overcarried perhaps
sometimes, by his zeal for God. I commend thine (...), (as he there goes on)
so thou mingle it with mildness. Wine and oil are in their several (...)
zelum, modo non (...) mansuetudo. etc.
seasons to be powered into men's wounds. Show thy self to be a gentle
Evangelist, and not a (...) lawmakers, etc.

Verse 7. And as they departed.]
Due praise is to be given to the (...).
(...) parts and practices of others; but rather behind their backs, Epist.
then before their faces, lest we be suspected of flattery, then the which
nothing is more odious: Aristobulus the Historian, wrote a slattering book, of
the brave acts of Alexander the Great, and presented it to him. He read it, and
then cast it into the river Hydaspes, telling the Author that he had deserved
to be so served Tu dignior (...) precipitareris, qui (...) me sic (...) sa is.
as his book was.

A reed shaken with the wind.]
A thing of nothing: A (...), (...) person. So the Jews esteemed John Baptist
after a while, whom at first they so much admired. But he soon grew stale to
them: and then they shamefully slighted him. And did John 5. 35.
not the Galathians do the like by S. Paul? Once they could have pulled out
their eyes for him: afterward, they would have pulled (...). 4. 15.
out his eyes, if they could have come at him. Where is then the (...).
blessedness ye spoke of, says he? q. d. Once you held and professed (...).
your selves a people much blessed in me: how comes it, that I am now so fallen
out of your hearts? But people are over-soon sated (...).
with the heavenly manna, and their affections to godly Ministers are as Ioabs
dagger, as soon in, and as soon out. Principes (...) Anno. 1559.
Luthero, sed jam iterum videtis ingratitudinem mundi erga Ministros, said
Melancthon.

Verse 8. A man clothed in softs?]
Which most men gaze at, (...)
go after, fawn upon. Hunc homines decorant, quem vestimenta decorant. Herein
they resemble those dogs that kept Vulcans Temple: of which Hospinian tells us,
that if any came to the Temple with brave clothes, they would fawn upon them:
but if in ragged, they would tear them in pieces. Such a vanity as this was
crept into the Church, I am. 2. 2. Fulgent fere monilibus, sordent moribus.
Cato could say, Cultus magnam curam, magnam virtutis esse incuriam. The Baptist
was not a man of that make. His Peach. (...) Compl. Gentle. (...). page 91.
heart and his habit were equally plain, simple. Buchanan seldom cared for a
better outside, then a rug-gown girt close about him.

Verse 9. And more then a Prophet.]
Because he pointed out Christ with the finger, whom they only saluted afar
off. Chrysologus (...).
calls him, Legis and Gratiae fibulam. Another resembles Heb. 11.
him to the Angel, that had one foot in the sea, and another on the land. The
Law he resembles to the Sea, which is rough and moveable. The Gospel to the
Land, which is firm and stable, etc.

Verse 10. Behold I send my messenger.]
Gr. mine Angel. So (...).
Phineas is called an Angel, Judge. 2. 1. The Priest an Angel, Eccles. 5. 6.
Ministers of the Gospel Angels, 1 Cor. 11. 10. Ministers and Angels have
exchanged names and offices: for are they not all Ministering spirits? Did not
Angels first preach the Gospel, Luk 2. (...). 1. 14.
the ministration whereof is now committed to us? so that if there be a (...),
an interpreter, one among a thousand to show unto man his righteousness, then
will God be gracious Job. 33. (...).
upto him, etc.

Verse 11. There has not risen a greater]
Because he was Christ's immediate (...). Now the nearer to Christ, the more
excellent: as the elements the higher, the purer. John was beyond all the
ancient Prophets, both in dignity and doctrine: Yet he came behind the
Evangelists and Apostles, not in the dignity of his office, but in the clearnes
of his doctrine, concerning the Messiah, whom he saw present, but neither saw
nor heard of suffering, dying, rising again, as they did. Macarius writes that
the Prophets knew indeed, that Christ should be born into the world, for the
work of our Redemption, but whether or no he should die and (...) again, this
they knew not. Verum long errat Macarius, (...).
says one. The Prophet Isay writes of all these, more like an Evangelist
Paedag Christian.
then a Prophet, and is therefore called by an Ancient, the Evangelicall
Prophet. Now the Baptist knew more then any Prophet: being as the
morning-starre that precedes the Sunrising. But how Aristotle should be said
to be Christ's foretunner Colonien, (...) librum de salute (...) osseruntque
illu. (...) praecursorem (...) in naturalibus, etc. D. (...). ex Baleo, and
Agrippo.
in Natural things, as John Baptist was in supernatural, and that he was
certainly saved, (all which the Divines of Collen affirmed in print, and showed
their reasons) I cannot conceive. And yet Sleidan tells us that in the Council
of Trent, the salvation of Heathens, by the power of nature only without
Christ, was cried up: and afterward defended by Soto, Vega, and Victoria, as
Valentia witnesses.

Verse 12. And from the days of John, etc.]
The Baptist is further commended from the good success of his ministry: a
sweet seal, but no sure sign of a sanctified preacher: since many causes give
that to others, that themselves have not. Thus the (...) heaven gives life to
diverse creatures, the dull whetstone sharpens Iron. A stinking breath may
sound a trumpet, with great commendation, etc. Howbeit, the fruitfulnes of the
people, is the preachers testimonial, 2 Cor. 3. 2. and God delights to honor
those of most sincerity, with most success, as 1 Cor. 15. 10.

The kingdom of heaven suffers violence.]
Men are resolved to have it, whatever pains or peril they (...) through. As
Gods Israel violently invaded and overran the promised land: So do his elect
lay hold on the promised inheritance. This true treasure (...) hid, Rom 16. 26.
is now discovered, and exposed to all that have a mind to it. Now therefore
they are carried with all strength of affection after Christ: him they must
have, whatever else they go without: toward him they fly as a cloud: and as a
flock of doves they scour into the columbary, and (...) into the windows, Isa.
60. 8.

And the violent, etc.]
The valiant, Isay calls them, that break through all difficulties, as did
David's Worthies; and walk about the world as so many Conquerours: yea more then
Conquerours they are, Romans 8. 37. and what can that be but Triumphers? 2 Cor.
2. 14.

Take it by force]
Make a prey or a prize of it. Diripiunt as Hilary renders it, making it a
metaphor, from a tower or town sacked and ransackt by the enemy. Cyprus is an
Island so fruitful and pleasant, that it was anciently called Macaria, that
is, blessed. And of it Sextus Rufus writes, that being famous for riches,
Cyprus (...) populi (...). (...), (...).
it thereby solicited the poverty of the people of Rome, to seize upon it.
This may be more fitly said of heaven, that habibitation of the happy ones, so
eagerly and earnestly sought for by the Saints, that nothing else will satisfy
them. Valde protestatus sum me nolle sic a Deo satiari, said Luther, when great
(...) were sent unto him, and a Cardinalship offered him by the Pope: God, he
said, should not put him off with those petty things, he breathed after better.
Heaven is had by the violent, earth inherited by those that are meek, Matthew. 5.
6. Where, though God would have his servants content with the least mercies,
(as being (...) then the very least) yet not satisfied with (...) greatest
things in the world for their portion, since they are born to better. If they
be, as most are, slothful in seeking to (...) themselves of Heaven: He chides
them, as Ioshuah did the seven tribes, for their negligence, Josh. 18. 2.

Verse 13. For all the Prophets and the Law, etc.]
i. e. The Ministry of the Prophets, and the shadows of the Law determined in
John's preaching. As for the substance of the Law, Christ came not to destroy,
but fulfill it, Matthew. 5. 17, 18. See the notes thereon.

Verse 14. This is Elias.]
Not the Thisbite, but yet the same that Malachy foretold should come in the
spirit and power of (...). And surely, if we observe it, (as here Christ (...)
to the Jews, If ye will receive it) there is a wonderful agreement between the
times of Elias and John Baptist, between Ahab and (...), between Jezebel and
Herodias, etc. The Jews also have a saying amongst them at this day, when they
are puzzled in any point, Elias cum venerit, solvet omnia.

Verse 15. He that has ears to hear, let him hear]
Let him (...) listen, not with that outward ear only, that gristle that grows
upon his head: but let him draw up his heart to his ears, that one sound may
pierce both at once. Thus hear, and your souls Isa. 30. 8, 9.
shall live, Isa. 55. 3. A heavy ear is a singular judgment, Isa. 6. The good
Hebrews are taxed for their dull hearing, Heb. 5. 11. Such cars are likely to
be forced open by correction, Job 33. 16. and be made hear the rod, (...). 6.
9. So that if they did but see their danger, they would do, as the Prophet
requires, cut their hair and cast it away, under the sense of the horror of
Gods heavy displeasure, Ier. 7. 24. 29.

Verse 16. But whereunto shall I liken this generation?]
So great was the contumacy and obstinacy of this perverse people, the
Pharisees especially, that the wisdom of God seems to be at a want for a fit
word to utter to them, for their better conviction. And do not some such sit
before us at this day, as senseless every whit of what is said to them, as the
seats they sit on, the pillars they lean to, the dead bodies they tread upon?
We may speak to them, alas, till we spet out our lungs, and all to as little
purpose, as Bede did, when he preached to an heap of stones.

Verse 17. We have piped unto you etc.]
It is probable that children, in those days, were wont to solace themselves
with songs in this sort: And thence our Savior seeks to repress the pride,
and set forth the sin of his untoward hearers. Fit similies do excellently
illustrate: And he is the best Preacher, says Luther, that delivers himself
vulgarly, plainly, trivially: not speaking in a Roman, English, or other lofty
language, that the hearers are nothing the wiser for: nor yet puzzling them
with scholasticall craggy disquisitions, that breed wind, and not nourishment.
But so attempering their discourses to the hearers capacities, that their
desires and endeavors may answer his: as it was between S. Paul and the Elders
of Ephesus, Acts 20. 31 -- 37. He tells them of his tears, and they answer him
with tears: O happy compliance! But most of our hearers are like these in the
text, which whether piped to, or mourned to, are nothing at all affected.

Verse 18. For John came neither eating, etc.]
So froward men are and frample, that no preacher can please them. If he preach
plainly, it will seem (...) slubbering: if elaborately, curious affectation.
And for his life; Austere John has a devil, sociable Christ is a winebibber.
And it was the worse, because from Scribes and Pharisees, whose word must carry
such credit with it, as alone to condemn Christ; and whose life must be a rule
to others. Do any of the Pharisees believe in him? In this case duty must be
done, however it be construed. Evil men, when they learn to think well will
learn to report well. Let our lives, and labors in the Lords work confute
them: and though they should by their reproaches bury our good names in their
throats, those open sepulchers, yet at utmost, when Christ comes to judgment,
there shall be a resurrection of names as well as of bodies. Be patient
therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord, James 5. 7.

And they say he has a devil]
So Staphylus and Surius said, that Luther learned his Divinity of the devil.
The Jesuits affirm, that he was stirred up by the devil, and they were sent
out by God to resist him. Himself knew all this, and took it well a worth.
Prorsus satan est Lutherus (says he in an Epistle to Spalatinus) (...)
Christus vivit and regnat: Amen; he adds his Amen to it.

Verse 19. The Son of man came eating and drinking]
Teaching us thereby, in the use of things indifferent, to do what we can to
preserve our good esteem with others, that we may the sooner prevail with them.
This was St. Paul's, All things to all men. He turned himself into all shapes
and fashions both of speech and spirit, to win men to God. St Austin spoke
broken barbarous As (...) a (...) (...), dolus for dolor, floret for (...).
latin to the Roman Colonies in Afrike, to the end that they might understand
him. When I come to Rome, says Ambrose to Monica, I fast on the Saturday: when
I am at Millain I fast not. So you, to what Church soever you come, ejus morem
serva, do as others do; not giving offense carelessly, nor taking offense
(...). Calvin was cast out of Geneva, for refusing to administer the Lords
Supper with wafer-cakes or unleavened bread. De (...) (...) tamen (...) quid
(...). (...).
post a restitutus nunquam contendendam (...) (says (...), in his life) of
which, being afterward restored, he thought best to make no more words, but to
yield: though he let them know, that he had rather it were otherwise. Christ
sets us to learn of the unjust steward, by all lawful (though he did it by
unlawful) means, to maintain our reputation with men. (...) this defect (...)
noted in the best when he said, The children of this world are wiser in their
(...). 16. 8.
generation, then the children of light.

But wisdom is justified of her children]
Who all having a right estimate of her worth, do meanly esteem of other
courses and (...), (...). (...).
discourses, do stand to her, and stickle for her, though never so much
slighted by the world. There are that read it thus: But Wisdom is judged of her
children, viz. the perverse Jews, who preposterously pass sentence upon their
mother, whom they should rather vail to, and vote for.

Verse 20. Then began he to upbraid]
Happily, because these Cities, drawn by the authority of the Pharisees, made
less account of our Saviors doctrine or miracles, by them maliciously
depraved and disparaged. The blind led the blind, but both fell into the
ditch, though their leaders lay undermost.

Because they repented not.]
There is a heart that cannot repent; that has lost all passive power of
coming out of the snare Romans 26
of the devil; that is become such, through long trading in sin, as neither
ministry, nor misery, nor miracle, nor mercy can possibly mollify. Upon such
you may write, Lord have mercy upon them. O, said a reverend man, If I must be
put to my option, I had rather be in hell with a sensible heart, then live on
earth with a reprobate mind.

Verse 21. Woe unto thee Chorazin]
These littorals, or those that dwell by the seacoast, are noted to be duri,
horridi, immanes, Twinus com. de reh. (...).
(...) denique pessimi, rough, harsh, theevish, peevish people, and as bad as
those that are worst. But that which aggravated these men's sin, and made it out
of measure sinful, was the contempt of the Gospel: which, as it is post
naufragium tabula, so how shall (...).
they escape that neglect so great salvation? See that ye shift not Heb. 12.
off him that speaks from heaven, etc. Hierom tells us, that Chorazin was in
his time turned into a defert, being two miles distant from Capernaum. As for
Beth saida, our Savior had therehence taken three of his Apostles at least, to
be lights of the world, but the inhabitants of this Town, loved darkness
rather then light; the Apostles their countrymen could do no good upon them.
Our Savior therefore would not suffer so much as the blind man whom he had
cured to be their Preacher, but led him to the Townes-end, and there restoring
him to sight, sent him away.

They would have repented long ago]
Blind heathens, when my misery was upon them, would to their fackcloth an^d
sorrows, thinking thereby to pacify God, and so they rested. In like sort,
there are amongst us, that, when they are afflicted, especially in conscience,
set upon some duty, so to lick themselves whole again, (...). 58 5. They do as
crows, that when they are sick give themselves a vomit, by swallowing down some
stone, and then they are well. They rest in their repentance: Hence Austin
says, Repentance (...) more then sin.

Verse 22. It shall be more tolerable]
Men are therefore the Ideo deteriores sumus quia (...) esse (...). (...).
worse, because they ought to be better: and shall be deeper in hell, because
heaven was offered unto them, but they would not. Ingentia beneficia, flagitia,
supplicia, say the Centurists. Good turns aggravate unkindnesses: and men's
offenses are increased by their obligations. If Turks and Tartars shall be
damned, debauched Christians shall be double-damned: because, though they defy
not, yet they deny the Lord that bought them; whilst by their unchristian
conversation they tell the world, that either there is no such thing as Christ,
or if there be, yet that he is but a weak Christ, and that there is no such
power in his death, or efficacy in his resurrection to sanctify those that
belong unto him.

Verse 23. Which art exalted unto heaven]
viz. In the abundance of the means of grace, many times called the Kingdom of
heaven: for as the harvest is potentially in the seed, so is eternal life
potentially in the ordinances. God sends up and down the world to (...)
salvation. Hence that phrase, My salvation is gone forth: Hence, they that
reject the word preached, are said to judge themselves unworthy of everlasting
life, Acts 13. 46. Hence, while Israel was without a teaching Priest, they are
said to have been without the true God, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3. Hence the Psalmist
makes the (...) that come out of Sion, to be better then any other that come
out of heaven and earth, Psalm. 134 3.

Shall be brought down to hell]
With a violence, with a vengeance. As Ahashuerosh said of Haman, that so much
abused his favor, Hang him on the gallows that is 50 cubits high: so shall God
say of such: Plunge them into hell much deeper then others, that whiles they
were on earth, set so light by my grace, though it even kneeled unto them,
wooing acceptance. 2 Cor. 5. 20.

It would have remained until this day.]
But God rained down hell from heaven upon them, and turned them into ashes
says Peter, (...). 2. 6.
yea their fire burnt to hell says Jude. Some footsteps of it are Jude 7.
yet to be found in the place, as Josephus relates: and something also may be
read of it in Tacitus and (...). Both S. Peter and De (...). (...). (...).
S. Jude say, they were set forth for an example. (...) perditio tua fit
cautio. Let their destruction be our instruction; (...) heathen (...).
Herodotus (...) up in judgment against us, who said, (...) the coals and
ashes of Troy burnt by the Greeks, were (...) set before the eyes of men, for
an example of this rule, that National and notorious sins, bring down
national and notorious plagues from a sin-revenging God.

Verse 24. It shall be more tolerable]
Infidelity then is, in some respect, a worse sin then Sodomy, and a heavier
doom abides it. They that suffer least in hell, suffer more then (...) can
either abide or avoid. All they suffer here, is but typical of the wrath to
come. Here the leaves only fall upon them, as it were, but there the whole
trees too. Here they sip of the top of Gods cup, there they must drink the
dregs, though it be eternity to the bottom. Howbeit (...) shall suffer less
then (...), mitius punietur Cicero quam Catilina, says an Ancient, non quod
bonus, sed quod minus malus. The beast and the false Prophet were cast alive
into the (...) genus. Pareus.
burning lake (which imports a most direful and dreadful degree of torment)
when the rest of the Antichristian rabble shall be first slain with the sword
(not cast in alive) and then thrown to the infernal vultures, to be torn in
pieces as a prey. Rev. 19. 20. 21.

Verse 25. At that time Jesus answered]
Here to answer, is to continue to speak. Albeit if we compare herewith, Luke
10. 21. it may seem to be spoken in answer to the seventy Disciples now (...),
and relating what they had said and done in their voyage. Laetius est quoties
magno sibi constat honestum.
Lucan.


Verse 26. Even so father, for so, etc.]
Christ being tired out as it were by the untractablenesse of his hearers,
turns him to his Father and comforts himself with the consideration of his
most wise decree and counsel. So must we in like case: accounting that we are
a sweet savor unto God howsoever, even in them that 2 Cor. 2. (...).
perish, and that God shall have his end upon them, though we have not ours.

Verse 27. All things are delivered unto me]
This the worlds wizzards acknowledge not; hence they stand off. But Christ is
the Fathers Plenipotentiary and Privy-Counsellour, unto all that are called
both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the 1 Cor. 1. 24.
(...) of God, as light as the world makes of him. But the more men see into
his worth, the more they will repair to him.

And be to whomsoever the Son will reveal him]
Qui (...) habet Christum in horoscopo, non habet (...) in medio caeli.

Verse 28. Come unto me]
Why do ye go about, as Jeremy has it, and fetch a compass? Why labor ye for
that which satisfies Ier. 31. (...).
(...), Isa. 53. 3? Can the son of Iesse give you vineyards and oliveyards,
etc. as Saul said? so say I, Can the world or the devil do for you as I can?
Why come ye not unto me that ye may be saved? Can you mend your selves any
where? etc. But the poor soul is ready to hang her comforts on every hedge,
shift and shark in every by-corner for comfort, and never come at Christ with
the hemorrhoisse, till all be spent, till she be forsaken of her hopes. Hag.
(...) 7.
Men will not desire Christ. till shaken.

All ye]
All, is a little word, but of large extent. The promises are indefinite, and
exclude none. It is not for us to be interlining Gods-Covenant, and excepting
our selves, how bad soever, if brokenhearted.

That labour]
Even to (...), but to no purpose, labor in (...)
the fire where you can make nothing of your labor.

And are heavy laden]
Poised to an inch, ready to be weighed down to hell, with the turn of a scale,
with the dust of a (...) (...)
superadded. Others might have Christ, if they would come to him. But till
then, none will come. Steep thy thoughts in this sweet sentence, thou burdened
soul, and come away to the Master, (as they said to blind Bartimeus) for
behold he calls thee,

And I will give you rest]
No rest to the weary soul but in Christ, (as the dove found no rest till she
returned to the Arc) (...) flees from this thing to that, as the be does from
flower to flower to get honey, as Saul sought his asses from place to place. But
as he found them at home after all, so must we find rest and refreshing in
Christ, or not at all. Let him that walks in darkness, and has no light,
trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. As for those that will
kindle a strange fire, and compass them selves about with the sparks of their
own tinderboxes, let them walk while they will in the light of their fire and
in the sparks that they have kindled, But this shall they have of Christ's hand,
they shall lie down in sorrow, Isa. 50 10. 11.

Verse 29. Take my yoke upon you]
q. d. Though freed by me from the damning and domineering power of sin, you
must not ^
think to live as you list. To argue from mercy to liberty is the devils
logic: from mercy to duty is the right reasoning as, Romans 12. 1. Christians
must not be yoaklesse, lawless, masterlesse, (...), that wander at will as
wild asses, or canes (...) but they must yield the obedience of faith, and be
adding to their faith (...), and to virtue knowledge, etc. linking the graces
hand in (...)
hand as in a dance (so the word signifies) so shall they have an 2 (...). 1. 5
11
(...) ministered unto them further and further into Christ's glorious kingdom.

And learn of me]
The archprophet, the Counselor, that excellent Dan 8. 13.
speaker, as he is called in Daniel, that (...) out of the fathers bosom, and
has his fathers will at his fingers ends. Besides what he taught us by himself
and his servants, he has written for us those excellent things of his law,
those lively oracles. He (...) also left us, as here, his own practice for a
pattern of the (...).
rule, and for a complete copy (as St Peter calls it) to write 1 (...). 2. 21.
after. Pindarus says of Hiero Siracusanus that he had cropped off (...)
the tops of all virtues. (...), of Friderick the Electour of Saxony, that he
had picked out the flower of all noble abilities and Frider. selegit florem ex
omnib (...). (...). (...). page 372.
endowments. The same author proposes George Prince of Anhalt for an example
(...) piety worthy of all men's imitation. Machiavel sets forth Caesar Borgia (a
far worse man) as the only pattern for a prince to express. St Hierom having
(...). de Principe.
read the religious life and death of Hilarion, folding up the book (...),
Well; Hilarion (...) be the champion whom I will (...). How much rather should
we say (...) of Christ: every of whose actions whether moral or mediatory,
were for our imitation. In his moral actions we should learn of him by doing
as he did, 1 Pet. 2. 23, In his mediatory, by translating that he did, to our
spiritual life, (...) to die to sin, live to righteousness, etc.

For I am weak and lowly in heart]
Lo here is a piece of Christ's yoke, which (...) therefore so calls, because
as the yoke (...) (...) (...) (...).
makes the heifer hang down his head, and frame to hard labor, so does
humility (the mother of meekness) work in our hearts, Humilitas ab: bumo.
(...). 10. 11. (...) was a heifer used to dance and delight in soft straw, and
could not abide to plow: but the Lord will make him (and all his) both bear and
draw, and that from their (...) up, Lam, 3. And whereas meeknes and
lowli-mindednesse go coupled here together, we must know that they are virtutes
(...) as Bernard (...), a pair of twin-(...), never (...). Act. and Mon.
Remember, (...) Mr Tindall to Mr Frith, that as (...) of mind shall make you
high with God, even so (...) of words shall make you sink into the hearts of
men.

And ye (...) find rest unto your soules]
These Christian virtues Socrates cum in (...) at (...)
have virtutem pacativam, they lodge a sweet calm in the (...), (...) it from
perturbations and distempers. An (...) man (...), who am I but I may be
despised, abused, injured? And that which will break a passionate man's heart.
Will (...) break a (...) sleep.

Verse 30. For my yoke is easie]
After a man is once used to (...) useful (...) to (...); (...), (...).
it a little: he cannot fadge so well with it perhaps at first, because an
untamed heifer: but after a while, his commandments will be nothing grievous, I
delight to do thy will O God, says David.

And my burden light]
Such as you may as (...) bear away as Sampson did the gates of Gaza; such as
you may well run under, as a horse does without a load, or a hind upon the
mountains. It is no more burden then the wings are to the bird, (...) it flies
aloft where it lists.

CHAP. XII.
Verse 1. Jesus went on the Sabbath day]
SAint Luke calls it the second Sabbath after the first, chap. (...)
6. 1. that is the second Anniversary or solemn-fealt, from the first, to wit
from the Passeover-Sabbath and this was Pentecost.

And his Disciples were an hungred]
Hereby he hardened and (...) them to further and future trialls: teaching them
also to depend upon Gods good providence for their necessary maintenance. The
Martyrs had their bread made of meal half mixed with Act. (...) Mor.
saw-dust.

To pluck the ears of corn and to eat]
This was their best Sabbath-dayes dinner: May not we be glad of mean fare on
any day, when our betters fared no better on so high a day? See my commonplace
of Abstinence.

Verse 2. Behold, thy Disciples do that which is not lawfull]
This was as the proverb is, Sus Minervam, when blind Pharisees will be
teaching Christ, how the Sabbath is to be sanctified. Not Hebrews only, but
also Greeks and Barbarians rested from work on the seventh day: (...) Josephus,
Clemens Alexand. and Eusebius. Howbeit, to the Hobrews at (...) Sina, God for a
special favor, made known his holy Sabbath, Nehem. 9. 14. commanding them to
do no servile work therein, Lev. 23. 7 8. Dio
This excludes not works of Piety, Charity, and Necessity, such (...):
as was this of the (...) in the text. The Jews in their superstition, would
not fight on the Sabbath, and therefore lost their chief City to the Romans,
under the command of Pompey, who took the advantage of the day, to do his
utmost then against them. In aftertimes they grew more rigid in this point:
for on the Sabbath they would not spet, ease nature, get out of a jakes, if by
mishap they had fallen into it, as that Jew of Tewksbury. This ever was, and is
the guise of hypocrites, to strain at gnats and swallow camels. Witness our
modern Pharisees the Monks and Jesuits, who stumble at straws, and leap over
mountains. Levius esse crimen mill (...) jugulare, quam (...). Pareus in loc.
Their Schoolmen determined that it was a less: crime to kill a thousand men,
then for a poor man to mend his shoe on the Sabbath Day.

Verse 3. But he said unto them]
They had not proved a breach of the Sabbath, neither could they. A breach it
had been, had not the Disciples been hungry, and he denies it not, but confutes
their present cavils by clear syllogismes, one in the Manifestu^ (...)
adversarios redar guit.
neck of another, such as they could not answer, nor abide: and therefore
sought to destroy him, ver. 14. See here the lawful use of logic in Divinity,
and mistake not S. (...), Qui syllogizandi (...).
(...) applicatam Theologiae, comparat plagis (...): understand him of that
false Sophistry, which the Apostle calls vain philosophy, Col. 2.

David did when he was an hungred]
Note here, that our Savior excuses David from his necessity, not from his
dignity, which in point of sin God regards not: Potentes potenter (...). And
yet how many are there who think; that when they have gotten an office, they
may oppress at pleasure, swear by authority, drink and swill without (...)?
But height of place ever adds two wings to sin, example and scandal. And ill
accidents ever attend such great ones, as being absolute in power, will be too
(...) in will, and dissolute in life. Q. Elizabeth said, that Princes owe a
double duty to God. 1. As men. 2. As Princes, (...) prima and vita ima, (...)
as unsuitable, as for those that are clothed in scarlet to embrace the (...),
Lam. 4 5.

Verse 4. And did eat the show bread]
The bread of proposition, (...).
(...) the Greek text has it, the face-bread, as the Septuagint call it, or
that which was daily set before the Lord, to in-minde him, as it were, of the
twelve Tribes by those twelve loaves: and to teach us, Jon. 6 (...).
to labor every day in the week (and not on the Sabbath only) for the bread
that endures to everlasting life; which the son of man will give to every
hungry David.

Verse 5. Profane the Sabbath]
As ye count profaning of it: or they profane it by divine dispensation, whiles
they do servile works in slaying sacrifices, and other things tending to the
service of God, such as is now the ringing of the Sermon-bell amongst Act. and
(...). (...). 8, 8.
us, as amongst the Protestants in France, the letting off of a (...) or
pistollet, whereby they congregate.

Verse 6. But I say unto you]
q. d. whereas you will here object, that that was done in the Temple: tell you
I am greater then the Temple: for in me the God head dwells bodily; as in the
Temple was the Col 1. 19.
Ark, where the glory of God appeared, so that it filled the Temple sometimes.
Take notice here (by the way) how good it is to have some grave and godly man
to be a beholder and Judge of our actions, to whom we may approve them,
whatever other il-affected think of them. -- Equitem (...) plaudere (...),
says the Heathen Poet. And (...) (...). ep. (...) (...).
Libanius (though an Atheist) could say, If Basil commend me, I care not what
all others say of me. Christ's white stone will comfort a Christian against the
black coals of the worlds censures. If Demetrius have a good report of the
truth, and such an one as S. John to bear record for him, he need not care
though Diotrephes Joh. 3. 10, 12.
prate as fast against them both with malicious words, as the Pharisees did
here against the Disciples, when Christ defended them.

Verse 7. But if ye had known]
And it was a foul shame for them not to know. Who is blind as my servant?
etc. (...) justly Isa 42. 19.
upbraided the Roman Priests, that there were many matters in (...) in Aug. de
civit. Dei, 4. c. (...).
their own rites and religions, that they understand not. What kind of men
they were, Tully in one place gives us to know in these words of his, (...)
majores nostri Cincinnatum illum ab aratro (...). 2. de (...).
abduxerunt, ut Dictator esset, sic vos de Pelasgis omnibus colligitis bonos
illos quidem viros, sed certe non (...), good honest men, but not guilty of
much learning.

I will have mercy, and not sacrifice]
q. d. I prefer the marrow and pith of the second Table before the (...) and
surface of the ^
first. See the Notes on Chap. 9 14.

Ye would not have condemned the guiltlesse]
Ignorance is the mother of misprision: the wisdom from above is without
(...), Jam. 3. 17. And as any man is more wise, he is more sparing of his
censures. Zanchy wonders that (...), who profess to eat Christ corporally
(...) censure so bitterly. (...).


Verse 8. The son of man is Lord of the Sabbath]
q. d. Say they were not innocent, yet have you no cause to condemn them for
Sabbath-breach; since I am Lord of the Sabbath, and may (...) with mine own, as
me seems (...). True it is that Christ hates sin by nature, not by precept
only; and therefore cannot dispense with the breach of his own laws, those that
be moral in themselves, such as are all the ten, but the fourth. The fourth
Commandment is moral, not by nature, but by precept, says one, and so the
Lord of the Sabbath may dispense with the literal breach of the Sabbath.

Verse 9. He went into their Synagogue]
These were Chapels of ease to the Temple, of ancient use, Act. 15. 21. and
divine authority, Psalm. 74. 8. This here is called the Pharisees Synagogue,
because they did Dominari in concionibus, Romans 2. 19, 20. and are for their
skill called Princes, 1 Cor. 2. 8.

Verse 10. Which had his hand withered]
So have all covetous (...), who may well be said, amidst all their (...), to
have (...) current coin, no quicksilver. They sit abrood upon what they have
got, as Euclio in the (...): and when, by laying (...) their money, they might
lay hold on eternal life, they will not (...) drawn to it. But as Alphonsus
King of Spain, when he stood to be King of the Romans, was prevented of his
hopes, because he, being a great Mathematician, was drawing lines Daniels Hist,
of Engl. f. 174.
(says the Chronicler) when he should have drawn out his (...): So here.

Verse 11. What man shall there be, etc.]
If a (...) slipped into a slow must be relieved, how much more Christ's
reasonable sheep, all which bear golden fleeces, and every thing about whom is
good either (...), or ad usum?

Verse 12. Is it lawful to do (...)?]
Nay it is needful, since not to do well is to do ill, and not to save a life,
or a soul, is to destroy it, Non faciendo (...), sed (...). (...). (...).
Mar. 3. 4 Not to do justice is (...), and not to show (...) is (...) then
cruelty.

Verse 13. And he stretched it forth]
So would our (...) out their hands to the poor, would they but (...) to
Christ, and hear his voice, as this man did. But till then, they will as easily
part with their blood as with their good: All their strife is, who (like the
(...)) shall fall asleep with most earth in his paws: As when they die, nothing
grieves them more, then that they must leave that which they have so dearly
(...), whiles alive. I read of one wretch, who being at point of death, clapped
(...) (...) (...).
piece of gold in his own (...), and said, Some wiser then some, I mean to have
this with me howsoever.

Verse 14. How (...) might destroy him]
All envy is bloody: Men wish him out of the world, whom they cannot abide: and
would rather the Sun should be (...), then their candle (...). David durst
never trust Saul's protestations, because he knew him to be an envious person.
Nero put Thraseas to death for no other cause, but for that it was not
expedient (...).
for Nero, that (...) worthy a man as he should live by him.

Verse 15. Great multitudes followed him]
Maugre the malice of earth and hell. They lose their labor that seek to quell
Christ, and subvert his Kingdom, Yet have I set my King upon mine holy hill of
Sion, Psalm. 2. 6. The Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, (...). 11. 12. Or
(as Melanctbon rendereth that text) Vierumpit, procedit, (...).
enititur: vi scilicet (...), ut sol enititur per nubes: ergo irriti (...)
conatus: it bursts through all.

Verse 16. That they should not make him known]
This, his (...), who sought to get credit and glory among men by his (...)
works, upbraid him with, Joh. 7. 4. If thou (...) these things, show thy self
to the world, say they; and so proclaim that they believed not in him, Joh. 7.
5. with Joh. 5. 44. Joh. 12. 43.

Verse 17. That it might be fulfilled]
The old Testament, is the new foretold; the new Testament is the old (...).
Ezekiel saw a wheel within a wheel. This is, says (...), the one Testament in
the other.

Verse 18. Behold my servant]
My servant the Messiah, as the Chaldee (...) renders and expounds it. The
Septuagint somewhat obscure the text by adding to it, Behold my servant Jacob,
and mine elect Israel. They are said to have (...) against (...) wills: no (...)
then they deal not so faithfully. Sure it is, that they have perverted sundry
(...) Prophecies (...) Christ, as (...) for instance; which therefore our
Evangelist and the rest of the Apostles allege not out of their translation,
but out of the Hebrew (...). The Latins drink of the puddles, the (...) of the
(...), but the Hebrews of the (...), said Johan. Reuchlin.

Whom I have chosen, my beloved, etc]
Ecce electum, dilectum. The Latins have a proverb, Deligas quem (...). Choose
for (...). 12 7.
thy love, and then love for thy choice. God has also chosen (...). Dilectam
animam (...).
(...) in the beloved, Ephesians. 1. 6. that we should be the beloved of his soul,
or as the Septuagint there emphatically render it, his belived soul. Vulg.


And he shall show judgement]
That is the doctrine of the Gospel (whereby is conveyed into the heart that
spirit of judgment and of burning (Isa. 4. 4.) or the sweet effect of it true
grace, which is called judgment a little below, verse. 20.

Verse 19. He shall not strive]
To bear away the bell (...) others.

Nor cry]
Nor lift up his voice, says the Prophet, as loath to lie hid, and (...) making
an O yes, as desirous of vainglory and popular applause. Lauds nec curat, nec
(...). He despises it as a little stinking breath, or the slavering of men's
lips which he disdains to suck in.

Verse 20. A bruised reed shall he not break]
A reed shaken with the wind is taken for a thing very contemptible at the
best, Mat. 11. (...)
how much more when bruised? The wick of a candle is little worth; and yet
less, when it (...); as yielding neither light nor heat, but only stench and
annoiance. This men bear not with, but tread out: So does not Christ, who yet
has a sharp nose, a singular sagacity, and soon resents our provocations. He
(...) also feet like burning brass to tread down all them that wickedly depart
from his statutes, Psalm. 119. 118. But so do not any of his, and therefore he
receives and cherishes with much (...), not the strong oaks only of his
people, but the bruised reeds too; nor the bright torches only, but the
smoking (...).
wick: He despises not the day of small things. Smoke is Sept.
of the same (...) with flame: for what else is flame, but (...).
smoke set on fire? So, a little grace may be true grace, as Heb. (...)
the filings of gold are as good gold (though nothing so much Caligans, (...)
ens.
of it) as the whole wedge. The least spark of fire, if cherished, will
endeavor to (...) above the air, as well as the greatest: So the least degree
of grace will be aspiring to more. Now those very pantings, inquietations, and
unsatisfiablenesse, cannot but spring from truth of grace, which Christ makes
high account of.

Till he bring forth]
Gr. Thrust forth with violence, the devil and (...).
the world in vain opposing the work of grace (called here judgment) which
shall surely be perfected. He that is Author, the same will be finisher of our
faith: he does not use to do his work to the Heb. 12. 3.
halves, Non est jusdem (...) and perficere, we say. But that rule holds not
here.

Verse 21. Shall the Gentiles trust]
This trust is here put for the whole service of God, it being the least, and
yet the best we can render to him. And the more we know of his name, the more
we shall trust in him, Psalm.(...) 9. 10.

Verse 22. One (...) with a devil blind and dumb.]
A heavy (...).
case, and yet that that may be any man's case. Cuivis potest contingere, (...).
(...).
quod cuiquam potest. Every one that sees another stricken, and himself
spared, is to keep a Passover for himself, and to say, Thou have punished me
(...) then my sins have merited, Ezra 9. 13. The devil had shut up from this
man all passages to faith, says Theophylact, by bereaving him of the (...) of
his eyes, ears, and tongue. See a mercy in the use of our serses, etc. Multo
plures sunt gratiae privativae quam positivae, says Gerson.

Verse 23. And all the people were amazed]
Admiration bred Admiratio peperit philosophian.
Philosophy, says the Heathen: it bred superstition, faith (...) Scripture,
when the world went wondering after the beast. We may say too, that it bred
piety in this people, and still (...). 13. 3.
(...) see the Word never works kindly, till men hear and admire it. Let
others censure with the Pharisees; let us wonder with the multitude.

Verse 24. This fellow does not cast out devils, etc.]
The devil that was east out of the demoniacks body seems to have got into
these (...) hearts. But he was not his (...)-master: for what a (...) slander
hear we? He should have (...) it a little better, to have been believed. (...)
mendacium (...), says Tacitus. This was such (...) lie as might be easily
looked through. But envy never regards (...) true, but how (...). Witness the
Popish Pharisees, who tell the poor (...) and muzzled people in their Sermons,
that the Protestants are blasphemers of (...) and all his Saints: that the
English are grown barbarous, and eat young children: that ever since the Pope
excommunicated us, we are (...), etc D. (...). (...).
as black as devils: that the Powder Treason was plotted, and should have been
acted by the (...): that the (...) of Blackfriars in London, likewise was
wrought by the Puritans, who had loosned the rafters, etc. That these are the
opinions we hold and teach, 1. To worship no God. 2. To frame our religion to
the times. 3. To account gain godliness. 4. To pretend public liberty to our
private lusts. 5. To break our oaths, when it makes for our advantage. 6. To
cover hatred with flattery. 7. To confirm tyranny with Eudaem. Joh. contra
Casaub. p 23.
bloodshed, etc. These and the like, that Cacodamon Joannes, the black-mouthed
(...) tells the world in print are our tenets and practices. Now the (...) thee,
Satan. But what reward shall be given to thee, thou false tongue? Even sharp
arrows, with hot burning coals: yea those very coals of hell, from whence thou
were enkindled.

Verse 25. And Jesus knew (...) thoughts]
That they blasphemed in this sort, out of the devilish venom of their hearts
fully possessed by Satan, who drew them (...) this unpardonable sin, which
himself every day, nay every moment commits. As one that had fallen into
that sin, wished that his wife and children, and all the world might be damned
together with him: So does the devil out of his deep and desperate malice to
mankind, draw some into this sin, that he may drown them in the same
destruction with himself.

And said unto them]
He could, as he did often no doubt, have answered them with silence, or punished
them with contempt, committing his cause to him that judges righteously. He
could have turned them off, as one did his (...) adversary with, (...) Tacitus.
linguae, (...) aurium Dominus: But inasmuch as Gods glory was Seneca.
highly concerned, and his cause might have suffered, if this (...) calumny had
not been confuted. Our Savior makes a most grave apology in the behalf of his
doctrine and miracles, which he maintains and makes good by many demonstrative
arguments.

Every Kingdom divided against itself]
Divide and impera, says Machiavel. Make division and get dominion. Every
subdivision, Hist. of Counc. Trent.
says another, is a strong weapon in the hand of the adverse party. Where
strife is (says the Scripture) there is confusion, as (...) 3. 16.
(...) and Pollux, if they appear not together, it presageth a Omne (...) est
(...), (...).
storm. Sicollidimur frangimur, If we clash we cleave, said the two earthen
pots in the fable, that were swimming down the stream together. The daughter of
division is (...), says (...). This the Jesuits know, and therefore do what
(...). Medit. (...). 2. cap. (...).
they can to keep up the contentions (...) the Lutherans and the Calvinists.
This the Turks know, and therefore pray to God, to keep the Christians at
variance. Discord was the destruction of our Ancestors, as Tacitus testifies,
who was here in this Island with his father-in-law Agricola, and saw it. And
the Lord Rich in his speech to the Justices of England, in Edward the sixths
reign, could say; Never foreign power could yet hurt, or in any part prevail
in this realm, but by disobedience and disorder in themselves. That is the way
wherewith God will plague us, if he mind to punish us. And so long as we Act.
(...) Mon.
do agree among our selves, and be obedient to our Prince, (...) 186.
and to his godly orders: we may be sure that God is with us, and that foreign
power shall not prevail against us, nor hurt us.

Verse 26. He is divided against himself]
But so he is not. There is a mavelous accordance even betwixt evil spirits.
Squamae Leviathan it a cohaerent, ut earum opere textili densato quasi
loricatus incedat (...). de (...).
Satan and cataphractus, as Luther elegantly and truly phraseth it, The devils
in the possessed person were many, yet they say My name (not Our name) is
Legion. Though many, they speak and act as one in the pofsession. That kingdom,
we see, (...) not divided.

Verse 27. By whom do your children, etc.]
That is your Countreyman. Aug de Civ.
Not the Disciples, (as Augustine and other Ancients Dei. lib. (...). cap. 5.
would have it) but the Jewish exorcists, of whom see, Mark 9. 38. Act. 199. As
if our Savior should have said: Unless that be a blemish in me, that you hold
to be a beauty in others, why should you condemn me for a conjurer? Why does
your malice thus wilfully cross your consciences? Certain it is, says
Compertum est damnata ut hae retica in (...) is Lutheri, etc.
Erasmus, that the self-same things are condemned as heretical in Luthers
books, that in Augustine and Bernards works are read and regarded as pious and
orthodox sentences. So these passages Eras. Epist ad Cardinal. (...).
were gathered as heresies out of Tindals works: He is not a sinner in the
sight of God that would be no sinner. He that would be delivered, has his
heart loose already. It is impossible that the word of the cross should be
without affliction and persecution. The Gospel is written for all persons and
estates, Prince, Duke, Pope, Emperor. We cannot be without motions of Act. and
Mon.
evil desires, but we must mortify them in (...) them. God (...). (...) 137.
made us his children and heirs, while we were his enemies, and before we knew
him. Men should see that their children come to Church to hear the Sermon, etc.
Were not these perilous heresies? Says not the Scripture the same in sundry
places? Is not Novum Crimen C. Caesar, and ante hoc tempus inauditum, Cic. pro
Ligar.
this to have the glorious faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in respect of
persons, Jam. 2. (...). So the greatest errors that Henry Voes and John Esch
Martyrs were (...) of, were, that men ought to trust only in God: for so much
as men are liers, and deceitful in Act. and Mon.
all their words and deeds; and therefore there ought no trust or (...). 799.
affiance to be put in them.

Verse 28. Then the kingdom of God is come unto you.]
A certain sign of the setting up whereof among you, is this casting out of
devils by the spirit of God, or as Luke has it, by the finger of God: for the
holy Ghost is the essential power of the Father and the Son.

Verse 29. A strong man's house, etc.]
The devil is strong, but overpowred by Christ. He has forcibly delivered us
from the (...).
Col. 1. 13.
power of darkness, snatched us out of the devils danger: so that, though he
shake his chain at us, he cannot fasten his fangs in us. Stronger is he that is
in the Saints, then he that is in the world: through Christ we shall overcome
him, Romans 8. 37.

Verse 30. He that is not with me, is against me.]
But the devil is not with me, says Christ: for all I do or suffer, is to
destroy his works. Let this sentence also be noted against Neuters and
Nicodemites, who stand halting betwixt two, and will be sure to hold themselves
on the warm side of the hedge howsoever. Such were of old the Samaritans,
Nazarites, Ebionites, and those (...). in parallel. lib. 1 8.
Corinthians that would neither be of Paul, nor Apollos, nor (...), but of
Christ: that is, as some Neuters say now-adaies, they are neither Cavaliers nor
Roundheads, but good Protestants: Others 1 Cor. 1. 12.
are neither Papists nor protestants, but Christians, that is (...) nothing,
Atheists. Christ hates neutrality, and counts it enmity: he (...) luke warmnes,
accepts not of any excuse in that case, Judge. 5. 16, 17. Dan and Ephraim are
passed by in the reckoning up of the Tribes, Rev. 7. as if they were Soldiers
put out of pay, and cut out of the rolls. So are all detestable indifferents,
out of Gods book of remembrance, Mal. 3. 17.

Verse 31. All manner of sin and blasphemy, etc.]
All without exception, yea though it be blasphemy, Isa. 44. 22. God blots out
the thick cloud as well as the cloud, (...) as well as infitmities. Man cannot
commit more then he can and will remit to the penitent. The Sun by his force
can scatter the greatest mist, as well as the least vapor: and the Sea by its
(...); drown mountains as well as mole-hills. The grace of our Lord abounds to
(...) over, says S. Paul. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses (...)
us from all sin, says S. John. Ego admisi, unde (...) damnare (...) (...). 1.
(...).
me, sed non amisisti unde tu salvare potes me, says S. Augustine. (...) Joh.
1. (...).
And yet Novatus the proud Heretic, denied possibility of pardon to them, that
had any whit fallen off in times of persecution, though they rose again by
repentance. But Gods thoughts of mercy are not as man's, Isa. 55. 8. he can and
will pardon such sins, as no God or man can do besides, Micah 7. 18. Who is a
God like unto thee? For what? That pardons all sorts of sins, etc. This (...)
can believe without supernatural grace: We are ready to measure God by our
model.

But the blasphemy against the holy Ghost, etc.]
This is nothing else, says John Diazius, to that (...) his brother, quam
agnitam (...) de (...). (...). Diaz.
veritatem (...) in sectari, a malicious persecuting of the known truth. A sin
it is of malice after strong conviction, expressed in words by a tongue set on
fire by hell, and in actions coming from a venomous spirit, and tending to
opposition, and bitter persecution, if their malice be not greater then their
power. (...) consessus est inter (...) mugitus, se contra conscientiam (...).
This was committed by Saul, Julian, Latomus of Lovaine, Rockwood a chief
perfecutour at Callice in Henry 8. days, who, to his last breath, staring and
raging, cried he was utterly damned, for that he had sought maliciously the
deaths of a number of the honestest men in the town, etc. Steven Gardener said
as much also in effect of himself, when he lay on his deathbed, and so both
(...).
stinkingly and unrepentantly died, says M. Fox. (...). (...). 5.


Verse 32. And whosoever speaks aword, etc.]
As Peter did Act. and Mon.
through infirmity, Paul through ignorance: (...) poor souls (...), 1905.
whom he haled to prison, and for fear of death, compelled them to (...)
Christ, Act. 26. 11. Tertullian reports the like of Claudius Herminianus a
Persecuter in Cappadocia, quod tormentis (...)
quosdam a proposito suo excidere fecerat, that for spite that his own wife was
turned Christian, he forced many, by (...) them, to reneague Christ. Pliny
writes also to Traian the Emperor, that where he was Governor, there came to
his hands a book, containing the names of many, that for fear of death, (...)
themselves to be no Christians. And when, says he, they had at my command,
called upon the gods, offered incense to the Emperors Image, and cursed Christ
(which those that are Christians (...) (...) ad (...).
indeed, will never be drawn to do) I thought good to dismiss them.

But whosoever speaks against the (...) Ghost.]
Not his person or essence, (for many (...), Eunomian, Macedonian heretics Aug.
did so of old, and repenting found mercy) but his grace and special
operation, by the which God comes nearer to man, then he is in nature or
person. This sin is against the immediate effect: work and office of the holy
Ghost, against that shining light kindled by Gods spirit in man's soul, and that
sweetness and comfort felt in Christ, that taste of the good Word of God, and of
the powers of the world to come, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.

It shall not be for given him, etc.]
And why? Not because it is greater then Gods mercy, or Christ's merits: but
first by a just judgment of God upon such sinners, for their hateful (...) in
despising his spirit: Whence follows an impossibility of repentance, Heb. 6. 6.
and so of remission, Luke 13. 3. Secondly such a desperate sury invadeth these
men, that they maliciously resist and repudiate the price of repentance, Act.
5. 31. and the matter of remission, 1 John 1. 7. viz. the precious blood of
Jesus Christ, whereby if they might have mercy, yet they would not: but
continue raving and raging against both physic and Physician, to their
unavoidable ruth and ruin. How bold therefore is Bellarmine, who interprets
this text of the difficulty and rarity only of remission, and not of an utter
impossibility?

Verse 33. Either make the tree good, etc.]
q. d. Your blasphemy is therefore irremissible, because it is the fruit of so
base a root of bitterness, as the desperate malice of your hearts, wilfully
crossing your consciences: a wretched despising and despiting of God, and the
work of his spirit out of revenge, Heb. 10. 29. Draw not therefore a fair glove
over so foul a hand, but (...) your selves in your own colors.

Verse 24. How can ye being evil, etc.]
The stream rises not above the fountain: the bell is known of what metal by
the clapper: (...) sunt principia, (...) and principiara.
what is in the well, will be in the bucket: what in the warehouse, will be in
the shop: so what is in the heart, will be in the mouth. Era puto
noscitinnitu: pectora verbis: Beza in (...).

Sic est; namque id sunt utraque, quale sonant.


Verse 35. Out of the good treasure, etc.]
Out of his habit of heavenly mindednes, out of that law of grace in his heart,
his mouth speaks wisdom, and his tongue talks of judgment, Psalm. (...). 30.
31. Works not done from a principle of life within, are dead works, says the
Author to the Hebrews, be they for the matter never so good, and praise
worthy. This moved Luther to say, that (...) non (...): sed (...). (...).
good works make not men good; but good we must be first, ere good can be done
by us. This moved Austin to say, that Omnis vita infidelium peceatum est, the
whole life of an unbeleever is sin, though Spira the Popish Postiller censure
that saying for a cruel sentence. (...) est illa (...).


An evil man out of the evil treasure, etc.]
Carnal hearts are stews of unclean thoughts, shambles of cruel and bloody
thoughts, exchanges and shops of vain thoughts, a very forge and mint of false,
politic, undermining thoughts, yea often a little hell of confused and black
imaginations, as one well describes them.

Verse 36. That every idle word, etc.]
Idle and waste words are to be accounted for: what then evil and wicked?
Therefore let thine own words grieve thee, as David somewhere has it, thy
frivolous and fruitless speeches: for among a thousand talents of common
communication (says Cassiodore) a man can scarce (...). in cap. (...). (...).
find an hundred pence of spiritual speeches, imo nec december quidem obolos,
nay not ten halfpence truly. It may be observed says another, that when men
get into idle company (which perhaps they like not) the very complement of
discoursing, extracteth idle, if not evil speaking, to fill up the time. Plato
and Xenophon, thought it fit and profitable, that men's speeches at meals, and
such like meetings should be written. And if Christians should so do, what
kind of books would they be?

Verse 37. For by thy words thou shall be justified]
Our Savior (...) upon this subject, because by words they had sinned against
the holy Ghost. A man's most and worst sins be his words. St Paul making the
anatomy of a natural man, stands more on the organ of speech, then all the
other members. Romans 3. St James says, that the (...) is not a city or
country, but a world of iniquity, Jam. 3. 6. It can (...) all the world over,
and bite at every body, when the devil fires it especially. Peraldus reckons up
four (...). 1. (...). (...) 4.
and twenty several sins of the tongue: he might have made them more. God has
set a double hedge before it, of teeth and lips, to keep it up: he has also
placed it between the head and heart, that it might take counsel of both.
Children he will not suffer to speak, till they have understanding and wit: and
those that are deaf, are also dumb, because they cannot hear instruction, nor
learn wisdom, that they may speak advisedly.

Verse 38. Then certain of the Scribes and Pharisees]
(...) not these, as one said of Nero, Os ferreum, cor plumbeum, an iron face,
a leaden heart, that could call for a sign after so many signs? But it is a
sign from heaven they would have (as Moses called for Manna from thence,
Samuel for rain, Elias for fire, etc.) and much the near they would have been,
should our Savior have gratified them. But he never meant it. They were now so
clearly convinced of their blasphemy, that they had nothing to say for
themselves, but fawningly to call him Master, whom before they had called
Beelzebub: and to pretend themselves to be willing to learn, if they might see
a sign. They could not see wood for trees, as they say. And who so blind as
he that will not see. Sic Senec. Epist.
fit, ubi homines majorem vitae, partem in (...), ut (...) solemn quafi
supervacuum fastidiant, says Seneca. Men that have lived long in the dark, may
think the Sun (...);

Verse 39. An evil and adulterous generation, etc.]
Spuria soboles, a bastardly brood. So he calls them, because utterly
degenerate from their forefathers faith and holiness.

Seeks after a signe]
Seeks with utmost earnestness, as if it (...), (...).
were such a business as must be done, or they were undone. It is the guise of
hypocrites, to be hot in a cold matter, to show great zeal in nifles,
neglecting the main, mean while.

But the sign of the Prophet Jonas,]
Nor that neither, but for a further mischief to them: as their fathers had
quails to choke them, a King to vex them, etc. and as Ahaz had a (...), whether
he would or no, to render him the more inexcusable. Deus saepe dat iratus, quod
negat propitius. God gives his enemies some (...) gifts, as Saul gave Michol to
David, to be a snare to him, or (...).
as Christ gave Judas the bag, to discover the rottenness of his heart.

Verse 40. For as Ion as was three days, etc.]
In the history of Jonas, Christ found the mystery of his death, burial and
resurrection: teaching us thereby to search the Scriptures, to search them to
the bottom; as those that dig for gold, content not themselves with the first
or second oar that offers it self, but search on till they have all. This we
should the rather do, because we need neither climb up to heaven with these
Pharisees, nor descend into the deep with Jonas: since the word is nigh thee,
even in thy mouth, and in thine heart, etc. Romans 10. 7. 8.

So shall the Son of man be three days, etc.]
Taking a part for the whole. So Esther fasted three days and three nights,
chap. 4. 16. And yet on the third day she went to the King, chap. 5. 1. So
then, the fast lasted not three whole days and nights, but two nights, one
full day, and two pieces of days.

Verse 41. They repented at the preaching of Jonas]
At one single Sermon of a mere stranger, who sang so doleful a dity to them,
as the destruction of their Town: And yet they repented. What will become of
us? Vae torpori nostro. If M. Bradford so complained of his own
unprofitablenesse under means, in those dim days, what cause have we now
much more? Here in London, says he, be such godly, goodly and learned Sermons,
which these uncircumcised ears of mine do hear, at the least thrice a week,
which were able to burst any man's heart, to relent, to repent, to believe, to
love and fear that omnipotent gracious Lord. But mine adamantine, obstinate,
most unkind, unthankful heart, hearing my Lord so sweetly calling and crying
unto me, now by his Law, now by his Gospel, now by all his creatures, to come,
to come even to himself: I hide me with Adam, I play not only Samuel running to
Eli, but I play Jonas running to the sea, and there I Act. and Mon. (...).
(...).
sleep upon the hatches, until he please to raise up a tempest, to turn and
look upon me as he did upon Peter, etc.

Verse 42. The Queen of the South, etc.]
The Ethiopian Chronicles call her Mackeda, and further tell us, that she had a
son by Solomon, whom she named David. (...) it is that she came from a far
country to hear Solomon, and was so taken with his wisdom, that she could have
been content to have changed her Throne for his footstool. Now our Savior took
it ill (and well he might) that men came not as far, and set not as high a
price upon him and his doctrine, as she did upon Solomon and his wisdom, how
much more that these hard-hearted Jews esteemed it not, though brought home to
their doors?

Verse 43. When the unclean spirit]
Unclean the devil is callen, 1. Affectione (says Iacobus de Voragine) because
he loves uncleanness. 2. Persuasione, because he persuades men to it. 3.
Habitatione, because he inhabits unclean hearts: he finds them soul, he makes
them worse. Wheresoever the great Turk sets his foot once, no grass grows,
they say, ever after. Sure it is, no grace grows where the devil dwells. Pura
Deus men's est, says one: And Religion loves to lie clean, says another. The
holy Spirit will be content to dwell in a poor, but it must be a pure house.
The devil, on the contrary, delights in spiritual sluttishnesse: Harpylike, he
defiles all he touches: and Camell-like, drinks not of that water, that he
has not first fouled with his feet.

Is gone out of a man]
In regard of inward illumination, and 2 Pet. 2. 20.
outward reformation; such as was (...) in B. Bonner, that breathing-devil, who
at first seemed to be a good man, a favourer of Luthers doctrincs, a hater of
Popery, and was therefore advanced by the Lord Cromwell; to whom he thus wrote
in a certain letter: Act and Mon. fol. 993.
Steven Gardener for malice and disdain may be compared to the devil in hell,
not giving place to him in pride at all -- I mislike in Ibid. 997.
him, that there is so great familiarity and acquaintance, yea and such mutual
confidence between him an M. as naughty a fellow, and as very a Papist as any
that I know, where he dare express it. Who can deny but that the devil was
gone out of this man, for a time at least?

He walks through dry places]
Here the Proverb holds true, Anima sicca sapientissima. Sensual hearts are
the fennish grounds that breed filthy venomous creatures, Job 40. 21. Bohemia
lies in In locis dormit humer tibus, (...) est, in omnibus (...) madentibus.
the fennes. This, Gulielmus Parisiensis applies to the devil in sensual
hearts. Contrariwise, the spirits of Gods Saints, which burn with faith, hope
and charity, and have all evil humors dried up in them by that spirit of
judgment and of burning, these the devil likes not. The tempter finds
nothing in them, though he seek it diligently. He strikes fire, but this
tinder takes not. Cupid complained he could never fasten upon the Muses,
because he could never find them idle. So here.

Verse 44. He finds it empty]
That is, idle and secure, swept (...) dant vitia.
of grace, garnished with vice, the devils fairest furniture.

Verse 45. And takes seven other spirits]
As the Jaylour (...) more load of irons on him, that had escaped his (...),
(...) is now recovered.

And they enter in and dwell there]
So they never do in a heart once truly (...). Lust was but a stranger to
David (no homedweller) as Peter Martyr observes out of that passage in Nathans
(...), 2 Samuel 12. 4. And there came a (...) to the rich man, etc. Faith leaves
never a sluts-corner, Acts 15 9.

And the last state of that man is worse]
(...) Apostate cannot (...) unto himself a worse condition. It is with such as
in that case, Lev. 13, 18, 19, 20. If a man had a bile healed, and it
afterward brake out, it proved the plague of leprosy. These are called
forsakers of the Covenant, Dan. 11. 30. and wicked doers against the Covenant,
ver. 32. Renegate Christians prove the most (...) Devoto's to the devil. We see
by experience, that none are worse then those that have been good and are
naught: or those that might be good, and will be naught. Such as were these
Jews in the Text, to whom therefore our Savior applies the Parable in these
words.

Even so shall it be also unto this wicked generation]
Their sins were not common sins (but as those of Korah and his accomplices,)
therefore they died not common deaths. As they (...) not God, but were contrary
to all men, so wrath came upon them to the uttermost, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 16. as
Josephus witnesses. And Mr. Fox relates of Bonner that wicked Apostate, that
as he wretchedly died in his blind Popery (after he had been long time
prisoner in the reign of Q. Elizabeth,) so, as stinkingly and blindely at
midnight was he brought out, and buried in the outside of all the City, among
thieves and murderers. A place, says he, right convenient, with confusion and
derision both of men and children, who trampling (...) and Mon (...) (...).
upon his grave, well declared how he was hated both of God and man.

Verse 46. Desiring to speak with him]
Either out of curiosity or ambition, as Ambrose thinks: certain it is, at a
most unseasonable time. Now as fish and flesh, so, every thing else is naught
out of season.

Verse 47. Behold thy mother and thy brethren]
This was (...) weakness in his mother, though otherwise full of grace, yet
(...) without original sin, as the Sorbonists contend, but had need of a
Savior, as well as others, Luke 1. 47. Scipio permits not a (...) man so to
do amiss once in his whole life, as to say, non putaram. (...).
How much better Crates the Philosopher, who said that in every Pomgranate
there is at least one rotten kernel to be found: intimating O (...).
thereby, that the best have their blemishes, their faults and follies.

Verse 48. Who is my mother, and who, etc.]
This (...) lamb was stirred with a holy indignation at so absurd an
interruption, and sharpes him up that delivers the message. Great is the honor
that is due to a mother. Solomon set Bathsheba at his right hand, and promised
her any thing with reason. (...) unicam matris (...) omnes istius (...) posse
delere? Knows not Antipater, that one tear of my mothers, can (...) blot out
all his accusations against her, said Alexander the Great? Brethren also, or
neer-allyes (as these were to our Savior) are dearly to be respected, and
greatly gratified, as were Joseph's brethren by him in his greatness. But when
these relations, or their requests, come in competition with Gods work or
glory, they must be neglected, nay rejected and abominated. For is there any
friend, to God? or any foe like him? Men be they pleased or displeased, he must
be obeyed, and his business dispatched, be the (...) occasions never so urgent
in show, the pretenses (...) so specious and plausible.

Verse 49. Behold my mother, and my brethren]
Sanctior est (...) cordis quam corporis. Spiritual kindred is better then
eternal: There is a friend that sticks closer then a brother, Prove. 18. 24.
Christ is endeared to his in all manner of nearest relations and engagements.
Oh then the dignity and safety of a Saint! And oh the danger and disaster of
such as either by hand or tongue malign or molest them! What? will they wrong
Christ's mother to his face? Will they force the Queen also in the house? etc.
If Jacobs Esth. 7. 8.
sons were so avenged for the indignity done to their sister Dinah, (...)
Absalom for Tamar, what will Christ do, or rather what will (...) not do
(...) his dearest relations? How will this greater then Solomon arise off his
throne, at the last day, to meet his mother halfway, 1 King. 2. 19.
and to do her all the honor that may be in that great Amphitheatre? How
sweetly will he accost, his brethren that have been long absent from him in the
flesh, though present ever in spirit, with (...), Come ye blessed, etc. q. d.
where have you been all this while? They also shall be bold to say to him as
Ruth die to Boaz, Spread thy skirt over us, for thou art our near kinsman, or,
Ruth 3. 9.
one that has good right to redeem.

Verse 50. For whosoever shall do the will]
Lo here is the right way of becoming akin to Christ: and can we better prefer
our selves? It was an honor to Mark, that he was (...) his sisters son. David
durst not in modesty think of being son in law to a King. Elymas the (...),
affected to be held allied to Christ, and therefore styled himself Barjesus: as
Darius in his proud (...) to Alexander, called himself King of Kings, and (...)
of the Gods. But the right way to be ennobled indeed, and inrighted to Christ
and his Kingdom is, to believe in his Name, and (...) his (...). This, this is
to become Christ's brother, and sister, and mother. Sister is named, to show
that no sex is excluded. And mother last mentioned, that the prerogative of the
flesh may be set aside and disacknowledged.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse 1. The same day]
WHerein Christ had had a sharp bout and bickering with the Scribes and
Pharisees in the forenoon, he sat and taught the people (as it may seem) in the
afternoon. A (...) of preaching twice a day. Chrysostoms practice was to Quench
not (...) (...)
Preach in the afternoon, and by candlelight; as appears by his Note on, 1
These. 5. 17. where he fetches a similitude from the lamp he was preaching by.
Luther likewise preached twice (...) day: which because one Nicolas White
commended in him, he Act and Mon. (...). 950.
was accused of heresy in the reign of Hen. 8. And this commendable course
began to be disgraced and cried down in our days as Puritanicall and
superfluous. A learned Bishop was highly extolled in print for saying that when
he was a Lecturer in London B. (...).
he preached in the morning but prated only in the afternoon. A fair
commendation for him.

He sat by the sea-side]
As waiting an oppertunity of doing good to men's souls: which was no sooner
offered, but he readily laid hold on. So St Paul took a text of one of the
Altars in Athens, and discourses on it to the superstitious people. A minister
Tit. 3. 1.
must stand ever upon his watchtower, prompt and present, ready and speedy to
every good work (as the be so soon as ever the sun breaks forth, flies abroad
to gather honey and wax) accounting employment a preferment, as (...) Savior
did, John 17. 4.

Verse 2. He went into a ship and sat]
Thinking, perhaps, there to repose himself, after his hard conflict with the
(...). But the sight of a new audience, incites him to a new pains of preaching
to them And as he held no time unseasonable, so no place unfit for such a
purpose. We find him (...) teaching, not in the Temple only and synagogues on
the Sabbath day (as he did constantly) but in the mountains, in cities, in
private houses, by the seaside, by the way side by the wells side, any where,
every where, no place came (...) to him, no pulpet displeased him.

Verse 3. And he spoke many things to them in parables]
A parable, says Suidas, is (...), a setting forth of the matter by way of
similitude from something else that differs in kind, and yet in some sort
resembles and illustrateth it. Christ, the Prince of preachers, varieth his
kind of teaching, according to the nature and necessity of his audience,
speaking as they could hear, as they could bear, says St Mark. Ministers, in
like sort, must turn themselves, as it were into all shapes and fashions both
of spirit and speech, to win people to God.

Behold a sower went forth]
Our Savior stirrs them up to (...) by a Behold. Which though it might seem
not so needful to be said to such as came far, and now looked throw him, as it
were, for a Sermon: yet he, well knowing how dull men are to conceave heavenly
mysteries, how weak to remember, hard to believe, and slow to practice, calls
for their utmost attention to his divine doctrine, and gives them a just reason
thereof in his ensuing discourse. It fares with the best; whiles they hear, as
with little ones, when they are saying their lesson; if but a bird fly by,
they must needs look after it: besides the devils malice striving to distract,
stupifie, or steal away the good seed, that it may come to nothing.

Verse 4. And when he sowed, some seed, etc.]
The word is a seed of immortallity. For, 1. As seeds are small things, yet
produce great substances, as an acorn an oak, etc. so by the foolishnes of
preaching souls are saved, like as by the blowing of ramshorns the walls of
Jericho were subverted. 2. As the seed must be harrowed into the earth, so must
the word be hid in the heart, ere it (...). 3. As the seedsman cannot make an
harvest without the influence of heaven: so, let us to the wearing of our
tongues to the stump (as that Martyr expressed it) preach and pray never M.
(...) sermon. of step. (...) est (...), vest (...), Dei (...). Cyril.
so much, men will on in their sins, unless God give the blessing, Paul may
plant, etc. 4. As good seed if not cast into good ground yields no harvest: so
the word preached, if not received into good and honest hearts, proves (...).
The Pharisees were not a but on the better for all those heart piercing Sermons
of our Savior, nay, much the worse. 5. As the harvest is potentially in the
seed: so is eternal life in the word preached, Romans 1. 16. As the rain from
heaven has a fatness with it, and a (...) influence more then other standing
waters, so there is not the like life in other ordinances, as in Preaching.
None to that, as David said of Goliahs sword.

Verse 5, 6, 7, 8. Some fell upon stony places, etc.]
Our Savior, his own best interpreter, explains all this to his Disciples,
verse. 18. 19. The intent of these several parables seems to have been, to
confirm that which he had said in the former chapter, verse. 50. that they that
do the will of his heavenly Father, shall be owned and crowned by him, as his
dearest relations and alliences. As also to teach the people not to rest in
hearing, since three parts of four hear and perish. Which loss is yet sweetly
repaired by the fruitfullnesse of the good hearers, some whereof bring forth an
hundred fold, some sixty, some thirty, the fertilty of one grain making amends,
for the barrenness of many; so that the sower repents not of his pains; It Is
well worth while, if but one soul (...) to God by a whole lifes-labour.

Verse 9. Who has ears to hear, etc]
q. d. Some have ears to hear, some not. So he divides his hearers into
Auritos and surdos. All men have not faith, says St Paul. Men's ears must be
boared as David's, their hearts opened, as Lydias, ere the word can enter, Pray
we that Christ would say Epphata unto us, and that when he opens our ears, and
by them our hearts, that he would make the bore big enough: since with what
measure we meat, it shall be measured to us, and unto us that hear, shall more
be given, (...) 4 24. The greater diligence we use in hearing, the more
apparent shall be our profiting.

Verse 10. And his Disciples came and said unto him]
They came to him for satisfaction. Note this against those captious and
capricious hearers, that maliciously relate to others, that which to them seems
not so well or wisely said by the Preacher, and come not to the Preacher
himself, who can best unfold his own mind (all cannot be said in an hour) and
make his own apology. Some sit behind the pillar, as Eli dealt by Hannah, to
watch and catch what they may carp and cavil at. They content themselves to
have exercised their criticismes upon the Preacher, and that is all they make of
a Sermon, (...) never so savoury and seasonable. These are (...) hearers.

Verse 11. Because it is given to you]
Plutarch thinks that (...)
life is given to men merely for the getting of knowledge. And the Greeks call
man (...) for the inbred desire of light and knowledge, that is naturally in
all. But desire we never so much, none can attain to sound and saving
knowledge, but those only to whom it is given from above: into whose hearts
Christ lets in a (...) of heavenly light. Hence Prove. 30. 3. 4. to know
heavenly things, is to ascend into heaven. And Luke 12. 48. to know the Masters
will, is the great talent of all other: there is a [ Much] set upon it.

But to them it is not given]
By a secret, but most just judgment of God, who has mercy on whom he will,
and whom he will he hardneth. The reason of many things now hid from us, we
shall see at the last day. Have patience, and be content in the mean while,
with a learned ignorance.

Verse 12. For whosoever has, to him shall be given]
sc. If he have it for practice, not else, Zach. 11. 17. Men, to the hearing of
the word, must bring with them the loan and advantage of former doctrine
communicated to them, if they mean to do any good of it. And then, as Manoah
believed (before the Angel vanished in the sacrifice) and sought no such sign
to confirm him, yet had it: so God will heap favors upon them, and every
former shall be a pledge of a future. God gives grace for grace, that is, say
(...), where he finds one grace he gives another.

From him shall be taken away even that he hath].
That he seems to have, says St Luke, for indeed all he has is but a seeming,
a semblance, he walks in a vain show, he has only the varnish of virtue,
which God shall wash of with rivers of brimstone. Albeit hypocrites are
commonly detected even in this life: how else should their names rot, as every
wicked man's must.

Verse 13 Therefore speak I to them in parables]
Because their wilful blindness aad stubbornness deserves I should (...).
de corr: and gratia, c. 7.
do it. They are sinuers against their own souls, let them rue it therefore.

And hearing they hear not]
Audientes corporis sensu, non (...), says Augustine.

Verse 14. In (...) is fulfilled]
(...) is again fulfilled. q. d. It is (...) with (...) now, as it was with
those then. The same fable is acted, (...) only changed. Men's hearts are as
hard as ever they were, (...) grace of the Gospel has not mended them a whit,
nor ever will do, till God strike the stroke.

And shall not understand]
Deus ijs in lingua sua (...), qui in Christo, suis Atticus, their wit serves
them not in spiritualls.

Seeing ye shall see, and not perceive]
As Hagar saw not the (...). (...).
fountain that was before her, till her eyes were opened.

Verse 15. For this peoples heart, etc.]
A fat heart is a fearful plague. Their heart is fat as grease, but I delight
in thy law, Psalm. 119 70. None can delight in Gods law that are fat hearted.
Feeding cattle we know, are most brutish and blockish. And Phyfiognomers
observe, that a full and fat heart, betokens a dull and doltish disposition.
Eglons fat paunch would not part with the poniard: and Pliny tells of bears so
fat that they felt not the tharpest prickles.

Their ears are dull of hearing]
So were the believing Hebrews, (...)
for the which they are much taxed and (...) by the Apostle. Surdaster erat M
Crassus: sed illud pejus, quid male audiebat, (...). 5. 11.
says Tully. These here hear very ill, for their no better hearing. (...).
(...).


Their eyes they have closed]
Or they wink hard with their eyes: they shut the windows lest the light
should come in: (...) liberius peccent libenter ignorant, they do not, what
they might, toward the work. (...).


Lest at any time they should see]
See we may here (in that which they should have seen and done) the right order
of repentance to salvation, never to be repented of. The blind eye is opened,
the deaf ear unstopped, the dull heart affected, etc. God first puts his laws
into men's minds, that they may know them, and then writes the same in their
hearts, that they may have the comfort, feeling and (...) of them: And then it
is, I will be to them a God and they shall be to me a people Heb. 8. 10.

Verse 16. But blessed are your eyes, etc.]
Demarathus of Corinth was wont to say that those Grecians lost a great part of
(...).
the comfort of their lives, that had not seen great Alexander sitting on
Darius his throne. St Austin wished but to have seen three sights, Romam in
flore, Paulum (...), Christum in corpore, Rome in the flourish, Paul in the
pulpet, Christ in the (...).

And your (...), for they hear]
The turtles voice, the joyful sound, the (...) Oracles, the precious promises
of the word, therefore called the word, by a specialty, because our ears should
listen after no other word but that. Origin chides his hearers for nothing so
much, as for this that they came so seldom to hear Gods word: and that when
they came, they heard it so carelessely, recte judicans, says Erasmus, hinc
esse praecipuum pietatis profectum (...). (...): (...). opera.
aut defectum, as one that well knew that men's growth in grace, is according to
their heed in hearing.

Verse 17. Desired to see those things that ye see, etc.]
They saw them and saluted them only a far off, and in the dark glass of the
ceremonies. But we all with open face, etc. 2 Cor. 3. 18. The 1 King. 7. 23.
sea about the altar was brazen, and what eyes could pierce through (...). 4. 6.
it. Now our sea about the throne is glassie, like to crystal, clearly
conveying the light and sight of God to our eyes. All Gods ordinances are now
so clear, that you may see Christ's face in them. Yea, as the glass set full
against the Sun, receives not only the beams, as other dark bodies do, but the
image of the Sun: so the understanding with open face beholding Christ, is
transformed into the image and similitude of Christ.

Verse 18. Hear ye therefore the Parable, etc.]
The Disciples had asked him concerning the multitude, verse. 10. Why speak
thou to them in Parables? They pretended that the multitude understood him not,
and therefore he should do well to show them the meaning. They were ashamed,
belike, to bewray their own ignorance: but our Savior calls to them also to
hear the Parable explained. We are all willing to make the best of our own
case, to hide our crooked legs with long garments, etc. Nature need not be
taught to tell her own tale.

Verse 19. The word of the Kingdom]
So called, because it points to, and paints out the way to the Kingdom: and is
therefore also called, The word of life, the power of God to salvation: Heaven
is potentially in it, as the harvest is in the seed, as above I noted.

And understands it not]
Considers it not, as the Syriack here has it, using the same word that
David does, Psalm. 41. 1. (...).
Blessed is the man that wisely considers the poor and needy. Consideration
(...) on the Word when it has been heard Jam. 1. 21.
(which else lies loose, and is driven away as chaff before the wind) makes
it to become (...) ingraffed Word, as the science graffed into the stock, or as
a tree rooted by the rivers side, that removes not.

Then comes the wicked one]
The troubler of Israel, the master (...).
of misrule; he is one at Church, whosoever is the other. A Doeg, Job 1. 6.
a devil, may set his foot as far within the Sanctuary, as a David. The sons of
God cannot present themselves before the Lord, but Satan comes also amongst
them, to do ill offices. (...) pro (...).


And catches away that which was sown in his heart]
That is, upon his heart: for into his heart the seed never came, because the
devil had made a pathway over it. People are now so Sermontrodden many of
them, that their hearts, like foot-paths, grow hard by the Word, which takes no
more impression, then rain does upon a rock: they have brawny breasts, horny
heart strings, dead and dedolent dispositions. Hence they become a prey to the
devil, as Abraham's sacrifice would have been to the fowls of the air, had he
(...). 15. 11.
not huffed them away.

Verse 20. And anon with joy receives it]
Anon, or immediately. Temporaries are too sudden: and, or ere they be soundly
humbled, will be catching at the comforts, as children do at sweet-meat,
stuffing themselves pillows with the promises, that they may sin more securely:
Praesumendo sperant, and sperando pereunt, as one says. These are your
(...)-Christians, so hot at first that they can never hold out. Swift at hand
gives in ere night, when soft and fair goes far.

With joy receives it]
Or with grief, if the nature of the doctrine require it. For by one affection
we are to understand the rest also. There Is no grace but bath a counterfeit;
Faciunt and (...) favos, and simiae imitantur homines. The Sorcerers seemed to
do as much as Moses. Many Apostates have had many meltings, and much sudden
strong joy, so as they have (...) the joy they have found at the hearing of the
Word, has been so great, that if it had continued but a while, they could not
have lived, but their spirits would have expired. Many examples there are of
such. Howbeit in these flashings, (...) truths of God (says a Divine) pass by
them, as water through a M. (...).
conduit, and leave a dew; but soak not, as water into the (...).

Verse 21. Yet has he not root in himself]
These fleshy (...) have not principles to maintain them, and therefore come to
nothing. They are enlightened only as by a (...) of lightening, and not by the
Sunbeam; they do no more then taste of the good Word Heb. (...) 4, (...).
of God, as Cooks do of their (...), they (...) nothing down, (...). (...) 14.
they digest it not. A good man is satisfied from himself, says Solomon, has
a spring within his own breast. Hic sat (...), said Oecolampadius, clapping his
hand upon his heart: This the temporary cannot say, He is moved by some
external principle, as are Clocks, Winde-mils, and the like: The root of the
matter is not (...) 19. 28.
in him: He wants depth of earth. (...), says another Evangelist, the plow
has not gone deep enough; and therefore, though the earth be good, and the
seed good, yet being uncovered, unburied, it miscarries. Exoriuntur, sed
exuruntur, His roots are dried up beneath, and above is his bud cut off, Job
18. 16.

For when tribulation or persecution ariseth]
As it will, for (...) crucis, says one. And opposition is, Evangelij (...),
(...).
says another. It is but a delicacy to go about to divide Christ and his
cross.

By and by he is offended,]
(...) Christus cum suo (...), says he. Let Christ keep his heaven to himself,
if it can be had upon no other terms; he is resolved to suffer nothing. When it
comes to that once, he kicks up profession, and may (...) prove a spiteful
adversary of the same ministry, which he once admired, as Herod, and a proud
contemner of the same remorse, with which himself was sometime smitten, as Saul.

Verse 22. He that received the seed among thorns]
So the love of money is called, because it chokes the word, pricks the
conscience, harbors vermin lusts. Magna (...), ut rei (...) nominis, (...)
and vitiis. Let rich men look to it, says Gregory, that they Dum (...) par as
per (...) parta peris. Viderint divites quomo (...) spinas sine punctione (...).
handle their thorns without pricking their fingers; that whiles they load
themselves with earth, they lose not heaven, as Shimei seeking his servants
lost himself. Set not thy heart upon the Asses (said Samuel to Saul) since to
thee is the desire of all Israel. Set not your hearts, say I, on this worlds
trash, since (...) things abide you. Martha was troubled about many things, but
neglected that one thing necessary, to sit, as her (...) did, at Christ's feet,
and hear his word. This Christ checks her for.

And the deceitfulness of riches]
The world is a subtle, sly enemy, (...). (...). de Herodoto.
that does easily insinuate and dangerously deceive. We may safely say of it,
as he sometimes did of an Historian, Both it is words and shows are full of
fraud. As the Panther hides his deformed head, till the sweet sent have drawn
other beasts into his danger: so deals the world, alluring men by the
deceitfulness of riches, and masking the monstrous and deformed head, the end
thereof, under the gilded show of good husbandry, or disguised shape of sin. In
a word, these outward things, (...) as hosts they welcome us into our Inn with
smiling countenance, yet, unless we look better to them, they will cut our
(...) in our beds.

And he becomes unfiu it full]
Because the (...) overtop the corn; whereas the good ground, though it has
many thorns, yet the corn ascends above them, grace is superior to corruption,
Mark 4 8.
the fruit springs up and increases, as S. Mark has it. These
thorny-ground-hearers, though they stood out persecution, and shranck not in
the wetting, as the stony-ground did, yet, because the plow had not gone so low
as to break up the roots, whereby their hearts were fastened to earthly
contents, they proved also unfruitful. See how far a man may go, and yet be
never the near after all. The stony and thorny ground were nearer to the nature
of the good ground, then that of the highway, and yet fell short of heaven.

Verse 23. But he that received seed, etc.]
Which is but a fourth part, if so much, of those that have the word purely and
powerfully preached unto them. As at Ephesus, so in our Church Assemblies,
(...).
the more part know not wherefore they are come together. They will say, to
serve God, and hear his Word, but who this God is, or how his Word is to be
heard, they neither know nor care. If the belly may be filled, the back fitted,
etc. They have as (...), (...), (...).
much as they look after. And of such dust-heaps as these, (...) corners are
full: Our Church is as much pestered, and (...) dark with (...), 13.
these Epieures and Atheists, who yet will not miss a Sermon, as Egypt was
with the Grasshoppers. These are those last and loosest times, wherein, by
reason of the overflow of iniquity, The love of many is waxen cold, but he
that endures to the end shall be saved. Where note that for many that lose
their love to Gods word, it is but a He in the singular number that holds out
therein to the end.

Some an hundred fold]
As Isaac's seed did, that he sowed in the land of Canaan. This is not every
man's happiness: yet we must propound to our selves the highest pitch. And let
as many as are (...) be thus minded. That man for heaven, and heaven for him,
that sets up for his mark, The resurrection of the dead, Phil 3. 11. that is,
that perfection of holiness that accompanies the (...) of the (...).

Some sixty, some thirty]
It befalls not every man to excel, but it behooves every man to exact of
himself such a growth in grace, (...) profiting may appear to all, and that he
is neither barren, (...) unfruitful in the knowledge of Jesus Christ. The vine
is the (...).
weakest of plants, yet bears abundantly. Thyatira had but a little (...). 3.
strength, yet a great door opened. The Colossians were but Col. (...). 13.
(...), and not born, yet preciously esteemed of God. He accepts according to
that a man has, be it more or less, he blesses Isa. 44. 3.
our buds. Courage therefore, though not so fruitful, as thou (...) be. (...)
earnest pantings, inquietations and desires of better cannot but commend thee
much to God. Prima sequentem, (...) de (...).
(...) est in (...) tertiisque consistere, faith one. And Summum (...) lib.
(...). in (...).
(...) affectantes, satis honest vel in secundo fastigio conspiciemur, faith
another. Aspire to the highest pitch, but be not discouraged, though ye fall
somewhat short of it. Every man cannot excel.

Verse 24. The Kingdom of heaven]
viz. Here on earth. For we have eternal life already. 1. In pretio. 2.
Promisso. 3. (...), in the price, promise, first fruits. As God prepared
Paradise for Adam, so he has heaven for his. Howbeit he reserves not all for
hereafter; but gives a grape of Canaan in this wilderness, where, by
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the M. Whitfields (...) to (...) converted
holy Ghost, Gods people do even eat, and drink, and sleep eternal life, as
it was once said of a reverend Divine of Scotland.

Which sowed good seed in his field]
Among the Romans it was, Plin lib. 18.
(...) censorium agrum male colere, a fault punishable by the Majores (...)
siquem (...), (...), virum (...), (...) Varro
Censors, to be an ill seedsman. And when they would highly commend any, they
would say, He is an honest man, and a good plow man.

Verse 25. But while men slept]
Christ the Lord of the husbandry neither slumbereth nor sleeps: but the
under-labourers and land-holders, to whom he lets out his vineyard, are
frequently (...) to be supine and secure, Zech. 4. 1. It fared with the good
(...) majora (...), (...). Aug.
Prophet, as with a drowsy person; who, though awake and set to work, is ready
to sleep at it. And albeit we watch against greater, yet lesser evils are ready
to steal upon us at unawares, as Austin has it.

His enemy came]
This is the Ministers misery: Other men find their work as they left it; but
when Ministers have done Ut jugulem (...) de nocte (...).
their best (...) one Sabbath Day, the enemy comes ere the next, and (...).
They sleep and are fearlesse, he wakes for a mischief, and is restless. Learn
for shame of the devil (said father Latimer Ut (...) serves non expergiscere?
to careless Minister) to watch over your flocks. God will shortly send out
summons for sleepers; and the devil waketh and walks, seeking whom to devour.
His instruments also are wondrous ^.
active in evil. O pray (said a dying man in the beginning of the German
Reformation) that God would preserve the Gospel: for the Pope of Rome and the
Council of Trent do bestirre themselves wonderfully! May not we say as much and
more now-adaies?

And sowed tares among the wheat]
(...) it were rendered, blasted corn, that yields nothing better at harvest
then (...) and chaste; though it be in all things like the good corn, and the
contrary appears not till toward harvest, when the dust is driven away by
the wind, the chaff cast into the fire. Hereby are meant hypocrites and
heretics, Qui (...) in (...) ^.
esse possunt, in area non possunt, who shall be sifted out ^.
one day.

And went his way]
As if he had done no such thing. Satan hides his cloven (...), as much as he
can, and would seem no other then an angel of light. Or abijt, idest, latuit,
says one: he went away, that is, he lurked, as his imps use to do, under the
fair penthouse of zeal and seeming devotion, under the broad leaves of formal
(...).

Verse 26. Then appeared the tares also]
Hypocrites are sure (...) or later to be detected. All will out at length.
Sacco solute apparuit argentum. When God turns the bottom of the bag upwards,
their secret sins will appear; They shall find themselves in (...). 5. 14.
all evil, in the midst of the Congregation and Assembly. They that (...).
125. 5.
turn aside unto their crooked ways, shall be led forth with the workers of
iniquity.

Verse 27. So the servants of the householder, etc.]
Godly Ministers are much vexed at hypocrites, and (...) hearers. So was our
Savior at the Pharisees, Mark 3. 5. he looked on them with anger, being (...)
at the hardness of their hearts. So was Paul at Elymas the sorcerer: he set
his eyes upon him, as if he would have looked (...) him; after which lightning,
(...) Act. 13. 9, 10. (...) 6.
that terrible thunderclap, O full of all subtilty, etc. So was Peter at Simon
Magus, and S. John at (...), I would they were even cut off that trouble you.
Mihi certe Anxentius nunquam aliud quam diabolus erit, quia Arrianus, says
Hilarious, who also called Constantius Antichrist.

Verse 28. Will thou then that we go, etc.]
This was zeal indeed, but rash and unseasonable, and is therefore to be
moderated by prudence and patience. Those two sons of thunder had over quick
and hot spirits, (...) 9. 55. Luther confessed before the Emperor Act. and
Mon. sol 777.
at Worms, that in his books against private and particular persons, he had
been more vehement then his religion and profession required. And he that
writes the history of the Trent-Councell tells us, if we may believe him, that
in Colloquio (...), (...), speaker for the Protestants, entering into the matter
of the Eucharist, (...). of Counc. (...) (...) 453.
spoke with such heat, that he gave but ill satisfaction to those of his own
party; so that he was commanded to conclude. Zeal should eat us up, but not eat
up our discretion, our moderation.

Verse 29. Lest whilst ye gather up the tares]
Those that are now tares, hypocrites, may become good corn, good Christians.
Iether an Ish (...) by nation, may prove an Israelite by religion. Simon Magus
may perhaps have the thoughts of his heart forgiven Acts 8. 21.
him. In the year 1553. a Priest at Canterbury, said Mass on one day; and the
next day after he came into the Pulpit, and desired all the people to forgive
him: for he said he had betrayed Christ, yet not as Judas did, but as Peter:
and so made a long Sermon Act. and Mon. sol. 1330.
against the Mass.

Verse 20. Bind them in bundles, etc.]
This shall be the Angels office at the last day, to bundle up swearers with
swearers, drunkards with drunkards, etc. that they may suffer together, as they
have sinned together, and pledge one another in that cup of fire and brimstone
that shall then be poured down their throats, Psalm. 11. 6. As in the mean,
brimstone is here scattered upon their habitation, Job 18. 15. every moment
ready to take fire, if God but lighten upon it, with the arrows of his
indignation, Psalm. 18. 14

Verse 31. Is like to a grain of mustard-seed]
Which soon pierces the nostrils and brain, as Pliny notes, and hurts the
eyes, as the very name in Greek imports. But that which our Sublimis fertur,
quando non aliud magis in nares and (...) penetrat. (...) l. (...) (...) 22.
(...)
Savior here observes and applies in it is, the smallness of the seed, the
greatness of the stalk or tree that comes of it, and the use of the branches,
for birds to build in. This grain of mustard seed sowed, is the word preached:
which though it seem small and contemptible, proves quick and powerful:
Hitherto flee the birds of the air, Gods elect for shade in prosperity, for
shelter in adversity. Yea as the trees of America, but especially of Brasile,
are so huge, that several families are reported to have lived in several Heb.
4.
(...) of one tree, to such a number as are in some petty village, (...) Geog.
page (...).
or (...) here: So is the growth of the Gospel, it runs and is glorified, 2 Thessalonians, 3. 1. as the Jerusalem-Artichoke overruns the (...)
ground, wheresoever it is planted. It was a just wonder how it was carried, as
on Angels wings, over all the world by the preaching of the Apostles at first,
and now again, in the late Reformation, by Luther and some few other men of
mean rank, but of rare success. These were those Angels that (...) flying with
the (...) Gospel (no new doctrine as the Adversaries slander it) in the midst
of heaven, or betwixt heaven and earth; because their doctrine at first was not
so clearly confirmed to others, (...) so fully (...) by themselves. Melancthon
confesses, Quod (...) habemus, sc. (...): quos (...), non (...). And Cardinal
(...) (says the same Melancthon) reading the Ansborough-Confession, says,
that our cause concerning Rev. 146, 7.
the righteousness of faith, was stronger in the confirmation, (...). (...).
(...) (...).
then in the confutation of the contrary opinion. Quod verum est, as he there
yields, quia facilius (...) in sophisticis quam (...). (...). Joh. Manl. in
(...). com. page 75.
destruere: In Physicis contra. But our John Wickliffe, long before Luther,
wrote more then two hundred volumes against the the Pope. The Lady Anne, wife
to K. Richard the second, sister to Wence slaus K. of (...), by living here was
made acquainted (...) plus quam 200 (...). (...) (...) in Apoc. 146 (...).
(...) page 375. In (...) and (...)
with the Gospel. Whence also many Bohemians coming hither, conveyed (...) book
into Bohemia; whereby a good foundation was laid for a (...) Reformation. After
this, were stirred up there by God, John Husse and Hierom of Prague; who so
propagated the (...) in that Kingdom, that in the year of Christ 1451. the
Church of God at Constantinople, congratulated to the University of (...) (...)
happy (...), and exhorted them to (...). For before the Hussites, by the
mediation of (...) Sophia, who (...) them, had obtained of the King the (...)
exercise of their Religion (...) Bohemia. Howbeit, soon after this, they (...)
persecution by the Popish party, who yet could say no worse of them then this;
In their lives they are modest, in their (...), in their (...) one toward
another servent; but their (...) is (...) and stark naught, says (...)
(...) the (...). And why stark naught? (...) another of (...) shall tell you:
Their (...), says he, is (...), 1. Because of so long standing. 2 (...)
2. Because so far (...). 3. (...) their show of purity, etc. This 3 (...).
(...). Revius de (...). Pont. page 151.
paved a way for the great work which Luther began in Germany, the last of
October 1617. And it was strangely carried on; 1. By diligent preaching. 2.
Printing good books. 3. Translating the holy Scriptures into vulgar tongues. 4.
Catechizing of youth. (...)
5. Offering public disputation. 6. Martyrologies. Here in England was a great
door opened at the same time, but many (...). The establishing of that
Reformation, how unpersit soever; to be done by so weak and simple means, yea
by casual and cross means (says one) against the force of so puissant and
politic an enemy, is (...) miracle, which we are in these times to look for.
It is such a thing (says another) as the former age had even despaired of, the
present age admireth, and the future shall stand amazed at. K. Henry the
eighth, whom God used as an Instrument in the work, had first written against
Luther, and afterward (...) dec 2 ep (...) cat.
established those six sacrilegious Articles. And sitting in Parliament, he
thus complained of the stirs that were made about religion. There are many,
says he, that are too busy with their new Sumpsimus, and others that dote too
much upon their old Mumpsimus. The new religion though true, he and they all,
for most Act. and (...). sol. 943.
part, envyed: the old, though their own, they despised. John Frith withstood
the violence of three of the most obstinate amongst them, Rochester, Moor and
Rastall: Whereof the one by the help of the doctors, the other by wresting
the Scriptures, and the third by the help of natural Philosophy had conspired
against him. But he, as another Hercules (says Mr Fox) fighting with all three
at once, did so overthrow and confound them, that he converted Rastall to his
part: Rochester and Moor were afterward both beheaded for denying the Kings
supremacy. Reformation has ever met with opposition, and never more then now,
men fighting for their lusts, which they love as their lives, and are loath to
part with. But Christ shall reign when all is done: and those golden times are
now at hand, that the new (...), which signifies the state of the Church in
this world, when it has passed the furnace of (...), presently upon it, shall
be all of fine gold. Let us contribute thereunto our earnest prayers and utmost
pains; not abiding among the sheepfolds with Reuben, nor remaining in ships
with Dan, etc. Judge. 5. 16, 17. not standing off, and casting perils, as the
Priests and Levites in (...) days; but beginning the Reformation 2 Chro.
(...). 12.
as Gideon did at (...) own hearts and houses, lest with (...), in stead of
making up the breach, we prove makers of breaches. Were our dangers greater,
thy single reformation may do much to prevent them, Ier. 5. 1. As, were our
hopes greater, thy sin and security may unravell them and undo all, Eccles. 9.
18. One sianer destroys much good: Be moving therefore in thine own orb, and
bestir thee as Nehemiah did, trading every talent wherewith divine providence
has entrusted thee for Ierusalems welfare: giving no rest either to thy self
or to God, as his remembrancer until he have established, and made her a
praise in the whole earth, Isa. 62. 6, 7.

Verse 32. Which indeed is the least of all seeds]
That is, one of (...).
the least; for there is as little, or less then it, as Poppy-seed, etc. (...)
semina adeo sunt minuta, ut (...) oculis cernt non possint, and tamen in ijs
tanta est arbor, (...) (...). lib. 11 cap. 1. Tremell. in Test. Sir.
Cypress seeds are said to be so small, that they can hardly be seen asunder;
and yet of them grows so great and tall a tree, Nusquam magis tota natura quam
in minimis, says Pliny. Tremellius testifies, that things almost incredible
are related of the wonderful growth of the Jewish mustard seed. Maldonat also
tells us, that in Spain he had seen little woods of mustard-seed-trees; and
that the bakers therehence fet fuel to heat their ovens, and do other
offices. The word of God (a thing worth observation, says a modern Divine) is
in the Gospel compared to mustard seed; which (as one gathers out of
Pythagoras) of all seeds is most in (...). (...).
ascent, takes deepest root, and being mixed with vinegar is sovereign D.
Playsere.
against serpents. Right so the word of God works effectually in us, begets
an ascent in our affections, lays in us a sure foundation, and though it touch
us sharply as vinegar, yet is a most powerful preservative against that old
serpent.

Verse 33. The Kingdom of heaver is like unto leaven]
Which soon diffuseth it self into the whole lump. The word of God is not
bound, though the Preacher, happily, be in bonds, 2 Timothy 2. 9. but runs, and is
(...), 2 (...). 2. 1. In the beginning of Q. Mary's reign, almost all the
prisons in England (says Mr Fox) were (...) right Christian schools and
Churches. During the Act. and Mon. fol 1381.
time of Mr Bradfords imprisonment in the King's Bench and Counter in the
Poultrey, he preached twice a day continually, unless sickness hindered him:
where also the (...) was administered. And through his means (the (...) so well
did bear with him) such resort of good people was daily at his lecture, and
(...) 1457.
ministration of the Sacrament, that commonly his chamber was well-nigh filled
there with. Concerning the Christian Congregation (says the same Author) in
Q. Mary's time, there were sometimes 40, sometimes 100, sometimes 200 met
together. I (...). 1881.
have heard of one, who being sent to them to take their names, and to epsy
their doing, yet in being among them was converted, and cried them all mercy.

Verse 34. And without a parable spoke he not, etc.]
A singular judgment of God upon them for their contumacy and contempt of the
Gospel: So is it now upon many people, that God takes sometimes from their
most illuminate teachers; clearness and perspicuity of expression, for a
punishment of their unthankfullnesse and rebellion against the light. Thieves
and malefectors that affect darkness (because the light discovers their evil
deeds) are worthily cast into a dark dungeon: so here, Ezekiel, by the just
judgment of God upon them, was no more understood by his hearers, then if he
had spoken to them in a strange language. Ab (...) dictu est (...).
Heraclitus, for his obscurities, was called the Dark Doctor, and it seems he
affected it; for he often commanded his scholars to deliver themselves darkly. A
minister is studiously to shun obscurity Ad hos etiam (...), cum it.
(...)(...) (...) eslo. Ioh. Bodin. Eructabo vel Palam prosoquar
in his doctrine. But if nevertheless he prove obscure and hard to be
understood, let the people see a hand of God in it, and rather accuse their own
impiety, then the preachers inability.

Verse 35. I will utter things, etc.]
I will freely and plentifully eventilate them, as a fountain casts out her
waters constantly and without spare. Charity is no churl: True goodness is
communicative and a counts that it has not that good thing that it does not
impart: as that Bishop of Licoln never thought (...) sepu'tae (...), celata
virtus. Horat.
he had that thing which he did not give. It is not pouring out, but want of
pouring out, that dryes up the streams of grace, as of that oil, 2 King. 46.
The liberal soul shall be made fat: and he that waters shall be watered also
himself. Prove. 11. 25.

Verse 36. Declare unto us the parable]
Private conference has incredible profit. The Minister cannot possibly say
all in an hour: seek settlement from his lips, who both must preserve, and
present knowledge to the people: Junius was converted by conference with a
countryman of his, not far from Florence, Galeacius Caracciolus, by a
similitude of Peter Martyrs in his public lectures on, 1 Corinthians. seconded and
set on by private discourse. David was more affected by Nathans Thou art the
man, then by all the lectures of the law, for a twelvemoneth before.

Verse 37. Is the Son of man]
i.e. Signifies the Son of man: as Circumcision is the covenant: that is, the
sign of the covenant. And as Christ (...) of the Sacramental bread. This is
my body, which Luther interprets synecdochically, for in, or, under this is my
body. Calvin, after Tertullian and Augustine, interprets it metonimically, for
this is the sign or the figure of my body. Hence the Jesuits presently cry
out: The spirit of God disagreeth not with it self. But these interpretations
(...) disagree: Therefore they are not of the spirit. But let them first agree
among themselves, before they quarrel our disagreements: for their own Doctors
are exceedingly divided even about this very point of the Eucharist, and know
not what their holy Mother holds. Bellarmine teaches, that the substance of
the bread, is not turned into the substance of Christ's body Productive, as one
thing is made of another, but that the bread goes away, and Christ's body comes
into the room of it Adductive, as one thing succeeds into the place of another,
the first being voyded: And this, says he, is the opinion of the Church of
Rome, himself being Reader of Controversies at Rome. But Suarez, Reader at
(...) in Spain consutes Bellarmines opinion, tearming it Translocation not
Transubstantiation, and says it is not the Churches opinion.

Verse 38. The field is the world]
The Christian world, the Church, not the Roman-Catholike Church only, the
Popes territories, as he would have it. The Roatian Heretics would needs have
made the world believe, that they were the only Catholics. The Anabaptists
have the same conceit of themselves. Muncer their Chieftain in his book
written against Luther and dedicated to Christ the most Illustrious Prince (as
he styles him) inviegheth bitterly at him as one that was merely carnal, and
utterly void of the spirit of Revelation. And Parcus upon this text tells us
that in a conference at Frankendal the Anabaptists thus argued. The field is
the world, therefore not the Church: that by the same reason they might deny,
that (...) breed in the Church. But tares are and will be in the visible
Church, as our Savior purposely teaches by this parable.

The tares are the children of that wicked one]
So called partly in respect of their serpentine nature, those corrupt
qualities, whereby they resemble the devil: And partly because they creep into
the Church by Satan's subtilety, being his agents and (...) ries. Agnosco te
primogenitum diaboli said St John of that Heretic Matthew 24.
Cerinthus. And Hypocrites are his sons and heirs, the very freeholders of
hell, and other sinners but their tenants, which have their part or lot with
hypocrites.

Verse 39. The enemy that sowed them, etc.]
As Esther said, the adversary and enemy is that wicked Haman; so Satan, Why
(...) Antiq. (...).
then have men so much to do with him? The Jews as often as they hear mention
of Haman in their synagogues, they do with Martinus Papa exector ex Anglia
(...), cum a Rege (...) peteret, respondit Rex, (...) te ad inferos ducat and
perducat, ad mare tanen ei commeatum (...). (...).
their fists and hammers beat upon the benches and (...), as if they did knock
upon Hamans head. We have those also that can bid defiance to the devil, spet
at his name, curse him happily: but in the mean space listen to his illusions,
entertain him into their hearts by obeying his lusts. These are singularly
foolish. For it is as if one should be afraid of the name of fire, and yet not
fear to be burnt with the flame thereof.

Verse 40. So shall it be in the end of this world]
As till then there can be no perfect purgation of the Church. Nevertheless
Magistrates, and all good people must do their utmost within their bounds to
further a (...) a little otherwise then the Cardinals and Prelates of Rome:
whom Luther fitly compared to foxes, that came to sweep a dusty house with
their tails, and Sleiden: comment.
instead of sweeping the dust (...), sweep it all about the house, so making a
great smoke for the time, but when they were gone the (...).
dust falls all down again. Marcell: Episcoporum (...) luxum regio (...), aslum
in (...) is matronarum oblationibus, etc. taxavit.


Verse 41. All things that offend]
Gr. All scandals, pests, botches, blocks to others in the way to heaven.
Scandalum est reinon bonae sed malae exemplum, aed (...) ad (...), says
Tertullian. Such were those proud, contentious, covetous Prelates in the
Primitive Church, that Ammianus Marcellinus stumbled and stormed at. Such were
those loose and ungirt Christians of (...) male audiunt castiganturque (...),
quod (...) quam (...) convenit vivant, and vitia sub obteutu nominis (...).
Lactant: de opific. dei (...). Iac. (...).
whom Lactantius complains in his time, that they dishonored their
profession, to the scandal of the weak, and the scorn of the wicked. Such was
Pope Clement the fifth, who so ill governed the Church, that Fridericke King of
Sicily began to call the truth of Christian Religion into question, and had
fallen utterly off from it, had he not been settled and satisfied by Arnoldus
de Villa nova, a learned man of those times. Forasmuch as Christians (the
Papists he meant) do eat the God whom they adore, Sit anima (...) cum
Philosophis, said Averoes the Mohammedan, let my soul be with the Philosophers
rather. Nothing more stumbleth that poor people the Jews, and hinders their
conversion, then the Idolatry of Papists, and blasphemies of Romans p. (...).
Protestants. Oh that God would once cut off the names of those idols, and
cause the unclean spirit to pass out of the land, according to his promise,
Zach. 13. 2! Fiat, Fiat.

Verse 42. And shall cast (...) into a furnace of fire]
Lo the good Angels are executioners of Gods judgments. (...) cannot (...)
leges and (...) and (...) and (...), and urbis (...) volunt. Ci. (...)
be a better and more noble act then to do justice upon (...) malefactors:
Howbeit at Rome they would not (...) common executioner to dwell within the
City, nay not so much as (...) to be seen in it, or draw breath in the air of
it: (...) was very strict in them, and that was very just in God, that (...)
which was executioner of (...), Bayfield, Bainham, (...), Lambert, and other
good men, died rotting above ground, (...) (...) and (...). (...). (...) 146.
that none could abide to come near him.

Verse 43. Then shall the righteous shine]
Those that have here lain among the pots, smucht and sullied, shall then
outshine the Sun in his strength. Shine they shall in their bodies, which
shall be clarified, and conformed to Christ's most glorious body the standard,
Philip. 3. In their souls, those spirits of just men made perfectly holy and
happy. And in their whole person, as the spouse of Christ. Vxor fulget radijs
mariti, she shall shine with the beams of his beauty. Three glimpses of which
glory were seen, in Moses face, in Christ's transfiguration, in Stevens
countenance.

Who has ears to hear, let him hear]
q. d. This is worth hearing. Lend both your ears to such a bargain as this is.
What shall we say to these things, says the Apostle after he had spoke of
glorification, Romans 8. 31? q.d. We can never satisfy our selves in speaking,
you should never show your selves (...) in hearing.

Verse 44. Like unto treasure hid, etc.]
A treasure is an heap (...).
of precious things laid up for future uses. By the treasure in this text, we
are to understand either Christ, or life eternal gotten for us by Christ, or
the Gospel that (...) unto us Christ, and with him eternal life. The field
wherein this (...) treasure lies hid, is the Church. The spades and mattocks,
wherewith it is to be dug up and attained unto, are hands and eyes, not
poring in the earth, but praying toward heaven.

He (...) it]
Nequis eum antevertat, that none remove it, ere he has made himself master of
it. Holding fast that he has, that no man take his crown from him. This he
ensures to himself, and cannot rest till he has done it. He likes not to have
with the (...) an estate hanging upon ropes, and depending upon (...) Foriunam
(...).
winds, but makes sure work for his soul.

Sells all that he hath]
Ever when justifying faith is infused there is a through-sale of all sin:
the pearl of price will never (...) be had. And for outward comforts and
contentments, every true son of Israel will be glad to purchase the
birthright with (...), spiritual favors with earthly; as did (...), the
Marquess of Vico, Martinengus Earl of Barcha, etc.

And buyeth that field]
Accounting it an excellent pennyworth, what ever it stand him in. Other
faint-hearted chapmen (...) heaven only, being loath to go to the price of it. A
price they have in their hands, but they, like fools, look upon their money
and have no mind to lay it out upon any such commodity. Oh what mad men are
they that bereave themselves of a room in that city of pearl, for a few paltry
shillings or dirty (...)!

Verse 45. The kingdom of heaven, etc.]
The wise merchant, besides the pearl of price, seeks out other goodly pearls,
common (...), which also have their use and excellency: but he rests not in
them as Philosopers, Politicians, and Temporaries. These, as (...), who though
they miss of their end, yet find many excellent things by the way: so though
they failed of the glory of God, yet they have many commendable good parts and
properties. The wise merchant so seeks after these, that he minds (...) the
main, the one thing necessary, in comparison whereof he counts all things else,
though never so specious, (...), and dogs meat.

Verse 46. (...) when he had found one pearl, etc.]
Of far greater price then that precious Adamant, that was found about
Charles Duke of (...), slain in battle by the Swissors at Nants Anno 1476. This
Adamant was first sold by a soldier that found it, to a Priest for a crown:
the Priest sold it for two Alsted. Chronol. page 309.
crowns: Afterward it was sold for 7000 (...), then for 12 thousand duekets,
and last of (...) for (...) thousand ducats, and set into the Popes
triple-crown, where also it is to be seen at this day. Christ is a commodity
far more precious: surely he is better then rubies, says Solomon, and all
the things that may be Prove. 8 11.
desired, are not to be compared unto him. No mention shall be Job 28. 18.
made of coral or of pearls: for the price of wisdom (this essential
Wisdom of God) is above rubies. Pearls are bred in shelfishes of a celestial
humor or (...): So was Christ by heavenly Tertul.
influence in the Virgins womb. (...) vitreum? (...) verum (...)? Christ is to
be sought and bought with any pains, at any price. We cannot buy this gold too
dear. (...), the jewel of the world, was far more precious, (...) the (...)
Merchants known so much, then all the (...) and myrrhs they transported. So is
Christ; as all will yield that know him.

Verse 47. Again the kingdom, etc.]
Christ is an (...) teacher: learn then for shame; lest he turn us off for
non-(...). Let one Sermon peg in another, and every second (...) the first a
work.

Is like unto a net etc.]
An elegant comparison, wherein the Fishers are the Ministers, the Sea the
World, the Net the Word, the Ship the Church, the Fishes the Hearers. (...)
comparing (...) Gospel to a net, makes fear to be the lead that (...) it, and
(...) it steady, and hope to be the cork, which keeps it (...) above water.
Without the lead of fear, faith he, it would be carried hither and thither; as
without the cork of hope, it would utterly sink down.

Verse 48. And cast the bad (...)]
Algam, silices, (...), (...) (...).
sordes. Here was of both sorts, till the separation was made. The visible
Church resembles the (...), which was full of creatures of diverse kinds, but
most unclean: Fair she is, but as the Moon, which is not without her blemishes.
Separatists that Mulae ablactatae matrem (...) petunt.
leave her therefore, yea deny her, and remain obstinate for trifles, are not
unfitly by one (...) to the hedge-hogge, which, says Pliny, being laden with
nuts and (...), if the least fillbeard fall off, will fling down all the rest
in a pettish humor, and beat the ground for anger with (...) bristles.

Verse 49. The Angels shall come forth and sever]
But how shall the Angels know them a (...), may some (...)? By that signum
salutare, that God has set upon them, that mark in their foreheads, (...). 9.
(...), by the lightsomenesse of their looks shall the elect be known, lifting
up their heads, because their redemption then draws nigh; when reprobates
shall look (...) and uggly, being almost mad with the sight of their eyes, that
they shall see, and the fear of their hearts wherewith they shall (...), Deuteronomy.
28. 34. 67.

From (...) the just]
Amidst whom they might happily hope to hide (...), laying hold upon (...) skirt
of a (...), inwardly. But it will not be: for then, even their best friends
will (...) them for ever, Moses in whom ye trust shall judge you, Joh. 12.

Verse 50. And shall cast them into the furnace]
An exquisite torment is hereby (...). This our Savior (...) said in the same
words, but a little (...), verse. 42. He here (...) it, that men may the better
observe it. And I would to God, says (...), that men would every day, and
every where discourse of hell torments, that they would take a turn in hell
(...) and (...) by their meditations. Certainly did men believe the torments of
hell, that weeping for extremity of (...), and that (...) of (...) that is there
for extremity of cold, they (...) not but be (...) innocent: they would never
(...) to fetch profits or pleasures out of those flames. It was a speech of
Gregory Nyssen: He that does but hear of hell is without any further labor or
study taken off from sinful pleasures. Thus he then: but (...) hearts are
grown harder (...): they can hear of (...), and be no more moved, then they are
to handle a painted (...).

Verse 51. Have ye (...) all these things?]
See here the ancient use of catechizing in the Christian Church. So (...),
Credis? Credo. (...)? (...) were the (...) and Answer. Origin and (...) were
(...). (...) the (...), catechizing of youth, was one main means of propagating
the Gospel. And the Jesuits (...) as much, (...) the same course for the
propagating of their superstition, and have set forth diverse, Catechismes. I
remember, says (...), that (...), the good Duke of Wittemberg, (...) hear the
young Gentlemen about the (...) once a Joh. (...). loc. com p. 549.
week (...) their Catechismes; which, if any, did not well, he was well whipped
in the presence of the Duke and his Courtiers. Bishop Ridley, in a (...) of his
to the brethren; I hear, says he, that the Catechism in English is now (after
Q Mary came in) condemned in every Pulpit. O devilish malice, and most
spitefully injurious to (...) salvation of mankind! Indeed Satan could not
long (...), that so great light should be spread abroad in the world. He saw
well enough that nothing was able to (...) his kingdom so much, as if children
being godly instructed in (...) should learn to know Christ, whiles they are
yet young. Whereby, not only children, but the elder sort also Act. and Mon.
fol. 1569.
and aged, that before were not taught in their childe-hood to know Christ,
should now even with children and babes be forced to know him.

Verse 52. Therefore every Scribe,]
i. e. Every teacher of the Church must be both learned and apt to teach. He
must give attendance to reading first, and then to exhortation and doctrine, 1 Timothy 4 13. Bishop Latimer, notwithstanding, both his years, Act. and Mon. fol.
1578.
and other pains in preaching, was every morning ordinarily both Winter and
Summer about two of the clock at his book most diligently. And as the Rabbis
have a proverb, Lilmod lelammed, Men must therefore learn that they may teach,
so did he. The Hebrew word Shachal signifies, 1. To understand. 2. To teach.
3. To prosper. They that therefore learn, that they may teach others, shall
find that the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in their hands, Isa. 53. 10.

That brings forth out of his treasury]
Extrudit copiose and al^criter. That throws out his store without spare, and
deals (...).
forth his soul to the hungry hearer, desirous to spend and be spent for him.
That has a treasury of his own, and steals not all out of others. Non libro
sacerdotis, sed labro conservatur scientia. He lays up good things into his
heart, that therewith after they have been well fried for a while, he may feed
many: according to that, Psalm. 45. 1. MY heart is ^^diting, or frying, a good
matter; my tongue shall be the pen of a ready Writer. They are empty vines that
Hos. 10. 1.
bear fruit to themselves: a wholesome tongue is a tree of life, Pr^^ 15. 4. God
has purposely put honey and milk under their Cant 3. 11. with Prove. 10. 22.
tongues, that they may bring forth, as occasion requires their new and old,
that they may look to lip-feeding, that they may be in company, like full
clouds or paps, that pain themselves with fullness, till eased of their milk;
or like Aromaticall trees that sweat out their sovereign oils.

Verse 53. He departed thence]
As wanting and yet waiting the next opportunity to glorify God, and edify
others. Ministers may hence learn, after their hardest labor, not to be weary
of well-doing, but to be instant (or to stand close to their work) (...)
in season and out of season, even then when that good Word of 2 Timothy 4 1.
God, that seasons all things, to some seems unseasonable. Si Dic (...), Tu vis
errare, Tu vis perire, (...). Aug.
decimus quisque, si unus persuasus fuerit, ad consolationem abunde sufficit,
as Chrysostom has it. Say but the tithe of our hearers be persuaded, say but
some one of them, it is sufficient encouragement. But what if not one? yet our
labor is not in vain in the Lord. The Physician is both thanked and paid
though the patient recover not: And though Israel be not gathered (as here
Christ's countrymen would not be reclaimed) yet I shall be glorious (says he
Isa. 49 5.
by his servant Esaias) in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength.

Verse 54. And when he was come into his own country]
Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cunt^^os Dicit, and immemores ^on sinit esse
sui.
Which naturally draws our hearts to it by a kind of magnetic power and
property. Egypt was but a miserable home to Moses, and yet his heart hangs
after it, whiles he lived in Midian; and therefore in reference to it, he calls
his eldest son Gershom, or a stranger there, to wit, where he now was. Patriam
quisque Exodus 2. 2^.
amat, non quia pulchram, sed quia suam, says Seneca. Bishop B. Jewels life
prefixed to his Works.
Jewel, when he first began to preach, chose there first to break the bread of
life, where he first had breathed the breath of life.

Insomuch that they were astonished]
It Is a lamentable thing that men should hear, rejoice and wonder at the word,
and for matter of practice, leave it where they found it. And yet what more
ordinary? Men look round about a Minister: and though they cannot but admire
his doctrine, yet, if they can find ever a hole in his coat, through which to
slip out, as here, be it but the meannesse of his birth, or the unsightlinesse
of his person, or the ^^^omnesse of his delivery, and c. it is enough

Verse 55. Is not this the Carpenters son?]
Why? but was he Josephus Pater Christi (...), putativus. Fabrum suisse (...).
and (...) ac juga, caeteraque, (...). (...).
not Architect of the world? St Mark has it, Is not this the Carpenter? Why
yes; it may be so. Justin Martyr an ancient Writer testifies, that our Savior
ere he entered upon the Ministry, made ploughs, yokes, etc. But was not that an
honest occupation? And did not this Carpenter make a coffin for Julian that
persecutting Apostate, as a Christian Schoolmaster fitly answered Libanus,
sarcastically demanding: what the Carpenters son S^zomen lib. 7. cap 2.
was now a doing? Thus those three miscreants, Saul, Shimei and Sheba, took
occasion to despise David, as the son of Iesse, who Muthes. in Mat. 1.
was vir bonus and honestus, minus tamen clarus. as one says of him, a good
honest man, but there is little said of him.

Verse 56. Whence then has this man, etc.]
Has he not got his skill by ill arts? yea by the black art, does he not work
these wonders? sure he never came by all these things honestly, and in Gods
Name. Think it not much to be miscensured.

Verse 57. A Prophet is not without honor: etc.]
This was an ordinary saying of our Saviors, recorded by all four Evangelists,
and is therefore much to be marked. How common is it, for familiarity to breed
contempt? for, men to scorn their own (...), because at hand, though never so
excellent and useful, to admire foreign things, though nothing comparable. Our
corrupt (...) nothing we enjoy, as the eye sees nothing that lies on it. Copy
of the best things breeds satiety. God therefore usually teaches us the worth
of them by the want. Bona a tergo fere formosissima. Good things are most
beautiful on the backside.

Verse 58. He did not many mighty works]
Mark says he could not do much for them. Christ, that could do all things
by his absolute power, could hardly do any thing by his actual power (could
not because he would not) for unbeleevers. Note here that this journey of his
to Nazareth, must be distinguished from that set down, Luk 4. though the same
things are said of both: his countrymen, we see, were no changelings, but
continued as bad as before, not a jot the better for that former visit.

(...) of their unbelief]
A sin of that venomous nature, that it (...), as it were, a dead palsy into
the hands of (...). This infectious sorceresse can make things exceeding good,
to prove exceeding evil.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse 1. At that time, etc]
When he was cast out by his countrymen, he was heard of at the (...). The
Gospel, as the (...), what it (...) in one place, it gets in another. But
what? had not Herod heard of Christ till now? It is the misery of many good
Kings, that they seldom hear the truth of things. (...) King of Arragon
bewailed it. And of M. Aurelius, one of the best (...) (...), it is said, that
he was even bought and sold by his (...). As for Herod, he may seem to have
been of (...) religion, even a mere irreligon. He lay (...) in filthy (...),
and minded not the things above. Whoredom, wine and new (...) 4.
wine had taken away his (...). S. Luke adds, that he (...) to (...) 9. 9.
(...) Christ, but yet never stirred out of doors to go to him; Good mo ions
make but a through-(...) of wicked men's hearts: they pass away as a flash of
lightning, that dazleth the eyes only, and (...) more (...) behind it,

Verse 2. And said unto his servants]
So seeking a diversion Luk (...). 7, (...) De ijs d (...) qui it a perplexi,
and (...) q. in luto (...) ut (...), (...) non inveniant. (...).
of his inward terrors and torments. Perplexed he was and could find no way
out, as S. Lukes word imports. Conscience will hamper a guilty person, and
fill him (...) with unquestionable conviction and horror. As those that were
condemned to be crucified, (...) their cross, that should soon after (...)
them: So God has laid upon evildoers the (...) of their own consciences, that
thereon they may suffer before they suffer: and their greatest enemier, need not
wish them a greater mischief. For assuredly, a body is not so torn with
stripes, as a mind with the remembrance of wicked actions. And here (...) runs
to building of Cities, Saul (...), to (...), which happily were his (...) loves.
to the delight of music, (...) to quaffing and carrousing, Herod to his
minions and Catamites; so to put by, if possible, their melancholy dumps and
heart-qualmes, as they count and call (...) terrors. But conscience will not
be pacified by these sorry Anodynes of the devil. Wicked men may skip and leap
up and Namnon (...) post (...), secutum est (...) and exitium. Joseph. lib. 18.
cap 9.
down for a while, as the wounded dear does: sed haeret lateri lethalis arundo,
the deadly dart sticks fast in their sides, and will do, without true
repentance, till it has brought them, as it did Herod, to desparation and
destruction, so that he (...) violent hands upon himself at Lions in France,
whether he and his curtizan (...) banished by Augustus.

This is (...) the Baptist]
Herod had thought to have (...) his Herodias without (...) when once the (...)
was beheaded: but it proved somewhat otherwise. Indeed so long as he played
alone, he was sure to win all. But now conscience (...) in to play her part,
Herod is in a worse case then ever: for he imagined (...) that he saw and heard
that holy head (...) and crying out against him, staring him also in the face
at every turn; as that Tyrant thought he saw the head of Symmachus, whom he
had (...), in the mouth of the fish that was set before him on the table. And
as Judge Morgan, who gave the sentence of condemnation against the Lady Jane
Gray, shortly after he had condemned her, Act. and (...). sol. (...).
fell mad, and in his raving cried out continually to have the Lady Jane taken
away from him, and (...) ended his life.

Verse 3. For Herod had laid hold (...) Iohn]
If John touch Herads white fin (And who will stand still to have his eyes
picked out?) John must to prison, without bail or mainprise; and there not only
be confined, but bound (...) a (...), as a stirrer up of sedition ( (...) qui
(...), as (...).
Lipsius notes upon Tacitus.) Neither bound only, but beheaded without any
law, right, or reason, as though God had known George Marsh in a certain letter.
nothing at all of him, as that Martyr expresses it. All this befell the good
Baptist, for telling the truth. Veritas odium parit. If Act and (...). (...)
(...).
conscience might but judge, how many of our hearers would be found to have an
Herod's heart toward their faithful Ministers? Were there but a sword (of
authority) in their hand, as he said to (...). 22. 29.
his Ass, they would surely slay them. They would deal by them no better then
Saul did by David, 1 Samuel 18. 10. whiles he was playing upon his harp to ease
Saul's distracted mind, he cast a (...) at him. The most savoury salt (if they
can do withal) must be cast out, and trodden under foot; as Calvin and other
faithful Ministers were driven out of Geneva at the first: whereupon (...).
he uttered these gracious words. Truly, if I had served men, I had been ill
rewarded: but it is well for me that I have served him who never (...) his, but
will approve himself a liberal paymaster, a (...) rewarder.

And put him in prison]
Having first laid hold upon all the principles in his own head, that might any
way disturb (...) course in (...), and locked them up in restraint, according
to that Romans 1. 18. wicked men (...) the truth, that is, the light of their own
consciences (which is as another John Baptist, a Prophet from (...) a (...).
God) this they imprison in unrighteousness, and become fugitives from their
own hearts, as Austin has it.

For Herodias sake, his brother, etc.]
Quam vulpinando (...) at, as one phraseth it: And he had her not only for his
wife, (...).
but for his (...): for she ruled him at her pleasure, as Iezabel did Ahab: of
which wretched couple it is said, that Reginaerat Rex, Rex vero (...). But
(...) never goes well when the (...) crows. (...).
How many have we known, whose heads have been broken with (...) 497.
their own rib? Satan has found this bait to take so (...), that (...) never
changed it since he crept into Paradise. And it is remarkable, that in that
first sentence against man, this cause is expressed, Because thou obeyedst the
voice of thy wife. Genesis 3.


Verse 4. For John had said unto him, It is not lawfull]
Others knew it to be so, but none durst tell him so but John. In like sort
Eliah told Ahab, that he had troubled Israel (those times, and these did very
much suit: John was another Elias, Herod and Herodias answered to Ahab and
Iezabel.) So Latimer presented, for a New Years gift to K. Henry the eight, a
new Testament with a napking, having this posie about it, Whore (...) and (...)
God will judge. He also wrote a letter to the King, after Act and Mon sol. 1594.
the Proclamation for abolishing English books: where we may see and marvel at
his great boldness and stoutnesse, who as yet being no Bishop, so freely and
plainly durst to so mighty a Ibid. 1591.
Prince, in such a dangerous case, against the Kings Proclamation set (...) in
such a terrible time, take upon him to write, and to admonish that which no
Counselor durst once speak unto him, in defense of Christ's Gospel. King Asa,
though a godly Prince, imprisoned the Prophet for dealing plainly with him.
Archbishop Grindall lost Q. Elizabeth's favor, and was confined, for favoring
Prophecies, and c. as it was pretended: but in truth, for condemning an Camd.
Elizab.
unlawful marriage of Iulio an Italian Physician with another man's wife, (...)
Leicester in vain opposed against his proceedings therein. Gods truth must be
told, however it be taken, and not be betrayed (as it is too too often,) by a
cowardly silence.

It is not lawful for thee to have her]
And yet the Pope frequently dispenses with such incestuous marriages. K.
Philip the third of Spain, were he now alive, might call the Archduke Aldred
Sands his survey.
both brother, cosen, nephew and son: for all this were he unto him either by
blood or affinity; being uncle to himself, (...)-german to his father, husband
to his sister, and father to his wife, and all by Papal dispensation. Abhorred
filth.

Verse 5. And when he would have put him to death]
Why, what had the good Baptist done, that he must dye? The people must be made
believe that he suffers for practicing against the Tenue (...).
King. But this was so thin a falsehood that it might be transparently seen
through. Therefore Herod durst not kill him, though (...) much desired to do
it, lest the people should move and mutiny. He knew himself hated by them
already for his cruelty and other crimes. Now if he should (...) them afresh by
executing the Baptist, whom they highly honored, who knew what they would do?
(...), how terrible soever, have their fears, that curb and keep them in for a
time at least, from (...) notorious outrages. In the beginning of Q. Mary's
reign, after the tumult at Bournes Sermon at the cross (where the people
flang daggers, and were ready to pull him limmeal out of the pulpet, for (...)
them to Popery) the L. (...) and Aldermen were willed to call a
common-Counsell, and to signify to said assembly the Queens determination, sc.
that albeit her (...) conscience is staid in matter of Religion, yet she
graciously meant not to compel or strain other men's consciences, otherwise
then God shall, as she trusted, put in their hearts a persuasion of the truth
that she is in, through the opening of the word unto them by godly, Act. and
Mon. (...). 1281.
virtuous, and learned Preachers

Verse 6. But when Herod's birthday was (...)]
All this was a mere plot, as St Mark also intimates, in those words of his,
chap. 6 21, And when a convenient day was come. This birthday Res (...) gesta
est. Pa.
then was the day appointed long before by Herod and his Harlot for the acting
of this tragedy. A great feast must be prepared, the states invited, the
damsel must dance, the King swear, the Baptists there upon be beheaded, that
the Queen may be gratified. And this tragedy was new-acted at Paris (...) 1572.
when the French (...) was committed under pretense of a wedding royal.
Cardinal Lorrain gave a great sum of (...) to him that brought the first
news thereof to Rome, and the Pope caused it to be painted in his palace.

The daughter of (...)]
Tripudiabat, tripped on (...) a (...) or (...).
the toe in a most immodest manner, as they used to do in their Bacchanals, as
the word (...). This old Fornicator seemed to be so taken and tickled with the
sight, that like a mad man (...) swears to give her her request, to the half of
the kingdom, which yet was more then he could do, the kingdom being not his
(...) the Emperor of Romes to dispose of. So, as Robert Duke of Normanay
passed through Falaise, he beheld among a company of young maids dancing, one
(...) a skinners daughter, whose nimblenesse in her dance so enamoured the
Duke, that he took her for his Concub ne, and one (...) begat our William the
Conqueror. Such and no better commonly are the effects, of mixed (...). (...).
(...). (...).
dauncings, which made Chrysostom say, where dancing is, there the devil is.
And another Ancient calls dancing a circle, whose ^
center is the devil blowing up the fire of concupisence in the hearts both of
the actours and spectatours. Augustine says, that every caper in the dance is
a leap into a deep jakes. No sober man does dance, says Cicero. ^


And pleased Herod]
Who was now well heat with wine as an oven, Prove. 23. 31, 33. for then, his
eyes were apt to behold strange women, and his heart to utter perverse things.
Gula Veneris vestibulum: Et Venus in vinis ignis (...) igne furit. But what a
monstrous thing is it to behold green apples on a tree in winter, to find
youthful lusts in old (...) goats?

Verse 7. He promised with an oath]
He not only swore rashly, but confessed himself bound thereby to perform his
oath (as the Greek word signifies) to give her whatsoever she would (...).
ask; as Judah did Tamar, and as wantons use to do, to their sweet-hearts. Ask
me never so much dowry and gift, says (...), and I will give according as ye
shall say unto me: but give Genesis 34. 12.
(...) the damsel to wife.

Verse 8. And she being before instructed, etc.]
Partus sequitur (...).
ventrem, the birth follows the belly. Here was like mother like daughter,
neither good bird nor good egg as they say. The mother and daughter both had
an aching tooth at the Baptist, (...) Mark 6. (...). (...) ofsensione omnes
captabat occasiones quibus (...). (...).
and sought an opportunity to be meet with him: which now having gotten they
pursued to the utmost. The damsel came with haste to the King, says St Mark.
chap. 6. 25. when once she had her (...), as fearing, belike, she should come
too late. Such another huswife as this, was Dame Alice Pierce concubine to our
Edward the third. For when as at a Parliament in the fiftieth year of that
Kings reign, it was petitioned that the (...) of Lancaster, the Lord Latimer
Chamberlain, and this (...) Alice might be a moved from Court, and the Petition
was vehemently urged by their speaker St Peter la Mare; this Knight afterward,
Daniels hist. of Engl. 256.
(...) the suit of that impudent woman (working upon the Kings impotencies) was
committed to perpetual imprisonment at Notingham. And another such history we
have of one Diana Valentina, Mistress to Henry 2. King of France, whom she had
so subdued, that he gave her all the confiscations of goods made in the
Kingdom, for cause of (...). Whereupon Hist. of Coun. of Trent. 387.
many were burned in France for Religion, as they said, but indeed to maintain
the pride, and satisfy the covetousnes of that lewd woman. This was in the
year 1554. And in the year 1559. Anne du Bourge, a (...) of state, was burnt
also for crime of (...); not so much by the inclination of the Judges as by the
resolution of the Queen provoked against him: because, forsooth, Ibid 418.
the Lutherans gave out that the King had been slain, as he was running at
tilt, by a wound in the (...), by the providence of God, for a punnishment of
his words used against Du Bourge, that he would see him burnt.

Verse 9. And the King was sorry]
John's innocence might (...) so triumph in Herod's conscience, as to force some
grief upon him at the thought of so soul a fact. But I rather think otherwise,
that all was but in hypocrisy. For laciviousnesse usually sears up the
conscience (till the time of reckoning for all comes) Luke 13. 23.
and brings men to that dead and dedolent disposition, Ephesians. 4. 19. Only this
fox fains himself sorry for John, as his father (...) Commiserabatur (...) in
(...). (...).
himself willing to worship the Lord Christ, Matthew. 2. as Tiberius ( Herod's
Lord and (...)) would seem very sorry for those, whom, for his pleasures sake
only, he put to death, (...) Germanicus, Drusus, etc. And as Andronicus the
Greek Emperor, that deep dissembler, would (...) over those whom (...) had for
no cause caused to be executed, as if he (...) been the most sorrowful man
alive. Dissimulat mentis suae malitiam (...) homicida. Turk. Hist. fol. 50.
This cunning murderer craftily hides his malice, says St Hierom, and seeming
sad in the face, is glad at heart to be (...) of the importunate Baptist, that
he may sin uncontrolled.

For the oaths sake and them which sate]
All this was but pretended to his villainy, and that he might have somewhat to
say to the people, whom he feared, in excuse for himself. As that he beheaded
the Baptist indeed, but his guests would needs have it so, because he had
promised the damsel her whole desire, and (...) would not otherwise be
satisfied. Besides, it was his birthday wherein it was not fit he should deny
his Nobles any thing, who (...) bonos mores (...): Est regula in (...).
minded him of his oath, etc. But the oath was wicked, and therefore not
obligatory. He should have broken it as David in like case did, 1 Samuel 25. when
he swore a great oath what (...) would do to Nabal. But Herod, for the avoiding
of the sands, rusheth upon the (...), prevents perjury by murder, not
considering the rule that no man is held so perplexed between two vices, (...)
duo (...) quin exitus pateat (...) ter (...)
but that he may find an issue without falling into a third.

And them which sat with him at meat]
These he had more respect to, then to God. An hypocrites care is all for the
worlds approof and applause. They should have showed him his sin, and oppose
his sentence. But that is not the guise of godless parasites, (...) nullum
(...) Attico. (...). Buchol
those Aiones and Negones aulici, qui omnia loquuntur ad gratiam, nihil ad
(...). These Court parasites and Parrots know no other tune or tone, but what
will please their masters quorum etiam sputum (...), as one says: soothing and
Apud (...) pes (...) ut (...) Craesi (...).
smoothing, and smothering up many of their foul facts, that they thereby may
the better ingratiate. Principibus ideo amicus deest quia nihil deest: there is
a wounderfull sympathy between Princes and Parasites. But David would none of
them, In vita Alphon.
Psalm. 101. and Sigismund the Emperor cuffed them out of his presence. And
surely if wishing were any thing (said Henricus Stephanus) like as the
Thessalians once utterly overthrew the City called Flattery, so I could desire,
that above all other Malefactors, H. Steph Apol. pro Herodoto.
Court-Parasites were (...) rooted out, as the most pestilent persons in the
world.

Verse 10. And he sent and beheaded John]
Put him to death in hugger-mugger, as the Papists did and do still (in the
bloody Inquisition-house especially) many of the Martyrs. Stokesby Bishop of
London caused Mr John Hunne to be thrust in at the nose Act. and Mon, fol. 15
(...).
with hot burning needles, whiles he was in the prison, and then to be hanged
there; and said he had hanged himself. Another Bishop having in his prison an
innocent man, because he could not overcome him by scripture, caused him
privily to be snarled, and Ibid.
his flesh to be torn and pluct away with pinsers; and bringing him before the
people, said the rats had eaten him. And, I have heard of a certain Bishop,
says Melanchton, that so starved ten good men whom he held in prison for
religion, that before they Manl. loc (...). page 124.
dyed, they devoured one another. Quis unquam hoc audivit in Thalaridis
historia, says he? who ever heard of such a cruelty? But so it pleases God,
for excellent ends to order that all things here come alike to all, yea that
none out of hell suffer more then the Saints. This made Erasmus say, upon
occasion of the burning of Berquin a Dutch-Martyr, Damnari, dissecari,
suspendi, exuri, decollari pijs cum impijs sunt communia. (...), dissecare, in
crucemagere, -Nec te tua (...) Pantheu (...) texit pietas.
exurere, decollare, bonis judicibus cum pirat is ac tyrannis communia sunt.
Varia sunt hominum (...); ille foelix, qui judice Deo absolvitur. The Athenians
were very much offended at the fall of their General Nicias, discomfited and
slain in Sicile; as seeing (...).
so good a man to have no better fortune. But they knew not God, and therefore
raged at him. But we must lay our hands upon our mouths when Gods hand is upon
our backs or necks: and stand on tiptoes, with Paul, to see which way Christ
may be most magnified in our bodies, whether by life or by death, Philip. 1. 20.

Verse 11. And his head was brought, etc.]
This was merces (...), the worlds wages to lohn for all his pains in seeking
to save their souls. Surely as Caesar once said of Herod the great, (this Dike
of the (...), (...) etc. (...)
man's father) It were better to be Herod's (...) then his son: So (says one)
many Ministers have, through the corruption of the time, cause to think, It
were better to be Herod's Ministrell then Minister, Player then Preacher,
Dauncer then Doctor.

And given to the (...)]
The (...) condemned it for a detestable cruelty in (...) Flaminius, that to
gratify his harlot (...).
Placentina, he beheaded a certain prisoner in her (...) a feast. This, Livy
calls facinus saevuni atque atrox, a cursed and horrid fact: And Cato the
Censor cast him out of the Senate for it. Neither was it long ere this tyrant
Herod had (...) from heaven. For Aretas King of Arabia (offended with him for
putting away his daughter, and taking to wife Herodias) came upon him with an
army, and cut off all his forces. Which (...) (...) lib 18. cap (...).
all (...) interpreted, says Josephus, as a just vengance of (...) upon him,
for his unjust usage of the Baptist. And, within a while after, being accused
at Rome by his brother Agrippa, (...) convicted that he had 70000 arms in
readiness against the (...), (...). cap. 9.
he was banished into France ((...) is above said) (...) with his Herodias,
where he became his own deathsman.

And she brought it to her mother]
As a most welcome (...), and pleasant dish at this Thyestian supper. Whether
it (...) carried about the table for a merry sight (as Aretius thinks) or
whether she pricked his (...) with needles, as Josephus says, (as they did
Tullies, setting up his head in the pleading-place, (...) concionibus (...)
capita servarat, as (...) a has it) I have nothing to affirm. But we want not
(...) of some Tigers (...) Tigresses, that have taken pleasure in such (...):
Witness Hannibals, O formosum (...)! O goodly bloody sight, when he saw a pit
full of man's blood: Valesas, his O (...) Act. and Men.
when he had slain 300. (...) his glorying on his deathbed, that he had been
the death of 50 herewigs, heretics he meant. Story his vaunting, that he tossed
a faggot at Denly the Martyrs (...). 1925.
face, as he was (...) a Psalm, and set a wine bush of thorns under his feet, a
little to prick him, etc. This he spoke in the Parliament in Q. Elizabeth's
days, whom he usually cursed in his grace before meat, and was therefore
worthily hanged, drawn, and (...). Whereunto we may add that Queen (another
Herodias) who when she saw some of her Protestant subjects lying (...) New
comen.
dead, and stripped upon the earth, cried out, The goodliest (...) that ever
she beheld.

Verse 12. And his Disciples came and took]
A (...) and courteous office, such as Joseph of Arimathca boldly (...) to
Christ, and those devout men to Steven, making great lamentation Act. 8. (...).
over him. Good blood will not belly it self: fire will not long be hid, Sr
Anthony Kingston came to Bishop Hooper a little Act. and Mon. fol 1369.
before he was burnt, and said, I thank God that ever I knew you, etc. And
another Knight came to George (...) field when he was at the stake, and taking
him by the hand, said, good brother be strong in Christ, etc. Oh sir, said he,
I thank you, I (...) so, Ibid 1535.
I thank God. It is an high praise to One siphorus that he sought out Paul the
prisoner, and was not ashamed of his chain. And to 2 Timothy 1. 16, 17.
David's brethren, that they came down to him to the cave of Adullam, though to
their great danger; to the good women in the 1 Samuel 22. 1.
Gospel, that they came to the sepulcher to (...) Christ's body, though it were
guarded by a band of soldiers: And to those Tametsi (...) terroribus mi. nis
and (...) interdictum (...). Chrysostom. orat. de (...). Martyr.
Christians in Chrysostoms time, that would not be kept from visiting the
Confessors in prison, though it were straightly forbidden them, upon pain of
many (...) and dangers.

And went and told Jesus.]
Whom should we tell of the sufferings of his servants and our selves, but
Jesus? Say to him of his laboring Church, as they did once of his friend
Lazarus, Behold she whom thou love is sick, or otherwise hardly dealt with.
Then will he soon be jealous for his land and pity his people: he Joel 2.
will play Phine as his part, and thrust a spear through the loins of (...)
enemies, that offer to force the Queen also in the house. But it is worth the
noting, that John's Disciples, who before had emulated Christ and joined with
the Pharisees against him, now repair unto him, and inform him of their masters
death; being henceforth willing to become his Disciples. Misery makes unity,
and drives them to Christ, who, till then, had no such mind to him.

Verse 13. When Jesus heard of it, etc.]
Dangers must be declined, where they may be with a safe (...). (...) and Peter
Psalm. 34.
(who had both paid for their learning) say both, what (...) is 1 Pet. (...)
he that loves life, and would see good (or quiet) days?

They followed him on foot]
Hot-foot, as they say. So the people resorted to B, Ridleys Sermons, swarming
about him like bees, and coveting the sweet juice of his godly discourses.
(...) diligence Act. and (...). (...) 1559.
and devotion is check to our dulnes and indevotion; If Christ would set up a
Pulpit at the alehouse-door, some would hear him oftener.

Verse 14. Was moved with compassion, and healed their sick]
Christ's mercy was not a mouth-mercy: such as was that of (...) in St James his
time, that said to their necessitous neighbors, Jam. 2. 15, 16.
Depart in peace, be warmed: But with what? with a fire of words. Be filled:
but with what? with a mess of words. For they gave them not those things that
were needful to the body. But our Savior, out of deep commiseration, both
pitied the people, ^ 4.
and healed them on both sides, within and without. Oh how well may he be
called a Savior, which in the Original is a word so full of Emphasis, that
other tongues can hardly find a fit word to express it by.

Verse 15. His Disciples came to him]
Not the multitudes. They forgot their bodily necessities, to (...) upon
Christ, to hang upon his honey lips, preferring his holy word before their (...)
food, as did Job, chap. 23. 12. Not only before his dainties and superfluities,
but his substantial food, without which he could not long live and subsist.
These hearers of our Savior came out of their cities, where they had every
thing at full, into the desert, where they thought nothing was to be had, to
hear him. I (...) 4. (...) Latin.
had rather live in hell, with the word, said Luther, then in Paradise without
it. Our forefathers gave five marks, some of them (which is more money then ten
pound is now) for a good book: and some others of them gave a load of hey for a
few chapters of St Paul, or St James in English. To hear a Sermon they would
Act and (...) (...).
go as many weary steps, as those good souls did, Psalm. 84. 7. or as these in
the text; and neglect or hazard their bodies, to save their souls. How far are
they from this that will not put themselves to any pain or cost for heaven? and
if held a while beyond the hour of a Sermon are as ill settled, as if they were
in the stocks, or in a fit of an ague: they go out of the Church as out of a
goal.

This is a desert place, etc.]
Christ knew all this, better then they could tell him: and to take upon them
to tell him, was as if Ac si (...) (...) (...). (...). Augustine
the ostrich should bid the stork, be kind to her young ones.

Verse 16. They need not depart]
Whither should they go from the great housekeeper of the world, the
All-sufficient God? Habet certe omnia, qui (...) habentem omnia. Christ has a
cornucopia, a horn of salvation, plenteous redemption, etc. And if he give us a
crown, will he deny us a crust? The earth is the Lords and the fullness
thereof. He feeds the ravens, and clothes the lilies. If meat be denied, he can
take away our stomachs. He can feed us by a miracle, as he did (...) of old,
and the Rochellers alate.

Verse 17. And they say unto him, we have here]
And were therefore ready to say with Nicodemus, How can this be? Christ had
said, Give ye them to eat, to try them only, as St John has it. And, upon
trial, he found them full of (...), as appears by their Joh. (...). 6.
answer. But the comfort is, he has promised to try his people indeed, but not
as silver; Jest they should not bear any (...) a Isa 48. 10.
trial, as having more dross in them then good oar. And, where he finds any
the least grain of true grace, he cherishes, and inhanceth it, by a further
partaking of his holiness. The Disciples here Heb. 12. 10.
were as yet very carnal, and spoke as men: They were ready to limit the Holy
one, and to say with those of old, Can he prepare (...) table in the
wilderness? They measured him by their model, and looked as Naaman did, upon
Jordan with Syrian eyes. This was their fault, and must be our warning; that
when we think of God, we (...) out Hagar, and set up Sarah, silence our reason,
and (...) our (...); which (...) and quelleth distrustful fear, and (...)
against sense in things invisible, and against reason in things incredible.

But five (...) and two (...)]
Tyrabosco was hardly driven (...). p. 164.
when from these five (...) and two fishes he concluded seven Sacramen^ts. Two,
belike, of Gods making, and five of the bakers. So Cenalis Bishop of Auranches,
would prove the Church of Rome the true Church, because it had bells by which
their Aslemblies be ordinarily called together: But the Church of the Lutherans
was reported to be congregated by claps of (...) buzes and (...): And (...)
makes a long Antithesis, by Act and (...). (...) (...).
the which he would make good, that bells are the makers of the true Church. As
that bells do sound, the other crack: bells open heaven, the other hell, etc.

Verse 18. Bring them hither to me]
Bring we all we have and are to Christ, that he may take off the curse, and
add the blessing. What the Apostle says of meat and marriage, is true of the
rest, All things are sanctified by the word and prayer. To teach 1 Timothy 4. 3.
the people this, it was, that the fruit of the trees was not to be eaten, till
the trees were circumcised. Lev. 19. 23.

Verse 19. And looking up to heaven, he blessed]
Heathens (...) their cates before they tasted them, as appears by many
passages in Homer and Virgil. Some say that the Elephant ere (...) eats his
meat, turns up with his trunk the first sprig toward heaven. The Scripture, we
are sure, says, that men eat to God when they give thanks, Romans 14 6. To whom
then do they eat that give none?

And the Disciples, to the multitude]
They grudged not of their little to give others some, and it grew in their
hands, as the widows oil did in the cruse. Not getting, but giving is the way
to thrive. Nothing was ever lost by liberality.

Verse 20. And were filled]
So David's cup over-flowed: he Psalm. 23 (...).
had not only a sufficience but an affluence. So, at the marriage of Cana,
Christ gave them wine enough for 150 guests. Howbeit (...). 2.
he has not promised us superfluities. Having food and raiment, 1 (...) 6.
let us be content. A little of the creature will serve to carry us through our
pilgrimage.

And they took up of the fragments]
Thrift is a great revenue, (...).
and good husbandry well pleasing to God, Prove. 27. 26, 27. so it degenerate
not into niggardise.

Twelve baskets full]
If we consider what they ate, we may wonder they left any thing, as if, what
they left, that they ate any thing.

Verse 21. Were about five thousand]
Pythias is famous, for that he was able, at his own charge, to entertain
Xerxes his whole (...).
Army, consisting of ten hundred thousand men. But he grew so poor upon it,
that he wanted bread ere he died. Our Savior fed five thousand, and his store
not a jot diminished: but as it is said of a great mountain of salt in Spain,
de quo quantum demas tantum (...).
accrescit: so is it here.

Besides women and children]
Which did very much add to the number, and so to the miracle. But they are
not reckoned of here (not out of any base esteem of them, as the Jews at this
day hold women to be of a lower creation then men, and made only for (...)
voyage, page 122.
the propagation and pleasure of men, but) because they eat little in
comparison of men.

Verse 22. Jesus constrained his Disciples]
Who seem to have been full loath to leave his sweet company. The presence of
friends (how much more of such a friend?) is so sweet, that death it self is
called but a departure. Christ compelled them, which is no more then commanded
them (say some) to get into a ship: 1. (...) they should take part with the
rash many-headed multitude, who would have made him a king, Joh. 6. thus he
many times prevents sin in his, by removing occasions. 2. To inure them to the
cross, and to teach them, as good soldiers, to suffer hardship, which the
flesh takes heavily. 3. To give them proof of his power, now prefected in their
weakness, when they were ready to be shipwrackt, and to teach them to (...) to
him absent, whom present they had not prised to the worth, as appears, ver. 17.
When we cast our precious things at our heels, as children, our heavenly father
lays them out of the way another while, that we may know the worth by the
want, and so grow wiser.

He sent the (...) away]
That he might shun even the Cant. 1. 7.
suspicion of sedition: We must not only look to our consciences but to our
credits. Why should I be as one that turns aside? says the Church, or as one
that is veiled and covered, which was the habit of an harlot? Why should I seem
to be so, though I be none Quiequid (...) male coloratum. Bern.
such? We must shun appearances of evil, whatsoever is but evilfavoured.

Verse 23. He went up into a mountain apart to pray]
Secret prayer fats the soul, as secret morsels feed the body: Therefore is it
said to be the banquet of grace, where the soul may solace her (...) with God,
as Esther did with Ahashuerosh at the banquet of wine, and have whatsoever
heart can wish, or need require. Only (because Anima (...) fit minor) get into
such a corner, as where we may be most free to call upon God without
distraction, remembering (...) own fickleness, and (...) restlesnesse.

When the evening was come, he was there alone]
Retire we must sometimes, and into fit places to meet God, as Balaam did,
Numb. 23.
but to better purpose: solacing and entertaining soliloquies with him, as
Isaac did in the fields, (...) upon the way, Ezekiel by the (...) Vlai, Peter
upon the leads, Christ here upon the mountain. Whiles the Disciples were
perilling, and well nigh perishing, Christ was praying for them: so he is still
for us, at the right hand of the Majesty on high.

Verse 24. Tossed with waves]
So is the Church often, therefore Isa 54. 11.
styled, O thou (...) and tossed with tempest, that have no comfort. Jesus was
absent all the while, so he seems to be from his darlings in their
desertions; he leaves them as it were in the (...) of hell, and (which is
worst of all) himself will not come at them. Howbeit as the Eagle when she
(...) highest of all from the nest, does (...) cast a jealous eye upon her
young; so does this heavenly Eagle.

For the wind was contrary]
So it is ever lightly to the Church: This world (...) like the straits of
Magellan, wherein which (...).
way soever a man bends his course, he is sure to have the wind sit (...) to
him. But the comfort is, that whether North or South blow, they both blow good
to a Christian, Cant. 4. ult.

Verse 25. And in the fourth watch, etc.]
Then, and not till then. His time is best, whatever we think of it: his help
most sweet, because most seasonable: his hand commonly kept for a dead list.

Verse 26. They were troubled]
Ere they were helped: Things often go backward, (...) they come forward with us.
Deus plagam sanaturus, graviorem in fligit: he knows how to commend his mercies
to us.

And they cried out for fear]
For fear of him, in whom was laid up all their comfort. But (...) in dubijs
Augur, Timor.-How often are we mistaken, and befooled by our fears?

Verse 27. But straightway Jesus spoke, etc.]
He waits to be Isa. 30. 18.
gracious: Our extremity is his opportunity. Cum duplicantur lateres venit
Moses. God brings his people to the mount with Abraham, yea to the very brow of
the hill, till their feet slip, and then delivers them: when all is given up
for lost, then comes he in, (...).
as out of an engine.

It is I, fear not.]
Quid timet homo in sinu Dei positus? A child that is in his fathers bosom,
fears no bugbears.

Verse 28. If it be thou, bid me come unto thee, etc.]
This fact of Peter some extol, as an argument of his strong faith and love to
Christ. But others of better judgment, censure it as an effect of unbelief,
and rashness in him, requiring to be confirmed by a miracle: to the which
though our Savior assented, yet we cannot say that he approved it. The other
Disciples believed Christ upon his bare word, but Peter must have a sign. He
had it, but with a check, ver. 31.

Verse 29. And he said, Come.]
Had the (...) asked a sign, they should have gone without, and have heard,
wicked and bastardly brood. as Matthew. 12. 39. But a (...) shall have it, rather
then he shall (...) betwixt two, as the word is, ver. 31. Christ condescends
(...), ^
to his infirmity, and bids him, come. And the like was his dealing with that
virtuous Gentle woman Mrs Honiwood: who (...) much of her salvation, was often
counseled by a worthy Minister, to take heed of enquiries further then Gods
word, etc. Yet still did the temptation grow upon her, insomuch that having a
Venice-(...) in her hand, and the same Minister sitting by her, You have often
told me, said she to him, that I must seek no further then Gods word. But I
have been long without comfort, and M. Boltons (...) a right (...). (...). p.
5. out of (...) his (...). of Hypoc page 357.
can endure no longer. Therefore if I must be saved, let this glass be kept
from breaking; and so she threw it against the walls. The glass rebounds
again, and comes safe to the ground: which the Minister having gotten into his
hands, says, Oh repent of this sin, (...) God for his mercy, and never
distrust him more of his promise: for now have you his voice from heaven in a
miracle, telling you plainly of your estate. This was curiosity, says mine
Author, and might have brought despair: Yet it was the Lords mercy to remit
the fault, and grant an extraordinary confirmation (...) her faith.

Verse 30. But when he saw the wind boisterous]
Every bird can (...) in a sun shine-day: and it is easy to swim in a warm
bath: but to believe in an angry God, as David, in a killing God, as Job, to
stick to him in deepest desertion, as the Church, Psalm. 44. 17, 18. to trust in
his Name, and stay upon his word, where there is darkness and no light, as
Isa. 50. 10. to cast anchor even in the darkest night of temptation, when
neither Sun nor stars appear, as Paul and his company, Acts 27. (...). praying
still for day, and waiting till it dawne, O quam hoc non est omnium! this is
not in the power of every Peter, who yet shall be graciously supported that
they faint not, neither sink under the heaviest burden of their light
afflictions. It was not so much the strength of the wind, as the weakness of
his faith, that put Peter into this fit of fear. Be we faithful in weakness,
though weak in faith, and it shall go well with (...). Be as a ship at anchor,
which though it move much, yet removes not at all.

Verse 31. O thou of little faith, etc.]
Thou petty-fidian, (...); Christ chides Peter, and yet helps him. Involuntary
failings, unavoidable infirmities discard us not: as robberies done by Pirates
of either Nation, break not the league between Princes: as (...) not the
marriage-(...). Christ knew us well before he took us, yet took us for better,
for worse. 2. He hates putting away, Mal. 2. 16. and herein, as he is above
law, so his mercy is matchless. Jer. 3. 1. Jehoshuah the High Priest, though
he was so ill-clothed, yet he stood before the Angel, Zech. 3. 3. Much will be
born with where the fault is of passion merely, or of (...) and inadvertency,
as here.

Verse 32. The wind ceased]
As if it had been weary of (...) so big, and now desired rest after hard
labor; as the word here (...), (...).
used imports. Herodotus uses the same word in the same sense, where he
speaks of a tempest laid by the Magicians. Rupertus calls the winds the
worlds beesoms, which are used by God to sweep his great house, and purge the
air. If the Prince of (...). in (...), (...).
the air make use of them to sweep Gods children, as he did Jobs children, out
of the world, it cannot be said as 1 King. 19. 11. that God is not in that
wind: sor he numbreth their hairs, and counts their flittings, and, being the
great AEolus, lays laws upon Virg (...) (...). (...) 1.
the winds and waves, which instantly obey him. No sooner was Christ in the
ship, but they were all at land.

Verse 33. Of a truth thou art the Son of God]
Not by Creation as Adam, and the Angels, Luke 3. 38. Job 1. 6. Nor by Adoption
as all believers, Joh. 1. 12. but 1 By eternal generation, Prove. 8 22. 2. By
personal union, Psalm. 2. 7.

Verse 34. They came into the land of Gennesaret]
Where he presently found some that observed him. When God sets up a light in
any place, a burning and a shining light, there is some work to be done. A
husbandman would not send his servant with his sickle to reap thistles and
nettles only. The ministry sent to a place, is an (...) of some elect there, 2
These. 1. 5.

Verse 35. They sent out into all that countrey]
See their charity. The Philistims were not so ambitious of sending the plague,
together with the (...), one to another, as these were of helping their
neighbors to health, to heaven. We are born for the benefit of many, as (...)
Physicians told him, Non sibise, sed multorum (...). Adam. (...).
(...) esse natum. Public persons especially must have public spirits. Kings
have in Greek their names from healing: And (...) (...) (...).
are called Healirs, or binders up of wounds, Isa 3. 7.

Verse 36. And as many as touched etc.
Oh the matchless might and (...) of Christ our Savior! He (...) to (...)
infirmity, and heals them promiscuously, not once questioning their (...). He
gives to all men liberally, and hitteth no man in the (...). 1 5.
teeth with his former failings, or present (...). Be we also, (...) (...)
(...) to heal (...), (...).
by his example, ready to distribute, willing to communicate. This was the
Philosophical friendship of the Pythagoreans, the legal of the (...) (a sect
among the Jews, that had their names of healing) and should be most of all the
Evangelicall friendship of us (...). Thou shall be called the repairer of the
breach, the restorer etc. Isa. 58. 12. A gallant tittle, better then a thousand
(...).

CHAP. XV.
Verse 1. Then came to Jesus.
THen, when the men of Genne sareth favored and observed him. Satan stomacketh
the prosperity of Gods Kingdom in any place, and stirs up his to oppose it.
Esau began with Jacob in the womb, that no time might be lost. As soon as ever
the Churches child was borne, the devil sought to drown him, Rev. 12.

Scribes and Pharisees]
Learned and lewd; these are Christ's greatest enemies, hypocrites especially,
those night-birds, that cannot bear the light of true religion, but, as bats,
beat against it.

Which were of Ierusalem]
That faithful City was now become Isa. 1. 22, (...).
an harlot, her silver was degenerate into dross, her wine mixed with water.
The sweetest wine turns into the sowrest vinegar, the whitest ivory burnt, into
the (...) coal. So about the year 1414 Theodoricus (...) in Germany, an
Augustine Friar complained, not without cause, Ecclesiam Romanam ex aurea
factam Joh. (...) (...). (...): 6
argenteam, ex argentea (...), ex ferrea terream, superesse (...) in stercus
(...). Machiavil observed, that there was no where (...). (...) de rep. lib. 1.
cap (...).
(...) piety, then in those that dwelt nearest to Rome.

Verse 2. Transgress the tradition of the Elders?]
They cried up aloud Traditions, and the authority of Antiquity. Similem hodie
dicam Papistae nobis scribunt. For as the Philosophers fled and hid themselves
in the haereticks, as one says, so did the Scribes and Pharisees in the Popish
Doctors. Non tam ovum ovo simile: One egg or apple is not so like another, as
Pharisees and Papists. The Pharisees deemed it as great a sin to eat with
unwashen hands, (...). Antiquit. Heb. (...). 49.
as to commit fornication. Semblably, the Papists count it worse to deface an
Idol, then to kill a man, to eat flesh or eggs on a fasting day, then to commit
incest, and for a Priest to have one wife then ten harlots. (...), say some, is
the number of the beast, 666. Parcus in (...).


Verse 3. He answered and said unto them]
He shapes them an answer by way of Recrimination: which is a singular means of
conviction to the adversary, but hard to be done by us without some (...).
mixture of (...), such as was that in David to Michal, 2 Samuel 6. 21.

Transgress the Commandment of God by your tradition?]
Gods commands should be kept as the apple of the eye, Prove. 7. 2. They are
broken by omissions, commissions and failings in the manner: like as a man may
miss: the mark by shooting short, or beyond, or wide. These Pharisees, as those
Athenians of old (...)
(whereas they had most excellent Laws, but most (...) natures) chose rather to
live by their lusts, then by their laws. They had many traditions, and
unwritten verities, pretended to be invented and prescribed them by their
(...), that by the (...) thereof they might be the better (...) to keep Gods
Commandments. These traditions they styled, Mashlamnathoth, Completions or
Perfections: because (...). (...). (...) (...)
thereby they conceited, that the written law was made more complete and
perfect. And say not the Papists as much of their traditions?

Verse 4. For God commanded, saying]
This is called the first (...) 6. 2. (...), (...) an (...).
Commandment with promise, viz. the first affirmative Commandment, or the
first, in the second Table: or the first of all the tea with promise. For that
in the second Commandment is rather a (...) of Gods justice and mercy, and that
to the observers of (...) D Gouge of (...). (...).
the whole Law: but here is a particular promife made to them, that keep this
particular commandment.

Honor thy father and mother]
Among other good offices, nourish Genesis 47. 12.
and cherish them as Joseph did Jacob and his family, (...) Ruth 4. 15.
(...) 5. 4.
(...), as a man nourishes his little-ones, lovingly and tenderly: (...).
(...). c. 23.
Be unto them as Obed was to Naomi, A restorer of her (...), (...) b. (...).
and a nourisher of her old age. This the Apostle commends to us, as (...) c. 6.
a (...) not only good before men, (...) acceptable before God. This the Stork
and the Mouse teach us, by their singular love to their aged (...). (...) was
the staff of his fathers age, and thereby merited the honorable name of Scipio
among the Romans. Epaminondas rejoiced in nothing more, then that he had lived
to cheer up the hearts of his aged parents, by the reports of his (...). (...).
Our parents are our household gods, said Hierocles. AEneas is surnamed Pius,
for his love to his father, whom he bore upon his (...) out of the fire of
Troy. And Aristotle tells how that when from the hill AEtna, there ran down a
(...) of fire that consumed (...). (...). (...).
all the houses thereabouts, in the midst of those fearful flames Gods
special care of the godly shined most brightly. For the river of fire parted
it self, and made a kind of lane for those who ventured to rescue their aged
parents, and pluck them out of the (...) of death.

He that curses father or mother]
That gives them an ill (...).
word, or but an ill look; for, Vultu saepe laeditur pietas. The Prove 30. 17.
(...) veret (...) gutture corvus. Catul.
eye that mocketh at his father, and despises to obey his mother, the ravens
of the valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it. Now they
are cursed with a witness, whom the holy Ghost thus curses in such
emphaticall manner, in such exquisite terms.

Verse 5. But ye say, whosoever, etc.]
The intolerable covetousness (...). Sands his (...). (...). 4.
of the (...) bred this abominable corruption of this Commandment, as it did
many other like. See my Notes on John 2. 14, 15. By the same arts at this day
the Lady of Loretto, as they call her, has her Churches so stuffed with vowed
presents and memories, as they are fain to hang their cloisters and Churchyards
with them. The (...) of grace in this Kingdom, had a man within it (...) with
an hundred wiers to make the image goggle with the eyes, nod with the head,
hang the lip, move and shake his jaws according as the value was of the gift
that was offered. If it were a small (...) of silver, he would hang a frowning
lip: if a piece of gold, then should his jaws go merrily. The Act. and Mon.
fol., 084.
like was done by the blood of Hales, brought afterward by the Lord Cromwell
to Paul's cross, and there proved to be the blood of a duck.

It is a gift by whatsoever, etc.]
Some read it thus, by Chorban, (...) by this gift, if thou receive any profit
by me: understand, then let Godw. Antiq. (...).
God do thus, and much more to me, q. d. by Chorban thou shall receive no
profit by me. Others thus, Chorban, Anathema (...), si (...), ut Mat. 10. 14.
and 23. 18. (...).
sit, Be it a devoted thing whatsoever I may profit thee by, q. d. Being
consccrated to God, it shall be beneficial to us both, and not here only in
this life, but hereafter in that to come: whereas cost bestowed upon parents
soon vanishes, and reaches no further then the life presents.

Verse 6. And honor not his father and his mother]
Supple, insons erit. Our Savior contents himself to relate (...) words only
of the tradition, as Lawyers use to do the first words of the Statute or Canon,
they (...) te or argue upon.

Thus have you made the Commandment of none effect]
Ye have (...) of (...) and (...) rule, authority.
sought to shoulder God out of his throne, to divest and spoil him of his rule
and authority, to ungod him as it were, by making his Commandment void and
invalid. And do not Papists as much as all this, whiles they teach that a Monk
(...) not leave his cloister, to relieve his father, but must rather see and
suffer him to die for hunger in the streets? Lyra has these very words, Filius
(...) professionem factam in religione, excusatur a subveniendo parenlibus.
This Lyra was a famous English Jew, but an arrant Papist, as, for most part,
all were then: for he flourished, Anno 1320.

Verse 7. Well did I saias propheey of you]
Of such as you, and so of you too. The Prophets and Apostles then spoke not of
them only with whom they lived, and to whom they wrote (as the Jesuits
blaspheme) but their oracles and doctrines do extend still to men of the same
stamp and making. In the volume of thy book Psalm. 40. 7.
it is written of me, says David: he found his own name in Gods book. And
where he spoke with Jacob at Bethel, there he spoke with us, says Hosea, Chap.
12. 4. And, Whatsoever was written, was written for our learning, says Paul,
Romans 14. 4.

Verse 8. This people draws (...) unto me, etc.]
And they are no changelings: For at this day, although they know better, and
can (...) the walls of their Synagogues this sentence, Tephillah (...) cheguph
belo neshamah, that is, Prayer without (...). Abbreviat. p. 186.
the intention of the mind, is but as a body without a soul; yet shall not a
man any where see less intention then in their orisons. The reverence they
show (says Sr Edwin Sands, who (...) it) is in standing up at times, and the
gesture of adoration, in the bowing forward of their bodies. For kneeling they
use none (no more do the Grecians) neither stir they their bonnets in their
Synagogues to any man: but remain still covered. They come to (...) Europe.
it with washen hands, and in it they burn lamps to the honor of God: but for
any show of devotion or elevation of spirit, that yet (...) posset (...), (...)
pro (...) quam pro (...). (...) S (...) epist. 1. (...) 1.
in Jews could I never discern: but they are as reverend in their Synagogues,
as Grammer-boyes are at school, when their master is absent. In sum, their
holiness is the very outward work it self, being a brainlesse head, and
soullesse body. Thus he.

And honors me with their lips]
But prayer is not the labor of the lips, but the travel of the heart: the
power of a petition is not in the roof of the mouth, but root of the heart. To
give way to wilful distractions, is to commit spiritual whoredom in Gods
presence. Is it fit to present the King with an empty cask? or to tell him a
tale with our backs toward him? Behold, I am a great King, says God, and they
that stand before him, must look Eccles. 7. 1.
to their feet, says Solomon, that they stand upright, and that they offer not
an heartlesse sacrifice, for that is the sacrifice of fools, and ever held
ominous.

But their heart is far from me]
And so, all they do is puted hypocrisy. God loves truth in the inward parts,
Psalm. 41. 6. and calls for the heart in all services, as Joseph did for
Benjamin, as David did for Michal, Thou shall not see my face, unless thou
bring it. In all spiritual Sacrifices we must bring him the fat and the
inwards. The deeper and hollower the belly of the lute or viol is, the
pleasanter is the sound; the fleeter, the more grating and harsh in our ears.
The voice which is made in the mouth is nothing so sweet, as that which comes
from the depth of the breast, Ephesians. 6. 5. Do the will of God from the heart. But
woe be to all careless (...), to all loose and ungirt Christians: the Lord
will make all the Churches to know that he searches the hearts and Revel. 1.
23.
reyns, and that he will kill with death all such as had rather seem to be
good, then seek to be so.

Verse 9. But in vain do they worship me]
For they loose their labor, and which is worse, they commit sin.
Displeasing service is double dishonor, as dissembled sanctity is double
iniquity.

Teaching for doctrines the commandments of men]
So do Papists. Host c. 4.
The Pope can do all things that Christ can do, says Hostiensis. He Bellar. de
pont.
can of (...) make righteousness, says Bellarmine, of (...), Romans l. 4.
(...), of nothing, something. His determinations are ipsissimum (...) verbum,
the very word of God, says Hosius. Murders, treasons, thefts, etc. there is no
command of the moral Law, but they can dispense with it; but none of their
ceremonial Law. Let God, say they, look to the breach of his own Law, we will
look to ours. Heathen Socrates and Cicero, shall rise up against Socrat. ap.
Xe. nophon.
these Pseudochristians, and condemn them. God, said Socrates, will be
worshipped with that kind of worship only which himself (...) non
superstitione coli (...) pietate.
has commanded. He will not be worshipped, said Cicero, with superstition, but
with piety.

Verse 10. And he called the multitude]
The Pharisees, those (...), (...) they would not be charmed, Christ will lose
no more sweet words upon them; but turns them up as desperate with this
inscription on their fore heads, Noluerunt (...); I would have healed these
hypocrites, but they would not be healed. Yea, When I would have healed
Ephraim, then (to cross me) their iniquity was discovered, as the leprosy in
their foreheads. And (...). 7. 1.
from such uncouncellable and (...) hearers, if a Minister depart, he does but
his duty: the desertion is on their (...), and not on his, The manifestation of
the spirit is given to every man to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12. 7.

Verse 11. Not that which goes into the man, etc.]
Whether with clean or (...) hands, taken meat (...) not the (...) guilty of
Gods wrath. What? Not if abused to surfeting and drunkenness? says
Bellarmine, who is angry with Christ for this doctrine Ob.
(as making against theirs directly) and therefore seeks to disprove him. We
answer for and with Christ: that he speaks here of the moderate use of meats,
which is indifferent. As for the abuse of it to (...) and excess, this is an
evil that comes out of the heart, and defiles the man, as being a flat breach
of the law of God, who every where condemns it.

But that which comes out of the mouth]
That is, out of the heart that muck-hill, through the mouth, as through a
dung-port, that defiles a man worse then any jakes can do. Hence sin is called
filthiness, abomination, the vomit of a dog, the devils excrements, etc. The
very visible (...) are (...) by it, and must therefore be purged by (...), as
those vessels were that held (...) sin-offering. As for the soul, sin sets such
engrained stains upon it, as nothing can fetch out, but the blood of Christ
that (...) lamb.

Verse 12. Know thou that the Pharisees etc.]
q. d. why do thou then thus call the people to thee, and exclude them? It
was a commendable charity in the (...), to desire the better information of
those that had (...) accused (...), v. 2. and to tender their salvation. Be not
overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. Speciosius aliquanto injuriae
(...) sicijs vincuntur, quam mutni odij pertinacia pensantur, says a (...).
(...). (...) l. 4. cap. 2.


Verse 13. Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted]
viz. By election, and watered by vocation. These Pharisees were reprobates,
designed to detection here, and to destruction hereafter. Therefore as it is no
wonder, so it is no matter, though they stumble at the Word, being disobedient,
since hereunto they were appointed, 1 Pet. 2. 8. Let them stumble and fall, and
be broken, and snared, and taken, Isa 8. 15. Christ is to reprobates a rock of
offense: but such a rock as that, Judge. 6. 21. out of which goes fire and
consumes them.

Verse 14. Let them alone]
A dreadful doom; like that, Hos. 4. 14. I will not punish your daughters,
when they commit whoredom, etc. No so great punishment as not to be punished.
And verse. 17. of that same Chapter, Ephraim is joined to idols, let him alone,
q. d. He has made a match with mischief, he shall have his belly-full of it.
Never was Jerusalems condition so desperate, as when God said unto her, My fury
shall depart from thee, I will be quiet, and no more angry, Ezekiel. 16. 42. A man
is ever and anon meddling with his fruit trees, paring and pruning, etc. but for
his oaks, and other trees of the forest, he lets them alone, till he comes,
once for all, with his axe to fell them.

Both shall fall into the ditch]
Though the blind guides fall undermost, and have the worst of it.

Verse 15. Declare unto us this parable]
It was no parable, but a plain (...), and easy to be understood, had not they
been dull of hearing, and somewhat soured with the Pharisaicall (...) of the
necessity of washing hands before (...): though for that time, by a singular
providence of God, (...) neglected; which both gave (...) to the Pharisees
quarrel, and to this question, whereto (...) Savior makes a most plain and
plenary (...).

Verse 16. Do not ye yet understand?]
What? Not at these 1 Timothy (...). (...).
years, and after so long standing? Will ye stand, till ye wax (...) adhuc pro
(...), at these years; now that you are ut full stature, and in your full
vigor?
sour again, and not give your selves wholly to these things, that your
profiting may appear to all? Is it not a shame to have no more wit at sixty
year old, then at six? to be always learning, yet never (...) to the knowledge
of the truth? God expects a proportion of skill and (...) according to the time
and means men have had, Heb. 5 12.

Verse 17. Whatsoever enters in at the mouth]
In nature, Animantis cujusque vita est fuga: Life, were it not for the repair
by daily (...), would be soon extinguished. Hence it is called, (...). 5. 7, 10.
The life of our hand, because maintained by the labor of our (...). But that
which our Savior here drives at is, to set forth the ridiculous (...): of the
Pharisees, whiles they placed a kind of (...) in those things that were
evacuated and thrown into (...) ad Episc. (...). de (...),
the draught. And do not Papists the very (...)? Qui gustavit ovum trahitur in
carcerem, cogiturque de haeresi causam dicere, says Erasmus. To eat flesh, or
but an egg in Lent, is punished with death. Whereas in the year of Christ, 330,
Spiridion a godly Bishop in Cyprus, having not what else ready to set before a
guest that came to him in the Lent, set him a piece of porke to feed on. And
when the stranger made scruple of eating flesh in Lent, saying I am a
Christian, and may not do it: Nay therefore thou may R m 14
do it said he, because to the pure all things are pure, and the (...) of God
consists not in meats and drinks, etc.

Verse 18. Come forth from the heart]
That source of sin, and fountain of folly: for as a fountain casts forth
her waters, so does the heart of man cast out it is wickedness, Jer. 6. 7. and
if the (...) be a world of wick dnesse, Jam. 2. what is the heart, ^.
that seminary of sin, wherein is a (...) as Empedocles says in Aristotle.
In this sea are not only that Leviathan the devil (who there sets up his forts
and strong holds, 2 Cor. 10. 4. and does entrench and incage himself) but
creeping things innumerable, Psalm. 104. 26. making that which should be the
Temple of God a den of thieves, a palace of pride, a slaughterhouse of
malice, a (...)-house of (...), a raging sea of sin, Isa. 57. 20. a little
hell of black and (...) imaginations. The (...) man (...) rotting in the grave
of corruption, wrapped up in the winding sheet of hardness of heart, and
blindness of mind; and ((...) a (...) crawleth with worms) swarming with
those (...) lusts, that were able to poison up an honest heart.

Verse 19. For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts]
These are the first and immediate issue of the sinful soul: words and ^.
deeds, Borborology and enormity follow in their order. And I dare be bold to
say (says a reverend Divine) that though the act contract the guilt, because
the lust is then (...) up to an height, so that it is come to an absolute will
in execution, yet the act of adultery and murder is not so abominable in Gods
(...), as the (...) of the spirit: for it is the spirit that he mainly looks
to, etc. Think not then that thought is free, for as inward bleeding will kill,
so (...) concupiscence, whatever the Papists say in favor of it, (...) a
condition of nature: and (...) flow most of their most (...) opinions, as
justification by works, state of perfection, (...), (...), etc.

Verse 20. These are the things which (...) a man]
Make him a (...) in Gods sight, his heart being a filthy (...) of all (...)
vices, his life a long chain of sinful actions, a very continued web of
wickedness. And whereas Repentance is the souls vomit, and Confession the
sponge that wipes out all the blots and blurres of our lives, that cunning
manslayer holds the lips elose that the heart may not disburden it self by so
(...).
wholesome evacuation, and does what he can to hinder the birth of Repentance,
that fair and happy daughter of an uggly and odious De Pompeio Romani ap.
(...). in vita Hist. of holy War.
mother, sin.

Verse 21. Into the coasts of Tire and Sidon]
That royal exchange of the world, as one calls it. Hither retired our
Savior, as tired out with the Jews perverseness. And here it is like he did
much good, according to that was prophesied, Isa. 23. 18. Sure it is, that
whereas here he would have hid himself, he could not, for the woman of Canaan
came and fell at his feet as a suppliant for her daughter. Mark 7. 24. (...), a
tergo (...).


Verse 22. And cried unto him]
One copy has it, And cried behind him: which implies either that Christ had
turned his back upon her, seeing her now coming toward him; or (...) that she
was abashed to come into his presence, as being of an accurfed kindred, devoted
to destruction.

Have mercy upon me, o Lord]
She acknowledged her own sin in her daughters sufferings. So did that other
good woman, 1 King. 17. 18. Her son was dead, her sin was called to
remembrance. And so must we see our selves beaten on our sick childrens 2
(...). 12. 16.
backs, as David did, and be humbled, laboring to mend by education, what we
have marred by propagation.

Thou son of David]
Thou that wast thy self born of a woman, pity a woman: thou that have the
bowels of a man in thee, hide not thine eyes from thine own flesh.

My daughter is grievously vexed with a devil]
The devil does his worst to her, therefore help. Misery makes men eloquent,
beyond truth many times: But surely this woman's case was very doleful. It was
her daughter, dear to her as her own Lambin in Menech Plauti Act.
soul. Filia quasi (...). The Greeks call children (...) the Latins Chara. And
those at Rome, that prayed and sacrificed whole days that their children might
be superstites long-lived, these were 1 (...). 1.
first called superstitious persons. Quod nomen patuit post a (...), Domi
domitus (...).
says Cieero. The word aftsrwards came to be of larger signification. This
(perhaps only) daughter, was vexed and grievously De not. (...).
vexed, and that of a devil: who ever busy enough to do mischief, yet then
chiefly (...) him to set up his kingdom, when Christ came to pull it down. And
as he oncestrove with Michael about a dead man's body, but it was that he might
thereby set up himself in living men's souls: So he still seeks to possess
himself of our bodies, that thereby he may the better wind and work himself
into our hearts.

Verse 23. But he answered her not]
Tacet ore, sed loquitur ei spiritu, ut fortius clamet, says an interpreter.
Christ answers her not with his mouth, but speaks unto her by that sweet
and secret voice of his spirit, to cry louder. No man prays heartily but he
has so much comfort at least, that he will come again to God, who secretly
supports his suppliants, and by (...).
that peace unconceivable guards their hearts and minds that they Philip 4. 7.
pray and faint not.

Send her away, for she cries]
Men may be tired out with uncessant suites, as the unjust Judge was, and as
these Disciples were weary to hear the poor woman's outcries, repeating the same
request over and over: Give her therefore, say they, either an alms or an
answer; that she may be silenced and we eased. But it is otherwise with God,
the oftener we come to him the better welcome: the louder we cry, the sooner we
are heard: and the often repetition of the self-same petition, till we put the
Lord out of countenance, put him (as you would say) to the blush, and even
(...) a blot in (...) face, as the Greek word signifies, Luk 18. 5. (...)
this is the best melody we can (...) him. He looks out of the casements of
heaven on purpose to hear it.

Verse 24 But unto the lost sheep, etc.]
He was properly the Apostle of the Circumcision, Romans 15. 8. Heb. 3. 1. till
the wall of partition was broken down by his resurrection. Then the (...) rent,
and it was open-tide. Then he became light to lighten the Gentiles, as well as
he was the glory of his people Israel.

Verse 25. Then came she and worshipped him]
She will not be said nay, or set down, either with silence or sad answers;
but, like another Gorgonia, she threatens heaven, and is (as her brother (...).
speaks of her) modestly impudent and invincible. She will believe, as a man
may say with reverence, whether Christ will or no. And to bring her to this it
was, that he so long held her off, for, (...) dilata crescunt: at (...) data,
vilescunt. Minnah, that light meat, was but lightly set by, because lightly
come by. But they that earn it before they eat it, and that know how they come
by that they (...), will set an high price upon it, and know how and why they
part with it.

Lord, help me]
Few words, but very forcible. When thou Eccles. 5. 1.
come before God, let thy words (...) few, says Solomon. This St Peter calls
to be sober (...) prayer, (...) Pet. 4 7. without trifling, Orationis (...)
(...) in loc.
or vain babbling, which the wise man calls the sacrifice of fools. The Baalites
prayer was not more tedious, then Eliah's short, and yet more pithy then short:
charging God with the care of his covenant, truth, glory, etc. It was Eliah
that praid loud and long, though in few words, yet very effectual. Fratres
AEgyptiaci brevissimis and raptim jaculatis orationibus uti voluerunt ((...)
Augustine) ne per moras evanesceret and habetaretur intentio. Those ancient
Christians of Egypt were very brief in (...) prayers.

Help me]
The word properly signifies to run at ones cry that (...) (...) (...) al
(...)(...). (...) (...). (...).
calls for help, as the tender mother does to her hungry child, when he sets up
his note, and cries lustily.

Verse 26. (...) to cast it to dogs]
To whelps, says St Mark, So he calls her, Bitch, her daughter, whelp. This
might have easily (...) and discouraged her. But she was that well resolved
Christian, whose part Luther says it is to believe things invisible, to (...)
for things deferred, and to love God when he shows himself most angry with him,
and most opposite to him. Our Savior was no sooner gone from this Canaanitesse
but he heals the (...), (...) dilata, and a (...) Deu (...) contrarium Luth.
(...). 30. 18.
(...) and dumb man (though far weaker in faith then her) at first word, Mark.
7. 33. and verse. 30 of this chapter the Galileans no sooner laid then sick and
lame friends at (...) feet, but he cured them (...) any more a do. He is a God
of judgment, and knows how and when to deal forth his favors. He lays
heaviest (...) on the strongest backs, and proportions our afflictions to our
(...), holding us off for deliverance, till (...) finds us (...) for it: and
giving us hearts to wait, and want it till his time is come.

Verse 27. Truth Lord]
(...) (...). This is particula assentientis and obsecrantis. How strangely
does God enable and enlarge his weak people many times in prayer? they are
carried beyond themselves in a wonderful manner, and though otherwise rude in
speech and (...), yet then they have words at will, far above natural
apprehension, and such as they are not able to repeat again: being for the
time, lost in the endless maze of spiritual ravishments, and ascending, with
the Church, in those pillars of incense, out of this wilderness of the World.
(...). 5. 6.


Yet the dogs eat of the crumbs]
Lo she picks an argument of speeding out of a repulse; she gathers one
contrary out of another by the force of her faith. See the like, Deuteronomy. 32. 36.
2 King. 14. 26. Going into captivity was a sign of the Israelites returning
out of captivity. Be it that I am a dog says this brave woman, yet some
crumbs of comfort, Lord. Dogs, though they may not eat the childrens meat (if
they offer to do it, they are shut out of doors) yet if children full-fed
crumble their meat, and make wast of it, as they will, and as the Jews now do,
may not the Gentile-dogs lick up those leavings? Thus she reasons it, and thus
she makes use of any thing she can lay hold of, whereby she may hope the better
to prevail. Those that are hunger-starved are glad to feed upon hedge-fruit,
and will make hard shift rather then perish. So, faithful hearers are not
delicate, but can suffer an exhortation, bear a reproof, yea suck honey, with
the be, out Heb. 13.
of bitter thime.

Verse 28. O woman, great is thy faith]
Our Savior had both reproached and repulsed her. Now he both graceth and
gratifieth her; grants her request and more, together with an high commendation
of her heroical (...), which is here found (...) to praise and honor and
glory, 1 Pet. 1. 7.

Verse 29. And came nigh to the sea of Galilee]
Where though he had lately been tired out, yet he will try again. Ministers must
have patience with a perverse people, not resolving, as Jeremy once in a pelt,
to speak no more to them in the name of the Lord, but proving if at any time
God will give them repentance to the acknowleging of the truth, etc. 2 Timothy 2.
25. I beseech you (said Mr Bradford to one with whom he had taken great pains,
but to no great purpose) I pray you, I desire you, I crave at your hands with
all my very heart; I ask of you with hand, pen, tongue, (...). and (...).
and mind, in Christ, for Christ, through Christ, for his name, blood, mercy,
power and truths sake, my most entirely beloved, that you admit no doubting of
Gods final mercies toward you, howsoever you feel your self, etc. Of this good
Martyr it is said, that in traveling with his own heart he would never give
over till he had made somewhat of it, as in confession, till his heart melted,
in seeking pardon till quieted, in begging grace, till warmed Aug de (...):
Christ: and in, (...).
and quickened: so in dealing with others he practiced that which St Austin
persuades every preacher to do, so long to beat upon and repeat the same
point, till by the countenance, but especially by the conversation of his
hearers, he perceive that they resent and relish it. Knowing the terror of
the Lord, says Paul, (...) persuade men; we give them not over till we have
prevailed 2 Cor. (...) 1.
with them and subdued them, though never so knotty and knorly.

And went up into a mountain]
Either to pray, or to preach, or to rest and repose himself; but that would
not be: for great multitudes resorted to him. The Sun set on high cannot be
hid, no more can Christ in the mount.

Verse 30. Having with them those that were lame, blind, etc.]
All these infirmities are fruits of sin (which has made the world an
Occumeniall Hospital) and accidents of life; for that which Cu (...)
contingere quod (...) quam contigit. (...). (...) plures sunt (...) positivae.
Gerson.
befalls any man, may befall every man. The privative favors that God shows
us here (says Gerson,) are more then the positive: meaning by privative, Gods
preserving us from manifold mischiefs and miseries by his manutension, They
that are got to heaven are out of the gunshot: for there is no more sickness,
nor sorrow, no crying, nor pain, for the former things are passed, Revel. 21.
4. All corruptions, temptations, afflictions, which stand, some above us, some
about us (as the insulting Philistims about blind Sampson) shall end with the
same blow, fall with the same clap with our selves. At Stratford bow were two
Martyrs burned at one stake (in the days of Q. Mary) Hugh Laverock an old lame
man, and John A Price a blind man. At their death, Hugh, after he was chained,
casting away his crutch, and comforting the other, he said to him, Be of good
comfort my brother, for my Lord of (...) is our good Physician: he will heal us
shortly, thee of thy Act. and Mon. (...) 1733.
(...), and me of my lamenesse. And so patiently they suffered.

Verse 31. They glorified the God of Israel]
They saw God in those miraculous cures, and gave him his due praise. He is
content that we should have the comfort of his benefits, so he may (...) the
glory of them; that is all the rent and return he looks for. All the (...)
Christ required for his cures was, Go and tell what God (...) for thee, Go show
thy self to the Priest and offer, etc. But we, instead of being temples of Gods
praise, become many times graves of his benefits. This made good David so often
to put the thorn to his breast, Psalm. 103. 1,2,3. and King Alphonsus not so
much to wonder at his Courtiers ingratitude to him, as at his own to God.

Verse 32. I have compassion on the multitude]
My bowels yearn toward them. Neither is he (...) loving now that he is in
heaven, toward his poor pennilesse (...) people on earth: but when they are
hardest put to it, and happily have not a cross to bless themselves with, as the
proverb is, he so graciously provides, that though the young lions (or the
strong ones, as the Septuagint (...). 34 10.
have it) do lack and suffer hunger, yet they that seek the Lord want nothing
that is good for them. Aaron though he might not bewail the death of his two
sons, Lev. 10. because he was High Priest, yet his bowels of fatherly affection
toward them, could not be restrained. Christ retains still compassion, Heb.
45. (...) 9. 5.
though free from personal passion: and, though freed from feeling, (...).
(...). (...).
has (...) yet a fellow-feeling. Manet compassio etiam cum impassibilitate,
says Bernard.

Because they continue with me now three dayes]
The Lord takes punctual and particular notice of all circumstances, how far
they came, how long they had been there, how little able they were to hold out
fasting to their own homes, etc. And so he does still, recount how many years,
days, hours we have spent with him: what straits, (...), hears, colds,
dangers, difficulties we have (...) with and passed through; all is exactly
registered in his book of remembrance: I know thy work, and thy (...), says he,
(...) 2. 19.
Rev. 2. Men take much pains many times, and none regard it, reward it. But
Christ takes notice, not of his peoples works only, but of their labor in
doing them, that he may (...) recompense their labor of love, their loss of
goods, etc. the godly shall know in themselves, not only in others, in books
etc. that they have a better, and an enduring substance, Heb. 10. 34.

Verse 33. Whence should we have etc.]
See their stupidity (...) ut (...), (...).
and diffidence, yet still budging and (...) out, upon all occasions. What a
life has Christ with the best of us, ere he can bring (...). (...)
us to any thing? Corruption will have some slurts, some out-bursts. (...)
cleaves to us more (...) then this evil heart of unbelief: like a fretting
leprosy in our cottages of clay, though the walls be well scraped, yet it will
never utterly out, till the house be demolished.

Verse 34. Seven, and a few little fishes]
Before, he had fed five thousand with fewer loaves. God can as easily maintain
us with a little, as with more; witness Daniels pulie, and Eliah's cake on the
coals, and cruse of water; Luthers herring, and Iunius his (...). 19. 6.
one egg a day, when means was short with him, by reason of the civil wars in
France, so that he could not hear from his friends. It is not by bread only
that man lives, but by the word of Gods Melch. Adam. in vita Lutheri. Iun. in
vita sua.
blessing, that makes it nourishable. As if he break the staff of bread, that
is, his own blessing, which is the staff whereon bread (that staff of life)
leans, it can neither feed nor fill, make men neither fuller, nor fatter.

Verse 35. To sit down on the ground]
He intended them not only a running-banquet, a slightcome-off, but a full
feast, a good meal, and therefore bad them sit down, and feed their fill. It
was indeed on the bare ground that they sat: but so do the greatest Turk.
Hist. fol. 713.
Lords in Turkey at this day: they sit at meat, with their legs gathered under
them, flat upon the ground; and their cheer, when they feast most sumptuously,
is only rice and mutton, with fair water out of the river.

Verse 36. And gave to his Disciples]
So confuting their unbelief, and confirming their faith for the future. And
the like he does for us every time we receive the Sacrament of his Supper. He
bespeaks us there, as he did peremptory Thomas, Joh. 20. 27.

And the Disciples to the multitude]
This is Christ's course to this day: by the hands of his faithful Ministers,
to deal forth his favors, to give his holy Spirit (which is, to give all good
things, Matthew. 7. 11. with Luke 11. 13.) by the preaching of faith. This Number.
11. 9.
Manna comes down from heaven in the dews of the Ministry. If 1 Pet. 1. 22.
our eyes see not our teachers, we cannot expect to hear the voice behind us,
Isa. 30. 20.

Verse 37. They did all eat and were filled]
They did eat to (...), Hoc proprie (...) de armentis. (...) (...) (...) gramen
aut pabulum. Bez^.
saturity, as men use to do at feasts, where the tables seem to sweat with
variety. The Greek word here is, in its proper signification, used of fatting
cattle, that have grass up to the eyes, such as is that in some parts of
Ireland, where they are forced to drive out their cattle sometimes from the
pastures into the commons, lest they should surfeit and spoil themselves.

Seven baskets full]
These baskets were bigger and of larger capacity then those coffins. Matthew.
14. 20. we read of Paul let (...).
down by the wall in a basket. Acts 9. 20. It was such a vessel then, that a
man might sit in it: as the former may seem to have been no larger then a pie
or pasty, the outside whereof, from the Greeks, we call a coffin.

Verse 38. And they that did eat]
See the Notes on Chap. 14 21. Herein was the majesty of the miracle, that
there was no proportion between the men, and the meat.

Verse 39. And he sent away the multitude]
Not without a blessing, and a great deal of good counsel. Labor not for the
meat that perishes etc. Amend your lives, for the Kingdom of heaven is come
home to you: Now that you have eaten and are full, beware that you forget not
the Lord your God, etc. Be not as children, with whom eaten bread is soon
forgotten. This was wholesome Deuteronomy. 8, 10, 11.
counsel, and far better then their good cheer; for this would stick by them.
Deal we so by our guests.

And came into the coasts of Magdala.]
This is held to be Mary Magdalens country, better known by her then she was by
it, as the Island of Co was by Hippocrates, and Hippo by Austin.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse 1. The Pharisees also with the Sadduces came.
CAme forth, says S. Mark, to wit out of the coasts of Magdala, (...)
so soon as ever our Savior arrived there, to quarr^ll him, and keep him from
doing good. So active are the devils instruments to hinder the Kingdom of God,
and the good of souls. Truth never wants an adversary; she goes seldom without
a scratcht face, as the Proverb is. The Pharisees and Sadduces, though at
deadly difference betwixt themselves, yet can easily combine against Christ. So
at this day, the Priests disparage the Jesuits, the Jesuits the Priests, the
Priests again the Monks, the Monks the Friars, but they can all conspire
against Protestants, whom they jointly persecute. Dogs though they fight never
so fierce, and mutually entertear one another; yet, if a hare run by, they give
over, and run after her. Martial makes mention of a hare on the Sicilian shore,
that having hardly escaped the hounds that hunted her, was devoured by a sea
dog; whereupon he brings her in thus complaining; In me omnis terraeque
aviumque marisque rapina est: Martial. Epigram

For sitan and coeli, si canis astra tenet.


Tempting, desired him]
Or questioned him to and fro, sifted (...), (...).
him by interrogatories, pretending to be his friends, and to seek satisfaction
only. All this savours strongly of putid hypocrisy, quae ipsis domestica (...)
virtus, as one says of them. Socinus did Aretius.
in like sort set upon Zanchius. He was, says Zanchius, a learned Homo suit
plenus diver sarum (...), quas tamen (...) nisi (...) causa, and (...) quasi
(...) doceri. Zanch. (...). ad (...) operi suo de (...). (...). ipsis. q. solu.
man, and of unblameable conversation, but full of heresies, which yet he never
propounded to me otherwise then by way of question; as seeming desirous to be
better informed. By this subtle means, he drew away many, and sought to work
upon Zanchius, as did also Matthaeus Gribaldus and some such others. But when
they could not prevail, they brake friendship with him, and he with them, for
the which he praises God from the bottom of his heart.

Show them a signe]
Them, by all means, as more worshipful men then the multidude, such as might
merit an extraordinary sign. See here their Satanicall arrogance. So Herod
would see our Savior, that he might see a sign from him. He looked upon him
no otherwise then upon some common juggler, that would sure show him his best
tricks. Thus these hypocrites here would gladly be gratified, but they were
deceived.

Verse 2. When it is evening, ye say, It will be fair, etc.]
q. d. Are you so weather-wise (which yet is not your profession?) are ye so
skillful in nature, and yet so ignorant of scripture, as not to know, that now
is the time for the Messiah, to come, and that I am He? surely you are either
notorious sots, or deep dissemblers, or both, in seeming so curiously to search
after the truth, which yet you (...) care to know, nor obey.

Verse 3. Can ye not discern the sign of the times?
The men of Issachar were in great account with David, because they had
understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do, 1 Chronicles. 12. 32.
A prudent man foreseeth an evil, and hides himself, Prove. 22. 3. He foreseeth
it; not by divination, or starregazing, but by a judicious collection and
connection of causes and (...): as, if God be the same that ever, as holy,
just, powerful, etc. If sin be the same that ever, as foul, loathsome,
pernicious, etc. then such and such events will follow upon such and such
(...). As God has given us signs and fore-tokens of a tempest, so he has
also of an ensuing judgment, and blames those that take not notice thereof;
sending them to school to the stork and swallow, Jer 87. If Elias see but a
cloud as a hand, arising from Carmel, he can tell that a great store of rain
will follow, that the whole heaven will anon be covered. Finer tempers are
(...) sensible of change of weather. Moses, as more acquainted with God, spies
his wrath at first setting out: so might we have done ere it came to this, and
have redeemed a great part of our present sorrows, had we had our eyes in our
heads, Eccles. 2. 14 had we not been of those wilful ones, who seek straws to
put out their eyes withal, as Bernard has it, or that wink for the nonce,
says (...) Qui (...) quaerunt unde oculos (...) Bern.
Martyr, that they may not see, when some unsavory potion is ministered unto
them.

Verse 4. A wicked and adulterous generation]
See the Notes (...).
on Chap. 12. 39. The same wedge (...), the same knot. They shall have no new
answer from Christ, till they have made (...) use of the old: Let them return
to thee, not thou to them, Jer. 15. 19.

And (...) left them, and departed]
Because he saw his sweet words were even spilt upon them. Frustra lavantur
AEthiopes, and certatur cum hypocritis: none are more obstinate and obdurate.

Verse 5. They had forgotten to take bread]
As wholly transported with fervor in following Christ the bread of life. This
is the fault of but a few now-adayes: worldly cares eat up heavenly desires, as
the lean kine in Pharoahs dream, did the fat.

Verse 6. Take heed and beware of the leaven]
Or take knowledge (...) (...) est (...) (...).
of, and then take heed of false doctrine; which is fitly called leaven,
because it sowreth, swells, spreads, corrupts the whole lump, and all
this secretly, slily, easily, suddenly; neither can our eyes discern it from
dowe by the color, but only our palate by the taste. Now the (...) tries
words, as the mouth tries meat, Job 343. Try all things before you trust any
thing. Those that sow (...) doctrine, are somewhere in the Acts called (...),
pests, Acts 24. 5.
botches, for their danger of infection: some can carry their collusion so
cleanly, that if possible the very elect might be deceived; like serpents, they
can sting without hissing; like cur-doggs, suck your blood without biting. Nota
est Arry (...), says one, qua (...) ponentes (...) (...).
(...) de fide Ni (...) elusit examen, by the cogging of a dye, by the adding
of one Iota, they corrupted the sense of the Habuerunt (...) quo (...) quam
(...). (...).
whole Synod. The Valentinians had a trick to persuade before they taught. The
ancient Antiirinitarians set forth a base book of their doctrines under (...)
name, and sold it dog-cheap, that men might the sooner (...) it, and be led by
it, as Ruffinus complains. Take heed and beware of such: ye are not ignorant of
their wiles.

Of the Pharisees, and of the Sadduces.]
(...), Erasm. (...).
Never a barrel better herring. Howbeit the Sadduces affected, by their very
name, to be held the only just men; happily Joseph. lib. 17. cap 3. and 18. cap.
1.
because they held, that all the reward that righteous men are to look for, is
here in this world. The occasion of this (...) is said to be this. When
Antigonus taught, that we must not serve God for wages, his scholars understood
him, as if he had utterly denied all Godwin. (...).
future rewards or recompense attending a godly life: and thence framed their
heresy, denying the Resurrection, world to come, Angels, devils, and lived as
Epicures and Libertines.

Verse 7. It is because we have taken no bread]
Oh the dullness that is in the best to receive or retain heavenly mysteries!
Surely, as Owls see best by night, and are blind by day: so in deeds of
darkness we are sharpsighted, wise to do evil; but in spirituals, we are
blinder then beetles, our wits serve us not, we are singularly (...) and
stubborn.

Verse 8. O ye of little faith!]
Fides famem non formidat. It was want of faith that made them fear they should
perish in the wilderness for lack of bread: God was better to them then their
fears. He makes the best living of it, that lives by faith: Feed on faith: So
Tremellius reads that, Psalm. 37. 3.

Why reason ye amongst your selves?]
(...) likely laid the (...); Disserere (...), ac (...) interse disceptare.
fault of forgetfullnesse one upon another: but none found fault with himself
for his unbelief, and carnal reasoning.

Verse 9. Neither remember]
Tantum didicimus, quantum (...). So much we learn as we remember. Our memories
Discere, voluit Socrates nihil aliud esse (...) recordari. Cic. Tusc. (...).
are naturally like hour-glasses, no sooner filled with good instructions and
experiments, then running out again. It must be our prayer to God, that he
would put his finger upon the hole, and so make our memories like the pot of
Mannah, preserving holy truths in the Ark of the soul.

Verse 10. Neither the seven loaves]
Learn to lay up experiences. D. Sibbs.
If we were well read in the story of our own lives (says a Reverent man) we
might have a Divinity of our own. The Philosopher says, that experience is
multiplex memoria, because, of the (...) of the same thing often done, arises
experience, which should be the nurse of confidence.

Verse. 11. How is it that ye understand not?]
Ignorance under means is a blushfull sin. The Scripture calls such, Horses,
Asses, (...), and sends them to school to unreasonable creatures.

Verse 12. Then understood they how, etc.]
This chiding then was well bestowed. So was that, Luke 24, (...). upon the two
(...) going to Emaus, and that upon the Virgin Mary, Joh. 2. 5. she laid her
hand upon her mouth and replied not. And that upon the Corinthians for
conniving at the incestuous (...), and that upon the Laodiceans, Rev. 3. 14.
for Eusebius tells us, that in his time it continued to be a flourishing
Church. It is said of (...), In (...) (...).
that he took not content in any thing so much, as in a plain and faithful
reproof from his friend. It is a commendation to (...) the words of
exhortation, Heb. 13.

Verse 13. Whom do men say that I, etc.]
This Question Christ asked, not as tickled with ambition to hear his own
commendation (...) Xenopbon.
(which yet is held and said to be the only sweet hearing) but as taking
occasion to make way for their Christian confession, and likewise for their
further information.

The son of man am?]
So he was called. 1. Because a true man. 2. Because he passed for no more then
an ordinary man. How can this man give us his flesh to (...)? Joh. 6. 3.
Because as man born of a woman, he was of few days and full of trouble: yea,
he was the man that had seen affliction by the rod of Gods wrath.

Verse 14. Some say that thou art John, etc.]
His body they saw was not John's, but they held then (and the Jews at this day
hold) the Pythagorean transanimation, or passing of souls out of one body into
another. So, because they received not the love of the truth, God gave them up
to the efficacy of error, even the better sort of them: for there were that
held (...) 2. 11.
Christ neither the Baptist, nor Elias, but a drunkard, a demoniack, etc. Who
now can think to escape variety of censures? And why should any stumble at the
diversity of opinions touching Christ and his kingdom?

Verse 15. But whom say ye that I am?]
q. d. It behooves you to say something, that is, better to the purpose, (...)
the vulgar says and censureth. God will take that of some that he will not of
others. Christ would not have his to stand doubtful, and to (...) to nothing
certainly: to be in religion as idle beggars are in their way, ready to go
which way soever the staff (...): but to strive to a plerophory, a full
assurance of knowledge, a certainty, as Luke has it, chap. 1. 4. and to be
(...) persuaded, verse. 1. A conjecturall confidence, a general faith, the
Colliers faith, (...) they call it, suffices not, To believe as the Church
believes, etc. And yet Thomas Aquinas, that great Schoolman had no better a
faith to support him at the last hour of his life: nor could he have any rest
within, till he had taken up the Bible, and clipping it in his arms, said,
Lord, I believe all that is written in this holy book.

Verse 16. Simon Peter answered, etc.]
As the mouth of the company, and one that being, happily, (...), and surely
bolder then the rest, spoke thus for them. But what a (...) mouth of blasphemy
opened those two Popes ( Peter's pretended successors) Leo Petrum in consortium
individuae (...) assumptum (...) arunt, Renius
the first, and Nicolas the third, that boasted, that Peter was taken into
fellowship of the individual Trinity? Neither can that be excused that Hierom
commenteth on the former verses ( Whom (...) say that I am? But whom say (...)
that I am?) that our Savior there purposely opposes his Disciples to men, to
intimate that they were something more then men. This is some thing like that
Note of a Latin Postiller upon Exo. 30. 31. where, because it is said, verse.
32. Upon man's flesh the holy ointment shall not be poured, thou (...) anoint
Aaron and his sons therewith, thence infers, that Priests are Angels, and
have not humane flesh. These were humane (...), and savoured as little of Gods
meaning, as that unsavory speech of Peter, v. 22. of this Chapter, for the
which he (...), Get thee behind me, Satan: thou savourest not, etc.

Verse Thou art Christ the Son of the living God]
A short (...). Singulae (...) suos (...) (...) adjectos. Arct.
confession, but such as in few, contains whatsoever we believe concerning
the person and osfice of Christ, Brevis and longa planeque aurea est baec
confessio. (...) we say of it, as St Bartholomew (quoted by Dionysius) did of
the Doctrine of Divinity, that it is, (...), Little and yet large.

Verse 17. Blessed art thou, Simon]
These and the following words of our Savior to Peter, were meant to all the
Apostles also, Joh. 20. 22, 23. Christ took his beginning of one, to teach
unity in his Church, in the confession of faith. Note this against the Papists,
who miserably wrest, and (...) this text, to the proving of the (...) Monarchy.
Gregory the great, though he styled himself a servant of Gods servants, and
detested the Pope of Censtantinople for arrogating the title of (...), during
the reign of Mauritius: yet when he was (...), and succeeded by the traitor
Phocas, he ceased not to flatter the same Phocas, to commend unto him the care
of the Church of Rome, and to exhort (...). (...), (...). (...).
him to remember this saying of our Savior, Thou art Peter, etc. and for no
other end, then that he might extend his power by the favor of the parricide.

Verse 18. Thou art Peter]
i. e. Thou art a living stone in the spiritual Temple, like as ` Peter says
all other Christians are, 1 Pet. 2. 5. And here Christ tells Peter why at first
he gave him that name.

Upon this Rock]
That is, upon this thy Rocky, thy solid and substantial confession of me.
Austin says, the rock is Christ, not (...) verb. Them. Sermon 13.
Peter, But this, says (...), is, humanus lapsus in Augustino. (...). (...).
6. c. 3.
So the Schoolmen say, that St Austin stood so much for grace, that (...)
yielded too little to free will. But it was a true saying of learned D.
Whitakers in his answer to Campian, Patres in (...) sunt nostri, in multis
(...), in minimis vestri.

I will build my Church]
Christ calls not the Church (...), or (...), (...), (...) populo age. (...).
(...).
(...), which is properly a convention of Lords and Statesmen, (...) (...),
which is an Assembly of the common people, even those of the lower rank and
condition according to that 1 Cor. 1. 26. and Luke 1. 48. he has regarded the
low estate of his (...)-(...).

And the gates of hell, etc.]
That is, all the power and policy of hell combined. The devil lends his
instruments, the Churches (...), his seven heads to plot, and his ten horns to
push. Craft and cruelty go together in them, as the Asp never wanders alone:
and as the Scripture speaks of those birds of prey, Isa. 34. 16. None of them
wants his mate. But yet all this shall not prevail: the devil may shake his
chain at the Saints, not set his (...) in them. For why? they stand upon a rock
that is higher then they, so that the floods of (...) and oppositions cannot
come so much as at their feet: or if they reach to the heel, yet they come not
at the head, or if they should dash higher upon them, yet they break themselves.

Shall not prevail against it]
No, though the devil should discharge at the Church his (...) ordinance: say
they were as big (...) valley of (...). 127.
as those two cast by Alphonsus Duke of Ferrara, the one whereof he called the
earthquake, and the other Grandiabolo, or the great devil.

Whether may the Catholic Church err in fundamentals? (...).


It is answered, that (...) the (...) Church of Christ, Ans.
taken for his mystical to (...) upon earth, and complete number of h select,
cannot err in matters fundamental, yet the external D. (...).
visible part of the Church may err, because the truth of God may be locked up
within the hearts of such a company, as in competition of suffrages, cannot
make a greater part in a general Council: so that the sentence decreed
therein, may be a fundamental error.

Verse 19. And I will give unto thee the keyes]
i. e. I will make thee and all my Ministers stewards in my house; 1 Cor. 4. 1.
such as Obadiah was in Ahabs house, as Eliakim in Hezekiahs, upon whose
shoulder God laid the key of the house of David, so that he opened and none
shut, and shut and none opened, Isa. 22. 22. Now let a man so think of us
Ministers, how mean soever, and we shall not want for respect.

Verse 20. That they should tell no man]
viz. Till the due time. Every thing is beautiful in its season, says
Solomon. Taciturnity in Eccles. 3.
some cases is a virtue, as here. The Disciples might preach that Christ the
Son of David was come to save the world: though they might not particularly
point himout, as the Son of the living God: which when Pilate himself heard, he
was afraid, says the text, and sought to deliver him.

Verse 21. How that he must go to Jerusalem]
He must, necessitate non simplici, sed ex supposito. It being supposed that
God had decreed this way (and no other) to glorify himself in man's salvation
by the death of his dear Son (wherein the naked bowels of his (...) were laid
open to us, as in an anatomy) it was necessary that Christ should be killed and
raised again at the third day, Voluntu Dei, necessitas rei.

And be killed and raised again]
That we might live and reign with him for ever, who else had been killed with
death, as the (...) is, Rev. 2. 23. that is, had come under the (...) of the
second death. David wished he might have died for Absalom, such was his love to
him. Arsinoe interposed her self between the (...) weapons, sent by (...) her
brother, to kill her children. The (...) not only feeds her young with her own
blood, but with invincible constancy abides the flames of fire for their
preservation. Christ is that good shepherd, who gave his life for his (...). He
is that true Pelican, who saw the wrath of God burning about his young ones,
and cast himself into the midst thereof, that he might quench it. He was
delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our justification, which
began in his death, but Romans 4 25.
was perfected by his resurrection.

Verse 22. Then Peter took him]
Took him by the hand, and led him apart, as we do those we are most (...)
with, in great courtesy and secrecy, to impart to them things of greatest
importance. Peter was strongly possessed with a fond conceit of an earthly
kingdom; and as Joseph dreamt of his preferment, but not at all of his
imprisonment: so neither could Peter think or hear of Christ's being killed,
whom he had even now confessed to be the Christ, the son of the living God. See
here how easily we slide, by the deceitfulness of our hearts, from the mean to
the extreme. Peter having made a notable profession of his faith, and being
therefore much commended by Christ, presently takes occasion to fall from the
true holiness of faith, to the (...) of presumption, in advising his Master to
decline the cross.

And began to rebuke him, saying]
No, he did not rebuke him, says Maldonat the Jesuit, but friendly counseled
him only, as Non tantum significat reprebend re and increpare, sed etia^ (...)
and interdicere.
if (...) were not to chide and charge, as masters do their servants, even with
threatenings and menaces. But these patrons of Peter (as they pretend) will not
abide that he should be blamed for any thing. Baronius blusheth not to say (and
so to put the lie upon the holy Ghost himself) that Paul was out in reproving
Gerh. Baron. Annal. Sands his Rel. of West. Relig.
Peter, Gal. 2. 14. and that it had been better manners for him to have held
his tongue. Others of them have blasphemously censured S. Paul in their
Sermons, as a hotheaded person, of whose assertions no great (...) was to be
made by the sober-(...) and that he was not secure of his preaching, (...) by
conference with S. Peter, neither durst he publish his Epistles, till S. Peter
had allowed them.

Verse 23. Get thee behind me, Satan]
Come behind as a (...) ciple, go not before me as a teacher: understand thy
distance, and hold thee to thy duty, by moving in thine own sphere; that (...)
be not thus (...) eccentrick, another Satan, who sets thee a work thus to tempt
me, as he once did Eve to seduce Adam: here Maldonat is hard put to it, to save
(...) blameless, and says, that, Get thee behind me is an Hebrew phrase, and
imports no more then Follow me. But when he comes to consider that Christ calls
him Satan, and that it would not be (...) that Christ should bid Satan follow
him, he is (...) to confess that it is the speech of one that bids another be
packing out of his presence with indignation, like that of Christ to the
tempter, Mat. 4. Get thee hence, Satan. Prosit (...) sternutatio (...),
Maldonate.

(...) art an offense unto me]
Thou do thy good will to (...) me in the course of my calling, as
Mediator, wherein, say some, he sinned more grievously then afterward he did
in denying his Master, and was therefore so sharply rebuked. So when (...). Act
(...) Mon. fol. 1153.
(...) was solicited by Criton to break prison, and save his life by flight;
Friend Criton, said he, thine earnestness herein were much worth, if it were
consistent with uprightness: but being not so, the greater it is, the more
trouble (...). I know not (said that (...) Martyr) by what reason they so
called them my friends, which so greatly labored to convert (pervert) me.
Neither will I more esteem them then the Midianites, which (...) times past
called the children of Israel to do sacrifice to their Idols.

But the things that be of men]
Erewhile it was of Satan, now of (...). How (...) is it to descry a devil in
our best friends sometimes, as (...) the French Martyr did in his parents?
Satan suborns such as may do much with us, and works in them effectually for
our hurt, as a Smith does in his forge, Ephesians. 2. 2. They were (...), and
thereby tormented, says the Apostle of those (...), Heb. 11. 37. Satan speaks
to us sometimes by our friends, as through (...).
trunks and canes.

Verse 24. If any man will come after me]
Not step before me, (...) to me, as Peter attempted to do, whose fault herein
is purposely recorded, that be might not be (as by the Papists, for (...) (...).
respects, he is) overmuch magnified, (...), as is above observed, and made
collateral, a very copesmate to Christ himself.

Let him deny himself]
Abdicet seipsum, Let him abrenounce himself flatly, peremptorily, again and
again (as the word imports) with a stout and stiff denial to so unreasonable
a request, as self will be sure to make to a man, his whole (...) throughout.
Every one has many a self within himself to say nay to, though never so dear
to him. Levi said unto his father and to his mother, I have not seen him,
neither did he acknowledge his (...), nor knew (...) own children, that he
might observe Gods Word, and keep his (...), Deuteronomy. 33 9. This was much. But he
that will be Christ's Disciple, must do more then this. He must deny himself,
his own reason, will, affections, appetite, aims, ends, acts, (...), etc. He
must utterly renounce himself, as much as if he had nothing at all to do with
himself. Yea, he must condemn and cast away himself, as God does those
reprobates, whom he denies, disowneth and disavoweth for ever. Horreo quicquid
de meo est ut sim meus, says Bernard. Ita cave tibi ut caveas (...), says
another. So take heed to your (...), that you take heed of your self. Oh
misery! says a third; we could not suffer a Lord, O (...) non (...), conservo
(...). mus. (...). (...). lib 12.
and yet we sustain to serve our fellow servants, self. (...) the Emperor
dying, affirmed, that he was proud of one of his victories only, viz. That he
had overcome his own flesh, that worst of enemies. Of all slaveries none so
grievous to a good heart, as to be slave to himself. And this yoke of slavery,
it is an easy matter to shake off, says Seneca; but he is foully deceived. For
a man will sooner say nay to all the world, then to himself. This made Robert
Smith the Martyr write thus to his wife, Be always Act. and Mon. (...). 1545.
an enemy to the devil and the world, but specially to your own flesh. There
are some diseases that will not be cured, till we be let blood ad deliquium
animae, till the patient (...); and such is sin: it is corruption totius
substantiae, the sinner must be unmade, taken all asunder, ere the new creature
can be made up in him: he must be stark dead to sin (...) he can live to (...),
as S. Peter (...), 1 (...). 2. 24.
has it: and the word he (...) there implies, that the old frame must be
utterly (...), and the whole man done to death, and (...) for a whole
burnt-offering. Instead of a (...), says Origin, we must kill our (...)
passions: in stead of a Goat, our unclean affections: in stead of slying fowls,
our idle thoughts and evil imaginations. Lo this is that evangelicall
sacrifice, that rational service so much commended and called for, Romans 12. 1.
Do this, and thou shale live: leave it (...), and thou art undone for ever.
Pray therefore with him, Domine, libera me a malo homine, meipso, Lord, free
(...) from an ill man, my self.

And take up his crosse]
Where (...) is renounced, the cross is (...) born. It is self (says one)
(...) the cross pinch. Things puffed up with wind, break when they come to the
fire: so (...) that are puffed up, and filled with self, will (...) nothing.
Privation is one of the principles of natural generation, so is self-denial
of holy (...). Pain would this flesh make strange of that which the Spirit does
embrace (said M. (...), Martyr, in a letter written to his wife out of the
prison.) O Lord, how loath is this loitering (...) to (...) forth in Gods (...)!
It fancieth, Act and (...). (...).
forsooth, much fear of fray-bugs, etc. Take up the cross, and follow me
through thick and thin, through fire and water; Oh this is an hard saying, says
another Martyr. But if there Ibid 1494.
be any way on horseback to heaven, surely this is the way. Only we must take
up our cross, be active in it, and not stay till it be laid upon us, whether
we will or no. And then bear it patiently, not grin under the burden of it, as
antic pictures (...) to do under the weight of the house-side, (...) they are
fastened. Drink (...) Gods cup willingly, and at the first (says M. Bradford)
Ibid. 1483.
and when it is full: lest peradventure if we linger, we drink at length of the
dregs with the wicked, if at the beginning we drink not with his children. We
must take up our crosses (says another) and when God bids us yoke, he is the
(...) man that M. (...).
yields his neck most willingly.

And follow me]
Without sciscitation; let him go blinde-fold (...) `(...) (...).
whether I lead him, as Abraham did. Neither may he leap over the hedge of the
command, for avoiding the foul way of affliction, Sed (...) quocunque Christus
vocarit, (...) in ea loca migrandum (...) -- Pigris ubi nulla campis (...) lib.
1 Od. (...).

Arbor (...) a recreatur aura;
Quod (...) mundi nebulae, malusque
Jupiter urget.


God has (...) us to be conformed to (...) image of his Son, in sufferings
also, Romans 8. 29. Crux pendentis, Cathedra docentis. Plato was crook-backt, and
his scholars counted it an ornament to go crooked like him. Aristotle (...),
and his scholars thought it honor to lisp. Shall not we hold our (...)
honored that may suffer with Christ, and then be (...) fied also with him?

Verse 25. For whosoever will save his life]
That is (...) (...).
of it, when Christ calls him (...) be prodigal of (...). Man is naturally
(...).
a life loving creature. What man is he that desires life? I do, and I, and
I, as Augustine brings men in, making (...) answer. Life is sweet, we say, and
every creature makes much of it, from the highest Angel to the lowest worm, as
that (...). But life in Gods displeasure is worse then death, as d ath in (...)
true (...) (...).
is true life, said Bradford to Gardener: for such a death (...) life, as S.
Paul has it, (...) Tim. 6. 19. or (as (...) read it) upon life indeed. For,
aeterna vita, vera vita, says Augustine. None to that, as David said of
Goliahs (...). None but Christ, none but Christ, as that (...) cried in the
flames. This love of Christ made them sacrifice their dearest lives to his Act.
(...) Mon. fol. 438.
name, yea profess, as John Ardely did to Bonner, That if every hair of his
head were a man, he would suffer death in them all for his sweet Christ's sake.
My wife and my children are so dearly beloved unto me, that they cannot be
bought from me for all the riches and possessions of the Duke of (...); But for
the love of my Lord God I will willingly forsake them, said George Carpenter,
who was burnt at Munchen in Ibid 807.
Bavaria.

Verse 26. For what is a man profited]
If there could (says a reverend Divine) be such a bargain made, that he might
have the M Ley his Monitour (...).
whole world for the sale of his soul, he should (for all that) be a looser by
it. For he might (notwithstanding) be a bankrupt, a beggar, begging in vain,
though but for a drop of cold water to cool his tongue. Is it nothing then to
loose an immortal soul? to purchase an everliving death? The loss of the soul
is in this verse set forth to be: 1. Incomparable. 2. Irreparable. If therefore
to loose the life for money be a (...), what then the soul? What wise man would
fetch gold out of a fiery crucible? hazard himself to (...) for a few waterish
pleasures? give his soul to the devil, as some Popes did for the short
enjoyment of the Papal dignity? What was this but to win Venice, and then to
Non magis (...), quam qui (...), ipse vero (...) ad Portam, ut est in prover
bio. Par in (...).
be hanged at the gates thereof, as the Proverb is. In great fires men look
first to their jewels, then to their lumber: fo should these, see first to
their (...), to secure them: and then take care of the outward man. The
soldier cares not how his buckler speeds, so his body be kept thereby from
deadly thrusts. The Pope persuading Maximilian (King of Bohemia, afterward
Emperor) to be a good Catholic, with many promises of profits and (...), was
answered by the King that he thanked his Holiness: but that his souls health
was more dear to him then all the things in the world. Which answer they said
in Rome was a Lutheran form of speech, and signified an alienation from the
obedience Hist. of the Coun (...) Tren. fol. 419.
of that Sea: and they began to discourse what would happen after the old
Emperors death.

Or what shall a man give in exchange]
He would give any thing in the world, yea 10000 worlds if he had them, to be
delivered. But out of hell there is no redemption. Has the extortioner pilled,
or the robber spoiled thy goods? By labor and leisure thou may recover thy
self again. But the soul once lost is irrecoverable. Which when the guilty soul
at death thinks of, oh what a dreadful shreek gives it, to see it self
lanching into an infinite Ocean of scalding lead, and must swim naked in it for
ever! How does it trembling warble out that doleful ditty of dying Adrian the
Emperor.

(...), vagula, blandula,
Hospes comesque corporis,
Qua nunc abibis in loca
Horridula, sordida, tristia,
(...), ut soles, (...)?
Verse 27. In the glory of his father with his Angels]
Great will be the glory of the man Christ Jesus at his second coming. He shall
come riding on the clouds (not that he needs them, but to show 2 Thessalonians 1. 8.
his sovereignty) environed with flaming fire, mounted on a stately Mat. 25 31.
throne, attended by an innumerable company of Angels (for they shall all come
with him, not one of them left in heaven) who shall minister unto him in this
great work irresistibly, justly, speedily, Rev. 15. 6. Christ himself shining
in the midst of them, with such an exuberancy and excess of glory, as that the
Sun shall seem but a snuff to him. This glory, howsoever it is here called, the
glory of the father, because he is the fountain, as of the Deity, so of the
divine glory wherewith Christ is crowned, Phil. 2. 9. 1 Timothy 3. 16. yet is it
his own glory (as he is one with the Father and the holy Ghost) and so it is
called, Mat. 25. 31. Joh. 17. 5. Now if Israel so shouted for joy of Solomon's
coronation, and in the day of (...) espousals, 1 King 1.
that the earth rang again. If the Grecians so cried out (...). 3. (...).
(...), Soter, to Flaminius the Roman General, when he had set them at
liberty, that the very birds, (...) at the noise, fell down to the earth: Oh
how great shall be the Saints joy to see Christ the King in his beauty and
bravery at the last judgment?

Verse 28. Which shall not taste of death]
The Saints do but taste of death only: they do no more but sip of that bitter
cup, which for tasting of that forbidden fruit in the Garden, they should have
been swilling and swallowing down for ever.

Till they see the Son of man, etc.]
This verse is to be referred to the transfiguration recorded in the next
Chapter, where some of them had the happiness to see Christ in his kingdom, that
is in his (...) glory, whereof they had a glimpse.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse 1. And after six (...)]
LUke says, about eight days after. It comes all to one. For Luke 9. (...).
Matthew puts exclusively those days only that went between, and were
finished: but Luke puts the two utmost days also, (...) the reckoning.

Jesus (...) Peter James and John]
So Matthew. 9. when he raised the damsel he took with him these three only:
happily as best beloved, because bold: (...), more zealous then the rest: or the
better to fit them for further trial: great feelings often precede great
afflictions. Howsoever, it is no small favor of God to make us witnesses of
his great works, and so let us take it. As all Israel might see Moses go toward
the Rock of Rephidim: None but the Elders might see him strike it. That God
(...) his Son before us, that he fetches the true water of life out of the
Rock in our sight, is an high prerogative. And no less surely, that we are
(...) transported in prayer, carried out of the body in divine meditation, and
lost in the endless maze of spiritual ravishments; that we return from the
public ordinances as Moses did from the mount, with our faces shining; that we
are transfigured and transformed into the same image from glory to glory, and
that the Angel of the covenant does wondrously, during the time of the
sacrifice, whiles Manoah and his wife look on, etc. These are special
privileges communicated to none but the communion of Saints.

And brings them up into (...) high mountain]
The name of this mountain no (...): but by common consent it was mount Tabor
(which Josephus calls (...)) (...) cap. 2.
whereof Hierom writes copiously and elegantly in his commentary upon the
fifth of Hosea. Our Savior, when he had some special work to do, went usually
up into a mountain; to teach us to soar a (...) in great performances
especially, and to be heavenlyminded, taking a (...) or two ever and anon, with
Christ in mount Tabor, treading upon the Moon, with the Church, Rev. 12. 1.
having our feet at least where other men's heads are, on things on earth, (
Prove. 15. 24. The way of life is above to the wise) delighting our selves in
high flying, as Eagles, never merry till gotten into the air or on the top of
trees, with the lesser birds. Zacheus could not see Christ till he had climbed
the figtree. Nor can we see the Consolation of Israel till elevated in divine
contemplation, till gotten up into Gods holy hill. The people tasted not
Mannah, till they had left the leaven of Egypt.

And was transfigured before them]
This was whiles he was praying, as St Luke notes. Prayer rightly performed,
is a parling (...) (...) (...)
with God, 1 Timothy 2. 1. a standing upon Intergatories with him, 1 Pet. 3. 21. a
pouring out of the heart unto him, Psalm. 62 8. a familiar conference with him;
wherein the soul is so carried (...) it self other whiles, (...) ut caro est
pene nescia carnis, as St (...) In (...). sanct.
speaks of certain holy women in his time, that they seemed in place only
remote, but in affection to join with that holy company of heaven. So Dr
Preston on his deathbed said, he should change his place, but not his company.
Peter praying fell into a trance. (...) praying saw heavenly visions. Mr
Bradford, See the (...) to his (...) of Gods Attributes.
a little before he went out of the Counter, praid with such plenty of tears
and abundant spirit of prayer, that it ravished the minds of the hearers. Also
when he shifted himself in a clean shirt made for his burning, he made such a
prayer of the wedding garment, that the eyes of those present were as truly
occupied in looking on Act and Mon. fol. 1458.
him, as their ears gave place to here his prayer. Giles of Brussels (...), was
so ardent in his prayers, kneeling by himself in some secret place of the
prison, that he seemed to forget himself. Being called many times to meat,
(...) neither heard nor saw them Ibid (...). 811.
that stood by him, till he was lift up by the arms: and then gently he would
speak unto them, as one awaked out of a deep sleep. Amor Dei est ecstaticus --
sui nec se sinit esse juris. - -

Verse 3. Moses and Elias appeared]
Those (...) is Candidati, as the (...) called them. God had buried Moses, but
brought him forth afterward glorious: the same body which was hid in the
vallie of (...), appears here in the hill of Tabor. Christ by rotting,
refines our bodies also: and we know that when he, who is our life, shall
appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory, (...) 3 4. As in the mean
space, be not we conformed to this world, but rather transformed by the
renewing of our minds: and in whatsoever transfiguration or ravishment we
cannot find Moses and Elias and Christ to meet (as here they did in (...). 12.
2.
this sacred Synod) that is, if what we find in us be not agreeable to the
Scriptures, we may well suspect it as an illusion.

Verse 4. Lord, it is good (...) us to be here]
(...) plura absurda quam verba. But he knew not what he should say, he was so
amused or rather amazed at that blessefull-sight. So Paul, whether in the body
or out of the body, when rapt into the third heaven, he cannot tell, God
knows, and again he cannot tell, God knows, 2 Cor. 12, 2. 3. Only this he
can tell, that he heard (...) Wordlesse Words, such things as words are too
weak to utter, and at the thought whereof,

Claudicat ingenium, delir at linguaque, mensque.
It is as impossible to comprehend heavens joys, as to compass the heaven
with a span, or contain the Ocean in a (...). No wonder then though Peter cry
out, it is good being here: Or it is better being here then at (...), ((...) St
Chrysostom senleth it) whither our Savior had said he must go, and suffer many
things of the Elders, and be killed, etc. That St Peter liked not; but would
build here rather. All men would have heaven, but not the rough way that leads
to it: they would enter into Paradise but not through that narrow portall of
afflictions: they would sit in the seat of honor with Zebedees children, but
not drink of Christ's cup, much lesle be baptized with his baptism, that is, be
dowzed over head and ears in the waters of miseries. They would feed on
manchet, tread on roses, and come to heaven, as (...) at sea do many times to
the haven, whiles they are sleeping, or before they are a ware. But this is no
less a folly then a delicacy, thus to think to divide between Christ and his
cross, to pull a rose without pricks, to have heaven without hardship.

One for thee, one for Moses, one for Elias]
He never thought of one for himself, he was so transported: but he had
provided (...) for himself and us, if Christ had taken his (...): for so he
should have declined death, whereby life and immortality was 2 (...). 1. 12.
brought to light to the Saints. And this unadvised advie was so much the worse
in Peter, because but six days before he had been sharply shent by our
Savior, and called Satan for such carnal (...) 9. 31.
counsel: and besides that, even then he heard Moses and Elias (...) with
Christ about his departure, confirming him against it. It Is hard to say how often
we shall fall into the same fault (though foul) if left to our selves.

Verse 5. Whiles he yet spake]
But had no answer (because he deserved it not) to so foolish a proposition.
Only the Father answers for the Son, by the oracle out of the cloud,
according to that, I bear not witness to my self, but the Father that sent me,
he it is that bears witness of me. Joh. 8.


A bright cloud over shadowed them]
As a eurtain drawn betwixt them and the heavenly glory; to the contemplation
whereof they were not yet sufficient. Hereby also their senses were drawn off
from beholding Christ's glory, to hear the voice from Heaven, which by the
cloud, as by a charet, was carried into their ears with greater sound and
solemnity. Non loquendum de Deo sine lumine, was a saying of Pythagoras: God
may not be mentioned without a light.

This is my beloved Son, in Whom]
Here God makes use of three diverse passages and places of his own book,
Psalm. 2. 7. Isa. (...) Pet. 4. 11.
42. 1. (...). 18. 18. to teach us when we speak, to speak as the Oracles of
God, to inure our selves to Scripture language. The voice also which Christ
heard from heaven at his baptism, in his first inauguration is here repeated
totidem verbis in his transfiguration, which was no small confirmation to him
doubtless: as it was also to Peter and the rest, that this voice was the same
in esfect with his and their confession of Christ in the former Chapter, ver.
16. Thou art Christ the Son of the Living God.

In Whom I am Well pleased]
In whom I do (...), and have (...).
perfect and full complacency, singular contentment. And as in him, so in us
through him, Zeph. 3. 17. he rests in his love (...) his, he will seek no
further; effecit nos sibi dilectos in (...) Dilecto, he has made us accepted
in that beloved one. Here we have Gods acquittance for our better security.

Hear ye him]
As the Archprophet of the Church, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. that Palmoni hammedabber, as
Daniel calls him, that excellent Dan. 8. 13.
speaker, that master of speech that came out of the (...) of his father, and
has his whole mind at his fingers ends, as we say, Hear ye him, Hear none but
him, and such as come in his name, and word. Haec vox [ hunc audite] summam
authoritatem arrogat Christo (says Erasmus) At nunc videmus passim dormitari
ad Christi doctrinam (...) crassam acrudem, and concionis auribus inculcari
quid dixerit Scotus, quid Thomas, quid Durandus etc. But what said S.
Augustine? when Manicheus, contesting (...) him for audience said, Hear me,
Hear me: Nay, said that Father, Nec egotu, nec tume, sed ambo audiamus
Apostolum, etc. Neither hear thou me, (...) I thee, but let us both hear
Christ. Cyril says, that in a synod at Ephesus, upon an high throne in the
Temple, there lay sanctum Evangelium, to show that Christ was both (...) and
President there. He is Rabbenu Doctor (...) Padre Cerephino, etc. And if Popish
Votaries so observe there Governors, that if they command them a voyage to
China or Peru, they presently set forward, to argue or debate upon their
Superiors Mandates they hold presumption, to disobey them, sacrilege: how
much more should we give this honor, audience and obedience, to Christ the
Wisdom and Word of God?

Verse 6. They fell on their face]
As amazed and amated with that stupendous voice that came from the excellent
glory, as St Peter phraseth it, 2 Pet. 1. 17. So Moses and Elias hid their
faces when God spoke unto them, as not able to bear his brightness: (...)
entered into their bones. The very Angels cover their faces before him with two
of their wings, as with a double scarf, or as one claps his hands upon his
face when it lightneth, and flasheth suddenly upon him. What a mercy is it then
to us, that we are taught by men like our selves? that we have this treasure in
earthen vessels, this pearl of price in a leathern purse? Here lay the three
Disciples; and, had not Christ mercifully touched them, and raised them, there
they had lain for dead.

Verse 7. (...) came and touched them]
Christ therefore kills his, that he may quicken them; casts them down, that he
may revive (...)
and raise them in the opportunity of time. Hos. 6. 1. 2. 1 Pet. 5. 6. not so
the devil, that destroyer, that has not his names for naught, Apollyon and
Abaddon.

Verse 8. Save (...) alone]
To teach them, that Moses and Elias, the Law and Prophets, vail bonnet to
Christ; that there is but one Mediateur, (...) the Man Christ Jesus; that there
is sufficient in him to (...) the soul, to comfort the (...).

Verse 9. Tell the vision to no man]
Tacitus, we say, is a good (...). Taciturnity, we are sure, is in some cases a
great virtue, an high commendation. Consus the God of Counsel, had his Temple
in Rome, under coverture, says Servius, ut ostenderet (...) (...). (...).
(...).
debere esse tectum. There is a time to be silent, says Solamon. Q. (...)
Motto was, Video, Taceo, I see and say nothing (...)
A fit Motto for a maid, In earth the first, in Heaven the second Maid, as one
Poet calls (...). Ministers should know when, and to whom, and in what order
to set forth Gods truths; to time a word with a learned tongue, as Esaias has
it, to set a word upon its wheels as Solomon, to circumstantiate it so as the
people can hear, can bear, as our Savior did. This is surely an high point of
heavenly husbandry. As it is also in all sorts of Christians B (...) on 1
(...). 1 page 267.
to be sober in prayer, 1 Pet. 4. 7. that is, as one says, to keep Gods
counsel, not to be proud, or boast of success, or speak of the secret
sweetness of Gods love without calling: it is, to conceal the familiarity of
God in secret.

Verse 10. Why then say the Scribes, etc.]
Christ had answered them this question once before: but they were unsatisfied
by any thing he could say, because strongly possessed with the conceit of an
earthly Kingdom. But the occasion of the question might be this: Our Savior
had forbidden them to tell any man the vision: Hence they might thus debate it.
Forasmuch, as Elias must first come (so the Scribes teach, and they have a text
for it, Mal. 4. 5) and now he is come, as we have seen in the Mount, why (...)
thou Lord, forbid us to tell it abroad, since this might be an effectual
argument with the Jews, to move them to acknowledge thee for the true Messiah?
To this our Savior answers.

Verse 11. And restore all things]
viz. In Malachies sense, i.e. not simply, absolutely, perfectly: for the
royalty of restoring all things so, was reserved for Christ alone, Acts 3. 21.
but comparatively to the state of the old Church. So those renowned Reformers,
Luther, Farellus, etc. abroad, Cranmer, Cromwell, etc. here at home, freed the
Churches from many burdens and bondages, did (for their time) worthily in
Ephrata, and are therefore famous in Bethlehem. But as ejusdem non est invenire
and (...) (it is a praise proper to Christ only, to be Alpha and Omega, Rev. 1.
(...) and Finisher of that he sets about) those brave men left Heb. 12. 2.
many abuses and disorders in the Church unrectified, unreformed, which either
they did not see, or could not help. But now as more light is diffused, so
great thoughts of heart, yea and great hopes are conceived, that God will
finish the work and cut it short in (...), Rom 9 28.
that he will cut off the names of the Idols out of the land and they shall be
no more remembered: yea that he will cause Zech. 13. 2.
the false Prophets, and with them the unclean spirit, to pass out of the
land. We shall read Neh. 8. 17, 18. of a feast of Tabernacles so well kept by
the Jews newly come out of captivity, with dwelling in booths, and reading
every day out of the Law, etc. as had not been done in many hundred years
before, no not (...) the reign of David and Solomon.

Verse 12. (...) I say unto you that Elias is come]
(...) that is likely to come, however the Papist (as it were to thwart.
Christ) by depraving that Prophecy in the Revelation touching the two
witnesses, which they say are Henoch and Elias, will needs persuade (...) and
others, that Elias the Thisbite must come ere Antichrist (...). (...) P. R.
(...) 3. cap. (...).
be revealed. Their arguments I recite not; their Author is Papias, who (...)
devised and divulged this fable. Now Papias that ancient Millenary, scholar to
St John, was a man much respected for opinion of his (...) and learning, but
yet homo (...), says Eusebius, not much oppressed with wit. But had he been
never so absolute otherwise, he was surely out in this. And (...).
herein we may truly say of him as the Papists fasly (...) of another,
Berengarius cum esset multum peritus, mulium erravit. But if Patias or any
other Ancient or modern Writer should have said so much against the Popish
dotages, as this man has done for them, Bellarmine, likely, would have
answered, as in like case he did, to (...), Tertullian, Eusebius and Luther, I
answer, They are all arrant heretics.

And they knew him not]
As neither did they the Lord of glory, because God had hid him under the
Carpenters son. Christians are all glorious within, like the Tabernacle, which
was gold within, and goats-hair without: like Brutus his staff, which as (...)
reports, was gold within, horn without. They are Princes in all lands, but as
Princes in foreign land, they are (...) and therefore unkist, as the Northern
proverb has it. But as, had they known, they would never have crucified the
Lord of glory: so, did (...).
the world know the worth of a Saint, of such a one as was the Baptist
especially, they would have given him but too much honor, as Cornelius did
Peter, as Chrysostom did Babylas, and as Tertullian did some other Martyrs, to
whom writing he says, (...) sum ut vos (...), I am not worthy once to (...)
unto you.

Verse 13. Then the Disciples understood]
Different measures of light and grace are given at several times, as God
pleases to dispense, Ioh. 12. 16. Ioh. 2. 22. Ioh. 10 41, 42. Joseph
understood not his own dreams, nor the (...) what (...) read, (...) afterward.
Wait at Wisdoms gates, wear out her threshold: then shall we know if we follow
on to know the Lord, (...) 6. 3. Beg, and dig for understanding, and thou shall
be sure of it. Prove. 2. 3, 4 5.

Verse 14. And when they were come to the (...)]
That was, the next day after the transfiguration, Luk 9. and in that nick of
time, when the (...) could neither cure the lunatic, nor answer their
adversaries, who had now sport enough to see them brought into the briers, and
therefore jeered them before the people (...). 9. 15.
to some purpose. Most opportunely therefore if ever, comes Christ to their
succor, as it were out of an engine, and both cures the child and confounds
the Pharisees. His late honor hindered him not from doing his office: his
incomparable felicity made him not forget poor Joseph's misery. He knew he was
much (...) and waited for, and therefore makes haste from the mount to the
multitude.

Kneeling down to him]
Some understand the word of such an humble gesture of catching the party
petitioned by the knees or feet, as the Shunammite used to the Prophet, the
Shulamite to (...): (...). (...).
her spouse, and Thetis to Jupiter, when she sued to him in her sons behalf.

Verse 15. For he is lunatick]
Or, he has the falling sickness, as the symptoms show. A common disease, but
(besides that) the devil was in it. The old manslayer makes advantage of our
natural humors (which are therefore the bath of the (...), and the bed of
diseases) to exercise his cruelty upon the poor creature by divine permission:
seeking by the infirmities of the body to bring sin upon the soul.

For often times he falls into the fire, etc.]
The devil pushing him in, as it were, to destroy him, but could not. He is
limited, and (...) do as he would, else he would soon end us. If God chastise
us (...).
with his own bare hand, or by men like ourselves, whip us as it were privately
and at home, let us thank him, and think our selves far better dealt with, then
if he should deliver us up to the (...) officer, to this tormentour to be
scourged with (...) at his pleasure. The wicked he often casts into the fire of
lust, and water of drunkenesse, and they complain not: like a sleepy man (fire
burning in his bedstraw) he cries not out, when others happily lament his case
that see afar (...), but cannot help him. It has set him on fire round about,
yet (...) knew it not: and it burned him, yet he laid it (...) to (...), Isa.
42. 25. See Prove. 23. 34. 35.

Verse 16. And they could not cure him]
The prayer of faith would have healed the sick, Iam. 5. 15. as Luthers prayer
recovered a godly Divine (that was far gone in a (...), and given up for a dead
man by the (...)) beyond all expectation. Iste vir potuit quod voluit, says
one of him. That man by the force of his faith, could do whatsoever he would
with God. Fiat mea voluntas, Let my will be done, said one in his prayer: and
then sweetly falls (...), My will, Lord, because thy will, and he had his
request. But let not the unbeleever (...) that he shall receive any thing of
the Lord, Iam. 1. 7. since he shuts heaven gates against his own prayers; and by
the evil operation of a misgiving (...), denies them before he (...) them.

Verse 17. O faithless and perverse generation]
He reproves (...).
the nine Disciples, but rejects them not. Christ in the very dunghill of
unbelief and (...), can find out his own (...) of faith and holiness, as we
see in Sarah, Genesis 18. 12. That whole speech of hers was vile and profane
(besides that for want of faith she laughed at the unlikelihood, and was
therefore checked by the (...).) One thing only was praiseworthy in that
sinful sentence, that she called her husband Lord: This, God has taken notice
of, and recorded to her eternal commendation, and others imitation, 1 Pet. 3.
6.

And perverse generation]
Depraved, distorted, dislocated. Homo est inversus decalogus. Man now stands
acrosse to all goodness, is born with his back toward heaven, a perverse and
crooked creature, Deuteronomy. 32. 5. having his upper-lip standing where his
nether-lip should, Pro 19 1. and all parts else out of frame and joint, Romans 3.

How long (...) I suffer you?]
As they do, that willingly bear (...) (...).
a burden, and are content to continue under it. Christ bears with our evil
manners, Acts 13. 18. as a loving husband bears with a froward wife: but yet he
is sufficiently sensible, and therefore complains of the pressure, Amos 2. 13.
and once cried (...) under the importable weight of it, My God, my God, why
have thou (...) me. The earth could not bear Korah and his company, but clave
under and swallowed them up: as it soon after (...) out the Canaanites, who had
filled it with filthiness from (...) to corner, Ezra 9. 11. Consider, how often
thou have (...) over the mouth of the bottomless pit, and art (...) yet (...)
into the boiling caldron, that fiery furnace. Oh stand and wonder at Gods
(...), and be abrupt in thy (...), (...) abused mercy turn into fury.

Verse 18. And he departed out of him]
Though with a very ill will, for he tore the child, and well-nigh (...) him.
So when we do, by the prayer of faith, conjure and charm the devil out of our
(...) ((...) is called a charm, Isa. 26. 16.) he will (...) all the hutly-burly
he can: but out- he must, though never so ill-willing.

And the child was cured]
By his Fathers faith. What wonder then, that the parents faith be beneficial
to the baptized infant?

Verse 19. Why could not we cast him out?]
They had heard why before, but either heeded it not, or were not willing to
hear on that ear. Loath they were to yield that it was any fault of theirs, that
the cure was not effected by them, but by some other occasion (the fathers
(...), the peoples perverseness, etc.) which what it was, here they make
enquiry. How unwilling are we that our penny should be held other then good
(...)? How ready to shift (...).
off him that (...) from heaven, and to mistake our selves in the (...). 12. 25.
(...) of our miscarriages?

Verse 20. Because of your unbelief]
q. d. That Is the naked truth of it, never deceive your selves: there is no
(...) will serve turn: be content (hard though it be) to hear your own. Veritas
aspera est, verum amaritudo ejus utilior, and integris sensibus Joh S de (...)
Curialium, lib. 3. cap. 6.
gratior, quam meretricantis (...) distillans favus. A smart truth takes better
with an honest heart, then a smooth supparasitation.

If ye have faith as a grain of, etc.]
The Disciples might object, If no faith, but that which is entire and perfect
can do such cures as this, then we may despair of ever doing any. (...) Savior
answers, that the least measure of true faith (fitly compared to mustard-(...),
for it s acrimony and vivacity) if exerted and exercised, will work wonders.
Neither is justifying faith beneath miraculous in the sphere of its own (...),
and where it has warrant of Gods Word, to remove mountains of guilt and grief.
A weak faith is a joint (...), though no faith can be a joint purchaser of sins
remission: And a man may have faith enough to bring him to heaven, though he
want this or that faith, as to rely upon God without failing, Luk 18. 1, 8.
without feeling, Psalm. 22. 1, etc. as resolved, that God nevertheless will
hear him, in that very thing (...) for.

Verse 21. This kind goes not out]
Some devils then are not so (...), politic, vile, villainous, as others: so
neither (...) men all alike wicked; Some stigmaticall (...) face the heavens,
burden the earth, please not God, and are contrary to all men. Others are more
tame and tractable, as the young 1 (...). (...). 15.
man on whom Christ looked and loved him. Yet, as when one commended the (...)
Legate at the Council of Basil, Sigismund the Emperor answered, Tamen Romanus
(...): So though the devil or his slaves seem never so fair conditioned, they
are neither to be liked nor trusted: he is a devil still, and will do his
kind: they are wicked still, and (...) proceeds from the wicked, as says
(...) Sam. 24. 13.
the Proverb of the Ancients. I have read of one that would (...) the (...),
theaters and whore-houses in London all day, but he (...) not go forth without
private prayer in the morning, and then would say at his departure, Now devil
do thy worst: and M. (...), p. 23 a.
so used his prayers as charms and spells against the weak, cowardly devil. This
was not that prayer and fasting our Savior here speaks of; men must not go
forth to this spiritual fight, (...), with their breakfast, as the Grecians
in Homer, but praying and fasting from sin especially: for otherwise they do
but light a candle before the devil, as the Proverb has it.

Verse 22. The Son of man shall be betray'd]
This our Savior often inculcates, to drive them out of their golden dream of
an earthly kingdom: which pleased them so well, that they could hardly foregoe
it. It is no easy matter to be disabused, undeceived: error once admitted is
not expelled without much ado. It sticks to our fingers like pitch: take heed
how we meddle.

Verse 23. And they were exceeding sorry]
Out of love to their Lord, says Hierom, out of ignorance and stupidity, says
Saint (...) 9. 32.
Mark and S. Luke: so they grieve where no cause was, as we Luke 9. 45.
do often upon like grounds and causes. How well might our Savior have said to
them, as afterward he did to the women, Grieve not for me, but grieve for your
selves. (...) knew well that if Christ (...), they should not escape scot free,
Hinc (...). We shrink in the shoulder when called to (...) the (...), and
pretend this and that for excuse, as Moses did the conscience of his own
insufficiency, Exodus 4. 10. when the very truth was, he feared Pharaoh, lest he
would have revenged the Egyptians quarrel against him, whom he had slain, and
hid in the sand: And as (...) pretended his dear love to his Master, Matthew 16.
22. when it appears, ver. 26. he aimed indeed at the safeguard of his own (...),
more then (...) Masters (...). (...) care be taken, that (what ever we make
believe) we be not self-(...) (which begins that black-bedroll, 2 Timothy 3.
2.) and lovers of pleasures, profits, preferments, more then lovers of God
(which ends it.)

Verse (...). They that received tribute money]
This (...) or half-shekel, was formerly paid by the Israelites every year,
after Godvv (...). Heb. ex (...). de bell. l. 7. c. 27.
they were twenty year old, toward the Temple, Exodus 30. 13. Caesar, by taking
it from the Temple, and turning it to a (...), did indeed take away from God
that which was Gods. This very tribute was paid afterward by the Jews toward
the Roman Capitol, by virtue of a (...) made by (...). How just is it in God,
that the spoiler should be spoiled, Isa. 30. 1. that the Roman Emperors, that
so robbed and wronged God, should be robbed of their rights, as they are by the
Popes usurpations?

(...) not your Master pay tribute?]
Is he either born or bought free? See Act. 22. 28. But if neither, they might
(had they had any (...) in them) have spared him, so public, so profitable a
person, that had so well deserved of the whole Nation, so well merited an
immunity, an indemnity. But all is lost that is laid out upon ungrateful
persons, or people. Covetousness has no respect to any thing, but to its own
profit, and knows no other Horat.
language then the horse-leeches, Give, Give, Rem, rem, (...) modo rem, without
any respect of persons, how well (...).

Verse 25. He says, Yes]
Christ submitted himself to every (...) of man for the Lords sake: and has
bidden us, Give unto 1 (...). 2. 13.
(...) those things that are Caesar's, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom
Mat. 22. 21.
to whom custom, etc. So does not that great Heteroclite of Romans 12. 7.
(...): he not only detains, but demands Peter Pence, and other (...) paiments
from Kings and States. One Pope said, that he (...) never want money so long as
he could hold a pen in his (...). This Kingdom was of old called the `
Popes-Asse, for bearing (...) burdens and exactions. Innocent the 4t said, that
England was Hortus (...) and puteus (...).
the Popes (...), and a pit that could never be drawn dry. What (...) sums
drained they hence in King John's days? Otto (one of the Popes Muscipulatores,
Mice catchers, as the Story calls them.) sent hither by Gregory 9. after
three years raking together (...) money, left not so much in the whole Kingdom,
as he either carried with him, or sent to Rome before him. But I hope (...)
long the Kings of the earth, awakened by their gross abuses put upon them,
will (...) that withered whore, and burn her flesh with fire, a punishment fore
prophesied and well befitting so foul (...).

Verse 26. Then are the children free]
q. d. And much more I (who am the natural, the only begotten (...) of that
King everlasting, the heir of all) am privileged from paiments. Yet because
few knew what Peter did, that he was the Christ the son of the living God,
the son also of David, according to the flesh, lest by his example he should
occasion and encourage either the Jews to deny payment, or the Romans to defy
the Gospel as contrary to Monarchy, he would not make use of his (...), but
sent to sea for money to make payment.

Verse 27. Lest we should offend them]
Better it is that a man part with his right, then give just (...) to any. This
was S. Paul's great (...), 1 Cor 9. and his constant counsel to others, Romans
14. 13, 14, 15. Let no man put a stumbling block, (...) ^ ^ ^ (...), ^ ^ ^
much l sse a scandal in his brothers way, that is, neither a lighter, nor
greater offense, but rather abridge himself of his (...). This is to express
Christ to the world, to be made like unto him.

Go thou to the Sea]
Here Hierom cries out, Quid primum (...) in hoc loco nescio, I knew not (...)
here to wonder at, whether Christ's prescience or greatness. His prescience,
that (...) knew that the fish had money in (...) mouth, and that that fish
should come first to (...). His greatness and power, that could create such a
piece of money by his bare word, and cause it so to be, by commanding it so to
be. Who would not fear this Lord of hosts? Who would not trust him for
necessaries, who can and will cause all (...) to scatter for his? But what a
wonderful work of God was it, and a (...) warning to us (...) these (...) days
of war, had we (...) so wise as to have made good use of it, that God should
send (...) Friths Preparation to the Cross, in the fish-belly, to the (...) of
Cambridge, a little before the Commencement, (...) few years since. That such a
book ((...) the reverend man that relates ^ ^ ^
it) should be brought (...) such a manner, and to such a place, and at such a
time, when by reason of peoples (...) cut of all parts, notice might be given
to all places of the Land, in my apprehension (...) can (...) for no less then
a divine (...), and to have this voice with it, England prepare for the cross.

Give it unto them for me and thee]
Upon this place, Papists would foolishly found their Popes primacy and
Clergies privilege of immunity from paiments to civil Princes and Magistrates:
because Christ and Peter are set together. But in what trow? In paying of
homage, not in receiving of honor. Christ paid tribute, to free us from the
servitude of Satan that rigid tax-master. Peter paid, because he had here an
house and family, Chap. 8. 5. and further to let his successors know, that
they paid (...) in Peter, and should learn in all due humility, to submit to
Magistracy: and not to withdraw from public impositions and taxations,
further then of favor they shall be exempted and privileged.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse 1. At the same time]
When he, by paying tribute, had been teaching them humility and modesty, they
most unseasonably discover their folly and ambition: so another time, after he
had been washing their feet, and giving them the Sacrament, Luke 22. See in
them the pravity, the canker of our natures, and what cause God had to
complain, Hos. 7. 1. When I would have healed Israel, then the iniquity of
Ephraim was discovered, as if it had been on purpose to spite me, and spet
venom in my face.

Came the Disciples,]
Peter also with the rest, verse. 21. though (...) will needs have it otherwise
(as if he were now at (...)) (...) he shall bear no part of the blame: take
heed of that, that (...) sin, Hos 12. 8.

Who is the greatest]
Quarunt non quaerenda, says Aretius: they should rather have enquired how to
get into heaven, then who should be highest in heaven. Ridiculum illud est,
initia ignorare, and ultima rimari. But they (...) of a distribution of honors
and offices (as once in the days of David and Solomon) a worldly (...), like
the Kingdoms of the earth; as afterward the Church was, and still is
transformed by Antichrist into the image of the beast, that is, of the Roman
Empire: yet they call it the kingdom of heaven, because they had heard Christ
many times call it so.

In the Kingdom of heaven]
i. e. In the state and condition of the Church Christian. So to this day among
the Jews the Kingdom of the Messiah is called Malcuth hashamajim, the Kingdom
of heaven: and rightly so: for, 1. (...) King is heavenly. 2. He (...).
has heaven for his throne, whence he puts forth his power. 3. His Subjects
are heavenly minded, and trade for heavenly commodities. 4. Their country is
heaven, though their commoration be a while upon earth, where they are pilgrims
and strangers. 5. The government of this Kingdom is wholly heavenly and (...).

Verse 2. And Jesus called a little childe]
Nicephorus says this was Ignatius, who was afterward Bishop of Antioch; but
I am not bound to (...) him. It is well known that he is full of fictions.
Christ calling for a little child, who neither (...) great things of himself,
nor (...) great things for himself, rightly and really confutes their (...)
ambition and (...) of (...).
primacy, and gives (...) such a (...) as Tarquin did (...) (...). (...).
son, when, walking in the garden he struck off the heads of the (...) 3. 6. 9.
Poppies in the sight of the messenger: and as Periander the (...) did
Thrasybulus the (...) of Athens, when pulling of the upper ears, he made all
the standing corn equal, intimating thereby what a tyrant must do, that would
live (...) and quiet.

Verse 3. Except ye be converted]
i.e. (...) turn over a new leaf, and cast away these fond conceits and
crotchets, these golden dreams of an earthly Kingdom, and your high (...)
therein, which, like bullets of lead fastened to the eyelids of your minds,
make you that you cannot look upwards.

And become as little children]
In simplicity, humility, innocence, (...)
ignoscency, etc. not in (...), (...), (...), (...), open (...), etc. How (...)
was that Anabaptist Aurifaber, who understanding this text Nicodemically, as
one says, stirred up people where ever he came (...) carry themselves (...),
if ever they would have heaven. Upon whose persuasion you might have seen
ridiculous (...) of boys and girls; women especially, skipping up and down,
clapping their hands together, sitting naked on the ground, ticking, (...).
(...).
toying, apishly imitating one while Christ, another while Antichrist, etc.
pretending this text for their authority. So did Massaeus the Franciscan, who
is famous amongst his fellow-friers, for that, at the command of his superior
St Francis, he wallowed Scdul lib. 3. c 1.
on the ground, as a little one, and showed all, in obedience to this (...), as
Sedulius testifies. Ridiculum caput! Many such like examples may be met with
in the Legends of the Fathers, of (...) 2. 18.
such as were voluntaries in humility (as the Apostle styles them) (...).
or rather in hypocrisy. For, hujus virtutis postea (...) Christiani (...)
studiosi and aemuli (...), ut tota in hypocrisin vere abierit, says (...),
here. Humility in many of the (...) degenerated into (...).

Ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven]
One sin allowed excludes the kingdom, be it but ambition, or some such inward
(...), such as the world takes no notice of, makes no matter of. Inward
bleeding kills many times, and God by killing Jezabels children Revel. 2.
(...).
with death ( i. throwing them to hell) will make all the Churches know that he
searches the inwards.

Verse 4. Whosoever therefore shall humble, etc.]
Children are (...) lifted up with pride, for the great things (...) are born
to, neither mind they high places: but the child of a Prince will play (...)
the poorest, and make him his mate. Christians should not mind high things,
but condescend to the meanest, and be (...).
carried by them, as the word signifies: especially since we are Romans 12.
(...).
all born again by the same seed, there is no (...) at all in our birth or
inheritance. Why then look we so big one upon another? Why do we slight or
brow-beat any? Have we not all one father?

The same is greatest in the Kingdom]
He that can most vilify and nullify himself, shall be highest in heaven.
When had David the kingdom, given him in (...), but (...) he was as a (...)
child? When was (...) advanced to (...) (...), but when he made himself a dog,
and therefore fit only to lie (...) the table, yea a dead dog, and therefore
fit only for the ditch? He that is in the low pits and caves of the earth sees
the stars in the firmament: when they who are on the tops of the (...) them
not. He that is most humble sees most of heaven, and shall have most of it:
for the lower the ebb, the higher the tide, and the lower the (...) of (...)
is laid, the higher shall the roof of glory be over laid.

Verse 5. And whosoever shall receive (...) such, etc.]
S. Luke (...) it, Luke 9 48.
Whosoever shall receive this child in my Name. (...) our (...) the child, or
those that were humble as that child? Both surely. See here how highly Christ
regards and rewards humility, even the picture of it in (...) ones. Now if the
shadow of this grace have such a healing virtue, what then has the body? If
the leaves be so sovereign, what then the fruit?

Verse 6. But whosoever shall offend, etc.]
By false doctrine, or loose life, or making a prey of their simplicity and
humility which many times draws on injury. A Crow will stand upon a sheeps
back, pulling off wool from her side. She durst not do so to a Wolf or a
Mastiff.

That a millstone were hanged, etc.]
The nether millstone, called (...)
in Greek the Ass, either because it is the bigger and thicker of the two; or
because the millstone was drawn about by the help of the Ass. This kind of
punishment the greatest malefactors among the Jews were in those days put to,
as says S. Hierom. And hereby is set forth the heaviest of hell torments. Thus
the Beast of Rome (that grand offendour of Christ's little ones, whom he
worrieth and makes havoc of) is threatened (by a like kind of punishment) to
be cast alive into the burning lake, Revel. 19. 20. And for his City Babylon, a
mighty Angel is seen to take up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into
the sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great City Babylon be thrown
down, and shall be found no more at all. This, by an elegant and emphaticall
gradation, notably sets forth the remediless ruin of Rome; In that an Angel,
a strong Angel takes a stone, and a great stone, even a millstone, which he
lets not barely fall, but casts, and with M Leigh of the pro^.
impetuous force thrusts into the bottom of the sea, whence nothing
ordinarily is recovered, much less a millstone, thrust from such an hand with
such a force, etc.

Drowned in the depth of the sea]
In that part of the sea that is farthest off from the shore, q. d. he is a
brat of fathomlesse perdition, (...) quasi (...) procul a terra.
he shall be desperately drowned in destruction, ita ut in aquae, summitate
rursus non ebulliat. So the Romans served their parricides, and the Grecians
other grievous malefactors: they wrapped them up Ca^^^^. Not.
in lead, and cast them into the deep.

Verse 7. Woe to the world, because of offences]
(...), proprie (...). (...).
tendicula, hoc est, lignum illud curvum, quo moto decipula clauditur. The
world, besides the ^ff^nces they give to the Saints, they give and take much
hurt one from another, and so heap up wrath; whiles, besides their own, they
bring upon themselves their other men's sins to answer for. I have read of a
woman, who living in M Wards happiness of paradise.
professed doubt of the Godhead, after better illumination and repentance, did
often protest that the vicious life of a great scholar in that town did conjure
up those damnable doubts in her soul. When therefore corruption boiles, and
thou art ready to run into some reproachful evil, think the name of Christ,
and thy poor brothers soul lies prostrate before thee. And will thou trample
upon that, and thrattle this?

It must needs be that offenses come]
By Gods permission, Satan's Senec. de benif. lib. 2. cap. 18.
malice, and man's wickedness: Venenum aliquando pro remedio f^it. God often draws
good out of evil, as wine draws a nourishing virtue from the flesh of serpents:
as the skillful Apothecary, of the poisonfull viper, makes an wholesome
triacle, 1 Cor. 11. 19.

Verse 8. If thy hand or thy foot offend thee etc.]
Chap. 5. 29. 30. Our Savior forbids all his to defile themselves with the
filth of sin, here to offend others thereby. See the notes there.

Verse 9. Pluck it out]
This is the circumcision of the heart, the mortification of earthly members
which is no less hard to be done, then for a man with one hand to cut off the
other: or to pull out his own eyes, and then rake in the holes where they grew.
And yet, hard or not hard, it must be done: for otherwise we are utterly undone
for ever. Hypocrites, as artificial jugglers, seem to wound themselves, but do
not: as stage players, they seem to thrust themselves through their bodies,
whereas the sword passes only through their clothes. But the truly religious
lets out the lifeblood of his beloved lusts, lays them all dead at his feet,
and burns their bones to lime, as the King of Moab d^d the King of Edom, Amos
2. 1. As Joshuah put down all the Canaanites, so does grace all corruptions. As
AG deposed his own mother, so does this, the mother sin. It destroies them
not by halves, as Saul, but hews them in pieces before the Lord, as Samuel.

Verse 10. Take heed that ye despise not, etc.]
Gr. Look to it if you do, a foul mischief is toward you. Look to it as you
tender (...). (...) verbum.
your own safety here, or salvation hereafter. Cast not the least contempt upon
Christ's little ones. As little as they are, they have a great champion, Isa.
37. 22, 23. and so many Angels to right them and fight for them, that a man had
better anger all the witches in the world, then one of these little ones. I
tell you, some great ones have been fain to humble themselves, and to lick the
very dust of their feet sometimes, that they might be reconciled to them, Isa.
60. 14. If Cain do not lowre upon Abel, God will arraign him for it. Why is thy
countenance cast down, etc? Why Genesis 4.
Numb. 12, 14.
do look so doggedly? If Miriam do but mutter against Moses God will spet in
her face: And, if Aaron had not made the more have to make his peace by
repentance, he also had tasted of the lame sauce.

Their Angels do allwaies behold the face]
Angels in the Syriack are named (...) of the face, because it is their office
and honor to look always on Gods face. They are sent about Gods messages to
this earth, yet are never out of their heaven, never (...) of the vision of
their maker. No more are godly men, when busied in their callings. And,
howsoever slighted in the world, yet Angels are sent forth for their safeguard
and service, Heb. 1. 14. yea for the accomplishment of all designs for the
Saints good, they stand always looking God full in the face, to receive
commandments.

Verse 11. For the Son of man came, etc.]
Therefore Angels are so active and officious about them. This the (...) Angels
could not bring their hearts to yield to, and therefore fell (...) envy, from
their first estate: and whereas the society (...) Angels was much maimed by
their fall, their room say some, is supplied by the Saints, whom therefore they
take such care of, and content in.

Verse 12. (...) he not leave the ninety and nine]
I am not says a Divine, of their fond opinion, that think the Angels are
(...). 99 oves (...) non (...), (...), (...).
here meant by the ninety nine sheep, as if they were (...) infinite in number
beyond the number of mankind: yet, without question, they are exceeding many,
and that number cannot be known of us in this world, Dan. 7. 10. Psalm. 68. 17.
The Chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels: the Lord is
among them as in Sinai, etc. that is, those myriads of Angels make Sion as
dreadful to all her enemies, as those Angels made Sinai at the delivery of the
law. But the application of this (...) makes it plain, that the hundred sheep
are Gods elect (...) ones; all which are set (...) by Christ upon the
everlasting mountains, and not one of them lost, Joh. 10. Matthew. 24.

Verse 13. And if so be that he find it]
As he will most surely, for none can take them out of his hands: nor can he
discharge his (...), should he suffer any one of them to wander and perish, as
they will do undoubtedly, if left to themselves, such is their sheepish
simplicity, Isa. 53. 6. God has charged Christ to see to the safe-keeping of
every true sheep, Joh. 6. 39 40. and he performed it to the full, Joh. 17. 12.
As for that son of perdition there excepted, he was never of Christ's body;
yet is excepted, because he seemed to be, by reason of his office,

Verse 14. It is not the will of your father]
Happy for us, that we are kept by the power of God to salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5.
for else it were possible for us to fall away and perish: an intercision there
might be, nay an utter excision from Christ, were not his left hand Cant. 2. 6.
under us and his right hand over us, and both his hands about us, to clasp and
hold us fast to himself. But his right hand is our (...), and his left hand our
Boaz. Both which pillars in the porch of Solomon's Temple did show, not only by
the matter whereof they were made, but also by the names whereby they were
called, 1 King 7. (...).
what steadfastness the Elect stand in before God, both for present and future.
For present they have strength in themselves: for future, God will so stablish
them with his grace, that they shall never wholly depart from him. As for
reprobates God says of them, (...) that will die, let it die; they shall die
in their sins, as the Lord threatens the Jews; which is a thousand times
worse then to die in a ditch or in a dungeon.

Verse 15. If thy brother shall trespasse]
As trespass he will, for it must needs be that offenses come, verse. 7. such
is humane (...). Two flints may (...) smite together, and not fire come out, as
two or more men converse together, and not trespasses in one kind or other fall
out. A Heathen could say, Non amo (...) nisi offendam: for so, I shall know
whether he love me or no, by his forbearing of me. And Augustine says Qui
desinit (...), desinit amare. He that cease to bear with me, cease to love
me. Here therefore our Savior, after he had deterred his from doing wrong,
instructs them how to suffer wrong. If it be not considerable, it must be
dissembled. As if it be, Go and tell him] (...) Get thee gone to him presently,
lest else the sore Levit. 19. 17.
(...), and thou hate him in thy heart: (...) not, he should come to me, etc.
but get thee to him with speed. Lech lecha, as God said to Abraham, up and be
packing: (...) not to strain courtesy with him, when both have haste: but seek
peace and ensue it; it is best to be first in a good matter. Remember, said
Aristippus to (...) (with whom he was fallen out) that though I were the elder
Nae (...) vir me long melior es, etc. Plutar. de (...). ira. (...). l b. 2.
mao, yet I first sought to thee. Verily, said (...), thou (...) not only an
elder, but a better man then I: for I was first in the quarrel; but thou art
first in seeking reconciliation.

Tell him his fault.]
Gods little ones are so to be loved, as not to be let alone in their
trespasses: but freely and friendly admonished, that they may see their sin,
and amend their way, as Denkius did when admonished by Oecolampadius. He being
a learned man held this heresy, that no man or devil should be damned
eternally, (...)
but all saved at last, etc. But, being withal an humble man, he repented;
being converted by Oecolampadius in whose presence he died at Basil of the
plague, but piously, (...) Dom. 1528.

Thou have gained thy brother]
To God and thy self; and if to God, to thy self surely for ever, as Philemon,
(how much (...) Onesimus?) to Paul, to whom they therefore owed themselves
Philem. 19.
also. St Anthony Kingston thus spoke to Mr Hooper a little before his
Martyrdom: I thank God that ever I knew you, for God did appoint you to call
me being a lost child. For by your good admonitions and wholesome reproofs,
whereas I was before both an adulterer and (...), God has brought me to
forfake Act and Mon.
and (...) the same.

Verse 16. Then take with thee one or two more]
Such as are faithful, and able both to keep counsel and to give counsel:
that so, if we cannot lead him by the hand to Christ, we may bear him in his
bed, as they did the palsie-man, and so bring him to Christ by the help of
friends.

That in the mouth of two or three]
To blame then are they that proceed upon every idle supposition, suspicion,
report or (...). Three manner of persons (said Father Latimer) (...) Act. and
Mon. (...) 15. 0.
make no credible information. 1. Adversaries, for evil will never speak well,
2. Ignorant men, and those without judgment. 3. Whisperers, and blowers in
men's ears, which will (...) out in hugger-(...) more then they dare avow
openly. To all such we must turn the deaf ear: the talebearer and tale-hearer
are both of them (...), and shut ou: of heaven, Psalm. 15. 3.

Verse 17. Tell it unto the Church]
That is, unto the ChurchGovernours, the Church representative, as some think.
Not the Pope, whom Papists make the Church (...) and who, like a wasp, is no
sooner angry but out comes a sting; which being out, is like a fools dagger,
(...) and snapping withoutan edge. Hence in the year 833. when Pope Gregory the
fourth offered to D. (...): de (...). Ec l. (...) and suc. (...) p. 3.
excommunicate Ludivicus Pius the Emperor with his followers, the Bishops that
stood for the Emperor affirmed, that they would by no means yield to the Pops
pleasure therein, sed (...) communicaturus venirit, excommunic atus abiret cum
aliter se habeat antiquorum (...) authorit as, And in the year 1260. Leonard an
English Doctor answered the Popes Legate, who pleaded (...). Hist. (...). page
278.
that all Churches were the Popes, that they were his indeed (so it went then
for current, but) tuitione non fruitione, (...), non (...). If he should cast
out Jonas and keep Cham in the Ark, they would decline and disclaim his
censures.

Let him be unto thee as an Heathen and a publican]
i.e. Neither B Hall (...) Matthew. 5. 20.
meddle, nor make with him: have thou neither sacred nor civil society with
him. The Jews hated the presence, the fire, the fashion, the books of an
Heathen: As now a Papist may not join Sands his (...) Europae.
with a Protestant in any holy action, no not in saying over the Lords prayer,
or saying Grace at table. Howbeit of old a Jew might eat at the same table with
an Heathen, Levit. 8: and come to the same Temple with Publicans, so they were
Proselytes, Luk: (...). But they might do neither of these to an obstinate
excommunicate, no more may we. Rebellion is as witchcraft, and obstinacy as bad
as idolatry, 1: Sam. 15. 23.

Verse 18. Whatsoever ye shall bind]
Let no man despise your (...), for I will (...) it. Whatever you-binde, i.e.
forbid, prohibit, etc. As whatever ye loose, that is, command; permit, shall be
seconded and settled by me in heaven, so that your word shall surely stand.
Further, to bind says Cameron, is to pronounce a thing profane; to loose is
to pronounce it lawful: as when the Jews say that David and Ezekiel bound
nothing, that (...) bound in the Law.

Verse 19. If two of you shall agree]
How much more then a whole Church full of you: Great is the power of joint
prayer, Act. 12. 12. Dan. 2. 18. Those in the Revelation whose prayers went up
as a pillar of incense and came before the Lord as the sound of many waters:
the thundering legion, the (...) in Tertullians time, that came, an army of
them, not more to beseech (...). in Daniel.
then to besiege God by their prayers. This made Henry the third, King of
France forbid the Protestant-housholders in his dominions to pray with their
families: And a great Queen said, that she (...). belli sacri.
(...) more the prayers of John (...) and his accomplices then an (...) of thirty
thou and men, Act. 4. the house shook where the Disciples were praying. The
devil was forced to throw in the obligation to Luther and some others that were
praying for a young Act. and Mon. (...).
man, that had yielded himself body and soul to the devil for money, and had
written the bond with his own blood. The Popish soldiers (...). 883.
that went against the (...) in (...), said that the ministers of that town
with their prayers conjured and bewitched them, that they could not fight.
Whiles Moses Aaron and Hur lift up their hands and minds together in the
mount, (...) beats (...) in the valley. They prevailed precando, more then he
did praeliando. Now for the fruit of prayer, said those brave spirits et
Edge-hill-battel, where there was never (...) seen of man and more of God, as
the Noble General thankfully acknowledged.

Verse 20. There am I in the midst]
As to eye their behavior, so to hear their suits. All that he requires is
that they bring lawful petitions and honest hearts: and then they shall be
sure to receive whatsoever heart can wish, or need require. A courtier, that is
a favorite, gets more of his Prince by one suit many times, (...) a tradesman
or husbandman happly does with twenty-years-labour: So does a praying Christian
get much good at Gods (...), as having the royalty of his ear, and the command
of whatsoever God can do for him, Isa. 45. 11. Concerning the work of my hands
command ye me. Hence that (...) rapture of (...) Med tat (...) 5.
in a certain prayer of his, Fiat voluntas mea Domine. (...) hence that request
of St Bernard to a certain friend of his to whom he had given diverse
directions for strictness and purity, Et (...), says he, (...) mei: when thou
art become such (...) one, think on me in thy prayers.

Verse 21. And I forgive him? till seven times?]
How (...) good people even at this day think if they forgive an (...) brother
some few times, that they have supererogated, and delerved to be Chronicled,
yea canonized? It was a fault in Peter to presume to prescribe to Christ, how
often he should enjoin him to forgive. Peter is still the same; ever too
forwardly and forthputting.

Verse 22. Until seventy times seven]
i. e. (...), (...) quoties. God multiplieth pardons, Isa. 55 7. so should we.
Love covers all sins, Prove. 10. 12. so large is the skirt of loves mantle.
Betwixt God and us the distance is infinite, and, if it were possible, our love
to him, and to our friends in him, our foes for him, should fill up that (...),
and (...) it self to (...). We may without (...) be sensible of injuries (a
sheep is as sensible of a bite, as a swine) but it must be with the silence of
a sheep, or at utmost the mourning of a dove, not the roaring of a bear, or
bellowing of a bull, when baited. All desire of revenge must be carefully cast
out: and if the wrong-doer say I repent, you must say, I remit, and that from
the (...): being herein like that King of England, of whom it is said that he
never forgot any thing (...).
but injuries. Every Christian should keep a continual Jubilee, 1 Cor. (...) 8.
(...), and noxas remittendo, by loosing bonds, and remitting wrongs.

Verse 23. Which would take account of his servants]
This God does daily. 1. In the preaching of the law with it is (...) or
correction, which he that trembles not in hearing, said that (...), shall be
erusht to pieces in feeling. 2. In trouble of (...), which when open, tells us
all we have done, and writes bitter things against us, though they be legible
only (as things written with the juice of limmons) when held to the light fire
of Gods fierce wrath. 3. In the hour of death: for every man's deaths-day is his
particular doomes-day. 4. At the day of judgment, when we shall appear to give
an account, 2 Cor. 5 10. Good Ita (...) ut (...).
therefore is the counsel of that (...). Let us so live, as that we forget not
our last reckoning. Rationem cum domino crebro (...) Villicus, Let the steward
ost reckon with his master, says (...). Cic. 4. in (...).
Cato de (...) rustica cap 5.


Verse 24. Which ought him ten thousand talents]
A talent is (...) to be 600 crowns; ten thousand talents are well-nigh twelve
tons of gold. As often therefore as thy brother offends thee, think with thy
self what a price is put into thy hands, what an opportunity is offered thee
of gaining so great a prize, of gathering in so rich an harvest.

Verse 25. His Lord commanded him to be sold]
Those that (...) to do wickedly with Ahab, will sure repent them (...) of
their bargain, when God shall sell them off to the devil: who when he has well
fed them (as they do their slaves in some countries for like purpose) will
broach them, and eat them, says Mr Bradf. Sermon. of Repent. p 70.
Bradford, chaw them, and champ them world without end in eternal woe and
misery. One reason why the wicked are eternally tormented is, because being
worthless, they cannot satisfy Gods justice iu any time; and he will be no
looser by them.

Verse 26. The servaut therefore fell down]
This was the ready way to disarm his masters indignation, and procure his own
peace, viz to submit to justice and implore mercy. Thus Abigail pacified David,
the Prodigal, his father, nay Benhadad, (...) that nonesuch, as the Scripture
describes him. The very (...) (...) voyage (...). 97.
at this day though remorselesse to those that bear up, yet receive humiliation
with much sweetness. Humble your selves under (...). (...). 0.
Gods great hand, says St James, and he will lift you up. The lion of Judah
rents not the prostrate prey.

Verse 27. Loosed him and for gave him the debt]
Every (...) is a debt: and the breach of the ten Commandments set us in debt
to God ten thousand talents. He requires no more but to acknowledge the debt,
and to come before him with a Non (...) solvendo, tendering him his Son (...)
all-sufficient Surety, and he will presently cancel the hand writing that was
against us: he will cross the black lines of our sins with the red lines of
Christ's blood, and we shall be acquitted for ever.

Verse 28. And he laid hands on him, and took him, etc.]
Had (...) truly apprehended the pardon of his own sins, he would not have
been so cruel to others. Had he thoroughly died his thoughts in the rich mercies
of God, he would have showed more mercy to men. Therefore the Apostles (when
our Savior had bidden them Luke 17. 5.
forgive, though it were often in the same day) said unto the Lord, Increase our
faith. As who should say, The more we can believe thy love and mercy to us, the
readier shall we be to do all good offices to men. But how rigid and cruel was
David to the Ammonites, while he lay in his sin, and before he had renewed
his Faith. 2 Samuel 12. 30 31.

Verse 29. And his fellow servant fell down]
This had been sufficient to have broken the heart of a better man then he was
any: The more manly and valiant any are, the more gentle and mild to the
submissive, as was Alexander, and Julius Coesar: and one the contrary the more
base and cowardly, the more hard-hearted and bloody: as Minerius the Popes
Champion, who at the destruction of (...) in France, being entreated for a few
poor souls that had escaped his al-devouring sword, although they had no more
but their shirts to cover their nakedness, he sternely answered, I know (...).
and (...). (...).
what I have to do; not one of them shall escape my hands, I will (...) them to
dwell in hell among the devils. But what came of it? his raging fury ceased not
to proceed, till the Lord shortly after brought him, by an horrible disease
(his guts by little and little rotting with in him) to the torments of death,
and terrors of hell.

Verse 30. And he would not, but (...) and(...).]
The true portraiture of an ungrateful and cruel man, that plucketh up the
bridge before others, whereby himself had passed over. He that will lend no
mercy, how does he think to borrow any?

Verse 31. So when his fellow-servants]
The Angels, say some, Angeli vident, dolent, and Domino omnia reserunt. Aret.
who, when they see us backward to business of this nature, are sorry, and say
our errand to their and our common Lord. Or the Saints on earth groan out their
discontents, against the unmercifull, to God, who soon hears them, for he is
gracious, Exodus 22. 27. (...) the cries of the poor oppressed do even enter
into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath, Jam. 5. 3.

Verse 32. O thou wicked servant]
Wicked with a witness, as that wicked Haman, so Esther called him ( Est. 7.
6.) who never till then had heard his true title. God will have a time to tell
every man his own: and for those that are now so haughty and passionate, that
none dare declare their way to their face, God will lay them low enough in the
slimy valley, where are many already like them, and more shall come after them,
Job 21, 31, 32.

Verse 33. Should not thou also etc.]
Which because he did not, his pattent was called in again into the
Pardon-office, and he deservedly turned over to the tormentour. God will set
off his own and all hearts else, from a merciless man, from a griping
oppressor, as he did from Haman: not a man opened his mouth to (...) for him,
when he fell before that Jewesse, the Queen. For be shall have judgment
without mercy, says St James, that has showed no mercy: when as mercy
rejoiceth against judgment, Jam. 2. 13.
as a man does against his adversary, whom he has (...).

Verse 34. And his Lord was wroth]
So God is said to be, when he chides and smites for sin, as men use to do in
their anger: but somewhat worse then they, for his anger burns to the lowest
hell, Deuteronomy. 32. 22.

Verse 35. If ye from your hearts forgive not]
Forget as well Siquis est qui neminem in gratiam putat red reposse, (...)
nostram is per fidiam (...), sed (...) suam. Cicer Ep. 37. lib. 3.
as forgive: which some protest they will never do, neither think they that
any do. But what says the heathen Orator to this unchristian censure? If any
think that we, that have been once out, can never heartily forgive, and love
one another again, he proves not our false-heartednesse, but shows his own.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse 1. And came into the coasts of Judaea.]
Upon the news of Lazarus his friends sickness: with the (...).
hazard of his life, he came far on foot to the help of his friend: (...).
Much water cannot quench love. And this was our Saviors last journey toward
Jerusalem: to the which he steeled his face (...).
with fortitude, and was even (...), or pained, till it were accomplished.
(...).
So was that Martyr, who (because he seemed at his (...).
lodging to be somewhat troubled, and was therefore asked by (...). (...).
one how he did?) answered, In very deed I am in prison, till I be in (...) 1,
(...).
prison.

Verse 2. And great multitudes followed him]
Though he were then to die. For all that follows from this 19 to Chap. 26.
(...).
(...) to be a relation of the acts of the last three months of his (...).
Follow God, was a moral precept of the Heathen Sages; (...) (...).
who therein placed the safety and happiness of a man, Magnus est animus qui
se Deo tradidit, says Seneca. He is a brave man that follows God through thick
and thin, through whatsoever hardship.

Verse 3. Is it lawful for a man etc.]
A captious question, purposely to put him to shame or peril before the people.
For if he liked divorce, the better sort would be offended and displeased: if
he disliked it, the common sort ( those that followed him,) for denying them
that liberty that Moses had allowed them. One thing that created Jeremy so much
trouble among the people of his time was, that he (...) them to the yielding up
of the City to the (...), which Isaiah had so earnestly dissuaded them, not
long before in the days of King (...).

Verse 4. And he answered and said unto them]
Our Savior Luke (...). (...).
would not divide the inheritance, when required to it; but he would decide
controversies touching divorces: for in marriagematters many cases of
conscience fall out fit to be determined by the (...), whose lips should both
preserve and (...) knowledge to the people, whose house for this cause should
be always (...), as the Ediles house in Rome was to all comers.

Verse 5. And said, For this cause etc.]
Dixit, (...), (...), (...) three things are said by Moses to have been done by
God in the institution, and for the honor of marriage: to the which still
(says a Divine,) God bears so great respect, as that (...) on 1 (...) 3. 2.
page 44.
he is pleased to bear with, cover, and not impute the many frailties, follies,
vanities, weaknesses and wickednesses, that are found betwixt man and wife.

For this cause shall a man leave father]
viz, In regard of cohabitation, not of sustentation: Relinquet cubile patris
and matris, as the Chaldee rightly interprets it, Genesis 2. 24. And this was the
first Prophecy that was ever uttered in the world (says (...) and Beda,)
venerable therefore for its antiquity: like as is Alsted Chron. (...). 468.
also that first Hexameter, made by Phemonoe, in the year of the world, 2580;
(...).


And shall cleave to his wife]
Gr. Be glued to her. A table will (...).
often cleave in the whole wood, before it will part asunder, where it is
glued. A husband ought to be as firm to his wife as to himself. See my Notes on
Genesis 2. 24.

And they twain shall be one flesh]
This is point blank against polygamy, which yet Anabaptists would bring in
again, and Turks allow of. They learned it of Lamech, qui primus unam costam in
duas divisit, says Hierom, but had soon enough of it. So had Jacob, Elkanah,
and other holy men of old, who lived and died in this sin of polygamy, and
merely through mistake, as it is thought, of that text, Lev. 18. 16. Thou shall
not take a wife to her sister, to vex her: i. e. Thou shall not superinduce one
wife to another. Now the Fathers took the word (sister) for one so by blood,
(...) was spoken of a sister by Nation, as those clauses ( to vex her) and (
during her life) do evince.

Verse 6. They are no more twain]
A man's wife is himself, Ephesians. 5. 28. (as is likewise a man's country, Luk 4 23.
to cure his country (...).
is to cure (...)) and they twain, says our Savior in the former verse, shall
be (...), into one flesh. The man misseth his rib, and the woman would be in
her old place again, under the man's arm or wing: Hence no rest, till they be
(...) and concorporated, Ruth. 3. 1. My daughter, said Naaman to Ruth, (...) I
not seek rest for thee, that it may be well with thee? Why then should there be
divorces for light matters? why should there (...) of wives, and laying upon
them (as some) with their unmanly fists? Did ever any man hate his own flesh,
Ephesians. 5. 29. or but hide his eyes from it, Isa. 58. 7? how much less tear it
with his teeth, and pull it away piecemeal, unless it were mad demoniacks and
rash divorcers? Christ, the best husband, hates putting away, Mal. 2. 16. yea
though never so much provoked to it ( (...). 3. 1. Ioh. 13. 1.) he will not do
it.

Verse 7. Why did Moses then command etc.]
Sophister-like they oppose Moses to God, Scripture to Scripture, as if God
were (...) himself. This is still the guise of (...) heretics; (...) also to
mingle and jumble together truths with falsehoods, that falsehoods may pass the
more (...). See it in these Pharisees. It was true that Moses commanded (for
the honor of the woman, and disgrace of the man,) that he should give her an
Abscessionale, a bill of divorcement. But it was not true that Moses commanded
to put her away. He permitted such a thing indeed as a civil Magistrate by
divine dispensation (better an inconvenience then a mischief) but that makes
little for its lawfullnesse.

Verse 8. Moses, because of the hardness of your hearts]
Ob duricordiam (...), says (...). For the relief of the (...),
questionless, was this permitted by Moses, not as a Prophet, but as a
Lawgiver; so he suffered them to exercise usury upon strangers. And, at this
day, they are by the States where they live S. (...). (...) Spec. Eur
permitted, to strain up their usury to 18. in the hundred upon the Christians:
And so they are used, as the Friars, to suck from the meanest, and to be sucked
by the greatest. But what says our Statut (...) (...) 8.
Statute? (...) as all usury, being forbidden by the Law of God, is a sin and
(...), etc. And what (...) Homilybook? Verily so many as increase themselves by
usury -- they have (...). l. (...). (...).
their goods of the devils gift, etc. And what says blind Nature? (...) 17.
(...) 2.
Aristotle in one page (...) both (...) and (...), the (...). in (...).
(...) and the Dicer. And Agis the Athenian General, set fire upon all the
usurers books and bonds in the marketplace: then which fire Agesilaus was wont
to say, he never saw a fairer. But to return to the (...): Moses notes the
hatred of a man's wife to be the cause of much mischief, (...). 22. 13, 14.
Hence a divorce (...) in that case, Chapt. 24. 3. lest the husbands hatred,
should work the wives ruth or ruin, in case he should be (...) to (...) her. He
might put her away therefore, but not without a double (...) to himself. 1. By
his writing of divorce, he should give (...) to her honesty, and that she was
put away meetly (...) his hard-heartednesse toward her. 2. If she were again
(...) by a second husband, the first might not take her to wife (...), as
having once sor ever judged himself (...) of her surther fellowship. Husbands
should be gentle to their wives, because of their weakness: glasses are not
hardly handled; a small knock soon breaks them. But here are a number of
Nabals, a brood of Caldeans, a bitter and furious nation that have little (...)
in their (...) but wormwood; they have a true gall of bitterness in them, Col.
3. 20. whereas the very heathens at their weddings, pulled the gall out of all
their good cheer, and cast (...). (...).
it away; teaching thereby the married couples what to do. And God Almighty
professes that he hates putting away: threatening (...) cut off such unkind
husbands, as by their harshnesse caused (...) wives when they should have been
cheerful in Gods services, Malach. 2. 13.
(...) cover the Altar of the Lord with tears, with weeping and with crying
out, so that he regarded not the offering any more. Picus (...) mariti, says
Melancthon. The Pyanit is an emblem of an unkind husband: for in autumn he
casts off his (...), lest he should be forced to keep her in winter:
afterward, in the spring, he allures her to him again, and makes much of her.

Verst 9. Except it be for (...).]
This sin dissolves the marriage-knot, and directly fights against humane
society. See the (...) on (...). 15. 32. and on Joh. 8. 5. The Apostle adds the
(...) 117. v. 9.
(...) of wilful desertion, 1 Cor 7. 15. The civil Laws of the Empire
permitted divorce for diverse other causes. In Turkey the woman may sue a divorce
only then, when her husband would abuse Blounts (...) Levant.
her (...) nature, which she does, by taking off her shoe before the Judges,
and holding it the sole upward, but speaking nothing for (...) of the fact.

Verse 10. If the case of a man be so with his wife]
viz. That (...) may not rid his hands of her when he will; better be married
to a (...) ague then to a bad wife, said Simonides.

It is not good to marry]
It is not evil to marry, but good to Bern de bon. (...).
be wary; to look ere one leap. Alioqui saliens (...) videat, (...) est
antequam debeat, as Bernard has it. Most men, as (...) Disciples look not to
the commodities but discommodities of wedlock, and other things, and are
discontented. But as there be two kinds of antidotes against poison, viz. hot
and cold: so against the troubles of life, whether single or married, viz.
(...) and Patience, the one hot, the other cold, the one quenching, the other
quickening.

Verse 11. All men cannot receive this saying]
Nor may we simply pray for the gift of continency, but with submission, since
it (...) not simply necessary to salvation: but only of expediency: inasmuch
(...) he that can keep himself unmarried, has little else to care for but how
he may please the Lord, and attend upon his 1 (...) 7 (...). (...).
work without distraction, sitting close at it (as the Greek word (...).
signifies) and not taken off by other (...). An instance whereof was clearly
to be seen in George Prince of Anhalt, whose family is said to (...) been
(...), Academia, Curia, a Church, an University and a Court; whose sanctity and
chastity in the single (...) to his dying day was such, that Melancthon
publicly delivered it of him, that he was the man, that of any then alive,
might most certainly expect the promised reward of eternal life: But Ex (...)
boc (...). (...).
this is not every man's happiness: and where it is, the pride of virginity, is
no (...) foul a sin then impurity, (...) Augustine. And (...) a single man and a
(...) in the Primitive Church (...), that the marriage bed undefiled was true
chastity. Congressum (...). (...) (...). (...). lib (...).
Those Popish votaries, that boasted so much of the gift of continency in
themselves, and exacted it of others, have (for a punishment of (...) arrogance
and violence) been often given up to notorious filthiness: as the Cardinal of
Cremona, after his stout replying in the Council of London against Priests
marriage, was (...). 11.
shamely taken, the night following, with a notable whore. (...) (...). (...)
Mon. 1065.
(...) Canterbury, a great enemy to Priests marriage, for all his gay show of
Monkish virginity and single life, had (...). 1062.
a son called (...) Monachus Cadonensis, whom he so gladly preferred to be
Abbot of St Albons. Dr Weston ((...) in the Ibid 1326.
disputation at Oxford against Cranmer, (...) and Ridly, who also (...) upon
them, inveighing against Cranmer, for Ibid. (...).
that he had been, sometimes a married man,) was not long after taken in
adultery, and for the same was by Cardinal Poole put from (...) his spiritual
livings.

Save they to whom it is given]
Maldonate the Jesuit says, it is given to any one that is but willing to
have it, and asks it of God: and that, because Marriage is given to all that
are willing to it. But this is 1 False for our Savior excepts Eunuchs. (...).
Inconsequent, 1 Cor. 7.
because the gift of Marriage proceeds (...) a principle of nature, but
continency from a special indulgence: which they that (...) not, are required
to marry for a remedy, And yet (...) most injuriously (...) some to marry at
any time, as there Clergy, all at some times: and that, not (...) a (...) of
convenience, but (...) and (...).

Verse 12. Which were so born]
Of a frigid constitution of body and unapt for generation. This is not
continency but (...), (...), a defect in nature.

Which were made Eunuchs of men]
Evirati (...) of manhood, as in the Court of Persia of old, and of Turkey at
this day; where Christans children are not gelded only, but deprived of all
their (...), (...) the (...) of nature with a silver quill: which (...) custom
was brought in among them by Selymus the (...), out of jealousy lest his
Eunuchs were not so chaste as they (...) have been, in keeping their Ladies
beds. For, though made (...) by men, yet are they not without their fleshly
(...), yea they are magni amatores mulierum, as she in Terence (...).

Which have made themselves Eunuchs.]
Not gelded themselves, as Origin and some others in the Primitive times, by
mistake of this text. (So Tertullian tells of Democritus, that he pulled out In
(...).
his own eyes, because he could not look upon women and not lust (...) them:
wherein he did but publish his extreme folly to the Joseph. lib. 2. de (...),
cap. 6.
whole City, says he) Nor yet tied themselves by vow to perpetual continency,
out of a superstitious opinion of meriting heaven thereby, as the (...) of old,
and the (...) Clergy now: But live single, that they may serve God with more
freedom, fighting against fleshly lusts (that fight against the soul) with
(...) spiritual weapons, Meditation, Prayer, Abstinence, etc. which are (...)
through God to the pulling down of Satan's strong holds set up in the heart.
Hence the Hebrew, Syriack, Chaldee and Arabic render this text, Qui castr
arunt animam suam, which have gelded their (...). And the truth is, there they
must begin, that will do any thing in this kind to purpose. Incesta est, and
fine stupro, (...) stuprum cupit, (...) Seneca. And S. Paul's virgin must be
holy both in body, and in spirit, 1 Cor. 7. 34.

Verse 13. Then (...) there brought unto him little ones]
By their parents careful of their (...) good. We must also (...) ours, as we
can, to Christ. And 1. By praying for them before, at, and after their birth.
2. By timely bringing them to the ordinance of baptism with faith, and much
joy in such a privilege. 3. By training them up in Gods holy fear; (...) God
to persuade their hearts, as Noah did for his son Iapheth. We may speak
perswasively, but God only (...): as Rebekah might cook the (...), but it was
Isaac only, (...) gave the (...).

And the Disciples rebuked them]
They held it a (...) below their-Lord to look upon little ones. But it is not
with our God, Non (...) ex (...) a. l. (...) lovi
as with their Idol that had no leisure to attend smaller matters. Christian
Children are the Churches nursery: the devil seeks to destroy them, as he did
the babes of Bethlehem: but Christ has a gracious respect unto them, and sets
them on a rock that is higher then they.

Verse 14. For of such is the Kingdom]
That is, all the blessings of heaven and earth comprised in the covenant,
belong both to these and such as these, Matthew. 18. 3. Let them therefore have
free recourse to me, who will both own them, and crown them with life eternal.

Verse 15. And he laid his hands on them]
So putting upon them his fathers blessing, as Jacob did upon Joseph's sons,
whom by this symbol he adopted for his own. And albeit our Savior baptized not
these infants (as neither did he those that were bigger,) yet for as much as
they were confessedly capable of Christ's gifts, they were doubtless capable of
the signs and seals of those gifts: if capable of imposition of Christ's hands,
of his benediction, and kingdom, then capable also of baptism, which saves
us, (...) St Peter, in the time present, because the use thereof is permanent
(...) Pet. 3. 21.
(though the act transient) so long as one lives. Whenever a sinner repents
and believes on the promises, Baptism (the seal thereof) is as powerful and
effectual, as if it were then presently administered. The (...), and book of
sentences say, that Lib. 4 (...). 7. cap. 1, (...).
Confirmation is of more value then Baptism, and gives the holy Ghost more
plentifully and (...). And the Papists generally (...) this text, to establish
their Sacrament of Confirmation, or (...) of children. But 1. These were little
infants, not led but brought in their mothers arms. 2. (...), as they use it,
was never commanded to Christ's Ministers, nor (...) by his (...).

Verse 16. And be hold one came]
One of good rank, a Ruler, Luke 18. 18. of good estate, for he was rich, and
had great revenue ((...), says Luke, (...), says Matthew, he had a good title
to that he had, and he lived not beside it.) He was also a Matthew 19. 22. (...)
(...)
young man, in the prime and pride of his age, and had been well bred; both for
point and civility, he came congeeing to our Savior, Mark. 10. 17. And for
matter of piety, he was no Sadducee, for he (...) after eternal life, which
they denied. And although but young, he hearkens after heaven: and though he
were rich, he comes running to Christ, through desire of information: whereas
great men (...) not to run, but to walk leisurely, so to maintain their
authority. Lastly, he knew much of Gods Law, and had done much: so that he
seemed to himself to want work, to be aforehand with God. Christ also looked
upon him and loved him, as he was a tame creature, a moral man, and fit to
live in a commonwealth.

What good thing shall I do?]
A most needful and difficult question, rarely moved, by rich men especially,
whose hearts are (...) upon their halfpenny, as they say, whose mouths utter
no (...) language but the horse leeches, Give, give. Who will show us any good,
etc? a good purchase, a good peny-worth, etc? Howbeit, by the manner of his
expressing himself, this Gallant seems to (...). tract.
have been a Pharisee and of that sort of Pharisees (for there were (...).
(...). 3.
seven sorts of them, says the Talmud,) which was named Quid (...) facere, and
faciam illud: Tell me what I should do and I will do it. They that know not
Christ, would go to heaven by their good meanings and good doings: this is a
piece of natural Popery, that must be utterly abandoned, ere eternal life can
be obtained.

That I may have eternal life]
He had a good mind to heaven, and cheapens it, but was not willing to go to
the price of it, that thorow-sale of all: Good desires may be found in
hellmouth, as in Balaam, some short-winded wishes at least. The Spies praised
the land as pleasant and plenteous, but they held the (...) impossible, and
thereby discouraged the people. Many like well of Abraham's bosom, but not so
well of Dives his door. They seek to Christ, but when he says, Take up the
Cross and follow me: they stumble at the cross and felt backward. Their
desires (...) heaven are lazy and sluggish, like the door that turns upon the
hinges, but yet hangs still on them: so these Wishers, and Woulders, for all
their faint and weak desires after heaven, still hang fast on the hinges of
their sins: they will not be wrought off (...)
from the things of this world, they will not part with their fitness and
sweetness, though it be to reign for ever. Judge. 9. 11. Theatinus in St
Ambrose would rather loose his sight then his sin of intemperance: so many,
their souls.

Verse 17. Why call thou me good?]
And if I be not good, much less art thou, what good conceits soever thou have
of thy self. Here then our Savior learns this yonker, (...), and
selfannihilation. (...).


There is none good but one, that is God]
He both is good original, (...). 119. (...).
(others are good by participation only) and does good abundantly, freely,
constantly, for thou Lord art good, and ready to for give, says David, Psalm.
86. 5. And let the power of my Lord Numb. 14 17.
be great, says Moses, in pardoning this rebellious people. In the Original
there is a letter greater then ordinary in the word jigdal (...) (...). etc.
(be great) to show, say the Hebrew-doctours, that though (...) people should
have tempted God, or murmured against him ten times more then they did, yet
their perverseness should not interrupt (...). Tiberias (...).
the course of his ever-flowing overflowing (...).

If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments]
That is (says Luther) Morero, die out of hand: for there is no man lives that
sins not. It (...) storied of Charles the fourth, King of France, that being
one time affected with the sense of his many and great sins, he fetched a deep
sigh and said to his wife, now, by the help of God, I will so carry my self all
my life long, that I never S. (...). (...). Christ. (...).
offend him more: which word he had no sooner uttered, but he presently fell
down and died. It is not our Saviors (...) here to teach, that heaven may be
had or earned by keeping the law: for Adam in his innocence, if he had so
continued, could not have merited heaven, neither do the Angels, nor could
Christ himself, had he been no more then a man. None but a proud Luciferian
would have said, as Vega the Popish Perfectionary did, Coelum gratis non
accipiam, I will not go to heaven for naught or on free-cost. But our Savior
here shapes this young Pharisee an answer, according to his question. He would
(...) be saved by doing, Christ sets him that to do, which no man living can
do, and so (...) him his error. He sets him to school to the law, that hard
schoolmaster, that sets us such lessons as we are never able to learn, ((...)
Christ our elder-brother teach us, and do our exercise for us) yea brings us
forth to God, as that schoolmaster in Livy did all his scholars (the flower of
the Roman Nobility) to Hannibal: who if he had not been more merciful then
otherwise, they had all perished.

Verse 18. Thou shall do no murther]
Our Savior instanceth Primo (...). (...). M Ley his (...). (...). P 99.
the Commandments of the second table only, as presupposing those of the first:
for the second table must be kept in the first: and the whole Law, say the
Schools, is but one copulative. The two tables of the law (says a Reverend
Divine) are, in their object answerable to the two natures of Christ: For God
is the object of one, man of the other. And as they meet together in the person
of Christ, so must they be united in the affections and endeavors of a
Christian.

Verse 19. Thou shall love thy neighbor, etc.]
Which because thou do not (as appears because thou will not part with thy
possessions to relieve the poor,) (...) much less do thou love God, and
therefore art not the man thou take thy self forCivil men overween
themselves, and boast of their moral (...): yet make no conscience of the
lesser breaches of the second table, nor yet of contemplative wickedness,
which yet angreth God, Gen 6. 6. and lets in the devil, 2 Cor. 10. And these
are the worlds very honest men, for lack of better: as a cab of doves-dung was
dear meat in the famine of Samaria, where better could not be come by.

Verse 20. All these things have I kept]
Lie and all: as now (...) mendacium nemo bominum de se dixit. Pareus (...)
bypocritam se gloiatur. (...).
the Popish Pharisees dream and brag that they can keep the Law, and spare.
They can do more then, then any that ever went before them, Psalm. 143. 3. Job
15. 14. Jam. 3. 2. Oecolampadius says, that none of the (...) lived out a full
thousand years (which is a number of perfection) to teach us, that here is no
perfection of (...). David's heart smote him for doing that which (...) highly r
commended him for.

What (...) I yet?]
Gr. Wherein am I yet behind with God? (...).
He thought himself somewhat aforehand, and that God, belike, was in his debt.
Truly many now-a days grow crooked and aged with over-good opinions of
themselves, and can hardly ever beset right again. They stand upon their
comparisons, I am as good as thou: nay upon their disparisons, I am not as this
Publican. No, for thou art worse; yea for this, because thou think thy self
better. This arrogant youth makes good that of Aristotle, who, differencing
between age and youth, makes it a property (...).
of young men, to think they know all things, and to affirm lustily their own
placits. He secretly insults over our Savior (...). 1.
as a trivial teacher, and calls for a lecture beyond the (...), worthy
therefore to have been sent to Anticyra: surely as when Drusus in his defense
against a nimble Jesuit that called him (...), alleged that (...) must be in
sundament is fidei, the (...) replied that even that assertion was heresy: So
when this young man affirmed that he had ever kept the Commandments, and asked
what lack I yet? Christ might well have said, thou art therefore guilty of the
breach of all the Commandments, because thou take thy self to be keeper of
all: and thou therefore lackest every thing, because thou think thou lackest
nothing.

Verse 21. If thou (...) be perfect]
As thou boastest and aimest: and which never yet any man was, nor can be here.
The (...) of this text made some of the Ancients count and call it consilium
perfectionis, a counsel of perfection: such as whosoever did observe should do
something more then the law required: and so merit for themselves an higher
degree of glory in heaven then others had. Hence Bernard writes, that this
sentence of our Savior filled the Monasteries with Monks, and the deserts with
Anchorites.

Go sell all, etc.]
A personal command (for trial and discovery) as was that of God to Abraham,
Go kill thy son (...). Christians may possess; but yet as if they possessed
not, they must (...) loose to all outward things, and be ready to forgo them,
when called to loose them for Christ.

And give to the poor]
So shall thou clear thy self from all (...) quod ad pedes (...). (...) to
(...).
suspicion of coveteousnesse; which properly consists in pinching and saving:
and so is distinguished by the Apostle from extortion, which stands (...)
immoderate getting, 1 Cor. 6 10. 1 Timothy 3. 3.

And (...) have treasure in heaven]
Far beyond the (...) of Egypt, which yet is called Rahab, Psalm. 89. 10.
because of the riches power and pride thereof. Oh get a Patriarchs eye to see
the wealth and worth of heaven: and then we shall soon make Moses his choice.
In the year of grace 759, certain Persian (...) fell into that madness, that
they persuaded themselves (...).
and sundry others, that if they sold all they had, and gave it to the poor,
and then afterward threw themselves naked from off the walls into the river,
they should presently be admitted into (...). (...) hac insania (...), says
mine Author. (...) cast away by this mad enterprise. How much better (if
without superstition and opinion of merit) Amadeus Duke of (...)) who (...)
asked by certain Ambassadors that came to (...).
his court, what hounds he had, for they desired to see them? showed them the
(...) day a pack of poor people feeding at his table, and said, these are the
hounds wherewith I hunt after heaven.

Verse 22. He went away sorrowfull]
That (...) should require that, which he was not willing to perform. If heaven
be to be had upon no other terms, Christ may keep his heaven to himself; he will
have none. How many have we now (...), that must be gainers by their religion,
which must be another Diana to the (...). They are resolved howsoever to loose
nothing, suffer nothing, but rather kick up all: Jeroboamo gravior (...)
regionis quam religionis. The King of Navarre told (...), that in the cause of
Religion he would launch no further into the sea, then he might be sure to
return safe to the haven. A number of such Politic professors we have, that
come to Christ (as this young man did) hastily, but depart heavily, when once
it comes to a wholesale of all for Christ, which yet is the first lesson, the
removens prohibens.

Verse 23. A rich man shall hardly enter]
With that burden of thick clay, that camels-bunch on his back: heaven is a
stately (...) est opibus non (...). Et (...) (...)
palace with a narrow portall; there must be both stripping and (...), ere one
can get through this strait gate. The greatest wealth is ordinarily tumoured up
with the greatest swelth of rebellion against God. Vermis divitiarum est
superbia, says Augustine, Pride breeds in wealth, as the worm does in the
apple, and he is a great rich man indeed, and greater then his riches, that
does not think himself great, because he is rich. Charge those 1 Timothy 6. 17.
that are rich that they be not high-minded (for the devil will soon blow up
such a blab in them, if they watch not) and that they trust not in uncertain
riches, so as to make their gold their God, as all worldlings do, and worse:
for could we but rip up such men's hearts we should find written in them The
God of this present world. They that mind earthly things have destruction for
their (...), Philip. 3. Have them we may and use them too, but mind them we
may not, nor love them, 1 John 2. 15. that is spiritual (...), such as Gods
soul hates, and he smites his hands at, (...) 22. 13.

Verse 24 It is easier for a camel, etc.]
Or, cable. rope, as some render it. Either serves; for it is a proverbiall
speech, setting (...) (...).
forth the difficulty of the thing. Difficile est, says St Hierom, ut
praesentibus bonis quis fruatur and futuris, ut (...) ventrem (...) mentem
(...), ut de (...) ad delicias transeat, ut in coelo and in terra gloriosus
appareat. Pope Adrian the sixth said that Adrian (...).
nothing befell him more unhappy in all his life, then that he had been head of
the Church, and Monarch of the Christian commonwealth. When I first entered
into orders, said another Pope, I (...).
had some good (...) of my salvation; when I became a Cardinal, (...). a Lap
i. (...) com. in Numb. 11. 11. (...). 1. (...).
I doubted of it: but since I came to be Pope, I do even almost despair. And
well he might, as long as he sat in that chair of pestilence, being that man
of sin, that son of perdition, 2 These. (...). (...).
2. 3. Ad hunc statum venit Romana Ecclesia, said Petrus Aliacus long since, ut
non esset dignareginisi per reprobos. The Popes, like the devils, are then
thought to do well, when they cease to do In (...).
hurt, says Johan. Sarisburiensis. They have had so much grace left we see
(some of them howsoever,) as to acknowledge, that their good and their blood
rose together, that honors changed their manners, and that they were the worse
men for their great wealth: and that as Shimei seeking his servants lost
himself; so they, by reaching after riches and honors, lost their souls. Let
rich men often (...) this terrible text, and take heed. Let them untwist their
cables, that is, their heart, by humiliation, James 5. 1. and 1. 10. till it be
made like small threeds as it must be, before they can enter into the eye of a
needle, that is, eternal life.

Verse 25. They were exceedingly amazed]
Because they knew that all men either are or would be rich; and that of rich
man, scarce any but trusted in their riches. Therefore, though our Savior told
them, Mark. 10 24. that he meant it of those only that relied upon their
riches, yet they remained as much unsatisfied as before, and held it an hard
case that so many should miss of heaven. We have much ado to make men believe
that the way is half so hard as Ministers make it.

Verse 26. With men this is impossible]
Because rich men's (...) are ordinarily so wedded and wedged to the world, that
(...). 11. 41.
they will not be loosned, but by a powerful touch from the hand (...) 2.
of heaven. Think not therefore, as many do, that there is no other hell but
poverty, no better heaven then abundance. Of rich (...) they say, What should
such a man ail? The Irish ask, what they mean to die, etc. The gold ring and
gay clothing carried it in St James his time. But he utterly (...) ked (...)
partiality: and (...) us that God has chosen the poor in this world, rich in
faith to be heirs of his kingdom; In which respect he bids the brother (...)
low degree, (...) in that he is exalted in Christ.

But with God all things are possible]
He can quickly root out confidence in the creature, and rivet rich men to
himself. He can do more then he will: but whatsoever he wills, that he does,
without stop or hinderance. Men may want of their will for want of power.
Nature may be interrupted in her course, as it was when the fire burnt not the
three Worthies, the water drowned not Peter walking upon it, etc. Satan may be
crossed and chained up: But who has resisted the Almighty? who ever waxed
fierce (...). 9 4.
against God and prospered? Nature could say, All things are (...) (...). Linus
Poeta.
to God, and nothing impossible: howbeit for a finite creature to believe the
infinite Attributes of God, he is not able to do it thoroughly, without
supernatural grace.

Verse 27. Behold we have for saken all, etc.]
A great All sure, a few broken boats, nets, household stuff: and Christ
maintained (...). Pareus.
them too: and yet they ask, what shall we have? Neither is it without an
emphasis, that they begin with a Behold. Behold we have forsaken all, as if
Christ were therefore greatly beholden to them, and if the young man were
promised treasure in heaven, doing so, and so, then they might challenge it,
they might say with the Prodigal Give me the portion that pertains unto me.

Verse 28. Ye which have followed me in the Regeneration]
As if our Savior should have said, to forsake all is not enough (...) ye be
regenerate: So some sense it. Others by Regeneration understand the estate of
the Gospel, called elsewhere a new heaven, and a new earth, 2 Pet. 3. 13. the
world to come, Heb. 2. 5. for God plants the heavens, and lays the foundation
of the earth, that he may say to Zion, thou art my people. There are that
understand by regeneration the general resurrection (of which (...) some think
Plato had heard, and therefore held, that in the revolution of so many years
men should be just in the same estate, wherein they were before.) These that
follow this latter sense, read the text thus by an alteration of points, Ye
which have followed me, shall, in the regeneration (when the Son of man shall
sit in his glory) fit upon twelve thrones, etc.

Ye shall also sit upon twelve thrones]
As so many Kings. Kings they are here but somewhat obscure ones, as
Melchisedech was; but shall then appear with Christ in glory, far outshining
Colos. 3. 4.
the Sun in his strength, higher then all the Kings of the earth. Psalm (...).
27.
When Daniel had (...) the greatness and glory of all the four Monarchies of
the world, at last he comes to speak of a Kingdom, which is the greatest and
mightiest under the whole heaven, Dan. 7. 18.
and that is the Kingdom of the Saints of the most high. So glorious is their
estate even here: what (...) it be then at that great day? And if the Saints
(every of them) shall judge the Angels; What shall the Apostles do? surely as
they (...) or (...) men in this world, so shall it fare with them at the
general Judgment.

Verse 29. Shall receive an hundred sold]
In reference to Isaacks hundredfold increase of his seed. Genesis 26. 12. or
that best of. grounds. Mat. 13, Those that do pillage us they do but husband
us, sow for us, when they make long forrowes on our backs Psalm. 126. and ride
over our heads. Psalm. 66, 12, Gordius the Mattyr said; It is to my loss, if
you bate me any thing in my sufferings. Crudelitas vestra nostra gloria, said
they in Tertullian, your cruelty is our glory: and the harder we are put to it,
the greater shall be (...). (...).
our reward in heaven. Nay on earth too; the Saints shall have their losses for
Christ recompensed, either in money or monies-worth either in the same, or a
better thing. Job had all doubled to him, Valentinian, for his tribuneship, the
Empire cast upon him, (...) (...) the Apostate, who had put him out of office,
for his religion. Qu pro Christi (...) accepit (...). (...).
Q. Elizabeth (whose life (...) a long while had been like a ship in the midst
of an Irish sea) after long restraint was exalted from misery to (...), from a
prisoner to a (...). Optanda nimirum est jactura quae lucro majore pensatur,
says Agricola. It is, (...) a lovely loss, that is made up with so great
gain. (...) Q. Elizabeth forknown, whiles she was in prison, what a glorious
reign she should have had for 44 years, she would never have wished her self a
milk maid. So, did but the Saints understand what great things abide them both
here and hereafter, they would bear any thing cheerfully. An hundred (...)
here, and (...) life hereafter: On who would not then turn spiritual
purchaser? Well might St Paul say, godliness is profitable to all things. Well
might the Psalmist say, In doing (in suffering) thy will, there is great
reward. Not for doing it only, but in doing it: for Righteousness is its own
reward. St Mark has it thus, He that leaves house, brethren, sisters, father,
etc. shall receive the same in kind: house, brethren, (...), father, etc. That
is, 1. He shall have communion with God and his consolations, which are Ne (...)
better then them all; as (...) that Italian Marquess that left all for Christ
avowed them: and as (...), when his City was taken by the Barbarians, (...) us
to God, Lord let me not be troubled at the loss of my gold and silver, for
thou art all in all unto me. 2. He many times gives his suffering servants here
such supplies of their outward losses, in raising them up other friends and
means, as (...) abundantly countervail what they have parted with. Thus, though
David was driven from his wife, and she was given to another, God gave him a
friend Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.
whose love was beyond the love of women. So though Naomi lost her husband and
children; Boaz, (...), and Obed became to her instead of all. The Apostles left
their houses, and housholdstuffe to follow Christ: but then they had the houses
of all godly people open to them and free for them: and happy was that Lydia,
that could entertain them: so that having nothing, they 2 Cor. 6. 10.
yet possessed all things. They left a few friends, but they found (...) more
where ever they came. Wherefore it was a (...) sarcasme of Julian the Apostate,
when reading this text, he jearingly demanded, whether they should have an
hundred wives also, for that one they had parted with? 3. God commonly exalts
his people to the contrary good to that evil they suffer for him: as Joseph of
a slave became a ruler: as Christ that was judged by men, is Judge of all men.
The first thing that Caius did, after he came to the Empire, was to (...)
Agrippa, who had been imprisoned for wishing him Emperor. Constantine embraced
Paphnutius, and kissed his lost eye. The King of Poland sent (...) his enerall,
who had lost his hand in his wars, a golden hand instead thereof. God is far
more liberal to those that serve him, suffer for him. Can any son of Iesse do
for us as he can?

Verse 30. But many that are first, etc]
Because Peter and the rest had called for their pay, (almost before they had
been at any pains for Chtist) he therefore quickens them in these words:
bidding them bestir themselves better, left others, that are now hindermost,
should get beyond them, and carry the crown. Lay 1 Timothy 6.
hold on eternal life, says Paul: intimating that it is hanged on high as a
garland, so that we must reach after it, strain to, it. So run that ye may
obtain; Look you to your work, God will take care of your wages: you need never
trouble your selves about that matter.

CHAP. XX.
Verse 1. For the Kingdom of heaven etc.]
THat last sentence Christ further illustrateth and enforces by this following
parable. Peter and the rest were in danger to be puffed up with the preconceit
of their abundant reward (...), chap. 19 28, 29. This to prevent, and that they
might not stand upon their terms and tiptoes, they are again and again given
to know, that (...) that are first shall be last, and last first.

Which (...) out early in the morning]
God is found of them that seek him not, Isa 65. 1. Yea the Father seeks such
to worship him, Ioh. 4. 23. he solliciteth suitours and servants. A wonderful
condescension it is, that he looks out of himself upon the Saints and Angels
in heaven, Psalm. 113. 6. How much more upon us poor earthworms?

Laborers into his Vineyard.]
Not loiterers. Jacob saw the Angels, some ascending, others descending, none
standing still. God has made (...) to play in the waters, not so men: they
must be doing, that will keep in with God.

Verse 2. For a penny a day.]
Not for eternal life, (for this those murmuring merit-mongers never had, who
yet had their penny) but something (what ever it were) that gave the laborers
good content: that it was for which each of them followed Christ, whether for
meat perishing, or enduring. Job. 6. 27.


Verse 3. Others standing idle.]
For any good they did, or could do, till sent into the vineyard, and set a
work by God. Till then we are mere excrements of humane society. Nos numerus
sumus, etc.

Verse 4. Go (...) also into the Vineyard.]
God has his times to call men in: Only let them stand in Gods way, wait at
the posts of wisdoms gates, at the pool of (...), etc. (...) and (...) est
adgratiam vocatio, Ephesians. 1. 11. The separation of the Saints is wonderful,
Exodus 33. 16.

Verse 5. About the sixth and ninth hour.]
God has his servants of all sexes and sizes, calling when and whom he
pleases. And they have the comfort and credit of it that are first called, so
they walk worthy of their time and that vocation wherewith they are called,
Ephesians. 3. 1. Thus it was an honor to Mnason, that he Act. 21. 16.
was an old Disciple; and to (...) and Junia, that Paul Romans 16 7.
should say of them, Who also were in Christ before (...).

Verse 6. And about the eleventh hour.]
About five a clock in the afternoon. When it was well-nigh time to leave work.
(...) sero, si serio. Howbeit delays are dangerous, (...) are abrupt, and
headlong, and if once past, irrecoverable. If (...) ye will enquire, enquire,
(...), (...), Isa. 21. 12. (...) that say, men may repent hereafter, say truly,
but not safely. They that allege these here that came in at the eleventh
hour, (...) consider that these were never called till then. But now God
(...), yea commands all men every where to repent, Act. 17. 30. And now he is
more peremptory, (...), then ever heretofore, See Heb. 2. 3. How many are daily
taken away in their offers and eslayes, before they have prepared their hearts
to cleave to God?

Verse 7. Go ye also (...) the Vineyard.]
At this hour the (...) was sent in, and he (...) him: for he justifies
Christ, condemns himself, chides his fellow for railing, prays for a part in
Paradise, etc. he lived much in a little time. Howbeit (...) is a singular
example, one of the miracles wherewith Christ would honor the ignominy of his
cross. Neither is it often seen (...) of, that old men are converted. They are
usually so set in (...) they are hardly removed: such an hoof they have over
their hearts, that scarce any thing will affect them. Abraham in the old
Testament, and Nicodemus in the New, were called in their (...) age. Name a
third he that can.

Verse 8. Says unto his steward.]
That is, to his Son Christ whom he has made judge of all, to give unto every
man according to his works. This he will do with demonstration of his (...)
both justice (so that none shall receive less then was promised him) and
mercy, (so that all shall receive more then they (...).) For although their
penny be here called their hire, (...) elsewhere (...) reward, yea their wages,
yet all is of (...).

Verse 9. And when they came.]
These last (...) were first (...), because they trusted not to the worth of
their own works, (...) to Gods free grace and goodness: when the other are
turned off in displeasure, with Toll quod tuum est and vade: Take thy penny and
be packing.

Verse 10. They supposed that they, etc.]
Good works are (...) Regni caelestis, says Bellarmine. But God is no such
merchant. Caelum gratis non accipiam, I will not have heaven for nothing, says
Vega. Thou shall never have it therefore; (...) give thee that gift.

Verse 11. They murmured, etc.]
They had that they agreed for, some temporal blessings, which is all that
carnal men commonly care for. Or if they seek after spiritual things, it is
not for any beauty he sees, or taste he finds in them, but only as a bridge
to bring them to heaven; as Spira confessed of himself. It is not good
therefore to indent and bargain with God how much he shall give us, either of
temporals or spirituals: for so you may have your penny, and yet be
discontented, that it is (...) a penny and no more. Profits, pleasures, honors,
appear to be but empty things, when men are to go into another world.

Verse 12. Thou have made them equal.]
Lo this is the guise of (...) hypocrites to be quarrelling, and contending
with God and man, as unworthily (...) withal. Thus those Jewish (...), Isa.
58. 3. hit God in the teeth with their good services, and small thanks. So the
proud (...) sets forth not his wants, but his worth. (...), Jacob cries out in
a low language, Domine non sum dignus, Genesis 30. 10. So does Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 9.
the Centurion, Matthew. 8. 6. the Baptist, Mat. 3. 11. St August (...), Non sum
dignus, quem tu (...), Domine, Lord, I am (...) worthy of thy love.

Verse 13. Friend, I do thee no wrong.]
Friend he is called, not (...), though he were a (...), a merit-monger. In
arguing the case with others, use hard arguments, but in a soft language; This
will soonest work: for man is a crosle crabbed creature, and if roughly dealt
with, will sooner slight you for your passion, then regard your reason, though
never so convincing, because not well managed. There are a generation whose
words Romans 3. 12. -- 19.
are swords, whose tongues are rapiers to run men through with, Psalm. 17.
upon every small occasion, and their throats as a gaping grave to (...). 17.
14.
bury them in.

Verse 14. Take that thine is, and (...).]
A (...) sentence. (...). Imp. (...) quantum est, (...) est nisi (...), quam di
(...). (...).
David blesses himself from those men of Gods hand: which have their portion
here, and that is all they are to look for. Valde protest at us sum, said Luther
when great (...) were offered him, me nolle sic a Deo satiari. A gracious
spirit (...) rest satisfied with low things. The Turkish Empire, as big as it
is, says the same Luther, is nothing else but a crust of bread, which the good
man of the house casts to his dogs.

Verse 15. It is not lawful for me, etc.]
This is Gods speech (who is the great proprietary of all) it may not be ours
who have nothing of our own, but all in trust: So that when we present any
thing to God, we must say as David did, 1 Chronicles. 29. 14. and afterward
Justinian the Emperor, (...) Georg Cedren. Compend hist.
Of thine own we give thee: for all that is in the heaven and the earth is
thine: St Bernard reports of Pope Eugenius, that meeting with a poor but honest
Bishop, he secretly gave him (...) jewels where with he might present him. If
God did not first furnish us, we should have nothing wherewith to honor him,
or do good to others.

Is thine eye evil, because I am good?]
It Is commonly observed, that witches and those that are in league with the
devil to do mischief, are never given over so to do, till they come to have
an evileye. Hence that, nescio quis teneros, etc. and those that are (...),
(...) (...).
bewitched, are said to be overseen, that is to be looked upon with an envious
eye. Envy is a quick-sighted and sharp-fanged malignity, Prove. 27. 4. and does,
de aliena mente tam prompte quam prave conjicere, as one says, nimbly and
naughtily guess at another Degrees. Whear. Relect. Antelog p. 11.
man's meaning.

Verse 16. So the last shall be first, etc.]
This is the purport of the preceding parable. Application is the life of
preaching.

Few are chosen.]
It Is a strange speech of Chrysostom, in his fourth sermon to the people of
Antioch, where he was much beloved, Non arbitror inter Sacerdotes multes esse
qui salvi (...).
and did much good. How many, think you; shall be saved in this City? It will
be an hard speech to you, but I will speak it: Though there be so many
thousands of you, yet there cannot Chrysostom Hom. 3. in Act.
be found an hundred that shall be saved, and I doubt of them too: For what
villainy is there in youth? What sloth in old men? and so he goes on. See the
notes on Mat. 7. 14.

Verse 17. Took the twelve Disciples.]
To rouse them and raise them out of their carnal fears and dejections.
Jerusalem was the Revel. (...). 8.
(...) slaughter house, Luke 13. 33. (as Rome is now, which therefore is
spiritually called Jerusalem, Egypt, Sodom, etc) Hither our Savior bent his
course: hereupon they were amazed and afraid, Mark. 10. 32. and gave him
counsel to go back rather into Galilee for his own and their safety, Joh. 11
8. He takes them therefore apart, and tells them as follows, what they must
trust to: and that though he be brought to the dust of death, he will rise
again gloriously, to their great comfort.

Verse 18. Behold we go up to Jerusalem.]
Behold, as it requires attention (and this was no more then need, for St Luke
Luke 18. 34.
tells us that they understood none of these things, etc.) so it sets forth our
Saviors forwardness, to go this dangerous voyage.

Verse 19. To mock, and to scourge, and to crucify him.]
What are all our sufferings to his? and yet we think our selves undone, if but
touched: and in setting forth our calamities, we add, we multiply, we rise in
our discourse, like him in the Poet. I am thrice (...). (...).
miserable, nay ten, twenty, an hundred, a thousand times unhappie. And yet all
our sufferings are but as the (...) and chips of that cross, upon which
Christ, nay many Christians have suffered. In the time of Adrian the Emperor,
ten thousand Martyrs are said to have been crucified in the mount of Ararath,
crowned with thorns, and thrust into the sides with sharp darts, after the
example of the Lords passion. The chief of whom were Achaicus, Act. and Mon.
Heliades, Theodorus, Carcerius, etc.

Verse 20. Then came to him, etc.]
Then, most unseasonably when Christ had by the parable been teaching them
humility, and now was discoursing of his death and passion, then came these
sons of Zebedee to beg a principality in Christ's imaginary earthly Monarchy.
And this is not the first time of their so foul mistake, so unseasonable a suit
to him, or strife among themselves. The leprosy was cured at once in Naaman: so
is not (...) in the Saints, but by degrees, and at times.

The mother of Zebedees children.]
Set on by her two sons, who were ashamed to make the motion themselves, (but
as good they might, for Christ knew all, and therefore directs his answer to
them, Mark. 10. 35.) and she also was not well assured of the (...) of her
request, and therefore came curtesying and craving a certain thing: not telling
him what at first, as going somewhat against her conscience. And surely her
request had been impudent, but that she presumed upon her near alliance to
Christ: For she is thought to have been sister to Joseph, who was Pater Christi
politicus: and thence her boldness, by reason of her right of kindred by the
Fathers side. And this is some kind of carnal excuse; Yet not for her and her
sons foliy and vanity, in dreaming of an earthly kingdom, and therein a
distribution of honors and offices, as in David's and Solomon's days.

Verse 21. What will thou?]
We may not over-hastily engage our selves by promise of this or that to our
best friends, but hold off and deliberate. Alioqui saliens antequam videat,
cafurus Bern.
est (...) debeat.

The one on thy right hand]
Quid voveat dulci nutricula (...) Horat.
alumno? Our Savior had promised in the former chapter that the twelve should
sit upon twelve thrones, etc. These men's suit was for the first and second
seat. Self-love makes men ambitious, and (...) them to turn the glass to see
themselves bigger, others lesser then they are, Paul on the contrary, was least
of Saints, (...) of Apostles.

Verse 22. Ye know not what ye ask]
Ye ask and miss, because Jam 4. 1.
ye ask (...). A prayer for things not lawful, begs nothing but a denial, as
Moses did, in praying to enter into the land, Deuteronomy. 3. 25. as Job did in that
peevish request of his that God would Job 6. 8, 9.
let loose his hand and cut him off; as the Disciples did in that overcurious
enquiry, Lord, will thou at this time restore the Kingdom Act. 1. 6, 7, 8.
to Israel? Our Savior answers, that that is not fit for them to know. But a
better thing he could tell them, that they should shortly after be clothed
which the holy Ghost. God sometimes in much mercy crosses the prayers of his
poople, as he did David's for the childs life, who if he had lived, would have
been but a standing monument of David's shame. Was it not better for him to have
a Solomon? The Saints have their prayers out, either in money or moneys-worth:
provided they bring lawful petitions and honest hearts.

Are ye able to drink of the cup, etc.]
Afflictions are frequently set forth by this metaphor of a cup, taken say
some, from an ancient custom that the father of the family should give to each
under his charge a cup fit for his use, according to his bigness: Or, as
others think, from the manner of feasts, whereat the Symposiarch, or ruler of
the feast, as he is called, Ioh. 2. prescribed what and how much every man
should drink.

And to be baptized with the baptisme]
Or plunged over head and ears in the deep waters of affliction. Of these we
may (...) as one does of the Spa waters, that they are more wholesome then
pleasant. Ever since Christ cast his cross into them, as Moses did that tree,
Exodus 15. 25. the property of them is altered, the waters healed.

They say unto him, we are able]
In your own conceit at least, not else. For these two Disciples as they knew
not what they asked, so they knew not what they answered. And yet Maldonat has
the face to defend them in it, as if they here (...) their alacrity rather then
betrayed their precipitancy: Sed exitus (...) probavit: they showed their
valor at Christ's apprehension.

Verse 23. Ye shall drink indeed of my cup]
Illud solum quod (...) est, and limpidius. The Saints sip of the top of Gods
cup: as for the dregs, the wicked shall wring them out, and drink them up.

And be baptized, etc.]
Or ducked, washed (not drowned) as St Paul was in the shipwreck; or as the
baptized child, which shakes off the water, or is dried after baptism.
Afflictions says one, are called baptism because they set Gods mark upon us
(as baptism does) that we belong to God: This for outward afflictions. And for
desertion, it is called Christ's cup, because we are sure to pledge him in that
too, and be conformed unto him, as was Job, David, Heman, Psalm. 88 etc. Grace
is no target against affliction: but the best shall have terrors within, and
troubles without, as sure as the coat is on their back, or the heart in their
belly.

Is not mine to give]
i.e. It is no part of my present office: Or, I have no such commission from my
father to give precedencies to all that affect them. Christ hereby seeks to
raise up the low grovelling spirits of his Apostles to things supernatural,
supernall.

Verse 24. They were moved]
They were angry at that ambition in their fellows, that themselves were deeply
guilty of. So Diogines trampled Platoes pride, but with greater pride. So
Crassus earnestly inveighed against covetousness in others, when there was not
a more covetous caitiffe then he upon the earth. So Gregory the great stomaked
the title of universal Bishop to the Patriarch of Constantinople, which yet
himself affected, and his successor Boniface arrogated and usurped.

Verse 25. Jesus called them to him and said]
We must (by Christ's example) advance, cherish concord all we can, amongst ^
(...) (...) (...).
ministers especially, by casting out those make-bates, emulation and ambition.
Pareus was wont to say, that the only cause of all Church-dissensions was,
Ministers reaching after rule and pre-eminence, as did Diotrephes. And that if
this evil humor could possibly be purged (...), there would be a sweet
symmetrie, an happy (...) of all hearts.

And they that are great]
The Grandees of the earth. There is, says one, a greatness Belluine and
Genuine. In that, a beast may and does exceed us: In this we exceed ourselves
and others. Great men are not always wise, says Elihu, Job 32. 9. And (...)
me major nisi qui justior, said Agesilaus, when the King of Persia (...)
himself the great King. Calamitas nostra magnus est, said Mimus concerning
Pompey, the people applauding so (...) a (...). Privilegium unius conceditur in
(...) alterius, says a learned Doctor: and si vis esse vere (...), ne sis
instar utris (...) tumidi, sed instar uteri prole gravidi; (...) attollas inane
supercilium, sed exhibeas utile ministerium. Goodness is the only greatness.

Verse 26. But it shall not be so amongst you]
How express is that against Papal primacy and Lordly prelacy? When the Duke
shall be damned, what will become of the Bishop, said the clown to the bishop
of Cullen? Mr Whithead refused a Bishopric because he liked not to be Lorded.
And Mr Coverdale being deprived of his Bishopric in Q. Mary's days, would not
(for the same cause) be reinvested in Q. Elizabeth's, but taught a school.

Verse 27. Let him be your servant]
This is the ready way to rise. Neither may any think himself too good to serve
the Saints, to wash their feet, to minister to their necessities. Christ came
out of the bosom of his Father to fetch them to heaven. The holy Ghost
disdains not to dwell in their hearts. Angels are desirous to do them any good
office. Prophets think not much to minister to them, 1 Pet. 1. 12. Paul and
Apollo and Cephas are theirs, public servants to the Church; accounting it a
far greater matter prodesse quam praeesse, to seek men's salvation, then to
exercise dominion.

Verse 28. And to give his life a ransome]
A redemptory, a valuable rate, for it was the blood of God wherewith the
Church (...).
was purchased, Acts 20. 28. silver and gold could not do it, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.
nor any thing else but that counter-price given by (...).
Christ, 1 Timothy 2. 6.

Verse 29. And as they departed from Iericho]
Christ cured (...) in his locis (...) curatos esse crediderim. (...).
one blind man as he went into Jericho, Luke 18. and two as he went out; for
all the haste he had to go to Jerusalem. Hence such multitudes followed him, to
make up his ensuing triumph.

Verse 30. When they heard that Jesus passed by]
Happy it was for them that, though blind, yet they were not d eaf. For as
death came in by the ear, so does life. Hear and your souls shall live Isa 55.
3. a heavy ear is a singular judgment, Isa. 6. 10. a (...) ear a special
favor, Prove. 20. 12. when God struck Zaechary, (...). 1. he made him dumb, but
not deaf. When God struck Saul, he made him blind, but not deaf. When God
struck Mephibosheth he made him lame, but not deaf. There is a deaf Mark 9 25.
devil, and a deaf adder, and deaf man, that yet want for no ears, I sal.
(...). 4.
Isa. 43, 8. But he that hears instruction is in the way of life, says
Solomon. These two blind beggars had heard of Christ by the hearing of the ear,
but that satisfied them not, unless their eyes also might see him, Job 42. 5.
They way-lay therefore the Lord of light, who gives them upon their suit, both
sight and light, irradiates both organ and object, cures them of their both
outward and inward (...) at once.

Thou son of David]
They knew and acknowledged Christ to be the true Messiah. Few such knowing
blind beggars now (...). They are commonly more blind in mind then body,
loose and (...); such as are neither of any Church, nor commonwealth: but as
the baser sort of people in Swethland, who do always break the Sabbath, saying
that it is only for gentlemen to sanctify it: Or rather as the poor Brasilians,
who are said to be sine rege, lege, fide, without any government, law, or
Religion.

Verse 31. And the multitude rebuked them]
In prayer, we must look to meet with many rubs, and (...); but Gods spirit is
heroike, and gets over them all. The (...) will interrupt us, as the (...) did
Paul, Act. 16. 16. as the birds did (...), Genesis 15. 11. as those Samaritans did
the Jews in building the Temple, Nehem. 6. Hence we are bid Strive in prayer,
Colos. 4. 2. and watch in prayer: for Satan will be at our right hand as at
Iehoshuahs, Zach. 3. 1. watching his time to cast in, if not a (...), yet an
impertinent thought, thereby to bereave us of the benefit of our prayers:
besides our own natural indevotion through hardness of heart, heaviness of
body, multiplicity of worldly distractions and (...). All which we must break
through and cry the more earnestly as Bartimaeus here did, though checked by the
multitude. Have mercy on us, o Lord, etc. Daniel would not be kept from his God
for any danger of death, (...).
(...)(...) 6: nor the French Protestants restrain prayer, though King Henry 3.
made a law to forbid them to pray with their families. The sun shall sooner
stand still then the trade of godliness, and that continual intercourse that
is betwixt God, and the Christian soul.

Verse 32. And Jesus stood still]
See the admirable power of fervent prayer. Christ stands and (...) (for all
the haste of his journey to Jerusalem, which till he had finished, oh how was
he Preces (...) inantem remorantur.
(...) Luke 12. 50?) to hear the blind beggars petition. So the sun once stood
still in Gibeon, and the moon in the valley of (...) upon the prayer of worthy
Joshua, who set the trophies of (...) victory in the very orbs of heaven.

Verse 33. Lord, that our eyes might be opened]
Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold
the sun, (...). 11. 7, And yet how little is this mercy (...), because common.
Our corrupt natures heed nothing that we enjoy, as the eye sees nothing that
lies on it: but things at a distance it discerns clearly. Bona a tergo
formosissima. Copy of good things breeds satiety, and makes them no dainties,
till God for our folly many times makes us see the worth of them by the want of
them, and so commends and indears his favors to us. But what a blindness is
this, worse then that of Bartimeus, never to see the face, but the back only of
benefits?

Verse 34. And Jesus had compassion on them]
He made their case his own. Misericordia sounds as much as misery laid to Isa.
63. 15.
heart. Christ's bowels sounded upon the sight and suit of these blind beggars:
and this was beyond all alms, should he have done no more for them. For when
one gives an alms, he gives somewhat without himself, but by compassion we
relieve another by somewhat within and from our selves, whiles we draw out
(...) (not our sheaf only) to the hungry, Isa. 58. 10.

And immediately their eyes received sight]
This is not every blind man's happiness, that yet prays for sight. But there
is a better eyesight then that of the body, which if God vouchsafe to any in
bodily blindness (as he did to that blind boy of Gloucester that had suffered
imprisonment there for confessing the truth) it may be said to such surely as
Bishop Hooper the Martyr did to (...). and (...). sol. 1371.
him; Ah poor boy, God has taken from thee thy outward sight, but has given
thee another much more precious, etc. The like favor God showed to Didymus
Alexandrinus, who, though blind from his childhood, yet was not only an
excellent Artist, but an able Divine; and wrote certain Commentaries on the
Psalms, (...) in (...) vir. (...).
and likewise on the Gospels; being now (says Jerome, who relates it) above 83
years of age. Trithemius and Bozius report (...). de (...).
the like things, concerning one Nicasius de (...) a dutchman, who being
struck blind at three years old, became nevertheless an excellent scholar,
and skillful in the laws, which he publicly (...). (...) lib. (...). (...).
(...).
professed at Collen. Afterward he proceeded Master of Arts at Lovain,
Licentiate in Divinity at the same University, and lastly Doctor of the laws
at Cullen: where, after he had printed his public Lectures, he died and was
buried in the Cathedrall-Church Anno Dom. 1491. 17. Calend. Septem.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse 1. And when they drew nigh to Jerusalem]
IN this one verse, our Evangelist closely comprizeth all that St John sets
down of our Saviors oracles and miracles from his seventh chapter to chap. 12.
12. viz. the history of five months and ten days: for Christ rode not into
the city till the fifth day before his last Passover, Joh. 12. 12. having the
day before been (...) by Mary at Bethany, Joh. 12. 1. called here Bethpage,
(...) a (...) and (...).
or the Conduit-house.

Verse 2. An Ass tied and a colt with her]
There are that by the Ass understand the Jews laden with the Law: and by her
foal, the Gentiles that wandered whither they would. That Canonist (...) and
(...) est. (...). (...) (...). page (...).
made the most of it, that said that children are therefore to be baptized,
because the Apostles brought to Christ not only the (...), but the colt too.

Verse 3. The Lord (...) need of them]
The Lord of all, both beasts and hearts: for else how could he so soon have
obtained the Ass, of her master? Some read the text thus. The Lord has (...)
of them, and (...) presently send them back (...): to teach us to be no further
burdensome or beholden to others, then needs must.

Verse 4. All this was done that, etc.]
Here is the mystery of the history: which would otherwise seem to some
ridiculous and (...) little purpose. He hereby declared himself that King of
his Church forepromised by the Prophets, how poor and despicable (...), as the
world accounts it.

Verse 5. Tell ye the daughter of Sion]
Here was that also of the Psalmist fulfilled, God is my King of old working
salvation in the midst of the earth, Psalm. 74. 12. For Jerusalem is by the
Fathers observed to stand in the very center and navell of the habitable earth,
as if it were fatally founded to be the city of the great King.

Thy King comes unto thee]
All in Christ is for our behoof (...) benefit, 1 Cor. 1. 30. and Micah 4. 8,
9. Unto thee shall it come, (...) daughter of Zion, even the (...) dominion:
the kingdom shall come to thee daughter of Jerusalem. Why then do thou cry
out aloud? Is there no King in thee? Is thy counselor (...)? A Mandamus from
this King, will do it at any time, Psalm. (...). 4.

Meek, and (...) upon an Asse]
Not upon a stately palfrey, as Alexander, Julius Caesar, etc. no such state
here. Christ Kingdom was of another world: He came riding meek, and his word
(the law of his kingdom) is both to be taught and received with (...), 2 Timothy
2. 25. Jam. 1. 21. At Genua in Italy they show the tail of the Ass our Savior
rod on for (...) holy relic; and (...). (...). (...)
bow before it with great devotion. Neither will (...) be reclaimed from such
fond foperies; being herein the Italian (...). com. (...).
Asses, which feeding upon the weed hen-bane, are so (...), that they lie for
dead, neither can they be wakened till (...).

Verse 6. And the Disciples went]
With a certain blind obedience they went on Christ's errand, though not very
likely to speed. Their Masters sole authority (...) them on against all
difficulties and absurdities. When (...) commands us any thing, we may not
dispute but dispatch, argue but agree to it, captivate our (...), exalt our
faith.

Verse 7. And put on them their clothes]
Teaching us to honor God with the best of our substance, and to (...) our
selves wholly to the Lord our God. (...) stripped himself, for his friend
David, of the robe that was upon him and his (...), 1 (...). 18. 4.
even to his sword and his girdle. Christ suspended his glory for a season,
laid aside his rich and royal robes, (...) a cast suit of (...), that he might
cloth us with his righteousness: And shall we think much to cloth him in his
naked members? etc. to part with any thing, for his (...) and service?

And they (...)]
They that make religion dance attendance to policy ((...) one) (...) set the
(...) upon Christ, not (...).
(...) upon the (...). Thus did (...), and before him (...), (...) jactura
regionis quam (...). Thus do all (...) and the worlds wisards, whose rule is,
(...) sed paucis: Religiosum oportet esse, sed non religentem, (...).
etc. But what says a Father? Deum siquis parum (...), valde contemnit. And,
one thing, said Luther, that will be the (...) in (...), and (...) tran (...).
Luth.
(...) of religion is worldly policy, that would have all well however; and
seeks to procure the public peace, by impious and unlawful counsels and
courses.

Verse 8 And a very great multitude]
Bondinus says, he was met at this time by three-hundred-thousand Jews, some
whereof went before Christ, some followed after, according to the solemn rites
and reverence used to be given to earthly Kings, in their most pompous
triumphs. This was the Lords own work.

Verse 9. (...) to the Son of David]
So they acknowledge Christ to be the true Messiah, and congratulate him his
kingdom over the Church; and yet a few-daies after, these same, at the
instigation of the Priests and Pharisees, cry (...): dealing by Christ as
Xerxes did by his steersman, whom he crowned in the morning, and then took off
his head in the afternoon of the same day: or as the fickle Israelites dealt by
David, 2 Samuel 20. where we shall find the same hands that erewhile fought for
David to be all theirs, do now fight against him under the son of (...), to be
none of theirs.

Verse 10. Who is this?]
Why? could not they tell after so (...) miracles done among them? Were they
such strangers at (...)? Many live and dye very (...), (...) in (...) places
where they have had line (...) line, precept upon (...), etc. and yet they are
no wiser then the child new weaned from the breast, Isa. 29. 8. their wits
serve them not in spiritualls, though otherwise shrewd enough.

Verse 11. The Prophet of Nazareth, etc.]
The Archprophet they acknowledge him; but of Nazareth, of Galilee. They had
not profited (...) much, or made so far (...) in the mystery of Christ as to
know him to have (...) born a (...). And to nourish this error in the people
it was, that the devil, that old Impostour, Mark. 1. 24. though he confessed
Christ to be the Holy (...) of (...), yet he calls (...) Jesus of Nazareth.
Satan (...) semel videatur verax, (...) est mendax and semper fallax. Satan
(...) speaks truth, but with a mind to deceave.

Verse 12. And (...) out all them that sold]
The zeal of Gods house did ever eat him up. And (as revenge (...) zeal 2 Cor.
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
7. 11.) he marrs their markets, and drives them (...) of the (...) with Procul
o procul este (...). And this deed of our Saviors was altogether divine;
whiles, as another Sampson, he (...) (...) upon heaps (yet without bloodshed)
with the (...) of an (...). St Hierom extolleth this (...) above the raising of
Lizarus, restoring the blind to their sight, the lame to their limbs, etc. and
adds this mystical sense of (...) text. (...) ingreditur Templum Patris, and
ejicit (...) tam Episcopos and Presbyteros, quam (...) and (...) turbam de
Ecclesia sua, and (...) criminis habet, vendentes pariter and (...). Christ is
every day casting out of his Church all these mony-marchants, (...), both
ministers and others, that make (...).
sale of holy things, which the very Heathens abhorred, and others long since
complained, that benefices were bestowed non ubi optime, sed ubi (...), as if a
man should bestow so much bread on his (...), (...) he is to ride on him.

The tables of the mony-changers]
This he did also at his first (...) into the ministry, Ioh. 2. 14. 15. See my
notes on that (...). The (...) of Religion was Christ's chief care, and so it
should be ours: And although little was done by his first attempt Ioh. 2. yet
he tries again; (...) should we; contributing what we (...) to the work
continually, by our prayers and utmost endeavors: (...). (...). (...).
wishing at least, as Ferus did, that we had some Moses (...) away the evils in
Church and state. Non (...) t (...), sed multos habemus, (...) he; for we
abound with (...), and (...).

Verse 13. Shall be called the house of prayer]
A principal piece of Gods (...) worship, and (...) put (...) the whole.
Christ (...) never came into this house, but he preached (...) as (...). In the
Sanctuary was the incense-Altar in the middle, a type of prayer, the table of
shewbread on the oneside, (...) the (...) tribes; and the candlestick, a type
of the word, on the other: To teach us that there is a necessity of both
ordinances to all Gods (...).

But ye have made it a den of theeves]
So Christ calls not the mony-marchants only, but the (...) also that set
them awork. And whereas they cried, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the
Lord (for to those was this speech first addressed, Ier. 7. 11.) as if they
could not do amiss, because they served in the Temple, the Prophet tells them
there, and our Savior these here, that it is so much the worse. What should an
Angel of darkness do in heaven? Who required these things at your hands, to
tread the courts of my Temple? This is the gate of the Lord, into Psalm. 118. ^0.
which the righteous only should enter. The Papists in like sort cry out at
this day, Ecclesia, Ecclesia, Nos sumus Ecclesia: and herewith think to shroud
their base huckstering of holy things. For omniae Romae venalia, all things are
saleable and soluble at Rome. But this covering is too short, and their gross
theeveries Act. and Mon. fol 1^84.
are now made apparent to all the world, as their rood of grace, and the blood
of Hales were at Paul's cross by that Noble Cromwell; and as their cheating
trade of Indulgencies and Popespardons was by Luther, who by dint of argument
overthrew those Romish mony-changers, and drove the country of those (...) and
(...), as Nazianzen fitly calls them.

Verse 14. Came to him in the Temple, and he healed them]
So true was that testimony given of our Savior, Luke 24. 19. that he was a
Prophet mighty in deed, as well as in word, before God and all the people. Nos
non eloquimur magna, sed vivimus, said the Primitive Christians. Our lives as
well as our lips should speak us right and real in Religion: As Christ here,
by his cures, gave a real answer to that question, ver. 10. Who is this? Let
us learn to lead convincing lives: these are the best apologies when all is done.

Verse 15. And the children crying, etc.]
To the great grief and regret of those cankerd carls the Priests and Scribes:
but Act. and Mon fol 866.
to the singular commendation of their parents, who had so well taught and
tutoured them. So the children of Merindoll answered the Popish Bishop of
Canaillon with such grace and gravity as was admirable. So, when John Lawrence
was burnt at Colchester, Act. and Mon. fol. 1403.
the young children came about him, and cried in the audience of the
persecutours, Lord strengthen thy servant, and keep thy promise.

Verse 16. Thou have perfected praise]
(...), thou have given ^.
it all its parts, and proportions; thou have completed and accomplished it.
The Hebrew says, Fundasti, thou have founded praise, and well bottomed it.
Quae enim perfecta, sunt firmissima. Now there is no mouth so weak, into which
God cannot put words of praise. And how often does he choose the sillysimples of
the world, to confound the wise and learned? See my notes on Psalm. 8. 2. And
here it is observable that our Savior answers warily to the captious question;
so as he may neither offend (...), by taking upon him to be a King, nor stumble
the people, who took him for no less, and he was well pleased there with. Let
our columbine simplicity be mixed with serpentine subtilty, that we run not our
selves heedlesly into unnecessary dangers.

Verse 17. And he left them]
As not willing to loose his labor, to cast away his cost upon men so
unthankful, untractable. Ovid.
Ludit, qui steril^ semina mandat humo.


Went out of the city into Bethany]
Happly for safety sake: undoubtedly for his delight and to refresh himself
with his friend Lazarus, after his hard labor, and little success.

Verse 18. As he returned into the city]
There his work lay chiefly: thither therefore he repaires betimes, and forgot,
for haste, to take his breakfast, as it may seem: for ere he came to the city
he was hungry, though it were but a step thither. A good man's heart is where
his calling is: Such a one, when he is visiting friends or so, is like a fish
in the air: whereinto if it leap for recreation or necessity, yet it soon
returns to his own element.

Verse 19. He came to it and found nothing]
He thought then to have found something: there was some kind of ignorance, we
see in Christ as man (but not that that was sinful.) His soul desired the
first ripe fruits; yea though they had not been ripe Mi^. 7. 1.
and ready; hard hunger would have made them sweet and savoury, as the
shepherds bread, and onions were to Hunniades, when he was put to flight by the
Turks: So well can hunger season Turk Hist. fol 310.
homely cates, says the Historian. Or this promising figtree our Savior might
say, as Alciat of the Cypress. Pulchra coma est, pulchro dig^staeque ordine
frondes, Emblem.

Sed fructus nullos haec coma pulchra gerit.


Verse 20. They marvelled, saying etc.]
And well they might, for no conjurer, with all his skill, could have caused
this figtree so suddenly to whither, with a word speaking. For the figtree is
the most juicefull of any tree: and bears the brunt of winterblasts. Yea
Plutarch tells us that there issues from the figtree Plut. Sympos. lib. ^.
such a strong and most vehement virtue, as that if a bull be tied unto it for
some while, he becomes tame and tractable, though he were never so fierce and
fell before. No wonder therefore though the Disciples wondered at so sudden an
alteration.

Verse 21. If ye have faith and doubt not]
Or dispute not the matter as probable only and somewhat uncertain, but not
altogether undoubted. He that doubts debateth it, as it (...), with (...)
(...). (...). lia. 7. 9.
himself, (...) the case to and fro, sometimes being of one mind, sometimes of
another. Now let not such a man think that he shall receive any thing of the
Lord, Iam. 1. 7. If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be (...).

Verse 22. What soever ye shall ask in prayer, beleeving]
Faith is the foundation of prayer, and prayer is the fervencie of faith. Cast
thy burden upon the Lord, or thy request, thy gift upon the Lord. Psalm. 55. 22.
that is, whatsoever thou desire that God should give thee in prayer, cast it
upon him by faith, and it shall be effected. Fidei mendica manus. Faith and
prayer are the souls two hands, whereby she begs and receives of God all good
things both for this and a better life. Hence of old when the Saints praid they
spread out the palms of their hands, as to receive a blessing from God, 1 Kings
8. 22. Exodus 9. 29. Psalm 143. 6.

Verse 23. And when he was come into the Temple]
Not into the Inn or victualing-house, though he had been so hungry by the
way. He forgot that; the zeal of Gods house had eaten him up: it was his meat
and drink to do the will of his heavenly father: this he preferred before his
necessary food. And truly a man would wonder what a deal of work he did up in
these three-(...), before his apprehension. All those Sermons and discourses
set down by Matthew from this place to chap. 26. by Mark from chap. 11. to
chap. 14. by Luke from chap. 20. to chap. 22. and by John, from the 12. to 18.
chap. were delivered by him in these three last days of his liberty. He
dispatched them with speed, as if he had been loath to have been taken with his
task undone. To teach us to get up our work, and to work out our salvation: Not
work at it only; Lazy spirits (...) not to immortality. The twelve tribes
served God instantly day and night, and found all they could do little enough,
Act. 26. 7.

Came unto him as he was teaching]
Otiosum vel (...) facile tulissent, says an Interpreter. (...) he would have
been quiet or silent, they would never have questioned him. A wolf flies not
upon a painted sheep; we can look upon a painted (...) with delight. It is your
active Christian that is most spited and persecuted. Luther was offered to be
made a Cardinal, if he would be quiet. He answered, no, not if (...) might be
Pope; And defends himself thus against those that thought him (happly) a proud
fool Inveniar sane superbus, etc. modo impij silentij non (...). Epist. (...)
(...).
for his refusal. Let me be counted fool or any thing, said he, so I be not
found guilty of cowardly silence. The Papists, when they could not rule him,
railed at him, and (...) him an Apostate: He confesses the action, and says,
I am indeed an Apostate, but a blessed and holy Apostate; one that had fallen
off from the devil. Consitetur se esse Apostaram, led beatum and (...), qui
(...) diabolo (...) non servavit.
They called him devil. But what said he? Prorsus Satan est Lutherus, sed
Christus vivit and (...): Amen. Luther is a devil: Be it so; but Christ lives
and reigns: that is enough for Luther: So be it.

By what authority do thou these things?]
They saw that their kingdom would down, their trade decay, if Christ should be
Epist ad (...).
suffered thus to teach and take upon him in the Temple as a Reformer. Ventres
and (...). (...) coronam Papae, and Monachorum (...) (...).
When Erasmus was asked by the Electour of Saxony, why the Pope and his Clergy
could so little abide Luther, he answered. For two great offenses, viz he had
meddled with the Popes tripple crown, and with the Monks fat paunches: (...)
illae lachrymae. Hence all that hatred: And hence now-adaies those Popish
questions to the Professors of the truth. By what authority do (...) these
things? where had you your calling, your ordination? Where was your Religion
before Luther? Where unto it was well answered by one once, in the Bible, where
yours never was.

Verse 24. I also will ask you one thing]
Our Savior could have answered them roundly that what he did, he did by the
will and appointment of his heavenly father. But (...) he had avouched that so
often, and they believed him not, (...) he took another course. We must be ready
to (...) on of (...) faith; but then it must be when we see it will be to (...)
good purpose; No (...). (...).
as if otherwise, forbear, or untie one knot with another as Christ here (...).

Verse 25. The baptism of John whence was it?]
That is, the whole ministry of John. As if our Savior should have (...), know
ye not by what authority I do these things? have ye not heard John's testimony
for me? And can ye deny that he had his authority for what he spoke, from God?
How is it then that ye ask me any (...) idle question as this? do ye not go
(...) to your (...)?

Verse 26. We fear the people]
Lest they should be stoned, and the (...) feared them, lest they should be
excommunicated. Thus they were mutual executioners one to another: for all
fear (...) torment, 1 John 4. 18.

Verse 27. We cannot tell]
Lie and all: they could tell, and would (...). Their reasonings within
themselves, verse. 25. testify (...) nodam (...) quem (...) vel (...) non
(...). (...) (...). (...) (...). (...) 1 cap. 21.
that they knew the truth, but would not acknowledge it; they (...) their
ignorance rather: And such dealing we have from many learned Papists. Thus
Bellarmine (...) that he never read in all the Bible a promise of pardon made
to (...) that (...) their sins to Almighty God. Baronius cannot see that Peter
was in fault at Antioch, but Paul a great deal more, for taking him up for
halting, Gal. 2. The wit of heretics will (...) (...). (...).
(...) them to (...) a thousand shifts to delude the truth, then their pride
will suffer them once to yield and subscribe to it.

Verse 28. But what think you?]
Christ reports himself to (...) own consciences, whiles he proves John
Baptists ministry to be from heaven, by the happy (...) he had in converting
the vilest sinners, see Ier. 23. 22. 1 Cor. 9. 2. The peoples fruitfulness is
the Ministers testimonial, 2 Cor. 3. 2. If but one of a city, or two of a
family be gained to God, it is a sign that the Pastors are according to Gods
own heart, Ier. 3. 14, (...).

Verse 29. I will not]
This is the language of most men's hearts, when pressed to duty: and, as (...),
(...) discover an headstrong (...) in (...), that is uncouncellable. As Pharaoh
(...) not down under the miracle, but (...) for Magicians: so do these, (...)
the word comes (...) to their (...), send for carnal arguments. And though the
word does eat up all they can say, as Moses rod did: yet they harden their
(...) with Pharaoh, they (...) their brows with him in the (...), that (...) I
will not: (...) said the Israelites but we will have a King. And as for the
word that thou have spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not harken
unto thee, said those, Ier 44. 16.

But afterward he (...)]
So do but few. Men will be as big as their words, though they (...) for it,
lest they should be accounted inconstant. These are niggardly of their
reputation, but prodigal of their souls.

Verse 30. I go Sir]
I, but when Sir? Stultus semper incipit Sen.
(...). Hypocrites purpose often, and promise fair to do better, but drive off
and fail in the performance, their morning cloud is soon dispersed, their
earthly dew is quickly dried up, (...) come to nothing, (...) and modo (...)
habent (...). The Hos. 6. (...). Augustine. Seneca.
(...) liked not such as are semper victuri, always about to live better, but
never begin.

Verse 31. Go into the Kingdom of heaven before you]
And it were an arrant (...) to be (...) behind by such: as that is a very
(...), we (...), that will not follow, though she will not lead the way. But
(...) proud Pharisees hated to be in the same heaven with penitent Publicans.
And, as Quintilian said of some in his time, that they might have proved
excellent scholars, had they not been so persuaded of their own scholarship
already. In like (...), these over-weeners of themselves might have had place
in heaven, had they not taken up their (...) in heaven aforehand.

Verse 32. John came unto you in a way of right]
Which he both (...) and lived. Nos non eloquimur (...), (...) vivimus. John's
practice was a transcript of what he preached: he burned within himself, he
shone forth to others, Joh. 5. 35.

Ye repented not afterwards]
No, not after his death, though ye saw me (...) to him, and preaching and
pressing the same things upon (...) that John did. An hypocrite comes (...) to
heaven then a (...) sinner, and (...) far more obstacles. As he that must be
stripped, is not (...) soon clothed, as one that is naked: and as he climbs not
a tree so soon that must first come down from the top of another tree, where he
is perked: So is it here.

Verse 33. Planted a vineyard, and hedged it]
Of all possessions, says Cato, Nulla majorem operam requirit, None requires
more pains then that of a vineyard. (...) comes up and (...) alone, Mark 4. 28.
Injussa (...) gramina, says the Poet: but (...) must be dressed, supported,
(...), sheltered every day almost, (...). 15. 2. (...) Church is Gods
continual care, (...), (...), (...), etc. Isa 27. 3. and he looks for an
answerable return offruits, Act. 12. 48. Regnum Angliae, regnum Dei, said
Polydor Virgil long since. The Kingdom of England, is the Kingdom of God. It
may weil be said so, since the Reformation (...): neither is there any thing
more threatens us then our (...). (...). The Cypress tree, the more it is
watered, the less fruitful; so many of us, the more taught, the more untoward.

And went into a far countrey]
As the impious husbandmen imagined, who put far away the evil day. But God
shall (...) such with an arrow, suddenly shall they be wounded, Psalm. 64. 7. As
a bird is with the bolt, whiles he (...) at the bow. Morae dispendium, Hieron
in Jer.
foener is (...) pensatur. God (...) men at length for the new and the old.

Verse 34. He sent his servants]
seil. His Prophets and Ministers, whom the Lord sends to his people
continually, not to teach them only, but to take account of their (...), to
urge and exact of them growth in grace, according to the means, (...) they
receive not the grace of God in vain. 2 (...). 6. (...).


Verse 35. Beat one, and killed another]
This is the worlds wages; this is the measure Gods Ministers meet with from
the sons of men: never have any, out of hell, suffered more then such.
Persecution is, (...) genius, says Calvin, the evil Angel that dogs the Gospel
at the heels. And, Praedicare nihil aliud est, quam derivare in se (...), etc.
says Luther. To preach faithfully is to get the ill will of all the world, and
to subject a man's self to all kind of deaths and dangers.

Verse 36. Again (...) sent other servants]
O the infinite goodness and long sufferance of Almighty God! Jonas upbraided
him with it most unworthily, in that brawl of his, chap. 4. 2. Paul admires it,
Romans 9. 22. teaching us to improve it to the practice of repentance, (...). 2.
4. Ezekiel describes it by Gods lying on Ezekiel. 4. (...), 5.
one side for three hundred and (...) years together, which must needs be very
troublesome. We cannot lie for a few hours, on one side, but we must turn us.
David, for the abuse of his (...), fell (...) foul on the Ammonites. Rehoboam
for one (...) of his slain by the ten (...), raised a mighty army to chastise
them. But God bears with men's evil manners, though he (...) power enough in his
hand to deal with them at his (...).

Verse 37. They will reverence my sonne]
They will (...) another (...).
way for shame (so the word imports) they will never be able to look him in the
face, they will be so abashed of their former villainies. But it fell out far
otherwise: for these frontlesse fellows, past grace, as we say, had faces
hatched all over with impudency, and that could blush no more then a sackbut.
Sin had woaded shamelesnes in their foreheads, and they were as good (...)
resisting the holy Ghost, as (...) their fathers were,

Verse 38. This is the heir, Come, etc.]
So that these husbandmen the Pharisees knew, and yet crucified the Lord of
glory: And all this out of desperate malice, which had debauched their reason,
and even Satanized or transformed them into so many breathing devils: they fell
into that unpardonable sin, (...), 12. 31.

(...) us (...) on his inheritance]
Covetousness is bloody, Ezekiel. (...). 13. Pro. 1. 11, 13. 1 Kin. 21. 10. Ahab
longed for a sallet out of Naboths vineyard, and must have it, though Nahoth
die for it. Quid non mortalia pector a cogit, (...) sacra (...)! Judas sells
his Master for thirty-pence.

Verse 39. Cast him out of the vineyard, and slew him]
By wicked hands, Act. 2. 23. and are therefore abhorred of God and men, and
exiled out of the world, as it were, by a common consent of Nation, for their
inexpiable guilt. (...) in Constantinople Biddulph.
and Thessalonica (where are many thousand Jews at this day) if they but stir
out of (...) at any (...) time between Maunday-Thursday at Noon, and Easter-eve
at night, the Christians, among whom they dwell, will stone them, because at
that time they derided, (...) and crucified our blessed Savior.

Verse 40. What will he do, etc.]
Nay, what will he not (...)? God will (...) upon them, even on their neck,
upon the thick bosses Joh. 15. 26.
of their bucklers. They that would kill their enemy, strike not where he can
defend himself. But so does God, he strikes through all, yea through the loins,
Deuteronomy. 33. 11. even to the very soul, (...). 4. 10. This made Moses cry out, Who
knows the power of (...) anger? Ps. 90. 11. Surely it is such, as none can
either avoid or abide.

Verse 41. They say unto him, he will (...), etc.]
Here they (...). Videtur paronomasia hec in proverbium (...).
(...) read their own destiny, as David (...) did his, 2 Samuel 12. 5, 6. The
wicked are presently self-condemned, Tit. 3. 11. and (...) at last day stand
speechless, Matthew. 21. 12. out of the conviction of their own (...).

Verse 42. Did ye never read in the Scriptures?]
Yes, full often, but never applied such a place as this to themselves. A godly
man (...) the Scriptures as he does the Statute-(...): he holds (...) in all
that he reads: he finds his own name written in every passage, and lays it to
heart, as spoken to him. The wicked on the other side, put (...) all they like
not, and dispose of it to others, as if themselves were none such. God forbid,
said these to our Savior, Luke 20. 16. But he convinces them out of their own
reading, to be the men he meant. Men may make some (...) shift, and (...) for a
while from side to side, as (...) Ass did, but there is no averting or
avoiding the dint of Gods displeasure, otherwise then by falling down, as the
Ass did, and afterward her master, being rebuked for his in quity, The dumb
Ass speaking with man's voice, forbad the madness of the Prophet, 2 (...). 2.
16,

Verse 43. The kingdom of God shall be taken (...) you]
An heavy sentence. We had better, says one, be without meat, drink, light,
air, earth, all the elements, yea life it self, then that one sweet saying of
our Savior, Come unto me, all ye that are weary Mallemus carere coelo terra,
omnibus (...), etc. (...). (...). (...).
and heavy laden, and I will refresh you. The Gospel is that inhetitance we
received from our godly fore fathers, the (...): and it must be our care to
transmit the same to our posterity, earnestly contending for the faith which
was once delivered, (...) 3. once for all: for if lost, or any way corrupted,
it will hardly be ever given again. Look to it therefore: unfruitfulnesse
forfeits all; as the Merchants non-paiment of the Kings custom forfeits all
his goods.

Verse 44. And whosoever shall fall on this stone]
Christ is a stone of stumbling to his enemies, who stumble at his (...), and a
rock of offense, 1 Pet. 2. 8. but like that rock, Judge. 6. 21. cut of which
fire wcnt and consumed them, Nemo me impune (...), says he. The Corinthians
abused certain Roman (...), and were therefore burnt to the ground by L.
Mummius. For irasci populo Job 9. 4.
Romans nemo sapienter possit, says Livy thereupon. Christ is wise in heart, and
mighty in strength; who ever hardened himself against him and prospered? Who
ever bragged of the last blow? If his wrath be kindled, yea but a little, woe be
to his opposites: but if he fall upon them with his whole weight, he will crush
them to pieces, yea grind them to powder. They can no more stand before him,
then can a glasse-bottle before a Cannon-shot.

Verse 45. They (...) that he spoke of them]
Who told them so, but their own guilty consciences? Every man has a (...)
Chaplain within his own bosom, that preaches over the Sermon to him again,
and comes over him with, Thou art the (...). Conscience is said to accuse or
excuse in the mean while, (...).
(...). 2. 15. In the (...) betwixt (...) and Sermon, conviction and
conviction. So that personal and nominall application is therefore needless,
(...) every man has a (...) faculty within him, applying several truths to
every man's particular (...). And, (...) gener (...) de (...) est, ibi (...),
says (...); Where the discourse against vice is (...), no man can justly
complain of (...) personal injury. By (...), Christ many times smites the
earth, Isa. 11. 4. that is, the (...) of carnal men glued to the earth, Gods
words (...) them full in the teeth, and makes them spit (...). Now if they
rage, as Tygres tear themselves at the noise of a drum, if they flee in the
faces of their teachers, and (...) upon them, they (...) cast into a (...), and
(...) escape the visible (...) of God.

Verse 46, But when they (...) to lay (...) on him]
And so showed themselves to be the same our Savior spoke of, ver. 39, 42. As
the Pope and his emissaries do well approve (...) to be that false prophet, and
(...) locusts, (...) forth in the Revelation. Their daily practice is a clear
Commentary upon that obscure prophecy, which the ancient Fathers, that lived
(...) to see it fulfilled, could not tell what to say to. (...) are best
understood by their events.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse 1. Spoke (...) again]
THat by one (...) he might peg in another. He had but a (...) to be with men,
and see how he bestirs him. (...) is more swift and violent toward the end of
it. It was as (...) to Christ to seek men's salvation, as it is to the devil to
(...) their (...): who therefore does his utmost, because he (...) that he has
but a short time, Rev. 12. 12. his malevolence is (...) to his (...).

Verse (...). (...) unto a (...) King]
God is a great King, and (...) his (...), Mal. 1. 8. will be served of the
best, and curses that cosener, that does (...), verse 14. He scorneth to drink
the devils (...), to take his leavings.

Verse 3. They would not come]
They proved Recusants, and this rendered them unworthy of eternal life, Act.
13. 46. Gods Ministers sent to call them, must turn them over to him, with a
Non (...), and let him deal with them.

Verse 4. Behold, I have prepared my dinner]
Luke calls it a supper. The Kingdom of heaven is compared to both, to show
that the Saints do both dine and sup with Christ; (...) at his table
continually, as (...) did at ` David's, yea they have, as (...) had, a
continual (...) from the King every day, a certain, all the (...) of their
lives.

My Oxen and my fatlings are killed]
Gr. Are sacrificed: but (...).
(...) it is translated to common use, because even Heathen. Princes began
their (...) feasts with sacrifices (which was craving a blessing on their food
in their way) and for that men should come to a feast as to a Sacrifice, Adeo
ut gulae (...) appetitus, as Novarinus here notes.

Verse 5. But they made light of it]
Gods rich offers are still slighted and vilipended: and most men turn their
(...) upon those blessed and bleeding imbracements of his, as if heaven were
not worth (...) after; -- Paris ut vivat regnetque beatus
Horat. (...). 2.
Cogi posse negat --


One to his farm, another to (...) merohandise]
Licitis perimus (...); More die by meat then poison. Worldliness is a great
let to faith, though men cannot be charged with any great covetousnes. See that
ye shift not off him that speaks to you from heaven, Heb. 12. (...).

Verse 6. Entreated them spitefully, and slew (...)]
This is that sin that brings ruin without remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. Josiahs
humiliation could not expiate Manasseh's bloodshed. Our Popish Prelates in
less then four years sacrificed the lives of eight hundred innocents to their
idols here in Queen (...) days. That precious blood does yet cry to heaven for
vengeance against us. And it was a pious motion that one made in a Sermon to
this (...). (...).
present Parliament, That there might be a day of public humiliation,
purposely set apart, and solemnly kept thorowout the Kingdom, for the innocent
blood shed (...) in those Marian days of most abhorred memory.

Verse 7. But when the King (...) thereof]
And Kings have long ears, this King of heaven especially, Cui (...) muta
(...). -- Ut taceant homines, jumenta loquentur. In case of the abuse of Gods
(...), a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall
tell the matter, Eccles. 10. 20. John Baptist was beheaded in the prison, as if
God had known nothing of the matter, said that Martyr. But when he makes
inquisition for bloods (which he often does with great secrecy and severity) he
(...) such to purpos, Ps 9 12. as he did (...), (...), Charles the ninth of
France, Felix of (...), and sundry other bloody (...). Flac, (...).


Sent forth his Armies]
The Roman spoilers, who were the rod in Gods hand, and revenged the quarrel
of his Covenant: (...) they thought not so, Isa. 10. 7. As in (...) blood by
leeches, the Physician seeks the health of his patient, the leech only the
filling of his gorge: So when God turns the wicked upon his people, he has
excellent ends, howbeit they think not so, but Isa. 10. 7.
to destroy and cut off nations not a few.

Verse 8. They which were bidden were not worthy]
Who were then? Such as came from the high ways and hedges, verse. 9. that is,
such as sit and show their sores to God, as the cripples and others do by the
high-way-side to every passenger, to move pity. Such sensible sinners shall
walk with Christ in white, for they are worthy.

Verse 9 Go ye therefore to the high-waies]
Those sinners of the Gentiles, Gal 2. 15. who wandered in their own ways,
Act. 14. 16. and were, till now, without God in the world, Ephesians. 4. 18. These
are those other husbandmen, to whom the householder would let out his vineyard,
chap. 21. 41, 43. which truth to illustrate this parable is purposely uttered,
and principally as it may seem intended.

Verse 10. Both bad and good, etc.]
Such a mixture there ever has been, and will be here in the Church. Doeg sets
his foot as far within the Sanctnary, as David. There are sacrificing (...),
Isa. 1. 10. sinners in Sion, Isa. 33. 14. We cannot avoid the company of those
from whom we shall be sure to carry guilt or grief.

Verse 11. And when the King came in to see]
He is in the assemblies of his Saints to observe their carriage, and to add
measure unto them in blessing, as they do to him in preparation: he goes down
into his garden to see whether the vinc flourish, and the pomgranats bud, Cant.
6. 11. he (...) in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, etc. Now
therefore we are all here present Revel. 1.
before God, said (...), Act. 10. 33.

Which had not (...) a wedding garment]
i. (...). Christ apprehended by faith, (...) expressed in his virtues by holy
life. Justification (...).
and sanctification are the righteousnesses of the Saints, wherewith arraied,
they are beautiful even to admiration: as without Revel. 19. 8.
the which, Satan stood at the right hand of (...) the high Priest, because (as
some will have it) his accusation was as true as vehement, so that Satan had
the upper hand of him, tell such time as Christ bad, (...) the (...) garments
from him; Zech. 3. 1.
there he pardoned his sin in heaven: and unto him he said, Behold, I have
(...) iniquity to pass from (...), and I will clothe (...) with change of
(...), There he pardoned it, in his own conscience also.

Verse 12. (...), how came? etc.]
Not wretch, (...), (...). Hard reproofs administered in soft language break the
bones. See the Notes above on (...). 20. 13.

Not (...) a (...)]
Is it fit to come to such a feast in thy worst? in the leathern coats, in the
tottered rags and menstruous clouts of wretched old Adam?

And he was (...)]
He was muzzled or haltered up, that is, (...) Occlusum est illi os (...) and
freno ac (...) animal (...), ratione (...). (...) in (...).
he held his peace, as though he had a bridle or a halter in his mouth. This is
the import of the Greek word here used. He was (...), self-condemned, Tit. 3.
11. and could not (...), chat (...) God, Romans 9. 20. as he used to do: he was
gagged, (...) it were.

Verse 13. (...) him hand and foot]
He that comes in to Christ's table without a wedding garment on his back, shall
not go out without fetters on his feet. Neither shall it help him, that he has
eat and drunk in Christ's presence. For his meat is sawced, and his drink spiced
with that bitter wrath of God, Job (...). (...). He shall be taken as here,
from the table to the tormenter. Look (...) Plut.
to it therefore, and come not hand over head. The very Heathens saw, and could
say, That God was not to be served slightly or slubberingly, but with all
possible preparation (...); hand.

Verse 14. For many are called, etc.]
With (...) outward calling: but outward privileges profit not, where the
hidden man of the heart is not right, where the power and practice of (...) is
wanting. Many a ship has been called Safe guard, and (...), which yet has
split upon the rocks, or fallen into the (...) of pirates.

Verse 15. Then went the (...)]
They (...), as one says, (...) and repuncti, minime (...) ad resipiscentiam
compuncti. They were stung with the former parables, and grew more enraged. It
is a (...) persuasion for any godly man to think, by any discretion (...) to
still and escape the clamours and hates of wicked (...): Christ himself could
not do it.

How they (...) entangle him in his talk]
As beasts are in the (...).
(...) toil, or birds in the (...) net. Every man hunteth (...). Piscator.
(...). a feris quibus (...). tur (...) and (...). Par. (...). and Mon, sol.
1803. Ibid. 1116.
his brother with a net, was an old complaint, Mica. 7. 2. And, They (...) a
man an (...) for a (...), and lay a (...) for (...) that (...) in the gate,
etc. Isa. 29. 21. Doctor (...) rule to know an (...) was, They will say, The
Lord, and, We praise God, and, The living God. So, The Lord, and not to say,
(...) Lord, is called by Steven Gardener, Symbolum (...), the heretics badge.
But God will take these wisards in their own craft, 1 Cor. 3. 19. he will catch
them in their own (...). (...), (...) and quasi (...). Aret.
he will over-shoot them in their own bow, he will take (...) handful of them,
so that they shall not make escape, as the word there signifies.

Verse 16. With the (...)]
i. e. Such as were of (...) religion, as the Melchites, a kind of
mongrel-Christians in the Nicephorus.
(...): so called of Melech, as one would say, Of the Kings (...), because they
followed the decrees and examples of the (...). Some think these (...) were
the same with the Publicans, or toll-takers (so Origin and Cyril) whom the
Pharisees took with them to our Savior, as if the one (...) tribute, the other
refused to pay, and both came to our Savior, as to an impartial Judge, to end
the quarrel, and decide the controversy.

Master, we know that thou art true, etc.]
Here Is a fair glove, drawn upon a foul hand. Burning lips and a wicked heart
(...) like a potsheard covered with silver dross, Prove. 26. 23: There are
those that will smile in your face, and at same time cut your throat. Squier,
sent out of Spain to poison Q. Elizabeth, (...) the pummell of the Queens
saddle with poison covertly, and as it (...). 1598.
were, doing something (...), praying with a loud voice, God: save the Queen,
etc.

That thou art true, and teach the way of God]
These all are high commendations and necessary qualifications of a teacher and
instructor of others. These Cony-catchers tell the truth of Christ (for he was
all this that they say of him and more) and yet they tell a lie, because they
thought him not so, but spoke against their consciences. They thought, belike,
to have tickled and taken our Savior with their flatteries (as every wind
will blow up a bubble,) and so to have had what they would of him: But Christ
was not for their turn. He was inadulabilis, unflatterable, and might better
say then Politian did, Assentatiunculis quorundam, ant etiam obtrectationibus
non magis attollor Ang. Polit. epist. l. 3. ep. 24.
(...) deprimor, quam umbra mei corporis. I am no more lifted up, nor cast down
with men's (...) or slanders, then with the shadow of mine own body. For I think
not my self (...) longer (...) shorter at morning, or at noon, because my
shadow is so, etc.

Verse 17. Is it lawful?]
They make it a case of conscience. (...) sanctity is double iniquity.
Covetousness goes cloaked or colored, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 5. So does malice (...)
times: but God will wash off it is varnish with rivers of brimstone.

To give tribute]
(...), a kind of coin proper to this purpose. Sands his Surv.
The Jews paid then to the (...), as now they do to the Pope, and other Princes
of Italy, a yearly (...) for the very heads they wear. And yet how they brave
it to our Savior, and say, Joh. 8. 33. We were never in bondage to any man.
And there is not Alst. Chronol p. 432.
a more vainglorious people this day under heaven, then the Jews, says Alsted.

Verse 18. Why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites?]
Hypocrites pretend Nathaneel in the skin of a Nicodemus, says one, of a (...)
rather, who made fair weather for a while, (...) at length forsook Paul, and
became an idolatrous Priest at Thessalonica, if Dorotheus may be believed.
Jesus perceived these men's (...), and detected it. So dealt Peter by (...)
Magus. whom Philip took for a very honest man, and baptized him. All will out
at length; Quod sis esse velis, (...) (...).
malis.

Verse 19. They brought unto him a peny]
Monachi pecunias attingere pro piaculo ducunt. No Cappucine among the Papists
may take or touch silver. This metal is as very (...) to these, as the wedge
of gold to Achan; at the (...) whereof he starts back, as Moses from the
Serpent. Yet he carries a boy with him that D. Halls epist. (...). 1, ep. 5.
takes and carries it, and never complains of either metal or measure.

Verse 20. Whose is this image, etc.]
Not that he knew not whose it was, but that he might refell them by their own
answers, judge them out of their own mouth; and that the people (into whose
hatred they thought by (...) captious question to draw him) might see that this
was not more his, then the Pharisees own sentence.

Verse 21. Render therefore unto Casar]
Not Give, but Render: As who should say, Ye give him but what belongs to him;
ye do him but right, ye help him but to his own, and that which he (...)
justly require of you, In (...) patrocinij and (...), in lieu of his care
toward you.

And unto God the things that are Gods.]
The Greek article is (...).
twice repeated, when he speaks of God more then when of (...); to show, says
one, that our special care should be to give God his due. For if Caesar will
take to himself Gods part, by (...) that which is sinful, to pay him such a
tribute, (...) tributum Caesaris, sed servitium diaboli, says Chrysostom, It
is not a paying of tribute to Caesar, but a doing service to the devil. (...)
non and animam nostram Dei imaginem soli (...), (...). Ens. Pandulf (...) l. 5.
(...). Neapol.
says one. Let God only have our soul, since it bears his (...). That was a
witless and wicked speech of him, that said, (...) he had two souls in one
body, the one for God, if he pleased, the other Ut eligeret ex (...) tribus
unu^, vel (...), vel (...), vel perpetuum (...). etc. Hist. Gall
for any one else that would. But that was a gallant (...) of the Prince of
Condee, who being taken prisoner by Charles the ninth of France, and put to his
choice whether he would go to Mass, or be put to death, or suffer perpetual
imprisonment? The former, said he, by Gods grace I will never do. (...) for the
two later, let the King do with me what he (...), I hope, will turn all to the
best.

Verse 22. They marvelled and left him, and (...) their way.]
Demitto auriculas ut (...) meant (...) a (...). Horat.
With a flea in their ear, as we say. Confounded they were that they were so
disappointed. Christ shaped them such an answer, as they could neither dislike
nor digest. The (...) man's eyes are in his head, but the fool walks in (...),
(...). 2. 14. Ad (...) properat, cito qui judicat. He that precipitates a
(...), shall soon see cause to repent him. How often does an open mouth prove a
man's purgatory? We had great need therefore (...) a pair of balances betwixt
our lips, left we be entangled in our talk. For, Sis licet in parts (...),
Nemo tamen (...), nemo cavere potest.


Verse 23. The same day came to him the Sadduces]
(...) possunt (...), (...) tamen caudae in face eadem (...). Heretics may
differ as much from one another, as they all (...) from the truth. Both
Pharisees and Sadduces can conspire against Christ, though they cannot consent
among themselves. These Sadduces were a brutish sect and sort of Jews, that
held many (...) opinions. Some of them are set down, Act 23. 8. Diverse Lib. 18.
(...) cap. 2. and de Bell Iud l. 2. c. 7.
other more gross may be (...) of in (...), who also (...) us, that they were
but (...) of them, yet of the chief among the people. And no wonder: for even
at this day Atheists (...) Epicures are rife; and among the great ones
especially, who (...) think or (...) wish at least, there would be no
resurrection, etc.

Verse 24. (...), Moses said]
They pretend Scripture: so did the devil, Mat. 4. So do heretics all; Sed
sensum afferunt, (...), but they fetch not the meaning from the Scripture, but
(...) a sense (even that of their own devising) on the Scripture: Cadem (...)
faciunt ad materiam (...), says (...), They taw the text, as Shoemakers do
their over-leathers, says Polydor Virgil, that they may bring them to serve
their (...): They lay the dead child of their own corrupt glosses in the bosom
of holy Scripture, and then cry out, It is hers, and not (...).

If a man die, having no children]
This Law these Sadduces (...).
(...) to approve, when indeed they (...) it, as the mother of much (...)
confusion, if there ever be a resurrection. So deals the devil and his
Janissaries ((...) I should say) at this day, by both Scriptures and Fathers,
whom they (...) or (...), further then they serve their turn, to confirm their
(...).

(...) up seed (...)]
Our children are a principal part of our selves, even the seed; as though now
there were nothing left in us, but the chaff.

Verse 25. When he had married a wife, deceased.]
Thus they that will marry shall have trouble, I, and that in the flesh,
wherein they happily promised themselves most comfort and contentment. How many
are there that seek an happiness here: and, when to enjoy it might seem an
happiness indeed, they die, and (...) all their thoughts perish. (...) we have
in Alexander the great, Julius Caesar, Tamberlain, who making great preparation
for the Conquest of the Turkish Empire, died of an ague in (...) hist s. 236
the midst of his great hope, and greatest power. The like might be showed of
many learned men, that died, when they might have been most useful, as
Keckerman, Perkins, Preston, Pemble, young Drusius, etc. All our learning is
soon refuted with one black Theta, which understanding us not, (...) us
unrespectively without distinction, and puts at once a period to our writing
and to our being.

Verse 26. And third unto the seventh]
Happy it was, if seeing their brethren (...) so fast, themselves were warned
to number their own days, and provide for deaths coming. But this is not
easily done; for we naturally dream of an immortality, Psalm. 49. 11. and it is
death to us to think of death, though we see so many daily die before us. It
fares with us for the most part, as with fatting Cattle. The Butcher comes to
day, and fetches away one, to morrow and fetches away another, etc. The rest
that are left behind do neither mifse their fellows, nor dread their own
destiny. So here, this is brutish stupidity, shake it off.

Verse 27. And last of all the woman, etc.]
It is (...) credible that one woman should outlive seven husbands. But grant
she did, yet impartial death, that had so oft-times cut (...) her head, (...)
her heart at last. Death as an archer aiming at us, misseth us (...), and
hitteth happily some beyond us, some short of us, some on either hand of us; now
our (...), now our inferiors, now our equals, till at length we also are
wounded; and the longer deaths hand is exercised, the more skillful it grows.
(...) Alsted Chronol.
de Temporibus, who is said to have lived in France above 300. years, died at
length: So did the old, old, the very old man, Anno 1635.

Verse 29. Ye do err, not knowing]
Ignorance is a breeder. All sins are seminally (...) ignorance. S. Paul thanks
it for all his Arist (...). l. 3 Chem. (...). (...). (...). (...). 2.
(...), 1 Timothy 1. 13. Aristole makes it the mother of all the (...) in the
world. All heresies, says Chemnitius are known to have proceeded, Velex (...)
velex (...) dialectica, velex AEtij (...), from (...), sophistry, or ignorance.

Nor the power of God]
Who can as easily raise the dead, as he did at first create them. This the
(...) with all their learning, understood not: and therefore counted all that
S. Paul could say to (...).
it bibble babble, because he preached Jesus, and Anastasis, or the
resurrection, which they took to be some strange goddess, Act. 17. 18, 19.
They saw not how there could possibly be a regresse from a privation to an
habit. Neither can any of us see it, (...) God by his spirit of revelation,
give us to know what is the exceeding greatness of his power, according to the
working of his mighty power, which he wrought in raising Christ, and us by him,
Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. where it is easy to observe a six-fold gradation in the
original, and all to set forth the power of God, in Christ's and our
resurrection.

Verse 30. For in the resurrection they neither marry]
Therefore our condition then shall be better then that of Adams in paradise,
where he had need of a meet help, Chenegdo, such another as himself, a
second-self. S. Luke adds the reason, why men shall not marry in the
resurrection, viz. They can die no more; and therefore need not marry for
propogation of their kind, and immortalizing of their name. Mahomet, as he
professed that himself had a special license given him by God to know what
women he would, and to put them away when he would: so he promised to all his
votaries and adherents the like carnal D. (...) on of Gods Attrib. Blounts
voyage, p. 67.
pleasures at the resurrection. Sensualists cast God and the things of God into
a dishonorable mould: they rise not above their spring.

But are as the Angels of God]
Are, that is certainly shall be; (...).
yea, in their head Christ they are so already. For God has even here raised
us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ (...),
Ephesians. 2. 6. And at the resurrection, the just shall shine as the Sun in
heaven, nay, as the Son of God himself, with whom they shall appear in glory,
as his Spouse, Uxor Phil. 3. ult.
fulget radiis mariti, is a maxim in law. Their vile bodies shall be conformed
to his most glorious body, the standard in beauty, brightness, agility,
immortality, etc. and other like unspeakable Angelical qualities and
perfections. Their (...) shall be (...) from all evil, fraught with all
fullness both of grace and of glory.

Verse 31. Have ye not read]
In Moses, whose writings only they received, (...) the rest. And the
superstitious Jews at this day are said in (...) to read two lessons, one out
of the law, which is read by some chief person, another out of the Prophets,
which is read by some boy or mean companion. For, savouring somewhat of these
old Sadduces, they will in no sort do honor, neither attribute (...) that
authority to any (...) of the Bible that they do to their (...), which they do
usually carry about their Synagogue (...) his surv.
at the end of the service in procession, with many ornaments of Crowns and
Scepters; the children kissing it, as it passes by them.

Spoken unto you by God It is God that speaks in the holy Scriptures: It is
the express mind of God that is there set forth unto us. See my True
treasure, p. 10 etc.

Verse 32. God is not the God of the dead]
That is, in the Sadduces sense, utterly dead and extinct for ever, but in S.
Paul's sense, Romans 14. 9. He is the God of the dead. For the dead bodies also of
the faithful, whiles they lie rotting in the grave, and resolved into dust,
are united to Christ; by means whereof a substance is preserved, sin only is
(...) with it is concomitant infirmities. But the rotting of the body is but to
refine it: it is but as the rotting of corn under the earth, 1 Cor. 15. 36.
that it may (...) more glorious. Once, death to the Saints is neither total,
but of the body only; nor yet perpetual, but for a time only. See both these
together, Romans 8. 10, 11. Further, from this verse we may learn, That there is
a two fold knowledge to be gotten from holy Scriptures. 1. Express, I am the
God of Abraham, etc. 2 By due deduction and firm inference, God is the God of
the living.

Verse 33. They were astonished at his doctrine]
This was well: But S. Luke adds, that which was more strange. 1. That certain
of the Scribes said, Master, (...) have well said: No (...) had Luke 20 39, 40.
ever so much ingenuity. 2. That the Sadduces were thenceforth (...), and (...)
no more. (...) her (...) dare, quam turpiter pugnare. Those Romish frogs the
Jesuits will never have done, though never Aristoph. in Ranis.
so much set down, but be still up with their hateful Brekekekex. (...)-coax.

Verse 34. But when the Pharisees]
Nunquam bella bonis, nunquam certamina de sunt. Truth never wants an
adversary. Christ had many conflicts all his life long, but most and sharpest
at last cast. At death, Satan will muster up all his forces against a
Christian: that last encounter is like to be the sharpest; as Israel in the
wilderness met with much hardship, but when they entered the Land, all the
Kings of Canaan combined against them.

Verse 35. Then one of them which was a Lawyer]
Pareus gathers Ad liberandum igitur se (...), parts disputan^i adversus cum
(...) i uponi a (...).
out of Mark, chap. 12. 28. that this Lawyer was one of them, that had
applauded Christ for his conquest over the Sadduces in the last conflict, Luke
20. 39. and that, for a penance he was enjoined by his fellow-Pharisees, to
undertake this following disputation with Christ.

Tempting him and saying]
Saint Peter says, They found no guile in his mouth, which implies that they
sought it, 1 Pet. 2. 23. There are that hear us merely to catch, cavil and
quarrel.

Verse 36. Which is the great Commandment]
The Rabbis reckoned up 613. Commandments of the Law: and distinguished them
into the greater, and the lesser. These later they thought might be neglected
or violated with little or no guilt. The Romish Pharisees have also their
venial sins, their peccadillo's, as we know; but the Scripture makes all sin
mortal and destructory. A little strange fire might seem a small matter, yet
it was such a sin, as made all Israel guilty, as appears by the sacrifices
offered for that sin. Levit. 16.

Verse 37. Thou shall love the Lord]
God must be loved and honored by us, (...), says one, truly, that there be
no halting, and totally that there be no halving: he will not divide with the
devil, as the Circassians are said to divide their whole life between rapine
and religion. Gods service must be the totum hominis: Eccles. 12. 13. and the
bonum hominis, Mic. 6. 8. We should Brcer. Enq.
love him infinitely: which, because we cannot, we must love him unfeignedly:
but how far short we come of loving him with all our heart, soul, strength,
etc. (which yet the Papists affirm feisable) appears by our lives, which, do
what we can, are fuller of sins, then the firmament is of stars, or the
furnace of sparks.

Verse 38. This is the first and great Commandment]
In respect of order, quantity and dignity. The second table is fulfilled in
the first, and Luther is bold to say, Primo praecepto reliquorum omnium
observantia praecipitur, In the first Commandment is commanded the keeping of
all the rest. We rightly love our very selves no further then we love God: And
for others, we are bound to love our friends in him, our foes for him.

Verse 39. And the second is like unto it]
For it has, 1. The same author. God spoke all these words. 2. The same tie.
3. The same sanction and punishment of the violation. 4. It requires the same
kind of love and service: for the love of our neighbor is the service of God.

Love thy neighbor as thy self]
Now, thou love thy self truly, really, fervently, freely, constantly, hiding
thine own defects and deformities as much as may be. Thou would have others
rejoice with thee and condole with thee, as occasion serves. Go thou now, and
do likewise to others. Howbeit our Savior strains us up a peg higher, Ioh. 13.
34. His new commandment of the Gospel is, that we love one another, not only as
we love our selves, but as he loved us. This form has something in it that is
more express (in which respect partly it is called a new commandment,) and for
the incomparable sufficiency of the president is matchless, and more full of
incitation to fire affection.

Verse 40. Hang all the Law and Prophets]
Yea and the Gospel too: for love is both the complement of the Law, and the
supplement of the Gospel, Romans 13. 10. Ioh. 13. 34. It is the filling (...).
up of the Law (as the word signifies,) for that it clotheth the duties of the
Law with the glory of a due manner, and seateth them upon their due subjects,
with unwearied labors of constant well-doing. The Prophets also hang upon the
same nail of love (...).
with the Law, so some frame the Metaphor here used: As some others rather
think, that our Savior, in this expression alludeth to the Jewish
Phylacteries, Heb. Totaphoth, which were scroules of parchment, having the
Commandments written in them, which the Pharisees ware about their heads and
arms, to mind them of obedience to the Law.

Verse 41. While the Pharisees were gathered]
i.e. Before the former meeting was dissolved. We should watch for, and catch
at all opportunities of working upon the worst. Dr Taylour preached every time
he could get his people together, holy day or else.

Verse 42. What think ye of Christ?]
Christus utramque paginam impleret. All our (...) should be, with those
wisemen, (...) of Bethlehem, who is wrapped up, as it were, in the
swathing-bands of both the (...).

Whose son is he?]
They were curious in genealogies. A shame therefore it was for them, to be
ignorant of Christ's (...) and (...).

They say unto him, the son of David]
Herein they said (...), but not all: for they conceived no (...) of Christ,
then as of a (...) man. Our Savior therefore takes a text, out of Psalm. 110.
and (...) them of his (...). (...) must be well versed in (...) mystery of
Christ, and neglect nothing (...) to be (...) by us.

Verse 43. How then does David in spirit]
The spirit (...) Davia (...) a sort, and by his mouth (...) what he would
publish to the Church, concerning the Godhead of Christ. Holy (...) spoke of
old as they (...) acted by the holy Ghost, as they (...)
were forcibly moved, or born away, and as it were, carried out (...). (...).
(...).
of themselves by the holy Ghost.

Verse 44. The Lord said unto my Lord]
God the Father to God the Son, these two differ no otherwise, then that the
one is the Father, and not the Son, the other is the Son and not the Father.

Sit thou on my right hand]
As my fellow and coaequal, Zach. 13. 7. Philip. 2. 6. And as Christ is at the
right hand of his Father, so is the Church at the right hand of Christ, Psalm
45. 9. which is a place both of greatest dignity and safety.

Verse 45. Lord, how is he his Son?]
This is that great mystery of Godliness, which Angels intently look into, as
the (...) did of old into the Mercy-seat. That Christ should 1 (...). 1. 12.
be David's Lord and David's son, God and man in one person, this (...) that
wonder of wonders: well might his name be (...), Isa. 9 6.

Verse 46. And no man was able to answer]
Though they were subtle sophisters, and mighty in the Scriptures, yet they
had nothing to oppose. Magna est veritas, and valebit. Great is the truth, and
shall prevail.

Neither durst any man, etc.]
How easily can God button up the mouths of our (...), yea and plead for us in
their consciences, as he did for Mr Bradford and many more of the Martyrs, whom
as they could not outreason, so neither could they but conceive well of the
Martyrs innocence, triumphing in their persecutours consciences.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse 1. Then spoke Jesus to the multitude, etc.]
CHrist having confuted and confounded the Scribes and Pharisees, turns him to
the people and to his Disciples: and that he might do nothing to the detriment
of the truth, he here (...), that they despise not the doctrine of the
Pharisees, so far (...) it was sound and sincere without leaven; but try all
things, (...). (...). Deligas (...).
(...) fast that which was good. Be advised, and remember to search into the
truth of what you hear, was the counsel of Epicharmus.

Verse 2. Sit in Moses chair]
i. e. Have the ordinary office of teaching the people, but quo iure, he
questioneth not. The Priests and Levites should have done it, but the Scribes
and Pharisees had (...). (...). (...).
for present taken it upon them, stepped into the chair, and there set (...). R
m. 2. 20. So Hildebrand and his successors, have invaded Peter's chair, as they
call the sea of Rome, but what said an Ancient? Non habent Petri haereditatem,
qui (...) non (...). They have no right to Peter's chair, that have not Peter's
faith. The Index (...), commands ( sublesta fide,) instead of Fidem Petri, to
print it Sedem Petri. (...) Quintil. lib. 9. (...) 2.
(...), said Calvus to Vatinius, and digniorem (...) dic qui Praetor (...)
Catonem. Put on a good face, and say that thou art (...) for the office then
Cato himself. But what a bold face had (...) the (...) who meeting the devil,
required his chair of (...).
him, as one that better deserved it? He had his desire I doubt not. But if
(...) and Pharisees sat in (...) chair, it is no news (...) for bad men to
succeed better; as Timotheus Herulus did Proterius the good Bishop of
Alexandria, and as Arminius did Junius in the (...) place at Leyden.

Verse 3. All therefore whatsoever]
Not their traditions, superstitions, and corrupt glosses upon the Law, but
whatsoever they teach that is agreeable to truth: so long as they sit close to
Moses chair, and keep it warm, as it were, hearken to them. Gods good gifts are
to be acknowledged and improved even in the worst, as David made Saul's epitaph,
2 Samuel 1. though the devil preached his funeral, 1 Samuel 28. 19.

But do not ye after (...) works]
If Ministers do well, says Chrysostom, it is (...) own gain, if they say
(...), it is (...). Take (...).
thou what thine own is, and let alone what is another man's. Sylla and K.
Richard the third commanded others, under great penalties, to be virtuous and
modest, when themselves walked the (...) contrary way. A deformed painter may
draw a goodly (...) quod tuumest, (...) alienum.
picture, a stinking breath, sound a mighty blast, and he that has but a bad
voice, show cunning in descant. A blind man may bear (...).
a torch in a dark night, and a harp make music to others, which it self is
not sensible of. Posts set for direction of (...) by the highway-side, do point
out the way which themselves go not: And signe-posts (...) the travellour there
is wholesome diet or warm lodging within, when themselves remain in the storms
without. Lewd preachers are like spirie-steeples, or high-(...), which point up
to heaven, but press down to the center.

For they say, and do not]
They had tongues which spoke by the talent, but their hands scarce wrought by
the ounce; like that ridiculous actour at Smyrna, who pronouncing o caelum, o
heaven, Of this actour, (...) chafing said (...).
pointed with his finger toward the ground: so these Pharisees had the heaven
commonly at their tongues end, but the earth continually at their fingers-end.
In a certain battle against the Turks, there was a Bishop that thus encouraged
the army. Play the men fellow soldiers, to day; and I dare promise you that if
ye dye fighting, ye shall sup to night with God in heaven. Now after the battle
was begun, the Bishop withdrew himself: And when some of the soldiers enquired
among themselves what was become (...). (...). (...). com. p. (...).
of the Bishop; and why he would not take a supper with them that night in
heaven, others answered, Hodie sibi jejunium indixit, ideoque non vult nobiscum
in caelo caenare. This is fastingday with him, and therefore he will eat no
supper, no not in heaven. Epictetus was wont to say, that there were many
Philosophers (...), etc. (...) ap Di. onem.
(we may say, Divines) (...), as far as a few words would go. But is religion
now become a word? goodness a name (as Brutus once cried out?) Should it be
said of holiness, as it was once in another place, Audivimus famam; Job. 28
22. (...).
we have heard the fame thereof with our ears, and that is all? The foolish
Virgins were found with their sic dicentes, but the good servants shall be
found with their sic facientes. Christ was Job. 1. 16.
full of grace, as well as truth. John Baptist was both a burning and shining
light. Origens teaching and living were said to be both one. That Is the best
Sermon (...), that is dug out of a (...). (...) Quod (...) and. gessit.
(...). ep (...).
man's own breast, when he practices what he preaches, non (...) solum
praedicans sed exemplis, as Eusebius testifies of Origin, and Mr Gataker of Mr
Stock. As the want hereof (...) Campian to write Ministris little nibil vilius,
their (...) are most base.

Verse 4. For they bind heavy burdens, etc.]
Their humane (...): so do the Popish Doctors (heirs herein to the (...), of
whom this Sermon is not more historical, then of the other it is
prophetical,) The inferior Clergy they make preach every day in Lent without
intermission, throughout all Italy in the greater cities: so as six days in
the week they preach on the Gospel of the days, and on the Saturday in honor
and praise of our Lady. Whereas the Pope and Bishops preach not at all. So
Sands his Surv. sect. 27.
for the Laity; they must fast with bread and water; when the Priests have
their suckets and other sweet meats three or four times on their
mock-fast-daies. What should we speak of their pilgrimages to Peru, Jerusalem,
etc. penances, satisfactions, etc. And no man must question, but obey without
sciscitation. Walter Mapes sometimes Archdeacon of Oxford, relating the Popes
(...) simony concludes, Sit tamen Domina materque (...) Roma baculus in aqua
fractus, and absit credere quae vidimus. In things that make against our
Lady-Mother Rome, we may not believe our own eyes.

Verse 5. To be seen of men]
Theatrically, thrasonically, and for ostentation, as stage players or
painted-faces. See notes on, chap. 6. verse 2. 5. Saints more seek to be good,
then seem to be so.

They make broad their Phylacteries]
That is, Conservatories, so called 1. Because of the use of them, the law was
kept in remembrance. 2. Because the superstitious Pharisees conceited, that by
the wearing of them about their necks, themselves might be kept from danger, as
by so many spells: what they were, see the Notes above on, Matthew. 22. 40.

Enlarge the borders of their garments]
God had charged the (...) to bind the law to their hand, and before their
(...), (...). 6. 8. wherein (as Hierom and Theophylact well interpret it) he
meant the meditation and practice of his law. They (says a learned Author)
like unto the foolish patient, which when the (...) si puellus (...) patris pij
vestigijs in fistendum, patris iter sacient is sirgula vestigia observaret, and
in ijsdem pedes suos poneret.
Physician bids him take the prescript, eats up the paper, if they could but
get a list of parchment upon their left arm next their heart, and another
scroll to tie upon their forehead, and four corners of fringe, or (if these be
denied) a red thread in their hand, thought they might say, Blessed be thou of
the Lord, I have done the commandment of the Lord. What was this but as Mr
Tindall said in another case, to think to quench their thirst by 1 Samuel, 16. 13.
sucking the Ale-powl.

Verse 6. And love the uppermost rooms]
Which is a singular vanity, and yet has bred greatest contestation in the
Church; as between the Bishops of Rome and Constantinople, the Archbishops of
Canterbury and York justling in Parliament for precedence, even unto blows and
bloodshed: what doleful effects followed upon the contention between the Lord
Protector and his brother in K. Edward the sixths days, raised by their (...)
wives, who could not agree about place? The Apostles rule is, in honor to pre
(...) one another, Romans 12. 10. And true humility is like true balm, that still
in water sinks to the bottom: like the violet, the sweetest but lowest of
flowers, which hangs the head downwards, and hides it self with its own leaves.

Verse 7. And to be called of men Rabbi]
They were tickled with high titles, and thought it a goodly thing to be held
and styled Magnifico's, to be flie-blown with flatteries. There is not a more
vainglorious people under heaven then the Jews. Hence that (...) Chronol. page
432.
rabble of titles amongst them in this order ((...) in a little before the
nativity of our Savior) Rabbi Rabban, Rab, Rabbi, Gaon, Moreh, Morenn and
Moreh tsedek. So the Friars proceed Sands his Surv.
in their vainglorious titles from Padre benedicto to Padre Angelo, then
Archangelo, Cherubino, and lastly Cerephino, which is the top of perfection.
Are not these those (...) the Apostle inveighs against, those great swelling
titles 2 Pet 2. 18.
of vanity? (...) 16.


Verse 8. Be not ye called Rabbi]
Do not ambitiously affect such a title, as if you were the only ones, and
others not worthy to be named in the same day with you. Swelling in the body is
an ill symptom, but worse in the soul.

For one is your master]
Your guide to godliness, and happiness, (...)
your Doctor and dictatour, your Oracle, your Ipse dixit, whose bare word you
are to take, without further proof or pawn.

And all (...) are brethren]
Not as the Pope calls his Cardinals brethren, when in creating them, he uses
this form, (...) fratres nostri, and Principes (...). Odi fastum illius
Ecclesiae, says Basil, which caused the lamentable separation of the Eastern
or Greek Church, from communion with the Latin, the other four Patriachs
dividing themselves from the Bishop of Rome, for his encroaching upon them.

Verse 9. Call no man your father]
i.e. Give no man absolute power over you; be not the servants of men, or
slaves to their opinions or mandates, as Friars are to their superiors, to
argue or debate on whose commands is held high presumption: to search their
reasons, proud curiosity: to detract or disobey them, breach of vow equal to
sacrilege. Quibus nibil placet nisi quod e capitis sui lirippio ipsi
protulerint.


Verse 10. One is your master]
Where then are Magistri nostri Parisienses? our Doctores resolutissimi? our
Masters of opinions, whose word must stand for a law, whose tenets must pass
for Oracles? By the Canon Law, Omnes sanctiones Apostolicae Muchesius. Did 19
c. In memoriam.
sedis irrefragabiliter (...) observandae. The Pope may not be disobeyed.

Verse 11. Shall be your servant]
The word signifies one that is ready pressed to raise dust, to do his utmost
endeavor with all possible expedition in any business, that he is set about.
q d. (...), expeditus, paratus, promptus.


Verse 12. And whosoever shall exalt himself, etc.]
Lo here a great miracle, says Augustine. God is on high, and yet the higher
thou liftest up thy self, the farther thou art from him: Videte magnum
miraculum: Altus est Deus, etc.
the lower thou humblest thy self, the nearer he draws to thee. Low things he
looks close upon, that he may raise them: proud things he knows. afar off,
that he may depresse them. The proud Pharisee pressed as (...) God as he could:
the poor Publican, Aug. de temp.
not daring to do so, stood aloof off: yet was God far from the Pharisee, near
to the Publican.

Verse 13. (...) unto you Scribes, etc.]
By these eight dreadful woes, as by so many links of an adamantine chain, our
Savior draws these hypocrites down to hell their place, and there leaves them
to be reserved unto judgment. St Hierom was called Fulmen (...), the Churches
thunderbolt. How much more might this be attributed to Christ? How terribly
does he here thunderstrike these stupid Pharisees though he saw well (with
Father Latimer) that whosoever will be busy with (...) Act. and Mon. sol.
(...).
vobis, shall shortly after come coram nobis.

Ye shut up the kingdom of heaven]
By hiding heavenly truths, teaching damnable errors, excommunicating the well
affected, or corrupting them by evil counsel and example: and all this, (...)
cor am and in os, before men, and to their faces, making fools of them, even
whiles they look on, casting a mist before their eyes, as those Egyptian
juglers did, Exodus 7. and keeping from them that collyrium, that should cure,
and clear up their eyesight, Revel. 3. 18. Thus did Arundell Archbishop of
Canterbury, Quod verbum Dei (...), ne (...) Tho (...). in (...). (...).
who bound up the word of God, that it might not be preached in his time (as
the Historians words are,) and was therefore (according to this woe here
denounced) so smitten in his tongue, that he could neither swallow, nor speak
for certain days before he died. Steven Gardener was plagued in like manner,
for like reason. And generally, the Popish Clergy are vexed with that grievous
and noisome sore of develish spite against the Reformation, Revel. 16. 2. which
they therefore oppose with might and main, till wrath come upon them to the
(...). And albeit many of them escape the visible vengeance of God, yet this
terrible Woe, as a moth, does secretly (...) them up like a garment, and as a
worm, eats them up like wood, Isa 51. 8. as it did these Pharisees; on whose
outside nothing could be discerned, all was as before, but their souls were
blasted, seared, and sealed up to destruction. He that has drunk poison,
falls not down dead presently in the place, but he has his death about him,
as we say. Saul lived and reigned long after he was cast off by God: and the
very devils are respited in regard of their full torment, but the more is
behind.

Verse 14. Ye devour widows houses]
Though they pretended to be great fasters, Luke 18. 12. yet. their (...)
prepared deceit, as Eliphaz has it, Job 15. 35. and their throats (those open
sepulchers swallowed up whole houses (such was their covetousness) and that of
widows (such was their cruelty) and that under a pretense of long prayers,
which was their hypocrisy: for while their lips seemed to pray, they were but
chewing that morsel, that murdering (...) that made them receive the greater
damnation. Multi in terris (...), quod apud inferos digerunt, says Augustine.
Many (...) that on earth, that they must digest in hell, where the never-dying
worm will feed greedily upon all such covetous caitiffs, as have the greedy
worm under (...)
their tongues, and their ill-gotten goods gotten already into their Luke 11.
41.
bowels, (...) these Pharisees had: which therefore God shall fetch Job 20. 15.
thence again with a (...).

Make long (...)]
God takes not men's prayers by tale, but by weight. He respects not the
Arithmetike of our prayers, how many they are, nor the Rhetorike of our
prayers, how eloquent they are, nor the Geometry of our prayers, how long they
are, nor the Music of our prayers, the sweetness of our voice, nor the Logic
of our prayers, or the method of them, but the divinity of our prayers, is that
which he so much esteems. He (...) not for any James with horny knees through
(...) in prayer: nor for any (...) with a century of prayers for the morning,
and as many for the evening: but S. Paul his frequency of praying with fervency
of spirit, without all (...) prolixities and vain bablings; this is it that God
makes most account of. It is not a servants going to and fro, but the dispatch
of his business that pleases his master. It is not the loudness of a
preachers voice, but the holiness of the matter, and the spirit of the
preacher, that moves a wise and intelligent hearer. So herenot gifts, but
graces in prayer move the Lord. But these long (...) of the Pharisees were so
much the worse, because thereby they sought to entitle God to their sin, yea,
they merely mocked him, fleering in his face.

Verse 15. Ye compass sea and land]
They walked the round, as the devil does, to gain proselytes; they spared for
no pains to pervert men (as now the Jesuits those Circulatores and (...);)
should not we be as diligent and indefatigable to convert them to God? Shall we
not be as (...) in building stair-cases for heaven, as seducers are in digging
descents to hell. If Saul seeking Asses found a Kingdom, shall not we by
seeking others find heaven?

Ye make him twofold more (...) the child of hell]
Either because they relapse to Gentilisme, as finding you so vile and vicious
in your lives: Or, because ye teach them only Ceremonies and superstitions: Or,
because you keep them ignorant of Christ, and Ambros. de (...) and (...). cap.
12.
plant in them an hatred of the truth, as the Jesuits do in their proselytes.
So that of them we may say as Ambrose did of Polemo, who, of a drunkard, by
hearing (...), (...) a Philosopher, Si (...) a vino, (...) tamen (...)
sacrilegio, Though he be now no drunkard, yet he remains drunk (...) with
superstition.

Verse 16. Ye blind guides which say]
His watchmen are blind, (...)
was an old complaint, Isa. 56. 10. Which that it is a foul fault the Vbi
Tsaddi est majusculum.
Rabbines have there noted from one letter (in the Original) of Buxtor. Tiber.
the word rendered Watchmen, bigger then his fellows. How many are there that
thrust into the Ministry, wanting both heart and art to teach the people?
These lead their flocks to the pits brink, wherein if they perish, themselves
lie lowermost.

Whosoever shall swear by the gold of the Temple]
So by the gift on the altar, verse. 18. these, they taught, were tied: the
other (...) for a sum of money be dispensed with, that swore by the Temple,
or the altar. Not so those that swore by the gold of the Temple, that is,
decicated to the Temple, or by the gift on the altar: for these oaths brought
these blind guides in commodity, which the swearer was forced presently to pay
down. The people also were hereby made more free and forward to offer gold for
the Temple, sacrifices for the altar; because they were made believe, that
those presents were more precious then either Temple or altar. Pretty devices
these were to get money; and are they (...) still practiced by Papists? Philip
Brasier was abjured in Henry Act. and Mon.
the eighths time, for saying, That when any cure is done the Priests do anoint
the Images, and make men believe the Images do sweat in laboring for them. The
rood of Grace, and blood (...) Hails is not orious. Our Lady of Loretto has
her Churches so Sands his relat.
stuffed with vowed presents and memories, that they are fain to hang their
cloisters and Churchyards with them. They teach the people, that as they may
sooner go to Christ by S. Dominick then by S. (...): so to swear by holy
relics, and in swearing to lay hand on them, is a more binding oath, then to
swear by God, laying hand on the Bible.

Verse 17. Whether is greater the gold, etc.]
The cause must needs be more noble then the (...). But the dust of covetoulnes
had put out the eyes of these buzzards, and expectorated their (...). It is a
besotting sin, and bereaves a man of right reason. Avidus (...) non videndo.
Papists, our modern Pharisees, are most corrupt in those things, where their
honor, (...), or profit is engaged. In the doctrine of the Trinity that (...)
not upon these, they are sound enough.

Or (...) the gold?]
Solomon's Temple was stone without, and gold within, to show, says one, the
resplendent glory of divine Majesty, lurking within a humane and humbled Moses
unveiled
body. Quid est templi illius aurum sive aurea claritas, nisi ad dextram (...)
sedentis immortalitas atque impassibilitas? says Rupertus, What is the gold of
the Temple, but the glory of Christ at Gods right hand?

Verse 18. But whosoever swears by the gift, etc.]
Vbi utilitas, (...)
(...), says Epictetus, where there is gain, there is godliness. And, Deos
quisque sibi utiles (...), (...) another. All the worldlings plowing, sailing,
building, buying, buts upon commodity, (...) knows no other deity. These
Pharisees strove to reduce all (...) to their own purses and paunches, though
they rendered men thereby not only irreligious, but unnatural, Mat. 15. 5, 6.
See the Notes there.

Verse 19. Ye fools and blinde]
The second time so. For behold they have rejected the word of the Lord (yea
the Word, the Lord Christ) and what wisdom was in them? Jer. 8. 9. True it is,
they were accounted the only (...) men: Where is the wise, 1 Cor. 1.
(...) is the Scribe? says S. Paul. As if wise and Scribe were terms
convertible. And for the Pharisees, they did so carry away the hearts of the
people, that there was no holy man that was not termed a Pharisee, as we find
in their (...). And, (...) the most straitest sect of our religion, I (...) a
Pharisee, says Paul, Act. 26. 5. They were (...), and did utterly outshine
and obscure those other sects of Sadduces and Essenes, the later whereof are
not so much as mentioned in the Gospel: And yet we see what esteem Christ had
of them, and what titles (...) here bestows upon them: To teach us not to rest
in (...), nor to think it sufficient that others think well of (...). But let
every man prove his own work, Galat. 6. 4. and know, that not he that commends
himself, or is commended by others, is approved, but he whom the Lord (...), 2
Cor. 10. 18.

Verse 20. Whosoever therefore shall (...)]
It was not lawful to swear by the altar, or by any creature whatsoever, Jer.
5. 7. (much (...) by idols, Amos 8. 14. I my self, says Latimer, have used in
mine earnest matters to say, Yea by S. Mary, which indeed is Sermon. in 3. Sun.
in Advent.
naught.) But though these oaths be formally naught, yet they are finally
binding: and being broken they are plain perjury, because Fieri non debuit
factum valet.
they are all reduced to God himself, no otherwise then if they had been taken
expressly by the name of God. Hence it is that the oaths of Papists, Turks,
Heathens (though superstitious) are obligatory, (...), quasi (...), An oath is
an hedge, which a man may not break.

Verse 21. And by (...) that dwells therein]
By his grace in his ordinances, yea (...) his glory, which sometimes filled
the temple. This temple at Jerusalem, together with that of Diana at Ephesus
(which was also built of Cedar in an apish imitation of Gods temple, as
Vitruvius (...) others witness) were destroyed much about one and the same
time; Believe me, says Christ, the hour comes, when ye shall neither in this
mountain, not yet at Jerusalem worship the father. Demosthenes says, That Ioh.
4. 21.
man's heart is Gods best temple, where he dwells with delight, Contra Arist,
(...).
so it be beautified with modesty, piety, justice, etc. And this is the end of
our creation, says another, that man should be the Temple of God, and God the
Altar of man.

Verse 22. By the throne of God]
Heaven is his throne, and earth his footstool: yet may we not conceive that
God is commensurable by the place, as if he were partly here, and partly
elsewhere: but he is every where all present. See more in the Notes on Mat. 5.
34.

Verse 23. Ye pay tithe of mint]
The Chaldee word for mint (...)
signifies also a book of histories: because in that one poor herb large
stories of Gods wisdom, might, and love, are described unto us. In tithing this
and other pot herbs the Pharisees were over and above sollicitous, and even
superstitious, and all for a name. So in the year of grace, 1435. Capistranus
the Minorite, being sent into Germany and other countries by Pope Nicolas to
preach obedience to the Sea of Rome, gat a great deal of credit and respect
Funcc. (...).
to his Doctrine by putting down dicing, carding, dancing, feasting, masking,
enterludes, etc. although he taught not one syllable of sound doctrine,
touching Christ and his merits, (...) of faith, patience of hope, etc. There
are both Magnalia and (...) legis, the great and the lesser things of the law:
both must be looked to. Hypocrites are nice in the one, but negligent of the
other.

Judgment, mercy and faith]
So of old, to those bodily exercises and external rites, so stood upon by the
hypocrites in their (...), Isaiah opposes judgment and justice, Chap. 1.
Hosea opposes mercy and kindness, Chap. 4. Zachary opposes truth and
fidelity, Chap. 8. as more to be looked after, and (...) for.

Verse 24. Which strain at a gnat, etc.]
A proverbiall speech warranting the lawful use of such expressions, for
illustration of a truth. The Greeks have a like proverb; to gargle down an
image, statue or colosse; that is, to make no bones of a foul fault, (...)
when matters of less moment are much scrupled. Saul kept a great stir about
eating the flesh with the blood, when he made nothing of shedding innocent
blood. Doeg was detained before 1 Samuel 14. 33.
the Lord, by some voluntary vow belike. But better he had been 1 Samuel (...) 7.
further off, for any good he did there. The Priests made (...) of putting the
price of blood into the treasury, Matthew. 27 6. Fernicaripecca (...) esse (...):
At mu ieri osculum sigere mortale acinus arbitrab. Funcc.
who yet made no conscience of imbruing their hands in the innocent blood of
the Lamb of God. The Begardi and Beginnae, a certain kind of heretics, Anno
1322. held this mad opinion, that a man might here attain to perfection, and
that having attained to it, he might do whatsoever his nature led him to: That
(...) Chronol ex Massei, l. 18.
was no sin, but to (...) a woman was a mortal wickedness, etc.

Verse 25. Ye make clean the out-side]
True Ephraimites or rather Canaanites, so they are called, Hos. 12. 7, 8. that
is, mere natural men, Ezekiel. 16. 4. the balances of deceit were in their hands,
they loved to oppress, yet so long as thereby they grew rich, they flattered
themselves and said, In all my labors they shall (...) none iniquity in me;
that were sin. Hypocrites if they can but make fair to the worldward it is
enough. But as the fish Sepia is bewraied by the black color, which she
casts out to cover her: so the hypocrite is convinced by the very show of
godliness, under which he hoped to have lurked. God so discovers his
deceitful courses, as that his wickedness is showed before the whole
Congregation, Pro. 26. 26.

Verse 26. Cleanse first that which is within]
God loves truth in the inwards, Psalm. 51. 6. O Jerusalem wash thy heart, Jer.
4. 14. (not thy hands only, as Pilate did:) this breeds constancy and evennesse
in all our outward behaviors, Iam. 4. 8. Grace and nature both begin at the
heart, at the center, and from thence goes to the circumference. Art and
hypocrisy, begin with the face and outward lineaments.

Verse 27. Ye are like unto whited Sepulchres]
The Jews had their vaults or caves for burial. These the wealthier sort would
paint, garnish, beautify at the mouth or entrance of them. And (...). (...).
Heb (...).
hereunto our Savior alludeth, Intus Nero, foris Cato: (...) (...).
hic ut Piso, vivit ut Gallomus, etc. It was said of the Sarmatians, (...) Tac.
lib. (...). cap 10.
that all their virtue was outward: And of Sejanus, that he had only a
semblance of honesty, Intus summa adipiscendi libido, within he was full of
extortion and (...). Hypocrites seem as gloworms, (...), etc.
to have both light and heat: but touch them, and they have neither. The
Egyptian temples were beautiful on the Tac.
outside: when within ye should find nothing, but some serpent or crocodile.
Apothecaries boxes often have goodly titles, when yet they hold not one dram of
any good drug. A certain stranger coming on (...) unto the Senators of Rome,
and coloring his hoary hair and pale cheeks with vermilion hiew, a grave
Senator espying the deceit, stood up and said, What sincerity are we to expect
at this man's hands, whose locks and looks, and lips do lie? Think the same of
all painted hypocrites.

Verse 28. But within ye are full, etc.]
Fair professors they were, but foul sinners, not close, but gross
hypocrites, such as knew themselves to be so; like as Ieroboams wife knew her
self to be disguised, when she went to the Prophet: and as the whore that
offered sacrifice to cover her whoredom, Prove. 7. 14. This hypocrisy goes
worthily coupled (...) with iniquity. It arises from secret Atheism, as in
Ananias and Saphira that noble pair of hypocrites, and paveth a way to the
unpardonable sin, as in these Pharisees.

Verse 29. (...) build the Tombs, etc.]
And lost their cost, because (...) est (...) sancti (...), vivi (...). (...).
they received not their doctrine. So do the Papists at this day in their
pretended honoring the ancient Saints and Martyrs, whose religion and
practices they persecute in the true professors. How much better Rabus,
Crispin, the French Chronicler, (...), Fox, and others, who have raised the
Martyrs, as Alan (...) us. (...). ex cont. (...).
so many Phaenices, out of their ashes again, by recording their holy lives and
Christian deaths? And how shall Cope and Kemp stink for ever in the nostrils of
all good people? The former (...) fouling so much fair paper in railing at, and
casting reproach upon the holy Martyrs of the Protestant religion, in his sixth
dialogue especially: The later, for disgracing them some few years since,
excusing (...) of (...) (...). p. 15.
the powder traitors at same time, in a Sermon at S. Mary's in Cambridge.

Verse 30. If we had been in the daies]
Either these men grossly dissembled, or their hearts greatly deceived them; For
certainly, an Herod and Herodias to John Baptist, would have (...) an Ahab and
Iezabel to Elias. But as it was said of Demosthenes, (...). (...).
that he was excellent at praising the worthy acts of (...), (...) so at
imitating of them: In like sort may we say of the (...), they could well
declaim against their forefathers (...), but not so well disclaim them. They
were adversus sua ipsorum (...) facundi (...), as one speaks in a like case.
Shrill accusers of themselves.

Verse 31. Wherefore ye be witnesses, etc.]
Here our Savior casts all their cost in their teeth, as if thereby (...) had
meant to commend (...) fathers curelty in killing the Prophets, since they (...)
it, by persecuting him and his to the death. (...) is commonly hereditary, and
runs in the blood: and (as we use to say of (...)) The older it is, the
stronger; as in the deadly feud of Scotland, taken away by K. (...).

Verse 32. Fill ye up then the measure]
Ironice (...). It gives us to understand, that sinners are stinted, and cannot
do what mischief they would. If at any time they exceed their commission (as
they are apt) and help forward the affliction, as out of their innate malice
they will, God will soon grow jealous for (...), and take them off, Zech. 1.
14, 15. When (...) has (...) her ephah, God will soon transport it into the
(...) (...), Zech. 5. 8. - - 11. When it is once ripe in the field, God will
not (...) it to shed to grow again, but cuts it up by a just and seasonable
vengeance.

Verse 33 Ye Serpents]
Serpentum tot sunt venena, quot genera, Lib. 12. cap. (...).
says Isidore, tot pernicies, quot species, tot (...), qnot colores. See how
our Savior sharps up these (...), that, if possible, they might be made sound
in the (...). So deals Peter by Simon Magus, Paul by Elymas, many of our
Champions by their Popish Antagonists. Before God you are deceivers of the
people (said M. Philpot Martyr, to his persecutours) before God there is no
truth in you. And to mocking Morgan, he said, I must tell Act. and Mon. fol.
1653.
thee, thou painted wall and (...), in the name of the living Lord, that God
shall (...) fire and brimstone upon (...) of his word, and (...) of his people,
as thou art. And afterward, Thou art but an Ass in the things of God, in that
thou kickest against the truth, and art void of all godly understanding. Thou
have seduced others (said Bonner to Philpot) and made them rejayce and sing
with thee. Yea, my Lord, quoth he, we shall sing when you shall cry, Woe, woe,
except ye repent. What an arrogant fool is this (said the Bishop) I will handle
Ibid. 1654.
thee like an heretic, and that shortly. I fear nothing, I thank God (said the
other) that you can do unto me. But God shall destroy such as thou art, and
that shortly, as I trust. Likewise Ibid 1567.
to the Bishop of Chichester he spoke thus. I perceive you are (...) certe
(...) quam diabolus, quia Arrianus.
blind guides and leaders of the blind, and therefore, as I am bound to tell
you, very hypocrites tvrannously persecuting the truth, which you are not able
to disprove. Thus Hilary called Constantius Antichrist, and (...) devil,
because they were Arrians.

Ye generation of vipers]
Quarum morsus insanabilis. Sic (...) Plin. l. 11. c. 37.
sycophantarum morsum non est remedium. See my Notes on Mat. 3. 7. Vipers teeth
are buried in their gums, that one would think they could not bite: so
hypocrites.

Verse 34. Wherefore, Behold I send you]
O the infinits goodness of God, in striving by his Spirit with refractory
sinners in the use of the means, waiting their return! Sed pensare solet vi
graviore moram.


Prophets, wisemen, and Scribes]
That is, Apostles, Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4. 11. whom he here calls by
the customary names of that country. Scribe was an honorable name, till
Pharisees dishonested it by their hypocrisy.

Ye shall kill and crucifie]
If therefore we have not yet resisted unto blood, be content with lighter
crosses, and look for heavier. Omnis Christianus crucianus. It is but a
delicacy to divide betwixt Luther.
Christ and his cross.

Verse 35. From the blood of righteous Abel]
God reckons of men by their righteousness, Romans 10. The righteous (let him
dwell where he will, and by whom) is better then his neighbor, says Solomon.
This was Cains grief, who was of that wicked one, and slew his brother: And
wherefore slew he him, but because his own works were evil, and his brothers
righteous? So Alphonsus Diazius, that Cain the second, slew his brother John,
because he could not win him to Popery. And I would 1 (...). 3. (...).
this patriarch of the devil (as one calls Cain) did not still live in his sons
and successors, who carry about his club that is red with Abels blood, Imo ut
(...) sacram adorans and venerantur, think they do a goodly act in killing up
the poor lambs of Christ. Caesar Quod melior vir erat quam esse quenquam (...)
expediret. Senec. 2 (...) benefic.
(...) said to have slain Grecinus Julius for this reason alone, for that he
was a better man, then that it was for the tyrants behoof, to suffer him to
live.

Unto the blood of Zacharias]
Most unworthily slain by his pupil Joas (as Linus likewise was by his scholar
Hereules for a 2 Chronicles 24. 20, (...).
few sharp words that he gave him, as he was teaching him.) Our Cum ille
Herculem verbulo asperiore inter (...) esset, etc.
Savior instanceth in this Zacharias as the last Prophet mentioned in the
Scripture to have been slain by them, though they slew many more, not elsewhere
mentioned, unless it be in that little Book of Martyrs, as one fitly calls
the eleventh to the Hebrews. Bucholc. (...).


Verse 36. Shall come upon this generation]
In that last desolation of Jerusalem, whereof more in the next Chapter. God
will not fail to punish persecutours. See Acts and Mon. of the Church, fol.
1902. to 1950. Good for them therefore is the counsel Si nobis non parcis,
tibi parce: (...) non tibi, Carthagini.
that Tertullian gave Scapula a bloody persecutour, If thou will not spare us,
yet spare thy self: If not thy self, yet thy City Carthage.

Verse 37. How often would I, etc.]
How then could they perish, whom God would have saved? It is answered,
Voluntas Dei alia est praecepti, revelata Antecedens, alia beneplaciti, arcana
Consequens. By the former God willed their conversion, but not by the later. A
King wills the welfare of all his Subjects: yet he will not acquit those that
are laid up for treason, (...), and the like foul crimes. A father is willing
to give his son the inheritance: yet if he prove an unthrift, he will put him
beside it, and take another. How often would I have gathered? that is (say some)
by the external Ministry of the Prophets, sent unto thee, verse. 34, 35. Not
by internal regenerating operation of the spirit.

Even as a hen gathers her chickens]
Columbarum masculus Chytraeus in Levit. 12.
ipse ovis incubat, (...) Christus ipse ecclesiam suam fovet. Of unreasonable
creatures birds, and of birds the hen excels in kindness to her young: so that
she doubts not, in their defense, to encounter a Kite, a dog, etc. Iniquo and
impari praelio, though with greatest disadvantage.

And ye would not]
Men may nill their conversion then, though Pareus.
called by God, Quo nihil est verius, sed and nihil turpius, says one. Men are
not damned, because they cannot do better, but because they will do no better.
If there were no will, there would ^
be no (...), Joh. 12. 39. Therefore they could not believe; They could not,
that is, they would not, says Theophylact out of Chrysostom, who yet usually
extolleth man's free will more then is meet.

Verse 38. Behold, your house is left, etc.]
City and temple both. God will not always stand men for a sinning-stock. They
(...) will not hear his word, shall hear his rod, and feel his sword too.
Elisha has his sword as well as Jehu and (...), 1 King. 19. 17. and the one
usually precedes the other. They therefore that say, Following of Sermons will
make men beggars, forget that (...) take away the Gospel from Jerusalem (...)
to leave their houses, as well as Gods house, (...).

Verse 39. Till ye shall say, Blessed, etc.]
That is, Ye shall never see me, or not till the general Judgment: whenas you
that would not obey that sweet voice of mine, Come unto me, ye that are weary,
etc. (...) have no other command of mine to obey but that dreadful Discedite,
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, etc.

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse 1. Departed from the Temple]
NEver to return more to it. In the ninth, tenth and eleventh (...)
Chapters of (...), God makes diverse removes, and still as he goes out, some
judgment comes in: and when he was quite gone, then followed the fatal
calamity in the utter ruin of the City and Temple. So it was then, and so it
was now, according to that, Hos. 9. 12. Woe also to them when I depart from
them. So Ier. 6. 8. Be instructed, o Jerusalem, lest my soul be dis-joynted
(...) thee, lest I make thee desolate, a land not inhabited. Whatever therefore
we do, let us retain Christ with us: lay hold on him, as Magdalen did, Take him
by the feet as the Shunamite did the Prophet, as the Shulamite held her Spouse,
constrain him to stay with us as the two Disciples going to Emaus, cry Vesper a
jam venit, nobiscum Christ maneto:
Extingui lucem ne (...) tuam.


To show him the buildings of the Temple]
As thinking by that goodly sight, happily, he might be moved to moderate the
severity of that former sentence of leaving their house desolate unto them,
chap. 23. 38. True it is that Herod (to get the peoples good will, which yet he
could never do) had been at a wonderful charge in building and beautifying the
Temple. Josephus Lib. 15. Antiq. cap. 14.
the Jew tells us, that for eight whole years together, he kept ten thousand
men aworke about it: and that for magnificence and stateliness, it exceeded
Solomon's Temple, if his words exceed not the truth of the matter. This the
Disciples fondly thought would work upon our Savior to reverse his former
sentence, as abovesaid: but his (...) were not as their thoughts. Animo magno
nihil magnum, says Seneca. The bramble reckoned it a great matter to reign
over the trees; not so the Judge. 9.
Vine and Olive.

Verse 2. There shall not be left here, etc.]
This was afterward fulfilled, when the Temple was set on fire by Titus his
soldiers, that it could not be quenched by the industry of man. Titus (it is
Josephus.
said) would have preserved the Temple, as one of the worlds wonders, from
being burnt, but could not: such was the fury of the soldiers, set awork by
God doubtless. And when, upon the taking of the city and Temple, the army
saluted him Emperor, and many others by way of congratulation sent him crowns
and garlands, he, by a memorable example of modesty, refused them, saying that
he had done nothing more then lent his hands and help to God, who declared his
(...) wrath against that sinful Non sese (...) illa secisse, sed (...) manus
(...) (...). (...). (...). (...)
people. And when Julian the Apostate to spite the Christians, permitted and
encouraged the Jews to reedifie their Temple at his charge, and they attempted
it accordingly, they were hindered from heaven by a mighty earthquake, together
with balls of fire issuing out of the ground works, and consuming the builders.
There are that say that at the same time the Temple at Delphi was utterly
overthrown by earthquakes and thunderbolts, and (...). 3.
(...). 3.
could never since be repaired. When Phocas the (...) sought (...).
to secure himself by building high walls, he heard a voice from (...).
heaven telling him, that though he built his bulworks never so (...) Antiq.
high, yet sin within would soon undermine all. We may say Hebr.
the same to the Jesuits telling us so often in their writings, de magnitudine
(...) (...).
Ecclesiae (...), that be they never so high-set, God, for their abominations,
will abase them. It is observed of Rome, that since it became the Popes seat,
it was never (...) by any, but it was sacked and ransackt. See its destiny
elegantly and emphatically set forth, Rev. 18. 21.

Verse 3. Came unto him privately, saying]
Because it was dangerous to speak publicly of the destruction of the Temple,
as the examples of Jeremy and Steven show. Howbeit Micah the Morashite
prophesied in the days of (...) saying, Zion (...). 26. 18.
shall be plowed, etc. and the mountain of this house shall be as the
high places of a forest. And God stirred up many faithful (...) to cry out
against Rome in her ruff, and to foretell her ruin. In the year 1159. lived
Joannes Sarisburiensis, who reproved Iac. (...). in hist. Pont. Romans p 145.
the Pope to his face, and wrote his Polycraticon, wherein he freely taxes all
the Romish hierarchy. Bernard also told the Bishops of his time, that they were
not teachers but seducers, not Pastors but Impostures, not Prelates but
Pilates, etc. And Lib. 4. de Consid.
a certain Painter blamed by a Cardinal for coloring the visages of Peter and
Paul too red, tartly but fitly replied that he painted them so, as blushing at
the lives of their successors.

The sign of thy coming]
viz. To destroy the temple.

And of the end of the world]
Which they thought could not possibly out-last the Temple. As they were wont
to say in the Primitive Church, Absque stationibus non staret mundus: The (...).
world could not stand if Gods people did not stand before him in prayer. Semen
sanctum statumen terrae, as Tremellius reads, Isa. 6. 13.

Verse 4. Take heed that no man deceive you]
Try the spirits, and turn from false doctrines, as you would do from a serpent
in your way, or from (...) in your meats. Deceivers are fly and subtle, and
that old serpent, more subtle then them all, catches the deceived by the
deceiver, as the fisher does one fish by another, that he may make a prey of
them both. These, as Harpies, have virgins faces, vultures tallons: they are
ravening wolves in sheeps-clothing, etc. Shun them therefore, for they will
increase to more ungodliness, and their word will eat as does a gangrene, 2 Timothy 2. 16, 17. Theodosius tore the writings of the Theod. Imp (...) scripta
(...) pugnantia cum testimonijs (...). (...). Sozom l. 7. c. 7.
Arrians that were presented to him. And when he desired to confer with
Eunomius, his Empress Placilla dissuaded him, very earnestly; lest being
perverted by his speeches he might fall into heresy

Verse 5. Shall come in my name]
Or, under my name, saying I am Christ, as (...) the Egyptian, (...) the
Galilean, Act. 5. 36. 37. Barchocab and others of old, who were miserably slain
Joseph Antiq. lib. 17. cap 12. and lib. ^8. c. 20.
by the Romans. So one Moore, in K. Edward the sixths time, took upon him to be
Christ: So did Hacket in Q. Elizabeth's time, David George likewise and others
in Germany: that I De ^el Iud. lib. 2 cap. ^2.
say nothing here of Papists, who desperately deny the Lord that bought them,
and wickedly set up Antichrist in his stead (as were easy to prove,) who
opposes him not so much in his nature (...).
or person, as in his unction and function, and thence also has his name.

Verse 6. See that you be not troubled]
Or frighted, as soldiers are by sudden alarm. Quid timet hominem homo in
sinu dei positus? David was undaunted, Psalm. 3. 6. and 27. 3. He looked (...).
not downward on the rushing and roaring streams of dangers that ran so swiftly
under him, for that would have made him giddy: But steadfastly fastened on the
power and promise of God All-sufficient, and was safe. So at the sack of
Ziglag. 1 Samuel 30. 6.

Verse 7. For nation shall rise, etc.]
See here the woeful effects of refusing Gods free offers of grace. They that
would have none of the Gospel of peace, shall have the miseries of war. They
that loathed the heavenly Manna, shall be hunger-starved. They that despised
the only medicine of their souls, shall be visited with the pestilence. They
that would not suffer heart-quake, shall suffer earthquake. Or as that Martyr
expresses it. They Bradford.
that trembled not in hearing, shall be crushed to pieces in feeling. As they
heap up sin, so they treasure up wrath: as there has been a conjuncture of
offenses, so there shall be of their miseries. The black horse is at the heels
of the red, and the pale of the black, Rev. 6. 4. God left not Pharaoh, that
sturdy rebel, till he had beaten the breath out of his body: nor will he cease
pursuing men with his plagues, one in the neck of another, till they throw the
traitors head over the wall.

Verse 8. All these are the beginning, etc.]
q. d. There yet remain far worse matters then war, famine, pestilence,
earthquakes. Adhuc restant (...).
And yet war is as a fire that feeds upon the people, Isa. 9. 19, 20. Famine
is far worse then that, Lam. 49. Pestilence is Gods evil Angel, Psalm. 78. 49,
50. Earthquakes are wondrous terrible, and destructive to whole cities, as to
Antioch of old, and to Pleurs in Italy alate, where fifteen hundred men
perished Anno 527.
Anno. 1618.
together. A conflux of all these abides the contemners of Christ's Gospel. The
holy Martyrs, as Saunders, Bradford, Philpot, Act. and Mon.
etc. The Confessors also that fled for Religion in Q. Mary's days
acknowledged (as Ursinus relates) that that great inundation of misery came
justly upon them for their unprofitablenesse under the means of grace, which
they had enjoyed in K. Edwards days. When I first came to be Pastor at
Clavenna, says Zanchy, there fell out a grievous pestilence, that in
seven-monethsspace consumed 1200. persons. Their former Pastor Mainardus,
Zan^^. Miscell. epist ad Lantg.
that man of God, had often foretold such a calamity for their Popery and
profanesse: But he could never be believed, till the plague had proved him a
true Prophet: and then they remembered his words, and wished they had been warned
by him.

Verse 9. And shall kill you]
Besides the butcheries at Jerusalem, that slaughterhouse of the Saints, Nero
orientem fidem primus Romae cruentavit, Nero was the first Roman persecutour,
says Tertullian, who therefore calls him the dedicatour of the condemnation
of Christians: He is said to have made such a Dedicator damnationis
Christianorum. Tert. Alsted. Chron. 33^.
bloody decree as this, Quisquis Christianum se esse confitetur, is tanquam
generis humani convictus hostis, sine ulteriori suidefensione capite plectitor.
Whosoever confesses himself a Christian, let him be put to death without any more
ado, as a convicted enemy of mankind.

Verse 10. And then shall many be offended]
As not willing to suffer. How many revolted for fear in the Primitive times,
were abjured here in Q. Mary's reign, fell to Popery in the Palatinate and
other places in Germany since the troubles there, as fast as leaves fall in
Autumn? Somewhat men will do for Christ, but suffer nothing.

Verse 11. And shall deceive many]
Witness the Eastern and Western Antichrists, those deceitful workers, that
have drawn millions of souls into hell, by their grand impostures. The world
went wondering after those two beasts, which as the Panther, hid their horrid
heads, that they may take men with their fleshpleasing superstitions: And (as
the serpent Scytale) when they cannot otherwise overtake the flying passenger,
they so bewitch him with their beauty and bravery, that he has no power to
pass away. In his (...) and (...).


Verse 12. And because iniquity shall abound]
In these last and worst times, as Bernard yoketh them, and as the Scripture
often describes them. There was never but one Noah, that with two faces saw both
before and behind him. But lo that Ancient of days, to whom all times are
present, has told us, that the last shall be the loosest, the dregs of time,
the sink of sins of all former ages.

The love of many shall wax cold]
Conversation with cold ones will cast a damp, and make one cold, as our
Savior here intimates: there is no small danger of defection, if not of
infection by such; they are notable quench-coals. This both David and Esaias
found, and therefore cried out each for himself, Woe is me, Psalm. 120. 5. Isa.
6. 5. There is a compulsive power in company to do as they do, Gal. 2. 14. Why
compellest thou, etc. It behooves Rev. 2. 5.
us therefore to beware, upon whom the ends of the world 2 Pet. 3. 17.
are come, least we suffer a decay, least leaving our first love, and De vita
Christi lib. 2 cap 87.
led away with the error of the wicked, we fall from our former steadfastness.
The world, says Ludolfus, has been once destroyed with water for the heat of
lust, and shall be again with fire for the coldness of love. Latimer saw so
much lack of love to God and goodness in his time, that he thought verily
doomes-day was then just at hand.

Verse 13. But he that endureth]
It is but a He, a single man, that holds out: when Many loose their love,
and therewith their reward, 2 Ioh. 8. Ecebolus, AEneas Sylvius, Baldwin,
Pendleton, Shaxton and many others, set forth gallantly; but tired ere they
came to their journies end. Of them that verse was verefied, Principium fervet,
medium tepet, exitus alget. Like the Galli Insubres, they showed all their
valor in the first encounter. Like Charles the 8. of France, of whom
Guicciarden notes, that in his expedition to Naples, he came into the field
like thunder and lightning, but went out like a snuff. Like Mandrobulus in
Lucian, who the first year offered gold to his gods, the second year silver,
the third nothing. Or lastly, like the lions of Syria, which as Aristotle
reports, bring forth first five whelps, next time four, next three, and so
on, till at length they become barren. So Apostates come at last to nothing,
and therefore must look for nothing better then to be cast off for ever: when
they that hold out and hold on their way, passing from strength to strength,
from faith to faith, etc. shall be as the Sun when he goes forth in his
strength; yea they shall shine forth as the Sun in the kingdom of their
father, Matthew. 13. 43. Caleb was not discouraged by the Giants, and therefore
had (...) the place of the (...): so those that hold out in the way of heaven,
shall be sure to have heaven. Thomas San-Paulins at Paris, a young man of
eighteen years, being in the fire, was plucked up again upon the gibbet, and
asked whether he would (...)? To whom he said, That he was Act. (...) Mon.
(...). 8, 5.
in his way toward God, and therefore desired them to let him go. (...)
Merchant of Paris his case was nothing so comfortable, who for jesting at the
(...), was by them condemned to be hanged: But he, to save his life, was
content to recant, and so he did. The Friars, hearing of his recantation,
commended him, saying, If (...) continued so, he should be saved. And so
calling upon the officers, caused them to make haste to the Gallows to hang him
up, while (...) was yet in a good way (said they) lest he Ibid (...). 831.
fall again.

Verse 14. For a witness unto all Nations]
Whilst, with Moses, it (...) the Egyptian, saves the (...); is a favor
(...) life to some, of death to (...); who shall be left without (...) by the
Gospel preached to them, as those that by their obstinacy have wilfully cut the
throats of their own poor souls, refusing to be reformed, hating to be (...).
Sure it is that the last sentence shall be but a more manifest declaration of
that judgment, which the Lord in this life, most an end, by his word has
passed upon people.

Verse 15. The abomination of desolution]
That is Antichrist, say some Interpreters; and hitherto may fitly be referred
that of (...); who in his (...) of the year 964. reckning up some Popes (...)
wicked, he calls them, The abomination of desolation standing in Gods Temple.
Others understand it of the Roman Eagles (...) se (...). (...) non aperuit,
(...), (...) (...) in (...) (...).
or Ensigns. Others of the Emperor Caius his statue, said by some to (...) set
up in the Sanctuary. As others again of Titus his picture placed there, which
happily was that one great sin that so troubled him upon his deathbed. But they
do best, that understand the text of those abominable authors of desolation,
the Roman Armies; who laid waste that pleasant Land, and destroyed the Nation;
as, besides what Daniel foretold, is set (...) by Josephus at large in his
sixth and seventh book, De (...) Iudaico.

Whosoever reads let him understand]
Let him strive to do so by (...) with (...) attention, diligence and
devotion; weeping as (...), did, till the sealed book was opened; digging deep
in the mine of the Scriptures for the mind of God, 1 Cor. 2. 15. and In vita
Apollon. (...). c. 4.
holding it fast when (...) has it, lest at any time (...) should let it slip,
Heb. 2. 1. Admirable is that, and appliable to this purpose, which (...)
lapidum non (...) ac apum examina (...).
(...) relates of the precious stone (...) of so orient, bright and sweet a
color, that it both dazeleth and refreshes the eyes at once, drawing together
heaps of other stones by it is secret Non (...) visceribus (...), sed and (...),
qua ex captantium manibus (...), (...).
force (though far distant) as hives of bees, etc. But, lest so costly a gift
should grow cheap, nature has not only hid it in the innermost bowels of the
earth, but also has put a faculty into it, of (...) out of the hands of those
that hold it, unless they (...) very careful to prevent it.

Verse 16. Flee into the mountains]
As (...) at length did, for Zoar was too hot to hold him: So should Judea be
for these, who were therefore to repair to Pella beyond Jordan, where they were
hid till the indignation was over-past, as Eusebius has it, in the third book
and fifth Chapter of his history. Such a receptacle of religious people was
Geneva in the (...) persecution. And such (blessed be God our strength for his
unspeakable (...)) is at this present Warwick-Castle to my self writing these
things, and to many others in these troublous times. So (...), and many godly
people were entertained and safeguarded by that noble Franciscus a (...) in the
German wars.

Verse 17. Not come down to take any thing]
See here the miseries of war, which now, alas, we feel and can (...) to; being
glad to flee for our lives with the loss of all, lest with (...), seeking to
save our goods, we lose (...) and all; glad if we may (...) with the skin of
our teeth: And how like (...) our present (...) to end in a deadly consumption!
War is called evil by a specialty, (...). 45. 7. Sin, Satan, and war have all
one (...), Evil is the best of them. The best of sin is deformity, of Satan
(...), of war misery. God yet offers us mercy, as (...) did those he warred
against, whiles the lamp burned. O let us break off our sins by repentance, and
be (...) in it, lest we should seem to come (...), Heb. 4. 1.

Verse 18. Return back to take his clothes]
The body is (...) Heu (...) nate Dea.
then raiment: And although there is great use of clothes, in flight
especially, to save us from the injury of wind and weather (for Host (...)
muros, etc.
we carry the lamps of our lives in (...), (...) it were) yet life for a prey
(though we have nothing else) in a common calamity is a singular mercy. A
living dog is better then a dead lion, says Solomon. The Gibeonites, to save
their lives, submitted to the meanest offices of being hewers of wood, etc.
Skin for skin, etc. Job 2. 4. We should be content to sacrifice all to the
service of our lives.

Verse 19. Woe to them that are with child, etc.]
By the laws of Nations, women with child, babes and sucklings, maids and old
folk should be spared. But the bloody sword often knows no (...), as Hos. 10. 14.
the mother was dashed in pieces upon her children, Hos. 13. 16. their infants
were dashed in pieces, and their women with child ripped up. So at the sack of
Magdeburg by Charles the fifth, and of Merindol in France by Minerius, where
the paps of many women were cut off, and their children, looking Act. and Mon.
sol. 868.
for suck at their mothers breast, being dead before, died also for hunger. Many
such barbarous but cheries have been acted lately in Ireland, and begin to be
also now in England (poor England, now an Ireland!) as at Bolton in Lancashire
lately. Help, Lord, or thy servant perishes.

Verse 20. But pray ye]
Christ says not, Fight ye, but pray ye. To fight it boots not: for God has
resolved the lands ruin: But prayers are Bombardae and instrumenta (...)
Christianorum, as Luther has it, the great guns and artillery of Christians,
whereby they may batter heaven, and make a breach upon God himself. Flectitur
(...) voce rogante Deus. Something God will yield to the prayers of his people,
even when he seems most bitterly bent, and unchangeably resolved against them.
Christ here bids them pray, that their flight fell not out in the winter, when
the days (...) Hyems.
are short, (...) foul, and all less fit for such a purpose. Nor on (...).
the Sabbath; when though it were lawful enough, yet it would (...), (...), i.
e (...). (...).
be so much the more uncomfortable. This they were bid to pray above thirty
years before the City was besieged. And they had what they praid for. Their
flight was not in winter, for the siege began about Easter, and the City was
taken in September. Neither was it on the Sabbath Day, as we have cause to
believe: for when Christ bids us pray for any thing, it is sure he means to
bestow (...). As when we bid our children ask us this or that, it is because we
mean to give it them.

Verse 21. Tribulation such as was not, etc.]
Those very days (...)
shall be affliction: so Mark has it, chap. 13. 19. As if the very time were
nothing else but affliction it self. He that can read the history of it without
tears, has hardly the heart of a man in him. Besides those many that perished
within the walls, Josephus tells us of a thousand thousand of them slain by the
Romans, and 97000 carried captive. Oh see the severity of God, and tremble,
Romans Isidor.
11. 22. Alterius perditio tua sit cautio. Scipio wept when he saw (...) on
fire. And when Saguntum was taken, the Romans were as much affected, as if
Hannibal fuisset ad portas, the enemy had been beating upon the walls of the
Capitol.

Verse 22. There should no flesh be saved]
That is, No Jew left alive; the Roman soldiers had been so often beaten by
them, that Deus (...) gladium (...) miserationis semper (...).
they (...) nothing more then to rid the world of them. But God, for his
Covenant sake, preserved a remnant of them, as he ever softeneth the sword of
his justice in the oil of his mercy, as Nicephorus has it. (...) attributes
it to Titus his clemency: but our Savior here better, to Gods infinite mercy
to his elect. These are the salt of the earth, that sprinkled here and there,
preserve it from putrefying and perishing. God gave all the souls that were in
the ship to Paul, and all that were in Zoar to Lot. If it were not for his
elect in the world, he would make a short work in the earth, Romans 9. 28.

Verse 23. Then if any (...) shall say]
Here again our Savior returns to the description of the last times,
containing the rise, reign and ruin of Antichrist, whose chief engine shall be
to persuade Christ's corporal presence here and there in certain places, and to
tie his worship and service to such or such a City, Country, Temple, etc.
where he may be seen, touched, eaten, etc. as they feign in the Eucharist.

Verse 24. If it were possible, etc.]
Fundamentally and finally the elect cannot possibly be deceived: because both
the deceived, and the deceiver are with the Lord, Job 12. 13, 16. In the
Primitive Church, those capital heresies concerning the Trinity and the
incarnation of our Savior did so prevail, Ut ingeniosares fuerit esse
Christianum, says Erasmus, that it was a witty thing to be a true Christian.
Arrianisme had so overspread the world, that Athanasius seemed to be alone, as
did Elias before him, and Luther after him. But God in the worst times,
reserved a remnant, and at all times, will not see nor suffer any of his to
miscarry: but will reduce them from their out-straies, as he did Latimer, who
Act. (...): (...). 919.
was (as himself confesses) as obstinate a Papist as any was in England, till
converted by (...); and as he did Denckins a learned Scultet. Annal.
Dutchman, but a pestilent heretic, till converted by Oecolampadius; and as he
did Francis (...), a desperate Atbeist, till converted by conference with a
countryman of his not far from (...). Adam.
Florence.

Verse 25. Behold, I have told you before]
See therefore that ye stand always upon your watch: for, for this end have I
warned you: prevision is the best means of prevention. Leo cassibus irretitus
ait si (...). To sin after warning, is to fall with open eyes, which deserves
no pity. Not to be warned, is both a just presage and desert of a downfall.

Verse 26. Behold, He is in the desert]
In such an ermitage, or blind chapel, built in a by-place to the honor of
such a Saint, as our Lady of Loretto, Hall, or Sichem (Lipsius his last
dotages) (...)
Behold (...) is in the secret chambers or conclaves (scil. of Cardinals, etc.)
or cupboards, as the breaden-god born up and down in a box, or on an altar, and
worshipped by the common people. The rebels of Norfolk in Edw. 6. time, brought
with them into the battle the Pyx under his Canopy, as the Israelites brought
the Ark, 1 Samuel 4. 3. and said it should save them. But as then the Ark, so now
the consecrated God, with all the trumpery about him, was taken in a Cart,
which was then in stead of an altar, and Act. and Mon. fol. 1190
there lay all in the dust. Believe them not therefore in any of these their
fopperies and forgeries. The simple believes Fatuus (...) (...). Lips.
every word: but the prudent man looks well to his goings. He is a slave to
good reason, but not easily swaied by every new Prove. 14. 15.
opinion.

Verse 27. So shall also the coming of the son of man be]
Clear and conspicuons, as the lightning cannot be hid or hindered from being
seen all the whole heaven over. Then shall all secret sins be made (...), as
things written with the juice of Limmons are legible, when held to the fire: as
visible shall they be, and legible too, as if written with the brightest
lightning upon a wall of crystal.

Verse 28. For wheresoever the carcass is, etc.]
That is, says M. Lambert, Martyr, wheresoever is declared by the course of
Act. and Mon. (...). 1021.
the Scriptures, the benefits granted to us by Christ's death, thither will men
seek and fly, to know how they may enjoy the same. The sacrificed body of
Christ (says another) has a most Pemble of the Sacrament.
fragrant smell, inviting the Saints (like birds of prey) to fly from far with
mavelous swiftnes to this dead, but all quickening carcass.

There will the Eagles be gathered]
The Vulturine Eagles especially, whereof read Job 39. 29, 30. they follow
armies, and feed on carcasses. Eagles the Saints are called, 1. For their
delight in high flying. 2. For their sharp sightednesse, and steadfast looking
into the Sun of righteousness. 3. For their singular sagacity, in smelling out
Christ, and resenting things above, for the which they are said to have, A nose
like the tower of Lebanon. Cant 7. 4.
4. For their feeding upon the bloody sacrifice of Christ, the true carcass.
Briefly this proverbiall speech may be well understood, either of the conflux
of the godly to the light and liberty of the Gospel, or else of their
indissoluble union with Christ, to be perfectly enjoyed at the resurrection.
For the sense of it is, that let the devil use what means so ever he can by his
emissaries the falseprophets, to divide betwixt Christ and his people, by
telling them, There be is, or here he is, it will not be: for they will flee to
him as a cloud, or as the Doves to their windows, Isa. 60. 8. Nay, as the
Eagles to their carcass, with incredible swiftness; so forcible is the tie
that is betwixt them, that they will not be kept asunder. The Israelites
removed their tents from Mithcah, which signifies sweetness, to Cashmonah,
which signifies swiftness, Numb. 33. 29. To teach us (says a Divine) that no
sooner have the Saints tasted Christ's sweetness, but presently they are carried
after him with swiftnes: they cannot rest till they are joined unto him, whom
their soul loves.

Verse 29. Immediately after the tribulation of those daies]
After that the mystery of iniquity has wrought effectually, and is come to an
upshot: after that Antichrist has had his full forth, as they say, and has
completed his sin, Christ shall suddenly come, as it were out of an Engine.

Shall the Sun be darkened, etc.]
Stupendous eclipses shall precede the Lords coming, and other strange events
both in heaven, earth and sea, as Luke has it. The frame of this whole
universe shall shake, as houses give great cracks, when ready to fall. See 2
Pet. 3. 10. and seek no further.

Verse 30. The sign of the son of man]
That is, either Christ himself (by an Hebraisme) or the dreadful dissolution
of the worlds fabric, or that cloud of heaven that was of old the sign of the
son of man in the wilderness, Exodus 13. 21. or the scars of his wounds, or his
cross, or something else that we cannot describe, and need not search into.
Look how a King, when he would gather his forces into one, sets up his
standard, or appoints his rendezvous: so, such shall be the brightness of
Christ's coming, that all his shall be gathered unto him by that token, not to
fight; but to triumph with him and divide the spoil, as it were, being more
then conquerours; and what is that but triumphers? The expectation of this day
(...) (as that did with David's soldiers at Ziklag) digest all our sorrows.

And then shall all the Tribes of the earth mourn]
This to prevent, we must judge our selves, 1 Cor. 11. 31. and take unto us
words against our sins, if we would not have Christ take unto him words against
our souls, Hos. 14. 3. Good men have been exceedingly affected at the hearing
of Gods judgments against (...), as Hab. 3. 16.

Verse 31. And he shall send his Angels]
As his apparitours and executioners. David went otherwise attended when he
went against Nabal, then when against Goliath: So Christ shall come, when he
shall come again with his troops and trumpets, etc.

With a great sound of a Trumpet]
Christ shall put forth his own mighty voice, Joh. 5. 28. and 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16.
ministered (...) his Angels, as in the text, and set forth by the sound of a
trumpet, in allusion, belike to Numb 10. where the people (...) congregated and
called together by the sound of a (...) to the door of the Tabernacle. The Lion
of the Tribe of Judah shall roar from above, and thrust out his voice from his
holy habitation, when he enters into judgment with all flesh, Jeremy 25. 30,
31. As the Lion roareth over his whelps, brought forth dead at first, and
raises them from death (...) life, as Pliny reports.

And they shall gather together his elect]
How shall they know (...). (...).
them from reprobates? By Gods saving mark set fairly in their foreheads,
Ezekiel. 9. And by their blithe and merry countenances, cleared and cheared in the
apprehension and approach of their full redemption, now drawing nigh. Besides,
as servants know their masters harvest from ano hers, and can easily discern
the corn from the cockle, so can the good angels soon single out the elect,
about whom they have been familiarly conversant here on earth, as ministering
(...) sent forth to minister to the heirs of salvation, ready pressed to any good
office about them. (...). l. 14.


Verse 32. Ye know that Summer is nigh]
Which is so much the sweeter, because brought in, and led out by winter: so
will eternal life be to the Saints, here tossed and turmoiled with variety of
sufferings. Many sharp showers they must here pass through, Light is sown for
the righteous, etc. sown only; and seed-time we know is usually wet and showry.
Howbeit it is fair weather oft-times with Gods children, when it is foulest
with the wicked; as the Sun rose upon Zoar, when the fire fell upon Sodom. But,
if they should have never a good day in this world, yet heaven will make amends
for all. And what is it for one to have a rainy day, who is going to take
possession of a Kingdom?

Verse 33. Know that it is near, etc.]
Some space then there shall be, it seems, between the foregoing signs, and
the coming of Christ. But though space be granted, yet grace is uncertain. Make
sure work therefore betimes, lest ye come late, and be left without doors for
your lingering.

Verse 34. This generation shall not passe]
viz. That generation that immediately precedes the end of the world. That this
is the sense, appears by the Antithesis, verse. 36. But of that day and (...)
knows no man, q. d. The generation and age wherein Christ shall come, ye may
know by the signs that foreshew it, but the day and hour ye must not look to
know, be you never so intelligent.

Verse 35. Heaven and earth shall pass, etc.]
What God has written, he has written. His word is stablished in heaven,
Psalm. 119.
says David; It endures for ever, says Peter; It remains firm 1 Pet. 1.
as Mount Sion, and shall stand inviolable, when heaven shall pass away with a
great noise, and the earth with its works shall be burnt up, 2 Pet. 3. 10. to
the terror and confusion of those profane scoffers, who deridingly demand,
Where is the promise of Isa. 5. 19.
his coming, etc? verse. 4. that say, Let him make speed and hasten Amos 5.
(...).
his work, that we may see it, etc. Woe to you that thus desire the day of the
Lord: To what end is it for you? The day of the Lord is darkness, and not
light. The great day of the Lord is near, it is near and hastes greatly. It is
a day of wrath, a day Zeph. 1. 15.
of trouble and distress, a day of wastnesse and desolation, a day of
darkness and gloominesse, a day of clouds and thick darkness, to them that are
settled on their (...), and that say in their heart, (...) Lord will not do
good, neither will he do evil.

Verse 36. But of that day and hour knows no man]
That the Lord will come, it is certo certius, not more sure, then what time he
will come, is to us most uncertain. Sundry (...) have been given at it by both
ancient and modern Writers: most of which, time has already refuted. In the
year of grace 1533. there was one that foolishly foretold, That the day of
judgment should fall out in October next ensuing. And this he gathered out of
these words, Jesus Nazarenus Rex Judaeorum. Likewise out of these, Videbunt in
quem transfixerunt: the numerals of the (...) (...).
point to the year 1532. of the later to 1533. Others there are that place the
end of the world upon the year 1657. And for (...). (...). page 494.
proof they make use of this Chronogram MVnDI Conf (...); and further allege,
thot the general deluge fell out in the year of the worlds creation 1657. The
end of the world, says another, (...) ex (...).
will be in the year of Christ 1688, three jubilees and an Christ. par. 2. pa.
374, 375.
half (or thereabouts) after the Reformation of Religion by Luther, etc.
Joachimus Abbas had long since set the year 1258. Arnoldus de villa nova the
year 1345. Michael Stiphelius Saint Lukes day in the year 1533. (...) Leonitius
the year 1583. Ioannes Regiomontanus the year 1588. Adelbertus (...) the year
1599. April 3. Nicolaus Cusanus the year 1700. Cardanus 1800. Picus Mirandula
1905. etc. So great has been the folly and sin of many learned men, who have
thus childishly set their wits to play in so serious a business, as one well
censureth it.

But my Father only]
Ordine (...) seiendi a se, non ab (...). The son knows it not, but from his
Father: like as he neither subsisteth nor works, but from the Father. The set
time of the general judgment God has hid from us. 1. For his own glory,
Prove. 25. 2. Romans 11. 36. 2. For our good that we may watch Ideo latet unus
dies, ut observentur omnes, Prove. 7.
always, and not wax secure as we would do, with the evil servant, verse 48.
till the very day and hour, if we knew it. The harlot in the Proverbs grew bold
upon this, that her husband was gone forth for such a time.

Verse 37. So shall the coming of the Son of man be]
Sudden and unexpected. Luther observes, that it was in the Spring that the
flood came, when every thing was in it is prime and pride, and nothing less
looked for then a flood: men sinned securely, as if they had lived out of the
reach of Gods rod, but he found them out. Security (...) the certain usher of
destruction: as at (...), Ziklag: Before an earthquake the air will be most
quiet, and when the wind lies, the great rain falls. Frequentissimum initium
calamitatis securitas, says the Historian. Paterculus.


Verse 38. They were eating, and drinking]
Wine, likely; because our Savior hereupon bids his Apostles take heed to
themselves lest their hearts at any time should be overcharged with surfeiting
and drunkenness, etc, Luke 21. 34. Like as some do not improbably conjecture,
that Nadab and (...) were in their drink, when they offered strange fire,
because after, they were devoured by fire from the Lord. Aaron and the Priests
are charged to drink no wine nor strong drink, when they go into the (...) of
the Congregation, lest they dye, Levit. 10. 12, 8, 9. St Luke delivers the
matter more roundly by an elegant, Asyndeton, They ate, they drank, they
married, etc. q. d. they passed without intermission, from eating, to drinking,
from drinking, to marrying, etc. they followed it close, as if it had been
their work, and they born for no other end. Of Ninias, second King of
Assyrians, Nephew happily to these Antedihunian belly-Gods, it is said, that he
was old excellent at eating and drinking. And of (...).
Sardanapulus, one of the same line, Tully tells us, that his gut was his god.
Summum bonum in ventre, aut sub ventre posuit: Athenae. (...). lib 2.
and (...), that he hired men to devise new pleasures for him. (...). quaest.
(...).
See my Commonplace of Abstinence. Plut. in Sympos.


Until the day]
They were set upon it, and would loose no time. Their destruction was foretold
them to a day; they were nothing bettered by it: no more would wicked men,
should they foreknow the very instant of Christ's coming to judgment. Joseph
had foretold the famine of Egypt and the time when it (...) come; but fulness
bred forgetfullnesse; saturity, security: None observed, or provided for it.

Verse 39. And knew not]
i.e. They took no kuowledge of Quod vel inviti norant, non agnoverant.
(...) predictions, or their own peril. Their wits they had buried in their
guts, their brains in their bellies (As of the Assefish it is said, that
contrary to all other living creatures he has Arist de (...).
his heart in his belly) whoredom, wine, and new wine take away the heart, Hos.
4, 11. Carnal sins disable nature, and so set men in a greater distance from
grace, which is seated in the powers of nature. I read of some desperate
wretches, that drinking together, In quodam episcopatu potaverunt aliqui, etc.
Joh. (...). loc. com. p 244.
when one of them had drunk himself stark dead, the other no whit warned by
that fearful example of Gods wrath, powered his part of drink into the dead
man's belly.

And took them (...) away]
Men are never less (...), then when they are most secure. Babylon bore it
self bold upon the twenty years provision laid up aforehand, to stand out a
siege. When it Herodot. lib. 1.
was nevertheless taken by Cyrus, some part of the city would Arist, Polit.
(...). 3.
not know or believe of three days after, that there was any such matter.

Verse 40. The one (...), the other left]
The (...) took all away in a manner: but at Christ's coming there shall be
found a considerable company of such as shall be saved. He shall separate his
Saints with a wonderful separation, and make himself to be admired in all them
that believe, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10. How (...) then should we work out our salvation,
and ensure to our selves our election by good works?

Verse 41. Two women shall be grinding at the (...)]
A poor trade, a hard task. (...) would have every man in his honest occupation
to humble himself by just labor, and so to accept of the punishment of their
iniquity, Levit. 26. 41. But one of these two poor grinders at the mill, is
left by Christ for her pride and profanesse. Many are humbled, but not humble,
low, but not Aug. de (...). dei. lib 1. (...). 33.
lowly. To these Christ will say, Perdidist is (...), miserrimi facti estis,
and pessimi (...). Misery has no whit mended you: woe be to you.

Verse 42. Watch therefore, etc.]
(...) simus, non securi, etc. Bernard.
Whilst (...) (...) upon his bed at noon, (...) and (...) (...) 3.
took away his head. Hold fast that thou have, that no man take (...) crown
from thee. Whilst the Crocodile sleeps with open mouth, the Indian rat gets
into him, and (...) his entrails. Satan works strongest on the fancy when the
soul is drousie. The (...) therefore promises to get up early, (...). 7.
(...). to shake (...) security, and not to (...) found henceforth supine and
(...), but to stand upon her watch: as of Scanderbed it is said, that from his
first coming to (...), he never slept above two hours in a night, (...). (...).
(...).
but with restless labor prosecured his affairs. Aristotle and some others
would not sleep, but with brazen balls in their hands; which falling on (...)
purposely set on their beds sides, the noise did difswade immoderate sleep. Our
Savior pronounces (...). (...).
them three times happy that watch, Luke 12. 37, 38. 43. The blessed (...) and
(...). Hor.
Angels are called Watchers, (...), Dan. 4. 10.

For ye know not what hour your Lord, etc.]
He may happily, come upon you, as Epaminondus did upon (...) sentinel, whom
finding asleep, he thrust through with his sword: and being Talem (...)
reliqui, qualem inveni.
chid for so severe a fact, he replied, I left him but as I found him.

Verse 43. He would not have suffered his house, etc.]
And shall the children of this world be wiser for their houses, then we for
our souls? what are these earthly tabernacles, these chair cottages, to our
houses from heaven? All things here are terrene and (...), nec vera, nec
vestra, subject to vanity and violence. Heaven only has a foundation, Heb. 11.
earth has none, Job 26. 7. And things are said to be in heaven, but on earth,
as ready with Colos. 1. 10.
the least shake, to fall off. There is nothing of any stability or (...)
consistency in the creature. It is but a surface, an outside, all the felicity
of it is but skin-deep. Seek therefore first Gods kingdom, etc.

Verse 44. Therefore be ye also ready]
(...) tells us, that it was a piece of Julius Caesar's policy, never to
foreacquaint Scilicet (...) and intentum (...) omnibus, quo (...).
his soldiers of any set time of removeall or onset, that he might ever have
them in readiness to draw forth whithersoever he would. Christ in like manner,
who is called the Captain of our salvation. Our enemy is always ready to anoy
us, should we not therefore look to our stand, and be vigilant? Solomon's
wisdom, (...). 2. 10.
Lots integrity, and Noah's sobriety felt the smart of the serpents sting. The
first was seduced, the second stumbled, and the third fell, while the eye of
watchfullnesse was fallen asleep.

For in such an hour, etc.]
Christ will soonest ceize upon the secure, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. such shall sleep as
Sisera, who (...) he awaked had his head fastened to the ground, as if it had
been now listening what was become of the soul. See the Notes on, verse. 42.

Verse 45. Who then is a faithful and wise servant]
So every man ought to be, but Ministers especially: who should so far surpass
others in these good qualities, as Saul did the people, then whom he was higher
by head and shoulders. They should be faithful in all Gods house as servants,
as stewards and (...) of the mysteries of God, to give to every man his
demense, his due measure of meat, and that which is fit for him, not (as (...).
he in the Emblem did) straw to the dog, and a bone to the ass, Luke 12. 42.
etc. but to every one his portion, 1 Cor. 4. 1.

Verse 46. Blessed is that servant]
It was Augustines wish, that Christ when he came might find him, aut
precantem, aut praedicantem, either praying or preaching. It was Latimers Act.
and Mon. sol (...)
wish (and he had it) that he might shed his heart-blood for Christ. It was
Jewels wish that he might die preaching, and he B. (...) life (...) D (...).
did so. For presently after his last Sermon at Lacock in Wiltshire, he was, by
reasen of sickness, forced to his bed, from whence he never came of, till his
translation to glory. I have heard the like of Mr Lancaster, a precious man of
God, sometimes Pastor of Bloxham in Oxfordshire, a man very famous for his
living by faith. Cushamerus a Dutch Divine, and one of the first Preachers of
the Gospel at Erfurt in Germany: had his pulpit In (...) veneno (...) extinctus
est.
poisoned by the malicious Papists there, and so took his death in Gods work.
What, would you that the Lord when he comes, should find me idle? said Calvin
to his friends, who wished him Scult. Ann. 80.
to forbear studying a while, for his health sake. And such a like answer made
Doctor Reynolds to his Physician upon the like Beza in vita.
occasion. Eliah was going on and talking with Elisha (about An (...) vitam
vivendi perdere (...).
heavenly things, no doubt) when the charet of heaven came to fetch him. There
can be no better posture or state for the messenger of our dissolution to find
us in, then in a diligent presecution of our general, or particular calling.

Verse 47. Verily I say unto you, etc.]
A deep asseveration, for our better assurance and encouragement. Christ is a
liberal paymaster, and his retributions are more then bountiful. (...)
thought much that the steward of his house should be heir of his goods, Genesis
15. 2. 3, Not so the Lord Christ.

Verse 48. But and if that evil servant]
All places are full of such evil servants (and so is hell too,) as future
their repentance, and so fool away their salvation. Of such dust-heaps we may
find in (...) corner: This is a depth of the devil, brim-full with the blood
of many souls, to persuade them that they have yet long to live, and many fair
summers to see: that there is no such haste, but that hereafter may be time
enough: In (...) comes grace: and a few good words at last will waft them to
heaven, etc.

Verse 49. To eat and drink with the drunken]
Though he neither be drunk himself, nor make others drunk, yet to be among
wine-bibbers and (...)-mongers, as Solomon has it, Prove. 23. 20. to company
with such as a frequent an immoderate (...), as Peter's (...),
word imports, 1 Pet. 4. 3. to drink (...), as Bullinger (...) it, though
there follow not an utter alienation of mind, this is here threatened.
Excessive drinking is drunkenness, Ephesians (...). 18. though men be strong
to bear it, Isa. 5. 22.

Verse 50. In a day when he looks not, etc.]
As he did to that rich fool ( Stultitiam patiuntur opes,) who made account
Martial,
he had much good laid up in store for many years; but heard ere morning,
Stulte, hac nocte, Thou fool, this night, etc. Then when Luke 12. 19, 20.
like a Jay he was pruning himself in the boughs, and thought least of death,
he came tumbling down with the arrow in his side: his glass was run when he
hoped it had been but new turned.

Verse 51. And shall cut him afunder]
Gr. Shall cut him (...).
in twain, that is, tear his soul from his body by main force, Job 27. 8. throw
him out of the world, as it were, by a firmae ejectione, and hurl him into
hell, there to undergo most exquisite torments, such as they did here, that
were sawn asunder, Heb. 11. hewn in (...) as Agag, torn limmeal, as Dan. 3.
29. 1 Samuel 15.
2 Samuel 12. 31.

And appoint him his portion with hypocrites]
Hypocrites (...) id quod in divisione obtigit. Lorin.
then are the freeholders of hell, other sinners are but as tenants and
inmates to them.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse 1. Then shall the kingdom of heaven]
OUr Savior here continues his former discourse, and sets it on by a second
parable to the same (...): not so much for the difficulty of the matter, (...)
for our (...) and backwardness to believe and improve it. Moses would have men
whet good Deuteronomy. (...). 7.
things upon their childrens minds and memories, by going often (...) si ut in
(...).
over them, as the knife does over the whetstone. Solomon says good counsel
should be fastened as (...) driven home to (...) and (...).
the head, Eccles. 12. 11. Paul holds it profitable to write the same things,
though not in the same words, to his Philipians, (...).
chap. 4. 1. Peter slacks not to rouse up those to whom he writes, by
remembering them of those points, wherein they were ready Aug de (...). (...).
and well-rooted, 2 Epist. 1. 12, 13. And Austin advises preachers so long to
press the same truths, till they read in their hearers very visage that they
resent and relish them.

Unto ten virgins]
Virgins without number, Cant. 6. 8. Professors at large, good and bad, one
with another.

Which took their lamps]
The solemnities of Marriage were anciently, performed and celebrated by night,
Luke 12. 35. (...). Problem. and the bridegrom brought to his lodging by the
virgins, bearing burning lamps before him.

Verse 2. Five were foolish]
That is, some were wise, and some (...) quasi (...).
others foolish, and these last usually the most, imprudent, improvident,
afterwitted, oculos habentes in occipitio, that foresee not a following
mischief, but come in with their fools, Had I wist, with their Si praescivissem
as the Lion in the fable. The Spaniards say of the Portugals that they are
pocos y focos, Few and foolish. But of foolish virgins, that is of (...)
professors, that have no more then an outside, there are not a few, but more
then a good many in all places, Cant. 6. 8, 9.

Verse 3. Took their lamps, and took no oyle]
Empty casks, (...) figtrees, pretenders only to the power of godliness: of
whom it may be said, as Livy says of the Athenians, that they waged war
against Philip the father of Persius King of Macedonia (...) 4.
(so these against the devil the world and the flesh,) literis verbisque,
quibus solis valent. These carry Uriah's letters about them destructory to
themselves. For if Religion be not good, why do they profess it? If it be, why
do they not practice it? To such it may fitly be said, as Archidamus to his
son, rashly conflicting with the enemy without sufficient strength, Aut viribus
add, aut animis adime, so either add practice, or leave profession: And as
Alexander, having a soldier of his own name, and this soldier being a coward,
he came to him and said, either leave off the name of Alexander, or be valiant:
so let these Nominals, either lay by their lamps or take oil with them.

Verse 4. But the wise took (...)]
That is, true faith in their (...), which as oil, is spredding, softning,
suppling, soaking. Christ puts not upon his a washy color of profession (a
blockwood blew) but he dies them in grain, with true grace and holiness.

Verse 5. While the bridegrom tarried]
Tarry he does. 1. To exercise our patience. 2. To eneager our desires. 3. That
his elect may be all gathered. 4. That the mystery of iniquity may be
fullfilled. 5. That the prophecies may be accomplished, etc.

They all slumbred]
The wise ones also slept, but their hearts Cant. 5. 2.
waked, they slept but half-sleep, they napped and nodded, they (...) with open
eyes, as the lion does, the spirit was willing to wake, but the flesh was weak,
and over-wayed it: They slumbred (...).
but it was by candlelight, they had their lamps burning by them, which the
foolish had not.

Verse 6. There was a cry made]
By the trumpet of the Archangell, (...) Archangeli (...). Arct. in loc.
and the voice of God, say some Interpreters: and Hierom reports it for an
Apostalicall tradition, that Christ shall come at midnight. But of that hour
no man knows, says the Judge himself. Others there are that expound this
cry, of the Preaching of the Gospel, according to that voice of the crier,
Prepare ye the way of the Lord, etc. Matthew. 3. And here -- clames ut Stentora
vincas, Cry aloud, spare not, etc.

Verse 7. And trimmed their lamps]
The (...) also made a fair flourish, and held themselves, happily, in case good
enough for heaven; deceiving their own hearts, or rather deceived by them,
whiles they use fallacious and specious (...), Jam. 1. 26. to make themselves
believe their penny to be good silver, when asit is nothing better then a slip.

Verse 8. Our lamps are gone out]
They were not lighted lamps, (...) sparks of their own (...); fantastical
fire, an ignis fatuus, a painted flame, which neither heats nor lights. The
glowworm seems to have both heat and light, but touch it, and it has neither.
Alchymy gold may seem brighter and (...) then true gold, but it can neither
pass the seventh fire, nor comfort the heart as a cordial. so here. A man may
live by a form, but he cannot dye by it. They that kindle a fire, but not of
Gods sanctuary, and compass themselves about with specious (...), (...) may
walk here for a while in the light of their (...), and in the sparks that they
have kindled. But when (...) done, this is all they shall have of Gods hand,
they shall lie (...) in sorrow, Isa. 50. 11.

Verse 9. Lest there be not enough, etc.]
The best have naught to spare, what ever Papists fancy of the Church-treasury.
The righteous is scarcely saved; at death he finds all he could do little
enough: though he began betime, and (...) himself to his (...)
utmost, hard and (...) gets he to heaven, though he has instantly served God
day and night ( Act. 26. 7.) with a kind of (...) and vehemence.

But go ye rather to them that sell]
Salsa est derisio non cohortatio, like that, Isa. 47. 13. As if God should say
to Papists, Go to your Indulgencers, pardon-mongers, Aneylers: or to carnal
Gospellers, Go to your parasiticall-preachers, that have soothed you up in your
sins (and ye loved to have it so) or at the best, have shot off a few potguns
only against gross sins, and licked you whole again presently with, I hope
better things of you, etc.

Verse 10. And they that were ready, went in, etc.]
The bridegroom waits no man's leisure: Love is (...) of delays, leaps (...).
1. 17.
over all impediments, those mountains of Bether or division, that it may have
not a union only, but a unity with the beloved.

And the door was shut]
Opportunity is headlong, and once lost, irrecoverable. It behooves us
therefore to be abrupt in the work of repentance, Dan. 4. 27. as a work of
greatest haste: lest we cry out, as he once, All too late, all too late: or as
a great Lady of this land did lately upon her deathbed, Time, time, a world of
wealth for an inch of time. We want not time so much, as waste it. Remember
that upon this moment depends eternity. God has hanged the heaviest weights
upon the weakest wiers.

Verse 11. Afterward came also the other Virgins]
The greater number by ods, that stand trifling and bafling with Christ, and
their souls, futuring their repentance, Epimetheus Postmasters, semper victuri
in Seneca's sense. Ioho saphat in temporalls, was (...) wise too late, 2 Chronicles.
18 31. and 20. 36, 37. and paid for his after-wit: howbeit in spiritualls he
was a wise virgin, made sure work for his soul, which was an high point of
heavenly prudence.

Verse 12. Verily I say unto you, I know you not]
i.e. With a knowledge of approbation or delight. Verbanotitiae, apud Hebraeos
secum trahunt affectum. See more above in the Note upon, chap. 7. v. 23.

Verse 13. Watch therefore]
Left ye smart for it, when God (...) send out summons for sleepers. This is an
exhortation answerable to that chap. 24. 42. and the upshot of that, this, and
the (...) parable. See the Notes there.

Verse 14. And delivered unto them his goods]
There is scarce any man but has some one thing or other in him, that is
excellent and extraordinary: some special talent to trade with, some honey to
bring to the common hive, have he but an heart to it. Suacuique dos est. Let
every man according to his several ability, improve what he has to the common
benefit. Freely he has received, freely let him give: ability he has none but
from God; who yet, for our encouragement, is pleased to call that ours, that is
his own work in us.

Verse 15. According to his several ability]
Usurers use not to lend to those that cannot give pledge or security. Howbeit
we have nothing of our own, but according to the measure of our gifts and
faith, Ephesians. 4. the measure of the rule distributed to (...), 2 Cor. 10. 13.
the measure of grace concredited, Romans 12.

Verse 16. Went and traded]
Grace grows by exercise, and decaies by disuse: as that side of the teeth
which is least used in chewing, is apt to have more rheum to settle upon it.
Though both arms grow, yet that which a man uses, is the stronger and bigger:
so is it in both gifts and graces. In birds their wings, which have been used
most, are sweetest. Among trees, that which is planted and plashed against a
wall, the more it is spread and laid forth in the branches, even to the least
twigge, the more warmth and vigor it gets from the Sunbeams, and the more
(...) it bears. So here.

Verse 17. He also gained other two]
The Lord, as he has a fatherly (...) to our weakness, so as not to overlay
us, so he takes well a worth what we are able, and exacts no more Honestum est
ei qui in primis nequit, in secundis tertijsve consistere. Cic.
then he gives. Despise not therefore the day of small things, since God does
not, Zech. 4. 10. Neither cast away your confidence, because not good to such a
degree: but be faithful in weakness, though weak in faith. A palsey-hand may
receive an alms: he that had but half an eye might look upon the brazen
serpent, and be healed.

Verse 18. Dug it in the earth]
Through sloth and pride: as many now-adaies, will do no more service to God
then may breed admiration amongst men. Some preachers (says one) to win
applause, set forth at first with such a strife to seem eloquent and learned,
that they quickly spend their store: and then, rather Bifield on Col. 4. fol.
200.
then they would be observed to want, they will give over preaching, or else
preach once a quarter, to air their learning, and keep it from moulding.

Verse 19. And reckons with them]
This is that we must also come to. Christ will one day say, Read rationem,
(...) an account of thy Stewardship. Cicero could say, Let us so frame our 2
Cor. 5. 10.
course, as that we reckon upon our last reckoning, and make account Ita
vivamus ut rationem nobis reddendam arbitre^ur. Cic. in Verr.
we must all come to an account. And, because often-reckonings keep
long-friends, Villicus rationem cum Domino crebro putet, says Cato, Let us be
often dealing with our selves, and setting things to rights, betwixt God and our
own souls: so shall we have the less to do at last cast. Sparing a little
pains at first, doubleth it in the end: as he who will not cast up his books,
his books will cast up him at length.

Verse 20. He that had received five]
He was first called ^o an account, and if four, or but one of his five talents
had ^^in dead and unoccupied, he had been doomed for his ill-husbandry. See
that ye receive not any grace of God in vain: neither envy those that have
much: a proportion is expected, Non tantum otiosi, sed cunctatores plectentur.
Thou idle, and therefore evil servant, verse. 26.

Verse 21. Thou have been faithful over a few things]
So the Lord calls the greatest measure of grace here attainable, in
comparison of heavens holiness and happiness, Ne donis vel bonis nostris
effer amur. What Is a spark to the Sun, a drop to the Ocean?

Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord]
A joy too big to enter into us, we must enter into it. A joy more meet for the
Lord then the servant. Yet such a Lord do we serve, as will honor his servants
with such a joy. Amongst men it is otherwise, Luk 17. 7. Genesis 15. 2, 3. 1 King.
11. 28, 40.

Verse 22. Lord, thou deliveredst unto me two talents]
It is with Christians as with planets. The Moon goes her course in a month,
the Sun in a year, the rest not but in many years, yet at length they finish.
Let us be doing as we can, and our reward is sure with God. Covet rather graces
then gifts; as to pray more fervently, though less notionally or elequently.
Stammering Moses must pray, rather then well-spoken Aaron. The Corinthians came
behind in no gift, 1 Cor. 1. 7. yet were babes and carnal, Chap. 3. 2, 3.

Verse 23. Well done good and faithful servant]
Though this second had the same good acceptance as the former, yet it follows
not that they were both alike rewarded; but had a different degree, as of
grace, so of glory.

Verse 24. Lord I know that thou were, etc.]
Invalidum omn^ Seneca.
natura querulum. A sorry senseless excuse it is that this man makes for
himself: and such as is both false and frivolous. It shows (...) utter
emptiness of the oil of Gods grace, when men's lips, like doors on rusty
hinges, move not without murmuring and malecontentednesse.

Verse 25. I was afraid and went and hid, etc.]
So God must bear the blame of his unfaithfulness. The foolishness of man
perverteth Prove. 19 3.
his way, and (then to mend the matter) his heart fre^ter^ against the Lord, or
at least he digests his choler, as horses do, by champing on the bridle-bit.

Verse 26. Thou wicked and slothful servant]
God puts no difference between betwixt Nequaquum and nequum, an idle and an
evil servant. Had idleness been a calling, this servant had been both a good
husband, and a good fellow too. But what says the Heathen? Salust, in Iug.
Nae illi falsi sunt, qui diversissimas res expectant, ignaviae voluptatem, and
praemia virtutis,

Verse 27. Received the same with usury]
Our Savior does no more patronize Usury here, then he does injustice, Luke
16. 1. The^^, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2. Dancing, Matthew. 11. 17. Olympic games, 1 Cor. 9.
24.

Verse 28. Take therefore the talent from him]
God will take Hos^^. 9.
his own, and be gone from an unworthy people or person. The Idol-shepherds arm
shall be clean dried up, and his right eye utterly darkened, Zech. 11. 17. It is
no hard matter to observe a wain and decay of Gods gifts in them that use them
not; till at last, Zedekiah like, they may say, When did the Spirit depart from
1 King. 22. 24.
me? And, as many of Ishbosheths friends shrank together with Abner, so do men's
abilities fail amain, when once they begin to fail, till at last God lays them
aside, as so many broken vessels, and cause them to be forgotten, as dead men
out of mind, Psalm. 31. 21.

Verse 29. But from him that has not, shall be, etc.]
See the Notes on Chap. 13. 12. Where the like is spoken, but with this
difference. There our Savior speaks of proud men, such as arrogate to
themselves that they have not: Here of idle and evil persons, such as improve
and employ not that they have: the rust of whose worth shall rise up against
them, Jam. 5. 3.

Verse 30. And cast ye the unprofitable servant]
That had his soul for salt only, to keep his body from putrefying, that
worthless, (...), useless.
saplesse, useless man, that is no more missed, when gone, then the parings of
ones nails, that never did good among his people, (...). (...).
Ezekiel. 18. 18. but lived wickedly, and therefore died wishedly. A way with such
a fellow, says Christ, from off the earth, which he has burdened, etc.

Verse 31. And all the holy Angels with him]
He shall not leave one behind him in heaven. (...), what a brave bright day
must that needs be, when so many glorious Suns shall shine in the firmament,
and among, and above them all the Sun of righteousness, in whom our nature is
advanced above the brightest Cherub?

Upon the throne of his glory]
Perhaps upon his Angels, who are called Thrones, Col. 1. 16. and possibly may
bear him aloft by their natural strength, as on their shoulders.

Verse 32. And before him shall be gathered all]
Then shall Adam see all his Nephews at once: none shall be excused for absence
at this general Assizes, none shall appear by a proxy, all shall be compelled
to come in and hear their sentence; which may be, as some conceive, a long
while a doing. It may be made evident (says one) from Scripture and reason,
That this day of Christ's kingly office in judging all men, shall last happily
longer then his private administration now (wherein he is less glorious) in
governing M. (...), Sincere convert, (...) 87.
the world. Things shall not be suddenly shuffled up at last day as some
imagine.

And he shall separate them]
Before he hears their causes: which is an argument of singular skill in the
Judge: it being the course of other Judges to proceed, Secundum allegata and
probata. But he shall set men's sins in order before their eyes, Psalm. 50 21.
with (...) of the particulars.

Verse 33. The sheep on the right hand, etc.]
A place of dignity and safety. Our Savior seems here to allude to that of
Moses his dividing the Tribes on Gerizzim and Ebal. Those six Tribes that came
of the free-women are set to bless the people: as the other five, that came of
the bond-women (whereunto is adjoined Reuben for his incest) are set to say
Amen to the curses, Deuteronomy. 27. 11, 12, 13.

Verse 34. Come ye blessed of my Father,]
Paterue alloquitur. As who should say, Where have ye been, my darlings, all
this while of my long absence? Come, Come now into my bosom, which is now wide
open to receive you, as the welcomest guess that ever accoasted me, etc. And
surely, if Jacobs and Joseph's meeting were so unspeakably comfortable: If Mary
and Elizabeth did so greet and congratulate, O what shall be the joy of that
(...) day!

Inherit the Kingdom prepared]
Here (as in the Turks Court) every man is aut Caesar aut nullus, as he said,
either a King or a Turk hist.
(...); as the Sultans children, if they reign not, they die without mercy,
either by the sword or halter.

From the foundation of the world]
Their heads were destinated long since to the diadem, as Tertullian has it.
K. James was crowned in his cradle. Sapores King of Persia, before he was born
(for his father dying, the Nobles set the crown on his mothers belly) but the
Saints were crowned, in Gods eternal counsel, before the world was founded.

Verse 35. For I was an hungred]
For in this place, denotes not the cause, but the evidence. It is all one as
if I should say, This man lives, for behold he moves. Where it will easily be
yielded, That motion is not the cause of life, but the evidence and effect of
it. So here. Merit is a mere fiction, since (...) can be no proportion betwixt
the work and the (...).

Verse 36. Naked, and (...) clothed me]
Darius, before he came to the Kingdom, received a garment for a gift of one
Syloson. And, when he became King, he rewarded him with the command of his
country Samus. Who now will say that Syloson merited AElian.
such a boon for so small a courtesy? A Gardener, offering a rape-root (being
the best present the poor man had) to the Duke of (...) was bountifully
rewarded by the Duke: Which his Steward observing thought to make use of his
bounty, presenting him with a very fair horse. The Duke ( ut perspicaci erat
ingenio, says mine author) being a very wise man, perceived the project,
received the horse, and gave him nothing for it. Right so will God deal with
our merit-mongers, that by building monasteries, etc. think to purchase heaven.

I was in prison, and ye came to me]
Many Papists have hence concluded, that there are only six works of mercy,
Visito, poto, cibo, etc. whereas indeed there are many more. But it is
remarkable out of this text, that the last definitive sentence shall pass upon
men, according to their forwardness and freeness in showing mercy to the
family of faith. And that the sentence of absoution shall contain a
manifestation of all their good works, and that with such fervency of affection
in Christ, that he will see and remember nothing in them, but the good they
have done. See my Commonplace of Alms.

Verse 37, 38, 39. Then shall the righteous, etc.]
Not that there shall be then any such dialogisme, (say Divines) at the last
day: but Christ would hereby give us to understand, That the Saints rising
again and returning to themselves, can never sufficiently set forth such a
bounty in Christ, whereby he takes all they do to their poor necessitous
brethren, in as good part, as done to his sacred self.

Verse 40. One of the least of these my (...)]
What a comfort is this, that our own brother shall judge us, who is much more
compassionate then any Joseph? What an honor that Christ calls us his
brethren? What an obligation is such a dignity to all possible duty? that we
stain not our kindred. (...) being invited to a place, where a notable harlot
was to be present, asked counsel of (...), what he should do; He bad him only
remember, that he was a Kings son. Remember we that we that we are Christ the
Kings brethren, and it may prove a singular preservative. Vellem si non essem
Imperator, said (...), when an harlot was (...) unto him, I would, if I were
hot (...).
General. Take thou the pillage of the field, said Themistocles: to his
friend: for thou art not Themistocles.

Ye have done it unto me]
Christ, says Salvian, is, (...) maximus, as one that shareth in all the
Saints necessities; and who would but relieve (...) Christ? Look out some
(...), in whom we may seal up love to deceased (...). My goodness extends
not to thee, says David, but to the Saints, Psalm. 16. 2. (...).
Christ's receivers. M. Fox never denied beggar that asked in Jesus M. Wards
(...).
name. And being once asked, Whether he knew a certain poor man who had
received (...) from him in time of trouble, he answered, I remember him well: I
tell you, I forget Lords and Ladies David's desire by Rob. Abbots.
to remember such.

Verse 41. Then shall he say also, etc.]
Then: Judgment as it begins here at Gods (...), so shall it at the last day.
The elect shall be crowned, and then the reprobates doomed and damned.

Depart from (...) ye cursed, etc.]
A sentence that breaths out nothing but fire and brimstone, stings and
horrors, woe and alas, (...) without end, and past imagination. Mercy, Lord,
says the (...) miser. No, says Christ, (...), be packing.

Yet bless me before I go. Ob.


Depart ye cursed. Sol.


To some good place then. Ob.


To hellfire, not material fire, but worse in many respects. Sol.


But let me then come out again. Ob.


It is everlasting fire, eternity of extremity. This is the hell of Sol.
hell: this puts the damned to their (...), as much as if they should say,
(...), Not ever, Lord, torment us thus. But they have a will to sin ever; and,
being worthless, they cannot satisfy Gods justice in any time: therefore is
their (...) everlasting.

But let me have some good company in my (...). Ob.


The devil and his Angels. Sol.


But who appointed me this hard condition? Ob.


It was prepared of old. The all-powerfull wisdom did, as it Sol.
(...), set down and devise most (...) that most formidable fire. And here it
is hard to say, whether (...), Depart from me ye cursed, or that which
follows, Into (...) fire; Pain of loss, or pain of sense. Sure it is, that
the (...) of hell are not sufficient to be wail the loss of heaven; the (...)
of grief gna (...) painful, as the (...) burns. If those good souls, Act. 20.
wept because they should see (...) (...) no more, how deplorable is the
eternal deprivation of the beatificall vision?

Verse 42. For I was an hungered, etc.]
Ill works are the just causes of damnation, as being perfectly evil. But good
works can be no such causes of salvation, because due debts to God, and, at the
(...), imperfect.

Verse 43. I was a stranger, etc.]
These fools of the people Prove. 17. 16.
(...) a price in their hands to get (...) (as Joseph by his (...) bought the
Land of Egypt) but they had no (...) it. (...) son to Henry the third of
England, was elected King of (...) being (...) therein before (...) (...) of
(...) (...). The Spaniard pretended and (...) have been first elected. But,
being it seems a (...), (...) Daniels Hist. of Engl. 174.
drawing lines, when he should have (...) his (...), and so came prevented of
his hopes. And is not this many (...) fault and folly?

Verse 44. Lord, When saw (...), etc.]
They were (...), (...).
and could not see Christ in poor Christians, whom they 2 Pet. 1. 9.
should have looked upon, as the only earthly Angels, the dearly beloved of
Christ's soul, Jer. 12. 7. The house of his glory, Isa. 60. 7. An ornament of
God, Ezekiel. 7. 20. A royal diadem in the hand of Jehovah, Isa. 62. 3.

Verse 45. Inasmuch as ye did it not to one, etc.]
Omissions then are damnable (...). Ammonites and Moabites were bastardized
Deuteronomy. 23 3, 4.
and banished the beauty of holiness, the Tabernacle of God, to the tenth
generation, because they met not Gods Israel with bread and water in the
wilderness. Not to do justice is injustice: not to show mercy is cruelty.
Where then will oppressors appear, that grind the faces of the poor, that
quaff their tears, and make music of their shreeks? Go to now ye rich men,
weep and howl, etc. Iam. 5. 1, 2, 3. If not relieving of the poor damns men,
What shall robbing do, but double damn?

Verse 46. And these shall go away, etc.]
The sentence began with the godly, the execution with the wicked: (...) that
the godly may see their desire upon their enemies, Psalm. 58. 10. and 79. 10.
And also, that in the others misery, they may behold, by the difference, their
own felicity: and thereby be moved to lift up many an humble, joyful and
thankful (...) to God.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse 1. And it came to pass when, etc.]
THis is our Evangelists transition from the Ministry of Christ's Doctrine, to
the Mystery of his passion. He had hitherto taught salvation, and now is
declared how he wrought it. He had done the office of a Doctor, now of a
Redeemer: of a Prophet, now of a Priest.

Verse 2. Is the feast of the passeover]
At which feast, Christ (...) was sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5. 7. and we were
purchased by his blood, as Israel was typically out of the world, by the blood
of the paschall lamb; our hearts being sprinkled therewith by the (...) bunch
of faith, from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water, Heb.
10. 22.

Verse 3. Then assembled together, etc.]
Here was met a whole Council of (...) to crucify Christ. General Councels
may (...) then in necessary and fundamental points: as the Council of (...)
and Seleucia (held in two Cities, because no one was able to contain them for
multitude, yet) (...) for Arrius against the deity of Christ. The truth of
(...) be locked up within the hearts of such a company, as in competition of
(...) ages, cannot make a greater part, in a general Council.

Verse 4. Take Jesus by (...), and kill him]
Craft and cruelty go commonly coupled in the Churches (...). Neither of them
wants their mate, as the Scripture speaks of those birds of prey and
desolation, Isa. 34. 16. These (...) and Elders were so bitterly bent against
Christ, (...) nothing would satisfy them but his blood. All plants and other
(...) have their growth and increase to a period, and (...), their declination
and decay, (...) only the (...), who grows bigger and bigger, even till death.
So (...) all passions and perturbations in man's mind their intentions and
remissions, except only malicious revenge. This dies not, many times, but with
the man (if that) as nothing (...) quench the combustible slime in Samosaris,
nor the (...) Plin. l. 2. 6. 104. and 105.
flame of the (...) (...), but only earth. Saint (...) tells us, That our
Savior being reviled, did not only commit 1 Pet. 2. 23.
his cause to God, but Himself to God: as expecting the increase of his
enemies opposition, till they had put him to death.

Verse 5. Not on the feast day, lest, etc.]
But God would have it on that feast day, and no other, Act. 4. 27. And here
these wicked ones fulfill the divine decree: but no thank to them: more then to
Haman for (...) advancement, whereunto Haman (...).
held the stirrup only. (...) devitatur impletur, says a (...).

Verse 6. Now when (...) in (...)]
This History of a thing acted before Christ came to (...), comes in here
somewhat out of place; to show the ground and occasion of Judas his treason,
which was discontent at the (...) of such a prize, and our Saviors sharping
him up, for showing his dislike.

In the house of Simon the (...)]
A leper he had been, but was now healed, and happily by Christ: whom therefore
he entertaineth in way of thankfulness, as Matthew also did.

Verse 7. An Alabaster box of very precious, etc.]
Pliny tells us, That they were wont to keep the most costly (...) in boxes
of Alabaster. And (...) reckons (...), In (...).
an Alabaster box of ointment, among the (...) things, that (...) the Persian
sent for a present to the King of (...). Mary thought nothing too costly for
Christ. See the Notes on Ioh. 12. 3.

Verse 8. (...):]
Not all, but one of them was (...), (...). (...), (as John explains Matthew)
who yet was of such esteem and authority amongst (...), that what he did, they
are all said to do, and possibly they might, some of them, be drawn to do the
same by his example, and upon so specious a pretense of charity to the poor.

(...) this (...)?]
All seems to be (...) to (...) and blood, that is laid out upon Christ, his
(...) and (...). The people is (...), said (...), when they Aug deciv. Dei.
would needs go worship in the wilderness. And (...) jeers the (...) for
wasting a seventh part of their lives on a weekly (...).

Verse 9. For this (...) been sold.]
(...), and (...) it had (...) sold, had it been a (...) and idle expense; such
as is now-adaies ordinary in fine-clothes, sumptuous feasts, over stately
buildings, etc. But here it is a senseless sentence that (...) utters, out of
discontent only, that he missed of so fat a (...). A varice made (...), as it
did (...), (...).
think all which he acquired not, to be lost, Quicquid non (...), (...) est.

Verse 10. Why (...) ye the (...)?]
Christ will patronize his well-doers, and stick to them though all forsake
them, 2 Timothy 4. 16, 17. He many times pleads for them in the consciences of
(...), who (...) more thoughts (...) such, then the world is (...) of: and
(...) afraid of the name of God, whereby they are called, Deuteronomy. 28. 9, 10.

Verse 11. The poor (...) have (...) with you]
To try and Mat. 6. (...).
to exercise your liberality, (...) your justice, as the Syriack calls it,
Prove. 3. 27. Withold not thy goods from these owners thereof.

But me ye have not alwaies]
Christ dwelt in the flesh, as in (...) tent or booth, Joh. 1. 14. He sojourned
here for a while only; his (...) with us was but temporary, as the Greek word
there (...). (...), ex quo intelligitur Christi moram apud nos temporariam
(...).


Verse 12. She did it for my buriall]
This Mary perhaps understood not. So things that we think come to pass by
hap-hazard, are preordained, and sweetly ordered by Almighty God in (...).
his secret counsel, and by his fatherly providence, to excellent ends many
times, such as we never thought on-

Verse 13. Be told for a memorial of her]
Though now she be sharply (...) by the (...) for a wast-good. Do well, and
(...) ill, is written upon heaven gates, said that Martyr. But God will both
right his wronged, and honor his disparaged. (...) (...) now smells as sweet in
all Gods house, as ever her ointment did; when Judas his name rots, and shall
do to all posterity. Yea in the next world, Mary and such, we shall look upon,
likely, with thoughts of extraordinary love and sweetness thorowout all
eternity: as Judas and such, with execrable and everlasting detestation.

Verse 14. Then one of the twelve, etc.]
sc. When he heard of the chief Priests and Elders meeting about such a matter,
Satan (...) him on being now malecontent, to make one amongst them. That spirit
of darkness loves to dwell in a soul that is clouded by passion: as in Saul
when he was envious at David, and here in (...), when defeated of his design,
and (...) at his Masters (...).

Verse 15. What will ye give (...)]
Take heed and beware of (...), says our Savior: for it is the root of all
evil, says Luke 12. 15.
Paul; a breach of the whole decalogue, as some Divines have demonstrated, 1 Timothy 6. 10.
and universal experience has confirmed. These See M. Dikes Caveat for the
Covetous.
(...), as one calls them, are still found every where: such as will sell
their souls to the devil with Ahab, (...) (...) Isid. Pelus. 2 3 ep. 24.
for seven years enjoyment of the Popedom, as some have done, but for a few
paltry shillings, as Judas here did, or some other pidling profit. This our
Savior calls the Mammon of iniquity, which is the next odious (...) to the
devil himself. Luk 16 9.


For thirty pieces of silver]
A goodly price, as the Prophet in scorn and (...) calls it. It was a known
set price for the basest slave, Exodus 21. 31. Joel 3. 3, 6. For so small a
sum sold this traitor, so sweet a master, as had not only admitted him into
his company, but committed the bag to him, and let him Virgil.
(...) for nothing. Quid non (...) a cogis, (...) sacra fames? Look well to it.
For as there were many Marij in one Caesar, so are there many Iudasses in the
best. Let Patrons especially look to it: for many of them are worse then Judas;
He sold the head, they the members: he the sheep, they the sheepherd: he but
the body, they the souls, as that scarlet strumpet, Revel. 1813.

Verse 16. And from that time he sought]
So it was no sudden but a prepensed wickedness, done in cold blood, and upon
mature deliberation. Gods people when they sin, they are preoccupated, and
taken before they are aware, Gal. 6. 1. There is Psalm 139 ult.
no way of wickedness in them, ordinarily. It is of incogitancy: put them in
mind, and they mend all. Or it is of passion; and passions last not long. They
deny not Christ that bought them: they can do nothing against the truth, they
will not fongoe God upon any terms, they never sin with deliberation about
this chief end: if they err, it is only in the way, as thinking that they may
fulfill such a lust, and keep God too.

Verse 17. Now the first day]
That is, on the fourteenth day of the first month, according to the law. The
Priests for politic respects, had adjourned this feast to the (...) day being
the Sabbath, against the letter of the law; that the celebrity might be the
greater, and the people were ruled by them. Our Savior follows not a
multitude, not observes man's tradition herein, but Gods preseription: No more
must we. This St Luke plainly intimates in his (...) Luke 22. 7. Then came the
day of unleavened bread when the Passover ought to be killed; though the
custom were otherwise.

Verse 18. Go into the city to such a man]
Meaning some man (...).
of his special acquaintance, for so the Greek imports, though he named him
not. So Palmoni hammedabber, such an one the speaker, Dan. 8. 13.

Verse 19. Did as Jesus had appointed them]
With a kind of blind obedience: such as we must yield to God,
notwithstanding all unlikely hoods or scruples whatsoever, cast in by carnal
reason. This the scripture calls the obedience of faith, and commends it to us,
in the examples of Abraham, Moses, others, Heb. 11.

Verse 20. He sat down with the (...)]
With Judas among the rest: though Hilary hold otherwise, for what reason I
know not. Christ sat at the Sacrament, when yet the gesture imported in the Law
was standing: and this sitting at the Passover was no where commanded, yet by
the godly Jews, was generally used. Let this heap of wheat (the Lords supper,
as some interpret it) be set about with lillies, that is with Christians,
(...). 7. (...).
white, and of holy life: that is the main matter to be looked to.

Verse 21. And as they did eat, he said]
With a great deal of detestation of so horrid a fact; to see the frontlesse
traitor bear himself so bold amongst them, having now hatched so prodigious
(...) villainy.

One of you shall betray me]
But shall any therefore condemn the whole twelve, as if there were never a
better? This were to offend against the generation of the righteous, Psalm. 73.
15. This were to match in immanity that cruel Prince of Valachia, whose Turk.
hist sol. 363.
custom was, together with the offendour to execute the whole family, yea
sometimes the whole kindred. And yet this justice is done Gods people many
times by the Church Malignant.

Verse 22. And they were exceeding sorrowfull]
Not joyful (as some would have been,) to find out other men's faults, and to
exagitate them. Not only those that make but that lovelies, yea Revel. 22. 15.
or unseasonable truths in this kind, are shut out of heaven among dogs and
devils.

Lord is it I?]
He puts them all to a search, before the Sacrament. 1 Cor. 11 28.
Let a man therefore examine himself, etc. who knows Psalm. 19. 12.
the errors of his life? says David. In our hearts are volumes of
corruptions, in our lives infinite Errata's. Socrates would say, when he saw
one drunk or otherwise disordered, Number ego talis? So would Mr Bradford, when he
looked into the lewd lives of any others.

Verse 23. He that dippeth his hand, etc.]
My fellow-commoner, Psalm. 41. 10.
my familiar friend. This greatly aggravateth the indignity of the matter. He
was ex societate Jesus that betrayed him. So do the pretended Jesuits,
Jebusites, at this day. Julius Caesar was slain in the Senate House by more of
his friends then of his enemies, quorum non expleverat spes inexplebiles, says
Seneca. Sen l 3. de ira.
But the wound that went nearest his heart, was that he received from his son
Brutus. (...); this peirced him worse (...).
then any poniard. Q. Elizabeth's grief and complaint was, that in trust she had
found treason.

Verse 24. The son of man goeth]
That is dies, suffers. Death was to him but an (...) as it is called Luke
9. 31. that is, an outgoing, or a departure. It was no more betwixt God and
Moses, but Go (...) and die, as it was said to another Prophet, Up and eat. He
that has conversed with God here, cannot fear to go to him; cannot hold death
either uncouth, or unwelcome.

But woe unto that man by whom, etc.]
He bewails not himself, but Judas. So should we do those by whom we are
traduced, and injured. They poor wretches, have the worst of it. Let us pity
them, and pray for them, as the holy Martyrs dealt by their persecutours. Ah! I
(...) the infidelity of England, Act. and Mon. sol. 1667.
said Mr Philpot. Ah! great be the plagues that hang over England, yea though
the Gospel should be restored again. Happy shall that person be whom the Lord
shall take out of the world not to see them.

Verse 25. Master, is it I?]
Desperate impudency! debauched hypocrisy! Had he the face to ask such a
question? He could not but know that Christ knew all: yet hoped he perhaps,
that of his wonted gentleness, he would conceal him still, as he had done for
certain days before. But incorrigible and incurable persons are no longer to
be born with. He hears therefore, Thou (...) res est (...), (...), stolidos,
impudentes (...) pro (...), and daemones ex (...). Chrysostom.
have said it: that is, Thou art the man I mean. Thus Christ pulls of his
vizour, washes off his varnish, and makes him to appear in his own colors, a
covetous caytiffe, an impudent dog, a breathing devil, as Chrysostom has it.

Verse 26. Jesus took bread]
From bread and wine used by the Jews at the eating of the Paschall lamb,
without all command of Moses, but resting upon the common reason given by the
Creator, Christ autorizeth a seal of his very flesh and blood. And as the
householder, at the end of that solemn supper, blessed God, B oughton on (...).
9.
first, taking bread, and again, taking wine: so, that we should not turn his
seal into superstition, he follows that plainness: (...) (...). (...). 104.
(...) miseri mortales, in istorum mysteriorum usu, in rebus terrestribus
haereant and (...), as Beza gives the reason. For which cause also, says he,
even in the old Liturgy they used to cry out to the people at the Lords table,
Sursum corda, Lift up your hearts: that is, Look not so much to the outward
signs, Ut in (...) usque (...).
in the Sacraments, but use them as ladders to mount you up to Christ in heaven.

This (...) my body]
This is referred to Bread by an (...) of Ibid.
the gender (the like whereof we find, Ephesians. 5. 6.) and so the (...) resertur
(...) (...) (...).
Apostle interprets it, 1 Cor. 10. 16. and 11. 26. The sense then is, This
bread is my true essential body, which is given for you: Pasor.
that is, by an ordinary metonymy. This bread is the sign of my body, as
circumcision is called the covenant, that is the sign of the covenant, and
seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4. 11. And -(...)
as Homer calls (...) sacrifices, covenants; because thereby the covenants were
confirmed: Virgil calls it fallere dextras, to deceive the right hands, for
to break the oath that was taken, by (...). lib. 3.
the taking of right hands, etc. Transubstantiation is a mere fiction: and the
learnedest Papists are not yet agreed whether the substance of the bread in
this Sacrament be turned into the substance of Christ's body productive, as one
thing is made of another, or whether the bread goes away, and Christ's body
comes into the room of it adductive, as one thing succeeds into the place of
another, the first being voided. (...) is for the first, Bellarmine for the
latter sense. And yet because Luther and Calvin agree not upon the meaning of
these words, This is my body, the Jesuits cry out, Spiritus sanctus a seipso
non discordat, Hae interpretationes discordant, Ergo: for Luther interprets
the words Synechdochically, Calvin Metonymically, after Tertullian and
Augustine; This is my body, for this is a sign or figure of my body, a seal
also to every faithful receiver, that Christ is his, with all his benefits.

Verse 27. And he took the cup]
Anciently of glass, afterward of wood, and lastly of silver or gold. Whence
that saying of a Father, Once there were wooden cups, golden priests: now there
are golden cups, but wooden priests.

Drink ye all of it]
This is express against that Antichristian sacrilege of robbing the people
of the cup. Eckius says the people ought to content themselves with the bread
only, because, Equi donati non sunt inspiciendi dentes, A gift-horse is not to
be Apud Manlium in loc. com.
looked in the mouth. He thought belike that Laymen could not (...) any right
to the bread neither. Bellarmine, a little wiser, grants they have right to the
bread, but adds, that in eating the bread transubstantiated by the Priest into
the body of Christ, they drink his blood also. But Lombard (his master) denies
this: saying that the bread is not turned but into Christ's flesh, (...) the
wine but into his blood. And thus these Babel-builders are confounded in their
language, and hard it is to know what the Church of Rome holds. The counsel
of Constance speaks out, and says, that albeit Christ instituted, and
accordingly administered this Sacrament in both kinds, tamen hoc non-obstante,
Caranza Sum.
All this notwithstanding, the authority of the holy Canons, Concel. sess. 13.
and the approved custom of the Church has and does deny the cup to the Laity.
And Nicolas Shetterden Martyr, in his answer Act. and Mon.
compelled the commissary to grant, that Christ's testament was broken, and his
institution changed from that he left it. But he said, they had power so to do.
Christ's redemption is both precious and plentious. He makes his people a full
feast. Bread and wine comprehend entire food: for humidum and siccum, moist and
dry are all that is required unto food, Isa. 25. 6. Therefore as he gave them
in the wilderness the bread of Angels, so he set the Rock abroach for them,
and so fed them with Sacraments. They did all eat the same spiritual bread,
and they did 1 Cor. 10. 3. 4.
all drink the same spiritual drink: that the ancient Church might give no
warrant of a dry Communion. The Russians, (...) (...).
kind of mongrell-Christians, communicate in both kinds; but Enquires.
mingling both together in a chalice, they distribute it both together in a
spoon.

Verse 28. For this is my blood]
This cup is my blood, viz. in a Sacramental sense; as before the bread is
said to be Christ's body: Act. and Mon. 1615.
If the words of Christ when he said, This is my body, did change the
substance, then belike, when Christ said, This cup is my blood, the substance
of the cup was likewise changed into his blood, said Shetterden the Martyr to
Archdeacon Harpfield. And you can no more enforce of necessity (said another
Martyr) from the words of Christ the changing of the bread and wine into his
body and blood, then the wives flesh to be the natural and real flesh of her
husband, because it is written, They are not two but one flesh. Besides whereas
it is forbidden that any should eat or drink blood, The Apostles
notwithstanding took and drank of the (...). (...).
cup, etc. And when the Sacrament was administered, none of them all crouched
down, and took it for his God. Quandoquidem Christiani manducant Deum quem
adorant, said Averroes the Arabian, sit anima mea cum Philosophis. Since
Christians eat their God, I Will have none.

Which is shed]
That is, shall shortly be shed. But all is delivered and set down in the
present tense, here and elsewhere in this business: Because to faith (which at
this Sacrament we should chiefly actuate and exercise) all things are made
present, whether they be things to come (as to these Disciples) or things past,
as now to us. A communicant must call up his faith, and bespeak it as Deborah
did her self, Judge. 5. 12. Awake, awake Deborah, utter a song. Ascend up to
heaven in the act of receiving, and fetch down Christ: lean by faith upon his
blessed bosom, cleave to his cross, suck honey out of this rock, and oil
(...). de (...) Dom.
out of the flinty rock, Deuteronomy. 32. 13. and intra ipsa redemptoris vulnera
figite linguam, as Cyprian expresses it. Let faith have her perfect work: since
she is both the hand, mouth, and stomach of the soul.

For remission of sinnes]
This includes all the benefits of the new covenant, all the purchase of
Christ's passion, sweetly sealed up to every faithful receiver. Christ
instituted his holy supper, tanquam (...) a sovereign preservative or
purgative, It a ut nos sugiat tanquam fi leones ignem exspuentes (...). (...).
says Ignatius. And by this Sacrament we are fenced and and strengthened
against the devil and all his assaults, says (...), so that he shunneth us, as
if we were so many lions spetting fire at him.

Verse 29. I will not drink hence forth]
So he takes his farewell of his Disciples: alluding, likely, to that custom
among them of Poculum (...).
drinking no more, till the next day after they had drunk, each his part, of
the parting-cup.

Drink it new with you in my Fathers kingdom]
Understand it either of the kingdom of grace ( Peter says, that he and others
did eat and drink with Christ after he rose from the dead, Act. 10. 41. we also
feast with him daily by faith, at his table especially, where he is both
feast-maker and feast-master,) Or of his kingdom of glory, frequently and fitly
set forth by the similitude of a sumptuous supper, Matthew. 8. Luke 14. etc. such
as to which all other feasts are but hunger.

Verse 30. And when they had sung an hymne]
The Jews at the Passover sang the great Hallelujah, that is the hundred and
thirteenth Psalm, with the five following Psalms. This they began to sing,
after that dimissory cup aformentioned. At all times we should sing
Hallelujah's, with grace in our hearts to the Lord: but at the Sacrament the
great Hallelujah, the Hosanna Rabbah. We should credit the feast by our
spiritual jollity, (...)
shouting as a giant after his wine, singing and making melody to the Lord in
our hearts. Chrysostom makes mention of an hymn: Hom 55. in Matthew.
of thanksgiving, wont to be used by the Monks of his time, after they had
supped: and he calls them Angels for their holy and heavenly life and
conversation. We should come from the Lords table, as Moses did from the mount,
with our faces shining, as the good women did from the sepulcher, with fear and
great joy, as the people went to their tents from Solomon's feast, joyful and
glad of heart, 1 King. 8. 66. If those in the wilderness were so cheared and
cherished by their idolatrous feast before the golden 1 Cor. 10. 7.
calfe that they did eat and drink, and rise up to play, how much more should
we by this blessed banquet? To whet our stomachs, let faith feed upon some
promise before the Sacrament. A moderate breakfast gets a man the better
stomach to his dinner, etc.

Verse 31. All ye shall be offended because of me]
Why? what had that righteous one done? Nothing but that his cross lay in
their way, whereat they stumbled shamefully, and left him, to (...) Ovid.
wonder that he was left alone, Isa. 63. 5. Adversity is friendlesse, says one
Heathen: Et cum fortuna, statque caditque fides, says another. Job found his
friends like the brooks of Tema, which in a moisture swell, in a drought fail.
Tempora si fuerint nubila, solus eris.

For it is written, I will smite]
This our Savior purposely subjoyneth, for their support under the sense of
their base deserting him. A foul sin it was, but yet such as was long since
set down of them; not without a sweet promise of their recollection, Zach. 13.
7.
I will turn my hand upon the little ones: Or, I will At reducam manum meam ad
parvulos.
bring back my hand to the little ones, as Tremellius reads it.

Verse 32. But after I am risen again, etc.]
Infirmities bewailed, break no square. Our sins hurt us not, if they please
us Trem.
not. The Church stands as right with Christ, when penitent, as Peccata nobis
non nocent, si non placent.
whiles innocent, Cant. 7. 12. with chap. 4. 1. 2. etc. Her hair, teeth,
temples, all as fair and well featured as ever. Aug.


Verse 33. Though all men should be offended]
Peter spoke as he meant, but his heart deceived him, as did likewise David's,
Psalm. 39. 1, 2, 3. and Orphah's, Ruth 1. 10. and those Israelites in the
wilderness, that were turned aside like deceitful bows, Psalm. 78. 57. They
levelled both eyes and arrows (that is both purposes and promises) to the mark
of amendment, and thought verily to hit: but their deceitful hearts, as
naughty bows, carried their arrows a clean contrary way. So did Peter's here, so
will the best of ours, if we watch them not.

Verse 34. Before the cock crow, etc.]
Christ mentions the cock, quia tum strenuum pugnatorem decebat tale
praeconium, says one. The presumption of proud flesh never but miscaries: when
humble self-suspition holds out, and has favor. The story Act and Mon. fol.
1363.
of Pendleton and Saunders is better known, then that it needs here to be
related.

Verse 35. Though I should die with thee]
Quot verba tot absurda, as one says of Peter's proposition of three
tabernacles, etc. Sure it is he knew as little what he said here, as there: How
much more considerately those Martyrs, who both said it, and did it? The
heavens shall as soon fall, as I will forsake my faith, Act. and Mon. fol. 1430
said William Flower. And, if every hair of my head were a man, Ibid. 1438.
I would suffer death in the opinion and faith, that I am now in, said John
Ardely.

Likewise also said all the Disciples]
Misled, as Barnabas afterward was ( Gal. 2.) by Peter's example. The leaders of
this people cause them to err, Isa. 9. 16. Our Savior (to teach us what to do
in like case) striveth not with them for the last word: but lets them enjoy
their own over-good conceits of themselves, till time should confute them.

Verse 36. Unto a place, called Gethseman]
By mount Olivet stood this garden: and here he began his passion, as well to
expiate that first sin committed in a garden, as to sanctify unto us our
repasts and recreations. Here, after our Savior had prayed himself into an
agony (to teach us to strive also in prayer (...)
as for life, and to struggle even to an agony as the word signifies, Joh. 18.
2.
Colos. 4. 12.) he was taken quasi ex condicto, and led into the city through
the sheep-gate (so called of the multitude of sheep driven in by it to be
offered in the Temple,) to be sacrificed, as a lamb ^^defiled and without spot.

Sit ye here while I go and pray yonder]
It may be lawful therefore in some cases to pray secretly, in the presence or
with the privity of others, so there be some good use of them.

Verse 37. And he took with him Peter, etc.]
He took the same that had seen his glory in the mount, to see his agony in the
garden: that they might the better stick to him. Let no man envy others their
better parts or places; since they have them on no other condition, but to be
put upon greater temptations, hotter services. If we could wish another man's
honor, when we feel the weight of his cares, as David once did of Saul's
armor, we should be glad to be in our own coat.

And very heavy]
To faint, or fall away in his soul, to be out (...) (...) vitat.
of the world, as we say, He sits alone, and keeps silence, because he
has born it upon him, Lam. 3. 28.

Verse 38. My soul is exceeding sorrowfull]
He had a true humane soul then; neither was his Deity to him for a soul, as
some Heriticks fancied: for then our bodies only had been redeemed by him, and
not our souls ((...), as that Father has it,) if he had not in soul also
suffered, and so, descended into hell. The sufferings of his body were but the
body of his sufferings: the soul of his sufferings, were the sufferings of his
(...).
soul, which was now undequaque tristis beset with sorrows, and heavy as heart
could hold. The sorrows of death compassed him, the cords of hell surrounded
him, Psalm. 18. 4, 5. the pain whereof he certainly suffered, non specie and
loco sed (...), something answerable to hell, and altogether unspeakable. (...).
Hence the Greek Letany. By thine unknown sufferings, good Lord deliver us.
Faninus an Italian Martyr, being asked by one why he was so merry at his death,
since Christ himself was so sorrowful? Act. and (...). (...). 853.
Christ, said he, sustained in his soul all the sorrows and conflicts with hell
and death due to us: by whose sufferings we are delivered from sorrow, and fear
of them all.

Tarry ye here and watch with me]
Yet not for my sake so (...), as for your own; that ye enter not into
temptation. Luke (...). 40.


Verse 39. And he went a little further]
Amat secessum ardens oration. St Luke says he was violently withdrawn from
them, Luke 22 41.
about a stones cast, and there he kneeled down and prayed: for (...). Illud
(...) precandi eum incessit, ut illum quodammodo (...).
further he could not go, thorough earnest desire of praying to his heavenly
father.

And fell on his face]
He puts his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope, Lam. 3. 29. This
and the like humble Cartw.
gestures in Gods service do at once testify, and excite inward devotion.

Let this cup passe]
In the time of execution, they gave the malefactor a cup of wine mingled with
myrrh, Mark 15. 23. to stupifie his senses, and so to mitigate his pains.
Hence the word Calix or cup is put here and elsewhere for death it self: which
being terrible to nature, is therefore here with strong crying and Heb. 5. 7.
tears deprecated by our Savior. This was natural in him, and not sinful in
us, so it do not degenerate into that which is carnal fear of death.

Nevertheless not as I will, but, etc.]
Here Christ does not correct his former request (for then there should have
been some kind of fault in it) but explicateth only on what condition he
desired deliverance; and becomes obedient unto death, even the death of the
cross, Philip. 2. 8. crying out, Not as I will, but as thou will: which shows
that he had a distinct humane will, from the will of his Father, and so was
very man, as well as God. And here Aristotle, that great Philosopher, is
clearly confuted. (...). (...). E. b.
For he denies that a magnanimious man can be exceeding sorrowful for any
thing that befalls him. Our Savior (his Churches stoutest Champion,) was
exceeding sorrowful even to the death; and yet of so great a spirit, that he
yields up himself wholly to God. Magnus est animus, qui so-Deo tradidit;
pufillus and degener, Sen. epist. 107.
qui obluctatur, says Seneca. He is a brave man that trusts God with all.

Verse 40. And he comes unto the Disciples]
They were his care in the midst of his agony: so was Peter; upon whom he found
time to look back, when he stood to answer for his life. So was the penitent
thief; whose prayer Christ answered, even when he hung upon the tree, and was
paying dear for his redemption. Our high priest bears the names of all his
people on his shoulders and on his breast, so that he cannot be unmindfull of
them. Behold he has graven them upon (...) palms of his hands, their walls
are continually (...) him, Isa. 49. 16. he loves to look upon the houses where
they dwell.

And finds them asleep]
When he should have found them at prayer for him. Prayer is (...) creature of
the holy Ghost: and unless he hold up men's eyes there while, even Peter,
James, and John will fall asleep in prayer, and put up yawning petitions to God.

And says unto Peter]
Who had promised so much forwardness, and stood in so great danger above the
rest, Luke 22. (...).
31. For Satan earnestly desired to deal with him, he challenged Peter forth,
as Goliath called for one to combat with. And was it for them to sleep then?
or, with Agrippa's dormouse, not to awake, till boiled in lead?

What? could you not watch with me, etc.]
How then will ye do to dye with me, as erst ye promised me? If the footmen
have wearied you, how will ye contend with horses, Jer. 12. 5. If you cannot
endure words, how will you endure wounds? If ye cannot strive against sin, how
will you resist unto blood, Heb. 12. 4? If ye cannot burn your finger with
Bilney, your right hand with Cranmer, how will you bear the burning of your
whole body? Alice Coberly being pitiously burnt in the hand by the Keepers Act.
and (...). sol. 17 19.
wife, with a hot key which she cunningly sent her to fetch, revoked.

Verse 41. Watch and pray]
Yea watch, whiles ye are praying, against corruption within, temptations
(...). Satan will be interrupting as the Pythonisse did Paul praying, Act. 16.
16. as the fowls did Abraham sacrificing, Genesis 15. 11. as the enemies did (...)
with his Jews, building, who therefore praid and watched, watched and praid.
Amongst all actions, Satan is ever busiest in the best; and most in the best
part of the best, as in the end of prayer, when the heart should close up it
self with most comfort. Watch therefore unto prayer. Set all aside for it, and
(...)
wait on it, as the word imports, Coloss. 4. 2. while prayer stands still, the
trade of godliness stands still: Let this therefore be done, whatever is left
undone. Take heed the devil take you not out of your trenches, as he did David,
likely, 2 Samuel 11. 2. Out of your strong-hold, as Joshua did the men of Ai.
(...) children, says Saint John, abide in God, keep home, keep (...) Joh. 2.
28.
close to your Father, if you mean to be safe, if that evil one shall not touch
you, 1 John 5. 18. nor thrust his deadly sting into you, etc.

The spirit indeed is willing]
q. d. Though the spirit purpose otherwise, yet the flesh will falter, and ye
will be foiled else. Or, our Savior speaks this by way of excuse of their
infirmity, q. d. I see you are willing, so far as you are spiritual and
regenerate: but the flesh is treacherous and tyrannical. It rebels ever and
anon, and would gladly reign. It hangs off, when called to suffer, and makes
shy of the business. So Peter was carried whether he would not, Joh. 21. 18.
So Hilarion chides out his soul (which played loath to depart) with Egredere o
anima, etc. So M. Saunders, Martyr, in a letter to his wife, a little before his
death, Fain would this flesh, said he, make strange of that which Act. and Mon.
sol. 1359
the spirit does embrace. O Lord, how loath is this loitering sluggard, to pass
forth in Gods path, etc? So M. Bradford going to his death, Now I am climing up
the hill, said he, It will cause Ibid. 1497.
me to puff and blow, before I come to the (...). The hill (...) steep and
high: my breath is short, and my strength is feeble. Pray therefore to the Lord
for me; pray for me, pray for me, for Gods sake, pray for me. See more in the
Notes on (...). 21. 18.

Verse 42. The second time and praid]
Prayer is that arrow of deliverance that would be multiplied. God holds off on
purpose, that he may hear often of us, that we may ply the throne of grace, 2
King. 13. 19.
and give him no rest. The Church, Psalm. 80. commenceth thrice the same suit,
but rises every time in her earnestness, (...). 3, 7, 19. If thy petition be
not lawful never prefer it: as if it (...), never give it over. God suspends
thee to (...) thee.

If this cup may not pass, except I drink]
It passes then, even while we are drinking of it. (...), Hold our faith and
(...). It is but a storm, and will soon be over. It is but a death, and that is
but the daybreak of eternal brightness. It is but winking (as that Martyr
said) and thou shall be in heaven presently.

Verse 43. He came and found them asleep again]
After so sweet (...) admonition, so sovereign a reproof, Who knows how often an
(...) may recurre, even after (...)? See it in (...), in (...), in these
Apostles, for their (...); Who should (...) greatest, etc.

For their eyes were heavy]
For sorrow (says S. Luke) which, Luke 26. 45.
exhausting the spirits, renders a man more sluggish: and hindering concoction,
sends up vapors to the brain, and so causes sleep. This was somewhat, but not
sufficient to excuse them. Christ took them with him into the garden for their
society and (...). But they not only not help him, but wound him by their
dullness unto duty: and instead of wiping off his bloody sweat, they draw more
out of him. Judas had somewhat else to do now then to sleep, when Peter was
fast, and could not hold up. (...) the Prophet lay under such a like drowsy
distemper, chap. 4. 1. for though awaked and set to work, he was even ready to
fall asleep at it.

Verse 44. And he left them, and (...) away again]
A most memorable and imitable pattern of patience toward those that condole
not, or that keep not touch with us; we must neither startle (...) storm, but
pass it by as a frailty.

And praid the third time]
A number of perfection. And, Si (...) pulsanti, etc. Paul praid thrice, and
gave over, 2 Cor. 12. because he saw it (...) Gods will it (...) be otherwis::
pardoning grace he had, but not prevailing, verse. 9. So our Savior here, had
an Angel sent from heaven to strengthen him, that he might the better drink
that cup, which he had so (...) deprecated. Luk 22. 43.
(...). 5. 7.
Hence the Apostle doubts not to (...), That he was heard in that he feared: he
was, and he was not; there is no praying against that, which Gods providence
has disposed of by an infallible order. And when we see how God will have it,
we must sit down and be satisfied: That which he will have done, we may be sure
is best to be done.

Saying the same words]
And they were no whit the worse for being the same. Let (...) comfort those
that complain they cannot vary in prayer: though that be a desirable ability.
The (...) were enriched by God in all utterance and knowledge, 1 Cor. 1. 5. But
the business of prayer is more dispatched by inward groanings, then outward
(...).

Verse 45. Sleep on now, and take your rest]
q. d. Do so, if (...) quo egebat (...).
you can at least. But now the hour is come, wherein you shall have small
either leisure or list to sleep, though never so drousie Beza.
spirited: for, The Son of man is (...), etc. Luther reads the words (...),
and by way of (...), thus, Ah, Do ye (...) sleep and take your rest? Will ye,
with Solomon's drunkard sleep upon a mast-pole? Take a nap upon a Weathercock?
Thus this heavenly Eagle, though he love his young ones dearly, yet he pricketh
and beats them out of the nest. The best (as Bees) are killed with the honey
of flattery, but quickened with the (...) of reproof.

Verse 46. Rise, Let us be going]
To meet that death, which till he had prayed, he greatly feared. So it was
with Esther, chap. 4. 16. and with David, Psalm. 116. 3, 4. See the power of
faithful prayer to disarme death, and to alter the countenance Bern. Sermon 33.
in Cant.
of greatest danger. Quoties me oration, quem paene desperantem susceperat,
reddidit exsultantem, etc? How often has prayer recruted me?

Behold, He is at hand]
Behold, for the miracle of the matter, yet now no miracle. (...) frequensque
via est per amicifallere nomen: Tnta frequenque licet sit via, crimen habet.

Verse 47. Lo, Judas one of the twelve]
Lo, for the reason next aforementioned. The truth has no such pestilent
persecutours as Apostates. Corruption optimi pessima; sweetest wine makes
sowrest vinegar.

With swords and staves]
What need all this ado? But that the Exodus 23. 28.
bornet haunted them, an ill conscience abused them. When he Joh. 18. 6.
put forth but one (...) of his Deity, these armed men fell all to the ground:
nor could they rise again, till he had done indenting with them.

Verse 48. Whomsoever I shall kisse]
Ah lewd losell! Betraiest thou the Son of man with a kiss? Give thou thy
Lord such rank (...). Philo (...) pacis tradidit sacrisicium pacis.
poison in such a golden cup? Consignest thou thy treachery with so sweet a
symboll of peace and love? But this is still usual with those of his Tribe.
Caveatur osculum Iscarioticum. Jesuits at this day kiss and kill familiarly:
(...) occidunt, as one says of (...).
false Physicians. When those Rhemish Incendiaries, Giffard, Hodgeson, and
others, had set Savage awork to kill Queen Elizabeth, Camd. Elizab.
they first set forth a book to persuade the English Catholics to attempt
nothing against her. So when they had sent. Squire out of Spain to poison the
Queen, they taught him to anoint Ibid. an. 1598.
the pummel of her saddle with poison covertly, and then to pray with a loud
voice, God save the Queen. Lopez, another of their agents, affirmed at Tiburn,
That he had loved the Queen as Ibid sol. 431.
he had loved Jesus Christ: Which, from a Jew, was heard not without laughter.
So Parsons, when he had hatched that namelesse villainy the powder plot, set
forth his book of resolution: as if he had been wholly made up of devotion,
Esocietate Jesus fuit qui Iesum tradidit.

Verse 49. Hail Master, and kissed him]
But love is not always in a kiss, says Philo the Jew; nor in crying Rabbi,
Rabbi, as the traitor here did, Mark 14. 45. out of a seeming pity of his
Masters misery. There are that think that he would have carried this his
treachery so cunningly, as if he had (...) no hand in Aretius.
it: and therefore kissed him as a friend, and so would still have been taken.

Verse 50. Friend]
Since thou will needs be so esteemed, though (...). (...).
most unfriendly.

Wherefore art thou come?]
As a friend, or as a foe: If as a friend, What mean these swords? If as a foe,
What means this kiss? Christ knew well enough wherefore he came: but thinks
good to sting (...) conscience by this cutting question.

Laid hands on Jesus and took him]
By his own consent, and (...), as Irenaeus has it, while the Deity rested,
and refused to put forth it self.

Verse 51. One of them which were with Iesus]
This was Peter, who asked (...) to strike, but staid (...) till he had it, out
of a preposterous zeal to his Master, and because he would be a man of his
word. A wonderful work of God it was surely, that hereupon he was not (...) in
an hundred pieces, by the barbarous soldiers. Well might the (...) say, He
that is our God is the God of salvation; and unto God the Lord belong the
issues from death, Psalm. 68. 20. My times are in thine hands, Psalm. 31. 15. But
this stout (...) could not be found, when his Master was, after this,
apprehended and arraigned. Plato has observed, That the most skillful (...)
Peritissimi (...) in ludo, sunt (...).
are the most cowardly (...).

Verse 52. Put up again thy sword]
See the Notes on John 18. 11.

For all they that take the sword]
Without a just calling, (...) those sworn swordmen of the devil the Jesuits,
whose faction (as one says of them) is a most agile sharp sword; the blade
whereof is sheathed at pleasure, in the bowels of every Commonwealth, but the
handle reaches to Rome and Spain: Their design is to subdue all to the Pope,
and the Pope to themselves.

Verse 53. Think thou that I cannot pray]
q. d. Need I be beholden to thee for help? (...) very boldly told his (...)
(...) Celfitul Vest. (...) a (...) and tu (...) esse, quam mibi (...), etc.
and Protector, the Electour of Saxony, That he, by his (...) gained him more
help and safeguard, then he received from him: and that this cause of Christ
needs not the (...) of man to carry it on, but the power of God, set a work
by the prayer of faith: And this way, says (...), I will undertake to secure
your Highnesses soul, body, and estate, engaged in the Cause of the Gospel,
from whatsoever danger or disaster, Sive id credat C. V. sive non credat,
whether your (...) believe me herein, (...).
or not.

More then twelve legions]
A legion is judged to be six thousand (...), and seven hundred horse. And this
great army of Angels is by prayer dispatched from heaven in an instant. Are we
then in any imminent (...)? send up to heaven for help by prayer, and God will
send from heaven and help us. We need not help our selves by seeking private
revenge, as Peter here, or using (...) shifts, as David, Ps. 34. 1. for in the
same (...), Men are exhorted to ensue peace, and (...) by private wrongs; (...)
the Angels of the Lord (...) round about them that fear him, and deliver them.

Verse 54. But how then shall the Scriptures, etc.]
Why do thou not then pray (might they object) for an army of Angels, to
rescue thee out of these wicked hands, that now hold thee prisoner, and will
let out thy life-bloud? How then should the Scriptures be fulfilled, says he,
that have foretold my death? This was his constant care, even when he hung
upon the cross, to fulfill the Scriptures: and so to assure us, that he was
the very Christ.

That thus it must be]
Why must? but because it was, 1. So (...) by God. 2, Foretold by the
Prophets; every particular of Christ's (...), even to their very spetting in his
face. 3. Prefigured in the daily morning and evening (...); this lamb of God
was sacrificed from the beginning of the world. A necessity then there was of
our Saviors suffering. Not a necessity of coaction (for he died freely and
voluntarily) but of immutability and infallibility, for the former reasons and
respects.

Verse 55. Are ye come out as against a thief?]
Secretly, and by night, with all this clutter of people, and clashing of arms,
so to make the world believe strange matters of me? whereas, had your (...) and
conscience bin good, you would (...) taken a fitter time. and I should have had
fairer dealing.

ANd ye laid no hand on me]
Ye wanted no will, but ye could never find (...): and which of you now
accuses me of sin? It is doubtless very lawful, and in some cases needful
for Christians to defend their own (...), and (...) their wronged credit, as
did Moses, Samuel, Paul, (...): I never have sought profits, pleasures, nor
preferments, says he, (...) was I ever moved with emulation or envy against
any man, (...) conscientiam aufero, quocunque discedo. This conscience I carry
with me (...) I go. (...) of all that ever lived, might best challenge his
(...) of (...): For of him it might be truly affirmed, what Xenophon (...)
Socrates, what Paterculus Velleius. l. (...)
does of Scipio, Quod (...) in (...) nisi laudandum aut fecit, aut dixit, aut
sensit, that he did all (...) well, as the people testified of him, and never
said or thought any thingamisse.

Verse 56. That the Scriptures, etc.]
Which yet were no more the cause of the Jews cruelty, then Joseph was of the
famine, then the Astrologer is of the eclipse, or Tenterton-steeple of the
(...) and flowing of the sea.

Then all the Disciples for sook him and fled]
Then, when there was no such need or danger to enforce them, Christ having
capitulated with the enemy for their safety. They had leave to go free before:
what staid they for then? Or why flee they now? This was the fruit and
punishment of their former sleeping, verse. 43. Had they watched and praid then,
they had not now thus entered into temptation.

Verse 57. Where the Scribes and the Elders were]
A full Council then may err. See the Notes on Chap. 2. 4. and on Chap. 26. 3.

Verse 58. But, Peter followed]
First, he fled with the rest, and then, remembering his promise, followed
afar off: but better he had kept him away: for he sat with the servants, so
venturing upon the occasion of sin, which he should have studiously shunned;
and merely out of curiosity, to see the end and issue of Christ's captivity. We
many times tempt Satan to tempt us, by our imprudence. Evil company is
contagious, and sin more catching then the plague. Israel going down to Egypt
brought a golden Calf from thence: Jeroboam brought two. A man may pass through
Ethiopia unchanged, but he cannot reside there, and not to be discolored.

Verse 59. Sought false witnesse]
Here Christ is convented and examined in the (...) Court, with a great deal of
injustice and subornation. They first sought false witness, as if they had
obeyed our Savior, who bad them ask those that heard him, what he had said
unto them, Joh. 18. 21.

Verse 60. Yea, though many false-witnesses came]
So adultery was objected to Athanasius, heresy and treason to Cranmer. Also I
lay to thy charge, said Bonner to Philpot, Martyr, that thou killedst thy
father, and wast accursed of thy mother on her deathbed, etc. Q. Elizabeth
wrote these lines in the window at Woodstock; Act. and Mon. (...). 1650.


Much alleged against me,
Nothing proved can be.
Freedom of speech used by the Waldenses against the sins of those times,
caused, Ut (...) nefariae eis affingerentur opiniones, a quibus See Alex (...)
(...). to his (...) of Pop brags.
omnine fuerant alieni, says Gerard, That many false opinions were fathered
upon them, such as they never favored. So deal the Papists by us at this day;
They tell the seduced people, (...). Johan (...).
that we worship no God, count gain godliness, keep no promises, eat young
children, make nothing of adultery, murder, etc. Good people, these men deny
Christ to be God, and the holy Ghost to be God, etc. said White Bishop of Act.
and Mon. (...). 813.
Winchester concerning Woodman, and other holy Martyrs, in a Sermon.

Yet found they none]
The enemies likeliest projects often fail. These false witnesses, as those
(...)-builders of old, disagreed in their language, which God confounded; and
so he does to this day.

Verse 61. I am able to destroy the temple]
Novum crimen Caie Caesar. For, what if Christ had said so? Could not he as
easily have reared a temple as raised the dead, restored the blind, etc? But
the truth is he never said so, but was misreported, and falsely (...) (says
Father Latymer,) both as touching his words and meaning also. He said
Destruite, Destroy ye; they made it Possum destruere, I am able to destroy. He
said Templum hoc, this temple, meaning his own body: they added manufactum made
with hands, to bring it to a contrary sense, etc. Thus mutilando vel mutando,
by chopping or changing, ill-minded men do usually deprave and wrest to a wrong
meaning, the most innocent passages and practices.

Verse 62. Answerest thou nothing?]
No, nothing: unless it had been to better purpose: for (...), says the wise
Heathen. Either hold thy peace, or say something that is worth hearing. And,
(...). To answer (...).
every slight accusation is servile. Some are so thin they may Tenue (...)
pellucet.
be seen through, others so gross, that they need no refutation. Sen.
These hypocrites were not worthy of an answer from our Savior; who knew also
that now was the time not of apologizing, but of suffering: therefore as a
sheep before her shearer is dumb, (...). 53. 7.
so he opened not his mouth. Besides, he saw that his enemies were (...) to
have his blood, and therefore held it more glorious, (...), as Basil has it,
to choke their spite Epist. 172.
with silence, and injuriam tacendo fugere, potius quam respondendo superare,
as another says, to set them down by saying nothing.

Verse 63. I adjure thee by the living God]
So had the devil done once before, horrendo impudentiae exemplo Mark 3. 7. Sed
os Caiaphae and culeus Satanaein (...) sunt praedicamento. It is nothing with
the devil and his, to pollute and dissallow that nomen majestativum, as
Tertullian styles it, that glorius and fearful name of God, as Moses calls
it: and to call him in, at (...) Deuteronomy (...)
turns, as an author or abettour at least, of their abominable plot and
practices. How much better that holy man that said, My heart, head, and tongue,
trembles as often as I speak of God? Yea (...), mente, and cogitatione (...) Deo
(...) habeo.
the very Heathen Sages had the same thoughts, that men ought to be better
advised, then to toss Gods reverend name upon their tongues as a tennis-ball,
or to wear his image for an ornament, etc. And surely, as St Mark relates this
history, one would (...).
think Caiaphas a very conscientious person. For he brings him (...).
in saying to our Savior, Art thou the son of that Blessed one, Mark 14 61. So
he calls God by a periphrasis, as if he were afraid Praecept. Pyth.
once to name God: when as yet presently after, he profanely (...).
adjureth our blessed Savior by the living God, that thou tell (...) bu, (...)
ipsum Dei nomen exprimire vereatur.
us whether thou be the Christ, etc. And this he does, not out of any desire to
know the truth: but as seeking an occasion, from his bold and free confession
of the truth, to put him to death: so going about to entitle God himself to his
villainous enterprises. See here the hateful nature of damned hypocrisy, and
abandon it.

Verse 64. Thou have said]
That is, as St Mark expresses the Hebraisme in plainer terms, I am. q. d.
Thou have said it, and I must second it, I am indeed the promised Messiah, and
the only-begotten son of God. This was the naked truth without Equivocation:
a device that the Jesuits have lately fet from hell, for the consolation of
afflicted Catholics, and for the instruction of all the godly, as Blackwell
and Garnet blush not to profess in print. Let us learn here of our Savior, to
make a bold and wise confession of the truth, when called thereunto: although
we create our selves thereby never so much danger from the enemy who shall so
be either converted, or at least convinced, and left inexcusable.

Hereafter shall ye see, etc.]
q. d. Now I am in a state of abasement, God having hid his son under the
Carpenters son, whom ye have now bound, and shall shortly crucify. But not
long hence, ye shall see me in a state of advancement, sitting on the right
hand of power, pouring out my spirit upon all flesh, Acts 2 33. and, after
that, coming in the clouds of heaven, as in a charet of state, to judge you
that are now my Judges, etc.

Verse 65. Then the high priest rent his clothes]
Which the high priest ought not by the law to have done, howsoever, Levit. 10.
6. and 21. 10. and here had no color of cause at all to do: no not so much as
Joab had, when for company, and at his Lords command, he rent his clothes at
Abners funeral, whom he had basely murdered, 1 Samuel 3. 31.

Verse 66. He is guilty of death]
Servile souls! they durst do no otherwise then concur with (...). So in popish
councels and conclaves the Bishops and others (those Aiones and Negones (...))
have no more to do, but simply inclinato capite to say Placet to that which in
the Popes name is proposed unto them. History of the Counc of Trent. fol 680.
The Legates in the Council of Trent were blamed for suffering the article of
Priests marriage to be disputed. And in Colloquio (...), after that Beza had
spoken much of the Eucharist Ibid. (...).
before the young King of France, the Queen Mother and the Princes of the
blood, a Spanish Jesuit, having reproached the Protestants, did reprehend the
Queen Mother for meddling in matters that belongd not to her, but to the Pope,
Cardinals, and Bishops.

Verse 67. Then did they spit in his (...)]
Condemned prisoners are sacred things: and, by the law of Nations, should not
be misused and trampled on, but rather pitied and prepared for death. But these
barbarous miscreants (not without the good liking of their Lords the Priests
and Elders,) spare for no kind of cruelty toward Christ, who was content to be
spit upon, to cleanse our faces from the filth of sin, to be buffeted with
fists (...) (...).
and beaten with staves, to free us from that mighty hand of God, Beza.
1 Peter 5. 6. and from those scourges and scorpions of infernal fiends.

Verse 68. Saying, prophecy unto us, thou Christ]
This is daily done to Christ by the children of darkness, which sin securely,
and say, who sees us? they put it to the trial, as Ananias and Sapphria did,
whether they shall be detected.

Verse 69. And a damsel came unto him]
A silly wench daunteth and dispiriteth this stout champion. Sic and Elias ille
(...).
(...) ad mulierculae ((...)) minas trepidat, factus seipso imbecillior. What
poor things the best of us are, when left a little to our selves, when our
faith is in the wain!

Thou also wast with Jesus]
She was just of her masters mind and making. We had need take heed where we
set our children to service: for, like water on a table, they will be led any
way, with a wet finger: and as any liquid matter, they will conform to the
vessel whereinto they are powered. Be sure to teach them Gods fear, and to
pray, and then where ever they come to (...), they shall do good, and find
favor, as (...) in the court of Babylon, (...). 1. and as the (...) (...)
family: that great Lord (...) maids coal: so (...) a thing is (...) works of
God, (...) the (...).

Verse 70. I know (...) what thou (...)
^ (...) not either her words, or her (...). (...) this (...) dissembling, was
a true denying. St (...) says, (...) now the cock crew, chap. 14. 68. A fair
warning to so soul a sinner; but he took no notice of it, till Christ looked
back upon him; to teach us, that without the help of divine grace, no means
can convert a sinner from the error of his way. God himself preached a Sermon
of repentance to Cain, but it prevailed not. Whereas Christ no sooner looked
back upon this fallen Apostle, but he went out and wept bitterly. Christ cured
him with less ado, then he did Malchus his ear: that was healed by a touch,
this by a look only.

Verse 71. And when he was gone out, etc.]
The orifice of his wound was not yet close: and therefore bled afresh so soon
again. Thus Lot committed incest two nights together, etc. See the Note on
verse. 43.

Verse 72. And again he denied with an oath]
This was fearful: and the worse, because his master, whom ne forswore, was
now (even as Peter's faith was,) upon his trial, and might say, with wounded
Caesar, What, thou my son Brutus? Is this thy (...) to thy friend? Scipio had
rather that Hannibal should eat his heart with salt, then that Lelius do him
the least discourtesie.

Verse 73. For thy (...) bewrays (...)]
Jacob must name himself Jacob, with the voice of Jacob. The Ephraimite must
(...) out his Sibboleth in despite of his heart, or habit. Each countryman is
known by his idiome or dialect. The fool says to every one that he is a fool,
Eccles. 10. 3. when the wise man's tongue talks of (...), Psalm. 37. 30.

Verse 74. Then began he to curse and swear]
This he had (...), belike, of the ruffianly soldiers, with whom usually,
(...) are but expletives, and horrible oaths, interjections of speech. But
though Israel play the (...), yet why should Judah (...). (...)
offend? come not ye to (...), (...) go ye up to Bethaven, nor swear The Lord
(...). (...) (...) once such an oath, and it was enough of that once, 1 Samuel 25
22. But Peter swears and forswears again and again, and that after warning: as
Aaron went down and did that in the valley, which (...) forbidden in the mount,
and then excuses it by his fear of the (...). That (...) is the mother of many
sins, (...) lying especially Zeph. 3. 13. and (...) too, to save the life.
But (...) dye then lie; and better bear then swear. We may not break the (...)
of any commandment to avoid any piece of foul way, but go in a right line to
God. Quas non oportet mortes praeligere, quod non supplicium potius far, imo
in quam profundam in ferni (...) non (...), quam (...) attestari, says holy
Zuinglius in his third epistle? What should not a man (...) rather then sin?

And immediately the cock crew]
Gallicinium complevit Christi vaticinium. The cock proved a preacher to Peter.
Despise not the Minister though never so mean: it is the foolishness of
preaching that must bring men to heaven. Cocks call men out of their beds, and
therehence have their name in the Greek tongue. (...) ^.
They constantly keep the law of crowing at set times that nature has enjoined
them: they cry loud and thick against a storm. So do faithful Ministers, when
gotten upon their battlements: they clap their own sides first, and then
constantly call up others. (...) cry aloud, and spare not, but lift up their
voice like a trumpet, to tell Judah of their sins, etc. The roaring lion of
hell trembles at their note: and the worlds Sybantes cannot bear their
disturbances, and therefore wish them banished. (...) wisdom is justified of
her children, and (though fierce before and untameable,) yet now a little
child shall lead them, Isa 11. 6.

Verse 75. And Peter remembered the words of Jesus.]
Here began his repentance. If we remember not what is preached unto us, ali's
lost, says the Apostle, 1 Cor 15. 2. If we leak and let slip, says another,
how shall we escape? (...). 2. 1, 3. The Spirit (...).
shall be the Saints remembrancer: and as the (...) casts up her dead; so shall
that come seasonably to mind, that was long before delivered, when Gods good
time is come to work upon the dead heart. God will be found of his that seek
him not. Surely (...) and truth shall follow them all the days of their (...),
as the Sunbeams follow the traveller that turns his back on them. He will
bring back his banished, he will reduce his runagates, he will not suffer any
of his to be utterly drowned, though happily they have been drenched in the waves
of sin, lain some while in them, yea and have also sunk twice or thrice, as
Peter, to the verry bottom. Now then how can any either presume of not
sinning, or despair for sin, when they read of Peter thus fallen, and now
thus remembering, thus rising again by repentance, and and received to mercy?
The like instances we have not a few, of Origin and other primitive Christians,
who recanting for a season through fear of death, were therefore utterly
excluded by Novatus from all hope of mercy: but not so by Christ. Be not Jer.
17 17.
thou a terror unto me, o Lord, says Jeremy, and then I care not, though all
the world condemn and cast me out. (...), Bainham, Act. and Mon. fol. 918, 938.
1857, 1633. (...), 1861.
Benbridge, Abbes, Whittle, Charp, and many other Martyrs, having denied their
Lord God, as they called it, for fear of the faggot, could have no rest till
they had repented, and publicly revoked their much bewailed recantations.
Steven Gardener indeed, like another Ecebolius, cried out that he had denied
with Peter, but never repented with Peter, and so both stinkingly and
unrepentantly dyed, says Mr Fox. It was a saying of Ibid. 1904.
the same Mr Fox that his graces did him most hurt, and his sins (...). of
Tempt.
most good. A paradox; but, by our temptations, we know his meaning. As pain
eases a Christian, death revives him, dissolution unites him, so corruption
clarifies him. I dare be bold to say Aug. de civit. dei. l. 14. c. 13.
(says Augustine,) that it is good for proud persons to fall into some foul
sin, unde sibi displiceant, qui jam sibi placendo ceciderunt. Salubrius enim
Petrus sibi displicuit quando (...), quam sibi placuit quando praesumpsit, that
they may be humbled, as Peter was, and so saved.

He wept bitterly]
That one sweet look from Christ, melted him; as Gods kindness did the
heardhearted Israelites at the meet of Mizpeh. In this troubled pool Peter
washed himself, Semper (...) suffusos (...) oculos adeo ut etiam (...) cutem
genarum exederint.
in this red Sea the army of his iniquities was drowned. As once his faith was
so great, that he leapt into a sea of waters to come to Christ: so now his
repentance was so great, that he leapt, as it were, into a sea of tears for
that he had gone from Christ. There are that say (and it may very well be) that
henceforth he was ever and anon weeping: and that his face was even furrowed
(...) (...).
with continual tears. He began soon after his sin, Mark. 14. (...). cum se
proripuisset, when he had thrown himself out, as Beza renders it. He had no
sooner took in poison, but he vomited it up again ere it got to the vitals. He
had no sooner handled his serpent, but he turned it into a rod, to scourge his
soul with remorse. Peccatum tristitiam peperit, and tristitia peccatum
contrivit, ut (...) in ligno natus, sed ipsum comminuit.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse 1. When the morning was come]
THey had broken their sleep the night before: and yet were up and at it early
the next morning, so soon as the day peeped, Luke 22. 66. So sedulous are the
Devils servants. Esau began (...)
to bustle with Jacob even in the very womb, that no time might be lost.

Verse 2. And when they had bound him]
Bound he had been before this (to loose the cords of our iniquities:) but
belike they had loosed him again, to try if by fair means they could make (...).
him belie himself. So those Martyrs were tempted, Heb. 11. 37. And this was
Iulians way of persecuting the Primitive Christians, as Nazianzen testifies:
persecutioni suae miscuit persuasionem; Nazianzen.
ideoque fuit superioribus nocentior, and perniciosior. So Bonner, after he had
allowed William Hunter Martyr, an halfpenny a day in bread and drink in prison,
persuaded with him saying: If thou will recant I will make thee a freeman in
the city, and Act. and Mon. sol 1397.
give thee forty pounds in good money, to set up thine occupation Ibid 1386.
withal: or I will make thee steward of mine house, and set thee in office.
So, to reduce D. Tailor Martyr, they promised him not only his pardon, but a
bishopric.

Verse 3. Then Judas which had betrayed him]
Might not Iedu have sang care away, now that he had both the bag and the price
of blood, but he must come and betray himself? Whiles he played alone, he won
all: but soon after, his own wickedness corrected him, and his backslidings
reproved him. Sin will surely Jer. 2. 19.
prove evil and bitter, when the bottom of the bag is once turned upward. A
man may have the stone, who feels no fit of it. Conscience will work once:
though, for the time, one may feel no fit of accusation: Laban showed himself
at parting. Know 2 Samuel 13. (...).
thou not that there will be bitterness in the latter end? But (...) devil
deals with men as the Panther does with the beasts; he (...) his deformed head,
till his sweet sent have drawn them into his danger. Till we have sinned, Satan
is a parasite: when we have sinned he is a tyrant. But it is good to consider
that of Bernard. ^
At the day of judgment, a pure conscience shall better bestead one then a
full purse.

When he saw that he was condemned]
He hoped, belike, that Christ would, as at other times he did, have delivered
(...) by (...) miracle. Let no man flatter himself, as if there were no such
hurt in sin; for, like dirty dogs, it does but defile us in fawning: and like
a treacherous Host, though it welcome us into the (...) with (...) countenance,
yet it will cut our throats in our beds.

He repented]
That is, he changed his mind, from thinking ^
well of his former actions. So those miscreants in Malachi are said to return
and discern, etc. (...). 3. 18. So (...) ^
Duke of Suevia, when, at the Popes instigation, taking up arms against Henry
the Emperor, he had lost his right hand in the battle, Hic (...) ille (...)
Papa (...), (...), (...).
he sent for his Bishops, and other his confederates and said unto them: Lo
this is that hand wherewith I swore that allegiance to my Sovereign, which by
your means and motion I have (...). Videte an recta via me duxeritis, etc
Consider whether you have (...) me on in a right way or not.

And brought again the thirty peeces]
So did James Abbes bring to the Bishop of Norwich, his forty (...) fastened
upon him by the Bishop: which when he had (...) (says (...) Fox) and was gone
from the Bishop, who had prevailed with him to recant, his conscience began to
throb, and inwardly to accuse this fact, how he had displeased the Lord, by
(...) to (...) illusions. In which combat with himself, being (...), he went to
the Bishop again, and there threw him his money (...) and (...). (...). (...).
and said, It repented him that he ever consented to their wicked persuasions
in taking of his money. Hereupon the Bishop with his Chaplains labored afresh
to win him again. But he was better resolved, and crying out to God for (...)
of his sin (which Judas did not) he obtained mercy, and suffered (...).

Verse 4, I have sinned, etc.]
Here was (...), Confession, Restitution (most men go not so far, that (...)
hopes of heaven) there was wanting that (...), Conversion, Obedience of faith
that should have completed his repentance. He died in the birth, as that
foolish child Ephraim. He confessed to men, and not to God: and by his
confession he sought no more then to ease his heart, as drunkards by vomiting
Melanct in Chronico p. 5.
rid their stomachs. So Latomus of Lovain confessed inter horrendos (...), se
contra conscientiam adver satum esse veritati, roaring and crying out, that
against his (...) he had persecuted the truth of God. In trouble of mind all
will out. Conscience, like Samsons wife, conceals not the riddle: like Fulvia a
whorish woman, (...) in bell. Catil.
who declared all the secrets of her foolish lover Cneius a noble Roman.

What is that to us? See thou to that]
Miserable comforters, Physicians of no value. To him that is afflicted pity
should be showed from his friend: but he for saketh the fear of the Almighty.
The devil Job 6. 14.
and his imps love to bring men into the briers, and there leave them: as
familiar devils forsake their witches, when they have brought them once into
fetters. Thus the old Bethelite, that had been at pains to fetch back the
Prophet, would not go back with him. Thus the Papists burnt Cranmer recanting,
and the present Prelates cast off their great Antisabbatarian White, when they
had served their turns on him. David when he was hunted from Samuel the
Prophet, he fled to Ahimelech the Priest: as one that knew that justice and
compassion should dwell in those breasts that are consecrated to God. But Judas
met with no such matter in the Priests of his time. Those mischievous men left
him, when they had led him to his bane.

Verse 5. And he cast down the pieces of silver]
That wages of wickedness burnt in his purse, in his conscience; neither could
it secure him in the day of wrath. See Zeph. 1. 18. Ezekiel. 7. 19. Obad. (...).
Jam. 4. 1, 2. Omnia fui, and nihil mihi profuit, said Severus the Emperor,
when he lay a dying. Most of the Emperors (...) nothing by their advancement
to the Empire, whereof they were so ambitious, but this, Vt citius
interficerentur, that they were slain the sooner. All or most of them, till
Constantine, died unnatural deaths. Achans wedge of gold served but to cleave
asunder his soul from his body; and the Babylonish garment but for a shroud.

And went and hanged himself]
If you confess your felf to a Priest, and not to God, said that Martyr, you
shall have the reward Act. and Mon. (...). 1538.
that Judas had. For he confessed himself to a Priest, and yet went and (...)
himself by and by. So did Pavier, TownClark of London, in Henry the eights
time, who had before sworn a great (...), That if the Kings (...) would set
forth the Scripture in English, and let it be read of the people by his (...),
rather then he would so long live, he would cut his own (...). But he brake
promise: for shortly after he hanged Ibid. 962.
(...). (...) the same time Foxford, Chancellor to the (...) of London, a
cruel persecutour and butcher of the Saints, (...) in his chair, his belly
being burst, and his guts falling Ibid. 962.
out before him; as likewise Judas his did, Cum (...) singularicrepitus
fragore, as the word imports, Act. 1. 18. (...) (...) (...) (...). Christ.
(...), (...)
makes mention of a covetous Bishop of Misna in Germany, who had the devil for
his deathsman: And D. Morton, late Bishop of Durham, reports a story of his own
knowledge, Institut. of the (...). l. 5. cap. 3. (...) 5.
of one Sir Booth, a bachelour of Arts in S. John's College in Cambridge, who
being Popishly affected, took the (...) bread at the time of the Communion; and
forbearing to eat it, conveyed and kept it closely for a time, and afterward
threw it over the College wall. But, a short time after, not enduring the
torment of his guilty (...), he threw himself headlong over the battlements of
the Chapel, and some few hours after ended his life. The spirit of a man may
sustain his infirmity: some shift or other a man may make to (...) calamities:
But a wounded spirit who can bear? (...) 18 14. (...) no fighting with a mighty
fire, no bearing up (...) storm. Job when once wet to the skin, (...) the day
of his birth, and thinks it better to be strangled or hanged, then longer to
endure it. Job 7. 15.
And yet God was but in (...), as it were, with Job, in comparison of Judas.

Verse 6. It is not lawful, etc.]
They would not suffer the price of blood to lie in a chest; but the blood it
self they could well enough suffer to lie in their consciences. So our modern
Pharisees (the Popish Prelates) will not be present when the Martyrs are
condemned to death, but have an hypocritical form of interceding for them to
the secular powers, when as they themselves have delivered them up to the
Judges to be executed, (...) suis praejudiciis damnarunt, as one speaks,
having (...), excommunicated and adjudged them worthy of death.

Verse 7. To bury strangers in]
Romans and others, with whom they would have nothing common, no not so much as
a burial place, Isa. 65. 4, 5. God (...) of a people that remain among the
graves, and lodge in the monuments; which say, stand by thy self, come not near
to me, for I am holier then thou, etc. sick (...) were of a Noli me tangere,
strict in (...), (...) of foul Adricom Th. ter sanct.
sins. There are that tell us, that the nature of this Potters field is such,
as, if a strangers body be laid in it, it consumes it to the Medit for the
(...) week, by N (...).
bone in four and twenty hours; which it does not to the body of any Jew. This,
if it be true, says one, it seems God would have the earth thus marked to
preserve the memory of the bloody money, by which it was purchased: and
therefore he gave it a virtue to consume strangers bodies ere they could
corrupt, refusing the Jews; to show how they had lost their privilege to their
own land, by crucifying their Lord, and strangers began to be possessed of it.
Also, to teach us, that his hope is nearest incorruption, who is the greatest
stranger from the sin of the Jews, that is, (...) Christ.

Verse 8. Was called the field of bloud]
Not the buriall-place for strangers, as they would have had it called
(thinking thereby to have gotten (...) an eternal commendation, for their love
and liberality to strangers) but the field of blood (so the Vulgar would needs
call it, much against these Masters minds) for a lasting monument of their
detestable (...), which they thought to have carried so cleanly, that the world
should have (...) never the wiser; and therefore they would not (...) Christ
themselves, as they did Steven; but, to decline the envy, delivered him up
(...) Pilate to be put to death. It is hard if hypocrites be not, by one means
or other, detected: how else should their names rot?

Verse 9. Then was fulfilled]
Those blind Pharisees not only observed not the sayings of the Prophets which
they daily read, but un wittingly also fulfilled them.

By Jeremy the Prophet]
Indeed by Zachary the Prophet: but either (...) had two several names (as was
ordinary among that people) or else what (...) had preached. (...) long after
(...) to writing, as did likewise Obadiah, etc.

The price of him that was valued]
A goodly price (...) there upon God, for all his pastoral pains with that
perverse people: and (...) upon Christ (who is hereby proved to be God) for all
his inestimable worth, and incomparable love to lost mankind. If we be at any
time undervalued, as we are sure to be (for the world knows us not, 1 Ioh. 3.
2.) what so great a matter is it? Was not the Lord Christ infinitely underrated?

Verse 10. And gave them for the Potters field]
To the Potter (says Zachary) in the house of the Lord. What the Prophet sets
down in short, and more obscurely, the Evangelist expounds, and applies to
Christ the antitype. So true is that observation of Divines, that the old
Testament is both explained and fulfilled in the new, by a happy harmony.

Verse 11. And Jesus stood before the Governour]
The best therefore and most innocent may be brought before Magistrates, and
accused of high treason, which ever was, as Lipsius observes out of Tacitus,
Vnicum crimen little qui crimine vacabant. (...) was held the Kings enemy.
Jeremy laid by the heels for a (...) to the State. Paul styled a pest. Luther a
trumpet of rebellion. Beza a seedsman of sedition, etc. Christ's accusers here,
shamelesly appeal him of matters that were evidently ntrue. This Pilate saw,
and therefore sought so many ways to deliver him.

Verse 12. He answered nothing]
Here the nimble Lawyer would have presently argued, as the Popes Legate did at
the meeting of the Princes at Smalcaldia in Germany. He brought Letters from
the Pope to the Electour of Saxony: and because the Electour gave (...) Manl
loc. com. p 406.
him not a present answer, he inferred, Qui tacet consentire videtur.
Melancthon, being by, made answer, Hoc est sophisticum, est regula juris, (...)
non valet inconjecturalibus. Nam dicit, videtur, and argumentum videtur,
solvitur per non videtur. Christ therefore answered nothing, because they
alleged nothing but notorious lies, and such as he saw well the Governor
himself saw through, and therefore tried so many policies to set him free.

Verse 13. Hear thou not? etc.]
Yes, well enough: but there is a time, when a man should be as a deaf man that
hears not, and as a dumb man that opens not his mouth. Ego (...) Psalm. 38.
13.
Dominus, ut tu linguae, said he in Tacitus to his obstreperous adversary. If I
cannot command thy tongue, yet I can command mine own ears. And the prudent
will keep silence in an evil time, says Amos. See the Note above, on Chap. 26.
62. Patience and Amos 5, 13.
silence were Isaac's apology to Ishmael. Sile, and funestam dedisti (...),
says Chrysostom.

Verse 14. The Governor marvelled,]
That Christ should so betray his own cause, by an obstinate silence. But why
marvelled he not as much at the impudency of the Priests, pressing such
palpable untruths against him? He did no doubt: and yet against all equity,
yielded to their importunity. But (...) not Magistrates be men of courage
cuerdelions? Solomon's throne was supported by lions; to show what manner of men
such should be, as sit in places of judicature.

Verse 15. The Governor was wont]
In remembrance, say some, of their deliverance from the Egyptian bondage. A
(...) it was, and therefore obtained; but an evil custom, and therefore should
better have been abrogated. Custom without truth is but hoarinesse or
mouldinesse of error, says one. And (...) without (...), is but antiquity of
iniquity, says another. A custom they have in Rome at this day, that if a
Cardinal meet a condemned person going to execution, and put his hat on the
malefactors head, he is thereby set free. I see no (...).
sense for such a pardon. But the Inhabitants of Berne in (...) gave a general
pardon to most of their prisoners, and called home their banished that same
day, wherein the (...) received and established amongst them. And they gave
this (...) usi. Scult. Annal.
reason for it. Should some confederate Prince pass through our coasts, we
should, for his sake, pardon our offenders, upon promise of amendment. Now,
shall the King of Kings. the Son of God, and our dear brother, who has done
and suffered so much for us, come graciously unto us, and we not honor him
this way also? Saul, for joy of his victory over the Ammonites, would not
suffer such to be put to death, as had spoken treason against him: for to day
(said he) the Lord has wrought salvation 1 Samuel 11, 13.
in Israel, etc.

Verse 16. A notable prisoner, called Barabbas]
That is, by interpretation his fathers son, his white son, his darling, his
tidling, whom he had cockered and not crossed from his youth. Such children are
often undone, as Absalom, Amnon and Adoniah were by their parents indlgence. How
many a Barabbas, brought to the gallows, blames his fond father, and happily
curses him in hell?

Verse 17. Whom will ye that I release?]
Pilate hoped they would never be so grossly wicked, as to prefer such a
stigmaticall varlet. But why did he give them the liberty of such a choice? Why
did he not rather (as Job) break the jaws of the wicked, and pluck the spoil
out of their teeth? Should not the standard Job (...) 17.
be made of hardest metals? the chief post of the house be heart of Oak? Was it
not pusillanimity and popularity that missed (...), and so muzzled him, that he
could not contradict the many-headed multitude?

Verse 18. For he knew that for envy]
His sin was the greater for his knowledge, I am, 4. 17. Omne peccatum contra
conscientiam, aedificat ad (...), says (...). When men imprison their light
(that Prophet from God) Rem. 1. 18. and after conviction run away with the
bit in their mouths, as it were, they run without Gods greater mercy upon their
utter ruin and destruction. Tostatus truly observes, that Solomon's idolatry
was a sin far more sinful then that of his wives; because (...) knowledge.

Verse 19. (...) wife sent unto him]
There are that think that this woman's dream was of the devil: thereby to have
hindered the work of redemption by this composition. Satan and his agents, when
they cannot conquer, would fain compound. (...) will have it to be a divine
dream, because it was sent, say they, Opus providenliae Dei: non ut solveretur
Christus, sed ut (...) uxor. Theophylact.
for the better clearing of Christ's innocence, even whiles he stood at the bar:
yea for the salvation of this woman's soul, as Theophylact is of opinion.

Verse 20. The chief Priests and Elders perswaded]
And prevailed. See then how needful it is that we pray for good governors;
Jeroboam made Israel to sin: Peter compelled the (...) to Judaize, Gal. 2.
14. As the corruption of a fish begins at the head, and as in a beast the whole
body follows the head: So are the people overruled by their Rulers.

Verse 21. They said, (...)]
This mad choice is every day made, whiles men prefer the lusts of their
flesh before the lives of their souls. In the present instance we may see, as
in (...) mirror, the inconstancy of the common sort (who erst cried Christ up
for a Prophet, and would have crowned him (...).
for a King) and the desperate madness of the Priests, Qui citius Diabolum ex
inferno petivissent quam Iesum, as Pareus has it; Who would have desired the
devil of hell, rather then Jesus.

Verse 22. Let him be crucified.]
He, whom (...) they had little less then deified. See how soon evil company
and counsel had altered them: like as Walnut-tree-roots imbitter AElian. var.
hist. lib. 7.
the roots of all the trees about them. Siquis obsequatur (...), (...) reddet
(...) temulentum Callias; si Alcibiadi, jactatorem: si Crobylo, coquum, etc.
says AElian. A man easily conformeth to his company.

Verse 23. Why? What evil has he done?]
Why? but if he have done no evil, wherefore does not Pilate pronounce him
innocent coutra gentes? And quit him by proclamation? which because he did not,
but the contrary, was he not therefore, by a just judgment of God upon him,
kicked off the bench, by the Emperor Tiberius? Judge Hales came to an evil end
for crossing Act. and Mon. Englands Eliz.
his conscience. And Judge Morgan, who gave the sentence of that peerlesse Lady
(...) Graies death, presently fell mad: and in all his distracted fits, cried
out continually, Take away the Lady (...), Take away the Lady Jane from me. It
is reported of Nevessan, a better Lawyer then an honest man, that he should
say: He that will not venture his body shall never be valiant: he that will not
venture his soul, never rich.

Verse 24. He took water]
Too weak an element to wash off guilt (...) which is not purged but by the
blood of Christ, or fire of hell.

And washed his hands]
An old Ceremony, used, in this case, (...).
both by Jews ( Deuteronomy. 21. 6, 7. Act. 18. 6.) and Gentiles, as the Scholiast
upon Sophocles testifies. And it was as much as to say, the guilt of innocent
blood does no more stick to my conscience, then the filth now washed off, does
to my fingers. Sed quid hoc est, (...) one? Manus abluit Pilatus, and cor
polluit. O Jerusalem, wash thy heart from wickedness, says the Prophet. God
and nature begin at the heart. And, Cleanse your hands, ye sinners, but Jer 4
14.
withal, Purify your hearts, ye double-minded, says the Apostle. Jam. 4. 8.
The very Turks, before prayer, wash both face and hands, Blunts voyage. page
100.
sometimes the head and privities. But bodily exercise only profits little.

See ye to it]
See thou to that, said they to Judas, verse. 4. See ye to it, says Pilate to
them: With what measure ye mete it shall be measured to you again, Mat. 7. 2.
They are paid in their own coin, their own very words, by a just judgment of
God, are regested upon them.

Verse 25. His blood be on us, and on, etc.]
God said Amen to this woeful curse, which cleaves close to them and their
posterity, as a girdle to their loins, soaking as oil into their bones to this
very day, Psalm. 109. 18, 19. Thirty eight years after this fearful
imprecation, in the same place, and close by the same tribunal where they thus
cried out, His blood be on us, etc. Historians tell us, that Herod, wanting
money, demanded of the Jews so much out of their treasury, as would pay for the
making of a watercourse. But the Jews, supposing it a needless work, not only
denied him, but gave many out-ragious and spiteful speeches, tumultuously
flockt about him, and with great clamours pressed upon him, even as he was in his
seat. Whereupon to prevent mischief, he sent to his soldiers to apparel
themselves like Citizens, and under their gowns to bring with them a (...) or
poniard, and mingle themselves amongst the multitude; which they did, observing
who they were that made the greatest uproar. (...). (...), p. 30.
And when Herod gave the sign, they fell upon them, and slew a great multitude.
Many also, for fear of loss or danger killed themselves: besides others, which
seeing this massacre, (...) treason among themselves, fell one upon another.
What a dispersed and despised people they are ever since, exiled, as it were,
out of the world, by the common consent of all Nations, for their inexpiable
guilt. See my True Treasure, Chap. 7. Sect. 2. And beware by their example of
wishing evil to our selves or others, as our desperate God, damn-me's do at
every third word almost, and God will undoubtedly take them at their words, as
he did those wretches, that wished they might die in the wilderness, Numb. 14.
28. As he did John Peter's, the cruel Keeper of Newgate in Queen Mary's days:
who commonly when Act. and Mon. (...). (...).
he would affirm any thing, were it true or false, used to say, If it be not
true, I pray God I rot ere I die, and he had his desire. So had Sir Gervaise
Ellowaies. Lieutenant of the Tower, hanged in our remembrance on Tower Hill,
for being (...) to the poisoning of Sir Thomas Overbury: who being upon the
Gallows, confessed it was just upon him, for that he had often in his playing at
cards and dice wished, That he might be hanged, if it were not so Joh Manl.
(...) com p. 192
and so. In the year, 1551. the devil in a visible shape lifted up a cursing
woman into the air in Germany; and therehence threw her down, in the view of
many people, and (...) her neck. Another brought her daughter to Luther,
entreating his prayers for her, for that she was possessed by the devil, upon
her cursing of her. For when she had said in a rage against her daughter,
Involet Ibid. 228.
in (...) diabolus, The devil take thee, he took possession of her Ibid 229.
accordingly. The same Author relates a like sad story of a stubborn son,
cursed by his father, who wished he might never stir alive from the place he
stood in, and he stirred not for three years, ando. Cursing men are cursed men.
Alterius perditio tua sit cautio. See thou another suffer shipwreck? look to
thy tackling.

Verse 26. And when he had scourged Jesus]
So (...) satisfy their cruelty, and move them, if it might be, to pity. But
though they relented not at the sight, it is fit we should. Would it not grieve
us at the heart, if we should see the Kings son basely whipped by our
adversaries, only for our affairs? Christ was scourged when we had offended,
that he might free us from the sting of conscience, and those scourges and
scorpions of eternal torments, that he might make us a plaster of his own
blessed blood: for by his (...) medici factus est medicina phrene. tici.
stripes we are healed, by the bloody wails made upon his back we are
delivered. We hold it a thing almost beyond belief, that the applying of
medicines to the sword that wounded a man, shall make the wounds heal in a man.
But here is a mystery that only Christian religion can tell of, and of which
there never was president in nature, that the scourging and wounding of one man
should cure another. See the Note, on Joh. 19. 1.

Verse 27. Then the soldiers of the Governour]
Barbarous and brutish men, skillful to destroy, Ezekiel. 21. 31. Let the young
men arise and play before us, said Abner, 2 Samuel 2. 14. It is but a sport to
soldiers to kill and put men to tormentfull ends. At the taking of Tripolis in
Barbary, the Turkish soldiers, having in their hands one John de Chabos, a
(...)-man born in Daulphine, they brought him into the town: and when they had
cut off (...) hands and nose, they put him quick into the ground to the wast,
and there, for their pleasure, shot at him with their arrows, and afterward
(...). (...). fol. 756.
cut his throat. What insolences and cruelties they exercised upon our Savior
for our sakes, even the whole band of them, we should read with regret for our
sins, the weapons and instruments of all his sufferings; and see through his
wounds the naked bowels, as it were, of his love to our poor souls.

Verse 28. And they stripped him]
That we might be clothed with the rich and royal raiment of (...)
righteousness, that fleece of the Lamb of God, who (...) away, etc.

And put on him a scarlet robe]
Ore worn and thread-(...) no doubt: so to set him forth as an historical
King, in (...) of him: but the Kingdom of Christ came not by observation. He is
an obscure King, as Melchisedeeh was, but yet a King, as he told (...), and
this was that good confession witnessed by him, and celebrated by S. Paul, 1 Timothy 6. 13.

Verse 29. And when they had platted a crown, etc.]
Christ, by wearing this crown of thorns, the first fruits of the curse, took
away the sin and curse of all his people: who must therefore, by their
obedience set a crown of gold on his head, Cant. 3. 11. as (...) in his
superstitious way (...) his crown upon the crucifix. See the Note on (...). 19
2.

And a reed in his right-hand]
So do all those still, that submit not to the scepter of his kingdom, that
give him not full (...) over their souls.

Bowed the knee before him]
With ludibrious devotion: So do hypocrites to this day. King Richard the
second, when he was to be deposed, was brought forth in royal array, whereof
he (...) (...). (...).
was presently despoiled. Never was Prince so gorgeous with (...) glory, and
more grief. (...) (...).


Verse 30. And they spit upon him]
So does (...) still cast dirt and drivell into Christ's face. See the (...) on
Chap. 26. 67. Robert Smith, Martyr, in his examination before Bonner, made one
of his Doctors to say, that his breaden god must needs enter into the belly,
and so (...) into the draught. To which he answered: What derogation was it to
Christ, when the Jews spit in his face? Smith presently replied, If the Jews,
being his enemies, Act. and (...). (...). 15 30.
did but spit in his face, and we, being his friends, throw him into the
draught, which of us deserves the greatest damnation? (...).


And (...) him on the head]
(...) into the head: drove the (...) into his holy head with bats and blows,
as Basiliades the Duke of Russia, nailed an Ambassadors hat to his head, upon
some displeasure conceived against him. At the taking of Heydelberg, the
Spaniards took Monsieur Mylius, an ancient Minister (...), (...). (...).
and man of God, and having abused his daughter before his (...); they tied a
small cord about his head, which with truncheons Act. (...). (...). 874.
they wreathed about, till they squeezed out his brains. The Monks of (...)
roasted the Minister of S. Germain, till his eyes dropped out. And the Spaniards
suppose they show the innocent Indians great favor, when they do not, for
their pleasure, S. Fr. Drakes travels, (...). 53.
whip them with cords, scratch them with thorns, and day by day drop their
naked bodies with burning bacon. So very a devil is one man to another.

Verse 31. Put his own raiment on him]
Gods hand was in this, that all men seeing him to suffer in his own habit,
might acknowledge that it was very he, and not another that suffered in his
stead. Mahomet in his Alchoran speaks very honorably of Christ, except only in
two things. 1. He took up the Arrian heresy, to deny his Deity. 2. He denied
that he was crucified, but that some one was crucified for him. But what says
S. Peter? He his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, etc. 1
Pet. 2. 24.

They led him away]
Quite out of the City, Ut vera piaculavis victima and (...) pro nobis fieret,
Heb. 13. 12, 13. This was a mystery hardly understood by any of the faithful
before Christ: neither could we well have told what to make of it, but that the
(...) has there opened it to us, by the instinct of the holy Ghost. Let us
therefore (as he advises) go forth unto Act. 5. 41.
him without the camp, bearing his reproach, accounting it our Est and consu,
on is gloria, and gloriosa consusio. Ambr.
crown, as those Apostles did that rejoiced in their new dignity of (...) shame
for Christ's name. It was their grace to be so disgraced.

Verse 32. They found a man of Cyrene]
A stranger, coming out of the field toward Jerusalem, meets with an
unexpected (...), and follows Christ, which occasioned him to enquire into the
cause, and got him renown among the Saints. In like sort, the faithful
Christian (a stranger upon earth) comes out of the field of this world, with
his face set toward Sion; and meets with many crosses by the way. But all-while
he follows Christ, let him enquire into the cause, and the issue shall be
glorious.

Him they compelled to bear his crosse]
Not so much to ease Christ, who fainted under the burden, as to hasten the
execution, and to keep him alive till he came to it. See the Note on Joh 19. 17.

Verse 33. A place of a skull]
Here our thrice noble Conqueror would erect his trophies to encourage us to
(...) for him, if God call us thereto, in the most vile and loathsome places, as
also to assure us that his death is life to the dead.

Verse 34 They gave him vinegar, etc.]
Cold comfort to a dying man; but they did it in (...), q. d. Thou art a King,
and must have generous wines. Here Is for thee therefore. See the Note on John
19. 29. It were happy if this vinegar given our Savior, might melt our
adamantine hearts into sorrow.

Verse 35. Parted his garments]
Let us likewise suffer with (...) the spoiling of our goods, etc. Heb. 10. 34.
yea, the spoiling of our persons, to have our clothes also taken and torn off
(...) backs: Christ will say, Bring forth the best robe, ring, etc. If a
Heathen could say, when he saw a sudden shipwreck of all his wealth, Well
fortune, I see thy intent, thou would have me be a Philosopher: Should not a
Christian conclude, Surely Christ would have me look after heavenly, that thus
strips me of all earthly comforts?

Verse 36. They watched him there]
Lest happily he should get get away thence by a (...). But his time of getting
out of their hands was not yet come. Here hung for a while that golden censer
Christ's body; which through the holes that were made in it, as through chinks or
holes, fumed forth a sweet savor in the nostrils of his heavenly Father, Ephesians.
5. 2. such as draws all men to him, that have their senses exercised to
discern good and evil, Joh. 12. 32, Heb. 5. 14.

Verse 37. This is Jesus, the King of the Jews]
Pilate (by a special providence of God) intending nothing (...), gives Christ
a testimonial, and would not alter it, though solicited thereto. He did it to
be revenged on the Jews for their senseless importunity to have him condemn an
innocent, and withal, to (...) (...).
put Christ to an open shame, as a crucified King. Like as that A theist
Lucian, blasphemously calls our Savior, The crucified cousener, the modern Jews
contemptuously call him (in reference to his cross) The Woofe and the Warp.
And, at the sack of Constantinople, the Image of the Crucifix was set up by the
insolent Turks, and shot at with their arrows: and afterward in great (...)
carried about the Camp, as it had been in procession, those dead dogs railing
and spitting at it, and calling it, The God of the Christians. Ten thousand
Martyrs were crucified in the Mount of Ararath under Adrian the (...), (...)
hist. fell. (...).
crowned with thorns, and thrust into the sides with sharp darts, in contempt
of Christ. (...). and Mon.


Verse 38. Then were there two theeves]
So he was reckoned among the transgressors, Isa. 53. 12. A sinner, not by
(...) only, for he bare the sin of many (ib.) but by reputation also, Quasi
(...). (...) rex (...).
and therefore crucified in the midst (as the worst of the three, chief of
sinners) that we might have place in the midst of heavenly Angels, in those
walks of paradise, Zach. 3. 7. The one of those two thieves went railing to
hell (his crucifixion being (...) a typical hell to him, a trap-dore to
eternal torment) the other went repenting forth-right to heaven, living long
in a little time, and by his prayer making his cross a Jacobs ladder, whereby.
Angels descended to fetch up his soul. It is remarkable, and to our purpose
suitable, that Rabus reports, that when Leonard Caesar suffered Martyrdom at
Rappa, a little town in Bavaria, a certain Priest, that had by the law for some
villainous act deserved death, being led forth with him toward the place of
execution, cried out often, Ego ne quidem dignus sum, qui tibi in hac poena
associer, justo injustus. I am not worthy to suffer with thee, the just with
the unjust.

Verse 39. Reviled him, wagging their heads]
God took notice of Cains frowns, Genesis 4. 6. Miriams mutterings, Numb. 12. 2.
these men's noddings, Rabshakeh's lofty looks, Isa. 37. 23. (...) lowrings, Genesis
31. 2. and sets them upon record. He is jealous for Jerusalem with a great
jealousy. Zac. 1. 14. (and jealousy is very wakeful, hardly shall the sly
paramour avoid the husbands eye) if he see any indignity offered to his beloved
spouse, he will arise and play Phineas his part, as that Martyr said. The
virgin daughter of Sion, though she be but a virgin, has a champion that will
not see nor (...) her to be abused, Isa. 37. 22. See how he revileth her (...),
Isa. 57. 3, 4. But draw near hither, ye sons of the (...), the seed of the
adulierer and the whore, Against whom do ye sport your selves? Against whom
make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue? Are ye not children of
transgression, a seed of falsehood? Yea he gives encouragement to his Spouse,
in an holy scorn to despise and deride Isa. 37. 22, 23.
her deriders, shaking her head at them, (...) they do at her, and saying, Whom
have thou (...) head and blasphemed? etc. q d. Do thou know what thou have
done? etc.

Verse 40. And saying, Thou that etc.]
Dogs will be barking at the Moon (as these dead dogs do here at the (...) of
righteousness,) At peragit cursus (...) Diana suos. (...) goes on with the work,
nothing retarded by their jears and buffoneries. Didicit ille maledicere and
ego contemnere, said he in Tacitus, Non tantum habemus etij. P C. said Augustus
to the Senate. Die in Aug.
when they informed him of what such and such had said against him, we are not
at leisure to listen to every slight slander raised of us. And of Severus the
Emperor it is recorded, that his care (...). (...).
was, what was to be done by him, not what was said or censured of him. Do well
and hear ill, is written upon heaven gates, said that Martyr. Railers are to be
reckoned kill-Christs: words may more afflict then blows, Psalm. 42. 3, 10. As
with a murdering weapon in my bones, etc.

Verse 41. Likewise also the chief Priests]
Sick of an (...) the devils disease, they petulantly insult over our dying
Savior, with their Satanicall sarcasmes: which he answers with silence, and
by a brave composedness sets himself above the slight of the injurious claw.
Facile est in me dicere, cum non sim responsurus, says one. It is as
impossible to avoid, as necessary to contemn the lash of lewd tongues, bitter
tongues, and scurrilous invectives. Those ears that were wont to hear nothing
but Angelical hymns, are here filled with them, and he replies not. Princes
use not to chide when Ambassadors offer them undecencies, but deny them
audience.

Verse 42. We will believe him]
They would not: but rather have said, he had done it by the devils help; or
have searched the deyils skull to find out some other trick, to elude the
truth.

Verse 43. He trusted in God]
These were cruel mockings, as those were called, Heb. 11. 36. Nothing
troubled David more then to be hit in the teeth with his God: to have his
Religion laid in his dish, Psalm. 42. and 43. And it went to Jobs heart to hear
his friend Eliphaz (a godly man otherwise,) scoff him for his Religion, Job 4.
6. Is not thy fear (or thy Religion) become thy folly? Zeackiah feared more to
be mocked of the Jews, then the Caldees, Jer. 38. 9.

Let him deliver him now]
But what if he do not deliver him now, is he therefore no son? So they would
seem to argue: and so Satan would fain persuade the Saints when (...) a while
under the cross. But the Apostle assures us otherwise, Heb. 12. 6, 7, 8. See
my Love Tokens.

Verse 44. The thieves also]
Both of them railed at first, till one of them was converted by a miracle (for
it was one of those seven miracles wherewith Christ would honor the ignominy
of his cross.) Till then either they both reviled our Savior, or the better
of them seemed, at least by his silence, for a season to consent to the other.
In whose example we see, that every fool has a bolt, to shoot at afflicted
godliness. Every curre is ready to fall upon the dog that he sees worried:
and every passenger to pull a branch from a tree that is felled. But there is
no small cruelty in composing comedies out of the tragedyes of the Church: and
so, to draw blood from that back which is yet blue from the (...). 13.
hand of the Almighty. God threatens Edom for but looking upon Jacobs
affliction in the day of their calamity.

Verse 45. Darkness over all the land]
The Sun hid his head Sol non sert aspectun illum uni (...), (...) fine (...)
and (...).
in a mantle of black, as ashamed to behold those base indignities done to the
Son of righteousness, by the sons of men. This darkness some think was
universal: not only over all the land of Jury, but over the whole earth (and
so the text may be rendered.) Tiberius, say they, was sensible of it at Rome:
Dionysius A (...).
writes to Polycarpus, that they had it in Egypt. And another (...).
great Astronomer Ptolomy (if I mistake not) was so amazed at it, that he
pronounced, either nature now determines, or the God of nature suffers.

Unto the ninth hour]
In this three-houres darkness he was set upon by all the powers of darkness,
with utmost might and malice. But he foiled and spoiled them all, and made an
open show of them (as the Roman Conquerours used to do) triumphing over them
on his cross, as on his chariot of state, Colos. 2. 15 attended by his
vanquished enemies, with their hands bound behind them, Ephesians. 48.

Verse 46. Jesus (...) with a loud voice]
Therefore he laid down his life at his own pleasure: for by his loud outcry it
appears, that he could have lived longer, if he had listed, for any decay of
nature under those exquisite torments that he suffered in his body, but much
greater in his soul. That which for the present seems to have expressed from
him this doleful complaint was, the sense of his Fathers wrath in the darkning
of the body of the Sun over him: which though God causes to shine upon the
just and unjust for their comfort, yet was not suffered to shine upon him, for
those three sorrowful hours together. When Theedorus the Martyr was racked and
tortured by the command of (...). (...).
Julian the Apostate, an Angel, in the form of a young man, stood by him and
comforted him, wiping off his sweat with a fine linen cloth, and pouring cold
water on his vexed limbs. When Mr Saunders Martyr was examined before Steven
Winchester, he felt a most pleasant refreshing issuing from every part of his
body to his heart, and from thence ebbing and flowing to each part again.
William Hunten Martyr cried out at the stake, Act. and Mon. fol. 13^8.
Son of God shine upon me, and immediately the Sun shone out of a dark cloud
so full in his face, that he was constrained to look another way: whereat the
people mused, because it was so dark Ibid 1398.
a little before. And I my self was an eyewitness of a like answer returned
from heaven, to a like prayer made by a penitent malefactor executed at
Evesham in Worcestershier, many (...) (...) plus quam (...) (...) quam
derelinquere.
years since. But our Lord Christ was forsaken of all these creature comforts:
and (which was worse then all) of his Fathers favor to his present
apprehension; left forelorne and destitute for a time, that we might be
received for ever. Howbeit, perplexed though he were, yet not in despair;
persecuted, yet not 2 Cor 4. 8, ^.
forsaken, cast down, yet not destroyed. He could say My God in the (...)
midst of all, by the force of his faith, which individuateth God (as a Father
says,) and appropriateth him to a man's self. And Hilary has a good note,
which here comes in, not out of place. Habes conquerentem relictum se esse,
quia homo est: habes eundem profitentem Latroni in paradiso regnaturum, quia
Deus est: As man he cries out My God, my God, etc when, as God, he promises
paradise to the penitent thief.

Verse 47. This man calls for Elias]
A malicious mistake, a devilish sarcasme. Whiles darkness was upon them, they
were Psalm. 32. 9.
overawed and hushed; their mouths were haltered (as horses Mark 4 ^9.
must be, says the Psalmist, as the sea was by our Savior,) and (...).
held in with bit and bridle, lest they come near unto thee. But no sooner was
it light again, but they are at their old trade again; deriding our Savior and
depraving his words, as if forsaken of his hope in God, he had fled to Elias
for help: So when M^^ch. Adam in vita Cranm.
Cranmer, standing at the stake, cried out often, Lord Jesu receive my spirit,
a Spanish Monk that heard him, ran to a Nobleman there present and tells him,
that those were the words of one that dyed in great despair.

Verse 48. And filled it with vineger]
Sorrow is dry we say. This man of sorrows more to fulfill the Scriptures, then
for his own satisfaction, though extreme dry no doubt (for now was the Paschall
lamb a roasting in the fire of his Fathers wrath) he says, I thirst, and had
vinegar to drink: that we might drink of the water of life, and be sweetly
inebriated in that torrent of pleasure that runs at Gods right hand for
evermore, Psalm. 16. 11. See the Note on Joh. 19. 29.

Verse 49. Let us see whether Elias, etc.]
This mocking is the murder of the tongue, which therefore our Savior
suffered, ut nos illusori Satanae insultaremus, says one. It is reported of
Aretine, that by a longer custom of libellous and contumelious speaking
against men, he had got such a habit, that at last he came to diminish and
disesteem God himself. May not the same be made good of these malicious
miscreants?

Verse 50. Yielded up the Ghost]
Or, let go his spirit, viz. to God that gave it, to whom also he recommended
it, Luke 23. 46. teaching us what to do in like case. Our care herein may make
even a Centurion, a graceless person to glorify God saying, Certainly this
was a righteous man, verse. 47. When so great a clark as Erasmus dying with no
better words in his mouth then Ioh. Ma^^^ loc com.
Domine fac finem, fac finem, is but hardly thought of. How much more that
English Hubertus a covetous oppressor, who dying made this wretched
will-paroll: I yield my goods to the King, my body to the grave, my soul to the
devil?

Verse 51. The vail of the Temple was rent]
To show than there was an end of the Leviticall liturgy; and that now there
was free and open access for all Saints to the throne of Gods grace, for the
vail was a figure of the spiritual covering which was before the eyes of the
Church till Christ's coming.

And the earth did quake]
To work a heart-quake in the obstinate Jews, as in some it did: others of them
had contracted such an habitual hardness, such a hoof upon their hearts, as
neither ministry, nor misery, nor miracle, nor mercy, could possibly mollify.

And the rocks rent]
So they do, wherever Christ makes forcible entrance into any heart. I will
shake all nations, and then the desire of all nations shall come, Hag. 2. 7. A
man will never truly desire Christ, till soundly shaken. Gods shaking ends in
settling, he rents us, not to ruin, but to refine us.

Verse 52. And the graves were opened]
To show that death was now swallowed up in victory by life essential: like as
the fire swallows up the fuel, and as Moses his serpent swallowed up the
enchanted serpents.

And many bodies of the Saints]
To show that the (...), strings of death, which before bound them in their
(...), were now broken, and they enlarged to attend our Saviors resurrection.

Verse 53. And appeared unto many]
Not to converse again, as heretofore, with men, but to accompany Christ, that
raised them, into heaven; and to be as so many ocular (...) of Christ's
quickening power, whereby he shall also raise our vile bodies, and conform them
to his glorious body the standard, Phil. 3. ult.

Verse 54. Truly this was the Son of God]
i.e. A divine (...) fine (...), id est (...). (...). in loc.
man, a de my-god, as these Heathens reputed those in whom they beheld and
admired any thing above the ordinary nature of (...), and their expectation.
Natural conscience cannot but stoop and do homage to the image of God stamped
upon his people; as being afraid of that name of God whereby they are called,
Deuteronomy. 28. 10. There are that think that these soldiers, our Saviors
executioners, were truly converted by the miracles they (...) seen, according
to what Christ had prayed for them, Luke 23. 34. And it may very well be: like
as Paul was converted upon (...) Stevens prayer; as Justine Martyr and others
were, by behold. Justin. (...).
ing the piety and patience of the Primitive Christians, and as James Silvester
(...) at the Martyrdom of Simon Lalot at (...). He seeing the great faith and
constancy of that heavenly Martyr, was so compuncted with repentance (says Mr
Fox,) and fell into such despair of himself, that they had much ado Act. (...)
Mon. fol. 829.
to fasten any comfort on him, which all the promises of the Gospel: till at
length he recovered, repented, and with all his family, removed to the Church
of Genova: Christians have showed as glorious power (and have as good success)
in the faith of Martyrdom, as in the faith of miracles; working wonders
thereby, upon those that have sought and sucked their blood.

Verse 55. And many women were there]
More hardy then the Disciples, who all, save John, were fled and hid. Oh stand
(says a Divine,) and behold a little, with those devout women, the body of thy
Savior, hanging upon the cross. See him afflicted from top to (...). See him
wounded in the head, to heal our vain D. Suttons Disce mori.
(...). See him wounded in the hands to heal our evil actions. See him wounded
in the heart, to cure our (...) thoughts. See his eyes shut up, that did
enlighten the world: See them shut, that thine might be turned from seeing of
vanity. See that countenance so goodly to behold, spetted upon and (...), that
thy face (...) shine glorious as the Angels in heaven, etc. See the Note on,
Job. 19. 25.

(...) afar off]
Either out of womanly modesty, or (...) of faith; which, when it is in heart,
is able by its (...) to pull the very heart as it were out of hell, and with
(...) and conquest to look even death, and the devil in the (...); as we see in
Anne Askew, Alice Driver, and other brave women, that suffered stoutly for
Christ.

Verse 56. Among which was Mary Magdalen.]
Love is (...) as death: good blood will never belly it self. Mary also (...)
mother of Jesus was there, sitting with the sword through her (...), that old
Sime on had forehight her. See, (...). 19. 26, 27. with the Note upon that text.

Verse 57. A rich man of Arimathaea]
Not many such, '(...) there are any. Joseph was a counselor, a Senator, one
of the (...) or seventy Seniours. Christ finds friends in the (...)
tempestuous times and unlikely places; as in (...) and Neroes court. Some good
Obadiah, or One (...), to seek out Paul the prisoner, and refresh his bowels.
Serena the (...), Bucholo.
wife to Diocletian that bloody persecutour, was a Christian, and a great
friend to the true Religion. So was the Lady Anne (wife to our King Richard the
second,) a disciple of Wickliffe; whose books also she conveyed over into
Bohemia her country, whereby a good foundation was laid for the ensuing
Reformation. (...) of Gaunt showed himself a great favourer of Wickliffe: The
like did the Electour of Saxony for Luther. George Marquess of Brandenburg, in
a meeting of the Emperor and (...) Ausborough, zealously professed that he
would rather kneel (...). (...)
down presently in the presence of them all, and yield his head to be (...) off
by the executioner, then deny Christ and his Gospel.

Verse 58. He went to Pilate.]
It was time for him now or never to show himself, and to wax bold, Mark 15.
43. The Spaniards, Hist. of (...). of (...). (...).
they say, abhor dangers, never aduenturing upon hard enterprises, but aiming
to proceed securely. Christ's Disciples must speak and do boldly in the Lord,
(...), 14. 3. whatever come of it. Audendo Graeci pervenere Trojam. Alexander
never (...) any thing, but he conceived it might be done, and he did it.
Historians (...) most of his success, to his courage; and tell us, that having
a soldier of his own name in his army whom he knew to be a coward, he
commanded him either to change his name, or show his valor. So says Christ to
all (...) Joseph's and Nicodemusses; either play the men, or pretend (...) to me.

Verse 59. He wrapped it in a clean linen cloth]
Which (...) had bought new for the purpose, says St Mark, to his no (...)
(...). 15. 46.
cost: for linen in those days was precious, so that a handkerchief Nam (...)
setaba ex (...) muneri (...) and (...). Catul.
among even the Roman riotours, was a rich token, as appears out of the Poet.
Neither did this rich man loose his cost; for he is and shall be famous for it
to the worlds (...): though (...) body be not at leisure to do as Paleottus
Archbishop of Binony did, who wrote a great book of the shadow of Christ's body
(...) Joseph's new syndon; which was also commented upon by (...) Professor of
Divinity there.

Verse 60. And laid it in his own new tomb]
His own, (...) was now well warmed sweetened and sanctified by our (...) body,
against himself should be laid there; as afterward he (...) and probably was
too. A new tomb it was, and fit it should (...) for that virgin-body, or
maiden-corps, as one calls it, (...) and untainted. Besides, else it might have
been suspected, (...) not Christ but another arose; or if he, yet not by his
own, but by another virtue: like him who revived at the touching of the bones
of dead Elisha, 2 King. 13. Buried our Savior was. 1. (...) none might doubt
of his death. 2. That our sins might be buried with him. 3. That our graves
might be prepared and perfumed for us, as so many beds of roses, or delicious
dormitories, Isa. 57. 2. He was buried in Calvary, to note that he died for the
condemned: and in a garden, to expiate that first sin committed in the
garden: and in another man's sepulcher, to note that he died for other men's
sins, as some will have it. Helena, mother (...).
of Constantine the great, bestowed great cost in repairing this (...) of our
Savior, which the Heathens out of hatred to Christ had thrown down, and built
a temple to Venus on the same ground. And Jerusalem, that poor ruinous city,
being governed, by one of the Turks Sanzacks, is for nothing now more famous
Turk Hist. (...) (...).
then for the sepulcher of our Savior again repaired, and much visited by the
superstitious sort of Christians and not unreverenced by the Turks themselves.

And he rolled a great stone]
Either for an inscription to the sepulcher, or for more safety to the body, or
that the glory of the resurrection might be the greater, or all these together.

Verse 61. And there (...) Mary Magdalen]
Carefully watching where they laid the Lords body, that they might not leave
off their kindness to him living or dead, as she said of (...), Ruth 2. 20.
Heavy they were as heart could hold: yet not hindered thereby from doing their
duty to Christ. So Daniel, though sick, yet did the Kings business. Even
sorrow for sin, if it so exceed, as to disable us for duty, is a sinful
sorrow, and must be sorrowed for.

Verse 62. Now the next day that followed]
That is, on that high-day, that double Sabbath; they that had so often quarreld
Christ for curing on the Sabbath, request a servile work to be done, of
securing and sealing up the sepulcher. It is a common proverb, Mortui non
mordent, Dead men bite not. But here Christ, though dead and buried, bites and
beats hard upon these evil men's consciences. They could not rest the whole
night before, for fear he should get out of the grave some way: and so create
them (...) trouble. Scipio appointed his sepulcher to be so placed, as his
image standing upon it might look directly toward Africa: that being dead he
might still be a terror to the Carthaginians. And (...), an ancient King of
this Island, commanded his dead body to be embalmed, and put into a brazen
image, and so set upon a brazen horse over Ludgate, for a terror to (...)
Saxons. It is well known that Zisca, that brave Bohemian, charged his
Taborites, to flea his corpse, and head a drum with his skin; the sound whereof
as often as the enemies heard, they should be appaled, and put to flight. And our
Edward the first, adjured his son and Nobles, that if he died in his journey
into Scotland, they should carry his corpse about with them, and not suffer it
to be interred till they had vanquished the Usurper, and subdued the country.
Something like to this, the Prophet Isaiah foretells of our Savior (and we
see it here accomplished) when he says, In that day the root of Jesse shall
stand up for an (...) to Isa. (...). 10.
the people, and even his rest (or, as some read it, his sepulcher,) shall be
glorius.

Verse 63. Sir, we remember, etc.]
They that had forgotten so many sweet and savoury sayings of our blessed
Savior, and written them all in the sand, could remember (but for no good
purpose,) that which his Disciples could not so readily call to mind for their
good and comfort; no nor (...) it, when plainly told them, Mark 9. 32. The soul
should be as an holy Ark, the memory as the pot of Mannan, preserving holy
truths, for holy uses. But most men have memories like nets, that (...) go the
(...) water, catch nothing but sticks, and (...)-(...); or like sieves, that
retain the chafte, let go the good corn: like the creature Cervarius, that if
he but look back, forgets the meat he was eating, though never so hungry, and
seeks for new: Or (...) in (...), who never in all his life could get by heart
those three names of Homer, Ulisses and Achilles. Old songs, old wrongs, etc.
they can retain sufficiently; but in matters of God, their memories serve them
not.

This deceiver said]
Men (...) as they use. Quis tulerit (...)? who can endure to hear the devil
taxing God of envy, as he did to our first (...)? or these deceitful (...) the
Faithful and true witness, a deceiver, a cheater, (...).
one who does (...) an (...) of cosening men to their faces? for Eust ath. iu
Hom.
so the Greek word signifies. We must look to hear all that naught is, either
whiles alive, or when dead. (...) mor tuits, (...) in deum, cruci affigitur,
says Zanchy: and all because he pleased not, in all points, the (...) (...) M
(...), (...).
Lutherans.

Verse 64. Command therefore]
How fain would the devil by his (...) have kept Christ still in the grave,
when there they had him. But all in vain: for his resurrection was to be the
demonstration of his deity, Romans 1. 4. and the ground work of our safety, 1
Cor. 15 14. He turned therefore their counsel into foolishness, and in the
fight of so many armed witnesses, rose the third day, in despite of them,
breaking the bonds of death as easily, as Judge 36. 7.
Sampson did the (...) withs.

Least his Disciples come by night]
A most vain, and yet a most vexing fear, such as was that of Herod after he
had beheaded John Baptist: he thought he heard that holy head ever shouting and
crying out against him, for his cruelty. This is John Baptist, said he (when he
heard the fame of Jesus,) whom I have beheaded. Exodus 23. 28. I will send the
hornet, says God, before thee. What was that hornet, but the misgiving fear of
the Canaanites self condemning consciences, that haunted them perpetually? So
here.

Verse 65. Pilate said unto them]
He was willing to please both sides: and therefore condescends both to Joseph
of Arimathea for his burial, and to the Priests for securing the sepulcher.
(...) erat utpote qui ab omnibus gratiam inire cupie (...): quales quidam per
jocum placentas dixit. But if I yet please men, Gal. 1. 10.
says Paul, as once I did when I was (...) Pharisee, I am no more the servant
of Christ: He scorns that such (...) counter (...) should be found in his
followers. Mordecai will not crouch or curry (...), to dye for it. Micaiah will
not budge, though sure to kiss Colos. 2. 8.
the stocks for his stiffnesse.

Ye have a watch]
Appointed for the use and service of the Temple, a band of garison-souldiers
who had their captain, Act. 4. 1. and are here set to watch that true Temple
wherein the Godhead dwelt bodily, i. e. personally.

Verse 66. So they went and made the sepulcher sure]
And now they seemed to dance upon Christ's grave, as thinking themselves
cock-sure of him. So did those bloody tyrants of the Primitive times (who
proudly engraved upon pillars of marble, Nomine Christianorum deleto, qui Remp.
evertebant,) make no other reckoning, but to raze out the name of Christ from
under heaven. Therefore also they did not only constitute laws and
proclamations against Christians, but did engrave the same laws in tables of
brass; meaning to make all things firm for ever and a day. But he that sat in
heaven, and said, Yet have I set my King upon my Psalm. (...). 4. 6.
holy hill of Sion, laughed at them, Jehovah had them in derision. Look how
Daniel was innocently condemned, cast into the lions den, had the door sealed
upon him, and to see to, no hope or means of life was left him; and yet, by
Gods good providence, he came forth untouched, and was made a greater man then
ever: So our blessed Savior was innocently condemned, cast into the grave,
sealed up among the dead, and to common judgment left as out of mind: yet
early in the morning, at the time appointed by the power of his deity, he
raised himself from death, and gloriously triumphed over it and hell. Now
thanks be unto God 2 Cor. 2. 14.
which also causes us to triumph in Christ, having as prisoners of hope,
brought us out of the pit by the blood of the covenant, Zech. 9. 11, 12.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Verse 1. The first day of the week]
GReek, of the Sabbaths. One day of seven is due to God of necessity. This the
Scripture calls by an excellency the Sabbath, (...).
day without a difference: as if it were the eldest brother to all (...) days
of the week, which is called here and elsewhere Sabbath; in the plural, Psalm.
24. title, A Psalm of David. To this the Greek adds, Of the first day of the
week, which now is the Revel 1.
Christian Sabbath, called the Lords day, in honor of Christ, and in a
thankful remembrance of his resurrection. See the Note on, Joh. 20. 1.

To see the sepulcher]
To see what the Pharisees had done with the Lords body the day before (for
they knew they had been tampering, and feared the worst, as love is suspicious)
and to bring the spices, which by an easy error, they had prepared, Luke 24.
1. They knew not, belike, that Joseph and Nicodemus had been at that cost and
pains before them; neither did any of them consider that what they did herein
was superfluous, for that it was Act. 2.
impossible for Gods holy one to see corruption. But he is pleased to pass by
our well-meant weaknesses, where the heart is upright.

Verse 2. And (...), etc.]
The holy Ghost here calls for as great attention, as if we had been present
and seen it. Remember (says St Paul) that Jesus Christ of the seed of David,
was 2 (...). 2. 8.
raised from the dead, according to my Gospel. All the four Evangelists have
therefore punctually recorded it, that we may remember and ruminate it, as a
main remarkable.

There was a great earth-quake]
Pythagoras said the reason Nullam (...). (...) quam (...) rum. (...). l. 4.
(...). (...) domino, infernorum trepidatio commovetur. Hilar.
of earthquakes was, the meeting of the dead: An odd conceit. But the true
reason of this earthquake, was our Saviors rising from the dead, in despite of
infernal spirits, who therefore quaked as much as the earth did, as Hilary
has it. The earth shook both at Christ's passion, and at his resurrection:
Then, to show that it could not bear his suffering: Now, to show that it could
not hinder his rising.

Rolled back the stone]
As an officer sent to let Christ (...) of prison, without the keepers consent.

And sat upon it]
In contempt of all their weapons, which fell out of their hands for woe, at
the sight of the Angel. And as (...) mighty man when he sits down, shakes the
bench under him, so do these the earth.

Verse 3. His countenance was like lightening]
So that though he appeared in humane shape, yet it might easily appear that he
was more then a man: his visage showed his power, his habit his innocence, to
the terror of the keepers, and comfort of the women.

Verse 4. The keepers did shake]
And well they might, as coming to see they had born arms against God, and
were therefore obnoxious to his wrath. It is a fearful thing to fall into the
punishing hands of the living God here: How then will wicked men bear the
horror of the last day? When they shall have an angry God over them, hell
gaping beneath them, an accusing conscience within them, the world all on a
light fire about them, the elements melting like scalding lead upon them, the
good Angels testifying against them, Job 20. 27. the evil Angels waiting to
worry them, and hurry them to hell? Oh the unspeakable akings and quakings of
heart! the terrible apprehensions, the convulsions of spirit that shall ceize
and surprise them at that dreadful day!

Verse 5. Fear not ye]
As the wicked are forbidden to rejoice for joy as other (...), Hos. 9. 1. So
the godly to fear, so (...). 46. 2.
long as they have Christ by the hand; no, though the earth be removed and the
mountains cast into the midst of the sea. David Psalm. 23 3.
would not fear the shadow of death, the darkest side of death, death in its
most hideous and horrid representations, because God was with him: When
Manasseh, that faced the heavens in his prosperity, in trouble basely hides his
head among the bushes, and is 2 Chronicles. 33. (...)
therehence fet, and bound with fetters. These desperate soldiers run away as
dastards, when the women stand it out, and as true daughters of faithful
Sarah, they are not afraid with any (...). 1 Pet. 3. 6.


I know that ye seek Jesus]
God and his Angels know our goodness, why then should we hunt after men's
applause? Caesar hoc ipso veram laudem meruit, quod falsam contempsit, says
Lipsius: It should suffice us, to know, that our faith, how little soever seen
or set by, by the world, shall be found to praise, and honor and glory at the
appearing of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 7. The eclipfed Moon shall by degrees wade
out of the shadow.

Verse 6. He is not here]
q. d. You are much mistaken, and deserve to be chidden for your not crediting,
or at least, your not remembering, that he foretold you of his resurrection. All
which notwithstanding, Come see the place, etc. q d. believe your own eyes at
least. Hilaris est (...) and plena gaudio invitatio, says an Interpreter. What
marvel (...) though they departed with (...) for their faithlesnesse, and joy
for the good news the Angels had told, and showed them?

For he is risen]
Consentaneum est Phaenicem ante (...) annum Neronis, significasse
Resurrectionem Christi, and omnium credentium, ex morte recepta divinitus vita.
The (...) is a (...) Die in Nerone
emblem of the Resurrection.

Verse 7. And go (...)]
Angels are called seraphims for their burning zeal: and are said to be winged
creatures for their speediness in serving God and his people. Gabriel wearied
himself, (...) 9. 21.
as it were, with swift flight, to certify Daniel of his good acceptance in
heaven. And this Angel bids these women go quickly and carry the good news of
the resurrection. Neither God not Angels can abide oscitancy and dullness in
any. Tardis (...) (...). (...). to (...).
virtus non facile committitur, could the Heathen say.

Tell his Desciples]
And Peter with the first, Mark 16. 7. because he is most dejected (and it is
God that comfort those that are cast down, 2 Cor. 7. 6. the lion of the
tribe of (...) Sat is est prostrasse (...).
spares the prostrate prey) the rest are in their dumps, as well they may, for
deserting Christ; but Peter especially for denying him. Now therefore, that he
is in a wilderness of ploddings and perplexities, Christ speaks to his heart,
Hos. 2. 14 He loves to comfort those that are forsaken of their hopes.

Lo, I have told you]
q. d. Be gone now about your business: you have your full errand, and this is
all I have at present to say to you. These good women, at first afraid of the
Angel, are now hardly persuaded to depart from him: They could have been
content to have heard him further. How unspeakably delicious unto us shall be
that innumerable company of Angels, Heb. 12. 22. that world of Angels, as the
Hebrew Doctors call it, that Gnolam (...).
Panegyris or Cogregation-house of the firstborn enrolled in heaven as free
denisons? O praeclarum illum diem cum ad illud Cic. de (...).
animorum concilium caetumque proficiscar, etc. said the Heathen Orator.

Verse 8. And they (...) quickly]
According as they were bidden. A ready heart makes rid dance of Gods work, and
does it up quickly, as afraid to be taken with its task undone. Baruch repaired
earnestly, and had done quickly, (...) 3. 20. Alexander (...). (...).
being asked how he had so soon overrun so many countreies? answered roundly,
by making quick work, by dispatching, and not lingering long in a place.

With fear and great joy]
A strange composition, of two contrary passions: but frequently found in the
best hearts. Psalm. 2. 11. God loves at once (...) and fear.

Verse 9. Jesus met them]
En obedientiae praemium, timoris remedium, says Pareus. God still meets his
people in the use of his ordinances, showing them great and mighty things that
they knew not before, Ier. 33. 3.

Held him by the feet]
As those that would loose him no more, The Saints do still the same by faith;
clasping about Christ and (...) unto him, as it were by corporal contact.

Verse 10. Go tell my brethren]
Brethren still, though foully fallen, Ier. 3. 1. Infirmities discard us not,
if bewailed, disclaimed, set against.

Verse 11. Some of the watch came into the city]
God would have the point of the Resurrection well proved, for our better
(...), in so weighty a matter. The Priests were unworthy to hear of it by an
Angel: they shall hear of it therefore by the profane soldiers, who come in to
them much affrighted, and thunderstruck, as it were, and told them all. Now
the confession of an adversary is held in law to be the most certain
demonstration of the truth, that can be.

Verse 12. They gave large mony]
q. d. We know that you (...) are good fellows, and both love and lack money.
Now if you will but say thus and thus, you shall have a round sum paid you
down in ready cash, etc. And what will not such men say or do for money? Pecunia
(...) fecit, forma (...), jamilla promissio temerarios, says Aretius.

Verse 13. Stole him away while we slept]
If it were so, 1. Ye kept a good watch the while; and wanted some (...) to
slay you for sleeping. 2. If all asleep, who told you his (...) stole him? did
you sleep waking as lions do? or did they make (...) little noise that you
never heard them about it? as (...) Francis Drake, at Taur apasa in the
West Indies, found a Spaniard Cand (...). fol. (...).
sleeping securely upon the shore; and by him thirteen wedges of silver, which
he commanded to be carried away, not so much as once waking the man. Surely
here it was neither so (...) but the devil, who began at first his kingdom by
lying, and by lying still upholds it, set these fellows awork to say, as they
were taught, any thing for money though never so absurd and false. But money got
on this manner will prove aurum Tolosanum, burn in thy purse, and bring Gods
curse upon all thy substance.

Verse 14. We will persuade him, and secure you]
Hypocrites have enough, if they can collogue with men and escape the lash of
the law. God is not in all their thoughts, or they think (...). 14. 3.
they can persuade him, and secure themselves. Hence that overflow of sin,
through hope of impunity, and abundance of Atheism.

Verse 15. So they took the mony]
So sequacious are such men to sin, where any thing is to be got by it.
Balaam will venture hard for the wages of wickedness. Set but a wedge of gold
in sight, and (...), that could stop the Sun in his course, cannot stay Achan
from fingering it.

And this saying is commonly reported]
They were given up to believe this lie, because they received not the love of
the truth, that they might be saved, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. There are that sense it
otherwise. This saying is commonly reported; that is, this (...) imposture of
the Priests and soldiers, wretchedly conspiring to cosen the world with such a
base lie, is sufficiently known for a piece of knavery, and is so resented to
this day. Think the same of the Trent-conventicle, carried by the Pope, and his
agents, with so much finenesse, etc. but so as now, all is come out to their
eternal infamy.

Verse 16. Went away into Galilee]
They had seen him twice or thrice before at Jerusalem: yet took a long journey
here into Galilee to see him again. Whom having not seen ye love, 1 Pet. 1. 8.
Austins wish was to see Christum in carne. But if we had known Christ after the
flesh, yet says St Paul, henceforth should we know him so no more, 2 Cor. 5.
16. since the comfortable presence of his spirit, is better then his corporal
presence, and more to our benefit, Ioh. 16. 7. By this it is, that though now
we see him not, yet believing, we rejoice with unspeakable and glorious joy, 1
Pet. 1. 8. and must not think much of a journey, (...) though it be not to a
mountain in Galilee, but to the heavenly hills from whence comes our help, to
see the King in his (...). 33. 17.
beauty, Christum regem videre in decore suo, which was Bedes wish.

Verse 17. They worshipped him, but some doubted]
Even whiles they worshipped, they doubted: yet was not their worship rejected.
The Lord knows his still, 2 Timothy 2. 19. But they know not him still, as here
in this text: howbeit they are known of him, Gal. 4. 9. and their whole way
both known and approved, Psalm. 1. 6.

Verse 18. All power is given to me]
Christ premiseth his power, and promises his presence, the better to persuade
them to set upon his work, his great work, of subduing the world to the
obedience of the faith. Better may this King of Kings say, then that King of
Spain, Sol mihi semper lucet; for he is Catholic (...).
Monarch: The kingdoms of this world (and of the other too) are become the
kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and (...) shall reign for ever and
ever, Revel. 11. 15. As for the Saints, how can they be but in an
all sufficiency, since all is theirs, they being Christ's, and Christ being Gods?
what boldness may they take to go to Christ, as Jacob did to Joseph, when he
understood that the sway of the whole land was in his hand, etc? See the Note
on, Matthew. 11. 27.

Verse 19. Go ye therefore]
In this my strength, as Gideon did against the Midianites; and, though but a
barley cake, course Judge. 7. 13.
and contemptible, yet shall ye overthrow the worlds tents, yea the strong
holds of Satan: though you have but lamps and (...) in your hands, yet shall ye
acheive great matters The Apostles were those white horses whereupon the Lord
Christ (...), went forth conquering and to conquer. Britannorum (...) (...).
advers. Iudeos. cap. 7. (...). (...). page 425.
Romany loca, Christo patuerunt, says (...). The Burgundians, much afflicted
by the Hunnes, sled to (...) the God of the Christians: whom after a long
dispute, they (...) World encomp. page 59.
to be a great God, and a great King above all Gods. St Francis Drake tells us
of twelve Martyrs burnt for Religion at Lima in Mexico, not two months before
his coming thither. And he that set forth New-Englands first fruits, assures us
of some of those Natives, that being converted to the faith, lived (...), and
died comfortably.

(...) all nations]
(...). Disciple them, make them (...).
Christians first, and then teach them to observe, etc. verse. 20. Disciputate.
as in Baptism they have promised: for otherwise it was pity that font-water
was ever spilt upon their faces. In the kingdom of Congo in Afrike, diverse of
those Heathens, by the (...) of the Portugals, arriving there, were content to
become Christians, and to be baptized: allowing of the principles of Religion,
and professing Christ, till the Priests pressed them to lead their lives
according to their profession: which the most Abois his Geog. page 79.
part of them in no case enduring, they returned back again to their
Gentilisme. As for the (...) Converts in Mexico, they so little remember their
covenant made with Christ in Baptism, that (...). Enq.
many times they forget (...) very names, soon after they have been baptized.

Baptizing them into the name of, etc.]
That is, consecrating them unto the sincere service of the sacred (...), and
confirming them by this holy Sacrament, in the faith of the forgiveness of
their sins, and in the hope of life eternal. This is the end, use and efficacy
of Baptism: which, Piscator says, few of the Fathers rightly understood:
Those Popish Asles certainly did not, who moved this foolish question, An
asinus bibens ex baptismo (...). (...). (...). (...). page (...).
bibat aquam baptismi, and sic asinus dicendus sic baptisatus? Pity but these
questionites had been present, when the young scollar reading publicly the
fifth of the first of Corinthians for probation-sake, at the College of
Bamberg, when he came to that passage, Expurgate vetus fermentum, etc. Sicut
estis azymi. He, not understanding the word Azymi, read (...) (...).
Sicut estis asini. The wiser sort of Prebendaries there present said among
themselves, Cum a sapientioribus nolumus hujusmodi audire, a pueris audire
cogimur. Children and fools usually tell the truth.

Verse 20. To observe all things]
Our obedience must be entire; as for subject, the whole man, so for object,
the whole law, That perfect law of liberty. The Gospel requires, that in our
judgments we approve, and in our practices prove, what that good and holy, and
acceptable will of God is. Those be good Catholics, says Austin, qui and
fidem integram (...), and bonos mores. But let carnal gospellers either add
practice, or leave their profession: renounce the devil and all his works, or
else renounce their baptism. As Alexander the great bad one Alexander a coward
in his army, change his name or be a (...).

I am with you alway]
viz. To preserve you from your enemies, prosper you in your enterprises, and
to do for you whatsoever heart can wish, or need require. When Christ says I
will be with you, you may add what you will: to protect you, to direct you, to
comfort you, to carry on the work of grace in you, and in the end to crown you
with immortality and glory. All this and more, is included in this precious
promise.

Laus Deo.
A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the Gospel according to Saint MARK.
CHAP. I.
Verse. 1. The beginning of the Gospel, etc.]
THe History of our Saviors life and death, Saint Mark is recorded to have
written at the request of the Romans: In the Latin tongue say Eusebius. Hist.
Eccles. l. 2. c. 15 ex Clemente. Widman stad. Epist (...) dic. (...). Test.
(...).
some (who pretend to have seen the Original Copy at Venice) but its more
likely in Greek, a tongue (then) very well known to the Romans also. He begins
with John's Ministry, passing over Christ's birth and private life for brevity
sake (as it may seem) though Papists feign many idle relations thereof, and so
expose us to the jears of Jewish and Turkish miscreants. There are that make
Mark an Epitomator of Matthew. But forasmuch as he neither begings like
Matthew, nor keeps the same order, but relates some things that (...) has
not, and other things much larger then Matthew has them; judicious Calvin
thinks Calvin. (...).
that he had not seen Saint Matthews Gospel, when he wrote his (as neither had
Saint Luke seen either of them:) but that, being acted by the same spirit, they
agree so harmoniously and happily; an undoubted argument of the Divinity of the
Scripture, which therefore a Greek Father (...) (...), every way suitable
Nazianz.
to its self.

Verse 2. As it is written in the Prophets]
Esaias and Malachi: so that there was no cause why that dead Dog Porphyry should
here bark and blaspheme, as if this testimony should be falsely fathered on all
the Prophets, when Esaias only was the Author of it.

Behold I send my Messenger before thy face]
Malachi says, Before my face, in the person of Christ: to show that He and
the Father are One.

Verse 3. The voice of one crying]
Here Mark begins the Gospel, at the preaching of the Baptist, which the
Author to the Hebrews begins at the preaching of Christ. Heb. 2. 3. But that
is only to prove that so great was our Saviors glory in his Miracles that it
matcheth, yea surpasses that of the Angels, those Ministers of the Law.

Verse 4. John did `Baptise in the Wildernesse]
Like as at the promulgation of the Law, the people were commanded to wash
their garments, and sanctify themselves: so at the first publication of the
Gospel, to wash their hands, and cleanse their hearts; and, in testimony of
profession thereof, to believe and be baptized for remission of sins.

Verse. 5. All the Land of Judaea]
That is, a great sort of them: but John quickly grew stale to them, John 5.
35. Principium fervet, medium tepet, exitus alget. Weak-Christians easily fall
off.

Verse 6. And John was clothed, etc.]
Elias also was a rough hairy man. Those Worthies, of whom the world was not
worthy, wandered about in Sheeps skins and Goats skins, Heb. 11. but they were
like the Ark, Goats hair without, but pure Gold within: or like Brutus his
staff, Cujus intus (...) aurum corneo (...).
(...). (...) (...) cared for a better outside, (...) comp. (...).
then a rugge-gown girt close about him, yet his inside was most rich.

He did eat Locnsts]
Good meat (to those there at least) though course, and easily come by.
Tartarians eat the carrion-carcasles of Horses, Camels, Asses, Cats, Dogs, yea
when they stink, and Peach. Valley.
are full of Magots; and hold them as dainty, as we do Venison.

Verse 7. I am not worthy]
So Jacob cried out of old: So the Centurion, Matthew. 8. So the Prodigal, Luke
15. So Peter, Luke 5. 8. So Augustine, Domine, (...) dignus quem tu diligas. I
am not worthy of thy love, Lord.

Verse 9. In those dayes]
When the people flocked so fast to John; that they might not mistake him for
the Messiah, and that his Baptism might be the more famous.

Verse 10. He saw the Heavens opened]
The visible Heavens: so that the Baptist saw something above the Stars: So did
Stephen; so could Christ when he was upon the earth. It is a just wonder that
we can look up to so admirable an height of the starry-sky, Burton of
Melancholy.
and that the eye is not tired in the way: Some say it is five hundred years
journey to it. Other Mathematicians tell us, that if a stone should fall from
the eighth Sphere, and should pass every day an hundred miles, it would be 65
years or more, before it would come to ground. (...).


Verse 11. In whom I am well pleased]
And in him with us, Gratificavit. vu'gat.
whom he has made gracious or Favorites in him the beloved One, Ephesians. 1. 5.

Verse. 12. The spirit drives him]
That is, suddenly carries him (who was most (...) to go) as that legal
Scapegoat, Number. 16. into the Wilderness; and there permitted him to be
tempted, but supported him under the temptation, that he came safe off again.
Sancti (...) nequaquam (...), sed toti (...) imperio. The Saints are as gods.
Beck and Check.

Verse 13. And was with the wild beasts]
Unhurt by them: as Adam was in the state of integrity. These fell creatures
saw in Christ the perfectimage of God; and therefore (...) him as their Lord,
as they did Adam before his fall, See Job 5. 21, 22.

Verse 14. Jesus came into Galilee]
To decline Herod's rage. And whereas it may seem (...) Savior herein (...) a
wrong course, (...) Herod was Governor of (...); we must know, that the
Pharisees were the men that delivered up John to Herod, Mat. 17. 11, 12. And
that, but for them, there was no great (...) of Herod.

Verse 15. And (...), The time is fulfilled]
These were Calvin. in Isaiam.
four of our Saviors Sermon-heads. The Prophets of old were wont to set down
some short notes of their larger discourses to the people, and (...) them to
the doors of (...) Temple, till the people had read them. And then they were
taken down by the Priests, and laid up for the use of posterity.

Verse 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.]
See the Notes on Matthew. 4. 18. etc.

Verse 21. He entered into the Synagogue, and taught]
This is noted as remarkable in Saint Mark, that he often inculcateth that our
Savior taught.

Verse 22. And they were astonished]
If it could be said of Dr. D. Hall's Epist. (...): cad. 1. Ep. 7.
Whitaker, that no man ever saw him without reverence, or heard him without
wonder; How much more of Christ, since grace was poured into his lips? Psalm. 45.
2.

As one that had authority]
See thou a Preacher deliver the Word with singular authority (as Paul, we
believe therefore we speak) esteem him very highly for the works sake. The
Corinthians are checked, for that they were unruly, and would reign without
Paul, 1 Cor. 4.

And not as the Scribes]
Frigidly and jejunly. Did thou believe thy self, thou would never plead
thy clients cause so coldly and carelessly, said Cicero to his adversary.

Verse 23. With an unclean spirit]
Gr. In an unclean spirit. An unregenerate (...).
man is in maligno positus, as St. John says of the world. He is inversus
decalogus: whole evil is in man, and whole man in 1 John 5. 19.
evil, till at last (without grace) he be satanized and transformed into a
breathing Devil. By reason of the inhabitation of unclean spirits, our spirits
have in them Trenches Cages, Forts and strongholds of Satan, 2 Cor. 10. 4.

Verse 24. What have we to do with thee?]
Not to do with Christ, and yet vex a servant of Christ? Could the Devil so
mistake him, whom he confessed? It is an idle misprision, to sever the sense of
an injury done to any of the members, from the head.

Thou Jesus of Nazareth]
Though the Devils confessed Christ to be the Holy one of God, yet they call
him Jesus of Nazareth; to nourish the error of the multitude that thought he
was born there, and so, not the Messiah. Neither did the Devils cunnning fail
him herein, as appears, John 7. 44.

Art thou come to destroy us?]
Before the time: such is the infinite goodness of God, that he respits even
wicked men and spirits, the utmost of their torments.

I know thee who thou art]
This he spoke, not to honor Christ, but to deingrate him, as commended by so
lying a spirit. Laudari ab illaudato, non est laus, says Seneca.

The holy one of God]
Some rest in praising the Sermon, and speaking fair to the Preacher. The
Devil here did as much to Christ, to be rid of him. So did Herod. Mark. 6. 20.

Verse 25. Hold thy peace]
Capistrator, be thou haltered up, or (...).
muzzled. Christ would not hear good words from an evil mouth. High words
become not a fool, says Solomon. The Lepers lips should be covered according
to the Law.

Verse 26. And when the unclean spirit had torn him]
So he will serve all that he is now at inn with, as Braford has it. You are
the Sermon. of Rep. p. 70.
Devils birds (says he to all wicked ones) whom when he has well fed, he will
broach you, and eat you, chaw you and champ you, world without end, in eternal
woe and misery.

And cried with a loud voyce]
But said nothing: according to verse 25.

He came out of him]
With as ill a will goes the worldlings soul Job 27. 8.
out of his body. God tears it out, as Job somewhere has it, death makes
forcible entry.

Verse 27. For with authority]
As he taught, so he wrought with (...).
authority. The same word is used verse 22.

Verse 30. Sick of a fever]
Which the Greeks denominate of (...).
the heat that is in it: the Germans of the cold. See the Note on Matthew. 8. 14.

Verse 32. When the Sun did set]
And the Sabbath was ended; for till then many held it not lawful.

Verse 34. Suffered not the Devils to speak]
For what calling had they to preach the Gospel?

Verse 35. And in the morning, etc.]
The fittest time for prayer, or any ferious business. Therefore not only
David, Psalm 5. verse 3. and other Saints, but also heathens chose the morning
cheifely for Sacrifice: as Nestor in Homer, the Argonauts in Apollonius. The
Persian Magi sang Hymns to their gods at break of day, and worshipped the
rising Sun. The Pinarii and Politii sacrificed every morning and evening to
Hercules, upon the great Altar at Rome, etc.

Verse 38. Let us go into the next Townes]
The neighboring (...).
Buroughs, such as were between a City and a town. Though secret prayer were
sweet to our Savior, yet he left it to preach and profit many.

Verse 40. Beseeching him, etc.]
Morbi (...) officina, says Ambrose. We are best, when we are worst, says
another. Therefore Camden.
King Aluored prayed God to send him always some (...).

Verse 41. Touched him]
Impensae gratiae and bonitat is signum and (...), says Calvin. And so it is
of his infinite goodness, that he will touch our menstruous (...), take at our
hands our polluted performances.

Verse 45. Could no more openly enter]
For press of people, (...) was so frequented, that he was forced to withdraw.

CHAP. II.
Verse 1. And it was noysed]
THe Sun of rightcousnesse could as little lie hid, as the Sun in Heaven.

Verse 2. Many were gathered together]
Erasmus observes, that Origin, in his Sermons to the people, chideth them for
nothing more, then for their thin assemblies to hear the Word, and for their
careless hearing of that, which they ought to attend to (...). in vita Orig.
operib. praefix.
with utmost diligence: recte judicans, says he, hinc osse (...) profectum aut
defectum.

Verse 3. Which was borne of foure]
apprehensis quatuor (...), vivo cadaveri (...). Wicked men are living ghosts,
walking Sepulchers of themselves. Bring them to Christ that they may be cured.

Verse 5. When he saw their faith]
By their works; as the goodness of the promised Land was known by the grapes
and fruits, brought back by the Spies. In all our good works, Christ's eye is
upon our faith, without which, it is impossible to please God.

Verse 6. But there were certain of the Scribes]
Little do (...) know when they preach, what hearers sit before them. (...) fell
est, quod (...). Some of our hearers carry fell in aure, as its said of some
creatures, they carry their gall in their ears.

Verse 7. Who (...) forgive sins, etc?]
Man may remit the (...), God only the transgression.

Verse 8. Perceived in his spirit]
That is, by his Deity, as 1 Timothy 3. 16. Heb. 9. 14. Or, by his own spirit, as
1 Pet. 3. 8. not by inspiration, as 2 Pet 1. 21.

Verse 10. Has power on earth]
Christus (...) divino omnia (...), non injusta aliqua virtute ac tyrannica.
Christ did (...) in his Fathers right, and not perforce.

Verse 11. I say unto thee, arise]
See here our Saviors letters testimonial, whereby he approves his authority
and power to be authentic. Ye are our Epistle says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 2.

Verse 13. And he taught them]
To teach us, that nothing can be better and more useful to the Church, then
wholesome teaching; which therefore our Savior never neglected. It was grown to
a Proverb at Constantinople, Better the Sun should not shine, then Chrysostom
not preach.

Verse 14. And as he passed by he saw Levi]
Our calling is of free grace, Ezeck. 16. 6. Esaias 65. 1. The Scribes and
Pharisees are let alone, and this Publican called to the work.

And he arose and followed him]
Leaving his gainful trade, and following his own ignominy, ruin, death.
Nihil hic disputat (...) vivere debeat: faith fears no famine: Christ is an
universal Good, an All in all.

Verse 15. Many Publicans and (...) sat also]
All at Matthewes charge; and he thought it well bestowed, to bring them to
Christ. So Paul, being himself assured of salvation, could do or suffer any
thing for the salvation of his poor countrymen, Romans 8. 38, 39. with Romans 9.
1, 2.

Verse 16. They said unto his Disciples]
They durst not say it Horat. de Arts. Poet.
to Him: Where the hedge is lowest the beast breaks over. The Devil, as the
Poet -- quae desperate reniteseere posse, (...). What he hopes not to effect he
never attempts.

Verse 17. He says unto them]
Though not for their sakes (for he knew it was to no purpose) yet for his
other hearers sakes, he makes Apology, Jer. 3. 14, 15. God often gives a Pastor
after his own heart, for a few that are to be converted.

Verse 18. The Disciples of John and of the Pharisoes]
Beza notes that only here and Matthew. 22. 16. Luke 5. 24. is mention made in
the Gospel of the Pharisees Disciples; unhappy doubtless in such perverse
Tutors, somewhat a kin to Protagoras of whom Plato writes that he bragged of
this, that whereas he had lived threescore years, he had spent forty of them in
corrupting of Plato in Menone.
youth.

Verse 19. While the Bridegroom is with them?]
Christ is (...) in ore, melos in aure, jubilum in cord. There cannot be but
music in his Temple.

Verse 20. Then shall they fast]
Novices are not to be tied to the austerity of Religion. The Pharisees are
revived in the Anabaptists, qui initiatis Christo ne risum quidem mediocrem
admittunt, (...). in Mat. 9. 15.
says Calvin. Capistranus the Minorite, sent by the Pope into Germany and
other Countries Anno 1453. to preach obedience to the Sea of Rome, gat a great
deal of credit to his corrupt doctrine, by such a Pharisaicall severity. Sed
tales Doctores meretur mundus suo fastidio veritatis, says one, they that will
not receive the (...) in Chronolog.
truth in love, are left to the efficacy of error. 16, 17.

Verse 21. No man seweth]
See the Notes on Matthew 9. 16, 17.

Verse 25. Have ye never read?]
Satis salse q. d. Ignorant is adhuc, quod adeo notum and tritum. Miror ego
vestram vel inscitiam, vel ignaviam. Its a shame for you, that you are yet so
stupid, or so stubborn.

Verse 26. And to them that, etc.]
Though meaner men (...) David.

Verse 27. The Sabbath was made for man]
That is, for man's safety and advantage. As he would be undone without it, he
would grow wild, and forget God: so, if it stand in the way of his safety, it
is not to be observed; as if an enemy then assault us, (...) Cassius.
we may fight with him. Pompey could never have taken Jerusalem, but that the
superstitious Jews refused to defend themselves on the Sabbath: which when he
observed, he then, on that day most feircely assaulted them and took their City.

Verse 28. Therefore the Son of man]
This Lordship taking beginning in Christ, seems to be, from him, derived to
all that are in Christ. As Psalm. 8. 4, 5. compared with Heb. 2. 6, 7. Whatever
David speaks of man, is applied to Christ, and so is proper to the Saints, by
virtue of their union with Christ.

CHAP. III.
Verse 1. There was a man there, etc.]
A Fit object inciteth and should elicite our bounty. Where God sets us up an
Altar, we should be ready with our Sacrifices, with such Sacrifice God is well
pleased, Heb. 13. 16.

Verse. 2. And they watched him]
So carnal men do still (...).
watch and pry into professors and their conversation, 1 Pet. 3. 2. curiously
observing what they may catch and carp at. But it is a brave thing to thrattle
envy, to stop an (...) mouth, to deny them occasion to blaspheme, as Christ
did; to lead convincing lives, as Act. and Mon
Bradford and (...) did, whom neither their friends could sufficiently praise,
nor their foes find any thing to fasten on.

Verse 3. Stand forth]
That the miracle might be notified, and God the more glorified. It is a
dishonor to a parent to hang his picture in a dark corner: so here, we should
show forth the virtues of him who has called us, 1 Pet. 2. 9.

Verse 4. To do good or to do evill]
Not to do good then, as there is opportunity, is to do evil. Qui non, cum
potest, servat, occidit. Non faciendo nocens, sed patiendo fuit, it is said of
the Emperor Claudius. Not robbing only, but the not releiving of the poor, was
the rich man's ruin, Luke 16. passive wickedness is taked in some of the
Churches, Rev. 2. and 3.

To save life]
Gr. soul, for man, and man for the body of man. (...).
So Psalm. 16. Thou will not leave my soul in the grave, that is, my body, as
Piscator senseth it.

Verse 5. With anger, being greived]
A sweet mixture of sinlesse passions. It is difficult to kindle, and keep
quick the fire of zeal (...). simul dolens.
without all smoke of sin.

Verse 6. With the Herodians]
Whom yet they hated in their hearts; but they can easily comport and comply to
do Christ a mischief; as concerning that Christ pertained to Herod's (...).

Verse 8. From beyond Jordan]
This Country by Josephus is (...).
called Peraea, as Ultrajectum in Germany.

Verse 9. Lest they should throng him]
Gr. afflict him, press, or pinch him, as they did: a piece of his passion,
verse 10.

Verse 10. As many as (...) plagues]
Gr. stripes, scourgings. (...)
Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth with lesser and lighter afflictions, and
scourges every son, etc. with hard and heavy Heb 12. 6.
judgments, as plagues, banishments, persecutions, etc. Oh the Non vulgares
morbi sed saeviores, and (...), qui quasiclamitant (...) and (...).
bloody wailes that God has left on the back of his best children!

Verse 11. Thou art the Son, etc.]
The matter is well amended since Satan's first onset upon Christ. Then it was,
If thou be the Son of God. The same power, when he lists, can change the note
of the Tempter to us.

Verse 13. And calls unto him whom he would]
Nec volentis, nec volantis, sed Dei miserantis, as a Nobleman, after Paul,
gave it for his Motto. It is not in him that wills nor in him that runs,
though he run as fast as a bird can fly: but in God that shows mercy.

Verse 14. That they should be with him]
As his household servants, more happy herein then those of Solomon. Christ has
many retainers, few fast and faithful servants that follow him in the
regeneration. There are those that will wear his livery, but serve themselves.

Verse 16. And Simon he surnamed Peter]
Not now, but after that famous confession of his, Matthew. 16.

V. 17. Boanerges]
Sir. Benai-regeschi, filii fragoris. Naz. says (...).
they were so called for the bigness of their voice. Farellus was famous for
his loud speaking: when the envious Monks rang the Bells to drown his voice as
he was preaching at Metis, ille (...) ad ravim usque vocem intendit, nec vinci
se a strepitu ullo passus Melch. Adam. in vita 114.
est. But there may be a great deal of force in a low language. Basil was
said to thunder in his preaching, lighten in his life. Hierom was called Fulmen
Ecclesiasticum, Athanasius Magues and Adamas. A Loadstone for his sweetness,
and an Adamant for his stoutnesse. The Apostles had fiery tongues, but yet
cloven. Barnabas and Boanerges, The son of Consolation and of Thunder make a
good mixture. The good Samaritan poures in wine to search the sores, and oil
to supple them. Discretion must hold zeal by the heel, as Jacob did his
brother: these two must be as the two Lions that supported Salomons Throne. He
that has them, may be a Moses for his meekness, and a Phineas for his
fervor. It was a good caution that Oecolampadius gave Farellus, Evangelizatum,
(...). Epist.
non maledictum missus, etc. laudo zelum, (...) non desideretur mansuetudo,
and. Thou art sent, not to rail, but to reveal holy truths in meekness of
wisdom.

Verse 18. And Bartholomew]
See the Note on Matthew 10. 3.

Verse 19. And they went into the house]
But could not rest Matthew. 12. 22.
in the house: for a demoniack was brought home to him, and the multitude met
to hear, and Christ gratified them, with the neglect of himself. Now to all his
he says, as Abimelech did to his soldiers, What ye have seen me do, make
haste and do Judge 9 48.
as I have done.

Verse 21. They went out to lay hold on him]
Some read, to lay hold on the multitude, as mad because fo eager and
earnest, that they left not our Lord liberty for his necessary repose and
repast. But if it be meant of Christ, his mother also may seem to have been in
the common error, Uerse 31.

Verse 22. By the Prince of Devils, etc,]
A devilish blasphemy, occasioned perhaps, by the former calumny of his
kinsmen. What advantages make our adversaries of our smaller differences? Every
subdivision is a strong weapon in the hand of the contrary party.

Verse 23, 24, 25, etc.
See the Note on Matthew. 12. 25, 26.

Verse 29. Has never forgivenesse]
and yet Bellarmine teaches, that the sin against the holy Ghost may be
forgiven, Lib. 2. de poenitentia cap. 16. But it may be he was of their opinion
Dan. Hist. of Engl. fol. 163.
that taught here in England in the reign of Henry 3. that to question the
Popes sanctions, was the sin against the holy Ghost.

Verse 31. Then came his brethren]
Here the Evangelist returns to the History he had begun to set forth, verse
21.

Verse 33. Who is my mother, etc.]
Bishop Ridley is likewise Acts and Mon. fol. 1559.
said to have been very kind to his kinsfolks, yet not bearing with them any
otherwise then right would require.

CHAP. IV.
Verse 2. He taught them many things by Parables.]
MInisters must like wise fetch comparisons from things most familiar, and best
known to their hearers: as the Prophets from when they have to deal with the
Egyptians, from flocks and herds; when with the Arabians, from Merchandise and
Navigation; when with the Tyrians and Sidonians, etc. And as our Savior from
fishing, when he deals with fishers: from sowing when with seedsmen, etc.

Verse 3. Hearken, behold]
Christ well knew the fickleness of men's spirits, and how every small matter
calls them off, when most earnestly set to hear: See the Note on Matthew. 13. 3.

Verse 4, 5, etc.]
See the Notes on Matthew. 13. 3, 4, 5, etc.

Verse 8. Fruit that sprang up and increased]
This is spoken in (...).
opposition to the thorny ground, where the thorns grow up together with the
corn, and overtop it: Whereas the good ground brings forth fruit increasing,
and ascending: and although it have many thorns, yet grace is superior to
corruption, and keeps it under.

Verse 11. Unto them that are without]
That are in the Church, but not of the Church. She has her hang-byes, that
are as Wens or botches to the body.

Verse 12.]
See the Note on Matthew. 13, 14, etc. (...) alias (...).


Verse 16. Immediately they receive it with gladnesse]
As children run away with sweetmeats. But the new birth is seldom without
pain, and without a flux of mortification. Leap-Christians prove Apostates.

Verse 21. Is a candle brought]
Or lighted, q. d. Take the benefit of the light of the Gospel, suffer it not
to stand under a bed or bushel: for there is nothing hid, viz. in our hearts
but it shall be opened, viz. by the power of the word most plainly. Lex, lux,
the word is a curious critic, Heb. 4. 12.

Verse 24. Take heed what you hear]
As the husbandman is very curious in the choice of his seed.

Verse Ibid. Shall more be given]
sc. If you bring with you a (...) of your former hearings. He that hears as he
ought, every time he hears he grows something more rich: he picks up the
Gospels pearls, and presents them to God the next time, that he may have more.
The good soul cannot be without some daily comings in from Christ.

Verse 25. For he that has to him shall be given]
Grace grows by exercise, and impairs by idleness: As that side of the teeth
John 1.
which is least used in chewing, is apt to have more rhume settle upon Romans 1.
it. Though both arms grow, yet that which a man uses, is the stronger and
bigger: so is it in grace. God gives grace for grace, and his righteousness
is revealed from faith to faith: that is, from a less measure to a greater.
Whereas it is easy to observe an Eclipse and decay of Gods gifts in them that
use them not, till at last they may say with Zedekiah, When went the spirit of
God from me?

Verse 26. So is the Kingdom of God]
God sows and reaps in the Church, though none observes it, and has his fruit
in due season.

Verse 27. And should sleep]
Ministers must rest secure of the success of their endeavors, having
diligently done their duties. The Word may work many a year after: as they say
of the Elephant, that she brings not forth till thirteen years after she has
conceived.

Verse 28. First the blade, then the (...)]
And the husbandman looks upon it with delight, in hope of an harvest: so does
God take in good part our weak beginnings, whiles we strive to better the
blessing that is upon our very buds. Esaias 44. 3. The first springs in the womb
of grace are precious to him, Ephesians. 2. 1.

Verse 30. Whereunto shall we liken, etc]
The wisdom of God, the great Counselor, seems to be at a fault for a fit
expression low enough for our slow apprehension.

Verse 33. As they were able to hear]
Not as he was able to have spoken. A Minister must masticate his matter as
Nurses do their childrens meat, and speak to his hearers shallow capacities; or
else he shall be a Barbarian to them, and they to him. He Is the best Preacher
says Luther, that preaches vulgarly, trivially, etc.

Verse 34. He expounded]
He read them the riddles, as it were, (...).
or untied the knots. So Judge. 7. 15. We read of a dream and the
interpretation, or breaking of it. A metaphor from the breaking of a Nut to get
the kernel.

Verse 36. They took him]
Viz. out of that part of the Ship where he had taught, into another part more
convenient, where he might rest. For he had preached all that day till the
evening, without taking either repast or repose, verse 1.

Verse 38. Asleep on a pillow]
Neither did the noise of the sea, nor the hurry of the seamen laboring for
life, awake Christ, till his own time was come. Despair not, if help be not at
hand at first; as we desire: but awake Christ, as here, and Esaias 51. 9. God
has a mighiy arm, but, it may be asleep; the Church therefore cries three
times in a verse, Awake.

Verse 39. Peace be still]
That is, have done quickly: so much the ingemination imports, Genesis 41. 32.

Verse 40. Why are ye so fearful?]
Increpatio cum admiratione: (...) tempestatem: (...), and (...). Plut.
As their, Master, carest thou not, etc. was interrogatio conquerentis and
reprehendentis. But if Caesar in a tempest could bid the Barge-man be of good
cheer, for he carried over the fortune of Caesar, which could not miscarry; how
much more might those that were upon the same bottom with Christ, have been
confident of a safe arrival?

CHAP. V.
Verse 2. A man with an unclean spirit]
GRaece. In an unclean spirit, quod eum spiritus quasi inclusum (...).
(...). So the flesh is called the old man, as if it were the whole Beza.
of a natural man: and the Devil is said to work effectually in such, Ephesians.
2. 2. See the Note on Mark 1. 23.

Verse 3. Who had his dwelling among the Tombs]
The buriallplaces of the Saints were anciently thought to have a kind of
holiness in them. Hence grew that superstition of meeting and praying together
at the Saints Sepulchers; and afterward of praying for them, and to them.
Which to foment the Devil usually haunted such places, there to play his
pranks.

Verse 4, 5, 6.]
See the Notes on Matthew. 8. 28.

Verse 7. I adjure thee by God]
Exemplum horrendum impudentiae sceleratorum spirituum, says Beza. To adjure
one, is to take an oath of him for our own security. An oath is not rashly to
be undertaken, but by a kind of necessity, when it is exacted. Hence the Hebrew
Nishbang is a passive, and signifies To be sworn, rather then to swear.

Verse 9. My name is Legion]
That is, a multitude. A (...) was commonly among the Romans says (Isidore)
six thousand armed soldiers. So many Devils were gotten in one poor man. Let
us in him see, what the best of us have deserved: and, since we have escaped,
offer a Pass over each for himself.

Verse 11. Nigh unto the Mountains]
All this Country was full of hills ( intercursantibus montibus Galaad) and
mountains of Gilead.

Verse 13. Jesus gave them leave]
If Christ condescended to the Devils, though to the loss of others, will he
not hear us?

Into the Sea]
So that standing pool in Gadaris is called, which, Strabo Geog. lib. 16.
Strabo says, is of such a naughty nature, that if beasts taste of it they
shed their hair, nails, hoofs or horns.

Verse 15. They come to Jesus]
And, amazed with the miracle, they expostulate not an injury; but
acknowledging him Lord of all, they beg him to be gone, lest they should
sustain further loss by him: The Devil shall have his dwelling again in
themselves rather then in their pigges (as that martyr phrased Bradford.
it) they will rather lose Christ then their porket.

And in his right mind]
Sanguis medici factus est medicina phrenetici. The Surgions blood was the sick
man's salve.

Verse 17. And they began, etc.]
See the Note on Mat. 8. 34.

Verse 19. Tell how great things, etc.]
This was all the fee Christ looked for, for his cures. Words seem to be a
slender and slight recompense: but Christ (says Nazianzen) calls himself the
Word.

Verse 20. Began to publish in Decapolis]
A great mercy to them to have such a Preacher sent amongst them. Bethsaida was
denied this favor, Mark 8. 26.

Verse 22, 23, 24.]
See the Notes on Matthew. 9. 18. etc.

Verse 25. And a certain woman]
This History fell out fitly, that Jairus might be confirmed, and the different
degrees of faith in several Saints, the better discerned.

Verse 26. And had spent all that she had]
Physicians are many Plaut.
of them crumenimulgae, and fordida poscinummia. They call their drugs (...),
gifts: yet we pay dear for them. Jurisconsultorum idem status and Medicorum:
Damna quibus licito sunt aliena lucro.
Hi morbos aegrorum, agrorum litibus illi Owen. (...).

Dant patienter opem, dum potiantur opum.
Howbeit their greedy desire of money seldom prospers with them. Dicis te
medicum, nos te plus esse fatemur: Mendico sc. Ibid.

Una tibi plus est littera quam medico.


Verse 28. If I may but touch]
See the Note on Mat. 9. 21.

Verse 30. That virtue had gone out of him]
As heat goes out of the Sun into the air, water, earth, earthly bodies, and
yet remains in the Sun; so here. Salienti aquarum fonti undas si tollas, nec
exhauritur, nec extenuatur, sed dulcescit: (...), etiam docendi officio,
dulcedinem (...), non sentiat minutias. A fountain is not drawn dry, but
cleared: so skill is not lost by communicating it to others, but increased.

Verse 32. And he locked round about]
He confuted the rashness of his Disciples, not with words, but looks. We may
more fitly sometimes signify our dislike of sin by frowns, then by speeches.
As the North Wind drives away rain, etc.

Verse 34. Daughter, thy faith, etc.]
They that can shame themselves to honor Christ, shall receive much
settlement, and inward satisfaction.

Verse. 35. Thy daughter is dead]
Christ commonly reserves his holy hand for a dead lift.

Verse 40.
See the Note on Matthew. 9. 24. etc.

Verse 43. That no man should know it]
Lest he should be too soon known and acknowledged by the people. But when he
knew that he was shortly to die, he openly restored to life Lazarus, and the
Widows son. Every thing is beautiful in its season. Eccles. 3.


CHAP. VI.
Verse 3. Is not this the Carpenter?]
SEe the Note on Matthew 13. 55.

Verse 5. He could do there no mighty work]
He could not, because he would not. Note here the venernous nature of
infidelity, that transfuseth, as it were, a dead palsy into the hands of
omnipotency, disabling Christ, in a sort, to do such a man good. Christ by his
absolute power can do all things: by his actual power he can do no more then
he will do.

Verse 6. And he marvelled]
Unbeleife must needs be a monstrous sin, that puts Christ to the marvel.

Verse 8. Save a stasse.]
Such a one as may ease and relieve you, not such as may curb and hinder you,
Matthew. 10. 10. So that seeming contradiction is assoyled.

No money in your purses]
Gr. No brass in your girdles. The (...).
most usual material of money among the Roman Princes was seldom gold or
silver, most times brass, sometimes leather, Corium (...) publica (...), as
Seneca has it. The like is said to have been used here in England, in the
times of the Barons Wars. And why not? since Opinion sets the price upon these
outward good things; and Anno 1574. the Hollanders, then being in their Hist.
of (...).
extremities, made money of past-board.

Verse 12. That they should repent]
This must be done; or men are utterly undone. Aut poenitendum aut pereudum.
Hence Repentance is so pressed and preached in both Testaments. Exodus 23. 20.
with 33. 2. 3, 4. Immediately after God had given the Law (by the rules and
threats whereof God the Father was to proceed, says One) and after they had
transgressed it, he could not go along with them, for he should destroy them:
but his Angel, that is Christ, he would send with them; who also would destroy
them, if they turned not and repented according to the rules of his Law, the
Gospel.

Verse 13. And anointed with oil many, etc.]
By the misunderstanding of this text, and that Jam. 5. 14. Pro pastoribus
habuit (...) Confess.
Ecclesia unguentarios, et pigmentarios; qui hoc (...) miser as oviculas non
tantum ungerent, sed etiam emungerent. This oil in the text was used, not as a
medicine, but as a sign and symbol of that power of miraculous (...).

Verse 14. For his name was spred]
By miracles, as by wings the Gospel quickly spread far and near. Eusebius says
that the (...).
Gospel spread at first, through the world, like a Sun (...). When Eusebius l. 2.
c. 3.
(...) first stirred, it was carried through the Christian world, as on Angels
wings. This was that miracle, which (...) these last times, are to look for.

Verse 16.]
See the Notes on Matt. 14. 2, 3, etc.

Verse 19. Herodias had a quarrel against him]
Gr. Hung over (...).
him, as highly displeased at him, and waiting an occasion to be even with him.
(...), they that follow truth close at heels, may have their (...) struck out,
though she be a good mistrisse. Tange (...). As wild beasts cannot endure fire,
so neither can carnal hearts fervency and plaindealing.

Verse 20. (...)]
Holiness is majesticall. (...) because holy. He honors his Saints in the
(...) of their greatest enemies.

He did many (...)]
(...), (...) some copies have it, He doubted in many things: he was often set
at a stand, and knew not how (...) multum (...).
to ward off the dry-blows of the word, (...) which way to look, it came so
close to him.

Verse 21 Made a supper]
The ancients took a light dinner usually, and therefore called it Prandium
quasi perendium: at supper they feasted more freely, and therefore called it
(...), because then their daies-work was done.

Verse 22. Came in and danced]
With immodest gesticulations (...) (...), (...) more.
and trippings on the toe, wherewith the old fornicator was so inflamed, that
he swore she should have any thing of him.

Verse 23. To the half of my Kingdom]
What was his whole kingdom to the life of that precious man, of whom the world
was not worthy? Shortly after, he was turned out of his kingdom, and (its to be
feared) out of Gods too.

Verse 24. And she went forth]
The men and women dined not together. In Barbary, it is death for any man to see
one of the Zeriffes concubines.

Verse 26. And for their sakes that sat with him]
Sic plerique, malum iter ingressi, post cum se errare resciscant, non
desciscunt (...), ne leves videantur: sui dicti domini, ut dicunt, esse volunt.
(...).
Some, rather then be worse then their words, will violate their consciences.

Verse 31. Rest a while]
God would not have the strength of his people to be exhausted in his service:
but that respect be had to the health of their bodies, as to the welfare of
their (...). Therefore the Priests of the Law took their turns of serving in
the order of their course, as Zacharias, (...) 1. 8. And the Ministers of the
Gospel are allowed to drink a little Wine for their healths sake as Timothy.
Those that neglect their bodies, must reckon for it. Coloss. 2. 23.

Verse 33. Ran afoot thither]
That is, they came thither by land, not by sea; whither on foot or a (...):
for many of (...) ubique opponuntur. Scultet.
them were not able to foot it, as being weak, lame, maimed, etc.

Verse 34. They were as Sheep, etc]
They were all slaves to the Romans, and many of them lame and diseased: but
nothing troubled Christ so much as this, that they wanted Pastors and
Teachers. They that are without a teaching Priest, are said to be without God
in the world, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3.

Vcrse 35. And when the day was now far spent]
Beza renders it, Cum jam multus dies esset. Our forefathers had a saying The
Summers day is never so long,
But at length' twill ring to even-song.


Verse 37. Shall we go and buy, etc.]
q. d. Yes: a likely (...) surely: Where Is your money? have we two-hundred pence
to cater for such a company? It is Interrogatio cum admiratione, atque adeo cum
ironia quadam conjuncta, says Beza. A question not without a jear.

Verse 40. (...) down in rankes]
Gr. ranks, ranks; that is, (...). Hebraismus, ut Exodus (...). 14.
(...) by rank, as rows or borders of beds in a garden. Ordinatim (...) in
Ecclesia faciendae. Church-work is to be done decently, and in order.

Verse 48. Would have passed by them]
Either the more to try them, or rather to spare them: because he foresaw they
would be further frighted else.

Verse 50. It is I]
I with an Emphasis: q. d. It is I; not a Cant. 2. (...).
Spirit. A concise kind of speech, importing his haste to comfort them. He
comes leaping over the mountains of Bether, all (...) and impedements.

CHAP. VII.
Verse 2. They found fault]
THey mumped at it, as we say: they dispraised, accused, complained. (...).
Vituperant homines quam collaudant promptius, says one: Another being
demanded, what was the easiest thing in the world? answered, To find fault with
another. (...), says a Third: It is easier to find a fault, then to mend it.

Verse 3. Except they wash their hands oft]
Or up to the Elbow, or with utmost diligence. The Pharisees deemed it as great
(...) and accurate. Sir.
a (...) to eat with unwashen (...), as to commit fornication. Do not our
Modern Pharisees the Papists as much? Fornication Godwins Antiq. Heb. p. 49.
is a money matter with them: but to eat an Egg in Lent, or the like, a deadly
sin. You may see them sometimes in Italy go along the streets with a great rope
about their necks, as if they were dropped down from the gallows. And
sometimes they wear a sawsedge or a swines-pudding in place of a silver or gold
chain. Bee-hive of Rome. p. 24.
Is not this sufficient to deserve heaven by?

Verse 4. (...) of Cups]
Gr. Baptismes. The Pharisees (...).
were great washers of the outside. Whence Justin Martyr calls (...).
them Baptists, by a peculiar Epithet.

Verse 5, 6.]
See the Note on Matt. 15. 2, 3.

Verse 8. Ye hold the tradition of men]
Gr. With tooth and (...).
nail ye hold it, Mordicus retinetis, as if on that hinge hung all your
happiness.

Verse 9. Full well ye reject]
q. d. Its finely done of you, is (...) Sane been.
it not? Ironice; year wise men therewhile: This was (...) to other
masterships. Sapientes sapienter in infernum (...), says a Father. The worlds
wizards have not wit enough to escape hell.

Verse 12. Ye suffer him]
i. e. Ye license him to deny his Parents any further succor.

Verse 14. Called all the people]
For he saw there was no good to be done upon the Pharisees, and that he did
but wash a tilestone, or a Blackmoore: he turns him therefore to the
commonsort. Pearls must not be cast to pigs.

Verse 15, 16, etc.]
See the Note on Matt. 15. 11.

Verse 19. And goes out into the draught]
Or into the long (...).
and lowermost gut, as Physicians use the word: and as it is, 1 Samuel 5. 9. 12.
Robert Smith Martyr made one of Bonners Doctors that examined him, say, that
his God must needs enter into the belly, and so fall into the draught. To which
he Answered, What derogation was it to Christ, when the Jews spit in his face?
If the Jews (said Smith) being his enemies did but spit in his face, (...), we
being his friends throw him into the draught, which of us deserves Act. and
Mon. fol. 1536.
the greater damnation?

Verse 20. That defiles the man]
Far worse then any jakes. Sin is the Devils excrement.

Verse 22. An evil eye]
Envious, and rejoicing at the miseries (...) (...), (...). q. (...).
of others, which is the property of Edomites, abjects, witches, and devils.
Those that are bewitched are said to be over-lookt, sc. with an evil and
malicious eye. (...) quis teneros, etc.

Verse 23. All these evil things]
Should God but break open that sink of sin that is within us, we should never
endure the stench, but rid our selves out of the world, as Judas, Ahitophel,
etc.

Verse 24. Would have no man know etc.]
There was therefore two wills in Christ: the one whereof rightly willed, that
which the other justly and wisely nilled.

But he could not be hid]
He is a God that (...) himself: we (...) 8. 17.
must fetch him out of his retiring room by our (...) prayers.

Verse 25. For a certain woman]
Of an heroical faith, felt her want of Christ, and (...) out for him.

Verse 27. To cast it unto Dogs]
Gr. unto whelps, for more (...).
contempt-sake, as Beza (...). The Pope made Dondalus the (...). p. 379.
(...) Ambassador to come before him, tied in iron chains, and to wallow under
his table with dogs, whilst his Holiness sat at supper. Unde ei Canis
cognomentum apud suos, says Kevius. He De viis pontif.
was ever after called the Dog-Embassadour.

Verse 28. Yes, Lord]
See the Note on Matthew. 15. 27.

Verse 33. And he took him aside, etc.]
Though these men's faith was but weak, yet he yields unto them at the first
word, who held off the Syrophenisse before, to the third Petition: He knew the
strength of her faith. The skillful Armourer tries not an ordinary piece of
Arms with Musket shot. The wise Lapidist brings not his softer stones to the
stithy. The good Husbandman turns not the wheel upon his cumin, nor his (...)
upon his fetches. For his God does better instruct him, Esaias 28. 26, 29.

Verse 34. He sighed]
As if himself had felt and fainted under (...).
the same burden: so the word signifies. And he was so much the more sensible,
as well weighing the cause.

Verse 35. His (...) opened]
So are the ears of all that belong to Christ, and their tongues loosed to his
praise, which before were bound by Satan. O pray that God would make the boar
of our ears as wide as may be, and teach us that pure language, Zeph. 3. 9.
that our tongues may run as the pen of a ready Psalm. 45. 1.
writer.

Verse 36. So much the more]
Eo magis praefulgebat utique quia non visebatur, as Tacitus says of Brutus:
the more he sought to secret himself, the more he was noticed.

Verse 37. He (...) done all things well]
Praise we him much more for his spiritual cures, of like kind, upon our
selves and others.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse: 1. The multitude being very great.]
YEt not so great as the five thousand before fed with fewer loaves, and more
leavings: To teach us, that Gods blessing, and not the muchnesse of meat, feeds
and satisfies.

Verse 2. I have compassion, etc.]
See the Notes on Matthew 15. 32, 33, 34, etc.

Verse. 3. They will faint]
Their sine (...) will be loosened, as it uses (...).
to fare with men in fainting fits. Physicians sometimes let blood usque ad
deliquium animae: so does God; as he did David often. See the Note on Matthew 15.
32.

Verse 4. With bread]
That is, with the coursest fare. (...) opponit panem libis and placentis. Lib.
1. Ep. 10. Bread is used for homely provision.

Verse 5, 6, 7, etc.]
See the Notes on Matthew. 15. 34, 35, 36.

Verse 12. And he sighed deeply]
His heart was straightned (as (...)
the word signifies) and would have burst, but for a vent. Expletur lachrymis
egeriturque dolor.
Ezekiel. 9. 4.


So those marked mourners sighed and cried for others, who were altogether
insensible of their own miseries. So Habacuc trembled and quivered for the
Chaldeans calamities, cap. 3. 16.

Verse 13. And he left them]
See the Notes on Matthew 16. 1, 2.

Verse 15. Of the leaven of Herod]
Of the Sadduces says Matthew: to the which Sect some conceive that Herod had
now joined himself, the better to still the noise of his conscience, by making
himself believe there was no judgment to come.

Verse 18. Do ye not remember?]
All Is loft that is not well laid up in this pot of Mannah, the sanctified
memory, 1 Cor. 15. 2.

Verse 19, 20.]
See the Note on Matthew. 16. 10, 11, etc.

Verse 21. How is it that ye do not understand?]
It is very ill taken when we improve not experiments. Of all things God can
least abide to be forgotten.

Verse 23. He took the blind man by the hand]
He could have delivered him to his friends, to lead him; but he did it
himself, as holding it an honor, a pleasure, to do men in misery any office of
courtesy.

And led him out of the town]
Either that the miracle he wrought might be the less noticed: or as holding
the inhabitants unworthy to behold it. All Israel might see (...) go toward
the Rock of Rephidim, none but the Elders might see him strike it. Their
unbeleif made them unworthy this privilege: so might their unthankfulness the
men of Bethsaida. Woe to thee (...). It is no small favor of God to make us
witnesses of his great works.

Verse 25. He saw every man clearly]
Procul and dilucide, long (...)
(...). When we come to heaven we shall see as we are seen, who now see but as
in a glass obscurely, as old men do thorough Spectacles, 1 Cor. 13.

Verse 26. Neither go into the town]
Christ would not vouchsafe such an ungrateful people the benefit of one more
Preacher, though never so mean. This was a greater judgment upon them, then if
he had turned some other way that arm of the sea that brought so much wealth
into their town.

Verse 27, 28.
See the Note on Matthew. 16. 13.

Verse 29. Thou art the Christ]
This was much in few. Here is not Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock, etc.
Which if either Saint Mark or Saint Peter had esteemed (as Papists now do) the
foundation of the Christian Church, it had not been here omitted (as Beza well
observes) since it goes for current among the Ancients, that Saint Mark wrote
this Gospel at Saint Peter's mouth.

Verse 31. And after three dayes]
That is, within three days, or on the third day.

Verse 34. Whosoever will come after me]
See the Notes on Mat. 10. 38. and Mat. 16. 24.

Take up his Crosse]
It is but a delicacy that men dream of to Joh. de Polemar. (...). in Council.
(...). ap. Binnium.
divide Christ and his Cross. Every Christian must be a Crucian, said Luther;
and do somewhat more then those Monks that made themselves wooden Crosses, and
carried them on their backs continually, making all the world laugh at them.

Verse 35. For whosoever will save his life]
As that revolting (...), Host to Philbert (...) Martyr, slain by his enemy
upon a private quarrel. As those Angrognians that yielded to the Papists Act.
and Mon. fol. 835.
that came against them, and were more cruelly handled by them then their
neighbors that continued constant in the truth. As Denton the Smith of Well
in Cambridgshire, that could not burn Ibid. 873.
for Christ, and was afterward burned in his own house. As West Ibid. 1558.
that was Chaplain to Bishop Ridly, who refusing to dye in Christ's cause with
his Master, said Mass against his conscience, and soon Ibid. 1570.
after pined away for sorrow. If I shrink from Gods truth (said Doctor Tailor
Martyr) I am sure of another manner of death then had Judge Hales: who being
drawn for fear of death, to do Ibid. 1382.
things against his conscience, did afterward drown himself.

Verse 36. For what shall it profit a man]
And yet many do as Shimei that to seek his servants, lost himself. And as
Jonas, that was content to be cast into the Sea, that the Ship with her lading
might come safe to shore.

Verse 38. In this adulterous and sinful, etc.]
The worse the times are, the better we should be. Stars are most needed in a
dark night. We may as well, says Zuinglius, Adaram Jovis aut Veneris adorare,
ac sub Antichristo fidem occultare. Antichrists limbs have their mark in their
hand, which they may show or hide at pleasure: but Christ's members have their
mark in their foreheads only. David's parents and brethren came down to him, to
the cave of Adullam though to their great danger, 1 Samuel 22. 1. Onesiphorus was
not ashamed of Paul's chain at Rome, 2 Tit. 1.

When he comes in the glory]
David going against Goliath took only his sling, and a few stones; but when
against Nabal, he marched better appointed. So Christ came at first in a mean
condition: but when he comes again to judgment, he shall march furiously,
attended with troops of Saints and Angels.

CHAP. IX.
Verse 1. Shall not taste of death]
SAints only taste of death, sinners are swallowed up of it, they are killed
with death, Revelation 2. 23. Whereas the righteous do mori vitaliter; death is
to them neither total, nor perpetual, Romans 8. 10, 11. (...).


Verse 3. Became shining]
Gr. Glistring and sparkling as stars which twinckle and beckon to us as it
were to remember their and our Creator.

Verse 10. And they kept that saying]
With much ado they (...).
kept it (as the word imports) for the rest of the Disciples were very
inquisitive, likely, what was said and done in the Mount. A friend that can
both keep counsel, and give counsel, is worth his weight in gold.

Verse 12. Set at nought]
Vilified and nullified as an (...), (...).
or one that had nothing in him. Vermis sum et non (...). I am a worm and no
man, says the Psalmist in the person of Christ.

Verse 15. Were greatly amazed]
To see him come in so opportunly, in the very nick, which is his usual time.
See the Note on Matt. 17. 14.

Verse 20. The spirit tare him]
Thus things often go backward ere they come forward; as the corn grows downward
before it comes upward. Duplicantur lateres, venit Moses. This child had never
such a sore fit, as now that he was to be cured. See verse 26.

Verse 22. It has cast him into the fire, etc.]
So does blind zeal deal by them in whom it is.

But if thou can do any thing]
This woeful father had no further He that believes, makes no haste, Esaias
28. 16.

Verse 24. I beleeve]
This act of his in putting forth his faith to believe as he could, was the
way to believe as he would.

Help thou mine unbeleefe]
That is, my weak faith, which he counts no better then unbeleef: howbeit,
God counts the preparation of the heart to believe, faith: as in those
Samaritanes Joh. 4. Doctor Cruuger cried out on his deathbed, Credo languida
Selnever. (...).
fide, sed tamen fide. Much faith will yield unto us here our heaven: and any
faith, if true, will yield us heaven hereafter.

Verse 29. But by prayer and fasting]
The cause why they could not cure the child, was unbeleef: the cure of
unbeleef is sought and wrought by fasting and prayer.

Verse 34. Who should be the greatest]
viz. In Christ's earthly Kingdom, in the which they vainly dreamt of a
distribution of honors and offices, as once in the days of David and Solomon.

Verse 37. Receives not me]
Non removet, sed corrigit, says Erasmus. He receives not me only, but him
that sent me.

Verse 38. And John answered him]
John was soon sated with that sad discourse of our Savior, and begins a
relation of another business, little to the purpose.

Verse 39. Forbid him not]
It is probable that this man would not forbear, unless Christ himself should
forbid him: which here he refuses to do, and shows reason for it.

Verse 41. (...) whosoever shall give, etc.]
Much more he that shall cast out devils in my name, and out of love to me.

He shall not lose his reward]
For his cup of cold water he shall have a torrent of pleasure. If therefore ye
will be wise Merchants, happy Usurers, part with that which ye cannot keep,
that ye may gain that which ye cannot lose.

Verse 43. It is better for thee to enter]
The Trojanes, after long debate, concluded it better to part with Helen,
though a Lady of incomparable beauty, then, by retaining her longer, to venture
their utter wreck and ruin.

'A(...), say they. Did we but forethink Hom. Iliad.
what sin will cost us, we durst not but be innocent.

Verse 44. Where their worme]
As out of the corruption of our bodies worms breed, which consume the flesh,
so out of the corruption of our souls this never-dying worm. This worm (say
Divines) is only a continual remorse and furious reflection of the soul upon
its own wilful folly, and now woeful misery. Oh consider this before thy
friends be scrambling for thy goods, worms for thy body, devils for thy soul.
Go not dancing to hell in thy bolts, rejoice not in thy bondage, as many do;
to whom the preaching of hell is but as the painting of a toad, which men can
look on and handle, without affrightment.

Never dies, and the fire is not quenched]
O quam diuturna and Manlii loc. com page 33.
immensa est (...) as! said the devil once. A child with a spoon may sooner
empty the sea, then the damned accomplish their misery. A (...) of brimstone is
not consumed by burning.

Verse 49. For every one shall be salted with fire]
The Spirit, as salt, must dry up those bad humors in us that breed the
neverdying worm; and, as fire, must waste our corruptions, which else will
carry us on to the unquenchable fire.

Verse 50. Salt is good]
Nature (...) prudently mingled salt with all things, that they may not easily
putrify. Greges enim Joh. Bodin.
pecorum urinam salsissimam effundere videmus, and in omnes stirpes (...).
(...).
salem infusum.

Have salt in your selves]
Habete in vobis sal. A (...) admonemur tribus literis (ut curiose observat
quidam) Sapere, Agere, Loqui. The conjuring of salt among the Papists is
intolerably blasphemous: It is thus: I conjure thee, O salt, by the living God,
etc. that thou may be made a conjured salt to the salvation of them that
believe. And that unto all such as receive thee, Act. and Mon.
thou may be health of soul and body: and (...) from out of the place,
wherein thou shall be sprinkled, may fly away and depart all fantasy,
wickedness or craftiness of the devils subtilty, and every foul Spirit, etc.

And (...) peace one with another]
By mortification season, tame, and purge your own hearts of those lusts that
war in your members, Jam. 4. 1. and prove offensive to others, Mar. 9. 43. so
shall you be at peace one with another. Stomack-worms are killed with salt.

CHAP. X.
Verse 1. And, as he was wont, he taught]
PRaedicationis officium (...) quisquis ad Sacerdotium accedit. Greg. in (...).
It was death for the High Priest to enter the Holy-place, or to come abroad,
without his bells and pomegranates. Saint Mark is much in setting forth Christ's
forwardness to teach.

Verse 4. Moses suffered to write]
Not commanded. There is difference between a permission and a precept,
properly so called. See the Note on Matthew. 19. 7. Non statim probat Deus quod
permittit. God approves not presently whatsoever he permits.

Verse 11. Whosoever shall put away his wife]
Annon columnae (...), (...) Lutherus, (...) errarunt, and (...) se dederunt,
cum illud (...) dederunt (...). (...). epist. dedicat.
(...) illi and (...) Principi Philippo Lantgravio, ut (...) adhue priore
legitima (...) uxore, (...) alteram, (...) est adulteram? says Zanchy: Luthor
and his fellow-Divines were shamefully out in licensing the Lantgrave to put
away his lawful wife, and marry another.

Verse 12. And if a woman have put away]
No such thing was permitted by Moses, but usurped by the women of those
licentious times. Among Turks the women may sue a divorce; but Blunts (...).
only then when her husband would abuse her against nature.

Verse 14. For of (...) is (...) kingdom of God]
As often therefore as we see an infant, (...) us think that a teacher is given
us of God. Psalm. 131. 1, 2.

Verse 19. Defraud not]
Do no man injury either by force (...). This seems to be an abstract of all
the other forementioned commandments.

Verse 21. Loved him]
As a (...) man, and fit to live in a civil society. Or he loved him, that
is, he pitied him, as a self-deceiver: like as we pity moderate Papists.

Verse 22. Went away grieved]
Which he would not have done, if he had loved God and his neighbor, as he
professed to do.

Verse 24. For them that trust in riches]
As most rich men do, thinking themselves simply the better and the safer for
them. This blab is soon blown up.

Verse 27. With God all things are possible]
This place is much pleaded by the Papists for their fiction of
Transubstantiation. I tell thee (said Bonner to Philpot) that God by his
omnipotency Act. and Mon.
may make himself to be this Carpet, if he will.

Verse 30. Brethren, and sisters, and mothers]
Mothers he cannot receive in kind, when once dead; but God will be to his
better then ten mothers: Communion with him shall yield more comfort, then all
outward comforts can. He can also make Jonathan more loving to David then any
wife, and the Kings of Moab and Ammon to be his foster-parents. This made
Hermannus Act. and Mon. (...). 815.
Archbishop of Cullen to reform his Church, using therein the aid and advice of
Martin Bucer: Wherefore he was deposed by the Emperor, which he patiently
suffered. Zech. 10. 6. They shall be as if I had not cast them off, and I will
hear them. God will one way or other make up his peoples losses: they shall
have it again either in money, or moneys-worth. Ne excrucier ob (...) Aug (...)
civit.
and argentum: (...) enim es mihi omnia, said Paulinus Nolanus, Dei. lib. 1. c.
(...).
when the Town was taken by the Barbarians. Let not my losses trouble me, Lord;
for thou art mine exceeding great reward.

Verse 32. Jesus went before them]
As most willing of his way, though he went now to suffer. Show we like
forwardness, and say, I am in prison till I am in prison. Act. and Mon.


Verse 35. Whatsoever we shall desire]
One said he could have what he would of God: And why? but because he would ask
nothing, but what was agreeable to the will of God. Fiat voluntas mea, said
Luther in a certain prayer; but then falls off sweetly, Mea voluntas, Domine,
quia tua. One says of Luther, Vir iste potuit quod voluit apud Deum: That man
can do what Melch. Adam.
he will with God.

Verse 39. Ye shall indeed drink of the cup]
But not of that bitter cup of his Fathers wrath, which he drank off in his
passion. Only the Saints fill up that which is behind of the sufferings of
Christ, Colos. 1. 24. (...) (...) (...).

Ye shall be baptized]
And come out of the waters of affliction with as little hurt as a babe does
out of the water in baptism, by the help of divine grace.

Verse 42. They which are accounted to rule]
All earthly ruledomes are but shows and shadows, to that of God. Qui
videntur Oi (...).
imperare: They do but seem to rule.

Verse 46. Blind Bartimaeus]
Named and celebrated in the Gospel, when many mighty Monarchs are utterly
forgotten, or else lie shrouded in the sheet of shame.

Verse 48. The more a great deale]
True faith works its way through many obstacles, as the clouded sun does.

Verse 50. And he casting away his garment]
Though a beggar, he stood not upon the loss of his coat; but for joy of his
calling (...) it from him. So Joh. 4. 28. Heb. 12. 1.

CHAP. XI.
Verse 2. Whereon never man sate]
AS if it had been done on set purpose. Here was a wheel within a wheel, Ezekiel.
1. the better to convince the stubborn Jews of his Kingly office.

Verse 3. Say ye that the Lord has need of him]
See here six several arguments of our Saviors Deity: 1. That he knew there
was such an asse-colt. 2. That he sent for it. 3. Foresaw that Piscator.
the masters of the colt would question them that fet it. 4. That he professes
himself the Lord of all. 5. That he could tell they would send the colt. 6.
That accordingly they did so.

Verse 12. He was hungry]
This, and that he knew not but that there were figs on the tree, declare him
to be true Man.

Verse 13. The time of figs was not yet]
viz. Of ripe figs; but if he could have found but green figs only, he would at
that time have been glad of them. He looked for somewhat from that great show
of leaves. But the old Proverb became true, Great bruit, little fruit.

Verse 17. My house shall be called, etc.]
He inveighs against the same fault with the same arguments, as before, Joh. 2.

Verse 21. And Peter calling to remembrance]
So the fig tree bare far better fruit now that it was dried, then when it
was green and flourishing. (...) nos Patres, tum docentes, tum labentes: Aug.
The Saints teach us, as by their instructions, so by their infirmities.

Verse 25. And when ye stand, praying]
Several gestures in prayer are described, not prescribed in Gods Book. The
word here rendered stand, imports a presenting ones self before the (...).
Lord, whether he stand, sit, or kneel, etc.

Verse 30. From heaven, or of men, answer me]
So when the enemies of Reformation demand what we mean by so doing, ask them
what they think of that we do? Is it from heaven, or of men? If from heaven,
why do not they approve it? If of men, why do not they disprove it by the
Scriptures? Bucer and Melancthon framed a form of Reformation according to the
truth of the Gospel, with the approbation of the Peers and States of Cullen;
Melch. Adam. in vit. (...).
but the Clergy, though not able to contradict it by good reason, yet rejected
it with slander, and said that they had rather choose to live under the Turkish
Government, then under a Magistrate that embraced that Reformation.

CHAP. XII.
Verse 1. A certain man planted, etc.]
SEe the Notes on Matthew. 21. 33.

Verse 3. And beat him]
Properly, they hilded him; but by (...) (...) excorio, (...). Gerhard.
a Metonymie, they beat him. Sie (...) vulpem, (...) pellis (...) AEtrahatur:
So men beat a Fox, that they may the better hilde him.

Verse 4. Wounded him in the head]
Caput. (...), they (...) Theophylact.
brake his head. Theophylact interprets it, They completed their villainy, and
spent all their spite upon him.

Verse 6. They will reverence my (...)]
They will surely be (...) to look him in the (...). This is the proper
signification of (...)
the word. But sin had (...) an impudency in their faces, that they could blush
no more then a Sack-but.

Verse 13. To catch him in his words]
As Hunters catch the (...).
beast in a toil; as Fowlers catch the bird in a snare, as Saint Matthewes
(...).
word here signifies. Fistula (...), (...) dum decipit auceps.


Verse 14. To give tribute]
This tribute the Jews then paid to the Romans, as now they do to the Turks,
for the very heads they wear. And yet they had the face to say to our Savior,
Joh. 8. 33. We never were in bondage to any man. But perhaps these Jews were
of the Sect of Judas Gaulonites, who would not be Joseph. lib 18. cap. 2.
drawn by any torments to acknowledge any Lord upon earth; believing that God
only was to be held their Lord and King.

Verse 24. Not knowing the Scriptures]
And yet they alleged and argued out of Scripture, but upon a false ground;
viz. that the state of men should continue in the other world such as it is
here, as to eat, drink, marry, generate, etc.

Verse 26. I am the God of Abraham]
Therefore thy God also, if thou walk in the footsteps of faithful Abraham,
Romans 4. 23, 24.

Verse 28. Asked him, which is the first]
All Christ's Disciples must be (...), Questionists, and do the same to learn,
that this Scribe here does, for a worse purpose.

Verse 29. Is one Lord]
This the wiser Heathens, as Pythagoras, (...), etc. Pythag.
Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle with his Ens Entium miserere mei (if that were
his) acknowledged. Exodus 34. 14. Thou shall worship (...) other god. Where the
word Acher rendered Other, has R greater then ordinary, to show the greatness
of the Buxtorf. Tiber.
sin of serving others gods, and to set forth a difference between Acher
Other, and Echad One God; One in Three, and Three in One.

Verse 34. Answered discreetly]
That he was better then the (...). Ennius.
Pharisees used to be. He was Egregie cordatus homo, and began to lift up his
head out of the mud toward heaven.

Verse 35. How say the Scribes]
They were great Genealogists; how was it then that they were no better versed
in the Genealogy of Christ? that they could give no better an account of his
twofold nature? Of other things one may be ignorant, and yet be saved: Not so
here.

Verse 36. Said by the Holy Ghost]
The Psalms then are a part of holy Writ by Christ's own testimony, who also
Luke 24. 44. divides the Old Testament into the Law of Moses, the Prophets and
the Psalms. Yea, Psalmorum liber (...) utilia sunt ex omnibus continet, says
Augustine after Basil: The Psalms are a treasury of all holy truths.

Verse 38. Love to go in long clothing]
Down to the heels, as Senators, or Counselors. A garment that Christ himself
ware, as (...). (...).
being a Citizen or free Denison of Capernaum. But he loved not to go in it, as
these Pharisees, these glorious Masters of the Jews; he affected not this
habit more then another out of pride and vainglory, to be looked at, and
admired by the vulgar. This they thought a goodly business.

Verse 41. And beheld]
He still sits and sees the condition, gift, and mind of every almes-giver:
And weighs all, not by the worth of the gift, but by the will of the Giver.
Lycurgus enjoined the Lacedaemonians to offer small sacrifices. For God, said
He, respects more the internal devotion, then the external oblation.

How the people cast mony]
Gr. Brass: the worst was thought (...)
good enough for God, and his poor. Something men will do, but as little as
they can.

Verse 42. Two mites]
A mite is valued of our money to be three Godw. Antiq.
parts of one c.

Verse 43. This poor Widow]
Women are noted in the Parable of the lost Groat to be fond of money: Widows
especially, and poor Widows, make much of that little they have, as their
(...).
life, so it is called here, verse 44. even all her life, that is, her
livelihood. All this she cast in, it being rather to and for the service of
God, then to the poor. She resolves, as a Widow indeed, to trust wholly in God.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse 1. What manner of stones, etc.]
HUge stones, and so cunningly cimented, and as it were inoculated Quasi tota
(...) ex (...) lapide (...) tantam magnitud. (...)
the one into the other, that a man would have thought and sworn almost, that
they had been all but one entire stone. Josephus writes of these stones, that
they were fifteen cubits long, twelve high, and eight broad.

Verse 2. There shall not be left one stone, etc.]
There Is no trusting therefore to Forts and strongholds, no though they be
munitions of rocks; as Esaias speaks; The Jebusites, that jeared David and his
forces, were thrown out of their Sion. Babylon, that bore her self bold upon
her twenty years provision laid in for a siege, and upon her high Towers and
thick walls, was surprised by Cyrus. So was this goodly Temple by (...), who
left only three towers of this stately edifice unrazed, to declare unto
posterity the strength of the place, and valor of the vanquisher. But, sixty
five years after, AElius (...) inflicting on the rebelling Jews a wonderful
flaughter, subverted those remainders, and sprinkled salt upon the foundation.

Verse 4. Shall be fulfilled]
Or, have an end, that is, be destroyed, (...).
as verse. 2. Which yet these Apostles held not destroyable till the worlds
destruction, as appears (...). 24.

Verse 5. And Jesus answering them, etc.]
Not directly to their question, but far better to their edification. This was
(...) with our Savior.

Verse 7. The end shall not be yet]
Neither of the world, nor of the Temple.

Verse 8. The beginning of sorrowes]
The sorrows and (...).
throws of childbirth; which are nothing so bad at first, as in the birth.

Verse 10. Among all nations]
i. e. Among other nations then the Jews.

Verse 11. Neither (...) ye (...)]
Conne not your answers as boys use to do their Orations and
School-exercises, which the Greeks call (...): whereunto Beza thinks our
Savior here (...).

Verse 14. The abomination of desolution]
The Roman forces, therefore most abominable to God and his Angels, because
they desolated the pleasant land, and abolished the true worship of God. See
Revel. 17. 4, 5.

Where it ought not]
viz. In respect of the Romans, who did it only out of ambition and
covetousness. See Esaias 10. 7.

Verse 19. For in those days shall be affliction]
Gr. Those days shall be affliction: as if the very time were nothing else but
(...) it self. See the Notes on Mat. 24. 21.

Verse 20. Except the (...) had (...)]
(...), (...). (...).
Not in respect of the divine decree, but 1. of the long miseries that the
people had deserved: 2. of the enemies rage, that would have exceeded. See
(...). 1. 13.

Verse 28. Now learn a parable of the fig-tree]
We should not rest content with a natural (...) of the creatures, as bruits
do, but pick some spiritual matter out of every sensible object. Thus (...)
Master (...) when the Sun shined on his face now lying on his death bed, fell
into a sweet meditation of the glory D. Hall's Art of Divine Meditation.
of God, and his approaching joy.

Verse 30. Till all these things be done]
Begun they were in the destruction of Jerusalem, carried on by the enemies
rage against the Church, and to be ended with the last age of the Church, which
begins at the coming of Christ in the flesh.

Verse 34. The porter to watch]
That the rest did their work.

Verse 35. When the Master cometh]
But come he will to judgment, as sure as that he has destroyed Jerusalem:
This is a pledge of the other.

Verse 37. Watch]
What Serbidius Scevola was wont to say of the Civil Law, holds more true of
the divine Law: Jus civil scriptum est vigilantibus, non dormitantibus: The
Law was written for those that observe to obey it.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse 1. After two dayes]
TWo days after the former discourse. This Sun of righteousness shone most
amiably toward his going down.

Verse 2. Not on the feast-day]
And yet they did it on the feast day, as loath to lose the opportunity then
offered them by Judas the traitor: But God had a special hand in it, that by
the circumstance of time Christ might appear to be the true Passover. He was
crucified on the very true day of that Feast.

Verse 3. Of spikenard very precious]
Or pure, right, sincere, (...) Melius, (...). (...). ex Hartungi Criticis.
not sophisticate, or adulterate; so Theophylact interprets it. But (...) says
it was spikenard of Opis, a Town not far from Babylon, whence the most
precious odours and ointments were (...) into other parts.

Verse 5. Three hundred pence]
That is, fifty-two French pounds and more, as Budaeus computes it. She spared
for no cost.

They murmured against her]
But Judas began: So dangerous (...) Murmur and fremitus indignantium (...).
Beza.
a thing it is to converse with hypocrites. One rotten sheep may (...) the
rest: Uvaque conspecta livorem ducit ab una. Great danger there is if not of
infection, yet of defection. Peter, by his halting, compelled others to do so
too, Gal. 2.

Verse 14. The guest-chamber]
In a private house; for the whole City was then turned into a great Inn, for
the receipt of strangers that came up to the Feast.

Verse 21. Good were it for that man]
For his own particular: for otherwise in respect of the glory of Gods justice,
in that man's righteous condemnation, good it was that he was born.

Verse 25. I will drink no more]
(...) I will not, not, not (...), So Heb. 13. 5. I will not, not, not forsake
thoe. Our Savior here seems to allude to that grace-cup (as they call it)
after which they might not eat any thing more, till the day following.

Verse 31. I will not deny thee]
The Syriack adds Mari, that is, Domine mi. And this he affirmed magis ex
abundanti. So did Pendleton the Apostate, when he said to Sanders the Martyr
with Act. and Mon. 1363.
greatest vehemence, I will see the (...) drop of this grease of mine molten
away, and the last gobbet of this flesh consumed to ashes, before. I will
forsake God and his truth.

Verse 36. Abba, Father]
Father, Father, with greatest earnestness. This was an effectual prayer, had
he said no more. God can feel breath in prayer, Lam. 3. 56.

Not that I will, but, etc.]
(...) emphatica, says Beza

Verse 37. Could thou not watch]
How then will thou die with me? So how will they endure wounds for Christ,
that cannot endure words? See Jer. 12. 5.

Verse 40. Neither wist they what to answer]
They were ashamed to excuse it, yet fell again into it.

Verse 41. Sleep on now, take your rest]
If you can at least, or have any mind to it, with so many swords and halberds
about your ears. They were in heaviness, and yet are sharply reproved for
relapsing so often into the same sin. Let not us be more mild then Christ was;
but deal freely and faithfully with all.

Verse 47. And one of them]
Beza gathers from this Text, that Mark received not this Gospel from Peter;
because Peter would no less have confessed this rashness in himself, then
he had done his denial of his Master.

And cut off his eare]
This was his indiscreet zeal, proceeding Piscat.
(...) affectu carnis, non ab afflatu Spiritus sancti: From the flesh, not
Spirit.

Verse 61. The Son of the Blessed?]
So God is called, because to be everlastingly blessed and praised of Men and
Angels. Hence God is frequently set forth in the Commentaries of the Hebrew
Doctors by (...), He that is blessed. So (...) begins his Canticle with Blessed
(...) the Lord God, etc. Luke 1. 68.

Verse 63. Rent his clothes]
So they used to do in case of blasphemy, to signify that their very hearts
were rent with grief at so sad a hearing.

Verse 64. They all condemned him]
As a Blasphemer, because he made himself the Son of God. This may comfortably
assure (...) that we are freed by Christ from that crime of blasphemy we stand
guilty of, for affecting a Deity in our first Parents.

Verse 65. Prophesie]
Est hic sarcasmus amarulentissimus. (...). This is a most bitter (...).

Verse 68. He went out]
Thinking to steal away: and here he heard the Cock, but recanted not.

Verse 71. To (...) and to sweare]
Let him that stands, take heed, etc. (...) autem, si pavebis. God had a sweet
providence in all this, that Peter might be an eyewitness of our Saviors
sufferings.

Verse 72. And when he thought thereon]
Or, adding to his grief, Augens, id (...), (...) flevit (...).
proportioning his sorrow to his sin: Or, throwing his garment over his head
(which was the garb of deep mourners, 2 Samuel 16. 30. Esth. 6. 12.) so
Theophylact expounds it. Or, prorupit in fletum. He (...) out and wept.

CHAP. XV.
Verse 1. And strait way in the morning]
THey thought once to have deferred his execution till after the (...), chap.
14. 2. But their malice was wrestlesse: as his was that said, he would not away
till he saw the Martyrs (the (...) Act. (...) Mon. (...). 1119.
he called him) heart out.

Verse 6. Now at the Feast)
Or, at each great Feast: viz. at the (...).
Passover, Pentecost, and Tabernacles, The reason of this custom see in Notes
on Matt. 27. 15.

Verse 15. When he had scourgod him]
Purposely to move the people to Pity him, and therefore brought him forth so
misused with, Behold the man. But this was ill done of Pilate nevertheless: As
was also his comparing him with Barabbas, though with (...) so to have
delivered him. For we may not do evil, that good may come thereof.

Verse 21. And they compel (...) Simon]
We all come off heavily, (...) cogunt invitum.
and shrink in the shoulder when called to carry the Cross, as Peter did, Joh.
21. 18.

The Father of Alexander and Rufus]
Men famously known in the Church, and therefore here but named only. God will
recompense even involuntary services.

Verse 23. Wine mingled with (...)]
This was not the same potion with that verse 36. and Matthew. 27. 48. but
another.

Verse 33. Darkness over the whole Land]
Portending doubtless those dreadful calamities that were coming upon this
perverse people: according to Esaias 5. 30. and 8. 22. Lam. 3. 1, 2. But clearly
showing Gods heavy displeasure against his Son our Surety, which made him also
cry out with a loud voice in the next verse, as (...) so far forsaken, as not
afforded the common-benefit of Sunnelight.

Verse 42. The day before the Sabbath]
Their preparation to the Sabbath began at three aclock in the afternoon. The
Jews of (...) Buxtorf.
began their. Sabbath sooner then others: those at Tsepphore continued it
longer; adding de profano ad sacrum. Among our Forefathers at the ringing of
the Bell to Prayer on Saturday-evening, the husbandman would give over his
labor in the field, and the tradesman his work in the shop, and set themselves
to (...) for the Sabbath.

Verse 43. Went in boldly unto Pilate]
It was boldly done indeed, thus to oppose, not the Jews only, but Pilate in
that which (...) had done to Christ. Good blood will not belly it self.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 1, 2. And when the Sabbath was past]
AS God on the first day of the week drew the World out of that abhorred estate
of nothing, and brought light out of (...): so did Christ, on that day, draw
his people out of an 2 Timothy 1.
estate worse then nothing, and brought life and immortality to light by the
Gospel.

Verse 4. And when they looked]
Or, as some read it, when they looked up: for till now they may seem either to
have gone plodding on with their eyes downward; or else to have looked on one
another, as people use to do when they are conferring.

Verse 8. Any thing to any man]
whom they met with, but hastened to the Disciples.

Verse 9. He appe red first]
This honor done to Mary Magdalene, Mark relates more at large then the rest:
'though otherwise, mostly, he be more brief then the rest.

Verse 15. Preach the Gospel]
Eckins hence blasphemously (...), (...). (...). (...). (...).
that Christ did never command his Apostles to write, but to preach only.

(...) every creature]
That is, to Man, who is a little world, an Epitome of every creature. 2. To
the Gentiles also, who had been denied this favor of the Gospel, as if they
had been none of Gods creatures.

Verse 16. He that beleeveth]
That which you preach.

And is baptized]
As content to give up himself to Christ, and to receive his mark, making a
public profession of the faith.

He that believes not]
He says not, or, Is not baptized; for it is not the want, but the contempt of
baptism that damneth. Unbeleef is a bloody sin, Heb. 10. 26. a heavy sin,
Joh. 3. 19. a most ungrateful, inexcusable sin, such as shuts a man up close
prisoner in the dark dungeon of the Law, unto unavoydable destruction, Gal. 3.
23.

Verse 18. It shall not hurt them]
No more shall the deadly poison of sin hurt those that have drunk it, if
they belong to God; provided that they cast it up again quickly by Confession,
and meddle no more with such a mischief.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the Gospel according to Saint LUKE.
CHAP. 1.
Verse. 1. Many have taken in (...).]
OR, have attempted, but not effected. Hence some (...).
have concluded, that Luke wrote (...) of the four Evangelists. Howbeit the
common opinion is (and the most ancient copies say as much) that Matthew wrote
his Gospel eight years (...) Christ, Mark ten, Luke fifteen, and John forty
two.

Verse 2. Which from the beginning were eye-witnesses]
Therefore it may seem his Gospel was not dictated to him by Paul (who was no
eyewitness) as some Ancients have affirmed. But if we can believe Tacitus or
(...) in things that fell out long before they were born, because we are
confident of their diligence in enquiring: how much more should we believe
Saint Luke upon such doubted assurance, etc?

Verse 3. Having had perfect understanding]
Or, Following (...),
them close at heels, (and as we say) hot-foot.

From the very first]
Or, from above, as inspired from heaven. (...).


To write (...) in order]
Distinctly, and yet (...), A (...).
singular praise in an Historian, for the which, Ambrose much (...) our (...)
above (...) the other.

Verse 4. Wherein thou have been instructed]
Which thou have (...).
received by hearsay, or by word of mouth: and wherein thou have been
catechized, receiving the mysteries of the faith by the ministry of the voice.
And surely when we see men caring and (...) how to find out this certainty
here spoken of, and not to (...) led by conjecturall suppositions, but be fully
persuaded as St. Luke was, and would have his Theophilus to be, then there will
be some hopes that the Lords parts will increase.

Verse 5. In the days of Herod]
Herod a stranger, upon the death of Antigonus, last of the Maccabeans, by
Augustus his favor, was made King of Judaea, and reigned 34. years. After
(...) and his sons death, Judaea was again reduced into a Roman Province; and
the government thereof committed unto Pontius Pilate, then to Petronius, after
him to Foelix, Festus, Albinus and Florus, whose cruelty provoked the Jews to
rebellion and war, to their utter overthrow.

Of the course of Abia]
According to their weekly waitings at the Altar: 1 Chronicles. 24. God would not
have his Ministers overwrought, though he require them to labor according to
their strength, even unto lassitude. But how thanklesse is their labor, that
do wilfully over-spend themselves!

Verse 6. In all the Commandments and Ordinances]
That is, in all the duties of both the Moral and Ceremonial Law.

Blamelesse]
Sine (...), says the Vulgar, without complaint. (...).
They neither complained of others, nor were complained of by Camp. Elisab.
fol. 495.
others. As it is reported of Burleigh, Lord Treasurer in Queen Elizabeth's
reign, that he never sued any man, nor did any man ever sue him: and was
therefore in the number of those few, that both lived and died with glory.

Verse 7. And they had no child]
Which was then held an heavy judgment, as that which rendered them suspected
of impiety: since Godliness had the promise of increase both within doors and
without.

Verse 8. In the order of his course]
He took but his turn, and served but his time. God never purposed to burden
any of his creatures with devotion.

Verse 9. To burn incense]
In the incense of prayer, how many sweet spices are burned together, by the
fire of Faith, as humility, love, etc?

Verse 10. Praying without, at the time of incense]
Cant. 3. 6. the Church is said to ascend out of the wilderness of this world
with pillars of smoke, elationibus fumi, that is with affections, thoughts,
desires toward heaven. And although she be black as smoke, in regard of
infirmities, yet has she a principle to (...) her upwards.

Verse 11. Standing on the right side of the Altar]
As Satan Zach. 3. 1.
stood at the right hand of Jehoshuah to molest him: So stand the Angels at our
right hand, in the public Assemblies especially to withstand him. And to
signify this, the curtains of the Tabernacle were wrought full of Cherubins
within and without.

Verse 12. He was troubled]
But without cause: he should have been comforted rather; for his sins were
covered. How will wicked men stand before Christ?

Verse 13. For thy prayer is heard]
Both for a Son, and for a Savior.

Verse 14. Thou shall have joy]
This is not every fathers happiness. Many fathers are forced through grief
for their untoward children to wish to die, as Elias did when he sat under the
juniper: and as Moses did when wearied out by the people, Numb. 11. 15.

Verse 15. Great in the sight of the Lord]
Significatur singularis (...) praestantia, ut Genesis 10. 9. He shall be singularly
qualified.

Verse 16. Shall he turn to the Lord]
An high honor to have any hand in the conversion of souls. They that wise
others shall shine in heaven, Dan. 12. 2.

Verse 17. In the spirit and power of Elias]
There is a great agreement between the times of Elias and John Baptist. Herod
answers to Ahab, Herodias to Jezabel, etc.

The disobedient to the wisdom of the just]
i. e. By his preaching he shall turn the hearts of the Gentiles to the Jews,
and by his (...). Antiq. lib. 18. c. 7.
Baptism tie them up, as it were, togerher. He made them (according to the
phrase that Josephus uses of him) to convent or knit together in Baptism.

Verse 18. For I am an old man]
Thus Reason will be encroaching upon the bounds of Faith, till she be taken
captive by infidelity. Drive therefore Hagar out of doors.

Verse 19. That stand in the presence of God]
Ut apparitor, ab apparendo, ready pressed to any service.

Verse 20. And behold thou shall to dumb]
His tongue that so lately moved through unbelief is now tied up. God will not
pass by the well-meant weaknesses of his own, without a sensible check. He was
also deaf as well as dumb: hence they made signs to him, verse. 62.

Verse 21. The people waited for Zacharias]
They would not away without the blessing, prescribed to the Priests, Numb. 6.
In the Council of Agathon it was decreed, that people should not presume to go
out of the Temples, before the Ministers had blessed (...). (...).
the Congregation.

Verse 22. He could not speak unto them]
Hereupon a Divine thus descants: Tacuit pater vocis, and cessit in miraculum:
Vox (...), cedit in contradictionem. Nunquid aeque obmutescit (...) and filius?
Johannes and Zacharias? Nunquid and praeco (...) ost? Let us lean to the
Papists (says another) Ministrorum muta officia, populi caeca obsequia, their
Ministers, dumb Offices; their peoples, blind obedience.

Verse 23. As Soon as the days, etc.]
Zachary, though he ceased to speak, yet he ceased not to minister. Though he
were dumb, yet he was not lame, but could do sacrifices, and did it. We may not
straight take occasions of withdrawing our selves from the public services.

Verse 24. And hid her selfe]
Obscurum qua id fecerit ex causa. Its hard to say wherefore she did this,
says a learned Interpreter: but, likely, out of modesty; and that she may make
no show, till she were sure; as also that the miracle might appear the greater.

Verse 25. Thus has the Lord]
She saw that all her prayers, that she had happily forgot, were not lost, but
laid up with God, who now sends in the blessing, that she had despaired of. The
Lord often does things for his people that they look not for, Isaith 64. and
stays so long, that when he comes, he finds not Faith, Luke 18. 8.

Verse 26. Unto a City of Galilee]
God and his Angels can find out his hidden ones, Psalm. 83. 3. in what corner
of the country soever.

Verse 27. Espoused to a man]
1 The better to free her from suspicion of fornication. 2 That she might have
one to provide for her, when she was with Child. 3 That the mystery of Sensim
sine sensu.
God manifested in the flesh might come to light by little and little.

Verse 28. Hail thou that art highly favoured]
A salutation, (...).
and not a prayer as Papists pervert and abuse it. And when the Ave-Mary-Bell
rings, which is at Sunrising, Noon, and Sunsetting, all men in what place
soever, house, field, street, or market do presently kneel down, and send up
their united devotions Sands his Survey.
to heaven by an Ave-Maria. Also, where one fasteth on Friday, which they count
our Lords day, many fast on Saturday, which they count our Ladies day.

Verse 29. She was troubled at his saying]
Affect not the vain praises of men, says one. The blessed Virgin was
troubled, when truly praised of an Angel. They shall be praised of Angels in
heaven, who have eschewed the praises of men on earth.

What manner of salutation]
Cujus esset (says one Interpreter) voluit enim probare spiritum. Qualis and
quanta, says another: Id est, quam honorifica and magnifica, ac proinde supra
sortem suam pofita. What an honorable salutation it was, and more then she
could acknowledge.

Verse 30. Fear not Mary]
We are not fit to hear, till quit of carnal affections and passions. The ear
which tastes words, as the mouth does meat, when filled with choler or other
ill humors, can relish no comfort.

Verse 31. Shall call his name Jesus]
See the Note on Matt. 1. 21. If it were such a mercy to Israel that God raised
up of their Sons for Prophets, and of their young men for Nazarites, Amos 2.
11. What was it to Mary and in her to all mankind, that she should be mother to
the Arch-prophet, to that famous Nazarite?

Verse 32. Son of the highest]
Answerable to the Hebrew Elion, whence (...) for the sun, cujus antiquissima
veneratio, says Beza, whom the ancients deifie.

Verse 33. And of his Kingdom there shall be no end]
St. Paul says indeed that he shall at the end of the world deliver up the
Kingdom to God the Father: not that his Kingdom shall then cease, but that
form of administration only, that he now uses in the collecting and conserving
of his Church.

Verse 34. How shall this be?]
This is a speech not of unbeleif, but of wonderment, as desiring also to be
better informed.

Verse 35. The power of the highest shall over-shadow thee]
As once he did the confused Chaos in the Creation: This very, expression was a
great confirmation to the Virgins faith, and may well serve for a caution to us
not to be overcurious in searching into this secret.

Verse 36. Who was called barren]
It is observed that the barren women (so called in both Testaments) had the
best Children, as Sarah, Rebecca, Rachel, Elizabeth, etc. because long held
off, and much humbled. Some also have observed that the D. Hall's Contemplat.
on the New Test.
New Testament affords more store of good women then the Old.

Verse 37. For with God, etc.]
We never doubt of Gods will, but we do in some measure doubt of his power. See
them both running parallel, Job 42. 2.

Verse 38. Behold the handmaid of the Lord]
Not Mall Gods Staffords Female Glory.
maid, as a black-mouthed Blatero has blasphemed in print, that the Puritans
rudely call her.

Verse 39. Into the hill-country]
Of Juda, southward of Jerusalem, into the City of Hebron, Josh. 21. 9.

Verse 40. Saluted Elizabeth]
To whom she could not rest till she had imparted the good news, and both
given and received some spiritual gift for mutual confirmation and comfort,
Romans 1. 11, 12 Grief grows greater by concealing, joy by expression. Only the
meeting of Saints in heaven can parallel the meeting of these two couzens.

Verse 41. The babe leapt in her womb]
Such comfort there is in the presence of Christ (though but in the womb) as it
made John to spring. What then shall it be in heaven, think we?

Verse 42. Blessed art thou among women]
So is Jael the wife of Heber said to be, Judge. 5. 24. who yet perhaps was
hardly so good a woman as Deborah, that called her so. But it was no small
confirmation to the blessed Virgin, to hear the same words from Elizabeth, that
she heard before from the Angel.

And blessed is the fruit, etc.]
Or, because blessed is the fruit of thy womb, therefore blessed art thou, etc.

Verse 43. That the mother of my Lord, etc.]
That the Lord himself should come amongst us, as he did in the flesh, and does
still by his Spirit, Oh what a mercy!

Verse 44 Leaped in my womb]
More like a suckling at the (...) (...), 1 Pet. 2. 2.
the breast (as the word signifies) then an Embryo in the womb. The Spirit
then works, even in unborn babes that are elect, some kind of saving
knowledge of Christ, answerable to faith in those that are grown up.

Verse 45. Blessed (...) she, and.]
Mary believed: so did not (...), though a man, a Priest, aged, learned,
eminent, and the message to him of more appearing possibility. This, Elizabeth
here seems to have an eye to.

Believed that there shall be, etc.]
The same may be said of every beleiver. It is true also in cases ordinary: A
persuasion that God will help and keep us will indeed help and keep us, Mark
9. 23.

Verse 46. And Mary said]
See the benefit of good (...), and how one Christian kindles another. As Iron
sharpneth iron, so (...) the face of a man his friend. Prove. 27.


Does magnify the Lord]
Makes room for him, enlarges her (...).
thoughts of him, throws wide open the everlasting doors, that the King of
glory may come in, in State.

My spirit rejoyceth]
Tripudiat, danceth a galliard (which (...).
seems to come from the Greek word here used) danceth (...). Super Deo.
Levaltoes in God, or for God my Savior, as the matter and ground of my joy.

Verse 48. The low estate]
Vilitatem, the (...) and abject (...). See (...). in loc.
Contra Mariae (...), quae (...) Papicolae. Here Is no mention of merit.

All generations shall call me blessed]
How much more should we with one mind and one mouth bless. God the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ? This is an honor that he much stands upon, Romans 15. 6.

Verse 49. He that is mighty]
(...) The mighty strong (...)
God.

Has done great things for me]
No small things can fall from so great a hand. He gives life himself.

And Holy is his (...)]
God that is holy is to be sanctified in holiness, Isaiah 5. 16. when men see
their children especially (as here) the work of Gods hands, Isaiah 29. 23.

Verse 50. From generation to generation]
Personal goodness is profitable to posterity.

Verse 51. He has showed strength, etc.]
It appears by the whole frame of this holy song, that the blessed Virgin was
well versed iu the Scripture, which she here makes so much use of in sundry
passages. She was eruditionis pietatis and modestiae (...), as one speaks of
the Lady Jane Gray.

He has scattered the proud]
He by his strong Arm has (...).
so splitted them, that they shiver into pieces: or has made them as darts,
which being among the enemies, are lost: or has hurled them hither and
thither, as the wind does the dust of the mountains.

Verse 52. He has (...) down the mighty]
As he did (...) the proud Turk, and set up Tamberlaine a Stythian shepherd;
who said that he was sent from heaven to punish Bajazets rashness; Turk. Hist.
and to teach him that the proud are hated of God, whose promise is to pluck
down the mighty, and raise up the lowly.

Verse 53. He has filled the hungry]
See (...) Note on Matthew. 5. 6.

Verse 54. He (...) servant]
He has put under his (...)
hand, and raised him prostrate, taken him up at his feet. This he will not do
for an evil doer: he takes not the ungodly by the hand, Job 8. 20.

Verse 55. As he spoke to our fathers]
Who lived upon reversions, and dyed upon the promises, accounting them good
freehold. God keeps promise with nights and days, (...) 33. 20. 25. How much
more will he, with Abraham, and his seed for ever?

Verse 56. And (...) to her own house]
An honest heart is where its calling is. Such a one, when (...) is abroad, is
like a fish in the air; whereinto if it leap for recreation or necessity, yet
it soon returns to its own element.

Verse 57. And she brought forth a sonne]
The voice of the Lord makes the Hindes to calve, Psalm. 29. 9. though of all
other bruit creatures they bring forth with great trouble, bowing themselves,
bruising their (...), and casting out their sorrows, Job 39. 4. 6. How much
(...) will (...) help his dear handmaids?

Verse 58. The Lord (...) great (...)]
And the greater, (...) in her old age. Births, with those that are ancienter,
are with greater danger: so is the new birth in old sinners.

Verse 59. To Circumcise the child]
Infants are no innocents, they are conceived in sin, and the first sheet or
blanket wherewith they are covered is woven of sin, shame, blood and filth,
Ezekiel. 16. 4. 6. They were Circumcised, to signify that we had bettet be
stayed, and have our skin quite stripped off, then to have it as a skinbottle
hanging in the smoke of filthy desires, and blown full of (...) motions with
the breath of Satan.

Verse 60. He shall be called John]
Bucer here observes that he that was high Priest when Solomon built the
Temple, was called Bucer. in (...).
John: and that there was herein a sweet suitableness. (...) vero connenit,
says he, ut quo nomine sacerdos Salomonis typici, hoc and very vocaretur: that
the Type and Truth might accord in the very name.

Verse 61. There is none of thy kindred]
There is an inbred desire in us all of immortality: we would eternize our
names, and do therefore call our children, cities, lands, etc. after them,
Psalm. 49. 11. But they do best that get assurance that their names are written
in heaven. They that depart from God shall be written in the earth, Jeremiah
17. 13. as Cains son, Lord Enoch of Enoch, Genesis 4. And those men of renown,
Genesis 11. 4 were.

Verse 62. And they made signs to his father]
Who therefore seems to have been deaf (as well as dumb) because he had not
hearkened to the Angels speech, but gain-saied it.

Verse 63. And he asked for a writing-table]
Tabellam sc. (...), in qua olim stylo (...), says Sa. He had an excellent
faculty of whom Martial reports, Martial. lib. (...) de Notario.
Current verba licet, manus est veocior illis:
Et vix lingua suum, dextra peregit opus.


Verse 64. And he spoke and praised God]
And had he had as many tongues as he had hairs upon his head, he could never
have sufficiently praised God for his son, but especially for his Savior. See
1 Timothy 1. 15, 16, 17. Zachary believes and therefore speaks, Psalm. 116. 10.
the tongue of the dumb sings, Isaiah 35. 6.

Verse 65. And fear came on all]
This was either the fear of admiration at the many strange accidents about the
birth of the Baptist; or the fear of punishment, seeing so good a man as
Zachary (...). de (...).
so long to have suffered for his unbeleef.

Verse 66. And the hand of the Lord]
That is, his grace and blessing. He had the honor to be Legis and gratiae
fibula, as Chrysologus has it; the buckle and boundary of the Law and Gospel.

Verse 67. Was filled with the Holy Ghost, and prophecyed]
This was a plentiful amends for the late loss of his speech. See here the
goodness of God to all his; Quibus non solum ablata restituit `sed (...)
concedit (says Ambrose) Ille dudum (...) Prophetat. God is better to his then
their hopes.

Verse 68. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel]
This is (...) Evangelicissimus, say both Bucer and Pelican. A most
Evangelicall Canticle.

Redeemed his people]
From the wrath of God over them; the guilt and power of sin within them; from
Satan and the punishment of sin without them.

Verse 69. An horn of salvation]
A Cornu-copia, or a mighty Savior, qui instar bovis cornupetae inimicos
populi Dei prosternat atque dejiciat, that can bestir him much better then that
Heegoate, Piscat.
Alexander the great, who had a notable horn between his eyes, wherewith he
cast down the Ram to the ground and stamped upon him, etc. Dan. 8. 7.
Macedones tunc temporis AEgeades, id est caprini dicti sunt. Occasionem vide
Justin. lib. 7. The Macedones were at that time called Goate-sprung.

Verse 70. By the mouth]
There were many Prophets, yet had they all but one mouth: so sweet is their
harmony.

Verse 71. That we should be saved]
Gr. Salvation from our enemies. This properly imports the privative part of
man's happiness, but includes the positive too.

Verse 72. To perform the mercy]
Gods love moves him to promise, his truth binds him to perform. See both
these, 2 Samuel 7. 18. 21. For thy words sake, and according to thine own heart:
(that is, ex mero motu) haste thou done all these things.

Verse 73. The oath which he sware]
(...) a hedge, (...) a man may not break: much less will God.

Verse 74. Might serve him]
Servati sumus ut serviamus. Christ has therefore broke the devils yoke from
of our necks, that we may take upon us this sweet yoke, and not carry ourselves
as sons of Belial.

Verse 75. Before him]
The sense of Gods presence makes men conscientiously obedient to both tables
of the Law. Cave, (...) Cato, was a watchword among the Romans. Noli (...),
Deus videt, (...) astant, etc. Take heed what thou do, God beholds thee,
Angels observe thee, etc.

Verse 76. And thou child]
scil. qui nunc tantillus es, in virum magnum evades: Though little, thou shall
prove great.

Thou shall go before the face of the Lord]
Any relation to whom ennobleth, and advances all worth.

Verse 77. To give knowledge]
Not by infusion, Dan. 1. 17. but by instruction. See the dignity and duty of
Ministers.

Verse 78. Whereby the day-spring]
Or as Beza renders it, (...).
The Branch from on high, not from beneath, as other plants or branches. So the
anchor of hope enters not into the deep, but into that within the veil, Heb.
6. 19.

Verse 79. That sit in darknesse]
This imports 1. continuance, 2. content.

To guide our feet]
The superstitious Pagans thought that their Arnob. advers. Gent. lib. 4.
goddess Vibilia kept them in their right way when they traveled: But we have
a better guide to God.

Verse (...). And the child grew]
Though his meat was but course, and not so nourishing. The blessing of God is
the staff of bread: bread would no more nourish without it then a piece of
earth.

CHAP. II.
Verse 1. A decree from Caesar Augustus]
BY a sweet providence of God, that Christ might be born at Bethlehem,
according to the Scriptures. Howbeit Augustus thought not so (as it is said in
another case of Nebuchadnezzar, Esaias 10.) but ambitiously sought the setting
forth of his own greatness, and large command, and carried it without
punishment; when as David smarted sore for a like offense. But God will take
that from others, that he will not bear with in his own. Amos 3. 2.

That all the world]
That is, the Roman world: but such was their ambition, that though they had
but a part, yet they styled themselves Lords of all the World. So the Pope (the
image of that Beast) will needs be styled Universal Bishop. The Great Turk
(that Eastern Antichrist) calls himself God on earth, Sole Monarch of the
(...), Commander of all that can be commanded, etc. and by many other such like
swelling titles.

Verse 2. When Cyrenius, etc.]
Quirinus the Latin Writers call him. Now that the Scepter was departed,
Shiloh came.

Verse 3. And all went to be taxed]
To pay a certain small sum of money in token of fealty. I was once at a
Court-Sermon (says Melancthon) on the Nativity-day, and this was the Text: but
the Preacher, instead of discoursing on Christ's (...), Joh. Manl. loc. (...).
479.
spent the whole hour, in a very cold day, in persuading the people to obey
Magistrates, and to give them as much money as they call for. This is the guise
of Court-Parasites, Princes trencher-Flyes.

Verse 4. And Joseph also went up]
By a special providence of God, as is above-noted, verse 1. and not only so,
but that the holy Virgin might still have with her the keeper and cover of her
virginity; that the devil might not have occasion to raise up false reports,
about her great belly.

Verse 5. Being great with child]
Yet could not be excused. This was a cruelty in Augustus (not to spare
great-bellied women) but a mercy of God to mankind; for what the (...) had it
been for us, if Joseph had gone to Bethlehem, and not Mary also?

Verse 6. The days were accomplished]
Her delivery might well be hastened, or at least facilitated by her long
journey; for it was no less then four days journey from Nazareth to
Bethlehem. Some say she was gravida, but not gravata; great-bellied, but not
unweildy: Lumen enim quod in se habebat, pondus (...) non poterat, says
Augustine: but I am not bound to believe him.

Verse 7. And she brought forth her first-born]
Whether she were Deipara, the Mother of God, was a great controversy, and
raised a great storm in the Council of Ephesus; insomuch as the Emperor
declared both sides heretics. But forasmuch as (...) was the Mother of Christ,
Mat. 1. 23. and Christ is God, in (...), (...) (...), ut (...)
bringing forth Christ, she was the Mother of God. Whether she continued after
this a Virgin, pie credimus, sed nihil affirmamus. But that she vowed
Virginity, as Papists (...), we deny: For how could she promise Virginity to
God, and Marriage to Joseph?

Wrapped him in swaddling-(...)]
This pains she was at (such (...) of (...) to rend.
was her love) though newly delivered, and much weakened thereby. His
swadling-clothes were poor and ragged, as may be gathered out of the Greek
word here used.

Laid him in a manger]
Non in aureo reclinatorio, says Ludolphus, not in a stately room, as the
Porphyrogeniti in Constantinople; not in the best but basest place of the Inn,
which is counted the meanest house of a City. Oh humble Savior, whither will thou (...)?

Verse 8. Keeping watch over their flock]
At the tower of (...), say some, between Jerusalem and Bethlehem, where Jacob,
returning from Mesopotamia, stayed with his flock, after he had buried Rachel,
Genesis 35. 21. Mic. 4. 8.

By night]
Hence some gather, that our Savior was not born in the winter; because in
winter they housed their cattle, and fed them not without doors, Pro. 27. 25.

Verse 9. And lo the Angel of the Lord]
Gabriel, likely, was sent, not to Zachary or Simeon, etc. but to certain
Shepherds. God goes a way by himself. Had the Sages of the East met with these
Shepherds, they had received better intelligence then they did from the learned
Scribes.

And the glory of the Lord]
As when a Kings son is born, (...) are made, etc.

Verse 10. I bring you good tidings]
The first Preacher of the Gospel, was an Angel. God has now taken this honor
from the Angels, and put it upon the Ministers, who are in Scripture called
Angels, Revel. 2. 1. and Angels Ministers, Heb. 1. 14. The old Church had (...)
the promise, we have (...), the (...) tidings.

Verse 11. A Saviour]
The Greek word is so emphaticall (as (...). Cic. in Verr. Act. 4.
Tully witnesses) that other tongues can hardly find a fit word to express
it. The Grecians by Flaminius rang out (...) with such a courage, that the
birds astonished, fell to the earth.

Verse 12. Wrapped in swadling-clothes]
In vilibus and veteribus indumentis, says (...). See the Note on verse 7.

Verse 13. (...) God]
Angels, who have neither so much interest in Christ, nor benefit by him as we,
sing him into the world: And shall we be dumb? They sang when the world was
created, Job 38. 7. So now that it was repaired by Christ.

Verse 14. In earth peace]
Pax, quasi pactio conditionum. (...) (...), a connectendo in unum. Christ is
the great Peacemaker; but only to the elect, called here the Men of Gods good
will. When he was born, Cuncta atque continua totius Flor. Hist. l. 4.
generis humani aut pax fuit aut pactio.

Verse 15. Let us now go even unto Bethlehem]
They did not reason nor debate with themselves (says Bishop Hooper Martyr in
a Letter to certain good people taken praying in Bow-Churchyard, and now in
trouble) who should keep the wolf from the sheep in the mean time; but
committed the sheep to him whose pleasure they obeyed: So let us do now that
we be called; commit all other things to him that called us. He will take heed
Act, and Mon.
that all shall be well. He will help the husband, comfort the wife, guide the
servants, keep the house, preserve the goods: yea, rather then it should be
undone, he will wash the dishes, rock the cradle, etc.

Verse 16. Found Mary and Joseph, etc.]
They, though of the blood royal, yet lay obscured, not thrusting themselves
into observation, but well content with a low condition. Beata Virgo in vili
stabulo sedet, and jacet; sed quod homines negligunt, (...).
coelestes cives honorant and inquirunt, says Stella. The humble person is
like the violet, which grows low, hangs the head downwards, Bernard.
and hides it self with its own leaves. And were it not that the fragrant
smell of his many virtues betrays him to the world, he would choose to live and
dye in his self-contenting (...).

Verse 17. They made known abroad]
True goodness is communicative: there is no envy in spiritual things;
because they may be divided in solidum: One may have as much as another, and
all alike. These shepherds, as those lepers, 2 King. 7. 9. said one to another,
We do not well: this day is a day of good tidings, and we hold our peace, etc.

Verse 18. Wondered at those things]
Yet made little benefit of what they heard. All the world wondered after the
Beast, Revel. 13. 3. And it was a wonder there was no more wondering at the
birth of our Savior; if that were true especially, that (besides the Wise-mens
star, Mat. 2. and the Angelical music in the air, etc.) among the Gentiles
a voice was heard, The great God is now about to be born: And that at Rome, the
likeness of a woman carrying a child in her arms was seen about the sun,
etc. These things are storied. Polydor Virgil reports out of Orosius, Polyd.
Virg. lib. 4. cap. 1.
that on the very day of Christ's nativity, Augustus Caesar caused proclamation
that no man should style him Lord any longer, Manifesto praesagio majoris
Dominatus, qui tum in terris ortus esset: as presaging a greater then himself
then born.

Verse 19. Mary kept all those things]
Her soul was as an holy ark: her memory like the pot of Ma^nnah, preserving
holy truths, and remarkable occurrences.

Verse 20. As it was told unto them]
God to show that he respected not persons, revealed this grand mystery to
shepherds and Wisemen, the one poor, the other rich; the one learned, the
other unlearned; the one Jews, the other Gentiles; the one near, the other far
off.

Verse 21. For the Circumcising of the Child]
Christ would be Circumcised, and so become bound to fulfill the Law, that he
might free us that were under the Law, Gal. 4. 5.

Verse 22. And when the days of her purification]
She was rather sanctified then polluted by bearing Christ, yet wrangleth not
with the Law, nor claims an immunity. Now if she were so officious in
ceremonies, what in the maine duties of morality?

According to the Law]
This Law of Purification proclaims our uncleanness, whose very birth infects
the mother that bare us. She might not till the seventh day converse with men,
nor till the fortieth day appear before God in the Sanctuary, nor then without
a burnt-offering for thanksgiving, and a sin-offering for expiation of a double
sin, viz. of the Mother that conceived, and of the Son that was conceived.

Verse 23. That opens the womb]
This proves that Mary brought forth Christ in a natural way, and not utero
clauso, by a miracle, as Papists would have it, to prove their fiction of
Transubstantiation.

Shall be called holy to the Lord]
God requires the firstborn, as usually best-beloved; that together with our
children, he might draw to himself the best of our affections.

Verse 24. A pair of Turtle-doves]
Christ's Mother was not rich enough to bring a Lamb. Let this comfort poor
Christians. I know thy poverty, says Christ, but that is nothing, thou art
rich, Revelations 2. 9. Smyrna the poorest Church, has the highest
commendation.

Verse 25. Just and devout]
Or wary and cautelous; one that (...).
takes heed and is fearful of being deceived in that which he takes for right
and current.

Waiting for the Consolation of Israel]
That is for Christ's coming: This was the sugar wherewith they sweetened all
their crosses: this was the Dittany, by tasting whereof (as Hearts do) they
shoke of all the peircing shafts of their afflictions. Some Jews conclude the
Messiah when he comes shall be called Menahem the (...).
comforter, from Lam. 1. 16.

Verse 26. It was revealed unto him]
By an immediate Oracle. (...).
The Idolatrous heathens made use of this word to signify their impious and
diabolical Oracles. The abuse of a word takes not away the use of it.

Verse 27. And he came by the spirit, etc.]
So still, the steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, Psalm. 37. 23. He
sets his spirit as a Tutour, to direct and convince (...) into all truth.
Simeon likely, had done as Daniel did, Chap. 9. 2. found out by diligent
search, that the fullness of time was come, and is therefore thus answered from
heaven.

Verse 28. Then (...) he him up in his armes]
The blessed (...) armfull that ever the good old man had in his life. The
Patriarchs saluted him, but afar off, Heb. 11. (...).


Verse 29. Lord now let thou thy servant]
Simeon having The souls solace.
laid in his heart (says one) what he lapt in his arms, sung, (...) dimitt
as; I fear no sin, I dread no death. I have lived enough, I have my life; I
have longed enough, I have my love; I have seen enough, I have my light: I have
served enough, I have my saint: I have sorrowed enough, I have my joy: Sweet
babe, let this Psalm serve for a (...) to thee, and for a funeral for me. Oh
sleep in my arms, and let me sleep in thy peace. Dying Velcurio broke out into
these words, Pater est amator, (...) Redemptor, Spiritus Sanctus Consolator:
quomodo itaque tristitia affici possim? Dying (...). (...). (...). (...). 117.
(...) said, Ego (...) Sanctorum minimus, credo and (...) Christum, salutem
(...).

Verse 30. For mine eyes (...), etc.]
A great satisfaction. So it was to Job, Chap. 42. 5. when he could say, I have
heard of thee by the hearing of the (...), but now mine eye sees thee. What
shall it be to (...) when we shall see God face to face, etc. 1 Cor. (...).
13. 12.? (...) aspe (...). Worship we God with reverence till we come to see
him face to face.

Verse 31. Before the face of all people]
As a banner displaid, as a beacon on a hill, or as the Sun in heaven to be
beheld of all: as the brazen serpent was lifted up in the wilderness, etc.
Joh. 3. 15. (...).
(...). 2. 11.

Verse 32. The glory of thy people Israel]
Oh! pity their (...), and pray their conversion, that the Jews may call God
Abba, the Gentiles Father, Dan. 12. 11. There is a Prophecy of Gods waiting to
be gracious by Mr. Case. p. 57.
the Jews final restoration, (says one) and the time is expressed which is
1290. years after the ceasing of the daily sacrifice, and the setting up of the
abomination of desolation: which is conceived to be about Julians time, who
assayed to re-build the Temple of the Jews, but was hindered from heaven. This
was Anno Dom. 360. to which if you add 1290. years, it will pitch the
calculation upon the year 1650.

Verse 33. Marvelled at those things]
Saints the further they see into the mystery of Christ, the more are they
transported with admiration. But most of al at the last day, 2 These. 1. 10.

Verse 34. And for a sign, etc.]
For a but-mark, against whom his enemies shall shoot the shafts of their
gain-sayings: Like as at the sack of Constantinople, the Image of the (...) was
taken (...) by the Turks, and a Turks cap put upon the head thereof, Turk.
Hist. (...) 347.
and so set up, and shot at with their arrows, calling it the God of the
Christians.

Verse 35. Yea a sword shall pierce, etc.]
This confutes that of (...); Mulier nulla cordicitus dolet ex animo. The word
A. Gil. l. 10. c. 25.
here rendered sword properly signifies a long Thracian (...).

That the thoughts of many hearts]
As they are also now in these discriminating, shedding times. Affliction
tries men who are Crocodiles, Spunges, Camelions, etc. Before these days came
Act. and Mon. fol. 1482.
(said Master Bradford Martyr) how many thought of themselves, that they had
been in Gods bosom, and so were taken, and would be taken in the world? But
now we see whose they are: for to whom we obey, his servants we are, etc. In
the Palatinate scarce one man in twenty stood out: but fell to Popery, as fast
as leaves in autumn.

Verse 36. From her virginity]
i. e. She was a pure virgin when married to her husband. All are not virgins
that pass for such: some have their secret conveyances, Prove. 30. 19. 20. They
can eat stolen bread, and afterward so wipe their lips that not the least
crum shall be (...).

Verse 37. A widow of about 84. years]
She was now ripe, and ready, even of her own accord, to fall into Gods hand,
as ripe fruits do into the hand of the gatherer. And the thoughts of death had
long since forbad the banes of a second marriage. Cogita te qisotidie
mariturum, and de secundis (...) nunquam cogitabis. Hier. Ep. ad (...).
Think of death, and the thoughts of marrying again will dye within thee.

Verse 38. Gave thanks likewise]
Succinuit Simeoni, seconded Simeon, and sang the same song. This was somewhat
extraordinary, as being against that 1 Timothy 2. 12. and therefore fell out only
in troublesome and confused times of the Church; as likewise (...) the
Prophetess. Our Praedicantissae have here no patronage.

Verse 39. According to the Law of the Lord]
This is often recorded of them in this Chapter, that they observe the Law
exactly, to their singular commendation. The Law is to be kept as the apple of
ones eye, Prove. 7. 2. Count nothing little that God commands. It is as much
treason to coin pence as twenty-shilling-peeces: And they were commanded not
to (...) of the blood, as ever they looked for Gods blessing.

They returned into Galilee]
After they had first fled down into Egypt, Matt. 2.

Verse 40. And the grace of God was upon him]
Without measure; so that of his overflow we have all received grace for grace
John 1. 10.
He had a fullness not repletive only, but diffusive too: not of plenty only,
but of bounty also, not only of abundance, but of redundancy. He was Anointed
with the Oil of gladness, not only above, but for his fellows.

Verse 41. Now his parents went, etc.]
Every male was to appear thrice a year before the Lord. In the females it was
a freewill offering, and well accepted.

Verse 42. And when he was twelve years old]
What he did from his infancy hitherto, the Scripture is silent: Papists feign
many idle relations, and thereby expose us to the jeares of Jewish and Turkish
miscreants. Where the Scripture has no tongue, we must have no ears.

Verse 43. Joseph and his mother knew not]
One would wonder they should be so careless of so peerlesse a pearl: They
might well think there were enough at Jerusalem, among the (...) especially,
that would have been glad to have dispatched (...) that should take upon them to
be Messiah the prince, as Daniel calls him, Chap 9. 25.

Verse 44. Sought him among their kinsfolk]
They knew him to be of a disposition not strange and Stoicall, but sweet and
sociable. Let not us tie up our selves in a stern austerity, but run into the
company of those now, that must be our everlasting companions in heaven.

Verse 45. And when they found him not]
The best are sometimes at a loss, and hard put to it for three days, or so.
(...) this, mostly, for their security, as the Church in the (...).

Verse 46. Sitting in the midst of the Doctors]
Christus prius sedet (...) medio Doctorum (ut recte distin. 36. Gratian.) quam
(...) capit munus Mediatoris obire.

Hearing them, and posing them]
In this very year the Temple was profaned, even at the Passover. For the
Priests having (...) the Temple doors by night, as the manner was, found a
great company of dead-mens bones in the morning, thrown here and there thorough
the whole house. This, says Josephus, was thought to have been done by the
Samaritans in spite to the Jews. But others think God had a special hand in
it, to signify (...) Temple-services were shortly to dye and determine; now
(...). Chron.
(...) the Lord of heaven and earth had taught therein with his own (...) voice.

Verse 47. At his understanding]
Which was so large, even as (...), that some have affirmed it to be infinite,
and uncreated: (...) of this, his manhood, being a creature, was incapable.
Howbeit here (...) Savior put forth a beam of his Deity, which yet he soon
drew in again, and lay long after obscured.

Verse 48. Have sought thee sorrowing]
Animo (...), (...) afflictissimo. God often cures a Lethargy of security, by a
(...) of perplexity.

Verse 49. Wist ye not]
Men be they pleased or displeased, God must be obeyed.

Verse 50. They understood not]
Yet were well versed in the (...). If God give us not sight as well as light,
we are still to seek.

Verse 51. (...) was subject unto them]
Laboring with his (...), etc, Mark 6. 5.

Verse 52. Increased in wisdome]
Being (...) as Macarius was called, whilst a child, for his extraordinary
grace and Niceph.
gravity.

CHAP. III.
Verse 1. Pontius Pilate being governour]
TAcitus calls him Procurator only of Judea. But Saint Luke (...)
here makes little difference betwixt his office and the Imperial honor of
his Master Tiberius: for he uses the same word to express both. The Earl of
Flanders counts it a great prerogative, that he writes himself Comes Dei
gratia. Others only Dei clementia. The Duke of Millain, that he is the prime
Duke of Europe. The Deputy of Ireland, that there comes no Vicegerent in
Europe more near the Majesty and prerogative of a King then he, etc.

Verse 2. Annas and Caiaphas being high Priests]
By turns, Joh. 11. 44. Act. 4. 6. contrary to the old order. Throughout the
whole Turkish Territories, there is but one Mufta or HighPriest, and he is the
supreme Judge and rectifier of all actions, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical.

Verse 3. Preaching the Baptism of Repentance]
John's note was still, Repentance. Christ comes not, where this Herald has not
been before him. Yet now it is come to that pass, that many men scorn to hear
a Sermon of Repentance. Its a sign, say some; that the Minister has been idle
that week, or that his stock is spent when he comes to preach of such a common
theme as Repentance. If God be not merciful, we shall quickly dispute away
all our Repentance, as a famous preacher justly complains.

Verse 4. In the book of the words of Esaias]
Called a great (...) Barathrum.
roll, Esaias 8. 1. (because it treates of great things, Maxima in minimo) and
said to be written with the Pen of a man, that is clearly that the simplest of
men may understand it, Deuteronomie 30. 11.

Verse 5. Every valley shall be filled]
Every hole, or hollow. Fainting of heart unfits the way for Christ, as well as
the swelling hills of pride. Plain things will join in every point one with
another; not so, rough and hollow things: so plain spirits close with Gods
Truths; not so those that are swollen, and uneven.

Verse 6. All flesh shall see]
Viz. All that order their conversation aright, Psalm. 50. 23. which is the life
of thankfulness. ib.

Verse 7, 8, 9.]
See the Notes on Matthew 3. 7, 8, 9, 10.

Verse 10. What shall we do?]
q. d. What are those fruits worthy of Repentance, that we in our places must
bring forth?

Verse 11. He that has two coates]
Thus Tyrus evidenced her repentance, Isa. 23. 18. by feeding and clothing
Gods Saints with her merchandise. Thus Zacheus, Dorcas, etc. This is all the
lesson that for the present he sets them, being but young scholars in the
school of Christ.

Verse 13. Exact no more]
Make no more of your places, then (...)
ye may with a good conscience. Shun that mystery of iniquity that is crept
into most callings. A great part of the Turks Civil Justice Sands his Travels.
at this day is grounded upon Christ's words, Thou shall not do what thou
would not have done to thee.

Verse 14. Do violence to no man]
Shake no man by the shoulders, (...)
toss no man to and fro, to put him into a fright, smite no man with the fist
of wickedness. Tamerlaine took such order with his Soldiers that none were
injuried by them: If any soldier of his had but taken an apple or the like
from any man, he died for it. One of his soldiers having taken a little milk
from a country woman, and she thereof complaining, he caused the said soldier
to be presently killed, and his stomach to be ripped, where the milk Turk. hist
f. 213
that he had of late drunk being found, he contented the woman and so sent her
away: who had otherwise undoubtedly dyed for her false accusation, had it not
so appeared.

Neither accuse any falsely]
Get nothing by sycophancie. Oppress (...)
no man either by force or fraud, and forged cavilation, as it is rendered, Luke
19. 8.

Verse 15. Whether he were the Christ]
Yet John did no miracle, but he was a burning and a shining light, he
thundered in his doctrine, and lightened in his life. Hence was he so much
admired.

Verse 16. The latchet of whose shoes, etc.]
By this expression the Baptist acknowledges Christ's Godhead, as did also Mary
by washing his feet. But what does the Pope that holds forth his feet to be
kissed? Is not this he that sits as God in the Temple of God? Is not this
Dominus Deus noster Papa? Learned he not this abominable insolency of
Dioclesian that bloody Persecutor? who as he was the first Roman Emperor that
would be worshipped Eatrop.
as God, so he was the first that wore shoes embellished with precious stones,
and held forth his feet to be kissed of his prostrate suitors.

Verse 17. Whose fanne]
Viz. The preaching of the Gospel.

Verse 19. For Herodias his brother Philips wife]
Whom it was not lawful for Herod to have, though Philip were dead, as
Josephus says he was. This was the case so much controverted Joseph. Antiq.
lib. (...). cap. 7.
here and beyond Seas in Henry the eighths time, touching his marriage with his
brother Arthurs widow, by Papal dispensation. The King had first a scruple
cast into his mind about it by the Bishop of Baion the French Ambassador, who
came to him to consult of a Marriage between the Lady Mary, and the Duke of
Orleans, whether Mary were legitimate, etc. This gave occasion to the casting
the Popes authority out of England. Mary was forced, for fear of death, to
renounce the Bishop of Rome, and to acknowledge Camdens Elisab. Introd.
her Mothers marriage to have bin incestuous and unjust, etc. Though
afterward, she set up the Pope here again: and it was her policy, so to get,
and keep the Crown upon (...) head.

And for all the evils, which Herod, etc.]
John reproved him with the same liberty that Herod committed them. So did John
Chrysostom, (...). Hist. (...). Cent. 5. (...). 1. cap. 6.
the great ones of his time. Ita quidem ut etiam Ducum, Eutropii and Gainae,
imo ipsius Imperatoris errata reprehenderet: He spared not Dukes, Princes, nay
not the Emperor himself.

Verse 20. Added yet this]
There is no stint in sin: but as one wedge makes way for another: so here. As
after Jonathan and (...) Armor-bearer, came the whole host: So.

Verse 21. And praying, the heaven was opened]
Prayer is the key of Gods Kingdom: And must be used, as at other times, so
especially when we or ours receive the Sacraments: though the most, if urged
hereto, must say, if they say truly as 1 Samuel 17. 39. I cannot go with these
accoutrements: for I am not accustomed to them.

Verse 23. Being (as was supposed)]
But falsely: for Joseph was no more then his Pater politicus, as Postellus
calls him his foster-father, reputed father.

Which was the son of Heli]
That is, his son in law. For Heli was Mary's natural father: and it is Mary's
genealogy that is here So Ruth 1. 11, 12, 13.
described: but put upon Joseph, because the Hebrews reckon not their
genealogies by women, but by men only.

Verse 27. Which was the son of Neri]
Salathiel was naturally the son of Neri, but legally, and by succession the
son of Jechoniah, Matt. 4. 12. for he succeeded him in the Kingdom. Neri which
signifies My candle, seems to have bin so named from the candle which the
Lord reserved for David and his house, 2 Chronicles. 21. 7.

Verse 30. Which was the son of Simeon]
Our Saviors genealogy is here the more accurately described, because there
were that would have substituted and put false Christ's upon the Church Ezekiel. 2.
62. The Priests that could not produce their genealogies were outed.

Verse 36. Which was the son of Cainan]
This name crept by Bez. in loc. Pareus in Genesis 11
some means, into the Greek copies after Jeromies time, says Beza and (...).
Others say, that Saint Luke herein followed the Septuagints translation, out of
wisdom and charity to the Hellenists Alsted. Chron.
or Greek-Jewes, that had received it, and read it. 2. That M. Lightfoots
(...). p. 312.
writing for heathens, he followed the heathens Bible in his quotations. 3.
That in his genealogies he was to be a Coppier, not a Corector.

Verse 38. Which was the son of God]
Not by generation, but creation. Therefore the Syriack translatour has it
Demen Elaba, A Deo, Of God, not Bar Elaha, the son of God.

CHAP. IV.
Verse 1. Returned from Jordan and was led]
NO sooner out of the water of baptism, but in the fire of temptation. After
greatest feelings, we are to expect sharpest assaults: neither can we better
quench the Devils fiery darts then with the water of baptism. We read, says
Luther, of a certain holy virgin, who, whenever solicited to sin, would stop
the tempters mouth with this one answer Christiana sum, I am a Christian.
Intellexit enim hostis statim virtutem Baptismi and fidei --. and fugit ab ea.
Satan could not abide the mentions of baptism, but fled from her presently.

Verse 2. Being forty dayes]
During which time, he was set upon with all sorts of temptations. These three
here recorded were likely the very worst; in quibus Diabolus omnes astus and
(...) suae sacculos deplevit, (as one says) wherein the Devil did his utmost.

Verse 3. Command this stone]
Bread of deceit is sweet to a Prove. 20. 17.
man, but afterward his mouth shall be filled with gravel. Compare this verse
with verse 9. and see how the devil usually tempts by extremes, to make men
offend either in defect, or excess. Thus he tempted Master Knox upon his
deathbed, if not to despair, (...).
then to presume that heaven should be his, for his zeal in the Scottish
Reformation.

Verse 5. Showed unto him all the Kingdomes]
In visible landscape of his own making, presented to the eye.

Verse 6. To whomsoever I will, I give it]
The Pope, as heir to the Devil, takes upon him to be Dominus regnorum mundi.
Boniface. 8. wrote to Philip King of France, that he was lord of all, both
Temporals and Spirituals, in all countries. Os papae and cultus diabobi in
eodem sunt praedicamento, says one. But, Cui volo do illa, is Gods only to say
Dan. 4. Z 2.

Verse 7 If thou will worship]
Papa dulia adorandus, say the Canonists.

Verse 8. Get thee behind me]
See the Note on Matthew 4. 10.

Verse 13. He departed from him for a season]
We must look for the the other bout, and in a calm prepare for a storm. The
tempter is restless and impudent: so that a man is to expect, if he live out
his days, to be urged to all sins, to the breach of every branch of the ten
commandments, and to be put to it in respect of every Article of the Creed.

Verse 14. In the power of the Spirit]
Without which the word is preached to no purpose. Cathedram in caelo habet,
qui corda docer, says Augustine. It is with the word and spirit, as with the
veins and arteries; as the veins carry the blood, so the arteries carry the
spirits to quicken the blood.

Verse 15. Glorified of All]
Envy it self was thrattled, which yet usually waits upon virtue. Every Zopyrus
has his Zoilus.

Verse 16. Where he had been brought up]
The Jews were to be kind to the Egyptians, and to pray for the prosperity of
Babylon, where they had bin bred, and fed. Be ye thankful, Coloss. 3. 15, viz.
to your friends and benefactors.

And stood up for to read]
In honor of the word that he read: So (...). 8. 5. A commendable custom.

Verse 17. He found the place]
Whether he looked for it, or it so fell out by a providence, its uncertain.
Origin, after his fall, lighting on that text, Psalm. 50. What have thou to do
to take my words, etc. fell into a passion of weeping, and came out of the
pulpit, as not able to speak to the people. Augustine hearing from heaven
Toll, lege, and happening upon that place Romans 13. 14. Put Aug. Confess. lib.
8 cap. 12.
ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, etc. was presently converted thereby. So was
Cyprian, by reading the prophecy of Jonah.

Verse 18. He has anointed me to preach]
Therefore the Gospel is a sure saying, and worthy of al acceptance, since its
an effect of the holy Spirit: doubt not of its excellency, authority,
certainty, sufficiency. See my True Treasure.

Verse 19. The acceptable year of the Lord]
A joyful Jubilee. Let us not stand out the time, least we be bored in the
ear by the Devil.

Verse 20. Were fastened on him]
A good help against distractions. Our hearts are fickle and fugitive, if not
hard held to it.

Verse 21. This day is the Scripture, etc.]
This was the sum of his sermon, as were also the (...) we read, the heads
only and short notes of the Prophets larger discourses. Brevity breeds
obscurity.

Verse 22. Is not this Joseph's son?]
And what of that? But it is still the course of our hearers, to look round
about, if possibly they may find any hole in our coat, through which to flight
and slip the coards of our doctrine, though they cannot but admire it.

Verse 23. Physician heal thy selse]
That is thy Country. So that for a man to cure his Country, is to cure himself.

Verse 24. No Prophet is accepted]
See the Note on Matt. 13. 57.

Verse 25. Many widows were in Israel]
q. d. God has (...) on whom he will have mercy, etc. He is a free agent, and
may do with his own as he pleases. If the Prophets, by the Spirits direction,
healed and helped forraigners sooner then Israelites; what so great wonder that
Christ did not that for his own Country, that he did for others?

Verse 26. That was a widow]
A calamitous name, 2 Samuel 14. 5. The Hebrews call her Almanah, a dumb woman,
because either she dare not, or may not speak for her self: but God professes
himself the patron of such; and he can speak for them in the hearts of their
greatest adversaries. Happy they in such an Advocate.

Verse 27. (...) the Syrian]
Nor he neither so long as he looked upon Gods Jordan with Syrian eyes.

Verse 28. And all they in the Synogogue]
Though but plain rusticks, yet they soon understood this saying of preaching
to the Gentiles: which put them into an anger, and our Savior into a danger.

Verse 29. Thrust him out of the City]
As unworthy to tread on their pavement. And so mad they were, that they could
neither stay till the business were brought to a judicial trial, nor forbear
execution till the Sabbath were over.

Verse 30. But he passing, etc.]
Like a second Sampson: (...) own arm saved him. This might have convinced his
adversaries; but that they were mad with malice.

Verse 31. And came down to Capernaum]
Contempt drives away Christ. And woe be unto you if I forsake you, Hos. 9. 12.
Contend earnestly for the Faith, since it is but once delivered to the Saints,
Jude 3. You must never expect another edition of it.

Verse 32. For his word was with power]
He preached not frigide and trepide, as the Scribes: but uttered oracles, and
did miracles.

Verse 33. And in the (...)]
See Notes on Mark 1. 23.

Verse 34. The Holy One of God]
The Pope will needs be called Most Holy: and so lifts up himself above Christ.

CHAP. V.
Verse 1. As the people pressed upon him]
THis was both an argument of the truth of his humanity (that he was thronged
and thrust (...) by the unmannerly multitude) and a part of his passion.

Verse 2. Were washing their nets]
Though they labored last night and had taken nothing. Ferendum and sperandum.
Hope beguiles calamity, as good company does the way.

Verse 3. He prayed him]
Gr. He gently asked him, Will you (...)
be pleased to thrust out a little? See Philem. 8, 9. Posse and nolle, (...)
est.

Taught the people out of the ship]
Any place served him for a pulpit. So if men be desirous to hear, they will
make a mat a seat, a pair of legs a (...).

Verse 4. Let down your (...)]
This is the fare he paies them, for the use of their ship. No man (...) by
Christ.

Verse 5. We have toyled all night, etc.]
Omnia fui, and nihil expedit, Spartian.
said Severus the Emperor. See Hab. 2. 13. Hag. 2. 6. If God stop not that
hole in the bottom of the bag, all will run (...).

Verse 6. And their net brake]
Yet the (...) got not out: which some note for another miracle.

Verse 7. Filled (...) the ships]
Here the dumb fishes do clearly preach Christ to be the Son of God.

Verse 8. For I am a sinful man]
Gr. A man, a sinner, a (...)
very mixture and compound of dirt and sin. See the like phrase, Numb. 32. 14.

Verse 9. And he was astonished]
Gr. Fear seized upon him, (...)
and surrounded him, as Tacitus says Induere pavores.

Verse 10. Thou shall catch men]
See the Note on Matthew 4. 19.

Verse 11. They forsook all, and followed him]
They had given their names to him before, John 1. But now they see by this
miracle his power to provide for them, they leave all to live with him. We love
to see how we shall subsist.

Verse 12. If thou will, thou canst]
It is a ready way to speed, to found our prayers upon the power of God.

Verse 13. I will, be thou clean]
So ready is Christ to gratify his suppliants, yea to be commanded by them,
Isaiah 45. 11.

Verse 14. For a testimony unto them]
For a Bill of Indictment against them. Reprobates shall give an heavy account
to God of all the means and offers of grace.

Verse 15. But so much the more]
Fame follows them that fly from it, and the contrary: as the Crocodile does.

Verse 16. And he withdrew]
Pray, if you mean to prosper.

Verse 17. And the power of the Lord]
So it is, when any Ordinance is afoot.

Verse 18. And behold men brought]
See the Notes on (...). 8. 2, 3, etc. and on Mark 2. 3. etc.

Verse 20. Thy sins are forgiven thee]
Let our sicknesses mind us of our sins, that we may soon seek pardon.

Verse 23. Whether is easier]
q. d. Neither of either: for both are equally hard, and feisable to God alone.

Verse 36. Strange things]
(...) Paradoxes, things that we (...).
never thought to have seen: and above belief, had we not seen them.

Verse 35. And then shall they fast]
This is fulfilled says Bellarmine, in our Lent-fasts. But this was fulfilled
say we, (...) (...). de (...) cap. 10.
Christ was crucified, and the Apostles mourned. Papists set-fasts are mere
mock-fasts.

Verse 39. The old is better]
That is, milder, and so pleasanter. Vetustate enim vina mitescunt, quia
vetustas igneum calorem, acerbitatem, and (...) e vino tollit. Age clarifies
wine, and ripens (...).
it.

CHAP. VI.
Verse 1. On the second Sabbath after the first]
Jerome says, that he asked Nazianzen what this second Sabbath (...).
after the first was? Nazianzen answered, I Will tell you that, when I come next
into the pulpit, for there you cannot contradict me. It a perjocum dixit (says
Melanchthon) quod hodie serio (...). See the Note on Matt. 12. 1.

Verse 2. That which is not lawfull]
Our Savior grants that it had not been lawful indeed, but in case of hard
hunger.

Verse 3. Have ye not read?]
Yes, over and over: but either understood not, or, through malice, dissembled
it. Quilibet nostrum de lege interrogatus facilus quam nomen suum respondet,
says Josephus. The Jews were all very well versed in the Scriptures.

Verse 6. And it came to passe]
See the Notes on Matthew 12. 9, 10, 11, etc.

Verse 12. He went out into a mountain to pray]
He premiseth prayer being to make choice of the twelve. If Eleazar prayed when
to seek a wife for Isaac, Genesis 24. If Solomon prayed for wisdom, ere he set
upon the Temple-work. If Ezra fasted and prayed, ere he committed the golden
and silver vessels to them that kept them, Ezra 8. 21. 30. Should there not
prayer be made for Ministers, ere they be set over Gods house and people?

Verse 13. And of them he chose]
See Notes on Matthew (...). 1.

Verse 20. Blessed (...) ye poor]
Here we have a repetition of that famous Sermon in the Mount, Matt. 5. 6, 7.
See the Notes there.

Verse 22. And cast out your name]
Ubicunque invenitur (...) Calvini, deleatur, says the Index expurgatorius.
Persecutors proscribe true professors, tanquam nequissimos and lucis hujus
usura indignos. After Joh. Husse was burnt, his adversaries got his heart which
was left untoucht by the fire, and beat it with their staves. Epist. (...). 16.
ad (...).
A Friar preaching to the people at Antwerp, wished that Luther were there,
that he might bite out his throat with his teeth, as Erasmus testifies.

Verse 25. Woe unto you that laugh now]
Worldlings jollity is but as a Book fairly bound: which, when its opened, is
full of (...) but tragedies.

Verse 26. When all men shall speak well]
What evil have I done said Aristides, when one told him he had every man's
good Sen. de (...). (...).
word? Male de me loquuntur; sed mali says Seneca. Malis (...), (...) est.
When Doeg blasted David, he thinks the better of himself, Psalm. 52. 8. Latymer
says, he was glad when any Sermon last before King Edward.
objected indiscretion against him in his Sermons: for by that, he knew the
matter was good; else they would soon have condemned that.

Verse 29. That smites thee on the one cheek]
Socrates, when one gave him a box on the ear in the marketplace said, Quam
molestum est nescire homines quando prodire debeant cum galea? What an odd
thing it is to go abroad without a head-peice.

Verse 30. Give to every man, etc.]
General Norrice never thought he had that, that he gave not away. It is not
lack, but love of money that makes men churles.

Ask them not again]
Or if thou take the benefit of the Law to recover them, do it without hate or
heat: as Tilters break their spears on each others breasts, yet without wrath,
or intention of hurt.

Verse 31. And as ye would that men, etc.]
The most part (...) (...) Travels.
of the Turks Civil Justice is grounded upon this Rule as is above noted.

Verse 35. Lend, hoping for nothing]
No not the principal, in case thy brother be not able to repay it. Thomas
Tomkins Martyr a Weaver dwelling in Shore-ditch, whenever any had come to
borrow money of him, would show them such money as he had in Acts and Mon. (...).
(...).
his purse, and bid them take it: And when they came to repay it again, so far
was he from Usury, that he would bid them keep it longer, till they were better
able.

To the unthankful, and to the evill]
An unthankful man is a naughty man: nay, he is an ugly man, Psalm. 147. 1.

Verse 38. Into your bosome]
The Jews ware large and loose garments, so that they could bare away much in
their bosoms. Hence this expression.

CHAP. VII.
Verse 2. (...) a certain Conturions servant]
PIscator thinks that this History is not the same with that Matthew 8. 5. His
reasons may be read in his Scholia on that place. Videsis.

Verse 4. That he was worthy]
So they held him: but he held himself unworthy, verse. 6. God in like manner
says that Jerusalem had received double for her sins, Isaiah 40. 2. But
Jerusalem her self says, Our God has punished us less then our sins, Ezra 9.
13. Too much, says God: Too little, says she: and yet how sweetly and
beautifully does this kind of contradiction become both?

Verse 5. Built us a Synagogue]
Antiochus had burnt up the Synagogues in sundry places. This man, now
converted, is content to be at cost for God and his people. So the Israelites
received to favor again after their foul fall in setting up the golden calf,
brought enough and to spare toward the work of the Tabernacle.

Verse 6. For I am not worthy]
So says Jacob of himself, Genesis 32. 10. so Paul, 1 Cor. 15. so the Baptist.
Matt. 3. so Augustine, Non sum dignus, quem tu diligas, Domine, I am not worthy
of thy love, Lord.

Verse 9. He marvelled]
See the Note on Matt. 8. 10.

Verse 12. There was a dead man]
Though a young man. Our decrepit age both expects death and sollicits it: but
vigorous youth looks strangly upon that grim sergeant of God. Senibus mors in
jannis, adolescentibus in insidiis, Bern. Death seizes on old men, and lays
wait for the youngest.

Verse 13. He had compassion on her]
Of his own free accord, and unrequested, he raised him. Christ had a most
tender heart. How shall he not pity and provide for his praying people?

Verse 19. Art thou he that should come]
The soul rests not till it pitch upon Christ. See the Notes on Matt. 11. 2.
etc.

Verse 23. And blessed is he]
This is check to them for their preposterous zeal for John, their Master.
Therefore also our Savior commends not John, till they were departed.

Verse 28. But he that is least]
This is no small comfort to the Ministers of the Gospel, against the contempts
cast upon them by the world. They are some-bodies in heaven, what ever men make
of them.

Verse 29. Justified God]
i. e. They glorified his word, Act. 13. 48. and acknowledged his
righteousness, repenting of their sins, and believing John's and Christ's
testimony, which the Pharisees so pertinaciously rejected.

Verse 30. Rejected the counsel of God]
Being ingrati gratiae Dei, as Ambrose speaks, and so much the further off,
for that they saw the people so forward.

Verse 33. Neither eating bread]
But Locusts and wild Honey.

Verse 35. Of all her children]
That is, her disciples, Psalm. 34. 11.

Verse 36. Sat down to meat]
It was fit he should feast sometimes, that fared so hard mostly.

Verse 38. To wash his feet]
They that make their eyes a fountain to wash Christ's feet in, shall have his
side for a fountain, to wash their souls in.

Kissed his feet]
But how many now refuse those kisses of his mouth, Cant. c. 1. by despising
the word preached, that sweet pledge of his love?

Verse 39. This man, if he were a Prophet]
See the picture of an hypocrite, slighting and censuring his betters.

What manner of woman this is]
Sir. What an ill name she has, for a light huswife.

Verse 40. I have somewhat to say to thee]
He that receives a courtesy, we say, sells his liberty. But so did not Christ
at Simons, at Martha's, etc. table. His mouth was not stopped with good cheer.
He entertains the Pharisees with as many menaces, as they do him with messes of
meat.

Verse. 44. Washed my feet with tears]
We read not that the Virgin Mary ever did as this greater sinner did.
Repentance is the fair child of that foul mother, sin, as the Roman said of
Pompey. (...).
And it is question whether more glorifies God, Innocence or Penitence?

Verse 47. For she loved much]
Nam, notificativum est, non impulsivum. Her love was an Argument (not a cause)
that her sins were forgiven her.

Verse 48. Thy sins are forgiven thee]
Melanchthon makes mention of a godly woman, who having upon her deathbed been
much conflicted, and afterward much comforted, brake out into these words;
Now, and not till now, I understand the meaning of those words, Thy sins are
forgiven. It is storied of another that courting a curtezan, and understanding
that her name was Mary: he remembered Mary Magdelen, and forbearing to commit
that act of filthiness that he intended, became a sound convert.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse 2. Which had been healed]
EXodus 31. After sickness, they were to offer to God the ransom of their
lives. Hezekiah testified his thankfulness for recovery, by a song: these good
women, by following Christ; when they might have stayed at home with more ease
to themselves; and more thank of their friends. Nay, very Heathens after a fit
of sickness, would consecrate something to their gods.

Verse 3. Joanna the wife of Chuza, Herod's steward]
Or Treasurer, as the Arabic calls him: his Vicar-Generall, or Protetrach.
This Court-Lady follows Christ: so did Serena the Empress, who was therefore
Martyred by her husband Diocletian. So Elizabeth Luth, in Epist. ad Jo. Agricol.
Queen of Denmark; of whom Luther testifies, that she died a faithful
professor of the Reformed Religion: and adds, Scilicet Christus etiam
aliquando voluit Reginam in coelum vehere. Christ would once save a Queen;
which he does not often.

Verse 4. And when much people, etc.]
See the Notes on (...). 13. 2, 3, etc.

Verse 12. Takes away the word]
Least, if it should lie long Jam. 1. 21.
upon their hard hearts, it should break through them with its weight, as being
able to save their souls.

Verse 14. Go forth, etc.]
Viz. About their worldly businesses; which as the lean kine in Pharaohs
dream, devour the fat, and it is nothing seen by them. After a while, they
remember no more then the man in the Moon does, what they had heard delivered.

Verse 15. In an honest]
Referred to the end, and intent in the action.

And good heart]
In respect of inward renewed qualities.

Having heard the word, keep it]
As food or physic, which if not kept, profits not. They incorporate it into
their souls, so as it becomes an ingrafted word; they are transformed into the
same image, conformed to the heavenly pattern.

With patience]
Or, with tarriance for the fit season: Not as (...).
that rath-ripe fruit, verse. 13. and Psalm. 129.

Verse 16. No man when he has lighted, etc.]
q. d. Though to you it is given to know Mysteries, etc. as verse 10. yet not
for your own use only, but that your light may shine before men.

Verse 18. Take heed therefore how ye hear]
For else ye shall neither bear good fruits, nor be born with for your
barrenness. All shall out, and you shall smart for it.

Verse 25. Where is your faith?]
It is not the having faith, but the living by it, the actuating of it, that
helps us in an exigence.

Verse 27. A certain man which had devils]
All Pharaohs cruelty exercised over the Israelites, was nothing to this. Oh
then Chrysostom.
the unexpressible torments of the damned! Utinam ubique de Gehenna
dissereretur! says a Father. I could wish men would discourse much and often of
hell.

Verse 29. And was driven of the devill]
As a horse is by his (...).
rider (so the word signifies) or a ship with oars. All wicked men are acted
and agitated by the devil, Ephesians. 2. 2. Persecutors especially. Bern.
Quod si videris aliquando persecutorem tuum nimis saevientem, scito quia ab
ascensore suo Diabolo perurgetur. If Persecutors sometimes be more moderate, it
is because the devil spurs not so hard.

Verse 30. And he said, Legion]
We must be ready and well appointed to resist: for the devil sets upon us not
without military discipline, and singular skill, Cataphractus incedit Satan,
says Luther. The devil marches well armed and in good array.

Verse 33. And the herd ran violently]
So would the possessed man soon have done, but that God preserved him.

Verse 35. Sitting at the feet of Jesus]
As fearing, least if he departed, he should be repossessed. So we see its an
old error and weakness for men to be too strongly conceited of Christ's
corporeal presence.

CHAP. IX.
Verse 7. And he was perplexed]
PEndebat, animi dubious. He stood amused and amazed: he stuck in the mud, as it
were, and could find no way out. This (...).
is the import of the Greek word. Thus the wicked, in the fullness of his
sufficiency is in straits, as Zophar has it, Job. 15. 22.

Verse 9. And he desired to see him]
with a faint and fruitless desire: for he never stirred out of doors to see
Christ, though he believed that God had raised him from the dead. So true is
that of Abraham, Luke 16. 31. Perhaps he desired to see whether it were John or
not.

Verse 11. And he received them]
Weary though he were, yet never weary of well-doing.

Verse 13. Except we should go, etc.]
Which is a thing not only improbable, but impossible. They held it an absurd
motion.

Verse 18. As he was alone praying]
Examinationi preces praemittendae. All our sacrifices should be salted with
this salt.

Verse 19. But some say Elias]
This Pythagorean transanimation is held by the Jews to this day, viz. (ut
singuli tertio renascantur) against so many clear testimonies of Scripture to
the contrary.

Verse 28. About eight dayes]
Putting the two utmost days also into the reckoning. See the Notes on Matthew
17. 1. etc.

Verse 29 And as he prayed]
Dum ipsius men's tota Deose immergeret, Luc. Burgens.
says one. Christians, whiles they are praying are oft-times carried out and
beyond themselves. See Matt. 17. 2, 3. and the Notes there.

Verse 31. And spoke of his decease]
Gr. Of his Exodus; in (...).
reference to that expedition or departute of Israel out of Egypt. It
signifies a translating from a condition and state of hardship: and is also
used by Saint Peter 2 Epistle 1. 15. Death to the Saints is but an out-going to
heaven; a loosing from the shore of life, and Philip. 1. 21.
launcing out into the maine of Immortality.

Verse 34. There came a cloud]
See the Note on Matthew 17. 5.

Verse 39. And bruising him]
As in the falling sickness, it falls out.

Verse 44. Let these sayings sink, etc.]
Ponite, reponite, lay (...).
up the sayings of my sufferings, notwithstanding this peoples vain applauses.
The best balm cast into water, sinks to the bottom: the baser sort, flotes on
the top.

Verse 51. That he should be received up]
The word implies a (...) Poly. Lyser.
Metaphor from fathers owning and acknowledging their children after long
absence.

He set his face]
He steeled his forehead against all discouragements. (...)


Verse 53. And they did not receive him]
Such is the hatred that Idolaters bear against all Gods true worshippers.
Illam Domum in qua inventus fuerit haereticus diruendam decernimus: It was a
Decree of the Counsel of Toulouse against the Albigenses.

Verse 54. And when his disciples]
These two brethren, sons of thunder, how soon was their choler up? they had
quick and hot spirits.

Will thou that we command]
It were to be wished that we would first consult with Christ in his word, ere
we stir hand or foot to revenge.

Verse 55. But he turned and rebuked them]
He did it not slightly, and by the by, but seriously and on set purpose: so
must we rebuke and rebate our vindictive spirits, our unruly lusts, when like
kine in a strait they rush and ride, one upon the back of another.

Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of]
Not of Elias his spirit, as ye imagine: this wildfire was never kindled on
Gods hearth, as his zeal was: you are men of another mould then Elias. He was a
Minister of indignation, you of consolation: his actions fit not you, because
your persons are not like his: It is a (...) Arisiot.
rare thing to be of an heroical Spirit says the Moralist. Every man cannot
be an Elias or a Phineas, Numb. 25. 8. To that height of heat, ordinary men's
tempers ate not raised.

Verse 58. And Jesus said unto him]
Christ had felt his pulse, and found his temper, that he looked after outward
things only: and therefore he lets him know what to trust unto.

Verse 62. No man having put his hand]
Christ here happily (...) to that which Elisha did, 1 King 19. 19.

CHAP. X.
Verse 1. Other seventy also]
AS his heralds, to foreshew his coming to Jerusalem, and to proclaim the
true Jubilee.

Verse 3. Go your wayes]
Christ had no sooner bidden them pray, but he answers their prayers. When we
bid our children ask us for this or that, it is because we mean to give it them.

As Lambs among Wolves]
Sed sollicitudo pastoris boni efficit (...) in agnos audere nil possint, says
Ambrose. The care of the good shepherd is the safety of the flock.

Verse 4. Salute no man]
For that your task is long, your time is little.

Verse 8. Such things as they set before you]
Not seeking after dainties. It becomes not a servant of the Highest, to be a
slave to (...).
his palate. Epicurci, dum palato prospiciunt, coeli (...) non suspiciunt, says
the heathen.

Verse 11. That the Kingdom of God]
There is in unbeleif an odious unthankfulness: Such judge themselves unworthy
of eternal life, Act. 13. 44. they are condemned already, Joh. 3.

Verse 16. He that despises you]
Julius (...), complaining to the Emperor of wrong done to him by the Duke of
Saxony, received this answer from him, Tuacausa erit meacausa: so says Christ
to all his servants. Causa ut sit magna, magnus est (...) and author ejus:
neque enim nostra est, says Luther to (...).

Verse 17. And the seventy returned again with joy]
We are all naturally ambitious, and desirous of vainglory. A small wind
blows up a bubble. Pray down this vanity.

Verse 18. Fall from heaven]
That is, from men's hearts, which he accounts is heaven: but is cast out, by
the mighty Gospel.

Verse 19. To tread on serpents]
See the Note on Mark 16. 18. Good Ministers tread so hard on the old Serpents
head, that its no wonder he turns again, and nibbleth at their heels.

Verse 20. That your names are written]
That you are (...) Burgesses of the new Jerusalem. Paul by his privilege of
being a Roman, escaped whipping: we by this escape (...). The sinner ingrosseth
his name in the book of (...).

Verse 21. I thank thee o father, etc.]
With this prayer the Anabaptists Scultet. Annal.
of Germany usually began their Sermons; thinking thereby to excuse their lack
of learning. And then protested that they would deliver nothing but what was
revealed to them from above.

Verse 23. Blessed are the eyes, etc.]
How blessed then are they that hear this Arch-prophet in heaven. Moses and
Elias conversing with Christ in the Mount, could much better discourse of his
decease, and other divine doctrines, then ever they could whiles here upon
earth. An infant of one day there, is much beyond the deepest Doctor here.

Verse 24. Many Prophets and Kings]
Many righteous says Matthew. 13. 17.
Matthew. Righteous persons are Kings.

Verse 27. With all thy heart, and etc.]
Serviendum Deo toto Martial.
cord: id est, amore summo, more vero, ore fideli, re omni: Hoc non fit
verbis: Marce ut ameris, (...).

Here some weak Christians are troubled, as conceiting that they love their
children, friends, etc. better then God. But it is answered, 1. When two
streams run in one channel (as here nature D. Sibbes. on 1 Cor, 2. 9.
and grace do) they run stronger then one st eam does. When a man loves God and
the things of God, grace is alone: nature yields nothing to that. 2. We must
not judge by an indeliberate passion. The love of God is a constant stream: not
a torrent, but a current, that runs all our life time, but runs still and
without Claudian.
noise, as the waters of Shiloh, and of Nilus, nullas confessus murmr vires,
that runs smoothly.

With all thy strength]
That is, says a Divine, in our particular places. A Magistrate must execute
Justice for Gods sake, etc.

Verse 30. And Jesus answering]
Gr. Taking the tale out of his (...).
mouth, being ready with his answer. For he is that Palmoni Ham Dan. 8. 13.
me dabbar in Daniel, that prime Prolocutour.

Verse 31. And by chance]
Indeed by the providence of God over ruling the matter, as it does in things
that to us are merely casual and contingent.

Verse 32. Passed by on the other side]
For fear of legal pollution. (...).
But two duties never meet so, as to cross one another: the one of them
yields: and the execution of the yiedling duty for the present has reason of
an offense. This Levites legal strictness was here a vice: he should rather
have showed mercy to his brother in misery. So that the Rule, Negatives always
bind, intends not that they are of an indispensable nature: but that every
particular instant of time is to be observed for their obedience, Huet of
(...). page 175.
while and where they stand of force.

Verse 33. A certain Samaritan]
Turnebus (...) putat Parabolanos, quasi aemulos Samaritani. Hoc autem nomine
vocabantur, qui curandis debilium corporibus deputabantur. Those that looked to
sick people were hence called Parabolanes, or Samaritans.

Verse 34. Pouring in Oil and Wine]
Wine to search, and Oil to supple. Wine signifies the sharpness of the Law
(says Melanchthon) Oil the sweetneste of the Gospel. Now, so great (...). in
(...). (...). Wigand. Syntag.
is the natural sympathy and harmony between the vine and the olive, that the
olive being grafted into the vine brings forth both grapes and olives.

Verse 39. Sat at Jesus feet]
As his disciples, Act. 22. 3. So the children of the Prophets of old: whence
that expression, 2 King. 2. 3. Know thou not that the Lord will take away
thy Master from thy head to day?

Verse 40. Martha was cumbred]
Diversely distracted. In (...).
multitude of worldly business, the soul is like a mill, where one cannot hear
another, the noise is such as takes away al intercourse. We should look at the
world but only out at the eyes end as it were.

Verse 41. Thou art carefull]
Christ prefers attention before attendance. To hearken is better then the fat
of rams, 1 Samuel 15. 22.

Verse 42. But one thing is necessary]
That bonum hominis, Mic. 6. 8. that totum hominis, Eccles. 12. 13. the
happiness, the whole of a man.

CHAP. XI.
Verse 3. Our daily bread]
OUr super-substantiall bread: so Erasmus renders it, and interprets (...).
it of Christ: for he thought that in so heavenly a prayer, there should have
been no mention of earthly things; wherein he was greatly deceived. For
temporals also must be prayed for.

Verse 4. For we (...) forgive]
So that our forgiving of others seems for Gods promise sake, to be as it
were the intervenient cause, or the sine Qua non of Gods forgiving us, says
learned Beza.

And lead us not, etc.]
One argument that we shall persevere, is, the prayers of the whole Church,
offering up this daily sacrifice Lead us not, etc.

Verse 8. Because of his importunity]
Gr. His impudency: A (...).
metaphor from beggars, that will not be said; but are impudently importunate.

Verse 9. Ask and it shall be given]
Ask, seek, knock. It is not a simple repetition of the same thing, but an
emphaticall gradation, and shows instantissimam necessitatem, says Augustine.
Nec dicitur quid dabitur, says he, to show that the gift is a thing supra
(...) nomen, above all name.

Verse 11. For every one, etc.]
Sozomen says of Apollonius, that he never asked any thing of God that he
obtained not. Hic homo potuit apud Deum quod voluit, said one concerning
Luther. He could have what he would of God.

Verse 14. And it was dumb]
So it was a double miracle: Gods favors seldom come single: there is a
series, a concatenation of them, and every former draws on a future.

Verse 21. When a strong man armed]
Qui se dedebant, arma tradebant. Caesar de bell. Gall. lib. 3. They that
yielded threw down their arms.

Verse 24. Seeking rest]
His only rest is to molest and mischief men.

Verse 26. Seven other spirits]
As the Jaylour lays load of iron on him that had escaped. None are worse then
those that have been good, and are naught: and might be good, but will be
naught.

Verse 28. Yea rather blessed]
His disciples were more blessed in hearing Christ, then his mother in bearing
him.

Verse 29. Were gathered thick together]
All on a heap, (...)
either to see a sign, or to hear what he would say to the motion.

Verse 33. No man when he has lighted, etc.]
Our Savior here warns those that had given some good hope of their
Repentance, that they cherish their light, and walk by it.

Verse 34. When thine eye is single]
A single eye, is that that looks on God singly, abstracted from all other
things.

Verse 37. Sat down to meat]
And yet, at their own tables, he sets the Pharisees forth in their colors,
and entertaineth them with as many menaces as they do him with messes of meat.

Verse 38. That he had not washed]
This the Pharisees deemed (...). Antiq. Heb. 49.
as great a sin as to commit fornication.

Verse 41. But rather give almes]
So Daniel counsels (...), Chap. 4. 27.

Of such things as ye have]
Gr. As are within: either within (...)
the platter (send morsels to the hungry) or within your hearts: for riches get
within their owners many times, and do more possess them, then are possessed
by them; -- difficile est opibus non tradere mentem.


Verse 42. But woe unto you]
Notwithstanding your tything of pot herbs; wherein you think you take course
that all things may be clean to you, verse. 41. Or woe unto you, for that
through covetousness you exact the utmost of your tithes, etc. So some sense
this text.

Verse 44. For ye are as graves]
As the deep grave keeps the stinking carcass from offending any ones smell:
so does the dissembling hypocrite so cleanly carry the matter that hardly the
sharpest nose, etc.

Verse 45. Thou reproachest us also]
Who meddled with them but that their own consciences accused them? It is a
rule of Jerome, Ubi generalis de vitiis disputatio est, ibi nullius personae
est injuria: neque carbone notatur quisquam, quasi malus sit, sed omnes
admonentur ne sint mali. Where the discourse is of all, there is no personal
intimation of any.

Verse 48. And ye build their Sepulchers]
And so ye set up the trophies of your fathers cruelty.

Verse 49. Therefore also said the wisdom of God]
That is, Christ himself, the essential wisdom of his Father, Matthew 23. 34.

Verse 52. Woe unto you Lawyers]
I see well, said Father Latimer, Acts. and Mon. fol. 1590.
that whosoever will be busy with Vaevobis, he shall shortly after come coram
nobis, as Christ did.

For ye have taken away the key of knowledge]
By taking away the Scriptures, and all good means of knowledge: as do also
the Jesuits at this day. At Dole, an University in Burgundy, they have not
only debarred the people of the Protestant books, but especially also forbid
them to talk of God, either in good sort or bad. In Italy they not only
prohibit the books of the Reformed writers, but also hide their own Treatises,
in which the Tenet of the Protestants is recited, only to be confuted: so that
you shall seldom there meet with Bellarmines works, or any of the like nature
to be sold.

Verse 53. To urge him vehemently]
Out of deep displeasure (...)
to bear an aching tooth toward him (as Herodias did toward the Baptist, Mark
6. 19.) waiting him a shrewd turn.

And to provoke him to speake]
Not to stop his mouth about many things, as the Rhemists falsely render it.
They asked him captious (...)
questions, to make him an offendour for a word, Isaiah 29. 21.

CHAP. XII.
Verse 1. Beware of the leaven]
WHich our eyes cannot discern from dough by the color; but only our palate,
by the taste. Such is hypocrisy; which also, as leaven, is 1 spreading: 2
swelling: 3 sowring the meal: 4 impuring and defiling the house where it is,
though it be but as much as a man's fist.

Verse II. Take ye no thought]
See the Note on Matt. 10. 19. and on Mark (...). 11. Alice Driver Martyr, at
her examination, put all the Doctors to silence, so that they had not a word to
say, but one looked upon another. Then she said, Have ye no more to say? God be
honored: you be not able to resist the Spirit of God in me a poor woman I was
an honest poor man's daughter, never brought up in the University, as you have
been. But I have driven the Plough many a time before my father, I thank God:
yet notwithstanding in the defense of Gods Truth, and in the cause (...) and
(...). (...).
of my Master Christ, by his grace I will set my foot against the foot of any
of you all, in the maintenance and defense of the same: And if I had a thousand
lives, it should go for payment thereof: So the Chancellor condemned her, and
she returned to the (...), as joyful, as the bird of day.

Verse 15. Take heed and beware of covetousnesse]
This our (...) adds after who made me a Judge? to teach us not to go to Law
with a covetous mind: but as Charles the French King made War with our Henry
the Seventh, more desiring peace then victory.

For a (...) life consists not, etc.]
He can neither live upon them, nor lengthen his life by them. Queen Elizabeth
once wished her self a milk-maid: Bajazet envied the happiness of a poor
shepherd that sat on a hill-side merrily reposing himself with his homely
pipe: Therein showing, says the historian, that worldly (...). hist 216
bliss consists not so much in possessing of much, subject to danger, as in
joying in a little contentment void of fear.

Verse 16. The ground of a certain rich man]
Gr. The country: (...).
for he had laid field to field, till he was the only land-holder thereabouts;
and had a country of corn, Esaias 58.

Verse 17. And he thought within himself]
He was up with the more, and down with the less: he cast up his reckonings,
as covetous men's manner is, and after long debate to and fro, concluded what to
do.

He talked to himself, etc.]
A marvelous proper word for the (...)
purpose.

Verse 19. (...) and drink and be merry]
A right Epicure, one that had made his gut his God: another Sardanapalus, that
did eat that in earth, that he disgested in hell, as Augustine has it.

Verse 20. Thou fool, this night, etc.]
This rich fool when, like a Jay, he was pruning himself in the boughs, came
tumbling down with the arrow in his side: his glass was run, when he thought
it to be but new turned. He chopped into the earth before he was aware: like as
one, that walking in a field covered with snow, falls into a pit suddenly. He
was shot as a bird with a bolt whilst he gazed at the bow: And this may be any
man's case. Which made Austin say he would not for the gain of a world be an
Atheist for one half hour: because he knew not but God might in that time call
him.

Then whose shall those things be, etc.?]
As thy friends are scrambling for thy goods, worms for thy body, so devils for
thy soul. We read of Henry Beauford that rich and wretched Cardinal, Bishop of
Winchester, and Chancellor of England in the reign of King Henry the Sixth,
that perceiving he must needs die, he murmured that his riches could not
repreive him. Fie, quoth he, Fox Martyrol. vol. 1. page 925.
will not Death be hired? will money do nothing? No: its righteousness only
that delivers from death.

Verse 26. For the rest]
For superfluities, when ye cannot provide your selves of necessaries?

Verse 29. Neither be ye of doubtful mind]
Hang not in suspense, (...).
as meteors do in the air, not certain whether to hang or fall to the
ground, Meteoradicta volunt quod animos hominum Magir. Physic.
suspensos, dubios, et quasi fluctuantes faciant. Aristotle himself
confesses, that of some meteors he knew not what to say, though of some other
he could say somewhat. One Interpreter renders this word, Make not discourses
in the air, as the covetous man does, when his head is tossed with the cares
of getting, or fears of losing commodity; Or it may note his endless framing
of projects for the compassing of his desires. The Syriack renders it, Let not
your thoughts be distracted about these things. Surely as a clock can never
stand still, so long as the plummets hang thereat: so neither can a worldlings
heart, for cares and anxieties. These suffer him not to rest night or day;
being herein like unto the flies of Egypt, or those tyrants Esaias 16.

Verse 32. Fear not little flock]
Gr: Little, little flock. There is in the original a double diminutive. If we
divide the known parts of the world into three equal Parts, the Christians
part is but Breerw. Enqui. page 118.
as five, the Mahometans as six, and the Idolaters as nineteen. Among the
best Churches the most are the worst, as, Philip 3. 18. Chrysostom could not
find an hundred in Antioch, that he could be well persuaded of that they should
be saved.

Verse 33. A treasure in the heavens]
As a merchant being to travel into a far country, does deliver his money
here upon the (...), that so he may be sure to receive it again at his
arrival in that Country: so let us that are passing into another Country, lay
up something that may stand us in stead in that day.

Verse 34. There will your heart be]
your inwardest affection, your (...) joy and trust.

Verse 35. Let your loins be girded]
It implies 1. Readiness 2. Nimblenesse, handinesse and handsomeness. A
loose, discinct and diffluent mind is unfit to serve God. Here it is, ungirt,
unblest.

Verse 37. Blessed are those servants]
So verse 38. and 43. They are three times said to be blessed that watch,
Terque quaterque beati: (...).
Faelices ter et (...).

Verse 47. Which knew his Lords will]
None are so filled with Gods wrath, as knowing men. Sapientes sapienter
descendunt in (...), says Bernard. The Devil is too hard for them.

Verse 48. Much is given]
To know our masters will is the great (...).
talent of all o her. There is a [Much] in that, There is a special (...)
(...).
depositum, as the word here used imports.

Verse 49. To send fire on the earth]
That is, that persecution 1 Timothy 6. 20.
1 Timothy 1. 14.
that is Evangelii genius, as Calvin wrote to the French King, and dogs at
the heels the preaching of the truth.

Verse 50. And how am I straitened]
This painful preconceit of his passion, was a part of our Saviors passion.
This made him spend many a night in prayer, bewayling our sins, and imploring
Gods grace, and he was heard in that which he requested, Heb. 5.

Verse 57. yea and why (...) of yourselves]
By consulting with your own consciences, which would, if rightly dealt with,
tell you, that I am that Messiah you have so long looked for.

Verse. 58. Give diligence]
Purus putus (...), says Drusius. (...).
Da operam: Id est, festina, and labora, omnesque (...) cogita quomodo ab eo
libereris, as Theophylact expounds it. Be at utmost pains to get freed from
him.

Verse 59. till thou have paid the very last (...)]
It is good to compound quickly with the Lord, and to take up the suite before
it come to execution and judgment, lest we be forced to pay not only the main
debt, but the arrearages too, that is the time of Gods long-suffering and
patience, here and (...).

CHAP. XIII.
Verse 1. Told him of the Galileans]
SO called from Judas Gaulonites or Galilaeus their Captain: to whose faction
also belonged those four thousand murderers Act. 21. 38. For Pilate had not
authority over the Galileans properly so called. See Joseph. lib. 18. cap. 2.

Verse 2. because they suffered such things]
None out of hell ever suffered more then those worthyes Heb. 11. Shall any
therefore condemn that generation of (...) children Psalm. 73. 15? See (...).
4. 6. Dan. 9. 12.

Verse 3. Except (...)]
(...) aut pereundum. Men must either turn from sin, or burn in hell.

Verse 5. (...) except (...) repent]
Except the best of you all repent more and more, when ye see the examples of
Gods wrath, etc. God would not have the wounds of godly sorrow so healed up in
his own children, but that they should bleed afresh upon every good occasion,
(...) plagis (...) medicamenta (...). Make best use of others miseries.

Verse. 7. Cut it (...)]
Trees that are not for fruit are for the fire. God will lay down his basket,
and take up his axe. He will not always serve men for a sinning-stock.

Verse 8. Lord, let it (...) this year.]
Happy that people, that have praying vine-dressers to intercede for them! God
will yield somewhat to prayer, when he is bitterly bent against a people or
person.

Till I shall dig, etc.]
Donec eam ablaqueavero and stercot (...). (...).
Ministers must try their utmost to fulfill their ministry that they have
received of the Lord. Colos. 4. 17.

Verse 15. Thou hypocrite.]
The Syriaek renders it Assumens vultum, Thou that (...) a good face upon it,
thou that personatest a better man then thou art; thou picture of piety, etc.

Verse 23. Are there (...) etc.]
Few received Christ in the (...) (...). 1. 12. (...) wondered at one good
(...). They are (...) that look (...). (...) in (...). The most (...) on that
old popish rule, to follow (...).

Verse 24. strive to (...)]
Strive even to an agony; or as they (...).
did for the garland in the Olympic games, to the which the word here used
seems to allude. All would come to heaven, but all like not the way; they
would not per angusta ad augusta pervenire: they like well of Abraham's bosom,
but not of Dives his door. But let none think to live in Dalilahs lap, and
then to rest in Abraham; bosom, to dance with the Devil all day, and then to
(...) with Christ at night; to fly to heaven with pleasant wings, to pass a
deliciis ad delicias, e coeno ad coelum, etc. to go to heaven in a feather-bed.

Verse 26. We have eat and drunk, etc.]
These pretenders to Christ perish by catching at their own catch, hanging on
their own fancy, making a bridge of their own shadow, etc. they verily
believe that Christ is their sweet Savior, etc. when it is no such matter: they
trust to Christ, as the Apricock tree that leanes against the wall, but is fast
rooted in the earth, so are these in the world, etc.

Verse 29. And shall sit down]
As at a sumptuous supper. When therefore we are invited to a full feast, think
of heaven: As Fulgentius beholding at Rome the Majesty of the Emperor, the
glory of the Senate, the luster of the Nobility, cried out, How beautiful is
Jerusalem the Caelestiall, since Rome the Terrestrial appears with such
splendour? So Master Esty when he sat and heard a D. Hall's Art of div. Medit.
sweet consort of Music, seemed upon this occasion carried up for the time
beforehand to the place of his rest, saying very passionately, What Music may
we think there is in heaven?

Verse 32. To day and to morrow]
i. e. As long as I list, without his leave. Faith makes a man walk about the
world as a conqueror.

I shall be perfected]
Or, I shall be sacrificed, as (...) renders (...) In (...).
it.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse 1. They watched him]
GRaece, They superstitiously and maliciously observed him. Aristot. (...)
lib. 2. Rhetor. accipit pro eo quod est ulciscendi (...) captare. They watched
as intently as a dog does for a bone: they pryed as narrowly into his actions,
as Laban did into Jacobs stuff.

Verse 2. A certain man before him]
A fit object, and that was sufficient to move him to mercy, who himself, by
sympathy, took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses.

Verse 3. And Jesus answering]
Viz. Their thoughts, which were naked and open, naked (for the outside) and
dissected, quartered, and as it were cleft through the backbone (for the
inside) before him with whom they had to deal, Heb. 4. 13.

Verse 4 And he took him]
Good must be done, however it be taken.

Verse 5. Pull him out on the Sabbath-day]
The Jew of Tewkesbury, that would not be pulled out of the jakes whereinto he
fell on their sabbath day, perished deservedly.

Verse 6. And they could not answer]
Yet ran away with the bit in their mouths.

Verse 7. When he marked]
Ministers, though they may not be time-servers, yet they must be
time-observers; and sharply reprove what they meet with amiss (...) their
people.

Verse 8. When thou art bidden of any man to a wedding]
When should a man rather feast then at the recovery of his lost rib?

Verse 9. Thou begin with shame]
As passing for a proud fool: a style good enough for a self-exalter.

Verse 10. Then shall thou have worship]
Honor est in honorante, therefore to be the less esteemed, because without
us, and mostly but a puff of stinking breath, not once to be valued.

Verse 11. For whosoever]
See the Note on Matthew 23. 12.

Verse 12. Nor thy rich neighbours]
Laudent (...) esurientium viscera, non ructantium opulenta convivia, says
Jerome. Bishop Hieron. ad (...).
Hooper had his board of beggars, who were daily served by four at a mess,
with whole and wholesome meats, before himself sat Act. and Mon.
down to dinner.

Verse 13. Call the poor]
Christ preferres charity before courtesy.

Verse 14. At the resurrection of the just]
Called theirs, because they only shall have joy of that day. It were well for
the wicked if they might never rise to judgment, or trot directly to hell, and
not be brought before the Lamb to be sentenced.

Verse 15. Blessed is he, etc.]
This man seems to have tasted Heb. 6. 5.
of the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to come. Happy he, if
he fed heartily thereon. This, says Luther, is Sancta crapula.

Verse 16. Made a great supper]
(...) They are happy that get to heaven: they rest from their labors. The
Ancients dined frugally, supped liberally. Be of good Act. and Mon.
cheer said that Martyr to her husband that suffered with her: for though we
have but an ill dinner, we shall sup with Christ.

Verse 18. I have bought, etc.]
Licitis perimus omnes. More die by meat, then by poison. Cavete, latet anguis
in herba. What more lawful then a farm? what more honorable, of all pleasures,
Vxori (...) nolo mea. Martial.
then marriage? But these men had not so much bought their farms, etc. as were
sold to them: not so much married wives, as were married to them.

Verse 19. I have bought five yoke of Oxen]
This answers those that plead their necessities, and that they seek not (...),
(as farm upon farm, etc.) but only a sufficiency. What could be more necessary
then Oxen, since without them he could not follow his husbandry? Worldliness is
a great hinderance to heaven, though a man cannot be charged with any great
covetousness. These all excused themselves out of heaven, by bringing
apologies why they could not go to heaven. Never yet any came to hell, but had
some pretense for their coming thither. Our vile hearts will persuade us that
there is some sense in sinning, and some reason to be mad.

Verse 20. And therefore I cannot come]
Note that the voluptuary is peremtory, and says flatly he cannot come.
Sensual hearts are void of the Spirit, Jude 18. 19. Miry places could not be
healed by the Sanctuary waters, Ezekiel. 47. 11. fleshly lusts fight against the
soul, 1 Pet. 2. 11. Those that dance to the timbrell and harp, say, Depart from
us. Job 21. 11. Better be preserved in brine, then rot in honey.

Verse 21. Then the master of the house being angry]
And good reason he had: for Non modo plur is putare quod utile videatur, Cit.
(...). de (...).
quam quod honestum, sed haec etiam inter se comparare, and in (...), (...)
est, says the honest heathen. Surely as Pharaoh said of the Israelites, They
are entangled in the land, the wilderness has (...) them in, Exodus 14. 3. so
may we say of many, They are entangled in the creature, the world has shut
them in, they cannot come to Christ: They are shut up in a (...), as those five
Kings, Joshua 10. and have hardness of heart, as a great stone, rolled to the
mouth, and honors, riches and pleasures as so many keepers, etc.

Verse 26. And hate not his father, etc.]
Much more his farm (...) ex odio reprobavit, respuit.
and his oxen. It was not these, but the inordinate love of these, that
detained them, as Christ here intimates. Your house, home, and goods, yea
(...), and all that ever ye have (says that Martyr) Master Brad.
God has given you as love tokens, to admonish you of his love, to Acts and
Mon. fol. 1492.
win your love to him again. Now will he try your love, whether ye set more by
him, or by his tokens, etc.

Verse 28. Intending to build a tower]
Rodulphus Gualther being in Oxford, and beholding Christ-Church-Colledge said,
Egregium opus: Cardinalis iste instituit collegium, and absolvit popinam. A
pretty business! A College begun, and a kitchen finished.

Counts the cost]
Let him that intends to build the tower of godliness, sit down first and
cast up the cost, left, etc.

Verse 31. Sits not down first]
To consult, and so with good advice to make War. Romani sedendo vincunt, says
Varro. Thou shall succor us out of the City, 2 Samuel 18. 3.

Verse 32. He sends an Embassage]
Mittamus preces and lachrymas cordis legatos, says Cyprian. Currat
poenitentia, ne (...) sententia, says Chrysologus. Repent, ere it be too late.

Verse 33. That forsakes not]
Gr. That bids not farewell (...).
to all.

Verse 34. Salt is good]
This was a sentence much in our Saviors mouth, Matt. 5. 13. Mark 9. 50. And
is here used, to set forth the desperate condition of Apostates.

CHAP. XV.
Verse 1. All the Publicans and sinners]
CHrist familiarized himself with these despised persons, and thereby much
won upon them. (...) easily allureth, austerity discourageth; as it did that
honest citizen, which having in himself a certain conflict of conscience, came
to Master Hooper the Martyrs door for counsel. But being abashed at his
austere Act. and Mon. fol. 1366.
behavior, durst not come in, but departed, seeking remedy of his troubled
mind at other men's hands, etc.

Verse 2. But the Scribes and Pharisees]
Being sick of the devils disease, and doing his lusts, Joh. 8. 44

Verse 7. Joy shall be in Heaven]
Would we then put harps into the Angels hands, ditties into their mouths?
Repent.

Verse 8. If she lose one peice]
One Testor. Dram enim valebat septem denarios cum dimidio. Breerwood de
numb. Jud. c. 1. See the margent of our new Translation.

And sweep the house]
Everrit, not Evertit, as the vulgar (...)
has it corruptly: and Gregory with others were deceived by it in their
discants and glosses, nothing to the purpose.

Verse 12. He divided unto them his living]
Gr. His life. Our (...).
(...) fe is called the life of our hands, Isaiah 57. 10. because it is upheld
by the labor of our hands.

Verse 13. Gathered all together]
Convasatis veluti omnibus.

With riotous living]
(...), Not caring to save any part, (...) (...), unsaveable.
nihil reservans, imo seipsum non servans, being such as safety it self could
not save: whence the Latins call such a man Perditum, an undone person. Such
were those of whom Seneca says, that singulis auribus bina aut terna dependent
patrimonia, hanged two or three good Lordships at their ears.

And such are those amongst us that turn lands into laces, great H. S. millies
in (...) congessit. (...).
rents into great ruffes, etc. The expenses of Apicius his kitchen amounted to
more then two millions of gold. He having eaten up his estate, and finding by
his account that he had no more then 200000. crowns remaining, thought himself
poor, and that this sufficed not to maintain his luxury: whereupon he drank
down a glass of poison.

Verse 16. (...) he would feign have filled his belly]
The stomach of man is a monster (says one) which, being contained in so
little a bulk as his body, is able to consume and devour all things.

Verse 17. And when he came to himself]
For till then he had been besides himself, and not his own worthy. Nebulo
(says one) comes of Nabal; fool of (...): (...) and (...) are of near
affinity. Evil is Hebrew for a fool, etc. Wickedness is called the
foolishness of madness, Eccles. 7. 25.

Verse 18. Against heaven and before thee]
That is, I have not only thee, but the whole heaven for a swift witness
against me of mine offenses and out-bursts. The heaven does declare mine
iniquity, and the earth rises up against me; Job 20. 27.

Verse 20. When he was yet a great way off]
Tantum velis and (...) tihi praeoccurret, says a Father. The Prodigal was
but conceiving a purpose to return, and God met him, Isaiah 65. 24.

And kissed him]
One would have thought he should have kicked him, or have killed him rather:
but God is Pater miserationum, he is all bowels. The prodigal came, the father
ran: God is slow to anger, swift to show mercy.

Verse 21. Father, I have sinned]
Confess, and the mends is made. Homo agnoscit, Deus ignoscit. Acknowledge but
the debt, and he will cross the book.

And am no more worthy, etc.]
Infernus sum domine, said that (...), Hooper at his death, Act. and Mon. 1374.
holy Martyr; Lord, I am hell, but thou art heaven: I am soil, and a sink of
sin, but thou a g acious God, etc.

Verse 23. And bring hither the fatted calfe]
Christ is that Act. and Mon. fol. (...).
fatted calfe, says Mr. Tindall Martyr, slain to make penitent sinners good
cheer withal: and his right eousnesse is the goodly (...) to cover the naked
deformities of their sins.

Verse 24. For this my son was dead, etc.]
So fares it with every faithful Christian. He was dead, but now lives, and
cannot be insensible or ignorant of such a change.

Verse 29. And yet thou never gave me a kid]
Much less a (...). Hypocrites hold God to be in their debt, and through
discontent weigh not his favors, as being never without some aylement.

Verse 30. But as soon as this thy sonne]
He says not, This my brother; he would not once own him, because in poverty.

Which has devoured thy living]
q d. which you were so hasty to give unto him before your death (which you
need not have done) and now he has made a fair hand of it.

Verse 32. Was lost, and is found]
Of himself he left his (...) yet is he called the lost son.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse 1. A (...) rich man which had a Steward]
MAsters had need look well 1. To the choosing of their servants. ( Solomon saw
Jeroboam that he was industrious, and therefore without any respect at all to
his Religion, he made him (...) over all the charge of the house of Joseph; but
to his (...) disadvantage. (...). King 11. 28. with chapt. 12. 3.) 2. To the
using of them: Most men make no other use of their servants then they do of
their beasts: whiles they may have their bodies to do their service, they care
not if their souls serve the Devil. Hence they so (...) prove false and (...).

Verse 2. Give an account of thy stewardship]
(...) cum (...) putet, said Cato. Stewards should often account with their
masters.

Verse 3. I cannot dig, etc.]
They that will get wisdom, must both dig and beg. Prove. 2. 3. 4.

Verse 6. Take thy bill]
The scope of this parable is, ut (...) charitate erga pauperes compensemus,
says Beza, that we expiate, as it were our prodigality by showing mercy to the
poor Dan, 4. 27.

Verse 8. And the Lord commended]
Gr. that Lord, viz. the (...).
Steward Lord, not the Lord Christ who relates this (...). (...) if we
understand it of Christ (as the Syriack here does) yet He herein no more
approves of this Stewards false-dealing, then he does of the Usurers trade
(...). 5. 27. or the thieves 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2. Or the dancers Matthew. 11. 17. or
the Olympic games 1 Cor. 9. 24.

Because he had done wisely]
The worldlings wisdom serves him (as the Ostriches wings) to make him
outrun others upon earth, and in earthly things; but helps him never a whit
toward heaven.

Are in their generation wiser]
A swine that wanders can make better shift to get home to the trough, then a
sheep can to the fold. We have not received the spirit of this world 1 Cor. 2.
12. we cannot shift and plot as they can: but we have received a better thing.
The fox is wise in his generation, the serpent subtle, so is the Devil too.
When he was but young, he outwitted our (...) parents, 2 Cor. 11. 3.

Then the children of light]
As the Angels are called Angels of (...). Adam.
light 2 Cor. 11. 14. Gods children are the only earthly Angels, have a Goshen
in their bosoms, can lay their hands on their hearts with dying Oecolampadius,
and say, Hic sat lucis.

Verse 9. (...) unto your selves friends]
quibus officia (...) (...).
(...) apud (...), (...), and (...) is (...). Testify your faith by your
works that God of his free grace may commend and (...) you.

Of the Mammon of (...)]
The next odious name to the Devil himself. This Mammon of iniquity, This
wages of wickedness is not gain, but loss.

They may receive you]
That is, that (...) the Angels, or (...) riches, or the poor may let you into
heaven.

Verse 11. In the unrighteous (...)]
or, the uncertain, (...), deceitful wealth of this world, which yet most
rich men trust in, as if simply the better or safer for their abundauce. Hence
(...) derives Mammon from (...), which signifies to (...).

Verse 12. In that which is another (...)]
Riches are not properly ours, but Gods who has entrusted us, and who does
usually agssine them to the wicked, those men of his hand, for their portion
Psalm. 17. 14. for all the heaven that they are ever to look for. Better things
abide the Saints, who are here but forreiners, and must do as they may.

Who shall give you that which is your owne]
Quod nec eripi nec Arist. (...). lib.
2. cap. 23.
(...) potest. Aristotle relates a law like this made by (...), That he that
used not another man's horse well, should (...) own. (...) Naso (...).


Verse 14. And they derided him]
Gr. They blew their noses at him in scorn and derision. They fleared and
jeared when they Horat.
should have feared, and fled from the wrath to come.

Verse 15. For that which is highly esteemed etc.]
A thing that I see in the night may shine, and that shining proceed from
nothing but rottenness. There may be malum (...) in bona (...), as in (...)
Zeal. Two things make a good Christian, good actions and good aims. And
though a good aim does not make a bad action good (as in Vzzah) yet a bad aim
makes a good action bad Hos. 1. 4.
(as in (...), whose justice was approved, but his policy punished.)

Verse 19. There was a certain rich man]
Not once named, as (...) was, though never so little esteemed of men. God knew
him by name as he did Moses: when the rich man's name is written in the earth,
rottes above-ground, is left for a reproach. (...) Verbum est (...). Pasor.


Which was clothed in purple, etc.]
Gr. was commonly so clothed. It was his every-dayes wear, as the word
implies.

Verse 20. A certain beggar named Lazarus]
Or Eleazar (as Tertullian and Prudentius call him) who having been Abraham's
faithful servant, now rests in his bosom.

Verse 21. And desiring to be fed with the crumbs]
Many poor folk have but prisoners pittances, which will neither keep them
alive, nor suffer them to dye.

The dogs came and licked his sores]
When Sabinus was put to death for whifpering against Seianus, his dog lay down
by his dead body, brought to his mouth the bread that was cast to him: And
(...) Sabinus was thrown into the river Tiber, the dog (...) (...).
after him, to keep him up, that he might not sink into the bottom.

Verse 22. Into Abraham's bosome]
A Metaphor from feasts say some: from fathers, say Others, who imbosome and
hug their children when wearied with long running-about, or (...) met with a
knock, and come crying unto them.

And was carried by the Angels]
Thorough the air, the Devils region, do the Angels conduct the Saints at
death: who may therefore call death as Jacob did the place where he met the
Angels, Act. and Mon. fol. 1907.
Mahanaim, Genes. 32. 2. For like as the (...)-man was let down with his bed
thorough the tiling before Jesus, Luke 5. 18. so is every good soul taken up
in an heavenly couch thorough the roof of his house, and carried into Christ's
presence by these heavenly Courtiers.

And was (...)]
Possibly with as much noisome stench and hurry in the air, as at Cardinal
Wolseyes burial. A terrible example there is in the book of Martyrs, of one
Christopher (...) an unmercifull Courtier, who suffering a poor Lazar to dye
in a (...) by him, did afterward perish himself in a ditch.

Verse 23. Being in torments]
Having punishment without pity, misery without mercy, sorrow without succor,
crying without compassion, mischeife without measure, torments without end, and
past imagination.

Verse 24. And cool my tongue]
In his tongue he was most tortured, quia plus lingua peccaverat, says
Cyprian. So Nestorius (...) exesa. Evagr. l. 1.
the heretic had his tongue eaten up with worms. So Thomas Arundell
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Steven Gardener Bishop of Winchester, (two
notorious persecutors) dyed with their Acts and Mon. fol. 1622.
tongues thrust out big-swollen, and black with inflammation of their bodies. A
spectacle worthy to be noted of all such bloody burning persecutors.

Verse 25. Son remember, etc.]
Son he calls him with respect either ad procreationem carnis, aut adaetatem,
says Piscator. But as it was but cold comfort to Dives in flames, that Abraham
called him son; so those that have no more to shroud themselves under, then a
general profession, shall find that an empty title yields but an empty comfort
at last.

Receivedst thy good things]
Wicked men then have not only a (...) title, but a right before God to earthly
things. It is their portion. Psalm. 17. 14. And what Ananias had was his own
Act. 5. whiles he had it. God gave Egypt to Nebuchadnezzar for his pains at
Tire. It is hard to say, they are usurpers. They shall not (says One) be
called to an account at last day for possessing what they had, but for abusing
that possession. As when the King gives a Traitor his life, he gives him meat
and drink that may maintain his life. So here God deals, not as that cr uell
D' (...) did who starved some prisoners after he had given them quarter,
Grimst. Hist. of Netherl.
saying, Though I promised you your lives, I promised not to find you meat.

Verse 26. There is a great gulf fixed]
viz. by the unmovable (...).
and immutable decree of God, called mountains of brass (...). (...).
Zech. 6. 1. from between which all effects and actions come forth as so many
charets.

Verse 28. Lest they also come into this place]
This he wishes, not for their good, but for his own. For he knew that if
they were damned, he should be double damned, because they were brought thither
partly by his lewd and loose example.

Verse 29. Let them (...) them]
Hell is to be escaped by hearing the word read and preached. Joh. 5. 25. Esaias
55. 3.

Verse 31. Though one rose from the dead]
As Lazarus did, and yet they listened as little to him as to Christ. Joh. 12.
but sought to kill him also.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse 5. Lord increase our faith]
A Most necessary request in this case. For the more any man believes that God
for Christ's sake has pardoned him, the readier he will be to pardon others.

Verse 8. Gird thy self and serve me]
It implies 1 readiness: 2 nimblenesse, handinesse, and handsomeness. A loose
(...) and (...) mind is unfit to serve God. The Deacons cried of old in the
Church-meetings Oremus, (...), Let us pray, let us attend to prayer, etc.

Verse 10. We have done that was our duty]
Or, our debt: and (...) (...) the Church. (...). (...) (...).
it is no matter of merit to pay debts. This made (...) founder of
New-Colledge, etc. profess, he trusted in Jesus Christ alone for Salvation.
Charles the Fifth did the like, when he came to die. And in times of Popery,
the ordinary instruction appointed to be given to men upon their death beds,
was, that they should look to come to glory, not by their own merits, but by
the virtue and merit of Christ's passion: that they should place their whole
(...). (...) in a Sermon. (...) Ephesians. 4. 13.
confidence in his death only, and in no other thing: and that they should
interpose his death betwixt God and their sins, betwixt them and Gods anger.

Verse 13. And they lifted up their voices]
These sought themselves only in their prayers as do hypocrites: and naught
esteemed the love of Christ. So did those that fasted to themselves, Cant. 51.
(...). 7. more to get off their chains then their sins. Ephrain is an empty
vine, he (...) fruit to himself. The Church keeps her fruit for her beloved.

Verse 14. Go show your selves unto the Priests]
As if ye were already cleansed. They did so, though they saw no sense for it:
and before they came to the Priest, they were cleansed indeed. Make your
requests known to God with thanksgiving, Philip. 4. 6. As who should say, make
account to speed, and be ready with your thanks, as if you had what you ask of
God.

Verse 15. And one of them]
Its ten to one if any return to give thanks. Men make prayer their refuge, but
not their recompense. (...) returned not according to his receipts.

And with a loud (...)]
He was as earnest in praises, as he had been in prayers. Our thanks should be
larger and louder then our requests; because God prevents us with many mercies,
and denies nothing: we have it either in money or moneys worth.

Verse 16. Giving him thanks]
A thankful man is worth his (...). (...). Barn. de Consid. lib 4.
weight in gold. Sed perraro grati homines reperiuntur, says the Orator.
Plerique ut accipiant. importuni, donec acceperint, inquieti; ubi acceperint,
ingrati, says the Father. Most pray, but pay not: they make prayer their
refuge, but not their recompense.

Verse 17. Were there not ten cleansed?]
Christ keeps count how many favors men receive from him, and will call them
to a particular account thereof. He is an austere man this way.

Verse 18. There are not found]
The Syriack, and some others (...) these words question-wise, and so it is
more emphaticall: Are there not found that returned? etc. q. d. That Is
admirable, that is abominable.

Verse 20. When the kingdom of God, etc.]
This they asked in (...). q. d. You tell us often of the kingdom of God, and
that it is at hand: but when comes it once? All things continue as they did,
etc.

Comes not with observation]
That is, with outward pomp, or superstitious seeking after.

Verse 21. The kingdom of God is within you]
It is spiritual, Romans 14. 17. Or, it is among you, but that you cannot see
wood for trees. You seek me as absent, whom you reject present.

Verse 22. And he said unto his Disciples]
q. d. This doctrine concerns you also, as well as the perverse Pharisees. You
shall be ere long at a great loss for me: look to it therefore and bestirre
you.

Verse 24. For as the lightning]
q. d. From mine Ascension, and so forwards, you are not to look for me again
till I come to judgment: and then I come on a sudden. Many devices there are
in the minds of some, to think that Jesus Christ shall come from heaven again,
and reign here upon earth a Thousand years. But Mr. Cotton upon the 7 Vials.
they are (says a good Divine) but the mistakes of some high expressions in
Scripture, which describe the judgments powered out upon Gods enemies, in
making a way to the Jews conversion, by the pattern of the last judgment.

Verse 27. They did eat, they drank]
An elegant Asyndeton. For the reason whereof, see the Note on Matt. 24. 38.

Verse 28 They did eat, they drank]
It is not said here as verse. 27. they married wives: they affected rather
those odious (...), (...).
qui non utrinque resolvunt. The Turkish Bashaes have their (...), which, are
their serious loves: for their wives are used Blounts Voyage, page 14.
but to dress their meat, to laundresse, and for reputation, says one that
had been amongst them. Sodomy (says he) in the Levant is not held a vice.

Verse 29. But the same day]
A fair Sun-shine-morning had a foul dismal evening. Neseis quid serus (...)
vehat. Thou Horat.
know not what a great-bellyed day may bring forth, (...) creed diem tibi
diluxisse supremum. Think every day the last day.

Verse 30. Even thus shall it be]
Security ushereth in destruction. The Judge stands before the door, as is
easy to foresee: Jam. 5.
Watch therefore.

Verse 31. He which shall be on the house-top]
An hyperbolicall expression, usual among the Jews, to denote matter of haste.

Verse 32. Remember Lots Wife]
Who either out of curiosity Vt (...) ab uncto (...).
or covetousness turned her but, and she was turned. We are as hardly drawn off
the world, as a Dog from a fat morsel. Those that set forth of Italy with
Galeacius Marquess of Vicum (who left all for the liberty of conscience at
Geneva) many of them when they came to the borders of Italy, and considering
what (...) of (...). by Mr. (...).
they forsook, first looked back, afterward went back again, and were taken by
the Spanish Inquisition, and made publikly to abjure the Christian religion.
Remember the horrible history of (...) of old, and the lamentable case of Spira
alate, said the Lady Acts and Mon. sol 1291.
Jane Gray prisoner, to Harding the Apostate. Lege historiam, (says one) ne
fias historia: lege judicia, ne fias exemplum (...).

Verse 37. Where Lord?]
Or, Whither Lord, viz. shall they be taken, of whom thou speak? To heaven,
says he. See the Note on Matt. 24. 28.

Verse 38. There the Eagles]
Those vulturine Eagles, that are said to fly two or three days before, to the
place where armies are to meet, and carcases shall be.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse 1. Always to pray and not to faint]
GRaece, Not shrink back, as Sluggards in work, or Cowards (...).
in War. Prayer should be redoubled and reinforced, as those Arrows of
deliverance, 2. Kings 13. 19. The woman of Canaan prays on when denied: And
Jacob holds with his hands, when his thigh is lamed. He wrestled with slight
and might, (...) post nau fragium tentantur (...).
he raised dust, as the word signifies, and would not away without a blessing.
James surnamed the Just, (Christ's Kinsman) had his knees made as hard as Camels
knees with much praying, as (...) (...). Epist. 81.
(...). Father Latimer during his imprisonment, was Act. and Mon. sol. 1579.
(...) constant and instant in prayer, that oftt-(...) he was not able to (...)
off his knees, without help. Yea Paulus Emilius, being to (...).
fight with Perses King of Macedony, would not give over (...) to his God
Hercules, till he saw certain arguments of a victory. As loathing of meat
(says a Divine) and painfulnesse of speaking are two symptoms of a sick body:
so irksomeness of (...), and carelessness of hearing, of a sick soul.

Verse 2. Which feared not God, nor regarded man]
These two, (...) of God and shame of the world, God has given to men as (...)
to restrain them from outrage. But sin has oaded such (...) impudency in
some men's faces, that they dare do any thing.

Verse 3. Avenge me of mine adversary]
A downright request, without either Logic or Rhetoric to set it forth, or
enforce it: to each us that though our prayers be but blunt or broken language
if importunate, they shall prevail nevertheless.

Verse 4. And he would not for a while]
There is a passive injustice. Non (...) nocens, sed (...) fuit, says Ausonius
of Claudius. Not to do justice is injustice.

Verse 5. She weary me]
Gr. She buffet me, or club me down. (...).
God must be pressed in prayer, till we put him (as you would say) Obtundat.
Vota fundimus (...) tundimus Deum tangimus misericordiam (...).
to the blush, or leave a blot in his face, unless we may be masters of our
requests.

Verse 6. 7. Hear what the unjust Judge saith]
Hic paria non inter se conferuntur, sed minus cum majore, says Beza.

Verse 7. Though he bare long with them]
When they are at the Tertul. Apol.
(...) most under. When their enemies are above fear, and they below hope;
when there is not faith in Earth to believe, then are there bowels in Heaven to
relieve and restore them.

Verse 8. Shall he find faith upon earth]
God often stays so long, till the Saints have done looking for him, when they
have forgot their prayers; etc. he comes, as it were out of an engine.

Verse 9. That they were righteous, and despised others]
Pray to be preserved from this perilous pinnacle of self exaltation.

Verse 10. The one a Pharisee]
A Doeg may set his foot as far and further within the Sanctuary, as a David.
The Pharisee and Publican went both of them up to private prayer.

Verse 11. God, I thank thee]
Non vulnera sed muner a (...), (...). Basil.
he shows not his want but his worth: and stands not only upon his
comparisons, but upon his disparisons, I am not as this Publican. No, for thou
art worse: yea for this, because thou think (...).
thee better. But of Pharisees it might be said as Arnobius did of the
Gentiles, Apud vos optimi censentur, quos (...) pessimorum (...).
(...) facit. They are very good that are not very bad.

(...)]
Pride wears a triple crown with this motio, Tra. (...), Non obedio, (...).
This Pharisee held himself (...), and all others a (...) only, as Basil of
(...) has it: He takes his poor counter and sets it down for a Thousand
pounds; he prizeth himself above the market.

Verse 12. I fast twice a week]
Cardinal Bellarmine did more: for he fasted thrice a week, says he that
writes his life. John ArchBishop (...). D. (...).
of (...), he who first affected the style of Universal Bishop, was surnamed
Nesteutes, from his frequent fasting. Monday and Thursday were the Pharisees
fasting-dayes: because Moses went up to the Mount on a Thursday, and came down
on a Monday, says (...).

Verse 13. (...) upon his breast]
In token of indignation, and that he would have smitten his sin so hard, if he
could have come at it.

God be merciful, etc.]
Here was much in few. The Publican (...) much: though he spoke little. As a
body without a soul, much wood without fire, a bullet in a gun without powder,
so are words in prayer without spirit. Oration brevis penetrat caelum. The
hottest springs send forth their waters by ebullitions.

Verse 14. Justified rather then the other]
The Pharisee was not at all justified: Neither is there More or Less in
justification. But our Savior here uses a popular kind of expression.

Verse 18. And a certain Ruler]
Saint Mark says that this Mark 10. (...) (...).
Ruler came running, which argues his earnestness; and in a man of quality was
(...): for such walk softly for most part, and in state.

Verse 22. Yet lackest thou one thing]
Yea all things. But our Savior speaks thus by an holy irony.

Verse 25. It is (...) for a (...)]
Caveant ergi divites (says an Interpreter) and solicit; mane, vesperi,
interdiu, noctu, secum de periculosa vitae suae, atione commententur. Let rich
men therefore weigh their danger, and beware.

Verse 34. And they understood none, etc.]
Prejudicate opinions of Christ's earthly kingdom hung as so many bullets at
their eye lids, that they could not perceive so plain a truth.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse 5. Zacheus, make haste]
CHrist is that good Shepherd, that knows all his sheep, and calls them by
name.

Make haste and come downe]
Heaven is a matter of greatest (...): We must not adjourne as he did once, In
(...) seria, more weighty (...) till to morrow.

To day I must abide at thy house]
Christ not only invites, but even obtrudes himself, as it (...), upon (...):
Its happy having (...) guests. He does the same to us, when he sends unto us
his poor servants to press upon our charity. Unworthy we are surely to give an
alms to poor Christ, etc.

Verse 8. The half of my goods]
See the like in Tyrus converted, (...). 23. 17, 18 (...)

I restore him four fold]
Which was the law for things stolen. Fraud is no better then theft.
Restitution (...) necessary to (...) of (...). God hates (...) ex rapina, as
Sultan (...) could tell his Counselor Pyrrhus, who persuaded him to bestow
(...). Hist. sol. 567.
(...) great wealth he (...) taken from the Persian Merchants, upon some
notable Hospital for releif of the poor: The dying Turk commanded it rather to
be restored to the right owners, which was done accordingly; to the great shame
of many Christians, who mind nothing (...) then restitution, etc. When Henry
the Third of England had sent the Friar Minors a load of (...) to (...) them,
they returned the same with this message; (...) he ought not to give alms of
what he had rent from the poor, neither Daniels hist. of Engl. 109.
would they accept of that abominable gift. Master (...) says, If ye make no
(...) of goods (...), ye shall cough in (...). ^

Verse 9. He also is a son of Abraham]
That is, freely elected, Romans. 9. 1. a. (...) of (...) faith, Romans 4. 12.
and a doer of his works, Job. 8. 39. Who then can say but he is his son, and
shall rest in his bosom?

Verse 14. (...)]
(...) [of sending a lamb to this (...) of the earth, (...). (...) with the
(...) of their lips, (...). 14. 3. Such (...) are (...) where; such dust-heapes
are found in every corner.

Verse 15. And whon he was returned]
He went, at his Ascension; and returns at the general Resurrection: At what
time he will first reckon with his servants, and then with his enemies.
Judgment shall then also begin at Gods own house.

Verse 16. Thy pound has gained]
Not my pains, but thy pound has done it. By the grace of God I am that I am,
says Paul that constantissimus gratiae Praedicator, as Austin calls him.

Verse 23. Into the bank]
Gr. Unto the table, or (according (...).
to some coppies) unto the Usurers, whom Beza here rightly calls humani certe
gener is perniciosissimas pestes, the most pernicious pests of mankind.

Verse 27. Slay them before me]
Howbeit the Beast and the false Prophet, that is, the Pope and his Janissaries,
shall not have the favor to be flain as the common sort of Christ's enemies are,
but shall be cast alive into the burning lake, tormented more exquisitly,
Revelations 19. 20, 21.

Verse 28. He went before]
To meet death in the face: this was true magnanimity. Herein he showed himself
the captain of our salvation, though perfected by sufferings.

Verse 29. Bethphage and Bethany]
Bethphage was one mile out of Jerusalem, Bethany two.

Verse 30. Go ye into the village]
Into Bethphage, that was in their veiw as they went from Bethany.

Verse 41. He beheld the City]
That common slaughterhouse of the Prophets. Our Lord is said to have been
slain at Rome, Revelations 11. 8. because crucified at Jerusalem by the Roman
authority.

And wept over it]
Shall not we weep over the ruins of so many fair and flourishing Churches,
that now lie in the dirt? Christ wept in this day of his solemn Inauguration.
It shall be in our last triumph only that all tears shall be wiped from our
eyes; till then our passions must be mixed, according to the occasions.

Verse 42. Oh, if thou had known]
They had cognitionem historicam non mysticam, speculativam non affectivam,
apprehensionis, non approbationis, discursivam, non experimentalem.

At least in this thy day]
The time of grace is fitly called a Day in regard of 1 Revelation. 2
Adornation. 3 Consolation. 4 Distinction. 5 Speedy preterition. Amend before
the drawbridge be taken up. No man can say, he shall have 12 hours to his day.

But now they are hid from thine eyes:]
Yet they lived under the Ministry long after, and no outward change to be
discerned. As Plutarch writes of Hannibal, that when he could have taken Rome,
he would not; when he would, he could not; so the Procrastinators.

Verse 43. For the days shall come]
God has his days for vengeance, as man has his day for repentance. There is
a Prime of every man's life, and of every man's. Ministry. The Levite lingered so
long, that he lost his Concubine; she came short home: so does many a man's soul
for like reason.

Shall cast a trench about thee]
Because like the wild-asse, thou would not otherwise be tamed, and kept
within compass of Gods Commandments. (...).


Verse 48. Were very attentive to hear him]
Gr. Hanged on him, as the Be does on the flower, the babe on the breast, or
the little bird on the bill of her Damme. Christ drew the people after him, as
it were, by the golden chain of his heavenly eloquence.

CHAP. X X.
Verse 1. The chief Priests and Scribes came]
GRaece, Came suddenly upon him]
As an expected storm: the (...).
Devil drove them.

Verse 4. The baptism of John, etc.]
q. d. If John were sent by God to testify, as he did, there is no color of
cause why ye should question mine authority?

Verse 8. Neither tell I you etc]
Gods servants should be ready with their answer upon sudden assaults, and not
to seek of such arguments as may stop the mouth of an adversary. When a (...)
Jesuit asked, Where was your religion before Luther? Answer was presently
returned, In the Bible, where your religion never was.

Verse 16. God forbid]
Viz. That they should ever kill the Son of God sent unto them. We cannot get
men to believe that their hearts are half so bad, or their ways so dangerous,
as the preacher makes of them.

Verse 17. What is this then that is written, etc.]
q. d. If it be not so as I say, that you shall kill the Messiah, how is it
that the Scripture says as much? press men with Scripture-testimonies: that is
the readiest way of sound conviction. It was a good speech of Augustine to
(...), contesting with him for audience: (...) me, hear me, said the Heretic.
Nay, says Augustine, (...) ego (...), (...) tu me, sed ambo (...) Apostoium
(...), (...) non cognovi, etc. It is not I say, or what thou say, but what
the Scripture says, that we (...) stand to.

Verse 20. They sent forth (...)]
Gr. Fishers, that with net and bait catch the silly fish, and feed on them:
such were these Emissaries, (...).
these catch-poles. Aretius.


Verse 35. Nor are given in marriage]
Hence some collect, that the difference of sexes (...) continue after the
resurrection: wherefore else should our Savior say, that they shall then
neither marry nor be given in marriage? Sed hic (...).

Verse 38. For all live to him]
Even in their bodies also, which he now by (...) refineth; and shall as
certainly raise, as if they were already raised, since all things are present
with him.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse 2. Casting in their two mites]
THat is, two eight parts of an halfpenny, says the Syriack. See the Notes on
Mark 12. 41, 42, etc.

Verse 13. And it shall turn to you, etc.]
Whilst the valor of the Martyrs and the savagenesse of the Persecutors
strove together, till both, exceeding nature and belief, bred wonder and (...)
in beholders and hearers.

Verse 19. In your patience possesse]
That is, Enjoy yourselves, however the world goes with you. He that cannot
have patience, had need make up his pack, and get out of the world: for here is
Camd. Elizab. fol. 495.
no being for him. Burleigh Lord Treasurer was wont to say, that he overcame
envy more by patience then (...).

Verse 20. Jerusalem compassed with armies]
By Cestius (...), a little before that fatal siege by (...). So God gave his
people this sign, to take best course for their own safety.

Verse 24. Until the times of the Gentiles]
The Gentiles then shall not always tread down Jerusalem. Those Kings of the
East the Jews may, likely, (...) their way prepared to it, through (...).
(...). 16. 12. and Jerusalem be again inhabited by them, Zach. 12. 6.
even (...) (...). But this will be not long (...) day, (...) 25.

Verse 26. Men's hearts failing them]
What marvel though (...) men be dispirited, and even ring their bells
backwards, when they shall see all on a light fire? Moses himself may tremble
at the terror of the mount, and Abraham show some trepidation in such a fright.

Verse 34. Take heed that (...) hearts]
The Disciples (...) had in them the common poison of nature: and so, were
obnoxious even to the most reproachful evils. That (...), if watered with the
temptation of Satan, what sin may it not produce in the best, unless God
prevent?

Verse 36. That ye may be accounted worthy]
Great is the Emphasis (...)
of this word (says learned Beza) for it gives us to understand that we owe
all to the free election of God, who loved us first, and so accepted us for
worthy; Rev. 3. 4.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse 1. Now the feast of unleavened, etc.]
IT is good to bring Bibles to Church. Socrates relates of one (...). lib. 7.
cap. 5.
Sabbatius a Novation Bishop, that reading this text, added such things of his
own as carried away many simple people from the faith.

Verse 2. How they might kill him]
Not put him to death as Judges, but kill him as cut-throates. So Act. (...).
2. 23.

Verse 3. Then entered Satan]
He stood but at the door till now, that the business was concluded on.

Verse 4. And communed with the chief Preists]
Suopte ingenio, (...) reprobi Angeli, says an Interpreter.

Verse 6. And he promised]
By mutual stipulation (says (...).
Beza) wherein the one asks, Do thou promise to do such a thing? the other
answers, I do promise. Like as of old it was, Credis? Credo. Abrenuncias?
Abrenuncia. Beleevest thou? I do believe. Forsakest thou? I do forsake.

Verse 7. The day of unleavened bread, when, etc.]
It must be our care to cast out all filthiness of flesh and spirit (that old
leaven) before we communicate, 1 Cor. 5. 7. First throw the baggage into the
brook Kidron (the town-ditch) and then kill the Passover, 2 Chronicles. 30. 14.

Verse 15. With desire have I desired]
How much more should we come with strong affections and lusty appetites to
this holy Supper? It is a virtue here to be an holy glutton, and to drink
hearty draughts; that we may go from the Table, as Christ from Jordan, full of
the holy Ghost. For this end consider what is before thee, as Prove. 23. 1. not
to restrain appetite, but to provoke it. And the rather because Christ thus
earnestly thirsted after our salvation, though he knew it should cost him so
dear. See Luke 12. 50.

Verse 16. Until it be fulfilled]
Until the old Passover be abolished, and the New brought in place, by my
death and resurrection.

Verse 17. And he took the cup]
The cup of the common supper, John 13. 2, 3.

Verse 23. And they began to enquire]
Therefore the Lord had not perfectly pointed out the traitor to them: or if
he did, they either heardnot, or heeded not.

Verse 24. There was also a strife]
This was so much the worse in them, because immediately after the Sacrament,
and before the Passion, which our Savior had told them should fall out within
two days after. Neither was this the first time that they had thus faulted,
and were reproved for it.

Verse 25. The Kings of the Gentiles, etc.]
In striving for precedence the Disciples showed themselves but Gentiles, who
stand upon their birth and privileges.

Exercise Lordship over them]
As he did with a witness (of Joh. Manlii loc. com. 636
whom Melancthon writes) that wrung money from his miserable subjects, by
knocking out their teeth, one by one, till he had what he would.

Verse 28, Ye are they which have continued, etc.]
Agrippa having suffered imprisonment for wishing Caius Emperor, the first
thing Caius did after he came to the Empire, was to prefer Agrippa to a
Kingdom. He gave him also a chain of gold as heavy as the chain of iron
that was upon him in prison. And shall not Christ richly reward all those his
suffering servants?

Verse 29. And I appoint]
Gr. I bequeath as by my last Will (...), (...).
and Testament. See Heb. 9. 17.

Verse 30. That ye may eat and drink, etc.]
As Mephibosheth and Chinham at David's table; which was an high favor.

Verse 31. Simon, Simon]
q. d. Mi charissime Simon. Piscat.

Satan has desired, etc.]
As a challenger desires to have one of the other-side to combat with, as
Goliath did. He cannot harm us without leave. So he desired to have Job, and had
him.

That he may sift you]
Cribratione Satanae non perditur, sed purgatur frumentum, says Zanchy. See
the Note on Matthew 3. 12.

Verse 32. But I have prayed]
So the plaster is ready made before the wound be given: for else the patient
might perish, as those do that are stung with scorpions, if not presently
anointed with (...) of scorpions.

That thy faith fail not]
It is our faith that Satan chiefly assaulteth: Seneca.
He knows that nihil retinet qui fidem perdidit.

Strengthen thy brethren]
So he does notably, in both his Epistles, dooming Apostates most severely, 2.
Pet. 2.

Verse 41. And he was with-drawn]
For privacy sake to pray, though (...) to leave their company, thorough
extreme perplexity; which made him return so often to them, calling upon them to
watch with him.

Verse 42. If thou be willing]
He was so astonished with the greatness of his present pressures, that he seems
for a time to suffer some kind of forgetfulness of his office.

Verse 44. And being in an agony]
(...) says a Greek Father. Alphonsus is honored in Histories for this, that
he abased himself so far, as to help one of his subjects out of a ditch. Shall
not Christ much more be honored that helped all his out of the ditch of
damnation?

Great drops of bloud]
Clotty blood issuing through flesh and skin in great abundance. Oecolampadius
tells of a certain poor man, (...),
who being kept hanging in the trusse of the cord (which is a certain hanging
by the hands behind, having a weighty stone fastened at their feet) the space
of six hours, the sweat that dropped from his Act. and Mon. fol. 805.
body for very pain and anguish, was almost blood. But here was no (almost) in
our Saviors bloody sweat; whiles, without any external violence merely by the
force of his own saddest thoughts working upon him, sanguinem congelatum quasi
extruserit. So great was Scanderbegs ardor in battle, that the blood burst out
of his Bucholcer.
lips. But from our Champions not lips only, but whole body, burst out a bloody
sweat. Not his eyes only were fountains of tears, or his head waters, as Jeremy
wished Chap. 9. 1. but his whole body was turned, as it were, into rivers of
blood: A sweet comfort to such as are cast down for that, that their sorrow for
sin is not so deep and soaking, as they could desire.

Verse 45. He found them sleeping]
Who should have waked, Socrates Theodoret.
and wiped off his sweat (as the Angel did Theodorus the Martyrs) but they
rather added to it by their security.

Verse 48. Judas, betrayest thou, etc.]
Sic Judaei, sub praetextu (...).
pietatis maxim delinquebant; and Deo osculum sine amore (...). Julian the
Apostate was no friend to Basil, though he wrote to him (...). Nor was Libanius
the more to be believed for saying (...). In (...) ad (...).
If Basil commend me, I despise other men's worse censures.

Verse 49. Lord shall we smite?]
But before he could answer, Peter smot: which might easily have cost him his
life. Quod (...), ne feceris, is a safe rule.

Verse 51. And he touched his ear, etc.]
After he had laid them flat on the ground. So he tried them both ways: but
nothing would do.

Verse 53. And the power of darknesse]
The dark places of the 1 Cor. (...).
earth are full of the habitations of cruelty, Psalm. 74. 20. Creatures (...)
Tim.
kept in the dark are (...) and furious. Had they known, they would never have
crucified the Lord of glory. I did it ignorantly, says Paul concerning his
persecuting the Saints.

Verse 61. And looked upon Peter]
A stroke from guilt broke Judas his heart into despair: but a look from Christ
brak Peter's heart into tears.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse 2. Perverting the people]
GRaece, Turning them up-side down, wreathing them from (...)
their right minds. So Verse 5. He Stirs up the (...) (...).
Gr. He makes an earthquake in them; rectam toll it de cardine (...), he
throws them off the hinges.

Verse 8. He was exceeding glad]
As if he had got some (...) or inchanter, that would show him some pleasant
sight.

Verse 9. But he answered him nothing]
Princes use to (...) the undecencies of Ambassadors by denying them audience:
as if (...) were the way royal to revenge a wrong. Christ (...) not a word to
(...) (says one) because Herod had taken away his voice, by beheading the
Baptist, who was vox clamantis.

Verse 10. Vehemently accused him]
Gr. With great intention (...)
of spirit, and contention of speech. Clamant, ut Stent or a vincant.

Verse 11. Set him at nought]
Gr. Made no body of him. (...)


Arrayed him in a gorgeous robe]
Or a whit robe, as the old Interpreter has it. Pilates soldiers clad our
Savior in purple, (...)
(a color more affected by the Romans) Herod in white, as more affected by the
Jewish Nobility.

Verse 12. Pilate and Herod were made friends]
Two dogs that are fighting, can easily agree to pursue the Hare that passes
by them. Martial brings in the Hare thus complaining; In me omnis terraeque
aviumque, marisque rapina est:
Forsitan and coeli, si canis astra tenet.


In littore Siculo cum lepus canum (...) vim (...), (...) Bodin. (...). Not.
359.
(...) marimo captus dicitur: Est enim voracissima (...), says Bodin. The
wicked can easily unite against the Saints.

Verse 20. Pilate therefore willing, etc.]
I read of one that did verily think that Pilate was an honest man, because he
was so unwilling to crucify Christ. But this arose only from the restraint of
natural conscience against so foul a fact.

Verse 25. Him that for sedition]
The Jews before they were banished out of this Kingdom, threw bags of poison
into the Wells and Fountains that the people were to drink of; and so
indeavovred to poison them all: so deal those that sow sedition, these are
the Pests, the botches of humane society.

Verse 28. Weep not for me]
We are not so much to lament dolorous sufferings (as Papists use to do in
their histrionicall descriptions of his passion) as to lay to heart and lament
our sins the cause of (...) When a Papist came to Master Hooper at the stake
Act. and Mon. sol. 1373.
and said, Sir, I am sorry to see you thus. Be sorry for thy self man, (said
hearty Hooper) and lament thine own wickedness: for I (...) well, I thank God,
and death to me for Christ's sake is welcome.

Verse 29. Blessed are the barren]
Better be so, then bring forth children to the murderer. Hence Hoseas prays
for barrenness as a blessing on his people, Hos. 9. 14.

Verse 31. What shall be done in the dry?]
Lo little sucklings also are here called dry trees, (...)-wood, such as Gods
wrath will soon kindle upon.

Verse 33. Which is called Calvary]
As sad a sight to our Savior, as the bodies of his slain wife and children
were to Mauricius the Emperor, who was soon after to be slain also by the
command of the traitor Phocas. Let us learn to consider the tyranny and
deformity of sin as often as we pass thorough Churchyards, and Charnell-houses.

Verse 34. Father, forgive them]
See the sweet mercy of Christ mindful and careful of his enemies, when the
pains of hell had taken hold of him, and they, like so many breathing devils,
were tormenting him. Pendebat and tamen petebat, says Augustine. He was slain
by them, and yet he begged for them.

Verse 35. Derided him]
(...). Blew their noses at him. (...)


Verse 36. Offered him vineger]
In stead of wine, which Kings drink much off.

Verse 38. Greek, Latin, and Hebrew]
This venerable Elogy and Epitaph, set upon our Saviors Cross, proclaimed him
King of all religion, having reference to the Hebrews, of all wisdom, to the
Greeks, of all power to the Latins.

Verse 39. Which were hanged, railed, etc.]
Sic plectimur a Deo, nec flectimur tamen, (says Salvian) corripimur, sed non
corrigimur. There are many, quos multo facilius fregeris, quam flexeris, says
(...).
Buchanan. Monoceros interimi potest, capi non potest. The wicked are the worse
for that they suffer, and will sooner break then bend.

Verse 40. But the other answering]
Silent he was for a while, and therefore seemed to consent; till, hearing
Christ's prayers and the enemies outrages, he brake out into this brave
confession, worthy to be written in letters of gold.

Verse 42. Lord, remember me]
By this penitent prayer he made his cross a Jacobs ladder, whereby the Angels
descended to fetch up his soul. So did Leonard Caesar burnt at Rappa in
Bavaria, whose last words were these, Lord Jesu suffer with me, support (...).
(...).
me, give me strength: I am thine, save me, etc. See the Note on Matt. 27. 38.

Verse 43. Verily I say unto thee]
See the infinite love of Christ to penitent sinners, in that when he hung upon
the tree, and was paying dear (...) man's sin, he rejected not this malefactors
petition. Shall he not hear us now that all is paid and finished?

To day shall thou be with me]
This is not every man's happiness. A pardon is sometimes given to one upon the
gallows: but who so (...) to that, the rope may be his hire. It is not good to
put it upon the Psalm of Miserere, and the neck-verse (says one:) for
sometimes he proves no clark.

Verse 47. Certainly this was a righteous man]
Bennet the (...) in King Henry the Eighths days, being brought to execution,
the most part of the people (he exhorted them with such Acts and Mon. fol 949.
gravity and sobriety) as also the Scribe who wrote the sentence of Ibid. 1156.
and 1423.
condemnation against him, did pronounce and confess that he was Gods servant,
and a good man. So when Wiseheart and March, the Martyrs, went toward the
stake, they were justified by the beholders, as innocent and godly persons.

Verse 51. The same had not consented]
This proved him to be a good man and a just, as Psalm. 1. 1. Sir John Cheek was
drawn in for fear of death to be present at the condemnation of some of the
Acts and Mon. 1774.
Martyrs. The remorse whereof so mightily wrought upon his heart, that not long
after he left this mortal life: whose fall, though it was full of infirmity,
yet his rising again by repentance was great, and his end comfortable, says
Master Fox.

Waited for the kingdom of God]
Gr. Entertained and embraced (...)
it.

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse 1. Very early in the morning]
ABout which time (probably) our Savior rose.

Verse 9. And told all these things]
Per os mulieris mors ante processerat, per os mulieris vita reparatur, says
Ambrose. So Chap. 1. an Angel of light communeth with a woman about man's
salvation, as an Angel of darkness had done, Genesis 3. about his fall and
destruction.

Verse 11. As idle tales]
Set on with great earnestness. (...) a (...) particula (...) and (...) valde
dico.


Verse 12. And stooping down]
Obstipo capite and propenso collo. We need not doubt therefore of the
certainty of this history of Christ's resurrection.

Verse 13. About Threescore furlongs]
About six miles.

Verse 14. And they talked together]
So did Elias and Elisha, when the heavenly chariot came to sunder them. Christ
is still with two or three met for such an holy purpose.

Verse 16. But their eyes were held]
Ut ulcus suum discipuli detegerent, (...) susciperent, says Theophylact. That
they may tell their own disease, and receive healing.

Verse 17. That ye have one to another]
Gr. That ye toss one (...) ut cum (...).
to another, as a ball is tossed betwixt two or more.

And are sad]
Christ loves not to see his Saints sad: he questions them as Joseph did his
prisoners, Wherefore look ye so sadly to day, Genesis 40. 7? and as the king did
Nehemiah, Chap. 3. 2.

Verse 18. And one of them, whose name was Cleophas]
They that hold the other of these two to have been Saint Luke, are (...) by
the preface he has set before the Acts, says Beza.

Art thou only a stranger, etc.]
Tragedies have no prologues, Natat. Comes.
as comedies have: because it is supposed, that all men take knowledge of
public calamities.

Verse 19. Which was a Prophet]
Yea and more then a Prophet. But the disciples were wondrous ignorant, till
the spirit came down upon them, Act. 2.

Verse 21. But we trusted]
q. d. Indeed nowwe cannot tell what to say to it. Here their hope hangs the
wing extremely, their (...). Epicter.
buckler is much battered, and needs beating out again. Ferendum and sperandum,
said the Philosopher. And good men find it more easy to bear evil, then to
wait for good, Hebrews 10. 36.

Verse 25. O fools, etc.]
Those in a Lethargy must have double the quantity of physic that others have.
Some Tit. 1. 12. 13.
slow-bellies must be sharply rebuked, that they may be sound in the faith.

Verse 26. Ought not Christ]
Ne Jesum quidem audias gloriosum, nisi videris crucifixum, says Luther in an
Epistle to Melancthon. (...) (...).
Agentem fortiter (...) aliquid pati, said a Theban soldier, out of Pindarus,
to Alexander, when he had received a wound in battle: For the which sentence,
he liberally rewarded him.

Verse 27. The things concerning himself]
Christ is author, object, matter, and mark of Old and New Testament: the Babe
of Bethlehem is bound up, (as I may so say) in these swathingbands: Turn we the
eyes of our minds to him, as the Cherubins did their faces toward the
Mercy-seat. The Angels do, 1 Pet. 1. 12.

Verse 28. And he made as though he would, etc.]
So did the Angel to Lot, Genesis 19. 2. See the like, Josh. 8. 5, 6. 1 King. 3.
24. If Solomon might make as though he would do an act that was unlawful, we
may surely do the like in things indifferent. Yet this was never done (as is
well observed) but 1 by those that had authority over others. 2 For some
singular good to them, with whom they thus dealt.

Verse 29. But they constrained him]
Though they had been sharply rebuked by him, whom they know to be no other
then a mere stranger to them.

For it is toward evening]
Cry we, now if ever, ere it be too late; Vespera jam venit, nobiscum Christ
maneto.
Extingui (...) nec patiare (...).


Verse 30. And blessed it.]
Its thought they knew him by his ordinary form of giving thanks before meat.

Versy 32. Did not our hearts burn]
By that spirit of burning Esaias 4. 4. that kindles the fire of God, Cant. 8.
6. on the harth of his Peoples hearts, whiles the mystery of Christ is laid
open unto them. Ego vero illius oratione sic incendebar, (says Senarclaeus,
Senarc. in (...) pist. ad Bucer.
concerning Diarius the Martyr) ut cum eum disserentem audirem, Spiritus sancti
verba me audire existimarem. Me thoughts when I heard him, I heard the Holy
Ghost himself speaking to me.

While he opened]
Preaching then is the key of the Scripture.

Verse 33. The same houre]
Late though it were, and they weary, yet they return the same night, not
sparing themselves to do good to others.

Verse 39. Behold my hands, etc.]
With those stamps of dishonor that the Jews did me with wicked hands. These
he retained even after his Resurrection, as for the confirmation of his
Apostles, so for our instruction, not to think much to suffer loss of honor
for our brethrens good and comfort.

Verse 44. And in the Psalmes]
When a book is set forth, verses of commendation, are often set before it. Christ
by this one sentence has more honored and authorized the book of (...), then
all men could have done by their Prefaces and Elogies prefixed thereunto. The
Turks disclaim both Testaments, yet swear D. Hakew in his David's Vow.
as solemnly by the Psalms of David, as by the Alchoran of Mahomet.

Verse 47. And that repentance, etc.]
Blessed be God (says one) that after our shipwreck by Adam, there is such a
plank as Repentance for a poor sinner to swim to heaven upon. It is a mourning
for sin, as it is offensivum Dei, and aversivum a Deo. It is commissa plangere,
and plangenda non committere, as Ambrose has it: to bewail what is done
amiss, and to do so no more.

Verse 49. Until ye be endued]
Gr. Clothed. Carnal men (...).
are naked men: when the Saints are arrayed with that fine (...) linen and
shining, Rev. 19. 8.

Verse 50. As far as to Bethany]
Where his three dear friends dwelt, Lazarus, Martha, and Mary. From hence he
went to his cross, and from hence he would go to his crown.

He lift up his hands]
As a good houshoulder, or rather as the high-Preist of the New Testament:
benedixit, id est, valedixit, he blessed them, and so bade them Farewell.

Verse 52. With great joy]
Yet could they not hear of his ascending to the Father, without great sorrow,
John 14. and 16. We greive for that sometimes that we have great cause to take
comfort in; such is our weakness and waywardness.

Verse 53, Praising and blessing God]
Inter laudum (...), promissum Spiritus sancti adventum, promptis per omnia
paratisque Beda.
cordibus exspectant. So putting themselves into a fit posture to receive the
Comforter that Christ had promised them.

Deo soli gloria.

