Roman Forgeries Or a TRVE ACCOUNT OF FALSE RECORDS Discovering the IMPOSTURES
AND Counterfeit Antiquities OF THE CHURCH OF ROME.

By a Faithful Son of the Church of ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed by S. and B. Griffin, for Jonathan Edwin at the three Roses in
Ludgate Street,

1 Timothy 4. 2. Speaking lies in Hypocrisy, having their Conscience seared with
an hot iron.

2 Timothy 3. 8, 9. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also
resist the truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith.

But they shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be manifest unto all
men, as theirs also was.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sr ORLANDO BRIDGEMAN KNIGHT and BARONET One of HIS
MAJESTY'S Most Honorable Privy Council;

The AUTHOR Devoteth his best Services AND DEDICATETH The USE and BENEFIT of
his Ensuing Labors.

A Premonition.
THe Bishops of Rome, in the persons of Zozimus, Boniface, and Celestine,
Successively opposed the Sixth Council of Carthage, consisting of 217 Fathers
(among whom the great S. Augustine is acknowledged to be one:) in the matter of
viz (...) all the world to the Roman Chair.
Appeals: which was the first step made by that irregular Chair, to the
Exorbitant Supremacy which they afterward claimed. In vindicating that Claim
before the Council, they produced two counterfeit Canons, fathered upon the
Ecumenical Synod at Nice; which were by the Records of Carthage, Alexandria
and Constantinople, in the presence of all those Fathers, in the sixth Council
of Carthage, detected to be forgeries, as well as by the Tenor of the undoubted
Canons of the Nicene Council it self, which are contrary to those by the Roman
Church pretended; and so they were esteemed by the Fathers in that sixth
Council, who were startled at the sight of those New unheard of Monsters, at
their first Publication, above 1200 years ago.

Upon this Passage, I redoubled in the Book an observation (to make it more
remarkable,) which you will find cap. 2. page 9. to this purpose, That in the
first General Council of Nice it was ordered, that the chief in every Province
should confirm the Acts of his inferior Bishops; And if any Trouble did arise
which could not be decided by the Metropolitan, Provision was made Can. 5. (in
words so clear and forcible, that none more plain can be put into their places)
that the last Appeal should be made to Councils, and that the Person condemned
in any Province should not be received, if he fled to others. That Parenthesis
(In words so clear and forcible, that none more plain can be put in their
places) relates to the CANON it self: which here follows that you may see how
forcible it is, and how much plainer then the very Words into which I had
contracted it. It is worthy your Consideration, as on of the most Important
Records in Antiquity, consented to by all the Popish Compilers of the Councils
themselves.

Can. 5. Concerning those that This is the Canon opposed by the Forgeries.
are Excommunicated, whether in the order of the Clergy or the Laity, by the
Bishops in every several province, let the Sentence prevail according to the
Canon, that they who are cast out by some, be not received by others; But let
it be required that no man be excluded the Congregation, by the Pusillanimitie,
or contention, or any such vice of the Bishop. That this therefore might more
decently be inquired into, we think it fit, that Councils should every year
throughout every Province twice be celebrated, that such Questions may be
discussed by the Common Authority of all the Bishops assembled together. And so
they that have evidently offended against their Bishop, shall be accounted
Excommunicated according to reason, by all; till it pleases the Community of
Bishops to pronounce a milder Sentence on such But let the Councils be held,
the one before the Quaaragesima before Easter, that all dissension being taken
away, we might offer a most pure Gift unto God: and the second about the middle
of Autumn.

Had the Canon said, The last Appeal shall be made to Councils, they that are
accustomed to such shifts without blushing, might easily have evaded the Words,
by affirming the Bishop of Rome to be particularly excepted, without any need
of expressing the exception; because by the general and Tacit Consent of all,
he is above the Limits of such Laws, and above the Authority of that, and all
other Councils. Thus they might still render the matter doubtful by their
Subterfuges and Pretenses; as indeed they do, in evading one expression of the
Canon it self. For whereas the Fathers say, Let the Sentence prevail according
to the Canon, that they, who are cast out by some, be not received by others:
Those Popish Hirelings make an exception of the Bishop of Rome, where the
Ecumenical Synod makes none: and might as well except him here, though the
Council had said in terms, The last Appeal shall be made to Councils. For the
last Appeal to any subordinate Authority, over which the Council had any
Legislative Power, was ordered, they might say to be made to Councils: But the
Bishop of Rome being the Head of the Church, and having the supreme Authority
over all Councils, was not thought of in this Canon: nor was fit he should be
at all mentioned, because that would imply he was under their authority. The
Prodigious Height of their usurped Claim being their sole Defense, and their
incredible Boldness the amazement of ignorant People, which is their chief
security.

But the Council adding to the former expression this clause, That Councils
should every year, throughout evry Province, twice be celebrated, (for this
very end) that such Questions may be discussed by the common authority of all
the Bishops assembled together: it puts an end to the business: especially when
they add, That they who have evidently offended their Bishop, shall be
accounted excommunicated according to reason, till it pleases the community of
Bishops to pronounce a milder Sentence. But that which renders it most plain
and forcible, is this, Let the Councils be held, the one before the
Quadragesima before Easter, that all Dissension being taken away, we might
offer a most pure Gift unto GOD. And the second about the middle of Autumn, All
the wit in the world could not have invented a more clear and apparent
provision, against the Roman Bishops absurd and impudent Pretenses. No Evasion
(I think) can possibly be made there from; when it is once noted and
understood. For the Bar put in against the Pope, is not here in Words, but
Things, It implies that the Controversy must before Easter be fully
determined: The very end of calling such a Council, and holding it then, being
the taking away of all dissension, that we might offer up a most pure Gift or
Sacrifice to God: that is, That Unity being restored to the Church at that
time, we might receive the Sacrament in Peace and Charity. Whereas, if after
the Sentence of the Council, the business were to be carried to the Court of
Rome; Suits and Quarrels could not be ended against Easter, but would be
lengthened in many Provinces, beyond Easter; both by reason of the Seas and
Regions, to be passed over by old and Crazy Persons, such as the venerable
Bishops were, before they could come from their own Countries to the Roman
Chair; and by those Prolatory delays they might find there, the matter being
wholly referred to the Popes pleasure.

The Variation of the Letter in the Book, made my Note on this place look too
like the Text of the Council it self; which for as much as it happened in a
most weighty Place, I could not with a good Conscience let it pass, without
acquainting the Pious Reader with the same. Though the Letter of the Canon it
self (to prevent mistakes) is faithfully translated afterward page 26, and 27.
Yet without giving this Gloss upon the Canon; which was the occasion of this
Pramonition, because so necessary to a clear and full understanding of all the
procedure.

This Note is the more weighty, because the Nicene Council is confessed on both
sides, (by us for its own sake and its conformity to the Scriptures, by the
Papists, for the Popes, that have ratified it,) to be of great Authority; next
to the Holy Bible, the very first, and most indisputable that is. Yet this
Canon laid in the foundation, utterly overthrowes all the following Pretenses
and Forgeries of the Roman Bishops. Which I beseech the Reader to examine more
perfectly. For though by many Arts and long Successes, the Bishop of Rome bas
ascended to an Ecclesiastical Supremacy; and a subtle Train of Doctrines, is
laid, to make him the Universal Monarch of the World, as much higher then the
Emperor, as the Sun is greater than the Moon, as they express it: Yet the
Sentence of an Eminent Dr. Still: Sermon on Acts 24. 17. page 45.
Divine well acquainted with these Affairs in a late Sermon preached before the
Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen in the City of London, and now published, is
very true, Dr. Still: Sermon on Acts 24. 17. page 45.
The Supremacy of the Roman Church was a mere Usurpation, begun by Ambition,
advanced by Forgery, and defended by Cruelty.

ERRATA.
THe Reader before he enters upon the Book is desired to correct these, as the
principal Errata's, with his Pen. Page 35 line 15 dele now p. 43 l. 21 r. love
of the world that. p. 55 for Councits r. Statesmen p. 66l. 16 aft. Magdenburg
r. and. p. 83 l. 21 for 1635 r. 1535. p. 104 l. 16 for fit r. fifth. p 107l 10
for 1618 r. 1608. p. 109 add in the Margin 11. p. 137l. 7 r Right use of the
Fathers. p 157 (...). r. Transeunt. p 172 Cap. 15. Contents: for Falsity r.
Falsely.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
IRenaeus, one of the most Ancient Fathers, Scholar to S. Polycarp, S. John's
Disciple, in his Book against Heresies, gives us four notable marks of their
Authors: First, he shows how they disguize their Opinions; Error never shows
It Self, Iren. Proem.
says he, lest it should be taken naked; but is artificially adorned in a
splendid Mantle, that it may appear truer than Truth it self, to the more
unskilful. 2. That having Lib. 1. cap. 1.
Doctrines which the Prophets never preached, nor God taught, nor the Apostles
delivered, they pretend unwritten Traditions: Ex non Scriptis legentes, as he
phraseth it. 3. They make a Rope of Sand, that (...).
they may not seem to want Witnesses; passing over the Order and Series of
Writings, and as much as in them lies, loosing the Members of the Truth, and
dividing them from each other: for they chop and change, and making one thing
of another, deceive many, etc. But that which I chiefly intend Lib. 1. cap,
(...).
is the fourth; They bring forth a vast multitude of Apocryphal and Spurious
Writings, which themselves have feigned, to the amazement of Fools; and that
those may admire them, that know not the Letters (or Records) of the Truth. How
far the Papists have trodden the foregoing Paths, it is not my purpose to
unfold, only the last, the Heretical pravity of Apocryphal and Spurious Books;
how much they have been guilty of imposing on the World by feigned Records, I
leave to the evidence of the ensuing Pages; which I heartily desire may be
answerable to the Merit of so great a Cause.

Vincentius Lirinensis, another eminent Father, praised by Gennadius, died in
the time of Theodosius and Valentinian. He wrote a Book against Heresies in
like manner; wherein preparing Furniture and Instructions against their Wiles,
he at first tells us, that the Canon of the Scripture is alone sufficient:
Then, that the concurrence of the Fathers is to be taken in, for the more clear
certainty of their sense and meaning. Upon this latter point he says
afterward, But neither are all Heresies to be assaulted this way, nor at all
times, but Vin. Lir. cap 39.
only such as are New and Green: to wit, when they first spring up, before they
have falsified the Rules of the Ancient Faith, while they are hindered by
straitness of time, and before (the Poison spreading abroad) they have
endeavored to corrupt the Writings of the Fathers. So that Heretics have
inclination enough, where they are not hindered by straitness of time, to
corrupt the most Ancient Writings of the Church: For which cause he further
says in the same place, But Heresies that Ibid.
are spread abroad, and waxen old, must not be set upon in this sort, because
by long continuance they have had opportunity to steal away the Truth.
Whatsoever (...) nesses there be therefore, either of Schisms or Heresies that
are grown Ancient, we (...) in no case otherwise to deal with them then either
to convince them, if it be needful, by the Authority of the Scriptures only; or
at least to avoid them, as convicted of old, and condemned by Universal
Councils.

In this Admonition the Father informs us of two things: First, that it is
possible for Error to prevail and spread abroad; to continue long, and wax
old: Secondly, that having gotten possession of Books and Libraries, it may
falsisie the Rules of the Ancient Faith and steal away the Truth, by corrupting
the Writings of the Fathers. In which case, he will not have the Controversy
decided by the Fathers, but by the Scriptures only, or by old Universal
Councils.

But if Error proceed so far, as to corrupt the Councils too, then of
necessity we must have recourse to some other remedy; either to the Scriptures
alone, as he directs; or else we must detect the frauds, whereby the Councils
themselves are falsified: For that they are liable to the same inconvenience,
is evident, both by the paueity of Ancient Records, and the many Revolutions
that have been in the World: especially since Nature teaches men to strike at
the Root, attempts are more apt to be made upon them, because Heretics are
prone to be most busy in undermining the Foundation.

That it is possible for men so far to act against their Consciences, as to
corrupt the Ancient Records of Truth, you see by the premises: and that it is
an easy thing for them to effect it, that have gotten all kind of Books and
Libraries into their hands, is apparent; because they that keep them, order
them as they please: So that if Heretics be the Lords and Masters of them, for
many Ages together, we may not rashly adventure our Salvation upon their own
Records: All the World knows, that the Church of Rome had all the Libraries of
these Western parts, for many Ages, in her power; and that the Eastern parts
are swallowed up by the Deluge of Mahumetanism: All that can seem harsh, is,
that she that pretends her self the Catholic Church, should be guilty of
Heresy. But if the property of falsifying the Fathers and Councils may pass
for a Badge of Heresy, there will no greater Heretics be found in the world,
than those who style themselves falsely Catholics. For as the sight of the
possibility of such a thing made Vincentius talk more like a Prophet than a
Father, the Church of Rome has so behaved her self since his departure, as if
she intended eminently to fulfill his Predictions: which will in the process of
our Discourse be made evident to the pious and Christian Reader.

S. Bernard lived to see the accomplishment of that which Lirinensis feared;
for he flourished in the Eleventh Age of the Church, when the Pope and his
Chair were mounted up to the top of their Height and Grandeur; and bearing an
impartial Testimony, he wrote many things against their Enormities: The Vices
of their Popes, with those of all other Orders and Degrees of men in the Church
of Rome, he inveyeth against at large, in his 33. Sermon upon the Canticles;
smartly touching their Vainglory, Pomp, Luxury, Avarice, Simony, Usurpation,
and Incorrigibleness: so that for any Piety or Conscience in them, such frauds
might easily be digested. He distinguishes the State of the Church into four
several periods, or four different times; to each of which he annexeth one
peculiar temptation: Terror in the Night of Persecution, Error in the Morning
of her Peace, the heat of Lust, and the glaring splendor of Riot and Excess,
beautified with Riches, and varnished over with Hypocrisy in the Noon of her
prosperity, and the Guile of Deception in the Evening; where with great
vehemence, and impatient Ibid,
(...), he speaks thrice in little room, of a certain business walking in the
dark. Now a little before his time, and not long after the second Nicene
Council, that Fardel of Forgeries came forth under the Name of Isidore, which
seduced all the late Collectors of the Decrees and Councils, which have risen
up among the Papists (at least if they have not been wilful corrupters of the
Records themselves, which is much to be feared) and discovered a design
(probably) to S. Bernard also, that was then on foot in the Court of Rome, to
alter and deface the Monuments of Antiquity: For Riculphus, the Archbishop of
Mentz, who first scattered (...) An. (...) (...). 5, 6, 7, 8.
those Forgeries abroad, and Benedictus Levita, who first put them into the
Capitular Books of the Kings of the Franks, and being conscious of their
weakness, got Ibid.
them confirmed by the Avthority of the Roman Chair. Hincmarus Laudunensis
also, whom Baronius calls Novissimum usque ad haec Tempora Collectorem, The
last Collector of the Councils, till his own Age. All these lived before S.
Bernards time: So did Hincmarus, Archbishop of Rhemes, who having a more
sagacious Nosiril than ordinary, as Baronius observes, did first attempt the
detection of the fraud, and was accused for the same, and that so roughly, that
as Baronius further notes out of Frodoardus his History of Rhemes, he was (...)
forced to recent; and though he did it, he was marked with Infamy, for having
attemqted to reprove them. S. Bernard therefore having such a Mirror before
his eyes, speaking covertly for his own S. Bern. Sermon. (...). in Cant.
preservation, yet plainly enough for the Authors Conviction, among other (...)
and open Abominations, seems to (...) at this in particular: For showing the
State of the Church to be more miserable under the Pompous Hypocrisy of the
Popes, than either in the night of persecution under Heathen (...), or in the
conflicts of Heretics that sprang up in the morning, in the midst of the
brightness of that Glaring Noon, he talks of, a work going on in the dark, a
design (...) carried on by the instigation and procurement of the Noonday
Devil, that should shortly after appear to seduce the rest, if there be any in
Christ, (says he,) abiding S. (...). Ibid.
yet in their simplicity: For he has swallowed up the Floods of the Wise, and
the Rivers of the Mighty, and trusts in himself: that he can take Jordan into
his mouth, that is, the simple and the lowly that are in the Church. Which
immediately following that business walking in the dark, makes me to believe,
that he looked upon that business as the Engine of their Deception; which gave
him the Hint, to speak by way of Prophecy, concerning the fourth Temptation
that was yet to come, in the Churches Declension; and which he expressly notes
to be the immediate means of opening the way for Antichrist to appear. His
words are very Poinant and Emphatical: it was bitter at first in the Death of
Martyrs, Ibid.
more bitter in the conflict of Heretics, but now most bitter in the manners
of Domestics: She cannot put them to flight, she cannot fly them, they are so
multiplied upon her: The Plague of the Church is in the Entrails, and
incurable; therefore its bitterness is most bitter in its peace. But in what
peace? It is peace, and it is not peace; peace from Pagans, and peace from
Heretics, but truly none from her Children: The voice of weeping is in that
time! I have nourished children, and exalted them, but they have despised me!
They have despised and defiled me with their filthy life, their filthy gain,
their filthy commerce; and finally, with that business walking in darkness. It
remains now that the Noonday Devil should appear to seduce the rest, if there
be any in Christ abiding yet in their simplicity.

That S. Bernard intended this, is only my conjecture; because whatsoever he
spoke against, under that Title of Darkness, he chose obscure terms, as it
should seem on purpose: for that business is Arcanum Imperii, the Great Mystery
of the Roman Chair, the Popes Palladium, not to be seen with profane eyes; nay,
the very Ark of his Most Holy Place, to be looked into by none but his own
faithful Priests: It was Death to look into it with suspicious eyes, or to
expose it to those of the people Where we may further observe, that as a
Serpent hides her head, and exposes any of her members, for the preservation
of that, to the strokes of her Enemy; so does the Church of Rome desire more to
conceal this Grand Art of counterfeiting Ecclesiastical Antiquities, than any
other points less Radical and Vital: All other Controversies are but
superficial blinds, more freely exposed to her Enemies debates, that men's eyes
may be turned another way from this Arcanum, which is with all endeavor hidden
from the people: And for this cause they find it better to buy up the Editions,
than answer the Discoveries; which makes Dr. James his Treatise, and Blondels
Pseudo-Isidorus, so rare among the people.

Matters of Fact may be manifest enough, where the means of contriving them
remain unknown: a conjecture in a circumstance therefore destroys not the
Foundation. You will find other kinds of Arguments in the subsequent Epitome,
than bare conjectures. In the mean time, be pleased to remember, that the
Papists have had all kind of Books, nay, and Libraries in their hands; that the
Roman Clergy (especially those that attend the Chair) have Glory, Wealth, and
Pleasure enough to tempt them to such endeavors; that the Pope has Power
enough to reward his Creatures, and that they have actually endeavored to
corrupt such Books by their Indices Expurgatorii, as also to put forth
Apocryphal and Spurious Pieces; which Dr. Reynolds, Dr. James, Bishop Jewel,
and the Learned Crashaw, as well as the Indices themselves, do evidently
declare. It shall here appear more clearly, that they have adulterated all by
Counterfeit Records; the very places and things corrupted, being themselves
produced, detected, and reproved.

I shall not descend into the latrer Ages, but keep within the compass of the
first 420 years, and lay open so many of their frauds, as disguize and cover
the face of Primitive Antiquities, which ought to be preserved most sacred and
pure. It is sufficient to prove, that all the Streams are infected by the
Poison that is thrown into the Fountainhead; and to expatiate downwards, would
overswell the Book, which is intended to be little, for the use and benefit of
all. Neither shall I talk of the Fathers at large: I will not meddle with their
Amphilochius, Abdias, S. Denis, etc. but keep close to Records, and public
instruments of Antiquity, which have the force of Laws: Such as Apostles
Canons, Decretal Epistles, and Ancient Councils; which they have either
depraved by altering the Text, or falsified, as it were, by Wholesale, in the
entire Lump: And I shall concern my self in the (...), more than the former.

I desire the Reader to note, that I do not trust other men's information, but
mine own eyes; having my self seen the Collectors of the Councils, and searched
into all their Compilers for the purpose: Neither do I use our own, but their
most affectionate and Authentic Writers, the circumstances of the things
themselves (in their most approved Authors) detecting the Forgeries.

Before I stir further, I shall add one passage which befell me in the Schools,
as I was studying these things, and searching the most Old and Authentic
Records in pursuance of them. One Evening, as I came out of the Bodleian
Library, which is the Glory of Oxford, and this Nation, at the Stairs-foot I
was saluted by a Person that has deserved well both of Scholars and Learning,
who being an intimate Friend of mine, told me there was a Gentleman his Cosen,
pointing to a Grave Person, in the Quadrangle, a man that had spent many
thousand pounds in promoting Popery, and that he had a desire to speak with me.
The Gentleman came up to us of his own accord: We agreed, for the greater
liberty and privacy, to walk abroad into the NewParks. He was a notable man, of
an Eloquent Tongue, and competent Reading, bold, forward, talkative enough: He
told me, that the Church of Rome had Eleven Millions of Martyrs, Seventeen
Ecumenical Councils, above an Hundred Provincial Councils, all the Doctors,
all the Fathers, Unity, Antiquity, Consent, etc. I desired him to name me One
of his Eleven Millions of Martyrs, excepting those that died for Treason in
Queen Elizabeth's, and King James his days: For the Martyrs of the Primitive
times, were Martyrs of the Catholic, but not of the Roman Church: They only
being Martyrs of the Roman Church, that die for Transubstantiation, the Popes
Supremacy, the Doctrine of Merits, Purgatory, and the like. So many he told me
they had, but I could not get him to name one. As for his Councils,
Antiquities, and Fathers, I asked him what he would say, if I could clearly
prove, that the Church of Rome was guilty of forging them, so far, that they
had published Canons in the Apostles names, and invented Councils that never
were; forged Letters of Fathers, and Decretal Epistles, in the name of the
first Bishops and Martyrs of Rome, made 5, 6, 700 years after they were dead,
to the utter disguizing and defacing of Antiquity, for the first 400 years next
after our Savior? Tush, these are nothing but lies, quoth he, whereby the
protestants endeavor to disgrace the Papists. Sir, answered I, you are a
Scholar, and have heard of Isidore, Mercator, James Merlin, Peter Crabbe,
Laurentius Surius, Severinus Binius, Labbe, Cossartius, and the Collectio
Regia, Books of vast Bulk and Price, as well as of great Majesty and
Magnificence: You met me this Evening at the Library door; if you please to
meet me there tomorrow morning at eight of the Clock, I will take you in; and
we will go from Class to Class, from Book to Book, and there I will first show
in your own Authors, that you publish such Instruments for good Records; and
then prove, that those Instruments are downright frauds and forgeries, though
cited by you upon all occasions. He would not come; but made this strange
reply; What if they be Forgeries? what hurt is that to the Church of Rome? No!
(cried I, amazed) Is it no hurt to the Church of Rome, to be found guilty of
forging Canons in the Apostles names, and Epistles in the Fathers names, which
they never made? Is it nothing in Rome to be guilty of counterfeiting Decrees
and Councils, and Records of Antiquity? I have done with you! whereupon I
turned from him as an obdurate person. And with this I thought it meet to
acquaint the Reader.

AN ABRIDGMENT OF THE CHAPTERS.
Cap. 1. OF the Nature, Degrees, and Kinds of Forgery.

Cap. 2. Of the Primitive Order and Government of the Church. The first Popish
Encroachment upon it, backed with Forgery. The Detection of the Fraud in the
Sixth Council of Carthage.

Cap. 3. A multitude of Forgeries secretly mingled with the Records of the
Church, and put forth under the Name of Isidore, Bishop of Hispalis: Which Book
is owned, defended, and followed by the Papists.

Cap. 4. James Merlins Edition of the Councils, who lately published Isidore
Hispalensis for a good Record, which is now detected, and proved to be a
Forgery.

Cap. 5. Diverse Forgeries contained in Isidores counterfeit Collection,
mentioned in particular.

Cap. 6. A further account of Merlins design. How some would have Isidore to be
a Bishop, others a Merchant, others a Sinner; no man knowing well what to make
of him.

Cap. 7. Of Francis Turrian, the famous Jesuit, with what Art and Soldness he
defends the Forgeries.

Cap. 8. Of Peter Crabbe, his Tomes of the Councils. Wherein he agrees with,
and wherein he differs from Indore and Merlin.

Cap. 9. Of Carranza his Epitome: He owneth, and uses the Forgeries for good
Records.

Cap. 10. Of Surius his four Tomes, and how the Forgeries are by him confirmed.
He has the (...) of Atticus and (...), by which Pope Zozimus was convicted of
Forgery, in the sixth Council of Carthage.

Cap. 11. Of Nicolinus his Tomes, and their Contents for the first (...) years.
How full of Forgeries. His Testimony concerning the sixth Council of Carthage;
with his way of desending the Popes Forgery therein.

Cap. 12. Nicolinus his Fpisile to Pope Sixtus V. His contempt of the Fathers.
He begins to confess the Epistle of Melchiadcs to be naught. He overthrows
the Legend about Constantines Donation.

Cap. 13. The Epistle of Pope Damasus to Aurelius, Archbishop of Carthage,
commanding the Decretals of the Roman Bishops to be preached and published, and
Fathering those Forgeries on the H. Ghost.

Cap. 14. Counterfeit Canons made in the Apostles names, defended by Binius. A
Glympse of his Pretenses, Sophistries, and Contradictions. A forged Council of
the Apostles concerning Images, defended by Binius, and Turrian.

Cap. 15. A Book called the Pontifical, falsely fathered upon Damasus, an
Ancient Bishop of Rome. How the most Learned of the Popish Collectors use it as
the Text on which they Comment in their voluminous Books, yet confess it to be
a Forgery full of lies and contradictions.

Cap. 16 Of the Decretal Epistles, forged in the Names of Holy Martyrs and
Bishops of Rome, for many hundred years together: The first was sent from S.
Clement, by S. Peter's Order, to S James (as they pretend) Bishop of Jerusalem,
seven years at least; and by the truest account, more than seven and twenty
years after he was in his Grave. S. Clements Recognitions, a confessed Forgery;
which detecteth the first Epistle of S. Clement to be a real fraud.

Cap. 17. Of Higinus, and Pius. A notable Forgery in the name of Hermes: Where
you have the Testimony of an Angel concerning the Celebration of Easter; never
cited while the matter was in controversy.

Cap. 18 A Letter Eathered on Cornelius, Bishop of Rome, concerning the removal
of the Apostles Bones, about the year 2 4. It gives Evidence to the Antiquity
of many Popish Doctrines, but is it self a Forgery.

Cap. 9. The ridiculous Forgery of the Council of Sinuessa, put into the Roman
Martyrologies. How the City, and the Name of it, was consumed (no man can tell
when) by an Earthquake, etc.

Cap. 20. Diverse things premised, in order first to the Establishment, and then
to the Refutation of Constantines Donation; the first by Binius, the latter by
the Author. The Forgeries of (...), Pope Eusebius, and Binius together, opened.

Cap. 21. The counterfeit Edict of our Lord Constantine the Emperor: wherein
the Western Empire was given to the Bishop of Rome.

Cap. 22. The Donation of Constantine proved to be a Forgery by Binius himself.
He confesses the Acts of Pope Sylvester (which he before had cited for good)
to be Forged.

Cap. 23. Pope Melchiades Epistle counterfeited. Isidore Mercator, the Great
Seducer of all the Roman Collectors, confessed to be a Forger. The Council of
Laodicea corrupted by the fraud of the Papists.

Cap. 21. Threescore Canons put into the Nicene Council after Finis, by the
care and Learning of Alphonsus Fisanus. Epistles counterfeited in the name of
Sylvester, and that Council. A Roman Council, under Pope Sylvester, wholly
counterfeited. Spurious Letters Fathered on Pope Mark, Athanasius, and the
Bishops of Egypt, to defend the Forgeries that were lately added to the Nicene
Council.

Appendix. Cardinal Baronius his Grave Censure and Reproof of the Forgeries.
His fear that they will prove destractive and pernicious to the Sea of Rome.

A TRUE ACCOUNT OF FALSE RECORDS; Discovering THE FORGERIES OR
Counterfeit-Antiquities OF THE CHURCH of ROME.
CAP. I. Of the Nature, Degrees, and Kinds of Forgery.
THe Sin of Forgery is fitter to be ranked with Adultery, Theft, Perjury, and
Murder, than to be committed by Priests and Prelates: One Act of it is a Crime
to be punished by the Judges; what then is a whole Life spent in many various
and enormous Offenses of that nature?

If a Beggar forge but a Pass, or a Petition, putting the Hands and Seals of
two Justices of the Peace to it, he is whipped, or clapped into the Pillory, or
marked for a Rogue, though he does it only to satisfy his Hunger

If a Lease, a Bond, a Will, or a Deed of Gift be razed, or interlined by
Craft, it passes for a Cheat; but if the whole be counterfeited, the Crime is
the greater.

If an Instrument be forged in the Kings Name, or his Seal counterfeited, and
put to any Patent, without his privity and consent, it is High Treason.

If any Records of Antiquity be defaced, or wilfully corrupted, relating to the
benefit of men, it is like the Crying Sin of removing thy Neighbors Landmark,
which Solomon censures in the Proverbs. But if those Records appertain to the
Right of Nations, the Peace of Mankind, or the Public Welfare of the World,
the Sin is of more mysterious and deeper nature.

If Counterfeits be shufled in among good Records, to the disorder and
confusion of the Authentic, and a Plea maintained by them, which without those
Counterfeits would fall to the ground, upon the deposition of False Witnesses;
Theft and Perjury are effectually couched, together with Lying, in the Cheat.

If the Records so counterfeited concern the Church, either in her Customs or
Laws, her Lands, or the limits of her Jurisdiction, the Order of her Priests,
or any other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Affair, besides other sins contained
in it, there is superadded the Sin of Sacrilege.

The highest degree of Forgery is that of altering the Holy Scriptures; because
the Majesty offended being Infinite, as well as the Concernment, the Crime is
the more heincus.

The highest, next under that, is to counterfeit Rules in the Names of the
Apostles, Ecumenical Councils, most glorious Martyrs, and Primitive Fathers,
that is, to make Canons, letters, Books, and Decrees in their Names, of which
they were not the Authors.

If the Church of Rome be guilty of this Crime, her Antiquity and Tradition,
the two great Pillars upon which she stands, are very rotten, and will
moulder into nothing.

If Money be spent in promoting the Forgery, or any thing given, directly or
indirectly, to its Fautors and Abettors, in order to the Usurpation of any
Spiritual Privilege or Power; he that does it, is guilty of Simony: And in
many cases, Simony, Lying, and Sacrilege; are blended together.

Finally, If they that make the Forgeries ather them upon GOD, or upon the Holy
Ghost, the Sin of Blasphemy is added to Forgery; for it makes God the Father
of Lies; and being done maliciously, it draws near to the unpardonable sin.

That some Popes have been guilty of Simony, cannot be doubted by them that are
any thing versed in Church Antiquty. Heart, in his Conference with Reynolds,
Confer. cap 7. Divis. 5.
(...) out of Dr. Genebrard, that the Popes, for the space of seven score years
and ten almost, from John VIII. to Leo IX. about fifty Popes did revolt wholly
from the virtue of their Ancestors, and were Apostatical, rather than
Apostolical: and that some of them came not in by the Door, but were Thy ves
and Robbers.

That it is not impossible to forge Records for the Bolstering up of Heresies,
those counter eit Gospels, Acts, Epistles, Revelations, etc. that were put
forth by Heretics in the Names of the Apostles, do sufficiently evidence;
which being extant a little after the Apostles decease, are pointed to by
Irenaeus, condemned in a Roman Council by Gelasius, and some of them recorded
by Ivo Cartonensis, in a Catalogue lib. 2. cap. (...). The Itinerary of
Clement, and the Book called Pastor, being two of the number.

I note the two last, because S. Clement in his first Epistle to S. James, is
made to approve the one, and Pope Pius in his Decretal magnifieth the other.
Which gives us a little glympse of the Knavery by which those Ancient Bishops
and Martyr of Rome were both abused, having Spurious Writings fathered upon
themselves; for had those Instruments been their own, they would never have
owned such abominable Forgeries. But of this you may expect more hereafter,
Cap. 16. and Cap. 17.

These aggravations and degrees of Forgery we have not mentioned in vain, or by
accident. In the process of our discourse, the Church of Rome will be found
guilty of them all, except the first, which is beneath her Grandeur; and in so
doing, she is very strangely secured by the height of her impiety. For because
it does not easily enter into the heart of man to conceive, that men,
especially Christians, should voluntarily commit so transcendent a Crime, the
greatness of it makes it incredible to inexperienced people, and renders them
prone to excuse the Malefactors, while they condemn the Accusers.

But that the Church of Rome is guilty in all these respects, we shall prove
not by remote Authorities, that are weak and feeble, but by demonstrations
derived from the Root and Fountain. I will not be positive in making
comparisons; but if my reading and judgment do not both deceive me, she is
guilty of more Forgeries than all the Heretics in the world beside: Their
greatness and their number countenance the Charge, and seem to promise that one
day it shall pass into a Sentence of Condemnation against her.

CAP. II. Of the Primitive Order and Government of the Church. The first Popish
Encroachment upon it, backed with Forgery. The Detection of the Fraud in the
Sixth Council of Carthage.
IT is S. Cyprian's observation, that our Savior, in the first Foundation of
the Church, gave his Apostles equal honor and power, saying unto them, Whose
soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye
retain, they are retained, Cyprian. Tract de Simpl. Praelator. The place has
been tampered with, but unsuccessfully: For though they have thrust in other
words into the Fathers Text, in some Editions of their own; yet in others they
are left sincere: As Dr. James in his corruption of the Fathers, Part. 2. Cap.
1. does well observe. But the most remarkable attempt of the Papists is that
whereas they have set a Tract concerning the Primacy of the Roman Church before
the Councils, containing many Quotations out of the Bastard Decretals, which
they pretend to be extracted, ex Codice antiquo, out of an Old Book, without
naming any Author; closing it with this passage of S. Cyprian, they leave out
these words of Scripture, Whose soever sins ye remit, etc. as rendering the
Fathers Testimony Bin. Tom. 1. Tractat de Primat. etc.
unfit for their purpose. You may see it in Binius his Collection of the
Councils, etc.

When the Apostles had converted Nations, they constituted Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons, for the Government of the Church; and left those Orders among us,
when they departed from the world.

It was found convenient also for the better Regiment of the Church, when it
was much enlarged, to erect the Orders of Archbishops, and Patriarchs.

The Patriarchs being Supreme in their several Jurisdictions, had each of them
many Primates and Archbishops under him, with many Nations and Kingdoms
allotted to their several Provinces; every of which was limited in it self, and
distinct from the residue: as appears in that first Ecumenical Council
assembled at Nice, An. Dom. 327. where it was ordained, Can. 6 that the ancient
custom should be kept; the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome being expressly
noted to be equal to that of the other Patriarchs.

In the two preceding Canons they ordain: 1. That in every Province Bishops
Council. Nicen. 1.
should be consecrated by all the Bishops Can. 4.
thereof, (might it consist with their convenience to meet together; if not) at
least by three being present, the rest consenting; but the confirmation of
their Acts is in every Province reserved to the Metropolitan. 2. That the last
Appeal should be made to Council. Nic. 1.
Councils; and that the person condemned Can. 5.
in any Province, should not be received, if he fled to others. Can. 4. and 5.

In the first of these Canons it was ordered, that the chief in every Province
should confirm the Acts of his Inferior Bishops, the Patriarch of Rome in his,
and every other Patriarch in his own Jurisdiction. In (...) last, if any
trouble did arise that could not be decided by the Metropolitan, provision was
made (in words so clear and forcible, that none more plain can be put into
their places) that the last Appeal should be made to Councils, (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)

But the City of Rome being in those days Queen of the World, and lifted up
above all other Cities, as the Seat of the Empire, the Bishop thereof began to
wax proud in aftertimes, and being discontented with the former Bounds,
invaded the Jurisdictions of his Fellow-Patriarchs.

For though the Foundation upon which the Government was laid was against it,
yet when persons were Immorigerous, if any Bishop were censured by his
Metropolitan, or Priest excommunicated by his Bishop, or Deacon offended with
his Superior, who chastised him for his guilt; though the Canon of the Church
was trampled under foot thereby (which forbad such irregular and disorderly
flights) the manner was, for those turbulent persons to flee to Rome, because
it was a great and powerful City; and the Roman Bishop trampling the Rule under
foot, as well as others, did (as is confessed) frequently receive them. Nay,
their ambition being kindled by the greatness of the place, it tempted them so
far, as to favor the Delinquents, and oftentimes to clear them, for the
encouragement of others, invited by that means, to fly thither for relief, till
at last the Cause of Malefactors was openly Espoused; and while they were
excommunicated in other Churches, they were received to the Communion in the
Church of Rome.

Hereupon there were great murmurings and heart-burnings at the first in the
Eastern Churches, because Rome became an Asylum, or City of Refuge, for
discontented persons; disturbing the Order of the Church, spoiling the
Discipline of other Provinces, and hindering the Course of Justice; while her
Bishop usurped an Authority, which neither Scripture nor Canon gave unto him.

It is recorded also, that they sometimes Council. Carth. 6. Epist. ad Celestin.
acquitted Malefactors without hearing Witnesses, and sent Orders for the
Restoration of those, who made such irregular flights, into the Provinces of
other Patriarchs that were Subject indeed to the Roman Empire, but not within
the Province of the Roman Patriarch

Nay, when those Orders were rejected, (if some of their own Collectors may be
believed) the Roman Bishops, through favor of the Empire, got Magistrates and
Soldiers to see them executed by Plain force: which grew chiefly scandalous in
the times of Zozimus, and Boniface; of which you may read the three last and
best Collections of the Councils, set forth by the Papists, Binius, (...) abbe,
and the Collectio Regia, unanimously consenting in their Notes on the sixth
Council of Carthage. And that this was the cause of calling that Council, they
confess in like manner.

For to stop these intolerable Encroachments, and to suppress the growth of an
Aspiring Tyranny, this seasonable Council was called at Carthage, consisting of
(...) Bishops, among whom S. Augustine was one present in particular.

To this Council Zozimus the Roman Patriarch sent three persons, one of which
was Faustinus, an Italian Bishop, to plead his Cause, with two Canons fathered
upon the Nicene Council; designing thereby to justify his Power of receiving
Appeals both from Bishops and Priests, but by the care and wisdom of that
Council they were detected and confounded, the Fraud being made a Spectacle to
the whole world.

For first, the Copy which Caecilianus, Archbishop of Carthage, brought from
Nice, (he being himself one of the Fathers in that Council) was orderly
produced, and the two Canons which the Roman Bishop sent were not there. Next,
because it might be pleaded upon the difference of the Copies, that the Copy of
Carthage must give place to that of Rome, Rome being the greater See; they sent
Messengers to the Patriarch of Alexandria, to the Patriarch of Antioch, and to
the Patriarch of Constantinople, (and admonished the Bishop of Rome to do so
too, that he might see sound and fair dealing) desiring the Records of the
Nicene Council, from all the principal parts of the world, from the Patriarchs
of Constantinople and Alexandria they received Authentic Copies, attested with
their several known Authorities, which agreed exactly with the Copy at
Carthage, but disagreed with that of Rome; the Extract produced out of it, by
the Name of a Commonitorium, being every word apparently forged.

Upon this the Bishop of Rome was condemned, his Arrogance and Usurpation
suppressed by Canons, and his Pride chastised by Letters; the Letters and
Canons being yet extant. This was done about the year 420.

Zozimus dying, Boniface and Celestine successively take up the Quarrel,
without any Dissent appearing in the Roman Clergy: nay rather all the Interest
of that Chair was employed to uphold the Forgery; whereby it is evident, that
it was not a Personal Act, but the guilt and business of the Church of Rome; as
appears further by all their Successors persisting in the Quarrel, by the
multitude of her Members defending it and the Forgery both; and by all the
Popish Collectors conspiring together, to maintain the Spurious and Adulterate
Canons.

Among other things which the Fathers Epist. Council Carthag. 6. ad Celestin.
wrote out of this Sixth Council of Carthage to Pope Celestine, they oppose the
true Canons of the Nicene Council, against the false ones, noting that, which
is alone sufficient to overthrow the Forgery, that these two Popish Canons were
really contrary to the Canons and Decrees of the Nicene Council: For desiring
him no more so easily to admit Appeals, nor to receive into Communion those
that were Excommunicated in other Churches; they tell him, he might easily find
this matter defined in the Nicene Council: for if it seemed fit to be observed
in the inferior Clergy, and Laymen, much more in Bishops. They tell him, that
he should chastise and punish such impudent Flights, as became him: As also,
that the Canons of the Nicene Council had most openly committed both the
inferior Clergy, and Bishops themselves to their own Metropolitans; wisely and
justly providing, that all businesses whatsoever should be determined in the
places where they arose; Nisi forte est Aliquis, etc. unless perhaps there be
some one who will say, that God is able to give Justice of Judgment to one, be
he who he will, but denies it to innumerable Priests assembled in a Council.
Which was in those days held so absurd and monstrous a thing to conceive, that
(however the case is altered since) they thought no man impudent enough to
affirm it. In these words they cut the Popes Arrogance sufficiently, for that
he being but One, was so highly conceited of himself, at least so behaved
himself, as if he had an extraordinary Spirit of Infallibility, and were fitter
to determine the Causes of the Church, than a whole Council of Bishops
assembled together. Finally, they charge him with bringing the empty puff of
secular pride into the Church of Christ: And so proceed to their Canons against
him.

Notwithstanding this, the Roman Bishops continued obstinate, contending so
long, till there was a great Rupture made in the Church upon this occasion. And
if some Records be true; namely, those Letters that past between Eulalius and
another Boniface, the Bishops of Rome grew so impudent, as to Excommunicate the
Eastern Churches, because they would not be obedient to an Authority sounded on
so base a Forgery. If they be not true, then there are more Forgeries in the
Roman Church than we charge her with: For the Letters were feigned (as Baronius
confesses) by some afterward, Baron.
that were zealous of the Churches welfare; to wit, for the better coloring of
that Schism which was made by the pride and ambition of Rome.

These Epistles were set forth by the Papists, and were owned at first for good
Records; but upon the consideration of so many Saints and Martyrs that sprung
up in the Churches of Africa, during that 100 years, wherein it is pretended by
those Epistles, that they were cut off from the Church of Rome, it was
afterward thought better to reject them as Counterfeits, because the Roman
Martyrologies are filled with the names of those African Saints: And it is a
stated Rule, that no Saint or Martyr can be out of the Church. Lest the Eastern
Churches therefore should outweigh the Roman, by reason of the Splendor,
Multitude and Authority of these Eminent Saints, these Letters are now
condemned by some among themselves; vid. Bellarm, de Romans Pont. lib. 2. cap.
25. Baron. in Not. Martyrol. ad 16. Octobr. and Bin. in Council. Carthag. 6.

This unfortunate Contest happening so near to the Fourth Century, was the
first Head-spring, or Root of the Schism, that is now between us: And the
matter being so, on whose side the fault lay, I leave to the Reader.

How the Roman Church proceeded in Daille concerning the right use of the
Fathers, lib. 1. cap. 4.
this business, we may learn from Daille, an able Writer of the French Nation:
He tells us, that the Legates of Pope Leo, in the year 45, in the midst of the
Council of Chalcedon, where were assembled 600 Bishops, the very Flower and
choice of the whole Clergy, had the confidence to allege the sixth Canon of
the Council of Nice, in these very words, That the Church of Rome has always
had the Primacy: Words which are no more found in any Greek Copies of the
Councils, than are those other pretended Canons of Pope Zozimus: Neither do
they yet appear in any Greek or Latin Copies, nor so much as in the Edition if
Dionysius Exiguus, who lived about 50 years after this Council: Whereupon he
breaks out into this Exclamation, When I consider that the Legates of so holy
a Pope, would at that time have fastened such a Wen upon the body of so
Venerable a Canon, I am almost ready to think, that we scarcely have any thing
of Antiquity left us, that is entire and incorrupt, except it be in matters of
indifferency, or which could not have been corrupted, but with much noise, etc.

He further tells us, (in the place beforementioned) That whereas the Greek
Code, Number. 206. sets before us in the XXVIII Council. Chalced. Act. 16. Tom. 2.
Council.
Canon of the General Council of Chalcedon, a Decree of those Fathers; by which
conformably to the first Council of Constantinople, they ordained, that seeing
the City of Constantinople was the Seat of the Senate, and of the Empire, and
enjoyed the same Privileges with the City of Rome, that therefore it should in
like manner be advanced to the same Height and Greatness in Ecclesiastical
Affairs, being the second Church in Order after Rome; and that the Bishop
should have the Ordaining of Metropolitans in the three Diocesses of Pontus,
Asia, and Thrace. Which Canon is found both in Balsamon and Zonoras; and also
has the Testimony of the greatest part of the Ecclesiastical Historians, both
Greek and Latin, that it is a Legitimate Canon of the Council of Chalcedon, in
the Acts of which Council, at this day also extant, it is set down at large:
Yet notwithstanding, in the collection of Dionysius Exiguus it appears not at
all, no more than as if there had never been any such thing thought of at
Chalcedon. He has other marks of Dionysius Exiguus, which sufficiently brand
him for a Slave to the Chair, but omitted here, as out of our Circuit. However,
I think it meet to lay down the Canon as I find it lying in the Code of the
Universal Church.

CCVI. Altogether following the Decrees Council. Chalced. Can. 28.
of the H. Fathers, and the Canon of those 150 Bishops, most beloved of God,
which was lately read, which met under the Great Theodosius the Pious Emperor,
in his Royal City of Constantinople [called] New Rome, we also define and
decree the same, concerning the Privileges of that most H. Church of
Constantinople [that is] New Rome: For the Fathers justly gave privileges to
the Sea of Elder Rome, Quod urbs illa imperaret, because that City was the Seat
of the Empire: And the 150 Bishops, most beloved of God, being moved with the
same consideration, gave equal Privileges to the most holy See of New Rome;
rightly judging, that the City which is honored with the Empire, and the
Senate, and enjoys equal privileges with the Royal Elder Rome, ought in
Ecclesiastical Affairs also, no otherwise then it, to be extolled and
magnified, being the second after it, etc.

Upon this advantage, the Patriarch of Constantinople advanced himself above
the other Patriarchs; and his See being made equal to the Sea of Rome, by the
Authority of the Church, upon the Interest he had in the Empire then settled in
Greece, he arrogated the Title of Universal Bishop: Which Gregory, then Bishop
of Rome, so highly stomacked, that he thundered out Letters against him,
calling the Title a proud and profane, Greg. lib. 6. Epist. 30. Lib. 4. Epist.
32. Lib. 6. Epist. 30.
nay, a blasphemous Title; denying that either himself, or any of his
Predecessors had ever used it; and plainly affirming, that whosoever used that
Title, was the forerunner of Antichrist. And to this purpose, Greg. lib. 4.
Epist. 34.
in the 34. Epistle of his fourth Book, he asks, What else can be signified
by this pride, but that the times of Antichrist are drawing near? For he
imitates him (says he) who despising the Fellowship of the Angels in their
common joy, endeavored to break up to the Top of Singularity. This he spoke
against John of Constantinople, because he brake the Order of the Patriarchs,
and despised the Equality of his Fellow-Bishops. Now whether it does not hit
his own Predecessors, Zozimus, and Boniface, and Celestine, and Leo, I leave to
the judgment of the Reader: They were not contented with an Equality in Power,
but aspired, and that some of them by the most odious way, that of Lying and
Forgery, as well as Pride and Ambition, to the top of Singularity.

Whether this Zeal of Gregory was according to knowledge, that is, whether it
proceeded from integrity, or self interest, I shall not determine. All that I
observe is this which follows, when the Tide turned, and the Emperor next
sided with the Bishop of Rome, the very next Successor of Gregory but one, took
up the Title, a little before condemned for blasphemous, which is claimed by
the Roman Bishops to this day.

The Emperor sided with the Roman Bishop, because the Roman Bishop sided with
him: For when Phocas had murdered his Master, the good old Emperor Mauricius,
and usurped the Throne in his stead, the Title of Universal Bishop was given to
the Patriarch of Rome by this Bloody Tyrant, to secure his own; which had so
great a Flaw in it, and needed the assistance of some powerful Agent.

Hereupon a Council was called at Helvic. Chronol.
Rome by Boniface 3. wherein the privilege of the Emperor Phocas was
promulged, and the Bishop of Romo made a POPE, upon the encouragement of the
Tyrant, by the consent of the Council: but his own, viz. a Roman Council.

Thus Boniface and Phocas were great Friends: The Imperial and Triple Crown
were bartered between them: Connivance and Commerce soiling them both with the
guilt of Murder, Simony, Treason; and if S. Gregory may be believed, with
Sacrilege and Blasphemy: For being involved in a mutual Conspiracy, they
became guilty of each others crimes; to partake with Adulterers, and comply
with Offenders, being imputed as sin, in the H. Scriptures.

Platina, an Eminent Writer of the Lives of the Popes, and a Papist himself,
informs us sufficiently of this business, in these words, Boniface 111.
(says he) a Platin. in vir. Bonif. 3.
Roman by Birth, obtained of the Emperor Phocas, but with great contention,
that the Seat of blessed Peter the Apostle (which is the Head of all the
Churches) should be so called, and so accounted of all: which place the Church
of Constantinople endeavored to vindicate to it self, evil Princes sometimes
favoring it, and affirming the first see to be due to the place where the Head
of the Empire was.

In the Life of Zozimus the first Episcopal Forger in the Church of Rome,
Platina mentions the foresaid business at Carthage; but so briefly, that it
is clear he did not like it. And to close up all, in the Life of this Boniface
he endeavors to strengthen the Title of the Roman Bishop against the Patriarch
of Constantinople, by the Donation of Constantine, another Forgery, of which
hereafter.

The two counterfeit Canons contained in the Commonitorium, which the Roman
Bishop sent to the sixth Council of Carthage, are these, as Faustinus the
Italian Bishop delivered them in Greek, to be read by Daniel the Pronotary in
the Council.

(...), etc. We are pleased, that if a Bishop be accused, and the Bishops of
his Country being assembled together, have judged him, and deposed him from his
Degree, and he thinks fit to Appeal, and shall fly to the most blessed Bishop
of the Roman Church, and shall desire to be heard, and he shall think it just
that the Trial be renewed; then he [the Roman Bishop] shall vouchsafe to write
to the B. shops of the adjoining and bordering Province, that they should
diligently examine all, and define according to the Truth. But if any one
thinks fit that his Cause be heard again, and by his own Supplication moves the
Bishop of Rome, that he should send a [Legate or] Priest from his side; it
shall be in his power to do as he lists, and as he thinks fit. And if he
shall decree that some ought to be sent, that being present themselves might
judge with the Bishops, having his Authority by whom they were sent, it shall
be according to his judgment: but if he think the Bishops sufficient to end the
business, he shall do what in his most wise counsel he judges meet.

Here the Roman Bishop, nay the meanest Priest he shall please to send as his
Legate, is exalted above all Councils, Bishops, and Patriarchs in the world; he
may do, and undo, act, add, rescind, diminish, alter, whatsoever he pleases in
any Council, when the Causes of the most Eminent Rank in the Church do depend
in the same. All Bishops are by this Canon made more to fear the Roman Bishop
than their own Patriarch, and are engaged, if need be, to side with him against
their Patriarch: the Gate is open for all the Wealth in the World to flow into
his Ecclesiastical Court, which is as much above the Court of any other
Patriarch, by this Right of Appeals, as the Archbishops Court above any
inferior Bishops, while we may Appeal to that from these at our pleasure. Thus
Bishops and Patriarchs are made to buckle under the Popes Cirdle, and the
Decrees of Councils are put under his foot: And all this is no more but half a
Step to the Popes Chair.

The other part of the Step in this Commonitorium, was the following Canon
concerning Priests:

(...), etc. I ought not to pass that over in silence, that does yet move me:
If any Bishop happen to be angry (as he ought not) and be suddenly or sharply
moved against his Priest or Deacon, and would cast him out of his Church,
Provision must be made, that he be not condemned being Innocent, or lose the
Communion. Let him that is cast out have power to Appeal to the Borderers, that
his Cause might be heard, and handled more carefully; for a Hearing ought not
to be denied him when he asks it: And the Bishop, which has either justly or
unjustly ejected him, shall patiently suffer, that the business be looked into,
and his Sentence either confirmed, or rectified, etc.

What is the meaning of this, etc. in Binius, Labbe, Cossartius, and the
Collectio Regia, I cannot tell; but doubtless the Canon intends the same in the
close with the former, that the last Appeal is reserved to the Roman Chair;
which made the Fathers in the sixth Council of Carthage so angry as we find
them, to see things so false and presumptuous, fastened upon the first most
Glorious Ecumenical Council, which decreed the clean contrary, in the 4 and 5
Canons. The substance and force of which, as we gave you before, so shall we
now the words of the Canons themselves.

Can. 4. (...), etc. It is fit that a Bishop chiefly be ordained by all the
Bishops that are in the Province: but if this be found difficult, either
because of any urgent necessity, or for the length of the journey, then the
Ordination ought to be made by Three certainly meeting together, the absent
[Bishops] agreeing, and consenting by their Writs: but let the confirmation of
the Acts be given, throughout every Province, to the Metropolitan.

Can. 5. (...), etc. Concerning those that are Excommunicated, whether in the
Order of the Clergy, or the Laity, by the Bishops in every several Province,
let the Sentence prevail according to the Canon, that they who are cast out by
some, be not received by others: but let it be required, that no man be
excluded the Congregation, by the pusillanimity or contention, or by any such
vice, of the Bishop. That this therefore might more decently be inquired into,
we think it fit, that Councils should every year, throughout every Province,
twice be celebrated: That such Questions may be discussed by the common
Authority of all the Bishops assembled together: And so they, that have
evidently offended against their Bishop, shall be accounted Excommunicated,
according to to reason, by all; till it pleases the community of Bishops to
pronounce a milder Sentence upon such. But let the Councils be held the one
before the Quadragesima before Easter, that all Dissension being taken away, we
might offer a most pure Gift unto God; and the second about the middle of
Autumn.

The last Appeal, you see, is ordered by the Canon to Councils; and, as they
please, the Controversy is to be ended, without flying from one to another
Bishop. These are the true and Authentic Canons of the Nicene Council,
overthrown by the Forgery.

CAP. III. A multitude of Forgeries secretly mingled among the Records of the
Church, and put forth under the Name of Isidore, Bishop of Hispalis: Which Book
is owned, defended, and followed by the Papists.
THe Roman Chair being thus lifted up to the utmost Height it could well
desire, care must be taken to secure its Exaltation. After many secret Councils
therefore, and powerful Methods used for its Establishment; for the increase of
its Power and Glory, (furthered by the Luxury and Idleness of the Western
Churches) of which Salvian largely complains in his Book De Providentia
(written to justify the Dispensation of GOD in all the Calamities they
suffered by the Goths, who sacked Rome Piatin. in (...). (...) (...).
in the days of the forenamed Zozimus) there came out a collection of Councils
and Decretal Fpistles, in the Name of Isidore, Bishop of Hispalis, about the
year 790. In which Book there are neatly interwoven a great company of forged
Evidences, or feigned Records, tending all to the advancement of the Popes
Chair, in a very various, copious, and Elaborate manner.

That the Bishop of Rome had a secret hand in the contrivance and publication
of them, is probable, if not clear, from diverse Reasons.

1. Before they were published, Hadrian 1. makes use of the Tale of
Constantines Leprosy, Vision, and Baptism by Pope Sylvester; things till then
never heard of in the world, but afterward contained in the Donation of
Constantine; a Forgery, which in all probability lay by this Hadrian, but of
his own preparing, when he wrote his Letter to Constantine and Irene; which
Letter was read, and is recorded in the 2. Nicene Council. Nicen. 2. Act.
Council, on the behalf of Images: being sent abroad like a Scout, as it were,
to try what success it would find in the world, before he would adventure the
whole Body of his Players to public view: For if that were swallowed down
without being detected, the rest might hope for the same good Fortune: if not,
the first might pass for a mistake, and its Companions be safely suppressed,
without any mischief following.

2. The Emperor and the Council having digested the first Legend, exposed by
the Pope so crastily to public view, the other Forgeries were a little after
boldly published in this Book of Isidore, together with the Legend and Donation
of Constantine: which when Hincmarus, Archbishop of Rhemes, (upon its first
Baron. An. (...). 5. nn. 6.
publication) set himself to write against, he was taken up so roundly for the
same by the Authority of Rome, that he was fain gladly to acquit the Attempt
for ever: And their tenderness over it, is, I think, a sufficient Indication of
their Relation to it; every Creature being naturally affectionate to its own
Brood, and prone to study its preservation.

The Church of Rome was so tender of Isidores Edition, that, as some say,
Hinemarus (...), ibid
was forced to recant his Opinion; and to declare, that he believed and
received the Book with Veneration.

3. It is recorded by Justellus, that the (...) (...) (...) (...).
forementioned Hadrian was careful to give Charles the Great a Copy of the
Councils and Decretal Epistles, drawn up (as he affirmed) by Dionysius Exiguus.
Daille accuses the Book of many faults; but whether Hadrian or Dionysius were
guilty of them, is little material; only 'twas done as a Pledge of
Reconciliation, after several Bickerings between the Giver and Receiver.
Charles the Great having several times invaded Rome, and now departing thence
with Friendship: which makes me a little the more prone to suspect Dionysius
too, for one of those Danaum Dona, which are given like Nessus his Shirt, when
wounded by Hercules, to his Enemies Wife, for the destruction of her Husband.

Be it how it will, it shows that Hadrian I. was a busy man, that he
understood the influence and power of Records, what force they would have upon
the minds of Laymen, and that his eyes and hands were sometimes busied in such
Affairs.

But that which above all other Arguments discovers the Popes to have a hand,
if not in the Publication, yet in the Reception of the Forgeries, is this; that
the Roman Canonists, Ivo, Gratian, etc. have digested them into the Popes Laws;
and they are so far countenanced by the Popes themselves, that almost from the
time of their publication, throughout all Ages since, they have been received
for Authentic in the apal Jurisdiction, and are used as such in all the
Ecclesiastical Courts under the Popes Dominion, as the chief of their Rules for
the deciding of Causes: So that they are not only fostered, but exalted by the
Authority of Rome. The Glory which they acquired in the Throne of Judgment,
advancing them for a long time above the reach of Suspicion. The Veneration
which is due to the Chair of Holiness was their best security.

By the influence of the Popes Authority they were received into the Codes of
Princes, being (as we shall show out of Baronius, in the next Chapter)
introduced into the Capitular Books of the Kings of the Franks by Benedictus
Levita; and at his instant request, confirmed and approved by the (...) Chair.

The Forgeries in Isidore being scattered abroad, it is difficult to conceive
to what a vast Height the Roman See by degrees (...): The Splendor of so many
Ancient Martyrs (...), together with so many Canons and Decrees in her behalf,
so far wrought, that her Bishop came at last to Claim all Power over all
persons, Spiritual and Temporal, to have the sole power of forgiving sins, to
be alone Infallible, to be Cods Vicar upon Earth, the only Oracle in the world,
nay, the sole Supreme and Absolute Monarch, disposing of Empires and Kingdoms,
according to the Tenor of the Doctrines contained in those Forgeries; wherein
he is made the sole Independent Lord, without Control, able to do what ever he
lifted.

Some few Ages after this first Publication of Isidore, there were other
Records put forth, though lately seen, yet bearing the countenance of (...)
Antiquity; which so ordered the matter, that (according to them) the
Evangelists brought their Gospels to S. Peter to confirm them; and several
books of (...). (...). 84.
S. Clement, S. Peter's Successor, were put into the Canon of the Holy Bible,
the whole number of Canonical books being settled and defined by his sole
Authority: Ibid.
In token (doubtless) of the Power Inherent in all S. Peter's Successors at
Rome, to dispose of the Apostles, and their Writings, as they please. S. (...)
own Canon, for that purpose, being numbered among those of the Aposiles.

That the Pope was incapable of being judged by any; that no Clergyman was to
be Subject to Kings, but all to depend immediately upon the Bishop of Rome;
that he was the Rock and Head of the Church, was the constant Doctrine of all
those Forgeries, when put together, with many other Popish Points, of less
concernment, sprinkled up and down in them at every turning.

Cui bono? Among the Civilians it is a notable mark of Detection in a blind
Cause, whose Good, whose Exaltation, whose Benefit is the drift and scope of
things; and it is very considerable for the sure finding out of the first
Authors. That they are Forgeries, is manifest: Now, whose they are, is the
Question in hand; and if Agents naturally intend themselves in their own
Operations, it is easily solved.

How excessively the World was addicted to Fables about the time of Isidore's
Appearance, we may see by the Contents of the 2. Nicene Council, Dreams,
Visions and Miracles being very rife in their best demonstrations; and among
other Legends, a counterfeit Basil, a counterfeit Athanasius, a counterfeit
Emperor, maintaining and promoting the Adoration of Images: As may perhaps in
another Volume be more fully discovered, when we descend from these first, to
succeeding Ages.

The Counterfeits in Isidore being mingled with the Records of the Church, like
Tares among Wheat, or false Coyns among heaps of Cold, lay undistinguished from
true Antiquities, and (after Hincmarus his ill success) were little examined by
the space of 500 or 600 years. Some small opposition there was, made in
particular by the Bishops in France, and (...). An.
perhaps by some Doctors and Bishops, more sincere than ordinary, or by some
Learned Lawyer that rarely appeared: but the general Interest of the Times, the
Deluge of corrupted manners, the Ignorance of the Laity, the Luxury of the
Priests, the Greatness of the Chair, and the Love of Superstition so far
prevailed, that for a long time the Court of Rome luxuriantly fiourished in the
Light of her own Glory, and to this Prodigious Sunshine owed much of its
Splendor.

For the Pope having wrought himself by his first Arts into that high
Reputation, the Luster whereof dazzled the world, it concerned him much to keep
the Earth in a Profound Quiet, and to cherish Ignorance, (a Virtue highly
praised in the Church of Rome) that as the Tares were sown, they might be
permitted to grow, and be fruitful, while men slept: In which, the want of
Printing much assisted him, Monks and Friars being the only scribes, or the
chief ones, and all at his Devotion.

Written Copies were the only Books, which at most could be but few; enough
indeed to preserve knowledge by way of Record; but being Chained up in
Monasteries and Libraries, they came seldom abroad, unless by the report of
such wellaffected persons as had their Tutelage and keeping.

The Popes Indulgence, and the Sloth (...), made way for the Artisice of (...)
in after-ages; which were not Bookish ones, as this is, neither were Laymen
addicted much to Reading.

But upon the Reformation, occasioned by nothing more than the notorious
impiety and excess of Popes, (unless the impudence and security of his
Followers may contend for a share in it) when Libraries fell into the
Protestants hands, Inquisition was made, Archives were entered, Books opened,
Records searched and diligently compared: Whereupon much fraud and shufling was
found, and exposed to the world.

For as the Copies were enough, had they been sincere; so, though they were not
sincere, by the Providence of God, they contained Indications, whereby clear
Judgments might easily discern between Records and Forgeries; as I found my
self, to my great amazement, without any Warning! when I first set my self to
read the Councils, and simply made use of none but Popish Compilers: For there
is not more difference, for the most part, between a piece of Gold and an
Oystershell, than between a true Record and a Forgery.

Upon this Inspection the Popes Power began to be questioned, and his Throne to
shake, as if it had been founded on a Quagmire: He therefore furnishes himself
with Armies of Priests, as S. Gregory phraseth it, new Orders of Jesnites and
Friars, (never before heard of) being erected for the defense of his Tottering
Chair: men devoted against the Truth, as those Conspirators were, that swore
they would neither eat nor drink till they had slain Paul; for the Maintenance
of whom, he is at great expense unto this day. Above all other arts, that of
providing Seminaries being the most costly, and the most mysterious: wherein
they are secretly trained up, like Sappho s Birds; of whom it is reported, that
being ambitious to be thought a GOD, he privately cherished a multitude, and
taught them by degrees to say, (...): Sappho is a great God: which being let
loose on a sudden with their Lesson, all the other Birds in the Forest were
quickly instructed in the same Ditty: Whereupon (he withdrawing himself) the
people thought him gone to Heaven, and a Temple was erected to the God Sappho.
Whether the Story be true, I shall not determine, I am sure it may pass for an
Emblem of the Popes Achievement, who by this means has made the World to ring
of a Doctrine which makes him a God; or if not that, at least Lord of all
Councils, greater than Emperors, Head of the Church, etc. His Emissaries
issuing forth from these mysterious Seminaries, and filling the Earth like
Locusts, or like little fraudulent and simple Birds, chirping out the Ditty:
and while all the Wood learning it one of another, the Earth is full of the
Miracle.

All the late Compilers of the Decrees and Councils seem hence to flow; James
Merlin, Peter Crabbe, Laurentius Surius, Nicolinus, Carranza, Severinus Binius,
Labbe and Cossartius, the Collectio Regia, etc. being his sworn Adjutants for
upholding the Chair. The last is a Book of such State and Magnificence, that it
consists of 37 Volumes, and is in price about 50 pounds: More or less, they all
carry on the Forgeries with one consent, which were at first published in the
name of Isidore of Hispalis; though some had rather, upon mature deliberation,
it should be Isidore Mercator, or Isidore Peccator, a Merchant, or a Sinner,
rather than a Saint, and a Bishop.

This Narrative of the Forgeries being thus nakedly, and by way of History
plainly given, it remains now, that the Forgeries themselves be proved to be
such: In the detection of which, much light will reflect upon the foregoing
passages: All which, if you please, you may take only for a fair Introduction.

Howbeit, I must close with two or three Observations. First of all, I do not
content my self with any single Collector of Councils among the Papists, lest
they should say, This is but one Doctors Opinion; but I take the Stream of them
together. Secondly, Detect not the Books of private men, but such as are
adopted by the Church of Rome; being dedicated to Popes, Kings, Emperors, and
coming out cum summo Privilegio. Thirdly, that the first of these Compilers,
(excepting those that were employed in the first publication and Promotion of
Isidore) did begin with that Service not much above 130 years ago; all of them
rising up since the times of Martin Luther, though their Names make a great
noise and bluster in the world: For upon the Reformation of the Church, so
happily wrought, and carried on by the Protestants, these Armies of Collectors
were marshalled together, to help a little, and to uphold the Popes Chair by
Forgeries: Which intimates a Dearth of Antiquities, since they are forced to
fly to such shameful expedients.

Luther appeared in the year 1517. The first that appeared after him was James
Merlin, in the year 1535. The next was Peter Crabbe, in the year 1538. After
him Carranza, in the year 1564. Then Surius, in the year 1567. Turrian follows,
not as a Collector, but as a Champion to defend them, in the year 1573. Whom
Nicolinus succeeded as a Compiler of the Councils, in the year 1585. After him
Binius, Labbe and Cossartius, and the Collectio Regia follow in their Order. So
that it is an easy matter to discern what set these Voluminous Writers on
work, to wit, the great and smart occasion they received by the Reformation.

Finally observe, that Isidore and Merlin, the first of the Compilers, whose
Works are extant, lay down the Forgeries, simply and plainly, for good Records;
but Binius, and his Followers, by reason of the Arguments which they cannot
answer, begin to confess some of them to be Forgeries: So do the most Grave and
Learned Cardinals, Bellarmine and Baronius, though they still carry on the
Design of the first Inventers, by some other Methods, which they hope will
succeed better.

Nor is it any wonder, that a Secular Kingdom should make men more active than
the love of Heaven; since we daily see, how the Kings of the world expend vast
Treasures of Gold and Silver, and run through all dangers of Death and Battle,
for their own preservation, and the Conquest of their Neighbors. The same care
which they take in building Forts and Cittadels, being taken by the Bishop of
Rome, in maintaining Seminaries, Universities, Printing-Houses, etc. which
depend absolutely on him, for the securing of all that Wealth and Empire, which
he has by his Wit and Policy acquired: It stands him upon; for if his
Religion falls, his Glory vanishes, and his Kingdom is abolished.

What men will do for Secular Ends, beyond all the belief and expectation of
the Vulgar, we see in Hamor and Shechem, Genesis 34
. the first and most Ancient Myrrour of that kind in the world: who for the
accomplishment of their desires, introduced a new Religion, troubling
themselves and their Citizens unto Blood, merely to get possession of Dinah,
Jacob's Daughter.

(...)'s Policy is about 2500 years 1 Kings.
old, though much more late. When the ten Tribes revolted from the House of
David, for fear lest they should return to their Allegiance, if they went up
yearly to Jerusalem, according to the Law, he set up two Calves for the people
to worship, and underwent a great expense (besides the Gold in the Calves) in
erecting a new Order of Friests, that the people might be kept at home in their
perverse Obedience. He very well knew those Calves were no Deities, yet for
secular ends he promoted their worship, and was followed therein by all the
Line of the Kings of Israel, several hundred of years together.

What Demetrius the Silver-Smith did for Diana of the Ephesians, and what an
uproar he made, purely for Gain, in making her Shrines, all the Christian World
understands: But the Highpriests, Scribes and Elders of the Jews, in acting
against all the Miracles of Christ, and against their Conscience; especially in
giving Money to the Soldiers to hold their peace, when they brought the news
of his Resurrection, their resisting of the Holy Ghost at his Miraculous
Descent; these are a sufficient instance of the incredible obdurateness of man's
heart, and his obstinate (...) allures his hopes, as the immediate Crown of his
Labors.

The Diana of the Romans is much more prosicuous than the Diana of the
Ephesians: The fattest places of the Provinces, and the greatest Empire in the
World, are the Game they Play. This Dinah animateth all their Strength to
impose on the people: And for the easing of their own Charge, it is a usual
thing with Popes, to permit their Priests and Friars, for their better support,
to deceive the people; which Dr. Stillingfleet, in his Book of Popish
Counterfeit Miracles, does excellently open: in which, and in all other Arts
and Tricks, they have a special connivance, provided they keep the poor simple
Sheep within the bounds of their Jurisdiction, and contribute to the
continuance of their Secular Kingdom.

This is the truth of the Story; and these are the circumstances of the whole
procedure, which remains now to be proved.

CAP. IV. James Merlin's Editions of the Councils, who lately published Isidore
Hispalensis for a good Record, which is now detected, and proved to be a
Forgery.
JAmes Merlin's pains was to publish Isidore, with some Collections and
Additions of his own. He positively affirms him to be that Famous Isidore of
Hispalis, a Saint, a Bishop, and a Father of the Church: though as Blondel and
Dr. Reynolds accurately observe, S. Isidore of Hispalis was dead 40, 50, 60
years, before some things came to pass that are mentioned in that Book of the
Councils.

Blondel in a Book of his, called Pseudo-Isidorus, or Turrianus Vapulans, Cap
2. observes, how the lowest that write of Isidores death, fix it on the year
647. as Vasaeus in his Chronicle: Others on the year 643. as Rodericus
Toletanus Hist. lib. 2. cap. 18. Or on the year 635. as the proper Office of
the Saints of Spain: or on the year 636. when Sinthalus entered his Kingdom, as
Redemptus Diaconus, an eyewitness, De Obitu Isidori.

Brauleo Bishop of Caesar-Augustana, Lucas Tudensts, Baronius the great
Annalist, Mariana, Grialus, and others, agree with the last; which is eleven
years sooner than Vasaeus. So that the general prevailing Opinion is, that
Isidore of Hispalis died in the year 636. However, that we may deal most fairly
with them, we will allow them all they can desire, and calculate our affair by
the last Account, which is most for their advantage.

Admit Vasaeus in the right, that Isidore lived till the year 647. yet the Book
which is Fathered upon him, can be none of his; for it mentions things which
came to pass long after.

It is observed by Blondel, that Honoratus, who succeeded Isidore in the Sea of
Hispalis, is found in the sixth Council of Toledo; whereas this pretended
Isidore makes mention of the eleventh Council in the same place. He talks of
the sixth Ecumenical Council, in the year 681. no less than 46 years after his
own death, by the lowest account. He writes of Boniface of Mentz, slain as
Baronius observes, in the year 755. which was threescore and sixteen years
after Isidores death: Yet Possevin, upon the word Isidorus Hisp. and Heart in
his Conference with Reynolds, contend the Author of this Book to be the true
Isidore, Bishop of Hispalis, as Merlin who first published Isidore in print,
and others did before them.

Among his Witnesses produced against this Counterfeit, the first which Blondel
uses, is the Code of the Roman Church; in which only the Epistles of 13 Roman
Bishops are contained, beginning with Siricius: Whereas there are in Isidore
above 60. whereof five or six and thirty lived before Siricius, and were all
unknown until the time of Isidore.

His next Testimony is that of the Bishops of France, about the year 865. who
concluded, that Isidore's Wares then newly beginning to be sold, could not have
the force of Canons, because they were not contained in the Authentic Code, or
Book of Canons formerly known.

He next cites the Council of Aquisgranum, An. 816. the Bishops of Paris, An.
829. Henricus Caltheisensis, Erasmus, Greg. Cassander, Anton. Contius, the
famous Lawyer, Bellarmine and Baronius, the Learned Cardinals.

The Testimony of Baronius being more largely cited than the residue, I thought
it meet to search the Author, and there I found these following passages.

Writing upon the Contest between Pope Nicholas and the French Bishops
concerning Appeals, he begins to show how they complained, that the Causes
of Baron. An. Christ. 865. nu. 4.
Bishops, which ought to be tried in Councils by their Fellow Bishops, were
removed to the Apostolic Chair: And they questioned in their Letters, whether
those Epistles of the more Ancient Bishops, which were not inserted into the
Body of the Canons, but were written in the Collection of Isidore Mercator,
were of equal Authority with the residue?

For the making of which Controversy the more plain, and to show what they
mean by the Body of the Canons, he tells us, It is certain, that the more
Ancient Collection of the Decretal Epistles of the Roman Bishops, and the
Canons of diverse Councils, acquired such a name, that the Volum was called, The
Book, or Code, or BODY of CANONS, increased by the addition of other Councils,
which were afterward celebrated. But the more ancient and full collection of
the Epistles of Roman Bishops, and Canons of Councils, was that of Cresconius,
of which I have spoken before, says he: Which being increased by the addition
of many Canons and Epistles, went under the name of the Book, or BODY of
CANONS. and whereas there were many other Collections of Canons compiled, that
which is the richest of all, made by Isidore surnamed Mercator, containing the
Epistles of the Ancient Roman Bishops, beginning from Clement, was Long
recentior, far younger than they all; as Hincmarus, Archbishop of Rhemes, does
testify: Forasmuch as it was not brought out of Spain into France, before the
times of Charles the Great, by Riculphus Archbishop of Mentz: For so he
testifies in a Letter of his to Hincmarus Laudunensis, beginning, Sicut de
Libro, etc. But he who first collected Canons out of the foresaid Epistles,
published at first by Isidore, and inserted them into the books of the Kings of
the Franks, was Benedictus Levita, as he testifies of himself in his preface
before the fifth book of those Canons; who writ in the times of the Sons of
Ludovicus Pins the Emperor, Ludovicus Lotharius, and Charles, as me showed,
where he says, I have inserted these Canons, etc. to wit, those WARES of
Isidore Mercator, which were brought, as thou have heard of Hincmarus, into
France out of Spain by Riculphus. Ne quis calumniari possit, ab Ecclesia Romana
aliquid hujusmodi commentum esse: Lest any one should slander us, and say, the
Church of Rome invented such a business as this.

I think here is enough: He looks upon it as a Commenium, a mere Fiction, and
is (...) left any one should have the advantage of Fathering such a dreadful
Bastard on the Church of Rome. He calls them Isidore the Merchants Wares; he
does not refel the Bishops of France; he dares not affirm they were in the
Ancient Code of Epistles and Councils; he acknowledges them far younger than
the BODY of CANONS, and subscribes to Hincmarus Archbishop of Rhemes, citing
him who writ against Isidore, as a good and Authentic Author. He confesses
that they were never known in France till the times of Charles the Great, that
is 700 years after they first began to be written; and that they were
introduced into the books of the Kings of the Franks by Benedictus Levita, in
the times of Ludovicus Lotharius, which was about the year 850. So that the
Church was governed well enough without them, and about 800 years after our
Saviors Birth they were first hateht as mere Innovations. This is too large a
Chink for an Enemy to open; but he proceeds further.

That the same Riculphus, Bishop of Baron. An. 865. nu. 6.
Mentz, did live in the times of Charles the Great, many Monuments of that Age
do make it certain; especially the Testament of the same Charles the Great, to
which this Riculphus is found to have subscribed among diverse others. We find
that he was President also in a Council at Mentz, held in the year of our
Redemption 813. etc. Since therefore the French Regions, which are nearest to
Spain, knew not the Collection of Isidore before the times of Riculphus, much
less Italy, it is a conjecture, that this Isidore did live and write not long
before; and so it was first published by Riculphus, who brought it thither;
then by Benedictus, who put it into the Capitular books; and lastly, by
Hincmarus Junior, Bishop of Laon, the last Collector unto this our Age: which
Hincmarus of Rhemes, a man of a keener smell, reprehendeth in many things,
defaming that collection of Isidore which the other used, for which cause he
was accused. For Frodoardus, in his History of Rhemes, Cap. 16. near the end,
says of him, that being accused because he had condemned the Decretal Epistles
of the Roman Bishops, he professed and protested otherwise, that he admitted,
held, and approved them with the greatest honor. Upon this occasion, to wit,
it appears, he was branded with a mark, because he had signified himself not to
have approved that Collection of Isidore in all things.

Baronius you see, who is one of the greatest Friends to the Sea of Rome,
endeavors to remove the matter of Isidore as far as he can from the Roman
Chair, being sore afraid, lest the guilt of so many Forgeries should too
apparently be charged upon (...) For which cause he will not have the book so
much as known in Italy, nay not in France, which is nearer unto Spain, for 800
years time, but that it came out of Spain first, being brought by Riculphus.
Perhaps Riculphus was never there. He does not tell us that he went into Spain,
for ought I can find, nor upon what occasion, nor in what City, nor of whom he
received Isidore: which puts me in mind of Cacus his device, who being a
strong Thief, and robbing Hercules of his Oxen, drew them all backward by the
Tail into his Den, that the print of their heels being found backwards, they
might not be tracked, but seem to be gone another way.

But he fails in his design: for as it is strange, that Italy should not know
the Decretal Epistles of its own Popes for 800 years, till Riculphus brought
them out of Spain; so is it more strange, that being such Forgeries as he would
have them, Hincmarus Archbishop of Rhemes should be accused for condemning
them, and ratled up, and Branded in such a manner, and compelled to recant by
so powerful an Enemy; for it seems he had no way to save himself, but by
renouncing his Opinion. The jealousy of the Roman Church, and its tenderness
over Isidore, appears most exceeding great in the hard dealing which
Hincmarus met with, who though he did recant, was still noted with infamy; as
if to speak against Isidore, were a Crime not to be washed off by the Tears of
Repentance in the Church of Rome. Perhaps the poor Bishop was an Hypocrite in
that forced Confession, and for this was branded, because he confessed a lie,
as men upon the Rack are wont to do, for his own deliverance: for that he knew
still that Isidore was a Counterfeit, and must therefore be reputed a rotten
Member of the Church of Rome. This Baronius observes, while he ascribes
Hincmarus his reprehending Isidore's Collection, to his keener scent; whereby
he was able, more readily than others, to smell a Rat, and discover the Cheat.

Baronius proceeds further in condemning the collection of Isidore, thus; But
Nicholas the Pope seemed to abstain An 865. nu. 7.
from it on purpose: for though he was often engaged in these Controversies,
concerning Appeals to the Apostolic Chair, and there were in it many, and
those most powerful, Testimonies of most holy Popes, and they Martyrs too,
whose Authority might be of highest force in the Church; yet he wholly
abstained from them (which that he knew to be doubtful at least, is not to be
doubted) using only those, concerning which there was never any doubt in the
Church of God; because the Church did not want those adventitious, and late
invented Evidences, because it might receive them abundantly from other places:
but Benedictus Levita himself also, though (as you have heard from Hincmarus,
and as he himself testifies in the Preface before his books) he took many
things out of that same Collection of Isidore; yet being conscious in himself,
that the Authority of those Epistles was not so sure, but that it nodded
exceedingly, he never cited any Author of them, as he did in the other Epistles
of the Roman Bishops, Innocent, Leo, Gelasius, Symmachus, and Gregory; naming
the Authors of those, whose Faith was clear and certain. But further yet, with
great caution, because he knew the Evidences taken from them not to be so firm,
he took care, as he testifies in the end, to have them confirmed by the
Apostolic Authority.

Is not here a merry passage? Benedictus Levita knew the Decretal Epistles to
be false, and therefore he got them to be made true by the Popes Authority; at
least to be confirmed as true, whereas they were doubtful before. It is the
manner of sometimes, to get others to propose the matters, which they
themselves design to be done; that the business springing from the request of
others, might appear more graceful in the eye of the people. We may justly
enquire, whether Benedictus Levita were not ordered what to Petition, by
private instructions from his Holiness, before he made his motion to the Chair:
for it had otherwise been an extravagant impudence to have assaulted the Chair
with such a request as that is, of craving a Confirmation of newfound Records,
so feeble and suspected. Whatever the Intrigue was, the event is clear,
Benedictus Levita got them confirmed, and so they were adopted for his Holiness
Children, though Pope Nicholas was shy a little out of shame and modesty, and
blushed to acknowledge his poor Kindred.

It is further observable, that these counterfeit Epistles were first brought
in into the Records of the Franks, without naming their Authors: and that a
little after their quiet publication, some Favorite of the Chair grew more
bold, and added their names unto them; this of Clement, that of Anacletus, etc.
And that the work was thus perfected by degrees, Baronius shows us in the
following passage.

But he who first published the Decrees Ibid nu. 7.
extracted out of those Epistles, with the Title of the Roman Bishops, in whose
names they are recorded, was that Hincmarus we mentioned, the Bishop of Laon,
as appears by an Epistle or book written against him by Hincmarus of Rhemes;
who receiving that work of the Bishop of Laon, read it not without indignation,
and in very many things reprovedit. But others have followed the Bishop of
Laon, as Burchardus, who writ in the following Age, and others after him, who
prefixed the names of the very Roman Bishops before all the Chapters, which
Gratian also did the last of all.

But that those Epistles are rendered suspicious, by many things which we have
said in the second Tome of our Annals, while we mentioned each in particular,
is sufficiently demonstrated: Where we showed withal, that the holy Roman
Church did not need them, so as (if they should be detected of falsity) to be
bereaved of its Rights and Privileges, since (though she wants them) she is
abundantly strengthened and confirmed by the Legitimate and Genuine Decretal
Epistles of other Popes. But that the Chapters taken out of them by Benedictus
Levita, were at first approved, as agreeable to the Canons (as himself
testifies) by the Authority of the Roman Bishops, (which was done also by the
latter Collectors) it happened rather by long use, than for any strength or
firmness in themselves.

Thus Baronius in his Annals, An. 865. nu. 5, 6, 7, 8. all together.

In Notis Martyrol. ad 4. April. he says, Vasaeus is convicted to have erred,
who thought this Isidore Pacensis that Isidore who collected the Epistles of
the Roman Bishops, and the Councils, etc. Hincmarus Laudunensis also, and
Trithemius, and others err, who ascribe that collection to Isidore of Hispalis:
That Opinion is refelled; first, because Brauleus and Ildephonsus, who lived in
those times, drawing up a Catalogue of his Writings, make not the least mention
of that work. But further, all doubt is taken away concerning this matter,
while the Author of that work, speaking there concerning the manner of holding
a Council. recites the words of the first Canon of the eleventh Council of
Toledo, and mentions Agatho the Pope in his Preface, since Isidore of Hispalis
departed this life, long before the times of that Council, and Pope Agatho.

Had we time, we might make many curious reflections upon these passages of
Baronius: He afterward talks of another Isidore, called sometimes Mercator,
and sometimes Peccator; but of what Parents, what Calling, what City, or what
Country he was, he mentions nothing. So that this Child, among all those
Isidores and Fathers that are found out for it, must rest at last in one that
is unknown.

All that can be gathered from this whole discourse of Baronius, is this, That
a new Book of Councils, richly fraught with Evidences for the Roman Church and
Religion, came abroad under the name of Isidore, containing Decrees and
Decretal Epistles that were never before heard of in the world: that this Book
was falsely Fathered upon Isidore of Hispalis; and that all those ancient
Epistles of the Roman Bishops, from S. Peter down to Siricius, are justly
suspected: Nay, he confesses them to be insirm, adventitions, and lately
invented, or newly found, and to nod exceedingly: He opposes them to those
Records which are Legitimate and Genuine, though they are of late magnified,
and followed by all the Collectors of the Decrees and Councils, being, though
waved by some, cited and approved by other Popes, as well as Doctors, Jesuits,
Cardinals, etc.

This is the last and best Story that can be made on the behalf of that Book,
the Counterfeits in which, as we observed before, were, because they extol and
magnify the Popes Chair, received for good and Authentic Laws in the Church
of Rome: For Baronius died not long since, about the year 1607. in this last
Century; and when he had seen the truth of those Arguments that are urged
against the Forgeries, endeavors so to handle this matter in his History, as
to clear the Church of Rome from the imputation.

Bellarmine, that saw not into this Mystery so clearly, takes another course;
which when we have intimated one or two Marginal Notes in Baronius, we shall
declare. Baronius deals more fairly with us than Binius; for the one in his
Marginal Notes contradicts his Text, sometimes to delude the Reader: but
Baronius fairly notes in the Margin, Isidori collectio vulgata in Galliis.
Isidori collectio ab Antiquis non adeo probata. Isidori collectio ut minus
sincera notata, etc. Soft words for a Treatise rejected, but strong Indications
of a Desperate Cause. The Ancients approved not the collection of Isidore. It
was not so sincere as it ought, etc.

Cardinal Bellarmine, to prove the Bellarm. de Romans Pont lib. (...) cap. 14.
Popes Supremacy, draws one Argument from the Popes themselves; whose
Testimonies he casts into three Classes. The first, says he, contains the
Epistles of Popes that sat from S. Peter to the year 300. in which Calvin and
the Magdenburgenses confess the Primacy to be plainly asserted; and that those
Bishops were holy men, and true Bishops; but they say the Epistles are forged
and new, and falsely Fathered on those Bishops. In this Class he affirms,
These Holy Fathers do clearly assert the Primacy; Clemens in his first Epistle,
Anacletus in his third, Evaristus Epist. 1. Pius Epist. 1, and 2. Anicetus
Epist. 1. Victor Epist. 1. Zephirinus Epist. 1. Calixtus Epist. 1. Lucius
Epist. 1. Marcellus in Epist. 1. Eusebius Epist. 3. Melchiades Epist. (...).
Marcus Epist. 1.

After this he says, Quamvis aliquos Errores, etc. Though I cannot deny, but
that some Errors are crept into them, and dare not affirm that they are
indubitable, yet I doubt not at all, but that they are very Ancient. As if an
old Deed being called into question, and the matter of Fact made certain, that
it was a real Forgery; he that holds his possession by it, should say, It has
been interlined indeed, and corrupted in many places, but it is very old. Let us
see however what his reason is for the Antiquity of it: He is rough with his
Opponents, and tells us, The Magdeburgenses do lie, when they say Cent. 2.
Cap. 7. near the end, that no Author worthy of credit ever cited these Epistles
before Charles the Great: For Isidore, who is 200 years older than Charles the
Great, in the Proem of his collection of the Holy Canons, says, that by the
advice of 80 Bishops, he collected Canons out of the Epistles of Clement,
Anacletus, etc.

Isidore did indeed begin to flourish near to the year 610. So that Bellarmine
takes him right for the same Isidore Bishop of Hispalis. But had he well
examined the matter, he would have forborne to give the Lie to men more in the
right than himself, confiding in the rotten Antiquity of this Counterfeit
Isidore. For Isidores Preface is a Counterfeit too, made on purpose to
countenance the Forgeries; not 200 years older than Charles the Great, things
after the Death of Isidore, its pretended Author, being mentioned in the same.

Dr Reynolds in his Conference with Confer. (...) (...) (...).
Heart, having smartly checked him for his fourscore Bishops out of one Isidore,
asked him, About what year of Christ Isidore did die? How does Genebrard write?
(because Genebrard was Hart's most admired Author.) He answers, About the
year 637. as he proves out of Vasaeus. Asking him, When the General Council of
Constantinople, under Agatho, was kept? He answers, In the year 681. or 682.
or thereabout Then Isidore was dead above (...) years, says Reynolds, before
that General Council. He was, says Heart, but what of that? Of that it does
follow, that the preface written in Isidores name, and set before the Councils,
to purchase credit to those Epistles, is a counterfeit, and not Isidore's: For
in that Preface there is mention made of the General Council of Constantinople,
held against Bishop Macarius and Stephanus, in the time of Pope Agatho and the
Emperor Constantine: which (...) it was held above 40 years after Isidore
(...) dead, by Genebrard's own confession, by his own confession Isidore could
not tell the fourscore Bishops of it. And so the 80 Bishops which Turrian has
found out in one Isidore, are dissolved all into one Counterfeit, abusing both
the name of Isidore, and fourscore Bishops. Heart was unable to answer him, and
(...) from the Point.

Harding, in his Book against Bishop Jewel, cites these Forgeries frequently
and briskly: Upon the failure of which, though Baronius pretends an abundant
number of other Evidences; yet in the loss of 30 or 40 Primitive Bishops and
Martyrs, that were so long time, for the first 300 years after Christ together,
thought to speak for the Supremacy of the Church of Rome, one of the fairest
Feathers in the Popes Crown is placked away; and the younger Evidences, in
which Baronius trusts, being none but the Malepert and Arrogant Testimonies of
Junior Popes, in their own Causes, will make but a slight impression in the
minds of men, that have found themselves deluded with more ancient (...), of
the grave and unspotted Authorities of Holy Men, that Sacrificed themselves for
the Glory of God, and the good of the World, and sealed their Testimony (...)
their latest blood which the latter Bishops of Rome have been more Secular and
Pompous, than to be doing like their Predecessors.

CAP. V. Diverse Forgeries contained in Isidore's Collection, mentioned in
particular.
Isidore, as he now stands set forth by Merlin, has 50 Canons of the Apostles
for pure and good Records; many Decretal Epistles, made, as he pretends, by the
first Martyrs and Bishops of Rome; very long and full of Popery.

He has two Epistles of S. Clement written to S. James Bishop of Jerusalem,
that was dead before S. Clement came to the Chair: one to the Brethren dwelling
with S. James, and two others in his name.

He has four Epistles in the name of Anacletus, who lived in the time of
Trajan, and sat in the Roman Chair, An. (...). In the last of which the
Counterfeit Anacletus feigneth, That all the Primacies and Archbithopricks in
the World were divided and fetled by S. Peter, and S. Clement; that the Church
of Rome is the Head and Hinge of all the Churches; and that all the Patriarchal
Sees were made such by virtue of S. Peter: Antioch, because he sat there,
before he came to Rome Alexandria, because S. Mark came to sit there from S.
Peter: but Rome especially the first See, because it is sanctified by the death
of S. Peter, and S. Paul. As if our Saviors Death were nothing able to
sanctify Jerusalem, as S. Peter's death was to sanctify Rome: though besides
the Death of Christ, Jerusalem has this advantage, that it is the first
Church, and the Mother of us all.

That you may a little discein the dealings of the Papists, note here, that
Anacletus his first and second Epistles are cited by Bellarmine for good
Records, (...). de Rom Pont. (...). I. cap. 23. (...)
in the very same book where he confesses them to be Counterfeits: For though
in one little passage they be confessed for the present satisfaction of a stiff
Oppanent; yet where men are minded to be corrupt, they may serve the turn in an
hundred other places, by a Pious Fraud; and the Confession being over-skipped,
they may still seem Authentic, especially if the place happen to be unseen
where the Confession was made, as it often comes to pass in voluminous
writings.

(...) has besides these, 2 counterfeit Epistles of (...), 3 of Alexander, 2 of
Sixtus, 1 of Telesphorus, 2 of Higinus, 2 of Pius, 1 of Anitius, 2 of Soter, 1
of (...), 2 of Victor, 2 of Zephirinus, 2 of (...), 1 of (...), 2 of Pontianus,
1 of (...), 3 of Fabian, 2 of Cornelius, 1 of (...), 2 of Stephen, 2 of Sixtus,
2 of Dionysius, 3 of (...), 2 of (...), 1 of (...), 2 of Marcellinus, 2 of
Marcellus, 3 of Eusebius, 1 of (...). All laid down without the least (...) of
any Fraud: though the later (...) of the Councils, having their (...) (...) by
the Century-Writers of (...), the care of other I (...), (...) to acknowledge
several of them to be Forgeries.

These Episiles have one common blast upon them they were first seen in a
counterfeit book and never known to the World, (...) hundred years after their
pretended Authors were set in their Craves. They cannot all be (...) at once;
the Reader therefore must have patience, till we meet with them in their
places. In the mean time see what Bishop Jewel says concerning them, a (...)
ever answered by any, especially as to these points, wherein he (...) them with
Forgery. Gratian shows, that (...) (...). De Epistolis.
the Decretal Epistles have been doubted of among the Learned. Dr. Smith
declared openly at Paul's Cross, that they cannot possibly be theirs whose
names they bear: And to utter some reasons shortly for proof thereof, these
Decretal Epistles manifestly (...) and abuse the Scriptures, as it may soon
appear to the Godly Reader upon sight. They maintain nothing so much, as the
State and Kingdom of the Pope; and yet there was no such State erected in many
hundred years after the Apostles time. They publish a multitude of vain and
Superstitious (...), and other like fantasies, far unlike the Apostles
Doctrine. They proclaim such things as Mr. Harding knows to be open and known
(...). (...), that (...) (...) (...)
was next after Peter, wills and (...) commands, that all Bishops, once in
the year, do visit the (...) of S. Peter's Church in Rome, which they call
Limina (...); yet was there then (...) Church as yet built there in the name of
Peter. Pope Antherus makes mention of Eusebius Alexandrinus, and Felix, which
lived a long time after him. Fabianus writes of the coming of Novatus into
Italy; yet it is clear by S. Cyprian, and (...), that Novatus came first into
Italy in the time of Cornelius, who was (next) after Fabianus. One Petrus Crab,
the Compiler of the Councils, complains much, that the examples from whence
he took them, were wonderfu ly corrupted, and not one of them agreeing with
another. Gratian himself upon good advice, is driven to say, that al such
Epistles ought to have place, rather in debating matter of Justice in the
Consistory, than in determining and weighing the truth of the Scriptures.
Besides this, neither S. Hierom, nor Gennadius, nor Damasus, nor any other Old
Father, ever alleged these Epistles, or made any account of them; nor the
Bishops of Rome themselves at the first, no not when such Evidences might have
stood them in best stead, in their ambitious contention for Superiority over
the Bishops of Africa: The Contents of them are such, as a very Child of any
judgment may soon be able to (...) them. Here he names St. Clement's writing
to St. James when he was dead, Marcellus charging the Emperor Maxentius, an
Infidel and a Tyrant, with the Authority of Clement; with several things of
this kind. In his Reply to Harding's Answer, Artic. 1. and 4. But I proceed
with Isidore, or rather Merlin, that first printed him.

He has, besides all these Epistles, certain counterfeit Decrees of Sylvester,
Bishop of Rome, in the time of Constantine the Great, and the Epilogus brevis
Romani (...) post (...) celebrati; which Hincmarus, Archbishop of Rhemes, is
reported particularly to have excepted against, as absurd, because it
ordains, 1. That no Layman ought to accuse a Clergyman. 2. That no
Inferior Priest may accuse his Superior. 3. That a (...) may not be condemned
without 72 Witnesses, a Cardinal Priest not without 43, a Cardinal Deacon of
the City of Rome not without 27, a Subdeacon, an (...), a Reader, a
Doorkeeper, not without 7 (...). It is further provided, that every one of
these (...) must be without any spot of infamy: no Layman at all, nor any
inferior Clergy man. So that upon the matter a safe Indemnity is prepared for
all kind of Priests, especially the great ones, to swim in any Excess as
himself lists, provided he be not guilty of the Protestants faults; that is
to say, that he does not touch the Popes Crown, or the Monks Belly.

This Decree is most solemnly put among the Councils by Isidore, and Merlin, by
Peter Crabbe, Surius, Binius, Labbe, and Cossartius, and the Collectio Regia;
and as solemnly put among the Popes Laws, by Ivo an ancient Bishop, a great
Civilian, and one of the Eldest Digesters of the Canon Law, before Gratian

This brief Epilogue set before the Council, gives you to wit, that there were
Cardinals in Rome in the time of Constantine, An. (...)
the first Christian Emperor. But if you please to examine Antiquities, you
will hardly sind Cardinals so ancient.

Isidore in his Preface directed to one, whom he calls his Fellow Servants and
Father of the Faith, mentions 70 Canons of the Nicene Council, somewhat too
affectedly: You 80 Bishops, says he, who have compelled me to begin and
perfect this work, ought to know, and so ought all other Priests of the Lord,
that we have found more than those 20 Canons of the Nicene Council, that are
with us: And we read in the Decrees of Julius the (...) that there ought to be
(...) Chapters of that Synod. Yet when he comes to the Council it self, he
forgets himself so far, as to lay down but 20; the 50 forged (...) receiving a
fair Countenance only, by that Preface or Epistle, set for show before the work.

He has an Epistle of Athanasius, and the Bishops of Egypt, to Pope Mark;
wherein they tell him, that there were 70 Canons of the Nicene Council, and
desire him to send them into Egypt from Rome, since all their own were burnt at
Alexandria by the Arrians. Mark was (...) (...). (...). in vita Marc.
dead 9 years before the Burning happened; howbeit, he sent them a Gracious
Answer, with the 70 Canons. The (...) of these was seriously cited to (...) by
a Learned Son of that Church, to prove the Bishop of Rome was called Pope (to
wit, by Athanasius, and all the Bishops of Egypt) within the first (...) years:
But some of their latest Authors begin to blush at it, as Binius and Baronius
do in particular.

Next to these he has three Epistles of Julius the Pope, as very Counterfeits
as the former, yet generally cited by the Pseudo-Catholicks, as good Records.

After these, an Epistle of Athanasius, and the Bishops of Egypt to Liberius;
the oppression of the Church by the Arrians being the pretended Theme, but its
real design is to magnify the Popes Chair.

Liberius his Answer. Ejusdem (...). A lofty Brag like the residue.

An Epistle of the Bishops of Egypt to Pope Felix, concerning the cruel
Persecutions of the Arrians: An humble Address, and very Supplicatory. Though
Felix was an Arrian himself, and an Usurper of the Chair, thrust in by an
Arrian Emperor, while Liberius the true owner of it was banished for the
Faith; yet the style of the Epistle runs thus, Domino beatissimo, etc. To
our most blessed and most honorable Lord, the Holy Father Faelix, Pope of the
Apostolical City, Athanasius, and all the Bishops of Egypt, Thebais and Lybia,
by the Grace of God assembled in the Holy Council of Alexandria. A style too
too lofty for those purer times of humble simplicity: The usual Compellations
of those days (as may be seen by S. Cyprian's Letters to the Bishops of Rome,
and some other good Records) being far more short and samiliar; such as Julio
Vrbis Romae Episcopo, or, Stephano fratri, or, Cornelio Collegae and
Coepiscopo; that is, to Julius Bishop of the City of Rome, or to Stephen my
Brother, or to Cornelius my Associate and Fellow bishop: Nor can we find any
other, in undoubted instruments, for the first 300 or 400 years: But for an
Usurper to be called Most blessed and honorable Lord, an Heretic, Holy Father
and Pope of the Apostolical City; and that by a man who had rather die than be
guilty of such a Flattery, was little suitable to the Spirit of Athanasius,
that Great and Courageous Champion of the Church, being (as God would have it)
one, that of all others was the most mortal hater of the Arrians.

Isidore and Merlin dote so exceedingly, as to make this Usurper a Pope, and to
record his Decrees as lawful Canons.

After a little time Liberius was restored, but on very base and dishonorable
terms, as Bellarmine himself testifies out Bell. de Romans Pont. lib. 4. cap. 9
Baron. An. Christ. 357. Liberii 6. nu. 32, 33.
of S. Hierom, and Athanasius. He fainted in his Persecution, and was restored
by an Arrian Emperor, upon his Subscription to the Heretical Pravity. After
this he writes more Decretals; and the Title of his Epistle is in Isidore
thus, Epistola Liberii Papae, ut nullus pro Persecutionibus dum dur are
potestatem suam relinquat Ecclesiam. It is Nonsense, and false Latin: but
Binius about a thousand Bfn. in vit. Liberii.
and three hundred years after Liberius his death, mendeth it thus; Epistola
XII. Liberii Papae, ad omnes generaliter Episcopos, ut nullus pro
persecutionibus dum durare potest suam relinquat Ecclesiam: That no man should
forsake his Church, for persecution sake, while he was able to bear it. By the
Title it should be a compassionate Letter: For if any one be wearied with
persecution, as Liberius was, by a tacit intimation, it seems to permit him
to renounce the Faith, as Liberius did: for Bellarmine and Platina consent to
this, Bellarm. ut supra
that he subscribed to the Arrian Creed; only the one says, he did it in the
external act, through fear; and the other Sentiens, that he thought, or
consented with them in all. Platin. in vit. Liberii.

Damasus his Epistle to Paulinus Bishop of Antioch follows. I fear an
Imposture: Isidore and Merlin were not aware there was no such man: Their
Followers are fain to mend it thus; Paulinus Bishop of Thessalonida. As Binius,
Labbe, etc. In vita Damasi.

Next the Epistle of Damasus to Hierom, and Hierom's Answer, both confessed to
Bin. (...) pist. 3.
be a Forgery, there is an Epistle of Stephen Damasi. and in Epist, Hieron. ad
Damas.
the Archbishop, and of three Councils in Africa, to Damasus the Pope,
concerning the privilege of the Roman Chair. Doubtless the Bishops in Africa
were very zealous for the privilege of the Roman Chair, ever since the
Oppression, and Cheat of Zozimus. The Title is somewhat suspicious: Beatissimo
Damino, and Apostolico Culmini sublato, etc. Stephanus Archiepiscopus Concilii
Mauritanii, etc. In English thus; To our most blessed Lord, and the Apostolical
Top highly lifted up, the Holy Father of Fathers, and the Supreme Bishop over
all Prelates, Stephen Archbishop of the Council of Mauritania, and all the
Bishops of the three Councils in the Province of Africa. Many men have styled
themselves Archbishops of Provinces, but no man (as I remember) Archbishop of a
Council. There may be Archbishops in a Council, but not an Archbishop of the
Council. Three Councils at once in the same Province were never heard of: One
and the same Letter sent from three Councils is a strange thing: So is a Letter
sent in the name of one Archbishop, as President of three Councils at a time.

After this we have 6 Epistles of Siricius, 2 of Anastasius, 19 of Innocent, 2
of Zozimus, 3 of Boniface, with feveral Answers: Among which there is inserted
a Constitution of Honorius the Emperor sent to Boniface, That if there were
two Bishops of Rome made any more, they should be both driven out of the City:
Which shows how subject the Roman Chair is to Schisms, and the Power that did
of old belong to the Emperor.

There are other Epistles of Celestine, Sixtus, Leo, Hilarious Simplicius Felix,
Gelasius, Anastasias, Symmachus, Hormisda, etc. the most of which do much
exceed our compass of the first 400 years, and are too late for our Cognizance:
For since the Forgery of Zozimus, much credit is not to be given to the Roman
Bishops: Not as if one man's fault had blasted them all; but he leads up the Van
of Forgets, and they have all persisted in his Guilt, no one of them making
acknowledgment or restitution, and almost all of them guilty of the like,
either by doing, or suffering.

Among the rest there is an Instrument, which the Collector calls, Sacra
Justini Imperatoris ad Hormisdam Papam: The Sacred Writing of the Emperor
Justinus to Hormisda Pope. But the word POPE is not in the superscription: The
Letter it self is, To the most Holy and blessed Archbishop and Patriarch of the
Venerable City of Rome, Hormisda. Archbishop and Fatriarch we allow him; but
not that Typhus wherewith the Fathers in the sixth Council of Carthage charge
Zozimus, that blasphemous Title which John assumed at Constantinople, and S.
Gregory so declaimed against at Rome.

This Letter of Justin the Emperor was written more than 500 years after our
Saviors Birth, yet I never saw true Record, in all that time, give a Title so
high to the Bishop of Rome. But Justin was a man of low Descent, a Swineherd at
first, a Carpenter afterward, then a Soldier of Fortune, and at last an
Emperor: He was the more solicitous therefore to complement so Mighty a Bishop
with accurate expression.

Note well. Isidore has suppressed all the Canons of the sixth Council of
Carthage, as too bitter and sharp for the Popes Constitution. And so has
Merlin, though very foolishly: for in the beginning of the Book he has a
Preliminary Tract, called, An Annotation of Synods, the Acts where of are
contained in this book. In which he gives us this account: in the Aquitan
Council, 18 Fathers made 24 Canons: in that of Neocaesarea, 16 Fathers made 14
Canons: in that of Gangra, 16 Fathers made 21 Canons: in that of Sardica, 60
Fathers made 21 Canons: in that of Antioch, 30 Fathers made 25 Canons: in that
of Laodicea, 22 Fathers made 59 Canons: in the Council of Car thage, 217
Fathers made 33 Canons. I had a long time coveted a sight of these Canons, and
finding them numbered in such an Annotation of Synods, the Acts whereof are
contained in this book, I was much comforted with hope of seeing them: But when
I turned to the place, I found them not! Surely to slip out 33 Canons at a
time, made by more Fathers than were in all the other Councils put together, is
a lusty Deleatur: There was never Deed of more importance imbezelled in the
World.

The Nicene Council had 318 Fathers, that made 20 Canons: for what secret cause
therefore he skippeth over the account which he ought especially to give of
this, is worth the enquiry. He mentions it by the by, and shuffles it off
without an account, (perhaps) because he was loath to say, or unsay the story
of 70 Canons in the Nicene Council. However he deals fairly with us in this,
that having noted Aurelius to have been President in the sixth Council of
Carthage, he confesses, that S. Augustine, Bishop of Hipyo, is recorded to
have been in that Council, in the Reign of Honorius. Ibid.

Binius, and all the Popish Compilers I could ever meet with before, clipped
off that Council in the midst, without so much as signifying the number of its
Canons. I was glad I had a sight of their number here, though I mist of
themselves: and was confident, that however cruelly the Pope dealt with
Aurelius Archbishop of Carthage, S. Aug. Bishop of Hippo, and other holy
Fathers, in cutting out their Tongues, I should at last meet with them: And the
Learned Justellus with much honesty and honor has made us satisfaction.

We acknowledge some true Records among these Spurious Abominations: but a
little poison spoileth the greatest Mess of the most wholesome Meat; much more
does a Bundle of Forgeries that overpoyseth the true Records in size and number.

The method which he uses in the mixture of the Records and Forgeries is
remarkable: For beginning with the Counterfeit Epistles of Clement, Anacletus,
etc. he first seasoneth the Readers spirit with Artificial Charms, and
prepossesseth him with the high Authority of the Roman Patriarchs; and after he
has given him those strong Spells and Philtres, composed of Roman Drugs,
permits him boldly to see some true Antiquities, his eyes being dazzled in the
very Entry, with Apparitions of Popes, and such other Specter.

Lest the Tincture should decay, he reserves some of the Forgeries till
afterward; that the true Records might be compassed in with an Enchanted
Circle, and the last Relish of Antiquity go off as strong as the first, and be
as successful as the prepossession. Thus he comes down with Forgeries to
Melchiades; and then he breaks off the Decretal Epistles, to make room for
the Councils, beginning with the Nicene, under pretense of its Excellency, and
putting the Councils before it in time, after it in order that he might get a
fit occasion to introduce them here, so running down in a disorderly manner,
from Ancyra to Neocaesarea, Gangra, Sardica, Antioch, Laodicea, Constantinople,
Ephesus, Chalcedon, among the Greeks, and then up again to the Latin Councils,
many of which preceded diverse of the other; as the first, second, third,
fourth, fifth, sixth Council of Carthage, all which were before the Council of
Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon: From the seventh Council of Carthage,
he runs down to the thirteenth Council of Toledo, which happened long after
Melchiades, Silvester, Pope Mark Liberius, Felix, etc. were dead: Then he
comes (in the second part of his Work) up again to Sylvester, and so downwards
with more Decretals, that he might Husband his Forgeries well, and not glut us
with them altogether. And remarkable it is also, that he does not give us the
least syllable of notice of any Fraud among them: Nay, even Constantine's
Donation set in the Front before the Nicene, and in the midst between the first
Order of Counterfeits and the Councils, passes with him silently and gravely
for a true and sacred Instrument, which is of all other the most impudent
Imposture.

Let Baronius say what he will, it was impossible to debauch all Antiquity and
Learning with so much Labor and Art, without some deep Counsel and Design.
What use Merlin puts all these things to, and how much he was Approved in the
Church of Rome, you shall see in the next Chapter, and how highly also he
extolleth this Book ofF orgeries.

How plainly he fathereth it upon S. Isidore Bishop of Hispalis, is manifest by
the Coronis of the first Part, where with it ends

Give thanks to industrious and learned men, studious Reader, that now thou
have at hand the Acts of the Councils, as well as of the Popes; which Isidore
the Bishop of Hispalis collected into one Volume, etc. What shall we believe?
The first Edition of the Book it self, or Baronius his Testimony? Old Merlin
fathers it upon Isidore before Baronius was born, and all the World was made to
believe the Bishop of Hispalis was the Author of it; though now for shame, and
for a shift, they fly to another Author. Now if Isidore were dead before the
Book was made, it must needs Ibid.
be a Cheat; which, as Clausule insuesa sus picionem (...).
Merlin says, honest Francis Regnault, the cunning Printer, ended at Paris, in
the year of our Lord 1535, which unusual form of Concluding, instead of
allaying, increases the suspicion.

CAP. VI. What use Merlin makes of Isidore, and the Forgeries therein. How much
he was approved in the Church of Rome. How some would have Isidore the Bishop
to be a Merchant, others, a Sinner.
HOw false and fraudulent soever the Collection of Isidore be, yet its Title is
very Splendid, and its Authority Sacred in the Church of Rome.

JAMES MERLIN'S COLLECTION OF THE Four General Councils; The NICENE, the
CONSTANTINOPOLITAN, the EPHESINE, and the CHALCEDONIAN:

Which S. Gregory the Great does Worship and Reverence as the Four Gospels.

TOM. I.

Of 47 Provincial Councils also; and the Decrees of 69 POPES.

From the APOSILES and their CANONS, to ZACHARIAS.

ISIDORE being the Author.

ALSO

The GOLDEN BULL of CHARLES IV. Emperor, concerning the Election of the KING
of the ROMANS.

PARIS:

At Francis Regnault. 1535.

All we shall observe upon this Title, is this; If Gregory the Great did
Worship and Reverence the Four General Councils as the Four Gospels, they were
the more to blame that added 50 Canons to one of them; and they much more, that
stain them all with the Neighborhood, and Mixture of such hateful Forgeries.

But who could suspect that so much Fraud could be Ushered in with so fair a
Frontispiece? or so much Sordid Basene s varnished over with so much
Magnificence! I have heard of a Thief that robbed in his Coach, and a Bishops
Pontificalibus; of the German Princess, and of Mahomet's Dove: But I never
heard of any thing like this, that a (...) should trade with Apostles, Fathers,
Emperors, Golden Bulls, Kings, and Councils: under the fair pretext of all
these, to Cheat the World of its Religion and Glory.

His Grandeur is rendered the more remarkable, and his Artifice redoubted, by
the Greatness of his Retinue: Riculphus Archbishop of Mentz, Hincmarus
Laudunensis, Benedictus Levita, the Famous (...), and his fourscore Bishops,
Ivo Cartonensis, Gratian, Merlin, Peter Crab, Laurentius Surius Carranza,
Nicolinus, Binius, Labbe, Cossartius, the COLLECTIO REGIA, Stanistaus Hosius,
Cardinal Bellarmine, Franciscus Turrianus, etc. Men that bring along with them
Emperors and Kings for Authority, as will appear in the Sequel: Men who think
it lawful to Cheat in an Holy Cause, and to lie for the Churches Glory: These
augment the Splendor of his Train. Their Doctrine of Pious Frauds is not
unknown: And if we may do evil that good may come, certainly no good, like the
Exaltation of the Roman Church, can possibly be found, wherewith to justify a
little evil.

The Jesuits Morals are well understood: Upon their Principles to do evil, is
no evil, if good may ensue. Perjury it self may be dispensed with by the
Authority of their Superior. An illimited Blind Obedience is the sum of their
Profession. To equivocate and lie for the Church, that is, for the advancement
of their Order, and the Popes benefit, is so far from sin, that to murder
Heretical Kings is not more Meritorious.

It is a sufficient Warrant, upon such grounds, to James Merlin our present
Author, that he was commanded to do what he did, by great and eminent Bishops
in the Church of Rome: as he shows in his Epistle Dedicatory, To the most
Reverend Fathers in Christ, and his most excellent Lords, Stephen and Francis,
etc. the one of which was Bishop of Paris, and the other an Eminent Prelate,
who ordered all his work by their care, and made it public by their own
Authority.

Conceiving nothing (says he) more profitable for the Commonwealth, I have not
dissembled to bring the Decrees of the Sacred Councils and Orthodox Bishops,
which partly the blessed Isidore sometime since digested into one, partly you,
most Reverend Fathers, having confirmed them with your Leaden Seal, gave me to
be published in one Volume: For every particular appears so copiously and
Catholickly handled here, which is necessary for the convicting of the Errors
of mortal men, or for the restoring of the now almost ruined World, that every
man may readily find wherewith to kill Heretics and Heresies.

The Protestants being grown so dangerous, that they had almost ruined the
Popish World, by reforming the Church; nothing but this Medusa's Head of Snakes
and Forgeries was able to affray them. The nakedness of the Pontisicians being
discovered, they had no Retreat from the Light of the Gospel, but to this
Refuge of Lies: Where every one may readily find, says Merlin, wherewith to
kill Heretics and Heresies, to depress the proud, to weary the voluptuous, to
bring down the ambitious, to take the little Foxes that spoil the Vineyard of
the Church. By the proud and ambitious, he means Kings and Patriarchs, that
will not submit to the Authority and Supremacy of the Roman Church; and by the
little Foxes, such men as the Martyrs in the Reformed Churches; the driving
away of which was the design of the publication. That he means Kings and
Patriarchs in the former, you will see in the Conclusion.

And if any one shall hereafter endeavor 15
to fray, and drive away these Monsters from the Commonwealth, what can be more
excellent, says he, than the stones of David, which this Jordan shall most
copiously afford? If any one would satisfy the desires of the Hungry, what is
more sweet and abundant than the Treasures which this Ship brings from the
remotest Regions? but if he desires the path and splendor of Truth, by which
the clouds of Error (with their Authors) may best be dispelled, and driven far
away; what is more apparent than the Sentences of the Fathers, which they, by
the Inspiration of The Forgeries Fathered on the Holy Ghost.
the Holy Ghost, have brought together into this Heap? For here, as out of a
Meadow full of all kind of Flowers, all things may be gathered with ease, that
conduce to the profit of the Church, or the suppressing of Vices, or the
extinguishing of Lusts. Here the most precious Pearl, if you dig a little, will
strait be found, etc. Here the Tyranny of Kings and Emperors, as it were with
a Bit and Bridle, is restrained. Here the Luxury of (...) and Bishops is
repressed: If Princes differ here peace sincere is hid: If Prelates contend
about the Primacy, here THE ANGEL OF THE GREAT COUNCIL discovers who is to be
preferred above the residue, etc.

Are not the Roman Wares set off with advantage here? How exceedingly are these
Medicines for the Maladies of the Church boasted by these Holy Mountebanks? The
stones of David that kill Goliath, the River that refreshes the City of God,
the Food of Souls, the Ship, the very Argonaut of the Church, that comes home
laden with Treasures from unknown Regions, are but mean expressions; the
Inspirations of the Holy Ghost, the Pearl of Price, Angelus ille Magni
Concilii, the Angel of the Covenant are hid here; and all (if we believe this
dreadful Blasphemer) declare for the Pope against all the World. Here is a Bit
and Bridle for Kings and Emperors, a Rule for Patriarchs, and what not?

The Councils, and true Records, we Reverence with all Honor due to Antiquity:
And for that very cause, we so much the more abhor that admixture of Dross and
Clay, wherewith their Beauty is corrupted. Had we received the Councils
sincerely from her, we should have blessed the Tradition of the Church of Rome
for her assistance therein: But now she loves her self more than her Children,
and the Pope (which is the Church Virtual) is so hard a Father, that he sows
Tares instead of Wheat, and gives Stones instead of Bread, and for Eggs
feeds us with Scorpions: We abhor her practices, and think it needful warily
to examine, and consider her Traditions

What provisions are made in Merlin's Isidore for repressing the Luxuries of
Popes and Bishops, you may please to see in Constantines Donation, and the
Epilogus Brevis. In the one of which so many Witnesses are required before a
Bishop be condemned; and in the other, care is taken for the Pomp. of the
Clergy, even to the Magnificence of their Shoes, and the Caparisons of their
Horses.

As Merlin, (who was a Doctor of Divinity of Great Account) so likewise all the
following Collectors among the Papists, derive their Streams from this Isidore,
as their Fountain. And for this cause I was the more desirous to see the Book,
which is very scarce to be found; and the more scarce, I suppose, because if
the Fountain be unknown, a greater Majesty will accrue to the Streams. The
Booksellers-Shops afforded me none: but at last I met with two of them; the one
with the Learned Dr. Barlow, Margaret Professor, and Provost of Queens College
in Oxford, the other in the Bodleian Library: The one was Printed at Collein,
An 1530. The other at Paris beforementioned. Either had all, and both affirm
Ifidore Hispalensis to be the Author.

Though some afterward are careful to distinguish Isidore Hispalensis from
Isidore Mercator. The one failing, the other is obtruded as the Author of the
Work: the latter Collectors unanimously leaving out Hispalensis, and calling
him only by the Name of Mercator. But how the Name of Isidore Mercator should
come before the Book, the Wisest Man in the World, I suppose, can scarcely
Divine.

It is said, that Eulogius Bishop of Corduba Blondel, cap. 6.
had a Brother, whose Name was Isidore, whose condition of Life Banishment,
whose Nation Spain, whose Trade was Merchandise: And that this Spanish Merchant
flying out of his Country, upon the account of Religion, chose rather to
entrust this most precious Treasure, which he had saved from the Lust of
Barbarians, to the care of the Germans, than to expose it to the Rage of those
Wasters and Destroyers wherewith Spain was at that time infested, as the Monks
of Mentz; at least, who, upon his having sojourned there, took occasion to put
his Name before the Book that was then in their hands, would have the World
really to believe. This is Blondel's conjecture, which he raises from the real
existence of such an Isidore. But he excuses himself for conjecturing barely
in such an affair, because the Work is a Work of Darkness, and they that did
it, hated the Light, because their Deeds were evil: And the Patcher up of those
Epistles coming forth in the Vizor of another Name, in such a business a
conjecture may suffice. Let them that imposed the Name, give us a Reason why
they did it: it is not incumbent on us to render an account of what other men
are pleased without reason at any time to do.

It is not impossible, but a Knave, called Isidore, might be sent abroad with
the Book, being picked out on purpose, that the Famous Isidore, Bishop of
Hispalis, might be believed to be the Author. He might come to Mentz, and
sojourn there under the notion of a Spaniard, and give Riculphus, or the Monks,
a sight of the Book, as a rare inestimable Treasure: For Sinon was let loose,
with as little Artifice as this, to the Destruction of Troy. Thus, whence it
came really, could hardly be discovered; and the Thing too would be the more
admired, because it came from the farthest Regions, as Merlin speaks, being
saved so Miraculously from the hands of Barbarians. But where did this
Traveller find it? this Merchant, of whom did he receive it? For morally
speaking, it is impossible, that a Merchant should be the Author of it;
especially at that time, when the Records lay scattered perhaps in an hundred
Libraries, and were all to be sought in obscure Manuscripts. An Ass may be
expected to meddle with an Harp, as soon as a Merchant with the Mysterious
Records of the Church. How come Laymen to be so Judicious? Had any Merchant so
great a Skill as this imports? It is improbable fourscore Bishops should know
its much more that they should urge him to do that, which their own Learning
and Function fitted them to do far better: Yet Isidore in his Preface writes
thus, You Eighty Bishops, who urged me to begin and perfect this Work, ought to
know, as ought all other Priests of the Lord also, that we have found more than
those 20 Chapters of the Nicene Council, etc. It is a shame to the Church of
Rome, that a Layman should be the Fountain of all her Records; and that in
very deed, the greater part of them should be in no Manuscript nor Library in
the World, being never seen, nor heard of, till Isidore brought them out of
Spain: That no man can tell what Isidore made the Book, which is now the
President, and the sole Storehouse of all their Collections, is a (...)
infamous; especially since they believed of old unanimously, that the Bishop
Isidore of Hispalis was its ancient Author.

Baronius when he had irrefragably disproved him, puts nothing certain in his
stead: but having a Wolf by the ears, and being willing to say something,
raises a dust, and goes out in the Cloud.

In the ancient Manuscripts, says he, Earon in (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
we find this Isidore, the Collector of the Councils, surnamed Mercator; as in
those which we have in our Library: but in the Inscription of the Books lately
Printed, he is stilled not Mercator, but Peccator, according to the manner of
some of the ancient Fathers, who for Humility sake were (...) to superscribe,
and subscribe themselves so. I conceive it crept in by a mistake. that Mercator
was written for (...); but since the Author of that Collection reciting the
General Councils in his (...) (...) with the sixth, it is evident that (...)
after the sixth Council, and before (...) seventh.

(...) (...) is here? He had before (...) (...) detected the Collection for a
(...), and yet he now gravely troubles his Brains, to know what Isidore this
might be It is a blind Isidore, that has left no mark of his Life behind him,
but only that which lies in this counterfeit Preface; an Isidore that can no
where else be found, by the great (...), Baronius. He has no other help to know
the time about which he lived, but the Preface: Whether Peccator, or Mercator,
is but a superficial Controversy; whether any Isidore made the Book, is a
deeper enquiry: The old Manuscripts of Baronius, are Books of yesterday, all
written since the counterfeit Isidore was published. The variety shows, that
the Papists can rest no where: And the liberty they take to alter what they see
in Manuscripts, as they please, is an ill sign of a large Conscience, which
studies not what is faithfully to be published, but conveniently. For because
the Name of Mercator did smell too strong of the Wares, left the World should
wonder how the Inscription of a Merchant should come out before the Councils,
they thought it fit to strain the courtesy of a Letter, and (because Peccator
is an humble Name) to turn the Merchant into a Sinner. That it was a Sinner, I
dare be sworn, and a fly Merchant too; lucky Names both of them: but the last
is capable of a siner pretense, no Cheat being so vigorous and unavoidable, as
that of a penitent we ping Sinner. The Pride of Rome comes clothed in
Humility, after the example of her Supreme Head, who styles himself the
Servant of Servants, while he aspires (by these very Records) to be the King of
Kings.

Isidore and Merlin being two of the first Collectors of the Councils among the
Papists, I have taken the more liberty to be somewhat copious in them, that I
may conveniently be more brief in perusing the residue.

CAP. VII. Of Francis Turrian the Jesuit: With what Art and Boldness he
defends the Forgeries.
NOtwithstanding all the weakness and uncertainty of Isidore, Francis Turrian,
the Famous Jesuit, appears in its defense, about 40 years after the first
publication of it by Merlin. The Centuriators of Magdenburg having met with it,
to his great displeasure, he is so Valiant, as not only to maintain all the
Forgeries therein contained, but the whole Body of Forgeries vented abroad by
all the Collectors and Compilers following, till himself appeared.

His Book is expressly formed against the Writers of the Centuries, and is a
sufficient Evidence, that as soon as Isidore came abroad by Dr. Merlin's
Labor, and the Bishop of Paris Command, it was sifted by the Protestants.

It is dedicated to the most Illustrious and most Reverend D. D. Stanissaus
Hosius, Cardinal of the Holy Roman Church, and Bishop of Collein. Printed by
the Heirs of John Quintel, and approved by Authority, An. Dom. 1573.

He defends all the Canons of the Apostles Vid. Turrian.
which are recounted by other Collectors. That you may know the Metal of the
Man, I will produce but two Instances.

The last of those Canons, which he maintains to be the Apostles, is this
which follows.

Qui Libri sunt Canonici, etc. Let these Can. 84.
Books be Venerable and Holy to you all: Of the Old Testament, five Books of
Moses, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy; one of Joshua the Son
of Nun, one of Judges, one of Ruth, four of Kings, two of Chronicles, Hester
one, three of the Macchabees, one of Job, one Book of Psalms, three of
Solomon, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Songs; one of the 12 Prophets,
one of Isaiah, one of Jeremiah, one of Ezekiel, one of Daniel: And without, let
your young men learn the Wisdom of the Learned Syrach.

But of ours, that is, of the New Testament, there are four Gospels, Matthew,
Mark, Luke, and John; fourteen Epistles of Paul, two Epistles of Peter, three
of John, one of James, one of Jude, two Epistles of Clement, and the
Ordinations of Me Clement, set forth in Eight Books to you Bishops, which are
not to be published to all, because of the Mysteries contained in them; and the
Acts of our Apostles.

This is the eighty fourth Canon, and in some Accounts the eighty fifth; where
you see the Episiles of Clement, and Eight Books of his Ordinations, put into
the Body of the Bible: As for the difference of the Accounts, he shows you
the way how to reconcile them.

If this be one of the Apostles Canons, then Clement was an Apostle, or had
(...) Power: But if it be a Forgery, then not only the Apostles Canons, but the
very Text of the Holy Scriptures is interlined and forged by the same.

He maintains all the Decretal Epistles, and among the rest S. Clement's: Whose
genuine Epistle to the Corinthians they leave cut, as making nothing to their
purpose: but five Spurious ones they record; the two first of them being
written to S. James, and the last to the Brethren dwelling with him at
Jerusalem.

It is good sport to see how like the shot of a great Gun, the Discovery of the
Protestants comes in among them: Their keenness in detecting the time of S
James his Death, shatter the (...); and whereas before they were all united,
they now fly several ways, every man (...) for himself, as he is best able.

Baronius dislikes suen Arts of upholding In (...) (...) (...) (...).
the Church, not as impious and unlawful, but as inconvenient and pernicious.
(...).
Bellarmine (...) the Epistles to be Old, but dares not attest them; Isidore,
Merlin, Peter Crabbe, Nicolinus, Carranza, and Surius, own them freely without
any scruple: For saying nothing of the Quarrel, they lay them down simply as
good Records. Binius, Labbe, and the Collectio Regia, confess some of them to
be false; and in particular, that S James was dead seven years before S.
Clement could write his first Epistle to him. And to salve the sore, they say,
that it was not written to James, but to Simeon, who was also Bishop of
Jerusalem, and Brother to our Lord; and that the Name of James crept into the
Title Mendose, by Error and Mistake, for that of Simeon. But honest Turrian
maintains plainly, that S. Peter and S. Clement knew very well that S. James
was dead before they wrote unto him; yet nevertheless they did very wisely,
both S. Peter in ordering the Epistle, and S. Clement in writing it. And his
Reasons, as he brings the matter about, are pretty specious.

For my part, I protest, that such a High Piece of Impudence was to me
incredible: But that you may see the rare Abilities of a Jesuit to argue well
for the absurdest Cause, turn to his Book, and read his Comment on S. Clement's
first Epistle, and there you shall see Wit and Folly equal in their height: Wit
in managing, but Folly in attempting so mad a business.

For the sake of those who are not able to read, or get the Book, I will give
you a Glympse of his Demonstrations. First he observes, how Reason it self
compels (...) in Clement E. pist (...)
us, especially being confirmed by so many and so great Testimonies of the
Ancients, to confess the Epistle to be S. Clement's, whose it is reported to
be. He sophistically pretends here, that there were great Authorities of the
Ancient Fathers extant to prove it: Whence, says he it began to be had in
every man's hand, to be read by the Catholics, to be put among the Decretal
Epistles, and produced and cited in Ecclesiastical Causes and Judgments. The
latter part of which Clause is true: For (as we before observed) Gratian, Ivo,
and the rest of the Popes Ministers, have brought the Decretals into the Body
of the Canon Law, which makes the matter more fatal and abominable; for being
really cited in their Ecclesiastical Courts, and used both in matters of
Controversy, and in cases of Conscience, they are forced either to defend
them, or to pluck up their Customs by the very Roots; and so further expose the
Church of Rome to the shame of Levity or Fraud; yet for this very cause, it is
far more impious and wicked to retain them: So that not knowing which way is
best, some of them retain them, and some of them renounce them. But you must
wink at all this, and believe what Turrian says, for the Authority of the Roman
Church (which has seated the Forgeries in the Chair of Judgment) is a greater
Argument, to them that believe her Infallible, than any one Doctor can bring
against them: Neither was blessed Peter ignorant, when he commanded to write to
the Dead, nor Clement, says he, when he wrote by the Commandment; but that the
Readers would presently see, the Epistle to be written to him, whom all men
knew to be dead before S. Peter; they being about thereupon, to enquire
diligently into the cause thereof, and seeking to find it: Nay, this was the
design of the blessed Peter, and therein he imitated the Holy Scripture.
Whether to counterfeit, or blaspheme the Scriptures, be the worse, I cannot
tell: but of this I am sure, that they who think such courses lawful, (as this
fastened on S. Peter, and the Holy Scripture here) will stick at nothing which
they take for their advantage. For that it was lawful to counterfeit S. James
his Name, he proves afterward very largely; and now he is giving the reasons
of it: One intention was to stir up all people to Enquiry; their admiration at
so strange a thing, being very prone to make them diligent to learn the cause
of it: Another was, that all Bishops might see the more clearly, that they were
taught in the person of James: For James being dead, and incapable of receiving
the instruction, it is evident, that he was not intended thereby; and therefore
it must be for others in his capacity. A third reason was the preventing of
envy: for had S. Peter vouchsafed (being our Saviors Vicar, and Head of the
Church) to write to any Bishop alive, the Honor done unto that Bishop had been
so great, that all the rest had been tempted to malign him shrewdly for that
advantage: His intention was, says he, to transfigure Ibid.
these things in the person of James, after the manner of the Holy Scripture;
and that as well for other Bishops as especially those that should succeed him
in the Church of Jerusalem, ( whence the preaching of the Gospel began,
according to the Prophecy of Isaiah) that they might thus think with
themselves; If the Prince of the Apostles commanded Clement to write these
things to James the Brother of our Lord, whom Peter, James and John did first
of all ordain, who now ceased to be a Shepherd and was rewarded with his Crown;
he certainly did not command him to write for his sake, but for us, to whom
Solomon says, Look diligently to the face of thy Cattle, and consider thy
Herds, etc. Let this, says he, be one cause of the Transfiguration, or
counterfeiting a person in this Epistle. Having noted how S. Paul transferred a
certain business on himself and Apollos by a Figure, he concludes thus: Why
therefore may we not think, that S. Peter for the same reason commanded Clement
to transfer his Epistle concerning his Death and Doctrine, pertaining in common
to every Bishop, by a Figure to S. James already dead? lest if he should have
commanded him to have written to Simon the Bishop of Jerusalem, who succeeded
S. James, or to any other, as to Mark the Bishop of Alexandria, or Ananias of
Antioch, or any other, he should then perhaps seem to love him, or honor him,
more than the residue?

Much more he says to this purpose but all made vain, with one small
observation: Whereas he pretends that Clement knew S. James to be dead, there
is a (...) Epistle written by the same Clement, To his most dearly beloved
Brethren dwelling at Jerusalem, together with his dearest Brother James, his
Fellow-Disciple. So that S. James after all, was still thought to be alive, by
those that transferred this Epistle on S. Clement by a Figure.

S. Peter's influence over the Bishop of Jerusalem, and our Lords Brother, was
thought a considerable Circumstance for the Establishment of the following
Popes: And till the Protestants discovered the Fraud, let Turrian say what he
will, there was scarce a person in the World, that thought not the Letter timed
well enough for the purpose.

And whereas he pretends so many and so great Testimonies of the Ancients,
confessing the Epistle to be S. Clement's; he is not able, nor does he so much
as attempt to name one, from S. Clement downward, till this Spurious Isidore,
that affirmed any such matter. Howbeit, he quotes Origin, Theodoret, Gregory
Nazianzen, etc. to prove the lawfulness of a Transfiguration, and makes great
Ostentation of the Fathers, in showing that S. Peter and S. Clement did wisely
in the business.

CAP. VIII. Of Peter Crabbe's Tomes of the Councils: Wherein he agrees with,
and wherein he differs from Isidore and Merlin.
BEsides the Forgeries that are in Merlin and the Bastard Isidore, Peter
Crabbe, whose Tomes of the Councils were published eight years after the first
Edition of Merlin, published more, of as great importance as the former; not
omitting those of Isidore and Merlin, but recording and venting them altogether.

He pretends to give an account of all those Councils that have been from S.
Peter the Apostle, down to the Times of Pope John II.

He wrote before Turrian, as Carranza and Surius did, whom it is Turrian's
business to defend.

The End being proposed before the Means, with what design these Editions of
the Councils are so carefully multiplied, we may conjecture by a Treatise that
is set in the Front of them, concerning the Roman Primacy. Almost all the
Compilers, after Peter Crabbe, having prefixed the same with one consent before
their Work, as the Aim of their ensuing Labors.

It is extant in Crab, Surius, Nicolinus, Binius, Labbe and Cossartius, and the
Collectio Regia. Carranza has it not nor Paul V.

Paul V. in his own Work, published at Rome, Anno Dom. 1608. touches the
Forgeries but very sparingly. It does not become the Majesty of a Pope in his
own Name to utter them: It is moreover a thing of hazardous consequence for him
to appear in Person in such a disgraceful business: It besits his Holiness to
act rather by Emissaries and Inferior Agents, as all great Statesmen and
Politicians do, being unseen themselves in matters that reflect too much upon
their safety: that Method (you know) is more stately, as well as more
Honorable and secure. Yet he approves others at a distance, as his dear Son
Severinus Binius in particular, who dedicated all his Tomes to Pope Paul V. in
the year 1608. and has a particular Letter of Thanks from Pope Paul himself, as
a Badge of his Favor before the Work. As for Carranza, he is but an Abstract,
or brief Compendium.

This Treatise of the Primacy, thus put before the Councils, contains a
Collection of Testimonies out of Counterfeit Epistles of the Primitive Bishops
and Martyrs of Rome, proving under the Authorities of most Glorious Names, that
the Holy Apostolical Church obtained the Primacy, not from the Apostles, but
from our Lord himself: that it is the Head and Hinge of all the Churches; that
all Appeals are to be made thereunto; the greater causes, and the contentions
of Bishops, being to be determined only by the Apostolical See: that she is the
Mother of all Churches; and as the Son of God came to do the Will of his
Father, so ought all Bishops and Priests to do the Will of their Mother: that
all the Members ought to follow the Head, which is the Church of Rome: that the
first See ought to be judged by no man, neither by the Emperor, nor by Kings,
nor by the People: that it was granted to the Church of Rome, by a singular
privilege, to open and shut the Kingdom of Heaven to whom she would: that none
may Appeal from her to any other: that the Apostolical See may without any
Synod unbind those whom a Synod or Council has unjustly condemned. Of which
Sentence she is to be the Judge, whether it be just; for she may judge all, but
none her: that the Church of Rome is the Foundation and Form of all the
Churches; so that no Church has its Essence without that of Rome: that from
her all the Churches received their beginning. Doctrines as true, as the
Authorities by which they are confirmed; and to say no more, as true as the
last: For the Christian Churches received their beginning from Jerusalem,
before the Church of Rome had any Being.

Consider it well, and you shall find this the removing of a mere stone of
highest importance, an Encroachment upon the Territories of other Patriarchs,
an (...) of all Spiritual and Secular Power, to the subversion of Emperors,
Kings and Councils.

For if all are to obey her, as Jesus Christ did his Eternal Father; if it be
granted to the Roman Church, by a singular Privilege, to open and shut the
Kingdom of Heaven to whom she will; if no King, Emperor or Council, has power
to judge the Pope, while he has power to judge all; Kings, Emperors and
Councils are made Subject to him, and nothing can escape the Sublimity of his
Cognizance.

Besides this Treatise of the Primacy, Peter Crab has 34 new Canons of the
Apostles more than Isidore and Merlin: So that Antiquities are daily increasing
in the Church of Rome, and Records are like Figs, new ones come up instead of
the old ones.

The last of these Canons is that of Clement, about the Canon of the Bible: a
Forgery of more Scriptures, added to the former, in the names of the Apostles;
defended by honest Turrian zealously, and magnified by Nicolinus as the Coronis
Vid. (...) (...)
of the Apostles Canons.

He has the Roman Pontifical, a Treatise of the Lives of Popes, fitted exactly
to the Decretal Epistles, and accordingly, most richly stored with all kind of
Forgeries and Lies. It is a new Book Fathered upon Pope Damasus; which Isidore
and Merlin (I think) were ignorant of, for it is not in them; and I admire
where he had it. It is the Text on which he commenteth, as a Great Record; he
uses it as a great proof in doubtful matters, and according to it the Method
of his Tomes is ordered. You will see more of it hereafter.

He has the counterfeit Council of Sinuessa, a new Piece, which I find not in
Merlin: But I verily believe, he scraped it up some where else, and it is not
his own, it is so full of nonsense: A Council sitting in the year 303. and
defining from that Text, Ex ore tuo justificaberis, and ex ore tuo
condemnaberis, that no Council can condemn a Pope, nor any other Power, but his
own mouth: For because our Savior has said, Out of thine own mouth thou shall
be justified, and out of thine own mouth thou shall be condemned; therefore no
body can condemn the Pope but himself alone: for which purpose they repeat the
Text over and over again, very (...) and childishly, even unto nauseating: And
the example of Marcellinus is made an instance in the case; who being called to
an Account for offering Incense to an Idol, could not be condemned by this
Council, and was therefore (because he was Pope) humbly implored to condemn
himself.

It is a Council of great value, because of the President we have in it, how
Scriptures may be applied to the Bishop of Rome; and how places that belong to
all the World, must peculiarly be ascribed to him alone: Howbeit Crab makes a
sour face on it, and is fain to premise this Premonition to the Reader.

By reason of the intolerable difference and corruption of the Copies, whereof
the one was old and faulty, though written in the best Parchment and Character;
the other more old, but equally depraved (as the Beholders might discern with
their eyes) so far, that what they mean sometimes cannot be understood, we have
set both the Copies, without changing a syllable of them, in two Columns;
setting the Letter A over the first, and C over the other: but the middle
Column over which B is placed, for its capaeity, or rather conjecture,
endeavors as much as it is able, to reconcile the other two so very diverse,
and bring them to some sense.

He does not tell you plainly, that he made the middle Copy; but it is easy to
conceive it, since he found but two, and they were so full of nonsense, that he
added one, which is the third, to reconcile them. Yet Crabbe's Invention is now
recorded by the Collectio Regia, and the two old ones, for their horrid
Barbarismes, are thrown out of the Councils, and (for very shame) are cast
away: for proceeding in his Apology, Crab a little after says, Nemo ergo caput
subsannando moveat, etc. Let no man therefore wag his Head in derision, who
having either gotten more correct Exemplars, or being of a more Noble and clear
apprehension, is able to mend these: but rather let him patiently bear with
what is done, and reduce it himself into better form.

This is a sufficient Light, wherein to see the dissimilitude between Forgeries
and true Records: For whereas the undoubted were made in great Councils of Holy
Men, and are all of them clear and pure, and well-advised, full of Uniformity,
Sense, Gravity, Majesty, Smoothness, Order, Perspicuity, Brevity, Eloquence and
Verity; it is the common Fare of these Instruments which we accuse as
Forgeries, being made in a Dark Age, by men not so Learned as the Church of
Rome could desire, (and sometimes in a Corner by some silly Monk) to swarm with
Absurdities, Errors, Tautologies, Barbarismes; to be rude and tedious, empty
and incoherent, weak and impertinent: yet some of them we confess to be more
pure in Language, and better in sense than others.

This Council of Sinuessa is more ridiculous than it is possible well to
imagine, before you read and consider it.

He has the Counterfeit Edict of the Emperor Constantine for a good Record. It
is more warily made than the other, and better Latin, but of Swinging
Importance: 'I is but a Deed of Gift, wherein the first most Christian Emperor
is made to give all the Glory of the Western Empire, with its Territories and
Regalities, to the Bishop of Rome. We shall meet with it in others: for the
Collectors of the Decretal Epistles, all of them, harp upon this String most
strangely.

As Pope Paul V. so Peter Crab has but 20 Canons of the Nicene Council; wherein
he agrees with Isidore and Merlin, and differs much from some that follow him:
Nay, he agrees and disagrees with Isidore at once, in this very thing: He
agrees with Isidore in his Book it self, (on the Nicene Council) but disagrees
with him in his Preface.

But then he makes amends for the Omission, for he has the Synodical Epistle
of the Nicene Council, a new Record, which I find not in Isidore, or in any
before him: It is an humble Address of the Nicene Council to Pope Sylvester,
beseeching his Holiness to ratify their Decrees: To show that no Council is of
any value, unless it be approved by the Bishop of Rome: And he has a Gracious
Answer too by the same Pen, or I am sorely deceived; for they are both alike so
full of Barbarismes and false Latins, that another Dunce can hardly be found
like the first to imitate them. In good earnest, they are the most feculent
Forgeries that ever I saw. To speak much in little, is, they are worse than the
Sinuessa Council.

They are without Greek Copies, which (where all the rest is in Greek) is an
evil sign: But as they are, you shall have them, when we come to Binius, that
the more Learned may judge of their Excellency.

He has a Pseudo-Catholick Council at Rome under Pope Sylvester, with the same
Premonition to the Reader, word for word, which he set before the Sinuessa
Council, Propter Exemplariorum intolerabilem nimiamque and Differentiam, and
Depravationem, etc.

He has the other Forgeries of Isidore Mercator; and among the rest, the
Epilogus brevis concerning the number of Witnesses.

He defaces and suppresses the sixth Council of Carthage, as well as his
Predecessor.

What with blotting out, and putting in, he so disguizes the Face of Antiquity,
that unless it be to very clear eyes, the Primitive Church appears not the
same.

Yet are his Voluminous Tomes dedicated to the Invincible Emperor Charles V.
being Printed in the year 1538. by Peter Quintell. Cum Gratia and Privilegio
tam Caesario quam Regio Colloniae. That is, At Collein by the consent and
Authority both of the King and Emperor. So far even Monarchs are deluded
sometimes with a show of Piety, and the Light of Depraved and Corrupted
Learning.

CAP. IX. of Carranza: his Epitome of the Decrees and Councils. He owneth the
Forgeries.
CArranza, being but a short Compendium, was Printed at Paris, An. 1564. to
wit, very fitly, for the more general sprcading of the corrupted Councils: All
the other Collections being great Volumes, but this a little Informer, or
Companion for the Pocket.

It was dedi ated to the Illustrious Dicgo Hurtado Mendoza, Orator in the State
of Venice, and his Imperial Majesty's Vicegerent in the Holy Council of Trent.

He lays down all the Apostles Canons for good Laws, even the last it self
being not excepted; and selects Decrees out of the Decretal Epistles for good
and Catholic Canons.

The Decretal Epistles themselves would be too long for so short a Compendium;
and therefore he has not the Decrees themselves, but Excerptions.

He has the Pontisical of the Popes Lives, but more modesty than to ascribe it
to Damasus: It is a part of his Text however.

He has but (...) Canons of the Nicene Council, and skippeth over the Council
of Sinuessa.

He omits the Epilogus Brevis, but owns the Council to which it is annexed.

He follows Isidore, and exceeds him a little.

CAP. X. Of Surius his four Tomes, and how the Forgeries are by him desended.
He has the Rescripts of Atticus and Cyril, by which pope Zozimus was condemned
of Forgery in the sixth Council of Carthage.
LAurentius Surius was a Monk of the Order of the Carthusians: He wrote four
Tomes: He pretends to have all the Antiquities of the Church at large, and to
mend and restore the defects of the Ancient Manuscripts. What their mending and
restoring is, you begin to discern. He dedicates the whole Work to Philip King
of Spain, Sicily, and Neapo lis, etc. and directs it in another Epistle to
the most August and Invincible Emperor Charles V. It was Printed at Collein by
Geruvinus Galenius, and the Heirs of John Quintell, in the year of our Lord
1567.

He has the counterfeit Preface of Isidore Mercator, before detected; The
Treatise of the Primacy of the Roman Church, all the 84 Canons of the Apostle,
and the Apostolical Constitutions of Pope Clement (newly added to the Tomes of
the Councils) for good Records; though Isidore Mercator, some of the Apostles
Canons, and Clement's Constitutions, are rejected by some of the best of his
most able Followers, (as you shall see hereafter:) not I suppose upon mature
deliberation, but inevitable necessity.

The Liber Pontisicalis of Pope Damasus, that notorious Cheat, is the
groundwork upon which he commenteth. It so exactly contains the Lives and
Acts of the Bishops of Rome, that when I first approached it, I apprehended
every Life to have been recorded by some person contemporary with the Pope, of
which he was writing: for it nominates the time of their Session to a Year, a
Month, a Week, and a Day, from S. Peter downward: Which being done for no
Episcopal Chair beside, it made the Roman See seem of more Eminent Concernment
than the residue from the very first beginning; such a peculiar and
extraordinary care being no mean Indication of its High Exaltation above all
other Chairs, that were not for a long time together so accurately regarded.
But a little after, I found a shrewd sign; for beside the errors and
contradictions noted before, in the midst of all this exactness, he (...)
sometimes. 3, 4, 5, (...), 9 years together. This shall be proved hereafter,
with more than we yet say, when we come to Binius.

He has all the Decretal Epistles, and the Donation of Constantine for good
Records. The Epistle of Melchiades concerning the Munificence of Constantine;
the Spurious Roman Council under Pope Sylvester, with the Epilogus Brevis; the
Letters between Athanasius and Pope Mark, concerning the number of the Nicene
Canons: Those Letters tell us the Canons of the Nicene Council are 70. and yet
he records but 20 of them.

The most of these Great Appearances are rejected afterward, by Baronius,
Binius, Labbe, and the Collectio Regia.

By good fortune he has the Rescripts of Atticus, and S. Cyril, the Patriarchs,
concerning the true Records of the Nicene Council, sent to the sixth Council of
Carthage, upon the occasion of Zozimus before related.

The Letter of that Council to Celestine the Bishop of Rome concerning that
Controversy.

And a Scrap of the Council it self: but he omits the Decrees.

Did I follow them throughout all Ages, my work would be endless. We should
find much foul Play in following Councils and Records of the Church: but for
several weighty Reasons I have at present confined my self within the compass
of the first 400 years next after the Death of our Lord, whose Name is not to
be mentioned without praise and glory.

Note well: I go on thus, to observe particularly what Forgeries every
Collector of the Councils owneth, and what Emperors, Kings, and Popes, their
Books are dedicated to; and what privilege, in all the principal parts of the
Popes Jurisdiction, they come forth withal; and especially what a multitude of
men have been encouraged to carry on this Design, that you might see the
Conspiracy of the Members with the Head, and the general Guilt of that Church
in so Enormous an Affair. To which we might add the innumerable Armies of
Learned men that have cited them in that Church, and the Company of Captains
that have defended them: But it had been better for them that they had never
meddled with the Protestant Objections, for they have made the matter worse than
they found it, and bewraid themselves in all their Answers; nay, they have made
the Frauds more eminent and notorious, by disturbing the Reader, while they
give him Warning by their Notes, though the intent be to defend them. This I
speak especially upon the last, from Binius downward.

CAP. XI. Of Nicolinus his Tomes, and their Contents for the first 420 years.
His Testimony concerning the sixth Council of Carthage.
NIcolinus is printed in five Volumes, Sixti V. Pont. Max. faelicissimis
Auspictis, as himself phraseth it: I think he means, By the favorable
Permission and Authority of Pope Sixtus V. He dedicates his Tomes to the same
most Holy Lord Sextus, etc. which were printed at Venice, An. 1585.

Among other things in which I should sav he is peculiar, had not Merlin in his
Isidore done the same, he sets a counterfeit Epistle of Aurelius, Archbishop of
Carthage, to Damasus the Pope, and the Popes Answer, in the Front of his Work.
The Epistle requesteth a Copy of all the Decretals that were made by the
Bishops of Rome, from S. Peter downwards. The Answer intimates a Copy,
commanding him to preach and publish the same.

In both these Collectors the Epistles are displaced above (...) years out of
their due order, merely that they might face the Forgeries with the great
Authorities of Aurelius and Damasus, who were both dead 300 or 400 years before
the Counterfeits were made: Howbeit, the Pageant does well to adorn the Scene;
it entertains the Spectators as a fit Praeludium, to make the way more fair for
these disguized Masquer's.

In the last of these Epistles, the Counterfeit Decrees are Fathered on the
Holy Ghost, and whosoever speaks against them, is charged with Blasphemy.

Yet for all (...), though the Epistles were desired by Aurelius, and sent by
Damasus, and commanded to be preached and published throughout the world, they
were never heard of by the space of 700 or 800 years after their first Authors,
nor for 300 or 400 years after this Damasus and Aurelius; though pretended to
be the Canons of the Holy Fathers, so Sacred, and so Divinely inspired by the
Holy Ghost.

This is that Damasus upon whom the Famous Pontifical is Fathered: He sat in
the Chair An. 370. The Forgeries were unknown till about the year 800.

This Aurelius is he who tasted the Decrees of Zozimus, and had experience of
their sincerity, when he resisted the Encroachments of the Roman Chair.

But to return to Nicolinus; he has Isidore's Preface, The Treatise conceruing
the Primacy of the Roman Church, containing so many Testimonies out of forged
Bishops, Martyns, and Fathers: All the Apostles Canons, of which he makes S.
Clement's the Top and Coronis, concluding that Impious Counterfeit with this
affected phrase, Coronidis ipsorum Canonum Apostolorum finis: The end of the
Coronis of the Apostles Canons.

Francis Turrian is in so much esteem with him, that he has Eight Books of
Clement's Constitutions, with Turrian's Proem, and Explanatory Defenses upon
them.

The Liber Pontificalis, drawn from the beginning like a Vein of Lies, through
the tedious length of 800 years, infecting all these Ages with Forgery: It is
his Text in like manner.

He has all the Decretal Epistles without Exception; the Council of Sinuessa,
or condemnation of Pope Marcellinus, with the same Premonition you saw in Peter
Crab to the Reader; The Donation of the Emperor Constantine, which by this
time one would think to be a sound and admirable Record, having so many Hands
subscribing it, and so many Pens inserting it among the Councils, without the
least note of any dubiousness or blemish in it.

He has threescore and eighteen Canons of the Nicene Council, and professes
Nicol. Epist Dedicatad Sixth V.
himself to be the first which added them thereunto: And he had them of a
certain man that brought fourscore of them in Arabic to Alexandria, as his
Printer does witness for him to the Reader. But surely had there been so many,
Pope Paul V. and all the Collectors before him, had not omitted them.

Some 40 years hence we may expect fourscore more: for as for those naked and
vulgar Canons, (as he calls the Old and Authentic Records) they will not
serve the turn; nor yet the old Seventy mentioned by Isidore, Athanasius, and
Pope Mark: by which you may see they are always growing, and may come to a
Million, if the continuance of the World permit it, and their need require it.

What say you? In good earnest, methinks, the year 1585. is very late, for the
finding of eight and fifty Canons of Nicol. (...). Lectori.
the Nicene Council: That Council was assembled in the year 327. and made its
Canons above one thousand and two hundred years before Nicolinus time: They
were written in Greek, and these lay dormant in Arabic, so many Ages, no man
can tell where. But the blessed Jesuits, or one of the same Society, luckily
found Nicol. T. pogr. Lectori.
them the other day.

Here and there he has a true Record, and among the rest a piece of the sixth
Council of Carthage, though mangled too: where concerning the two Counterfeit
Canons of Pope Zozimus, he says, The African Fathers not finding any such
Canons as these, in the Codes which they had of the Nicene Council, both in
Greek and Latin, promised that they would keep them only so long, as the time
would be, that they might get the true Copies out of Greece: Which when they
had been sent for, and were brought from Cyril of Alexandria, and Atticus of
Constantinople, they were found imperfect, as not containing but only those 20
Canons, which were extant also among the Latins; in which nothing is contained
concerning Appeals to the Roman Bishop: Nay, those African Fathers from the
fifth and sixth of those Canons gathering the contrary, did earnestly beseech
Celestine the Pope, that succeeded Boniface, who was the Successor of Zozimus,
that he should not admit Appeals: which (they said) as it was most prudently
and justly provided for by the Nicene Council, so they found it in no Synod of
the Fathers, that any should be sent from the side of his Holiness. No Legatus
a Latere.
What Boniface and Celestine answered, it is not certain: Acta enim illa valde
concisa sunt, and mutila, For those Records are cut very short, and maimed; and
therefore the matter is the more obscure.

Who maimed those Records is worth the Enquiry: Somebody that was concerned in
them, and whose influence must be exceeding great for the attempting of such a
thing, has out them short, that Records so offensive and pernicious to him,
might be made obscure. But as Thieves, by dropping some of the Goods by the
way, are oftentimes detected, or Murderers by forgetting the Knife behind them;
so does the Great and Just GOD infatuate the Pope of Rome, against whom this
Council was asiembled, and smite his Agents with blindness here; and at other
times their heart fails them, because of Guilt: so that not daring to make
through work with the Councils, they faulter, and are detected.

Here is a rare case, all the Copies of the Nicene Council, throughout the
World, were imperfect 1200 years ago, both among the Greeks, and among the
Latins, only those at Rome were valid and Authentic. For the Councils of
Carthage were reckoned among the Latins, as you may see by Isidore, and
Merlin, placing them in that number, and that justly; for the African Fathers
that pertained to Carthage, wrote in Latin, as S. Augustine, Fulgentius,
Tertullian, etc. They were Naturalized so far, that Latin was almost their
MotherTongue, as Justellus observes out of S. Augustine: and yet these that
were Allied to the Sea of Rome so near, were at one with the Greeks in the
Records controverted: None were good at Carthage, Constantinople, or
Alexandria, etc. but only those which the Pope produced in his own Cause: Nor
were any like his upon the Face of the whole Earth besides.

At first I admired to see those Canons of Carthage so abruptly cut off by
Binius, where I happened first to miss them: but when I afterward found them,
by the help of Justellus, I saw the reason: The Roman Bishop was curbed; though
that of Anacharsis concerning Laws proved true; Laws are like Spiders Webs,
they detain Flies, but Hornets break through them.

Nicolinus having intimated the lameness and obscurity of the Narration, goes
on thus: It is probable that Celestine wrote back sharply, and would have the
Appeals of Priests, from their own, to the bordering Bishops, and of Bishops
themselves to the Roman Chair established and valid. The Pope would have it so,
notwithstanding all contradiction: Forasmuch as they were founded on Right and
Nicol. ibid.
cusiom, and upon the Nicene Canons, which were kept entire (it is credible) in
the Roman See, as they were extant in the time of Mark.

It is credible: Was ever such Impudence known before! They were not able to
urge one Argument why it should be credible, and yet this credibility must
overthrow all the Evidence in the whole World.

But they were kept entire in the Roman See, as they were extant in the time of
Mark. This spoileth all! for by referring you to Mark, he appeals to the
Epistles of Athanasius to Mark, and of Pope Mark to Athanasius, concerning the
number of the Nicene Canons. Which Epistles of Mark and Athanasius, by
invincible reasons urged by Binius, as well as the Authorities of Baronius,
Labbe, and the Collectio Regia, are evidently proved to be very Forgeries.

He gives you more of these audacious Guesses; He says it is credible, that
they were contained also among the Canons of Sardica which Celestine sent, it
is probable, unto them: But that the Africans rested not satisfied, either
because they suspected those Canons to be corrupted, or for some other cause;
it is shown in the Epistle of Boniface the H. to Eulalius of Alexandria,
concerning the Reconciliation of Carthage, which happened about 100 years after.

The more you stir this business, the more it stinks. The Epistles made in the
name of Eulalius and Boniface, concerning the Excommunication of the churches
of Africa for 100 years, past down so fair to Nicolinus, that he took them for
good Records; and doubtless he thought it well enough, that the African Fathers
were Excommunicated for opposing the Popes Opinion: So that the Quarrel rose
very high, or, what we before observed was very true, these Epistles of
Boniface and Eulalius were invented to color the Popes Cause, and disgrace the
Fathers. Take it which way you please, it smells ill: Baronius and Bellarmine
had rather they should be Counter (...).

His probability about Celistine's sending the Canons of Sardica to Carthage
fares little better: Celestine knew very well the Canons of Sardica would not
do in that Council: Nicolinus cannot produce one syllable in proof, to make it
probable, that he sent them thither, and his flying to Sardica is in an evil
hour; for it is opposed by (...) Bishops, so great, that they have frighted
Rome out of her Excommunication, who altogether testify, no less than twelve
hundred years ago, that no Synod of the Fathers made any such Canons. And if
Sardica were no Synod, what will its Canons signify? The Popes then living and
concerned, never attempted so vain a shift, but positively affirmed and
maintained still, that they were the Nicene Canons: only the Council of Sardica
is pretended of late, and some new men, now the business is over, persuade us
they did all mistake while the matter was in agitation, both at Rome and
Carthage; and that themselves have more clear and piercing judgments (to see
into a business so far off better) than all the Fathers.

Admit those Canons were made at Sardica, it was a gross Error to Father them
upon the Nicene Council: for the Authority of Sardica is not to be compared
with that of Nice. Sardica was unknown to all the Council at Carthage. S.
Augustine thought it an Arrian Council; as Binius in his Notes upon it
observes: and Bellarmine puts it among the partly (...). de Council. and
Eccles. lib (...) cap (...).
Reprobated. And that which induces me to believe those Canons now extant in
the name of Sardica to be forged, is, that they were first produced in Zozimus
his Counterfeit, and Fathered upon Nice. And there being a Council once, it is
now pretended that there were two there; that these Bastards disowned at Nice,
might have a Sanctuary somewhere, and find some Fathers. My conjecture is made
considerable, because the Canons now Fathered upon Sardica are contrary to
those of Nice: And it is not probable, that two Catholic Councils so near,
should so suddenly Decree things contrary to each other; nor that the same
Fathers that were at Nice, when they came to Sardica, should change their minds
with the place of their Session. That there were no Canons of Sardica known
till the time of Dionysius Exiguus, is very probable, because they were not in
the Code of the Universal Church, nor in the African Code, till Dionysius.
Exiguns put them in; as Jacobus Leschasserius most excellently proves.

Whether Dionysius or Hadrian put them in, is to me uncertain: But Hadrian I.
first gave the Copy of Dionysius to the Emperor Charles, whence the old
Manuscripts were transcribed, which are now extant in several Libraries; and in
which the Dedication of Pope Hadrian is contained in Verse, To his most
Excellent Son King Charles, etc. The first Letters of the Verses being put
together, make this Acrostick, EXCEL. FILIO. CARULO. REGI. HADRIANUS. PAPA.
The Verses are found in the Copies yet extant of Dionysius Exiguus.

This shows that some New Thing was put into the Book, and that Hadrian had a
finger in it, which reached perhaps farther than the beginning. If the Book was
as new as the Acrostick, Dionysius was far enough from being its Author. What
Faith we are to have in the Papists, when they tell us who were the Ancient
Compilers of the Councils, you may see by Baronius, who giving us an Account of
In Not. Martyrol. ad. (...). April.
their Order, reckons Isidore (a known Counterfeit) for one; Dionysius Exiguus
for the first, Ferdinandus Diaconus for the second, Martinus Bracarensis for
the third, Cresconius for the fourth; and after all these, Isidore for the
fifth. As certain as Isidore was a Collector of the Councils, so certain is it
that Dionysius was one, but further certainty yet I can see none.

Charles the Great, perhaps having never seen the like before, was pleased with
the Acrostick; and the putting of his Name in Capital Letters before the
Councils was delightful to him. Sirens sing sweetly, while they deceive
bloodily. Hadrian I. knew well, what was a Gift fit for a Scholar, and a Pope
of Rome.

If I should produce but one passage which I found in it, the matter would be
more effectual: For after he has done with the Councils, he lays down the
Decretal Epistles of 13 Roman Bishops, beginning with Syricius, who lived in
the year 385. In his Epistle to Himerius, there is this passage: Such is our
Office, says he, that it is not lawful for us to be silent, for us to
dissemble, upon whom a Zeal greater than that of all others, of the Christian
Religion, is incumbent: We bear the burdens of all that are oppressed: nay
rather the blessed Apostle Peter bears them in us: who as we trust,
protecteth and defends us his Heirs in all the things of his Administration.

Of GOD he says nothing here, but his confidence is all in Peter. There is not
a word like it in all Antiquity: and those words protecteth and defends us,
seem to relate to those Jars that had been before between Hadrian, and Charles
the King, or Emperor.

These observations carry me to believe what I met with in Daille, since
Dionysius is gone from under my hands: and having searched into the Book since,
I am further confirmed.

About 74 years after the Council of Daille page 45. etc.
Chalcedon, Dionysius Exiguus, whom we beforementioned, made his collection at
Rome, which is since Printed at Paris, cum Privilegio Regis, out of very
Ancient Manuscripts. Whosoever shall but look diligently into his collection,
shall find diverse alterations in it; one whereof I shall instance in, only to
show how Ancient this Artifice has been among Christians. The last Canon of
the Council of Laodicea, which is the 163 of the Greek Code of the Church
Universal, forbidding to read in Churches any other Books than those which are
Canonical, gives us withal a long Catalogue of them. Dionysius Exiguus,
although he has indeed inserted in his collection, Number. 162. the beginning of
the said Canon, which forbids to read any other Books in the Churches,
besides the sacred Volumes of the Old and New Testament; yet has he wholly
omitted the Catalogue, or List of the said Books; fearing, as I conceive, lest
the Tail of this Catalogue might scandalize the Church of Rome, etc. A little
after he says, the Greek Code represents unto us VII Canons of the first
Council of Constantinople. which are in like manner found both in Balsamon, and
in Zonoras, and also in the Greek and Latin Edition of the General Councils,
Printed at Rome. The three last of these do not appear at all in the Latin
Code of Dionysius, though they are very considerable ones, as to the business
they relate to, which is the order of proceeding, in passing judgment upon
Bishops accused, and in receiving such persons, who forsaking their communion
with Heretics, desire to be admitted into the Church. It is very hard to say,
what should move the Collector to Gueld this Council thus: But this I am very
well assured of, that in the sixth Canon, which is one of those he has
omitted, and which treats of judging of Bishops accused, there is not the
least mention made of Appealing to Rome; nor of any Reserved Cases, wherein it
is not permitted to any, save only to the Pope, to judge a Bishop: The power of
hearing and determining all such matters being here wholly and absolutely
referred to the Provincial Synods, and to their Dio cesans.

Another instance which he has is this, After the Canons of Constantinople,
there follow in the Greek Code VIII Canons of the General Council of Ephesus,
set down also both by Balsamon and Zonoras, and Printed with the Acts of the
said Council of Ephesus, in the first Tome of the Roman Edition: but Dionysius
Exiguus has discarded them all, etc. Daille in his Treatise of the Right (...)
of the Fathers. Cap. 4. page 45, 46, 47.

This being true, the Authority of Dionysius is very small, relating to the
matter of the Council of Sardica. If any man has any thing to say against it,
let him, when he answers this Charge of ours, produce what he is able in
Defense of Dionysius, as to the points whereof he stands accused by Daille; but
we proceed to Nicolinus.

CAP. XII. Nicolinus his Epistle to Pope Sixtus. His contempt of the Fathers.
He begins to confess the Epistle of Melchiades to be dubious, if not
altogether Spurious. He overthrows the Legend about Constantines Donation.
THat you may know the Genius of the Man a little better, how much he was
devoted to the service of the Pope, and how little he valued the Authority of
Councils and Fathers, I have thought it meet to give you his Epistle; and his
Admonition to the Reader, recorded by him in the words following.

To our Most Sovereign Lord, Sixtus V. High Priest.
It fell out conveniently for me, Most Blessed Father, in the Universal Joy of
the Christian World, for your Elevation to the Sublimity of the Apostleship,
that in so great a multitude flowing from every place to honor you, I also,
among the Oldest Servants of your Holiness, had something near at hand, which
is unworthy neither of the Masty of your Name, or Authority; and yet very fit
for my Occasions to offer at your feet, as suitable to the Office of my
Gratitude and Veneration It is a new Edition of the Councils: for the Things
put into the Councils of Nice and Ephesus (...) Nicolinus.
remarkable addition of two Councils especially, the Nicene and the Ephesine,
never published so entire and full, as now.

For to whom may the Councils of the Church, aided by the Inspiration of the H.
Ghost, according to the seasonableness of various times, for the repairing of
her Ship, more fitly be Dedicated, than to her Chief Master, to whom it is
given from Heaven to call and confirm them? especially him, who is so well
versed in all Scholastical Disciplines, and Ecclesiastical History!

I have used all diligence, according to my weak ability, sparing no cost,
omitting no labor; the most Catholic and Learned Divines of our Age, being
assembled also from every Quarter, especially the most Excellent Father
Dominicus Bollanus, a Nobleman of Venice, of the Order of Preachers, never
enough commended for his excellent parts; who by his Industry, Care, and
Learning, was a vast help both to me, and to the Work.

And that I may in one word signify my study and pains bestowed thereupon,
lest I should seem to draw the Saw backward and forward too often upon the same
Line, I have taken care to perform whatever could be done by one man, and he a
private person, that this Edition might come forth from me, and be offered to
you, more Copious and Illustrious than any other Publications hitherto sent
abroad: In which I trust, that as a just and knowing Judge, you will discern
some Accomplishment: Wherefore I suppose I may affirm, that nothing is
perversely, or too concisely expressed; but all things most rightly and clearly,
as far as was possible, according to their Primitive Candor.

This my Gift therefore, from which men may receive so great profit and
benefit, since both those things that before were wanting, and those that have
hitherto been dispersed, may be had together in it; and this Work of mine, not
of less cost in Printing (the great expenses of which may easily be proved by
the magnitude of the Volume) than labor: to which I was not so much present,
as presiding; earnestly desiring that it should come forth most free from
Error and Faults, for the benefit of the Studious, I doubt not but according
to your Humanity, you will accept it with a willing mind, as some kind of Token
of my will to serve you; even as I desire with all my Soul, and humbly pray,
that your Holiness may receive it. In the mean time, Holy Father, I desire that
all things may fall out prosperously to your Blessedness: And I pray, that you
may long be preserved in health, and more plentifully adorned with Heavenly
Gifts, for the good of the whole Church.

Venice VI. Kal. October. M. D. LXXXV.
Here you see one of the Popes Old Servants laying down all the Councils at his
Holiness Feet, boasting of additions to the Nicene and Ephesine Councils, never
before published, ascribing the Councils to the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost;
and yet adding, for the good of the Roman Church, eight and fifty Canons to the
most glorious of them all, ascribing the power of calling and confirming
Councils, to the Pope, sparing no cost (though he draws the Saw too often upon
that point, which as if he were enchanted, he cannot leave, throughout all the
Epistle) assisted, as himself confesses, with a confluence of the best Popish
Divines, permitted to come forth under the Popes Nose, with all these
Abominations. By which you may perceive, it is not the work of a private
Doctor, but the Disease of the Church of Rome.

His Typographus Lectori.

His contempt of the Fathers appears in his Printer to the Reader: for by one
of Turrian's Transfigurations, he covers that Admonition with the Printers
Name, though too Learned for any Printer, and evident enough to be his own: for
he there unfoldeth the matter, order and use of the Work, far above a Printers
reach; and especially notes its Corrections and Emendations to us: which he
reduces to four Heads.

1. To the observation of the time wherein Councils were held, and under what
Pope. Whereupon we note, the manner of ordering the Councils under such and
such a Pope, seems a new thing: Nicolinus else arrogates too much to himself,
in ascribing this to his own Invention. Certainly the custom of computing times
by the Popes Lives, is of no long standing, but an Artisice lately taken up by
his Flatterers, to dazzle the eyes of their Readers; for it adds much to the
Splendor of the Chair, to see Kings and Councils marshalled under the Reign,
as it were, of this, and that, and the other Pope, down from S. Clement,
throughout all Ages. But from the beginning it was not so.

2. To the truth of History and Actions: As when various Authors are often
cited, either for the confirmation of Sentences, or to show the variety that is
among Writers, or to reprehend some falsity, Quod interdam, parce tamen, and
timide fecimus. In his Dedicatory Epistle he told the Pope, that he did nothing
perversty, but all things most rightly and clearly, as far as was possible,
according to their Primitive Candor: As you see before. But here he
confesses, the business of repieving falsehoods to be a tender work, which he
went about with great caution and trembling. Some he detected, but timerousiy
and sparingly: he durst not meddle with them all.

3. To the consutation of some contumacious and rebellions persons; who lay
hold on the lightest occasions, and oftentimes wrest the plainest matters, to
the disgrace of the H. Roman Church. As when from a slight contention of the
African Fathers, about Appeals to the Church of Rome, they foreibly conclude
against the very truth of the Acts, and the Faith of the History, that those
Fathers did not acknowledge but refuse its Primacy over them. In the Body of
his Tomes, he (...) Epistles of Boniface and Eulalius, as good Records,
testifying the Excommunication of all the African Churches by the Pope; yet
here he calls it a light contention: Himself wresteth the plainest matters
forcibly against the very truth of the Acts, and charge the fault on the
Protestants: For in this very place he pretends that the African Fathers did
not refuse the Primacy of Rome, but acknowledge its Supremacy, or its Primacy
over them. Yet it all this but a Copy of his countenance, a common flourish in
the Frontispiece of their work: For if they submitted to the Popes Primacy over
them, why should they be Excommunicated? He knows well enough, when we come
close to the matter, that these Rebellions Protestants, and those Catholic
Fathers, were of the same judgment, and acted the same thing. By way of
provision therefore he adds, that this was far from the mind of those
Fathers; but if they had conceived so, it would have redounded to their Infamy,
and not at all have tended to the lessening of the Supreme Authority of the
Roman Church, ordained and established by God.

Two hundred and seventeen Bishops in an ancient approved Council, even the
sixth Council of Carthage, protested against the Popes Supreme Authority, to
their perpetual Infamy; as Nicolinus would have it: for should all the Bishops
in the World join together, they would but dash themselves against that Rock,
and do things to their Infamy, and there is an end. This is the value which
Papists have for the Councils and Fathers, when they stand in their way: And
this Impudence comes abroad by the consent of Nicolinus, and the Pope, without
Blushing.

His fourth Head is Addition. His Emendations are referred lastly to Addition,
either by making those things perfect and entire, that before were imperfect
and marred: (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) Canons of the (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) Acts of that (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) of a Greek Book (...)
(...) (...) (...) into Latin by (...) (...) (...) suite; and (...) (...) (...)
(...) Latin out of an Arabic book brought to Alexandria by another man of the
same Society.

I once thought a certain man had had the Book at Alexandria; but now it seems
a Jesuit brought it thither. He does not tell you who, nor from whence.
Jesuits are the Popes Janissaries, and fit to be so employed: And the Vatican
is an admirable Storehouse doubtless for the Greek too, a very Pit of Witnesses
for the Popes Supremacy. As if Perkin Warbeck should have brought Evidences out
of his own Closet to prove himself King of England. If no body but he must be
believed, the veriest Cheat in the World must needs prevail. Greek and Arabic
are strange amusements: else a Book out of the Vatican, in its Masters own
Cause; or another man without a name, that brought an Arabic Book to
Alexandria, with fourscore Canons of the Nicene Council in it, would scarcely
be regarded against the Evidence of the whole World; especially in a matter so
upheld by Forgeries.

Two things there are wherein he adventures to be a little cordial; Licet parce
and timide: though seldom, and with fear.

1. Whereas Isidore, and Merlin, and Peter Crab, and Surius, etc. have the
Epistle of Melchiades without any Note of its dubiousness, he (...) it can be
none of Melchiades, because mention is made therein of the Nicene Council, and
of other things that were done after Melchiades Death.

2. Whereas Binius lays a Dreadful Reproach upon Constantine, the first most
Excellent Christian Emperor, as if after all his Glorious Acts done for the
Church and State of Christendom, he were an Apostate, a Murderer, a Tyrant, a
Perecutor, a Parracide, smitten with Leprosy for notorious Crimes, for killing
Licinius unjustly, and his own Son Crispus: And all, that he might uphold the
Counterfeit Donation, Nicolinus begins the first Book of the Acts preceding the
Nicene Council, (translated out of an Ancient Greek Book in the Vatican) thus.

De Gestis post sublatum impium Licinium, and de Imperio Regis Constantini, and
de Pace Ecclesiarum Dei.

Constantine, when he had conquered his Enemies, showing himself an Emperor by
the Wisdom given him of God, took care to better the Affairs of the Christians
day by day, more and more. And this he did several ways, having a most flaming
Faith, and faithful Piety toward the God of all: And the whole Church under
Heaven lived in profound peace. Now let us hear what Eusebius, that most
excellent Husbandman of the Churches Agriculture, (...) from the most Famous
Pamphilus, speaks here. In his tenth Book he says, What Licinius saw long
ago to befall wicked Tyrants with his eyes, he now suffered himself, like to
them; and that deservedly: for he would neither receive Discipline, nor be
admonished at any time to learn wisdom by the punishment of his Neighbors, etc.
But Constantine the Conqueror being adorned with all kind of Piety, together
with his Son Crispus, the Emporour beloved of God, and in all things like his
Father, reduced all the East into his Power, and brought the Empire of the
Romans into one, as it had been of old, and obtained an Universal Kingdom, from
the rising of the Sun, to the utmost borders of the West, and to both the other
Regions of the North and South, in perfect peace: Then the fear of Tyranny
wherewith men were before oppressed, was utterly taken away from the life of
men; then frequent Assemblies were held, and Festivals kept; then all things
abounded with gladness and joy; then they that were before of a dejected (...),
and sorrowful, looked with a pleasant face, and with joyful eyes; then with
Dances and Hymns, throughout all Cities and Fields, they proclaimed fast, that
God was truly God, and the Highest King of all: next they magnified the
Emperor and his Children, most dear unto God. (...) there was no remembrance
of the former evils; then all Impiety was forgotten; then there was a sweet
enjoyment of present goods, and a joyful expectation of future: Then (...), not
only the Decrees of the Emperor, the most Illustrious Conqueror, (...) of
Humanity and Clemency, but his Laws also glorious in Magnificence, and fraught
with Tokens of true (...) (...) published in all places: So the (...) Spot of
all Tyranny being (...) away, and wholly blotted out, Constantine alone, and
his Children, thenceforth possessed the Helm of the Empire, which by Right
pertained to them; it being made secure by his Authority and Government, and
freed from all envy and fear. Hitherto Eusebius Pamphilus, of all
Ecclesiastical Writers most worthy of belief.

Thus their own Record in the Vatican justifies Eusebius: and thus Nicolinus
produces it, who also defends Eusebius, though himself holds the Donation
of Constantine firm; not discerning how that History overthrows the same. But
Binius who saw the inconsistence better, cries out of Eusebius for a Liar, a
Flatterer, an Arrian, because he stands in his way. Thus all of them, here and
there, serve the Fathers: For Eusebius lived in the time of Constantine
himself, and was Honorable in his eyes: He was Bishop of Caesarea-Cappadocia,
and an individual Friend of Pamphilus the Martyr, a Father in the Nicene
Council, and one of those that disputed there, in person, against Phaedo the
Arrian: As Binius also himself records in the Disputation, extant in his
Tomes. But of such Legends as this, and the Tragical Story of Constantine, we
have more than good store in Popish Writers: As you may see at large in Dr.
Stillingfleet his Book of Popish Counterfeit Miracles.

CAP. XIII. The Epistle of Pope Damasus to Aurelius, Archbishop of Carthage,
commanding him to take care, that the Decretals of the Roman Bishops be
preached and published abroad: Wherein the Forgeries of the Church of Rome are
Fathered on the Holy Ghost.
DAmasus, to his mest Reverend Brother, and Fellow-Bishop Aurelius. We have
received the Epistle of your (...) with due Veneration: Wherein we understand
how your Reverence and Prudence thirsts, as is fit, for the Apostolical
Decrees. Concerning which Affair, we have sent some of those which you desired,
and desire to send more when you shall send unto us. Yet we have past by none
of our Predecessors, from the Death of Blessed (...), Prince of the Apostles,
of whose Decrees we have not sent somewhat to you under our certain Seal by
Ammonius the Priest, and Falix the Deacon: Which we both desire you to keep,
and command to be preached and published to others; that they may inviolably be
kept with due Veneration of all, and inviolably observed, and diligently
reverenced by all future Ages.

Because the voluntary Breakers of the Canons are heavily censured by the H.
Fathers, and condemned by the H. Ghost, by whose Gift and Inspiration they were
dictated: Because they do not unfitly seem to blaspheme the H. Ghost, who being
not compelled by any necessity, but willingly (as was before said) either do
any thing perversely, or presume to speak against the same Holy Canons, or
consent to them that will; for such a presumption is manifestly one kind of
blaspheming the H. Ghost: Because (as was even now promised) it acts against
him, by whose grace and impulse the same Holy Canons were set forth. But the
wickedness of the Devil is wont to deceive many, and so does very oftentinies
delude the imprudence of some by a similitude of Piety, that he persuades them
to take hurtful things for healthful.

Therefore the Rule of H. Canons which are made by the Spirit of God, and
consecrated by the Reverence of the whole World, is faithfully to be known, and
diligently to be handled by us; lest by any means the Decrees of the H. Fathers
should without A (...) for the Popes:
inevitable necessity (which God forbid) be transgressed: but that we walking
most faithfully in them, may by their Merits, God assisting, deserve the glory
of a reward, and the heap of our labor.

These therefore being rightly considered, and upon our deliberation brought to
the knowledge of your Churches, it most highly becomes you to obey the Rules
of the same H. Canons, lest the sloth of some should make them in any thing to
walk contrary to them. But let your wise and wholesome Doctrine, which desires
you in all things to please God, show them these faithful Fellowworkmen in
their Thrones, the coheirs and partakers of the Celestial Kingdom. Dated XVI.
Kal. Jun. Gratian and Cyricius being Consuls.

The close of the Epistle (is not clear nonsense) is very obscure. The meaning
of it is, that Aurelius should show men the Decretal Epistles of Clement,
Anacletus, etc. those faithful Fellow-workmen in their Thrones, the coheirs and
partakers of the Celestial Kingdom, that are now in Heaven, to the intent they
may obey them, and come to the same Eternal Glory. A goodly design doubtless.
But we have a cross proverb, (...) be to the Sheep, while the Fox Preaches.
This piety in the Close is but the Sheep-skin to cover the Fox, who needs not
more cunning in Preaching, than concealing himself. We have a more sacred
saying, In the Pit which he made for others, is himself fallen. And it is not
impertinent: for while he charge others with the unpardonable sin, himself
blasphemes the Holy (...). For to make the Holy Ghost the Father of Lies, is (I
think) to blaspheme him.

Damasus, we confess, never made the Epistle; but that makes the matter worse.
Some other in Damasus his Coat, is guilty of this accursed business; that while
he Fathers the Frauds, which himself invented, on the H. Ghost, has not
ignorance to excuse, but malice to condemn him. And whether the Forgeries are
not so Fathered still on the Holy Ghost, may be a proper Question. Binius, I
think, was afraid of these Epistles.

Nicolinus in his Printer to the Reader, pretends an exact observation of the
time, under what Pope things were done: but for once he varies the method, and
sets this in the Front of the Forgeries, to countenance all.

He knows them perhaps to be what they are, yet clearly owns them.

There is some Error in the date of these Epistles; an usual Symptom of the
Disease in such Instruments. Instead of the XVI. Kal. Jun. Nicolinus puts it
the XI. Some hidden reason compels him, or he would never be so nice: for
Cyricius, Siricius a small mistake: But the next is greater, for Gratian,
Equitius. As if Damasus the Pope could not tell who was Consul at Rome when he
wrote his Letter.

I wonder at Damasus for one thing much; he tells us of the wickedness of the
Devil, who deludes men with a show of Piety, and forces in that expression of
the Devils persuading men to take hurtful things for healthful so affectedly,
that it would make one to think his Guilt put him in memory of such a saying.
But his design in charging all that impugn them, with the dreadful and
unpardonable sin of blaspheming the Holy Ghost, was more clearly to deter men
from writing or speaking against these pretended Canons. And perhaps he
declaims against the wickedness of others, that delude the imprudence of some
with a similitude of Piety; and so loudly inveigheth against the Guilt of
persuading men to take hurtful things for healthful, to remove the suspicion
from himself. Whatever it is, no man is more guilty of the Fraud in the World.

You may note a contradiction in the Letter: The Canons of the H. Fathers, and
Bishops of Rome, were consecrated by the Reverence of the whole World; and yet
upon Aurelius his desire, were newly brought to the knowledge of the Churches,
and now first ordered to be published and preached.

They past the deliberation of our present Damasus before they came abroad,
being rightly considered, and upon due deliberation brought to the knowledge of
the Churches. Doubtless they were well weighed, and what was most agreeable to
the Roman Chair was picked out, and chosen for the purpose.

CAP. XIV. Counterfeit Canons of the Apostles defended by Binius. A Glympse of
his Pretenses, Sophistries, and Contradictions. A Forged Council of Apostles
concerning Images, defended by Binius and Turrian.
SEverinus Binius, a late Collector of the Councils, is grown so famous, that
his Voluminous Tomes have been Printed thrice; he is approved by an Epistle of
Pope Paul V. inserted among other Instruments before his Work, and so highly
esteemed, that he is exactly followed by Labbe and Cossartius in 17 Volumes,
and taken in, word for word, by the COLLECTIO REGIA; lately published by the
care of a King in 37 Tomes.

The reason why they follow Binius so exactly, the Collectio Regia gives in
(...) words, set next to the Title Page of the Book, for our better
information. We thought fit to follow the last collection of the councils put
forth by Binius, and illustrated with his Notes; and to Print it (...), as that
which of all others is most richly stored. Wherein they have done Binius as
great Honor as one can well imagine: for it shows his Notes to be the best and
most convenient that can be gotten in the Church of Rome, and that all the
Collectors since (which were very many) have not been able to devise better.

Hereupon it follows, that in one Work we may the more concisely treat of
Binius, Labbe, Cossartius, and the Collectio Regia together.

I once intended to give you a Copy of the Popes approbation, with the other
Authorities by which Binius is approved; but as the case (...) it is
superfluous.

He pretends in Preface, and (...), to justify all the Canons, Councils, and
Decretal Epistles, and makes a glorious show, setting them down afterward
with great Titles of Splendor and Majesty; in such sort, that a man would take
them all for Authentic Records: But when he comes to his Notes, he many times
deserteth his design, and confesses the Imposture. But his Notes are (...) in
more (...) and inconsiderable Letters, and those his acknowledgments hidden
from a (...) Eye in little room.

In his Letter to Paul V. he lays all his Labors at the Popes Feet. So that
we are like to have good on it, when the Malefactor (accused) is made sole Lord
and Judge of the Witnesses.

He has several Prefaces to the Reader, and to Persons of the Highest Rank and
Splendor: in which he pretends to magnify the Decrees and Canons following,
as good Records.

He prefixeth Isidore's Counterfeit Preface before his Collection.

Over the Canons of the Apostles, in a Splendid manner, he sets this Title.

THE CANONS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES WITH ALL VENERATION TO BE FOLLOWED.

According to The Ancient Edition OF DIONYSIVS EXIGVVS.

A man would think now there should no more Canons be laid down, than Dionysius
Exiguus has in his Ancient Edition: But as if he intended to bear the Mark of
the Beast in his Forehead, he puts under this Title eighty four Canons of the
Apostles, whereas Dionysius has but 50. Certainly it is not well done so to
Cheat his Reader with a Lie; but in some blind Corner or other he will make us
satisfaction.

Over against this he puts a Note in the Margin, thus: Francis Turrian, of the
Society of Jesus, has published a very clear Book in Defense of the Apostles
Canons. He approves the Book, yet rejects two of the Canons which Turrian
defends: but that is concealed till afterward.

It is his custom, in the top of his Pages, Chapters and Margins, eminent and
conspicuous places, to put Notes or Titles, defending those Counterfeit
Antiquities, which in some little Gloss hidden in the Text, he really
slighteth: For the Potentates of the World, with their Lords and Counselors,
not having time enough to search into the bottom, may by such means as these
neatly be deceived; while they think no man so impudent, as in the same Leaf,
to contradict his pretenses. So that the very greatness of the Crime is their
greatest security.

Another Artifice like this, is that of putting the Preface of Dionysius
Exiguus before these Tomes of his own, the better to countenance the ensuing
Frauds. Though Dionysius were dead 1000 years before he wrote them, and never
intended, nor thought of the greater part of them.

But Liars are entangled always in the (...): what is convenient in one
respect, being inconvenient in another.

For in that his Preface, Dionysius speaking for himself, says only this: In
the beginning we have placed those Canons which are said to be the Apostles,
translated out of Greek: which because the most do not easily acknowledge, I
thought meet to acquaint your Holiness with the same.

He doubts them all you see; yet speaks only of his own fifty, which he has
in the Code which himself digested: He does not meddle with those that make up
the number of 84. no more than Isidere and (...) do: (...) Binius, when he
(...) to his Notes upon the word Canones (...) stolorum, speaks thus, after
his large Copy in three Columns of all the 84. These Canons made by the (...)
of the (...), and by Tradition from them delivered to us, Clement of Rome, S.
Peter's Disciple, wrote in Greek; and Dionysius Exiguus, an Abbot of Rome,
translated them into Latin, in the time of Justinus the Emperor. An. 520.


He does not prove that Clement wrote them, unless by the last (...), which
has Per me Clementem (...): nor by that neither; for that he (...) (...) (...)
a Forgery. Dionysius (...) (...) (...) before Binius, does not say (...) (...)
wrote them, but rather the contrary: He suspects them all, and knows Clement
could not write them all; since himself has but fifty, and those only by
Rumor, not Tradition.

Nay Einius himself, you will see presently, rejected some; and yet here he
pretends the whole number to be written, both by Clement in Greek, and by
Dionysius in Latin: For of all his Catalogue, he faith, These Canons, etc.
Clement of Rome, S. Peter's Disciple, wrote in Greek, and Dionysius (...), an
Abbot in Rome, translated them into Latin; as if it were not sufficient to
write a Lie in the Front, unless he closed up the Canons with a Lie in the Tail.

It would be worth the Enquiry to know where they had the 34. which were
unknown to the Ancient Dionysius? For after all this, he seems to reject them
in the passage following.

Horum quinquaginta priores, etc. says he, Only the first fifty of these (the
last of which is of dipping thrice in Baptism) containing nothing but sound
Apostolical Doctrine, and approved by Ancient Bishops, Councils, and Fathers,
are received as Authentic, Cap. 3. Did. 16. And according to that common Rule
of the Holy Fathers, because the Author of them is unknown, they are rightly
believed to flow unto us by Apostolical Tradition. The residue by Pope
Gelasius, Can. Sanct. Did. 15. are accounted Apocryphal, both because their
Author is unknown, as also because by the 65 and the last Canon, it is evident,
that some of them are craftily put in by the Grecians, and some of them
corrupted by Heretics.

This passage deserves one or two remarkable Observations.

1. If the Tradition of the Apostles, though committed to writing, be capable
of corruption; what security can we have of Oral Tradition, which is far more
loose, and liable to danger?

2. If the Church of Rome were unable to secure the Apostles Canons from the
Leven of the Grecians, and other Heretics; or so careless, as not to keep one
Copy, or Record sincere; what assurance can we have of her care and ability in
the residue? This shows the weakness of these inconvenient Shifts, and pitiful
(...).

But the reason why some are received as Authentic, and others accounted
(...), is most fit to be marked. The reason why it is highly to be presumed,
that the first 50 Canons should be (...) (...), Because the Author of them is
unknown: And the reason why the residue are rejected, is, Because the Author of
them is unknown. So that the same reason (as Fire hardens Clay, and (...) Wax)
will prove contrary things. And by reasoning in such a Latitude, it will be
easy to prove the Sun black, and the Sky a Molehill.

Howbeit for these reasons, Gelasius an Ancient Pope rejects some of them:
But Binius takes the liberty to put his judgment in the other end of the Scale;
and outfacing us with a Counterfeit Clement, and Pretended Dionysius, will have
all but two, to be Authentic Canons: All but two; namely, the 65. and the last
Canon; by which it is evident, that some of them are crastily put in by the
Grecians, and some of them corrupted by Heretics. Some of them put in by the
Grecians, must at least be two; and some of them corrupted by Heretics, must
at least be two more; yet they are all of them, except two, Authentic.

Let his reason be what it will, we observe, 1. That the Church of Rome is in a
tottering condition, when a poor Canon of Collein shall take upon him to refel
the Sentence of an (...) Pope, and fourseore Bishops: for so many did (...) use
in (...) the Apocryphal from Cennine Books; and this Sentence was Desinitive by
a Pope in his Council: So that 2. A Pope in his Council is not (...). 3. If
Einius be right, Gelasius and fourscore Bishops did (...) (...) in condemning
the Code (...) (...) Canons, which S. Clement wrote from the mouth of the
Apostles. 4. The Church of Rome is divided, the New and the Old Church of Rome
are against each other. The New is all for Additions, and the very Apostles
Canons, allowed in Gelasius his time, which was 1260 years ago, are not
sufficient, unless more be added.

But let us now consider Binius his reasons. Quia tamen ex his posterioribus
fere omnes praeter praedictos duos, etc. But because all these latter almost,
besides the two forementioned, are either by the Authority of the Roman
Bishops, or by the Decrees of other Councils, or by the Sentences of some
Fathers, confirmed and approved, as is manifest by these our Marginals and
Annotations: (So that it may not lightly or rashly he doubted, whether they
were taken hence by the Bishops, Councils, and Fathers, or rather translated
hither, and put here out of their Writings:) Hereupon they may and ought
rightly and deservedly all, except the two excepted, to be taken for Authentic.

How perplexed his discourse is, I suppose you see. His courage fails in the
midst, and it becomes thereupon so rough and difficult, that it is scarce
intelligible. The occasion of its Incoherence is that Parenthesis (thrust into
the middle.) For Binius foreseeing a strong Objection to the Discourse he was
going to make, claps it Sophistically into the midst of his Argument; hoping
thereupon, that it would never more be retorted upon him: Which you may easily
see, both by the Nature of his Argument, and by the resolution of his words.
For his Argument is this; which if you lay aside the Answer to it, runs
smoothly. Almost all these latter Canons, besides the two forementioned, are
either by the Authority of Roman Bishops, or the Decrees of other Councils, or
the Sentences of some Fathers, confirmed and approved (:) hereupon they may and
ought rightly and deservedly, all except the two excepted, to be taken for
Authentic. Now the Answer is the Parenthesis in the midst. Certain Sentences
like to these Canons are in the Fathers writings, but so contained there, that
it may not lightly or rashly be doubted, whether they were taken hence by the
Bishops, Councils, and Fathers, or rather translated hither, and put here out
of their Writings. To doubt a thing rashly is nonsense; but it may justly be
feared, that these Canons are Sentences picked out of other Books, and packt
into a Body, bearing the name of the Apostles Canons. His Conscience did
convict him, and he replieth not a word, though it be an important
consideration in the case.

But there is a worse fault in his Logic; he argues from Particulars to
Vniversals: for having said, Fere omnes praeter praedictos duos, he comes to
conclude, Omnes praeter praedictos duos. Almost all except two are approved,
therefore all except two are Authentic.

Such Tricks as these he has often: And sometimes affects an obscure kind of
speaking, on purpose to blind the Reader; especially when he is entangled with
some difficult Argument: He then Clouds himself, like the Cuttle, in his own
Ink, that he might vomit up the Hook in the dark, and escape away.

He might have produced a General Council, if he pleased, to confirm all the 84
Canons, and that under the Name of the Apostles too, which had been more to the
purpose: but then he must have confessed the last Canon of Clement to be true,
and consequently that his eight Books of Constitutions, and his two Epistles,
are part of the Bible; or else that the Decree of the Council, confirming
these, was Spurious; or else of necessity, that the Pope and Council did err.
But he had more kindness for the Pope than so, and therefore perhaps let the
Council alone.

He would inure you by his words to believe that Popes are equal to Councils.
Because they are, says he, either by the Authority of Roman Bishops, or other
Councils, or some Fathers confirmed, they may and ought to be taken for
Authentic. Some Fathers is a dwindling expression: He very well knows that 217
were rejected together in the sixth Council of Carthage. Roman Bishops, and
other Councils, are words of some weight: But what can other Councils do, if
the Roman Bishops please to reject them? The Roman Bishops, and other Councils,
are so put in contradistinction, that the Authority of Roman Bishops is set
before that of other Councils: And perhaps the proportion being observed, the
Roman Bishops must be thought as far above other Councils, as other Councils
above some Fathers.

In other places they affirm a Pope with his Council to be Infallible: Here,
that the Roman Bishop is a Council: Otherwise it is nonsense to say, The Roman
Bishops, or other Councils. The Roman Bishop has a Council in himself: And
indeed it is requisite, that he of all other should be the greatest Council,
when standing alone, he is to judge of a Council, and to determine, even
whether an (...) Council shall be approved, or disapproved.

This is a Taste of Binius, an Elephants Clee, a Scrap of five large Volumes,
full of the same integrity and perverseness.

The swelling words which they talk of, approved and disapproved Councils, are
all to be understood, of Councils approved, or disapproved by the Roman Bishop.

From his Canons we proceed to his Council: for Binius has a Council of
Apostles too, on a Prodigious Theme! the setting up of Images. It is but a
short one, and has but one Canon, and that is the eighth. It is set forth in
this form.

ANTIOCHENA SYNODUS (...).
Canon. 8. (...) (...) Salvati ob Idola: sed pingant (...) Opposite Divinam
Humanamque manufactam (...) Effigiem Dei very ac Salvatoris nosire Jesu
Christi, ipsiusque Servorum, contra Idola and (...). Neque errent in Idolis,
neque similes siant Judaeis.

This is all: and sure it is old, for the Latin is very bare. If you construe
it, (...) (...) thus, but has no Greek Copy.

A COUNCIL of the APOSTLES at ANTIOCH.
Canon. 3. Let not the Saved be deceived for Idols: but let them paint on the
Opposite, the Divine and Humane unmingled Image of the true God, and of our
Savior Jesus Christ, made with hands, and of his Servants. Neither let them
err in Idols, nor be made like the Jews.

The first Authority he has to prove it, is the 2 Nicene Council, 800 years
almost after the Apostles. And he collecteth it thence by a blind conjecture,
not by any evident Assertion of theirs.

Besides this he cites one Pamphilus, who testifies that he found it in
Origen's Study, as Turrian says against the Writers of Magdenburg. So that all
this rests upon Turrian, an impudent Corrupter, as the World has any. Where
we first observe, that Origin had no Images himself, neither adored any. 2.
That Images were forbidden in the H. Scripture, especially in the Old
Testament. 3. The Apostles were wont to allure the Jews, and not to offend
them. To the Jews, says S. Paul, I became as a Jew, that I might gain the
Jews. Whereas to set up Images, was the only way to drive them out of the
Temple. 4. That all other Councils, Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, Chalcedon,
Arles, Eleberis, Antioch, Laodicea, Sardis, Jerusalem, Alexandria, Rome, etc.
during all the time of 800 years, were silent of this Apostolical Canon.

Concerning which, I beseech you to consider further: 1. That admitting it were
in the 2 Nicene Council, that was an Idolatrons Council, addicted to Fables,
and full of Forgeries; for which it is rejected by all the knowing and sounder
part of the World. 2. The Apostles were not obeyed in this Commandment, neither
in their own Age, nor in diverse Ages after. 3. Binius himself seems conscious
of its unsoundness, for he puts it not among the Councils of the Apostles,
which are before their Canons altogether, but in another place straggling by it
self, in his own Notes, and after the Apostles Canons. 4. Since the Apostles
wrote in Greek, this is rendered suspicious by wanting a Greek Copy. 5. No
Collector produces one word besides himself, in the whole Circuit of the first
400 years, on the behalf of Images. 6. The Fathers unanimously write against
Images in the Church of GOD. 7. You may perceive by the dullness of the Sense
out of what Storehouse this Fragment came, and by the horrid incongruity of
making a Divine and Humane Image unmingled with hands: The Divinity and and
Humanity being Natures infinitely distant, cannot be painted in the same
Picture. But for want of a better, this Musty Evidence must serve the turn.

CAP. XV. Of the Pontisical Falsety Fathered upon Damasus, Bishop of Rome, An.
397. How the Popish Collectors use it as their Text, yet confess it to be a
Forgery full of Lies and contradictions.
THe Liber Pontifiealis is a Legend so stuffed with Lies, that the very Title
of it is notorious: The very first Inscription of the Book miscarries; not so
as to need, like the former Counterfeits, either those of the Apostles Canons,
or their Council, or the Preface of Isidore, a long Circuit of Deductions to
prove the Forgery; Binius, Labbe, and the Collectio Regia, immediately confess
it. It begins thus.

THE BOOK OF POPES, From Pope Peter down to Pope Nicholas of that Name the
First; in which their Acts are described: The Acts of the first Popes by Pope **
Damasus: The rest by other * Ancient Cunning honest men like Merlin's Printer.
Men, and * worthy of credit. Upon this Title Binius notes, Hujus libri
Pontificalis Damasus Auctor non est, etc. Damasus is not the Author of this
Pontifical: but rather it is patched up of two diverse Authors; as may be proved
by this, that almost in every Popes Life, it contains things fighting with
themselves: And so no account can be given of Things and Writings clashing with
one another. And for this he cites Baronius, An. Christ. 69. nu. 35. Au. 348.
nu. 16. and 17. Anton. Possevin. Apparat. Sac. on the word Damasus.

Now a man would expect he should lay aside the Book, and refuse to make use of
such an odious Pamphlet: But for want of a better he takes it in, as his most
Learned Companions do; and so they labor all under the miserable Fate of
making a Forgery, the Text upon which their Notes and Volumes are the
Commentary.

It is meet before I pass, to make some use of what is given us: for
Observation is the Life of History, Reflections digesting the Objects that are
before us, and turning them into nourishment.

What is here said, concerns not a Page, but a whole Book, stuffed with
Legends, and Lives of Popes.

It was set forth as a Book made by Damasus, a Learned, Grave, and Ancient
Bishop of Rome, that his name might give color and Authority to the same.

Because it could not be believed that (...) should write of Popes that
followed after he was dead, part of it is ascribed to other ancient men, and
worthy of credit; naming no body, for the greater Reverence, and show of
Antiquity, and the more pious estimation of unknown persons.

How ancient, and how worthy of credit they are that (...) such Cheats, and
what a Mystery of Iniquity they make of Antiquity, you may easily conjecture.

Sometimes (...) are thrown upon (...) Greeks and (...): but here is one made
and compiled by the more Famous Romans.

Binius knew it to be a Forgery by the baseness of the Style; Consarcinatus
est, It was patched up. That is his word; a Metaphor implying, the Tailors were
but Botchers that made it. Secondly, By the contradictions that are in it, he
knew they were diverse Authors, because they jangle, and cannot agree. The parts
of it are so irreconcilable, that the Story will by no means hang together.

It is a Vein of Lies, reaching from S. Peter to Damasus, and from Damasus to
Nicholas 1. containing the Lives of above 100 Popes, from S. Peter to the year
860.

About the time of this Nicholas 1. the Popedom was exalted above the Clouds,
and was (of necessity) to be secured by as evil means, as it was gotten: When
lo the Witch of Endor raises up Samuel in the good old Damasus, to tell the
World that Peter was a Prince, and all his Successors Universal Heads of the
Catholic Church.

Nicholas 1. began to sit about 50 years after the death of Hadrian 1. the Pope
that is suspected by us to be the Father of the (...). So great an Impression
therefore being made by the Publication of Isidore, a little before, it was
thought good to follow the Blow by this Pontifical: and a more ancient Father
than Isidore must be awakened out of his dust to justify him. For as Light
answered Light in Solomon's Buildings, so do the Lives and Letters of the Popes;
their Lives in the Pontifical, and their Letters in the Decretal.

The Artifice shows contrivance, and the design of it a deep and hidden
Correspondence.

The World has been cheated for so long a time, by the attempt of wicked and
deceitful men.

Peter Crab, Carranza, surius, Nicolinus, the Elder Compilers of the Councils,
use it boldly and freely, without warning their Readers to suspect it, or
confessing it to be a Forgery; though Binius, and the last Compilers, upon
necessary Conviction, are forced to do it.

(...) and (...) have it not at all: we may justly wonder therefore where these
latter (...) got it.

The Forgery is not about mean matters, but things most Sacred, the Rights of
the Church, and the Souls of men.

Here the (...) are detected by their own confession; and he that is once (...)
is still suspected.

The Works of Darkness are seldom (...), so that more are committed than (...)
known.

All these Forgeries that are now acknowledged, did pass about 200 years ago
for good Records, excepting some perhaps that were since invented: And if the
last two Ages brought so many to light, an Age or two more may, through Gods
blessing, accomplish Wonders.

The Secular state and security of the Pope, with his Adherents, which Binius
in his Epistle to Pope Paul V. calls Honor and Augmentum (...), was the end of
all. And if men excogitate Titles to Crowns, and patch up (...) with some
Flaws, yet serviceable enough with the help of a Long Sword; then a Chair so
Politic is able to do it more neatly, having had the strong Holds of the
Church so long in their hands.

Now we shall note some few of those many Errors that are in the Pontifical;
which, though it be a duty circumstance to have such a Text to gloss on, is the
Basis of their Discourses, and the Rule of their Method, both in the Popes and
Councils. It begins thus.

Peter the blessed Apostle, and Prince of (...), (...)
the Apostles, the Son of John, of the Province of Galilee, of the City (...)
(...), the Brother of Andrew, sat in the Chair of Antioch seven years. In the
end it (...) us how long S. Peter Reigned, just twenty five years, two months,
and three days. Binius tells us with the consent of Baronius, it was rather
twenty four years, five months, and eleven days.

The Pontifical says, Peter was Martyred with Paul on the same day: Though
Prudentius and S. Angustine say, It was not the same year. Binius reconcileth
them, They were slain the same day indeed, but not the same year: Therefore say
we, Peter was not Martyred with S. Paul.

The Pontifical says, It was 38 years after the Passion of our Lord. More truly
the 35. says Binius, in the 13 year of Nero, and the 69 after the Birth of
Christ.

S Peter's Name is the Patron and (...) of the Roman Church; and therefore
inserted like a Shield in the Front. Next his Notes on S. Peter's Life. Binius
inserts the Treatise of the Roman Churches Primary, Ex antiquo Codice: out of
an Old Book, without any name at all: Which puts me in mind of the Gibeonites
old Bottles, clouted Shoes, and moldy Bread, and the notable Cheat which
thereby they put on the Israelites. All is Old and Ancient in the Church of
Rome: and this Old Book of the Primacy set before the Councils according to the
Rules of Art, because the End is to be proposed before the Means.

After this old Treatise of the Primacy, he comes to S. Linus, Pope and
Martyr. He is pleased to call him Pope, as well as Pope Peter; not as if his
Contemporaries called him so, but because the Modern Title will not sit well on
the present Popes, unless it be given to S. Peter, and the first Bishops of
that See. And ever and anon he begins with a known Lie in the top of the
Chapter, formally set by it self, the more pleasingly to take the eye, after
the manner of a Title, Ex Libro Pontificali Damasi Papae;

OUT OF THE PONTIFICAL OF POPE DAMASVS. This course he continues from Life to
Life throughout all the Popes, so far as the Pontifical lasts, intermixing
the Decretal Epistles first, and then the Councils, in the Lives of the several
Popes: or to use his form, under the pope in whose Life they happened. And all
his Tomes being molded into that form, it makes every Pope seem, to him that
is not aware of the fetch, the Supreme over all Councils from the beginning.
And with this Method he always goes on, Ex libro Pontificali Damasi Papae,
hoping perhaps that in long tract of time, he should be at last believed.

In all the Book, there is scarce a Life, wherein there are not as many
Errors, as in S. Peter's. As in example.

Linus sat eleven years, three months, An. (...).
and twelve days, (...) the Pontifical: Binius says, It was eleven years, two
months, and twenty three days. A days difference, where the exactness is
pretended to be so great, shows all to be Counterfeit.

He says, (...) sat twelve years, one An. (...).
month, and eleven days: Binius tails on him for the mistake; though he agrees
with him in the (...), that Linus and Cletus sat some twenty three years
between Peter and Clement. So that on this account, S. James was dead above 27
years before S. Clement (who wrote a (...) Epistle to him) came to the Chair:
For before he was Pope he might write an Epistle, but not a Decretal Epistle.

Cletus (says Binius) was by S. Irenaeus, Ignatius, and (...), called (...),
which Baronius thinks was a mistake among the Greeks, (...) by the Error of
Writers and Libraries. What shifts will a man be driven to by a desperate
Cause! Three of the best and most Ancient Fathers were cheated with the Error
of Writers and Libraries, concerning a man's Name that was alive, either not
long before, or together with themselves. S. Irenaeus and Ignatius are
extremely Ancient. Ignatius lived before Anacletus was Bishop of Rome, much
more before his Name was put into Libraries, and much more yet, before it could
be corrupted there by the mistake of Scribes and Writers. But such Errors of
Writers and Libraries are a good hint, how capable they are of them, and how
much the Church of Rome is acquainted with them.

Binius is at last terribly provoked with the nonsense of the Pontifical: for
whereas it says, Cletus was in the Church from the seventh Consulship of
(...), and fifth of Domitian, to the ninth of Domitian, and the Consulship of
Rufus; that is, from the 78 year of Christ, to the 85. Binius speaking as if he
were present, takes him up (...), Errorem igitur Errori addis, quisquis (...)
Pontificalis Authors, etc. Whoever thou be that art the Author of this
Pontifical, thou addest Error to Error: For if Cletus began to sit in the
forementioned Consulship, in the 78 year of Christ, how did he immediately
succeed Linus, dying, as thou said, in the 69 year of Christ, Capito and
Rufus being Consuls? How will thou excuse a 9 years Interregnum in the Chair,
made only by thy Authority contradicting it self? How say thou that Cletus
sat twelve years, whose continuance thou do circumscribe by two
Consulships, in the space of 7 years distant from themselves? How, which is
more intolerable and absurd, do thou say, that Clement sat from the
Consulship of Trachilus and Italicus, even to the third year of Trajan; which
is from the 70 year of Christ to the 102. and so to have administered the Sea 33
years, whom in his Life thou affirmest to have continued only 9 years? Thus far
Binius.

When Cato saw the Southsayers saluting one another in the Roman Marketplace,
he said, I wonder they can forbear laughing, to think how delicately they cheat
the people! Hence therefore, says Binius, O Reader, thou may perceive on
what Rocks he shall (...), whosoever shall suppose the writings of this Book to
be taken up upon Trust, without any Inquisition! Yet when the fit is over, in
the very next line, he is at it again, THE LIFE, EPISTLES, AND DECREES OF
CLEMENT, EX LIBRO PONTIFICALI DAMASI P. The Pontifical is (afresh) ascribed to
Damasus: For Friends may quarrel, without falling out eternally. But if they
are so angry, what make they together? What have Scholars to do in so
scandalous a Fellows Company? Why of all Books in the World do they take this
to follow? All of them from Peter Crab to the Collectio Regia? Why not the
Grave, Sincere, and Learned? Why not a true Record? Why do they choose a
Counterfeit so full of lies and contradictions? It is the highest Symptom of a
deadly cause, that they take such a Fellow to be their Copy to write after,
their Text to gloss on, their Guide to follow. For all these gross mistakes are
committed within the compass of some 30 or 40 lines, in four Lives of one
hundred and six: And in every Life almost throughout, they are exercised in the
same manner. If this be the best Record they can find for the purpose, and all
their Antiquities be like this, they are as moldy and rotten as can well be
desired.

CAP. XVI. Of the Decretal Epistles forged in the Names of the first holy
Martyrs and Bishops of Rome The first was sent (as they pretend) from S
Clement, by S. Peter's order, to S. James the Bishop of Jerusalem, seven years
after he was dead; and by the best Account 27. S. Clement's Recognitions a
corsessed Forgery.
TO stumble in the Threshold is Ominous: If the first of all the Decretals be a
Forgery, it is a leading Card to the residue.

Binius his Title, and the Text of the Pontifical, is represented thus.

THE LIFE, EPISTLES, AND DECREES OF POPE CLEMENT I. Out of the Pontifical of
Pope DAMASVS. He made two Epistles that are called Canonical. This man, by the
Precept of S. Peter, undertook the Government of the Church; as by Jesus Christ
our Lord the Chair was committed to him. In the Epistle which he wrote to S.
James, you shall find after what manner the Church was committed from S. Peter.
Linus and Cletus are therefore recorded to be before him, because they were
made Bishops by the Prince of the Apostles himself, and ordained to the (...)
Office before him.

NOTES. (After the Method of Binius.)

He made two Epistles called Canonical.] These words are adapted to the 84th
Canon of the Apostles, where two Epistles of Clement, and his eight Books of
Ordinations, are made parts of the Canonical Scripture.

In the Epistle which he wrote to S. James] Here the Pontifical openly voucheth
his Epistle to S. James; which Binius afterward tells you was written to
Simeon. If the Pontifical be right, Binius was overseen, in saying, the name of
S. James crept by corruption into the Title of the Epistle, for that of Simeon.
The Tales do not hang together.

They were made Bishops by the Prince of the Apostles, etc.] You understand
here, that S. Peter out of his superabundant care for the Church, made three
Bishops of Rome in his own life time: So that Rome had four Popes at once, S.
Peter, S. Clement, S. Linus, and S. Cletus. Some think that Linus and Cletus
were S. Clement's Adjutants in External Affairs: Some, that they succeeded each
other in order: Some, that they presided over the Church together. Some say,
that Clement out of modesty refused the Chair, till he was grown older belike.
It is a world to see, what a variety and puzzle they are at in this matter: The
confusion springs from two causes: The first is the obscurity of the State of
Rome in the beginning: The second is the ignorance of the Forger that made S.
Clement's Letter to S. James: For happening so heedlesly to Father it on S.
Clement, he has made all the Story inconvenient. S. Clement says not one word
of refusing the Chair in his Epistle, nor of Linus and (...) coming between him
and it; but (...) a (...) fair Hypocritical show, (...) in his (...) to S.
James, that (...) (...) by S. Peter, and (...) (...) (...). Whereupon, (...)
(...) will have this Epistle to be a good and true Record, are forced of
necessity to say, that S. Peter did himself ordain Clement, though they very
well know that Linus and Cletus, or Anacletus, were both in their Order Bishops
before him. For a sure Token, either that the Church of Rome was little
considered in the dawning of the Gospel, or that their ignorance marred her
Officious Impostors, nothing is more obscure and doubtful than the order and
manner of her first Bishops. The Pontifical undertakes to reconcile all; and
does it luckily, were it not that it contradicts it self: For he says of
Clement, that he undertook the Government of the Church by the precept of Peter
And yet of Linus and Cletus it says, they are recorded to be before him,
because by the Prince of the Apostles they were made Bishops before him.

Be that a contradiction or no, it was neither Linus nor Cletus it seems, but
Clement who writ the Epistle to S. James about the death of Peter.

He made many books.] Binius upon those words observes, that before his
Epistles he wrote the Constitutions of the Apostles, etc. He did not make, but
write the Apostles Canous in Greek, etc. It is much he did not make them, for
the Coronis of them, as Nicolinus calls it, has by me Clement in it; and for
ought I know a Pope that has the fullness of power Apostolical, may make
Apostles Canons at any time. It is an odd observation, He did not make, but
write the Apostles Canons.

Among his other Monuments (says Binius) there are ten books of the circuits
of Peter; which by some are called, The Itinerary of Clement, by others his
Recognitions: Which since they are stuffed with Loathsome Fables, and the
Fathers abstained from the use of them, as Gelasius also in a Roman Council
rejected them for Apocryphal; all wise men will advisedly abstain from reading
them. It is a Tradition, that Clement left the Rite of offering Sacrifice to
the Church of Rome in writing. It is reported also, that many pieces are falsely
published under the Name of Clement.

Forgeries are (you see) thick and threefold in the Church of Rome: but this of
Clement's Itinerary, which Binius disswadeth all men from reading, even ten
Books, Cum insulsis fabulis reserti (...), since they are stust with loathsome
Fables, I desire you to take special notice of; because this Confession of his
will discover him to be either a false man, or a Fool. It is a delicate Snare,
and will detect S. Clement, and S. Binius together.

As for Binius, who defends the first Epistle of Clement to S. James for a
good Record; if he did read the Epistle, and note what he read, he was a false
man for defending it against his Judgment and Conscience. He that so mortally
hated the Itinerary of Clement, could not but know the Epistle to be Forged, if
he read it with any diligent observation: If he trusted others, he was an
unwise man, to be so confident in maintaining it, upon the report of those that
read and transcribed it for him: For their inadvertency has deceived him.

For S. Clement himself (if that Epistle be his) owneth the Forgery of S.
Clement's Itinerary, which Binius so extremely abhors. It must needs be a
Forgery therefore, because in this case, nothing but a Forgery can defend a
Forgery: no Author (if a Saint) acknowledging those Forgeries for his, which he
never made.

After a long Oration which S. Clement fendeth to S. James, in that Epistle out
of S. Peter's mouth, concerning the Dignity and Excellency of the Roman Chair,
he has these words, speaking of S. Peter.

When he had said these things in the midst before them all, he put his hands
on me, and compelled me (wearied with shamefacedness) to sit in his Chair. And
when I was sat, again he spoke these things unto me: I beseech thee, O
Clement, before all that are present, that after (as the Debt of Nature is) I
have ended this present S. Peter's order about the (...) ary.
life, thou would briefly write to James, the Brother of our Lord, either
those things that relate to the beginning of thy Faith, or those thoughts also
which before thy Faith thou have born; and after what sort thou have been a
companion to me from the beginning, even to the end of my Journey, and my Acts;
and what, being a Solicitous Hearer, thou have taken from me disputing through
all the Cities; and what, in all my preaching, was the order either of my words
or actions: as also what End shall find me in this City, as I said; all things
being (as thou art able) briefly comprehended, let it not grieve thee to
destine unto him: Neither fear, that he will be much grieved at my End, since
he will not doubt but I endure it for piety. But it will be a great solace to
him, if he shall learn, that no unskilful man, or unlearned, and ignorant of
the Discipline of (...) Order, and the Rule of Doctrine, has undertaken my
Chair: For he knows, if an unlearned or an unskilful man take upon him the
Office of a Doctor without, the Hearers and Disciples being involved in a Cloud
of Ignorance, shall be drowned in destruction.

Wherefore I my Lord James, when I had received these precepts from him, held
it necessary to fulfill what he commanded, informing thee both concerning these
things, and briefly comprehending, concerning those, which going through every
City, he either uttered in the word of preaching, or wrought in the virtue of
his deeds. Though concerning these things I have sent thee (...), and more
fully described already, at his command, under that very Title which he ordered
to be prefixed; that is, Clementis Itinerarium, The Itinerary of Clement, not
the preaching of Peter.

In these words he tells us, how S. Peter taking his leave of the World,
placed him in his Chair, and by that Ceremony installed him in the Episcopal
Throne in the presence of them all: What a charge he gave him in that moving
circumstance of time, just before his piercing and bitter Passion, to write to
S. James: How he ordered him to make an Itinerary of his Circuits throughout
the World, and furnished him at the same time with the Materials and Title of
the Book; The Itinerary of Clement, not the preaching of Peter. S. Peter's
modesty (as is to be supposed) giving the Honor of the Title, not to himself
that was the Subject, but to the Author: How S. Clement, according to this
commandment, had sent to S. James, not only this Epistle, but the Book it self
long before it; wherein the Journeys and the Acts of Peter were more fully
described: And the great care which S. Peter took, (...) the dead man should be
grieved, by the Solace he provided in the Tidings sent unto him, concerning the
perpetual certainty of Skilfulness and Learning in all his Successors, securing
at once both the Church, and his Chair, is very remarkable. All these things,
out of the very Bowels of the Epistle, disgrace (...) Chimera's of Binius and
(...). For what Saint being well in his Wits, would tell the World, that S.
Peter commanded him to make a Forgery, nay a putid Forgery, stussed with
loathsome Fables! S. James his Name is over and over in the body of the Epistle,
not only in the Title. The Epistle was not sent to S. James by a Figure, but it
plainly tells S. James, that he had sent him the (...) before; which consisting
of ten books, must be some considerable time after S. Peter's Death in making,
some time in going from Rome to Jerusalem, and some time must be (...) in
coming back with the Answer, that certified him of S. James his receiving it.
After all which, this new Letter was written to S James, impertinently giving
him an account of the same business: And yet all this while S. James was dead
before S. Peter. For as Binius observes, S. Peter was put to Death in the
thirteenth year of Nero, and S. James in the seventh.

The Compiler of this Epistle, finding S. Clements Itinerary extant in the
World, several hundreds of years before himself, and being not aware of its
unfoundness, took it up as a good Record, and so fitted the Epistle and Fable
to the purpose in hand, being himself cheated with a Forgery, as many others
are, and not expecting to be detected so clearly, as it has since happened.

But to make the matter more absurd, they have a second Letter to S. James, De
Sacratis (...) vel (...). Wherein he divides the Priesthood (as Pius in his
Decretal afterward (...)) into three Orders, of Presbyter, Deacon, and (...):
With what design I cannot tell, unless he would have us think the Pope the only
Bishop. Wherein he also takes care about the Lords Body; orders the Priests
with what Ceremony of Fasting and Reverence it shall be consumed: Gives
Commands about the Pall, the Chair, the Candlestick, and the Vail: speaks of
the Altar, the Worship of the Altar, the Doorkeepers, the Vails for the Gates,
the covering of the Altar, etc. As if there were stately Temples, Attires,
Ornaments, and Utensils, in those early days of poverty Persecution, when a Den
or a Cave was both Sanctuary and Temple. Among other things, he orders that no
man should through ignorance believe a dead man ought to be wrapped in a Clerk.
Friars Coul; a Novel, superstitious Error. All which he speaks out of the
mouth of S. Peter, whom he calls the Father and Prince of the Apostles. In the
end of the Letter, he denounces a Curse against all them that will not keep S.
Peter's Commandments. So that Peter's Name, and Peter's Authority, is used for
every thing appertaining to the Chair, and all the Apostles to be ordered by S.
Peter's Successors, as S. (...) (...) of our Lord was.

CAP. XVII. Of Higinus and Pius, as they are represented in the Pontifical; and
of a notable Forgery in the name of Hermes: Where you have the Testimony of an
Angel, concerning the Celebration of Easter, cited by no body, while the matter
was in (...).
HIginus sat, says the Pontifical, four years, three months, and four days.
An. 184.
Binius faith, He sat four years, except two days; counterfeiting as much
exactness as the other. If we should follow him in his Consuls, says he, we
should make Higinus sit twelve years.

But the Pontifical is guilty of a more arrogant and ambitious error: The
Hierarchy of the Church, it says, was made by Higinus, to wit, the Order
wherein Presbyters were inferior to Bishops, Deacons to Presbyters, the people
to Deacons. Binius mendeth it as well as he is able, interpreting it only of a
Reformation of Collapsed Discipline. But it (...) so exactly with the
distinction before made in S. Clement's second Epistle, who will have the
Priesthood divided into the Order of Presbyter, Deacon, and Minister, that the
design seems deeper than so. He does not say, the Hierarchy of the Church was
corrected, but made by Hyginus: which strikes at the Root of Episcopacy; as if
it were not of Divine, but Humane Institution: and being made by the Pope
alone, depended only on the Popes pleasure.

Binius is not able to name the time wherein the Discipline of the Church was
(in this respect) corrupted so, as to need the Reformation pretended.

Next after Hyginus, the Pontifical An. 158.
brings in Pius, an Italian, the Brother of a Shepherd. He sat nineteen
years, four months, and three days, in the times of Antoninus Pius. Hermes his
own Brother wrote a book, in which a Commandment was contained, given him by an
Angel of the Lord, coming to him in the Habit of a Shepherd, that Easter should
be observed on the Lords Day. This man ordained, that an Heretic, coming from
among the Jews, should be baptized, and c,

This Hermes, says Binius, in his Notes on the place, is the same whom S. Paul
mentions in his Epistle to the Romans. Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas,
Patrobus, Hermes, etc. He was at Man's Estate when S. Paul saluted him, and a
very old man sure for a Writer of Books in the time of Pius.

Binius is not willing to have him so obscure as a Shepherd, but faith, He was
called Pastor, either because he was of the Family of Junius Pastor, who in the
third year of Aurelian was Consul, or more probably, because the Angel appeared
to him in the form of a Shepherd. In this his Guess he is upon the brink of
rejecting the Pontifical. Howbeit he quits it not of a Lie: for instead of
nineteen years which the Pontifical gives him, Binius faith, he sat but nine
years. A small mistake in this Learned Pontifical.

Concerning the Book which Hermes the Shepherd wrote, he says, It was almost
unknown among the Latins, but very famous among the Greeks: Which was very
strange, considering he was the Popes Brother: A Book made by so eminent a
person, and so near home, unknown among the Latins! But his meaning is
perhaps, it was better known than trusted. For a little after he says, The
Latins esteemed it Apocryphal as Tertullian, Athanasius, and Prosper witness,
and as Gelasius decreed; Can. Sanct. Dift. 15.

Now because their unmannerliness does refiect a little upon the Pope himself,
who in his Decretal Epistle annexed, owns his Brother with an Honorable
mention of the Angelical Vision; Binius to display more Learning on the behalf
of the Pontifical, and Pius his Decretal, tells you; that the Book of the true
Hermes Pastor, praised so much by Tertullian, Origin, Athanasius, Eusebius,
Jerome, etc. is not now Extant. Which is evident (he says) because in that we
now have, there is no Mention at all of Easter. Nay the Author of it says, he
was admonished to deliver it to Clement the Pope, by whom it was to be sent to
foreign Cities. They have as good Luck at Rome, as if they held Intelligence
with Purgatory. The Dead and they have as intimate a Correspondence, as if the
Pope knew the Way to send his Bulls thither. Here is another Forgerie detected,
by its Dedication to S. Clement who by no unusual Providence is served just in
his own kind, for he disturbed S. James, and another disturbes him, in his
Crave. Yet Binius is very much inclined to this Opinion, for from hence he
gathers, it was long ante haec Tempora Scriptus, a Book written long before
the time of Pius. As no doubt it must, if it be not the same that was praised
by Tertullian, Origin, Athanasius, etc. For all Forgeries must be old and True,
or they are not worth a farthing.

But how comes Tertullian and Athanasius, etc. to esteem it Apocryphal, and yet
to praise it so much, in the same (...)? It is Binius his Breath, not theirs.
They poor men are made like Stage players to say whatsoever the Poet lists.
Or else as Binius observes there were two Books of Hermes (though it be double
dealing thus to have two of a Sort:) the one right, and the other Apocryphal.

But then Gelasius did very ill, there being two of a Sort, to condemn the one,
and not tell us of the other. And so did Ivo. For this Pastor is one of the
Catalogue we told you of in the Beginning.

But Binius has a fetch beyond this; He teaches you a way, how to take both
these persons for the same man: and what you may say in defense of your self,
if you so do. However (says he) if any one be disposed to take them for the
same Author, Ex Sententia Illustriss. Card. Barona dicendum est, etc. He must
necessarily say, as Baronius gives his Opinion, that they were two
commentaries, written at diverse times where of the first was more famous among
the Greeks the later more obscure among the Latins. A brave Antithesis! So
that upon the point the Latins had none. The more obscure among the Latins
was obscure every where; the more famous among the Greeks and the more obscure
among the Latins! The Antathesis makes a show of giving you some Solid matter,
but when you grasp it in your hand, it turns to Air. Unless perhaps you will
learn thereby, that the more obscure among the Latins was a Book made in an
instant, by a mere Conjecture and a pretty Mockery to gull the Reader, as a
shadow at least of some proof that the Pontifical and the Decretals are not
Liars.

Among other Things their Allowances are considerable: for they are good honest
reasonable men, and will let you think what you will of the Book, so you
consent to the main, and believe the Popes Supremacy. And next that, their Art
of Instruction is to be weighed, Whether it be true or no, no matter: If the
Disciple can but defend himself by a Distinction, and escape the Conviction of
an Absurdity, it is enough; Bellarmine is at such Dicendums often. Though it is
a Secret among themselves, they teach their Disciples What to say, not What is
True. But I thought we had been agreed before, that of these Hermes at least
was a Forgerie.

It seems. by Pope Pius his Letter, that Hermes was a Doctor, and not a
Shepherd, for in these Days, he says, Hermes a Doctor of the faith, and of the
H. scriptures shined among us. Not of old, but in these Days. Yet it is
pretended, that the Book of old was by some order from on high, to be delivered
to Clement the Pope, by whom it was to be sent to foreign Cities.
Notwithstanding all their Contrivance, there Wit fails them sometimes, that
are so accustomed to Lying. They have so many Irons in the fire that some of
them miscarry, whether they will or no.

Nevertheless that Hermes received this Commandment from the Angel Tertullian
witnesses, in his third Book of verses against Mareion says Binius. I have
not heard much of Tertullian's Poetry. I have his Works, put forth with the
Notes of Beatus Rhenanus, and cannot find any such verses among them. If he
has? all that Binius pretends out of them, is that Hermes spoke Angelical
Words; Therefore he saw the Angel.

Pius in his Decretal Epistle applies this Scripture, Not holding the Head
from which all the body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered, and
knit together, increases with the increase of God,] to the Pope of Rome.
Whereupon, he says, We instruct you all by our Apostolical authority, that you
ought to observe the same Commandments, because we also observe the same. And
ye ought not by any means to divide from the Head.

The Commandment was given to Hermes by an Angel. Whereupon Pope Pius after the
first complement, begins very unluckily with forbidding the Religion or
worshipping of Angels. Whereas upon this occasion some eminent matter ought to
have been spoken concerning Angels. But because of the words following, he puts
them together. Let no man beguile Colos. 2. 18, 19.
you of your reward in a voluntary humility of worshipping Angels, etc. Not
holding the Head from which all the body by joints and bands, etc. Where he
takes off the Eternal Head, and puts a New one on the Churches shoulders. For
in these days Hermes a Doctor of the Faith and of the Holy Scriptures shined
among us: And though we observed Easter on the foresaid day, yet because some
doubted, for the confirming of their Souls, an Angel of the Lord appeared to
the same Hermes in the shape of a Shepherd, and commanded him that the
Passover should be celebrated by all on the Lords day: Whereupon we also
instruct you all by our Apostolical authority, that you ought to observe the
same Commandments. (Not because an Angel brought them, or GOD sent him; but)
Because we also observe the same, and ye ought not by any means to divide from
the Head. And because the business is to promote the Apostolical Authority
above all the Angels, instead of extolling and magnifying them, which had been
the natural method on such a Topic: as if he would enervate the evidence of
the Angel, he bids them take heed, and that diligently, least any one seduce
you, by any Astrology, or Philosophy, or vain Fallacy, according to the
tradition of men: after the Rudiments of this World, and not after Christ's and
true Tradition. As if no more heed were to be given to an Angel, than to an
Ass, unless the Pope first approved the Vision: Nor is Philosophy, nor the
Tradition of men, nor any thing else to be valued in opposition to him, and his
true Tradition; for in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily: that
ye may be repleat in him, who is the Head of all Principality and Power, and
who bath commanded this Apostolical See, to be the Head of all Churches, saying
to the Prince of the Apostles, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build
my Church.

What it is to walk after Christ and true Tradition, you may see Clearly, by
this Glos, upon our Saviors Text. They that do not hold the Head, from which
all the Body by Joints and Bands having nourishment ministered, and knit
together, increases with the increase of God, are in extreme peril of
damnation. And our Savior who is the Head of all Principality and Power, has
commanded this Apostolical See to be the Head of all Churches; Therefore,
Whosoever holds not to this Head is in extreme peril of damnation. For the
Pope is not the Head of all Principality and Power in himself, but only by
Derivation he is made the Head, etc. And consequently, it is as necessary to
cleave unto him as to Christ himself. Since he in whom all the fullness of the
Godhead dwells Bodily, dwells in his Vicar, even as S. Peter does in like
manner. So that all Angels and (...) of men, Reason, Philosophy etc. (...) but
feeble Threeds for him that has (...) Potestatis, the fullness of Power, and
may open the Kingdom of Heaven to whom he will

It is a Cross Observation to note the little Authority of the Popes Custom.
For though it it was the Practice of all the Roman Church to Keep Easter in
such a manner before, yet some doubted, that is, all the Eastern Churches were
of another Easeb.
Opinion: till an Angel came to teach them otherwise. Yet when he came, he must
not be believed for his own sake, but the Popes: nor be obeyed for himself: so
jealous was the Pope of his Apostolical Authority.

How weak both the Popes Authority and the Angels were, (which thus mutually
needed each others assistance) appears by the Event, for notwithstanding the
Testimony of Pius and the Angel, this Controversy was left undetermined till
the Nicene Council.

It continued above 150 years after Pope Pius his days. Yet through all that
considerable Tract of time, this Testimony of the Angel was cited by no Body.
Only as Ovid makes use of the (...), and his Crowing in the Morning, to
introduce the fable of Alector; this wicked Pius makes use of this
Controversy, for the fable of the Angel. But it was a little Suspicious that
the Angel should appear to no body but the Popes Brother, and the matter be
published by no body but the Pope himself. It smells of the Forge out of
which it came, being proved by the Pontifical of Pope Damasus

CAP. XVIII. A Letter fathered on Cornelius Bishop of Rome in the year 254.
concerning the Removal of the Apostles Bones: giving Evidence to the Antiquity
of many Popish Doctrines, but is it self a Forgery.
THe forgery made in the Name of Pius, is fitted to the year 158. You shall now
see one made in the Name of Cornelius Bishop of Rome in the year (...)54. 100.
years after the former excepting four. Not as if there were no forgeries
between this and that, there is scarce a year upon which they have not fastened
something, but should we trace them all, through the weary Length of so many
Ages, our Travail would be Endless. We have chosen one, or two, as Exemplars of
the residue.

THE FIRST EPISTLE Of Cornelius the Pope.
Concerning the Translations of the Bodies of Peter and Paul, etc.
(...) the (...) to his Dear and most Beloved (...), the Sons or the Holy
Church of God, and to all them that serve our Lord in the right Faith.

Considering the (...) of your Charity, because ye are Lovers of the Apostles
and hold (...) (...) and Doctrine, I determined (...) write unto you, (the Lord
being the Author) some of those things which are at this time necessary to be
Known, and which the Lord assisting, by the Merits of the Apostles, were lately
done among us in the Church of Rome, or are now in Doing. Because Charity
patreniring, I believe with fatherly Grace, ye willingly receive (...) Writings
of the Apostolical See, and preform the Commandments of the same, and (...) in
the Increases thereof. Because whosoever engrasses himself in the root of
Charity, neither (...) of Greatness,

(nec a fructibus inanes eis) nor waxes vain from fruit, neither does he by
Love lose the Efficacious Work of fruitfulness. For Charity it self does
exercise the Hearts of the faithful, corroborates their Senses, that nothing
seems Grievous, nothing difficult, but all is easy which is done; while its
property is to nourish Concord, to keep the Commandments, to join things
disleyered, to correct Evil things, and to consolidate all other virtues by the
Bulwark of its perfection.

Wherefore I (...) you to rejoice with us, because by the Entreaty of a certain
devout Woman, and most noble Matron Lucina, the bodies of Peter and Paul were
lifted out of the Catatumbae. And first of all, the Body of the Blessed Paul
was carried with Silence and put in the Grounds of the foresaid Matron, in the
Ostiensian Way, near to that Side where he was beheaded. But afterward we
received the Body of the Blessed Peter, the Prince of the Apostes, and decently
placed it near the place where he was crucified, among the Bodies of the H.
Bishops, in the Temple of Apollo, in the golden Mountain, in the Vatican of
Nero's palace; the third day of the Ca' end, of July: praying God and our Lord
Jesus Christ, that these his holy Apostles interceding, he would purge away the
Spots of our Sins, and keep you in his Will all the days of your Life, and
make you perseverable in the Fruit of Good works. But see that ye rejoice
together for these things: Because the Holy Apostles themselves also rejoice
together for your joy. Praise ye God always, and he shall be glorified in you.
For it is written, What shall I return unto the Lord, for all he has returned
to me? I will take up the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord.


In this first part of the Epistle concerning the Translation of the Bodies of
the B. Apostles, Peter and Paul, the Pope does you to wit of his wonderful
kindness and charity to the Dead, as also of his devotion and reverence toward
the Relics of such glorious Saints.

Wherein first of all, he would have his gratitude toward those blessed
Founders of the Roman See made conspicuous, it being a thing meet to be
published all the World over, as it is in most solemn manner here, by Decretal
Epistle. 2. He does intimate the veneration due to Relics, especially those of
such glorious Saints, as Peter and Paul. 3. He gives us to know that the
Translation of their Bodies from one Grave to another was a matter of such
moment, that it was Quaedam ex his quae (...) temporis necessaria (...) (...),
A thing, in these days, necessary to be (...). 4. That the merits of the (...)
(...) God to assist and (...) the Church of Rome in all her Doings. 5. That God
was the Author of those things which he wrote unto them: (...) a (...) says,
Decrevivobis seribere, (...) (...). 6. That all the World did even in Cornelius
days, and upward, to (...) (...) S Clement and S. Peter, Script (...) (...)
Apostolicae libenter (...), (...) (...) the Writings of the (...) (...), obey
its commands, and (...) in its increases. For the Roman Church (...) (...)
increasing in Tradition, Doctrine, Wealth, etc. 7. That Love is so excellent an
ingredient, that like Salt it must (...) all things, especially this Ppistle,
Because it (...) a multitude of faulrs: The (...) of it otherwise comes in very
(...), as (...) (...) to the Story of removing the (...) bones.

The Epistle (...) many other (...) even in this little part of it: As that
(...) Saints are to rejoice for any benefit done to the Church of Rome: That
the bodies of the most blessed Apostles being too dishonourably buried before,
turned to the greater joy of the Church, which otherwise had lost this occasion
of Festivity. If you ask, how it was possible they should be interred so
gloriously in the days of Decius a bloody Persecutor? It was at the entreaty of
Lucina, a noble Matron, of which kind there are some always that have a great
influence in the Church of Rome. That Peter was buried in the Golden Mountain
as a presage of his Successors glory. That the Bishops of Rome, were even in
the Height of Paganism (and Idolatry) buried in the Temple of Apollo: That
Peter was buried in three or four places at once: among the Bishops of Rome, in
the Temple of Apollo, in the Golden Mountain, and in the Vatican of Nero's
Palace; a little before Cornelius his Martyrdom, on the 3. of the Kalends of
July.

If you will not believe this, consider yet further, the holiness of Cornelius
affirming it. For while he was settling these Holy Bodies, he, and the Saints
of the Church of Rome with him, prayed God and our Lord Jesus Christ, that upon
the Intercession of those Holy Apostles, he would purge away the Sins of all
them to whom he wrote; the Merits of the Apostles, and especially the
Intercession of those that sat in the Roman Chair being established 1450 years
ago, by the Decretal Epistle of Cornelius: The Vision of the Apostles, and
their knowledge of things done upon Earth is intimated sufficiently, together
with the Principality and Piety of the Church of Rome, that was ever a Loyer of
the Saints, and a Worshipper of their Relics. Way is made too for Praying to
Saints departed: (...). (...).
this Part of the Epistle ending with that notable Passage (...) (...), What
shall I give unto the Lord for all his Benefits toward me? I will take up the
Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. Which shows the
honorable use they make of the Scriptures.

Now if you enquire, Whether this Epistle be Authentic? you sin against the
Doctrine of Implicit faith, and highly Scandalize the Church of Rome. For can
any man be so wicked, as to believe that Cornelius, or any other Pope should
counterfeit COD to be the Author of a Counterfeit; or return such Solemn
praises for a feigned Deliverance; or write Public Admonitions to all the
Churches in the World concerning a Lie; or abuse the Holy Scriptures; and make
nothing of Love, but a pretext to patch up, and cover Forgery? Yet let us hear
what Binius and Baronius say concerning these Matters. For though the Epistle
be never so formally set down, and a Lie written in the Top, both of the
Epistle, and the Page, Cornelii Papae Epistola 1. And again, The sirst Epistle
of Pope Cornelius: yea, though Binius says in his Notes on this Epistle, that
S. Jerome witnesses Cornelius to have written many Epistles; and that this
therefore is undeservedly taxed for its faith and authority, which has gotten
so famous a Witness as Jerome. Yet after all this, ( though (among other
Circumstances of Importance) it has been laid down as a Good Record by Binius
his Ancestors) he says, That it does attribute to Cornelius the Translation of
the H. Bodies of Peter and Paus from the Catatumbae, (which is, if I mistake
not, from the meaner Graves of the Common people) Id ex Libri Pontificalis
Erroribus in Epistolam irrepsisse, probabile, etc. That that crept in into this
Epistle, from among the Errors of the Pontifical, seems probable. For more
truly that Translation happened in the first Age, a little after their Passion:
As by the testimony of S. Gregory the Pope we demonstrated above.

Surely the feet upon which this Peacock stands, are very Black. The pride of
Rome is founded like that of the great Whore, on the waters at least, if not in
the mire.

If you examine What, or Where this Testimony of S. Gregory is, that
overthrows this Epistle of Cornelius, a Person much more Ancient and
Authentic than himself; and with what Circumstances, or with what form of
words Binius makes use of the same? Let your patience turn to Binius his Notes
on those Words in the Pontifical, Hic Temporibus, etc. in the Life of
Cornelius, and there it shall be satisfied.

CAP. XIX. The ridiculous Forgery of the Council of Sinuessa, put into the
Roman Martyrologies. How the City, and the name of it was consumed, (though
when, no man can tell) by an Earthquake.
MARCELLINVS the Bishop of An. 296.
Rome entered on his See about the year 296 in the days of Dioclesian. The
Pontifical in the Life of Marcellinus tells us, that he offered incense to an
Idol, to escape the wrath of the Emperor.

Binius says, When Marcellinus the Roman Pontisex was therefore accused,
because in the Temple of Vesta and (...), he burnt incense, and offered
Sacrifice to Heathen Images and Idols, to wit, that of Jupiter and Saturn; 300
Bishops came together in the City Sinuessa, to pass their Sentence on the Fall
of Marcellinus. The place of meeting was the Crypta Cleopatrensis, which fifty,
one after another could enter, it not being able to contain them all, by reason
of its straitness. After the discussion of the Cause, and condemnation of
certain Priests, Marcellinus the chief Bishop, publicly confessing his Sin,
(...) Sackcloath, sprinkled with ashes, prostrate on the ground, acting
Repentance, said, I have sinned before you, and cannot be in the Order of
Priests: and so condemned himself by his own Sentence. After those of
Magdenburg, the English Innovators reject this Convention of 300 Bishops, as if
it were feigned by the Donatists. Because they think it improbable, that in
this 20. year of Dioclesian, wherein the fiercest Flame of Persecution burned,
and the Anger of the Emperors did rage more bitterly against the Christians,
throughout all the Roman world, 300 Bishops should be assembled together, Bin.
Not. in Vit. Marcellin.

By the way I must tell you, that the English do upon several accounts, besides
that of the Persecution reject this Council of Sinuessa, however it pleases
Binius to ease himself of labor, by mentioning only that. Neither do they
fasten it on the Donatists, but the Papists. For though Marcellinus be made a
Donatist in opinion, his Confession being founded on that Doctrine, that no man
guilty of mortal sin, can (though penitent) continue in the Order of Priests:
Binius himself puts the Doctrine into his mouth: while other Doctrines relating
to the Popes Supremacy, and other Persons defending this Council, show plainly
enough whose it is, notwithstanding the present Mist which Binius puts
before our eyes. Hear him on.

But if no fear of the Persecution of Decius, says he, could hinder them, but
that about sifty years before this, as we said in our Notes of the Roman
Council held in the Interregnum, many Bishops of the Remoter Provinces, and
many others neighboring on Italy, and living in hanishment, came together upon
the Letters of the Roman Clergy, at Rome, and holding a Council there, ordained
those things, which the present necessity of the Church did require: Why should
it seem more distant from the truth, that by the most vigilant care of the
Roman Clergy, the Bishops of Foreign Churches should be called together by
Circular Epistles, and no fear or Danger of Life deterring them, meet at the
time and place appointed, to transact and decide that cause, of all other the
most deplorable, in which not only the Roman Church, but the whole Christian
Religion was brought into the greatest Hazard, wherein the whole Foundation of
the Church was shaken, in the first Bishop of the Catholic Faith, and almost
utterly overthrown?

Binius you see consesseth the Truth, that Mercellinus did offer Incense (...)
an Idol: and that the Gates of Hell had well nigh prevailed against S. Peter's
Chair, in the Idolatry of his Apostate Successor. That therefore they might
imitate God, though the perverse way, in bringing Good out of Evil: the matter
is so neatly ordered, that the Ball reboundeth higher by its Fall; the Weakness
of Marcellinus increases the Popes power, and his Disgrace is turned to his
Greater Glory. His slip is made the establishment of all his Successors. For a
Council of 300. Bishops is raised up, by the Invention of the Papists, which do
all of them most humbly beseech the Cuilty Pope to condemn himself, and Decree
with one Consent, that the Sovereign Bishop of the City of Rome can be
condemned by no body. For out of thine own mouth thou shall be justified, and
out of thine own mouth thou shall be condemned. It is an important Point: and
no witness fit to be lost, that gives Testimony thereunto.

Concerning this Council therefore, on the Words Act a Omnia. The says, Though
exceeding many among the most learned of men, have endeavored to prove those
Acts to be Spurious, and of no weight, truly by Strong Arguments, and would
esteem it as no other than a Device of the Donatists, cunningly contrived that
the Name of Marcellinus, well accepted of among all the Ancients, and had in
great Esteem, should be defamed: We nevertheless conceive the same Acts, to be
not only not Commentions, or forged, to be ascribed to the Donatists; but
rather to be had in great Veneration, both because venerable Antiquity it self
fights Sharply for them, compelling a Reverence even from the unwilling by
its majesty: and because by the Common Assent of all, being believed, it has
hitherto been received, and without all Controversy maintained in the Ancient
Martyrologies and Breviaries both of the Roman, and other Churches. Baron. In
Append. Tom. 10. Ad hunc Annum.

Note here, that as Surius, and Binius and Baronius, so even the Roman Church
has it self received this Council into her purest Records, her Sacred
Martyrologies, and Mass-books, or Breviaries. Which is a reason above all other
reasons, compelling Binius and his fellows, Baronius, Labbe, and the Collectio
Regia, to embrace this Council. For it cannot be rejected without Prejudice to
the Authority of the Roman Chair. Which as it clears the Donatists from the
pretended imputation, discovers plainly who are the true Authors of this
Council.

For though it be more than probable, that some pitiful barren Head, void of
all Sense and Learning, did at first compose it, out of the affection he had to
the Sea of Rome: Yet as in Treason all are Principals, so here the Receiver is
as bad as the Thief. The Roman Church by aiding and abetting this Abomination,
has made it her own: Be it forged in what empty Shop it will, she has
magnified it to the Stars, by fixing it in her Martyrologies: The Chair is
defiled with the Forgery it has adopted: and the Pope has made it as much
his, as if it had been the Issue of his own Brain.

Being therefore it cannot now be deserted, without discovering the shameful
secrets of the Roman Church; Binius like a good Son endeavors to maintain it:
but with such ill success, that he shames her more by miscarrying in the
enterprise.

First he says, Exceeding many among the most learned of men, have endeavored
to prove those Acts to be spurious. By these most learned of Men he means the
Papists, not the Protestants: So that exceeding many of the most learned
Papists have rejected that Council; lest the Chair should be too much disgraced
with the reproach of Marcellinus. 2. He says, They have endeavored to prove
these Acts to be spurions, truly by strong Arguments. He confesses the
Arguments to be strong against it. And here he varies a little from himself:
for besides the Persecution of Decius, there are Arguments and strong ones to,
against this Council; which he before concealed. Nor do the English Innovators
only, but the Papists also, and the most learned among them write against it.
What Arguments then does Binius bring to defend it? His Opinion, Antiquity,
General Consent, and all resolved into the Roman Martyrology. As for the first,
his Nevertheless I conceive, will not do, against strong Arguments. Antiquity,
which is the second, stands upon other men's Legs, and speaks by other men's
Mouths: She may be painted like a Woman, but is of neither Sex: And though
Binius would persuade us, that She fights in person very sharply for the
Council, you can see nothing but her Name, and his Talk of her Majesty. She
wanted the tongue of the Learned, and is a dumb Champion. His General Consent
is disturbed by those exceeding many most Learned men, of which he had (...)
before, that endeavonred to prove these Acts to be spurious. They come out of
their Graves with strong Arguments, to disorder the common Assent of all, by
which it is believed; to defile the Majesty of Antiquity, by which it is
asserted, and to reprove Binius for a Liar, who faith, that it has hitherto
been received, and without all Controversy maintained. Nor is he a Liar only,
but contradicts himself, and foolishly bewrays his design, while he shufles
and cuts upon all occasions.

But perhaps you will say his meaning is, It is without all Controversy
maintained in the Roman Martyrologies and Breviaries. That reserve be keeps for
a (...), then, but it will not do. He might say, it was put in without all
controversy, because the Roman Martyrologies and Breviaries were works of
Darkness, made in Secret by the Popes Authority: But is it maintained without
all controversy, when exceeding many of the most Learned Men endeavor to
prove its Acts to be Spurious by strong Arguments? Does veneralle Antiquity it
self fight sharply for them, compelling a Beverence from the unwilling by its
Majesty; or is it by the common Assent of all believed; when exceeding many
endeavor to refute it? As for the Roman Martyrologies, it is no wonder it
should lie quiet in then. None were by but the Actors only when the Council was
put in and if by dissembling the fraud, it be maintained there, it is no great
business. But there it is, and that is sufficient.

For my part I could not have believed, that Binius or any other Sober man,
could ever reckon such (...) piece of Barbarism for a Council (...) I not seen
it with my own eyes in the Author. It is so much against all reason, that a
thing so absurd should be owned, to the disgrace of all Martyrs, Synods, and
Councils. And were it not for the (...) of the wonder, the Roman Martyrologies,
whose credit must be saved, it would be my lasting amazement.

Binius is so stiff in defending this Council, that in the next words he
charge ignorance on S. Augustine for not understanding it.

Love and Hunger will eat through stone walls. His Zeal for the Church of Rome,
and its Direful necessity, makes him to defend this Council in the Roman
Martyrologies, against an apparent falsehood in the bottom of it, against very
many most learned men, against all the barbarous intolerable Nonsense and
Tautologies therein, against the Killing Circumstance, that there was no such
City or Crypta at least in the World, as well as against the Impossibility of
calling it, on his own Principles; Besides all which, the vanity of its Design,
and the Absurdity of its meeting on such an occasion, is sufficient to detect
it.

The Lie in the bottom of it is in those Words, Cum (...) in Bello Persarum.
This Council was convened, as the Title shows, when Dioclesian was in his War
with the Persians. Upon these words Binius says, Haec (...) emendentur falsa
sunt, etc. These Words be false unless they be mended: for since Eusebius, and
diverse others witness, that Dioclesian in this 20. Years of his Reign divested
himself of the Empire, and which is more, two years before triumphed at Rome
with his Colleague Maximianus, for having conquered the Persians; how I pray you
could (...) this year be going forth with his Army against the Persians.

This is one reason more, for which the Writers of Magdenburg, and the English
Innovators, as he is pleased to style them, reject that Council. Another is
contained in Binius his Notes on the word Sinuessa, number.] So called from the
City Sinuessa in a certain Crypta whereof, called Cleopatrensis, they came
together secretly to shun the Sword of the raging Gentiles. For whereas men
doubt, whether any such City was ever in the World, he proceeds to tell us,
that it is not to be admired at al, that there is no mention made either of
this City, or such a Crypta, in any other Writers, nor at least the smallest
memory of this Place to be found: Since we know that by great Earthquakes, not
only mountains and plains have lost their Situation and Name, but the
Desolation of some most ample Cities has bin also made

It is an unlucky Chance that this City should be swallowed up by an
Earthquake: As ominous almost as the Burning of the Nicene Canons by the
Arrians. That other Place have been lost we know: but no man knows that this
City was lost, nor is the least memory of it to be found. Whereas such Strange
Accidents being the (...) Themes for the Trumpet of Famous such a Rarity had
made it more remarkable, than if it had continued until this Day: Since Marvels
chiefly busy the Pens of Historians. That they should be Silent, or its Name be
shaken out of (...) Books by an Earthquake, is the greatest Miracle Story does
afford.

Inserting the Notes of Peter Crab and Surius, he (...) (...) another reason
fot which we reject that (...). Be pleased to look back on Peter Crab, and
there you shall see his Premonition beginning thus, Because of the intolerable
and too too grievous Depravation of the Copies, and c The Collectio Regia has
rejected the old ones, and for the smoother Convevance of that Council has
left them both out, and recorded only the false one that was made in their
Stead. So may it come to pass in time, that all the Barbarismes shall be
forgotten, and the well-mended but Spurious Copy be taken for the true Record.
They reject the old one for their Nonsense, and we theirs for its Novelty.

Surius, whose Premonition to the Reader Binius reserveth till after the
Council, yields us another reason whereupon we refuse it. It is pretty to see
the Hypocrisy wherewith he admires the Care and Diligence of its first
Compilers, notwithstanding the Depravations and Corruptions of the same. For he
tells us, It seemed not good to the * Collector, to pass over these things
for the forementioned Peter Crab
Trifles, which our forefathers have with so much Labor and Diligence left us.
That is (when you pull of the mask, which Peter Crab the Collector, out of some
idle Monk or other set on work by the Church of Rome, was pleased to record,
for the interest of that Chair) though those little Trifles, The in tolerable
Difference and Depravation of the Copies would otherwise have hindered him. The
reason why he defends it, moves us to reject it. For they, who being Zealous
for the Bishop of Rome, conceit these things to be (...) by those who rival the
Apostolical See, as if it were unworthy of the Apostolical Chur, that in great
a Bishop should be brought to so (...) a Pass, as to Sacrifice (...) (...) seem
little to remember how Peter Denial did not hurt him; or that there is joy
among the Angeis over one Sinner that repents; or that this very Marcellinus
afterward constantly met his Death for the sake of Christ; and according to
the Proverb, sought manfully after he ran away. However it be, O Reader, we
would not have that concealed from thee, which we have found in the Monuments
of the Ancients, leaving the Truth of this to the Records themselves, and not
prejudicating any man's Sentence by our Opinion. His Reason why it may be held
for a good and true Record, is the safety of the Roman Chair not with standing
it should be thought so. And one of the Reasons why we so greatly suspect them,
is that very behavior: The advantage of the Roman See being the only
Touchstone among them, of Records and Forgeries. By this very example you see,
that men as wise as Binius leave the Council Doubtful; and by his Testimony you
find that many Romanists renounce it: So may you discern by the Crookedness of
their Rule, that they are fit to be suspected. It is a very great Secret and
warily to be discovered, and that to none but friends! but they that are
zealous for the Bishop of Rome, shape their Opinions by their Affections. Some
that are zealous, conceit those things to be feigned, because they think it
unworthy of the Apostolical Chair, that so great a Bishop should sacrifice to
Idols. While some of them, that are zealous too for the Bishop of Rome, because
they remember how Peter's denial did not hurt him, and know that the fear of
the former might easily be removed with pretenses enough, think it better to
retain this Council. For there is joy among the Angels for a Sinner that
repents; and Marcellinus's Martyrdom is as glorious to the Chair, as his
Fall was disgraceful. The one are afraid of the Popes Infallibility, and
because they think the Fall of Marcellinus in that respect too dangerous to be
recorded, would suppress the Council: The other are zealous of the Popes
Supremacy, and because they would exempt him from all Superiors, and make him
incapable of being judged by any, record the Council. And which is the Wisest,
that is the Question: Not what is true, but what is expedient? While their
Judgments are formed not according to Things, but conveniences.

Another reason why we reject this Council is because it contains a Doctrine,
which no true Record of Antiquity teaches: but where with the Forgeries before
laid open do extremely abound. And here the behavior of Surius is a little
further to be noted. He avers that he found these things in the Monuments of
the Ancients, and yet is so dashed, that he leaves the truth of them to the
Records themselves. What Records, what Monuments, what Ancients can these be,
that are fit to be suspected? He will not prejudicate any man's Sentence by his
opinion. Which is a piece of Liberality in a (...). that implies some
extraordinary Cause not to be uttered

Another reason of our opposing it, is because it so notoriously wresteth the
H. Scriptures. That Place which is spoken of the general Account, which all men
must give at the Day of judgment, being applied in particular, to show that no
man may condemn the Pope. Out of thine own Mouth thou shall be justified, etc.
Which being the Sole foundation on which they lay any stress, is with so much
ridiculous Babbling repeated, that it would turn a man's Stomach, and make him
sick to peruse it.

But the Impossibility of the Thing is an Argument ad Hominem, that may perhaps
be more convincing. For as they hold that no man may condemn a Pope, So do they
hold that no man, but he, can call a Council. And though for Formsake they
ascribe the Power of Calling Councils, in the Vacancy of the Sea, to the Roman
Clergy; yet when a Pope is Alive, they utterly deny it to them, orany else:
Because the Pope is Supreme, and be he Good or Bad, can be judged by none. By
what Authority then did the Roman Clergy call this Council, before the Pope was
judicially deposed. If the Roman Clergy take upon them to condemn him before he
is heard, his Condition is worse than that of other men. If they presume to
call a Council before he is condemned, they usurp his Authority, and act
independently to the prejudice of the Chair, in such sort as was never heard
of; there being no President or Copy but this, of such a Proceeding. Though the
Pope were a Criminal, yet every one must not judge him. I suppose they will
Confess there have been many wicked Popes, yet while the Pope is a Pope, no man
without his Authority may call a Council. The thing is impossible therefore in
it self. For he must First be condemned, before a Council could be called to
condemn him; and before he could be condemned, the Council must be called.
Which would seem among Protestants a Contradiction.

The Absurdity of the Plot, is another reason why we reject it. Three hundred
Bishops in a persecution adventure their Lives to meet together, upon an
unwarrantable Call before the Pope was convicted as a Criminal, and without
knowing whether he would come to Judgment; though certainly knowing that none
could compel him, convene him before them. They produce one Day 14. Witnesses,
another Day 44. And care is taken, according to the Decree of the Epilogus
Brevis: to complete the number of 72. Witnesses: And when all is done, they
confess they have no Power to condemn him. The Absurdities are not easily
fathomed. How gross was it for the Roman Clergy to call a Council for the
Deposing of a Pope, whom they before knew nothing could condemn but his own
Sentence? How absurd, for them to judge the Pope, whom they continually teach no
man can judge? How much more absurd for the Council to meet to depose him, who
if he were pleased to declare their Sentence null, all was in vain? It is just
as if a Rebellions Parliament should meet on their own Heads, to call their
King to account, upon pretense of his Crimes. If this be admitted, all must be
Disorder and Confusion in Kingdom.

If his Ingenuity had led him to depose himself, without giving all these
Bishops the trouble, he might have done it at home. That he wanted Ingenuity,
his denial, of the Fact (before the Council) testifies. Whereupon I wonder
what brought him thither, or what Miracle made him stand before the Bar, at his
Trial? But had he not denied the Fact, the Ceremony had been lost of producing
seventy and two Witnesses. Which relation to the putid Forgery of the Epilogus
Brevis, as yet unmade, utterly mars the business.

The Council it self is the greatest evidence against it self in the World. If
you please to give your self the trouble of reading it, either in Peter Crab,
or Surius, or Nicolinus, or Binius, and compare it with the Letters of Pope
Sylvester and the Nicene Council, recorded afterward, you will find reason to
believe the very same Dunce made them all. Those three being the absurdest
pieces, that ever were seen with learned eyes.

For a Taste of this, take but the beginning of the two old pretended
Originals, A. and C. to let go the third, which being made by latter men, is
nothing to the purpose.

A. C. Dioclefiano and Maximiano Augustis. Cum multi in vita sua asperse (...)
suae vacillitate mentiebantur, ori (...) dicentes, quod (...) (...) (...)
vanitas super se sentirent, and ad Sacrificandum (...) tempore multi
inducerentur per (...) (...), (...) (...) Diis. Marcellinus itaque, etc. Cum
multi in (...) sua aspersu mentis suae vacillitate (...), origin, dicentes,
quod de eorum Superstitionem vanis super sentirent, and ad (...) codem tempore
multi (...) per pecuniam ut (...) Di is. Marcellinus itaque, etc.

Take which you will, and try to construe it; you will find it impossible: yet
in this Diaject he holds from end to end. Many things more we might speak,
but we study brevity.

CAP. XX. Diverse things premised in order, first to the Establishment, and then
to the Refutation of Constantine's Donation; the first by Binius, and the
latter by the Author. The Forgeries of Marcellus, Pope Eusebius, and Binius
opened.
MArcellus a Roman sat five years, six An. 304.
months, and twenty one days, says the Pontisical. He succeeded Marcellinus.
There are two Decretal Epistles aseribed to him, and both counterfeit: The one
is coneerning the Primacy and Authority of the Roman Church: the Other is
written to Maxentius the Heathen Emperor, and a Tyrant. Concerning which last,
Binius (in his Notes upon it) says, Hanc Epistolam, Anno 308. Scriptam,
Additamentum aliquod accepisse, Res Scriptae hic parum sibi cohaerentes
indicant. He holds it for a good Record; but there are so many things
inconsistent in it, that he fears it has taken a Dose, and confesses that some
things were put in by way of Forgery.

This is an easy way of defending. There was never any Deed forged, wherein the
larger half, being directed purely according to form of Law, was not Good. But
if for that cause, when it comes to be Scanned, the forger at every
Detectionshould say, This was forged indeed, but the rest is good; the Court
would laugh at him: And this is Binius his present Case.

In the time of Marcellus there was a Council called at Eliberis, An. 305.
where they forgot Binius his Council of Apostles at Antioch; and among other
Canons decreed this for one, Placuit Picturas in Ecclesia esse non debere. Ne
quod colitur and adoratur, in Parietibus depingatur. They think it unlawful to
put any Picture of what is adored, in the Church on the Walls. He takes much
pains to pick this Thorn out of the Popes foot: but we leave him at his work,
and proceed to

THE LIFE, EPISTLES, AND DECREES OF EVSEBIVS POPE, Out of the Pontifical of
Pope Damasus. Eusebius a Grecian sat nine years, four An 309.
months, and three days. Binius proves, he could sit but two years, some
months, etc. And whereas Eusebius says, the Cross was found in his days, and
Fathers the Invention of it upon one Judas, converted thereupon, and called (at
his Baptism) Quiriacus; though he names the day of the month exactly, the
fifth of the Nones of May, and instituteth and Holy Day thereupon; yet is all
this rejected by Binius for a Fable. For by the consent of all Ancient Writers,
says (...), the Cross was found after the Nicene Council, by Helena the Mother
of Constantine the Great. Howbeit, there is a very formal Epistle to the
Bishops of (...) and Campania, in the name of (...), devoutly abusing H.
Scripture, exalting Piety, and the Popes Chair; till at last it decrees an
Holy Day for this happy Invention, solemnly enjoined by the Authority of this
Roman Catholic and Apostolical Bishop, though all this be as very a Cheat as
any of the former. Binius has a cure for this too, but a very course one: This
part of the Epistle we confess to be counterfeit. Vid. Bin. in loc.

Melchiades an African sat three years, An. 311.
eleven months, and eight days. Binius says, two years, etc. And reprehends
the Pontificals Confusion, which I shall not (...) to mention, having greater
matters (...).

(...) his time Constantine the first Christian Emperor arose: Concerning whom
the Pontifical is silent in the time of Melchiades, having need of him in that
of (...): but Binius gives us this little Abstract of his History here.

After an Interval of seven days. October. 3. (...). Christ. 311. in the third
year of the Emperor (...), Melchiades began to sit. In his time, six months
from the return of Peace to the Church being searcely past, (...) in the East,
being Emperor with Licinius, stirred up a most grievous Persecution against
the Christians, whom he called the Firebrands, and the Authors of all the Evils
in the World. Eusebius l. 9. c. 6. Maxentius in the West oppressed the Empire with
a grievous (...): But Constantine his Fellow Emperor that Reigned with him in
the West, as Licinius Reigned with Maximinus in the East, being stirred up
partly by injuries, and partly by the prayers of the Romans, resolved to
suppress the Tyrant. When therefore he designed the War, he despised the Aids
of the Heathen Gods, and determined in himself to implore only the Creator of
Heaven and Earth, whom his Father Constantius adored. It happened therefore
that while he was praying for Prosperity, he saw at Midday the Sign of the
Cross, made with Beams of Light, appearing in the Heavens; in which these words
were manifestly contained, IN HOC VINCE. The Explication whereof when he had
learned from our Lord Jesus Christ appearing to him in his sleep, and from his
Priests; he undertakes the War against Maxentius, and happily conquers him.
Which Victory being gloriouly gotten, in acknowledgment that it came from that
One Invisible and Immortal God, he erected a Trophy of the Cross in the midst
of the City, with this Famous Motto: HOC (...) ARI SIGNO, VERO FORTITUDINIS
INDICIO CIVITATEM VESTRAM TYRANNIDIS JUGO LIBERAVI. Under this Saving Sign, the
true Mark of Fortitude, I freed your City from the Yoke of Tyranny. And as a
man fest Token of his Liberality and Piety, he gave to Melchiades the Public
House in the Lateran, which heretofore was the Palace of Fausta the Empress.
Opt. Mil. He restored the Goods of the Church, gave great Privileges and
Immunities to the Clergy, and made a Decree, that they should be maintained at
the Public Charge.

In the latter end of this first Tome, Binius has a long Record of Gelasius
Cyzicenus, in fair Greek and Latin, who being a very Ancient Author, confirms
all these things, showing the madness of Maximinus, and his destiuction, the
building of Churches, the evil manners of Licinius, the Victory which the
Religious Emperor obtained against that Wicked man, the Peace of the Churches
after Licinius his Death, and the several ways whereby the good Emperor
promoted the Christian Affairs.

Yet as if all this were a Dream, the Scene is immediately overthrewn; (...)
(...) Tyraat, a Murderer, an Oppressor, a Persecuter of the Church, and smitten
with Leprosy from Heaven! namely for his great abominations: Licinius is
innocent, and unjustly slain; but Constantine is made the Destroyer of peace.
For in the Life of Sylvester the next Bishop after Melchiades, the Pontifical
says, he was banished into the Mountain Soracte. Upon which words, Binius
further says, that Sylvester searing the cruelty of the Emperor, fled from
the City, as his own Acts, and Zozimus, and Sozomen do probably show.

As for Sylvesters Acts so simply and freely cited here, merely to cheat the
Reader, he afterward Bin. Not. in Constant. Edict.
confesses them to be a Forgerie. And as for Zozimus and Sozomen: those Words,
[Do probably show.] show Binius to be a Sophister. He would fain have fathered
the Story upon Zozimus and Sozomen: but his Courage sailed him: for they speak
not expressly, but Probably show; that is, in his conceit, they give him color
enough to side with a Cheat, a Forger, a Liar, a notorious Counterfeit,
Damasus, against all the true Antiquities and Histories in the World. The
positive Relation of Eusebius Pamphilus an holy Father in the Niceue Council,
that lived in those times, the Records of Gelasius Cyzicenus that ancient
Author, and Nicolinus, the late Compiler of the Councils, that commend Eusebius
as the most faithful witness among Ecclestastical Writers, being palpably
contradicted, while Zozimus the Heathen is favored in some dark expression,
wherein his Envy tempted him to carp at the Emperor; because he was next under
God, the Author of so much Peace and Felicity amongst the Christians. As for
Sozomen he was a Christian indeed, but too late an Authot to contend with
Eusebius and Gelasius (...). Neither does Binius say he positively avers any
such thing, but probably shows either a (...) or a Fernbush; Some frailty
perhaps which proves Consiantine a Man: but Binius should have produced clear
Testimonies, as sound and authentic as the former, if he meant to swim against
all Antiquity, in disgracing so glorious an Emperor, positively affirming him
to be guilty of Murder, and Paricide, Apostasy, and Idolatry, Persecution, etc.

Binius acts his part too far: for, is (as he says) Constantine
counterfeited himself to be an Heathen only to satisfic the People; his great
munificence, and kindness to the Christians having imbittered the Multitude, so
far, that it almost brake out into a Rebellion: for the appeasing of the
Sedition therefore, he dissembled his Religion, upon Temporal Considerations,
for which God was provoked, Certainly he could never hope to be cured of his
(...), by going in earnest to the Heathen Priests and their Idols, as Binius
pretends, when he was so deeply humbled, and in danger of Destruction.

But this whole pretense is overthrown, and the Genius of the Man more clearly
(...) in the passage following.

In (...) Life of Marcellus with which we began the Chapter, and which was some
years before this pretended necessity, he tells us that Maxentius, who
studied to possess himself of the Tyranny of Rome, at his first entrance into
the Roman Empire, feigned himself craftily to embrace our Faith; thereby to
please the Roman people, and to take them with his (...), for which cause he
remitted the (...) against the Christians: and put on (...) a show of Pretty,
that for a time he (...) (...) of Courtesy, Love, and Humanity. This he
proves out of (...). l. 8. (...). (...). But for a purpose of which (...) was
not aware: his design being hereby to justify the Counterfeit Epistle of
Marcellus, and to palliate the absurdities therein contained, the Popes ranting
so foolishly out of the Bible, and threatening Maxentius the Heathen Emperor,
with the Authority of his (...) Clement; While he was a Pagan (...). Now if
Maxentius found it necessary to counterfeit himself a Christian, to please the
People; Constantine, who found the minds of men far more (...) to Religion then
Maxentius did, was by consequent, more engaged to appear a Christian, than
(...) was; that so he might also please the People. But voluble Wits in partial
Heads are bended easily to any Cause, they fancy for their advantage: Otherwise
the Cross in the Heavens, the Trophies upon Earth, the prevailing glory of
Christianity, the victories of Constantine, the joy and exultation of the
people, and the general applause with which he was received throughout the
whole World, would have taught Binius another Lesson, than Constantines
necessity to counterfeit himself an Heathen, which is the mere Chymera of a
lying Brain: for which he is not able to produce any one Author in the World,
worth the naming.

He produces the Testimony of Eusebius concerning the necessity of Maxentius
his counterfeiting himself to be a Christian, but Eusebius speaks not one
word of any necessity lying upon Constantine to counterfeit himself an Heathen:
but the contrary, so far, that Binius, who had quoted Eusebius so gravely
before, brandeth him with the Reproach of an Arrian, because he crosses his
design now about Constantines Donation.

For the Donation is founded on Constantines Cure, his Cure on his Leprosy,
his Leprosy on his Apostasy, his Apostasy upon a Necessity to comply with the
perverseness of the Heathen people, whose Power was of too great a sway for his
Design in the Empire: All which is contradicted by the continual decaying of
Heathenism that then was day by day, and the growth of Christianity, which had
taken such root and possession in the People, that there needed nothing but the
change of the Emperor, to turn the Empire into Christendom. But this Necessity
must be invented: for else it would seem impossible that he should turn Pagan,
after our Savior had appeared to him in his sleep, after he had seen the Cross
in the Air, after he had set it up in his Standard, aster all his Victories
gotten under that glorious Banner, after he had erected its Trophy in the City,
and made the World Glorious by his Munificence to the Churches.

For this Cause, a far off, and so long before the end could be discovered, to
which it should be applied, does Binius take his Rise from the Fable in the
Donation, and shape his Discourse to the (...) of the Sea, by rooting the (...)
(...) in the Minds of men. For all (...) is to no other purpose, than to (...)
the Donation of the Emperor, thereby to settle the Empire in the Chair: for
the sake of which, he tramples upon the Emperor, wryeth Antiquity, wresteth
Authority, cites Forgeries and Heathen Authors, defaceth the History of the
Church, and rewards the greatest of all Benefactors with the basest ingratitude.

All these Wars are commenced afar off: for the strength of Rome is always at
a distance: near at hand she is weak and feeble; when he comes up close to the
matter, though he makes a great semblance of its evident certainty, writing
over head in Capital Letters, EDICTUM CONSTANTINI: And putting down the
Donation under it at large, commenting on it also very formally, nay and
writing in the Margin of his Notes, Constantini Donatio defenditur, and near
the close of them, Constantini Donatio consirmatur: yet after all this, he
confesses the Donation to be Spurious. His Design being no more, than to make a
Show, and cover that onfession; which mere necessity, at greatest pinch,
wrested from him. His Confession lies in little room, and his Notes are made
for the assistance of Confederates; Such mighty Tomes for the Help of a sworn
Party. As for the rest of men that are allured perhaps by the Magnificence of
the Books to admire them, and to grace their Studies with them, such as Lords
and Princes, he very well knows, they may feed their Eyes with Great Titles,
and Glorious Shows afar off; but they will never penetrate (...) Stupendous
Volumes. by reason of other Diversions, Labors, cares, and (...) (...), which
call them (...) (...) other secular Objects. So that they may easily be
deceived with the outward Appearance and splendour of such great and learned
Collections, which (...) Design is the Mystery of the Popish Councils.

For in the Body of those Notes, Binius himself by many well studied Arguments
sets himself strenuously to overthrow the Donation; and Fathers it on the
Knavery of Balsamon a Greek, who produced it (as he pretends) with an intent to
dis race the Roman Chair; by making the World believe, that the Popes Supremacy
came not by Divine Institutions but the Grant of the Emperor: Which he abhors
as sickle, weak, and humane, choosing rather that the Popes Right should rest on
the Scriptures.

Labbe, Cossartins, and the COLLECTIO REGIA follow Binius exactly, even to
those Cheats in the Margin. But now it is high time to see the Contents of this
wonderful Donation.

CAP. XXI. The EDICT of our Lord CONSTANTINE the Emperor.
IN the Name of the Holy and Individual A Forgery beginning in the Name of the
Father, Son, and H. Ghost.
Trinity, the Father, and the Son, and the H. Ghost; Flavius Constantinus,
Caesar, and Emperor, in Jesus Christ, one of the same H. Trinity, etc. To the
most Holy and Blessed Father of Fathers Sylvester, Bishop and Pope of the City
of Rome, and to all his Successors about to sit in the Seat of blessed Peter,
to the end of the World: And to all our most Reverend and Catholic Bishops,
amiable in God, made Subject throughout the World to the H. Church of Rome, by
this our Imperial Constitution, etc. It is too long to put it down formally,
and at large: We shall therefore take only the chief Contents, as they lie in
the Donation. It first contains a large account of the Articles of his Faith;
Secondly, the story of his Leprosy, Cure, and Baptism: wherein the Font is
remarkably called Piseina, ( the Popes Fishpond as it were) then he comes to
the Gift it self.

While I learned these things by the Preaching of the blessed Sylvester, and by
the benefit of the blessed Peter, found my self perfectly restored to my
health, we judged it profitable, together with All the Nobles, and the Se nate,
converted in a moment.
all our Nobles, and the whole Senate, my Princes also, and the whole People
Subject to the Empire of the Roman, Glory; that as S. Peter upon Farth seems
to be made the Vicar of the Son of God, the Bishops also that are the
Successors of him, the Prince of the Apostles, may obtain the Power of
Principality given from us and our Empire, more than the Earthly Clemency of
our Imperial Majesty is seen to have had; choosing the Prince of the Apostles,
and his Successors, for our steadfast Patrons with God. And we have decreed that
this H. Roman Church shall be honored with Veneration, even as our Terrene
Imperial Power is: And that the most Holy Seat of B. Peter be more gloriously
exalted than our Earthly Throne; giving it Power, and Dignity of Glory, and
Vigor, and Honor Imperial. And we decree and ordain, that he shall hold the
Principality, as well over the four Principal Sees of Antioch, Alexandria,
Jerusalem, and Not built.
Constantinople, as over all the Churches of God in the whole World. And by his
Judgment let all things whatsoever, pertaining to the Worship of God, and the
Establishment of the Christian Faith be ordained.

When Binius pleases to give Efficacy to a Miracle, all the World shall be
converted in a moment. Notwithstanding all the Miracles and Victories before,
Constantine was fain to counterfeit himself an Heathen for fear of the people:
Now all his Nobles, and the Senate, are changed in an instant; and his Leprosy
upon Earth has done more than his Cross in the Heavens. So easy it is to blow
men's minds with a Breath, when they are dead and gone. His Princes also, and
the whole people subject to the Empire of the Roman Glory, judged it
prositable, together with him, and his Nobles, to do that which they abhorred
before, to give to Banished Sylvester, and his Heirs, the Glory of the Roman
Empire: As it that one Miracle had in a trice for Virtue outgone all our
Saviors.

The last Clause contains something more than the Emperor had power to bestow.
That a Layman should by Deed of Gift devise, and give away the power of
determining all Controversies in Religion, to whom he fancieth; may be put
among the Popes Extravagants (as some of their Decrees are called:) yet with
Constantinople, (a City yet unmade) this also is given to the Pope in the
present Donation. But upon good reason: For it is just that the Holy Law should
retain the Head of Principality there, where our Savior, the Instituter of
Holy Laws, commanded the B. Peter to undertake the Chair of his Apostleship.

A merrier accident follows, he bequeaths his Goods to the Dead! It is true
indeed he was allied to them, for he was dead when the Deed was made, as well
as they. S Peter's Trustees having the management of his Pen, knew very well,
that whatever he gave to his most blessed Lords, Peter and Paul, (since dead
men never want Heirs) would fall to their share: and like our late Long
Parliament, conspired to give large Boons to themselves, in form following.

WE Exhort and admonish all, that Ibid.
with us they would pay abundant thanks to our God and Savior Jesus Christ,
because being God in Heaven above, and in Earth beneath, he has visited us by
his H. Apostles, and made us worthy to receive the H. Sacrament of Baptism,
and the health of our Body. FOR WHICH we grant to the H. Apostles themselves,
my most Blessed Lords, Constanti e the Great gives his Clothes to S Peter and
S. Paul in heaven.
Peter and Paul, and by them also to B. Sylvester our Father, the chief Bishop
and Pope of our Universal City of Rome, and to all Bishops his Successors that
shall ever sit in the Chair of B. Peter, to the end of the World, Our Diadem,
to wit, the Crown of our (...) together with our Mitre, as also (...) Cloak on
our Shoulders; viz (...) Breast Plate which is wont to compass our Imperial
Neck, as also our Purple Clamys, and Violet Cloak, and all the Imperial
Attires. The Dignity moreover The Popes Guard.
of our Imperial Horsemen: Giving him also the Imperial Scepters, with all
other Signs, Badges, Banners, and other Imperial Ornaments, with the whole
manner of the Procession of our Imperial Highness, and the Glory of our Power.

WE Decree also and Ordain to the most Reverend Clergymen serving that H.
Roman Church, in their diverse Orders, the Height in Singularity, Power and
Excellency, with the Glory whereof our most ample Senate (...) to be adored;
that is, that they shall be made Patricii, and Consuls. As also we promulgate
Secular Power.
it for a Law, that they be beautified with the other Imperial Dignities. AND
as the Imperial Army is adorned, The Popes Army.
so do we Decree the Clergy of the Roman Church to be adorned: And as the
Imperial Power is adorned with diverse Offices, as that of Chamberlains,
Porters, and all Guards; so we will have the Roman Church to be adorned.

AND that the Pontifical Glory may The Popes Horses.
shine most amply, we Decree this also; That the Horses of the Clergy of the
said Roman Church, be beautified with Caparisons, and Linen Vestures of the
whitest color, and so to ride. And as our Senate uses Shoes, cum Vdonibus,
made bright and illustrious with fine white Linen, so let the Clergy also do:
And let the Heavenly, as the Earthly things are, be made comely to the praise
of God.

BUT above all, we give License to our most H. Father Sylvester, Bishop and
Pope of the City of Rome himself, and to all that shall succeed him for ever,
for the Honor and Glory of Christ our God, in the same Great, Catholic, and
Apostolic Church of God, by our Edict, Vt quem placatus proprio False Latin
and Nonsense.
Consilio clericali voluerit, and in numero (...) Clericorum connumerare,
nullum ex omnibus praesumentum superbe agere.

Binius for Clericali will have it Clericare, which he puts over against it in
the Margin. Here are more Barbarismes than one: but I think the drift is that
no man but he whom the Bishop of Rome pleases, shall be made a Priest: and
that no man so made, shall behave himself proudly against the Bishop of Rome.

WE have Decreed this also, That the Ibid
same Venerable Sylvester our Father, the High Priest, and all his Successors,
ought to use the Diadem, to wit, the Crown which we gave him from off our Head,
of pure Gold and Precious Stones, and to wear it on his Head, to the praise of
God, and honor of S. Peter. * BUT because the most The Popes Modesty.
Holy Pope himself will not endure a Crown altogether of Gold on the Crown of
his Priesthood, which he bears to the Glory of the B. Peter, we have with our
own hands put the Mitre of Resplendent White, signifying the most Glorious
Resurrection of our Lord, on his Head: * And holding the Bridle (...) the Great
the Popes Groom or Stirrupholder.
of his Horse, for the Reverence we owe to S. Peter, we served him in the
Office of a Stirrup-holder: Ordaining, that all his Successors shall in single
and peculiar manner use the same Mitre in their Processons, in imitation of our
Empire.

The Popes Modesty comes off purely: Because he would not have his Shaven Crown
profaned with a Crown of Gold; therefore the Emperor must give him the Mitre
too: because it was unlawful for him to wear the one without the other; that
is, his Conscience made a seruple at the one, unless he might have both. being
so made exactly like the Heatheu Monarchs at Rome, Pontifex Maximus, and
Emperor together.

The Regalities were affected, not for themselves; Alas, Ornaments are but
shadows, the Body and Substance is the thing desired.

WHEREFORE that the Pontifical Crown Ibid.
may never wax vile, but he more exalted also than the Dignity of the Terrene
Empire, and the Glory of Power: Behold, we The Popes (...) (...).
give and leave as well our Palace, as was before said, as the City of Rome,
all Italy, and all the Provinces, places, and Cities of the Western Empire, to
our (...) most B. High Priest. and Universal Pope, and to the Power and Tenure
of the Popes his Suc cessors, by firm Imperial Censure, Per have The Popes (...)
Divalem and Pragmaticum Constitutum; By this our Divine and Pragmatical
Constitution, we Decree them to be dispased, and grant them to remain under the
Right and Tenure of the H. Roman Church.

Poor Priests are fain to cheat the people by witty Miracles, and small
Devices, at Shrines and Images, for a little Silver and Gold. The best of them
can attain no more than Lordships, and the Territories of Subjects: As the
Manours evidence, which are given to our Lady of Loretto, and those Lands which
Jesuits squeeze out of dying men with the fear of Purgatory. But the Pope and
his Cardinals find it not suitable to their State and Dignity, to juggle for
less than Empires and Kingdoms; and therefore soar high, you see, in the
present Donation.

Wherefore, says the Emperor, we Ibid.
have thought it convenient to change and remove our Empire, and the power of
our Kingdom into the Eastern Countries, and in the best place of the Province
Byzantium, to build a City after our Name, and there to found our Empire.
Because where the * Head of the The Pope the Head of Religion.
Principality of Priests, and of the Christian * Religion is ordained to be by
the Celestial Emperor, it is not just that the Earthly Emperor should there
have any Power.

Here is a high Career of notorious He resie and Blasphemy together. S. Peter
was called the Prince of the Apostles, but the Pope is the Head of the
Principality; nor Head of the Priests only, but of the Christian Religion:
which I think none but our Savior can possibly be. It smells rank of
Blasphemy; but that the Priestly and Imperial Power should be incompatible, is
Rebellion and Heresy. It shows how incompatible Popish and Imperial Power is:
Yet all these things are ratified by other Dival Sanctions, made by the
Emperor, though recorded no where; as you may see in the words following.

BUT all these things we also have decreed, The Sanction of the Decree
and ratified by other Dival Sanctions, and we decree them to stand
unblemished, and unshaken, to the end of the World. WHEREFORE we protest before
the Living God who commanded us to Reign, and before his Terrible Judgment by
this our Imperial Constitution, that it shall not be lawful for any the
Emperors our Successors, nor for any of our Nobles and Peers, or for the most
Ample Senate, or for all the people of the whole World, now, or hereafter, from
hence in all Ages, lying under our Empire, by any means to contradict, or
break, or in the least to diminish these things; which by this our Imperial
Sanction are granted to the Holy Roman Church, or to all the Bishops of the
same. But if any Breaker or Contemner of these shall arise (which we do not
believe) let him be knotted and ensnared in eternal Damnation, and find the
Saints of God, and the Princes of the Apostles Peter and Paul, Enemies unto
him, both in the Life present, and in that which is to come: and being burnt in
the lower Hell, let him perish with the Devil and all the wicked. The great
Council of Chalcedon consisting Council. (...) (...).
of 620 Fathers, lies under this Sentence; because they made the Patriarch of
(...) equal with the Bishop of Rome: If Constantine the Great did make it, with
the consent of all his Nobles and the whole Senate, before all the Princes and
People of Rome, as is pretended in the Donation. It was too public a thing not
to be heard of, and too remarkable to be let pass in silence. Since therefore
it is incredible, that so many Fathers should wilfully fall under the Curse, it
is certain the whole Donation is a Counterfeit. Howbeit as the Substance of the
Act, so the Ceremony is worth the observation.

But (...) the Page of this our Imperial Decree, we laid it with our own hands
on the venerable Body of the blessed Peter Prince of the Apostles, and there
promising to that Apostle of God, that we would inviolably keep all these
things, and leave them in charge to be kept by the Emperors our Successors, we
delivered them to our blessed Father Sylvester, High Priest, and Gregory the
Great's Blasphemous Title
Universal Pope, and to all the Popes his Successors, the Lord God, and our
Savior Jesus (...) allowing (...), for ever, and happily to be enjoyed. And
the Imperial subscription. The (...) keep you many years, (...) and blessed
Fathers. Dated in Rome, on the (...) day of the Kalends of April. Our Lord
Flavius Constantinus (...) th fourth time, and Gallicanus being Consuls. A NOTE.

No Emperor being ever accustomed, to style himself Our Lord, etc. Those words
Our Lord Flavius Constantinus, coming out of Constantine's own Mouth bewray the
Donation, as made by some other, unless he were at the same time both his own
Subject, and his own Emperor.

CAP. XXII. The Donation of Constantine proved to be a Forgery by Binius
himself. He confesses the Acts of Sylvester, which he before had cited as good
Records, to be Counterfeit.
THose things ( says Binius in his Notes) which are told concerning the
Dominion and Temporal Kingdom, given to the Sea of Rome, are manifestly enough
proved to be likely, by what we said in our Notes upon the former Epistle; as
well as by the Munificence of the Emperor himself, never enough to be praised.

Observe here the modesty of the man! He ought to prove the Instrument itself;
but that he throws by, and talks of the Dominion, and Temporal Kingdom.

2. Neither will he undertake to prove it certain, but likely, that the
Dominion and Temporal Kingdom was given to the Sea of Rome.

3. He cites his Notes on a counterfeit Epistle, to make it likely: For the
Epistle going before was the Epistle of Melchiades, which he confesses to be a
Forgery.

4. The Munificence of the Emperor makes it probable, that he gave away the
Empire to the Sea of Rome. If you will not believe this, you are an
hard-hearted man; for Binius says it.

His Notes upon the former Epistle, to which he refers you, are these:

That the things which are written in this Epistle concerning the Donation of
Constantine to Melchiades and Sylvester, are true, is proved not only from
hence, but most firmly also by the Authority of Optatus Milevitanus, a most
approved Writer. For he writes, lib. 1. cont. Parm. that Constantine and
Licinius being the third time Consuls, to wit, in the year of Christ 313. a
Council of 19 Bishops was held at Rome, in the Cause of Caecilianus and the
Donatists, in the Lateran, in the House of Fausta, which was the Seat of the
Roman Bishop. Truly he does not expressly write, that the House was given to
Melchiades by the Emperor: but since no reason does appear for which it is
necessary, that the Convention of 19 Bishops should require larger Rooms out of
the House of Melchiades, that wherein the foresaid Synod was assembled, to wit,
the Lateran, or House of Fausta, can by no prudent person any more be doubted,
to be given by the Emperor to Melchiades the Bishop of Rome.

The Lateran is not so much as named in the Epistle of Melchiades; but that he
left the Imperial Seat, which the Roman Princes had possessed, and granted it to
the profit of the blessed Peter, and his Bishops. Which considering what
follows, is far more fit to be understood of the Emperors leaving Rome, and
granting it to the Bishop: whence they pretend, he did go on purpose. So that
the agreement between Optatus Milevitanus, and the Epistle of Melchiades, is
very small, or none at all.

But admit that Melchiades and Optatus Milevitanus had said, both of them, that
the Lateran was given to Melchiades; what is that to the Dominion and Temporal
Kingdom? A single House, instead of an Empire! Though, that the House was
given, Optatus Milevitanus does not affirm, even by Binius his own confession.

How the things in this Epistle should be concerning the Donation of
Constantine to Melchiades and Sylvester, is difficult to conceive; because
Melchiades was dead before the Donation was made to Sylvesier. It is very
unlikely therefore that Melchiades should make mention of that Donation.

His Epistle talking of Constantine his being President in the H. Synod that
was called at Nice, is a manifest Imposture, Melchiades being dead before the
Nicene Council; as is before observed: Yet hence it is proved, that Constantine
(...) a Donation to Melchiades and Sylvester.

Binius holds fast the Donation, though he lets go the Epistle. Like a Lo
gician, who lets go the premises, but keeps the conclusion.

For it is most firmly proved by Optatus Milevitanus. What is proved by him?
That Constantine the Great gave the Lateran to Melchiades. How is it proved?
Why he testifies, that a Council of 19 Bishops met in Fausta's house in the
Lateran. Truly he does not expressly write, that the house was given to
Melchiades. But it seems probable to Binius his imagination: And so it is
most firmly proved by Optatus Milevitanus, a most approved Writer. Thus those
things that are told concerning the Dominion and Temporal Kingdom given to the Sea of Rome, are manifestly enough proved to be likely by what we said in our
Notes upon the former Epistle. But it is better proved, by the continual
possession of those houses, by the space of thirteen Ages, until now; as he
afterward observes. Though the length of an unjust Tenure increases the
Transgression.

Having first proved the Donation, he proceeds thus. Hoc Edictum a Graecis
persida Donatione (qua, juxta illud. Virg. 2. Aeneid. Timeo Danaos and Dona
ferentes; donare solent acceptum) mutilum esse, ac dolose depravatum, hae
rations evidenter demonstrant. These following reasons evidently show this
Edict of Constantine, by the persidious Donation of the Greeks, to be maimed,
and treacherously depraved.

He enters upon the business gently, pretending at first (as if the Donation
were true) that it was depraved by the Greeks. But afterward, when he is a
little warm in the Argument, and somewhat further off from his Sophistical
Defenses, he falls foul upon it as a Counterfeit, and rejects it altogether; as
in the close will appear to the considerate Reader. But here let us see what
Arguments he produces, to prove it maimed, and treacherously depraved.

1. Because it pretends the Primacy Bin. Not in Constable intin. (...).
of the Church to be granted by a Layman, which was immediately given to Peter,
by God himself, and by our Lord Jesus Christ; as is manifest by those words,
Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church.

2. The Emperor, by this Edict, is made to give a Patriarchal Dignity to the
Church of Constantinople: Which if it be true, how then could Anatolius, the
Bishop of Constantinople, be said to take the Patriarchal Dignity to himself
long after; even after the Council of Chalcedon was ended, Leo, Gelasius, and
other Roman Bishops resisting him?

How could the Church of Constantinople be a Patriarchal See at this time,
wherein even the name of Constantinople was not yet given to Byzantium.

3. This Edict was first published by Theodorus Balsamon, out of the Acts of
Sylvester the Pope, falsely written in Greek under the name of Eusebius, Bishop
Forgeries in the Name of Eusebius.
of Caesarea: not that he might do any service to the Church of Rome, but that
he might show the Patriarchate of Constantinople to be the eldest. Which Acts
of Sylvester were not known till a The Acts of Sylvester forged.
thousand years after Christ, coming then forth in Eusebius his name, out of a
certain Book of Martyrs; but were now increased by the Addition of this Edict
of Constantine.

His design is, if it be possible, to clear the Church of Rome of this too
palpable and notorious Counterfeit: And for that end he would fain cast it on
the Treacherous Greeks, that he might thereby acquit the more Treacherous
Romans: Which he further pursues in the clause following.

The new found Heretics that oppose this Edict of Constantine, translated out
of Greek into Latin, with such great endeavor, and impertinent study; let
them know, that in this they rather further our Cause, than fight against us:
Who do our selves, with Irenaeus, Cyprian, and other Holy Fathers, as well
Greek as Latin, profess the Privileges of the Church of Rome, not to be
conferred and given of men, but from Christ to Peter, and from Peter to his
Successors.

Where the (...) are so great, we need not make a Remark on the common Cheat,
his vain Brag of the Fathers. But this we may observe, that whereas the Popes
Claim is somewhat blind to the Prerogative, which is pretended to be given to
S. Peter, Binius hints at a proper Expedient to make it clear. For suppose our
Savior made S. Peter the Rock on which he built his Church: How comes the Pope
to be that Rock? Since S. Peter being an Apostle immediately inspired, and able
to pen Canonical Scripture, some of his Prerogatives were Personal, and died
with him? He tells you, that the Privilege was granted from Christ to Peter,
and from Peter to his Successors. So that it was not Christ, but Peter that
gave it to the Bishops of Rome. Now it would extremely puzzle him to show,
where Peter gave that power to the Bishops of Rome; in what place, at what
time, by what Act, before what Witnesses. All he can produce, is S. Clement's
counterfeit Letter, and that miscarries.

But in opposing the Edict of Constantine, the Protestants further their Cause,
rather than fight against them. Is not this a bold Aslertion? Their Popes have
laid Claim to the whole Empire of the Western World, even by this very Edict,
or Donation of Constantine: And yet the Protestants did nothing, when they
proved it to be a Forgery. This Donation is an old Evidence, proving the Divine
Right of Peter's Primacy, and the Popes Supremacy: Did they promote their
Cause, that proved it to be a Cheat? Certainly they that have Fingers so long
as to grasp at an Empire, and Foreheads so hard as to claim it by Frauds, will
stick at nothing they can conceive for their advantage. Is it impertinent to
discover Knavery in the Holy Roman Catholic Church; or Imposture in the
Infallible Chair? And together with the Credit of Rome, to take away an Empire?
Besides the Spiritual Right of being the Rock, there are ample Territories and
Cities claimed, with a Temporal Kingdom.

Let him therefore pretend what he will, the Authority of such Instruments is
very convenient: And because he knows it well enough, he produces the
Diplomata, or the Patents of other Kings and Emperors, to confirm the Churches
Secular Right, extant, as he says, in the Original, with their Imperial Seals;
as particularly those of the Most Christian Princes of France, restoring those
things which the Longobards took away. But he does not tell you, by what Arts
they got possession of those Territories at first, nor by what Ancient
Evidences, Seals, or Patents, they held them before the Longobards touched them.

And because a Kingdom is of much Moment in the Church of Rome, he further
says, As for the Dominion of things temporal given to the Church, herself
proves them by the Broad Seals of the very Emperors giving them, yet extant in
the Originals, and she quietly enjoys them. How quiet her enjoyment is, you
may see by that stir and opposition she meets, and by all the clamor
throughout the Christian World, that follows her Usurpations. Which she
defends here by the Seals of Emperors in general Terms, but what Seals they
are, she scorneth as it were, to mention in particular. Which argues her cause
to be as Bad, as her pretense is Bold.

But as for the Rights granted to the same Roman Church, S. Leo, Faelix,
Romanus, Gelasius, Hormisda, Gregorius, and other their Successors, that
flourished famously from the times of Constantine, have defended them, says
he, not by the Authority of this Constantinian Edict, but rather by Divine and
Evangelical Authority, against all the Impugners of them. The man is warily to
be understood; for some of these, whom he pronounces as Defenders, violently
oppose their claim, as Gregory in particular: who for himself and all his
Predecessors, renounceth that Blasphemons Title, which John of Constantinople
Greg. lib.
first arrogated, but the Bishops of (...). Ep. 30
Rome acquired afterward, by the Gift of Phocas, the bloody Emperor. So that
all these are Mummers, brought in, as it were in a Masque, to show their
vizars, and say nothing. For of all these Roman Bishops mentioned by Binius,
Gregory was the last: who testifies, that none of his Predecessors ever
claimed such a Title. Greg. lib.
4. Epist. (...)


We may further note, that he speak here with much Confusion, because he speaks
of the Rights granted to the Roman Church; but does not distinguish between the
Divine and Humane Rights of which he is treating. For the Business he is now
upon, is the Temporal Klngdom; in desending of which these Popes down to
Gregory did forbear to use the Authority of this Constantinian Edict, as he
calls it (by way of scorn) not because they had it not, but rather (as he
pretends) because they had no need of it, having enough to show by Divine and
Evangelical Authority for the same. Which is another pretense as bold and
impudent as the former. For, I think, none of his own Party will aver, that the
Bishop of Rome can claim a Temporal Kingdom by the Holy Scripture.

As for any other Claim by this Constantinian Edict, or any Donation else of
Emperors, before the Longobards, he slighteth all: especially the Authority of
this Constantinian Edict, conceruing which, he says, None of all those, who
sat over the Church before the year 1000. many of which saw the genuine Acts
of Sylvester recited, concerning which we spoke above, is read to have made any
mention of this Edict. For as much as the Counterfeit Edict was not yet added
to the Acts by the Greek Impostors.

He does not tell us how he came to know, that many of the Roman Bishops saw
the genuine Acts of Sylvester, before the year 1000. that being an Artifice or
Color only, as if there were two diverse Books of Sylvesters Acts, and the one a
true one. He tells us not a word of the Contents that were in them: but he
before told us plainly, that the Acts of Sylvester the Pope, were falsely
written in Greek under the name of Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea, that they were
not known till 1000. years after Christ, coming then forth in Eusebius his
Name. And now he tells us as plainly, that the Counterfeit Edict was not yet
added to the Acts by the Greek (...).

The poor Greeks on whom he lays all the Load of Imposture, never enjoyed the
benefit of these Acts, nor ever pleaded the Imposture as the Latins did. And
in all likelihood they made it, that laid Claim and Title to the Supremacy by
it. Since therefore the Question is come to this, Who were the Impostors? we
must define against him, that the Counterfeit Edict was added to the forged
Acts, not by the Greek, but Latin Impostors.

For how Counterfeit to ever he will have it, Pope Adrian in his Epistle to
Constantine and Irene, which remains inserted in the Nicene Council, recites
this whole History almost in the same manner, and so confirms it by the Truth
of this Edict. As Binius himself tells us on the words Ipse enim.] So that
the Edict was pleaded long before the Greeks added it to the Acts of Sylvester.
For Pope Adrian died in the year 795, and the Acts of Sylvester were unknown
till the year 1000. Yet this Adrian founded his Epistle to the Emperor and
Empress, in the second (...) Council, upon the truth of this (...). And in very
truth, the Story he tells is the same of Constantine's Leprosy, etc.
contained in the Donation. Which if (...) had been pleased to remember, was
published by the Latins in Isidore Mercator's Collection of the Councils,
about the year 800. Where the Greeks in all probability first found it, and
were cheated, (as many Wiser men have since been) with the appearance of it
there. So that searching it up to the Fountain Head, it rests still among the
Romans.

By the way, to show you that Binius is his Crafts-Master, over against these
words concerning Adrian before mentioned, he puts down that Famous Marginal
Note; Donatio Constantini confirmatur, The Donation of Constantine is
confirmed; not by Binius, as the simple Reader would suppose, but by Adrian's
Epistle, recorded in the 2 Nicene Council, and expressly containing the whole
Fable of Constantine's Leprosy, Vision, and Baptism. So that the first that
ever knew it in the World, for ought I can yet perceive, was this Adrian, of
whom we have spoken somewhat before.

Now he comes to show, how greedily the Popes received this Cheat of the
Greeks. Among those who received the (...). (...) (...) (...) (...).
Acts of Sylvcster in good seoth, corrupted thus with the addition of this
counterfeit Edict, by an evil Art, and by the sorry faith of the Grecians
carried out of the East into the West, and that earnestly defended them as
Legitimate and Genuine, and pure from all fraud and Imposture, the first is
found, says he, to be Pope Pope Leo. (...). citet; the Donat on.
Leo the Nineth: Who in an Epistle to Michael of Constantinople, and Leo of
Acridanum, Bishops, in the year of our Redemption, 1054. makes mention of the
Donation of this Constantinian Edict, made to Sylvester. From whence, I
believe, it was, that much Faith and Authority being hereby added unto it, very
many of the The Gravest and most Learned Doctors among the Papists use it
without any suspicion.
Gravest and most Learned Doctors, without any suspicion of Fraud or Imposture,
with good Faith did read and receive it.

He makes a large Confession here; wherein three things are fit to be noted.
The first that ever used this Edict was a Pope: Pope Leo 9. 2. He used it
immediately after it came forth: For Sylvesters Acts came forth about the year
1060. being afterward increased with the Addition of this Edict of
Constantine; and some 54 years after, the Pope made use of the Donation in it.
Wherein he is followed by many, very many of the Gravest and most Learned
Popish Doctors; which is the third thing to be noted. This fault of the Popish
Doctors, who did read and receive this Donation of Constantine, without any
suspicion of Fraud and Imposture, being by Binius charged upon the Pope. The
Shepherd went out of the way, and the Sheep followed him. The Captain, and the
Herd, did all stray and miscarry: Leo 9. being somewhat like the Dragon in the
Revelation, that threw down the third part of the Stars with his Tail.

Binius his Cure is but the shift of a Mountebank, to save his Credit. There
are Errors and Heresies in the Donation of Constantine, which whosoever
receives the Donation, he receives them in like manner: And to say, that the
Head and its Members in the Church of Rome were deceived by the Evil Art and
sorry Faith of the Grecians, while they licked up this Vomit of Balsamon, for
the Popes advantage; is but a sorry shift, a Corrosive that eats like a Canker.
For it shows how the Holy Catholic Roman Church may be deceived; Head and
Members, Pope and Doctors, Priests and People. They were imposed on by an Evil
Art it seems, and swallowed down Heresy in Constantine's Donation.

But that Binius lies in his prevarication about the Greeks, and that the
Greeks were not the Authors of the Donation, and that it did not intend to hurt
the Popes Chair, is evident by this. The Donation was made not to overthrow,
but confirm the Divine Right of the Popes Supremacy, point blank against what
Binius pretends. He that made it had an eye both to the Temporal and Spiritual
Privileges of the Roman Chair. For the Donation applies those Scriptures, on
which the Popes build their Right, to S. Peter's Successors, and makes the
Empercur to note, that the Will of our Savior was the Root of all his Kindness
to the Chair: nay it expressly throws all on our Saviors Institution. For it is
just, that the Holy Law should retain the Head Constantin. Donat.
of the Principality there, where our Savior, the Instituter of H. Laws,
commanded the blessed Peter to undertake the Chair of the Apostleship. Where
you may note another fetch of the Papists: Lest what our Savior did to S.
Peter should seem too remote to concern Rome; that they might make the Channel
of Conveyance clear, these old Counterfeits record, that S. Peter did not come
to Rome by chance, but being invested in so great an Hereditary power, our
Savior chose the place where it should rest: and that Peter came to Rome, and
there undertook the Chair, of his Apostleship, by our Saviors Commandment.
Which if they could make the World believe, their work would be half done. So
that it utterly destroys the Interest of the Greeks, and the Donation is Root
and Branch altogether Roman. Neither did the Greeks ever use it to disgrace the
Roman Church, for ought I can find, though the Romans used it, to magnify
their Church above all other Churches.

CAP. XXIII. Melchiades counterfeited. Isidore Mercator confessed to be a
Forgery. The Council of Laodicea corrupted, both by a Fraud in the Text, and by
the False Glosses of the Papists.
THe Forgery put out at first in the name of Melchiades, concerning the
Primitive Church, and the Munificence of the Emperor Constantine, has now
gotten a clause added to the Title, viz. Falsely ascribed to Melchiades: In
Binius, Labbe, and the Collectio Regia. Upon those words, Falsely ascribed to
Melchiades, Binius speaks thus. That this Epistle was ascribed to Melchiades,
appears Can. Futuram 12. q. 1. and Can. Decrevit. Did. 88. which bearing the
name of Melchiades, contain for the most part the things which are written
here. It appears from hence also, that hitherto it was commonly put in the
former Edition of the Councils, just after the Decrees of Melchiades the Pope.
Thus was this counterfeit Epistle placed among their Laws and Councils. But
Ibid.
that it was noted with the false Title and name of Melchiades, appears from
hence; (says he) because it makes mention of the Nicene Council: which by the
consent of all men happened after the death of Melchiades, and after the
Baptism of the Emperor: not under Melchiades, but under Sylvester, in the year
of Christ 325. being the 20 year of Constantine, as almost all Historians
unanimously do testify. Perhaps. therefore it is more true, that Isidore
himself, being a Compiler, rather than a (...) a Forger.
Collector, was the Author of this Epistle: Which it is certain was made out of
the third Canon of the Council of Chalcedon, and a certain fragment of the 24
Epistle in the 1. Book of Pope Gregory, and the History of the Nicene Council.
Baron. An. 312. Nu. 80.

Here we come to know the manner how Decretal Epistles were made: Good passages
stolen out of the Fathers, are clapped Artificially together, and a Grain or two
of Interest, thrust neatly in, makes up an Epistle. This of Binius is plain
dealing. Isidore is confessed to be a Compiler, that is, a Forger, rather than
a Collector, or Recorder of the Councils.

* Note this well: because Isidore is the Fountain (a muddy dirty one) out of
which they drink their waters.

This acknowledgment is the more considerable, because Baronius, Labbe, and
Cossartius, and the Collectio Regia, herein do keep Binius Company.

Confessing it to be stolen out of S. Gregory, he acknowledges it to be made
almost 300 years after it was pretended: Which draws near to the time of
Hadrian the First, and sheds another Ray of Light on the Original of these
Impostures.

In the time of Sylvester there happened many Councils. One Feather is finely
thrust in, into that at Arles, to adorn the Papacy: The Pope is set before the
Emperor. In that of Ancyra, the Marriage of Deacons is permitted. Can. (...)
Priests also were not compelled to leave their Wives, unless they were taken in
Adultery. Can. 8. The Cup and the Bread were both given to the People. Can. 13.
In the Council of Laodicea it is determined, that the Scriptures should be read
on the Sabbath days. Can. 16. And that we ought not to leave the Church of God,
and go and call upon Angels, and make Congregations which are known to be
forbidden. If any one therefore be found observing this hidden Idolatry, let
him be accursed; because he leaves our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, and
gives himself over to Idolatry. Can. 35.

The Invocation of Angels, though they were known to be Angels, is by the
Council of Laodicea called Idolatry: Which vindicates Dr. Stillingfleet, in his
acceptance of the word Idolatry, from the cavils of his Adversary. The Council
esteems the very calling upon Angels a forsaking of Christ, and an hidden
Idolatry.

Many attempts have been made to overthrow the Canon: I should be tedious,
should I give you all their several ways to evade it. That which lies under my
Cognizance, is their corrupting of the place.

Angelus and Angulus, being two words in the Latin, near of Kin, though in the
sense they differ much, the one signifying (...) Angel, the other a Corner;
some have been so bold, as to turn Angelos into Angulos, Angels into Corners:
making the Canon to run thus; We ought not to leave the Church of God, and to
go and call upon Corners. Though neither the sense of the place, nor the word
in the Greek Tongue, nor the occasion of the Canon will bear it.

Binius indeed is not so bold as to put it into the Text, but as a various
Reading he puts it over against the Text in the Margin; to stumble the Reader,
or make him obdurate.

Theodoret, an Ancient Father, living Theod. in Colos. 2.
near the times of this Council, observes that by this Canon those Heretics
were condemned, who taught that Angels were to be worshipped: As Binius himself
upon the place confesses.

Epiphanius, among other Heretics, Epiphan. Hares. 60.
mentions the Angelici; against whom, in all probability, this Canon was made.

Bellarmine defends Theodoret, and approves of his Exposition. For there is no
Lib. 1. de SS. Beatcap. 20.
doubt (says he) but Theodoret was sound and Orthodox in his Opinion,
concerning the Worship of Angels. But then he has a fetch to clear the Church
of Rome: Not every pious Veneration of Angels is forbidden, but that only which
is due to God. Doubtless Theodoret was willing to give a pious Veneration to
Angels; but neither he, nor the Council of Laodieea, knew of any pious
Invocation of them.

But we leave these to come unto Binius. In his Notes upon Pius his Epistle
before mentioned, he says, The words of S. Paul, Colos. 2. are written, not as
Hierom supposes against the Jews, who believed the Stars of Heaven to be
Angels; nor against the Simonaici, as Bellarmine supposed; but rather against
the pernicious Doctrine of Cerinthus: who holding Christ to be a naked man,
extolled all the Angels, as the Makers of the World, above him. Yet a little
after he says the clean contrary: That Cerinthus did not only not teach, that
Angels were as Makers of the World to be adored; but rather they were to be had
in hatred, as the Authors of evil. For the one he cites (...), Epiphanius, and
Tertullian: Baronius for the other: And (which is very strange) himself sideth
with all. Which (...) must conceive to be a neat effect of clean conveyance:
For by how much the more impossible the Operation is, the Juglers slight is the
more to be admired. In very truth, his behavior is such, that it makes me too
justly to fear, they say any thing in every place, that will serve their turn,
make Ciphers of the Fathers, and care not a farthing how much they contradict
themselves, so they be not discerned in doing it: Nay, his contradictions are
so palpable, as if long custom had made him careless of being seen too, and
deprived him of his feeling: For Liars, speaking truth and falsehood
indifferently, for a long time, at last note not themselves, nor well apprehend
which of the two they are speaking. And they that make a Trade of
contradictions, inure themselves, by long habit, till they become insensible:
Which (if need be) we shall more fully and clearly show, out of Binius himself,
upon this occasion.

CAP. XXIV. Threescore Canons put into the Nicene Council after Finis, by the
care and Learning of Alphonsus Pisanus. The counterfeit Epistles of Sylvester,
and that Council. A Roman Council wholly counterfeited. Letters counterfeited
in the Name of Pope Mark, and Athanasius, and the Bishops of Egypt, to defend
the Forgeries that were lately added to the Nicene Council.
BInius has the Code of the Nicene Council, fairly written in Greek, and at
the end of it (...): or in Latin, FINIS.

After this, in another place, (by it self) under the name of Alphonsus
Pisanus, with the Patronage of Francis Turrian, he brings in a whole Legend
of Canons, to the number of fourscore, Fathered all upon the Nicene Council.

In the Code it self there are the Epistles of Alexander Alexandrinus,
Constantine the Emperor, and the whole Synod, the Emperors Oration, the
Recantation of Theognis and Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, the Nicene Creed, and
the 20 Canons of the Nicene Council. All curiously written in fair Greek.

Out of the Code, after (...), there is a counterfeit List of the Bishops
Subscriptions (but miserably depraved) to put the better face on the rest of
the Forgeries: and like many other of the Frauds, written only in Latin. Then
there is an humble Letter, whereby the Council submits it self to the Popes
Censure; but in the Column on the other side (for there are 2 Columns in the
Leaf) it is defaced with an empty Blank, for want of a Greek Copy.

For fear this Letter should not be seen often enough, he has it again, with
the Answer of Pope Sylvester thereunto; both recorded in another place, near to
the Arabic Canons; detected by these marks: They are without any Greek Copy,
are not among the Acts of the Council, are full of mistakes and Barbarismes,
and clearly refelled by the Genuine Acts of the Council it self.

The Epistles are these. SYNODI NICAENAE Epistola AD SYLVESTRVM PAPAM.
Beatissimo Papae Urbis Romae, cum om (...) Reverentia (...), Sylvestro; Hosius
Episcopus Provinciae Hispaniae, Civitatis Cordubae; Macarius Episcopus
Ecclesiae Hierosolymitanae, Victor and Vincentius ex Urbe Romae, Ordinati ex
directione tua.

QUONIAM omnia corroborata de Divinis Mysteriis Ecclesiasticae utilitatis, quae
ad robur pertinent Sanctae Ecclesiae Catholicae and Apostolicae, ad sedem tuam
Romanam explanata, and de Graeco redacta sunt, scribere confitemur, nuncitaque
ad vestrae Sedis argumentum accurrimus roborari. Itaque censeat vestra
Apostolica Doctrina, Episcopos totius vestrae Apostolicae Urbis in unum
convenire, vestrumque habere Concilium, sicut docet mystica Veritas, ut
firmetur nostra Sanctimonia, gradusque fixos, vel textus Ordinationis tuae
Sanctimoniae nostra possit habere Regula. Quoniam decet numerum dictorum tuorum
Coepiscoporum a te discere gradus vel ordinis constituere Urbis. Quicquid autem
constituimus in Concilio Nicaeno, precamur vestri oris consortio confirmetur.
Oret Beatitudo tua pro universo Concilio. Data (...). Kalend. Julias. Accepta
13. Kalendas Novembris, Paulino and Juliano (...) (...).

There are a great many faults in it, which Binius mendeth; but he did not
consider how accurate they were in Dating the time wherein the Letter was
received: nor how much the Council condescended to the Bishop of Rome, while
they wrote in Greek to the common people of Alexandria; but translated their
Acts into Latin, for the Popes understanding. Ad sedem tuam Romanam explanata,
and de Graeco redacta. As if the Pope and his Clergy were unacquainted with the
Greek Tongue.

RESCRIPTUM SYLVESTRI ad Synodum Nicaenam.
SYLVESTER Episcopus Sedis Apostolicae and Sanctae Catholicae Ecclesiae
Reverendae Religionis Vrbis Romae, fratribus and Coepiscopis, qui in Nicaenum
Concilium convenerunt in Domino Salutem.

GAUDEO promptam vos Benignitatem servare. Nam and confirmo figoque ad vestrae
Doctrinae reclamantes de Mysterio vel unitate Trinitatis Chrysmatis vos
secundum Dict a and Doctrinam Evangelicam Sanctam accepisse Gratiam. De quo
Examinationis probo vera fuisse and esse mansura, quae in vestrum nostrumque
manavere Mysterium. Meum Chirographum and Discipulorum meorum offero in vestro
Sancto Concilio, quicquid constituistis una parem dare consensum. Atque in
gremio vestrae Synodi parva propter Disciplinam Ecclesiae alligabo praecepta,
propter Victorinum qui arbitrio suo quicquid vellet affirmabat, and Cyclos
Paschae pronunciabat fallaces, and cum Episcopis (...) Vrbis Italiae examinatam
universitatis vestri Sancti Concilii dignetur accipere veritatem. Et (...)
manu, Oret pro nobis Beatitudo vestri Sancti Concilii Trecentorum December and
Octo: ut Charitatis quae vobis data est Domini nostri Jesu Christi servetur
Augmentum. Data 5. Kalendas Novembr. Accepta 4. Idus Februarii, Constantino
Septies and Constantio Cafare Quarto Consulibus.

Though the Nonsense be the most horrible that ever was seen, the exactness is
great: For in token of the Spirit of Prophecy, the Bishop of Rome tells them
at Nice, that they were three hundred and eighteen, and dateth the day on which
his Letter was received: which I think was extraordinary.

But there is a contradiction in these Dull Letters, that mars all. They at
Nice inform the Pope, that all the Bishops of the Apostolical City were
assembled in one, and held his Council for him there: The Pope on the other
side tells them of a Council at Rome of the Bishops of all the City of Italy
(assembled) whence he sent the Truth examined by his Disciples there (as he
calls them) for them at Nice, to receive: which he prays them to accept, etc.
I confess the nonsense so terrible, that it is difficult to construe it to any
sense at all: but diverse circumstances interpret the words so, that Praecepta
signify Canons, and Episcopi totius urbis Italiae, the Roman Synod under
Sylvester: As those other words, Meum Chirographum and Discipulorum meorum
offero; his own Subscription, and the Subscription of the Bishops under him,
whereby he confirmed the Nicene Council.

For the Legend goes, that while the Council was sitting at Nice of 318
Bishops, Sylvester called a Council at Rome of 267 Bishops; where they made
Canons as they did at Nice, and as good luck was, confirmed the Council there:
Else all at Nice had not been worth a Rush. And to this Roman Council Sylvester
relates, when he says, I send you mine, and my Disciples hands to give our
joint consent to all. that you have ordained. This is that Council which made
the Epilogus Brevis, the commending of which to the Nicene Council, (were there
nothing in the Letter beside) would disgrace it for Cosin-German to that putid
Forgery, so often touched in the Epilogus Brevis.

This Council is set by Binius (I know not why) before the Nicene Council;
though it professes it self to be held at the same time. Perhaps the reason
is, that they could not be set down both together, and Priority was to be given
to the Synod at Rome.

The Title of this Council is,

CONCILIUM ROMANUM

Aliud, sub Sylvestro Papa Primo.

It immediately follows Constantines Donation, and depends on the truth of
the same.

The Popes See is magnified therein above the Skies; and for that reason it
shines among the Councils, as a Direful Comet among the Stars of Heaven.

The Proem set before it bears the name of the Epilogue, Epilogus brevis, etc.
A short Epilogue of the following Roman Council. A Trip in the Threshold
bewiaying the Author. A Learned Council it was, no doubt, that began with the
conclusion: For the Epilogue is the close of any discourse, the Prologue is the
beginning.

But this First is a small Indecency, we proceed to the matter. The Nicene
Council has the good fortune of being full of smoothness, clarity and Majesty:
But Binius finds this so rude and rough, that he is fain to clear the way by a
Premonition to the Reader.

The following Canons were written verbatim, Bin. in Council.
says he, out of two Ancient Copies, Romans (...) Sylvest.
which in many places, by reason of the depravation of the Exemplars, can
scarcely, or indeed not at all, be understood. Let the Reader censure
favorably, and communicate, if he has, something more certain.

You must touch it gingerly you see, or it will fall to pieces. Solecismes and
Nonsense are like Rust and Cobwebs, signs of Antiquity in the Roman Church:
Else certainly (...) would never have dared to present such Moldy Instruments
to the Face of the World. * But such Councils (...)
are fit to support the Mystery of Iniquity, which is made a Mystery, by making
and supporting such Councils.

Since the Canons are so rude, we will let them go, and come to the Epilogus,
which bears the force of the most Authentic Canon.

Therein it is recorded, that in the time of Sylvester and Constantine the most
holy Emperor, while 318 Bishops sat in Council at Nice, by the Command of
Sylvester; on the thirteenth of the Kalends of July, there was a Council of 267
Bishops convened at Rome, by the Canonical Call of the Pope: That again
condemned Callistus, Arrius, Photius, and Sabellius, before condemned in the
Nicene Council, and ordained, that no Arrian Bishop returning, should be
received by any but the Bishop of the place. In which also, by the consent and
Subscription of all, it was ordained, That no Layman should accuse a
Clergyman, and that no Priest should accuse a Bishop, no Deacon a Priest, no
Subdeacon a Deacon, no Acolythite a Subdeacon, no Exorcist an Acolythite, no
Reader an Exorcist, no Doorkeeper a Reader. It was further ordained, that no
Bishop should be condemned but by the Testimony of at least threescore and
twelve Witnesses, nor shall the Highest Priest be judged by any, etc.

This Decree is put among the Popes Laws by Ivo Cartonensis, etc. Doubtless to
the very great ease and satisfaction of the Roman Clergy: For it reaches down,
you know, to the lowest Orders of Readers and Door keepers. So that they may
write as many Forgeries as they will: If it be a Pope, no man can condemn him:
If it be a Bishop, no less than threescore and twelve Bishops, must on their
Corporal Oath prove the Fact against him: forty four Equals, against a
CardinalPriest, twenty six must depose against a Cardinal-Deacon of the City of
Rome, and seven against a Door keeper; all which must be at least his Equals. A
Mavelous Privilege for the City of Rome! Which word Rome, though annexed
only to Cardinal-Deacons, yet, for ought I know, the Judge will interpret its
Extent, to all the other Orders; or use it Equivocally, as himself lists, or
as his Superior pleases. So that in Causes pertaining to the Interest of the
Roman Church, other Priests perhaps, beside them in the City of Rome, shall
enjoy the benefit of this Law; but in Causes displeasing the Pope, and his
Accomplices, none shall enjoy it, but the Priests of Rome. Many such Trap-doors
are prepared in Laws, where Rulers are perverse and Tyrannical; and whether
this be not one of those, I leave to the Readers further Examination.

Mark succeeded Sylvester in the Sea of Rome: Between whom, and Athanasius,
there were certain Letters framed, that stand upon Record to this day, to prove
the Canons of the Nicene Council to be Threescore and ten. Heretofore they were
good old Records magnificently cited: but now they are worn out: for Baronius
and Bellarmine have lately rejected them; who are followed by Binius, as he is
by Labbe and Cossartius and the Collectio Regia, all concluding the Letters to
be Forged. The three last have this Note upon that of Athanasius. Hanc
Surreptitiam and ab aliquo confict am fuisse quinque rationibus ostenditur, etc.

That this Epistle is a Counterfeit devised Bin. in Ep: Ashan. ad Marc:
by some body, appears evidently by five reasons. Whereof the first is this,
In the Controversy between the African Churches, and the Roman Bishops,
(Zozimus and Boniface) concerning the number of the Nicene Canons, this Epistle
was unknown. 2. Athanasius, as is manifest by what went before, was at this
time fled into France, and so it could not be written from Alexandria and from
the Bishops in Egypt. 3. That Divastation fell upon the Church of Alexandria
many years after these times in the Reign of Constantius, etc. As Athanasius
himself witnesses in his Epistle ad omnes Orthodoxos. 4. Mark died in the
Nones of October this present year: Constantine himself being yet alive. 5. If
Pope Mark had sent a Copy of the Nicene Council out of the Roman Archives, to
them at Alexandria, surely the Roman Copy and that of Alexandria would have
agreed thenceforth as the same: How then were those three Canons wanting in the
Copy, which S. Cyril sent from Alexandria to the Africans, which were found in
the Roman Copy?

He points to the Commonitorium sent from Rome to the Sixth Council of
Carthage; and verifies all the Story we have related; by rejecting these
Letters of Mark and Athanasius, made on purpose to defend the Forgeries there
detected. For which he cites Baron. An. 336. nn. 59, 60. and Bellarm. de Romans
Pont. lib. 2. cap. 25.

This Epistle was alleged by Harding against Jewel, and by Heart against
Rainolds for a good Record. How formally it was laid down by the Elder
Collectors you may see with your eyes: and may find it frequently cited by the
most learned Papists. Such as these being their best and only Evidences.

After Mark Julius succeeded. The Epistle sent by the Bishops of the East to
Pope Julius 1. is now confessed to be a Forgery. (...). in Epist. Julii.
Veram and germanam non extare praeter authoritatem Baronii illud asserentis,
ea quae supra in principio Epistolarum Julii annotavi confirmant: Says Binius.
Again he says, This Epistle which is put in the second place, bearing the
Names of the Bishops of the East, seems to be compiled by some uncertain
Author, both by the concurrent Testimony of Sozomen, and Socrates, and because
thou may observe many things to be wanting, and some in the words and things
expressed to be changed,

Rescriptum Julii] The Epistle which Julius returned in answer has the like
Note upon it. Hanc mendosam, corruptam, and a quodam ex diversts compilatam,
etc. That this Epistle is counterfeit, corrupt, and compiled by some body out
of diverse Authors, the Consulships of Felicianus and Maximianus evidently show,
etc.

The matter in these Epistles is the Popes Supremacy; the unlamfulness of
calling Councils, but by his Authority; his Right of receiving Appeals; with
other Themes, which Ambition and self Interest suggest, and of which genuine
Antiquity is totally silent.

Having so fortunately glanced upon that Sixth Council, I shall not trouble the
Reader with any more: but bewailing what I observe, beseech him earnestly to
weigh this Business walking in the Dark, and take heed of a Pope and a Church,
that has exceeded all the World in Forgerie. For let the Earth be searched
from East to West, from Pole to Pole, Jews, Turks, Barbarians, Heretics, none
of them have soared so high, or so often made the Father of Lies their Patron,
in things of so great Nature and Importance. Since therefore the Mother of Lies
has espoused the Father of Lies for her assistance, and the accursed
production of this adulterate brood is so numerous; I leave it to the Judgment
of every Christian, what Antiquity or Tradition she can have, that is guilty of
such a Crime, and defiled with so great an Offspring of notorious Impostures.

AN APPENDIX. Cardinal Baronius his Grave Censure and Reproof of the Forgeries:
His fear that they will prove destructive and pernicious to the Sea of Rome.
APiarius, a Priest of the Church of Africa, being Excommunicated by his
Ordinary, for several notorious crimes, flies to Rome for Sanctuary; Zozimus
the Bishop receives him kindly, gives him the Communion, and sends Orders to
see him restored. Hereupon the African Churches convene a Council, namely, the
sixth Council of Carthage, whence they send a modest Letter, but as Sincere as
Powerful, showing how after all shifts and Evasions, Apiarius had confessed his
Enormities; and that both the Nicene Council, and clear Reason, was against the
disorder of such Appeals: All Causes being to be determined in the Province
where they arose, by a Bishop, Patriarch, or Council, upon the place.
Otherwise, say they, how can this Beyond Sea Judgment Epist. Council. Carth. 6.
ad Calestin.
be sirm, where the necessary appearance of Witnesses cannot be made, either by
reason of weakness of Nature, or Old Age, or many other Impediments? They decry
the Innovation of the Bishop of Rome in arrogating that Authority, lest the
smoakie (...) of the pride of this World Ibid.
should be brought into the Church of Christ. This Epistle is on all sides
owned and confessed to be a good Record. It was sent to Celestine the Successor
of Zozimus and Boniface.

About 100 years after, Eulabius sat in the Chair at Alexandria, (some call
him Eulalius:) Between him and Boniface 2. there are two Epistles extant, out
of which it is gathered, that after the sixth Council of Carthage, the African
Churches were Excommunicated by the Roman for 100 years, and reconciled at last
upon the Submission of Eulalius, Archbishop of Carthage, accursing S.
Augustine, and his own Predecessors.

Concerning these two Epistles, Cardinal Bellarmine gives his Opinion thus:
Bell. de (...). (...). lib. 2, cap. 25.
Valde mihieas Epistolas esse suspectas, etc. I have a mighty suspicion of
these Epistles: For first they seem to be repugnant to those things which we
have spoken concerning the Union of S. Augustine, Eugenius, Fulgentius, and
other Africans with the Roman Church: And again, either there was no Eulabius
of Alexandria, to whom Boniface seems to write; or at least there was none at
that time: as is evident out of the Chronology of Nicephorus of Constantinople.
Besides, Boniface intimates in his Epistle, that he wrote at the Commandment of
Justinus the Emperor. But Justinus was dead before Boniface began to sit; as
is manifest out of all Histories. Moreover, the Epistle which is ascribed to
Boniface, consists all of it almost of two fragments, of which the one is taken
out of the Epistle of Pope Hormisda to John, the other out of the Epistle of S.
Gregory to the Bishops of France: even the 52 Epistle of his fourth Book. Now
S. Gregory was not born at that time: nor is it credible that Gregory took
those words out of Boniface, since the Style is altogether Gregorian.

In the Epistle also which is Fathered upon Eulabius the Carthaginian, there is
a Sentence of S. Gregory's inserted, out of the 36 Epistle of his fourth Book:
and the rest of that Epistle is nothing but a sragment of au Epistle of John,
the Bishop of Constantinople, to Pope Hormisda.

Notwithstanding all these reasons, Bellarmine is afraid to damn the Epistles:
but Cardinal Baronius is a little more bold. He judges it inconvenient for the
Church of Rome, that any such Forgeries were ever made: And upon the occasion
of these two Epistles, utterly disgraces Isidore Mercator for a mere Impostor.

Whether in so doing he salves the Sores of the Roman Church, that has been
guilty of vending them, the experience of Ages yet to come, will hereafter
evidence. In the mean time let us fee what he says.

In Not. Martyrol. ad 16. Octobr. he lays down these words: Scias falsam and
adulterinam Epistolam illam, quae fertur nomine Bonifacii 2. etc. Know, that
the Epistle which is carried abroad in the name of Boniface 2. to Eulalius
Bishop of Alexandria, which is extant, and published in the second (...) of the
Councils of the latter Edition, is false and adulterate.

And speaking concerning the Schism, Excommunication, and Reunion of the
African Churches, he says, Sihaec vera sunt, etc. If these things are true,
certainly then all the Martyrs and Confessors, which were at that very time
crowned with Martyrdom in the African Church, or otherwise waxed famous by the
Merits of their Eminent Sanctity, must be blotted out of the List of Saints,
which THE HOYL ROMAN CHURCH it self has, in its Martyrology, numbered among the
Martyrs, or reckoned among the Confessors. Since it is most manifest by a
thousand Sentences of Cyprian, Augustine, and all the Fathers, that out of the
Church there can be no Martyrdom, nor any kind of Sanctity.

If Lies were always consistent, Truth would be amazed. God does infatuate the
Counsels of his Enemies, and turn their Wisdom into Foolishness. They run into
inconveniences, sometimes so great, that they cannot be remedied. Could a Lie
shun all inconvenience, and see to its Interest on every side, it would be as
wife and perfect as Truth itself.

Quin amplius ex Collegis Aurelii, etc. Ibid.
But yet further, among other Companions of Aurelius, the most holy Father S.
Augustine, the most glorious Beam of the Catholic Church, was accused in that
Epistle. Who being clouded with the same (...) of Schism, must (if (...) (...)
be true) be blotted out of the Class, of the Doctors of Holy Church out of the
number of Saints, nay out of the Martyrology; nor only so, but out of the
Calendar of the HOLY ROMAN CHURCH. For it is most certain, that after the
aforesaid Aurelius, he departed this life, within the space of the time
beforementioned. What should I reckon the Fulgentiuses, the Eugeniuses, and
others, almost innumerable men, most Famous for Holiness and Learning, to be
accounted in the same condition?

It is a common Artifice in the Church of Rome, to propagate these Forgeries as
far as they are able, by them to possess the minds of men with great
apprehensions of the Popes high and Infallible Power; and if at at any time
they are detected, to cast the blame on private persons: while the Church is
free (they pretend) from such Abominations. I desire you to note therefore,
that the HOLY ROMAN CHURCH it self is the Author of Her Martyrologies and
Kalendars, and that the HOLY ROMAN CHURCH her self has Canonized her Saints,
and made Holy Days, and put them into her Breviaries: And it was this very HOLY
ROMAN CHUCH, that put the counterfeit Council of Sinuessa into her
Martyrologies, the Lying Legend of Sylvester into the Roman Breviary,
Authorized by three Popes, and the Council of Trent; and her counterfeit
Decretals among her Laws, in all her Consistories, and Ecclesiastical Courts of
Highest Judicature. So that if Baronius do not (...), the ROMAN CHURCH is
liable to the Charge of these Bastard-Antiquities: For which cause he might
well break out into that angry (...), Ecce in quod Diserimen Ibid.
Vnus isidorus Mercator, illarum Epistolarum Collector, res nostras adduxit! ut
ex (...) part periclitari videatur Ecclesia, etc. Behold into what peril, one
Isidore Mercator, the Collector of those Epistles, has brought out Affairs! So
that the CHURCH seems on that side to be endangered, if we shall say, those
things which he has collected, or rather (...), be (...) and certain. If the
Roman Church be (...) (...) of (...), in Baronius, his judgment, (...) is
utterly (...).

(...) is of (...) (...) Importance, did he only (...) the things to be feigned
(rather than (...)) which their great (...) of the (...) (...) in Isidore,
their first Author. But his acknowledgment of the hazard which the Roman Church
runs, is more. For they have so many Subterfuges about the Roman Church,
that it is more difficult to find it, than to vanquish it. It was not the Pope
in a formal Council, that Excommunicated the Church of Africa, or that put her
Saints first into the Roman (...), yet it was the (...) Roman Church. And
indeed, if the Holy Roman Church, and her Authority, be not to be found in her
Mass books and Breviaries, her Courts and Consistories, her Laws and (...), her
Martyrologies and Kalenders, her Popes and Doctors. I know not where to meet
with Her: And if nothing else be the Roman Church but a Pope and Council (...),
the Roman Church is but a blinking (...). There is no Roman Church (upon this
account) sometimes for two or three Ages together: for she always vanishes upon
the (...) of the Council.

The Roman Church is in a great (...); but she may thank herself. She threw her
self into this Peril, by making her self a Schismatic, an (...) a (...). She
first breaks the Rule; and if the Pope and his Doctors about him be the Roman
Church, as they certainly must needs (...) (for all that depart from (...),
shall be Schifmaticks:) if the Head of the Church, and all the Members that
cleave unto it, be the Roman Church, she first brake the Rule, and then forged
Ancient Canons in the Name of the Nicene Council, to defend her Exorbitancy:
she cut her self off from the true Church in the sixth Council of Carthage, by
a perverse inveterate obstinacy; and to acquit her self afterward, laid the
Curse and Scandal upon others. She pretends, at least, that the most Holy
Churches were Excommunicated; that 217 Bishops in a Sacred Council, Alypius. S.
Augustine, Aurelius, and all his Colleagues, were puffed up with pride by the
Instigation of the Devil, and accursed by a Dreadful Excommunication: for so it
is in the Epistle of Bonifaee 2. to Eulalius. And now she has nothing left to
support her Enormity, but that Greatness alone, which by these Forgeries she
has acquired and maintained. These Thorns are never to be pulled out, but the
Veins and Sinews will follow after: For in rejecting these (Thorns in her
sides) all her Authority, Infallibility, Antiquity, Tradition, Unity,
Succession, Credit and Veracity is gone.

As for Baronius, and the way he takes, a man may safely throw away the Sword,
when he has killed the Enemy: but the Church of Rome is not arrived to such an
happiness. Politicians pull down the Ladder by which they have gotten up to the
Top of their desires. But the case is altered here: They are undone, if the
Ladder be removed. To acknowledge these Helps to be Forgeries, is their
apparent Ruin.

Some Papists use these Counterfeits, by virtue of which their Predecessors
acquired, and established their Empire, as Usurpers do Traitors, by whose
villainous help they are seated in the Throne. But they can never wash off the
Guilt they have contracted; nor make the Act, or the Crime (committed once) to
be again undone. After 700 years enjoyment of the Benefit, they begin to slight
the means of acquiring it: But it is, because they cannot help it. The Cheat is
detected, and they would sain persuade the World they are Innocent of it. All
of them either hold these things to be Forgeries or (if Forgeries) to be none
of their The Confession is not Genning like (...) of S. Peter; rather it is
awkward (...) (...) like that of Apiarius; (...) Confession the sixth Council
of Carthage observes to be sorced. For after (...) (...) obstinately persisted,
as long as possible, in an impudent denial, reviled his Judges, abused the
Roman Chair, disordered the Church, and inflamed the World, when God had
brought him into so vast a strait, that he could do no otherwise: then the
Fraudulent Dissembler, as they call him, fled to Confession; but the Root of
his Malevolence he retained in him.

Some Papists confess these Forgeries, but deny them to be theirs: They confess
the things, but justify themselves. The things they say are Forgeries, but
themselves no Forgers: And whether of the two be the greater Impudence, is hard
to define: They confess the Fraud, but make no Restitution. All their Drift is
to save their Skin: when one pretense is broken, they fly to another: nay, they
go on to quote these things, even now they confess them: where they are not
detected they still do quote them; and wish still, they were as able to conceal
and defend them, as ever: For for one that knows them, they meet with a
thousand that are ignorant of those devices. There they dissemble their
Conviction, and hide their Confession with the Ignorant, and before such make
show of these Frauds, as of great and glorious Antiquities; though, like
Proteus, they transform themselves into other shapes before the more Learned.
They find it meet and necessary to fail with every Wind, and to adapt
themselves fitly in their discourses, both to them that know them, and to them
that know them not; with them that know them they seem to decry the Impostures.

These things I speak, not to the poor simple seduced Papists, who did they
believe and know these things, would abhor them to the Death; but to the
Seducers themselves, who so delude the Ignorant, and are by all Methods ever
busy in carrying on the Cause of the Temporal Kingdom of the Church of Rome:
as by their obstinate practices is most apparent.

Baronius himself bewrays his Confession to be without any purpose of
amendment; even by the Defense he makes, for his good Old Friend, the Bastard
Isidore.

A Jerome of Frague, or a John Huss, a Latimer, or a Ridley, though never so
holy and pure in other things, were to be cursed with Bell, Book and Candle, if
the least Error appeared in them, that reflected on the Popes Security: Though
never so Innocent, they were with all violent fury pursued to the Fire. But if
a man have this one Virtue, of maintaining the Popes Interest, he may lie, and
cog, and cheat, and forge; abuse Apostles, Councils, Fathers, and be followed
by an Army of Popes and Doctors: becoming a Zealous and Venerable Saint
notwithstanding. Hincmarus of Rhemes could hardly escape, for offering to
mutter against Isidere. But Isidore himself, because he did the Pope Service,
though he be a Sacrilegious person, and deserves all that can be called Bad,
for the incomparable height and depth of his Villainy; yet he is received to
fair Quarters, and well esteemed of by Cardinal Baronius: Testimonium illi
perhibeo (utar verbis Apostoli) (says he) quod Zelum habuit, sed non secundum
Scientiam, etc.

I will give him this Testimony, (and here I will use the words of the Apostle)
He had a Zeal, but not according to knowledge. For because the contention of
Aurelius, Bishop of Carthage, Augustine, and other African Bishops, seemed to
him a little more hot than it should be, with Boniface and Celestine the Roman
Popes, in the Cause of Apiarius the Priest: he supposed it expedient, in that
Epistle which he feigned in the name of Boniface, to patch up what was cut
away. But away with these things! The Church of God is not founded, nor does it
lean upon Chaff, it self being the Pillar and Ground of Truth. Baron. Martyrol.
October. 16.

I will not note, how he abuses the Scriptures, nor how he wresteth the words
of the H. Apostle, to cover a filthy piece of Knavery: nor yet in what sense he
makes the last words, which he utters, to sound; concerning the Roman
Churches being her self the Pillar and Ground of Truth. Though matters are so
carried, as if she were great enough to be her own Support, and without being
founded on any other, were her own Foundation. All I shall observe, is, that
Hadrian 1. and Leo 9. have been very zealous and tender of these Records: that
Benedictus Levita got them confirmed by the Roman Chair: that several Popes,
since Leo 9. have embraced, countenanced, and furthered them, as Pope Paul V.
and Sixtus V. in particular: that Isidore Mercator, whom Baronius confesses to
be a Cheat, is the common Father of the Popish Compilers: That the Codes, or
Tomes of the Councils, at this day received in the Roman Church, for good and
Sacred Records, are by these Collectors, James Merlin, Peter Crab, Laurentius
Surius, Carranza, Nicolinus, Severinus Binius, Labbe, the Collectio Regia, old
Ivo, Gratian, etc. have digested these Impostures, and recorded them as the
Sacred Authenticks of the H. Catholic Church: that whole Armies of Cardinals,
Archbishops, Bishops, Doctors, Schoolmen, Jesuits, Monks, Friars, Canonists,
etc. have cited them for many Ages as true Records: that Turrian in particular
(with diverse others) have set themselves strenuously to defend them: that they
have imposed the Cheat upon Kings and Emperors: that the Forgeries are backed
with the Authorities of Popes, Emperors, Kings, etc. All, no doubt, having a
zeal, but not according to knowledge; that is, being exceeding regardful of the
Interest of the Chair, and studiously maintaining the Temporal Kingdom of the
Church, as they call it; but erring in the manner. While they thought this the
way to advance her, which is now become her apparent shame, and a probable
means (without sudden amendment) to bring her to Confusion.

That Princes may a little more clearly see into the Mystery of these
counterfeit Decretals, it is meet, in the close of all, to expose to the view
of the World one Passage, out of many other, which we have passed over in
silence. The Design of it touches Kings and Emperors to the Quick, though (for
greater security to the Chair) it be covertly expressed. It is in the (...) of
S. Peter to the people of Rome, in S. Clements Letter to S. James and it is
commended to the consideration of the World by all the Popish Compilers of the
Decrees and Councils, (...) (...) downwards.

(...) revived in the first Epistle of (...), as Binius Bin. Marg in Clement.
Epist. 1.
observes: And expressly repeated (because they will make much of it) in the
counterfeit Letter of Fab Epist. 1.
Fabianus, a Roman Bishop and Martyr, that lived about 1400 An. Christ 238.
years agoto this purpose.

When he had said these things, and many S. Peter's Forged Oration.
more like unto these, looking upon the people, again, he said, And you my
dearest Brethren, and Fellow Servants, obey this. The Roman Bishop
Man that presideth over you to teach you the Truth, IN ALL THINGS: Knowing,
that if any one grieveth him, he receives not Christ, who entrusted to him the
Chair of Teaching: and he that receives not Christ, shall be judged not to
have received God the Father: and therefore neither shall himself be received
into the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. But ever coming together to Clement, Date
omnes operam proipso sentire, (it is an Emphatical expression) make it your
business to be of his Opinion; and with your utmost study to show your (...)
toward him: Knowing, that for every one of your sakes, the Enemy is more
enraged against him alone, and stirs up greater Wars against him. Ye ought
therefore to endeavor with your utmost study, that being all knit together in
the Bond of love toward him, ye may cleave unto him with a most perfect
affection. But you also be sure to continue unanimous in all Concord, that you
may so much the more easily obey him with one Consent and Unanimity. For which,
both you may attain Salvation, and he, while ye obey him, may more readily bear
the weight of the Burden laid upon him. They must with their utmost study
favor him, and bend all their Charity to each other, [for this very end] that
they may cleave the faster unto him; for doing which, they shall attain
Salvation. This environs the Popes Chair with Armies of Well-wishers and
Servants. But the Dangerous Passage follows, which shakes all the Thrones and
Kingdoms in the World! Lest they should be an Army of silly Sheep, and simple
Doves, wanting the Serpents Fraud and Sting. He admonishes them further, that
they all must be Enemies to their Popes Enemies, and hate all that he hates. I
leave Kings and Princes to judge of the words.

Quaedam etiamex vobis ipsis intelligere debetis, etc. Some things also ye
ought to understand of your selves; If there be any thing which he dares not
evidently and manifestly speak out, for fear of the Treacheries of evil men. As
for Instance: If he be an Enemy to any one for his Deeds, do not ye expect that
he should tell you, Be ye not Friends with such an one: but ye ought prudently
to observe, and to do his Will without any Admonition, and to turn from him,
against whom ye perceive he is an Enemy; nor so much as to speak to him, with
whom he speaks not, etc. That every one in fault, while he covets to regain
all your Friendships, may the sooner make haste to be reconciled to him who is
over all; and by this return to Salvation, while he begins to obey the
Admonitions of his Superior. But if any one shall be a Friend to those to whom
he is not a Friend, or speak to those to whom he speaks not, he is one of
them, etc.

This dangerous Intimation is a sufficient hint sor Jesuitical Souls: He
declares his Principle, that he is an Enemy to some, contrary to our Saviors
Order: and gives order to his Disciples to guess at his meaning, and without
any public notice to execute the same. Hatred removes its Object; he hates,
and they must do his Will without Admonition. If they mistake his meaning,
provided they do it out of Zeal, he can easily connive at it: which suits with
their Practices, of Poisoning Emperors, Murdering Kings, attempting on Queens,
their Massacre at Paris, the Gunpowder-Treason, and c. The Instruments of which
Acts, are by such Records rather favored than discouraged; and some of them
Canonized, rather than punished in the Sea of Rome.

FINIS.

