Historical Collections: OR, An exact Account of the PROCEEDINGS OF THE Four
last Parliaments OF Q. ELIZABETH Of Famous Memory. Wherein is contained The
COMPLETE JOURNALS Both of the Lords and Commons, Taken from the Original
RECORDS of their Houses. AS ALSO The more particular Behaviors of the Worthy
Members during all the last notable Sessions; comprehending the Motions,
Speeches, and Arguments of the Renowned and Learned Secretary Cecill, Sir
Francis Bacon, Sir Walter Rawleigh, Sir Edw. Hobby, and diverse other eminent
Gentlemen. Together with The most considerable Passages of the History of those
times. Faithfully and Laboriously Collected, By Heywood Townshend Esquire; a Member
in those Parliaments. The like never Extant before.

LONDON: Printed for T. Basset, W. Crook, and W. Cademan; at the George in
Fleetstreet, at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar, and at the Pope's Head in
the New Exchange. 1680.

THE PREFACE TO The Reader.
THE whole Reign of our Renowned Queen Elizabeth, was such a Series of
admirable Events, such a Pattern of wise and honest Counsel and steady Conduct
(such an age of hellish Plots and secret Conspiracies by the Papists) on the
one hand; and such prudent Circumspection, Female Courage and Zeal (and happy
Deliverances) on the other; that no History can deserve to be more minutely
described than the Affairs in her time: And though many famous Pens have
already traveled therein, and given us a fair prospect of her actions, the
subtle Contrivances and open Force of her Enemies against her sacred Life,
Government, and the true Protestant Religion, and the many providence and more
than humane success which blessed and crowned her days; yet we never had so
full an account of her last Parliaments as is comprehended in this Volume,
especially so curiously as the very last is, collected by Mr. Townshend a
worthy Member in that Session, who has so faithfully done it, that it is
thought very fit, even after so long an Interval, to appear in public. There
have been many excellent persons of the greatest abilities and worth, who
though they had not the ambition to struggle to be chosen into the House, and
were well acquainted without-doors with all the most important passages within,
have yet often wished they might have had the liberty of sitting there but a
few days, only to observe the behavior, methods, and tempers of Men so
assembled, and be an eyewitness how things are managed and passed there. Now
in this Relation there is so particular and exquisite an Account, that such may
even satisfy their curiosity in those very Circumstances: For this is not
only the Journal Book of what is entered upon Record, but (in the last Session
especially) there are all the particular Speeches, Motions, Arguments, nay and
the very behavior of every one in that grand Assembly; and all so painted to
the life, that to a considering Reader, it is almost the same thing as if he
had been present with them all the while. Here you will find that the
Grievances they labored to have redressed, were very considerable, their
Arguments rational and strong, though finely adorned; which will be easily
believed, when we know the famous Secretary Cecill, Sir Francis Bacon, Sir
Walter Rawleigh, and many other solid Statesmen, were Fellow Members in this
illustrious Assembly, whose Speeches alone are, as I should guess, a sufficient
Invitation to any one that has but heard of them in our English world, to know
how they behaved themselves in that House of Commons: which that you may do, I
shall make no further Preamble, but conduct you into the Work it self.

Farewell.
ADVERTISEMENT.
That long-expected Work of Dr. William Howell's, now Chancellor of Lincoln,
entitled, The General History of the World, in two Volumes, in Folio; the
first reprinted, with very large Additions; and the second never before
printed; being a most exact History, is finished. Printed for T. Basset, W.
Crook, and W. Cademan.

An exact and perfect Journal of the Passages in the Upper House of Parliament,
31 Eliz.
holden at Westminster, Anno xxxjo Reginae Eliz. Annoque Dom. 1588. which began
there Feb. 4. and then and there continued until the Dissolution thereof; which
was on March 29. Anno Dom. 1589.
THE Queens Majesty, soon after that her wonderful and glorious Victory which
God Almighty had given her Navy over that vainly-stiled Invincible Armado,
sent against her Realm of England by the King of Spain; Queen summons a
Parliament soon after the defeat of the Spanish Invincible Armado.
summoned this her High Court of Parliament to begin on Tuesday the 12th day of
November that present year 1588. and in the 30th year of her Reign; that so by
common Advice and Council she might prepare and provide against the inbred
malice of that Prince and Nation: But other occasions of great importance
requiring the deferring of the said Assembly, her Majesty prorogued the same
to a further day, in manner and form following.

MEmorandum, The Queen prorogues the Parliament from the 12th of Nov. to the
4th day of Feb.
Whereas the Queens Majesty by her Writ summoned her Parliament to begin and
be holden at Westminster this present Tuesday the 12th of November 1588. her
Highness for certain great and weighty Causes and Considerations her Majesty
specially moving, by the advice of her Privy Council, and of her Justices of
both her Benches, and other of her Council learned, did prorogue and adjourn
the said Parliament until the fourth day of February next, by virtue of her
Writ-Patent, sealed with the Great Seal, and bearing date the 15th day of
October last past. Whereupon, at this said 12th day of November, the Archbishop
of Canterbury, Sir Christopher Hatton Lord Chancellor, William Lord Burghley
Lord Treasurer, The Earl of Huntingdon, the Bishop of London, and three other
Barons, repaired to the Parliament-chamber (commonly called the Upper House)
and there, in the presence of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses summoned to
the said Parliament, declared, That her Highness, for diverse good Causes and
Considerations her specially moving, by her Highness's said Writ had prorogued
the said Parliament from the said first summoned day, An. 1588.
until the fourth day of February next: Whereupon the Writ for the said
Prorogation, in the presence of all that Assembly, was openly read by the Clerk
of the Upper House, in haec verba.

ELizabetha Dei gratia, Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regina, Fidei
Defensor, etc. Praedelectis and Fidelibus nostris Prelatis, Magnatibus, and
Proceribus Regni nostri Angliae, ac dilectis and fidelibus nostris Militibus,
Civibus, and Burgensibus dicti Regni nostri, ad praesens Parliamentum nostrum
apud Civitatem nostram Westminster. duodecimo die Novembris prox. futurum inchoandum
and tenendum, convocatis and electis, and vestrum cuilibet, salutem.

Cum nos pro quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis nos statum and
desensionem dicti Regni nostri Angliae, and Ecclesia Anglicana concernentibus,
dict. Parliamentum nostrum ad diem and locum praedict. teneri ordinavimus, ac
vobis per seperalia Brevia nostra apud Civitat. and diem praedict. interesse
mandaverimus, ad tractandum, consentiendum, and concludendum super hiis in
dicto Parliamento nostro tunc and ibidem proponerentur and tractarentur;
quibusdam tamen certis de causis and considerationibus nos ad hoc specialiter
moventibus, dictum Parliamentum nostrum usque ad quartam diem Februarii prox.
futur. duximus prorogandum; Ita quod nec vos nec aliquis vestrum ad dictum
duodecimum diem Novembris apud Civitatem praed. comparere teneamini seu
autemini: volumus enim vos and quemlibet vestrum nos penitus openerari
Mandanies, and tenore presentium firmiter injungendo precipientes, vobis and
cuilibet vestrum ac omnibus aliis, quibus in hac part intererit, quod ad
dictum quartam diem Februarii apud praedictum Civitate Westmonaster.
personaliter compereatis, and intersitis, and quilibet vestrum compereat, and
intersit, ad tractand. faciend. agend. and concludend. super hiis quae in dicto
Parliamento nostro de Communi consilio dicti Regni nostri favente Domino
contingerint ordinari. In cujus rei testimonium, has literas nostras sieri
fecimus Patentes. Test meipsam apud Westminster. quinto decimo die Octobris, Anno
Regni nostri tricesimo.

Per ipsam Reginam. Ha. Gerrarde.



And according to this Prorogation, the Parliament held on the fourth day of
February following; when the Queen's Majesty in her accustomed state and order
came to the Upper House, accompanied by Sir Christopher Hatton Knight, then
Lord Chancellor of England, and diverse of the Nobility: of which the
Journal Book makes mention in manner and form following.

On Tuesday the fourth of February, Feb. 4. The Q. comes to the House of Lords.
in the 31th year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth (to which day the Parliament
had been last prorogued, and accordingly now held) the Queen's Majesty was
personally present in Parliament; but the Journal Book does not mention the
names of such Lords as were then present.

The Queen being set under her Cloth of Estate, and the Lords placed in their
several ranks and order, and as many of the House of Commons as conveniently
could, being let in, and standing before the Bar, Sir Christopher Hatton
Knight, Lord Chancellor of England, Heads of the L. Chancellor Hatton's Speech.
in a well-framed and discreet Speech, did there declare unto them at large,
the Queens gracious disposition to Peace, and her great wisdom in preserving
the same, and singular government of the Realm.

Next, he showed the great benefit which this Kingdom enjoys by her
Government; and remembered the great Conquest over the Spanish late wonderful
Army (or Fleet) on the Seas, viz. Anno Dom. 1588.

He further declared, how much the King of Spain remained bent against this
Kingdom: And lastly, showed, that the cause of calling this Parliament, to be,
that by the consent of the most grave and wise persons now called together out
of all parts of the Realm, preparation may (as far forth as by council of man
is possible to) be made and provided; that Arms, Soldiers, and Moneys, may be
in readiness, and an Army prepared and furnished against all Events.

The Lord Chancellor's Speech being ended, the Clerk of the Parliament read the
Names of the Receivers and Triers of Petitions in French, according to the
usual form; which were these:

Receivers of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland. Sir
Christopher Wray, Chief Justice; Committees, or Receivers and Triers of
Petitions.
Sir Gilbert Gerrard Knight. Master of the Rolls; Sir Robert Shute, one of the
Justices of the King's Bench; Dr. Aubery, and Dr. Ford.

Receivers of Petitions for Gascoigne and other Countries beyond the Seas, and
the Isles. Sir Edmond Anderson, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas; Sir Roger
Manwood, Chief Baron; Francis Windham, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas;
Dr. Clarke, and Dr. Carry.

Triers of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland. The Archbishop
of Canterbury, the Earl of Darby, the Earl of Worcester, the Earl of Sussex,
the Bishop of London, the Bishop of Winchester, the Lord Howard of Effingham
Lord Admiral, the Lord Cobham, and the Lord Gray of Wilton.

Triers of Petitions for Gascoigne, and for other Countries on the other side
the Seas, and the Islands. The Earl of Oxford great Chamberlain of England, the
Earl of Warwick, the Earl of Pembrooke, the Bishop of Salisbury, the Bishop of
Lincoln, the Bishop of Rochester, the Lord Hunsdon Lord Chamberlain to the
Queen, the Lord Lumley, and Lord Buckhurst.

During this Parliament, upon several days, seven Temporal Lords sent their
Proxies; so did five Spiritual Lords.

Et norandum, That all the said Spiritual Lords, excepting one, did every one
constitute two several Proctors; and the fifth being John Bishop of Carlisle,
whose Proxy was returned February the fifth, made only one, viz. the
Archbishop of Canterbury his Proctor. It likewise seldom happens, that any
Bishop does nominate fewer than three or two Proctors; nor any Temporal Lord
more than one.

Nota, That the Lord Burleigh had this Parliament four Proxies sent unto him,
viz. one from the Lord Dacres, one from the Earl of Warwick, one from Viscount
Mountacute, and one from the Lord Lumley.

Ipsa Regina continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Jovis prox. hora
secunda post meridiem.

Thursday, February 6. (to which day the Parliament had been last continued)
the Queens Majesty was personally present, coming to the said Parliament in
her accustomed state and order, about three of the clock in the afternoon, it
being the time appointed for the House of Commons to present their Speaker, who
they had been authorized to choose on Tuesday last, when the Parliament first
began. And thereupon accordingly, the Queen and Lords being set, and the said
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons being let into the
Upper House, two of the most eminent persons of the said House did lead up to
the Bar of the Upper House George Snagg Sergeant at Law, Geo. Snagg, their
Speaker, presented to the Queen. Excuses himself.
who was chosen the Speaker of the said House of Commons; who being placed at
the said Bar, and silence being made, did in a modest and discreet Speech,
disable himself, by reason of his many imperfections; and humbly desired her
Majesty to discharge him of that great Place, and to nominate some other more
able and sufficient Member of the same House.

Whereupon the Lord Chancellor, by commandment from the Queen, The Queen
approves of him.
did let him know, That her Majesty did very well allow of his Choice; and
thereupon encouraged him willingly and cheerfully to undertake and execute that
Charge and Place, to which he had been by the free and unanimous consent of the
House of Commons elected and chosen.

Upon which Speech of the Lord Chancellor's, the said Speaker, according to the
usual course and form, rendering all humble thankfulness to the Queens Majesty
for her underserved goodness toward him, He returns his thanks.
in conceiving him able and worthy for the execution of a Place of that great
Charge and Trust; and promising his care and readiness with all diligence to
undergo the same, he did offer up unto her Majesty diverse Petitions, in the
name and on the behalf of the House of Commons.

First, Petitions the Queen in behalf of the Commons.
That during the continuance of this Sessions, themselves and their necessary
Attendants and Servants might be freed from all Suits and Arrests. Secondly,
That they might have free access to her Majesty upon all urgent and important
occasions. Thirdly, That they might have free liberty of speech in the said
House, to debate and dispute of such matters and things as should be there
proposed. And lastly, he petitioned her Majesty on his own behalf, that if any
thing should be mistaken, or unwillingly omitted by himself, that she would be
graciously pleased to pass by and pardon the same.
To which Speech the Lord Chancellor, The Queen allows of them.
by commandment from the Queen, shortly replied, That her Majesty was
graciously pleased to grant all his Petitions; and that he the said Speaker,
and the House of Commons, should use and enjoy all such Liberties and
Privileges as others in like cases before them had been accustomed to use and
enjoy in the times of her Majesty's most noble Progenitors: withal admonishing
them not to extend the said Privileges unto any irreverent and mis-beseeming
Speeches, or unnecessary Accesses to her Majesty.

After which Speeches ended, the Lord Chancellor, by command from the Queen,
continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Sabbati prox. hora nona.

Saturday, Feb. 8. to which the Parliament was continued, were present the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, the Marquess
of Winton, the Earl of Derby great Steward, six Earls, twelve Bishops, and
eighteen Barons more.

An Act concerning Captains and Soldiers, prima vice lect. Two Bills read
about the Soldiery and Husbandry.


An Act for maintenance of Husbandry, and for increase of Tillage, prima vice
lect.

Dominus Cancellarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Lunae
prox. hora nona.

February the ninth, Sunday.

Monday, Feb. 10. were four Bills read, whereof the last being a Bill
concerning Captains and Soldiers, secunda vice lect. and commissa Domino
Thesaurario, Marchioni Winton, six other Earls, three Bishops, eleven Barons,
Sergeant Puckering, and nostro Atturnato.

Nota, That here mere Attendants of the Upper House, Observation of the
Collector of this Journal.
and no Members of it, are made joint Committees with the Lords; which is very
usually done in the Parliaments foregoing in the Reign of this Queen: where
also the Judges being but mere Assistants of the said House, are often
nominated Committees also. Whereas in the last Parliaments of her Majesty's
Reign, viz. in Anno 39, and Anno 43. and in the latter times of King James, and
our present Sovereign his Son, these are seldom or never nominated as
Committees, but only as Assistants to the Committees, to give their advice if
it shall be required, and not otherwise. And although the Clerk of the
Parliament might at some times mistake and err in setting such down for
Committees as were only commanded to be attendant upon or assistant unto the
said Committees; yet that he should so often mistake in so many Parliaments,
and the rather because such Committees are frequently named diverse times in
sundry of the several Sessions, it is most unlikely and improbable.

Dominus Cancellarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Veneris
prox. hora nona.

Friday, Feb. 14. an Act for the more speedy payment of Dismes and Tenths,
primae vice lect.

Memorandum, The Lords Committees brought in the Bill concerning Captains and
Soldiers, with Amendments: And by reason of diverse defects in the same Bill,
they had framed a new Bill; which new Bill, by consent of all the Lords, was
received, and prima vice lect.

An Act touching Constats of original Conveyances made by the Queens Majesty,
Bill about Original Conveyances. Bill about Writs of Error, read and committed.
secunda vice lect.

An Act to save discontinuance of Writs of Error upon Errors in the Courts of
Exchequer, secunda vice lect. and commissa Archiepisc. Cant. and Ebor. Dom.
Senescallo, three Earls, three Bishops, six Barons, Magistro Rott. Servient.
Shuttleworth, nostr. Attur. and Solicitor.

Nota here also (as in the Page before going) such as are no Members of the
Upper House, are made joint Committees with the Lords.

Dominus Cobham and Dominus Stafford, Robis Parliamentaribus induti,
introdxerunt Dominum Talbott, cumque ad locum suum perduxerunt, praeeunte
Gartira Principale Rege Armorum, qui etiam tunica Armorum indutus erat.

Because the daily continuing of the Parliament in these words, Dominus
Cancellarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum, etc. is but matter of form, it
is henceforth omitted, unless somewhat extraordinary fall out in respect of the
person or manner of continuing of it.

Saturday, Feb. 15. three Bill were read; whereof two of them, the first being
an Act for maintenance of Houses, Three Bills read, two committed, viz. for
Tillage and Husbandry, and against Horsestealing.
for Husbandry and Tillage; and the second being an Act against Horsestealing,
were secunda vice lect. and tunc commissa Domino Thesaurario, 4 Comitibus, 2
Episcop. 8 Baronibus, Justiciario Gaudy, Servienti Puckering, and Solicitatori
Reginae.

Nota, That here also one Assistant of the Upper House, and two Attendants upon
it, are made joint Committees with the Lords.

February the 16th, Sunday.

Monday, Feb. 17. four Bills were read; whereof the first was an Act for
Reformation of Excess in Apparel, Bill against Excess in Apparel, read and
committed.
secunda vice lect. and commissa Domino Thesaurario, 3 Comitibus, 2 Episcop. 6
Baronibus, Servienti Shuttleworth, and Solicitatori Reginae.

Tuesday the 18th of February, four Bills were read; whereof the first was an
Act providing Remedy against discontinuance in Writs of Error in the Exchequer
and King's Bench, tertia vice lect. and conclus. and sent to the House of
Commons by Sergeant Shuttleworth and Doctor Awbry; and three other Bills.

Die Jovis xxo Feb. were four Bills read; the first a Bill for having Horse,
Armor, and Weapons, prima vice lect. and three other Bills.

Die Sabbati xxijo Feb. were three Bills read; whereof the last was an Act
concerning Captains and Soldiers, tertia vice lect. and conclus. and together
with the two Bills aforesaid, sent to the House of Commons by Sergeant
Puckering and Doctor Ford.

Three Bills were also sent from the House of Commons, viz. an Act concerning
Informers, and two others of no great moment.

Feb. 23. Sunday.

Monday, Feb. 24. four Bills were read; whereof one of them being a Bill for
Writs upon Proclamation upon Exigents to be current within the County Palatine
of Durham, secunda vice lect. and commissa Justiciario Gaudy; quod nota.

Tuesday, Feb. 25. two Bills were read; whereof the first was an Act concerning
Informers, prima and secunda vice lect. and conclus. Bill about Informers.
and so expedited.

An Act for the abridgment of Proclamations upon Fines to be levied at the
Common Law, secunda vice lect. wherein the Lords finding some imperfections,
sent down Sergeant Shuttleworth and Doctor Clarke to the House of Commons,
Lords desire a Conference.
to pray a Conference with some of that House; which being granted, the Lords
for Committees were, Lord Treasurer, Lord Steward, Bishop of Winton, the Lord
Cobham, and the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas to attend the Lords.

Nota, Observation.
That here one of the Judges is particularly nominated to attend upon the Lords
Committees; which may further prove, that in all the former places where the
Judges or the Queens learned Counsel are named as Committees, it is no error
or mistake of the Clerk. So that hence the difference may very well be gathered
to be this: That where a Committee of the Lords was formerly used to be
selected out to meet with another Committee of the House of Commons, here
neither the Judges being but Assistants, nor the Queens learned Counsel being
but Attendants of and upon the House, were ever nominated or appointed as joint
Committees with the Lords, because the very Members of either House only are
then admitted to partake of such matters of weight and secrecy as they do there
commonly confer upon. But when the Lords, amongst themselves, do appoint a
Committee to consider of some ordinary Bill that is to pass their House, and
especially if the Bill do concern matter of Law, here it has been anciently
used, and may still, without any prejudice to the honor of that House, be
continued, that the Kings learned Counsel, but especially the Judges, may be
nominated as Committees alone, or as joint Committees with the Lords: for in
regard that nothing can be absolutely concluded at a Committee, but all matters
shall still depend on the resolution of the House; and so no inconvenience
shall ensue thereupon.

After the Committees of both Houses had met, the Lords Committees proceeded to
the amendments of the Bill; and afterward this present day the Bill and
Amendments received their second reading and passed the House, and were sent
down to the House of Commons to be amended by them, by Doctor Carewe and Master
Solicitor.

It appears by the Journal Book, that the House of Commons having yielded to
a Conference, did presently choose Committees, and sent them up to the Upper
House.

Two other Bills had each of them one reading, and one Bill was sent up to the
Lords from the House of Commons; all being of no great moment.

Thursday, Feb. 27. were two Bills read; whereof the first being an Act for
Reformation of Excess of Apparel, Two Bills read.
was secunda vice lect. and commiss. ad unum Commit. and 4 Baron.

On Saturday, March 1.
March 1. were two Bills read, of no great moment. This forenoon also the Lords
Committees returned the Bill for the having Horses, Two Bills read.
Armor, and Weapons; signifying that they could get no meeting but of so small
a number, as their Lordships would not deal in it.

The whole House presently proceeded to the Question, Whether it should be
engrossed or no? Upon which Question, the Lords with one consent agreed it
should be engrossed.

March 2. Sunday.

Monday, March 3. two Bills were read; whereof one of them concerning the sale
of Tho. Hanford's Lands toward the payment of his Debts, and another of no
great moment, had been sent up to the Lords this morning from the Commons.

On Tuesday, March 4. two Bills were read; whereof the latter was a Bill for
Sale of Tho. Hanford's Lands, etc. secunda vice lect. Whereupon the Lords
ordered, that as well the said Thomas Hanford, as those that followed the Bill,
should be warned to be before them with their learned Counsel, at the next
sitting of the Court; which shall be on Thursday next, at nine a clock. Two
Bills of no great moment were this forenoon also sent up to the Lords House
from the House of Commons.

Thursday, March 6. the Amendments of the Bill for maintenance of Husbandry,
were prima and secunda vice lect. and commiss. ad ingross. Three Bills also of
no great moment, had each of them one reading. And one Bill concerning the
preservation of Orford-haven, was brought up to the Lords from the House of
Commons.

Saturday, March 8. were three Bills each of them once read, of no great moment.

March 9. Sunday.

Monday, March 10. four Bills; whereof the last being a Bill for an Assurance
to be made of the Jointure of Anne, Bill to assure the Jointure of Anne Nevill.
Wife of Henry Nevill Esquire secunda and tertia vice lect. and communi omnium
Procerum assensu conclus.

Memorandum, That before the third reading and the passing of the Act of the
Jointure of the Wife of Henry Nevil, by which all former Conveyances made by
the said Henry Nevil of the Manors of Waighfield and Wadhurst, etc. in the
County of Sussex, were made frustrate and void;

The Lords ordered, That the said former Conveyance should by the Parties to
the same, be brought into this House, and delivered to the Clerk of the
Parliament sealed up; to the end that if it shall please her Majesty to give
her Royal assent unto the said Act, that then the said Indentures and
Conveyances should be forthwith cancelled. But if it shall not please her
Majesty to give her Royal assent, that then the said Indentures and Conveyances
should safely be redelivered to the said Parties, unseen of any, and
uncancelled. And to this, all the Parties agreed, as well before the Lords the
Committees, as before the whole House.

Memorandum, That according to the said Order, the Deeds mentioned therein were
cancelled the 12th day of May, Anno Regni Reginae Elizabethae tricesimo primo.

Tuesday the 11th of March, was one Bill read, of no great moment. Subsidy-Bill
brought from the Commons.
And two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; whereof
the first was an Act of four Fifteens and Tenths, and two entire Subsidies,
granted by the Temporalty; and another of no great moment.

Thursday the 13th of March, the Amendments of the Bill for having of Horses,
Arms, and Weapons, prima and secundae vice lect. and commiss. ad ingross.

The Amendments also, and a new Proviso annexed unto the Bill against
Informers, secunda and tertia vice lect. and communi omnium Procerum assensu
conclus. and one other Bill of no great moment, read prima vice.

Friday, March 14. the Bill of Subsidy was once read: And the Bill for the
Provision for Orford-Haven lect. est and conclus. and sent to the House of
Commons by Sergeant Shuttleworth and Mr. Powell. Subsidy-Bill read.


Saturday, March 15. were six Bills read; whereof one being an Act against
erecting and maintaining of Cottages, Bill against Cottages.
tertia vice lect. and conclus. and sent to the House of Commons by Dr. Clarke.

Another Bill, being an Act for the confirmation of the Subsidies of the
Clergy, prima and secunda vice lect. and commiss. ad ingross.

Sunday, March 16.

Monday the 17th of March, were four Bills read; whereof the first was the Bill
of the Subsidy, Subsidy-Bill assented to.
being tertia vice lect. and communi omnium Procerum assensu conclus.

There were also sent up to the Lords this sorenoon, six Bills of no great
moment.

Tuesday, March 18. were seven Bills read; whereof one being an Act that the
Children of Aliens shall pay Strangers Customs, tertia vice lect. and conclus.
and sent with the former to the House of Commons, by Dr. Clarke and Dr. Carewe.

There were also this morning brought up to the Lords from the House of
Commons, four Bills; which were of so little moment, as two of them were not
mentioned in the Journal Book.

Wednesday, March 19. were three Bills read, of no great concernment.

Thursday the 20th of March, were two Bills read, of no great moment: And the
same forenoon one other Bill of small consequence, brought from the Commons.

Friday, March 21. were four Bills read; whereof the first being an Act
concerning the Hospital of Lamborn, tertia vice lect. and conclus. and sent to
the House of Commons by Serj. Puckering, and three other Bills of no great
moment.

There were also sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons this forenoon,
three Bills of no great moment.

Saturday, March 22. were four Bills of no great concernment, brought from the
House of Commons: Bill for maintenance of the School at Tunbridge.
And the Lords having this forenoon given three readings to the Bill for the
better Assurance of Lands and Tenements for the maintenance of the Free
Grammar School of Tunbridge in the County of Kent, did send the said Bill with
those new Amendments, to be passed also in the House of Commons; the Bill it
self having before passed that House, and had been sent up from them to the
Lords on Monday last.

March 23. Sunday.

Monday, March 24. three Bills of no great moment, and the Amendments of the
fourth, were read: And five Bills of as little consequence, were sent up to the
Lords from the House of Commons.

Memorandum, quod Christopherus Wray Miles, Capital. Justiciar. de Banco Reg.
secum adduxit in Parliamento in Camera Parliamenti, intra Dominos Breve de
Errore and Billam de Regina indorsat. ac Rotnl. in quibus continebantur placit.
and processis in quibus supponebatur error, and ibid. reliquit transcript.
totius Recordi cum Clerico Parliamenti, simul cum praedicto Breve de Errore in
Parliamento.

On Tuesday, March 25. An. 1589. 25.
three Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, of no
great moment; and other Bills of as small consequence, read in the House;
whereof one was read twice, and the other thrice.

No mention is made of the continuance or adjournment of the Parliament, being
omitted by the Clerks negligence.

Wednesday, March 26. three Bills were read; whereof the first being an Act to
avoid secret Outlawries of her Majesty's Subjects, Bill to avid secret
Outlawries; For relief of Jurors.
tertia vice lect. and sent to the Commons by Dr. Carewe: And the last being an
Act for the relief of Jurors, read secunda and tertia vice, and rejected.

An Act also of no great moment, was this forenoon sent up to the Lords from
the House of Commons.

Thursday the 27th of March, nothing was done; but the Parliament continued to
the hour accustomed.

Friday, March 28. three Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of
Commons; whereof the first was an Act for the explanation or declaration of the
Statute of 8 Hen. 6. concerning forcible Entries, Bill concerning forcible
Entries.
the Indictments thereupon found expedit. and two other Bills of no great
moment.

An Act also for naturalizing Joyce the Daughter Ralph Elkin Gent. and Wife of
Richard Lambert Merchant, Bill for Naturalization.
born beyond the Seas, read thrice, and expedit.

Dominus Cancellarius continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Crastinam, dimid. horae ante septimam.

Saturday, March 29. a Bill for continuance of diverse Statutes, tertia vice
lect. and sent to the House of Commons by Dr. Stanhopp, and Mr. Powell.

Here, by the negligence of the Clerk, the Lords Spiritual that were present,
are omitted; but the Lords Temporal that attended the Queen, are thus named,
who was there personally present this day at the dissolving the Parliament.

Lords Temporal present at the Dissolution of this Parliament.
Sir Christopher Hatton Miles, Dominus Cancellarius. Dominus Burleigh, Dominus
Thesaur. Angliae. Marchio Winton. Comes Darby, Magnus Senescallus. Comes
Northumberland. Comes Kane. Comes Cumberland. Comes Sussex. Comes Hundingdon.
Comes Bathon. Comes Pembrooke. Comes Hartford. Comes Essex.
Barons.
Dominus Howard, Admiral. Dominus Hunsdon, Camer. Dominus Willoughby. Dominus
Morley. Dominus Cobham. Dominus Talbott. Dominus Stafford. Dominus Gray.
Dominus Darcy. Dominus Sands. Dominus Windsor. Dominus Wentworth. Dominus
Wharton. Dominus Rich. Dominus Willoughby. Dominus North. Dominus St. John.
Dominus Buckhurst. Dominus De-la-ware. Dominus Norris.
These being thus set, and the Commons House with their Speaker, and as many as
conveniently could, being let in, the said Speaker, Bills presented to the
Queen for Royal Assent.
according to the usual form, presenting her Majesty with the Bill of two
Subsidies and four Fifteenths granted by the Temporalty; desired her Highness
graciously to accept thereof, as the free Testimony of the faithful and loyal
Respect of her Subjects: and withal desiring her Majesty to give her gracious
consent to such Acts as had been prepared and expedited by the two Houses of
Parliament.

To the Bill of Subsidies the Queen answered, Queen passes the Subsidy.
Le Royne remercee ses loyaule Subjects accept leur benevolence and ainsi le
veult.

The Clerk of the Parliament having read this former Answer of the Queens
acceptance of the Bill of Subsidy, did then read in these French words
following the thanks of the Lords and Commons, for her Majesty's most free and
gracious Pardon.

Les Prelates, Seigneurs, and Communs in ce present Parliament assembles, Lords
and Commons return thanks in French.
au nom de touts vos autres Subjects remercient tres-humblement vostre
Majesty, and prient a Dieu que il vous done en bonne vie and longue.

To every public Act allowed by the Queen, the Clerk of the Parliament read in
French these words following: La Royne le veult.

To every private Act that passed, Soit fait comme il est desire.

These two last Answers to the Public and Private Acts that pass, are to be
written by the Clerk of the Parliament at the head of every Act.

To such Acts as her Majesty did forbear to allow, the Clerk of the Parliament
did read in French these words: Le Royne se advisera.

After which ended, the Dissolution of the Parliament followed in these words:
They are dissolved.
Dominus Cancellarius ex mandato Dominae Reginae tunc praesentis dissolvit
praesens Parliamentum.

A Journal of the House of Commons, in the Parliament held at Westminster, Anno
31 Reginae Eliz. Annoque Dom. 1588. begun the 4th of February, and ended on the
29th of March, 1589.
ON Tuesday, Feb. 4. the Parliament did begin, Feb. 4. 1588.
and the House of Commons had authority to choose their Speaker, and they chose
George Snagg Sergeant at Law, House of Com. assembled. Serj. Snagg chosen
Speaker.
for their Speaker; who having modestly disabled himself, was notwithstanding
allowed of by the House, and thereupon placed by two of the most eminent
Personages thereof in the Chair.

Wednesday, Feb. 5. the House sat not, because their Speaker was not yet
presented to her Majesty.

Thursday, Feb. 6. the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons
having notice about two of the clock this afternoon that her Majesty with the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal were already come into the Upper House expecting
their attendance, repaired thither with George Snagg Sergeant at Law, their
Speaker, and presented him unto her Majesty; Presented to the Queen. Disables
himself. Is allowed to be Speaker by the Queen.
who notwithstanding his humble disabling and excusing of himself, her Majesty
did, by the mouth of the Lord Chancellor, signify her allowance of him; and
afterward also in like manner answered to his Petitions of course made in the
name of the House of Commons for freedom of Access, liberty of Speech, freedom
from Arrests and Suits, and lastly, in his own name, for pardon for himself;
and that the said House of Commons and himself should enjoy and use all such
Privileges and Freedoms as had in the like case been enjoyed by any others in
the times of her Majesty's most noble Progenitors. Whereupon the said Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses, with their Speaker, departed to their own House: And
then was read the Bill for reformation of deceitful Practices used in reversal
of Fines at the Common Law. Bill against deceitful practices in Law.


Friday, Feb. 7. the Bill touching Informers and Informations upon penal
Statutes, was read the first time.

This day the House was called over; House called over.
and all those that did then sit in the House, and were present at the calling
of the same, did thereupon severally answer to their names, and departed out of
the House as they were called.

Saturday, Feb. 8. the Bill to avoid the Abuses grown by Forestalling, Bill to
avoid Forestalling, etc.
Engrossing, and Regrating, was read prima vice.

Also the Bill touching Informers and Informations upon Penal Statutes, was
read the second time, and committed to all the prime Counsel of this House; Mr.
Recorder of London, Sir William Moore, Mr. Grafton, and others, who were
appointed to meet in the Starchamber at two of the clock in the afternoon.

February 9. Sunday.

Monday, Feb. 10. the Bill touching the benefit of Clergy in some cases of
Offenders, Bill touching benefit of Clergy.
was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Secretary Woolley,
and others, who were appointed to meet in the Star Chamber on Wednesday next at
two of the clock in the afternoon.

A Bill was brought in, that Lands intailed and Copyhold-lands may be liable to
the payment of Debts, and read the first time; and after sundry Arguments,
rejected upon the Question.

Tuesday, Feb. 11. a Bill touching the pursuit of Hue and Cry, Bill touching
Hue and Cry.
was read the first time.

The Committees touching Informers and Informations, which should have met this
afternoon, are deferred until Friday next in the afternoon.

Mr. Speaker moved the House on the behalf of Mr. Fulke Onslow the Clerk of the
same, That having of late been long sick, and yet somewhat recovered, albeit
but weak still and sickly, and enjoying his Office by Letters Patent of the
grant of her Majesty to exercise the same by himself or his sufficient Deputy
or Deputies, it might please this House in his absence, if it shall happen in
regard of his health and necessary ease to withdraw himself from the exercise
of his Office in this House, in his own person, to vouchsafe therein the
attendance of his own Clerks or Servants, such of them as before their
intermedling therein within this House, shall first have taken the Oath usually
administered unto all the Members of this House: And thereupon it was so granted
and assented unto by the whole House accordingly.

Wednesday, Feb. 12. two Bills of no great moment had each of them a reading;
Bill touching Orford-Haven in Suff.
of which, the first was a Bill touching Orford-Haven in the County of Suffolk.

Also two other Bills of no great moment had each of them a reading; of which,
the second being a Bill to avoid the Abuses grown in Forestalling, Regrating,
and Engrossing, was read the second time; and after many Arguments had upon the
same, was committed unto Sir Valentine Dale Master of Requests, Mr. Recorder of
London, Sir Edward Dymmocke, and others, who were appointed to meet on Monday
next in the afternoon at two of the clock, in the Star Chamber.

Thursday, Feb. 13. three Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the
last being the Bill to reform Disorders of common Innes and other
Victualling-houses, Bill concerning Disorders in Innes, etc.
was read the second time; and after many Speeches and Arguments, committed
unto Sir Valentine Dale Master of Requests, Mr. Francis Hastings, Mr. Coke, and
others; who were appointed to meet upon Wednesday next at two of the clock in
the afternoon, in Serjeants-Inne-hall in Chancery Lane.

The Bill touching Orford-haven was read the second time, and after some
Speeches committed unto Mr. Arthur Hopton, Mr. Anthony Wingfield, Mr. Recorder,
Mr. Grimston, Mr. Robinson, and others; who were appointed to meet upon this
day sevennight at two of the clock in the afternoon, in the Exchequer-chamber.

Friday, Feb. 14. four Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the second
being the Bill touching Exactions upon the Subjects of this Realm by the
Officers of the Exchequer, was read the first time; which said Bill was brought
into the House by Sir Edward Hobby, who alleged that the said Exaction did
nothing tend to any further profit or commodity of her Majesty.

Two other Bills also had each of them one reading; whereof the second being
the Bill for abridging of Proclamations upon Fines to be levied, was upon the
second reading committed unto Mr. Morice, Mr. Broughton, Sir Henry Knivit, and
others; who were appointed to meet in Serjeants-Inne-hall in Fleet Street, on
Tuesday next, at two of the clock in the afternoon.

Also the Bill touching Orford-Haven committed yesterday, was this day
delivered to Mr. Arthur Hopton one of the Committees.

Saturday, Feb. 15. a Bill to reform Disorders in Purveyors, was read the first
time. Mr. Treasurer, Mr. Cradock, Sir William Moore, and others, did speak unto
the Bill; and afterward it was ordered upon the Question, That the said Bill
should be read again this present day: whereupon the said Bill was then
presently read again, and upon the Question committed unto all the Privy
Council being of this House, and all those that spoke unto the Bill, and some
others added unto them; who were appointed to meet in this House upon Monday
next at two of the clock in the afternoon. And the same time and place is also
appointed for the Committees in the Bill for Informers and Informations.

Feb. 16. Sunday.

Monday, Feb. 17. the Bill touching the multiplicity of Suits, and the
excessive numbers of Atturneys, Bill against excessive numbers of Suits and
Atturneys.
was upon the second reading committed unto the Knights for the Counties of
Norfolk and Suffolk, Mr. Recorder of London, Mr. Cromwell, and others; who were
appointed to meet upon Wednesday next at two of the clock in the afternoon, at
Serjeants-Inne in Chancery Lane.

Sir Edward Hobby shows, with his great grief, That since the last sitting of
this House, (...)
he has been (of some great Personage, being no Member of this House) very
sharply rebuked for some of his Speeches delivered in this House by him on
Friday last, in the setting forth of the Bill for Reformation of Abuses in some
Officers in the Court of Exchequer; and that the same his Speeches have been
delivered by some unto the said great Personage very untruly, as tending to all
the Officers of the said Court. And so showing other the particularities as
well of his own said former Speeches, as of the said untrue Report, and
sinister construction of the same, somewhat at large, does in the end refer
himself therein to the testimony of this whole House; and withal praying the
good consideration of this House toward him in this his honest and just
excuse, as in like former cases has been often accustomed toward other Members
of this House; and especially in regard of the maintenance and preservation of
the ancient Liberties of the same, desired that by some of this House the said
great Personage may be satisfied of the truth of the Case: And also moved to
show the name of the Reporter of the said untrue Speech; and to that end cites
to them two like Presidents of this House, one in the time of King Edw. 6. and
the other of the Queens Majesty that now is. And showed further, That he
thinks his said Speech was discovered after Mr. Speaker his late Admonition
generally given to the whole House against the uttering the Secrets of this
House, either in Table-talk, or Notes in Writing, and not before. And so
concluding, gives all commendation to the said Bill, and prays another
reading of it presently, and also all good and speedy course both in the
commitment and other passages of the same.

Sir Henry Knivit entering into some Speech, does testify his approbation of
the said Speech of Sir Edward Hobby; and well liking and allowing of due
consideration to be had thereof by this House, recites very briefly the whole
substance in effect both of the said first Speech of Sir Edward Hobby, and also
of his said late motion; and giving due commendation of his first Speech, and
also of his said Protestation of excuse, urges the present reading and
proceeding upon the said Bill with all speed. Whereupon, after sundry other
Speeches tending likewise to the prosecution of the said Bill to commitment,
upon the Question it was ordered, that the same Bill should be presently read;
which was done accordingly.

Tuesday, Feb. 18. four Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the last
was for the relief of Thomas Hasilrigg Esquire.

Mr. Sergeant Shuttleworth and Dr. Awbery brought down from the Lords a Bill
entitled, An Act providing Remedies against discontinuance of Writs of Errors
in the Exchequer and King's Bench.

Wednesday, Feb. 19. Mr. Sergeant Malmsey one of the Committees in the Bill
touching the abridging of Proclamations appointed on Wednesday the 12th of this
month upon Fines of the Common Law, showed, That they have met and conferred
upon the said Bill; and having in some parts amended the same, offered another
Bill containing the same Amendments.

Mr. Vicechamberlain showed, that he and others the Committees in the Bill
concerning Purveyors, had met, and had conference together with some of her
Majesty's Officers of the Green-cloath, and according to the Commission of this
House. And further, that they have in some parts amended the same Bill, and
added a Proviso thereto, such an one as they think fit both for her Majesty's
service, and also for the better passage of the Bill, and relief of the
Subjects; and prayed the same Amendments and Proviso may be read: which said
Amendments and Proviso were then read twice. Which done, there then followed
sundry Speeches upon the same Amendments and Proviso; and so for that time left
it at large without any further course then of question to engrossing, the
House being ready to rise.

The Bill touching Quo titulo ingressus est, was delivered to Sir Edward Hobby
one of the Committees in the same. The Bill concerning common Innes and
Victualling-houses was delivered to Mr. Pratt one of the Committees for the
same. And the Bill touching the multiplicity of Suits and excessive numbers of
Atturneys, was delivered to Mr. Heydon one of the Committees.

Thursday, Feb. 20. three Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the
last being for the relief of Tho. Hasilrigg Esquire was upon the second reading
committed unto Sir Richard Knightly, Sir Henry Knivit, Mr. Recorder of London,
and others; who were appointed to meet on Monday next at two of the clock in
the afternoon, in the Star Chamber.

The Committee in the Bill touching Informers and Informations, is deferred
until Saturday next at two of the clock in the afternoon, in the same place of
meeting.

Friday, Feb. 21. the Bill for the true payment of the Debts of Thomas Hanford,
was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Controuler, Sir Henry Knivit,
Mr. Alford, Mr. Hare, Mr. Grafton, and Mr. Francis Moore; who were appointed to
meet to morrow-morning at seven of the Clock in the Committee-chamber of this
House, and then Mr. Hanford to attend the said Committees. And also the Bill
passed in the last Parliament from this House to the Lords, to be also
delivered to the said Committees; both which Bills were then delivered unto Mr.
Controuler.

Four other Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the the last, being a
Bill for the repealing of certain Statutes, was read the second time, and upon
the Question committed to Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Broughton, Mr. Dier, Mr. Grafton,
and others; who were appointed to meet on Tuesday next at Serjeants-Inne-hall
in Chancery Lane, at two of the clock in the afternoon.

The Amendments in the Bill touching Informers and Informations, were twice
read; and upon the Question ordered to be engrossed.

Saturday, Feb. 22. two Bills had each of them one reading; whereof the second
being for the relief of George Orgnell Esquire was upon the second reading, and
upon the Question, committed unto Sir Henry Brook, Mr. Sergeant Walmesey, the
Knights of the Shire for the County of Warwick, and others; who were appointed
to meet upon Monday next at two of the clock in the afternoon, in the
Star Chamber.

Three Bills which had passed the House upon the third reading, were sent up to
the Lords by Mr. Vicechamberlain, Sir John Parrott, and others, with
Commendations, and request for their Lordships favorable expedition; of which,
the two last were one touching Purveyors, and the other touching Proclamations
in Fines.

Two other Bills also had each of them one reading; whereof the second being a
Bill touching Mortmain, was upon the second reading committed to Mr. Treasurer,
Sir John Parrott, Sir Edw. Hobby, Sir William Moore, and others; who were
appointed to meet on Thursday next at two of the clock in the afternoon, in the
Exchequer-chamber.

Sir Thomas Palmer one of the Knights for the County of Sussex, is for his
special occasions of business, licensed by Mr. Speaker to repair home into his
Country.

Feb. 23. Sunday.

Monday, Feb. 24. the Bill for four Fifteenths and Tenths, and two entire
Subsidies, Subsidy-bill read. Bill about Dover-Haven.
had its first reading.

The Bill for reviving and enlarging of a Statute made in the 23th year of her
Majesty's Reign for repairing of Dover-Haven, was read the first time.

Upon a Motion made touching a Conference to be had in the Commitment of the
Bill for relief of George Ognell Esquire and that Trussell the adverse Party being
now in Execution in one of the Counters of London, might be heard before the
said Committees without peril of an Escape, if he should be brought to
Westminster; it is agreed, That the Committees which were appointed to have met
this day in the afternoon about that matter in the Star Chamber, do meet in the
Guild Hall, where the said Trussell may be brought before them with his Keeper,
without danger (as it is thought) of an escape in the Execution.

Tuesday, Feb. 25. three Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the
first Mr. Cradock offered to this House, being for continuance and perfecting
of diverse Statutes; and praying that the same might be read, the same was read
accordingly.

Mr. Davenport moved neither for making any new Laws, nor for abrogating any
old Laws, but for due course of proceeding in Laws already established, but
executed he thinks by some Ecclesiastical Governor, contrary both to the
purpose of the same Laws, and also to the mind and meaning of the same
Lawgiver or maker, to the great grief, and hindrance and grievance of sundry
of her Majesty's good Subjects; and so offered some particularities in writing
to the effect, he said, of his motion; praying the same might be read, and
committed to be further considered of, and dealt in as this House should think
good.

The Bill concerning Processes and Pleadings in the Exchequer passed this day
in this House, was sent up to the Lords by Sir John Parrott and others, with
request to be made unto their Lordships from this House, for their good and
favorable expediting of the Bill for reformation of certain Abuses by
Purveyors lately sent unto their Lordships from this House.

Two other Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the second being the
Bill touching secret Outlawries, was read the first time, and upon further
motion read again the second time, and committed to Sergeant Walmsley, Sir
Henry Knivit, Mr. Cradock, Mr. Coke, and others; who were appointed to meet at
two of the clock in the afternoon, at Serjeants-Inne in Fleet Street.

The Bill touching Mortmain, with a Note of the names of the Committees in the
same, were delivered to Humphry Waring Servant to Mr. Aldersey one of the
Committees in the same Bill, to be delivered to the said Mr. Aldersey.

Wednesday, Feb. 26. the Bill concerning Captains and Soldiers was read the
first time, and argued upon by Mr. Outred, Sir Edward Dymmock, and others; and
afterward was committed to Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Outred, Mr. Sergeant Walmsley, and
others; who were appointed to article to the said Bill, and to meet this
afternoon at two of the clock in the Chequer-chamber.

Upon a Speech used by Mr. Alford, purporting that some that had spoken to the
same Bill, had uttered some words of rejecting the said Bill and casting it out
of the House; where in very deed there was no such Speech used at all by any
that had spoken to the said Bill, nor yet any word tending to such effect: It
was upon the Question resolved by the judgment of the whole House, that there
had been no such Speech used by any of them that did speak.

Thursday, Feb. 27. the Bill for four Fifteenths and Tenths, and two entire
Subsidies, had its first reading.

Mr. Recorder, one of the Committees in the Bill for reformation of Disorders
of common Innes and other Victualling-houses, showed the meeting and travel of
the Committees, and some causes which moved them to deal only with that part
thereof which concerns Casks and the gaging of Vessels for Beer and Ale; and
so offered a new Bill for that purpose, with request for good expediting
thereof.

Mr. Apsloye moved this House touching the great inconvenience grown by the
great number of Pluralities and non-Residents, Bill against Pluralities and
Non-Residents read.
and offered a Bill for reformation thereof, and prayed the same might be
presently read; which was so done accordingly.

Friday, Feb. 28. four Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the last
being a Bill for the maintenance of the Poor of Hartlepool, was upon the second
reading committed unto Sir Edw. Hobby, Mr. George Carry, Mr. Stubbs, Mr. Beal,
the Burgesses of Newcastle, Lime, and Yarmouth, and others; who were appointed
to meet to morrow in the afternoon at two of the clock, in the
Exchequer-chamber: and the Bill was delivered unto Sir Edward Hobby one of the
Committees.

The Bill also touching Costs to be recovered against common Informers had its
first reading, and upon a further motion was read again, and upon the Question
ordered to be engrossed.

On Saturday, March 1.
March 1. two Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the second being
the Bill against Pluralities and Non-Residents, was read the second time; and
after sundry Arguments, many with the Bill, and some against it, was in the end
committed to Mr. Treasurer, Mr. Morice, Mr. Beal, Sir Robert Jermin, Mr.
Francis Hastings, and others; who were appointed to meet in the
Exchequer-chamber this afternoon.

The Bill for Tunbridge-School, with Amendments, was brought in by Mr. Coke one
of the Committees, and the reasons of the said Amendments were showed by him.

The Bill concerning the Poor of Hartlepool is deferred to be considered of by
the Committees on Monday next in the afternoon; and Mr. Vicechamberlain and Sir
John Parrot are added to the former Committees.

The Paper-book of the Bill touching Process and Pleadings in the Court of
Exchequer, is delivered to the Sergeant of this House, to be by him delivered
over, this present afternoon, to the Committees for Search and Conference.

March 2. Sunday.

Monday, March the third, upon many Speeches used by Mr. Grafton, touching a
Report to be made to this House by the Committees touching the Examination of
the Returns of one of the Batons of the Port of New Rumney in the County of
Kent, not yet certified into this House by or from the Clerk of the Crown; Mr.
Cromwell, one of the said Committees, shows, That the said Committees had met
about the same, according to the Commission of this House; and so showing his
own opinion, it was, after sundry other Speeches, resolved upon the Question,
That he that was chosen by the said Town, should be received into this House as
a Member thereof; which was done accordingly.

The Bill for the true payment of the Debts of Thomas Hanford, was read the
third time, and passed upon the Question.

Which Bill being passed, the Bill also for abridgment of Proclamations upon
Fines, sent down before to this House from the Lords with some Amendments; and
being amended accordingly, were sent to the Lords by Mr. Treasurer and others;
which Mr. Treasurer moved (before he went) that the Lords be desired by this
House, That Mr. Solicitor being returned a Member of this House, might come
into this House and give his attendance in the same; which was assented unto;
and required that he would move the Lords, and the said Mr. Solicitor also, to
that end accordingly.

Richard Leveson Esquire returned into this House one of the Knights for the County
of Salop, for his occasion of business is licensed to depart.

Tuesday, March 4. the Amendments of the Bill touching Writs of Covenant, etc.
and a Proviso added thereunto, were both twice read; and upon the Question
ordered to be engrossed.

Two Bills did both pass upon the third reading; of which, Bill against common
Informers, etc.
the first was against common Informers, and the second against the Denial for
the assurance of the Jointure of Anne the Wife of Henry Nevil Esquire in which
there were these several Amendments incerted, viz. in one place this word [but]
put out, and this word [and] put in; and in another place this word [like] put
out, and this word [good] put in; and after this word [effect and no other, as
if this Act had never been made] were clean put out. And in another place after
this word [title] this word [and] is put out, and these words [claim and
demand] are put in. All which Amendments being thrice read, in the end, after
some Speeches had, the Bill was passed upon the Question; which said Bill, with
another, were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Vicechamberlain and others.

Wednesday, March 5. the Bill concerning Richard Southwell was read prima vice:
Bill about Dover-haven.
Also the Bill for the maintenance of the Peer of Dover, was read the second
time, and after sundry Speeches, committed unto all the Privy Council being of
this House, Mr. Mills, Mr. Alford, Sir Edward Hobby, and others; who were
appointed to meet to morrow at two of the clock in the afternoon, in the
Exchequer-chamber.

The Bill against Forestallers, Regrators, and Ingrossers, Bill against
Forestallers, Regrators, etc.
was read the first time, and upon further examination read again; and upon the
division of the House thereupon, upon the Question after the same division,
with the yielding of the negative Voices, ordered to be committed unto all the
Privy Council being of the House, Mr. John Hare, Mr. George Moore, Sir William
Moore, Mr. Grimston, Mr. Cromwell, and others; who were appointed to meet on
Friday next at two of the clock in the afternoon, in the Exchequer-chamber.

Thursday, March 6. three Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the
second being a Bill touching Cordwayners, and the third concerning Curriers,
they were both committed unto Mr. Alford, Sir William Moore, Mr. Grafton, Mr.
Thomas Knivit, and others; (the Bills being then also read the second time) who
were appointed to meet upon Saturday next in the afternoon, at Guild Hall.

Mr. Doctor Awbury and Dr. Carry do bring word from the Lords, That their
Lordships desire that the Committee of this House which were with their
Lordships the last day, may now be sent to their Lordships, for that now their
Lordships have charge from her Majesty to make their Answer. And thereupon the
names of the Committees being read, they were presently sent unto the Lords:
And the Bill for the maintenance of the Haven at Orford was then also sent up
to their Lordships by Mr. Vicechamberlain and the residue of the said
Committees.

Whereupon Mr. Treasurer, then one of the Committees touching gaging of Casks,
etc. having showed their meeting about the same yesterday, moved for another
time of conference about the same; and that being appointed upon Saturday next
at Guildhall in the afternoon, it was ordered, That the Brewers and such others
as shall think good, may then and there be heard before the Committees what
they can say.

Friday, March 7. four Bills had each of them a reading; whereof the third
being a Bill for the relief of Thomas Hasilrigg, was read the first time; and
thereupon it was ordered upon a motion, That Mr. Thomas Drury should come into
the House and be heard; who was brought in and heard.

The Amendments in the Bill touching the Free Grammar School in Tunbridge in
the County of Kent, was twice read: and Andrew Fisher Gent. after the reading
of the same being brought into the House, did presently give his assent unto
the said Bill, and then the Bill upon the Question was ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill against Forestalling, engrossing, and regrating, committed the fifth
of March instant, was this day delivered unto Sir George Barney, one of the
Committees in the same Bill.

Saturday, March 8. Mr. Speaker showed unto the House her Majesty's great and
inestimable care toward her loving Subjects, Speaker acquaints the House of
the Queen's care about the abuses of the Purveyors, etc.
yea more than of her own self, or than any of them have of themselves. And as
to the parts of the present humble Petition of this House unto her Highness in
the grievance by the Purveyors, and in the Court of Exchequer, it pleased her
Majesty to tell them, That for the one, to wit, the Abuses of Purveyors, her
Highness, of her own Princely care toward her Subjects, had given order unto
the late Lord Steward deceased, to address her Letters Patent to all the
Shires of this Realm, for the due inquiry and certificate of the misdemeanors
of Purveyors in all places, and of some courses thereupon to be had for
convenient redress in the same: And that before any order could well be taken
for accomplishing that good intended effect, the Spaniard upon a sudden attempt
d the Invasion of this Realm; by reason whereof, her Majesty said, the said
purpose was not performed. And further showing that her Majesty having as much
skill, will, and power to rule and govern her own Household, as any Subject
whatsoever to rule and govern theirs, without the help or aid of their
Neighbors; so her Majesty intends, being very careful of her own more great
love and affection toward her dutiful and loving Subjects (whose most faithful
and approved good love and fidelity toward her she more esteems than all the
Treasures of the world besides) very shortly to cause a Collection to be made
of all the Laws already in force touching Puveyors, and also all the
Constitutions of her Highness's Household in that case; and thereupon, by the
advice of her Judges and learned Counsel, to set down such a formal Plot for
the said Redress (yea, and that before the end of this present Sessions) as
shall be as good and better for the ease of the Subjects than that this House
had attempted without her privity, and in which they would have bereaved her
Majesty of the Honor, Glory, and Commendation of the same. And touching the
Exchequer, she said, it was her Chamber, and so more near unto her than the
Household: And that in the tenth year of her Reign, her Majesty had caused
certain Orders and Constitutions to be set down for the due and fit course of
such things in the said Court as her Subjects seem to be grieved for.

March 9. Sunday.

Monday, March 10. two Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the second
being concerning Writs of Covenant, etc. was read the third time; and a Proviso
for the Lord Powes and Sir Edward Herbert, and their Heirs, was thrice read;
and after many Speeches both with the Bill and against it, the said Bill was
dashed upon the Question.

Tuesday, March 11. the Bill for relief of the City of Lincoln, was upon the
second reading committed unto Mr. John Stubbs, the Burgesses of Norwich, the
Burgesses of York, and others; who were appointed to meet to morrow at two of
the clock in the afternoon, in the Exchequer-chamber.

Sir Edward Hobby, Mr. Markham, Mr. Buckley, and Mr. Peter Euers, were added to
the Committees in the Bill for the City of Lincoln; and the Bill with their
Names was delivered to Sir Edw. Dymmocke one of the Committees.

Wednesday, March 12. five Bills had each of them one reading; of which, Bill
against Aliens and Strangers retailing of Goods.
the last being against Aliens and Strangers retailing of Foreign Wares, was
upon the second reading committed to Mr. Vicechamberlain, Mr. Controuler, Sir
Robert Jermin, Sir William Moore, and others; who were appointed to meet on
Friday next at two of the clock in the afternoon, in the Exchequer-chamber.

Thursday, March 13. three Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the
last being the Bill touching Mr. Southwell, was upon the second reading
committed unto Mr. Secretary Woolley, Mr. John Stanhopp, Mr. Haydon, Mr.
Recorder of London, and others; who were appointed to meet on Saturday next at
two of the clock in the afternoon, in the Exchequer-chamber.

The Amendments in the Bill for the maintenance of Dover-Haven being opened to
the House, and the Bill read in such sort amended, was passed upon the
Question, after a Proviso offered for the Cinque Ports first refused upon a
former Question.

Friday, March 14. three Bills had each of them a reading; of which, the second
being for the Town of Barwick, was read the second time; and thereupon
committed to Mr. Cromwell, Mr. Grimston, the Burgesses of Barwick, Mr. Robert
Bows, and others; who were appointed to meet this afternoon at two of the
clock, in the Exchequer-chamber.

The Bill touching the Children of Aliens Denizons, was upon the second reading
committed to diverse Committees being of this House; who were appointed to meet
to morrow in the afternoon, in the Exchequer-chamber.

Saturday, March 15. three Bills had each of them one reading; of which, Bill
against Horse-stealing.
the third being a Bill to prevent Horse-stealing, had its first reading. Also
the Amendments in the Bill for the relief of the City of Lincoln, being twice
read, and the Bill also read in such sort amended, the Bill upon the Question
was committed to Mr. Vicechamberlain, Sir John Parrot, Mr. Alford, the Master
of the Wardrope, Sir Robert Jermin, and others; who were appointed to meet this
present day at two of the clock in the afternoon, in the Exchequer-chamber.

The Amendments of the Bill for relief of Curriers being twice read, was upon
the Question ordered to be engrossed.

March 16. Sunday.

Monday, March 17. four Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the last
being the Bill for pursuit of Hue and Cry, was upon the second reading
committed to Mr. Vicechamberlain. Mr. Sherley, Mr. Harries, Mr. Wroth, Sir
William Fleetwood, Sir William Moore, and others; who were appointed to meet to
morrow at two of the clock in the afternoon, in the Exchequer-chamber.

The Bill for pleading at large in an Ejectione firm, had its first and second
reading, with an Amendment twice read; and upon the Question ordered to be
engrossed.

The Bill touching Forestallers, Regrators, and Ingrossers, was brought in by
Mr. Treasurer one of the Committees, without any thing done to it, or any
Report made; and so likewise the Bill made for Aliens Children.

Two other Bills had each of them one reading; of which the second being a Bill
to prevent Horse-stealing, was read the second time.

Tuesday, March 18. the Bill for repeal of certain Statutes was brought again
without any Report by Mr. Harries, one of the Committee.

Two other Bills had each of them their third Reading, of which the second was
the Bill for the relief of Curriers; and after some amendments added unto it,
being likewise read three times, the Bill was upon the question, and the
division of the House, dashed by the difference of thirty Voices; viz. with the
Yea Ninety, and with the No one Hundred and twenty.

Wednesday, March 19. the Bill concerning the Glass-Houses and Glass-Furnaces
was upon the second reading committed unto Sir William Moore, Mr. George Moore,
Mr. Markham and others, who were appointed to meet in the Exchequer-chamber
this afternoon.

Thursday, March 20. two Bills had each of them one Reading, of which the
second being a Bill for the continuance and perfecting of diverse Statutes, upon
the second Reading was committed unto Mr. Morice, Mr. Hare, Mr. Wroth, and
others; who were appointed to meet in Serjeants-Inne-Hall in Fleet Street, this
present day, at two of the clock in the afternoon.

Friday, March 21. Four Bills had each of them one Reading; of which the third
being a Bill for repeal of certain Statutes, Bill for repeal of certain
Statutes past.
was read the third time, and passed upon the Question.

The Amendments made by the Lords in the Bill for the relief of Thomas
Haeselrigg Esquire, and in the Bill for the better recovery of Costs and
Damages against common Informers, before passed in this House, and sent up to
their Lordships; and the Proviso, added by the Lords to the said last-recited
Bill, were three times read, and the same Proviso and Amendments were then
passed upon the Question accordingly.

Saturday, March 22. Mr. Palmer one of the Committees in the Bill touching
Gaging of Casks and of other Foreign Vessels, brings in the Bill with some
Amendments and Provisoes; being twice read, the Bill was upon the question
Ordered to be engrossed.

Four Bills were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Treasurer, and others; of which
the two first were, one for the Relief of the City of Lincoln, and the other
against the abuse in Elections of Scholars, and Presentations to Benefices,
with the Amendments and a Proviso.

March 23. Sunday.

Monday, March 24. Mr. Anderson being licensed to depart about her Majesty's
service, two Bills had each of them one reading; whereof the first being the
Bill concerning Glass-houses, was brought in by Mr. De la bar one of the
Committees, in such sort as it was delivered unto them; and thereupon being
twice read, was, after sundry Speeches, and division of the House, ordered to
be engrossed, viz. with the Yeas forty three, and with the No's thirty five.

Tuesday, An 1589.
March 25. it was ordered upon the Question, That both the learned Counsel of
the Earl of Warwick, and also the learned Counsel of George Ognell, do attend
this House to morrow-morning.

The Bill for maintenance of houses of Husbandry and Tillage, was upon the
second reading committed unto the Privy Counselors of this House, Mr. Wroth,
Mr. Cromwell, and others; who were appointed to meet this afternoon at two of
the clock, in the Exchequer-chamber.

Wednesday, March 26. the Bill concerning Aliens Children was read the second
time. The Bill also for Strangers retailing of foreign Wares, was amended by
the Committee; which Amendments being brought in by them with the Bill, were
now twice read, although it be mistaken in the Original Journal Book that the
Bill it self had its second reading.

The House was this day called over, The House called over, and the Defaulters
noted.
and the Defaulters noted, upon a Motion this day made by Sir John Parrot by
her Majesty's pleasure, upon some intelligence given to her Highness of the
small number of the Members of this House presently attending the service of
the same, the one half at least being supposed to be absent.

Thursday, March 27. the Bill against secret Outlawries had its second and
third reading, and passed upon the Question.

Dr. Carry and Dr. Stanhopp brought from the Lords the Bill for the relief of
the City of Lincoln, with some Amendments of their Lordships unto the same,
with further advertisement from their Lordships, that their Lordships do
suspend their proceeding on the Bill for continuance and perfecting of certain
Statutes sent from the House of Commons to their Lordships, until their
Lordships do hear from this House of the proceedings of this House in the Bill
for the maintenance of Houses of Husbandry and Tillage.

Friday, March 28. the Amendments of the Lords in the Bill touching forcible
Entries, and also the Amendments of this House, being all thrice read, are
agreed upon the Question in this House to be passed accordingly.

The Bill against such as steal or imbezzle the Goods, Chattels, or Treasure of
her Majesty, being put in trust with the same, was read the first time. Also
the Bill that Aliens Children shall pay Strangers Customs, was read the third
time; and a Proviso added unto it, thrice read: the Bill and Proviso upon the
Question, and Division of the House, dashed, with the Yeas sixty four, and the No's seventy four.

Saturday, March 29. Dr. Stanhopp and Mr. Powle do bring from the Lords the
Bill lately passed this House for the continuation and perfecting of certain
Statutes, with a Schedule unto the same added and annexed by their Lordships;
and the same Schedule being thrice read, passed upon the Question.

The Bill for the relief of the City of Lincoln being perfected according to
the Amendments of the Lords, and the Bill also for continuance of Statutes,
with the Schedule to the same, were sent up to the Lords by the Master of the
Wardrope and others.

Dr. Carry and Dr. Stanhopp brought from the Lords two Bills, viz. the Act of
her Majesty's gracious and free Pardon, and the Act of the four Fifteenths and
Tenths and two entire Subsidies; which had before passed this House.

The Bill of the Queens Majesty's most gracious and free Pardon being once
read, passed thereupon; which Bill so passed, was presently sent up unto the
Lords by Mr. Fortescue and others.

After which, Acts passed.
her Majesty having given her assent unto the passing of sixteen public Acts,
and eight private Acts, being all the Acts that passed this present Parliament;
Parl. dissolved.
Sir Christopher Hatton Knight. Lord Chancellor, by her Majesty's Commandment,
dissolved this Parliament.

An exact and perfect Journal of the Passages of the Upper House of Parliament,
35 Eliz.
holden at Westminster, Anno xxxvo Reginae Eliz. Anno Dom. 1592. which begun
there on Monday the 19th of February, and then and there continued until the
Dissolution thereof, on Tuesday the 9th of April, Anno Dom. 1593.
THE Summons for this Parliament being returnable upon this Monday, February
19, it held accordingly. Feb. 19. 1592. The Queen goes to the House of Lords.
The Queen coming privately by Water, accompanied with Sir John Puckering Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal, and many of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal; there
being present this day these Peers, and others ensuing.

The Names of the Peers there sitting.
Archiepisc. Cant. Johannes Puckering, Miles. Dom. Custos mag. Sigill. Dom.
Burleigh, Dom. Thesaurar. Angliae. Marchio. Wintoniae.
COMITES.
Comes Oxon. Magnus Camerarius Angliae. Comes Derby, Magnus Seneschallus. Comes
Northumbriae. Comes Salopiae. Comes Kanciae. Comes Wignor. Comes Cumberland.
Comes Sussex. Comes Huntingdon. Comes Bathon. Comes Pembrooke. Comes Hartford.
Comes Essex. Comes Lincoln. Vicecomes Bindon.
EPISCOPI.
Episc. London. Episc. Dunelmen. Episc. Asaphen. Episc. Cestren. Episc. Covent.
and Litch. Episc. Lincoln. Episc. Peterburgh. Episc. Heref. Episc. Cicestrens.
Episc. Bangor. Episc. Wignor. Episc. Landaven. Episc. Salopiae. Episc. Bathon.
and Wells.
BARONS.
Dom. Howard, Mag. Maresch. and Admir. Dom. Hunsdon, Camerarius Reginae. Dom.
Strange, Dom. Morley. Dom. Stafford. Dom. Gray. Dom. Scroope. Dom. Montjoy.
Dom. Sands. Dom. Windsor. Dom. Cromwell. Dom. Wharton. Dom. Rich. Dom.
Willoughby. Dom. Sheffield. Dom. North. Dom. Shandois. Dom. St. John. Dom.
Buckhurst. Dom. De-la-ware. Dom. Compton. Dom. Norris.
The Queen and the Lords being thus sat, An. 1592.
and the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons, as many as
conveniently could be let in; about two of the clock in the afternoon, Sir John
Puckering Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, by command from the Queen, spoke to
this effect.

The Lord Keeper's Speech.
THat though the assembling of Parliaments has anciently been, and still were
for the Enacting of Laws, and Reforming of Abuses and Grievances of the
Subjects within the Realm; The Lord Keepers Speech, (...) to direct the
^^s^^^^s in this Session.
yet at this time the Queens Majesty was desirous to have the Advice of all her
loving people, concerning the Defense and Preservation of her Self, her Realms
and Subjects, from the Power and Oppression of a foreign Enemy.

Then he declared, that this Enemy was the King of Spain, and that his malice
was increased by his loss and shame received in 88. That his resolution still
was to invade this Kingdom, The Spaniards Design of Reveenge discovered;
did plainly appear by his building and getting together many Ships of less
bulk, which would be fitter for service in our Seas, than those greater
Galliasses and Gallions had been in 88. That he desired some nearer place from
whence to invade England, and therefore at this time was laboring to plant
himself in Britain, a part of France. And his Designs laid open.
That he had raised Factions in Scotland, and Conspiracies against the King
there, finding him an enemy to his ambitious desires.

And therefore we her Majesty's Subjects (said he) must with all dutiful
consideration think what is fit for us to do; Ex^ them to raise Moneys.
and with all willingness yield part of our own for the defense of others, and
assistance of her Majesty in such an unsupportable charge. Were the cause
between Friend and Friend, how much would we do for the relief of one another?
but the cause is now between our Sovereign and our selves: seeing there is so
much difference in the parties, how much more forward ought we to be?

The Aid formerly granted to her Majesty in these like cases, is so ill
answered, (...) Supplies paid;
and with such slackness performed, as that the third of that which was granted
comes not to her Majesty. A great show, a rich grant, and a long sum seems to
be made; but little it is, hard to be gotten, and the sum not great which is
paid. and (...).
Her Majesty thinks this to be, for that the wealthier sort of men turn this
charge upon the weaker, and upon those of worst ability; so that one
discharges himself, and the other is not able to satisfy that he is charged
withal: these things should be reformed by such as are Commissioners in this
service.

Wherefore it is her Majesty's pleasure, (...).
the time be not spent in devising and enacting new Laws, the number of which
are so great already, as it rather burtheneth than eases the Subject; but the
principal cause of this Parliament is, that her Majesty might consult with her
Subjects, for the better withstanding those intended Invasions, which are now
greater than ever before were heard of. And, where heretofore it has been used
that many have delighted themselves in long Orations, full of verbosity and
vain ostentations, more than in speaking things of substance; the time that is
precious would not be thus spent. This Session cannot be long; the Springtime
is fit that Gentlemen should repair to their Countries, the Justices of Assize
also to go their Circuits; so the good hours would not be lost in idle
Speeches, but the little time we have should be bestowed wholly on such
business as is needful to be considered of; and Thursday next is appointed the
day to present the Speaker.



As Soon as the Lord Keeper's Speech was ended, Receivers of Petitions named.
the Clerk of the Parliament read the names of the Receivers of Petitions for
England, Ireland, and Wales, and Scotland; Sir Francis Popham Lord
Chief Justice of the King's Bench, John Clinch one of the Justices of the said
Bench, Dr. Awbery, Dr. Ford; and they which will deliver Petitions, are to
deliver the same within six days next ensuing.

Receivers of Petitions for Gascoigne and other parts beyond the Seas and the
Isles, Sir Edmond Anderson Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Sir William
Peryam Lord Chief-Baron, Tho. Walmesley one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas, Doctor Carry, Doctor Stanhop; and they which will deliver
Petitions, are to deliver them within six days next ensuing.

Triers of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland, the Archbishop
of Canterbury, the Marquess of Winchester, the Earl of Darby Lord Steward of
the Queens Household, the Earl of Sussex, the Earl of Essex, the Bishop of
London, the Bishop of Durham, the Lord Howard of Effingham Earl Marshal and
Lord Admiral of England, the Lord Cobham, the Lord Gray of Wilton: all these,
or four of them, calling to them the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England,
and the Lord Treasurer, and the Queens Sergeants, when need shall require,
shall hold their place in the Chamberlains Chamber.

Triers of Petitions for Gascoigne, and other parts beyond the Seas, and the
Isles, the Earl of Oxford great Chamberlain of England, the Earl of Shrewsbury,
the Earl of Huntington, the Bishop of Rochester, the Bishop of Lincoln, the
Lord Hunsdon Lord Chamberlain to the Queen, the Lord Lumley, the Lord
Buckhurst; all these, or any four of them.

Although the usual Custom in the Original Journal-books, is to place all
Proxies upon what days soever returnable, before the beginning of the Journal
it self; yet I have conceived it more methodical, to place all such Returns in
those days upon which they were delivered to the Clerk of the Parliament; and
always upon the day on which the first Return was, to make some short
Observations of that, if it be unusual and extraordinary, and so to refer the
view of the residue to their proper days. On this instant Monday therefore,
being the Nineteenth day of February, and the first day of the Parliament, was
returned only this one usual Proxy.

Decimonono die Februarii introductae sunt Litterae Procuratoriae Edwardi
Episcopi Norwicensis, in quibus Procuratores suos constituit Johannem Episcopum
Land. and Richardum Episcopum Peterburgen.

Nota, This is one of those Proxies I call an usual or ordinary Proxy, when a
Spiritual Lord makes but two Proctors, and a Temporal Lord but one, and those
of their own Order: but when a Temporal Lord nominateth a Spiritual Lord for
his Proctor, or nominateth more than one Proctor; and when a Spiritual Lord
nominateth a Temporal Lord for his Proctor, or but one Proctor, or more than
two; these I call unusual and extraordinay Proxies. And therefore at this very
time, of nine Temporal Lords that sent their Proxies, but one named two Lords;
of which see afterward on Monday, March 5. all the rest naming but one.
Indeed, of six Spiritual Lords which sent their Proxies, there was but that one
set down in the Page before-going, which made two Proctors, all the rest naming
three, or but one; all which, see afterward on the 22.24.27. days of February,
and on the 7. and 28. days of March: Where also it may be noted, That John
Archbishop of Canterbury had this Parliament five Proxies. Now follows next in
order to be set down, the continuing of this Parliament; which in the original
Journal Book it self, followed immediately upon the names of the Lords
foregoing, being present this afternoon: So that the substance of the Lord
Keeper's Speech foregoing, and this also that follows at the presentment of the
Speaker, was supplied by my self out of a very exact Journal which I had of the
Passages of the Lower House this present Parliament; conceiving those Speeches,
in all my Journals, ought more fitly to be referred to the Passages of the
Upper House, than of the House of Commons.

Dominus Custos Magni Sigill. ex mandato Dominae Reginae, continuavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in diem Jovis prox. futur.

Thursday, Feb. 22. the Queens Majesty her self came about three of the clock
in the afternoon, accompanied with diverse of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal;
there being present this day the Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir John Puckering
Knight. Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, William Lord Burleigh Lord Treasurer of
England, the Marquess of Winchester, twelve Earls, two Viscounts, fifteen
Bishops, and twenty three Barons; being for the most part the very same that
are by name set down to have been present on Monday last.

The Queen and the Lords being thus sat, the House of Commons having notice
thereof, Edw. Cook the Queens Solicitor chosen and presented.
immediately came up with Edward Coke Esquire the Queens Solicitor, into the Upper
House, whom they had chosen for their Speaker; who being led up to the Bar at
the nether end of the said House, between two of the most eminent Personages of
the Lower House, as soon as silence was made, and the rest of the House of
Commons had placed themselves below the Bar, he spoke as follows.

The Speaker's Speech.
YOur Majesty's most loving Subjects the Knights and Burgesses of the Lower
House, have nominated me, your Graces poor Servant and Subject, to be their
Speaker. This their Nomination has hitherto proceeded, that they present me to
speak before your Majesty; yet this their Nomination is only a Nomination yet,
and no Election, until your Majesty gives allowance and approbation: For as
in the Heavens a Star is but opacum corpus until it has received light from
the Sun, so stand I corpus opacum, a mute body, until your high bright shining
wisdom has looked upon me and allowed me.

How great a Charge this is, The Speaker disables himself.
to be the Mouth of such a Body as your House of Commons represent, to utter
that is spoken Grandia Regni, my small experience, being a poor professor of
the Law, can tell; but how unable I am to undergo this Office, my present
Speech does tell, that of a number of this House I am most unfit: for amongst
them are many grave, many learned, many deep wise men, and those of ripe
Judgments; but I an untimely Fruit, not ripe, nay bud a but not scarce fully
blossomed, so as I fear your Majesty will say, Neglecta fruge, liguntur folia;
amongst so many fair fruits, you have plucked a shaking leaf.

If I may be so bold to remember a Speech used the last Parliament in your
Majesty's own mouth, Many come hither ad consulendum qui neseiunt quid sit
consulendum: a just reprehension to many, as to my self also, an untimely
fruit, my years and judgment ill befitting the gravity of this place. But
howsoever I know my self the meanest, and inferior unto all that ever were
before me in this place, yet in faithfulness of service, and dutifulness of
love, I think not my self inferior to any that ever were before me: And amidst
my many imperfections, yet this is my comfort, I never knew any in this place,
but if your Majesty gave him favor, God who also called them to this place,
gave them also the blessing to discharge it.



The Lord Keeper having received Instructions from the Queen, answered him.
Mr. Solicitor,

HER Graces most Excellent Majesty has willed me to signify unto you, that
she has ever well conceived of you since she first heard of you; which will
appear when her Highness selected you from others to serve her self: but by
this your modest, wise, and well-composed Speech, you give her Majesty further
occasion to conceive of you above that she ever thought was in you: by
endeavoring to deject and abase your self and your desert, you have made known
and discovered your worthiness and sufficiency to discharge the place you are
called to. And whereas you account your self corpus opacum, her Majesty, by the
influence of her Virtue and Wisdom, (...) is commanded and a^^^^^ed by the Qs.
order.
does enlighten you, and not only allows and approves you, but much than
keth the Lower House, and commends their discretions in making such a Choice,
and electing so fit a man.

Wherefore, Mr. Speaker, proceed in your Office, and go forward to your
Commendation as you have begun.



The Lord Keepers Speech being ended, the Speaker began a new Speech.
COnsidering the great and wonderful Blessings, The second Speech of the
Speaker.
besides the long Peaece we have enjoyed under your Graces most happy and
victorious Reign, and remembering withal the Wisdom and Justice your Grace has
reigned over us with, we have cause to praise God that ever you were given us;
and the hazard that your Majesty has adventured, and the charge that you have
born for us and our safety, ought to make us ready to lay down our Lives and
all our Living to do you service.

After this, he related the great Attempts of her Majesty's Enemies against us,
especially the Pope, and the King of Spain adhering unto him; how wonderfully
were we delivered in 88, and what a favor therein God manifested unto her
Majesty.

His Speech, (...).
after this, tended wholly to show out of the Histories of England, and the old
State, how the Kings of England, ever since Henry the third's time, have
maintained themselves to be Supreme Head over all Causes in their own
Dominions; and recited the Laws that were made in his and other Kings times,
for maintaining their own Supremacy, and excluding the Pope. He drew down his
Proofs by Statute in every Kings time since Hen. 3. (...).
unto Edw. 6.

This ended, he came to speak of the Laws, that were so great and so many
already, that they were fitly to be termed Elephaentinae Leges: Wherefore to
make more Laws, it might seem superfluous; Too great a multiplicity of our Laws.
and to him that might ask Quid Causa ut Crescunt tot magna volumina Legis? it
may be answered, In promptu Causa est, Crescit in orb malum.

The malice of our Arch-enemy the Devil, though it was always great, yet never
greater than now; and that Dolus and Malum being crept in so far amongst men,
it was necessary that sharp Ordinances should be provided to prevent them, and
all care to be used for her Majesty's preservation.

Now am I to make unto your Majesty three Petitions in the names of your
Commons. First, That liberty of Speech and freedom from Arrests, according to
the ancient custom of Parliament, be granted to your Subjects: That we may have
access to your Royal Person, to present those things which shall be considered
of amongst us: And lastly, That your Majesty will give us your Royal Assent to
the things that are agreed upon. And for my self, I humbly beseech your
Majesty, if any speech shall fall from me, or Behavior found in me, not
decent, and unsit, That it may not be imputed blame upon the House, but laid
upon me, and pardoned in me.



To this Speech the Lord Keeper having received new Instructions from the
Queen, he replied,
HE commended the Speaker greatly for his Speech; Lord Keeper's Reply.
and he added some Examples for the Kings Supremacy in Henry the second's time,
and Kings before the Conquest. As for the Deliverance we received from our
Enemies, and the Peace we enjoyed, he said, the Queen would have the praise of
all those to be attributed to God only. To the Commendations given to her
self, she said, Well might we have a wiser Prince, but never should they have
one that more regarded them, and in Justice would carry an evener stroke
without acceptance of Persons; and such a Princess she wished they might
always have.

Yo your three Demands, the Queen answers, Liberty of Speech is granted you;
but how far, this is to be thought on: there be two things of most necessity,
and those two do most harm; which are Wit and Speech: the one exercised in
Invention, the other is uttering things invented. Privilege of Speech is
granted; A good caution about liberty of speaking in the House.
but you must know what Privilege you have, not to speak every one what he
lists, or what comes in his brain to utter, but your Privilege is to say
Yea or No. Wherefore, Mr. Speaker, her Majesty's pleasure is, That if you
perceive any idle heads which will not stick to hazard their own Estates, which
will meddle with reforming of the Church, and transforming of the
Commonwealth, and do exhibit any Bills to such purpose, That you receive them
not, until they be viewed and considered of by those whom it is fitter should
consider of such things, and can better judge of them.

To your Persons all Privilege is granted, As also about privilege of their
persons.
with this Caveat, That under color of this Privilege, no man's ill doings, or
not performing of duties, be covered and protected.

The last, free Access, is also granted to her Majesty's Person, so that it be
upon urgent and weighty Causes, and at times convenient, and when her Majesty
may be at leisure from other important Causes of the Realm.



After this Speech was ended, the Lord Keeper continued the Parliament in
manner and form following: Dominus Custos Magni Sigill. ex mandat. Dominae
Reginae continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem Sabbati prox. futur.

This day was returned the Proxy of John Bishop of Carlisle, by which he
constituted John Archbishop of Canterbury, John Bishop of London, and Matthew
Bishop of Durham, his Proctors; quod nota.

Saturday, Feb. 24. a Bill for restraining and punishing vagrant and seditious
persons, who under fained pretense of Conscience and Religion, corrupt and
seduce the Queens Subjects, prima vice lect.

Eodem die Returnat. est Breve quod Richardus Wigorn. Episcopus praesenti
Parliamento interesse summonebatur, and idem Episcopus ad suum praeheminenciae
sedendi in Parliamento locum admissus est, salvo cuiquam jure suo.

Dominus Custos magni Sigill. continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque in diem
Lunae hora nona.

This day was returned the Proxy of John Archbishop of York, by which he
constituted only one Proctor, viz. John Archbishop of Canterbury; quod nota.

Feb. 25. Sunday.

Monday, Feb. 26. Returnatum est Breve quo Edwardum Dom. Cromwell praesenti
Parliamento interesse summonebatur, qui admissus est ad suum praeheminenciae
sedendi in Parliamento locum, salvo jure alienae.

The Writ returned, whereby Gilbert Earl of Shrewsbury was summoned. The
several Writs returned, whereby George Bishop of Landaff, William Lord Compton,
and Edward Earl of Worcester were summoned.

It seems by the Journal Book, that nothing else was done this day, but the
Parliament continued in usual form: As on Thursday the 22th of February, and on
Saturday the 24th day of the same month, two extraordinary Proxies were
returned from two Spiritual Lords; the first constituting three Proctors, and
the other but one: for the most ordinary use of the Bishops is, to constitute
two Proctors. So also on the 27th of February, being Tuesday, though the Lords
did not sit, yet was one unusual Proxy returned from another Spiritual Lord,
who constituted but one Proctor to give his voice in Parliament in his absence;
whereas it is before often observed, no Temporal Lord nominateth usually above
one Proctor, and no Spiritual Lord fewer than two. This said Proxy is thus
entered in the Journal Book of the 35 year of the Queen at the beginning of it.

Februarii introductae sunt Littera Procuratoriae Thomae Wintoniensis Episcopi,
in quibus Procuratorem suum constituit Johannem Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem.

Wednesday, Feb. 28. two several Writs were returned, whereby John Bishop of
Bath and Wells, and Matthew Bishop of Durham, were summoned to come to this
Parliament; who accordingly took their places. Also this morning two Bills had
each of them one reading.

Nota, That because the daily continuing of the Parliament in these words,
Dominus Custos Magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum, etc. being but
matter of course, is omitted in all the Journal afterward, unless something
extraordinary and unusual does happen, in respect of the Person, time, or
manner.

On Thursday, March 1. March 1.
two Bills were each of them once read.

Saturday, March 3. (to which day the Parliament had on Thursday been
continued) four Bills had each of them one reading.

March 4. Sunday.

Monday, March 5. three Bills were read; and the second, upon the second
reading, was committed to be engrossed.

Nota, This day also was returned a Proxy for a Temporal Lord, by which he
constituted two Proctors; which because it is extraordinary and unusual, I
desired to have it inserted; and the rather, because of eight other Temporal
Lords, none of them constituted above one Proctor, according to the ordinary
practice both in these times and since. The said Proxy before mentioned is
thus entered in the beginning of the original Journal Book of this Upper House
of Parliament.

Quint. Marcii introductae sunt Litterae Procuratoriae Henrici Comitis
Huntingdon. in quibus Procuratores suos constituit Gulielmum Dominum Burleigh
Thesaurarium Angliae, and Robertum Comitem Essex, Vicecomitem Hereford, and
Dominum Ferrers de Chartley.

Tuesday, March 6. there was one Bill read once.

Wednesday, March 7. Breve returnatum est quo Johannes Salisburien. Episc.
praesenti Parliamento interesse summonebatur, qui admissus est ad suum
praeheminenciae sedendi in Parliament. locum, salvo jure alieno.

The same morning there were four Bills read each of them once; A Bill for
restraining Popish Recusants to certain places of abode.
the fourth being a Bill for restraining Popish Recusants to some certain
places of abode.

There was also brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons, an Act for
the naturalizing and making free of William Sidney eldest son of Robert Sidney
Knight. Governor of Vlushing, and Dame Barbara his wife; and of Peregrine
Wingfield son and heir of Sir John Wingfield Knight. and Dame Susan Countess of
Kent his wife.

And note, this day also was one extraordinary Proxy returned from a Spiritual
Lord, who constituted but one Proctor, whereas usually no such Lord
constituteth fewer than two; which Proxy is thus entered in the beginning of
the Journal Book of this Parliament.

7o Marcii introductae sunt Litterae Procuratoriae Mathei Dunelmensis Episc. in
quibus Procuratorem suum constituit Johannem Cantuariensem Episcopum.

Thursday, March 8. were three Bills each of them once read; whereof the first
was an Act for explanation and confirmation of the Queens Majesty's Title to
the Lands and Tenements late Sir Francis Englefield's Knight. convicted of
High Treason. Not long after this Bill had been committed to engrossing,
according to a certain Order formerly made by the Lords, Francis Englefield Esquire
appeared before them with one of his learned Counsel; who were commanded to
declare what they could allege, why an Act for explanation and confirmation
of the Queens Majesty's Title to the Lands and Tenements late Sir Francis
Englefield's Knight. attainted of High Treason, should not pass: And upon
Allegations made by the learned Counsel, the Lords commanded they should set
them down in Writing, and deliver them to the Atturney-General; and that on
Friday they should attend on the Judges and the Queens learned Counsel at
Serjeants-Inne, and show such Deeds of Conveyance as they made mention of
before the Lords, that the said Lords, upon answer of the Judges and learned
Counsel, might proceed upon the said Bill as it should seem best to their
Lordships.

Saturday, March 10. (to which day the Parliament had been last continued)
after the reading of one private Bill, prima vice, the Lords gave in
Commandment to Mr. Atturney-General to bring on Monday certain Depositions
remaining in the Exchequer, concerning the Case of Sir Francis Englefield,
after they had first heard the opinion of the Judges; which was delivered by
the Lord Chief Justice of England.

March 11. Sunday.

On Monday, March 12. two Bills had each of them one reading.

Tuesday, March 13. two Bills being each of them once read, the Lords, at the
Bishop of Worcester's motion, A Collection in the House of Peers for poor
Soldiers.
condescended to a Contribution for the relief of such poor Soldiers as went
begging in the streets of London, viz. That every Earl should give Forty
shillings, every Bishop Thirty shillings, and every Baron Twenty shillings; and
appointed the said Bishop and the Lord Norris Collectors thereof, and committed
the bestowing thereof to the Earl of Essex and Lord Willoughby of Eresby.

Thursday, March 15. (to which day the Parliament had been last continued) were
four Bills each of them once read.

On Friday, March 16. were two Bills each of them once read.

And then the Lord Keeper continued the Parliament, in the usual form, to the
Monday following.

Monday, March 19. one Bill only, upon its second reading, was committed to be
engrossed.

Tuesday, March 20. the Bill touching Sir Francis Englefield's Lands had its
third reading, and was concluded. Four Bills also more were this forenoon sent
up to the Lords from the Commons.

On Thursday, March 22. two Bills had each of them one reading.

Saturday, March 24. (to which day the Parliament had been last continued) was
one Act concluded after the third reading; and four other Bills brought up to
the Lords from the House of Commons, whereof one was an Act concerning the
lawful deprivation of Edmond Bonner late Bishop of London.

March 25. Sunday. An. 1593.


Monday, March 26. were three Bills each of them once read; Subsidy-bill read,
granted by the Temporaity.
whereof the first was an Act for the grant of three entire Subsidies, and six
Fifteenths and Tenths, granted by the Temporalty, which had passed the House of
Commons, and was sent up to the Lords on Saturday last. This morning also two
other Bills were sent up to the Lords from the said Commons.

Tuesday, March 27. three Bills had each of them one reading.

Wednesday, March 28. three Bills were read secunda vice, and one Bill tertia
vice. Five other Bills were also sent up to the Lords from the Commons.

Nota, This day was an unusual Proxy returned from one of the Bishops absent
at this time from the Parliament (as diverse other Peers) by the License of her
Majesty; in which Proxy he constituted but one Proctor, whereas it is the
usual custom for every Spiritual Lord to nominate two at the least, and every
Temporal Lord but one. This Proxy is thus entered in the beginning of the
original Journal Book of this Parliament.

28o Die Marcii introductae sunt Litterae Procuratoriae Thomae Cicestrensis
Episcopi, in quibus Procuratorem suum constituit Johannem Archiepisc.
Cantuariensem.

Thursday, March 29. seven Bills had each of them one reading.

Friday, March 30. five Bills were read; whereof the first was the Bill of
Subsidy granted by the Temporalty, Subsidy granted by the Clergy, passed.
and the last the Bill of Subsidy granted by the Clergy: both which at this
time, upon their several third readings, passed the Lords House.

Saturday, March 31. were five Bills read.

April 1. April 1.
Sunday.

Monday, April 2. one Bill was read; and six Bills of like consequence were
sent up to the Lords from the Commons.

Tuesday, April 3. were four Bills once read.

Wednesday, April 4. one Bill was read prima and secundae vice.

Thursday, April 5. three Bills of no great moment, upon their third reading,
passed the House, and were expedited.

This morning also this Order was agreed on amongst the Lords: An Order about
the Contribution for mustred Soldiers.
viz. Whereas the Lords of Parliament, both Spiritual and Temporal, assembled
in the Parliament chamber at Westminster, have with one uniform consent, both
in their own Names and the rest of the Lords absent, ordered, That there shall
be a charitable Relief and Contribution made toward the relief and help of a
number of Soldiers that are seen in the time of this Parliament maimed and so
hurt in the Wars of France, the Low Countries, and on the Seas, for the service
of the Queens Majesty and of the Realm; and for that purpose have allowed, that
every Archbishop, Marquess, Earl, and Viscount, should pay toward the
Contribution the sum of 40 s. every Bishop 30 s. and every Baron 20 s. For
collection whereof, there has been appointed the Queens Majesty's Almoner, the
Bishop of Worcester, to collect the same of Bishops; the Lord Norris to collect
the sums payable by the Lords Temporal: which has been diligently done, and
received by them for all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal that have been
present, and that have attended to their great charge on the service of the
Realm in this Parliament. And considering the number of the Soldiers be very
many to be relieved therewith, notwithstanding the Knights and Burgesses of the
Commons House have yielded very good and large Contributions, according to
their degrees, for the better relief of the said maimed Soldiers; It is by the
said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, that have given their chargeable attendance
here, and have charitably and honorably yielded to this Contribution, thought
meet, and so it is ordered and decreed by them, with common and free consent,
That all the Lords of Parliament that have been altogether absent in this
Sessions, The absent Peers to pay a double proportion for the relief of the
indigent and maimed Soldiers, by Order of the House.
and that shall not have contributed to this charitable Relief before the end
of this Sessions, shall be required by Letters to be sent to them by the Lords
that had their Procurations for their absence, or by Letters from the Lord
Keeper of the great Seal, required and charged to make payment to be made
according to their degrees and vocation, double the sums of money paid by the
Lords that have been here present and continued their attendance: that is to
say, every Earl that has been absent 4 l. the Archbishop of York to pay as
much, and every Bishop also to pay 3 l. and every Baron 40 s. And for such as
have been here present sometimes, and yet very seldom, but have been absent
most part, it is thought meet, That every such Lord Spiritual and Temporal
shall, according to their degrees, pay a third part more than the Lords that
have been present. All which sums of money they shall cause to be delivered to
the hands of the Lord Keeper of the great Seal, to be afterward by such
Spiritual Lords of Parliament as are chosen for that purpose, distributed to
the maimed Soldiers as shall be found to have most need thereof. The Commons
having taken the same method.
The like whereof the Commons assembled in this Parliament have ordered for all
the Members of that House that are absent, and have not paid, to contribute in
double manner: which Order is thought very just, considering the Lords and
others that have been absent, and have been at no charge to come up and give
their attendance, may very reasonably, and with a great saving to their
charges, contribute to this Order. And if any Lord Spiritual or Temporal shall
refuse, or shall forbear thus to do, (which is hoped in Honor none will do)
there shall be ordinary means used to levy the same.

Friday, April 6. Four Bills were each of them once read. Eight Bills were this
Morning sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons, whereof the last was an
Act to make void the Spiritual Livings of those that have forsaken the Realm,
and do cleave to the Pope and his Religion.

Saturday, April 7. two Bills, only, were each of them once read.

April 8. Sunday.

Monday, April 9. were Three Bills each of them read secunda and tertia vice,
and so expedited. Also eight Bills, this Morning, were sent up to the Lords
from the House of Commons, whereof one was read prima and secunda vice, and
another read prima vice.

This Morning, finally, whereas a Bill entitled an Act touching Power and
Repeal of certain uses of a Deed Tripartite therein mentioned, of and in
certain Manors, Lands and Tenements of Anthony Coke of Rumford in the County
of Essex Esquire, has been heretofore three times read, and assented unto by
the Lords, in which Bill there is no Saving to the Queens Majesty, or any other
person or persons, of their lawful estates or titles; there was a Saving drawn
for her Majesty and all others, which was offered to this House, And some
question and ambiguity did grow, whether the Saving should be now added to the
Bill; and in the end it was Resolved the same should be added to the Bill, for
that it is usual and requisite to have such Savings in every Bill; and for that
there was nothing in the Saving contrary to any matter in the Bill, and that
her Majesty's Right and all others be saved thereby. And nevertheless upon
weighty Considerations, the Lords have ordered, that this shall not hereafter
be drawn to make any president.

Then the Lord Keeper continued the Parliament till the Morrow following, on
which it ended; which said Continuance is entered in the Original Journal Book,
in Manner and Form following: Dominus Custos Magni Sigilli continuavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in diem Martis hora octava.

Tuesday, April 10. In the Morning were two Bills read, whereof the first was
an Act for Naturalizing of certain Englishmens Children born beyond the Seas,
tertia vice lect. and expedit. And the second was an Act for the Queens most
gracious and free Pardon; which was read only once, and then passed the House.

Nota, That the Bill or Act for the Queens general Pardon passes each House
upon the first reading; whereas other Bills cannot be expedited without being
thrice read both by the Lords and Commons.

The Queens Majesty came not till the Afternoon; and therefore in this place,
through the negligence of the Clerk, the continuing of the Parliament until
some hour in the Afternoon is omitted, which should have been inserted.

Between 5 and 6 a Clock in the Afternoon, this present Tuesday, being the 10
of April, the Queens Majesty, The Queen comes to Dissolve the Parliament.
accompanied with her Officers and daily Attendance, came to the Upper-House;
and as soon as her Majesty, with her Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the rest
that have place there, were set; the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the
House of Commons having notice thereof, came up with their Speaker, bringing
with them the Bill of the Subsidy. The Speaker being placed at the Bar of the
Upper-house, and as many of the Commons as could conveniently be let in; after
humble Reverence to her Majesty spoke as follows:

The Speakers Speech to the Queen.
THe High Court of Parliament, most High and Mighty Prince, is the greatest and
most ancient Court within this Your Realm; for before the Conquest, in the high
places of the West Saxons, we read of a Parliament holden; and since the
Conquest they have been holden by all your Royal Predecessors, Kings of
England, and Queens of England.

In the times of the West Saxons a Parliament was held by the Noble Queen Ina,
by these words: I Ina Queen of the West Saxons, The Antiquity of Parliaments in
this Island.
have caused all my Fatherhood, Aldermen, and wise Commons, with the Godly-men
of my Kingdom, to consult of weighty matters, etc. Which words do plainly show
the parts of this Court, still observed to this day. For in Queen Ina, is Your
Majesty's most Royal Person represented: The Fatherhood in ancient time were
those whom we call Bishops, and still we call them Reverend Fathers, an ancient
and free part of our State. By Aldermen was meant your Noblemen; for so
honorable was the word Alderman in ancient time, that the Nobility only were
called Aldermen. By wisest Commons, is signified your Knights and Burgesses;
and so is your Majesty's Writ, De discretioribus and magis sufficientibus. By
Godliest men, is meant your Convocation-house; it consists of such as are
devoted to Religion, and as godliest men do consult of weightiest matters; so
is your Highness Writ at this day, Pro quibusdam arduis and urgentissimis
negotiis, nos statum and defensionem Regni nostri and Ecclesiae tangentibus.
Your Highness Wisdom and exceeding Judgment, with all careful Providence,
needed not our Councels: yet so urgent Causes there were of this Parliament, so
importunate Considerations, as that we may say, (for we cannot judge) if ever
Parliament was so Needful as now, or ever so Honorable as this.

If I may be bold to say it, I must presume to say that which has been often
said; but what is well said, cannot be too often spoken: This sweet Council of
ours I would compare to that sweet Commonwealth of the little Bees;

Sic enim parvis componere magna solebam. The little Bees have but one
Governor, whom they all serve; he is their King, Quia latrea habet latiora; he
is placed in the midst of their habitations, ut in tutissima turri: they forage
abroad, sucking honey from every flower, to bring to their King: Ignavum Fucos
pecus a Principibus arcent, the Drones they drive out of their Hives, non
habentes aculeos; and whosoever assails their King, in him immittunt aculeos, and
tamen Rex ipse est sine aculeo.

Your Majesty is that Princely Governor and Noble Queen, whom we all serve;
being protected under the shadow of your wings, we live; and wish you may ever
sit upon your Throne over us; and whosoever shall not say Amen, for them we
pray, ut convertantur ne pereant, and ut confundantur ne noceant. Under your
happy Government we live upon Honey, we suck upon every sweet Flower; but where
the Be sucketh Honey, there also the Spider draws Poison: some such there
be; but such Drones and Dore-Bees we will expel the Hive, and serve your
Majesty, and withstand any Enemy that shall assault You, our Lands, or Goods.
Our lives are prostrate at your feet to be commanded; yea, and thanked be God,
and honor be to your Majesty for it, such is the power and force of your
Subjects, that of their own strengths they are able to encounter your greatest
Enemies; and though we be such, yet have we a Prince that is Sine aculeo, so
full of that Clemency is your Majesty. I come now to your Laws.

The Laws we have conferred upon this Session of so honorable a Parliament,
are of two natures; the one such as have life, but are ready to die, except
your Majesty breathe life into them again; the other are Laws that never had
life, but being void of life, do come to your Majesty to seek life.

The first sort are those Laws that had continuance until this Parliament, and
are now to receive new life, or are to die for ever. The other that I term
capable of life, are those which are newly made, but have no essence until your
Majesty gives them life.

Two Laws there are, but I must give the honor where it is due, for they come
from the noble wise Lords of the Upper House, the most honorable and
beneficial Laws that could be desired; the one a Confirmation of all
Letters Patent from your Majesty's most noble Father of all Ecclesiastical
Livings which that King of most renowned Memory took from those superstitious
Monasteries and Priories, and translated them to the erecting of many
foundations of Cathedral Churches and Colleges, thereby greatly furthering the
maintenance of Learning and true Religion. The other Law to suppress the
obstinant Recusate, and the dangerous Sectary; both very pernicious to your
Royal Government.

Lastly, your most loving and obedient Subjects, the Commons of the Lower
House, most humbly and with dutiful thanks stand bound unto your gracious
goodness for your general and large Pardon granted unto them, wherein many
great Offenses are pardoned; but it extends only to Offenses done before the
Parliament.

I have many ways, since the beginning of this Parliament, by ignorance and
insufficiency to perform that which I should have done, offended your Majesty;
I most humbly crave to be partaker of your most gracious Pardon.



The Lord Keeper then received Instructions from the Queen, and afterward
replied unto the Speaker. The former part of this Speech was an Answer almost
verbatim to the Speaker's Oration, very excellently and exactly done; and those
things which followed, were to this or the like purpose.

The Lord Keeper.
HE said, The Lord Keeper replies.
That her Majesty most graciously did accept of the Service and Devotions of
this Parliament, commending them that they had employed their time so well, and
spent it on necessary Affairs; save only that in some things they had spent
more time than needed: but she perceived some men did it more for their
satisfaction, than the necessity of the thing deserved.

She misliked also, that such irreverence was showed toward Privy-Counsellors,
(who were not to be accounted as common Knights and Burgesses of the House,
Gently rebukes them for some Miscarriages.
that are Counselors but during the Parliament;) whereas the other are
standing Counselors, and for their wisdom and great service, are called to the
Council of State.

Then he said, That the Queens Majesty had heard that some men, in the case of
great necessity and grant of Aid, had seemed to regard their Country, and made
their necessity more than it was, forgetting the urgent necessity of the time,
and dangers that were now eminent.

That her Majesty would not have the People feared with Reports of great
dangers, Gives them Cautions.
but rather to be encouraged with boldness against the Enemies of the State.
And therefore that she straightly charged and commanded, that the mustred
Companies in every County should be supplied, if they were decayed, and that
their Provisions of Armor and Ammunition should be better than heretofore it
has been used.

That for this offer of three Subsidies, her Majesty most graciously in all
kindness thanketh her Subjects; but except it were freely and willingly given,
she did not accept of it: for her Majesty never accepts any thing that is not
freely given.

That if the Coffers of her Majesty's Treasure were not empty, or if the
Revenues of the Crown and other Princely Ornaments could suffice to supply her
Wants, and the Charges of the Realm, in the word of a Prince she does pronounce
it, she would not now have charged her Subjects, nor accepted of this they gave
her.



The Lord Keeper's Speech being ended, after some time of intermission, the
Queen being sat in her Chair of State, used a Princely Speech unto the Houses;
of which, the greatest part was to the effect and purpose following.
THis Kingdom has had many wise, The Qu. speaks her self.
noble, and victorious Princes; I will not compare with any of them in Wisdom,
Fortitude, or any other Virtues: but saving the duty of a Child, that is not
to compare with his Father, in Love, Care, Sincerity, and Justice, I will
compare with any Prince that ever you had or shall have.

It may be thought simplicity in me, that all this time of my Reign I have not
sought to advance my Territories, and enlarge my Dominions; for opportunity
has served me to do it. I acknowledge my womanhood and weakness in that
respect; but though it has been not hard to obtain, yet I doubted how to keep
the things so obtained: that has only held me from such attempts. And I must
say, my mind was never to invade my Neighbors, or to usurp over any; I am
contented to reign over mine own, and to rule as a just Prince.

Yet the King of Spain does challenge me to be the Quarreller, and the beginner
of all these Wars; in which he does me the greatest wrong that can be: for my
Conscience does not accuse my thoughts wherein I have done him the least
injury; but I am persuaded in my Conscience, if he knew what I know, he himself
would be sorry for the wrong that he has done me.

I fear not all his Threatenings; his great Preparations and mighty Forces do
not stir me: for though he come against me with a greater power than ever was
his Invincible Navy, I doubt not (God assisting me, upon whom I always trust)
but that I shall be able to defeat and overthrow him. I have great advantage
against him; for my Cause is just.

I heard say, when he attempted his last Invasion, some upon the Seacoast
forsook their Towns, and flew up higher into the Country, and left all naked
and exposed to his entrance. But I swear unto you by God, The Q. swears by God,
the will punish Cowards.
if I knew those persons, or of any that shall do so hereafter, I will make
them know and feel, what it is to be so fearful in so urgent a Cause.

The Subsidies you give me, I accept thank-fully, if you give me your good
wills with them; but if the necessity of the time, and your preservations, did
not require it, I would refuse them. But let me tell you, that the sum is not
so much, but that it is needful for a Prince to have so much always lying in
her Coffers, for your defense in time of need, and not to be driven to get it
when we should use it.

You that be Lieutenants and Gentlemen of Command in your Countries, I require
you to take care that the People be well armed, and in readiness upon all
occasions. You that be Judges and Justices of the Peace, I command and
straightly charge you, that you see the Laws to be duly executed, and that you
make them living Laws, when we have put life into them.



Thus with most gracious thanks to both Houses, the Princely Speech ended.

Then were the Titles of all the Acts read in due order, and first, the Bill of
Subsidies; to which the Clerk of the Parliament standing up, did read the
Queens Answer, in manner and form following: La Royne remercie ses loyaule
Subjects accept leur benevolence, and ainsi le veult.

The Clerk of the Parliament having read the Queen's acceptance, and thanks for
the Subsidies given, as aforesaid, did then, upon the reading of the Pardon,
pronounce in these French words following, the Thanks of the Lords and Commons
for the same.

Les Prelates, Seigneurs, and Communes, en se present Parliament assembles, au
nome de touts vous autres Subjects, remercient treshumblement vostre Majesty,
and prient a Dieu, que il vout done en sante bonne vie and longue.

Nota here, to the Subsidy-bill, because it is the mere gift of the Subject,
the Queen's consent is not required for the passing of it, but as it is joined
with her thankful acceptance; nor to the Bill of Pardon, because it is
originally her free gift, no other circumstance is required than that the
thankful acceptance thereof by the Lords and Commons be likewise expressed; it
being but once read in either House before it comes thus at last to be
expedited. Now to all other Bills, either private or public, the Queen's
express consent, though in different words, is always requisite, as follows.

The Bills of Subsidies and Pardon being passed in manner and form as
aforesaid, then were the Public Acts read; to every one of which, allowed by
the Queen, the Clerk of the Parliament reads in French these words following:
Le Royne le veult.

To every Private Act that passes, the Clerk of Parliament reads the Queens
Answer in these French words following: Soit fait come il est desire,

These two last Answers to the Public and Private Acts that pass, are to be
written by the Clerk of Parliament at the end of every Act.

To such Acts as her Majesty forbears to allow, the Clerk of the Parliament
reads in French these words following: Le Roynes advisera.

After which ended, the Dissolution of the Parliament followed, in these words:
Dominus Custos Magni Sigilli, ex Mandato Diminae Reginae, tune praesentis
dissolvit praesens Parliamentum.

A Journal of the Parliamentary Proceedings in the Lower House, Anno xxxvo
Eliz. Annoque Dom. 1592. very laboriously collected: Being chiefly called for
Consultation and Preparation against the ambitious Designs of the King of
Spain; in which some unusual Distastes happened between her Majesty and the
House, by reason of their intermeddling with her Majesty's Successor to the
Crown; which she had forbidden. This Session begun on Monday, February 19.
1592. and ended April 9. 1593.
Monday, Feb. 19. Feb. 19. The Parl. meet.
This day the Knights and Burgesses met, and at this day appeared: after that
their Names were declared to the Clerk of the Crown, and there entered into his
book, they entered into the House.

The House being set, the Earl of Darby, High-Steward for this Parliament, came
into the House to take their Oaths. Sir Thomas Henage gave him instructions
what order he should use: First, that all should remove into the Court of
Requests: There the Lord High-Steward sitting at the door, called the Knights
and Burgesses of every County, according to the letters of their names in the
Alphabet. Alphabetically every one answered as he was called; and having
answered, departed thence up to the Parliament-house-door, and there took the
Oath of Supremacy given him by one of the Queens Majesty's Privy Counselors.
His Oath taken, The Members are sworn.
then he entered again and took his place as Knight or Burgess of the House.
The Fee for entering his name into the Sergeants book is 2 s. the Rewards to
the Door-keepers being 3 s. and 8 d. the Fee for returning the Indenture 2 s.

This done, there was no further proceeding in any matter till two of the clock
in the afternoon; about which time the Nobility came, and were set in the Upper
House; The Qu. comes to the House of Lords.
the Queen came privately by water. After her Majesty's coming, and the Lords
being all sat, the Lower House had intelligence thereof, and went to attend in
the Upper House below the Bar (being well repleated with those that had gotten
in before privately.) The door was shut upon us until the Lord Keeper had gone
a good step in his Oration. The Lower house finding themselves discontented at
this, (because of custom the way ought to have been opened) murmured so loud,
that the noise came to her Majesty's ears, who presently commanded the doors to
be set open; which was done: and by that time the Lord Keeper was upon these
words following. The former part of his Oration seemed to set forth matter of
form only, as the manner of Parliaments, their Antiquities, etc.

The Lord Keeper's Speech.
HE set forth the great malice of the King of Spain which he had toward this
Realm; and that he showed by sundry instances. His last Invasion intended,
Heads of the Lord Keeper's Speech. Vide Journal of the House of Lords.
his Forces then addressed out of the Low Countries for that purpose, to have
been conducted by the Duke of Parma. The high and mighty Ships that he then
prepared and sent for that purpose; which because he found not fit for our
Seas, and such a purpose, he is building Ships of a lesser bulk, Spaniards
preparations by Sea.
after another fashion; some like French Ships, some like the Shipping of
England; and many he has gotten out of the Low Countries. He is now, for the
better invading of England, planting himself in Britain, Plants himself in
Britany.
a Country of more facility to offend us than the Low Countries: there he has
fortified himself in the most strong Holds in that Country.

In Scotland he has of late wrought most of the Nobility to conspire against
their King to give landing to his Forces there, Corrupts the Scots against
their King to assist him to invade England:
and to assist him in his Invasion; and a great part of the Nobility in
Scotland are combined in this Conspiracy, and they have received great sums of
money for their service herein. And to assure the King of Spain of their
Assistance, To which they consent.
they have signed and sent their Promises sealed unto that King.

These Conspiracies the King of Scots was brought hardly to believe, but that
her Majesty advertised him thereof, having received intelligence thereof, as
she has of all things done and intended in those parts. The King of Scotland
informed of their practices by the Queen.
And that the King might better advise thereupon, her Majesty has sent one of
her Noblemen into Scotland; and that King has assured her Majesty, with all
his ability and endeavor, to prevent the Spaniard, whose purpose is on the
North part to assault us by Land, and on the South side to invade us by Sea;
which is the most dangerous practice that could be devised against us.

And now the Rage of the Enemy being such, his Forces joined with other
Princes, his adherency is great; the charge of her Majesty for the defense of
her Realm, both with Forees by Sea, and Armies by Land, has been such, that
has both spent the Contribution of her Subjects by Subsidies, and what
otherwise they have offered her; and also consumed her Treasure, yea, caused
her to sell part of her Highness Crown Lands: And it is not to be marvelled how
all this is consumed, but rather to be thought how her Majesty could be able to
maintain and defend this her Realm against so many Realms conspired against us.

Wherefore, we her Majesty's Subjects must with all dutiful consideration think
what is sit for us to do, and with all willingness yield part of our own for
the defense of others, and assistance of her Majesty: And therefore he wished
that care might be had for advancing of the Subsidies from the wealthier and
better sort; and concluded with a desire that the greatest part of the time
might be spent by material short Speeches, in advising and providing for the
defense of the Kingdom against the foreign Enemy.



After which Speech ended, her Majesty calling the Lord Keeper unto her, by
whose commandment he gave the Lower House authority to choose their Speaker, and
to present him on Thursday following, the 22th day of February, unto which day
he adjourned the Parliament.

Upon this Adjournment, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of
Commons departed into the Lower House, and there chose Edward Cook Esquire the
Queen's Solicitor, to be their Speaker; who after a discreet and modest excuse
of himself, was notwithstanding called to the Chair, and placed in it. After
the Ceremony ended, the House of Commons likewise departed for this day.

Thursday, Feb. 22. the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of
Commons met about one of the clock in the afternoon; and about three the same
day, having notice that the Queens Majesty and the Lords were sat in the Upper
House, expecting them and their Speaker, they repaired thither; and as many as
could getting in, the Speaker was placed at the Bar; where having with all
humility excused himself, and confessing that in the said House there were many
more experienced Members thereof, and better enabled for that service.

To which Speech, the Lord Keeper having Instructions from the Queen, answered,
That her Majesty did very well allow of himself to the Place to which he was
chosen, and did also commend the House of Commons for so discreet and fit a
Choice.

Upon which Speech, the Speaker accepting of the said Charge, with all humble
acknowledgment of her Majesty's grace and favor toward him, did in the
conclusion thereof, make these Petitions of course for the House of Commons,
and in their Names: That they might have free liberty of Speech, and freedom
from Suits and Arrests of themselves and their followers; and that they might
have Access to her Majesty's Royal Person upon all urgent and important
occasions; petitioning also for himself, that if any thing were unwittingly
miscarried by himself, the same might not light upon the House, but upon
himself, and be pardoned in him.

To which last Speech of the Speakers, the Lord Keeper also, by commandment
from the Queen, replied, That her Majesty did well allow thereof; and for his
Petitions which concerned both the House and himself, her Highness was willing
that they should enjoy all their ancient and lawful Privileges; but with this
caution, That she did not allow that any man should speak unreverently or
scandalously either of the Church or State. And then the Lord Keeper, by the
Queens commandment, continued the Parliament until Saturday following, being
Feb. 24.

Nota, That the aforesaid Speeches are set down more at large in the Journal of
the Paslages of the Upper House of this Parliament, to which they do more
properly belong. And on Friday the House met not.

Saturday, Feb. 24. the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of
Commons did meet in the Lower House about nine of the clock; but by the Clerk
of the Parliament it was signified, that the Speaker had been ill at ease the
night past, and could not without peril of further sickness adventure to come
abroad: wherefore he craved in his name, leave of the House to be absent that
day.

This day Mr. Peter Wentworth and Sir Henry Bromley delivered a Petition unto
the Lord Leeper, A Petition delivered to the Lord Keeper by Mr. Wentworth, etc.
for intailing the Succession to the Crown. The Queen offended at it, causes
them to be confined.
therein desiring the Lords of the Upper House to be Suppliants with them of
the Lower House, unto her Majesty, for entailing the Succession to the Crown;
whereof a Bill was ready drawn by them.

Her Majesty was highly displeased therewith, after she knew thereof, as a
matter contrary to her former straight Commandment, and charged the Council to
call the Parties before them. Sir Thomas Henage presently sent for them; and
after speech with them, commanded them to forbear coming to the Parliament, and
not to go out from their several Lodgings.

About this matter, A Committee appointed for this thing; but few come to it.
in the beginning of the Parliament, was a Committee appointed to be had of
many wise, grave, and ancient Parliament Men as were of the House; but at this
time few met at the place appointed, at least such men as were expected.

It was appointed at this time to Mr. Stevens to peruse the penning of the
Petition that should have been delivered to that House, and to have provided a
Speech upon the delivery of it; but this office, by reason of other occasions,
he could not attend. What other things were done in that Conference, were, as I
heard, confessed unto some of the Privy Council, Their Secrets discovered by
some of them to the Privy Council.
by some of those Parties that were present at the Conference. All that were,
except those before-named, went free, and were never called in question.

Sunday, and Feb. 25. and the House sat not; yet the aforesaid Mr. Wentworth,
Sir Henry Bromeley, and some others, were called before the Lord Burleigh Lord
Treasurer of England, the Lord Buckhurst, and Sir Thomas Henage, who entreated
them very favorably, and with good Speeches; but so highly was her Majesty
offended, that they must needs commit them, Wentworth and Bromeley (...).
and so they told them. Whereupon Mr. Peter Wentworth was sent Prisoner to the
Tower, Sir Henry Bromeley, and one Mr. Richard Stevens (to whom Sir Henry
Bromely had imparted the matter) were sent to the Fleet, as also Mr. Welche the
other Knight for Wercestershire.

Monday, Feb. 26. after the Letany was read (which is the first thing done when
the Speaker is set in his Chair) was read an Act, entitled, An Act for
continuing her Majesty's Subjects in more due Obedience. This Bill contained
all these Particulars following.

1. The Party so indicted and convicted, A Penal Act.
shall forfeit all his Goods and Chattels which he has in his own right, or in
the right of his Wife. 2. He shall forfeit two parts of his Lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments, if he be born under her Highness Allegiance, and of the age
of sixteen years. 3. A Feme Covert shall lose her Dowry or Jointure, which she
might have by her Baron. 4. If a man match with an Inheritrix, being a
Recusant, he shall lose two parts of those Lands to the Queen; and neither of
them shall administrate to any man. 5. Such Party being a Recusant, shall be
disabled to make any Purchase or Sale of Lands. 6. He shall be disabled to take
or make any Lease, either to the use of himself, or to the use of his Wife. 7.
A Recusant shall forfeit for keeping any such Recusant person in his house,
either Servant or Stranger, 10 l. every month, being at one time so long in his
house, or at several times in his yard. 8. He shall be barred to bear any
Office in the Land, or to practice as Counselor, Doctor, Solicitor, Proctor,
Attorney, or Advocate to the Law. 9. He shall have his Children taken from him,
if they be above the age of seven years, and to be disposed of by the Lords of
the Council, or the Ordinary, or the Judges of Assizes; and their maintenance
to be raised out of the third part of such Recusants Livings. 10. He shall be
disenabled to make any sale of any of his Goods or Chattels. 11. If he be a
Copyholder, he shall forfeit his Copyhold during his life; whereof two parts is
to go to the Queen, and the third to the Lord of the Manor. 12. If any person
be indicted for Recusancy, of malice, he shall have the remedy against the
party at the Common Law. 13. If any person, having been a Recusant, shall at
any time recant, he shall make his submission in the Parish Church where he
dwells, acknowledging the Queens proceedings to be just, and detest the
Church of Rome; which he shall also do in open Court before the Judges of
Assize. 14. If any such person, after his Recantation, fall into relapse, he
shall lose the benefit of the former Recantation for ever. 15. Lastly, there is
a Proviso, That those that have already bought any Lands of any that now are or
shall be indicted for a Recusant, the Bargain shall be as good, and stand in
effect, as if this had never been made.
This Bill upon a Committee, received all these Alterations following;
whereupon it came as a new Bill again.

The first Article omitted altogether, being thought too hard. The Penal Bill
amended.


The third. That the women are to lose but two parts of Dowry or Jointure after
her Husbands death: The Husband not being a Recusant, to forfeit no part of his
Land for his Wives Recusancy.

The fifth. All Sales made by Recusants since 2o Eliz. of Lands, whereof he
takes the profits, or which Conveyauce is to his use, or upon any Trust or
confidence, to be void as to the Queen, as for two parts of the Profits to be
answered her; and so all Sales hereafter to be made by any Recusant convicted,
the Sale being bona side.

The sixth. They shall be disabled to be Justices of the Peace, Mayors, or
Sheriffs.

The ninth. Children being ten years, until they be sixteen, to be disposed at
the appointment of four Privy Counselors, the Justices of Assize, the Bishop
of the Diocese, Justice of the Peace. And if the third part of the Land suffice
not for maintenance, the rest to be levied of the Parents Goods.

The eleventh. Recusants that be Copyholders, to forfeit two parts to the Lord
of the Manor, if the Lord be no Recusant; and if he be, then to the Queen.

The thirteenth. Protesting that he does not come to Church under color of any
Dispensation or other allowance from the Pope, but for Conscience and Religion.

Sir Robert Cecill. AS I remember, Cecill's Speech.
I have been of this House these five Parliaments, and I have not determined to
say any thing in these Assemblies further than my Cogitations should concur
with my Conscience, in saying bare I and No. Give me leave, I pray you, to
rehearse an old Saying, and it is in Latin: Nec te Collaudes, nec te Vituperes
ipse: For me to do the one, were exceeding Arrogance; and to do the other, I
confess, I hope you will pardon me.

The occasion of this Parliament, which I take to be by that which we received
from the honorable and learned Speech of the Lord Keeper, as of and from her
Majesty to us, in the Higher House, is for the cause of Religion, and the
maintenance thereof amongst us; the preservation of her Majesty's most Royal
Person, and the good of this Realm our Country.

All which, because they be things of most dear and nearest price, and at this
present in exceeding great and eminent danger, it is behoveful to consult of
most speedy remedies, which in parcels should proceed from the most wise heads.

The Enemy to these, is the King of Spain, whose malice and ambition is such,
that together with the Pope, that Antichrist of Rome; for I may well couple
them together, the one being always accompanied with Envy and Prosperity, the
other with unsatiable desire, makes them by all means seek the subversion of
this State.

But concerning the first, the Cause of God and his Religion, which her Majesty
professed before she came on this Royal Seat, which she has defended and
maintained, and for which cause God has so blessed her Government ever since
her coming to the Crown: yea, while the Crown was scarce warm on her head, she
abolished the Authority of Rome, and did set up God's Truth amongst us, and, to
her great Renown, made this little Land to be a Sanctuary for all the
persecuted Saints of God; whereby the People perceived her Magnanimity, Zeal,
and Judgment.

Magnanimity, in understanding so great an Enterprise; Zeal, in professing the
same, not of show, but in sincerity; Judgment, in defending it, and preventing
all the Popes designs: He set forth his Bulls and Missives against her
Majesty, thereby most unnaturally depriving her of her most natural Right,
Duty, and Loyalty, which her Subjects should owe unto her, etc.

Here he touched the many dangers which her Majesty had been in; which, as it
caused him to fear to think, so it did cause him to tremble to speak,
concerning the danger of our Country; and so the loss of our Lives, Liberties,
Wives, Children, and all other Privileges.

Let me not trouble you with things passed so long, and perhaps beyond my
reach; but of things passed of late years, and since 88: when as we were so
secure, and never thought the King of Spain would have set up his Rest for
England, then sent he his Navy, termed Invincible, and had almost been upon the
backs of us, before we were aware; yea, we were so slack in Provision, that it
was too late to make resistance, had not God preserved us; his attempt against
us, by seeking to win the Low Countries, and to obtain Ireland; which being but
trifles, and partly devices, (which I mean not to trouble you with.) He has
now of late gone about to win France, wherein he has greatly prevailed, as in
Lorain and in other parts, as you have heard; but especially in Britain, having
most part of the Port-towns in his possession; whither he still sends Supplies
daily, and re-enforceth them every four or five months, which Port is always
open, and his men and forces never wanting.

This Province he especially desires, for it lies most fitly to annoy us;
whither he may send Forces continually, and there have his Navy ready to annoy
us: the which he could not otherwise so easily do, unless he had the Wind in a
bag. Besides, having this Province, he will keep us from Traffic to Rochel
and Bourdeaux, as he does in the Streights from Tripoly and St. Jean de luze;
and so hinder us from carrying forth or bringing in into this Land any
Commodities whereby this Realm might be enriched, and her Majesty's Impost ever
increased, being one of the greatest Revenues of her Crown. He has also gone
about with them of Stood, and the King of Poland, one of his own Faction, and
who, by reason he cannot do in that Kingdom what he lists, he may easily
command him to impede or hinder our Traffic in those Eastern parts; which if
he could bring to pass, you see how hurtful it would be to this Land.

But, to descend yet more lower, and into these latter Actions, he has seen it
is but a folly to endeavor to make a wooden-bridge to pass into England;
therefore he has found out a more sure way, and stronger passage unto it by
Land, and that by Scotland; which though it be not talked of at the Exchange,
nor preached of at Paul's Cross, yet it is most true, and in Scotland, as
common as the Highway, that he has procured to him many of the Nobility there.
It is true, he has sent thither no Navy; and if he had endeavored it, her
Majesty would not have suffered him: yet do she what she can, some paltry
Fly-boat may escape her Majesty's good Ships, and carry Gold enough in her to
make them Traitors, and stir them to Sedition.

These things her Majesty understood before, and advertised that King thereof;
but he not so well conceiving thereof, has by the effect proved the other
true. And unless I be deceived, the last Letter that came from thence the other
night, shows, that King is gone to make a Road into the North, and to bring
Back the Lord Bothwell and the Lord Huntley.

The King of Spain's malice thus daily increases against us, and seeks also
to stir up Sedition amongst us by his Instruments; the number also of Papists
daily increases, or at leastwise be more manifested.

My advice is, That you would consult which ways to withstand such eminent
dangers, which the greater they be, the sooner they would be looked into and
remembered. Wherefore, Mr. Speaker, I desire some Committees should be appointed
of the sufficientest and wisest men in the House, to consider thereupon.


Sir John Wooley, to the like effect. FIrst saying, Sir John Wooley's Speech.
That upon the cause of the danger the Realm was now in, and of the remedy, his
Speech should consist; which he likened to a natural Body, which the more the
principal Member was in danger, the greater means should be used for the
preservation thereof. Roan being now made Admiral of France by the League,
should say he was a poor Admiral now, but that he doubted not but shortly he
should be able to bring such a Navy to Sea, as should terrify the Queen of
England. Also he showed how the Princes of the Holy League had conspired the
Overthrow of this Realm, the Extirpation of Religion, and the Confusion of her
Majesty and her Royal Subjects. And he exhorted the House, now the season of
the year grows on, which called many of the Knights and Burgesses to be in
their Countries, besides the Sickness being in the Town, so that many of that
House knew not whether he lodged in a house infected or not, that they would
seek to dispatch and end the Parliament so soon as might be. He also showed how
the Dunkirkers troubled our Fishermen in small Barques upon the Seacoasts;
and so moved that this matter might be committed to some of the sufficientest
in the House.

He also exhorted the House to a speedy agreeing of a Subsidy; which,
considering the dangers we were in, and that it was for our own good, as also
for her Majesty's, he hoped no good Subject but would most willingly agree to
it.

Also he showed, that the Wars which the King of Spain brought upon this
Nation, had cost her Majesty a Million of money; but this he avouched, that
where it cost her Majesty one, it cost the King of Spain three.


Sir John Fortescue. THey that spoke before me, spoke sufficiently of the
Authors of ours Troubles, and of the great danger which is now eminent upon us,
insomuch, that it is come to this point now, Non utrum imperare, sed utrum
vivere: I will speak of nothing but that which concerns my Calling. Her Majesty
not only being careful for the preservation of her own Realm, but of her
Neighbors also; she has not only defended her own Subjects from being
invaded, but also has aided Strangers which wanted money, with whom otherwise
it would have gone very ill by this time, and also with our selves; insomuch
that the burden of four Kingdoms has rested upon her Majesty, and maintained
with her Purse, England, France, Ireland, and Scotland. For how could the
French King at his first coming to the Crown, have held out against those
Leaguers, had not her Majesty assisted him with her men and money? which has
cost her Majesty above 100000 l.: for it is well known the French King had not
been able to withstand the Duke of Parma's coming into France, had it not been
for our Englishmen and money. As for the Low Countries, it stood her Majesty
yearly, ever since she undertook the defense of them, in 150000 l. all which
her Majesty bestowed, for the good of this Realm, to free us from War at home.
Besides, when her Majesty came to the Crown, she found it four Millions
indebted; her Navy, when she came to view it, she found it greatly decayed: Yet
all this she has discharged, and thanks be to God she is nothing indebted. And
now she is able to match any Prince in Europe; which the Spaniards found, when
they came to invade us; yea, she has with her Ships compassed the whole world,
whereby this Land is made famous through all Nations.

She did find her Navy furnished only with Iron Pieces, but she has
furnished it with Artillery of Brass; so that one of her Ships is not a
Subjects, but rather a petty Princes wealth.

As for her own private Expenses, they have been little; in Building, she has
consumed little or nothing; and for her Apparel, it is Royal and Princely,
becoming her Calling, but not sumptuous or excessive; the Charges of her house
small, yea never less in any Kings time; and shortly, by Gods grace, she will
free her Subjects from that trouble which has come by the means of Purveyors.

Wherefore she trusts that every good Subject will assist her Majesty with
his Purse, seeing it concerns his own good, and the preservation of his estate:
for before any of us would lose the least member of his body, we would bestow a
great deal, and stick for no cost or charges, how much more ought we in this
politic body, whereof not only a member, but the whole body is in jeopardy,
if we do not make haste to the preservation of it? And for these Subsidies
which are granted to her Majesty nowadays, they are less by half than they
were in the time of Henry the Eighth.

Now, although her Majesty has borrowed some money of her Subjects, besides
her Subsidies, yet has she truly repaid every one fully. He desired the
matter might be put to a Committee to consider of.


Mr. Francis Bacon. Mr. Speaker,

THat which these honorable Personages have spoken of their Experience, Sir
Francis Bacon's Speech.
may it please you to give me leave likewise to deliver of my common knowledge.

The cause of assembling all Parliaments, has been hitherto for Laws or
Moneys; the one being the sinews of Peace, the other of War: To the one I am
not privy, but the other I should know.

I did take great contentment in her Majesty's Speech the other day, delivered
by the Lord Keeper; how that it was a thing not to be done suddenly, or at one
Parliament, nor scarce a year would suffice to purge the Statute-book, nor
lessen it, the Volume of Laws being so many in number, that neither common
people can half practice them, nor the Lawyers sufficiently understand them,
than the which nothing would tend more to the praise of her Majesty. The
Romans, they appointed ten men who were to correct or recall all former Laws,
and to set forth those twelve Tables so much of all men commended. The
Athenians likewise appointed six to that purpose. And Lewis the the ninth King
of France, did the like in reforming his Laws.


Tuesday, Feb. 27. a Bill was read, for transporting of Cloth, the first time.

Mr. Morris, Attorney of the Court of Wards. MY Religion toward God, Mr.
Morris's Speech.
my Allegiance to her Majesty, the many Oaths that I have taken for the
maintaining of her Supremacy, causes me to offer to your considerations,
matters concerning the sacred Majesty of God, the Prerogative and Supremacy of
her Majesty, the Privileges of the Laws, and the Liberties of us all.

After some touch upon the usage of Ecclesiastical Discipline by the Prelates,
he laid down these three things: Lawless Inquisition, injurious Subscription,
and binding Absolution; to which he spoke severally, showing the abuses of the
Bishops in every one of them. He delivering the Bill, made this his request,
That if the House thought good to receive it, that then they might be Suitors
unto her Majesty to have it allowed. The Bill being delivered by Mr. Morris his
hand unto Mr. Speaker.


Mr. Dalton of Lincolns-Inne, stood up and spoke with much earnestness against
it, saying,
IT is hard for me upon a sudden to answer a long premeditated Speech, but as I
am able, I will say and show what I think of the Bill exhibited: It pretends
great things in show, things tending to the hindrance of God's Service, to the
derogation of her Majesty's Prerogative, to the overthrowing of our Laws, and
violating of our Liberties; things great in show, but no such things to be
found in matter spoke against.

It is easy to make of a Molehill a Mountain in words; so by a well compiled
Speech, to make a great and dangerous thing of nothing; nay, indeed a thing
needless: for that the State hitherto has always stood upon this Government.
And so showed how the Ecclesiastical Government was distinct from the Temporal.
The Reasons he gave were few or none; only his great mislike was, that having
received straight Commandment from her Majesty not to meddle with things
concerning the Church and State of this Realm, therefore in his opinion the
Bill ought to be suppressed.



Mr. Speaker. IN favor and in free love, above my merits and deserts, you have
elected me to do all my best service, and to be faithful to you. This Bill
delivered to me, is long, and contains important matters of great weight, and
such matters as cannot be expressed in few words. It has many parts; and if
you put me presently to open it, I cannot do it as I should: for indeed it is a
matter far above my ordinary practice, and so I cannot so readily understand
it; and to deliver a thing before I conceive it, I cannot.

Wherefore, if it would please you to give me leave to consider of it, I do
profess I will be faithful, and will keep it with all secrecy.


Hereupon it was put to the question, Whether it should be committed to the
Speaker only, or to the Privy Council and him? But it was held to be against
the Order of the House, that a Bill should be committed before it was read.
Therefore upon a Motion made by Mr. Wroth, it was agreed that Mr. Speaker
should keep it.

This afternoon at two of the clock, Mr. Speaker was sent for unto Court; where
the Queens Majesty her self gave him commandment what to deliver unto the House.

Wednesday, Feb. 28. after Prayers, the Bill for Recusants was read. This
morning Mr. Morris was sent for to Court, and from thence he was committed unto
Sir John Fortesoue's keeping. This Bill against Recusants was opened and read
by Mr. Speaker, who made fourteen divided parts of the same.

Mr. Speaker. YEsterday a great Member of this House, after a Speech used, and
his Reasons laid forth, delivered two Bills unto me; which Bills, though not
being read, yet were diversely spoken of. They being long, and the matters grave
and of great importance, and the day being almost spent, I desired further time
to consider of the parts of the Bill: I humbly thank this honorable House,
time was granted me freely, it being almost twelve of the clock.

I have perused and read both of the Bills; I have them about me, and they have
been continually with me ever since they were delivered to me; never any man
saw them, nor ever any man's eye more than my own ever saw one word of them.

A little after I had perused the Bills, I was sent for by a special Messenger
from her Majesty: Coming in her Royal presence, I was commanded to deliver
these words from her most excellent Majesty unto the body of the Realm (for so
she termed this House:) The matter I have to speak is great, yea it is the
greatest matter I ever had to deal in; wherefore I pray God direct mentem and
linguam hanc. I must be short, for her Majesty's words were not many; and I may
perhaps fail in the delivery of them: for though my Auditors be great, yet who
is so impudent that the presence of such a Majesty would not appale him? and it
did greatly fear me, when I did see none of these honorable persons in her
presence who were present at the holding of the matter in this House; yet so
God in his providence had appointed it, that even in this while came in some of
the persons here present, who, if I fail in delivering what was given me in
charge, can report it unto you: and I glad am that there are witnesses with me
in this action what was my faithful service for the House.

I protest a greater comfort never befell me, than that this my Integrity and
faithful Promise to this House, is not violated; for her Majesty, in her most
gracious wisdom, before my coming determined not to press me in this, neither
indeed did she require the Bill of me; for this only she required of me: What
were the things spoken of by the House? which points I only delivered, as they
that heard me can tell.

The Message delivered me from her Majesty, The Speaker (...) Message to the
Commons.
consists of three things: First, the end for which the Parliament was
called. Secondly, the Speech which her Majesty used by my Lord Keeper. Thirdly,
what her Pleasure and Commandment now is.

For the first, it is in me and my power (I speak now in her Majesty's person)
to call Parliaments, and it is in my power to end and determine the same; it is
in my power to assent or dissent to any thing done in Parliament.

The calling of this Parliament was only that the Majesty of God might be more
religiously served, and those that neglect this service might be compelled by
some sharper means to a more due obedience, and more true service of God, than
there has been hitherto used. And further, that the safety of her Majesty's
Person, and of this Realm, might be by all means provided for against our great
Enemies the Pope and the King of Spain.

Her Majesty's most excellent Pleasure being then delivered unto us by the Lord
Keeper, it was not meant we should meddle with matters of State, or in Causes
Ecclesiastical; (for so her Majesty termed them.) She wondered that any would
be of so high commandment to attempt (I use her own words) a thing contrary to
that which she had so expressly forbidden; wherefore with this she was highly
displeased. And because the words then spoken by my Lord Keeper, are not now
perhaps well remembered, or some be now here that were not there, her Majesty's
present Charge and express Commandment is, That no Bills touching matters of
State, or Reformation in Causes Ecclesiastical, be exhibited: And upon my
Allegiance, I am commanded, if any such Bill be exhibited, not to read it.


On Thursday, March 1. after Prayers read, March 1.
an Act was read against Strangers born to sell foreign Wares by retail; no
Stranger born to do it, except he has served seven years with an Englishman in
the same Trade.

Sergeant Yelverton. HE spoke concerning the Privileges of this House.
Yelverton.
The Burgess of Misteard in Cornwall being elected, the Town refused to deliver
up their Indenture to the Sheriff; but the Party elected made his Indenture,
and delivered it to the Clerk of the Crown, who filed it with the rest of the
Indentures returned by the Sheriff, the Sheriff having indorsed it upon his
Writ: but this Indenture was never executed by the Sheriff, nor returned; and
yet this Return was held (as it should seem by the Committees) to be good.


Sir Edward Hobby. THe Party outlawed, is not out of his wits, therefore
capable; Sir Edward Hobby.
and then he is a man able to be chosen, and Idoneus to be a Burgess; only a
difference may be made, where the Outlawry is for a Cause Criminal, and a Cause
Personal, as in this Cause. Is this disability greater? then a man outlawed may
not be a Burgess as well as an Attorney to a man, or as an Executor. And I
think it will stand with the Privilege of the House to deliver him, though he
were outlawed.


Mr. Finch. HE said, he could not tell which to hold, Mr. Finch.
or on which side to speak. The book of 20 Hen. 7. does prove, that there were
elected such as were attainted, and that disability was taken against them. The
Writ to choose a Burgess is not legalem hominem, as in all places, but Idoneum;
therefore we ought not to be so strict, as if he were to be challenged upon a
Jury. At the Common Law, Outlawries was only for Causes Criminal, as for
Treason or Felony; but these Outlawries in Personal Causes, only by the
Statute 11 Hen. 4. not so great a difficulty as that at the Common Law. On the
other side, utlegatus ne villen. cannot be a Champion, which is as a Judge to
decide; then a Fortiori he can be no Judge in this House. Outlawry is an
Attainder, therefore the Party so stained, is no competent Judge. The great
Charter is, all Trials ought to be per legales homines, and parum suorum; the
outlawed man is not of the number of Parium, and so not to be a Judge. Vide 8
Ed. 3. utlegatus ne puit estre, etc.


Friday, March 2. the old Question touching an outlawed man to be a Burgess,
was again spoken unto.

Mr. Tanfield. HE held, Mr. Tanfield.
that a Person outlawed might be a Burgess. He made an Exception where the
difference of a Burgess grew upon matter before the Election, and where after.
If the Exception grew after, then a Burgess elected must not be out of the
House. If Exception be taken to this Election, and this Outlawry now alleged
to disenable him, the Statute of 23 Hen 6, cap. 15. will disenable most of this
House; for they ought to be Burgesses resident. Now if this be a good Election,
then it follows, that the Party elected is to have his Privilege. And although
the Common Law does disenable the Party, yet the Privilege of the House being
urged, that prevails over the Law.


Sir William Moore. FIrst, Sir Will. Moore
he showed, that her Majesty had more cause to have Subsidies, than had Hen. 8.
Edw. 6. or Queen Mary: for Hen. 8. Wars continued not, though they were
violent: In his time the Wars were impulsive, not defensive; he had the
suppression of all the Abbeys, a matter of great Riches unto him; he had a
Benevolence, and then a Subsidy, paid within three months to Sir Geo. Peckham.
Edw. 6. had Chauntries, and all the Church-plate for relief, paid him. Queen
Mary had a Relief paid her, which she never repaid. But her Majesty that now
is, has been a continual Defense of her own Realms, and her Neighbors France
and the Low Countries; yet has she repaid the Loans, and has had no such
helps.


Sir George Carey. I Speak for the Subsidy; Sir Geo. Carey.
first answering one that has said we must regard them and their Estates for
whom we be here; saying, he regarded and came for them, as was meet: and they
will more thank us for taking something from them, than if we should abandon
them, and leave them and all that they have, to the spoil of the Enemy; which
will be, if with Forces we provide not to withstand them: for eminent dangers
hangs over our SPEAKERs, and are intended to us this Summer.

The Spaniards already have sent 7000 Pistols of gold into Scotland, to corrupt
the Nobility; and to the King 20000 Crowns now lately were dispatched out of
France into Scotland, for the levying of 3000 men, which the Scottish Lords have
promised; and the King of Spain will levy 30000 men, and give them all Pay. Her
Majesty is resolved to send Sir Francis Drake to Sea to encounter them with a
great Navy; wherefore this our Danger is to be prevented, and these her
Majesty's infinite Charges supplied by us.


Sir Walter Rawleigh. HE spoke of the Subsidy, not only, as he protested, Sir
Walter Rawleigh.
to please the Queen, to whom he is infinitely bound above his desert, but for
the necessity he both saw and knew: He very well discovered the great strength
of the King of Spain; and to show his mightiness, he told how he possessed all
the world, and also that his malice and ill purpose was evident to this Realm.
He showed how on every side he had beleaguered us.

In Denmark, that King being young, he has corrupted the Council and Nobility
so, as it was very likely he would speed himself of Shipping from thence; in
the Marine-Towns of the Low Countries, and in Norway, he has laid in great
store of Shipping; in France, he has the Parliament-Towns at his command; in
Britain, he has all the best Havens; and in Scotland, he has so corrupted the
Nobility, that he had promised them Forces to assist the Papists; that they
were ready to join with any foreign Forces that would make them strong, to be
by themselves, and to resist others: for as he thought, there were not six
Gentlemen of that Country to be of one Religion. In his own Country, there is
all possible preparing, and he is coming with sixty Galleys besides other
Shipping, with purpose, if he goes forward and has good success, we must then
have no Ships, if he invade us riding at Anchor; but all will be little enough
to withstand him. At his coming, he fully resolves to get Plymouth, or at
least to possess some of the Havens this Summer within our Land, and Plymouth
is in most danger; for no Ordnance can be carried thither to remove him, the
passages will not give leave.

Now the way to defeat him, was this: To send a Royal Army and supplant him in
Britany, and to possess our selves there; and to send a strong Navy to Sea, and
to lie with it upon the Cape and at Lambuck, to which places comes all his
Ships with Riches from all places; and then they may set upon all that comes.


Saturday, March 3. there ensued some discouse touching the Privileges of the
House.

Sunday, March 4.

Monday, March 5.

Mr. Beale. HE desired to satisfy the House, Mr. Beale.
by reason it was conceived by the Lords the other day, that upon his Motion,
and by the President he showed, the House was led to deny a Conference with the
Lords: he acknowledged he mistook the Question appointed; for there being but a
Conference desired by the Lords, and no confirming of what they had done, he
thought we might, and thought fit we should confer: And to this end, he only
showed the President, That in the ninth year of Hen. 4. the Commons having
granted a Subsidy, which the Lords thought too little, and they agreed to a
greater; and would have had the Commons to confirm that they had done. This the
Commons thought they could not do, without prejudice to their honor: Wherefore
he acknowledged himself mistaken in the Question, and desired if any were led
by him, to be satisfied, for that he would have been of another opinion, if he
had conceived the matter as it was meant.


Sir Robert Cecill. I Desire now I may be somewhat long, Sir Rob. Cecill.
because I must include an Answer to three Speeches. Those two honorable
persons which sit above, the one of them declared the true state of the
Question, the other, what was sit we should do; but my Answer shall tend only
to the other Tales that followed.

The first was a kind of satisfaction for a former mistaking, but in the same
satisfaction a new mistaking was also; which was by way of information, casting
it into the House, that the Queen should seem to demand three Subsidies. Now
the Queen never demanded three, nor one: so here is a new mistaking added to
the former satisfaction. The second man's Motion thus far I allow, that the
Councels of this House be secretly kept, and that nothing be reported in Malam
partem; but if his meaning be, that we may not impart any thing that is done
here unto the Queen, but that all things must be kept secret from her, I am
altogether against it. This only I should desire, what ought to be observed,
that nothing ought to be reported unto her in Malam partem. The third man's
Motion consisted upon three points: The first, was News; the second, History;
the third and last, a Motion. His News was, that men's Names were given up to
the Queen; this was News, for I heard it not before. The History was, a large
Report of the whole progress of this matter. His Motion was, that we should
confer with the Lords about a Subsidy, but not conclude a Subsidy with them.
His Motion seems contrary to his meaning, or else is more than ever was meant;
for it was never desired of us by the Lords, that we should confer with them
about a Subsidy.


Sir Walter Rawleigh. HE informed the House, that he thought the Division of
the House the last day, Sir Walter Rawleigh.
to grow upon the mistaking of the Question; and that some had since reported
to him, That had the matter been resolved, that only a general Conference was
desired, most of them that sat would not have been against it: Wherefore he
desired Mr. Speaker to put it to the question, Whether they should confer with
the Lords generally or no, without naming a Subsidy.

This Motion being well liked, Sir Walter Rawleigh was desired by the House to
repeat it again, that so it might be the better heard of them all.

And thereupon he said, That touching the aforesaid Question, which had
received a No upon Saturday last, he would not make it a Question again; for by
the Order of the House he could not, but propound this for a new Question, in
these or the like words.

Whether the House would be pleased to have a general Conference with the
Lords, touching the great and eminent dangers of the Realm and State, and the
present necessary supply of Treasure to be provided speedily for the same,
according to the proportion of the necessity? Which Question being propounded,
it was assented unto by all, without any negative voice.


Tuesday, March 6. two Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the second
being a Bill for confirming Letters Patent granted to the Mayor, Sheriffs,
Citizens, and Commonalty of the City of Lincoln, was read the second time.

Sir Edward Hobby, one of the Committees for Returns and Privileges, showed,
that for the Borough of Calmesford in the County of Cornwall, one Richard
Leech was returned to the Sheriff for a Burgess by a false Return; and that
afterward Sir George Carew Knight, was returned Burgess by the true Return:
and alleging that the said Richard Leech offered to yield the place to the
said Sir George Carew, he moved for the Order of this House therein.

And thereupon Mr. Speaker was appointed to move the Lord Keeper in the said
Case for his Order, either for his allowance of the said Sir George Carew in
the place of the said Richard Leech, or else in awarding a new Writ for choosing
another, at his Lordships pleasure. And so for his Lordships Order in the Case
of the Burgess returned for the Borough of Southwark, in the allowance of
Richard Hutton already returned, or else in awarding a new Writ for choosing
another, at his Lordships pleasure. And so also for his Lordships altering the
name of John Dudley to the name of Thomas Dudley, in the return of one of the
Burgesses of Newtown in the County of Southampton, or else to award a new Writ,
at his Lordships pleasure.

Diverse other Bills were read on this day.

Wednesday, March 7. Sir Edward Hobby moved the Case of Mr. Fitz-Herbert his
bringing up unto this House by a Hab. Cor. cum causa, from the Lord Keeper,
shows, that he has moved the Lord Keeper touching the said Writ; and that
his Lordship thinks best, in regard of the ancient privileges of this House,
that a Sergeant at Arms be sent by order of this House for the said Mr.
Fitz-herbert, at his own charge, by reason whereof he may be brought hither to
this House without peril of being further arrested by the way, and the state of
his Cause considered of and examined, when he shall come hither; which was
thereupon well liked and allowed of by this House.

Three Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the second concerning the
lawful deprivation of Edward Bonner late Bishop of London, was read the second
time.

Thursday, March 8. Mr. Speaker showed unto this House, that according unto the
appointment of this House, he has attended the Lord Keeper touching his
Lordships pleasure for the directing of a new Writ for the choosing of another
Burgess for the Borough of Southwark in the County of Surrey, instead of
Richard Hutton Gentleman, supposed to have been unduly and indirectly elected:
And also for the allowing of Sir George Carew Knight. to be Burgess for the
Borough of Camelsford in the County of Cornwall, as truly returned Burgess of
the said Borough of Camelsford in the said County of Cornwall, instead of
Richard Leech alleged to have been returned by the said Sheriff, by a false
Return made before the said other Return of the said Sir George Carew. And also
for changing the name of John Dudley Esquire returned for the Borough of Newtown
in the County of Southampton, into the name of Thomas Dudley Esquire alleged to
be the same person, in very deed, that should have been returned, and that his
name was mistaken, and none living known by the name of John Dudley. His
Lordships answer and resolution in the said Case was, That the said Returns by
the said Burgesses of Southwark and Camelsford should stand and continue
according to the Return of the same, without taking notice of any fact therein,
or in the Election at all. And that his Lordship would direct another Writ for
choosing of another Burgess for the Borough of Newtown instead of the said John
Dudley, and that his Lordship would insert the said Cause of misnomer so as is
before alleged.

Four Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the last being a Bill for
confirmation of the assurance unto certain Purchasers of Lands sold by Sir
Richard Knightly Knight. Valentine Knightly and Edward Knightly Esquires, was upon
the reading the second time, committed to Mr. Sergeant Yelverton, Sir Henry
Vmpton, Mr. Cradock, and others; who were appointed to meet to morrow at two of
the clock in the afternoon, in the Exchequer-chamber.

Friday, March 9. the Bill concerning Woollen-cloaths, called Vesses, etc. was
upon the second reading committed unto Sir William Knowls, Sir John Heart, Mr.
Recorder of London, and others; who were appointed to meet on Tuesday next in
the afternoon, in the Exchequer-chamber.

Sir John Harrington and Sir Thomas Wilks were added to the former Committees
in the Bill for confirmation of certain assurances unto certain Purchasers of
Land sold by Sir Richard Knightly Knight. Valentine Knightly and Edward Knightly
Esquires, appointed yesterday.

The Committees in the Bill touching Recusants, nominated upon Wednesday the 28
of February before-going, are appointed to meet in this House at two of the
clock this afternoon.

The Committees also in the Bill for the naturalizing Samuel Saltingston, and
others nominated on the sixth of this instant March, are appointed to meet to
morrow at two of the clock in the afternoon, in the Middle-Temple-hall.

Diverse Bills were this day read.

Saturday, March 10. Mr. Wroth, one of the Committees in the Bill against
stealing Oxen, Sheep, and Lambs, showed, that he and the rest of the Committees
in the same Bill, have met together and added some Amendments to the same Bill,
and offered both the Bill and Amendments to the House; which Amendments being
inserted into the Bill by the Clerk of this House, and the same Amendments then
also twice read, the Bill upon the Question was ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for relief of Jurors, Bill for relief of Jurors upon Trials.
upon Trials between Party and Party, was upon the second reading committed
unto Mr. Tasborough, Mr. Recorder of London, Mr. Wroth, and others; and the
Bill was delivered to Mr. Tasborough, who with the rest were appointed to meet
this day at two of the clock in the afternoon, at Middle-Temple-hall.

Diverse other Bills were this day also read.

March 11. Sunday.

Monday, March 12. Mr. Lewis, one of the Committees in the Bill concerning
salted Fish and salted Herrings, showed, That he and the rest of the Committee
had taken pains in consideration of the said Bill, and have added a Proviso,
and prayed the twice reading of the said Proviso, and that the same Bill and
Proviso may be ordered to be engrossed. Whereupon the said Proviso being twice
read, the said Bill and Proviso, after some Speeches both against the said Bill
and with it, was upon the Question referred to the former Committees; who were
appointed on Monday the fifth of this instant March, to be considered of in
this afternoon of this present day, in the Exchequer-chamber.

The Bill committed for the confirmation of Letters Patent to the Mayor,
Sheriffs, Citizens, and Commonalty of Lincoln, and concerning the lawful
deprivation of Edward Bonner late Bishop of London, are delivered to Sir Edward
Dimmocke one of the Committees; and also the Committees names in both the said
Bills: And diverse Bills read.

Tuesday, March 13. the Bill for reducing disloyal Subjects to their obedience,
had its second reading.

Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer brought in a Preamble agreed by the major part
of the Committees, to be set down in the Bill for the Subsidies, if this House
shall think well to like of it; which Preamble being read by the Clerk of this
House, the same was after some Speeches had pro and con. committed upon the
Question unto Mr. Vicechamberlain, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr.
Broughton, Mr. Brown, and others, to be presently further considered of in the
Committee-chamber of this House.

Mr. Atturney-General and Dr. Ford brought from the Lords a Bill concerning the
Lands of Henry late Lord of Abergaveny deceased, with a Message also from their
Lordships, to desire that a Committee of selected Members of this House may be
appointed to have Conference with a Committee of the Lords, touching the
continuance of the Statute. It was resolved by the House to assent to such a
Committee; and that assent was also delivered in answer to the said Mr.
Attorney and Dr. Ford, and to attend their Lordships therein, at such time and
place as their Lordships should please to signify unto this House, and appoint
for that purpose.

Diverse Bills were this day read.

Wednesday, March 14. Sir Edward Hobby, one of the Committees in the Bill
touching Mr. Stafford, brought in the Bill with some Amendments; and opening
the Effect of the said Amendments to the House, the same Amendments being then
also read by the Clerk, it was ordered by the House that the same Amendments
should be inserted into the Bill.

The Bill for Mr. Anthony Coke had its first reading; Mr. Richard Lukenor, one
of the Committees in the Bill concerning the lawful deprivation of Edward
Bonner late Bishop of London, brought in the Bill with some Amendments; and
opening the contents of the same Amendments unto the House, the same Amendments
being then also read to the House by the Clerk, it was ordered by this House,
that the said Amendments should be inserted in the said Bill; which was done
accordingly.

Diverse other Bills were this day also read.

Thursday, March 15. Sir Edward Dimmocke, one of the Committees in the Bill for
confirmation of Letters Patent to the Mayor, Sheriffs, Citizens, and
Commonalty of the City of Lincoln, appointed on Saturday the 10th of this
instant March, brought in the Bill with some Amendments; and opening the same,
the said Amendments were afterward read by the Clerk, and then upon the
Question agreed to be inserted into the said Bill accordingly.

Two other Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the latter being a
Bill for the better execution of Process, was upon the second reading committed
unto Mr. Lewis, Sir Edward Dimmocke, the Recorder and Citizens of York, Mr.
Recorder of London, and others; who were appointed to meet to morrow in the
afternoon in this House.

Diverse other Bills were the same day read.

Friday, March 16. the Bill for Mr. Anthony Coke was upon the second reading
committed to Mr. Wroth, Mr. Dalton, Mr. Francis Bacon, and others; who were
appointed to meet this afternoon at two of the clock, in the Exchequer-chamber.
And the Bill was delivered unto Mr. Francis Hastings one of the Committees.

Four other Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the last being the
Bill for speedy punishment of Felony called petty Larceny, was upon the second
reading committed unto Sir William Moore, Mr. Hobard, Mr. Sands, and others;
and the Bill was delivered unto Mr. Hobard, who with the rest were appointed to
meet upon Tuesday next in the afternoon in the Exchequer-chamber.

Diverse other Bills were this day also read.

Saturday, March 17. Richard Topcliffe and William Basset Esquires, Sheriffs of
the County of Darby, and Mr. Moore being of Counsel with Mr. Basset, were heard
at large at the bar in this House, in the Case of Tho. Fitz-herbert Esquire
returned a Member into this House, and now a Prisoner in the custody and charge
of the said Sheriffs; and after long hearing of the said Parties, it was in the
end resolved by this House, That this House being a House of Record, would take
no notice of any matter of Fact at all in the said Case, but only matter of
Record: And that Mr. Speaker, on the behalf of this House, shall move the Lord
Keeper of the great Seal of England, for return to be made into Chancery of the
Writ of Hab. Corpus cum Causa, in that Case lately awarded by his Lordship unto
the said Sheriff, upon motion to his Lordship from this House in that behalf,
according to the purport of the same Writ, with such due expedition as they
ought to have done, being Indilate, his Lordship will then at the request of
this House, assess a good round Fine upon the Sheriff for his Contempt.

Vide concerning this matter on Thursday 1. and Friday 2. of this instant
March; and also on March 30. and on April 3. and April 5. following.

Mr. Thomas, Posthumus, Hobby, showed, That according to the appointment of
this House, he has moved his brother Sir Edward Hobby for the two Bills that
were in his hands; viz. the Bill concerning Perpetuities, and the Bill
concerning the execution of Process: And that Sir Edward Hobby says, he is a
Committee amongst others in both the said Bills, by appointment of this House;
and that the same Bills were in that respect delivered unto him by the Clerk of
this House; and that albeit he thinks it reasonable he should be acquainted
with the proceedings in the said Bills in the same Committee, as one of the
same Committees, yet in regard of the dutiful good will he bears to the
Members of this House, and being loath to offend any of the same, he delivered
the same Bills to the said Mr. Tho. Posthumus Hobby to be brought into this
House accordingly; and so the said Mr. Thomas Posthumus Hobby delivered the
said Bills.

Diverse Bills were this day read.

March 18. Sunday.

Monday, March 19. two Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the first
being the Bill concerning Iron-wyer and Iron-wyer-works, was read the first
time.

Sir Francis Hastings, one of the Committees in the Bill concerning the breadth
of Plunkets, Azures, Blues, and other colored Clothes, appointed on Friday the
16th of this instant March, showed, That he and the rest of the Committees in
the same Bill have met together, and have thought good to make some addition to
the said Bill; and opening the Contents thereof to the House, and after praying
that the same might be read, it was after the reading thereof, ordered to be
inserted into the said Bill.

Diverse other Bills were this day read.

Tuesday, March 20. three Bills had each of them one reading; of which, A Bill
for selling the Gray-fryers in Cambridge. Sidney-Colledge built by (...) of the
said Bill.
the last being touching the sale of the Gray-fryers in the Town of Cambridge,
was twice read, and ordered to be engrossed: by virtue of which said Bill, the
College, now called Sidney-Colledge, was built in the said University.

Mr. Cradock, one of the Committees in the Bill for the better execution of
Process, and against Rescues, committed on Thursday March 15. showed, That he
and the rest of the Committees have met together, and upon good considerations
have thought good to amend sundry things in the said Bill; and opening to the
House the Effects of the same Amendments, the same being read to the House, it
was ordered upon the Question, they should be inserted into the said Bill;
which was done accordingly.

Diverse other Bills were this day likewise read.

Thursday, March 22. the Bill for the grant of three entire Subsidies, (...).
and six Fifteenths and Tenths, was read the third time, and passed upon the
Question, That this Bill of the Subsidy, in respect of the greatness of the
sum, passed the House with very great difficulties, as it may appear by those
several days on which it was agitated; viz. Feb. 26. March 2, 3.6, 7.9,
10.12.16. and 19.

This day the House was called over, and those Members of this House which were
then present, did pay into the hands of Mr. Robert Wroth and Mr. Warren, (...).
their charitable Contributions to the relief of the Poor, in such proportion
as had been agreed upon March 19. viz. every Privy Counselor of the House 30
s. every Knight in degree, and every one returned a Knight of a Shire, though
not of that degree, and every Sergeant at Law or Doctor of Law (because I
suppose they are in some respects accounted equal to Knights) 20 s. every Baron
of the Cinque Ports and every Burgess 5 s.

Diverse other Bills were also this day read.

Friday, March 23. two Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the last
being concerning Woollen-cloaths and Kersies made in the County of Devon, out
of Cities, Towns Corporate, and Market Towns, was upon the second reading
committed to Sir William Moore, all the Knights and Burgesses of Norfolk, York,
Surrey, Kent, Somerset, Devon, and Cornwall, Mr. Sergeant Harris, and others;
and the Bill delivered to Sir William Moore, who with the rest were appointed
to meet to morrow at two of the clock in the afternoon, in this House.

Mr. Attorney of the Duchy, one of the Committees in the Bill for Mr. Anthony
Cook, showed, That he and the residue of the Committee in that Bill, have met
and had conference together; and that in sundry respects, then opened by him to
the House, they thought good to frame a new Bill; and so offered the same new
Bill, and prayed it might be read.

Diverse other Bills were this day read.

Saturday, March 24. the Bill touching Clap-boards and Casks was twice read,
and committed to Mr. Treasurer, Mr. Wroth, Mr. Francis Bacon, Mr. Finch, and
others; and the Bill was delivered unto Mr. Treasurer, who with the rest were
appointed to meet this afternoon at two of the clock, in the Exchequer-chamber.

Mr. Thomas Fane returned into this Parliament one of the Barons of the Port of
Dover, and Mr. henry Fane also returned into the same Parliament one of the
Barons for the Port of Hyeth, are licensed by Mr. Speaker, for their necessary
business, to depart.

Diverse other Bills were this day read.

March 25. Sunday. An. 1593.


Monday, March 26. two Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the last
concerning Spinners and Weavers, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr.
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir William Knowls, Sir Moyle Finch, Sir Francis
Hastings, and others; and the Bill was delivered to Sir William Knowls, who
with the rest were appointed to meet to morrow in the afternoon, in the
Exchequer.

Mr. Speaker showed, That he had received a Bill signed by her Majesty for the
restitution in blood of Sir Thomas Parrott Knight, son and heir of Sir John
Parrott Knight, deceased, lately attainted of High Treason; whereupon the Bill
of restitution of blood of Sir Thomas Parrott Knight, son and heir of the said
Sir John Parrott attainted of High Treason, was twice read.

Tuesday, March 27. Mr. Fuller, one of the Committees in the Bill for repealing
of a branch of a Statute made 4 and 5 Philip. and Mariae, entitled, An Act for
making of Woollen-cloaths, shows the travel of the Committees: whereupon
then, after some other Speeches, then moving the House, the said Bill was
recommitted to the former Committees; who had been appointed on Wednesday the
14th of this instant March to meet again this afternoon.

The Bill touching the true and lawful assizing of Bread was read the second
time; and upon the doubtfulness of the Voices, whether it should be engrossed
or no, was upon the Question, upon the division of the House, rejected with the
difference of twenty seven Voices, viz. with the Yeas sixty five, and with the No's ninety two.

Diverse other Bills were this day read.

March 28. being Wednesday,

The Bill for renewing, continuing, explanation, perfecting, and enabling of
certain Statutes, was twice read, and committed to the former Committees, and
unto Mr. William Hiningham, Mr. Doughty, Mr. Rotherham, Mr. Finch, Mr. Attorney
of the Duchy, the Barons of the Cinque Ports, Mr. John Hare, Mr. Penrudeck,
and Dr. Caesar; and the Bill was delivered unto Mr. Wroth, one of the former
Committees, who with the rest were appointed to meet in this place at two of
the clock in the afternoon.

Sir Robert Cecill, one of the Committees in the Bill for the relief of poor
maimed Soldiers, showed, That the Committees had met together, but in the
effect, upon sundry reasons showed unto them by diverse of them in the said
Committee to contrary effects, they could come to no conclusion, but rather to
a confusion upon the points of the matter. For his own private part, he said in
the end, That as this House had committed the Bill unto him, and the residue of
the said Committees, so had he thought good to commit the same Bill to Prison,
rather than to return the same to this House in the same form or no better
state than they did before receive it.

Diverse other Bills were this day read.

Thursday, March 29. Mr. Broughton, Mr. Attorney of the Duchy, Sir Thomas
Dennis, Sir Francis Godolphine, were added to the former Committees in the Bill
for the Haven of Plymouth; and appointed to meet at two of the clock in the
afternoon this present day.

The Bill concerning the Haven at Colchester, and the paving of the said Town,
was upon the second reading committed to Mr. Vicechamberlain, the Burgesses of
Colchester, Mr. Grimston, and others; and the Bill was delivered unto Mr. Wroth
one of the said Committees, who with the rest were appointed to meet at two of
the clock this afternoon, in the Exchequer-chamber.

Diverse other Bills were this day read.

Friday, March 30. Mr. Broughton and Mr. Dier were appointed to attend the Lord
Keeper touching the return of the Hab. Cor. cum Causa, for the bringing up of
the body of Thomas Fitz-herbert Esquire.

Vide concerning this matter on the first day, the second day, and the 17th day
of this instant March; and also on April 3. and 15. following.

The Amendments in the Bill for the continuation, explanation, and confirmation
of the Queens Majesty's Title to the Lands and Tenements late of Sir Francis
Englefield Knight, being twice read to the House, and the Bill it self and the
Amendments read the third time also, passed upon the Question.

Diverse Bills more were this day read.

Saturday, March 31. the Bill for confirmation of Subsidies granted by the
Clergy, was read the first time, The Clergies Subsidy confirmed.
and passed upon the Question.

The Bill touching Casks, brought in with more Amendments by Mr. Wroth one of
the Committees; and the same Amendments being twice read, the Bill upon the
Question was ordered to be engrossed.

Diverse other Bills were this day read.

April 1. Sunday. April 1.


Monday, April 2. the Bill concerning Woollen-cloaths called Devonshire
Kersies, was upon the second reading committed to the Knights and Burgesses of
Devon, Mr. Sergeant Harries, Mr. George Moore, and others; and the Bill was
delivered to Sir Thomas Denny one of the same Committees, who with the rest
were appointed to meet at two of the clock this afternoon, in the
Exchequer-chamber.

Six Bills were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Treasurer and others; of which, the
first was the Act for confirmation of the Subsidies granted by the Clergy, and
another touching the Lands of Sir Francis Englefield Knight.

Diverse other Bills were this day read.

Tuesday, April 3. the Bill concerning Spinners and Weavers was twice read, and
committed to the former Committee; and Mr. Wroth and the Burgesses of York and
Norwich were added to them.

Sir Thomas Dennis, one of the Committees for Devonshire Kersies, showed the
meeting of the Committees, and that they had in some few things amended the
Bill, praying the reading of the Amendments; which being twice read, the Bill
upon the Question was ordered to be engrossed.

Diverse other Bills were this day read.

Wednesday, April 4. Mr. Barker, one of the Committees in the Bill concerning
Spinners and Weavers, showed the meeting and travels of the Committees, and
their Amendments of the Bill, praying the reading of the same; which being
read, and ordered to be inserted by the House into the Bill, the same
Amendments were twice read, and the Bill upon the Question was ordered to be
engrossed.

Mr. Wreth, one of the Committees in the Bill concerning Brewers, showed the
meeting and travel of the Committees, and their Amendments of the said Bill,
and prayed the reading of the said Amendments; which being read, and ordered by
the House to be inserted into the said Bill, and also twice read, upon the
Question the Bill was ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for explanation of a branch of a Statute made in the 23 year of her
Majesty's Reign, entitled, An Act to retain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in
their due Obedience, with some Amendments to the same, was read the second
time; upon which diverse Speeches in the House passed before the said Bill was
committed, some of them being of very good moment; which because they are
omitted in the original Journal Book it self, is therefore supplied out of the
Anonymon-Journal, mentioned at the beginning of this present Journal, in manner
and form following.

Sir Thomas Cecill, Dr. Lewyn, Mr. Sands, Sir Thomas Henage, Sir Edward
Dymmocke, and some others, spoke diversely to this Bill touching the explanation
of a branch of the Statute made Anno 23 Reginae, for reducing disloyal Subjects
to their Obedience, as is aforesaid.

Sir Walter Rawleigh.
Sir Walter Rawleigh said, In his conceit the Brownists are worthy to be rooted
out of a Commonwealth; but what danger may grow unto our selves, if this Law
passes, it were fit to be considered: For it is to be feared, that men not
guilty will be included in it; and that Law is hard that takes Life, or
sends into Banishment, where men's intentions shall be judged by a Jury, and
they shall be Judges what another man meant: But that Law that is against a
Fact, that is just; and punish the Fact as severely as you will.

If two or three thousand Brownists meet at the Sea side, at whose charge shall
they be transported? or whither will you send them? I am sorry for it; I am
afraid there is near twenty thousand of them in England; and when they are
gone, who shall maintain their Wives and Children?

Diverse other Bills were this day read.

Thursday, April 5. the Bill for the true assizing and marking of Timber, was
read the second time, and committed to Mr. George Moore, Mr. Dalton, Mr. Wroth,
Sir John Heart, and others; and the Bill was delivered unto Sir John Heart, who
with the rest were appointed to meet to morrow at two of the clock in the
afternoon, in the Exchequer-chamber.

Mr. Sergeant Owen and Mr. Powle brought in from the Lords an Act for
explanation of the Statute made 34 Hen. 8. as well touching Grants made to his
Majesty, as for confirmation of the speedy Letters Patent made by his Highness
to others; and did pray from their Lordships the speedy execution of the same.

Mr. Vicechamberlain, one of the Committees with the Committees of the Lords in
the Bill for reviving, continuing, explanation, and perfecting of certain
Statutes, shows the meeting and conference with the Committees of the Lords;
and that their Lordships have thought good to add some small Amendments to the
said Bill, and a Proviso also for her Majesty's Prerogative in point of
transportation of Corn, as the like whereof was in the Statute of the 13 of her
Reign.

Nota, That the business so much before agitated touching Mr. Fitz-herbert,
received this day the final resolution of this House, as is plainly set down in
the often-before-cited Anonymon-Journal more particularly mentioned in the
beginning of this present Journal, although it be wholly omitted in the
original Journal Book; which said Case was singly thus:

Thomas Fitz-herbert being elected a Burgess of the Parliament, two hours after
his election, and before the return of the Writ to the Sheriff with an
Indenture of his Election, the said Sheriff arresteth him upon a Capias
utlegatum, after Judgment, at the Queens suit, (as may be collected out of the
reasons given of their said resolution;) and then his Indenture was returned
unto the Sheriff.

Upon all which matters, there grew two Questions: First, whether the said Mr.
Herbert were a Member of the House? and secondly, admitting he was, Whether he
ought to have privilege? Which said matter having been much formerly debated
on the 1, 2, 17. and 30. days of March last, as also on the 3. instant,
received now at last the Judgment of the House; which is inserted out of the
aforesaid Anonymon-Journal-book.

Diverse Bills were this day read.

Friday, April 6. two Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the second
being the Bill for restraint of new buildings, converting of great houses into
several Tenements, and for restraint of Inmates and Enclosures in and near unto
the Cities of London and Westminster, was upon the second reading committed
unto all the Privy Counselors of this House, the Knights and Burgesses of
London, Mr. Francis Bacon, and others; and the Bill was delivered unto Mr.
Wroth one of the said Committees, who with the rest were appointed to meet this
afternoon at two of the clock, in the Exchequer-chamber.

The Bill concerning Devonshire Kersies was read the third time, and passed
upon the Question.

Diverse other Bills were this day read.

Saturday, April 7. the Bill concerning Coopers was upon the second reading
committed unto Mr. Sergeant Harries, Mr. Dalton, Mr. Wroth, and others; and the
Bill was delivered unto Sir John Heart one of the said Committees, who with the
rest were appointed to meet at two of the clock this afternoon, in the
Exchequer-chamber.

The Bill for naturalizing of Justice Dormer and George Sheppie, was upon the
second reading ordered to be engrossed.

Mr. Finch, one of the Committees in the Bill for the avoiding of deceits used
in the making and selling of the twice-laid Cordage, and for the better
preserving of the Navy of this Realm, showed the meeting of the Committees, and
some few Amendments to the Bill; which being read and allowed by the House, the
said Amendments were twice read; and the Bill and the said Amendments also read
the third time, passed upon the Question.

Diverse other Bills were likewise this day read.

April 8. Sunday.

Monday, April 9. Westlen Webben Beer-brewer, and John Lightbonne Sergeant at
Mace, Prisoners at the bar, after admonition given them by Mr. Speaker, were
discharged of their Imprisonment, paying their Fees.

Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, one of the Committees in the Bill for
explanation of a Statute made 34 Hen. 8. as well touching Grants made to his
Majesty, as for confirmation of Letters Patent made by his Majesty to others,
showed the meeting of the Committees, and that they had considered of some
small Amendments: and showed further, that four several Provisoes were offered
to them; one by Mr. Adams, one by Tipper, one by -- and one by Daws: and so
offered in both the Bills the Amendments, and the said four Provisoes, leaving
the same to the further consideration of the House.

Diverse other Bills were read this day.

April 9. Sir John Heart, one of the Committees in the Bill concerning Coopers,
brought in the Bill again as not dealt in by the Committee, for lack of
convenient time.

The Bill for restraint of new buildings, converting of great houses into
several Tenements, and for restraint of Inmates and Enclosures near unto the
Cities of London and Westminster, with one Amendment to the said Bill, was sent
up to the Lords by Mr. Treasurer, Sir John Woolley, and others; with a
Remembrance to move their Lordships for sending down of the Bill for grant of
three entire Subsidies, and six Fifteenths and Tenths, granted by the
Temporalty; to the end Mr. Speaker may this afternoon present the same unto her
Majesty according to the former accustomed usage of this House.

Mr. Sergeant Owen, Mr. Atturney-General, and Mr. Powle, brought down from the
Lords an Act, entitled, An Act for the Queens most gracious general and free
Pardon.

Diverse other Bills were this day read.

This Afternoon the Parliament was dissolved.

39 Eliz.
A Journal of such things as passed in the Upper House of Parliament, in the
Parliament that held Anno xxxixo Eliz. Reginae, and began October 24. in the
same year, and ended February 9. following.
ANno Dom. 1597. and Regni Eliz. Reginae 39. die Lunae 24. Mensis October.
Inchoatum est Parliament. Westmonasterii in Domo consuet. quo die Regina and
diversi Domini tam Spiritual. quam Temporal. viz. Archiepiscopus Cant. Tho.
Egerton Miles Dominus Custos Magni Sigilli, Dominus Burleigh Dominus
Thesaurarius Angliae, Marchio Winton, Comes Sussex Magnus Marescall. Comes
Nottingham Magnus Scenescall. eight other Earls, one Viscount, fifteen Bishops,
and twenty three Barons, were present; whose Name are particularly set down in
the Journal Book.

Dicto 24. die October. viz. primo die hujus Parliamenti, Oct. 24.
introduct. est Breve quo Archiepiscopus Ebor. praesenti Parliamento interesse
summonibatur, and admissus est ad suum praeheminenciae sedendi locum, salvo
jure alieno. Consimilima Brevia introduct. sunt 4 Comitibus, 10 Episcopis, and
5 Baronibus.

The Lord Keeper, by the Queens commandment, delivered to both Houses the
Causes that moved her majesty to summons this Parliament.

The Lord Keeper's Speech.
THE Queens most excellent Majesty, Lord Keeper's Speech.
my most gracious and dread Sovereign, has commanded me to declare unto you,
my Lords and others here present, the Causes which have moved her Highness to
summons this Parliament at this time; which before I can express, I must
confess truly, that the Royal presence of her Majesty, the view of your
Lordships and this honorable Assembly, together with the consideration of the
weightiness of the service, and of my own weakness, does much appale me, and
cause me to fear.

Wherefore, if either through fear I forget, or through the many wants and
imperfections which I have, I fail to perform that duty which is required, I do
most humbly crave pardon of her Majesty, and beseech your Lordships to bear
with me.

The great Princely Care which her Highness now has, An. 1597.
as heretofore she has ever had, to preserve her Kingdoms in Peace, and safe
from all foreign Attempts, has caused her at this present to assemble this
honorable and great Council of her Realm, to advise of the best and most
needful means whereby to continue this her peaceable and happy Government, and
to withstand the malice of her mighty and implacable Enemy; which hitherto, by
the space of many years, through her provident and Princely wisdom, has been
performed, to the great and inestimable benefit of her Subjects, as that the
simplest amongst them could not but see, and the wisest but admire their
happiness therein; the whole Realm enjoying Peace in all security, when our
Neighbour-Countries have been torn in pieces, and tormented with cruel and
bloody Wars.

This her Majesty is pleased to ascribe to the mighty power and infinite mercy
of the Almighty: And therefore it shall well become us all, most thank-fully
upon the knees of our hearts, to acknowledge no less unto his holy Name; who of
his infinite goodness still preserve her Highness, and send her many years more
over us in all happiness to reign.

In this her blessed Government her Highness chief care and regard of all, has
been of the honor and service of the Almighty God, that true Religion might be
planted and entertained in the hearts of her People through all the parts of
her Realms; and as well in that behalf, as for the peace and benefit of her
Subjects, she has from time to time established many good Laws to meet with
the Disorders, and to punish the offenses of wicked and ungodly men, that
continuing in their bad ways, they may not be hardened and go forward in their
wickedness: for Mora in peccato, dat incrementum sceleri. And whereas the
number of the Laws already made are very great, some also of them being
obsolete andworn out of use; others idle and vain, serving to no purpose; some
again over-heavy and too severe for the offense; others too loose and slack for
the faults they are to punish; and many of them so full of difficulties to be
understood, that they cause many controversies and much trouble amongst the
Subjects:

You are to enter into a due consideration of the said Laws; and where you
find superfluity, to prune and cut off; where defect, to supply; and were
ambiguity, to explain; that they be not burthen-some, but profitable to the
Commonwealth: Which being a service of importance, and very needful to be
required, yet as nothing is to be regarded, if due means be not had to
withstand the malice and force of those professed Enemies which seeks the
destruction of the whole State,

This, before all, and above all, is to be thought of, and with most endeavor
and care to be provided for: for in vain are Laws made, and to little purpose
will they serve, be they never so good, if such prevail as go about to make a
Conquest of the Kingdom, and destruction of the People.

Wars heretofore were wont to be made either out of Ambition to enlarge
Deminions, or out of Revenge to requite Injuries; but this against us is not
so; In this the holy Religion of God is sought to be rooted out, the whole
Realm to be subdued, and the precious life of her excellent Majesty to be taken
away; which hitherto, by the powerful hand and great goodness of the Almighty,
have been preserved, maugre the Devil, the Pope, the Spanish Tyrant, and all
the misohievous designs of all her Enemies.

Wherefore it is high time that this be looked into, and that no way be left
unsought, nor means unused, that may serve for defense thereof. Her Majesty
has not spared to disburse a mass of Treasure, and to sell her Land for the
maintenance of her Armies by Sea and Land, whereby, with such small helps as
from her Subjects has been yielded, she has defended and kept safe her
Dominions from all such forcible attempts as have been made; which being still
to be performed by infinite Charge, her Majesty notwithstanding hears of
nothing more unwillingly than of Aids and Subsidies to be received from her
People; though what she does receive, she does carefully bestow, and infinitely
more of her own.

The Taxations at this day, howsoever they seem, are nothing so great as
heretofore in the Reigns of former Kings they have been. In the times of Edw.
3. and the two next before him, and those three which succeeded next after him,
the payments of the Commons then did far exceed any that have been since her
Majesty's Reign; which is of Record in the Histories of those times to be seen:
but never cause so great to employ great sums of money, as now.

Now therefore you are to consider how to provide needful and convenient Aid,
in some measure, to maintain and support her Majesty's Charge which at present
she is at, and is to continue at, for the defense of the Realm. He cannot be
well advised, which in this case will not be forward to contribute and bestow
whatsoever he has: for if with the Commonwealth it goes not well, well it
cannot be with any private or particular person. That being in danger, he that
would seek then to lay up Treasure and enrich himself, should be like to him
that would busy himself to beautify his house, when the City wherein he
dwells is on fire; or to him that decketh up his Cabin, when the Ship wherein
he saileth is ready to sink. To spare in that case, is to spare for those which
seek to devour all; and to give, is to give to our selves. Her Majesty's part
being only carefully to bestow what is delivered into her hands, wherein men
performing their duties, there is no cause at all to fear: for the War is just;
it is in defense of the Religion of God, of our most gracious Sovereign, of our
Native Country, of our Wives, Children, Liberties, Lands, Lives, and whatsoever
we have.

Wherefore, not mistrusting your forwardness, that I may not offend in too much
enlarging this point, as a poor Remembrancer to her Majesty, I shortly say to
your Lordships, Quod justum and necessarium est; nothing can be more just, than
this War; nothing ought to seem more necessary, than carefully to provide due
Maintenance for the same. And, to you of the House of Commons, that you may
orderly proceed, and wisely consult of these weighty Causes delivered unto you,
her Majesty's pleasure is, You should, according to your accustomed manner, go
down to the Lower House, and there make choice of some grave, learned, and wise
man amongst you, to be your Speaker; who shall be for understanding sufficient,
and for discretion fit, as your mouth to signify your minds, and to make your
Petitions known unto her Highness; and him upon Thursday next to present in
this place.



The Lord Burgh. was absent, being the Lord Deputy of Ireland.

The Lord De-la-ware was absent, because he made question of his place,
intending to make suit to the Parliament concerning the same.

Dominus Custos Magni Sigilli, ex mandato Dominae Reginae, continuavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in diem Jovis prox. futur. viz. 27o diem Octobris.

Thursday, October. 27. the Queens Majesty, the Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir
Thomas Edgerton Knight. Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, the Lord Burleigh Lord
Treasurer, the Marquess of Winton, the Earl of Sussex great Marshall, the Earl
of Nottingham Mag. Seneschall. six Earls, one Viscount, thirteen Bishops, the
Lord Hunsdon Chamberlain, and twenty two other Barons present.

Mr. Sergeant Yelverton, Serj. Yelverton chosen Speaker.
being chosen Speaker of the Lower House, was by diverse Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses, brought into the Upper House, and by the hands of Sir William Knolls
Controuler of her Majesty's Household, and Sir John Fortescue Chancellor of the
Exchequer, presented to her Majesty; who by a Speech full of Gravity and
Modesty, signifying the accomplishment of the duty of the House in making an
Election; but he excusing himself by pretense of many disabilities and
imperfections, Excuses himself.
and wishing earnestly that he were of sufficiency to perform the duty of that
Place, made humble suit to her Majesty that he might be discharged, and that
the Lower House might proceed to a new Election.

Which Excuse was not allowed by her Majesty, Is allowed and commended by the
Queen.
as the Lord Keeper delivered by answer; and the Choice of the said Mr.
Yelverton being by her Majesty very well approved, and his Sufficiency much
commended,

He then proceeded in another Speech, according to the manner, to undertake
that Charge and Place, and to present unto her Majesty, on the behalf of the
Lower House, certain humble Petitions, viz. For Access unto her Majesty:
Petitions for the House in the usual form.
For the using and enjoying of such Liberties and Privileges as in former
times had been granted and allowed by her Majesty's Progenitors and her self.

Whereunto her Majesty making answer, by the Lord Keeper, did yield her
gracious assent, Which are granted.
with admonition that the said Liberties and Privileges should be discreetly
and wisely used, as was meet.

Dominus Custos Magni Sigilli, ex mandato Dominae Reginae, continuavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in diem quintum mensis Novembris.

On Saturday, 5 Novembris, introductum est Breve Thomae Dom. Gray de Wilton,
quo praesenti Parliamento interesse summonebatur, Nov. 5.
and admissus est ad suum praeheminenciae sedendi in Parliamento loco, salvo
jure alieno.

The Petition of the Lord De-la-ware, presented to this House for restitution
of the same place in the Parliament which his Ancestors had in the Rank and
Order of the Barons, and referred to Committees, viz. to the Lord Treasurer,
the Earl of Nottingham Lord Admiral, the Earl of Shrewsbury, Lord Bishop of
London, Lord Bishop of Winton, Lord Zouche, Lord Stafford, Lord Windsor, Lord
Sheffield, Lord North, Lord St. John of Bletsoe, Lord Buckhurst, Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, Lord Chief Baron, and Edward Coke Esquire the Queens
Attorney; who appointed to meet at the Council Chamger at the Court at
Whitehall, on Sunday, Nov. 6. at two of the clock in the afternoon.

Monday, Nov. 7. An Act for the speedy satisfaction of her Majesty against
Accomptants, secunda vice lect. and committed to the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Admiral, three Earls, three Bishops,
three Barons, the Lord Chief Justice of England, Mr. Baron Ewens, and Mr.
Attorney General, to attend their Lordships; and appointed to meet at the
little Council Chamger in Whitehall, to morrow at four a clock in the afternoon.

Introductum est Breve Com. Derby, quo praesenti Parliamento interesse
summonebatur, etc.

Thursday, Nov. 10. the Lord Treasurer made Report to the House, what had been
done by the Committees upon the Petition of the Lord De-la-ware; and how it was
resolved by them, upon hearing and debating the matter with certain learned
Counsel in the Law brought before the said Committees by the said Lord, That
the Place which he claimed in the Order and Rank of the Barons, was due unto
him, viz. next after the Lord Willoughby of Ersby: which Report being made to
the House, and the Voices of all the Lords being demanded, the Opinions of the
Committees was allowed by the consent of all the Lords (the Lord Willoughby
only excepted:) And the Lord Keeper was desired to acquaint her Majesty with
the Determination of the House, and to know her pleasure concerning the same.

The Lord Treasurer made a Motion to the House, The Treasurers Motion about the
Journal Book.
that forasmuch as the Journal-books kept heretofore by the Clerk of the
Parliament, seemed to have some Errors in them in misplacing the Lords, so as
it was doubted how the same might be of true Record, That it would please their
Lordships to take order that the said Books that should from henceforth be kept
by the Clerk of the Parliament, may be viewed and perused every Parliament by
certain Lords of the House, to be appointed for that purpose; and the List of
the names of the Lords, in their order, to be subscribed by them, taking unto
them, for their better information, the King at Arms; and that this Order might
begin this present Parliament.

Saturday, Nov. 12. the Bill for taking away the benefit of Clergy from
Offenders, A Bill against the benefit of Clergy for such as take away women
against their wills.
against a Statute made Anno 3 Hen. 7. concerning the taking away of women
against their wills, was read secunda vice.

Monday, Nov. 14. the Lord Treasurer moved the House, that such Lords as were
absent from the Farliament, and had not sent their Proxies; and such others as
had made their appearance at the beginning of the Parliament, and have since
neglected their attendance, may be admonished to reform the same.

Upon the same day, upon the Petition of the Lord De-la ware, exhibited to her
Majesty concerning his place in the Order of the Barons of the Parliament, and
with her Majesty's commandment and direction presented unto the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal in this present Parliament the fifth of this instant November, and
referred the same day upon the reading unto Committees, (as is recorded in the
Session of the same day;) the said Committees having at the time and place
appointed assembled themselves, and advisedly considered of the said Petition,
and of all Arguments that were brought and alleged both for the Petition and
against it, did resolve and determine, That in their opinions the said Petition
of the said Lord De-la-ware was just, and that the Place which he sought, was
due unto him, viz. to have his place betwixt the Lord Willoughby of Ersby, and
the Lord Berkley; being the same place which his great Grandfather had held
before, as appears by Record. Of which Resolution and Determination, Report
having been made by the Lord Burleigh Lord Treasurer, first of the Committees,
the tenth of this instant November, in the Session of the same day, as before
is recorded, and the same being allowed and approved of by the consent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal then present in the House; it was thought meet,
and ordered, That her Majesty should be acquainted by the Lord Keeper with the
Opinion and Resolution of this House; Which having been performed by his
Lordship, her Majesty having allowed of the proceedings of this House, and of
the determination of the Question touching the place of the said Lord
De-la-ware, as has been declared to this House by the Lord Keeper, it was and
is agreed and ordered by her Majesty, and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
That the Lord De-la-ware should be brought into the House, and placed in the
room and order before mentioned, to have place and voice betwixt the Lord
Willoughby and Lord Berkley; which was accordingly done this day.

The Lord De-la ware was brought in his Parliament-robes unto the place
aforesaid, by the Lord Zouch, supplying the place of the Lord Willoughby, and
by the Lord Berkley, in their Robes, Garter the King of Arms attending them,
and doing his service according to his Office.

Tuesday, Nov. 15. an Act for the taking away the benefit of Clergy from
Offenders, against a Statute made 3 Hen. 7. concerning the taking away of women
against their wills unlawfully, together with the Proviso annexed unto it, by
the consent of the House was read.

Saturday, Nov. 19. the absence of the Lord Marquess of Winton, and the Earl of
Huntingdon, severally excused by two of the Temporal Lords; and the like Excuse
delivered by the Bishop of Norwich for the Bishop of Chichester's absence.

Report was made by the Lord Keeper, that the Earl of Essex received not his
Writ of Summons until the 17th of this month, through the negligence of the
Messenger to whom the same was delivered; and now his Lordship wanting health
to give his attendance, desired to be excused for his absence, the Earls of
Worcester and Southampton testifying of his sickness.

Introduct. est Breve Richardi Dom. Eure, quo praesenti Parliamento interesse
summonebatur, and admissus est ad locum praeheminenciae sedendi in Parliamento,
salvo jure alieno.

Monday, Nov. 21. a Bill for the confirmation of the deprivation of diverse
Bishops, in the beginning of her Majesty's Reign, was read.

Tuesday, Nov. 22. a Bill formerly sent to the Commons, with a Proviso from
this House thereto added, concerning taking away of Clergy from Offenders that
take away women against their wills unlawfully, expedited.

The Committees upon the Bill of Tellers and Receivers, meeting at the little
Chamber near the Chamber of the Parliament-presence, and conferring on the Bill
and the Provisoes that were thought on and came in question amongst them, by
reason of sundry doubts that were moved, did refer the Bill to her Majesty's
Atturney-General to be reviewed.

Thursday, Nov. 24. an Act for the better explanation and execution of the Act
made in the thirteenth year of the Queens Majesty's Reign, concerning tellers
and Receivers, prima vice lect. This Bill was renewed by Mr. Atturney-General,
by the appointment of the Committees to whom the former Bill was referred, as
is mentioned in a Note in the last Session, and brought instead of the former
Bill.

Saturday, Nov. 26. an Act for the explanation and execution of an Act in the
thirteenth year of the Queens Majesty's Reign, concerning Tellers, Receivers,
etc. secunda vice lect. and commanded to be engrossed.

A Sergeant at Arms to be sent for one Winwood, A Sergeant at Arms sent to take
a City-Serjeant into custody.
and one Stevenson a Sergeant at Mace of London, who arrested Edward Barston
the Lord Chandois servant, contrary to the Privilege of the House.

The Bill for repeal of a Statute made 23 of her Majesty's Reign, entitled, An
Act for the increase of Mariners and maintenance of Navigation, was brought
into the House by the Committees, with an Amendment thought fit to be put into
the Bill, the Amendment thrice read, and appointed to be fixed in the Schedule
of the Bill.

Monday, Nov. 28. the Bill that was sent from the Lower House with this Title,
viz. an Act for the repeal of a Statute made in the 23 year of her Majesty's
Reign, entitled, An Act for the increase of Mariners and maintenance of
Navigation, was after the third reading returned again to the said House, for
their consideration and allowance as well of another Title thought more fit by
the Committees to be given thereto, viz. an Act for the increase of Mariners,
and for maintenance of Navigation, repealing a former Act made 23 of her
Majesty's Reign, bearing the same Title; as also of some Amendment in the body
of the Bill added by the Committees, sent by Mr. Atturney-General and Dr. Carew.

On Thursday, December. 1.
December. 1. the Parties that arrested the Lord Chandois servant, viz. Wood and
Stevenson, with two others, brought into the House by the Sergeant at Arms, and
upon some notice taken of the matter, Mr. Justice Owens and Mr. Sergeant Drew
were appointed to examine the same, and make Report thereof to the Lords.

The Lord Hunsdon Lord Chamberlain, took his place this day as Baron of
Hunsdon, betwixt the Lord Chandois and Lord St. John of Bletsoe.

This day an Act concerning the School at Sownocke, tertia vice lect. and sent
to the Commons House.

Saturday, December. 3. An Act for the increase of Mariners, and for maintenance
of Navigation, repealing a former Act made 23 of her Majesty's Reign, bearing
the same Title; which Act was sent to the Lower House from hence, for their
consideration and allowance of this Title, and some Amendments in the body of
the Bill.

Upon the Report of Mr. Justice Owens and Mr. Sergeant Drew, unto whom the
Examination of the matter was committed concerning the Arrest of my Lord
Chandois servant, by one Stevenson a Sergeant in London, at the Suit of one
William Wood, being found and judged to have wilfully offended therein against
the Privilege of the House, were committed and sent to the Prison of the
Fleet, there to be kept close Prisoners until further directions from the
Lords. And whereas -- and -- were this day brought into the House before the
Lords, L. Chandois ser^ant Barston released out of Prison.
as supposed partakers in the same offense, they upon examination being found
not to have wilfully committed any fault therein, were dismissed, and order
given by the Lords for the discharge of Edward Barston out of the Prison of the
Counter.

Monday, December. 5. an Act for the better and safer recording of Fines to be
levied in the Court of Common Pleas, read secunda vice, and referred to the
same Committees as before, with the addition of the two Lords Chief Justices
and Mr. Atturney-General.

The absence of the Earl of Essex, the Lord Viscount Byndon, the Earl of
Cumberland, the Lord Scroope, the Lord Willoughby of Ersby, and the Lord Bishop
of Rochester, were excused by the Lord Rich, the Lord Chandois, the Lord
Wharton, the Lord Zouche, and the Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells.

Order was given for the release of Stevenson the Sergeant, who arrested my
Lord Chandois his servant.

Tuesday, December. 6. an Act for erecting of houses of correction and punishment
of Wanderers, prima vice lecta.

Wednesday, December. 7. an Act for the confirmation of the Jointure of Dame
Christian the Lady Sandies, secunda vice lect. and commanded to be engrossed.

Thursday, December. 8. an Act for the erecting of houses of correction, and for
punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars, secunda vice lect. and
referred to the Committees for the former Bill; and the same time and place
appointed for their meeting. And also authority was given to the Committees to
call such of the Lower House unto them at this meeting, as they should find
cause, to confer withal for the better perfecting of the Bill.

An Act for Arthur Hatch, her Majesty's Ward, for the enjoying the Rectory and
Personage of South-Moulton, according to an Agreement, secunda vice lect. upon
which reading it was ordered, That all Parties whom this Bill may concern,
either on the part of Mr. Hatch, or against him, shall be heard openly in the
House upon Monday next by their Counsel learned; and all specialties concerning
the same then to be produced, to the end that it may be considered, whether it
shall be convenient to pass this Act or not: Mr. Sergeant Drew and Mr.
Atturney-General being appointed by the Lords to inform themselves against that
time, whether any thing be contained in the Bill that may prejudice the Poor
Knights of Windsor, and to make Report thereof accordingly on the part of the
said poor Knights.

An Act for the establishing of the possession of Henry Vpton Knight. deceased, and
for payment of his Debts, read secunda vice.

A Motion made by some of the Lords, and agreed to by the House, that there
should be respit of some days taken before the third reading, for any such
Party or Parties as the Bill concerns, and namely any of the Wentworths, to
come to the House and allege, if they find cause, why the Bill should not
proceed, the next Tuesday assigned for this purpose.

William Cole the Knight-Marshal's man, that arrested James York the Lord
Archbishop's servant, was brought before the Lords by the Sergeant at Arms; and
being found upon his Examination before the Lords wilfully to have offended
therein against the Privilege of the House, was Committed to the Fleet, there
to remain until their Lordships should give further directions for his
enlargement.

Friday, December. 9. an Act for the establishing of the Hospital of Queen
Elizabeth in Bristol, Bill to establish Q. Eliz. Hospital in Bristol.
and for relief of Orphans and Poor there, read secunda vice: Upon this reading
some Amendments were thought fit by the House to be added; which were presently
drawn, and agreed by the House, and also twice read, and commanded to be
engrossed.

Saturday, December. 10. an Act that the Lord Montjoy may dispose of his lands
whereof he is Tenant in tail, as other Tenants in tail by the Laws and Statutes
of this Realm may do, a private Statute made to the contrary 27 Hen. 8. not
withstanding, secunda vice lect.

Upon the Motion of the Lord Marquess of Winchester, it was ordered, that the
Cause shall be heard openly in the House on Munday-morning by the Counsel
learned on both sides.

An Act for the better recording of Fines to be levied in the Court of
Common Pleas, returned and allowed by the House of Commons, without any
alteration, expedited.

Monday, December. 12. a Motion and Request made by the Lower House, and
delivered by Mr. Secretary Cecill, accompanied with many others, for a
Conference to be had concerning the Bill, entitled, An Act concerning Tellers,
Receivers, etc. and assented unto: Whereupon the Committees formerly named upon
this Bill, were appointed with others, viz. the Lord Treasurer, Lord Admiral,
four Earls, five Bishops, Lord Chamberlain, and twelve Barons, the Lord Chief
Justice of England, the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, the Lord Chief
Baron, Mr. Sergeant Drew, and Mr. Atturney-General, to attend the Lords: the
meeting to be at the great Council Chamger at Whitehall, to morrow at two of
the clock in the afternoon.

The Counsel on both parts, for the Lord Marquess of Winchester, and the Lord
Montjoy, were admitted to public hearing in the House; and thereupon no just
cause being found to hinder or to stay the proceeding of the Bill, the same was
commanded to be read the third time, and so was expedited.

Tuesday, December. 13. an Act against Forestallers, Regrators, and Ingrossers,
read tertia vice, and returned to the Lower House for their consideration of
some Amendments.

An Act giving power and liberty to Sir John Spencer Knight, Dame Mary his
Wife, and Robert Spencer Esquire their Son, to alienate certain Manors and lands
in the Counties of Dorset and Bedford, read tertia vice; and thereupon two
Letters from the Lord Spencer to the Lord Chamberlain, signifying his consent
to the Bill, were read.

Wednesday, December. 14. order was given for release of William Wood out of the
Fleet, at whose suit Edward Barston the Lord Chandois servant was arrested, so
as he make satisfaction to the said Barston of such charges as he was at by
means of the said Arrest.

The like Order was made for the enlargement of William Cole, that arrested
John York the Archbishops servant, paying only the Fees of the Fleet.

Thursday, December. 15. an Act for explanation of the Statute made Anno 5
Reginae, concerning Laborers, A Bill returned, because the Amendments went
engrossed in Parchment, which should have been in Paper.
returned from the Lower House with some Exceptions to the Schedule affixed,
because the Amendment was engrossed in Parchment; which, according to the
custom of the House, should have been in Paper.

Certain Articles were presented in writing by the Lower House, touching their
Opinions and Objections concerning the Bill of Tellers, etc. which were
delivered to Mr. Attorney, to the end he might confer with the Judges upon the
same, and make Report to their Lordships.

The Bill concerning Mr. Arthur Hatch, her Majesty's Ward, etc. returned into
the House by the Lord Treasurer the first of the Committees. And forasmuch as
it seemed to the Committees that there were in the Bill certain points that
could not be well reformed, a Motion was made to the House, upon agreement
among the Committees, That the proceeding in this Bill might cease, and that
another course might be taken by way of Composition betwixt the Dean and
Chapter of Windsor and Arthur Hatch; for which purpose a Bill was brought ready
drawn by Mr. Atturney-General, containing a form of Composition betwixt them,
to be ratified, if it should be thought good by Parliament.

Friday, December. 16. a Bill for the grant of three Subsidies, six Fifteenths
and Tenths, read the third time, and expedited.

Saturday, December. 17. an Act to preserve the property of stolen Horses in the
true Owners, and to reform the abuses of Vouchers in the sale of Horses in
Fairs and Markets, read prima vice.

An Act for the repressing of Offenses that are in the nature of Stealth, and
are not Felonies by the Laws of the Realm, prima vice lect.

Monday, December. 19. certain Amendments were offered to the House by the
Committees on the second reading, concerning Arthur Hatch her Majesty's Ward,
the said Amendments being twice read; whereupon both the Bill and the said
Amendments were commanded to be forthwith engrossed: which was accordingly
done, and presently read the third time, and sent to the Lower House by Mr.
Atturney-General and Dr. Stanhopp.

The Amendments in the Bill concerning Laborers, formerly engrossed in
Parchment, whereat some exception was taken by the Lower House, and for that
cause returned without their allowance to the Lords, was now commanded to be
written in Paper.

Tuesday, December. 20. the Bill for erecting of houses of Correction, Bill for
houses of Correction.
and for punishment of vagabond Rogues, etc. was read tertia vice.

Dominue Custos Magni Sigilli, ex mandato Dominae Reginae, adjournavit praesens
Parliamentum usque in xio die Januar. prox. sequen. hora octava.

Wednesday, Jan. 11.
January 11. the Earl of Essex having been created Earl-Marshal the 18th of
December last by her Majesty's Letters Patent, took his place according to the
said Office, viz. next the Earl of Oxford great Chamberlain of England, and
before the Earl of Nottingham great Steward.

Thursday, Jan. 12. the Bill, entitled, An Act for the increase of People for
the service and defense of the Realm, Bill for increase of People for the
service and defense of the Realm.
returned to the House by the Committees. A Motion made by the Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury first of the Committees, that a Conference might be had with a
competent number of chosen persons of the Lower House, for the better
perfecting of the Bill; whereupon Mr. Atturney-General and Dr. Stanhopp were
addressed to the Lower House, with a Message to that effect: and the time and
place of meeting desired, to be at the great Council Chamger at Whitehall, to
morrow by two of the clock in the afternoon.

Certain select Committees, chosen by the Lower House, concerning that Bill for
the increase of People, etc. were sent to the Lords, signifying their allowance
of the time and place appointed for meeting about that Bill; but desired, that
in the mean time they might have delivered unto them in writing such Objections
of their Lordships as they do make unto the Bill, to the end they might be more
ready to deliver their Opinions and Resolutions at the meeting.

The Lords having considered of this Motion, thought it unfit, and not
agreeable to the Order of this House, to deliver the same in writing: and
therefore agreed that answer should be made, That if upon verbal Conference
they should remain unsatisfied touching the said Exceptions, then they should
have the same delivered unto them in writing, for their further consideration
thereof: which Answer was presently notified to the said select Committees. And
in the mean season the Judges were required to set down the Objections in
writing, that they might be in readiness for the said Committees of the Lower
House, if upon the verbal Conference beforementioned they should not be
satisfied.

An Act for establishing the Bishopric of Norwich and the possessions of the
same, against a concealed Title made thereunto, read secunda vice; and upon
this reading, it was ordered by the Lords, That all Parties whom this Bill may
concern, should be openly heard in the House upon Saturday next in the morning,
to the end that it might be considered whether the same may justly pass without
prejudice to the said Parties; George Lester to be warned then to attend.

Friday, Jan. 13. an Act concerning a Lease of great yearly Value, procured to
be passed from her Majesty by William Kirkham, read prima vice: Kirkham and
Ambrose Willoughby Esquire to be warned to attend the Lords on Munday-morning next;
at which time it is appointed the said Bill shall be read the second time.

An Act concerning the draining and recovery from the water certain overflown
Grounds in the County of Norfolk, An Act for draining of Lands.
secunda vice lect. and referred to the same Committees upon the Bill formerly
read of that kind concerning 300000 Acres, etc. with addition of the Lord St.
John and Mr. Attorney to attend; appointed to meet, etc. and such Parties as
the same may concern to be warned to attend.

Saturday, Jan. 14. certain Objections unto a Bill, entitled, An Act for the
increase of People, etc. were set down in writing by Mr. Atturney-General, and
brought into the House by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury the first of the
Committees, and the same sent to the Lower House for their consideration
thereof, according to a Promise made by their Lordships to the select
Committees of the Lower House, at the meeting yesterday about the Bill
delivered by Mr. Attorney and Dr. Stanhopp.

Certain Knights and Burgesses of the Lower House were sent to their Lordships
to desire a Conference with a competent number of that House, concerning the
Amendments and Provisoe added to the Bill, entitled, An Act for erecting of
houses of Correction, and punishing of Rogues, Vagabonds, etc. whereupon choice
was made of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Admiral, the Earl of
Shrewsbury, and the Bishop of Winchester, and two Barons, being part of the
number formerly appointed upon the Bill; the two Chief Justices and the Chief
Baron, Mr. Sergeant Drew and Mr. Atturney-General to attend them, and the same
presently signified to the same Knights and Burgesses; but with this caution,
That whatsoever had been mended or added by their Lordships, could not now be
altered by the Orders of the House: howbeit, to yield the Lower House
satisfaction of the reasons that moved their Lordships to make those
Amendments, they assented to a Conference: the meeting appointed to be in the
outward Chamber of the Upper House of Parliament, on Munday-morning at eight of
the clock.

The Earl of Essex, not able to attend for want of health, certified by the
Lord North. The Bishop of Landaff absent by reason of sickness, signified by
the Bishop of Chester.

Monday, Jan. 16. Report was made by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, That
upon meeting of such of the Lords of the Higher House as were appointed this
day to confer with certain select Knights and Burgesses of the Lower House
concerning the Amendments and Provisoes added by their Lordships to a Bill,
entitled, An Act for erecting houses of Correction, etc. the said Knights and
Burgesses do hold themselves satisfied upon the Reasons alleged by their
Lordships in some part of the said Amendments, but not in all.

Kirkham was called into the House before their Lordships; and after he had
been heard what he was able to say on his own behalf, the same Bill was read a
second time, viz. An Act concerning a Lease of great yearly Value, procured to
be passed from her Majesty by William Kirkham, and commanded to be engrossed.

A Motion made, that a Proviso should be added to the Bill concerning the
Bishopric of Norwich; which Proviso was presently drawn in the House by Mr.
Atturney-General, and thereupon read: And for the more expedition in the
proceeding of the Bill, it was thought meet that the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, Lord Marshal, Lord Admiral, Bishop of London, Lord Chamberlain, and
Lord Cobham, should confer with a competent number of the Lower House about the
said Proviso. Whereupon Mr. Sergeant Drew and Mr. Attorney were sent to the
Lower House to signify the same unto them; who presently assented to a
meeting, and made their repair to their Lordships forthwith.

An Act for enlarging the Statute made for following of Hue and Cry, in 27
Reginae, in some sort to relieve the Inhabitants of the small hundred of
Beyvershe, alias Benhurst, in cases where they are in no ways voluntarily in
default, and yet they are or shall be charged by the same Statute, and by two
ancient Statutes, the one made 13 Edw. 1. and the other 28 Edw. 3. for
repressing Robberies.

Tuesday, Jan. 17. a Proviso drawn by Mr. Attorney, by commandment of the
House, to be added to the Bill for establishing of the Bishopric of Norwich,
etc. was twice read, and commanded to be engrossed; and then both the Bill and
Proviso read the third time, and returned to the Lower House for their
consideration on the Proviso.

An Act for some better staying of Corn within this Land, to give liberty to
English Subjects sometimes to buy Wheat, etc. and to sell the same again in the
same kind, for the better relief of the Commonwealth, tertia vice lect. and
rejected.

Wednesday, Jan. 18. the Lord Keeper signified to the House, That the Parties
that followed the Bill for the Hospital of Warwick, are not provided of their
Counsel learned; whereupon the House assigned them a new day, viz. Friday
morning next.

An Act for avoiding of bringing of Pins into this Realm made and wrought in
foreign parts beyond the Seas, secunda vice lect. and rejected.

The Amendments agreed upon by the Committees upon the Bill of Tillage,
appointed to be brought into the House to morrow-morning by the Lord Chief
Justice of England.

An Act for the better furnishing and supply of able Chyrurgeons in and to the
Land and Sea-service, for her Majesty and the Realm, secuuda vice lect. A Bill
about Surgeons for Sea-service.


The Lord Buckhurst signified that upon a Letter written unto him, by the Lord
Marquess of Winchester, notifying his present sickness, whereby he was not able
to give his attendance as yet: the said Lord Buckhurst, according to the
request of the said Lord Marquess, having moved her Majesty therein, it pleased
her Majesty to hold him excused until his recovery, and commanded that he
should then give his attendance.

Thursday, Jan. 19. Answer was returned in writing from the Lower House, and
delivered by certain Knights and Burgesses sent for that purpose, unto the
Objections taken by their Lordships to some points of the Bill entitled An Act
for the increase of People for the service and defense of the Realm; which
Objections were formerly delivered unto them in writing, upon their request
made to their Lordships.

Certain selected persons of the Lower House, viz. Sir William Knolles, and Sir
Edward Hobby Kts, with diverse others, coming from the said Lower House,
delivered a Message, Complaint of the Commons of an Innovation by their
Lordships.
signifying that the Knights and Burgesses desired to receive satisfaction from
their Lordships concerning an Innovation as the said Knights and Burgesses
supposed, very lately begun in the Upper House, in delivering an Answer from
the Lords by the mouth of the Lord Keeper, in other form and manner than as was
pretended by the Knights and Burgesses in former times used, as they did
interpret it, to the prejudice and derogation of the Liberty of the Lower
House. For, whereas on the 14th instant, Sir Walter Rawleigh Knight. with diverse
others of the Lower House, were sent to the Lords to deliver a certain Message
to this House; after consultation had thereupon by the Lords, and after
signification thereof given to the said Sir Walter Rawleigh, and the rest
(staying in the outward room for answer) that they might come in and receive
the same; it was thought meet, that the Lord Keeper should deliver the said
Answer sitting in his place, and every of the Lords keeping their places, and
not going out to the Bar, as the use and form is when the Lords receive either
Bills or Message from the Lower House; and as the Lords had done once or twice
before, by error, or not attending the Formality and Order of the House in
that point. This was the Exception taken by the Message delivered this day from
the Knights and Burgesses of the Lower House, wherein they desired to receive
satisfaction.

Upon which Message, the Lords having consulted and delivered their Opinions
touching that Order and Custom of the House, as it had been observed, and
particularly noted by some of them that were the most ancient and of longest
continuance in Parliament, and especially by the Lord Burleigh Lord Treasurer,
the most ancient Parliament man of any that are at this present, either of the
Upper or the Lower House; and likewise by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
and by the Lord Admiral, the Lord North, the Lord Buckhurst, and others, that
had been present at many Parliaments.

It was resolved, The resolution of the Lords upon the Complaint.
That the Order and Usage of this House was, and is, that when any Bills or
Messages be brought from the Lower House, to be preferred to the Upper House,
the Lord Keeper and the rest of the Lords are to rise from their places, and to
go down to the Bar, there to meet such as come from the Lower House, and from
them to receive in that place their Messages or Bills. But, contrary wise, when
any Answer is to be delivered by the Lord Keeper, in the name and behalf of
this House, to such Knights and Burgesses as came from the Lower House, the
said Knights and Burgesses are to receive the same standing toward the lower
end of the House without the Bar. And the Lord Keeper is to deliver the same
sitting in his place, with his head covered, and all the Lords keeping their
places; and that whenever it had been done otherwise, the same was by error,
or mistaking, and therefore not to be drawn into an Example or President, as it
was acknowledged by the Lord Keeper this day, and the rest of the Lords, that
the going of the said Lord Keeper and the rest of the Lords from their places,
unto the Bar, some few days before, once or twice, to give answer to some of
the Lower House, whereof the Lower House seemed to take some advantage, was
only by miscognizance, or rather for want of due remembrance at the present of
the Order and Custom of this House; whereunto, their Lordships having regard
rather to the dispatch of matters of importance in the House, than to
Formalities, were not greatly intentive.

This to have been the ancient usage of the House, and that the same ought
still to be, was concluded by common and general consent of the Lords, both
upon particular remembrance, and observations of the like course and Order
holden afore-time, by other Lords that held the place in the House of
Lord-Chancellor and Lord Keeper, and also by diverse reasons, urged and
alleged, to prove and show that the said Order does best stand with the
dignity and gravity of the House, and with the convenience and aptness for
dispatch of Affairs appertaining to the Parliament; and that the contrary
course is both indecent and inconvenient.

This being so resolved and concluded, The Lords send to the Commons to come up
and know their Resolutions.
it was agreed, that Mr. Atturney-General and Mr. Sergeant Drew should go down
to the Lower House, and signify from the Lords to the Knights and Burgesses,
That if they would send any of that House up to the Lords, to receive Answer
unto their aforesaid Demand, Answer should be given them. Whereunto the said
Knights and Burgesses returned signification of their Assent, by the said Mr.
Atturney-General, and Mr. Sergeant Drew. And within a very little time after,
sent up accordingly the said persons, and diverse of them who before had been
sent to demand satisfaction; but being come into the House, and having placed
themselves at the lower end of the room, (as at other times they accustomed)
expecting that the Lord Keeper and the rest of the Lords would come from their
places, and meet them at the Bar, to deliver them Answer: When the Lord Keeper
moved them to come nearer to receive Answer, 39 Eliz.
and when they perceived the Lords were resolved not to come from their places
to the Bar, they protested by the mouth of Sir William Knolls, The Commons
protest.
that they had no Commission to receive Answer in that Form; and so refusing to
receive any Answer, departed.

The Question and Difference thus remaining betwixt the Houses, it was
afterward (upon a motion sent from the Lords to the Lower House) agreed on
both parts, The Question continuing, the Lords desire a Conference,
that a Conference should be had, and that the aforesaid selected persons of
the House, or so many of them as shall be needful, should meet with diverse of
the Lords of the Upper House (being nominated by the House for that purpose) in
the outward great Chamber, before the Chamber of Parliament-presence, to debate
the matter, and bring it to a conclusion. Which Meeting and Conference being
assented unto, and afterward accordingly there performed on the 19 of
Jannuary, and the Question debated; and the reason and observation of former
times, for the aforesaid Order and Custom of the House, being alleged by the
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Admiral, the Lord
North, and the Lord Buckhurst, that had been present in many Parliaments, and
especially by the Lord Treasurer (the most ancient Parliament Man) it was found
and resolved, that the Order and Custom of the House was, as is before written,
viz. where the Dispute is determined.
That when any Bills or Messages are brought from the Lower House to be
presented to the Upper House, the Lord Keeper and the rest of the Lords are to
rise from their places, and to go down to the Bar, there to meet such as come
from the Lower House, and from them to receive in that place their Messages or
Bills.

But contrariwise, when any Answer is to be delivered by the Lord Keeper, in
the name and behalf of the House, to such Knights and Burgesses as come from
the Lower House, the said Knights and Burgesses are to receive the same
standing toward the lower end of the House; and the Lord Keeper is to deliver
the same with his head covered, and all the Lords are to keep their places. And
thereupon the Lower House was satisfied, and the same form was afterward kept
accordingly.

Friday, Jan. 20. The Answer in writing that came yesterday from the Lower
House, to the Objections taken by their Lordships to some points of the Bill,
entitled, An Act for the increase of People for the service and defense of the
Realm, was by the Order of the House referred, and delivered unto the Lords
Committees formerly appointed upon that Bill, who were required to consider
thereof, and make their Report of their Opinions concerning the same.

Saturday, Jan. 21. the Bill for reforming of sundry abuses committed by
Soldiers and others in the War, read secunda vice.

Monday, Jan. 23. a Bill for establishing a Jointure to Anne Lady Wentworth,
read prima vice.

Tuesday, Jan. 24. the Bill entitled, An Act for the relieving of Clothiers,
concerning the weight of short, broad, and colored Clothes, to be made in the
Counties of Suffolk and Essex, returned to the House by the Earl of Shrewsbury
first of the Committees, who made report that upon hearing of both parties, and
upon due consideration of the reasons and allegations by them alleged, the
Committees thought there could not be any further proceedings in the same;
whereupon a new Bill was presented, bearing this Title, viz. An Act touching
the making of short, broad, course, colored Clothes, in the Counties of
Suffolk and Essex; which was read prima vice.

Debated in the House whether Amendments upon a Bill being brought into the
House by Committees, may afterward be contradicted or spoken against by any of
the Committees. A Doubt propouded, and re^^^^ed.
The doubt was left for the present unresolved; but afterward cleared, and
ruled Affirmatively.

Wednesday, Jan. 25. an Act that no person robbing of a House in the Daytime,
although no person be therein, shall be admitted to have the benefit of his
Clergy, secunda vice lect.

An Act, that Lessees may enjoy their Leases against all Patents, their Heirs
and Assigns, notwithstanding any default of payment of their Rents, during the
time that the Reversion or Inheritance remained in the Crown, secunda vice
lect. and referred to Committees, viz. the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord
Treasurer, Lord Marshal, and others, appointed to meet, etc. the Lord
Chief Justice, the Lord Chief-Baron, and Mr. Atturney-General to attend them.

Sir Moyle Finch, to be heard by his Counsel learned openly in the House to
morrow-morning concerning this Bill.

Notice given to the House by the Lord Treasurer, that the Committees upon the
Bill concerning Tellers, Receivers, etc. had a meeting with a select number of
the Lower House, to confer upon the Objections and Answers touching that Bill
yesterday in the Afternoon, according to the order taken Jan. 23. But forasmuch
as the said number of the Lower House, at the meeting affirmed that they had no
authority to undertake the debating of the said Objections and Answers,
(otherwise than to speak as they should see cause as private men) and desired
that the Answers might be communicated to the Lower House in writing; the Lords
therefore sent down the said Answers to the Lower House by the hands of Mr.
Atturney-General and Dr. Stanhop.

Thursday, Jan. 26. an Act for enabling Edmond Molineux to sell Lands for the
payment of his Debts, etc. was returned to the House by the Lord Marshal,
second of the Committees. And forasmuch as the same could not be determined by
the said Committees, by reason of some of the Kindred of the said Edmond
Molineux, who opposed themselves against the Bill; a motion was therefore made
that the Cause might be ended by some arbitrary course; whereupon the Parties
on both sides were called into the House, and moved to that purpose; unto which
they assented, and made choice of the Earl of Rutland, the Bishop of London,
and the Lord Montjoy, who were appointed to meet that afternoon, etc.

An Act to reform Deceits, and breaches of Trust touching Lands given to
charitable uses, returned to the House by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
with some amendments, and a Proviso thought meet to be added, which were twice
read; and thereupon Commandment given, that the said Amendments should be
written in Paper, and the Proviso engrossed in Parchment, ready for a third
reading.

The Bill, entitled, An Act for the increase of People, for the service and
defense of the Realm, returned to the House by the Earl of Shrewsbury first of
the Committees. And because it seemed to all the Committes appointed for this
Bill, together with the Judges, that notwithstanding the Conference with
several selected persons of the Lower House, that this Bill could not proceed;
Order was given to the Judges, but especially to the Lord Chief Justice, to
draw a new Bill; whereupon this new Bill following was brought into the House.

An Act against decaying of Towns and houses of Husbandry, prima vice lect.

Excuse made by the Lord Admiral for the Earl of Hertford's absence for want of
health. The like by the Lord Chandois for the Lord de la Ware.

The Lord Marshal signified to the House, that the Lord Mordant and the Lord
Sheffield had leave of her Majesty for their absence.

Friday, Jan. 27. the Lord Treasurer took his place this day as Baron of
Burleigh, between the Lord Buckhurst and the Lord Compton. The Lord Admiral his
place, as Earl of Nottingham, between the Earl of Lincoln and the Lord Viscount
Byndon. The Lord Chamberlain his place, as Baron of Hunsdon, between the Lord
Chandois and the Lord St. John of Bletsoe.

Saturday, Jan. 28. the Bill for the lawful making of Bays in the Counties of
Essex and Suffolk, was read tertia vice.

Monday, Jan. 30. an Act for Retailing-brokers, and other Pawn-takers, returned
to the House by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, first of the Committees;
and because there was found many defects therein, so that they thought the same
unfit to be proceeded in, they therefore, together with the said Bill,
presented a new Bill, entitled as the former, which was read prima vice.

Tuesday, Jan. 31. a Motion from the lower House by Sir John Forscue and
others, that some new time might be appointed for conference about the Act,
entitled, An Act for reforming sundry abuses committed by Souidiers, etc. in
regard they had appointed some other meeting this Afternoon, for the preparing
of a Bill of Accomptants in readiness to proceed, their Lordships having
considered of the Motion, made answer by the Lord Keeper, that they wished for
some good consideration, that the appointed time, viz. this Afternoon, might
hold for this Conference; supposing, that if it please the Committees of the
Lower House to come the sooner this Afternoon for this purpose, they might well
enough perform both the one and the other.

On Wednesday, Feb. 1. the Bill entitled, Feb. 1.
An Act for the reviving, continuance, explanation, and repealing of diverse
Statutes, returned to the House, by the Lord Chief Justice, with some
amendments, which were presently twice read; and thereupon Commandment given to
be prepared ready in writing in Paper for a third reading. It is agreed, that a
Conference shall be had with some of the Lower House about this Bill upon
Friday Morning next.

Friday, Feb. 3. a Proviso in the Bill for recovering 300000 Acres, more or
less, of waste Marsh and watery Ground, this day twice read, and the Amendments.
And thereupon Commandment given, the said Amendments should be written in
Paper, and the Proviso engrossed in Parchment, ready for a third reading.

Report made by the Lord Treasurer, what the substance of the Conference was
between their Lordships and certain select Committees of the Lower House,
concerning the Bill for reviving, continuing, and repealing of diverse Statutes;
and the same referred to the Lord Chief Justice, and other Justices, for their
further consideration.

Saturday, Feb. 4. an Act for reformation of Retailing-brokers, and other
Pawn-takers, read tertia vice.

An Act against the deceitful stretching and Taintering of Northern Clothes,
tertiavice lect.

An Act for the reviving, continuance, explanation, perfecting, and repealing
of diverse Statutes, tertia vice lect. The three Bills abovementioned sent to
the Lower House, of which the two latter were returned, for their consideration
of certain Amendments and Proviso's added by their Lordships.

The Proviso thought meet by the Committees, on the Bill concerning the
draining and recovery of certain over flown Grounds in the County of Norfolk,
twice read, and commanded to be engrossed.

A Motion by the Lord Buckhurst, that the County of Sussex might be added to
the general Bill of surrounded Grounds.

The like Motion by the Lord North and others, for the Counties of Somerset and
Essex; whereto the House assented, and the said three Counties were accordingly
added to the rest.

Monday, Feb. 6. hora secunda post Meridiem, the Proviso added by the Lower
House, to the Bill for the confirmation of the Jointure of Christian Lady
Sandis, read tertia vice; and thereupon the Bill expedited.

Tuesday, a Message from their Lordships to the Lower House, delivered by
Sergeant Drew and Dr. Carew, for a Conference concerning a Bill against excess
of Apparel, with a competent number of the said House: The time and place being
desired to be at Two of the clock this Afternoon, at the great Chamber of the
Upper House of Parliament.

Wednesday, Feb. 8. the Bill for amendment of Highways in the Counties of
Sussex, Surrey, and Kent, was read tertia vice, and expedited.

Thursday, Feb. 9. at Three of the clock in the Afternoon, They are dissolved.
Dominus Custos Magni Sigilli, ex Mandato Dominae Reginae, tunc dissolvit
presens Parliamentum.

A Journal of the Passages of the House of Commons in Parliament, holden at
Westminster in Anno 39 Eliz. Reginae, annoque Dom. 1597. begun there on Monday
the 24 of October. and Dissolved Febr. 9. Anno 40. ejusdem Reginae.
THe Ninth Parliament of our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth by the grace of God of
England, France, and Ireland Queen, 1597. Oct. 24. The Parliament assembles.
defender of the Faith, etc. began at Westminster upon Monday October. 24, in the
39th year of her Majesty's Reign; upon which day many of the Knights of the
Shires, Citizens of the Cities, Burgesses of Buroughs, and Barons of the
Cinque Ports, did then make their appearance at Westminster, being returned
into the said Parliament for the same Shires, Cities, Buroughs and Ports,
before the Right Honorable the Earl of Nottingham Lord Steward of her
Majesty's most honorable Household: Chooses Serj. Yelverton for their Speaker.
and having authority to choose their Speaker, they made choice of Mr. Sergeant
Yelverton to be their Speaker.

Thursday, October. 27. the House being set, and before Mr. Speaker went up unto
her Majesty in the Upper House, Chancellor of the Exchequer moves that none may
hereafter enter the House with Spurs on, and pay the Sergeant his fees.
Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer moved, and admonished that none of this House
should, after this present day, enter into the House with their Spurs on, for
offending of others: and withal, that none do come into this House before they
have paid the Serjeant's Fees due unto him, according to the accustomed usage
of this House, in that case.

After which, Mr. Speaker, The Commens go to the Lords House.
with the greatest number of this House, went toward the Upper House, there to
attend her Majesty's pleasure; and afterward being admitted, the said Mr.
Sergeant Yelverton was presented before her Majesty, and allowed of by her,
Speaker approved, they return to the Lower House.
according to the usual form in that case accustomed. And so returning to this
House, he was Speaker, and took his place, and sat in the Chair.

And then and there signified to this House, that whereas in former times the
Order was, to have a Bill read before they did rise, A caution given that no
Bill could be read this day, as was usual;
the same could not be so done at this time, because her Majesty had in the
Upper House adjourned this Parliament until Saturday next come seven-night,
being the fifth day of November next coming, at eight of the clock in the
Forenoon of the same day, till which time he said all the Members of this House
might depart, and take their ease: and so then every man went his way.

Saturday, November. 5. the House met about eight of the clock in the Morning,
Which proved a mistake of the Speakers.
having through a mere mistake and error of the Speaker and themselves,
conceived their House to have been adjourned by the Lord Keeper the first day
of this Parliament, unto this present day.

The Bill against Forestallers, Regrators, and Engrossers, read the first time.

Mr. Finch showing sundry great and horrible abuses committed by Vagrant and
Idle persons, offensive both to God and the world, and further showing the
extreme miserable estate of the Godly and honest sort of the poor Subjects of
this Realm, moved for a Committee of this House to be selected for redress
thereof.

The Bill for the taking away the benefit of Clergy from Offenders against a
Satute made 3 Hen. 7. concerning the taking away of Women again their wills,
Bill against those that take away Women against their will.
was read prima vice.

Sunday, November. 6.

Monday, November. 7. four Bills had each of them one reading; the last being the
Bill against Forestallers, etc. was upon the second reading committed unto Mr.
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Francis Bacon, the Citizens for London, York,
Coventry, Bristol, and Gloucester, Mr. Nathaniel Bacon, and others, who were
appointed to meet on Wednesday next at the Exchequer-Chamber at two of the
clock in the Afternoon; and the Bill and Committees names were then delivered
to Mr. Chancellor of the Duchy.

The Bill for taking away of benefit of the Clergy from Offenders against the
Statute made 3 Hen. 7. concerning the taking away of Women against their wills
unlawfully, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Solicitor, Mr.
Recorder of London, Mr. Boys, Mr. Finch, Mr. Bourcher, and M. Duport, to go
presently into the Committee-chamber of this House; who taking the Bill with
them, and returning again very soon after they had inserted into the Bill these
words, viz. (hereafter to be committed) which words being read unto the House,
and not well liked of, were stricken out, and these words were set down therein
by consent of the House, viz. (to be committed after the end of this present
Parliament) and were then twice read, and so the Bill upon the question was
ordered to be engrossed.

Tuesday, November. 8. two Bills had each of them one reading, of which the
second being the Bill touching the transporting of Sheepskins and Pelts, was
read prima vice.

Also two other Bills had each of them one reading, of which the second being
the Bill for due performance of the last Will and Testament of George Durant,
was upon the second reading committed unto Sir Edward Hobby, Mr. Francis Bacon,
Mr. Francis Maro, Sir Robert Wingfield, Mr. Calthrope, Sir Thomas Cecil, and
Sir James Harrington, who were appointed to meet to morrow in the
Exchequer-Court at Two of the clock in the Afternoon.

Sir Francis Hastings moved for the abridging and reforming of the excessive
number of superfluous and burdensome penal Laws: which motion being seconded
by Mr. Francis Bacon and others, the consideration of the management thereof,
was committed to all the Privy Council being Members of the House; A Bill to
reform the number of superfluous and burdensome penal Laws, etc.
all the Sergeants at Law likewise being Members of this House; all the Lawyers
of this House, Mr. George Moore, Mr. Lukenor, Mr. Nathaniel Bacon, Mr.
Rotherham, Mr. Comistie, Mr. Diggs, Mr. Crompton, Mr. Peake, Mr. Attorney of
the Court of Wards, Mr. Colebrand, Mr. Attorney of the Duchy, Mr. Tolerby,
Mr. Culpepper, Dr. Bennet, Dr. James, Dr. Perkins, all the Knights of the
Counties, and for the City of London returned into this House, Sir. William
Moore, Sir Edward Hobby, Sir Thomas Hobby, and Mr. Hubbert, who were appointed
to meet in this House upon Thursday next at Two of the clock in the Afternoon.

Wednesday, November. 9. two Bills had each of them one reading: the second being
the Bill to suppress the multitude of Maltsters, Bill to suppress the multitude
of Maultsters.
was upon the second reading committed unto Sir Robert Wroth, Mr. Hubbert, the
Burgesses of Iork, Hull, Worcester, and Gloucester, Mr. Nathaniel Bacon and
others, who were appointed to meet at Two of the clock this Afternoon in the
Middle Temple Hall.

Two other Bills had each of them one reading, of which the second being for
the amendment of Weavers and Spinners Wages, was read prima vice.

The House began this day to name Committees touching Monopolies, and Patents
of Privileges; of which Sir John Fortescue, Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr.
Barker, Mr. Lawrence Hide, and some nine others being appointed, Mr. Secretary
Cecil moved the House, the day being far spent, and the business in agitation
of great weight, the nominating of the said Committee might be deferred until
the day following, and that then it might be discussed and set down touching
what matter the said Committee should treat: Whereupon, upon the question it
was deferred accordingly.

Thursday, November. 10. the Bill for the establishing of the Town-lands of
Wanting in the County of Berks to the relief of the Poor, amending of
Highways, and maintaining of a Schoolmaster in the Town of Wanting aforesaid,
was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Controler, the Knights for the
County of Berks, Mr. Henry Nevil, Sir Humphry Foster, Mr. Solicitor, Mr.
Francis Moore, Mr. Oglethorp, Mr. Laurence Hide, Mr. Little, Mr. Tasborough,
and Mr. Oldsworth, who were appointed to meet on Saturday next at Two of the
clock in the Afternoon in this House.

Three other Bills had each of them one reading, of which the last, being the
Bill for re-edifying the Town of Langford Estevor in the County of Somerset,
was upon the second reading committed unto the Knights for the County of
Somerset, Sir Francis Hastings, Mr. Hexte, all the Burgesses of Somersetshire,
Mr. Edward Philips, Mr. Alexander Popham, the Knights and Citizens for London,
Sir Robert Wroth, Mr. Jerome Horsey, and Dr. James, who were appointed to meet
on Monday next at Two of the clock in the Afternoon in the Middle Temple Hall.

Mr. Walgrave moved touching the abuses of Licenses for Marriages granted by
Ecclesiastical persons, and prayed that consideration may be had for
reformation thereof by this House.

Friday, November. 11. four Bills had each of them one reading, of which the
first was the Bill concerning the Hospital of Warwick.

Dr. Wingfield, and Dr. James, do show sundry great abuses by Licenses for
Marriages without Banes, granted by Registers, and other inferior Officers.

Whereupon Sir Thomas Cecil moved for a Committee for drawing a Bill for
reformation thereof; whereupon were nominated Sir Thomas Cecil, Mr. Fannel, Mr.
Finch, Dr. James, Mr. Nathaniel Bacon, Mr. Robert Wingfield, and others, who
were appointed to meet to morrow at Two of the clock in the Afternoon in
Grays-Inn-hall.

Mr. Hexte moved touching the abuses in Probates of Wills.

Mr. Edward Hobby moved for a Committee for continuance of several Statutes;
whereupon were nominated Mr. Attorney of the Duchy, Mr. Attorney of the Court
of Wards, Sir Robert Wroth, Mr. Solicitor, Sir Edward Hobby, Mr. Francis
Moore, Mr. Francis Bacon, all the Sergeants at Law being of this House, Sir
William Moore, and others; and a note of the names of the Committees were
delivered to Sir Robert Wroth, who with the rest were appointed to meet on
Thursday next, in the Inner-Temple-hall, at Two of the clock in the Afternoon.

Saturday, November. 12. four Bills had each of them one reading, of which the
first being the Bill for the repeal of the Statute of the 23 of her Majesty's
reign, Bill for increase of Mariners, and maintenance of Navigation.
entitled, An Act for the increase of Mariners, and maintenance of Navigation,
was upon the second reading committed unto all the Burgesses of the Port-towns,
all the Citizens of London, York, Hull, and Norwich, the Burgesses of
Carnarvan, Mr. Miles Sands, and others, who were appointed to meet on Monday
next at Two of the clock in the Afternoon in the Middle-Temple-hall.

The Bill against the counterfeiting the Hands of the Lords, Bill against
counterfeiting of Hands.
was read the second time, and upon the question committed unto all the
Privy Council being Members of this House, all the Sergeants at Law which are
of this House, Mr. Brograve, Attorney of the Duchy, Sir Thomas Hobby, and
others, who were appointed to meet on Monday next at Two of the clock in the
Afternoon in the Exchequer-chamber.

The Bill for the better answering of her Majesty's Tenths and Subsidies from
the Clergy, was upon the second reading committed to Mr. Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Recorder, Mr. Nathaniel Bacon, Mr. Wingfield,
Sir Edward Hobby, and others, who were appointed to meet upon Wednesday next at
Two of the clock in the Afternoon, in the Exchequer-chamber, and the Bill was
delivered unto Mr. Solicitor.

Sir Robert Wroth, in the Bill to suppress the multitude of Maltsters, being
one of the Committee, who with the rest had been appointed to meet on Wednesday
last, showed, the Committees have met and travailed therein, and thought good
to draw a new Bill, and so brought in both the old and the new Bill.

Sunday, November. 13.

Monday, November. 14. Mr. Laurence Hide, one of the Committees in the Bill for
the Town of Wanting, showed the meeting of the said Committees, and some
amendments made by them in some parts of the said Bill; which said Amendments
being twice read to the House, the Bill upon the Question was ordered to be
engrossed.

Mr. George Moore, one of the Committees in the Bill touching Armor and
Weapons, showed their meeting upon Saturday last, and requiring to have a new
day of meeting, and that some of the Lawyers which are of this House being of
this Committee, may then attend in the same. Whereupon day was given to meet
again in this House, upon Wednesday next at Two of the clock in the Afternoon;
and the Committees Names being then read by the Clerk, Mr. Sergeant Williams,
Mr. Sergeant Harris, and Mr. Sergeant Heal were added unto them.

Mr. Francis Bacon, one of the selected Committees concerning Enclosures and
Tillage, moved for a time to be appointed for the same selected Committees to
impart their labor and travails therein to the general Committees, who were
appointed in the same cause upon Saturday the fifth of this instant November,
to the end that thereupon the same may afterward be reported unto this House
accordingly. Whereupon it was ordered, that they should for that purpose meet
in this House to morrow at Two of the clock in the Afternoon.

The Bill for repressing of Robberies and touching Hue-and-crie, Bill for
repressing Robberies and touching Hue and Cry, rejected.
after the second reading, upon question for commitment, was denied to be
committed; and upon another Question for the engrossing, was denied to be
engrossed, and so rejected.

Tuesday, November. 15. five Bills had each of them one reading, of which the
first being a Bill for extirpation of Beggars, was read prima vice.

Mr. Sergeant Drew and Dr. Stanhop brought from the Lords the Bill lately
passed in this House for taking away the benefit of Clergy from Offenders
against the Statute made 3 Hen. 7. concerning the taking away of Women against
their Wills unlawfully; which Bill their Lordships have also passed, with a
Proviso thereunto annexed by their Lodships.

The Bill concerning the establishing of the Town-lands of Wanting in the
County of Berks, was read the third time, and was passed upon the Question.

Wednesday, November. 16. Four Bills had each of them one reading, of which the
last, being the Bill for the Town of Northampton, was upon the second reading
committed to the Knights for the County of Northampton, and the Burgesses of
the Town of Northampton, Mr. Edward Montague, Sir Edward Hobby, and others, who
were appointed to meet at Two a clock in the Afternoon of this day, at Sir
Thomas Cecil's house.

The Bill for keeping of Horses from stealing, was upon the second reading
committed to Mr. Hubbert, Sir Robert Wroth, Mr. Maynard, Mr. Porteington, Sir
William Brereton, Mr. Henry Nevil, Mr. Pennington, and others, who were
appointed to meet to morrow in the Afternoon in the Middle-Temple-hall.

The Proviso which came from the Lords in the Bill for taking away the benefit
of Clergy from certain Offenders, in a Bill lately passed this House and sent
up to the Lords, was three times read, and passed upon the Question.

Thursday, November. 17. two Bills had each of them one reading; of which, one
concerning Lands and Debts of Sir Henry Hatton Knight. deceased, had its first
reading.

The Bill also for erecting Houses of Correction, Bill for erecting houses of
Correction, and punishment of Rogues and sturdy Beggars
and the punishment of Rogues and sturdy Beggars, was read the first time.

Friday, November. 18. twelve Bills had each of them one reading, of which the
last, Bill for Hospitals and Workhouses.
being a Bill for erecting of Hospitals and Working-houses for the Poor, was
upon the second reading committed unto Sir Edward Heart, Mr. Recorder of London,
Mr. Tasborough, all the Readers of the Middle Temple, Mr. Boys, Mr. Henry
Bellasis and others, who were to meet this Afternoon at Two of the clock in the
Middle Temple hall.

The Bill concerning the Hospital of Warwick, read the second time, and
committed to the Knights for Warwickshire, the Burgesses of Warwick, Mr.
Lindsey, Sir Francis Hastings, Mr. Recorder of London, Dr. Caesar, Mr. Fulke
Grevil, Sir Robert Wroth and others, who were appointed to meet on Wednesday
next at Two of the clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer-chamber.

Saturday, November. 19. Four Bills had each of them one reading, of which the
last, being a Bill for erecting houses of Correction, etc. was upon the second
reading committed unto Mr. George Moore, Mr. Attorney of the Duchy, Mr.
Attorney of the Court of Wards, mr. Francis Bacon, Sir Thomas Cecil, Sir
William Moore, Sir Robert Wroth, Mr. Recorder of London, and others, who were
appointed to meet on Tuesday next in the Afternoon at the Middle-Temple-hall.

Sunday, November. 20.

Monday, November. 21. the Bill against Barstardie was read the second time, Bill
against Bastardy.
and committed to the former Committees in the Bill for erecting of houses of
Correction, etc. to meet at the former time and place. Also the Bill for the
employment of the Poor, and to restrain them from Idleness, was read the second
time, and committed to the former Committees, and to meet at the same time and
place.

The Bill for the Lord Montjoy had its first reading.

The Bill concerning the Lands and Debts of Sir Henry Hatton Knight. deceased, was
read the second time, and committed unto Mr. Controuler, Sir Thomas Cecil, Sir
William Cornwallis, Mr. Recorder and others, who were appointed to meet on
Wednesday next at Two of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer-chamber.

Tuesday, November. 22. the Bill for the necessary Habitation and Relief of the
Poor, and Lame, and Blind in every Parish, was read the second time, and
committed unto the former Committees for erecting houses of Correction, etc.

The Bill for relief of Hospitals, poor Prisoners, and others impoverished by
casual Losses, was upon the second reading committed to the former Committees
for erecting houses of Correction, etc. Also the Bill for setting the Poor on
work, was read the second time, and dashed upon the third Question for the
Committee, and rejected upon the Question for engrossing.

The Bill for relieving of the Poor out of Impropriations and other
Church Livings, was read the second time; and after some speeches both with and
against the Bill, upon the doubtfulness of the double Question for the
committing, was upon the division of the House rejected, with the difference of
29 voices, with the Yea 117. and with the No 146.

Three Bills were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Controuler, Mr. Chancellor of the
Exchequer and others, of which the two last were, one for the establishing of
the Town-lands of Wanting in the County of Berks to the relief of the Poor, and
the last was for a repeal of a Statute made 13 of her Majesty's reign,
entitled, An Act for the increase of Mariners, and maintenance of Navigation.

The Bill concerning certain Lands of Sir John Spencer Knight. Dame Mary his Wife,
and Robert his Son, was read prima vice.

Three other Bills had each of them one reading, of which the second, being the
Bill for Arthur Hatch, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Sands,
Mr. Philips, Mr. Finch, Mr. Francis Popham, Sir Robert Wroth and others, who
were appointed to meet on Thursday next at Two of the clock in the Afternoon in
the Middle-Temple-hall.

Wednesday, November. 23. Four Bills had each of them one reading, of which the
last, being the Bill concerning Leases made by the Archbishops and Bishops, was
upon the second reading rejected upon the question for committing, and so
likewise upon the question for engrossing.

The Bill for repealing part of the Charter granted to the Town of Yarmouth,
was upon the second reading committed to Sir Robert Wroth, Mr. Fulk Grevil, all
the Burgesses of the Port-towns, the Knights for Norfolk and Suffolk, Mr.
Nathaniel Bacon, and others, who were appointed to meet on Friday at Two of the
clock in the Afternoon in the Exchequer-chamber.

Thursday, November. 24. seven Bills had each of them one reading, of which the
last being the Bill for punishment of certain Felonies hereafter to be
committed, was upon the second reading committed unto the former Committees for
the relief of the Poor, etc. and Mr. Wiseman, Mr. Little, and Mr. Let were
added unto them, and the Bill delivered to Mr. Wroth, who with the rest were
appointed to meet this Afternoon in the Middle-Temple-hall.

The Bill that Lessees many enjoy their Leases against certain Patentees in
certain cases, was read the first time.

The Bill concerning George Durant was read the third time, and after many
Speeches, both with and against the Bill, and some tending to amendments to be
made in some parts of the same, it was in the end deferred from being put to
the Question until Saturday next, upon some expectation that the parties
concerned in the mean time might come to some good end among themselves,
without any further troubling of this House.

Friday, November. 25. Four Bills had each of them one reading, of which the
last, being the Bill concerning the Lands and Tenements of Sir John Spencer,
was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Winch, Sir Robert Wroth, Mr.
Rotheram, Mr. Henry Yelverton, Mr. Luke, Sir Richard Knightley, Mr. Henry
Hubberd, Mr. Robert Wingfield, the Knights of Bedfordshire, and Mr. Bourcher;
and the Bill was delivered to Sir Robert Wroth, who, with the rest, were
appointed to meet at the Middle-Temple-hall to morrow at Two of the clock in
the Afternoon.

The Bill for assurance of certain Lands and Tenements unto Robert Cotton Esquire,
was upon the second reading committed to the former Committees in the Bill
concerning Sir John Spencer, and at the same time and place; and there were
added unto them Sir John Hungerford, Mr. William Cecil, and others.

The Bill concerning the draining of certain Lands and Grounds in Norfolk, was
upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Nathaniel Bacon, Sir Anthony Cope,
Mr. Henry Yelverton, Mr. Henry Spilman, Sir Robert Wroth, and others, who were
appointed to meet upon Monday next at Two a clock in the Afternoon in the
Exchequer-chamber.

The Bill for the increase of people for the service of the Realm, was read the
first time.

Mr. Secretary Cecil moved the second reading of this Bill to morrow, and
wished all the Members of this House to be present at the same, and provided,
as they shall think fit, to employ their endeavor and Speeches to the
furtherance of the proceedings in the said Bill: whereupon it was agreed, that
both this Bill, and also that for increase of Tillage, shall both of them be
read to morrow.

Saturday, Nov. 26. four Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the last
being the Bill for inrolling and exemplifying of Defeazances, was upon the
second reading committed unto Sir Edward Hobby, Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower,
Mr. Francis Moore, Mr. Edward Luknor, and others: who were appointed to meet on
Tuesday next at two of the clock in the afternoon, in the Exchequer-chamber.

The Bill concerning Transportation of Sheepskins and Pelts over Seas, was
read the second time, and committed to Sir Robert Carry, the Burgesses of
Newcastle, Barwick, Northampton, and Lincoln, Mr. Francis Moore, and others:
who are appointed to meet on Tuesday next at two of the clock in the afternoon,
in the Exchequer-chamber.

The Bill for Husbandry and Tillage was upon the second reading committed to
Mr. Francis Bacon, Mr. Yelverton, Mr. Tasborough, the Citizens of all Cities,
Mr. Green, and others: who was appointed to meet on Tuesday next at two of the
clock in the afternoon, in this House.

Sunday, Nov. 27.

Monday, Nov. 28. two Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the second
being the Bill for the City of Bristol, was upon the second reading committed
to Dr. James, Mr. Francis Moore, the Citizens of Bristol, Gloucester, Bath and
Wells, Mr. Green, and others: who were appointed to meet this afternoon at two
of the clock, in the Middle-Temple-hall.

Mr. Coombs and Mr. Henry Powle being Members of this House, showed, They were
this day served with a Subpoena ad testificand. in the Star Chamber, by Anne
the wife of Thomas Wye Gent. and so moving for privilege, the Sergeant of the
House was thereupon charged to bring in the said Anne to appear in this House
to answer the Contempt.

The Bill for increase of people for the strength and defense of the Realm,
upon the second reading, after many Speeches, all tending to the good liking
and furthering of the said Bill, it was ordered to be committed unto the former
Committees in the Bill of Tillage; so, with a Note of the Names of the
Committees, the Bill was delivered unto Mr. Controuler.

Mr. Atturney-General and Dr. Stanhopp brought from the Lords a Bill,
entitled, An Act for the better explanation of a Statute made 13 Rginae, cap.
4. concerning Tellers and Receivers, etc. and showed, that their Lordships did
especially recommend the said Bill to this House.

Three other Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the last being a
Bill for erecting of Hospitals, or Abiding and Working-houses for the Poor, had
its third reading; and after many Speeches both with and against the Bill, it
was ordered upon the Question to be recommitted to the former Committees; and
the Bill, with a Note of the Committees Names, were delivered to Mr. Boys.

The Bill against excessive Fees of Ecclesiastical Judges, and of their
Officers and Ministers, Bill against the excessive Fees of Ecclesiastical
Judges, etc.
was this day in the afternoon delivered to Mr. Speaker.

Tuesday, Nov. 29. eight Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the last
being the Bill for repairing the bridges of Newport, and Carlion in the County
of Monmouth, was upon the second reading committed unto all the Knights for all
the Shires, and Burgesses for all the Buroughs in Wales, Monmouthshire, and
the Citizens for Bristal and Gloucester, Mr. Sergeant Williams, Mr. Pembridge,
and Mr. Oldsworth: who were appointed to meet on Thursday next in the
Exchequer-chamber, at two of the clock in the afternoon.

The Bill for the Town of Northamp. was read the third time, and upon the
doubtfulness of the Question, twice put, was dashed upon the division of the
House by the difference of 53 voices, viz. with the No 153, and with the Yea
but 100.

The Bill for Arthur Hatch was read the third time, and passed upon the
Question; the learned Counsel on both sides heretofore having been heard, as
well before the Committees as before this House at the bar.

Wednesday, Nov. 30. four Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the
last was for the prohibiting of bringing into this Realm of any foreign Cards
for Wool.

The Amendments and Additions in the Bill for the erecting of houses of
Correction, and places of punishment of Rogues and sturdy Beggars, being twice
read, upon the Question was ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill concerning the possessions of the Bishopric of Norwich, was upon the
second reading committed to Mr. Stevenson, Mr. Henry Hubberd, Mr. Henry Warner,
the Burgesses of Norwich and Lynn, Mr. Nathaniel Bacon, and others; and the
Bill was delivered to Mr. Henry Warner: who with the rest were appointed to
meet to morrow at two of the clock in the afternoon, in the Exchequer-chamber.

Mr. Finch one of the Committees in the sundry former Bills for the relief of
the Poor, Bill for relief of the Poor.
showed the meetings and travel of the said Committees in sundry of the said
Bills; in some of which as they have not as yet thoroughly proceeded, so he
delivers in a new Bill for the relief of the Poor into this House.

On Thursday, December. 1.
December. 1. two Bills were each of them read the first time; of which, the
former was a Bill for provision of a Preacher in the Tower of London.

Two other Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the second being for
maintenance and reparation of Stains-bridge and Egham-Cawsey, was upon the
second reading committed unto Mr. Geo. Moore, Sir Robert Wroth, Mr. Amersham,
and others: who were appointed to meet to morrow in the afternoon at two of the
clock, in the Exchequer-chamber.

Also four other Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the last being a
Bill against Forestallers, etc. was read the third time, and after sundry
Speeches both with and against it, it passed upon the Question.

Two other Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the second being the
Bill for the better execution of the Statute made 13 Reginae, for the
establishing of Logwood alias Blockwood, Bill about Logwood for Dying.
in the dying of Cloth, Wool, or Yarn, was read the third time, and passed
upon the Question.

Friday, December. 2. the Bill for the establishing of an Award made between
Edmond Cotton Gent. and Thomas Harvie Yeoman, read prima vice.

Four other Bills had each of them one reading; of which, Bill to prevent
double payment of Book-debts.
the last being a Bill to prevent double payment of Debts upon Shop-books, was
upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Jackson, Mr. Maynard, Mr. George
Moore, Sir Edward Hobby, Mr. Wingfield, Sir Francis Hastings, and others; who
are appointed to meet to morrow at two of the clock in the afternoon, in the
Exchequer-chamber.

Saturday, December. 3. Four Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the
last being the Bill for the speedy punishment of certain Felons, and the manner
of their delivery, was read the first time.

The Amendments in the Bill for Bristol being twice read, the Bill was ordered
to be engrossed.

The Bill for recovery of surrounded waste Marshes and watery Grounds in the
Isle of Ely, Counties of Cambridge, Huntington, Northampton, Lincoln, and
Norfolk, was upon the second reading committed unto Sir Thomas Cecill, the
Knights of Norfolk, Northampton, Lincoln, Cambridge, Huntington, Sussex, and
Bedford, the Burgesses of the Buroughs in the said Shires, Mr. Oxborough, and
others: who were appointed to meet this afternoon at two of the clock, in the
Exchequer-chamber.

The Bill for the Hospital called Nevil's Hospital in the County of York, had
its third reading; and upon a Motion to have Mr. Burde Master of the said
Hospital heard, before the Bill be put to the Question for the passing, day was
given him to be heard with his Counsel in this House upon Monday next.

Five Bills were sent up to the Lords from the House of Commons by Mr.
Controuler and others; of which, the first was the Bill against Forestallers,
etc. the second concerning Arthur Hatch, and the third was for the abolishing
of Logwood alias Blockwood in dying of Clothes.

The Bill that Leassees may enjoy their Leases, against Patentees in some
certain cases, was upon the second reading committed unto Sir Francis Hastings,
Sir Thomas Hungerford, Mr. Solicitor, Sir Thomas Hobby, Sir Thomas Conisby,
Mr. Yelverton, Mr. Controuler, Mr. Henry Hubberd, Mr. Wiseman, Sir Robert
Wroth, and others: who were appointed to meet on Tuesday next in the afternoon,
in the Exchequer-chamber; and the parties concerned to bring their Counsel
before the Committees.

December. 4. Sunday.

Monday, December. 5. six Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the last
being a Bill for erecting of houses of Correction and punishment of Rogues and
Beggars, was read the third time, and passed upon the Question.

The Proviso in the Bill for draining of certain over-flown and surrounded
Grounds in the County of Norfolk, was twice read, and the Bill and Proviso were
ordered to be engrossed.

Six Bills were this morning sent up to the Lords; of which, the two principal
were, one concerning the Lands of Sir Henry Hatton, and the other to give power
to Sir John Spencer, and Dame Mary his Wife, and Robert their Son, to alienate
certain Manors and Lands in the County of Somerset.

The Bill concerning Tellers and Receivers, etc. was upon the second reading
committed to all the Privy Counselors of this House, all the Sergeants at Law
being of this House, Sir Oliver Lambert, Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Tasborough, Mr.
Francis Bacon, Mr. Recorder of London, Mr. Controuler, Mr. George Moore, and
others: who were appointed to meet in the Exchequer-chamber to morrow in the
afternoon.

Dr. Muffet one of the Burgesses of Wilton, being licensed to depart, left 2 s.
6 d. with the Clerk of the House for the Poor and the Minister.

Tuesday, December. 6. five Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the
second being a Bill for establishing an Award made between Edward Cotton Gent.
and Thomas Harvey Yeoman, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr.
Sergeant Harries, Mr. Henry Warner, Mr. Edward Lukener, Mr. Recorder of London,
and others; who were appointed to meet to morrow in the afternoon, in the
Middle-Temple-hall.

The Amendments in the Bill for the Lord Montjoy being twice read, the Lord
Marquess of Winchester, and the Lord Montjoy, with their learned Counsel, were
heard at the bar of this House, before the said Bill and Amendments were put to
the Question for engrossing; and after their departure, the said Bill and
Amendments was upon the Question ordered to be engrossed.

Wednesday, December. 7. five Bills had each of them one reading; of which, Bill
against lewd wandering pretended Soldiers and Mariners.
the last being the Bill against lewd wandering persons pretending themselves to
be Soldiers or Mariners, was upon the second reading committed unto Sir
William Moore, Mr. George Moore, and others: who were appointed to meet this
afternoon in the Exchequer-chamber.

The Bill also against stealers of Corn and Fruit, was upon the first and
second reading committed to the former Committees in the Bill against lewd
persons, etc.

The Bill against stretching and taintering of Northern Cloth, was read the
second time, and ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for suppressing the multitude of Maultsters was read the second time,
and committed to the Burgesses of York, Mr. Winch, Mr. Yelverton, Mr. Lukenor,
and others: who were appointed to meet to morrow in the afternoon, in the
Middle-Temple-hall.

The Bill for increase of people for the strength and defense of the Realm, had
its first reading. Bill for increase of people.


Post Meridiem.

The Bill for granting unto her Majesty six Fifteens and Tenths, Subsidy-bill.
and three entire Subsidies, was read the first time.

Thursday, December. 8. three Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the
third being the Bill for the better staying of Corn within the Realm, was upon
the second reading committed unto Mr. George Moore, Mr. Wiseman, Mr. Edmund
Bacon, Mr. Colefield, Mr. Berkby, and others: who were appointed to meet to
morrow in the afternoon, in the Middle-Temple-hall.

The Bill against the bringing in of foreign Cards for Wool, was upon the
second reading committed unto Mr. Sergeant Harries, Mr. Sergeant Heal, the
Knights and Burgesses for London, Mr. Hubberd, and others: who were appointed
to meet to morrow in the afternoon, in the Middle-Temple-hall.

The Bill concerning Fustians was upon the second reading committed unto the
former Committees.

The Bill for the increase of people for the strength and service of this
Realm, was upon the second reading committed unto all the Privy Counselors
being of this House, Mr. Francis Bacon, Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Mountague, Sir
Thomas Cecill, Mr. Pelham, and others: who were appointed to meet this
afternoon in the Exchequer-chamber.

Three other Bills had each of them one reading; of which, Bill to alter the
nature of Gavil-kind.
the first being the Bill to alter the nature of Gavil-kind, was read the third
time, and passed upon the Question.

The Proviso in the Bill concerning the Town-lands of Wanting, was read the
third time, and passed upon the Question.

Friday, December. 9. four Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the last
being the Bill for the retaining, well ordering, and governing of Mariners and
Seamen, was upon the second reading committed unto all the Burgesses of the
Port-Towns, the Burgesses for York, the Knights and Citizens for London, Dr.
Caesar, Mr. Whally, and others: who were appointed to meet on Monday next in the
afternoon, in Middle-Temple-hall.

The Bill for establishing of good order in Grammar-schools was read the second
time, and upon the several Questions for committing and engrossing, was
rejected.

Six other Bills had each of them one reading; Bill to confirm the
Statute-Merchant.
the last being a Bill for the confirmation of Statutes-Merchant acknowledged
in the City of Lincoln, and Town corporate of Nottingham, was upon the second
reading ordered to be engrossed.

Seven Bills were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Controuler and others; of which,
one was the Bill concerning Fustians, and another for the repairing of
Stains-bridge and Egham-cawsey.

The Bill for Tillage and Husbandry was read the first time.

The Amendments in the Bill for the recovery of certain waste marish and watery
Grounds in the Isle of Ely, and the Counties of Cambridge, Huntington,
Northampton, Lincoln, Norfolk, and Suffolk, being twice read, the Bill upon the
Question was ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for the Lord Marquess of Winchester, upon the second reading was
committed unto Mr. Wingfield, Dr. Caesar, Mr. Maynard, Mr. Henry Mountague, Mr.
Francis Moore, and others: who were appointed to meet to morrow in the
afternoon, in the Exchequer-chamber.

Saturday, December. 10. three Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the
last being a Bill against the decay of Highways in the Counties of Sussex and
Surrey, was read the first time.

The Amendments in the Bill against stealing of Corn and Fruit, was twice read,
and the Bill thereupon ordered to be engrossed.

Three other Bills also had each of them one reading; of which, the second
being the Bill for the well ordering of such as do practice the Science of
Surgery, was read the second time, and after the doubtfulness of the
Question three several times put, it was upon the division of the House dashed
with the difference of 29 Voices, viz. with the No 102, and with the Yea 72.

Two Bills were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, and
others; together with a third, being for the explanation of the Statute made 5
Reginae, concerning Laborers.

Mr. Wiseman one of the Committees in the Bill against bringing in of foreign
Cards for Wool, showed the meetings of the Committees, and that eleven of the
Committees did only meet, and six of them do well like of the Bill, and five
do not; and so delivered in the said Bill, and referred the further
consideration thereof to the House.

Mr. Sergeant Drew and Dr. Stanhopp brought from the Lords two Bills lately
passed in this House, and now also passed with their Lordships, with some
Additions and Amendments; the one of them being for erecting of Hospitals, or
Abiding and Working-houses for the Poor, and the other for the establishing of
the Queens Hospital in Bristol, and for the relief of the Poor and Orphans
there.

Sunday, December. 11.

Monday, December. 12. the Bill for redressing the abuses and deceits used in
Painting, upon the second reading was committed unto Mr. George Moore, Mr.
Fettiplace, Sir William Cornwallis, Mr. Recorder of London, and others: who
were to meet to morrow in the afternoon, in the Exchequer-chamber.

The Bill for confirming the Letters Patent granted to the
Merchant-Adventurers of the City of Exeter, was upon the second reading
committed unto the Knights and Citizens for London, the Burgesses for York,
Lynn, and Newcastle, Mr. Sergeant Heal, and others: who were appointed to meet
this afternoon in the Middle-Temple-hall.

The Bill against the buying of Armor brought from beyond the Seas, was read
the second time, and rejected upon the several Questions for the committing and
engrossing.

The Bill for provision of a Preacher in the Tower of London, Bill for a
Preacher in the Tower of London.
was upon the second reading committed unto all the Privy Counselors of this
House, Mr. Henry Hubbert, Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower, Mr. Recorder of London,
and others: who were appointed to meet to morrow in the afternoon, in the
Exchequer-chamber.

The Bill also for building of a bridge over the River Wye, was upon the second
reading committed unto Sir Robert Wroth, Mr. Herbert Crofts, Mr. Sergeant
Williams, Mr. Robert Knowls, Sir John Scudamore, Mr. Creswell, and others: who
were appointed to meet to morrow in the afternoon, in the Middle-Temple-hall.

The Bill for the Lord Thomas Howard, was upon the second reading committed
unto Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Francis Bacon, Mr. Francis Moore, Mr.
Winch, Mr. Solicitor, and others: who were appointed to meet upon Wednesday
next in the afternoon, in the Treasury-chamber.

The Bill for the relief of the Poor was read the third time, and passed upon
the Question.

Tuesday, December. 13. six Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the
last being a Bill for the true making of Daggers, Swords, and Rapiers, and of
the blades of every of them, was read the second time, and rejected upon the
several Questions for the committing and engrossing.

The Amendments in the Bill for Bristol, was thrice read, and passed.

The Bill for the recovery of certain waste, marish, and watery Grounds in the
Isle of Ely, and the Counties of Cambridge, Huntington, Northampton, Lincoln,
Norfolk, and Suffolk, was read the third time, and passed upon the Question.
Which Bill, and also the Bill for the relief of the poor which passed the House
yesterday, were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Controuler and others.

The Bill for Husbandry and Tillage was read the second time; and after some
Amendments therein by some of the Committees in the Committee-chamber of this
House, the said Amendments being twice read, the Bill was ordered to be
engrossed.

Wednesday, December. 14. five Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the
last being the Bill for granting of three Subsidies and six Fifteens and
Tenths, was read the third time, and passed upon the Question.

Mr. Atturney-General and Dr. Stanhopp brought from the Lords a Bill lately
passed in this House, entitled, An Act for the explanation of the Statute made
1 Eliz. concerning Laborers, showing, that their Lordships have likewise
passed the same, with some Amendments.

Two other Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the second being a
Bill for the establishing of the possessions of the Bishopric of Norwich, was
read the third time, and staid from being put to the Question for passing till
to morrow, that the Counsel of one Mr. Leicester might be heard in this House.

Friday next is appointed to hear the Counsel learned of and concerning the
Cause of Leassees and Patentees.

Thursday, December. 15. two Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the
second being the Bill for the lawful making of Bays, was read the third time,
and passed upon the Question.

The Amendments in the Bill for the relieving of Cloathiers, concerning the
weight of short, broad, and colored Clothes to be made in the Counties of
Suffolk and Essex, were twice read, and ordered to be committed.

The Bill for better staying of Corn within the Realm, passed upon the
Question; and upon the division of the House, after many Arguments, with the
difference of 29 Voices, viz. with the Yea 124, Observation of a Ceremony of
ancient custom used in the House of Com.
and with the No 85. Whereupon after a Motion, that according to the ancient
custom of this House, all the Members of the same which did speak against the
passing of the said Bill, should go forth of the House to bring in the Bill
into the House again, together with the residue of the Members of this House
which went out before with the passing of the said Bill, wherein as sundry
Speeches were used pro and contra; so at last it was resolved, it should be so
done and observed for orders sake accordingly. And then all the Members of this
House being gone forth, saving Mr. Speaker and the Clerk, Mr. Controuler
brought in the Bill in his hand, accompanied with all the Members of this
House, and delivered the same Bill to Mr. Speaker according to the ancient
former use of this House in that behalf observed.

Friday, December. 16. five Bills had each of them the third reading, and passed
upon the Question; of which, one was against the stretching and taintering of
Northern Cloth, and another against the transporting of Sheepskins and Pelts:
And a little after all the said Bills were passed in the House, they were sent
up to the Lords by Mr. Controuler and others.

The Bill for confirmation of the Jointure of Christian Lady Sands, was upon
the second reading committed to Mr. Controuler, Mr. Secretary, Mr. Brodgrave
Attorney of the Duchy, Sir William Moore, Mr. Edward Lukenor, Sir Francis
Hastings, and others: who were appointed to meet to morrow in the afternoon, in
the Exchequer-chamber.

After many Arguments in the Bill for increase of people for the service and
strength of the Realm, both for and against it, a Motion was made, That a
Proviso engrossed in Parchment might be added to the same Bill; which being
thrice read, and the Bill and Proviso put to the Question, the same did pass
upon the Question, and it was then ordered, that the said Proviso should be
inserted and written in the end of the said Bill, as parcel thereof.

Saturday, December. 17. the Bill for relief of Cloathiers, concerning weight of
short, broad, colored Clothes to be made within the Counties of Suffolk and
Essex, was read the third time, and passed upon the Question; and after upon
the division of the House, with the difference of 26 Voices, viz. with Yea 105,
and with the No 79: Which being done, and a Motion thereupon made by some, That
those that did sit against the Bill, might rise and go forth to fetch and bring
in the Bill into this House, accompanied with the residue of the Members of
this House, according to the ancient Orders in such cases used, Mr. Speaker did
thereupon move, That in regard of the pretiousness of the present time, the
Parliament being so near an end, it might please this House, in yielding and
assenting to the due allowance of the right of the said Order in the said
course thereof, The usual Ceremony dispensed withal for this time.
in the ceremony of bringing in this Bill, the execution of the same may be at
this time omitted, in regard of the shortness of the same time; and was
thereupon so assented unto, and ordered accordingly upon the Question.

The Bill for Husbandry and Tillage was read the third time, and passed upon
the Question; and after many Arguments, was sent up to the Lords by Mr.
Secretary and others.

Sunday, December. 18.

Monday, December. 19. the Amendments in the Bill concerning the confirmation and
establishment of the deprivation of diverse Bishops in the beginning of her
Majesty's Reign, being thrice read, the Bill with the Amendments, passed upon
the Question.

Two other Bills had each of them one reading; of which the second being the
Bill against lewd and wandering persons pretending themselves to be Soldiers
or Mariners, was read the third time, and referred, after sundry Speeches, to
Sir Robert Wroth, and others, to go up presently into the Committee-chamber of
this House, to amend some parts of the said Bill according to some of the said
Motions.

Mr. Atturney-General and Dr. Stanhopp brought from the Lords a Bill passed
with their Lordships, entitled, An Act for the confirmation of the Subsidy
granted by the Clergy, and showed, that their Lordships do recommend the same
to this House for the speedy expedition of the same Bill in this House.

The Bill for confirmation of the Subsidy granted by the Clergy, prima vice
lect.

Mr. Atturney-General and Dr. Stanhopp brought from the Lords a Bill lately
passed with their Lordships, with the good assent and agreement of the Parties,
entitled, An Act of Parliament for Arthur Hatch her Majesty's Ward, for
enjoying the Rectory and Parsonage of South-Moulton in the County of Devon, for
certain years, reserving the usual Rent.

Tuesday, December. 20. the Bill for confirmation of the Subsidy granted by the
Clergy, was read the second time, and passed upon the Question.

Mr. Recorder of London, one of the Committees in the Bill against lewd and
wandering persons pretending themselves to be Soldiers or Mariners, showed,
That they had mended the said Bill in some parts thereof; which Amendments
being twice read to the House, and before any allowance for the third reading
of them, sundry Members of this House did argue to the parts of the said Bill
and Amendments, both with and against it. After which, Committees were
appointed in the said Bill against wandering Soldiers and Mariners; and also
in the Bill concerning Leassees and Patentees, against the next sitting of this
Court; and to meet to morrow in the afternoon, in the Middle Temple hall, who
were as follows: Mr. Recorder of London, Mr. Brodgrave Attorney of the
Duchy, Sir George Carewe, Mr. Hunt, and others; together with all other
Committees in all other Bills formerly committed by this House, and not as yet
expedited: all which are to meet at the aforesaid time and place, concerning
such Bills as are committed unto them.

This day this Court was adjoured until the 11th of January next coming, The
House adjourned to the next month.
at eight of the clock in the morning, by her Majesty's commandment; and so
likewise the Upper House.

Upon which 11 of January, Jan. 11.
being Wednesday, the House met again, and without any other further ceremony,
proceeded in such ordinary Bills and businesses as had been left unperfected in
the former meeting: The first of which (that is expressed in the Original
Journal Book of the House of Commons) was the giving of the first reading unto
the Amendments and Provisoes of the Lords, added unto the Bill lately passed in
the House, and sent up to their Lordships, and again returned by them with the
said Amendments and Provisoes, being entitled, An Act for erecting of houses
of Correction for punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars.

The Amendments and Proviso of the Lords in the Bill lately passed in this
House, for the relief of the Poor, was this day read in this House, for the
first reading of the said Amendments and Proviso.

The Bill for Arthur Hatch her Majesty's Ward, for enjoying the Rectory and
Parsonage of South-Moulton in the County of Devon for certain years, reserving
the usual Rent, was read the first time.

The Bill concerning the Highway-lands of Alisbury in the County of Bucks, was
upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr.
Recorder of London, Mr. Lee, the Burgesses of Alisbury, Mr. Boyer, and others:
who were appointed to meet this afternoon in the Inner-Temple-hall.

The Amendments and Proviso in the Bill to prevent double payment of Debts upon
Shop-books, was deferred until to morrow to be considered of, for perfecting of
the same, above in the Committee-chamber of this House.

Lastly, the Bill for taking away the benefit of Clergy from Robbers of houses
in the daytime, though no person be therein, was read the first time.

Thursday, Jan. 12. three Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the
last being the Bill for the due execution of Ordinances made in Corporations,
was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Philips, Mr. Sergeant Warberton,
Mr. Finch, Mr. Wingfield, Mr. Pelham, and others: who were appointed to meet to
morrow in the afternoon, at Serjeants-Inne in Chancery Lane.

The Bill for the Hundred of Beynersh alias Beynerst, in the County of Berks,
was read the second time, and upon the Question it was ordered to be engrossed.

The Amendments this day made by some of the Member of this House above in the
Committee-chamber, in the Bill to prevent double payment of Debts upon
Shop-books, were twice read, and upon the Question ordered to be engrossed.

The Amendments and Provisoes of the Lords in the Bill lately passed in this
House, entitled, An Act for erecting of houses of Correction and punishment of
Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars, being twice read for the second and
third reading of the same Amendments and Provisoes, were together with the said
Bill, after sundry Speeches first had, referred to the further consideration
and examination of Sir Walter Rawleigh, Mr. Francis Bacon, Mr. Solicitor, Mr.
Lukenor, Mr. Wingfield, Sir Edward Hobby, Sir William Cornwallis, Mr. Hext, Mr.
Robert Wroth, and Mr. Sergeant Harries: who were appointed to meet this
afternoon, together with the other Committees against wandering Soldiers and
Mariners, at Serjeants-Inne in Chancery Lane.

The Bill to reform Deceits and breaches of Trusts touching Lands given to
charitable uses, was read the first time.

Friday, Jan. 13. two Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the second
being the Bill concerning Garret de Malmes, and John Hunger, Merchants
strangers, was upon the second reading committed to the Knights and Burgesses
of London, Mr. Tho. Smyth, Sir Walter Rawleigh, Mr. Oldsworth, and others: who
were appointed to meet on Monday in the afternoon, at Serjeants-Inne in
Chancery Lane.

Two other Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the second being the
Bill for the suppressing of unlawful and unsized bread, was upon the second
reading committed unto the Knights and Citizens of London, Mr. Edward Hubbert,
the Burgesses of Chester, Worcester, Oxford, Bristol, Winchester, and
Cambridge, Sergeant Harries, and others: who were appointed to meet to morrow
in the afternoon, at Sergeants Inn in Chancery Lane.

Mr. John Acton one of the Burgesses for Droyt in the County of Worcester, is
for his special businesses, licensed by Mr. Speaker to depart.

Saturday, Jan. 14. two Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the
second being the Bill to avoid Deceit and breaches of Trust touching Lands
given to charitable uses, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr.
Sergeant Harries, the Knights and Burgesses for London, Mr. Miles Sands, and
others: who were appointed to meet upon Monday next in the afternoon, at
Serjeants-Inne in Chancery Lane.

The Bill for Arthur Hatch her Majesty's Ward, for enjoying the Rectory and
Parsonage of South-Moulton in the County of Devon, for certain years, reserving
the usual Rent, was read the third time, and passed upon the Question.

Sir Walter Rawleigh renewing the Motion for Conference to be prayed with the
Lords concerning their Lordships Amendments and Provisoes in the Bill
concerning erecting houses of Correction and Punishment of Rogues and sturdy
Beggars, for the better reconciling of them with the Bill now begun against
wandering Soldiers and Mariners; it was thereupon thought convenient by the
House, that the said Sir Walter Rawleigh, accompanied with a convenient number
of this House, should presently repair to the Upper House, to move for the said
Conference accordingly.

Which Conference the Lords granted, and appointed six of themselves to meet
with a convenient number of this House, upon Monday next at eight a clock in
the morning, in the second chamber of the Upper House.

Sunday, Jan. 15.

Monday, Jan. 16. two Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the first
being the Bill for explanation of and addition to an Act made 5. Reginae, for
maintenance of the Navy, was read prima vice.

Sir Edward Hobby moved, That the Sergeant of the House be commanded to call on
-- Leicester to appear in this House for serving a Subpoena on Sir Henry
Norris; and also to warn one -- Stevens.

Two Bills more had each of them one reading; of which, the first being the
Bill concerning the Hospital of Warwick, was read the third time, and passed
upon the Question.

Tuesday, Jan. 17. four Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the last
being the Bill for the assurance of the Jointure of Joyce the wife of John
Thornbrigge, was read the second time, and upon the several Questions for
committing and engrossing, was rejected.

The Bill for the reforming of sundry Abuses in the garbling of Spices and
Drugs, was read the second time, and rejected upon the several Questions for
the committing and engrossing thereof.

Mr. Sergeants Drew, and Dr. Stanhopp brought from the Lords a Bill concerning
a Lease of great value, procured to be passed from her Majesty to William
Kirkham Junior; which Bill their Lordships have passed, and do desire the
speedy executing thereof in this House, the same Bill greatly importing her
Majesty: whereupon the Bill was presently read in the House, prima vice.

Wednesday, Jan. 18. eight Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the
first being a Bill for the reviewing, continuance, and explanation of an Act
for the necessary relief of Mariners and Soldiers, was read the first time;
and the last being the Bill to tax all Lands and Goods for the payment of the
Subsidies in the same Parish where it lies, was read the first time, and
rejected upon the Question for a second reading.

The Committees in the Bill for restraining the excessive making of Malt, and
the Committees in the Bill to restrain Deceits in breaches of Trust, were
appointed to meet this afternoon in the Exchequer-chamber.

Thursday, Jan. 19. the Bill for reuniting the Manor of Parrisgarden in the
County of Surrey, was upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Brodgrave
Attorney of the Duchy, Mr. Newton, Mr. Wiseman, Mr. Sergeant Williams, Mr.
Edmond Boyer, and Mr. Francis Moore, and others; and the Bill, with the
Committees Names, were delivered unto Mr. Edmond Boyer: who with the rest were
appointed to meet to morrow in the afternoon, in the Middle-Temple-hall.

The Bill for the repealing of a branch of a Statute made 34 Hen. 8. entitled,
The Ordinance for Wales, was read the second time, and not being spoken against
by any, was ordered to be engrossed.

Friday, Jan. 20. the Bill for the sale of the Lands and Goods of John Sharp,
to pay his Debts, was upon the second reading committed to Sir John Heart, Mr.
Henry Hubbard, Mr. Nevil, Mr. Thomas Smith, Mr. Southerton, Mr. Colebrand, and
others; and the Bill, with the Committees Names, were delivered unto Mr.
Southerton: who with the rest were appointed to meet this afternoon in
Middle-Temple-hall.

The Bill that Thomas Culpepper and John Culpepper may dispose of their Lands,
whereof they are Tenants in Tail, as other Tenants in tail may do, was read the
second time, and committed unto Mr. Barker, Mr. Sergeant Williams, Mr. Sergeant
Harries, and others; and the Bill and Committees Names were delivered to Mr.
Sergeant Williams: who were appointed to meet this afternoon in the
Middle-Temple-hall.

Saturday, Jan. 21. two Bills had each of them their first reading; of which,
the last was against carrying of Corn or Grain out of the Realm at certain
times.

Mr. Francis Goodwyn, one of the Committees in the Bill concerning the
Highway-lands of Alisbury in the County of Bucks, brought in the Bill with some
Amendments; which being twice read, the Bill was upon the Question ordered to
be engrossed.

Mr. Waldgrave, one of the Committees in the Bill to prohibit the carrying of
Herrings beyond the Seas, showed their meeting, and their Amendments of the
Bill; the Bill being twice read, upon the Question it was ordered to be
engrossed.

Sunday, Jan. 22.

Monday, Jan. 23. three Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the third
being a Bill for explanation of a Saving in a Stat. made 27 Reginae, entitled,
An Act for the better foundation and relief of the Poor of the Hospital of
Eastbridge in the County of kent, was read the second time, and rejected upon
the several Questions of the Committing and engrossing.

Sir John Heart, one of the Committees in the Bill concerning Garret de Malmes
and John Younger, Merchants strangers, showed the meeting and travail of the
Committees, and their making of a new Bill, for sundry considerations then
opened by him, and so delivered in to the House both the old Bill and the new.

Tuesday, Jan. 24. the Bill concerning Garret de Malmes and John Younger,
Merchant strangers, had its first reading, being a new Bill brought in by the
Committees, who had thought fit the old Bill should be rejected.

The new Bill also for the disposing of certain Lands of Mr. Tho. Knivett, was
read the first time, after the old Bill had been rejected by the Committees
thereof.

The Bill for confirmation of the Jointure of Mary Lady Verney, was upon the
second reading committed unto Mr. Philips, Mr. Sands, Mr. Snigg, and others;
and the Bill, with the Committees Names, delivered to Mr. Snigg: who were
appointed to meet this afternoon in the Middle-Temple-hall.

Wednesday, Jan. 25. Mr. Snigg, one of the Committees in the Bill for
confirmation of the Jointure of Lady Mary Verney, the Wife of Sir Edmond
Verney, showed the meeting and travail of the Committees, and some few
Amendments in the said Bill, and so delivered in the Bill.

Three Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the second being the Bill
for avoiding of deceits in Measures and Weights, was read prima vice.

The Committees in the Bill for the better measuring of seven miles from the
Town of Great Yarmouth, A Bill for the measuring 7 miles from Yarmouth.
are ordered to meet this afternoon in the Exchequer-chamber.

The Committees in a Bill for the reviving, continuing, and explanation of an
Act for the necessary relief of Soldiers and Mariners, are likewise to meet
this afternoon in the Exchequer-chamber.

Thursday, Jan 26. two Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the second
being the Bill concerning Garret de Malmes and John Younger, Merchant
strangers, was read the second time, and ordered upon the Question to be
engrossed.

Mr. Arnold, one of the Committees in the Bill for the reviving, continuing,
and explanation of an Act for the necessary relief of Mariners and Soldiers,
prayed a new day for the meeting of the said Committees; whereupon Mr. Arnold,
Sir Henry Norris, Sir Gilley Merricke, Sir Oliver Lambert, the Knights and
Burgesses for London, and twenty three others, were nominated and appointed to
meet this afternoon in the Middle-Temple-hall about it.

Friday, Jan. 27. the Bill that Plaintiffs shall pay the Defendants their
Costs, lying in Prison for want of Bail, A Bill that the Plaintiff pay the
Defendants cost lying in prison for want of Bail, if the Action pass against
the Plaintiff.
if the Action pass against the Plaintiff, was read the second time, and
committed to Mr. Sands, Mr. Boys, Mr. Snigg, Mr. Crook, the Recorder of
London, and others: who were appointed to meet this afternoon in the
Temple-hall.

The Committees likewise in the Bill for execution of Judgment, and the
Committees in the Bill for avoiding deceits in Measures and Weights, were
likewise appointed to meet at the same time and place; which was now upon the
second reading committed to the former Committees in the Bill that the
Plaintiffs shall pay the Defendants their Costs; and Mr. Johnson was added unto
them.

The Bill for punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds, etc. was read prima vice.

Saturday, Jan. 28. the Bill for punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds, etc. was read
the second time, and committed to some Members of this House, to be considered
of in the Committee-chamber of this House.

The Bill for confirmation of Lady Mary the wife of Sir Edmond Verney Knight. her
Jointure, was read the third time, and passed upon the Question.

Goodale, one of the adverse parties to the Bill concerning the Highway-lands
of the Town of Alisbury, being present in this House and praying some words to
be inserted into the Bill; which being upon due and deliberate consideration of
this House admitted to be inserted accordingly, and three times read, the Bill
was put to the Question and passed accordingly.

Sunday, Jan. 29.

Monday, Jan. 30. the Bill concerning Garret de Malmes and John Hunger,
Merchant strangers, was read the third time.

There were seven Bills this morning sent up to the Lords from this House by
Mr. Secretary and others; of which, the first was the Bill for punishment of
Rogues, etc. the second, for the lawful making of Bays; the third, to reform
deceits and breaches of Trust touching Lands given to charitable uses: with
order also to move their Lordships for Conference, some time after this present
day, with their Lordships concerning the Bill lately passed with their
Lordships, and sent down by them unto this House, entitled, An Act to reform
sundry abuses committed by Soldiers and others, used in her Majesty's service
concerning the Wars.

Tuesday, Jan. 31. the Bill concerning the confirming of Statute-Merchants,
acknowledged in the Town of Newcastle upon Tyne, prima vice lect.

The Amendments in the Bill for reviving, continuing, and explanation of an Act
for the necessary relief of Mariners and Soldiers, being twice read, the Bill
was ordered to be engrossed.

The Amendments in the Bill for avoiding deceits in Measures and Weights, were
twice read; and after sundry Speeches had, pro and contra, the learned Counsel
of the Clerk of the Market being upon a Motion of some of this House, admitted
to be heard at the bar, and called for that purpose by the Sergeant of this
House to come in, the Sergeant showed, that the said Clerk of the Market was
gone down into the Hall to fetch his Counsel: in the mean time the House
entering into another Cause, the said Bill was thereupon committed to be put to
the Question for engrossing.

On Wednesday, Feb. 1.
Feb. 1. three Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the last being the
Bill for reviving, continuing, and explanation of an Act for the necessary
relief of Mariners and Soldiers, was read the third time, and passed upon the
Question.

The Amendments in the Bill against the excess of Apparel, Bill against excess
in Apparel.
was read the second time, and ordered upon the Question to be engrossed.

The Bill for maintenance of Hospitality, Bill for maintenance of Hospitality.
and for increase of all Victual and Flesh, whereby the Poor shall be much
relieved, was read the second time, and rejected upon the several Questions for
committing and engrossing.

Friday, Feb. 3. the Bill to restrain the lading of Corn in some Ports, was
upon the second reading committed unto Mr. Colebrand, Mr. Hext, Sir Thomas
Munson, Mr. Arnold, the Burgesses of the Port-Towns, and others: who were
appointed to meet this afternoon in the Middle-Temple-hall.

The Bill also for the restraint of carrying of Corn out of the Realm, was read
the second time, and committed to the last former Committees; and the same time
and place was appointed for meeting of both Committees, and both the Bills were
delivered to Mr. Colebrand.

The Bill against excess in Apparel was read tertia vice, and passed upon the
Question.

Saturday, Feb. 4. Mr. John Sherley, one of the Committees in the Bill for
better execution of Judgments, showed the meeting and travail of the said
Committees, and some Amendments they had made in the said Bill; and so
delivered in the Bill and Amendments to the House.

The Bill for building and erecting of a bridge over the River of Wye at Wilton
upon Wye near the Town of Ross in the County of Hereford, was read the third
time, and passed upon the Question.

Dr. Carewe and Dr. Stanhopp did bring from the Lords a Bill passed in this
House, and sent up to their Lordships, entitled, An Act for the establishing a
Jointure to Anne Lady Wentworth now Wife of William Pope Esquire and for the better
enabling William Pope, aforesaid, to sell certain of his Lands for the payment
of his Debts. And another for the confirmation of the Jointure of the Lady
Verney, Wife of Sir Edmond Verney Knight; which Bill their Lordships have also
passed, with some Amendments.

Sunday, Feb. 5.

Monday, Feb. 6. two Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the first
being the Bill for the reformation of retailing, and Pawn-takers, was read the
first time.

Mr. Boys, one of the Committees in the two Bills, the one against carrying
Corn out of the Realm, and the other to restrain the lading of Corn in some
Ports, showed the meeting of the Committees, and that they had made some
Amendments in one of the same Bills; and so delivered the said Bills into the
House.

Mr. Francis Bacon, Bill against the decaying of Towns and houses of Husbandry.
one of the Committees in the Bill late passed in the Upper House by the Lords,
and sent down to this House, against the decaying of Towns and houses of
Husbandry, showed the meeting of the Committees, and their Amendments in the
said Bill; which being read to the House, were very well liked of by the whole
House.

Tuesday, Feb. 7. two Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the second
being a Bill for establishing a Jointure to Anne Lady Wentworth, now Wife of
William Pope Esquire, and for the better enabling of the said William to sell
certain Lands for payment of his Debts, was read the second time, and committed
to Mr. Controuler, Mr. Lukenor, Mr. Francis Bacon, Mr. Oglethorpe, and the
Knights and Burgesses of London, and twenty four others: who were appointed to
meet this afternoon in the Court of Wards.

The Amendments and Provisoes of the Lords in a Bill lately passed in this
House, entitled, An Act for the reviving, continuing, and repealing of diverse
Statutes, being thrice read, the Amendments were assented unto, and the
Provisoes were passed upon the Question.

Wednesday, Feb. 8. the Bill entitled, An Act for the establishing of a
Jointure to Anne Lady Wentworth, now Wife of William Pope Esquire, and for the
better enabling of the said William to sell certain of his Lands for the
payment of his Debts; and the Bill entitled, An Act for the enabling Edmond
Moleneux Esquire to sell Lands for the payment of Debts and Legacies; and the
Bill entitled, An Act against the deceitful stretching of Northern Cloth; and
the Bill entitled, An Act for the further continuing and explanation of an Act
for the necessary relief of Soldiers and Mariners, made thirty five Reginae,
were sent up to the Lords by Mr. Controuler and others.

The Bill for the reformation of abuses in Wine-casks was read the third time,
and dashed upon the Question.

The Bill for the better execution of Judgments was read the third time, and
passed upon the Question.

Thursday, Feb. 9. the Bill entitled, An Act for reformation of
Retailing-Brokers, and other Pawn-takers; the Bill, entitled, An Act that
Lessees may enjoy their Leases against all Patentees, their Heirs, and
Assignees, notwithstanding any default of payment of their Rents during the
time that the Reversion or Inheritance remained in the Crown; and a Bill
entitled, An Act for the better execution of Judgments; were sent up to the
Lords by Mr. Controuler and others.

The Bill for the Queens Majesty's most gracious Pardon was once read, and
passed upon the Question.

Nota, That whereas to the passing of other Bills three several readings are
required, here the Bill for her Majesty's most gracious Pardon passed upon the
first reading.

Mr. Sergeant Drew and Dr. Carewe brought from the Lords the Bill entitled,
An Act for the grant of three Subsidies, and six Fifteenths and Tenths; and did
show that their Lordships in like manner have passed the said Bill; and so
delivered the same to Mr. Speaker, to the end that he might carry the same up
to the Upper House to be presented by him unto her Majesty, in the name of the
whole House.

Post Meridiem.

The Queens Majesty came to the Upper House soon after three of the clock; of
which, the House of Commons having notice, repaired thither with Christopher
Yelverton Sergeant at Law their Speaker, who having in the name of the whole
House presented her Majesty with the Bill of three Subsidies, and six
Fifteenths and Tenths, amongst other things, desired her Majesty's Royal assent
to such Laws as had passed the two Houses. He was answered according to her
Majesty's command, by the Lord Keeper, That she thankfully accepted of the said
Gift of her loving Subjects, and very well allowed of the said Speakers pains
and Speech.

Then Mr. Smith the Clerk of the Upper House, The Qu. passes 24 public Acts,
and 19 private Acts, and refuses 48 Acts that had passed both Houses, and then
dissolves this Parl.
having read the Titles of all the Acts, her Majesty gave her Royal assent to
twenty four public Acts, and nineteen private; and refused forty eight which
had passed both the Houses. After which, Sir Thomas Edgerton Knight, Lord
Keeper of the great Seal of England, by her Majesty's commandment dissolved
this present Parliament.

An exact Journal of the Passages of the Upper House of Parliament, 43 Eliz.
holden at Westminster anno 43 Eliz. Reginae, annoque Dom. 1601. which began on
Tuesday 27 October. and there continued until 19 December. next ensuing.
ON Tuesday, October. 27. Oct. 27.
the Parliament held according to the Summons that had been sent forth, The Qu.
comes to the House of Peers.
and the Queens Majesty was personally present in the Upper House about three
of the clock in the afternoon: her Majesty came accompanied with the Lord
Keeper of the great Seal, and diverse of the Nobility and Bishops. There were
present, all sitting in their Parliament-Robes according to their several
places, these Noble Personages following.

Lift of the Peers then present.
The Archbishop of Canterbury. Sir Tho. Edgerton, Lord Leeper of the great Seal.
The Lord Buckhurst, Lord Treasurer of England. The Marquess of Winchester. The
Earl of Sussex, Earl Marshal of England. The Earl of Nottingham, Lord
High-Admiral of England, and Lord Steward of her Majesty's Household. The Earl
of Northumberland. The Earl of Shrewsbury. The Earl of Derby. The Earl of
Worcester. The Earl of Cumberland. The Earl of Hertford. The Earl of Lincoln.
BISHOPS.
The Bishop of London. The Bishop of Durham. The Bishop of Winchester. The
Bishop of Rochester. The Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield. The Bishop of
Worcester. The Bishop of Bath and Wells. The Bishop of St. David's. The Bishop
of Lincoln. The Bishop of St. Assaph. The Bishop of Chester. The Bishop of
Chichester. The Bishop of Exeter. The Bishop of Salisbury. The Bishop of Ely.
The Bishop of Peterborough.
BARONS.
The Lord Zouche. The Lord Cobham. The Lord Stafford. The Lord Gray de Wilton.
The Lord Dudley. The Lord Lumley. The Lord Sturton. The Lord Windsore. The Lord
Mordant. The Lord Wharton. The Lord Rich. The L. Willoughby of Parham. The Lord
Sheffield. The Lord Darcy of Chichester. The Lord Chandois. The Lord St. John
of Bletsoe. The Lord Compton. The Lord Norreys. The Lord Howard of Walden.
Sir Thomas Edgerton Knight. Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, made a
Speech to this effect. An. 1601.

HE used strong persuasions both to Thankfulness and Obedience; Lord Keeper's
Speech.
and also showed, her Majesty desired the Parliament might end before
Christmas. He showed the necessity we stand in, and the means to prevent it;
the necessity of the Wars between Spain and England, the means and treasure we
had to oppose. His advice was, that Laws in force might be revised and
explained, and no new Laws made.

The causes of the Wars, he laid down to be, that they were Enemies to God, the
Queen, and the Peace of this Kingdom: that they conspired to overthrow
Religion, and to reduce us to a tyrannical Servitude.

These two Enemies he named to be, the Bishop of Rome, and the King of Spain.
Our Estate standing thus, he advised us to be provident, by reason we deal with
circumspect Enemies, and said, he was confident of good success, because God
has ever, and he hoped ever would bless the Queen with successful fortune. He
showed how apparent his providence was; for by experience and judgment, his
tortering he gives, the means and courses he takes for our instructions: And
secondly, the success we had against him by Gods strong arm of defense in Anno
1588, and diverse others times since.

You see to what effect the Queens support of the French Kings Estate has
brought him to, even made him one of the greatest Princes in Europe; yet when
her Majesty's Forces there left him, how again he was fain to ransom a servile
Peace at the hands of our Enemies the Spaniards, with dishonorable and servile
Conditions.

For the Low Countries, how by her aid, from a confused Government and Estate,
she brought them to an unity in Council, and defended them with such success in
her Attempts against the greatest power of the Spaniards tyrannical designs;
which have so much galled him, that how many desperate practices have been both
devised, consented unto, and set on foot by the late King his Father, I need
not show you, nor trouble you with Arguments for proof thereof, being confessed
by them that should have been Actors themselves thereof; but De mortuis nil
nisi bonum. I would be loath to speak ill of the dead, much more to slander the
dead. I have seen her Majesty wear at her Girdle the price of her own blood; I
mean, Jewels that have been given to her Physicians to have done that unto her
which God will ever keep her from; but she has worn them rather in triumph,
than for the price, that has not been valuable.



Receivers of Petitions for England, Receivers of Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland. Sir John Popham Knight. Lord Chief Justice, Francis
Gaudy one of the Justices of the King's Bench, George Kingsmell one of the
Justices of the Common Pleas, Dr. Carewe, and Dr. Stanhopp.

Receivers of Petitions for Gascoigne, and other Lands and Countries beyond the
Seas, and of the Isles. Sir Edm. Anderson Knight. Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, Sir William Periam Knight. Lord Chief Baron, Thomas Walmesly one of
the Justices of the Common Pleas, Dr. Swale, and Dr. Hene.

Triers of Petitions of England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland. Triers of
Petitions.
The Archbishop of Canterbury, the Marquess of Winchester, the Earl of Sussex
Lord Marshal of England, the Earl of Nottingham Lord High Admiral of England,
and Steward of the Queens house, the Earl of Hertford, the Bishop of London,
the Bishop of Durham, the Bishop of Winchester, the Lord Zouche, and the Lord
Cobham: All these, or any four of them, calling unto them the Lord Keeper of
the great Seal, and the Lord Treasurer, and the Queens Sergeants, at their
leisures to meet and hold their place in the Chamberlain's chamber.

Triers of Petitions for Gascoigne, and other Lands and Countries beyond the
Seas, and the Isles. The Earl of Oxford High Chamberlain of England, the Earl
of Northumberland, the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Earl of Worcester, the Earl of
Huntingdon, the Bishop of Rochester, the Bishop of Lincoln, the Lord Hunsdon
Chamberlain to the Queen, the Lord De-la-ware, the Lord Lumley, the Lord
Burleigh: All these, or any four of them, calling to them the Queens Sergeants,
and the Queens Attorney and Solicitor, to hold their place, when their leisure
did serve them, to meet in the Treasurer's chamber.

Then the Lord Keeper continued the Parliament; which is set down in the
Original Journal Book in these words: Dominus Custos Magni Sigilli, ex mandato
Dominae Reginae, continuavit praesens Parliament. usq in diem Veneris prox.
futur. viz. 30 diem October.

Friday, October. 30. about one of the clock in the afternoon, her Majesty came
by water to the Upper House; and being apparelled in her Royal Robes, and
placed in her Chair of Estate, diverse of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal being
present, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons, who had
attended at the door with John Crook Esquire Recorder of London, John Crook Esquire
Recorder of London, presented as Speaker.
their Speaker elect, the full space of half an hour, were at last, as many as
could be conveniently, let in: And the said Speaker was led up to the bar at
the lower end of the said House by Sir William Knolls Knight. Controuler of her
Majesty's Household, and Sir John Fortescue Chancellor of the Exchequer, and
presented to her Majesty; to whom, after he had made three low Reverences, he
spoke in effect as follows.

Most sacred and mighty Sovereign,

UPon your commandment, His Speech.
your Majesty's most dutiful and loving Commons, the Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses of the Lower House, have chosen me, your Majesty's most humble
servant, a Member of the same House, to be their Speaker; but my self finding
the weakness of my self, and my ability too weak to undergo so great a burden,
do most humbly beseech your sacred Majesty to continue your most gracious
favor toward me, and not to lay this Charge, so unsupportable, upon my
unworthy and unable self: And that it would please you to command your Commons
to make a new Election of another more able and more sufficient to discharge
the great Service to be appointed by your Majesty and your Subjects.

And, I beseech your most excellent Majesty, not to interpret my denial herein
to proceed from any unwillingness to perform all devoted dutiful service, but
rather out of your Majesty's clemency and goodness, to interpret the same to
proceed from that inward fear and trembling which has ever possessed me, when
heretofore with most gracious audience it has pleased your Majesty to license
me to speak before you: For I know, and must acknowledge, that under God, even
through your Majesty's great bounty and favor, I am that I am. And therefore,
none of your Majesty's most dutiful Subjects more bound to be ready, and being
ready, to perform even the least of your Majesty's commandments.

I therefore do most humbly beseech your Majesty, that in regard the service of
so great a Prince and flourishing Kingdom may the better and more effectually
be effected, to command your dutiful and loving Commons the Knights, citizens,
and Burgesses of the Lower House, to proceed to a new Election.


On Tuesday, Nov. 5.
Nov. 5. were two Bills read; of which, the first being for assurance of Land,
and the second for the restraint of the excessive and superfluous use of
Coaches within the Realm of England, Bill against excessive and superfluous use
of Coaches.
were each of them read prima vice.

Dominus Custos Magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliament. usq in diem
Sabbati, 7 November. hora decima.

Saturday, Nov. 7. the Bill for assurance of Lands was read secunda vice, and
committed unto the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Treasurer, the Earl of
Nottingham, the Earl of Worcester, the Earl of Cumberland, the Earl of Lincoln,
the Lord Bishop of London, the Lord Bishop of Durham, the Lord Bishop of
Winchester, the Lord Zouche, the Lord Cobham, the Lord Gray, the Lord Rich, and
the Lord Howard of Walder; and the Lord Chief Justice of her Majesty's Bench,
the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, the Lord Chief Baron, and Mr.
Atturney-General, were appointed to attend their Lordships.

Tuesday, Nov. 10. two Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the second
being the Bill for preservation of Phesants and Partridges, was read secunda
vice, and committed to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Treasurer,
the Earl of Nottingham, the Earl of Northumberland, the Earl of Derby, the Earl
of Worcester, the Earl of Cumberland, the Earl of Pembrooke, the Earl of
Lincoln, the Bishop of London, the Bishop of Durham, the Bishop of Winchester,
the Bishop of Lincoln, the Bishop of Ely, the Lord Zouche, the Lord Cobham, the
Lord Gray, the Lord Mordant, the Lord Rich, the Lord Sheifield, the Lord
Chandois, the Lord Compton, the Lord Howard of Walden; and the Lord Chief
Justice of her Majesty's Bench, the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and
the Lord Chief Baron, to attend the Lords: And the Bill was delivered to the
Archbishop of Canterbury.

Thursday, Nov. 12. (to which day the Parliament had been last continued) the
Bill concerning Musters, Soldiers, and other things, was read secunda vice,
and committed unto the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Treasurer, the Earl
of Nottingham, six other Earls, eight Bishops, the Lord Zouche, the Lord
Cobham, and eight other Barons; and the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
Mr. Justice Walmesly, Mr. Justice Warberton, Mr. Sergeant Yelverton, and Mr.
Atturney-General, were appointed to attend the Lords.

Saturday, Nov. 14. (to which day the Parliament had been last continued)
request was made by Mr. Connisby Gent. Usher to the House, and signified by the
mouth of the Earl of Nottingham Lord Steward, That forasmuch as the bringing of
any person before the Lords, upon the breach of the Privilege of the House,
did appertain, as the said Mr. Connisby supposed and alleged, to his place,
though in the last Parliament, by some mistake, the Sergeant at Arms was
employed therein; that therefore their Lordships would be pleased to confirm
and settle such Order, as he might at this time and henceforth have the right
of his place in that behalf. Whose Request being considered by the Lords, it
was thought meet, That the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Treasurer,
the Earl of Nottingham, the Earl of Worcester, the Lord Bishop of Winchester,
the Lord Zouche, and the Lord Cobham, should at their next meeting upon any
other occasion, take notice of such Presidents as could be produced therein,
either for the Gentleman Usher, or for the Sergeant at Arms; and thereof to
make Report to the House: Whereupon their Lordships would proceed to the
deciding of the Question between them.

Sunday, Nov. 15.

Monday, Nov. 16. (to which day the Parliament had been last continued) the
Bill for reuniting Eye and Dunsden to the Manor of Sunning, was read secunda
vice.

Dominus Custos Magni Sigill. continuavit praesens Parliament. usq ad diem
Jovis, viz. 19 November.

Thursday, Nov. 19. the Bill for the breed and increase of Horses of Service
within the Realm, was read prima vice. Bill for increase of Horses of service.


Two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which,
the second was to avoid and prevent diverse Misdemeanors in lewd and idle
persons; and the other was for the confirmation of Grants made to her Majesty,
and of Letters Patent made by her Majesty to others.

The Lord Mordant being not able to attend for want of health, certified so
much to the House by the Lord Compton.

This day William Hogan was brought into the House from the Fleet; One of the
Qu. servants complains of an Arrest.
who having made relation of his Arrest, and the time when, and of the parties
that arrested him, declaring that he was arrested by the Undersheriff of
Surrey, and others, upon the Saturday before the beginning of his Parliament,
and that it was known unto the said Undersheriff that he was her Majesty's
servant in Ordinary, and that he thought Tolkerne who was the Creditor, was not
privy to the Arrest, contrary to the Privilege of that Court; upon the Offer
and Petition of the said William Hogan, it was ordered, That the said William
Hogan should enter into sufficient Bond to abide the Order and Judgment of the
Earl of Cumberland, He is ordered to give Bond to abide Judgment, etc.
the Lord Bishop of London, and the Lord Zouche, for such satisfaction to be
made of the Debt of 50 l. and any Costs and Charges as by the said Lords should
be thought fit, the Bond to be taken to the said Lords, and thereupon to be
discharged out of Prison and Execution. And likewise, that the Warden of the
Fleet should be free from any trouble, or damage, or molestation, for discharge
of the said William Hogan.

It was likewise ordered by the Court, Those who arrested him, to appear at the
Lords Bar.
That the Undersheriff and any others that did arrest, or assist the Arrest of
the said William Hogan, shall be sent for to appear before the Lords in the
House, on Saturday next, by nine of the clock in the morning.

Saturday, Nov. 21. (to which day the Parliament had been last continued) three
Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the last being the Bill for
assurance of Lands, was read tertia vice.

Upon the reading of which Bill, sundry Objections were made against some
points of the same by the Lord Bishop of London, and diverse other Lords,
insomuch that the House was divided, Whether it should be put to the question
for the passing thereof, or no? many of the Lords affecting well the said Bill,
and wishing that any defect therein might rather be reformed, than by the
Question to put it to the hazard to be rejected. Upon which, it was thought
meet to propound another Question, viz. Whether the said Bill, having been
referred to Committees at the second reading, and by them returned with some
Amendments, and thereupon appointed to be engrossed, may now, after the
engrossing thereof, and third reading, be committed again, or no? Which being
accordingly put to the question, and the number both of the affirmative part
and negative part falling out to be equal, upon the accompting of them by the
Lord Bishop of London and by Lord Gray, (...)
appointed by the Lords for that purpose, it was adj^^^^d that the Voices of
the negative part, which were against the (...) committing of the Bill, should
prevail, following therein the usual rule of Law, whereof the Lord Keeper made
mention, that where the numbers of the affirmative and negative are equal,
Smper presumetur pro negante; and after that, the Bill it self being put to the
question, Whether it should pass or no, was by the major part denied and
refused.

Excuses were made for the absence of diverse Lords, by reason of sickness or
other reasonable occasions: The Marquess of Winchester, the Earl of Nottingham,
and the Earl of Hertford, signified by some of their Servants to the Lord
Keeper; the Earl of Cumberland, and the Lord Scroope, signified by the Lord
Wharton; the Lord Rich, by the Lord Zouche; the Lord Mordant, by the Lord
Sturton; the Lord Bishop of Coventry, by the Bishop of Meneven; and the Bishop
of Chester, by the Bishop of Bangor.

A Motion was made by the Lord Keeper, and approved of by the Lords, That the
ancient course of the house may be observed hereafter, in certifying the
Excuses of such Lords as should happen to be absent from the House upon
reasonable occasions, which ought to be done by one of the Peers, and not by
other information.

Thomas Crompton, Henry Best, and Francis Jackson, made their appearance in the
House, and being demanded whether the Bill concerning Eye and Dunsden might
lawfully pass without their prejudice, they answered, That it might so do, and
they could take now exceptions to it.

Monday, Nov. 23. (to which day the Parliament had been last continued) the
Bill for reuniting Eye and Dunsden to the Manor of Suning, was read tertia
vice; and so sent down to the House of Commons by Dr. Stanhopp and Mr. Hone.

The Bill to avoid diverse Misdemeanors in lewd and idle persons, was read
secunda vice.

The Bill for confirmation of Grants made to the Queen, and of Letters Patent
made by her Highness to others, was read secunda vice, and committed to the
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and others: who were appointed to meet at the
great Council Chamger; and the Bill was delivered to the Archbishop.

The Bill for increase of Horses of service within this Realm, was read secunda
vice, and committed to the Earl of Nottingham, and others; and the Bill was
delivered unto him, being the first of the Committees.

The meeting of the Committees for the suppressing of the multitude of
Alehouses, and for avoiding of unnecessary delays of Exeutions upon Judgments
for Debt, was upon a Motion of the Lord Treasurer, appointed to be upon
Thursday next, at the little chamber near the Parliament-presence, before the
House sit; for that the Committees could not conveniently meet at the times
formerly appointed for the same.

The Undersheriff of the County of Surrey that arrested William Hogan, was
brought into the House to answer for the same, The Undersheriff sent to the
Fleet for arresting Hogan.
and by Order of the House committed to the Prison of the Fleet.

Tuesday, Nov. 24. (to which day this Parliament had been last continued) three
Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the last being the Bill for the
establishing of the remainder of certain Lands of Andrew Ketleby Esquire upon
Francis Ketleby, was read secunda vice, and committed unto the Earl of
Worcester, the Earl of Lincoln, the Lord Bishop of Winchester, the Lord Bishop
of Worcester, the Lord Cobham, the Lord Chandois, and the Lord Howard of
Walden; and the Bill was delivered to the said Lord Howard: who with the rest
were appointed to meet on Saturday next in the afternoon, at the Chamber of the
Parliament-presence.

This day the wife of Andrew Ketleby made her appearance in the House on the
behalf of her husband and her self, excusing his not coming, by reason of his
great age and infirmities; and withal, prayed their Counsel learned might be
heard: whereupon it was ordered, That both their Counsel, and the Counsel of
Francis Ketleby, should be heard upon Thursday next in the morning.

Thursday, Nov. 26. (to which day the Parliament had been last continued) one
Bill being for the more peaceable government of the Parties of Cumberland,
Northumberland, and Westmoreland, and Bishopric of Durham, was read the second
time, and committed; but in respect the manner of committing Bills all this
Parliament was the same, and that the Judges and her Majesty's learned Counsel
were appointed always to attend the Lords Committees, and never made joint
Committees with them: therefore the names of the said Committees are for the
most part omitted, as a thing not worth the observation.

It was ordered by the House, upon the humble Petition of William Hone
Undersheriff of the County of Surrey, That he should be set at liberty out of
the Fleet, whither he had been committed for arresting one William Hogan her
Majesty's servant.

The Counsel learned of Andrew Ketleby Esquire and Francis Ketleby, were heard in
the House; and thereupon the Committees of the said Bill were appointed to meet
on Saturday in the afternoon at the Chamber of Parliament-presence: and the
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Gray, and the Lord Windsor, were added
to the said Committees; and the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas to
attend them with the others formerly appointed. And the Bill was delivered to
the Lord Howard of Walden.

Dominus Custos Magnis Sigilli continuavit, etc.

On Tuesday, December. 1.
December. 1. two Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the second was
the Bill for confirmation of the last Will and Testament of George Lord Cobham
deceased.

Wednesday, December. 2. three Bills had each of them one reading; Bill to avoid
triyling Suits in Law.
of which, the first was to avoid trifling Suits in Law in her Majesty's Courts
at Westminster.

Thursday, December. 3. two Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the
second was the Bill for enabling Edward Nevil of Burling in the County of Kent,
and Sir William Nevil his son, to sell certain Lands.

Friday, December. 4. the Bill against Drunkards and common Haunters of
Alehouses and Taverns; the Bill for levying of Fines with Proclamations of
Lands within the County of the City of Chester; the Bill for enabling of Edward
Nevil of Berlin in the County of Kent, Esquire etc. and the Bill for confirmation
of Letters Patent made by Edw. 6. to Sir Edward Seignior Knight. were each of them
read secunda vice.

Saturday, December. 5. the Bill for maintenance of the Navy, increase of
Mariners, and for avoiding the scarcity of Victuals, was read prima vice.

Report was made to the House by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury the first of
the Committees, concerning Musters, Soldiers, etc. That the said Committees
having oftentimes met and conferred about the said Bill, did find so many
imperfections in the same, as it could not conveniently be mended: and
therefore thought it meet to draw a new Bill; which he presented to the House.

The Bill entitled, An Act for the more peaceable government of the Parties of
Cumberland, etc. was returned to the House with certain Amendments; which
Amendments were presently twice read, and thereupon the Bill commanded to be
engrossed.

Monday, December. 7. two Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the first
being the Bill for the more peaceable government of the Parties of Cumberland,
etc. was read tertia vice, and sent down to the House of Commons, by Dr. Carewe
and Dr. Stanhopp.

The Bill to avoid the double payment of Debts, was brought up to the Lords
from the House of Commons by Mr. Controuler, Sir Edward Hobby, and others.

Four other Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the third being the
Bill for the confirmation as well of all Grants made to the Queen, and of all
resumptions made by her Highness of the possessions of any Archbishopric or
Bishopric, as of Letters Patent made by her Majesty to others, was read prima
vice.

The Bill for confirmation of Grants made to the Queen, and of Letters Patent
made by her Highness to others, was this day returned to the House, with
certain Amendments, by the Lord Treasurer the first of the Committees.

This day Sir William Knowls, Sir Edward Hobby Knights, and diverse others of
the House of Commons, delivered a Message from the said House, desiring a
Conference with some of their Lordships concerning the uniting of Eye and
Dunsden to the Manor of Sunning: Upon the delivery of which Message, after the
said Sir William Knowls and the rest had a little withdrawn, and then upon
propounding this Motion to this House, the Lords having assented thereunto,
Answer was made by the Lord Keeper, sitting in his place, and the the rest of
the Lords also keeping their places, unto the said Sir William Knowls and the
rest, That the Lords had yielded to the Conference, and had appointed the Lord
Treasurer, the Lord Steward, the Lord Bishop of London, the Lord Bishop of
Winchester, the Lord Zouche, and the Lord Cobham, to meet with some select
persons of the House of Commons for that purpose, to morrow by eight a clock in
the morning, at the Utter chamber near the Parliament-presence.

Tuesday, December. 8. six Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the last
being the Bill concerning Captains and Soldiers, and other in the Queens
service in the Wars, was read secunda vice, and committed to the Committees
formerly appointed for the first Bill of that kind, with addition of the Lord
Windsor; and the said Committee to meet upon the said Bill upon the first
opportunity of meeting on any other Bill: and the said Bill was delivered to
the Earl of Nottingham the third of the Committees.

Nota, NOTA.
That here this Bill was delivered unto the Earl of Nottingham, being the third
of the Committees, of whom the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Lord Treasurer
were the two first: Whereas on Monday, Nov. 23. a Bill being committed upon the
second reading, was delivered unto the Archbishop the first of the Committees:
And on Thursday, Nov. 26. upon the commitment also of a Bill in the like
manner, the Bill was delivered unto the Lord Howard of Walden, being the Puisne
Baron, or last of the Committees: by which it is plain, that in the Upper
House, as well as in the House of Commons, after any Bill is committed upon the
second reading, it may be delivered indifferently to any of the said Committees.

A Proviso was offered by the Earl of Worcester, on the behalf of the Earl of
Shrewsbury, to be annexed unto the Bill entitled, An Act for the consirmation
of Grants made to the Queens Majesty, and of Letters Patent made by her
Highness to others; which Proviso, together with the Amendments in the said
Bill, were read presently. And forasmuch as the Lords desired a speedy
proceeding in the said Bill, they sent Dr. Carewe and Dr. Stanhopp to the House
of Commons, to move them that some meet persons of that House might join in
Conference with the Lords, being to the number of twenty, or thereabouts,
concerning the Proviso and Amendments aforesaid; and that the meeting about the
same, might be at the outward Chamber near to the Parliament-presence, to
morrow by eight of the clock in the morning. Upon delivery of which Message to
the House of Commons, they assented accordingly to the Motion made on that
behalf.

Upon a Motion sent this day from the House of Commons by Sir Walter Rawleigh,
Sir Francis Hastings, Sir Edward Hobby, and others, signifying, That they
desired Conference with some of their Lordships, for certain matters concerning
the honor of both Houses; the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord
Treasurer, the Earl of Nottingham Lord Steward, the Earl of Northumberland, the
Earl of Worcester, the Bishop of London, the Bishop of Durham, and the Bishop
of Winchester, the Lord Zouche, the Lord De-la-ware, the Lord Cohham, and the
Lord Howard of Walden, were appointed to meet on Thursday next by eight a clock
in the morning, at the outward chamber near the Parliament-presence: which was
signified to Sir Walter Rawleigh and the rest, in answer of their Message.

Wednesday, December. 9. the Counsel of the Lady Fane was heard in the House
what he could say on her behalf against the Bill of Edward Nevil and Sir Henry
Nevil his son; whereupon the Lords finding no cause why the proceeding on that
Bill should be any longer staid, Order was given for the third reading thereof.

The Bill for the enabling of Edward Nevil Esquire and Sir Henry Nevil his son and
heir apparent, to dispose of certain Copyholdlands, was read tertia vice; upon
the third reading of which Bill, and before the putting thereof to the
Question, whether it should pass or no, the Lady Fane yielded her consent to
the passing of the same, being thereunto persuaded by sundry of the Lords.

The Bill to avoid the double payment of Debts, was read secunda vice.

The Lord Treasurer made Report, That the Committees in the Bill concerning
Letters Patent, etc. could not proceed to any certain Conference with those
that were sent from the House of Commons for that purpose, in respect of some
doubts that were conceived, whether the Proviso offered to be annexed
thereunto, were necessary or no. And thereupon Mr. Atturney-General was
required to deliver his Opinion on that behalf; which being done by him
accordingly, to this effect, That he thought the said Proviso needless and
unnecessary, and the Judges also concurring with him in that opinion,
nevertheless upon a Motion made by the Lord Bishop of London, that the Counsel
learned of the Earl of Shrewsbury, and Mr. Holcroft (whom the said Proviso did
concern in particular) might be heard in the House as they desired, touching
the same, it was thought meet, and agreeable to the honor and equity of the
House, that they should be so heard; to which end their Counsel were appointed
to give their attendance to morrow by eight in the morning.

And moreover, for the better satisfaction of the House of Commons for the
present, Mr. Sergeant Yelverton, Dr. Carewe, and Dr. Stanhopp, were sent unto
them with this Message, to signify their Lordships desire to have proceeded to
Conference with them this morning about the said Bill, as was yesterday
appointed; and that the Lords were the more willing to give furtherance to the
expediting of the said Bill, in regard the same was especially recommended unto
their Lordships from the said House: but forasmuch as they found not themselves
sufficiently prepared for this Conference, by reason of some doubts that were
not yet cleared unto them, they desired the said Conference might be respited
until Friday morning next at eight of the clock, at the outward chamber near
the Parliament-presence: unto which Motion the House of Commons willingly
consented.

Thursday, December. 10. the Bill for the establishing of the remainder of
certain lands of Andrew Ketleby Esquire upon Francis Ketleby, was read tertia vice,
and sent to the House of Commons by Dr. Stanhopp and Dr. Hone.

Two other Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the first being the
Bill to avoid double payment of Debts, was read tertia vice, and expedited.

The Bill concerning Resumptions, etc. was this day delivered to the Lord
Treasurer one of the Committees.

The Counsel learned, as well on the behalf of the Earl of Shrewsbury, as on
the behalf of Thomas Holcrost, Henry Candish, and William Candish Esquires,
were heard at large in the House; and thereupon Mr. Attorney was required to
deliver again his Opinion concerning the said Provisoes offered on either part:
which being done accordingly, in more ample and particular manner than he had
done before; and having also delivered his Resolution to sundry Questions
propounded to him by diverse of the Lords concerning the said Cause, it was
ordered as follows.

Upon Debate in the House concerning several Provisoes offered by the Earl of
Shrewsbury, and Thomas Holcroft, Henry Candish, and William Candish Esquires,
to be annexed to the Bill entitled, An Act for confirmation of Grants made
unto the Queens Majesty, and of Letters Patents made by her Highness to others;
it was at last agreed, That the Lord Chief Justice of her Majesty's Bench, and
the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, calling unto them the rest of the
Judges, and Mr. Atturney-General, should draw some new Provisoes, such as they
should think indifferent for all parties, and meet to be annexed to the said
Bill; and should present the same to the Lords to morrow in the morning, before
their Conference with the House of Commons concerning the said Bill.

The Lord Keeper signified unto their Lordships, that he received command from
her Majesty, to let them understand her pleasure to be, that the Parliament
should end on Thursday the 17. or Friday the 18. of this instant December. at the
furthest, to the end that their Lordships may repair home to their Countries
against Christmas; and therefore she required them to employ and spend that
time that remains, in matters concerning the Public, and not in private
causes.

Memorandum, The Commons desire a Conference with the Lords about a Bill
preferred in the Starchamber against a Member of their House.
Quod dicto decimo Decembris, those of the House of Commons that were appointed
to confer with some of the Lords upon the Message lately sent from the said
House, signifying their desire of Conference for some matters touching the
honor of both Houses, did make known to the Lords, the Committees nominated
for that purpose, That the occasion of such their Message was, for that, as
they were informed, Mr. Atturney-General had preferred a Bill into the
Star Chamber against one Belgrave a Member of the House of Commons, for and
concerning some matter of Misdemeanour pretended to be done toward the Earl of
Huntington a Lord of the Upper House; and therefore they desired this mutual
Conference: letting their Lordships understand, That to the preferring of the
said Bill, they conceived just exceptions might be taken by them for two
respects; first, that Belgrave being a Member of the House of Commons, was
thereby vexed and molested during his service in time of Parliament, contrary
to the honor and privilege of the House, saying, that no Member of that House
ought by any such means in time of his service to be distracted either in body
or mind. The other, because in the said Bill, They reflect on the At. Genesis
for preferring the said Bill, because he had formerly been their Speaker, and
so ought to be tender of their Privilege and Honor.
preferred by Mr. Atturney-General, who had been heretofore Speaker of that
House, and therefore as they thought ought to have more regard to the honor
and liberty of the same. Certain words and clauses were inserted, which were
taken to be prejudicial and derogatory to the honor of the said House. And
therefore they desired that the Lords would peruse and consider of the said
Bill. Whereupon the said Bill, being offered to be read, and forasmuch as it
appeared that it was not an authentical Bill, testified by the hand of the
Clerk of the Star Chamber, as it had been meet, the Lords thought it not fit,
though otherwise they were willing, to have it read; nor agreeable to the
proceedings of such a Court, that the said Bill or Scroul shall be received to
reading: And therefore, with a Message to that effect, were pleased to send it
down again to the House of Commons by Mr. Sergeant Yelverton, and Dr. Hone; who
finding the House risen before they came, brought the said Bill back again.

Friday, December. 11. the Bill concerning Gaptains, Soldiers, and other in the
Queens service in the Wars, was returned to the House by the Lord Steward, with
certain Amendments and a Proviso, thought meet by the Committees; which
Amendments and Proviso were presently twice read, and thereupon the Bill
commanded to be engrossed.

The Bill for the maintenance of the Navy, increase of Mariners, etc. was
returned to the House by the Lord Treasurer the first of the Committees, with
certain Amendments; which Amendments were presently twice read.

Four Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which,
the two last were, one for assurance of the Parsonage and Vicarage of
Rotherston in the County of Chester, and a Scholars Room in the
Cathedral-church of Christ in Oxford, of the foundation of King Hen. 8. by the
Dean and Chapter of the said Cathedral-church, to Thomas Venables Esquire and his
Heirs for ever; and the other for the augmentation of the Jointure of Rachel
Wife of Edward Nevil, in the County of Kent Esquire: both which Bills were read
prima vice.

Saturday, December. 12. eight Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House
of Commons, by Mr. Secretary Cecil, Mr. Secretary Herbert, and others, which
were each of them read prima vice; of which, the first was for reformation of
abuses in Sheriffs and other their inferior Officers, for not duly executing
Writs of Proclamation upon Exigents, according to the Stat. 31 Reginae; and the
second was for prohibiting Fairs and Markets to be holden on the Sunday. Bill
to prevent holding Fairs and Markets on Sundays. Subsidy-bill.


Two Bills also had each of them one reading; of which, the the first being the
Bill for the grant of four entire Subsidies, and eight Fifteenths and Teuths,
granted by the Temporalty, was read prima vice.

The Lords, and those of the House of Commons, not having time yesterday to
conclude their Conference about the Bill concerning Letters Patent and
Conveyances, etc. another meeting was appointed for them this morning: Mr.
Atturney-General and Dr. Carewe were therefore sent unto them, to let them know
that their Lordships were ready presently to meet. Upon which Message, the
House of Commons returned answer, That they would make their repair to their
Lordships forthwith for that purpose.

The Bill for the perfecting of the Jointure of the Lady Bridget Countess of
Sussex, Wife of Robert Earl of Sussex, was read secunda vice.

The Bill concerning the Jointure of the Countess of Bedford, was returned to
the House by the Earl of Worcester the first of the Committees, with a Proviso
and certain Amendments thought sit to be added; together with a Petition of the
Lady Russel against the said Bill.

The Lords that were appointed Committees for the Bill touching
Letters Patent, etc. went forth to the outward chamber to have conference with
those of the House of Commons, appointed Committees for the same Bill; but
nothing concluded touching the Amendments, because the said Committees had no
power to conclude: and therefore, after long debate, the Bill was brought back
to the House, and the relation thereof referred to be made by Mr. Attorney, and
the same deferred till the afternoon sitting, by reason the day was spent.

Dominus Custos Magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliament. usque ad horam
tertiam post meridiem hujus diei.

About which hour the Lord Keeper and diverse Lords, having assembled
themselves, five Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the first
concerning the draining and recovery from water of certain over-flown Grounds
in the County of Norfolk; the second, for reformation of abuses committed in
buying and selling of Spices and other Merchandises; and the third, to prevent
Perjury and subornation of Perjury, and unnecessary expenses in Suits of Law;
were each of them read secunda vice.

The Proviso that was presented to be added to the Bill for the maintenance of
the Navy, and increase of Mariners, etc. was read tertia vice, and sent to the
House of Commons; together with the Bill concerning Captains, Soldiers, etc.
by Dr. Carewe and Dr. Stanhopp.

The Amendments and Proviso in the Bill concerning the Countess of Bedford's
Jointure, were twice read; and likewise the Lady Russel's Petition was read:
whereupon it was appointed that the Proviso should be engrossed in Parchment,
and the Amendments in Paper.

The Committees in the Bill for the observation of Rules in the Exchequer, were
appointed to meet forthwith in the little chamber near the Parliament-presence,
to consider of a Proviso drawn by the Lord Chief Justice and the rest of the
Judges, by direction of the Committees; which Proviso having been considered of
accordingly, was brought into the House, and presently twice read: and
thereupon the said Proviso was commanded to be engrossed.

Monday, December. 14. (to which day the Parliament was last continued) the Bill
for the better observation of certain Orders in the Exchequer, set down and
established by virtue of her Majesty's Privy Seal, was read tertia vice; and
the Proviso thought fit by the Committees to be added, was also read the third
time.

The Bill for assurance of certain Manors and Lands for part of a Jointure to
Lucy Countess of Bedford, and the Provisoes and Amendments presented by the
Committees to be added to the Bill, were also read the third time: both which
Bills were sent to the House of Commons for their consideration of the several
Provisoes and Amendments, by Dr. Swale, and the Clerk of the Crown.

Four Bills more had each of them one reading; of which, the last being the
Bill for the grant of four entire Subsidies, and eight Fifteenths and Tenths,
granted by the Temporalty, was read secunda vice.

Two Bills more were also brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of
which, the second being the Bill for the confirmation of the Charter of Edw. 6.
of the three Hospitals of Christ, Bridewel, and St. Thomas the Apostle, to the
Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of London, was read prima vice.

The Bill to confirm the assurance of the Manors or Farms of Sagebury alias
Sadgbury, and Obden, and other Hereditaments, to Samuel Sandis Esquire and John
Harris Gent. and their Heirs; and the Bill for the Amendment of certain
imperfections of a Statute made 8 Reginae, concerning the true making of Hats;
were each of them read secunda vice.

The Paper or Scroul concerning Belgrave, was this day returned from the House
of Commons, subscribed by the Clerk of the Council in the Star Chamber, and
excuse made by them for not sending the same at the first.

Dominus Custos Magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliament. usque ad horam
secundam post meridiem hujus instantis diei.

About which hour, the Lord Keeper and diverse Lords assembling, six Bills had
each of them one reading; of which, the third being the Bill for augmentation
of the Jointure of Rachel Wife of Edward Nevil of Berling in the County of
Kent, was read secunda vice.

The Bill concerning the erecting of a Harbor and Key in the north part of
Devon, Bill to erect a Harbor and Key.
etc. was returned to the House by the Lord Steward, with one Amendment; which
was presently twice read.

The Bill for prohibiting Fairs and Markets to be kept on the Sunday, was read
secunday vice, and committed.

Upon the Motion of the Earl of Worcester, it was ordered by the House, That
William Crayford prisoner in the Fleet, should come to make his humble
submission before the Lords in the said House, to morrow by nine of the clock
in the morning.

The Counsel, as well of the Company of Plaisterers, as Painters, were
appointed to be heard in this House to morrow in the afternoon.

Tuesday, December. 15. three Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the
second being for the erecting and making of a Harbor and Key on the north part
of Devon, in the River of Severn, for the safeguard of men and shipping, and
for the public good of the Commonwealth, was read tertia vice, and sent down
to the House of Commons for their consideration of an Amendment sent down by
Dr. Stanhopp, Dr. Swale, and Dr. Hone.

The Bill for the grant of four entire Subsidies, eight Fifteenths and Tenths,
granted by the Temporalty, was read tertia vice, and expedited.

The Bill for naturalizing certain persons born beyond the Seas, was read
secunda vice.

The Bill for confirmation of the Subsidy of the Clergy, Subsidy of the Clergy
confirmed.
was read prima, secunda, and tertia vice. Memorandum, That at the second and
third reading of the said Subsidy-bill, the body of the Grant was omitted to be
read, according to the accustomed manner, and only the preface and
confirmation of the Grant were read; and the Bill was sent to the House of
Commons by Mr. Sergeant Yelverton, Dr. Stanhopp, and Dr. Hone.

Upon the humble Petition of William Crayford, lately committed to the Prison
of the Fleet, and upon his humble submission and acknowledgment of his offense,
he was, by order of the Court, set at liberty. Vide concerning this matter on
December. 19. following.

Dominus Custos Magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque ad horam
secundam post meridiem hujus diei.

About which time the Lord Keeper and diverse other Lords assembling, the Bill
for naturalizing certain persons born beyond the Seas, was read tertia vice,
and expedited.

Eight Bills were brought up to the House of Lords from the House of Commons;
of which, the first being the Bill for continuance of diverse Statutes, and for
repeal of some others; and the second being against the transportation of
Ordnance, Bill against the transportation of Guns, etc.
Guns, Metal, Iron-Ore, and Iron-shot, were each of them read prima vice.

Wednesday, December. 16. the Bill for the re-edifying, repairing, and
maintaining of two bridges on the River of Edon near the City of Carlisle in
the County of Cumberland, was read prima and secunda vice.

Seven other Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the fourth being the
Bill for continuance of diverse Statutes, and for the repeal of some others; and
the fifth to redress the misemployment of lands, goods, and stocks of money,
heretofore given to charitable uses, were each of them read secunda vice.

Eight Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons by Mr.
Secretary Cecil, Sir Walter Rawleigh, and others; of which, the first being the
Bill for the ending and appeasing of all differences and debates between
Francis Ketleby of the one part, and Andrew Ketleby and Jane his Wife of the
other part; and the second being for the recovery of many thousand acres of
marish grounds, subject commonly to surrounding with water, within the Isle of
Ely, and Counties of Cambridge, and Suffolk, Huntington, Northampton, Lincoln,
and Norfolk, were each of them read prima vice: As also the fifth, being the
Bill for the necessary relief of Soldiers and Mariners, was read prima vice.

A Message was delivered from the House of Commons by Mr. Controuler and
others, That the said House was not satisfied concerning the Proviso added by
the Lords to the Bill entitled, An Act for the better observation of certain
Orders in the Exchequer; and therefore desired a Conference with some of their
Lordships about the same.

The Conference was yielded unto, and appointed to be this afternoon at the
outward chamber.

The Bill entitled, An Act for the reformation of Deceits of certain Auditors,
etc. was returned to the House with certain Amendments; the Bill, with the same
Amendments, was forthwith twice read, and ordered to be engrossed.

Upon Conference with the House of Commons concerning the Bill for confirmation
of Grants made to the Queens Majesty, etc. it was agreed by the Committees of
both Houses, That certain Amendments and Provisoes should be added to the said
Bill; which were returned to the House, and presently twice read, and so
commanded to be engrossed. And thereupon the Bill it self, with the said
Amendments and Provisoes, were read the third time, and sent to the House of
Commons for their Consideration of the same, by Mr. Atturney-General and Dr.
Stanhopp.

Dominus Custos Magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque ad horam
secundam post meridiem hujus diei.

About which time the Lord Keeper and diverse other Lords assembling together,
eleven Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the fifth being the Bill
for the recovery of many thousand acres of marish grounds, subject commonly to
surrounding, within the Isle of Ely, etc. the sixth being for redress of
certain abuses and deceits used in painting; Bill about ensurance amongst
Merchants.
the seventh concerning matters of assurance amongst Merchants; and the eighth
being for the assize of Fuel; were each of them read secunda vice.

Upon the meeting this afternoon with those of the House of Commons appointed
to confer with the Lords Committees in the Bill entitled, An Act for the
better observation of certain Orders in the Exchequer, etc. concerning a
Proviso added by the Lords to that Bill, after some debate by the Committees on
both parts thereupon, they of the House of Commons did signify, That the said
House would allow of the said Proviso, so as the same might in some certain
points be amended. Whereupon question grew between them, Whether the said
Amendment of the said Proviso should be made in the Upper House, upon notice
given thereof by the Committees, and so be sent down again, or else be made in
the House of Commons: which doubt being reported by the Lords Committees, by
order and appointment of the House, it was agreed by common consent, That the
Amendments should be made in the House of Commons, and sent up in Paper, and to
be inserted in the body of the Proviso; which Order was by the Lords Committees
signified to the Committees of the House of Commons, and they thereunto
assented.

Whereas it has been accustomed in former Parliaments, that toward the end of
the Parliament a Collection should be made amongst the Lords for the Poor, and
it was this day moved by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, that the like
Collection might be made at this time; it was upon this Motion ordered by the
House, That there should now be such a Collection made; and that the Lord
Bishop of Chichester, the Lord Bishop of Peterborough, the Lord Zouche, and the
Lord Rich, should be Collectors of the same, after such Rates as have been
usually given and bestowed by the Lords for the said charitable purpose, as in
former Parliaments; and they to take order for the distribution of it.

Thursday, December. 17. the Bill for the relief of the Poor, was read secunda
vice.

It was ordered, That Edward Thomas of the Middle Temple, should be presently
sent for and brought before the Lords in the House, for that contrary to the
Privilege of the House, he has caused one Thomas Gerrard Gent. to be
arrested: And it was likewise ordered, That such persons as made the Arrest, or
did assist in doing the same, shall likewise be sent for by the Sergeant at
Arms, to answer their doings therein.

The Bill for the necessary relief of Soldiers and Mariners, was read secunda
vice.

Two Bills were brought up to the Lords from the House of Commons; of which,
the first being the Bill for assurance of certain Manors and Lands for part of
a Jointure to Lucy Countess of Bedford, was expedited.

Two other Bills had also each of them one reading; of which, the second being
the Bill for reformation of deceits and frauds in certain Auditors and their
Clerks, in making deceitful and untrue Particulars, was read tertia vice, and
sent to the House of Commons by Dr. Carewe and Dr. Hone.

The Bill was brought back from the House of Commons, entitled, An An for
confirmation of Grants made to the Queens Majesty, and of Letters Patent made
by her Highness to others, and expedited.

The Bill for confirmation of the Subsidy granted by the Clergy, was returned
from the House of Commons, and was expedited.

The Bill concerning the Assize of Fuel, was read tertia vice, and expedited.

Dominus Custos Magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliament. usque ad horam
secundam post meridiem instantis diei.

About which hour the Lord Keeper and diverse other Lords assembling, five Bills
had each of them one reading; of which, the second being the Bill for
strengthening of the Grants made for the maintenance and government of the
house of the Poor, called St. Bartholomew's Hospital, of the foundation of King
Hen. 8. was read secunda vice.

The Bill for recovery of many hundred thousand acres of Marshes and other
Grounds, subject commonly to surrounding within the Isle of Ely and Counties of
Cambridge, Huntington, etc. was read tertia vice, and expedited.

Upon the third reading of this Bill, it was moved, that certain Additions
might be put in the title of the Bill, and Amendments in some points in the
body thereof, and the Lord Chief Justice and Mr. Atturney-General were required
to draw the same; which was done presently by them, and presented to the House:
Whereupon the said Additions and Amendments were thrice read, and then sent to
the House of Commons for their consideration of the same, by Mr. Attorney and
Dr. Hone; who returned presently from the House of Commons with their allowance
of the said Amendments and Addition in the title of the Counties of Sussex,
Essex, Kent, and the County Palatine of Durham.

Three other Bills had also each of them one reading; of which, the last being
the Bill to make the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments of Edward Lucas Gent.
deceased, Executor of the last Will and Testament of John Flowerdew Esquire;
deceased, liable, etc. was read secunda vice.

Conference was desired by the House of Commons with some of their Lordships,
about the Bill sent to them this day concerning the reformation of deceits and
frauds of certain Auditors, etc. The Conference was yielded unto, and appointed
to be presently at the outward chamber near the Parliament-presence.

Friday, December. 18. four Bills had each of them one reading; of which, the
last being the Bill for her Majesty's most gracious general and free Pardon,
was read prima vice, and sent to the House of Commons by Mr. Atturney-General
and Dr. Stanhopp.

Memorandum, That whereas a Bill has been presented to the High Court of
Parliament by the Company of the Mystery or Trade of Painters, making thereby
complaint against the Company of Plaisterers for and concerning certain wrongs
pretended to be done to the said Painters by the Company of Plaisterers, in
using some part of their Trade of Painting, contrary to the right of their
Charter, as is pretended, and humbly seeking by the said Bill, reformation of
the said wrong: Order of the House about the dispute between Painters and
Plaisterers.
And whereas the said Bill passed not the Upper House of Parliament, for just
and good reasons moving the Lords of the Higher House to the contrary, yet
nevertheless the said Lords of the said Upper House have thought it meet and
convenient, that some course may be taken for reformation of any such wrong as
may be found truly complained of, and fit to be remedied, and for setting some
good agreement and order for the said Painters and Plaisterers, so as each sort
of them might exercise their Trade conveniently, without incroaching one upon
the other.

It is therefore ordered by the said Court of the Upper House of Parliament,
That the said complaint and cause of the said Painters, which proceeded not in
Parliament, shall be referred to the Lord Mayor of London, and the Recorder of
London, to be heard and examined, adjudged and ordered, as in Justice and
Equity shall be found meet: And that at the time or times of hearing of the
said Cause, the Lord Chief Justice of England, the Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, Mr. Justice Gaudy, and Mr. Baron Clarke, and Mr.
Atturney-General, or any four, three, or two of them, shall assist and give
their help for the making and establishing of some good Order and Agreement
between the said two Companies. And that the said Parties Complainants, and
also the Company of Plaisterers, shall observe and keep such Order as the said
Mayor, the Lord Chief Justice of England, the Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, Mr. Justice Gaudy, Mr. Baron Clarke, Mr. Attorney General, and
Mr. Recorder of London, or any six, five, four, or three of them, whereof the
Lord Mayor, the Lord Chief Justice of England, or Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, shall be two, shall be set down and prescribed.

Memorandum, That whereas William Crayford of Mongham in the County of Kent,
Gent. was this day brought before the Lords in the Upper House of Parliament,
to answer an Information made against him, That he had procured and suborned
his Son William Crayford to lay sundry Executions and Outlawries on William
Vaughan Gent. servant to the Earl of Shrewsbury, contrary to the Privilege of
the Court, and the said Crayford having been heard in the presence of William
Vaughan, what he could say concerning the said Information, wherein he
protested that he was guiltless, and that his said Son had not in any sort
received such direction from him as was informed: It was therefore by the Court
thought meet, and so ordered, That the examination and determining of the
Controversies and Suits depending between the said Crayford and Vaughan, should
be referred to the Earl of Worcester, the Lord Bishop of London, and the Lord
Cobham; and that they the said Crayford and Vaughan, should enter into good and
sufficient Bonds each to other, to stand to, observe, and perform such Award
and Arbitrament as the said Lords shall make and set down between them.

Saturday, December. 19. a Motion was made in the House for the avoiding of all
further Controversies between William Crayford and William Vaughan Gent. That
forasmuch as each of them took mutual exceptions one to the other, touching the
Bonds whereinto they had entered by order of the Court, the said William
Crayford alleging, that it sufficed not for William Vaughan alone to be
bound, because his Heirs or some other claiming by and from him, might trouble
and molest him, and that the said Vaughan is insufficient. And the said William
Vaughan alleging, that if the said William Crayford were bound alone, his
Sons and Heirs might trouble and molest the said Vaughan, without hazard of the
Bond, some further order might thereupon be taken. It is therefore this day
ordered by the Court, That the said William Crayford and his eldest Son Edward
Crayford, shall enter into sufficient Bond unto the said William Vaughan,
without hazard of the Bond for themselves and their Heirs, that they and every
of them shall stand to the Award of the Earl of Worcester, the Lord Bishop of
London, and the Lord Cobham, or any two of them. And that also the said William
Vaughan shall enter into the like Bond with a sufficient Surety for himself and
his Heirs, to stand to the said Award of the Lords beforementioned, or any two
of them; so as the said Award be made before the Feast of Easter next
following. And moreover, it is ordered by the Court, That if they or either of
them shall refuse to enter into Bond according to the said Order, that the Lord
Keeper, notwithstanding the ending of the Parliament, and though it be after
the same, shall commit them or either of them to close Prison, for refusing;
there to remain until the party refusing be conformable to the said Order.

Dominus Custos Magni Sigilli continuavit praesens Parliamentum usque ad horam
secundam post meridiem hujus instantis diei.

About which hour in the afternoon, The Qu. comes to the House.
the Queens Majesty was personally present, being accompanied with the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir Thomas Egerton Knight. Lord Keeper of the great Seal,
the Lord Buckhurst Lord Treasurer of England, and with diverse other Lords
Spiritual and Temporal: but what was there done, is not mentioned in the
Original Journal Book of the Upper House, and therefore is supplied out of a
very laborious and copious Journal of the House of Commons, taken by Hayward
Townsend Esquire; a Member thereof at this Parliament.

Her Majesty, with diverse Lords Spiritual and Temporal, being set in the Upper
House in their Parliament-Robes, between two and three of the clock this
afternoon, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons had
notice thereof, and thereupon repaired thither with John Crook Esquire; their
Speaker; who being placed at the Rail or Bar at the lower end of the said Upper
House, after he had made three Reverences to her Majesty sitting under a rich
Cloth of Estate, spoke to the effect following.

THat Laws were not first made with humane Pen, The Speaker's Speech.
but by divine Ordinance; that Politic Laws were made according to the evil
condition of men; and that all Laws serves not at all times, no more than one
Medicine for all Diseases: and said, if he were asked what was the first and
chiefest thing to be considered of, he would say, Religion: for Religion is all
in all; for Religion breeds Devotion, Devotion breeds Zeal and Piety to God,
which breeds Obedience and Duty to the Prince; and Obedience to the Laws,
breeds Faithfulness, Honesty, and Love, the three necessary and only things
to be wished and observed in a well-governed Commonwealth. And that her
Majesty, by planting true Religion, had laid such a foundation, upon which all
those Virtues were planted and builded, that they could not easily be rooted up
or extirpated: and therefore acknowledged, that we ought and do acknowledge,
that we will praise God and her Majesty for it.

And then he descended to speak of Governments and Laws of Nations; amongst
which, principally and above all, he preferred the Laws of this Land; which, he
said, were so many and so wise, that there was almost no offense, but was met
with in a Law: notwithstanding her Majesty being desirous, for the good of her
Land, to call a Parliament for redress of some Laws, and for making of new;

Her dutiful and loyal Subjects, having considered of them, have made some new,
and amended some old; which they humbly desire may be made Laws by her Royal
Assent, which gives life unto them.

And so, after thanks given for the Pardon, by which we dread your Justice and
admire your Mercy, and a Prayer unto her Majesty, That she would accept, as the
testimony of our Loves and Duties offered unto her with a free heart and
willing spirit, four entire Subsidies, and eight Fifteenths and Tenths, to be
collected of our Lands and Livelihoods; in speaking whereof, he mistook, and
said, Four entire Fifteenths and eight Subsidies; which he was advised of by
some of the Counsel that stood near unto him, and so he spoke it right: and
craving pardon for his offense, if either he had forgotten himself either in
word or action, he ended his Speech.

The L. Keeper returns the Queens Answer.
To which, the Lord Keeper answered thus in effect.
AS touching her Majesty's proceeding in the Laws for her Royal Assent, that
should be as God directed her sacred spirit. Secondly, For your presentation of
four Subsidies, and eight Fifteens and Tenths; And thirdly, Your humble
thank-fulness for them and your self; I will deliver her Majesty's Commandment
with what brevity I may, that I be not tedious to my most gracious Sovereign.

First, She says your proceeding in the matter of her Prerogative, she is
persuaded that Subjects did never more dutifully do it; and that she understood
you did but obiter touch her Prerogative, and no otherwise but by humble
Petition: and therefore the thanks that a Prince may give to her Subjects, she
willingly yields. But she now well perceives that private respects are
privately masked under public pretenses.

Secondly, Touching the presentation of your Subsidies, she specially regards
two things, both the persons, and the manner: For the first, he fell into
commendations of the Commonalty; for the second, the manner, which was speedy,
not by persuasion, or persuasive inducements, but freely, out of duty, with
great contentment. In the thing which you have granted, her Majesty greatly
commends your confidence and judgments; and though it be not proportionable
to her occasions, yet she most thank fully receives the same, as a loving and
thank-ful Prince. And that no Prince was ever more unwilling to exact or
receive any thing from the Subject than she our most gracious Sovereign; for we
all know she never was a greedy Grasper, nor siraight-handed keeper: And
therefore she commanded me to say, That you have done (and so she takes it)
dutifully, plentifully, and thank-fully.

For your self, Mr. Speaker, her Majesty commanded me to say, That you have
proceeded with such wisdom and discretion, that it is much to your
commendations, and that none before you have deserved more. And so he ended,
after an Admonition given to the Justices of Peace, That they would not deserve
the Epethites of prowling Justices, Justices of Quarrels, who counted Champerty
good Chevesance; sinning Justices, who did suck and consume the Good of this
Commonwealth; and also against all those that did lie, if not all the year, yet
at least three quarters of the year, in the City of London.



After these Speeches ended, They are dissolved.
her Majesty gave her Royal Assent to nineteen Public Acts, and ten Private
Acts; and then the Parliament was dissolved by the Lord Keeper of the great
Seal of England.

A perfect Journal of every days Proceedings, in the House of Commons at the
Parliament; beginning at Westminster, the xxvijth. day of October, Anno 1601.
and in the 43. Year of the Reign of Q: Eliz. and ending the xixth. day of
December, then next following.
Collected by Mr. Heyward Townshend, one of the Members of the said House.
THe first day of the Parliament, The Queen goes to the Parliament in an open
Chariot, with a Canopy of Silver.
about three of the Clock in the Afternoon; the Queens Majesty, went by Land to
westminster-Abby, riding in a Chariot, made all open, only like a Canopy over
her head, being of Cloth of Silver; with all the Bishops, and Lords, in their
Parliament Robes, according to their Degrees, being marshalled by the Heralds;
Where was made unto her a Sermon, after the hearing whereof she went to the
Upper-house of Parliament; where being sat a while, and the Knights and
Burgesses of the Lower House being sent for, the door kept so that they went
not all in; notwithstanding, some were within, by some special means before,
and heard the Lord-keepers Speech made unto them; which is after (in effect)
delivered by Mr. Secretary Cicil, Some of the Commons discontented.
in the Lower House. So that after the Knights and Burgesses had staid a good
while, it was told them, That the Lord-keepers Speech was done, and thereupon
every man went away discontented.

In the mean time, whilst her Majesty was at Sermon, the Lord-Admiral came into
the Court of Requests, Admiral.
and there began to call the Knights and Burgesses by the Poil; and also, to
swear them at the same time: But because that course seemed too tedious, he
staid, whilst Sir William Knowls, Controuler of the household, Sir John
Stanhopp Vice-Chamberlain, Sir Robert Cicil, Principal Secretary of State; and
John Herbert Esquire, second Secretary, came; who were all coming up from the
Upper house together, and then only the Knights and Burgesses were called;
After that, the Lord Admiral, and Mr. Secretary Cicil, went up to the
Upper-house; but Mr. Controuler, Sir John Stanhopp, and Mr. Secretary Herbert,
went to the space before the Parliament House door; where they swear all the
Lower House confusedly, four at one time, six at another, eight at another,
taking their names that swore; and who not: and still as every man was Sworn,
he went into the house, and to his place, as best liked him.

When all were Sworn, and the Queen come to the Upper-House, and the
Lord-Keepers speech ended: Then all the Privy Council of the Lower House, came
in thither, and sat quiet a while; and then putting their heads together, Mr.
Controuler stood up, and spoke to this effect.

That it was an Ancient Custom in that House, The Comptrouler speaks first.
that at those times, some Man should break silence; and I must confess at this
time, it belongs to my place. It is needless to show the use of this House,
because its well known to all, or most here. All men knows, that the speech of
a multitude breeds confusion, and dissension. It is therefore fit for us to
choose one, to be our Speaker; which for his experience may speak, and for his
sufficiency, dare and can speak on all our Behalfs and Affairs; Neither does it
stand with the Honor, and Ancient Usage of this House, to speak but by one.
Neither is it answerable to the State of her Majesty, to deliver unto her our
minds, by the Tongues of a confused Multitude. Then we are to fall into
consideration, what manner of person he shall be. First, A man Religious; for
Religion ought to be the foundation of our building and labor: Then Honest,
Grave, Wise, Faithful, and Secret. These Virtues must concur in one Person
able to supply this place.

Now, having delivered unto you, the necessity of a Speaker, and his qualities;
I will deliver unto you my Opinion, whom I think fit for the place, referring
it to your consideration; and for my own part, He Recommends the Recorder of
London for their Speaker, who seems to Admire at it.
not prejudicing the VVorth of any in this House, I deem Mr. John Crook,
Recorder of London, a most fit, and worthy, and able man for this Service.

At which words Mr. Crook put off his Hat, with a kind of strange Admiration;
whose Sufficiency in all respcts, and his Loyalty and Faithfulness to do our
Commonwealth service, is well known unto us; and has been often approved by
his learned Speeches diverse times delivered before her Majesty.

I do not attribute so much to mine own Choice, that I presume to assure you,
there is no Man here fitter for the same than he is; but I only make bold to
deliver my Opinion, leaving the choice of him, or any other to the free
Election of every particular Member of this House.

And for the motion which has been made, touching the keeping out of the
house, during the time of the Lord Keepers Speech; I do assure you, it was not
willingly done, but through Ignorance of the Groom of the Chamber; but if the
House be desirous to hear the Effect thereof, I will entreat some that were
there at that time, to satisfiy their desires. (The cause of which preclose
was, for that one Mr. Leigh, during the time of the Commons swearing, made a
complaint to Mr. Controuler, sitting in the House, that they toook it in great
disgrace, that they were shut out.

After which Speech, the Council sat silent a while; and afterward Mr.
Controuler stood up again, and asked the House of their consent, The House
Votes for him
and opinions to his Motion; Whereupon every man cried, I, I, I.

Then Mr. Recorder stood up in his place, and briefly showed unto us, his
insufficiency and disability; his willingness to serve, but his weakness to
perform; his thankfulness for their desire, but the smalness of his own desert;
The Recorder Excuses himself.
And so laying open his own Infirmities, both for shortness of Memory, and want
of Wisdom and Experience, for the undertaking of so great a burden, he humbly
prayed, that they would choose a man who for his Sufficiency were more able;
and for his Abilities were more sufficient to supply that place.

So sitting down, and the House a little while quiet, They Choose him.
Mr. Controuler asked, If they agreed as before? and all Answered, I, I, I.

Then Mr. Controuler and Sir John Stanhop rose up; and Sir John Stanhop on the
right hand, and Mr. Controuler on the left, He is Lead to the Chair.
lead him to the Speakers Seat; where standing, without any sitting down as
yet, he pawsing a while, spoke again in effect as Follows.

Your honorable Choice of me, without any my desert, Speaks to the House.
stops me from pleading either Insuficiency, or Disability; lest I should show,
and make my weakness more apparent, to disapprove the Sensure and good
allowance of the Honorable Assembly of this House. But however, it has
pleased you to enable me in this sort; This I dare and can assure you, that you
might have chosen many more worthy, but none more ready to show his utmost
endeavor in this service. Which Choice, seeing it has proceeded out of your
Favor undeserved on my part, I shall endeavor, as God shall enable me, to show
my self for this Assembly, most careful, and to every particular Member, most
respective, and thankful.

VVhereupon he sat down, and put on his Hat: And after a little sitting, and
pawse, Sir William Knowls, Controuler, rose up and said, It was her Majesty's
pleasure, that we should be ready to present our Speaker on Friday next, at two
of the Clock in the afternoon. So for that day every man departed.

Friday Octo. 30. About one of the Clock, the Speaker, October. 30.
and all the House were ready in the Lower House, sitting and talking
privately; and then Word was brought, that her Majesty was come by Water to the
Upper House; so the Privy Council, and the Speaker, with the whole House, went
to the Upper House door, and there staid a long half hour, before such time as
they were let in. After, being come in, the Upper House was sat, and the Queen
under the State, the Speaker, standing at the Bar below, made three Reverences;
which done, he made a Speech to her Majesty to the effect following.

Most Sacred and mighty Sovereign; The Speakers Speech to the Queen.
upon your Majesty's Command, your most dutiful and loving Commons, the
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the lower House, have chosen me, your
Majesty's most humble servant (being a member of the same House) to be their
Speaker: But my self finding the weakness of my self, and my abilities too weak
to undergo so great a burden, do most humbly beseech your most sacred Majesty,
to continue your most gracious favor toward me; and not to lay this Charge, so
unsupportable, upon my unworthy and unable self. And that it would please you,
to command your Commons to make a new Election of another more able and
sufficient, to discharge the great service to be appointed by your Majesty, and
your Subjects.

And I besceech your most Excellent Majesty, not to interpret my denial herein,
to proceed from my unwillingness to perform all devoted dutiful Service: But
rather out of your Majesty's Clemency and Goodness, to interpret the same, to
proceed from that inward fear and trembling, which has possessed me when
heretofore, (with most gracious Audience) it has pleased your Majesty, to
License me to speak before you. For I know, and must acknowledge, that under
God, even through your Majesty's great bounty and favor, I am that I am. And
therefore none of your Majesty's most dutiful Subjects, more bound to be ready,
and being ready, to perform the least of your Majesty's Commands.

I do therefore, most humbly beseech your Majesty, that in regard the service
of so great a Prince, and flourishing Kingdom, may the better and more
successively be effected, to command your dutiful and loving Commons, the
Knights, Citizens, and Burgessess of the Lower House, to proceed to a new
Election.

Then, after he had made three Reverences, the Queen called the Lord Keeper, to
whom she spoke something in private. And after that, the Lord Keeper spoke in
effect as follows.

Mr. Speaker, The Lord Keeper Answers by the Queens Command.
Her Majesty, with gracious Attention, having heard your wise and grave Excuse;
for your discharge, commanded me to say unto you, That even your eloquent
Speech, in excuse of your self, is a great Motive, and a Reason very
persuasive, both to ratify and approve of the Choice of her loving Commons, the
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses; as also to commend their wise and discreet
Choice of your self, in her gracious Sensure, both for Sufficiency well Able,
and for your fidelity and service, well Approved of; and therefore, her Majesty
takes this Choice of yours, for bonum omen, a sign of good and happy Success,
when the beginning is taken in hand with so great Wisdom and Discretion: Her
Majesty therefore, Commanded me to say unto you, That she well likes of your
Election, and therefore she Ratifieth it, with her Royal Assent and Consent.

Then, Mr. Speaker making three low Reverences, Answered, in this sort. Most
sacred and most puissant queen, seeing it has pleased your to command my
service; by consenting to the free Election of your dutiful and loyal Subjects,
the Knights, The Speakers second Speech
Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons, of me to be their Speaker: I
most humbly beseech your Majesty, to give me leave to show unto you, the
dutiful thoughts, and earnest affections of your loyal subjects, to do your
Majesty all service, and to defend your Sacred and Royal Person, both with
their Lives and Goods against, etc. And so made a vehement invective against
the Tyranny of the King of Spain, the Popes ambition, and the Rebels in
Ireland; which he said, were like a Snake cut in pieces, which did crawl and
creep to join themselves together again. And lastly, with prayers, to continue
the prosperous Estate and Peace of this Land, which had been defended, as he
said, by the mighty Arm of our Dread and Sacred Queen. (To which she answered
openly her self, No, but by the mighty hand of God, Mr. Speaker.) Then he
proceeded to the last part, to beseech her Majesty for freedom of Speech to
every particular member: For access to here Person, liberty of Privilege to
all the Members of this House, and their Servant. And lastly, if any mistaking
of any Message (delivered unto him from the Commons) should happen, that her
Majesty would be pleased to attribute that to his weakness, in delivery or
understanding, and not to the House: As also, any forgetfulness, through want
of memory; or that things were not so judicially handled, or expressed by him,
as they were delivered by the House. To which, after the Queen had spoken to
the Lord Keeper again; the Lord Keeper spoke in effect, as follows.

Mr. Speaker, her Majesty does greatly commend, The Lord Keeper replies, by the
Queens Order.
and like of your grave Speech, well divided, and well contrived; the first
proceeding from a sound Invention, and the other from a settled Judgment and
Experience: You have well, and well indeed, weighed the state of this Kingdom,
well observed the greatness of our puissant, and great Empire, the King of
Spain; the continual and excessive charges of the Wars of Ireland; which if
they be well weighed, do not only show the prudence of our gracious Sovereign,
in defending of us; but also, the greatness of the charge continually bestowed
by her Majesty, even out of her own Revenues, to protect us; and the exposing
of her Majesty's self to continual troubles, and toilesome Cares, for the
benefit and safety of her Subjects.

Wherefore, Mr. Speaker, it behooves us to think, and say, as was delivered by
a great man lately, in a Concilio ad Clerum, opus est subsidio, ne fiai exitum;
or as I think, excedium.

Touching your other Requests: First, For freedom of Speech, her Majesty
willingly Consents thereunto, with this caution; That the matter be not spent
in Idle and Vain matters, Painting out the same with Froth, and Volubility of
words.

And her Majesty Commands, That you suffer not any Speeches made for
Contention, or Contradiction-sake, maintained only by a Tempest of words;
whereby the Speakers may seem to get some reputed Credit, by imboldning
themselves to maintain Contradiction, and on purpose to trouble the House with
vain and long Orations, to hinder the Proceedings in more weighty and greater
Importance.

Touching Access to her Person, she most willingly grants the same; desiring
she may not be troubled, unless urgent and matters of great Consequence compel
you thereunto. For this has been held for a wise Maxim, In troubling great
Estates, you must trouble seldom.

For Liberty unto your selves, and servants, her Majesty has Commanded me to
say unto you all, That she ever intends to preserve the Liberty of the House;
and grants Liberty to the meanest Follower of the meanest Member of this
House.

But, her Majesty's Pleasure is, you should not maintain, and keep with you,
notorious Persons, either for Life, or Behavior; As desperate Debtors, who
never come abroad, fearing her Laws, but at these times. Petty Foggers, and
Vipers of the Common Wealth; prouling and common Solicitors, that sets
Dissension between man and man, and men of the like Condition to these.

These her Majesty earnestly desires, a Law may be made against; as also that
no Member of this Parliament would entertain, or bolster up any man on the like
Humor, or Quality, on pain of her Highnesses Displeasure.

For the Excuse of the House, and your self, Her Majesty Commands me to say,
That your Sufficiency has so often times been approved before her, That She
doubts not of the Sufficient Discharge of the Place you shall serve in.

Wherein, she wills you, to have a special Eye, and Regard; not to make new
and idle Laws, and trouble the House with them: But rather to look to the
Abridging, and Repealing of diverse obsolete and superfluous Statutes.

As also, First, To take in hand Matters of greatest Moment and Consequence; In
doing thus, Mr. Speaker, you shall fulfill her Majesty's Commandment, do your
Country good, and satisfy Her Majesty's Expectation.

Which being said, the Speaker made three Reverences to the Queen. Then the
Lord Keeper said; For certain great and weighty Causes, Her Highness's Pleasure
is, the Parliament shall be Adjourned until Friday next.

Which Speech, was taken to be an Adjournment of the Lower House, but it was
not so meant; wherefore the Lower House sat the next day, being Saturday
morning.

So, after some room made, the Queen came through the Commons, to go into the
Painted-Chamber, who graciously offering her Hand to the Speaker, he kissed it;
but not one word she spoke unto him, neither, as she went through the Commons;
few said, God bless your Majesty, as they were wont in all great Assemblies.
And the throng being great, and little room to pass, she moved her Hand to have
more room; whereupon one of the Gentlemen Ushers said openly, Back Masters,
make room. And one answered stoutly, behind, If you will Hang us, we can make
no more room: which the Queen seemed not to hear, though she heaved up her
Head, and looked that way toward him that spoke. After, she went to White Hall
by Water.

Saturday, October. 31. I was not there, thinking the House had not sare till
Thursday; but I heard there was a motion made for the maintenance of the
Privileges of the House, and to have a Committee for it; which was appointed
on Thursday at one of the Clock in the Afternoon. And two Bills were Read, one
against Drunkenness; another, that no Bishop, nor Archbishop, may make any
Lease in Remainder, or Reversion, until within three Years before the
expiration of the former Lease.

This Day, the Prayer was brought into the House, which was appointed every
Morning to be Read, during the sitting of this Parliament, amongst other
Prayers, by a Minister appointed for that purpose.

The COPY of the PRAYER.
OH Eternal, Almighty, and ever Living GOD; A Prayer to be used Every Morning
in the House of Commons.
which have made the Eye, and therefore see; which has framed the Heart, and
therefore understandest; from whose only Throne all Wisdom comes: Look down
upon us, that call upon Thee; bow down thine Ear and hear us; open thine Eyes
and behold us, which in the Name of thy Son, and our Savior, do lift up our
Hearts unto Thee. Forgive us O Lord, forgive us all that we have done amiss, in
Thought, Word, or Deed. Forgive us our negligences; forgive us our
unthankfulness, make us mindful of thy Benefits, and thankful for all thy
Mercies. Thou that see the Hearts, and searchest the Reins, and beholdest the
utmost parts of the World, try and examine our Hearts, and guide us in thy
ways; knit our Hearts unto Thee, that we may fear thy Name. Let us ever fear
this Glorious, and Fearful Name, The Lord our God. Let all that despise Thee,
feel thy Judgments: Let all Men know, it is a fearful thing to fall into the
Hands of the Living God: Let thy Mercies always prevent us, and compass us
about: In all our Ways, Words, and Works, let us set Thee always before our
Eyes. Remove from us all vanity and hypocrisy. Let thy Truth always preserve
us; Bless our Consultations and Councels, bless the Thoughts of our Hearts,
bless the Words of our Lips; let our Meditations be acceptable in thy sight.
Let all be directed to the advancement of thy Glory, the upholding of thy true
Worship, the safely of thy blessed Servant and Anointed Queen, our dear and
dread Sovereign; and to the continuance of the Peace and good of this Land. Let
all prosper that love Thee; confound the Council of the Wicked, break their
Jaws in their Mouths that speak against thy Truth, or have evil will against
Her, whom in thy great Mercy thou have set over us; multiply and increase her
days; add age after age in all peace and happiness, unto her Years; make her a
long Nursing Mother unto thy Church, a Comfort to thy People, a Terror to
thine, and her Enemies: Bless her Armies, both at home and abroad; bless her
going out, and her coming in; bow down the Backs of all that rise against her,
continue thy Truth, Grace, Mercy, and Peace amongst us, whilst the Sun
indureth: And we will Offer unto Thee, O Lord our God, the Sacrifice of Prayer
and Thanksgiving; we will Praise Thee with joyful Lips, our Hearts shall
rejoice in Thee, we will sing of thy Salvation, all the Days of our Lives, and
always say, Thine is the Kingdom, all Power, and Glory, for ever and ever, Amen.



Monday, November, A Bill against Alehouses, etc.
2d. The House sat, and an Act was Read against Excess in Inns,
Victualling-Houses, and Alehouses: By the preclose of which, every
Ale-House-Keeper, or Innkeeper, was required to Observe certain Rules, or to
Forfeit sive Pound.

An Act for the Breeding of Horses for Service, A Bill for breeding of Horses,
etc.
and for the avoiding of the stealing of them, was put in by the Lord Chief
Justice Popham.

Sir Edward Hobby, Sir Edw. Hobby's Speech for Abridgment of Laws Penal.
made a Speech for the Abridging of the multiplicity of Penal Laws, which he
said, Were the Thorns that did prick, but did yield no Fruit; and that they
being not looked unto, it bred in us an alteration of Manners; and therefore,
the Proverb must needs be fulfilled, Morum mutatio mutationem legum requirit;
times are not as they have been, and therefore the necessity of the times,
requires a necessity of the Alteration of Laws: and commending the proceedings
of former Ages, he concluded with a desire of a Commitment.

Which speech, Seconded by Mr. Sergeant Harris.
was seconded by Mr. Sergeant Harris; who said, That Anno 27. of the Queen, the
like motion had been made, and that then by reason of the shortness of the
time, and sudden ending of the Parliament, nothing was done therein;
notwithstanding (he said) this motion, being now so happily made, in the
beginning of the Parliament, he thought it fit, for his part, to deserve a
Commitment.

He was Seconded again, Then by Mr. Wiseman.
by Mr. Wiseman of Lincoln's Inn; who was of the same mind, and said, That
diverse particular Laws, of his knowledge, were now both needless to be
performed, as also dangerous to the Subjects, by reason of the Penalties. So a
Commitment was granted, diverse Committees assigned; and Friday in the
Afternoon, at two of the Clock in the Exchequer-Chamber appointed for that
Purpose.

The Act was Read for Explanation of Statutes for Leases made by Archbishops
and Bishops.

Mr. Speaker showed to the House, That some particular Members found themselves
aggrieved, That the ancient Order for Putting off their Spur, before they came
into the Parliament House, was not observed, which he prayed might be done;
others would have Boots and Rapiers taken away; but nothing was done therein.

Tuesday, November 3. The Act to preserve the Breed of Horses, and against the
Stealing of them, was Read: And a motion was made therein, by Sir George Moore,
who said, That he feared, the Bill would not pass, in that two Vouchers by this
Bill must be; where by a former Statute, there is to be but one, and that very
hardly observed. And besides, the Law may be defrauded, because a poor Man must
sell a Horse, and so be voucher after, and then not able to answer the value.
So the Bill was Committed, and the Committees appointed to meet in the
Exchequer-Chamber, to Morrow in the Afternoon.

The Act to restrain the Excess and Abuse used in Victualling-Houses; Mr.
Johnson moves for Corporal punishment against the Alehouse-Keepers.
and Mr. Johnson moved, that bodily punishment might be inflicted on
Alehouse-Keepers that should be offenders; and also Provision made therein, to
restrain Resort to Alehouses.

In the same Bill, Sir George Moore made a Speech, against Drunkenness, and
desired some special Provision might be made against it: For, although there
were Laws already against it, yet they did not reach grievous enough to the
offense in that kind now Committed. And therefore, we must not be like Spiders,
that always keep their old, and the same Webs, so allowing the same Laws which
must alter with the times; and touching the Authority that is given to the
Justices of Assize, and Justices of the Peace, by this Bill, That they shall
assign Inns, and Innkeepers, I think that inconvenient: for an Inn is a Man's
Inheritance, and they are set at great rates, and therefore, not to be taken
away from any particular Man.

Another wished, that there might be a reformation of Ale, which is now made so
strong, that he offered to affirm it upon Oath, that it is commonly sold for a
Groat a Quart. It is as strong as Wine, and will Burn like Sack.

Mr. Glascock of Gray's Inn moved to the House, and said, Glascock against the
suppressing of Alehouses for very good Reasons.
Mr. Speaker, I will only liken this Bill to the Suppression of Stews and
Bawdy-Houses, in old time; That, where then all Whores and Bawds were together
in one House, now being suppressed, every Man's House is a Bawdy House; so, if
you take away Alehouses, and hinder them from being Drunk there, it will be a
ready way to make every Man Drunk at his own House, at home.

Mr. Leigh stood up, and moved Mr. Speaker, that some of the House were
desirous to know what the Lord Keepers Speech was, Mr. Leigh (...) to (...) the
Lord Keepers Speech (...).
in the Upper-House of Parliament, when the Burgesses were kept out: And also
he complained of a Gentleman Usher, that said through the Door of the
Upper-House, That if they were not quiet, they should be set in the Stocks.

To which, Mr. Controuler made answer, That he would entreat Mr. Secretary
Cicil, who was there, in regard he had promised to procure them the
understanding of the Lord Keepers Speech, to deliver the Effect thereof. And
also, he desired the House, that for any word spoken to any particular Member
of this House, by the Usher, he would undertake particular satisfaction should
be made.

So after a pause a while, Mr. Secretary stood up, and spoke to to this Effect.
Secretary Cicil Speaks.
I am sorry, and very loath to break a Resolution that I had taken, which is,
for some respects to have been Silent, or very sparing of Speech all this
Parliament, but your Commandments are to me a Law. And I will be always ready
to pleasure any particular Member of this House, in this or the like Design.

My memory is frail, and I know my self unable to Deliver Articulately, the
Grave and Learned Speech of that Wise and Worthy Counselor, who first spoke
it; For hard it is to tell a Wisemans tale after him, and therefore to
particularize, I must plead my Excuse: Seeing men of the best Sufficiency may
forget, when ordinary Capacities may Remember; my mind was not then fit for
Attention, when I had some cause of Distraction.

He used persuasions of Thankfulness and Obedience, as also showed her
Majesty's Desire of a Dissolution of this Parliament before Christmas; He
showed unto us the Necessity we stand in; and the means to prevent it; The
necessity he said is the Wars between Spain and England; the means to prevent
it, Treasure. His Advise was, that Laws in force might be Revisited, and
Explained, and no new Laws made. The Cause of the War he laid down to be, That
they were Enemies to God, the Queen, and the Peace of this Kingdom; That they
Conspired to overthrow Religion, and to Reduce us to a Tyrannical Servitude.

These two Enemies, he Named to be the Bishop of Rome, and the King of Spain.
Our Estate being thus, He Summoned us to be Provident and Confident; Provident,
by reason we deal with a provident Enemy; and Confident, because God has ever,
and I hope ever will, Bless the Queen with Successeful Portune.

He showed how Apparent his Providence was: for by Experience and Judgment, You
know his Torturing he gives, and the Means and Courses he takes for our
Destruction. And Secondly, the Success we have had against him, by Gods
strong-Arm of Defense in 1588. and diverse times since. You see to what Effect
the Queens Support of the French Kings Estate has brought him unto, even made
him one of the greatest Princes in Europe; Yet when her Majesty's Forces there
left him, how again he was fain to Ransom a Servile Peace at our Enemy the
Spaniards Hand, with Dishonorable and Servile Conditions. For the
Low Countries, how by Her Aid, she has from a Confused Government, and Estate,
brought them to an Unity of Council, and defended them with such Success, in
her Attempts against the greatest Power of the Spaniards Tyrannical designs:
Which has so much Gauled him, that how many desperate Practices have been both
Devised, Consented unto, and set on Foot by Commandment of the late King his
Father; I need not now show you, nor trouble you with Arguments for Proof
thereof, being Confessed by them, that should have been Actors themselves of
those bloody Designs, but De mortuus nil nisi bonum. I would be loath to speak
of the Dead, much more to slander the Dead. I have seen her Majesty wear at her
Girdle, the Price of her Blood; I mean Jewels which have been given to her
Physicians, to have done that unto her, which I hope, God will ever keep from
her; but she has worn them rather in Triumph than for the Price, which has
not been greatly valuable.

Then he fell to persuade us, because new Occasions were Offe'rd of
Consultations to be Provident in Provision of means for our own Defense and
Safety, seeing the King of Spain means to make England miserable, with
beginning with Ireland; neither does he begin with the Rebels, but even with
the Territories of the Queen her self.

He showed, that Treasure must be our means; for Treasure is the sinews of War.
Thus much that Honorable Person said, from whom I protest I would diminish
nothing, that should be spoken of, if I could Remember more, or deliver it
better: And I had rather wrong my self than wrong him.

For my own Advise, touching the particular Councils of this House; I wish,
Cicil now gives his own advice.
that we would not trouble our selves with any Fantastic Speeches, or idle
Bills; but rather, with such as be for the general good, both light in
Conception, and facile in Execution: Now, seeing it has pleased you all, with
patience hitherto to hear me, If with your Favor, I may particularize, and show
the Grounds of the former Speech, touching the State of Ireland, I shall be
very glad, both for my own Discharge, and your Satisfaction.

The King of Spain, having quit himself of France, by a base and servile Peace,
forgets not to follow the Objects of his Fathers Ambition. England, and the
Low Countries, he has made diverse Overtures of Peace to; which, if they might
be both Honorable, and for the public good, I hold him neither a Wise, nor an
Honest man, that would Impugn them. He has put an Army into Ireland, the
Number Four Thousand, under the Conduct of a valiant, expert, and hardy
Captain, who Chooses, rather than to return to his own Country without any
Famous Enterprise, to live and die in this Service.

These Four Thousand, are three parts of them natural Spaniards, and of his
best expert Soldiers, except them of the Low Countries; those he would not
spare, because of his Enterprise of Ostend; and how dangerous the loss of that
Town would be to this Land, I think there is no man of Experience but can
Witness with me, that he would easily be Master of that Coast; and that the
Trade between England, and the Low Countries, were quite Dissolved; yea, he
would be so dangerous a Neighbor to us, that we which are Tenants at
Discretion, are likely shortly to be Tenants by his Courtesy; when he is our
Neighbor of the Low Countries, what Neighbor has Spain, to whom he shall not
be a trouble?

I will show you further, what besides this he has done, and how Eagle-eyed he
is still over us. To resist the Turks Attempt, he has sent Ten Thousand Men.
To the Low Countries, he has sent Nine Thousand. In an Enterprise of his own
against the Turks, he has sent -- which being dispatched, those Soldiers
shall return against the next Spring, and second these Four Thousand now in the
Enterprise for Ireland.

To resist these Attempts in Being, and the ensuing provisions against us, Let
us consider the certainty of our Estate in Ireland: We have there an Army, and
nothing but an Army, fed even out of England: with what Charge it brings to the
Queen, what Trouble to the Subject, what danger it is to them there left, if
the Provision should fail; What hurt to the Commonwealth, by making things at
an higher Rate than otherwise they would be, I refer it to your Wisdoms to
imagine

Over this, I assure you, It is beyond all President and Conjecture, his
Pretense and Cause of War there, is to desend the Catholic Cause; I mean, to
Tear her Majesty's Subjects from her; for I may say, she has no Catholic
Obedient Subjects there, because she stands Excommunicated at this present,
by force of two Bulls of this Popes, by which her Subjects are Absolved of
their Obedience. That you do only Remember you do it; pro aris and focis, yea
we do it for a Prince, that desires not to draw any thing extraordinary out of
the Coffers of her Subjects: She sells her Land to Defend us; she Supporteth
all her Neighbor-Princes, to gain their Amity, and Establish our long Peace;
not these five, or seven, or ten Years, but Forty-three Years, for all our
Prosperities: I hope I shall not see her Funeral, upon which may be Written,
Hic Solum restat victrix Orientis, and I pray God, I may not; what we freely
give unto Her, she living bestows it to our Good; and dying, doubtless, will
leave it for our Profit. Thus have I out of my own Genius, for my own part,
delivered unto you what I know: And touching that I have spoken, in performing
your Commandment, I will take no thank from you for my Pains: For no man cares
with less Affection to speak in this Assembly, or desires to gratify any
particular Member of this House, more than my self.

The Bill for Ale was denied to be Committed, and not put to the question,
whether it should be Engrossed Yea, or No. But some Doubt made thereof, but as
it seems, if the Committing be denied, it uses not to be Engrossed, because
the House will not lightly pass it.

Sir George Moore moved, that where the Lord Keepers Oration was, that the
greatest matters should be handled in the beginning of the Parliament, that a
Committee might be Chosen to Certify the House, what those matters were; That
Order might be taken accordingly; which Committee was appointed to meet in the
House on Saturday in the afternoon.

Mr. Secretary Cecil said openly, Sir Rob. Wroth offers 100. l. per Annum
toward the Wars.
that Sir Robert Wroth had offered One Hundred Pounds per Ann. toward the
maintenance of the Wars.

On Wednesday, November. 4. A Bill was Read for Punishment of the Abusing and
Profaning of the Sabbath Day, which after the second Reading, was committed,
and the Committee appointed to meet, at two of the Clock in the afternoon, in
the middle-Temple-Hall.

Mr. Serjant Harris moved the House, That in respect great danger and
inconvenience might grow by the want of any one particular Member of this
House, therefore he thought good to Certify the want of a Knight for
Rutlandshire; for he said, That Sir Andrew Noell, being the Sheriff of the
County, had returned himself jointly with Sir John Harrington to be Knights; A
Motion about a Void Election; the Sheriff Returning himself.
which he took in Law, to be a void Return, because it is against the express
Words of the Writ; which are, Ita quod neque tu, neque aliquis alius Vicecomes
alterius Comitatus eligatur, etc. Which he thought good to move the House in,
referring it to their Considerations; and prayed, that the Record may be sent
for from the Clerk of the Crown. For (said he) we know, in Law, that a Man
cannot make an Indenture to himself: No more can he here, between Himself and
the County; for there are required Two Persons.

To which Sir Edward Hobby replied, That notwithstanding this, Sir Edw. Hobby
Replies, and quotes Precedents.
the House might well Receive him: And he vouched a Precedent in the
Twenty-Fifth, (or Twenty-First) of this Queen; when a Writ was directed to the
Bailiffs of Southwark, to return Burgesses, and they returned Themselves, and
were Received. But if we do not Receive him, another Question will grow:
Whether a new Warrant must go from the Speaker, to Elect a new Knight, or from
the Clerk of the Crown. To which it was agreed, per omnes, It must go from the
Speaker.

Then Mr. Wiseman of Lincoln's Inn stood up, Mr. Wiseman Opposes him.
and showed the Necessity of having all our Members; because otherwise the Body
is but maimed: And also, how dangerous a Precedent this would be, if it might
pass with the Applause of the House. And lastly, the Reason of putting in the
aforesaid special Words in the Writ; because it must be necessarily intended,
that they being so great Officers, having so great a Charge, and their Presence
in their Counties so requisite, should not be returned. Besides, for that time,
they be the Chief Men of the Shire: Freeholders, peradventure, would rather
Choose them, than Men far more sufficient for that Place.

Mr. Carry moved, Mr. Cary's Motion.
Whether it were with his Will, he should be punished by Fine, or otherwise.

Sir John Harrington said, Sir John Harrington excuses the Sheriff.
Of his own Knowledge, he knew him very unwilling. But the Freeholders made
Answer, They would have none other.

Mr. Speaker said, The Speaker is not of his Opinion.
It could not be intended to be against his Will, because his Hand is to the
Indenture. But he moved, Whether it should be intended, that this Sir Andrew
Noell were Una and eadem Persona, or no? And though he were, yet, Whether they
could take notice thereof? and to be certifyed out of Chancery. To which all
the House said, There was no other of the Name.

Then Mr. Comptroller stood up, Mr. Comptroller puts a Question, which the
House determines.
and moved, That in respect the Return was joint, and that they did disallow
Sir Andrew Noell, he desired to be resolved of the learned Masters of the Law
of this House, Whether all the Return was insufficient, and so Sir John
Harrington to be Excluded? To which all the said House said, No.

Mr. Sergeant Harris said, No; because the said Warrant is Affirmative, to
choose any but the Sheriff, who is excepted by special Words: But the Return of
the other is warranted; but of him, his Election is void.

Sir Edward Hobby answered; Nay then, Mr. Sergeant, if you stand on that, I
think there are few Knights in this House lawfully Chosen: For the Words of the
Writ, and of the Statute, are, That he must be Commorant within the County,
which but few are. To which not one word was answered; and so that Clause was
shut up.

Mr. Speaker said; A New Election voted.
Well, I will put it to the Question, which shall be twofold: One, Whether a
new Warrant shall be sent forth? To which, being twice moved, all cried I, I,
I; and not one Man said No.

Sir Edward Hobby said; And the Warrant to be Issued by the Speaker.
Mr. Speaker, the Warrant must go from your self: for in the 27. Reginae, when
Parry was chosen Burgess for Queenborough, a new Election was made, and the
Warrant was sent from the Speaker.

The Act touching Bishops Leases was read, A Bill touching Bishops Leases.
viz. That no Bishop, or Archbishop, might make any Lease in Remainder, till
within Three Years of the expiring of the former Lease.

To which only Mr. Boys stood up, Mr. Boys opposes it, and gives his Reasons.
and said; That this Act would be prejudicial both to the Bishop present, and
the Successor, and their Servants, and to the Bishop's own Farmers and Tenants.
To the Bishop present, in the Maintenance of his Estate, which comes only by
continual Fines; which, if they be taken away, then are they not able to
maintain that Hospitality, or keep that Retinue either belonging to their
Place, or answerable to their Living: For, consider the Revenue of the greatest
Bishopric in England; it is but Two Thousand, and Two Hundred Pounds, per
Annum; whereof he pays for Annual Subsidy to the Queen, Five Hundred Pounds.
And what Damage we shall do both to him, and his Successor herein, his Revenue
being so Beneficial to her Majesty, I refer to all your Judgments. To the
Successor it must needs be more hurtful; for when he first comes in, he pays
First Fruits, and yet is not allowed to make his Benefit by Fines; which all
Bishop's Farmers are contented to do: So that he is cast one whole Years
Revenue behind-hand; and perhaps, has no Power neither to make Leases in
Twelve or Sixteen Years.

This, Mr. Speaker, will be a Cause to induce the Ministers of the Word, not to
seek Bishoprics; whereby we may bring the Clergy both to Poverty and Contempt;
from which they have ever been carefully defended, and provided for, even by
the most ancient Statutes and Laws of this Realm, now Extant.

Hurtful it is to their Servants; for this may be every Man's Case: We know,
many good Gentlemen's Sons served Bishops; and, How can they reward their long
and faithful Service, but only by means of granting over of these Fines, or
some other means out of the Spiritual Function? But this Act is good for the
Courtier: But I must speak no more of that.

Lastly; Mr. Speaker, my self am Farmer to a Bishop; and I speak this, as in my
own Case, (on my Knowledge) to the House, that it is ordinary, upon every Grant
after Four or Five Years, ever to Fine, and take a New Lease. But I refer it to
the Consideration of the House, to do their Pleasures therein: Only this I
certify, that I have the Copy of the Bill the last Parliament, exhibited to
this Purpose; which I having compared together with this present Bill, do find
them to be word for word all one; and that was rejected: And so, I doubt not,
if the Reasons be well weighed, but this will have the like Success.

Upon whose Motion it was put to the Question, Upon which it was Rejected.
Whether it should be committed? and all said, No; not one, Yea: So this Bill
was rejected.

An Act was read, That Plaintiffs in Writs of Error, should give good Bail. To
which no Man offered to speak: Whereupon Mr. Speaker stood up, and said, That
if no Man speak, it must be engrossed.

Mr. Carry said; He thought it very fit, that the Bill should be first
Committed: For, talking with Sir Roger Maynwood in his Lifetime, Lord Chief
Baron of the Exchequer, he was of opinion, That it was more fit, and more safe
for the Subjects Good, and far more easy for the Judges, that the Money should
be brought into the Court, and no Recognizance taken; which, if it might be
committed, the Bill might be amended in that Point; and, no doubt, would pass.
So it was committed, to be set upon on Monday, in the Middle-Temple-Hall, the
Nineth of November.

Mr. Johnson moved the House, That whereas the last Parliament there were Three
Bills: One touching Pattentees, another touching the Clerk of the Market, and
the Third touching Petty Thefts. That these being Public Matters, might be
brought into the House this Parliament, and Read. And touching the Clerk of the
Market, he durst undertake to lay open as many vile Practices, as almost there
be Men in this House. He made a very long and good Speech, touching these Three
Bills; which for Brevity, I omit.

An Act was read against fraudulent Administration of Testator's Goods.

The Bill against Drunkards was again read; the effect whereof was, That common
Drunkards should be presented as common Barrettors; which was Committed upon
the Motion of Mr. Wiseman, to the Committees for the Bill, for the Abuse of the
Sabbath Day. He said, It was very convenient in his Opinion, Blasphemers and
Swearers were punished by some strict Law. And so told of a Conference betwixt
him, and a Prisoner in the Gate House at Westminster; who through a Window,
secing many Children playing, they Swore almost at every word: Then the
Recusant asked him, If that was the Fruit of our Doctrine? and, How it chanced
that our Doctrine being so sincere, such Blashemy was committed? Therefore,
that the Slanders of our Adversaries may be avoided, the Sin punished, and
God's Name more reverenced, and Himself better served, some Provision in that
Law, touching that Point, he thought very necessary.

An Act touching the Sowing of Hemp, An Act for sowing Hemp.
was read the second time.

To which Bill, Sir Walt. Rawleigh does Oppose it.
Sir Walter Rawleigh spoke, and said:

For my part, I do not like this Constraining of Men to Manure, or use their
Grounds at our Wills; but rather, let every Man use his Ground to that which it
is most fit for, and therein use his own Discretion. For Halsars, Cables,
Cordage, and the like, we have plentifully enough from Foreign Nations; and we
have diverse Countries here in England make thereof in great abundance. And the
Bill of Tillage may be a sufficient Motive to us in this Case, not to take the
Course that this Bill intends: For where the Law provideth, That every Man
must Plow the third Part of his Land, I know it, diverse poor People have done
so, to avoid the Penalty of the Statute; when their Abilities have been so
poor, that they have not been able to buy Seed-Corn to Sow it withal; nay, they
have been fain to hire others to Plow it: which, if it had been un-plowed,
would have been good Pasture for Beasts, or might have been converted to other
good Uses.

Upon this Motion, all the House bad away with the Bill: But it was put to the
Question, Whether it should be committed, or no? But because of Doubt, the
House was divided, and the I, I, I, were 103 and the No's were 162. So the Bill
was not committed. After it was put to the Question for Engrossing, Upon which
it was Rejected.
and notwithstanding a Speech Mr. Comptroller made for the Weightiness thereof,
it was denied; and so absolutely Rejected.

This was one of the Proviso's in the Bill For the Breeding, and against
Stealing of Horses, viz. That all Justices of Assize, A Proviso against
Stealing of Horses.
in their several Circuits, and all Justices of the Peace in their several
Quarter Sessions, as well within Liberties, as without, shall have full Power
and Authority to inquire of, and hear and determine all Offenses to be
committed against this present Statute. And there is a former Clause, That if
Sale without Voucher be made, then the Person shall be apprehended, and carried
to the next Justice, as a Felon.

Thursday November 5. An Act touching certain Assurances used amongst
Merchants, was Read and rejected.

An Act touching Reformation of Abuses in Alehouses, Bill against Abuses in
Tippling-Houses.
and Tipling-houses; which Act, after the former was Rejected, was Read: The
Effect whereof is, that for the sale of every pot of Bear, being not of the
Assise of a full Ale-quart, the Seller shall Forfeit Three Shillings four
Pence. Note, that no Suitor is Named in this Bill; the same to endure till the
end of the next Parliament, Read twice this Day.

The Bill for Observing the Sabbath Day, Read twice, and Ordered to be Engrossed.

Nota, That by the Order of this House, when a Bill is returned from
Commitment, the Words must be twice Read, which are Amended, before the
Engrossing thereof.

An Act against false Returns, and Not Returns by Sheriffs and Bailiffs, twice
Read, and Ordered to be Engrossed.

Mr. Bacon Moves to prefer a New Bill.
Mr. Bacon stood up to Prefer a new Bill, and said:
Mr. Speaker,

I am not of their minds that bring their Bills into this House Obscurely, by
delivery only to your Self, or the Clerk; delighting to have the Bill to be
incerto Authore, as though they were either Ashamed of their own Work, or
Afraid to Father their own Children. But I, Mr. Speaker, have a Bill here,
which I know I shall be no sooner ready to Offer, but you will be as ready to
receive and approve.

I liken this Bill, to that Sentence of the Poet, (...)
who set this as a Paradox in the Forefront of his Book, First Water, then
Gold; Preferring Necessity before Pleasure. And I am of the same Opinion, that
things necessary for Use, are better than those things glorious in Estimation.

This, Mr. Speaker, is no Bill of State, nor of Novelty, like a stately Gallery
for Pleasure; but neither to Dine in, or Sleep in; but this Bill is a Bill of
Repose, of Quiet, of Profit, and of true and just Dealing; the Title whereof
is, An Act for the better Suppressing of Abuses in Weights and Measures. We
have turned out diverse Bills, without Disputation, and for a House of Gravity
and Wisdom, as this is, to bandy Bills like Balls, and to be silent, as if no
body were of Council with the Common wealth, is unfitting, in my Understanding,
for the State thereof.

I Will tell you, Mr. Speaker, I Will speak out of my own Experience, that I have
learned and observed, having had Causes of this Nature referred to my Report,
That this fault of using false Weights and Measures, is grown so intolerable
and common, that, if you would Build Churches, you shall not need for
Battlements, and Bells, other things than false Weights of Lead and Brass.

And, because I would observe the Advice that was given in the beginning of
this Parliament, That we should make no new Laws; I have made this Bill only a
Confirmation of the Statute of 11 Hen. 7. with a few Additions, to which I will
speak at the passing of the Bill, and show the Reason of every particular
Clause; the Whole being but the revival of a former Statute; for I count it far
better, to Scour a Stream, than to Turn a Stream. And the First Clause is, that
it Extends to the Principality of Wales, to constrain them to have the like
Weights with us in England.



Sir Robert Wroth made a motion for a Commitment to amend the Statute for the
Relief of the Poor, and Building of Houses of Correction, made the last
Parliament 39 Reginae: And also for the continuance of certain Statutes, which
was referred to Commitment on Tuesday next in the Exchequer-Chamber.

By Order of the House, Nota.
it was agreed upon, That a Committee once made and agreed upon, there shall
not hereafter be more Committees joined unto them, for the same Bill; but for
any other there may.

Sir Robert Cecil moved the House, Secretary Cecil makes a Motion.
To have their Opinions, in that there wanted a Chief Member, viz. a Knight of
Denby-shire. And he said, I am to Certify the House thus much, in respect of
some Disorder Committed there touching the Election, by Sir Rich. Trevor, and
Sir John Flood, to which Sir John Salisbury is a Party, the Sheriff could not
proceed in Election; For my own part, I think it fit, Mr. Speaker should attend
my Lord Keeper therein. (quod not attend) if it please you, you shall hear the
Letter. Which was Read, the Contents whereof were,

He Reads a Letter about a Disturbance at the Election of Knights for the Shire.
THat on the Twenty-first of October, he kept at (...) the County-day, and there
being quietly Chooseing the Knight for the Shire, a Cry came suddenly, that Sir
Richard Trevor and Sir John Flood on the one Party, and Sir John Salisbury on
the other, were together sighting, and all their Companies ready to do the
like; whereupon, presently I went to the Churchyard where they were, and there
I found both Parties, with their Swords drawn ready, but with much ado pacified
them both. And fearing lest by drawing such a Multitude together, there might
great Danger and Bloodshed happen, I made Proclamation, That every Man should
depart; by means whereof I did not Execute her Majesty's Writ, as I thought to
have done, rather choosing to adventure your Honor's Censure herein, than to
hazard so great Bloodshed. Under Subscribed,

Your Honor's most humble at Commandment, Owen Vaughan.


Also Mr. Secretary said, There was a Schedule annexed to the Letter, which had
some other Matters of Importance, not fit to be read; yet if it did please the
House to command it, they should: Whereupon all cried No.

Sir Edward Hobby answered; Sir Edw. Hobby takes Exceptions at his Expressions.
Methinks, under Favor, the Motion Mr. Secretary made, was good; but the Form
therein, (I speak with all Reverence) not fitting the State of this House: For
he said, Mr. Speaker should Attend my Lord Keeper. Attend! It is well known,
that the Speaker of this House is the Mouth of the whole Realm: And that the
whole State of the Commonalty of a Kingdom, should Attend any Person, I see no
reason. I refer it to the Consideration of the House. Only this Position I
hold, That our Speaker is to be Commanded by none, neither to attend any but
the Queen only.

Mr. Johnson said, The Speaker might, ex Officio, send a Warrant to the Clerk
of the Crown; who is to certify the Lord Keeper, and so make a New Warrant.

Sir Edward Stanhop said, That for Election of Burgesses, he had seen half a
score Warrants Yesterday, with Sir John Puckering's Hand to them, when he was
Speaker.

Mr. Speaker said, That I may inform you of the Order of the House, The Warrant
must go from the Speaker to the Clerk of the Crown; who is to inform the
Lord Keeper, and then to make a New Writ.

Mr. Secretary Cecil said, I should be very sorry to detract from any
particular Member of this House, much more from the general State: My Meaning
was mistaken, and my Words misconstrued; yet both in Substance agreeing with
Mr. Speaker.

Sir Edward Stanhop said, I think in the Bill for Ale it were very fit, that
Power were given to Lords in Leets, to take the like Penalty, and to inquire
thereof there: And withal, that they keep not Victualling, nor sell Ale any
longer.

An Act for Redress of certain Abuses used in Painting; which, when it was
offered by the Clerk to be read, he being asked by Sir Edward Hobby, sitting by
him, What Bill it was; he answered, A Bill of no great Moment.

Nota, The same was for the City of London only, or for a certain Compass of
Miles about it.

Sir Francis Hastings exhibited a Bill against Blasphemous Swearing.

At the Committee holden the said Fifth Day of November, there were these
Precedents showed, Precedents, That (...) of Parliament, the (...) for New
Elections must go from the Speaker.
to prove, That Warrants ought to go from the Speaker, in case of Election of
Knights, and Burgesses, in time of Parliament; viz.

First, The Fourth of December, 1584. 27. Reginae, Valentine Dale, Master of
the Requests, was returned Burgess for Chichester, and also for Hydon: but he
chose Chichester; and John Puckering, Speaker, directed his Warrant to the
Clerk of the Crown, to send a Writ to make a New Election in Henden: which bare
Date the Tenth of December, six Days after, 27 Eliz. Secondly, Nota.
The Twenty-First of December, 1584. The Writ bearing Test the Thirteenth of
February, for the same Matter: In which the Style of the House is, The Knights,
Barons, Citizens, and Burgesses. Quod nota. Thirdly, The Nineteenth of
February, 1584. when Parry, being Burgess of Queenborough in Kent, was
attainted for Treason, a Warrant was directed to the Clerk of the Crown,
directing to make a Writ, dated the Nineteenth of February aforesaid: In which
Warrant, under the Speaker's own Hand, was inserted a Reason to this Effect,
viz. Because the said Parry is disabled, by reasen of his Attainder. Fourthly,
The Thirtieth of November, 1584. Thomas Bodithe was elected Burgess of
Portsmouth, and also Baron of one of the Cinque Ports, viz. Hithe; but he took
Portsmouth, and refused the other: A Warrant was directed as abovesaid; but no
Test of the Writ was there. Fifthly, The Twenty-Eighth of January, 1584.
Alexander Pymm, Esquire, was chosen Burgess of Taunton: Being Deceased, a new
Warrant was directed from the Speaker, to the Clerk of the Crown; and the Writ
bare Test the Thirtieth of January. Sixthly, The Third of December, 1584. John
Puckering, being Speaker, was chosen Burgess for Bedford, and for Carmarden;
who chose Bedford: And a VVarrant was directed to the Clerk of the Crown, from
the Speaker, to make a New Writ; which bare Date the Fourth of December, Anno
27. Eliz.
All which Writs were signed by the Speaker John Puckering.

For the Matter between Dr. Aubery, Doctor of the Civil-Law, and Mr. William
Delabar, Barrister at Common Law, touching the Burgeship of Cardigan in Wales;
the Case stood thus: Cardigan being by ancient Precedents, ever since 1. Eliz.
a Burgess-Town; and ever the Return of the Indenture has been for Cardigan
only: Now this Parliament, the Sheriff of the Shire favoring a Town called
Aberistowe; after he received the Parliament-Writ, sent his VVarrant to the
Bailiffs of Aberistone, to choose a Burgess, etc. who chose for their Burgess,
Dr. Aubery, and returned him Burgess of Cardigan and Aberistowe; and showed in
the Indenture, the Election to be made by both Towns; and the Indenture was
signed with the Sheriff's Hand.

On the other side, the Bailiffs of Cardigan understanding the Writ to be come
to the Sheriff, took notice thereof; and without VVarrant from the Sheriff,
made an Indenture and Election of William Delabar, and sent the same in a
Letter unto him. Mr. Delabar sought the Sheriff, and his Deputy in London, to
deliver the Indenture of Cardigan; but not finding him, delivered the same to
the Clerk of the Crown, paid his Fees, was Sworn, and admitted into the House,
till this present Day.

Now, at this Committee of Privileges, Dr. Aubery came to complain. The
Committees found upon Examination of the Matter, that the County Court was kept
at Aberistowe, and at Cardigan, Alternis vicibus; and that the County Court was
to be kept at this time at Aberistowe. So when they went to Conference, both
Aubery and Delabar were desired to depart forth. And upon Consultation, these
Questions arose:

First, Whether the House have Power to Fine the Sheriff; because, according
to the Statute, he sent not his VVarrant to Cardigan?

Next, If he be punishable by the Penalty of the Statute?

Also, If he have pursued his Authority, in making an Election in Aberistowe?
Which were left, with diverse other Doubts, to the Discussing of the House, and
to the Report of Sir Edward Hobby, or Mr. Solicitor.

Also, in the 23 Reginae, a VVarrant directed to the Town of Hull, from the
Speaker Popham; now Lord Chief Justice, then Speaker.

Sir Edward Hobby, at this Committee, A Saying of Sir Edward Hobby.
said by Aubery and Delabar, being the one Civilian, the other a Common Lawyer,
That he might say of them, as the Duke of Millan said of the Thief; It Is no
matter whether goes first; the Hangman, or the Thief.

The Town of Harwich in Essex, and New-Town in the County of Southampton,
returned Burgesses this Parliament, which never did before.

On Friday November 6. An Act for the Uniting and Consolidation of certain small
Churches in Exeter, into one Parish Church.

An Act for the better setting of Watches in the Night, Bill for Setting of
Watchmen.
for the Apprehending of suspected Persons, was Read.

To which Act Sir George More spoke, and said:
Mr. Speaker,

I am still of Opinion, That it is good to have trial of Laws, before we make
them perpetual; for those that be Night-walkers offend God, do the
Commonwealth no good, and sin in both. In my Opinion therefore, it were good
to limit the continuance of this Law, and that the Defects therein may be the
better Examined, that it be Committed.



An Act, to prevent and avoid diverse lewd Misdemeanors in Base and Idle persons.

Doct. James, a Civilian, being a Committee, brought in the Act against
Drunkards, and common haunters of Taverns, and Alehouses.

An Act for the Inhabitants of Rapesdale, in the County of Lancaster, touching
the Buying of Wools.

An Act for the better keeping of the Sabbath Day, called Sunday, was Read, A
Bill to avoid Contracts on the Sunday.
in which Act, there was a Proviso, That all Contracts made on the Sunday, in
Fairs or Markets, should be utterly Void; and the Goods so Contracted for,
Forfeited to the Queens Use.

Mr. Glascock of Grayes-Inn stood up and spoke to this Bill, and said,
Mr. Speaker,

I would willingly put one Case to the House, Mr. Glascockk puts a Pleasant
Case.
To know whether it be their minds, If a Man take a Wife on a Sunday, in Fair,
or open Market, that this should be Void, and she and the Goods forfeited to
the Queens Use? for that is a Contract: At which all the House Laughed.



Mr. Bacon said, Bacons Speech for Repealing superfluous Laws.
May it please you Mr. Speaker, not out of Ostentation to this House, but in
Reverence I do speak it: That I do much wonder to see the House so continually
divided, and to agree upon nothing; to see many Laws here, so well framed, and
Offenses provided against, and yet to have no better Success and Entertainment.
I do think every man in his particular, bound to help the Commonwealth the
best he may; and better it is, to venture a man's Credit by Speaking, than to
stretch a man's Conscience by Silence, and to endeavor to make that good in
Nature, which is possible in Effect.

Laws be like Pills all gilt over, which if they be easily and well swallowed
down, are neither bitter in digestion, nor hurtful in the body; every man knows
that Time is the true Controuler of Laws, and therefore there having been a
great alteration of Time, since the Repeal of a number of Laws; I know, and do
assure my self, there are many, more than I know, Laws both needless, and
dangerous.

I could therefore wish, that as usually every Parliament, there is a Committee
selected for the Continuance of diverse Statutes, so the House would be pleased
also, that there might be a Committee for the Repeal of diverse Statutes, and of
diverse superfluous Branches of Statutes. And that every particular Member of
the House, would give Information to the Committees, what Statutes, he thinks
fitting to be Repealed, or what Branch to be Superfluous, lest, as he said,
pluat super nos laqueas: The more Laws we make, the more Snares we lay to
entrap our selves.

Upon which Motion, a Committee was granted to meet on Friday.

On Saturday November 7. An Act, That the Marquess of Winchester may dispose
of his Lands, whereof he is Tenant in Tail, as other Tenants in Tail may do,
by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, was read the first time; and the
Pedigree hereafter set down, was then produced to the House.

pedigree or family tree of Fulke Greville, Lord Brook Robert Willoughby, Lord
Brook. 1. -- Dorothy 2. Wife. Edward Willoughby. Blaunch, the First Daughter,
Married to Francis Dawtery. Elizabeth, the 2 d. Daughter, Married Sir Fulke
Grevill, and had Issue Fulke Grevill, Esquire.

Anne 1. Daughter. -- Charles Lord Montjoy. James Lord Montjoy. Charles Ld.
Montjoy.

Elizabeth 2. Daughter 1. -- Sir John Pawlet Lord Marquess of Winchester.
William Lord Marquess of Winchester. William, now L Marquess. 1. The Lady Denny
had Issue two Daughters. 2. The Lady Katharine, 2 d. Daughter, had Issue 4
Sons, 2 Daughters. 3. The Lady Elizabeth was Married to Sir William Courtney.
Sir William Courtney had Issue 3 Sons. and 6 Daughters.

Mary Married to the Ld. Cromwell, and had Issue 2 Sons, and 1 Daughter, ore
Sn'r. and had Issue 2 Sons, and 1 Daughter; and had Issue 1 Son, and George
Cromwell, and 1 Daughter; and had Issue 7 Children.






There was this day, a Page brought to the Bar, A Page is brought before the
House.
for that Yester-day Sir Francis Hastings had caused him to be Committed: For
that as he went down the stairs, the Page offered to throng him. Whereupon he
held him till the Speaker came out of the House, who did commit him to the
Serjeant's Custody, till this day, to know the Pleasure of the House, what they
would do therein. But this day, upon Sir Francis Hasting's entreaty, speaking
very earnestly for him, and of his innocence, and unwillingness to do that
Fact, as also upon the Pages Submission upon his Knees at the Bar, he was
discharged. It was moved, That because his Hair was very Long, he might be
carried to a Barber, and close cut before his Discharge. But that was thought
very unfit, for the Gravity of the House to take notice of so light a fault;
so, after a sharp and threatening Admonition, given him by the Speaker, he was
Discharged.

Sir Edward Hobby moved the House, That for as much as the ancient Custom of
the Parliament had been, that not only themselves, but their Servants should be
free from all Arrests; yet notwithstanding, a servant of Mr. William Cook, a
member of this House, was Arrested by one Baker a Sergeant, at the suit of
another, upon a Bond, in which indeed he is but Surety, as may appear unto you
by this Letter (so the Letter was Read) the Contents whereof was as aforesaid,
with this Clause in the end, From the most Loathsome, and the unfortunate Hole
in the Prison of Newgate, I humbly, etc.

Upon which Motion, as also upon Declaration of a Precedent in the 35 of Henry
the Eighth: That the Sheriffs of London were Committed to the Tower, for
Arresting George Ferrars a Member of this House: It was generally agreed, That
the Sergeant of this House, should be presently sent with his Mace for the said
Prisoner and his Keeper; and also should command the said Baker, the Sergeant,
and the procurater of the Arrest, to attend the Court on Monday morning; so,
after the Sergeant had been away about an hour and an half, he brought the
Prisoner and his Keeper to the Bar, who Affirmed the whole matter as aforesaid.
And the Keeper was Commanded to deliver his Prisoner to the Sergeant, which he
did, by taking him by the Hand, and so delivered his Prisoner to the Sergeant.
And the House commanded the Keeper to take no Fees, and so the Prisoner was
quite discharged.

But Sir Robert Wroth moved to know, Whether Mr. Cook would Affirm that man to
be his Servant, who stood up and said, He was one of his most necessary
Servants; for, in truth (quoth he) he is my Tailor. And thereupon the Sergeant
was sent for him as aforesaid.

An Act, for the better Settling of Watches, was Read, and committed, and the
Committees to meet at the middle Temple-Hall on Thursday in the afternoon.

Mr. Henshaw moved the House, That the immediate Landlord of every such
Night-Walker, should be bound for the good Behavior of him to the Queens Use,
which the House would by no means hear of.

An Act to avoid and prevent diverse Lewd Misdemeanors in base and idle Persons,
was Read and Committed to the Committees in the Bill for Night-walkers, to meet
on Thursday afternoon, in the middle Temple-hall.

An Act against Drunkards, A Bill against going to an Alehouse, if within Two
Miles of ones own House.
and haunters of Alehouses, the Effect whereof is, That if any man do go to an
Alehouse within two miles of his own House, he shall Forfeit so much as he is
in the Subsidy.

Mr. Glascock spoke to this Bill, and Informed the House, That it was a common
and usual thing in Lancashire, and those Parts, for Gentlemen as they go a
Hawking, to go and take a Repast at an Alehouse; Mr. Glascock Opposes it.
Yea, men sometimes of 500. Marks a Year: But, Mr. Speaker, I hope these men
are not intended to come within this Bill. And for the Act it self, I think it
to be a mere Cob-web to catch poor Flies in.

Sir Francis Darcy said, Sir Francis Darcy is for it.
I think this Bill very fit to be considerd of, and Committed; for it tends
to the Restraint of great Excess usually Committed, which we had need
especially to provide for, seeing such continual and great Provisions both of
Meat and Drink, go daily out of the Land, chiefly into Ireland, Sir Robert
Cecil.
That (as an Honorable Person affirmed in this House) we may feed an Army
therewith, yea all the Realm, almost within the English Pale, and else where in
other Countries.

Besides, in Restraining this great Excess, we shall do our Duties, and please
God the more, who is jealous of his Honor, and will not suffer such and so
great a Sin to go unpunished, neither in the Offenders themselves, nor in us
that tolerate the same; but will lay his heavy hand of Wrath and Indignation
upon this Land, which God avert and turn from us. So it was Committed, and the
Committees appointed to meet on Friday in the Afternoon, at the
Middle-Temple-Hall.

The Act touching Weights and Measures was read; which, upon diverse Motions,
was clearly expunged the House. Mr. Wiseman showed a great Imperfection in the
Bill, because there wanted a Remedy to meet with the Clerk of the Market.
Besides, where a Punishment is inhaunc'd, and a special Privilege to gain
greater Authority, it makes me doubt much of the good Intent: For, why should
he desire to have Wales in, seeing he has it in his Jurisdiction already. And,
it is as ordinary as can be, Bring your Groat, (when he goes a Circuiting)
your Measure shall be Even.

It was after put to the Question for Committing; and some Twelve I, I, I; but
not one for the Engrossing, but all said No: So it was Rejected.

In the Afternoon the same Day, at the Committee in the House, touching the
Subsidies:

Sir Walter Rawleigh moved the House to consider, Sir Walt. Rawleigh's Speech
for Subsidies.
for what Intent they came thither; and now in their Coming, what was to be
considered for the Subsidy, and the Manner and Quality thereof.

I now only will intimate thus much unto you, That the Last Parliament only
Three Subsidies were granted, upon fear that the Spaniards were coming. But now
we see they are come, and have set Foot even in the Queens Territories already;
and therefore, are the more of Us to be Respected and Regarded.

And, seeing the Sale of Her Majesty's own Jewels, the great Loans her Subjects
have lent her, yet unpaid: the continual Selling of her Lands, and decaying of
her Revenues; the sparing even out of her own Purse, and Apparel for our
sakes, will not serve; but yet she must be fain to call her Court of Parliament
for our Advice and Aid in this Case. I wish, for my own part, as a particular
Member of this Commonwealth, That we may not do less than we did before; and
that we also would bountifully, according to our Estates, contribute to her
Majesty's Necessities, as now they stand.

Mr. Wiseman said, Mr. Wiseman Speech for Subsidies.
after a very discreet and judicious Speech made, touching Gods Protecting us
for Religion-sake, our peace and quietness, the safety of her Majesty's Person,
the great Victories we have had, the greatness of Neighbour-Princes, only
raised by her Majesty, so that she has spent, as was said by Sir Walter
Rawleigh, so much as that She is now fain to desire the help of her Subjects:

Let us therefore, draw to some head, and leave our Orations and Speeches,
fitter for a Parliament than a Committee; we are to consider only, what is fit
to be given: And for my own part, as a poor Member, and one of the meanest in
this House, I will be bold to deliver my Opinion first, because some must break
the Ice, Three Pound Land and under, to pay Two Shillings and Eight Pence in
the Pound; Five Pounds Goods, and under, to pay One Shilling Eight Pence in the
Pound, and double Tenths and Fifteens, as soon as possible may be.

And though I may seem over-bold, being but a Rural and Country man, to speak
even out of my own Element in this Case, yet I do heartily crave Pardon of all,
beseeching that neither my unaptness, nor disorder of Speech, nor the
unworthyness of my Person, may prejudice the Cause.

Sir Robert Wroth moved, Sir Rob. Wroth.
That Four Pound Land might pay full Subsidy, and Six Pound Goods might pay
full Subsidy unto Her Majesty.

Sir Francis Hastings moved, Sir Francis Hastings.
moved, That the Three Pound Men might be Exempted, and all others above that
Rate to Pay according to the Rate, to make up a full Subsidy.

Mr. Phillips moved, Mr. Phillips.
That Three Pound men might be spared, and Four Subsidies received from the
Rich, which should be termed a Contribution, because it might make no
Innovation.

Sir Walter Rawleigh said, Sir Walt. Rawleigh.
If all pay alike, none will be aggrieved; if any be excepted, doubtless it
will produce much Grief. And the feeling will be great to those Three Pound men
that feel any thing, but it will be nothing to them that know any thing.

Sir Edward Hobby said, Exceptions against Speaking Sitting.
We cannot hear you speak out; you should speak standing, that the House might
hear you.

So Sir Walter Rawleigh said, That being a Committee, he might speak Sitting or
Standing; and so repeated over again his former Speech.

Mr. Secretary Cecil said, Secretary Cecil's Speech for Speedy and considerable
Supplies.
Because it is an Argument of more Reverence, I choose to speak standing. As
long as the Queen, by Advice of her Council, did find means to spare you, so
long she ever desired her Subjects might not be Charged. But if her Majesty, as
soon as the last Subsidy had been spent, should have again resorted unto you, I
do assure you this Parliament had been called in October last.

Now, if upon the Providence and Foresight of a growing Sore, you did
Contribute unto her Majesty, much more now, should we do the same; seeing a
Resolute company of Spaniards have Entrenched themselves in Her Majesty's
Kingdom of Ireland, and more Supplies thither are daily Expected. It is time
that we open our Coffers, that we may obviate in the beginning these few Forces
of the Spaniards, lest growing to greater Forces, we cannot expel them with
Five Hundred, which we may now do with One Hundred at present.

If any that sit next the Door, be desirous to sit next the Chair, to give his
Opinon, I will not only give him my Place, but thank him to take my Charge.
[This was conceived to be spoken of Sir Edward Hobby, who coming to sit near
the Chair, and none giving him place, sat next the Door] We that sit here,
take your Favors out of Courtesy, not out of Duty. But to the purpose:

The Queen has occasion to use (as diverse in this House do know) Three Hundred
Thousand Pounds before Easter: How this shall be Raised and Gathered, That is
the Question. For without this proportion of Charge, neither can the Spaniards
in Ireland be repelled, nor the War there maintained: Neither Her Majesty's
other Affairs be set on Foot: Neither Provision sufficient can be made for
defense against Foreign Invasions.

Admit with a less Charge we should now Expel him; Will any man be so simple
to think he will give over the Enterprise, being of so great Consequence, and
grow Desperate? I should think him a man but of a shallow Understanding, and
less Policy. Surely, if we had been of that mind, when he had that great
Overthrow of his Invincible Navy, One Thousand Five Hundred Eighty Eight, we
had been destinated unto Perdition. For, how many chargeable Enterprises, of
Puissant and great Consequence has he since made? The like, if his Forces in
Ireland should now Fail, would he do again.

And therefore, That we now do in Defense, if he should be expelled with a less
Matter, would as well serve to make Defense against his next Invasion of that
Kingdom; as also, to Enrich her Majesty, to be ready to Furnish her Navy and
Forces the speedier for her safety. Besides, if he bestows so vast a Treasure
for the gaining of one poor Town, Ostend; what will he do to gain so strong and
Famous a Kingdom as Ireland?

I will, by the Leave of a Worthy Person that sits by me, and knows these
things better than I do, yield a particular Account to you of the State it
self. First, The last whole Subsidy after the Rate of Four Shillings Land, and
Eight Groats Goods, came not to above Eighty-Thousand Pounds; the Subsidy of
the Clergy, Twenty-Thousand Pounds; the Double Fifteens, Sixty-Thousand Pounds:
In all, One-Hundred and Sixty-Thousand Pounds.

Since my Lord of Essex's Going into Ireland, (who now is with God) she has
spent Three-Hundred-Thousand Pounds; which comes unto Three-Hundred and
Twenty-Two-Thousand Pounds: So the Queen is behind-hand Three-Hundred-Thousand
Pounds. Thus we refer the Matter to your Judicial Consideration: We only show
you the present Estate of the Queen, and her Affairs; wishing no Man to look
that we should give Advice, what is to be done: As though your Selves, who are
the Wisdom of the Land, could not direct your Selves; neither upon the Reasons
alleged, judge of the Necessity of the State.

Mr. Comptroller, Sir John Fortescue.
Sir John Fortescue, and Mr. Secretary Harbart, spoke all to the same Effect;
only Sir John Fortescue added this: That what pleased the House, in the Name of
the Subjects to bestow, the same Her Majesty did, and ever would employ to
their Uses: So that Dying, it might be written on Her Tomb, as on the Emperor,
Quod occupatus vixit. So that, She Dying, Lived still, employing all to the
Safety of Her Subjects.

And, I beseech you, remember, That the Great Turk, when he Conquered
Constantinople, found therein Three-Hundred Millions of Gold. Which being told
him: If they (said he) had bestowed but Three Millions in defense of their
City, I could never have gotten it. A notable Saving of the Great Turk.
From this Blindness I pray God Defend us, that we may not be backwards to give
Four Subsidies to Her Majesty; for want whereof, in time, we may hap to lose
that which cannot be Recovered or Defended with a Hundred.

So, after a few other Conferences and Speeches, Pro and Contra, it was
concluded, That the House should be Certified of their Proceedings, on Monday;
and by General Consent, the Three Pound Men were to be included: And so the
House, about Six a Clock at Night, rose confusedly.

Nota, That Mr. Anthony Maynard, by the Consent of the whole House sat in the
Chair, as Clerk, to Register the Order of this Committee; and by Consent also,
was Licensed to put on his Hat. Sunday, November the 8th.

Monday, November the 9th. A Bill for Suppressing of Maintenance.

Also, A Bill to suppress People from idle Shifting: The first time Read.

Also, A Bill for the Reformation of Abuses in the Making of Cloth.

Also, A Bill for Advance of Customs.
A Bill for the Benefit of Merchants, and Advancing of Her Majesty's Customs,
both Inward and Outward.

Also, Mr. Townsend moves against the great Number of common Sollicitors.
A Bill to Restrain the Number of Common Sollicitors, put in by Mr. Townsend of
Lincoln's Inn, (the Collector of this Journal) to which he spoke as follows.

May it please you, Mr. Speaker,

It was well said by a Worthy Member of this House, (Mr. Francis Bacon) That
every Man is bound to help the Commonwealth the best he may: Much more is
every Man, in his own Particular bound, being a Member of this House, if he
knows any dangerous Enormity toward the Commonwealth; That he would not only
open it, but if it may be, suppress it.

We being all here within these Walls together, may be likened to a Jury, shut
up in a Chamber: Every Man There upon his Oath, and every Man Here upon his
Conscience; being the Grand Jurymen of this Land, bound to deal both Plainly
and Truly. Here-with (though a most unworthy, and least sufficient Member of
this House) my Self being touched, I had rather adventure my Credit by
Speaking, (though confusedly) knowing the great Inconvenience and Mischief
attends this Kingdom by Silence, in so pleasing a Case, as I persuade my self,
this Bill will be to every Man that hears it.

To which, Mr. Speaker, because I may have Benefit of Speech, if occasion
serves, at the second Reading thereof, I will not speak more at this present,
than only touch the Tract of the Bill it self.

The Honorable Person that in the Upper-House, in the Beginning of this
Parliament, spoke against the Lewd Abuses of Prowling Sollicitors, and their
great Multitude; who set Dissension between Man and Man, like a Snake cut in
pieces, crawl together, and join themselves again, to stir up even Spirits of
Dissension: He, I say, advises us, that a Law might be made to suppress them.

I have observed, that no Man this Parliament, ever profer'd to prefer any such
Bill to this House; but sure I am, no Man spoke to this Purpose. I have
therefore, Mr. Speaker, presumed out of my young Experience, because I know
part of their Abuses, and with that small Portion of Learning that I have, to
draw a Bill; and here it is. The Title is thus, An Act to Suppress the
Multitude of Common Sollicitors. The Body of the Act disableth all Persons to
Solicit in any Cause, other than their own. There is Excepted, and
Fore-prized, Four several sorts; Lawyers and Atturnies, in their own Courts
where they be Sworn: Servants in Livery, and Kinsmen within the Fourth Degree
of Consanguinity. And no Man within this Kingdom, but may find a sufficient
Solicitor within these Four Degrees. And I humbly pray, The Bill, being short,
may be Read, and Received.

A Bill concerning certain Abuses in the Exchequer, Committed; the Committee to
meet on Tuesday in the Afternoon, in the Exchequer-Chamber.

A Bill against Transportation of Moneys, was brought in: On which Mr. Davis
made a long Speech; The Effect whereof was: A Bill against Transporting of Coin.
That by Transportation of Money the Realm is Impoverished, for that Twenty
Shillings English is Twenty Three Shillings Flemish; and as much good Silver in
the first, as the last, And so, he said, They gained Three Pence in every
Pound; and the like he said, was in Commodities.

Mr. Secretary Cecil spoke, Secretary Cecil touching the Subsidy.
touching the Subsidy, as Follows:

When it was the good Pleasure of the House, to give Order to the Committees
to consider the common danger of the Realm; in which not only every Member of
this House, but every Man in the Kingdom, is Interessed: It liked the
Committees, after their resolution to choose one amongst all, to give an
Account of their Proceedings; and that is my self.

I do know it were the safest way for a man's memory, to deliver the last
Resolution, Reports to the whole House, what was Cone at the Committee.
without any precedent Argument; for rare is the Assembly, in which there is
not some variety of Opinions. I need not recite the Form of the Committee, by
reason of so good Attendance, being little inferior to our Assembly at this
present: yet if it be true, that, Forma does dare essentiam, it will be
somewhat necessary for me to deliver the manner of our Proceeding, and the
Circumstance, rather than hazard the Interpretation of such a Resolution.

The Day was Saturday last, the Place this House, the Time about four hours:
And I am of Opinion, That if we had all agreed upon the manner, as we did
speedily upon the matter, all had been dispatched in an hour. It seemed, by the
ready Consent of the Committee, That they came not one to look on another, like
Sheep, one to accompany another; but the Matter was Debated by some, and at
last Consented unto by all.

Our Contention bred Difference, our Difference cause of Argument, both how to
ease the State, and make this Subsidy less burdensome, which shall be recited.

Some were of Opinion, that the Three Pound Men should be spared, because it
was to be considered, they had but small portions, and they did give almost
Secundum sanguinem. Others were of Opinion, that the Four Pound men should give
double, and the rest upward should be higher Cessed. Others were of other
Opinions.

Again it was moved, Whether this Subsidy should go in the name of a
Benevolence, or Contribution? Or whether in the Name of a Fourth Subsidy, but
was said to be subject to great Mistaking, because it would be said to be a
great Innovation.

But at last, most Voices Resolved, It should have the old Name of a Subsidy,
because Subsidium and Auxilium are all one. The most Voices Concluded, There
should be no Exception of the Three Pound men, because according to their Rate,
some were Assessed under value; besides, separation might breed Emulation,
Suspicion of Partiality and Confusion.

The Time was Resolved upon, and that in respect of Expedition, to be by the
First of February, and the whole Realm, when each man comes into his Country,
will be better satisfied, when they shall know we have spared no man, nor made
no Distinction.

It was said, by a Member of this House, (Sir Francis Hastings) That he knew
some poor People Pawn their Pots and Pans, to pay the Subsidy.

It may be, you dwell where you see and hear. I dwell where I hear and
believe. And this I know, That neither Pots nor Pans, nor Dish nor Spoon,
should be spared, when Danger is at our Elbowes. But he that spoke this, in my
Conscience spoke not to hinder the Subsidy, or the greatness of our Gift, but
to show the Poverty of some Assessed, and by sparing others. But by no means, I
would have the Three Pound men Exempted, because I would have the King of Spain
know, how willing we are to sell all in Defense of Gods Religion, our Prince
and Country. I have read, when Hannibal resolved to sack Rome, he dwelt in the
Cities Adjoining, and never feared or doubted of his Enterprise, until word was
brought him, That the Maidens, Ladies, and Widows of Rome, sold their
Earrings, Jewels, and all their Necessaries, to maintain War against him.

I do take my self in Duty bound, to acquaint this House with the Modesty of
the Committee, at the Proposition; That when first this House never stuck to
Commit, they never stuck in understanding the Reasons to grant it. And I do
persuade my self, that the Bonus Genius of this House, did not wish a more
Resolved Unity, than we had Unity in Resolution. And of this Great Committee,
it may be said, De Majoribus Principes Consultant, De minoribus omnes.

Thus, by your Commandments, I have undergone this Charge; and will be ready to
do the like Duty, whenever you shall command me.

Then, after Consultation of the great Occasions, The Subsidy put to the
Question, and voted, without any Opposition.
it was put to the Question. Whether the double Tenths and Fifteens, should be
Paid by the First of February, and the Subsidy by the last of February, viz.
for this Fourth Subsidy, before the Third began: And that the First Payment of
the First Three Subsidies, should be brought in by the Tenth of June viz. half
a Subsidy? And all said, Yea; and not one, No.

Then was a Motion made by Sir Robert Wroth, Sir Robert Wroth's Proposition
rejected.
That this new Subsidy might be drawn in a Bill by it self, to which should be
Annexed, A preamble of the great Necessity, the willingness of the Subject and
that it might be no Precedent. But that could not be yielded unto.

Then Mr. Speaker asked the House, If they would appoint Committees to draw the
Bill? So they appointed the Queens Council, and all the Sergeants at Law of the
House, and no more.

Mr. Francis Moore Moved, Mr. Francis Moors Motion.
That that which was done might be completely done, and the Subsidy gathered by
Commission, and not by the old Roll; for Peradventure, some were dead; others
fallen to Poverty, others Richer; and so ought to be enhaunced, etc. And
withal, he said, The granting of the Subsidy, seemed to be the Alpha and Omega
of this Parliament. Mr. Wingfeild Moved the House, That seeing the Subsidy was
granted, and they yet had done nothing, It would please her Majesty not to
Dissolve the Parliament until some Acts were passed. Mr. Wingfeild's Motion.


Mr. Sergeant Harris said, Sergeant Harris.
That he that spoke Intempestive, spoke, Injocunde: And the Motion of the
Gentleman that last spoke, is not now to be Discussed. We are to speak touching
the Subsidy.

Mr. Francis Bacon, after the Repetition of the Sum of what was done Yesterday,
Mr. Bacon.
That the Three Pound men might not be excluded, he concludes it was Dulcis
tractus pari Jugo. And therefore the Poor, as well as the Rich, not to be
Exempted.

Sir Walter Rawleigh said, Sir Walter Rawleigh.
I like not, That the Spaniards our Enemies should know of our Selling our Pots
and Pans to pay Subsidies; well may you call it Policy, as an Honorable Person
alleged, but I am sure it Argues Poverty in the State. And for the Motion
that was last made, Dulcis tractus Pari Jugo: Call you this Par jugum, when a
poor man pays as much as a Rich? And peradventure his Estate is no better than
it is set at, or but little better? When our Estates that are Three or Four
Pounds in the Queens Book, it is not the Hundredth part of our Wealth,
therefore it is neither Dulcis nor Par.

Mr. Secretary Cecil said, Secretary Cecil.
That now seeing one of the weightiest Matters, and Causes of Calling of the
Parliament was agreed upon, he doubted not, but we should have a quick
Parliament, and speedy Payment.

But for that Gentleman that said on my right Hand (Mr. Francis Moore) That the
Subsidy was the Alpha and Omega of this Parliament: I think he spoke it not
simply out of Humor, but rather upon Probability. For I can assure you, her
Majesty is so Respective over you, touching her Laws, which she desires may be
perused and amended, That she means not to Dissolve this Parliament until
something be mended.

For that I said, touching the Spaniards knowing of the sale of our Pots and
Pans, which should be a matter of Policy, to which the Gentleman on my left
hand, (Sir Walter Rawleigh) took exceptions: I say it is true; and yet I am
mistaken. For I say it is good the Spaniards should know how willing we are to
sell our Pots and Pans, and all we have, to keep him out: Yet I do not say it
is good he should know we do sell them; that is, I would have him know our
willingness to sell (though there be no need) but not of our Poverty of
selling, or of any necessity we have to sell them, which I think none will do,
neither shall need to do.

Then all the House cried No, No; as much as to say, no man did so

Sir Arthur Gorge Moved, Sir Arthur Gorge
That it would please the House, that order might be taken that Justices of the
Peace might be Assessed according to the Statute, viz. at Twenty Pound Land,
where there be few Justices that are above Eight or Ten Pound, which Mr.
Secretary Cecil Noted in his Tables.

Then Sergeant Heal stood up, and made a Motion, saying;
Mr. Speaker,

I do marvail much, Serj. Heal speaks to some purpose.
that the House will stand upon Granting of a Subsidy, or the Time of Payment,
when all we have is Her Majesty's; and She may lawfully, at her Pleasure, take
it from us: Yea, She has as much Right to all our Lands and Goods, as to any
Revenue of Her Crown.



At which the House Hummed, and Laughed, and Talked. He is Hum'd and Laughed at.


Well, (quoth Sergeant Heal) all your Humming shall not put me out of
Countenance.

So Mr. Speaker stood up, and said; It is a great Disorder, The Speaker puts
them in mind of the Orders of the House.
that this should be used; for it is the Ancient Use of this House, for every
Man to be Silent when any one Speaks; and he that is Speaking, should be
suffered to deliver his Mind without Interruption.

So the said Sergeant proceeded; Heal proceeds. They Hum again.
and when he had spoken a little while, the House Hummed again; and he sat
down. In his latter Speech he said, He could prove his former Positions in the
Time of Henry the Third, King John, King Stephen, etc. which was the Occasion
of their Humming.

Mr. Mountague, of the Middle Temple, said; Mr. Mountague shows him his Mistake.
There were no such Precedents: And if all the Preambles of the Subsidies were
looked upon, he should find, that it was of Free-Gift. And although Her Majesty
requires this at our Hands, yet it is in us to Give, not in Her to Exact of
Duty: And for the Precedents, there be none such. But touching a Tenth Fleece,
and a Tenth Sheaf of Corn, that was granted to Edward the Third, at his Going
to the Conquest of France; because all the Money then in the Land, to be Levied
by way of Subsidy, would not be any ways able to Raise that vast Sum he
desired: So having these Tenths, he sold them to private Men; and so raised
Money to himself, for his Enterprise.

After this, the Speaker appointed the Committees for drawing of the
Subsidy-Bill, all to hasten it; and so the House arose.

Tuesday, November 10. The Bill was read for shortening of Michaelmas-Term: The
Substance of the Bill is, A Bill to shorten Michaelmas-Term
That whereas the Term begun the Nineth of October, it should begin the Twenty
Third of the same Month.

A Bill for avoiding of Trifling and Frivolous Suits, in Her Majesty's Courts
at Westminster, was read the first time. It was put in by the Queen's
Attorney General.

A Bill for to Restrain the Multitude of Common Sollicitors, read prima vice.

A Bill for the Denization of certain Persons, was presented; and it was made
in the manner of a Petition: The Beginning whereof is; To the Queen's most
Excellent Majesty. The Speaker at the Reciting of the Bill, began thus; This is
an Humble Petion of, etc. wherein they humbly desire to be made Denizons, and
made Inheritable, and of Ability to Sue and implead, as other Natural-Born
Subjects of this Realm are: The first time of Reading.

A Bill against Blasphemous Swearing: A Bill against Blasphemous Swearing.
It was put to the Question for the Commitment, and not one No. Appointed at
the Temple-Hall, on Saturday, with the Bill against Drunkenness.

A Bill for Consolidating, and Uniting of certain small Churches in Exeter,
into one, read.

One spoke against this Bill, who was the Bishop's Servant of Exeter; and
showed how the Patron of one of the Churches, took a piece of the Churchyard
to make a Jakes.

Mr. Martyn of the Temple, Mr. Martyn.
answered him; Protesting he meant not to speak: but seeing the General Voice
of the House seemed to be carried away with the Bill, and himself Born in the
Town, he could not but speak against such a Man, as he that last spoke; who
spoke more for his Master's Benefit, than for God's Honor. He certified diverse
things, which he that spoke first, untruly spoke: And wished, that the
Gentleman, (Sergeant Heal) that had Yesterday so much flattered his Prince,
were now here, to do God and his Country good Service, by setting forward so
good a Bill. Whereupon he prayed, it might be Committed, (which was done
accordingly;) and the Committees to meet in the Middle-Temple-Hall.

The Person that Arrested Mr. Cook's Man, was brought in; who after a sharp
Speech, delivered by Mr. Speaker, showing that he had committed an heinous
Offense, to Arrest any Member of the House his Servant; knowing that both their
Persons, their Servants, Goods, and every thing they had, were Privileged
during this Great Council, How durst you presume to do it?

To which the poor Old Man answered upon his Knees; That he knew not that his
Master was of the House; but, peradventure, the Bailiff did, (quoth he.) I do
acknowledge, I have offended; and humbly crave Pardon: and I protest upon my
Salvation, I would not have done it, had I known his Master had been Privileged.

So the Sergeant of the House was commanded to take him away; and presently
after, he was brought in again. To whom Mr. Speaker gave Council, That himself
should ever hereafter take Warning hereby; and that the House receiving his
modest Excuse, did pardon his Offense: And so, paying his Fees, he was
Discharged. The Sergeant was commanded to lay wait for the Bailiff, but he
could not be found.

A Bill to Restrain the Multitude of Idle People, which flock from all Parts of
the Realm to London, and the Suburbs thereof, was read. To which Bill, Sir
George Moore spoke, and showed the Unconscionableness of the Bill, that no
Mechanical Person could Trade in London. And so it was Rejected, without any
one I, I, I, for the Commitment; but only Mr. Fetyplace, one of the Burgesses
for London.

A Bill for the Benefit of Merchants, and Advancement of Her Majesty's
Customs, (both Inward and Outward) was Read, and Committed.

Wednesday, November the 11th. A Bill for Avoiding unnecessary Executions upon
Judgments, put to the Question, and ordered to be Engrossed.

A Bill for Explanation of an Act made 13 Reginae, touching Leases of
Benefices, and Ecclesiastical Livings with Cure.

A Bill to enable Sir Edmond Markeham to sell his Lands, being Tenant in Tail,
as other Tenants in Tail may do; was read the first time.

A Bill for Reformation of Abuses in making of Cloth, read the first time.

A Bill for the Inhabitants of the Town of Rappesdale, in the County of
Lancaster, was Committed.

A Bill put in by Mr. Francis Moore, Entitled, An Act for Confirmation of
Grants made to the Queen's Majesty, and of Her Highness's Grants to others;
read the first time.

He said, That forasmuch as it was dangerous to the Queen and State, that
Purchases should be Annulled by Misprision, or the like; and lest the Queen
should be Tenant in Tail, then all Sales made by her, should be void:
Therefore, to avoid this Inconvenience, he had penned this Law, almost word for
word, but altogether to the Sense of the Statute, made Anno, Hen. 8. cap.
(...). which is even in manner of a Petition: And it being but short, I pray it
may be Read, and Received.

An Act to Restrain Transportation of Money out of this Realm, and to Restrain
certain Abuses in Exchanges. This Bill was brought in by Mr. John Davis, and
read prima vice. Vide November. 9.

A Bill for the Abbreviation of Michaelmass-Term. A Bill to abbreviate
Michaelmas-Term.
It was put to the Question, Whether it should be Committed, or no? And the
greater Voice were, Yeas. Yet the Burgesses of London were against it. And
therefore, at naming of Committees, Burgesses of London oppose it.
they were exempted; but some would have them in, and others out: And after
many Speeches made, Pro and Contra, A Dispute, Whether any of them should be of
the Committee?
it was alleged by Sir Edward Hobby, That they that had given their Voice
against the Body of the Bill, could not be Committees.

But at length, Mr. Secretary Cecil said, I am willing to speak, in two
Respects; the One, touching the Bill it self; the Other, touching the
Controversy in the House, Secretary Cecil speaks to it.
about the Commitment.

Touching the Bill, I dare not upon my own Judgment, be so venturous or bold,
to Reject this Bill, unless first it might have a Commitment. For, the Wisdom
of that Time, when it was first Instituted, was so apt to look into
Imperfections, that doubtless, if any Inconvenience had been but espied, they
would straight have avoided it.

Therefore, in my Opinion, it is not fit for us to look into the Actions of
former Ages, but upon mature and advised Deliberation. I do therefore greatly
commend the Wisdom of this House, in Committing of this Bill, and others of the
like Nature and Consequence, before we Reject them.

For the other Part, Though it be a Rule in the House, That those against the
Bill should be no Committees; yet in a Case of so great Consequence, and so
greatly touching the State of the City of London, there is no Reason, but they
may have their particular Voices, as Committees, as well as any Member of this
House: Neither have we any Reason to Exclude them, more than any other;
especially they being Chosen for the most Principal City of this Kingdom; which
is the Chamber of Her Majesty: whom we should the rather respect, for Her
Majesty's sake; who does, and will remember their Loyalty and Faithfulness,
showed unto Her in the late dangerous Action, ( meaning the Earl of Essex his
Rising): For which, if ever Prince had Cause of Thankfulness to Her Subjects,
doubtless Her Majasty is to confess as much.

In my Opinion therefore, we should do great Wrong, and purchase them great
Blame at their Hands that sent them hither in Trust, if in a Matter of this
Consequence, and so particularly touching the State of this City, we should not
admit them as Committees.

Mr. Wiseman said, Mr. Wiseman replies.
That by Committing of a Bill, the House allowed of the Body thereof, though
they disallowed of some Imperfections in the same. And therefore, committed it
to some chosen Men in Trust, to Reform and Amend any thing therein, which they
found Imperfect.

And it is presumed, That he that will give his No to the Committing of a Bill,
at the Commitment will be wholly against the Bill. And therefore, the House
allowing of this Bill to be Committed, are, in my Opinion, to disallow any that
will be against the Body of the Bill, for being Committees.

Mr. Comptroller said, Mr. Comptroller starts another Question.
He was of Opinion, for the Reasons before-alledged, That they ought to be
Committees. But he moved another Question; Whether a Committee, speaking
against a Bill at the Commitment, may also Speak at the Engrossing thereof, in
the House, and have his Free Voice.

Sir Edward Hobby said, Sir Edward Hobby replies.
That may be resolved upon by Precedents: And for my own Opinion, I think, That
he that is against the Body of the Bill, can be no Committee; and he that being
a Committee, speaks against a Bill, may also speak hereafter in the House.

Mr. Fulke Grevill said, Mr. Fulke Grevill's Opinion.
A Committee was an Artificial Body, and framed out of Us, who are the General
Body: And therefore, that which is spoken at the Committee, Evanescit, it is
gone, when the Body, which is the Commitment, is dissolved: And then every
particular Committee is no more a Part of the Artificial Body, but of Us the
General Body, when he has his Free Voice, as though he had never spoken before.

Then the Speaker stood up and said, I will propound two Questions, The First,
If when a man has spoken against the Body of a Bill, Speaker puts two
Questions, about the former Controversy.
he may be a Committee? The Second, If any Committee speak against a Bill at
the Commitment, yet whether he may speak again, and have his free Voice?

Now (quoth he) I will propound the first Question: All that will have a man,
that has been against the Body of the Bill to be a Committee, let them show
their Opinions by saying Yea. And not one said Yea. All that will not, say No.
And all said No. So he did for the second Question; And not one said No, but
all Yea.

Then he put it to the Question, Whether they of London, notwithstanding this
Order, in respect this Commitment so greatly concerned the State, should be
Committees. And the Yeas were greater than the No's.

Then he put it to the Question, Whether the Two aforesaid Rules should be
Entered for Orders of Record: And all said Yea.

On Thursday November. 12. A Bill was Read, for Confirming of Letters Patents
made by King Edward Six, to Sir Edward Seymor, Knight.

A Bill, for the Explanation of the Statutes, made 3, 4, 5, Edv. 6. against
Buyers of Butter and Cheese to sell again; and against Ingrossers and
Forestallers.

A Bill, against the unlawful Hunting and Stealing of Deer in the Nightime,
was Read the first time.

A Bill, for the Redressing of certain inconveniences in a Stat. 21 Hen. 8.
Cap. 13. Entitled, An Act against Plurality of Benefices, for taking of Farms
by Spiritual men, and for Residence. This Bill was drawn by Robert Air of
Lincoln's Inn. That the Proviso of that Statute might be Repealed.

A Bill for avoiding Frivolous Suits in Court at Westminster.

To which Bill, one Lashbrook an Attorney spoke, and showed the Inconvenience
of Scriveners being Atturnies, and practicing in their Names.

The Bill against Fraudulent Administration of Intestates Goods, after
Ingrosment Read and passed.

The Bill of Writs of Error also Read, after Ingrosment Passed.

Whilst there were diverse Disputes of this Bill; Mr. Fleming the Queen's
Solicitor took the Bill to look a word in it; after he had done and laid it on
the Board, One Mr. Brown, Clerk, A Rule in the House about Bills.
Comptroller to the Queens Household, stood up, and said, Mr. Speaker, You
should, after a Bill is engrossed, hold it in your Hand, and let no Man look
into it; which was confessed by all. And so the Speaker took it.

The House was moved, to send these two Bills to the Lords, and they Chose Mr.
Comptroller, and he, accompanied with diverse others, went with them, and
returned within half an hour.

The Bill for the Denization of certain Persons, viz. Will. Millet, Ann Pope,
George Chandlor, Peter Eaton, Nicholas Eaton, Nicholas Tailor, and others,
Denization of certain Persons.
was Read the second time, and put to the Question to be Engrossed. And all
said Yea, and there was not one No, and never Committed.

The Bill for Erecting of a Haven or Key, on the North-part of Devon, on the
River of Severn.

The Officer that Arrested Mr. Cook's man, was brought to the Bar; and upon his
Submission, after a sharp Exhortation, was dismissed, paying the Serjeant's
Fees.

A Bill for Confirmation of Grants made to the Queens Majesty, and of Letters
Patents made by Her Majesty to others, Read Secunda Vice, and then it was
Committed.

On Friday November. 13. The Bill against the Covetousness of Butchers, for
Buying, and Engrossing of Lambskins, out of Markets and Fairs.

And a Bill against Pedlars, Petty-Chapmen and Hawkers. A Bill against Hawkers,
etc.


And a Bill for Cloath-workers.

And a Bill against wilful Absence from Church on Sundays; which Bill, Sir
Rob. Wroth preferred. The Effect whereof is, for the better gathering of One
Shilling for every Absence, which is given by the Stat. of 1 Reginae, and the
Statute is limited to endure the Queens Reign, (which was greatly whispered at,
and Observed in the House).

The Bill for matters concerning Assurance, used amongst Merchants, being moved
for a Commitment, and put to the Question, there was not one No.

Sir Hugh Beeston stood up in the lower end of the House, and said; Sir Hugh
Beeston.


We that be here, cannot hear you that are above. I would it would please them
that speak there, to speak Louder. Also, I am to Certify, that I am here for a
Town, but not in mine own Country, Denbyshire, or for any part thereof; but if
I should not speak something in behalf of my Country, I dare not go thither
again.

Therefore I heartily beseech you, A Motion about a new Writ.
Mr. Speaker, that the House may be Resolved what course is taken, according to
the Order of the House, for the Election of a Knight and Burgess; for they can
not but find themselves greatly grieved for want of the Election; but what is
done I know not.

Mr. Secretary Cecil said, Secretary Cecil reports.
Because I am the Reporter of the Election, as also of the Proceeding, I will
now also Certify you, that there was Order taken for the sending out of a new
Warrant for the Election; but what is done therein, I also know not.

Mr. Speaker said, Mr. Speaker gives Account of it.
I gave Warrant to the Clerk of the Crown, according to the Ancient Form, to
send forth a new Writ; who answered me, That the Lord Keeper desired to have
the Warrant directed to him to have a new Writ, and for his Warrant for Sealing
thereof. So that nothing is done therein, in, until the Pleasure of the House
be known.

Sir Edward Hobby said, There is no Court that does not observe its Rights, and
follow its Privileges; Sir Edward Hobby Speaks to it.
Much more this High Court of Parliament, being the Greatest, and Commander of
all other Courts, does and ought to Observe the same most strictly. And all the
Precedents that I have seen, touching this Point, have ever gone to the Clerk of
the Crown, and no other; And therefore, I take it, that that Course, ought
inviolably to be Observed.

Sir George Moore said, Sir George Moore, etc.
I agree with the Gentleman that last spoke, That Precedents ought to be
Observed, yet to be altered upon urgent Occasions, or by necessity of time.
Knowing this, I take it as my duty to Inform you, if any alteration has been,
it proceeded from imperfection of the Speaker. It was well Observed by an
ancient Member of this House, who is now with God, that no Conference with the
Lords touching a Subsidy, should be had; yet that Rule has been altered in
late Parliaments, by reason of special Causes: So I do think it would be more
Honor to this House to direct a Warrant to the Lord Keeper, than to an
Inferior Minister of the Chancery.

Sir Francis Hastings said, Sir Francis Hastings.
By the Leave of your Honorable Favors, I will show you, that I my self was
yesterday with the Lord Keeper, and how honorably I heard him speak of this
House. That he desires no more, than to show the Love and Duty he bears to
this House, as also that himself would be our immediate Officer, and would be
willing and glad to receive a Warrant from us, so it might be directed to him
for his Discharge, be it in what Terms soever we pleased. And he said, he
doubted not, but if this Honorable House knew so much, they would rather
choose him, than any other Minister. Thus much I thought fit to certify this
House of, which being spoken in private unto me, I now deliver in public unto
you: For my own Advice, I think nothing can be more Honorable to this House,
than to have a person of so great Estate, to whom we may direct our Warrant as
our Minister.

Mr. Francis Bacon said, Mr. Bacon.
It is far more Honorable for this House, in my Opinion, when our Warrant
shall move the Principal Member of Justice, than when it shall command a base,
petty, or inferior Servant to the Clerk of the Crown, or the Clerk of the
Petty-Bag. It will be said our Warrant emanuit improvide, when we shall direct
our Warrant to these base Officers, when we may move the great Seal of England
by it, even as soon as either Petty-Bag or Petty Officer.

Mr. Speaker said, Mr. Speaker.
I was ever Zealous and Jealous of the Privileges and Orders of this House. I
was commanded by you to send forth a Warrant for the Election of a Knight and
Burgess, I found a Resolution and judgment Agreed and Resolved, That during
the time of the Sitting of this House, the Speaker for any new Election, is to
make a Warrant, directed to the Clerk of the Crown; so that in my doing
thereof, I hope I have done rightly.

Mr. Secretary Cecil said, (...)
I shall move unto you a Conclusion, which will end this Controversy, and in
the mean time be a Saving unto all persons: I mean not to second my former
Error, for which I was excepted to, That is, that Mr. Speaker, or any Member
of this House should attend my Lord Keeper, but that four of this House, might
be Assigned to go unto my Lord Keeper, to know the cause of the Stay, as also
his Lordship's request unto this House. And that other six may be Assigned to
call before them the Clerk of the Crown, the Clerk of the Petty-bag, and the
Clerk of this House, with their Precedents and Books, to see to whom this
Warrant has in former times been directed; and whether the Privileges in
former times have daunced a Pavan too and Pro, and according to the time, have
been altered. This to be done this afternoon, and to certify the House to
morrow. And then, We to make a Determinate Resolution.

To which all said, It was a good Motion.

Mr. Holteroft a Knight for Cheshire, said, May it please you, Mr. Speaker, the
County-day for Denbyshire is on Thursday next; and therefore, there had need be
speed made, or else there can be no Election this Parliament.

Mr. Speaker said, Will It please you to name the six Committees? So the House
Named, Sir Edward Hobby, Sergeant Harris, Sir Francis Hastings and three others.

Mr. Speaker also said, Will It please you to Nominate the four to go to the
Lord Keeper? So the House (...) Mr. Seceretary Hubbart, Sir Edward Stafford,
Sir Edward Stanhop, and Mr. Fulk Grevil.

Saturday November. 14. The Bill for the Confirmation of the Sale of Lands, made
by Leaes Lord Mordant Deceased.

The Bill for Amending the Statute made 8 Reginae, concerning the making of
Hats.

A Bill to enable Sir Edward Markham Knight, to sell Lands, was Read and
committed: The Committee to meet on Friday in the afternoon, in the Court of
Wards.

The Bill for the Repealing of certain Statutes, for the Reforming of certain
Abuses in Clothing, in the County of Somerset.

Mr. Johnson said, Mr. Johnson informed that he is Sub^d.
Mr. Speaker, I being a Member of this House, I thought it my Duty to Inform
you, That my self and diverse others are served with Subpanas. I do not this,
either that I am loath to answer, or desire to delay Justice, but to Inform the
House thereof; by Peradventure it might be a Precedent, or some prejudice to
the Privilege of this House. Here is one, which is now delivered into my Hand.
The House Cried, Read it. So the Clerk Read it.

Edvardo Mountague and Jacobo Harrington, etc. and indorsatur Stephanus
Riddlesden sequitur hoc.

Another was read, Michaeli Hicks, and Thomae Low, in Cancellaria.

Another, Henrico Jackman, and Jeronimo Horsey, in Scaccaria, ad sectam Thomae
Cornwallis Armigeri, per Billam Anglicanam.

Another, Michaeli Sames, and Riccardo Sames, in Banco Reginae, ad
Testificandum inter Reginam and Johannem Stray.

After the Reading of which, he certified the House thus much; That the
Informer came to his Lodging this Morning, as he was coming out of the Doors,
and asked for him; he told him, He was the Man: Then (quoth the Informer) the
Queen Greets you well. What Is this, (quoth I?) A Subpoena, (quoth the Informer)
and I charge you to appear upon it, according to the Contents. Then I told him,
I was of this House, and could not Attend: He answered me again; There it is, I
care not; look you to it at your Peril.

Mr. David Waterhouse stood up, and showed, David Waterhouse shows Reasons for
the Allowing it.
That the Subpoena came out of his Office; and further showed The Necessity of
Obeying it: For that a Cause for want of a Witness, might be lost. And
therefore, if the Hearing be appointed at a Day certain, the Client might
peradventure be undone, if he should not have this Subpoena ad Testificandum,
in due time, both served and appeared unto.

Sir Edward Hobby alleged diverse Precedents in this Point; Sir Edward Hobby
shows Precedents against it.
as the 10th. of February, 27 Reginae; Mr. Kerle served one Roger Stepney with
a Subpoena, into the Star Chamber; for which he was adjudged to the Sergeant at
Arms Keeping, for Six Days, and to pay Five Marks Charges. And the 25th. of
March, 27 Reginae, Mr. Crook served a Member of this House with a Subpoena,
into the Chancery; and for so doing, was adjudged to give a Copy of the Bill,
and Twenty Shillings for Charges; and was committed to the Serjeant's Keeping.

Mr. Wiseman said; Seconded by Mr. Wiseman against it.
That notwithstanding the Allegation and Excuse of the Gentleman, that spoke in
Favor of the Subpoena ad Testificandum, I think it deserves no more Favor
than the other: For if the Necessity of the Cause were such, that he must needs
be served, and spared out of this House, the Party ought to ask Leave of the
House, or at least of the Speaker; or entreat him to relate the same to the
House.

Sir George Moore said; Sir George Moore of the same Opinion.
I think, as the Gentleman that last spoke; for the like Subpoena being brought
the Last Parliament, it grew a Question, Whether it was an Impeachment to the
Privileges of the House. And after some Dispute, an Ancient Member of this
House showed diverse Precedents, how that the Minds of the Members of this House
ought to be freed, as well as their Bodies. Whereupon two Members of this House
were sent, to require the Lord Keeper to Reverse that Subpoena.

He also spoke of a Quo Warranto, for the Liberties of the Black-Fryars,
withheld.

Then it grew to a Question, Whether a Burgess of the Parliament may be served
with a Subpoena, ad Testificandum: and concluded, He could not.

So after this Dispute, it was agreed, That the Sergeant should be sent to
Arrest all those to appear, that had procured the Subpoena aforesaid, to
answer their Contempts with all speed.

Sir Francis Hastings stood up, and made a Relation of the Proceedings, which
he, with the other Committees, according to the Commandment of the House the
Day before, had made.

He said; Sir Francis Hasting 's Report.
We have called before us the Clerk of the Crown, the Clerk of the Petty-Bagg,
and Our Clerk of the Parliament. The Clerk of the Crown showed unto us five
Warrants, and one Order, all in one Course, and one Form, in 27 Reginae. Three
of the Warrants were directed to the Clerk of the Crown, Two without
Directions: and he showed unto us Two Writs, without Warrants. Then we called
the Clerk of the Petty-Bagg, who would show us no Warrants, but only a Record
of a Writ in his Roll, 39 Reginae: Only, he said, (but we heard him not) That
Warrants had been granted to the Clerk of the Petty-Bagg. The Clerk of the
Parliament showed unto us Two Precedents; one of the Fifth, and the other of
Thirteenth Reginae; both without Direction; but with these, or to the like
Effect, as I take it: It is required, such and such a Thing be done, etc.

Sir Edward Hobby said; Sir Edward Hobby 's Report.
Because the Truth hereof might be made more plain, and that it pleased you to
command my unworthy Self, to attend Yesterdayes Service; I will, under the
Favor of the Gentleman that last spoke, make a Repetion, ab Origin, a little
longer than he did, for your Satisfactions of this House, and our Pains.

It pleased you, to depute Six for this Service: Five attended the Sergeant at
Law, (Mr. Sergeant Harris) of whose Furtherance we best hoped, deceived both
your, and our Expectations. The Clerk of the Crown, the Clerk of the
Petty-Bagg, and the Clerk of the Parliament, attended us. The Clerk of the
Petty-Bagg, delivered unto us a fair Record, containing a Writ sent out Sedente
Parliamento; for so are the Words: It was for the Knights in Yorkshire, and
Lancashire, etc. This was all he could show: Only, he said, An old Officer
would be sworn; There were more, but lost by Mr. Garth's Decease.

The Clerk of the Crown dealt with us two ways. The First, By way of
Experimented Officers: The Second, By way of Precedent. For the First, One
Steven Brown was brought before Us; who had been an Officer in the
Crown-Office, these Thirty-Six Years: And being asked, If he knew how Warrants
were directed? He answered, That in the Time of the Lord Keeper Bacon, when he
was Speaker of this House, they were directed to the Clerk of the Crown. Being
further asked, If they were ever impugned? He answered, No. Being asked, Where
these Warrants were kept? He answered, On the Labels in the House. The said
Clerk showed us Five Precedents, and One Order: The rest were lost, by Mr.
Watson's Death; as the other Precedents were, by the Death of Mr. Garth.

The Clerk of the Parliament produced Warrants indefinite, of 13 Reginae, when
Sir Christopher Wray, Knight, was Speaker: As also, an Order dated the
Eighteenth Day of March, 1580. die Sabbati; That a Warrant should be directed
to the Clerk of the Crown, to Choose a New Burgess for Norwich, instead of one
Beamont: The Words whereof were; It is required by the Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses, and Barons, etc. And also, another Order, dated die Sabbati, 18
March, Anno 1580. In these Words; It is further Agreed upon, and Resolved by
this House, That during the Time of the Sitting of this Court, there do not at
any Time, any Writ go out, for the Choosing or Returning of any Knight,
Citizen, Burgess, or Baron, without the Warrant of this House, first directed
for the same, to the Clerk of the Crown; according to the Ancient Jurisdiction
and Authority of this House, in that behalf accustomed. And another Warrant
subscribed; Henry Gates, William Fleetwood; who were Committees in Examining of
a Cause, touching one Henry Beremaker, and Anthony Wild. The Effect whereof
was; That for as much as they were Arrested into the King's Bench, whereas we
find them Privileged, as Members of this House; A Warrant was directed to the
Clerk of the Crown, for making Writs of Privilege, as aforesaid. Dated from
Westminster, the Sixth Day of December, 1586.

Therefore, in my own Opinion, His Opinion.
and according to these Precedents, I think, the Warrant ought to be directed
to the Clerk of the Crown.

Sir George Moore stood up, and showed a Precedent, Sir George Moore of the
other Opinion.
Dated on Friday, the Second Day of March, 35 Reginae: Where a New Writ was to
be awarded out, concerning one Mr. Fitz Herbert; and a Writ of Privilege to
come from the Chancery: And the Speaker made a Warrant to the Lord Keeper, to
make a New Writ, in the like Case; both touching Southwark, and Melcombe Re'.
So, I think, the Warrant ought to be directed to the Lord Keeper.

Mr. Tate of the Middle Temple, showed; That Ratio Legis, Mr. Tate's Opinion.
was Annima Legis: And he that presents a Precedent without a Reason, presents
a Soul without a Body. There is a Difference of Writs: There be Brevia ex
gratia Speciali, and Brevia Cursoria. The Writs which we speak of, are Brevia
Cursoria: And therefore, when the Warrant has gone from the Speaker to the
Clerk, it has caused the Writs to be Sealed of course, by the Lord Keeper, etc.

Mr. Secretary Harbert showed, How that He, Secretary Harbert reports from the
Lord Keeper.
with the other Three, by their Commandments, had been with the Lord Keeper;
whom we found most Honorably to Entertain both me, and the rest: and that his
Lordship did greatly respect the Majesty and Gravity of this House; and said,
He would be loath to derogate any thing from Either: Notwithstanding, he hoped
and prayed, That if any former Precedents had improvidently gene from this
House, or contrary to the most Ancient Usage, that we would now Settle our
Resolutions, and Establish and Decree that, which might be a sufficient warrant
unto him, to put in Execution our Commandments; and also increase the Majesly
and Henour of this House: Which he most heartily wished, might ever continue.
And for my part, I can assure you, we cannot wish him to be more Honorable, or
more Agreeable to this House, than we found him.

Mr. Doyley of Lincoln's Inn, Mr. Doyley.
said: Mr. Speaker, As I take it, there is a Precedent this Parliament, which
will decide this Question. For there is an Honorable Person in this House,
being Chosen with my self, Burgess for Wallingford, and also Knight of the
Shire, chose to be Knight: And a Warrant went from You, Mr. Speaker, directed
to the Clerk of the Crown, for Election of a New Burgess; who is Chosen, and
Sworn; and is now a Member of this House: Mr. Thomas Fortescue, by Name.

Mr. Fleming, Mr. Fleming.
the Queen's Solicitor, said: The Clerk of the Crown is our Immediate Officer;
He is to be Attendant between the Two Doors of the Upper-house, and the
Lower House: When any Warrant-General is required, he is to Subscribe it, to
Certify it, etc. He is to convey our Minds and Messages to the Upper-house;
yea, this Warrant is to be directed unto him. -- Then all the House cried, The
House calls to put it to the Question.
to have it put to the Question.

Then the Speaker stood up, The Speaker divides into Three Questions or Parts.
and said: The Question must stand on Three Parts: First, If the Warrant shall
be directed to the Clerk of the Crown? Secondly, If to the Lord Keeper?
Thirdly, If without any Direction?

The House, The House, Murmurs.
after this Speech, was in a great Murmur, and very Loud.

Then stood up one, and said; Mr. Speaker, Let the First Question stand, and
then all will be at an end.

Then said the Speaker, Shall the First Question stand? And all said, Yea.

Then he said, All that will have the Warrant directed to the Clerk of the
Crown, say, Yea: And all that will not, cry, No.

And the Yeas got it a little.

Then he asked, The Question determined.
If they would have this Order entered of Record?

And all cried, Yea, Yea.

Sunday, November. 15.

Monday, November. 16. A Bill for the Enabling of Edward Moluneux Esquire, to
sell Lands, for Payment of his Debts.

A Bill for the Strengthening of Her Majesty's Forces, in the North-Parts of
the Realm; and especially, for the County of Cumberland.

A Bill for the Confirmation of the Charters of King Edward the Sixth, made for
the Hospitals of St. Bartholomew's- Bridewel, and St. Thomas in London.

A Bill for the Putting-down, and Abolishing of certain Idle Courts, kept every
Three Weeks by Archdeacons, and their Officials, and Commissaries, and
Registers.

Mr. Henry Doyley of Lincoln's Inn, made a Motion, and said;
Mr. Speaker,

I think my self bound in Conscience, Mr. Doyley complains of a Libel, called,
The Assembly of Fools.
to certify you of an Infamous Libel that is Printed, and Spread abroad, since
the Beginning of this Parliament: Saving your Presence, Mr. Speaker, It is
called, The Assembly of Fools. I desire the Printer that Printed it, may be
sent for: He dwells right over Guild-Hall-Gate.



The House wondered much at this Motion, and great Murmuring there was. At last,
the Speaker asked him, Where the Book was? and, Where he saw it? He answered,
In the Hands of one Mr. Henry Davies his Clerk, of Lincoln's Inn; but the
Clerk's Name he knew not.

The Sergeant, upon Consultation, was sent for Mr. Davies and his Man, into the
Hall. After a while, they came up; and notice being given thereof, the Man was
only sent for into the House; who being asked by the Speaker, What was his
Name? He said, It was John Baker. Being asked, Of whom he had the aforesaid
Book? He said, Of Jeremy Gouge, of Cliffords-Inn. Being asked, How long he had
had it? He answered, Three or Four Days. Being asked, If he knew it to be a
Libellous or Seditious Book? He answered, That he never knew any such Matter in
it. Being asked, Where the Book was? He answered, At his Master's-Chamber.

Then the Sergeant was commanded to take him forth, and to command one of his
Men to go with him to Lincoln's Inn, to fetch the Book. Then the Speaker asked,
If they would have his Master in?

But Mr. Doyley stood up, and said; Mr. Davies was a very honest Gentleman, and
showed him the Book first, and wished him to complain to this House thereof;
and he found great Fault with it: Therefore, he wished that Mr. Davies might be
staid, until the Book was brought; and then, if they pleased, to send for him
into the House, they might. And so he was staid.

In the mean time, Mr. Davy's Man went to his Chamber for the Book; which,
after it was brought, The Libel scanned, and found to be an old foolish Toy,
called, Jack of Dover; for which the Informer was Laughed at.
and well scanned by the Privy-Councel, it was found to be a mere Toy, and an
Old Book, Entitled, The Second Part of Jack of Dover: A Thing both Stale and
Foolish. For which, Mr. Doyley was well Laughed at; and thereby, his Credit
much impeached, in the Opinion of the House.

Whereupon, Mr. Speaker asked, If they would have Mr. Davies, and his Man
called in? And all cried, No, No. Then, If they should be Discharged? And all
cried, Yea, Yea.

A Bill for Reformation of Abuses in Buying and Selling of Spices, and other
Merchandise.

A Bill for Redress of certain Inconveniences, An Act against Pluralities of
Benesices.
in the Statute of 21 Hen. 8. Cap. 13. Entitled, An Act against Pluralities of
Benesices, for taking of Farms by Spiritual Men, and for Residence; was Read
Secunda Vice.

Dr. Dunn spoke against this Bill, Dr. Dunn oppos^ it.
and said; That it was no Reason, that Men of Unequal Desert, should be Equally
Benesiced, or Equallized with the Best.

Dr. Crompton, Dr. Crompton seconds him.
amongst many other Speeches, wished, That Plurality of Offices might be taken
from the Layity, and then Pluralities of Benefices from the Clergy. Also, in
former Ages, (he said) Impropriations were given to the Spiritualty; and then,
no Pluralities allowed: As also, Spiritual Men bound by Ecclesiastical Canons,
and their own Vow, from Marriage; so that, they might Live with far less
Charge, than now they do: But having taken from them Impropriations, they
cannot keep that Hospitality that is required. And next, Marriage being
Tolerated amongst them, they Lived at greater Charge, both of Wife and
Children: One Benefice of small Cure, suffices not.

Sir George Moore said, Sir George Moore for the Bill.
He thought the Bill most fit to be Committed; it being, in the General Scope,
a Good Law, and tending to a Good and Religious End: But, such is the Iniquity
of this Age, that for want of a Good Law of this Nature, many Souls do not only
Languish, but Perish Everlastingly, for want of Spiritual Food. I think,
therefore, though there be some Imperfections in the Bill, yet the Body and
Parts of it may be Amended, to every ones Satisfaction.

Mr. Lock said; Mr. Lock seconds him.
Mr. Speaker, I think bare Silence is not an Exoneration of a Man's Conscience.
The Similitude of Offices and Benefices, made by the Doctor, does not hold,
under Favor. For, Non est incipiendum cum Laicis, sed incipiendum a domo Dei.
Therefore, if They begin first, We shall follow, in avoiding of Pluralities.

Dr. James said; Dr. James against it.
That it had been said, That Pluralities were the Cause of bringing in
Corruption into the Church: But for that, under Favor, (said he) I think the
contrary; because Corruption is commonly where Poverty is. But if Competent
Living be given to the Minister, I see no Reason why Just Men should judge that
to be Corruption.

Secondly, It was said, That it would be a Means, that Preaching would be more
frequent. For that I answer, That if Hope of Competent Living be taken away, it
will be a means to make the best Wits resuse the Study of Divinity. And
therefore, an Historian said well, Sublatis pramiis corruunt Arts.

Consider besides, That in England, there are not above Eight Thousand, Eight
Hundred, and odd Parish-Churches; Six Hundred of which do but afford Competent
Living for a Minister. What then shall become of the Multitude of our Learned
Men? They have no other Preferments, unless it be to get some Deanary,
Prebendary, or such like; which is no easy matter to do, they being so few;
especially in this catching Age.

To give the best Scholar, but as great a Proportion as the Meanest Artizan; or
to give all alike, there is no Equality: For, Inaequalibus aequalia dare
absurdum. And this will breed Poverty in the greatest Learned, which is the
Mother of Contempt: A Thing both Dangerous, and Odious unto Divinity. This must
needs make Preachers preach placentia; which is a Thing abhorred, even of God
Himself. A Preacher, which is no Ordinary Person, ought to have an
Extraordinary Reward: For the Canon says, He must be Ad minimum Artium
Magister, aut Publicus, aut idoneus verbi Divini Concionator.

Mr. David Walterhouse said; Mr. Speaker, Because, Mr. Walterhouse for the Bill.
my self am an Officer, I mean only to speak to the Doctor's Similitude of
Pluralities of Offices. By the Common Law, an Officer shall forfeit his Office
for Non-Attendance: So for a Benefice, the Incumbent shall also forfeit. But
after, the Statute came, which made this Toleration upon Eighty Days Absence.
So that now, if we set this Statute at liberty again, this shall be no
Innovation in us, but a Renovation of the Common Law. I will end, only with
this Caution to the House, That commonly, the most Ignorant Divines of this
Land, are double Beneficed.

Sergeant Harries said; Serj. Harries gives the House a Caution, not to meddle
in it.
We seem to Defend the Privileges and Customs of the House: But if we proceed
to determine of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, we shall not only infringe a Custom,
which we have ever observed, viz. To meddle with no Matter, which touches Her
Majesty's Prerogative; but also procure Her great Displeasure. Admit we should
determine this Matter, yet Her Majesty may grant Toleration, Non Obstante. And,
Mr Speaker, the Last Parliament may be a Warning unto us, when the like Bill
was by us Preferred; and the same not only Rejected, but also, Her Majesty
commanded the Lord Keeper to tell us, That She hoped hereafter, we would not
meddle in Cases of this Nature, so nearly touthing Her Prerogative.

Mr. Martin said; I agree with him, who said, Mr. Martin.
Learning should have her Reward: But I say more, Our Souls should have their
Spiritual Food. And I do wish, that Divines may have Promotion, not only with
good Convenience, but also with good Abundance.

Though I be Zealous, yet I hope to Refrain and Restrain my self from that
Heat, which the Heat of my Zeal, and Love of my Country, drove me into very
lately; for which, I do not only acknowledge my self Guilty in your Censures;
but also crave Pardon of every particular Member of this House, that heard me:
But most especially, of him I offended. -- So he spoke to the Bill. Vide, His
Words spoken in Heat to the Bill of Exeter, November. 10.

After him, an Old Doctor of the Civil-Law spoke; but because he spoke too
Long, and too Low, the House Hawked and Spit, An old Doctor speaks so Low, and
so Long, the House Hawk and Spit, to make him end.

Sir Francis Hastings dislikes their Noise, and moves against it.

He speaks to the Bill.


to make him make an End. Which Speech finished,

Sir Francis Hastings stood up, and said; My Masters, I utterly mislike this
strange kind of Course, in the House. It is the Ancient Usage, that every Man
here should speak his Conscience; and that both Freely, and with Attention:
Yea, though he speaks never so Absurdly. I beseech you therefore, that this Way
may be amended, and this Troubling of any Man in his Speech, no more used.

But to the Matter: Mr. Speaker, I protest, that which I shall Speak, I will
Utter unto you All, out of the Conscience of a Christian, Loyalty of a Subject,
and Heart of an Englishman. I know, that Distributio Parochiarum est ex Jure
Humano non Divino: But he that said so, must give me Leave to tell him, That
Distributio verbi Divini est ex Jure Divino and Humano. If then by the
Distributing and Severing of Benefices to diverse Learned Men, the Word may be
the better Distributed, and Preached, (as God be thanked, it has been these
Forty Three Years, under Her Majesty's happy Government; the Period of whose
Days, I beseech the Almighty, may be Prolonged) I see no reason, why we should
doubt of the Goodness of this Bill, or make any question of the Committing
thereof.

Mr. Roger Owen said, Mr. Owen.
(after particular Answers to diverse particular Objections, made by the
Doctors) That a Statute was but Privato Communis Juris; and this Act will be
made no Innovation, because it Repeals only the Proviso, and not the Body. And
whereas it was said by a Doctor, That Honos alit Arts, (and much more to that
Purpose:) And, If you take away the Honor and Reward, then you take away the
Study it self.

For Answer thereunto, I say, under Favor, Mr. Speaker, This Statute takes
away no Benefices from the Clergy; but only better orders the Distribution of
Benefices amongst the Clergy. For that another Doctor, alleged a Canon
confirmed under the Great Seal of England: I say, under Favor, That They of
the Clergy, not We of the Laiety, are bound thereby; for they are as they were
Bylaws unto Them, but not unto Us.

Then the Speaker stood up, The Bill Committed.
and put it to the Question for Commitment; and it was Committed.

He also asked the House, If they pleased to Sit to Morrow, being the Queens
Holy Day? To which, after a little Speech, it was agreed, They should Sit after
the Sermon was done at Westminster; which would be ended by Ten of the Clock:
And that was affirmed, to be the Ancient Course.

Tuesday, November. 17. A Bill was read for the Enabling of Edward Nevill, of
Berling, in the County of Kent Esquire and Sir Edward Nevil his Son and Heir
apparent, to Sell certain Coppy-hold Lands.

A Bill for the true payment of Tithes to the Parsons, and Vicars of all
Parishes within the Walls of the City of Norwich.

An Act against the unlawful Hunting and Stealing of Deer in the Night time.

A Bill, to prevent Perjury, Bill to prevent Perjury and subornation, etc.
and Subornation of Perjury, and to prevent unnecessary Suits in Law; the
Effect of which Bill, is for Removing of Suits by Habeas Corpus, or Certiorari
before one Juror Sworn, out of the petty Courts to Westminster.

I delivered this Bill ( viz. Mr. Heword Townssend the Collector of this
Journal) at the delivery whereof, I said: Mr. Speaker, I take every man to be
bound in Conscience, to remove a little mischief from the Commonwealth, before
it take Head, and grow to a great inconveniency. This Mischief is ordinary and
general, therefore though but small, yet to be considered of, and provided
against. And if a Heathen Philosopher could Admonish us, Obstare principiis, I
see no reason, That men Endued with Christianity, should be, of the least hurt
growing in his Country, either regardless or respectless. For which purpose, a
Gentleman well experienced, having found this grief common to the poorer sort,
like a good Subject, tendering all the parts of this Commonwealth, entreated
me at my coming into this House this morning, to offer unto your considerations
this Bill. It is Entitled An Act, etc. the Effect whereof is, etc. which if it
please you to entertain with that willingness it is offered, I doubt not but
this inconvenience will be quickly Redressed. So I Offered the Bill, and prayed
it might be Read.

A Bill for the Confirmation of Letters Pattents, made by King Edward the
sixth, to Sir Edward Seymor Knight.

A Bill, for strengthening an Act made by King Henry 8. for the maintenance of
the Poor in St. Bartholomews, London, A Bill about St. Bartholomew Hospital.
according to a Covenant made by the said King, was Read the second time.

And after a Speech made, by Sir Stephen Some, Alderman of London, it was
committed, he alleged, Sir Stephen Some speaks to it.
That by the Foundation of the Hospital, there were only One Hundred Poor
maintained; and by the Gifts of other Benefactors since, One Hundred more,
besides Six Hundred, which are there now in Cure of diverse Diseases. And the
Good that comes by this, as well as other Hospitals in London, is very
apparent. For there are of Poor people, besides the certain Number of
Hospitallers, the best part of Three Thousand daily in Cure.

Sir Edward Hobby said: Sir Edward Hobby's consideration about the same.
I find this Bill to be put into this House, to the end that some Contention
touching the Limits of the Parish next adjoining to St. Bartholmews, may be
adjusted. I am ever jealous of private Bills of this Nature, and dare not show
my self hasty in Assenting to Pass any without Commitment, lest we might
Infring the Liberties of some other Parish adjoining, Therefore, I Pray it may
be committed, and the Parties on both sides Called before the Committees.

A Bill, to Redress Adultery, was Offered to the Speakers hands. The Substance
of the Bill was, A Bill against Adultery.
That if a Woman, or Man, or both were Convicted of Adultery, He should lose
his Tenancy by Courtesy, and she her Tenancy in Dower; Read the first time.

Sergeant Harries stepped up to this Bill, Sergeant Harri. Objects.
and said: Mr. Speaker, by the scope of this Bill, the Determination of this
Fact must be by two or three blind Witnesses, in the Ecclesiastical Court;
which is no Reason, that Judges Ecclesiastical should Determine of Laymens
Inheritances: Besides, there is another gross fault in the Bill; For if they be
both Poor, and have nothing but Goods, they Forfeit nothing. Now, if a man be
taken in Adultery he shall not be Punished, because there is nothing of what he
should be Tenant by the Courtesy. But if the Woman be taken, she is to lose the
Third of the Goods, or if it be in the City, The House rejects it.
by Custom, she loses the half; which is Jus inequale, and not to be admitted
in this House; Then all the House Cried, Away with it.

Then the Speaker put it to the Question, Whether it should be Read the second
time? And the House gave a very great No.

Wednesday November. 18. The Bill concerning Cloth-workers, was Committed, and
the time of Meeting appointed, on Monday next in the afternoon, in the
Middle-Temple-Hall.

The Bill for Reforming the Abuses in Silk-Weavers.

A Bill for Reforming Abuses in Embroderers.

A Bill for the Repealing of certain Statutes made 5. Edward 6. and 2. and 3.
Phil. and Marie, touching the making of Cloth, and for the Reforming of Abuses
in Making of Cloth, in the County of Somerset, was committed to the Committee
for Cloth-workers.

The Bill for Solicitors, A Bill about Solicitors.
brought in by Mr. Jones; the Effect whereof is, That no person whatsoever
shall Solicit, other than those that will do the same without Fee or Reward;
also a Proviso, that Utter-Barresters may Solicit in all Courts whatsoever; the
like for Attorneys; the like for them which may maintain any Suit by Law; the
like for Corporations, that they may make a Solicitor. Also a Proviso, that no
Mechanic Trader may be a Solicitor, viz. Broker, Scrivener, Miller, Smith,
etc. and limited to continue to the end of the first Session of the next
Parliament.

A Bill against Trifling Suits, A Bill against Taincoring of Cloth.
brought in by Mr. Boyse.

The Bill touching Confirmation of Patents, brought in by Mr. Francis Moore.

A Bill for Reformation of Abuses in making of Cloth, Read. Sir George Moor
opposes the too great punishment, and desires it may be Committed.


To which Sir George Moore stood up and said, This Statute forbids Clothiers
to use Tayntors. The first Offense Twenty Pounds; the second, Pillory, too
infamous a Punishment for so necessary a Member. It pleased the Lords of her
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, to direct their Letters to the
Justices of the Peace in the Shire where I dwell, for the Suppressing of
Tayntors. We sent our Warrants out to the Cloth-workers, appointing them to
attend us at a certain Day and Place. Upon Examination of the Matter before us,
We found, by those Reasons they alleged, that Cloth could not be made
serviceable without Tayntors: And though they Taintred it never so little, it
would stretch a little in breadth, and at least a quarter of a yard in length;
for which small fault, being not voluntary, methinks the punishment aforesaid
is too too grievous. I think it therefore fit, That the Bill be Committed. And
so it was.

Mr. Francis Bacon brought in the Bill touching the Exchequer, Mr. Fr. Bacon's
Bill touching orders in the Exchequer.
now thus Entitled, An Act for the better observation of certain Orders, set
down and Established in the Exchequer, under her Majesty's Privy Seal.

At which time he said, Mr. Speaker, His Speech concerning it.
This Bill has been deliberately and judicially considered of by the
Committees, before whom Mr. Osbourn came; who (I assure you) so discreetly
Demeaned himself, and so submissively referred the state of his whole Office to
the Committees, and so well Answered in his own Defense, that they would not
Ransack the heaps, or sound the bottom of former Offenses, but only have taken
away something that was superfluous and needless to the Subject.

Though the Committee have reformed some part, yet they have not Eyed so nearly
every particular, as if they would pare to the quick an Office of her Majesty's
Gift and Patronage.

This Bill is both Public and Private; Public, because it is to do Good to
the Subject; and Private, because it does no Injustice unto the particular
Officer. The Committees herein have not taxed the Officer by way of Imputation,
but removed a Tax by way of Imposition.

I will not tell you what we have taken away, either in quo titulo, or
Checquer-Language; but, according to the Poet, who says, Mitte id quod Scio,
dic quod rogo, I will omit that which you have known, and tell you that you
know not, and are to know, and that in familiar Terms. And so he told the
Substance of the Bill.

We found her Majesty, whose Eyes are the Candles of our good Days, had made
him an Officer by Patent; in which that he might have Right, Her Majesty's
Learned Council were there in Sentinel, to see that Her Majesty's Right might
not be suppressed. If my Memory has failed me in the delivery of the Truth of
our Proceedings, and the Committee's determination; I desire those that were
there present, to help and assist me. Here is the Bill. So he called aloud to
the Sergeant of the House, and delivered him the Bill, to be delivered to the
Speaker.

A Bill to prevent diverse Misdemeanors, in idle and lewd Persons; A Bill
against Idle and lewd persons.
being Engrossed, it was put to the Question and Passed.

Mr. Dyott of the Middle- Temple said: Mr. Speaker, There be many Commodities
in this Realm, which being public, for the benefit of every particular
Subject, Mr. Dyott moves against Patentees.
are Monopolized by Patent from her Majesty, only for the Good and private Gain
of one man. To remedy the Abuses of those kind of Patents, which are granted
for a good Intent by her Majesty, I am, Mr. Speaker, to Offer to the
Consideration of your self, and this House, An Act against Patents, purporting
particular Power to be given to sundry Patentees; it has a very long Title.

Mr. Laurence Hide, Mr. Lau. Hide moves against them too.
of the Middle- Temple said: I would only Mr. Speaker, move you to have an Act
Read, containing but Twelve Lines. It is an Exposition of the Common Law,
touching these kinds of Patents, commonly called Monopolies.

A Bill for the better Observation of the Sabbath, Bill penal for Observing the
Sabbath.
which is framed upon the Act of 1 Eliz. the which requires an Indictment
before the One Shilling can be taken or levied, for not coming to Church; which
Circuit takes away: was Read, and so committed, after much Dispute; for the
House generally disliked the course of the Bill; for by that, every Husband
must pay One Shilling for the Wives absence, and every Master One Shilling for
his Servant's absence, etc.

Mr. Dyott stood up and said: Mr. Dyot, shows the inconveniency in the penalty
Every Man can tame a Shrew but he that has her: perhaps she will not come;
and for her willfulness, no reason the Husband should be Punished.

So, Mr. Downold going to speak about it, is interrupted by the Speaker.
as they were naming Committees, Mr. Downold the Lord-Keeper's Secretary, stood
up; and desired, That the Bill Mr. Hide called for, might be Read: and was
saying somewhat more.

But Mr. Speaker interrupted him, and said: I pray you let us name Committees,
and then you may Spoke. And so they went to Naming of Committees. And Mr.
Secretary Cecil, a little while after, Who rises from the chair and would not
hear him.
spoke something in Mr. Speaker's Ear. But so soon as time and place of
Commitment was named, the Speaker rose without further Hearing of Mr. Downold,
which he took in great disgrace, At which he threatens him.
and told him, He would complain of him the next Sitting; to which the Speaker
Answered not one word, but looked earnestly on him; and so the Press of People
parted them.

On Thursday, But the Speaker replied not a word.
November. 19. An Act, For the Confirmation of the Authority of the Mayor of
London, in Saint Katharines.

A Bill for the discovery of the Stealers of Cattle.

A Bill Limiting what Persons shall Die, or retail Woollen-Cloth.

A Bill against Gavel-kind-Land in Kent.

A Bill for the Explanation of the Statutes of 13. and 18. Eliz. against Bonds,
Courts, or Leases of Ecclesiastical Livings.

A Bill for Explanation of a Statute of 32. Hen. 8. of Limitation of
prescription; Read the first time.

A Bill against Blasphemous Swearing.

A Bill for Explanation of the Common Law, in certain cases of Letters Patent;
brought in by Mr. Hide.

A Bill for the Denization of certain Persons: viz. of Joseph Lupo, one of the
Queen's Physicians: Thomas Moxon, Richard Bye, Son of William Bye, and Margery
his Wife; and Mary Questor.

A Bill for the Enabling of Edward Nevil of Burling, in the County of Kent Esquire
and Sir Henry Nevil his Son and Heir apparent, to sell certain Coppy-hold
Lands; Read and Committed: And Tuesday in the Afternoon, is the time appointed,
for them to meet in the Court of Wards; and all the Queens Council, and
Council on both sides are to attend; for that the Queen is in Remainder. And
Sir Edward Hobby certified the House, That to his knowledge, the Queen was well
pleased with this Bill.

There were returned Burgesses for Newton in Lancashire, one Mr. Langton of
Lancashire, and one Mr. Richard Ashton, who was present in the House; but the
said Baron, though he were returned, he was not yet come to Town, by reason he
fell Sick by the way, as Mr. Ashton informed the House. But he sent up his
Solicitor hither, to follow his Causes in Law, and to pay a certain Debt of
his, to Mr. John Lacy of Cheapside. Now Mr. Ashton informed the House, A
Complaint of an Arrest of a Solicitor belonging to a Member that was not yet
Sworn.
That this Solicitor was Arrested on Sunday Night last, in Grays-Inn-Lane, by a
Bill of Middlesex, at the Suit of one William Musket a Tailor, and carried
Prisoner to Newgate. And there, after a discharge gotten, because he said he
was a Servant to a Parliament Man; he was no sooner discharged, but he was
strait again Arrested, and carried to the Compter, and there laid all Night,
until he sent to the Sergeant at Arms, who fetched him out, and kept him in
his Custody.

And now this Day at the Bar, he desired the privilege of the House, he being a
special Servant to a Member thereof: Mr. Moore makes a Doubt, Whether he could
have Privilege.
so after, he was removed out.

Mr. Francis Moore said, I think it will grow a Question, Whether he shall have
privilege, in that his Master is not Sworn, nor here. Nota, Mr. Brown pleads,
he had, as all others, Fourteen days, before the Meeting or Swearing of the
House. Where Note, The Members then claimed but Fourteen Days before a Session,
which is now reck'ned Forty Days.


Mr. Brown said, Every Parliament Man has privilege for himself and Servants
Fourteen Days before the Parliament, and this is, before he is returned or
Sworn; much more ought we to give privilege in this Case.

Then was Musket, that procured the Arrest, brought in; and being demanded the
Reason, How he durst meddle with any Man's Servant of the House? he Answered,
That the said Soliciter, being demanded whether he Served any Parliament Man?
He Answered, No. Which indeed afterward proved untrue, when they were brought
Face to Face.

Then the Sergeant was brought in, who said, He was put to his Choice, Whether
he would tarry still at Newgate, or go to the Compter. Being further asked,
Whether he could say any more in his own Excuse? He said, No.

So the Solicitor was brought in; who justified, that he was first Arrested,
and after Discharged, and then the second time Arrested as aforesaid. So they
were both removed out of the House.

Sir Edward Hobby took hold of the Speech made by the Sergeant, of his Choice
to stay in Newgate, or to go to the Compter; as also, that he was doubly
Arrested, and paid double Fees.

So after Consultation had, it was put to the Question, and agreed by the
House, That they both should pay the Solicitors Cost and Damages, and be
imprisoned three days in the Sergeants Custody. And each of them, both Musket,
and the Sergeant, to Pay the Sergeant Attending this House his Fees, and the
Solicitor to Pay none, and so to be Discharged.

A Bill for Confirmation of Grants made to the Queens Majesty, and of
Letters Patent made by her Majesty to others, being Engrossed, was Read the
Third time, and without Speech, or denial Passed, only Mr. ^ale of the Temple
said, No.

Mr. Secretary Herbert said, Secretary Herbert's Report from the Lord Keeper.
According to Your Commandment, Sir Edward Stafford, and my self, went to my
Lord Keeper, and delivered unto him, That Notwithstanding some Allegations,
which were Alleged on the behalf of his Lordship concerning our Resolutions,
about the Warrants, which upon mature Deliberation we found by Precedents, That
they ought to go and be directed to the Clerk of the Crown.

His Lordship after a small Pause, The Keeper's Reply to him, etc.
Answered, That he now Considered the Weightiness of diverse Businesses that
were now in hand: The Consultation which we were likely presently to have
touching the Bill of Subsidy. That the Enemy, the Spaniard, was Landed in
Ireland; and the business, of those Affairs of great Imports: as also his own
Business in the Upper-House, and the short end which was like to be of this
Parliament. And therefore, he would now not stand to make Contention, or show
his further Reasons; but prayed us, to certify you all, That he would be most
ready and willing, to perform the desire of this House.

The Bill of Petty-Theft, and Patents aforesaid, were sent up to the Lords, by
Sir John Fortescue and Mr. Secretary Hubbart. The House called upon Mr.
Secretary to go, but he desired to be excused, because he was troubled with a
Cold.

A Bill to restrain the Transportation of Money out of the Realm, A Bill to
prevent Transporting of Bulloin.
and to Reform certain Abuses in the Exchanges, was Read.

Mr. Fettyplace a Burgess for London, spoke to this Bill, and said, Mr.
Fettyplace speaks to that Bill.
It is to be thought that the Netherlander having so much use for Money, is the
Exporter thereof out of this Realm. The French King made it a Law, That no man
on pain of Death, should Export Money thence. Germany holds the Standard, so
does France, and so do We. But the Netherlander only does not, and he only
thereby gained of all Three. There be good Statutes already made to this
purpose, both in the time of Rich. 2. Hen. 3. Hen. 4. Hen. 5. and Hen. 6. That
no Stranger should bring Commodities into this Land, but he should bring in so
much Money, etc. He made a very long Speech touching the manner of Trade by
Exchange, in Merchants Language, which I could not well Note. So the Bill was
committed, and the Chequer-Chamber appointed the place, and Friday in the
afternoon the Time.

Mr. Henry Mountague showed, That 17. Ed. 4. Mr. Mountague for the Bill.
such Transportation was made Felony, and never since Transportation much heard
of, till this Queens Days; in whose time, none of those Laws are in force,
which if they were revived, and set on Foot again, I think such kind of
Transportation would be less used than it is.

One of the Burgesses of Yarmouth Moved, All Officers of Ports might be
certified of such Goods as be Exported, and the Skipper bound in Bond, to be
sent to her Majesty's Custom House, etc.

Mr. Davis said, " Mr. Speaker, Mr. Davies about Money and Barture in Trade.
I hold this Paradox for a true ground of Policy, That if there were no Money
in the World, then this Kingdom were the happiest Nation in the World. And the
best Age was, when there was only bartering of Commodities; For one yard of
Cloth would be better than three yards of Velvet. And an Ounce of Iron, for
the Use of man, better than a Pound of Gold. A Bushel of Corn, better than ten
Bushels of Pepper or other Grain. The fundamental Cause of this Bill was, That
we might not be Cozened of our Moneys, who have the best Standard in the World:
For now the Exchange is Governd by Brokers; and as it pleases them, the
Exchange must Rise and Fall. So the Bill was Committed.

The Bill, for Setting of Watches, was Read and Committed; the Place of meeting
appointed the Court of Wards, and Tuesday next in the afternoon the Time.

A Bill for the Relief of Theophilus Adams, touching certain obligations
reputed to be made void by the Statute of 39 Eliz. entitled, An Act, etc. Some
say, this Bill was cast out of the House the last Parliament.

Friday November. 20. An Act for the Assurance of the Jointure of Lucy Countess
of Bedford.

A Bill Prohibiting Fairs to be held on Sunday, by which the Statute of Hen. 6.
cap. is repealed.

A Bill against wilful absence from Church on Sundays, A Bill about the Wilful
Abstaining from Church.
was brought in.

Sir Francis Darcy brought this Bill in after Commitment, and said, Mr.
Speaker, Me thought I heard a strange Voice at the Committing of this Bill. I
hope after these Amendments, For which Sir Francis Darcy pleads.
it will have better success at the Passing, than that Voice did presage; but
most especially of us that are the Mouths of the most Grave, and Religious
Commons of this Realm: by this Bill every Husband must pay for the willful
absence of his Wife, and Children above Twelve years of Age, and Servants:
There is a new Proviso for having Service at home.

Sir Edw. Hobby said: I think this Statute is an implicative Exposition of the
Stat. 23. Eliz. by which every Recusant is to pay 20 l. to the Queen, (...).
a month, for wilful absence from the Church; and it has been a doubt, whether
they shall pay so much for their Wives. Now, this Statute does not Explain that
point, but only that they must pay One Shilling for their Wives, etc. and
therefore I doubt some matter of Secret is in this Statute, which is not yet
known.

Sir George Moore said: Sir George Moore to the same Bill.
The old Statute of 23. Reginae says, That every person that has Goods shall
pay; but the Wife has no Goods, therefore she shall not pay: And for any
matter of Secret in this Bill, I protest, I know none; and therefore I think it
needs no new Constructions.

Mr. Francis Moore said: Mr. Francis Moore to the same.
Mr. Speaker, I think the Bill intends not to bring any that be ill-Affected
within danger of this Law, or any that be within the Statute of 23. Reginae,
but only to punish those with the Penalty of One Shilling, which though they be
well addicted, yet they be negligent. For my own part, I do so much desire the
Furtherance and good Success of this Bill, or any of the like Nature, that he
that does not the like, I would he had neither Heart to think, nor Tongue to
speak.

Mr. Martin said: Mr. Martin against it, upon good Consideration.
I do Mr. Speaker, as much favor this Bill, as any man does; but I would but
Move one Question to the House, in which I desire to be Resolved: That is, if
they that pay their Twenty Pound a month to the Queen, shall pay also their
Twelve Pence a Week by force of this Statute: For my part, as the Law it self
will not tolerate two Remedies for one Inconvenience; So I can never agree, in
Conscience, to consent to a double Remedy for one Offense.

Sir William Wray, Sir William Wray Explains it.
To the Question that was propounded. However the Bill now stands, this I can
affirm to the House, That the Intent of the Committee was, That those Recusants
that are able to pay their Twenty Pound, should not pay this Penalty; but that
it should be only inflicted on the Poorer Sort.

Dr. Bennet said: Dr. Bennet's Observation.
Mr. Speaker, Though I had no Meaning to speak, yet I will now speak to the
Objection that was last made. This Law gives Life to that Statute, 1 Eliz.
which by reason of by Ambages Indictment, and otherwise, never almost had his
due Execution: And a Law without Execution, is like a Bell without a Clapper;
for as the Bell gives no Sound, so the Law does no Good.

There are, Mr. Speaker, in the County where I am, Twelve or Thirteen Hundred
Recusants; most of which, this Law which we have now in hand would constrain to
come to Church: I mean only those of the Poorer Sort. It is a Duty in
Christianity, for the Father to look to his Child, and for the Master to look
to his Servant; which because it has grown Cold, this Law will Quicken and
Revive: For Punishment will make them do that by Constraint, which they ought
to do in regard of Religion.

Sir Robert Cross said: I would move but one Question; If a Man be in the
Queen's Wars, Must he pay for the Absence of his Wife, Children, and Family?
This indeed is a Fault in the Bill. Sir Robert Cross's Objections.
So if a Man be absent from Home, as at London about his Lawsuits, etc.

Mr. Carew said: Mr. Speaker, I will not speak against the Body of the Bill;
only, I mislike one thing in it; and that is, Mr. Carew's Objections.
That Justices of the Peace should have this Authority. They have enough
already to do; and therefore, no reason they should meddle in Ecclesiastical
Causes. I think rather, it were fit to be Committed into the Hands of the
Parson of the Parish: For it is no Policy, that Justices of the Peace should
have such Power over their Neighbors.

Mr. Brown said: Mr. Speaker, There is one Thing would be looked into in this
Bill, which cannot now be remedied; Mr. Brown's Objection.
and that is: If the Churchwardens shall secretly keep a Calendar; and so,
where he should gather Twelve Pence for the Poor, perhaps, will take Four Pence
for himself, and dispense with the rest.

So, after long Dispute, it was put to the Question; and the House divided: The
I, I, I, were 137. and the No's, 140. The Bill rejected by 3. Voices.
So the Bill was Rejected but by Three Voices only.

One Mr. William Morris, Burgess for Bewmorris, informed the House: That as he
was coming up to London, on his Way his Man was Arrested at Shrewsbury:
Whereupon, he told the Sergeant, That he was of the Parliament House; and
therefore wished him to Discharge his Servant. The Sergeant said, He could not
Discharge him; but he would go to the Bailiff with him: To whom, when he came,
he likewise declared, He was of the Parliament House; and therefore, required
his Servant. To whom the Bailiff answered, He could not Discharge him, without
the Consent of him that procured the Arrest. To whom he also went; and he
answered the Sergeant and him: Keep him fast; I will not Release him, until I
be satisfied. Then he told the Creditor, That he was of the Parliament House;
and therefore, his Servant was Privileged. Whereunto the Creditor made this
Answer: I care not for that; keep him fast, I will be your Warrant. I thought
good to move the House herein, referring it to your Consideration. And because
I am willing, that the Privileges of this House may be known as well afar off,
as here at hand, I thought good to move the same.

Mr. Francis Moore said: Mr. Speaker, Methinks this Action is very Scandalous
to the whole House; and because it is a Cause both Extraordinary and
Contemptible, in my Opinion, it deserves a most severe Exmplary Punishment.

Whereupon all the House cried, To the Tower, to the Tower with them! Send for
them, send for them!

Mr. Speaker said: Is it your Pleasure, the Bailiff, and he that procured the
Arrest, and the Sergeant, shall be sent for? And all cried, Yea. Then the
Speaker said: The Sergeant must go down to Shrewsbury: And all cried, Yea.

The Speaker gave the Clerk a Bill to read. And the House called for the
Checquer-Bill: Some said, Yea; and some said, No; and a great Noise there was.

At last, Mr. Lawrence Hide said: To end this Controversy, because the Time is
very short, I would move the House, to have a very short Bill read; Entitled,
An Act of Explanation of the Common Law, (...)
in certain Cases of Letters Patent. And all the House cried, I, I, I.

So, after it was read, the Question was to be Propounded for the Committing of
it; and some cried Commit it, some Ingross it: At length,

Mr. Spicer, (...) on to (...)
Burgess for Warwick, stood up, and said: Mr. Speaker, This Assembly may be
said to be Libera Gens; and therefore, I hope, here is both Libera Men's, and
Libera Lingua. Therefore, Freely and Faithfully, that which I know I will speak
to this Honorable House.

This Bill may touch the Prerogative Royal; which, as I learned the Last
Parliament, is so Transcendant, that the Eye of the Subject may not Aspire
thereunto. Far be it therefore from me, that the State, and Prerogative-Royal
of the Prince should be tied by me, or the Act of any other Subject.

First, Let us consider the word Monopoly, what it is; Monos is Unus, and
Polis, Civitas: So then, the Meaning of the Word is; A Restraint of any thing
Public, in a City, or Commonwealth, to a Private Use. And the User called a
Monopolitan; quasi, cujus privatum lucrum est urbis, and orbis Commune Malum.
And we may well term this Man, The Whirlpool of the Princes Profits.

Every Man has Three especial Friends, his Goods, his Kinsfolk, and his Good
Name: These Men may have the Two First, but not the Last. If I were acquainted
with any of them, I would wish them to lose some Goods, to gain a Good Name.
They are Insidiosa, quia dulcia: They are dolosa, quia dubia. I speak not, Mr.
Speaker, either Repining at her Majesty's Prerogative, or misliking the Reasons
of her Grants; but out of Grief of Heart, to see the Town wherein I Serve,
pestered, and continually vexed with the Substitutes, or Vicegerents of these
Monopolitans; who are ever ill disposed, and ill affected Members.

I beseech you, give me Leave to prove this unto you by this Argument;
Whosoever transgresses the Royal Commission of Her Majesty, being granted upon
good and profitable Suggestions, and also abuses the Authority and Warrant of
Her Majesty's Privy-Councel, being granted unto him for the more Favorable
Execution of his Patent; this Man is an evil disposed, and dangerous Subject.
But that this is true, and has been done by one Person, a Substitute of a
Patentee, I will prove unto you.

The Major needs not be proved, the Minor I will thus prove: My self am
Occulatus Testis of this Minor; Et talis testis plus valet existens unus, quam
auriti december.

The Substitutes of the Patentees for Aqua-Vitae, and Vinegar, came not long
since to the Town where I Serve; and presently staid Sale of both these
Commodities; unless the Sellers would compound with them, they must presently
to Councel-Table. My self, though Ignorant, yet not so Unskilful, by reason of
my Profession, viewed their Patent, to see whether their Proceedings were
according to their Authority, and found they exceeded it in Three Points. For,
where the Patent gives Six Months Liberty to the Subject that has any
Aqua-Vitae, to sell the same, this Person comes down within Two Months, and
takes Bond of them to his own Use; where he ought to bring them before a
Justice of Peace, and they there be bound in Recognizance; and after, to be
returned into the Exchequer. And so, by Usurpation, retains Power in his own
Hands, both to Kill and Save. Thus Her Majesty's Commission being transgressed,
both in Zeal, as a Subject, and Sworn-Servant to Her Majesty, I hold my self
bound in Duty, to certify the House thereof. And also, this Substitute stands
Indicted, as an Obstinate Recusant: Yea, when Her Majestys Name has been
spoken of, and Her Self prayed for, he has refused to stir Hat or Lip.

My humble Motion therefore is, That we may use some Caution, or Circumspective
Care, to prevent this ensuing Mischief.

Mr. Francis Bacon said: The Gentleman that last spoke, Mr. Bacon to the same
Bill, against it.
tossed so for, and against the Bill, that for my own Part, not well hearing
him, I did not well understand him. I confess the Bill, as it is, is but in few
Words; but yet Ponderous and Weighty.

For the Prerogative-Royal of the Prince: For my own Part, I ever allowed of
it; and it is such, as I hope I shall never see discussed. The Queen, as She is
our Sovereign, has both an Enlarging and Restraining Liberty of Her
Prerogative; that is, She has Power by Her Patents, to set at liberty Things
restrained, by Statute Law, or otherwise: And by Her Prerogative, She may
restrain Things that are at Liberty.

For the First: She may grant non Obstantes, contrary to the Penal Laws; which
truly, in my own Conscience, are as hateful to the Subject, as Monopolies.

For the Second: If any Man, out of his own Wit, Industry, or Endeavor, find
out any thing Beneficial for the Commonwealth, or bring any New Invention,
which every Subject of this Realm may use; yet in regard of his Pains, Travel
and Charge therein, Her Majesty is pleased (perhaps) to grant him a Privilege,
to use the same only by himself, or his Deputies, for a certain time: This is
one kind of Monopoly. Sometimes, there is a Glut of Things, when they be in
Excessive Quantities, as of Corn; and perhaps, Her Majesty gives License to one
Man, of Transportation: This is another kind of Monopoly. Sometimes there is a
Scarcity, or small Quantity; and the like is granted also.

These, and diverse of this Nature, have been in Trial, both in the
Common Pleas, upon Actions of Trespass; where, if the Judges do find the
Privilege good for the Commonwealth, they will Allow it, otherwise Disallow
it. And also, I know, That Her Majesty Her self, has given command to her
Attorney General, to bring diverse of them (since the Last Parliament) to Trial
in the Exchecquer. Since which, Fifteen or Sixteen, to my Knowledge, have been
Repealed: Some upon Her Majesty's own Express Command, upon Complaint made unto
Her by Petition; and some by Quo Warranto, in the Exchecquer.

But, Mr. Speaker, (said he, pointing to the Bill) This is no Stranger in this
Place; but a Stranger in this Vestment. The Use has been ever, by Petition to
Humble our selves to Her Majesty, and by Petition to desire to have our
Grievances redressed; especially, when the Remedy touches Her so nigh in
Prerogative. All cannot be done at once; neither was it possible, since the
Last Parliament, to repeal All. If Her Majesty makes a Patent, or a Monopoly,
to any of Her Servants; That we must go and cry out against: But if She grants
it to a Number of Burgesses, or Corporation, that must stand; and that,
forsooth, is no Monopoly.

I say, and I say again, That we ought not to deal or meddle with, or judge of
Her Majesty's Prerogative. I wish every Man therefore, to be careful in this
Point: And humbly pray this House, to testify with me, That I have discharged
my Duty, in respect of my Place, in speaking on Her Majesty's Behalf; and do
protest, I have delivered my Conscience, in saying what I have said.

Doctor Bennet said: Dr. Bennet against the Monopoly for Salt.
He that will go about to debate Her Majesty's Prerogative Royal, must walk
warily. In respect of a Grievance out of that City for which I Serve, I think
my self bound to speak That now, which I had not intended to speak before: I
mean, a Monopoly of Salt. It is an Old Proverb, Sal sapit omnia: Fire and Water
are not more Necessary. But for other Monopolies of Cards, Sir Wall. Rawleigh
Blushes.
( At which word Sir Walter Rawleigh Blushed) Dice, Starch, etc. they are,
(because Monopolies) I must confess, very Hateful, though not so Hurtful. I
know, there is a great Difference in them: And I think, if the Abuse in this
Monopoly of Salt were Particularized, this would walk in the Fore-Rank.

Now, seeing we are come to the Means of Redress, let us see it be so Mannerly
and Handsomely handled, that after a Commitment, it may have good Passage.

Mr. Laurence Hide said: Mr. Laurence Hide to the same Bill.
I confess, Mr. Speaker, That I owe Duty to God, and Loyalty to my Prince. And
for the BILL it self, I Made it; and, I think, I Understand it: And far be it
from this Heart of mine to Think, this Tongue to Speak, or this Hand to Write
any Thing in Prejudice or Derogation of Her Majesty's Prerogative Royal, and
the State. But because ye shall know this Course is no new Invention, but long
since digested in the Days of our Forefathers, above Three Hundred Years ago;
I will offer to your Considerations, one Precedent in the 50 Ed. 3. At which
time, one John Peache was Arreigned at this Bar, for that he had obtained of
the King a Monopoly for Sweet Wines: The Patent, after great Advice and
Dispute, adjudged Void; and before his Face, in open Parliament, Cancelled;
because he had Exacted Three Shillings and Four Pence, upon every Tun of Wine:
himself adjudged to Prison, until he had made Restitution of all that he ever
had Received; and not to be Delivered, till after a Fine of Five Hundred Pounds
paid to the King.

This is a Precedent worthy Observation; A notable Precedent.
but I dare not presume to say, worthy the Following. And, Mr. Speaker, as I
think it no Derogation to the Omnipotency of God, to say, He can do ill; so I
think it no Derogation to the Person or Majesty of the Queen, to say so: Yet,
because Two Eyes may see more than One, I humbly pray, That there may be a
Commitment had of this Bill, lest some thing may be therein, which may prove
the Bane and Overthrow thereof, at the Time of the Passing.

Mr. Sergeant Harries said: Mr. Speaker, For ought I see, Sergeant Harries.
the House means to have this Bill in the Nature of a Petition: It must then
begin with more Humility. And truly, Sir, the Bill is Good of it self; but the
Penning thereof, is somewhat out of Course.

Mr. Mountague said: The Matter is Good and Honest; Mr. Mountague for the Bill.
and I like this manner of Proceeding by Bill well enough, in this Matter. The
Grievances are great; and I would only note but thus much unto you, That the
Last Parliament we proceeded by way of Petition, which had no successful
Effect.

Mr. Francis Moore said: Mr. Speaker, I know the Queen's Prerogative is a Thing
curious to be dealt withal; Mr. Francis Moore.
yet all Grievances are not comparcable. I cannot utter with my Tongue, or
conceive with my Heart, the great Grievances that the Town and Country for
which I Serve, suffer by some of these Monopolies: It brings the General
Profit into a Private Hand; and the End of all, is Beggary and Bondage to the
Subject. We have a Law for the true and Faithful Currying of Leather: There is
a Patent that sets all at Liberty, notwithstanding the Statute. And to what
purpose is it, to do any thing by Act of Parliament, when the Queen will undo
the same by Her Prerogative.

Out of the Spirit of Humility, Mr. Speaker, I do speak it; There is no Act of
Hers that has been, or is more Derogatory to Her own Majesty, or more Odious
to the Subject, or more Dangerous to the Commonwealth, than the Granting of
these Monopolies.

Mr. Martin said: I speak for a Town that grieves and pines, and for a Country
that groaneth under the Burden of Monstrous and Unconscienable Substitutes, to
the Monopolitans of Starch, Mr. Martin (...)
Tynn, Fish, Cloth, Oil, Vinegar, Salt, and I know not what; nay, What not?

The Principal Commodities both of my Town and Country, are engrossed into the
Hands of these Blood-Suckers of the Commonwealth.

If a Body, Mr. Speaker, being Let Blood, be left still Languishing without any
Remedy, How can the Good Estate of that Body long remain? Such is the Estate of
my Town and Country. The Traffic is taken away by Wars; the Inward and Private
Commodities dare not be used, without License of those Monopolitans. If these
Blood suckers be still let alone, to suck up the best and principallest
Commodities, which the Earth there has given Us; What shall become of Us, from
whom the Fruits of our own Soil, and the Commodities of our own Labor, which
with the Sweat of our Brows, (even up to the Knees in Mire and Dirt) we have
labored for, shall be taken from Us by Warrant of Supreme Authority, which the
poor Subject dares not gainsay?

Sir George Moore said; Sir George Moore.
I make no Question, but that this Bill offers Good Matter; and I do wish,
that the Matter may in some other sort be Prosecuted, and the Bill Rejected.
Many Grievances have been laid open, touching the Monopoly of Salt; but if you
had added thereunto Peter, then you had hit the Grief aright, with which my
Country is perplexed. There be Three Persons; Her Majesty, the Patentee, and
the Subject: Her Majesty the Head, the Patentee the Hand, and the Subject the
Foot. Now, here is our Case; the Head gives Power to the Hand, the Hand
Oppresses the Foot, the Foot Rises against the Head.

We know the Power of Her Majesty cannot be Restrained by any Act: Why
therefore, should we thus Talk? Admit we should make the Statute with a non
Obstante; yet the Queen may grant a Patent with a non Obstante, to cross this
non Obstante.

I think therefore, That it agrees more with the Wisdom and Gravity of this
House, to proceed with all Humbleness, rather by Petition, than Bill

Mr. Wingfeild said: Mr. Wingfeild.
I would but put the House in mind of the Proceedings we had in this Matter,
the Last Parliament: In the End whereof, our Speaker moved Her Majesty by way
of Petition, That the Grief touching these Monopolies might be Respected, and
the Grievance coming of them might be Redressed. Her Majesty answered by the
Lord Keeper: That She would take care of these Monopolies; and our Griefs
should be Redressed: If not, She would give us free Liberty to Proceed, in
making a Law the next Parliament.

The Wound, Mr. Speaker, is still Bleeding; and we grieve under the Sore, and
are without Remedy. It was my Hap, the Last Parliament, to Encounter with the
word PREROGATIVE: But as Then, so Now, I do it with all Humility; and wish all
Happyness both unto It, and Her Majesty. I am indifferent, touching our
Proceedings, whether by Bill or Petition; because that therein our Grievance
may follow, whereby by Her Majesty may specially understand them.

Sir Walter Rawleigh said: I am urged to Speak, in two Respects; Sir Walter
Rawleigh.
The one, because I find my self touched in Particular; the other, in that I
take some Imputation and Slander to be offered unto Her Majesty: I mean, by the
Gentleman that first mentioned Tynn, ( which was Mr. Martin): For That being
one of the Principal Commodities of this Kingdom, and being in Cornwall, it has
ever (so long as there were any) belonged to the Dukes of Cornwall; and they had
special Patents of Privilege. It has pleased Her Majesty, freely to bestow on
Me that Privilege, and that Patent; being word for word, the very same the
Duke's is. And because, by reason of my Office of Lord-Warden of the
Stannaries, I can sufficiently inform this House of the State thereof, I will
make bold to deliver it unto you.

When the Tynn is taken out of the Mine, and Molten and Refined, then is every
Piece containing a Hundred Weight, sealed with the Duke's Seal. And by reason
of this Privilege, (which I now have) he ever had the Refusal in Buying
thereof, for the words of the Patent are, Nisi nos emere voluimus. Now I will
tell you, That before the granting of my Patent whether Tynn were but at
Seventeen Shillings, and so upward to Fifty Shillings a Hundred, yet the poor
Workman never had but Two Shillings a week, finding himself. But since my
Patent, whosoever will work, be Tynn at what price soever, they have Four
Shillings a week truly paid; there is no poor that will work there, but may,
and have that Wages. Notwithstanding, if all others may be Repealed, I will
give my Consent as freely to the Cancelling of this, as any Member of this
House.

Sir Francis Hastings said, It is a special Honor to this Assembly, to give
freedom of Speech to all; and howsoever some have been heretofore troubled, yet
I Joy to see so great Reformation, that we may speak quietly and be heard
peaceably; every man has not a like Sense or Judgment, neither is every man's
memory alike. I wish that if any Gentleman that speaks of this, or any other
Subject as curious, shall let fall any word amiss or unpleasing, that it may be
Attributed rather to earnestness, than want of Duty.

This Speech proceeded in respect of Sir Walter Rawleigh's sharp Speech; as
also of the great Silence after it.

Mr. Snigg wished a Commitment to Devise a Course.

Sir Robert Wroth wished a Commitment, in which a Course might be devised, how
Her Majesty might know our Special Griefs.

Mr. Downall said, Mr. Downall's Proposal.
As I would be no let, or over vehement in any thing, so I am not sottish or
senceless of the common Grievances of the Commonwealth.

If we proceed by way of Petition, we can have no more gracious Answer, than we
had the last Parliament to our Petitions. Since the Parliament, we have had no
Reformation. And the Reason why I think no Reformation has been had, is,
because I never heard the Cries against Monopolies greater, and more vehement.

Mr. Johnson said, Mr. Johnson's With, and good Opinion of the Queen.
Mr. Speaker, I will be very short; I say only thus much, I would we were all
so happy, That Her Majesty's Gracious Self, had heard but the fifth part of
that, that every one of us has heard this day. I think verily in my Soul, and
Conscience, we should not be more desirous in having these Monopolies called
in, than She would be earnest therein her self.

So it was put to the Question, Agreed to be Committed.
When the Commitment should be? And agreed, to morrow in the afternoon, in this
House.

Saturday, November. 21. A Bill for Explanation of the Statute made 21 Hen. 8.
Cap. (...). touching Loading, and Unloading of Merchandise; the first time Read.

A Bill for the Reducing of those which be Brewers, within the City of London,
and Suburbs thereof, and within Two Miles Compass of the same, into the said
Company of the said City.

A Bill to Enable Sir Anthony Maney, Knight, and Anthony Maney, Esquire, his
Son, to make Sale of certain Lands of John Maney, his Father, Deceased; Read
the first time.

A Bill for Levying of Fines with Proclamation, of Lands within the County of
the City of Chester; put in the Sixteenth of November, 1601. The Substance of
the Bill is; That Fines Levied before the Mayor, at the Portmoot-Court, should
be Available; and the Conusors of Fines may take by Dedimus potestat. Vide 2
Edvardi 6. Cap. (...). and 21 Hen. 7. Cap. (...).

A Bill for Fines with Proclamation, within the County of Chester.

Mr. Wingfeild brought in the Bill for Dreined Grounds.

Sir Edward Hobby said: A Gentleman, a Good Member of this House, ( Sir John
Gray) was Served with a Subpoena in Chancery, Ad Respondendum 30 Nov. ad sectam
Roberti Atkins. If no Order be taken herein, I think for my own Part, both the
House, and the Privileges thereof, will grow in Contempt. I wish, that the
Sergeant may be sent for the Party, and that some Exemplary Punishment may be
inflicted.

Mr. Doyley said: Mr. Speaker, We spend much time (which is now Precious) in
Disputing of Privileges, and other Matters of small Impertance: For my own
Part, I think no time should be spent herein; but that a Writ of Privilege may
be Granted.

Mr. Johnson said: Mr. Speaker, Our own Lenity, is the Cause of this Contempt.
And until some special Punishment be Inflicted it will not be otherwise.

Mr. Francis Moore brought in the Bill touching Sir Francis Seymor, Knight.

A Bill to avoid the deceitful Stretching, or Tentoring of Woollen Cloths,
Committed to the former Committees of Woollen Cloths.

Sir Edward Seymor's Bill was put to the Question, and Ordered to be Engrossed.

A Bill for the Erecting and making an Harbor or Key on the North-part of
Devon, in the mouth of the River Severn, was read.

Mr. Zacharias Lock said: Mr. Speaker, I am not against this Bill, it is a
Commendable piece of Work; but, Mr. Speaker, methinks the Bill yeildeth too
great scope of Fishing into the Sea; which how Prejudicial it may be to the
Office of the Lord Admiral, or to his Successors, or to the Royalty of any
other, I know not; therefore, That the Bill may have the safer Passage, I wish
it may be Considered of at a Commitment.

A Bill for the Assurance of a Jointure, to Lucy Countess of Bedford,
Committed, and the meeting to be in the Exchecquer-Chamber upon Wednesday, in
the Afternoon, at two of the Clock.

A Bill for the Observation of certain Orders in the Exchecquer, set down under
her Majesty's Privy Seal.

And the Bill to Enable Mr. Edmond Markham, to dispose of his Lands whereof he
is Tenant in Tail, as other Tenants in Tail, by the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm, may do.

The question upon the Checquer-Bill, grew, Whether before Commitment, the
Counsel of the Clerks of Mr. Osborne's Office should be had, in respect of Mr.
Wing field moved, The old Officers might be heard, by their Council.

Mr. Bacon said: I did rather yeildingly accept, than forwardly embrace this
labor imposed upon me. I Wish the Council may be heard, because we shall have
the more time of consideration, what to do. There is nothing so great an
impediment to certainty of prevailing, as have and earnestness in prosecuting;
I therefore think it fit, that they may have time Assigned them to proceed by
Council.

Mr. Martyn said: Mr. Speaker, Mr. Martyn.
Here is a new Bill sprung out of the old; it has a smooth face, and I think
the inward part of the Bill is answerable to the Exterior. I am utterly against
that they should have Council; they have had time enough already to consider of
it. If their Council be now without, it were good we heard them; if not, I hold
it best to proceed to the Question. Then the house cried, To the Question for
Commitment; and it was Committed: and it was agreed, that they should have
their Counsel there.

Then the Question was, When the Commitment should be? some said this
Afternoon, others Monday; but being put to the Question, the House was divided,
and the I, I, I, were 98, and the No's, 181. and so Monday was agreed on.

At the Commitment, in the Afternoon, touching Monopolies.

Sir Edward Stanhop informed the House, Sir Edw. Stanhop against Patentees.
of the great Abuse by the Patentee for Salt in his Country; that betwixt
Michaelmas and Saint Andrews tide, where Salt was wont, before the Patent, to
be sold for Sixteen pence a Bushel, it is now fold for Fourteen and Fifteen
shillings a Bushel; but after the Lord President had understood thereof, he
Committed the Patentee, who caused it to be sold as before. This Patent was
granted to Sir Thomas Wilks, and after to one Smith. To Lynn there is every
year brought at least Three Thousand weight of Salt: and every weight, since
this Patent, is inhanced Twenty shillings; and where the Bushel was wont to be
Eight pence, it is now Sixteen pence. And, I dare boldly say it, if this Patent
were called in, there might well be Three Thousand Pounds a year saved in the
Ports of Lynn, Boston, and Hull. I speak this of white Salt.

Mr. Francis Bacon said: Mr. Fr. Bacon against the Bill, but Moves to go by way
of Petition.
The Bill is very injurious, and ridiculous: Injurious, in that it takes, or
rather sweepeth away her Majesty's Prerogative; and Ridiculous, in that there
is a Proviso, That this Statute shall not extend to Grants made to
Corporations. That is a gull to sweeten the Bill withal, it is only to make
Fools Fond. All men of the Law know, that a Bill which is only Expository to
Expound the Common Law, does Enact nothing, neither is any Proviso good
therein. And therefore the Statute of 34. Hen. 8. of Wills, (which is but an
Act expository of the Statute of 32. Hen. 8. of Wills) touching Sir John
Bonfords Will, was adjudged void. Therefore I think the Bill unfit, and our
proceedings to be by Petition.

Mr. Solicitor Fleming said: Mr. Solicitor's Acount of the Queen's intentions.
I will briefly give you an account of all things touching these Monopolies:
Her Majesty, in her provident care, gave. Charge to Mr. Attorney and my self,
That speedy and special course, may be taken for these Patents. This was in the
beginning of Hillary-Term last. But you all know the danger of that time, and
what great Affairs of importance happened to prevent that business. Since that,
nothing could be done therein for want of Leisure.

Sir Robert Wroth said: Sir Rob. Wroth.
I would but Note, Mr. Solicitor, That you were charged to take Care in
Hillary-Term last. Why not before? There was time enough ever since the last
Parliament; I speak it, and I speak it boldly, These Patentees are worse than
ever they were. And I have heard a Gentleman affirm in this House, That there
is a Clause of Reversion in these Patents. If so, what needed this stir, by Quo
warranto, and I know not what? when it is but to send for the Patents, and
cause a redelivery.

There have been diverse Patents granted since the last Parliament; these are
now in being, viz. The Patents for Currants, Iron, Powder, Cards, Horns, Ox
Shin-bones, Train Oil, Lists of Cloth, Ashes, Bottles, Glasses, Baggs,
Shreds of Gloves, Aniseed, Vinegar, Sea-Coales, Steel, Aqua-vitae, Brushes,
Pots, Salt, Saltpeter, Lead, Accedence, Oil, Transportation of Leather,
Callamint-stone; Oil of Blubber, Fumothoes, or dried Pilchers in the smoke,
and diverse others.

Upon Reading of the Patents aforesaid, Mr. Hackwel.
Mr. Hackwell of Lincoln's Inn stood up, and asked this, Is not Bread there?
Bread, quoth another? This voice seems strange quoth a third: No quoth Mr.
Hackwell, but if order be not taken for these, Bread will be there, before the
next Parliament.

Mr. Townshend of Lincoln's Inn (the Collector of this Journal) seeing the
disagreement of the Committees, Mr. Townshend.
and that they could agree upon nothing, made a Motion to this effect: First,
to put them in mind of a Petition made the last Parliament, which though it
took no effect, we should much wrong her Majesty, and forget our selves, if we
should think to speed no better in the like Case now; because there was a
Commitment for this purpose, and the Committees drew a Speech, which was
delivered by the Speaker word for word at the end of the Parliament. But now,
we might hope, that by the sending of our Speaker, presently after such a
Committee, and Speech made, with humble Suit, not only to Repeal all Monopolies
Grievous to the Subject; but also, that it would please Her Majesty to give us
leave to make an Act, that they might be of no more force, validity or Effect,
than they are at the Common Law, without the strength of her Prerogative: which
though we might now do, and the Act being so reasonable, we did assure our
selves Her Majesty would not deny the passing thereof; yet we her Majesty's
Loyal and Loving Subjects, would not offer without Her Privity or Consent, (the
Cause so nearly touching Her Prerogative) or go about the doing of any such
Act. And also, that at the Committee, which should make this Speech, every
Member of this House, which either found Himself, his Town, or Country grieved,
might put in, in fair Writeing, such Exceptions and Monopolies as he would
justify to be true. And that the Speaker might deliver them with his own hand,
because many hindrances might happen.

Mr. Francis Bacon, after a long Speech, Mr. Bacon.
Concludes thus in the end: Why you have the readiest course that could be
possibly devised, I would wish no further Order to be taken, but to Prefer the
Wise and Discreet Speech made by the young Gentleman, even the youngest in the
Assembly, that last spoke; I Will tell you, That even ex ore Infantium and
lactantium, the true and most certain Course is propounded unto us.

So the House parted, and agreed to meet on Monday in the afternoon; at which
time, all the said Matters passed.

Sunday November 22.

Monday November 23. An Act to Restrain the Abuse in Tayntoring, and other
Abuses in Clothing.

The Bill for Hospitals, was this day read.

A Bill for Dreining of Grounds and Fenns, preferred by Mr. Wingfeild.

The Bill for Mr. Markham was brought in: And for as much as the Purport of the
Bill seemed to the Committees to be dangerous, to the Disinheriting of the
Children of the first Wife of the said Mr. Markham; therefore the Committee
thought the Bill, in Equity, unfit to be Passed, and without Amendment have
returned it to the House.

The Bill for enabling of Anthony Manley, Esquire, to sell certain Lands, this
Day Read, and Ordered to be Committed.

There was a Gentleman that sat by me, which showed me a Paper, in which was
contained the Discommodity of diverse Patents, called Monopolies. First, of
Steel, where it has been sold to Mr. Rowland Heyward in London, in former
times, for Twelve Pounds, Inconveniences arising from the Monopolies, in
raising the Prices of several Goods.
Ten Shillings the Barrel; it is now sold for Nineteen Pounds. Besides, it is
mixed, and worse than the Steel in former times; and where it has been but at
Two Pence Halfpenny the Pound, before the Patent, it is now at Five Pence the
Pound. And where Two Thousand Poor people were maintained, by Working of Steel,
and Edge-Tooles, and might well live by Working thereof at Two Pence Halfpenny
the Pound, they are now not able, by reason of the Price thereof, to work; but
now many go a Begging, because the Faggot has also less Weight, to the utter
undoing of all Edge-Toole-Makers.

Of Starch: Where other Countries have heretofore spent their Corn and Fuel in
making of it, and we had it then at Eighteen Shillings a Hundred Weight, and
Her Majesty Received great Custom thereby; now do we spend Corn and Fuel
extraordinary in making thereof, which might well be spared, and it is now at
Fifty and Fifty Six Shillings a Hundred; and her Majesty has great loss of her
Customs, by making it within the Realm.

Playing Cards: Every Subject that would, before the Patent, might make them,
which was a great help to those that were brought up in the Trade. And where in
former times they were sold at Twenty Pence a Dozen, now they are at Three
Shillings, and three Shillings Two Pence the Dozen. And before, every Subject
might see what he bought, and make choice to his liking. Now they are Sealed,
and no Man can see what he Buys. Besides, the Deputies and Substitutes of
these Patentees, will search Houses by force of Letters of Assistance, of Lords
of the Privy-Councel, under Color of Cards being there. And if they find a
pair or two, they will carry Men by some Pursuivant Fifty Miles or more; and
threaten them by Imprisonment, if they will not Ransom themselves by a Ransom
of Money.

Stone-Bottles, Pots, Heath-Brushes, are double and treble the Price they were
at, before the Patent.

Glasses; Where before they were had from beyond the Seas, and very cheap, with
much Saving of Wood; they are now risen from Sixteen Pence to Five Shillings
the Dozen, and from Three Shillings Four Pence, to Nine Shillings, Besides the
loss of Custom to her Majesty, and expense of many Thousands of Billets, every
Twenty Four Hours. This Patent is a great discouragement to the Masters of
Ships, because the Substitutes of the Patentees will Imprison them, until they
will become bound to bring no Glasses from beyond the Sea. Besides, there is
continual spoil of Woods in Sussex, and elsewhere by Glassmaking.

Beere-Eager, Vinegar, Aqua-Vitae, be it never so bad, if the Patentee has his
Imposition, it passes for good: The like for Sea-Coals, Salt, Ordnance, Tinn,
Leather, and Wines.

A Bill for the true Making of Cloth; after it was once Read, A Bill for true
Making of Cloth.
one stood up, and said:

Mr. Speaker, I think this Bill both Idle and Injurious; Idle, One opposes it.
in respect that a Number of Bills are to the same Effect already: Injurious,
in that it lays a greater Tax upon every Piece of Cloth, than Her Majesty's
Custom desires.

We are all here like Physicians; who, when they are to minister Physic to the
Sick Patient, and have many Simples before them, be Distracted, and make a
Mixture of so many, that they Kill the Patient: So we, Mr. Speaker, if by good
Providence we look not to it, shall not Redress the waining and decrepid Estate
of Clothing, if we do not at a Commitment, carefully consider of all the Bills.
There are now Five of these Bills, concerning Clothing: And I pray also, This,
with the rest may be committed to the former Committees, to consider of.

The Bill of Monopolies was read; to which, Mr. Spicer spoke, and said:

I think it were good this Bill were Committed. I am no Apostate, but I stick
to my former Faith; and upon that, asserted the first Faith I was of, That by
way of Petition will be our safest Course: For it is to no purpose, to offer to
tie Her Majesty's Hands by way of Act of Parliament, when She may loose Her
Self at Her Pleasure. I think it were a Course nec Gratum, nec Tutum; and
therefore, the best Way, to have a Committee to consider what Course shall be
proceeded in: For I doubt not, but that we are all Agreed on the Reformation,
though not on the Manner.

Mr. Davies said: God has given Power to Absolute Princes, which he
Attributes to Himself; Dixi quod Dii estis: Mr. Davies.
And, as Attributes unto them, he has given them Majesty, Justice, and Mercy.
Majesty, in respect of the Honor that the Subject shows unto his Prince.
Justice, in respect he can do no Wrong: Therefore, the Law is, 1 Hen. 7. That
the King cannot commit a Disseisin. Mercy, in respect he gives Leave to his
Subjects, to Right themselves by Law. And therefore, in the 44 Ass. an
Indictment was brought against Bakers and Brewers; for that, by color of
License, they had broken the Assize: Wherefore, according to that Precedent, I
think it most fit to Proceed by Bill, and not by Petition.

Mr. Secretary Cecil said: Secretary Cecil against the Bill.
If there had not been some Mistaking, or Confusion in the Committee, I would
not have now spoken. The Question was, Of the most convenient Way to Reform
these Grievances of Monopolies. But, after Disputation of that Labor, we have
not Received the expected Fruit.

If every Man should take Leave to Speak for the Common Subject, I am afraid,
in these vast Powers of our Minds, we shall Dispute the Project and Reformation
quite out of Doors.

This Dispute draws Two great Things in question: First, The Prince's Power.
Secondly, The Freedom of Englishmen. I am Born an Englishman, and a
Fellow-Member of this House; I would desire to Live no Day, in which I should
Detract from Either.

I am Servant to the Queen; and before I would speak, or give my consent to a
Case that should debase Her Prerogative, or abridge it, I would wish my Tongue
cut out of my Head. I am sure there were Lawmakers, before there were Laws.

One Gentleman went about to possess Us with the Execution of the Law, in an
Ancient Record of 50 Edvardi 3. Likely enough to be True in that Time, when the
King was afraid of the Subject. Though this Presence be a Substance, yet it is
not the whole Substance of the Parliament; For in former Times, all Sat
together; as well King, as Subjects: And then, it was no Prejudice to His
Prerogative, to have such a Monopoly Examined.

If you stand upon Law, and dispute of the Prerogative, hark what Bracton
says; He gives the Speaker a Caution.
Prerogativam nostram nemo audeat Disputare, etc.

For my own Part, I like not these Courses should be taken. And you, Mr.
Speaker, should perform the Charge Her Majesty gave unto you at the Beginning
of this Parliament, Not to receive Bills of this Nature. For Her Majesty's Ears
be open to all our Grievances, and Her Hands stretched out to every Man's
Petition.

For the Matter of Access, I like it well, so it be first moved, and the Way
prepared. I had rather all the Patents were burnt, than Her Majesty should lose
the Hearts of so many Subjects, as is pretended She will.

I will tell you what I think of these Monopolies; I take them to be of Three
Natures: Some of a Free Nature, and Good; some Void of themselves; some both
Good, and Void.

For the First; For the Prince to Dispense with Penal Laws: That is left to the
Alteration of Sovereignty; I mean, Powerful and Irrevocable.

For the Second: As to grant that which takes from the Subject his
Birthright; and such Men as desire such Patents, I count them Misdoers, and
wicked and wilful Offenders.

For the Third: As the License for the Matter of Cards, etc. And therefore, I
think it very fit to have a New Commitment, to consider what Her Majesty may
grant, and what not; And what Course we shall take, and upon what Points, etc.

Dr. Stanhop, and Dr. Hone, were sent from the Lords with a Bill, Entitled, An
Act for the Uniting of Eye and Dunsden, to the Manor of Sunning.

Mr. Mountague said: Mr. Speaker, Mr. Mountague.
I am loath to Speak what I know, lest perhaps I should Displease. The
Prerogative Royal is that which is now in question, and which the Laws of the
Land have ever allowed and maintained. My Motion then shall be but this: That
We may be Suitors unto Her Majesty, That the Patentees shall have no other
Remedies, than by the Laws of the Realm they may have; and that our Act may be
drawn accordingly.

Mr. Martin said: I think the Common Grievance, Mr. Martin.
and the Queen's Prerogative, have so Inspired the Gentleman that last spoke,
(whom for Reverence sake, I must needs name, Mr. Mountague) to make that Motion
he has done. And because the House seems greatly to Applaud it, may it please
you, Mr. Speaker, to put it to the Question, Whether that shall be Determined
of, at the Committee.

So it was again Committed to the Afternoon; and agreed, That as well That, as
Mr. Secretary's Motion, should be Determined upon by the said Committee.

Mr. Francis Moore brought in a New Bill against Pluralities of Benefices, with
the same Title as the former.

At the Committee in the Afternoon, touching Monopolies.

A List of certain Monopolies, and to whom Granted.
A Gentleman showed me a Note of certain Monopolies, and to whom Granted; viz.

1. To Sir Henry Nevill, the Patent for Ordnance. 2. To Simon Farmor, the
Patent for Lists, Shreads, and Horns to be Transported. 3. To Henry Noell, the
Patent for Stone-Pots and Bottles. 4. To Brian Ansley, the Patent for Steel. 5.
To Elizabeth Matthews, the Patent of Oil of Blubber. 6. To Richard Drake, the
Patent for Aqua-Composita, and Aqua-Vitae. 7. To Michael Stanhopp, the Patent
for Spanish-Wools. 8. To Thomas Cornwallis, a License to keep unlawful Games.
9. To Mr. Carr, a Patent for Brewing of Beer to be Transported. 10. To John
Spillman, a Patent to make Paper. 11. To Edward Darcy, a Patent for Cards. 12.
To Mr. John Packington, a Patent for Starch. 13. To Sir Walter Rawleigh, a
Patent for Wines.
The Patent for Bottles, was lately made void by Judgment in the Exchecquer.

Mr. Davies moved the House first: Mr. Davies.
That he for his part, thought the Proceeding by Bill to be most Convenient;
for the Precedent in the 50 Edvardi 3. warranteth the same: And therefore, let
us do Generously and Bravely, like Parliament- Men; and our selves send for
Them, and their Patents, and Cancel them before their Faces; Arreign them, as
in times past, at the Bar, and send them to the Tower; there to remain, until
they have made a good Fine to the Queen, and made some part of Restitution to
some of the Poorest that have been oppressed by them. And withal, Laughed.

Mr. Martin, Mr. Martin.
after a long Speech made, touching these Monopolies, he thus concluded: And
therefore, the Gentleman that last spoke, spoke most Honestly, Learnedly, and
Stoutly. Yet thus much I must needs say, His Zeal has masked his Reason; and
that, I think, was the Cause of his fervent Motion; which I desire may be
cooled with a Petition, in most dutiful Manner, and humblest Terms, most
fitting to the Majesty of the Queen, and the Gravity of this House. So, I doubt
not, but our Actions will have prosperous, and successful Event.

Mr. Secretary Cecil read a Paper of Three or Four Sheets openly, Secretary
Cecil reads a List of Patentees, and their several Patents.
of all the Patents granted since 16 Reginae. And first he read, in the 17th.
of the Queen, A Patent to Robert Spark, to make Spangles, and Owes of Gold.

18 Reginae, A Patent to Sir Edward Dier, To Pardon, Dispense, and Release all
Forfeitures and Abuses committed by Tanners, contrary to the Statute.

19 Reginae, A Patent to William VVade, Esquire, and aliis, For the making of
Sulphur, Brimstone, and Oil.

A Patent to James Chambers, To give License for Tanning, contrary to the
Statute.

30 Reginae, A Patent to Sir Walter Rawleigh, of Tonnage and Poundage of
VVines.

To John Ashley, and aliis, A Patent, For Benefit of Forfeiture of Buying of S
--.

To William Watkins, The List of Patents, and Patentees.
and aliis, A Patent, To Print Almanacks.

A Patent to -- To Print David's Psalms.

A Patent to one Kirk, and aliis, To take the Benefit of Sowing Flax and Hemp.

A Patent to Richard Welsh, To Print the History of Cornelius Tacitus.

A Patent to (...) To Transport Iron and Tynn.

A Patent to John Norden, To Print Speculum Brittaniae.

A Patent to -- To Print the Psalms of David, according to the Hebrew-Text.

A Patent to certain Merchants, To Traffic.

A Patent to Sir Jerome Bows, To make Glasses.

A Patent to (...) To Provide and Transport Lists and Shreds.

Anno 35 Reginae, A Patent to Henry Noell, To make Stone-Pots, etc.

A License to William Aber, To Sow Six Hundred Acres of Ground with Oade.

A Patent to Mr. Heal, To provide Steel beyond the Seas.

A Patent to (...) To have One Shilling upon ever Hogshead of Pilchards.

A Patent to (...) To have the Benefit of Forfeiture by Gigmills.

A Patent to Elizabeth Mathews, For Train-Oyl of Blubber.

A Patent to Richard Drake, For Aqua-Composita, Aqua-Vitae, Vinegar, and Alegar.

A Patent to Robert Alexander, For Aniseeds.

A Patent to Edward Dacry, For Steel.

A Patent to Michael Stanhop, For Spanish-Wools.

A Patent to Valentine Harris, To Sow Six Hundred Acres of Ground with Woade.

A Patent to (...) To take Benefit of the Statute for Gashing of Hides, etc.

A Patent to Mr. Cornwallis, For unlawful Games.

A Patent to Henry Singer, Touching Printing of School-Books.

A License to Arthur Bassaney, To Transport Six Thousand Calf-Skins.

A Patent to Edward Darcy, To Provide, Bring, Make, and Utter Cards.

A Patent to Thomas Morley, To Print Songs in Parts.

A Patent to Sir John Packeington, For Starch and Ashes.

A Patent to (...) To make Mathematical Instruments.

A Patent to (...) To make Saltpeter.

A Patent to Thomas Wight, and Bonham Norton, To Print the Law Books.

A Patent to (...) For Livers of Fishes.

A Patent to (...) For Polldavis, for Fishing.

After the Reading of which Note, nothing was Concluded upon; but a Meeting
appointed on Tuesday in the Afternoon.

Tuesday, November. 24. A Bill declaring the Lordship of Llandan, alias
Llandaugher, to be within the County of Carmarthin, was Read the second time,
and Committed; and the Time and Place appointed for their Meeting, to be to
Morrow in the Afternoon, in the Middle-Temple-Hall.

A Bill to Enable Edward Moleneux, Esquire to sell Lands for the Payment of Debts
and Legacies.

A Bill for Painting, was Read and Committed.

A Motion was made by Mr. Doyley of Lincoln's Inn, That before Mr. Moleneux's
Bill was put to the Question, his Council for the Passage thereof, might be
Heard; as also, Mr. Moleneux himself, (a Councellor of Gray's Inn) who came to
spoke against the Bill. And they were admitted to the Bar to speak; where it
was alleged against the Bill, by the said Mr. Moleneux of Gray's Inn; That it
was drawn of purpose to Defeat himself, and his Brother, and a few
Children-Infants, and Fatherless; which could not be Answered by Mr. Hitcham,
of Council with the other Moleneux for the Bill: Which Reason quashed it. And
so, after they were put out, the Bill was put to the Question for Engrossing;
and the greater Voice was, No. So it was Rejected.

Sir Francis Hastings brought in the Bill against Alehouses, and
Tippling-Houses.

Sir Edmund Morgan, a Member of this House, was served with a Subpoena, at the
Suit of one Lemney; who was sent for by the Sergeant.

Mr. Pemberton, another Member of this House, was also served with a Subpoena,
at the Suit of one Mackernes; who was also sent for by the Sergeant.

A Bill to prevent Double-Payment of Debts, upon Shop-Books.

Mr. Phillips, Mr. Phillips shows the Danger of an Old Statute, touching
Charatable Uses.
showed the Great danger that might ensue, by the Statute made 39 Reginae, Cap.
6. Entitled, An Act touching Charitable Uses: which Statute was made to a good
intent; but yet it may tend to the setting a Foot, in all the Monasteries in
old time, and other Religious Houses, as also to the searching into the estate
of diverse particular Subjects, in this Realm: First, In respect of the Title;
Secondly, In respect of the Preamble; Thirdly, In respect of the Body; And
Fourthly, In respect of the Conclusion, which appeared somewhat plain to the
House, upon the Recital of the words of the Statute: And therefore, he thought
it a Duty in Conscience, to offer to the Consideration of this House, a Bill
entitled, An Act to Explain the true Meaning of the Statute made 39 Reginae,
cap. 6. Which was presently Read.

After some loud Confusion in the House, touching some Private Murmur
concerning Monopolies;

Mr. Secretary Cecil said: Secretary Cecil about Monopolies.
The Duty I owe, and my Zeal to Exstinguish Monopolies, makes me to Speak now,
to satisfy their Opinions that think there shall be no Redress of these
Monopolies.

Order is Attended with these Two Handmaids, Gravity and Zeal; but Zeal with
Discretion. I have been, though Unworthy, a Member of this House, in Six or
Seven Parliaments; yet never did I see the House in so great Confusion.

I believe, there was never, in any Parliament, a more tender Point handled,
than the Liberty of the Subject, and the Prerogative Royal of the Prince: What
an Indignity then is it to the Prince, and Injury to the Subject, that when any
is Discussing this Point, he should be Cried and Coughed down? This is more fit
for a Grammar School, than a Parliament. I have been a Councellor of State
these Twelve Years; yet never did I know it subject to Construction of Levity
or Disorder: Much more ought we to be, in so Great and Grave an Assembly. Why?
we have had Speeches, and Speech upon Speech, without either Order or
Discretion.

One would have had us to proceed by Bill, and see if the Queen would have
denied it. Another, that the Patents-should be brought here before Us, and
Cancelled; and this were Bravely done. Others would have Us to proceed by way
of Petition; which of Both, doubtless is Best.

But for the First, ( and especially, for the Second) It is so Ridiculous, that
I think, We should have had as bad Success, as the Devil himself would have
wished in so good a Cause. Why? If Idle Courses had been followed, we should
have gone (forsooth) to the Queen, with a Petition to have Repealed a Patent or
Monopoly of Tobacco-Pipes [Which Mr. Wingfeild's Note had] and I know not how
many Conceits.

But I wish every Man to rest satisfied, until the Committees have brought in
their Resolutions, according to your Commandments.

A Bill for making the Parks of Noblemen, and Gentlemen of the Realm, for the
Keeping and Breeding of Horses.

Wednesday, November. 25. A Bill for Enlarging a Branch of the Statute of 25
Eliz. Cap. 8. touching Gashing of Hides.

A Bill concerning the Assize of Fuel.

A Bill for the Levying of Fines with Proclamation, of Lands within the County
of the City of Chester.

A Bill for the Re-uniting of Eye and Dunsden, to the Manor of Sunning; read
the first Time.

A Bill For the enabling of Edward Nevil, of Burling in the County of Kent Esquire
and of Sir Henry Nevil his Son and Heir Apparent, to sell certain
Coppy-hold-Lands.

This Act was brought in after Commitment, by Sir Edward Hobby, who at the
delivery thereof, showed to the House, That they had put out Esquire in the Title,
in respect that they would not leave such a Title as Esquire for a Monument of
Record in Parliament, lest perhaps, it might in After-ages be a prejudice to
the Title of the Lord Abergaveny. Also we have (said he) left out all other
Words, and Clauses touching that Point. As also have added a Proviso, For
saving of the Right of the two Mr. Vanes, Sons to the Lady Vane, because the
Elder of them lays Title to the Barony. And thus they both being at the
Committee, with their Council, have given consent to the Bill: The Gentlemen
are both in the House, and can testify as much.

Therefore, I think it good, it were put to the Question for Engrossing. And so
it was; and all said, I, I, I.

The Exchecquer-Bill was read.

The Bill against Trifling Suits, was put to the Question. And ordered to be
Engrossed.

The Bill to prevent Perjury and Subordination of Perjury, and unnecessary
expenses of Suits in Law.

A Bill to prevent the double Payment of Debts upon Shop-Books, which was put
to the Question for the Engrossing. And most said No.

Mr. Speaker, after a Silence (and every one marvailing why the Speaker stood
up) spoke to this Effect:
The Speaker delivers a Message from the Queen.
It pleased Her Majesty to command me to attend upon Her Yesterday in the
Afternoon: From whom, I am to deliver unto you all, Her Majesty's most gracious
Message, sent by my unworthy self.

She yeildeth you all hearty thanks, for your care, and special regard of those
things that concern Her State and Kingdom, and Consequently our selves; whose
Good She has always tendered as Her own: For our speedy Resolution in making
so hasty and free a Subsidy; which commonly succeeded and never went before our
Councels.

For our Loyalty, I will assure you, with such and so great Zeal of Affection
She uttered, and showed the same, that to express it with our Tongues we are
not able, neither our Hearts to conceive it. It pleased Her Majesty to say unto
me, That if She had an Hundred Tongues, She could not express our hearty good
Wills: And further, She said, That as She had ever held our Good, most dear; so
the last Day of ours, or Her Life, should Witness it. And that if the least of
Her Subjects were Grieved, and Her self not Touched, She appealed to the Throne
of Almighty God; how careful She has been, and will be to defend Her People
from all Oppression.

She said, That partly by Intimation of Her Council, and partly by diverse
Petitions that have been Delivered unto Her, both going to Chapel, and also
Walking abroad; She understood, That diverse Patents that She had granted, were
grievous unto Her Subjects, and that the Substitutes of the Patentees, had used
great Oppression. But, She said, She never assented to Grant any thing that was
Malum in se. And if in the Abuse of Her Grant, there be any thing that is Evil,
which She took Knowledge there was, She, Her self, would take present Order for
Reformation thereof.

I cannot Express unto you, the apparent indignation of Her Majesty, toward
these Abuses. She said, Her Kingly Prerogative was tender, and therefore
desires us not to speak or doubt of Her careful Reformation. For, She said,
her Commandment given a little before the late Troubles ( meaning the Earl of
Essex's Matters) by the unfortunate event of them, was not so hindered, but that
since that time, even in the midst of Her most weighty and great Occasions, She
thought upon them. And that this should not Suffice, but that further Order
should be taken presently, and not In futuro. (For that also was a Word which I
take it, Her Majesty used) and that some should presently be Repealed, some
Suspended, and not put in Execution: but such as should first have a Trial
according to the Law, for the Good of Her People.

Against the Abuses, Her Wrath was so Incensed, that, She said, She neither
would, nor could suffer such to escape with Impunity.

So to my unspeakable Comfort, She has made me the Messenger of this Her
gracious thankfulness, and care.

Now we see, that the Axe of Her Princely Justice is put to the Root of the
Tree. And so we see Her Gracious goodness has prevented our Councels, and
Consultations; for which God make us thankful, and send her long, and long to
Reign amongst us.

If through my own Weakness of Memory, Want of Utterance, and Frailty of my
self, I have omitted any thing of Her Majesty's Commands, I do most humbly
crave pardon for the same; And do beseech, the Honorable Persons, which do
assist this Chair, and were present before her Majesty, at the Delivery hereof,
to supply and help my Imperfections, which, joined with my Fear, have caused
me, no doubt, to forget something that I should have Delivered unto you.

After a little Pause and Silence, the Council talking one with another, Mr.
Secretary Cecil stood up, and said.

There needs no Supply of the Memory of the Speaker; Secretary Cecil Speaks to
the same purpose.
but because he desires some-that be about him, to aid his Delivery, and
because the rest of my Fellows be Silent; I will take upon me to Deliver
something, which I both then heard and since know.

I was present with the rest of my Fellow-Councellours, and the Message was the
same, that has been told you. And the cause has not proceeded from any
particular course thought upon, but upon private Information of some particular
Persons. I have been very Inquisitive after them, and of the Cause, why more
importunity was now used, than before; which I am afraid comes by being
acquainted with some course of our Proceeding in this House.

There are no Patents now of Force, which shall not presently be revoked; for
what Patent soever is Granted, there shall be left, to the overthrow of that
Patent, a Liberty agreeable to the Law. There is no Patent, but if it be Malum
in se, the Queen was ill apprised in Her Grant; but all to the generality are
unacceptable. I take it, there is no Patent whereof the Execution thereof, has
been Injurious; would that had never been Granted. I hope there shall never be
more. (All the House said, Amen.)

In particular, most of these Patents have been supported with Letters of
Assistance from Her Majesty's Privy Council; but whosoever look upon them, they
shall find they carry no other Style than with Relation to the Patent. I dare
assure you, that from henceforth there shall be no more Granted; and how many
soever have been already Granted, they shall all be revoked.

But, to whom do they repair with these Letters? To some out-house, to some
desolate Widow, to some simple Cottage, or poor ignorant People; who rather
than they would be troubled, and undo themselves by coming up hither, they will
give any thing in Reason for these Caterpillars Satisfaction. The Notice of
this, is now public. And you will, perhaps, judge this to be a Tale to serve
the Time. But I would have all Men know thus much, That it is no jesting with a
Court of Parliament; neither dares any Man (for mine own part I dare not) so
much abuse all the Subjects of this Kingdom, in a Matter of this Consequence
and importance.

I say therefore, there shall be a Proclamation general through the Realm, to
notify Her Majesty's Resolution in this behalf. And because you may Eat your
Meats more Savourly than you have done; every Man shall have Salt as cheap as
he can buy it, or make it, freely without danger of that Patent, which shall be
peresently Revoked. The same Benefit shall they have which have cold Stomachs
both for Aqua-Vitae, and the like: And they which have weak Stomachs, shall
have Vinegar and Aleagar set at Liberty: Train-Oil shall go the same Way; Oil
of Blubber shall March in the same Rank: Brushes and Bottles endure the like
Judgment. The Patent for Polldavis, if it be not called in, it shall be. Oade,
which as I take it, is not restrained either by Law or Statute, but only by
Proclamation (I mean from the Sowing thereof) though, for the saving thereof,
it might receive good Disputation; yet for your Satisfaction, the Queen's
Pleasure is, to revoke that Proclamation: Only She Prays thus much, That when
She comes in Progress to see you in the Country, She may not be driven out of
your Towns, by suffering it to infect the Air too near them. Those that desire
to go Sprucely in their Ruffs, may with less charge than Accustomed, obtain
their Wish; for Starch, which has so much been Prosecuted, shall now be
Repealed. There are other Patents for new Drapery, which shall be suspended,
and lest to Law: Irish-Yarn, a Matter that I am sorry there is no cause of
Complaint for; for the Savageness of the People, and the War, has Frustrated
the Hope of the Patentee, a Gentleman of good Service, and Desert, a good
Subject to Her Majesty, and a good Member of the Commonwealth (Mr.
Carmarthen;) notwithstanding, it shall be suspended and left to the Law. The
Patent for Calf-Skins, and Pelts, shall endure the Censure of the Law.

But I must tell you, There is no Reason that all should be Revoked; for the
Queen means not to be swept out of Her Prerogative: I say it shall be
suspended, if the Law does not warrant it. There is another Servant of her
Majesty's, (Mr. Anslow) one of Her Pensioners, an Honest Gentleman, and a
Faithful Servant; he has the Patent for Steel, which once Mr. Beal had; these,
too, because of Complaints shall be suspended. There is another, that has the
Patent of Leather, Sir Edward Dier, a Gentleman of good Desert, Honest,
Religious, and Wise. This was Granted unto him Thirty Years ago, it crept not
in by the new Mis-government of the Time; yet this shall also be suspended. The
Patent for Cards shall be suspended, and Tried by Common Law. The Patent for
Glasses, which though I do least apprehend to be prejudicial to the Public
Good; yet it is to be left to the Law. There is another Patent for Saltpeter,
that has been both Accused and Slandered: It digs in every Man's House; it
removes the Inhabitant, and generally troubles the Subject. For this, I
beseech you, be Contented; yet I know, I am too blame to desire it, being
Condemned by you in foro Conscientiae: But I assure you, it shall be fully
sifted, and tried in foro Judicii. Her Majesty means to take this Patent to
Her self; and advise with Her Council, concerning the same: For, I must tell
you, The Kingdom is not so well furnished with Powder, as it should be. But, if
it be thought fit (upon Advice) to be Cancelled, Her Majesty commanded me to
tell you, That though She be willing to help the grave Gentleman that has that
Patent; yet out of the abundant Desire that She has, to give you complete
Satisfaction, it shall be Repealed.

This has come to the Ear of the Queen, and I have been most Earnest to search
for the Instrument; and as a Councellor of State, have done my best Endeavor
to salve this Sore: But I fear, we are not secret amongst our selves. Then must
I needs give you This, for a future Caution; That whatsoever is subject to a
Public Exposition, cannot be Good. Why, Parliament-Matters are ordinarily
Talked of in the Streets. I have heard my self, being in my Coach, these Words
spoken aloud: God prosper those that further the Overthrow of these Monopolies!
God send the Prerogative touch not our Liberty.

I will not wrong any so much, as to imagine he was of this House; yet let me
give you this Note, That the Time was never more apt to Disorder, or make Ill
Interpretations of Good Meanings. I think those Persons would be glad that all
Sovereignty were Converted into Popularity: We being here, are but the Popular
Bouch, and our Liberty, the Liberty of the Subject; and the World is apt to
slander, most especially the Ministers of Government.

Thus much have I spoken, to accomplish my Duty, due unto Her Majesty; but not
to make any further Performance of the well-utter'd, and gravely and
truly-deliver'd Speech of the Speaker.

But, I must crave your Favors a little longer, to make an Apology for my
self. I have held the Favor of this House, as dear as my Life: And I have been
told, That I deserved for taxing Yesterday of the House. I protest, my Zeal to
have the Business go forwards in a right and hopeful Course, and my Fear to
displease Her Majesty by a harsh and rash Proceeding, made me so much to lay
aside my Discretion, that I said, It might rather be termed a School, than a
Council; or to that Effect.

But, if any think by this Speech, I called him Schoolboy, he both Wrongs me,
and Mistakes me Shall I tell you what Demosthenes said to the Clamours which
the Athenians made? That they were Pueriles and dignos Pueris: And yet, that
was a Popular State. And, I wish, that whatsoever is here spoken, may be Buried
in these Walls. Let us take Example by the Jewish Synagogue, who would always
Sepelire Senatum cum Honor; and not blaze their own Follies and Imperfections.
If any Man in this House speak Wisely, we do him great wrong to Interrupt him:
If Foolishly, let us hear him out; we shall have the more Cause to Tax him. And
I do heartily pray, That no Member of this House, may Plus verbis offendere,
quam Concilio Juvare.



Mr. Francis Moore said: Mr. Fr. Moore.
I must confess, Mr. Speaker, I moved the House both the Last Parliament, and
This, touching this Point; but I never meant (and I hope, this House thinks
so) to set Limits and Bounds to the Prerogative Royal.

But now, seeing it has pleased Her Majesty of Her Self, out of the Abundance
of Her Princely Goodness, to set at Liberty Her Subjects, from the Thraldom of
these Monopolies; from which there was no City, Town, or Country free: I would
be bold to offer in one Motion, Two Considerations to the House.

The First, That Mr. Speaker might go unto Her Majesty, to yield Her most
Humble and Hearty Thanks; and withal, to show the Joy of Her Subjects for their
Delivery, and Thankfulness unto Her for the same.

The Other, Whereas diverse Speeches have been made Extravagantly in this House,
which doubtless have been told Her Majesty; and perhaps, all ill Conceived of
by Her: I would therefore, that Mr. Speaker not only should satisfy Her
Majesty, by way of Apology therein; but also, humbly crave Pardon for the same.

Mr. Wingfeild said: Mr. Wingfeild.
My Heart is not able to conceive the Joy that I feel; and, I assure you, my
Tongue cannot utter the same. If a Sentence of Everlasting Happiness had been
Pronounced unto me, it could not have made me show more outward Joy, than now I
do; which I cannot refrain here to Express, (And, as I think, he Wept.) There
could nothing have been more Acceptable to the Subject, than this Message. And
I verily think, That if ever any of Her Majesty's Words were Meritorious before
God, I do think these are.

I do agree, with all my Heart, in the First Part of the Gentleman's Motion,
that last spoke; but do utterly mislike the Latter: For, it is not to be
intended, we should have had so Good and Gracious a Message, if the Truth of
some particular Speeches had been delivered unto Her. And now, for us to Accuse
our selves, by Excusing a Fault with which we are not Charged, were a thing (in
my Opinion) inconvenient, and unfitting the Wisdom of this House.

Sir George Moore spoke to the same Effect.

Mr. Francis Bacon spoke to the same Effect also; Mr. Fr. Bacon.
and in the End concluded thus, Nescio quid peccati portet haec Purgatio.

So it was put to the Question, and concluded, That Thanks should be Returned
by the Speaker; and some a Dozen were named to go with him, as a conveniet
Number; and Entreaty made to the Privy-Councellors, to obtain Liberty of Her
Majesty, to be Admitted.

A Bill for the Mending of the Statute made 8 Eliz. cap. 11. Entitled, An Act
for the true Making of Hats and Caps; Read the second Time, and Committed: The
Committee to meet at the Middle-Temple-Hall, on Saturday in the Afternoon.

A Bill limitting what Persons shall Make, Dye, and Retail Colored Clothes.

A Bill for the Furnishing Her Majesty's Navy-Royal, with good and sufficient
Cordage, Read: The Substance of this Bill was the same with that the Bill of
Hemp was, which has been once Rejected this Parliament; and it has a
Limitation, to endure to the End of the next Parliament.

After a Speech made by Mr. Fettyplace, and Mr. Johnson of Gray's Inn (The
First, For the Bill; the Other, Against it) Mr. Johnson said: Mr. Speaker, Old
Parliament- Men say, A Bill once cast out, should not be read again. This Bill
is the very same we once cast out; and I think it were very good, this Bill
marched, Pari pede, with the Former.

Mr. Comptroller showed, How necessary Cordage was to the Land, and also Flax
and Hemp; which we might have in our own Land, if it happened, that Intercourse
of Traffic were hindered in other Countries: And therefore, he wished, That a
Bill of this Nature might not so slightly be Rejected; but, that it might be
once again Read, and Committed.

The House upon this Bill, was Divided: The I, I, I, were 70, the No's, 102.

The Bill for Landonerer.

Mr Secretary Cecil said: Secretary Cecil.
If I should tell you otherwise than Truth, in a Matter of so great
Consequence, I should need no other Process, than my own Conscience. That to so
gracious a Message, there were never returned more Infinite Thanks, we all are
assured. From the Queen, I have received a short Answer, in these words: You
can give Me no more Thanks for that which I have promised You, than I can and
will give You Thanks for that which You have already Performed, (Meaning the
Subsidies and Fifteens.) So inseparably are the Qualities of the Prince, and
the Subject, good for the one and the other. If by true Interpretation of the
Law, Voluntas Reputatur pro facto, You shall not need (your Good Will being
already known) use any Actual Thanks; neither will She receive any, till by a
more effectual Consummation, she has Completed that Work. At that time, she
will be well pleased to receive your Loves, with Thanks; and to return You Her
best Favors.

A Bill for the Granting of Four Subsidies, and Eight Fifteens.

Friday, November. 27. The Bill for Norwich was Read, and Committed; the Place of
Meeting, the Exchecquer-Chamber, on Monday in the Afternoon.

Sir Francis Hastings said: I cannot find a better time, after so good a Bill,
Sir Francis Hastings.
For the Maintenance of the Word in Preaching, than to move unto you a good
Course for the Maintenance of Hearing.

He that seeks to please All, shall please None; and he that seeks to
please All in God's Cause, shall not please a Good Conscience. There is a
Necessity, if the Queen's Will so be, that this Bill should be Preferred: For
Religion is the Mother of Obedience.

Four Exceptions have been taken to the Bill: That the Husband should not pay
for the Wife, nor the Father for the Son, nor the Master for the Servant: And,
That Recusants that pay the Penalty of Twenty Pound the Month, by Force of the
Statute 23 Reginae, should not be included: All these Penalties are now
Excluded.

I know some Half-Parishes, I would I could not say some Whole-Parishes,
perverted by Jesuits, and Seminaries: These be of the poorer, and meaner sort
of People; of whom this small Tax of Twelve Pence being duly Levied, will more
pinch than any Law ever yet devised. And I humbly beseech, both in regard of
the State of the Countries, and of our more secure Obedience to Her Majesty, it
may be looked into, and Received. The Bill is Entitled, An Act for the more
speedy Coming to Church on Sundays.

Dr. Perkins brought in the Bill from the Committee, Entitled, An Act for the
Benefit of Merchants, and furtherance of Her Majesty's Customs.

Mr. Speaker stood up, The Speaker advises the House.
and wished the House to advise what they would do with the Prisoners that
served Sir Edmund Morgan, and Mr. Pemberton with Subpoena's; and showed, that
they were ready at the Door to Attend.

Mr. Tate said: Mr. Tate speaks to their Privileges.
I will be bold to offer Two Precedents to this House, touching serving of
Subpoena's: Yet first, let us enter into Consideration of the Force of the
Privileges we now have.

It is manifest, and I think no Man doubts, but that heretofore the Houses of
Parliament were both one, without Division; and, That the United Body of the
Parliament had the same Privileges, and Jurisdictions which we now have. And,
Though there be a Cession or Separation of the United Body; yet the Privileges
do still remain entire: For, by most Ancient Records of this Realm, it plainly
may appear, That the same Privileges serve Both Houses.

The First Precedent is in King Edward the First's Days, when the Templars had
certain Tenants in the Parliament House, which were behind with their Rents;
and they made Humble Petition to the King, That they might Distrain either
their Bodies, or their Goods for the same. The King, as it appears, answered,
Non videtur honestum quod aliquis de Magno Parlamento nostro distringatur. So
that it seems, we are privileged from all kind of Distress whatsoever.

The Second is, One Bago de Clare did presume to serve a Citation upon Edmond
Earl of Cornwall, within Weslminster-Hall, as he was going to the Parliament;
for which he was sent to the Tower, and made to submit himself De alto and
basso, and a Fine of Two Thousand Marks imposed upon him; which he truly Paid.
Besides, because Westminster Hall was within the Liberties of the Abbey of
Westminster, he was Fined One Thousand Pounds for his Contempt; but by
Mediation of the Bishops it was reduced to One Hundred Pounds, which he also
paid to the Abbot.

And our Use at this Day is not warranted by Precedents of Ancient Times; For,
if a Man had been Arrested upon a Subpoena, upon Notice given, he should have
had a Writ of Privilege, which of course Her Majesty must have allowed.

Then he made a long Discourse upon Trewynnard and Skewish's case. 35. Hen. 8.
Dyer. fol. 55. pl. 8. and 36. Hen. 8. fo. 59. pl. 17. Vide the Books.

Mr. Britten showed, That a Member of the House, Mr. Phillips the Lawyer, was
served with a Privy Seal, out of the Court of Wards, by one Thomas Deane
servant to Mrs. Chamberlain a Widow, who when he delivered the Process, being
told it would be taken in ill part by the House, he said, He cared not; being
told the House would punish him for it, and bring him on his Knees, He
Answered, His Mistress would bear him out, and she made no doubt, she should
find as good Friends there, as he had any. Whereupon, the House Ordered, That
she and her servant should be sent for by the Sergeant.

Mr. Holcroft said: That many Complaints were made, but none Punished; many
sent for, but none Appeared. There was a Matter complained of, by one Mr.
Morris a Gentleman, that had his Man Arrested at his Heels, by the Bayliffe of
Shrewsbury, and nothing was done therein.

Mr. Morris said: That after the House had given Order to go, he came (said
he) unto me to Certify him of the Parties and Particulars, and what he has
since done he knows not.

Mr. Roger Owen said, May it please you, Mr. Speaker, my self being chosen for
the Shire, I think it my part to Speak something, seeing the Burgesses for the
Town neglect their Duties, in not Speaking. True it is, that such Order was
given by the House; but Mr. Morris, and some others being willing to let me
have the Examination of the Matter, they came before me. And upon Examination
(a Wife Examination no doubt, said Mr. Secretary Cecil) I found he was no
menial Servant, but only a Servant that brought him part of the Way, and was to
go no further with him, toward the Parliament; whereupon, I think, the
Sergeant having some Notice, staid.

Mr. Brown of Gray's Inn said: It seems this Matter, is shuffled up: I humbly
pray the Sergeant may be heard; and all the House Cried I, I, I.

After three Congees made, the Sergeant showed He was with Mr. Morris, and
that he offered him to send one of his Men; but because he was in doubt of
finding him, he desired some part of his Fees, or Money for his Charges, or
Horses, or else he would find Horses, and get one of his Fellow-Serjeants to
go, because he could not well be spared from his Service; if not, he would for
his more Expedition procure a Pursuivant, to go with a Warrant under Mr.
Speaker's Hand, and the Honorable of the Privy-Councel' in this House; for the
more speedy Passage. All which Courses, Mr. Morris rejected. I hope the House
means not that I should go or send on mine own Purse, or hazard the Charge my
self. And therefore, I hope this will be Sufficient for my Discharge, And all
the House Cried, I, I, I.

So no more was said of that Matter; For the Speaker seemed to Favor the
Cause. And therefore he presently stood up, and asked If the House would have
the Prisoners in, which Served Sir Edmund Morgan, and Mr. Pemberton? And all
said, I, I, I. And by this Shift, the former Matter was shuffled over.
Christopher Kennel, and William Mackerles, were brought to the Bar, the one for
Serving Sir Edmund Morgan, and the other Mr. Pemberton with a Sabpaena.

Christopher Kennel said, Mr. Speaker, and the rest of this Honorable House, I
am, though poor, a Gentleman Born, and known to many in this Affembly: this
perhaps, may be a cause to aggravate my Offense. I hope there is no Man here,
that does not know me; and I am sure there is no Man which knows me, but
thinks, I would not willingly commit such an Offense as this is.

I have been sometimes, (though unworthy) a Member of this House. And I have
seen and known the Justice of this House, in the like Cases. But, Mr. Speaker,
if there be either Honelty, or Christianity in me, by the same I do protest,
that I knew not Sir Edmund Mergin was of the Parliament- House; which, I think
he will avouch himself. And as soon as I heard it, I went to Sir Edmuna's
Chamber, where I found him, to reconcile my self, and make an Atonement with
him. And as I was doing this, Mr. Sergeant came into the Chamber, and there
Arrested me, whose Arrest I most willingly Obeyed, and do now acknowledge my
self to have Offended, though not Wittingly.

May it please you, I have served Her Majesty these 18. Years, in Her Wars; and
in all my Life, I was never Trespasser in any Offense of this kind or nature. I
therefore do most humbly beseech you, in your Wisdoms to have Consideration of
the nature and circumstances of my Offense. And most willingly I do submit my
self to your Censures.

William Mackerless, being a poor simple Fellow, could say nothing for himself,
but only, That he knew not Mr. Pemberton to be of the House.

So the Sergeant was commanded to Remove them both forth.

Mr. Johnson said: Some we Pardon out of Discretion, some out of Commiseration.
I think, set all Parliaments together, they will not match this Parliament with
Numbers of Offenses of this Nature; and only our Impunity is the Cause.

Mr. Edmond Morgan said: Mr. Speaker, The Gentleman is a Man of good Sort,
Desert, and Carriage: And, I think, if he had known me to be of the House, he
would not have served me with a Subpoena. Truly, he came to my Lodging, and
acknowledged his great Fault, and prayed me to Extenuate it. I protest, I think
he did not know I was of the House. And therefore I pray, in regard of his
Person, and good Service done to Her Majesty, his Offense may be as freely
Remitted by the House, as it is by Me: And that it would please you All, to
Refer your Justice to Matters of greater Importance. Which was marvellously
well liked by the House.

Mr. Pemberton being asked, What he could say? whether William Mackerles knew
him? He answered, I; and that his Man had told him, he said, That he knew the
said William was a very Knave: And therefore, he would not entreat the Favor
of the House; but let him have the Justice of the House. Which Speech was
generally misliked.

Mr. Fleetwood, a Councellor of Gray's Inn, showed unto the House, That one
Holland, a Scrivener by Temple Bar, and his Man, had Beaten his Servant; and he
humbly prayed, they might be sent for. And the Question grew upon Dispute in
the House, whether this were Punishable: And after, upon a Precedent vouched by
Mr. Roger Owen, of 8 Hen. 4. touching a Knight of the Parliament, coming
toward the Parliament, etc. it was agreed, That they should be sent for.

Mr. Kennel, and Mackerles were brought to the Bar: And after their Offense
laid open by the Speaker, he said: It pleased the House, to have so favorable
Consideration of their Offense, That they should only have but Three Days
Imprisonment, in the Custody of the Sergeant, and pay his Fees.

Mr. Downold moved the House; Mr. Downold moves to have the Queen's Message
entered in the Journal.
First, That the Gracious Message sent from Her Majesty, might be written in
the Books of the Records of this House, [As, well it is worthy to be written in
Gold] as well as written and fixed in the True Hearts of every good Subject.

Secondly, That the Honorable of this House, would move Her Majesty, and be an
earnest Means of Speed; lest that which is now meant indeed, should by
Protraction of Time be altered, or perhaps not so happyly Effected.

Mr. Secretary Cecil said: Secretary Cecil speaks to it.
I promised to be as Silent as I could. Amongst much Speech of the Wise, there
wants not much Folly; much more in Me. I do not Speak, because I do dislike the
Motion of that Gentleman that last spoke; but to defend the Diligence and Grace
of the Queen. It is no matter of Toy, for a Prince to Notify in Public, a
Matter of this Weight. Though the Idol of a Monopoly be a great Monster, yet
after Two or Three Days, I doubt not, but you shall see him Dismembered. And I
do protest, there is not any Soul living, deserves Thanks in this Cause, but
our Sovereign.

Yesterday, the Queen gave Order for the Draught of a Proclamation: I had the
Minutes thereof, even now in my Hands. You all know, I went even now out of the
House; then I Read it, and sent for him that should Deliver it to Her Hands.
Now, What needs this new Zeal?

Mr. Davies said: Mr. Davies.
Mr. Speaker, I stood up before to Speak. It was not much I had to say, only
this: That which was delivered unto You from Her Sacred self, I think to be
Gospel; that is, Glad Tidings. And as the Gospel is Written and Registered, so
would I have that also: For Glad Tidings come to the Hearts of the Subjects. --
This is all.

Sir George Moore said: Sir George Moore.
This eating and fretting Disease of Monopolies, I have ever detested with my
Heart; and the greater the Grievance is, and has been, the more Inestimable is
the Grace of Her Majesty, in Repealing them. And therefore, to think we can
sufficiently Record the same, it were to hold a Candle before the Sun, to dim
the Light. And seeing that She, in Her Clemency and Care to Us, has taken the
Matter into Her own Hands, I wish the Matter may be no more spoken of, much
less proceeded in.

Sir Francis Hastings said: Sir Francis Hastings.
It ought to be Written in the Tables of our Hearts.

Mr. Laurence Hide: I think that this Gentleman, that set this Motion on Foot,
spoke out of Joy for Her Majesty's Grace, and Zeal to have Performance of Her
Promise: In that he wished it might be Recorded in Paper here, or in Parchment,
it is not to be intended, but he also meant in our Hearts, which remain no
longer than we Live; but Records remain longer, and will give a Lively
Remembrance in Ages to come. And therefore, for that part of his Motion, I
think it very Good, and wish the Clerk may do accordingly.

Mr. Comptroller said: Mr. Comptroller
I think that he that moved first this Question, exceedingly forgot himself,
and exceedingly detracted from Her Majesty; who, I know, out of her abundant
Grace and Favor to this House, has taken such speedy Course, as has been
delivered by my Fellow-Councellour. With that Affection She embraces this
House, that in more Familiar, than Princely sort, it has pleased Her to say,
Recommend me to the House, with Thanks for their Promise, and Care for the
Common Good.

Mr. Speaker said: Mr. Speaker
My Heart is not able to conceive, nor my Tongue to utter the Joy I conceive
for Her Majesty's Gracious, and Especial Care for our Good and Welfare.
Wherefore, as God said, Gloriam meam alteri non dabo; so may Her Majesty say in
that, That She Her self will be the only and speedy Agent, for the Performance
of our most Humble and Wished Desires. Wherefore, let us not doubt, but as She
has been, so She still will be our most Gracious Sovereign, and Natural Mother
unto Us: Whose Days, the Almighty God prolong to our Comforts. And all the
House cried, Amen.

Saturday, November. 28. The Bill Entitled, An Act for Explanation of the
Statute of 39. Eliz. Cap. 6. touching Charitable Uses, was Read the second
time, to which Mr. Tate spoke; and said, amongst other things, that That could
be no Law, which was contrary to the Great CHARTER of England. And this was,
because it gave Power against the Great CHARTER, which gives Challenges to
Jurors, which this Law allows not.

Therefore he wished there might be a Commitment, to Consider, whether it were
fit to be continued, or repealed. And the House would have appointed Monday.

But Mr. Secretary Cecil spoke: I told you of late, That Her Majesty accepted
of our Loves, and Thanks: But She Her self, from our Selves by our Speaker,
would receive none, till She had performed Her Promise; which you may see is
Accomplished, and Proclamations extant in every Man's Hand. Now, because you
shall not think but She will receive your Thanks, which proceed from your
Loves, (which is the greatest Pillar and Pearl of Her CROWN) She has appointed
Monday in the Afternoon, for that Purpose. And, if it please you to come with a
Convenient Number of Forty, Fifty, or a Hundred, they shall all be Welcome.

So the Committee was put over till Tuesday; and they went to Name those that
should go: At the last, at the Lower-End of the House, they cried, All, All
All; and so none were Named.

Robert Holland a Scrivener at Temple Bar, and Laurence Brook his Man, were
brought to the Bar, for that they had beaten Mr. Fleetwood's Man, a Member of
the House.

The whole Matter was thus related to the House, by Mr. Fleetwood, viz. That he
was bound as Surety with one Mr. Heydon, for payment of Money at Holland's
Shop, which was paid and told there, and the Bag, after, put up. Mr. Fleetwood
on Wednesday, as he came by Holland's Shop, was called in by Holland into the
Shop, and after into a Parlour; where after chafeing and swearing that there
wanted Ten Pounds Six Shillings of the Sum in the Bag; and that he should not
have his Bond, until he had it: Mr. Fleetwood called his man to justify the
payment, who did so. Holland swore he Lied like a Boy and a Rascal. To which
the Boy Answered. If you say so, I say, that whosoever says there was not so
much Money, he Lies; With that, Holland ran at him, and thrust him into a
Chimny-Corner, and would have Stabbed him, if Mr. Fleetwood had not taken the
Daggar from him. The Scriveners man, who heard the bussle, came in, and not
only struck Mr. Fleetwood, but helped the Master to Beat the Man, and after,
went again into the Shop, through which Mr. Fleetwood and his Man went forth.
The Boy Mocked and jeared at him, and Mr. Fleetwood telling him, They should
both answer it in the Parliament House; The Boy Answered, My Master will
warrant me, I care not. And it seemed by Holland, who could not well be heard,
the aforesaid matter was true.

So, after he was removed, there was a great Dispute whether he should be sent
to the Tower, or Committed to the Sergeant. And, I verily think, he had gone to
the Tower, if Mr. Fleetwood had not by chance spoken a word, touching Mr.
Anthony Maynard, Secretary to the Old Lord Treasurer, which happened thus: When
Holland, Kneeling at the Bar, had spoken for himself; the Speaker asking Mr.
Fleetwood What he could say? He told all the Matter aforesaid. But as he was at
the beginning, some said, At the Bar, At the Bar; which Mr. Fleetwood took to be
a great Disgrace, and said: Mr. Speaker, I have heard that Mr. Anthony Maynard
has given out Speeches in the behalf of this Holland; and for some special
Reason, I think he is the Man that says, At the Bar. But the House pushed at
him, and bad, to the Matter He fell again to speaking of Mr. Maynard, then they
did as before; and so the Third time.

Then the Speaker wished him, To leave that as a Private Matter, and so fall to
the Point.

After which, he told the whole Matter aforesaid, though I verily think, there
was no such thing done by Mr. Maynard; for none spoke against him, and for the
easy Punishment of the Scrivener, but Mr. Maynard's Friends, even some of the
greatest. Besides, it seems by the many Counselors that spoke for Holland,
That, etc.

Mr. Francis Bacon said: Mr. Francis Bacon
I have been a Member of the House these Seven Parliaments, and yet never knew
of above two that were Committed to the Tower: The first was Arthur Hall, for
saying, The Lower House was a new Person in the Trinity; which, because these
words tended to the Derogation of the State of this House, and giving absolute
power to the other, he was Committed. The other was Parry, that for a Seditious
and Contemptuous Speech, made even there (pointing to the Second Bench) was
likewise Committed. Now this Offense was not of the like Nature, and very
small; not done to the Person of any Member of this House. And therefore, I
think the Serjeant's Custody punishment sufficient.

Mr. Francis Moore said: Mr. Francis Moore.
Why, Mr. Speaker, this Offense is ordinary; my Man was well Beaten, and
carried to the Tavern, and made Free of the Company of Gentlemen-Pages,
forsooth. It were ridiculous for me to Complain; but this is a Matter of
greater Importance.

Mr. Jones of Gray's Inn said: Mr. Jones.
Mr. Speaker, I think this is a great Wrong: For he has charged him with Ten
Pounds Six Shillings, and yet sent the Bond; which he would never have done, if
he could have justified his Charge. The Tower is our Prison. And in Courts of
Common Law, if a man be Arrested but for Twenty Shillings, he shall be in the
same Prison with him that is Arrested for Ten Thousand Pounds; and therefore, I
think best he were Committed to the Tower.

So after other Consultation and Debate, it was put to the Question, and
agreed, he should be in the Serjeant's Hands five Days, and also his man: And
that they should pay double Fees.

Sunday, November. 29.

Monday November. 30. The Bill for Redress of unsized Bread, Read the first time;
and it has a Limitation, to the end of the next Parliament.

A Bill for the Repairing and Amending of two Bridges over the River of Eden,
in the County of Cumberland, adjoining to the Walls of the City of Carlisle,
Read the first time.

Doctor Caesar brought in a Bill from the Committees, Entitled, An Act for the
making of a Hold or Key, in the North-Parts of Devonshire.

A Bill that no Person or Persons shall use the Art or Mystery of Poulterers in
London, or within Forty Miles thereof; unless he has been an Apprentice Seven
Years thereunto; Read the first time: And the House cried, Away with it. And
being put to the Question for a Second Reading, all cried, No, No, No.

A Pill for the Perfecting of the Jointure of Bridget Countess of Sussex, by
the Right Honorable, the Earl of Sussex; and to the Right Honorable Anne his
Wife, now Countess.

Mr. Comptroller said: Mr. Comptroller's Message from the Queen.
I am to Certify you, of the Queen's Gladness and Willingness to hear the
Acceptable News, that was delivered unto Her from this House, of the Humble and
Earnest Desire of us all to see Her Majesty, and to show our Thankfulness. She
commanded me to tell you, That the Reason of Her Limitation of having a
Convenient Number, was, in that the Place whereinto we should come, was not big
enough to Receive us all. But She says, That She is Glad, That there is such a
Sympathy betwixt Her, and Us. And She is well pleased, That this Afternoon at
Three of the Clock, we should all come; and without Restraint or Limit we may
all come, and shall be very Welcome.

The Bill for the Four Subsidies, and Eight Fifteens granted to Her Majesty,
put to the Question, and ordered to be Engrossed.

It was concluded, At Three of the Clock in the Afternoon, to meet in the Great
Hall at White Hall, there to Attend Mr. Speaker to Her Majesty.

Mr. Barrington brought in the Bill against Swearing, from the Committees.

The Bill for Avoiding of Trifling Suits, being Engrossed, and put to the
Question for Passing, it passed.

The Bill touching Edward Nevill, Esquire, etc. was passed, with a Proviso
added to it, for the Saving of the Right of the Lady Vane, and her Sons.

The Speaker asked the House, What it was their Pleasure he should deliver unto
Her Majesty? And Sir Edward Hobby stood up, and said: He thought it was best he
should devise that himself; for the whole House would refer it to him.

In the Afternoon, the Commons Attended the Queen at White Hall, about Three of
the Clock, to the Number of One Hundred, and Forty.

At length, The Commons attend the Queen in the Council Chamger.
the Queen came into the Council- Chamber; where sitting under the Cloth of
State, at the Upper End, the Speaker, with all the Commons came in: And after
Three low Reverences made, he spoke to this Effect:

Most Sacred, The Speaker's Speech to Her Majesty.
and more than most Gracious Sovereign;

WE Your Faithful, Loyal, and most Obedient Subjects, and Commons here present,
vouchsafed of Your special Goodness, (to our unspeakable Comforts) Access to
Your Royal Presence: Do in all Duty, and Humbleness, come to present that which
no Words can express, our most Humble and Thankful Acknowledgment of Your most
Gracious Message, and most Bounden and Humble Thanks for Your Majesty's most
abundant Goodness, extended and performed to Us.

We cannot say, (most Gracious Sovereign) We have Called, and been Heard; We
have Complained, and have been Helped; though in all Duty and Thankfulness, we
acknowledge, Your Sacred Ears are ever open, and ever bowed down to Hear us,
and your Blessed Hands ever stretched out to Relieve us.

We acknowledge (Sacred Sovereign) in all Duty and Thankfulness; we
acknowledge, That before we Call, your preventing Grace, and all-deserving
Goodness do watch over Us for our Good; more ready to give, than we can desire,
much less deserve.

The Attribute which is most proper unto God, To perform all he promises,
(most Gracious Sovereign, Queen of all Truth, of all Constancy, of all
Goodness, never wearied of doing Good unto us, which the Deeds themselves do
speak) That we must render unto You most Zealous, most Careful to provide all
good Things for us, most Gracious, most Tender to remove all Grievances from
us, which all Your Princely Actions have ever showed. And even now, Your most
Gracious published Proclamation, of Your own only mere Motion, and special
Grace, for the Good of all Your People, does witness unto us.

We come not (Sacred Sovereign) One of Ten, to render Thanks, and the rest to
go away Unthankful: But All, of All, in all Duty and Thankfulness, do throw
down our Selves at the Feet of Your Majesty. Neither do we Present our Thanks
in Words, or any outward thing, which can be nothing, which can be no
sufficient Retribution for so great Goodness.

But, in all Duty and Thankfulness, prostrate at Your Feet, We present our most
Loyal and Thankful Hearts; even the last Drop of Blood in our Hearts, and the
last Spirit of Breath in our Nostrils, to be poured out, to be Breathed up for
Your Safety.



The Commons fall on their Knees.
After Three low Reverences made, He, with the rest, Kneeled down, and Her
Majesty began thus to Answer, Her Self; viz.

Mr. Speaker,

WE have heard your Declaration, The Queen answers to them Her self.
and perceive your Care of Our State, by falling into the Consideration of a
grateful Acknowledgment of such Benefits as you have Received; and that your
Coming is to present Thanks unto Us, which I Accept with no less Joy, than your
Loves can have Desire to offer such a Present.

I do assure you, There is no Prince that loves his Subjects better, or whose
Love can countervail Our Love. There is no Jewel, be it of never so Rich a
Price, which I set before this Jewel; I mean, your Love: For I do more Esteem
of It, than of any Treasure or Riches; for That we know how to prize, but Love
and Thanks I count Unvaluable.

And, though God has raised Me high; yet This I count the Glory of my Crown,
That I have Reigned with your Loves. This makes me that I do not so much
rejoice, That God has made Me to be a Queen, as, To be a Queen over so
Thankful a People.

Threfore, I have Cause to wish nothing more, than to Content the Subjects; and
that is a Duty which I owe: Neither do I desire to live longer Days, than that
I may see your Prosperity; and That Is my only Desire.

And as I am that Person, that still (yet under God) has Delivered you; so I
trust, (by the Almighty Power of God) that I still shall be His Instrument to
Preserve you from Envy, Peril, Dishonor, Shame, Tyranny, and Oppression;
partly by Means of your intended Helps, which We take very Acceptably, because
it manifests the Largeness of your Loves and Loyalty to your Sovereign.

Of My Self, I must say this, I was never any greedy scraping Grasper, nor a
straight, fast-holding Prince; nor yet a Waster. My Heart was never set on
Worldly Goods, but only for my Subjects Good. What You do bestow on Me, I will
not hoard it up, but Receive it to bestow on You again: Yea, My own Proprieties
I count Yours, and to be Expended for your Good; and your Eyes shall see the
Bestowing of All, for your Good. Therefore, render unto Them from Me, I beseech
you, Mr. Speaker, such Thanks as you imagine my Heart yields, but my Tongue
cannot express.



The Queen bids the Commons rise up.
Nota, All this while, we Kneeled; whereupon Her Majesty said: Mr. Speaker, I
would wish You, and the Rest to stand up; for I shall yet trouble you with
longer Speech.

So we all stood up, and She went on with Her Speech, saying:

Mr. Speaker,

YOu give Me Thanks; And then continues to Speak.
but I doubt Me, that I have more Cause to Thank You all, than You Me. And I
charge you, to Thank them of the Lower House, from Me: For had I not received a
Knowledge from you, I might have fallen into the Lapse of an Error, only for Lack
of True Information.

Since I was Queen, yet, did I never put my Pen unto any Grant, but that, upon
Pretext and Semblance made unto Me, it was both Good and Beneficial to the
Subject in general; though a private Profit to some of My Ancient Servants, who
had deserved well at My Hands. But the Contrary being found by Experience, I am
exceedingly beholding to such Subjects, as would move the same at the first.
And I am not so Simple to suppose, but that there are some of the Lower House,
whom these Grievances never touched. And for Them, I think they spoke out of
Zeal for their Countries, and not out of Spleen, or Malevolent Affection, as
being Parties grieved. And I take it exceeding Gratefully from them; because it
gives Us to know, that no Respects or Interests had moved them other than the
minds they bear to suffer no diminution of our Honor, and our subjects Loves
unto Us. The zeal of which Affection, tending to ease my People, and Knit their
hearts unto Me, I embrace with a Princely care; for (above all earthly
Treasure) I esteem my People's Love, more than which I desire not to Merit.

That my Grants should be grievous to my People, and Oppressions privileged
under color of our Patents; our Kingly Dignity shall not suffer it: yea, when
I heard it, I could give no rest unto my Thoughts until I had Reformed it.

Shall they think to escape unpunished, that have thus Oppressed you, and have
been respectless of their Duty, and regardless of Our Honor? No, Mr. Speaker,
I assure you, were it not more for Conscience Sake, than for any Glory or
Increase of Love, that I desire; these Errors, Troubles, Vexations and
Oppressions done by these Varlets and lewd Persons, not worthy the name of
Subjects, should not escape without Condign Punishment. But I perceive they
dealt with Me like Physicians, who Administering a Drug, make it more acceptable
by giving it a good Aromatical Savor, or when they give Pills, do Gild them
all over.

I have ever used to set the last Judgment-Day before my Eyes, as so to Rule,
as I shall be Judged to Answer before a higher Judge, to whose Judgment Seat I
do Appeal, That never Thought was Cherished in my Heart, that tended not to my
People's Good. And now, if my Kingly Bounty have been abused, and my Grants
turned to the Hurt of my People, contrary to My Will and Meaning; or if any in
Authority under Me, have neglected or perverted what I have Committed to them;
I hope God will not lay their Culps and Offenses to my Charge; who though there
were danger in repealing our Grants, yet what danger would I not rather incur
for your Good, than I would suffer them still to continue?

I know the Title of a KING is a Glorious Title. But assure your self, That the
Shining Glory of Princely Authority, has not so dazelled the Eyes of our
Understanding; but that we well know and remember that We also are to yield an
Account of our Actions, before the Great Judge.

To be a KING, and wear a Crown, is a thing more Glorious to them that see it,
than it is pleasing to them that bear it: For my self, I was never so much
enticed with the Glorious Name of a KING, or Royal Authority of a QUEEN, as
delighted that GOD had made Me his Instrument to maintain his Truth and Glory,
and to Defend this Kingdom (as I said) from Peril, Dishonor, Tyranny, and
Oppression.

There will never Queen sit in my Seat, with more Zeal to my Country, Care for
my Subjects, and that sooner with willingness will venture her Life for your
Good and Safety, than My Self. For it is not my desire to Live nor Reign
longer, than my Life and Reign shall be for your Good. And though you have had,
and may have many Princes, more Mighty and Wise, sitting in this State; yet you
never had, or shall have any that will be more Careful and Loving.

Shall I ascribe any thing to my Self, and my Sexly Weakness? I were not worthy
to Live then; and of all, most unworthy of the great Mercies I have had from
God, who has ever yet given me a Heart, which never yet feared Foreign or
Home-Enemy. I speak it to give God the Praise, as a Testimony before you, and
not to Attribute any thing to My Self. For I, O Lord, What am I, whom Practices
and Perils past should not fear? Or, What can I do? [These Words She spoke with
a great Emphasis.] That I should speak for any Glory, God forbid.

This, Mr. Speaker, I pray you deliver to the House, to whom heartily commend
Me. And so, I commit you All to your best Fortunes, and further Councels. And I
pray you, Mr. Comptroller, Mr. Secretary, and You of My Council, That before
these Gentlemen depart into their Countries, you bring them All to Kiss My Hand.



On December. 1. being Tuesday, The Bill for Dreining the Fens, Committed.

The Bill for Explanation of the Statute of 8 Reginae, December 1.
touching Hats and Caps, brought in with Amendments.

The Bill to avoid Idleness, and to set the Poor on Work.

The Bill of Llandouerer was Read; and it was put to the Question; I stood up
to speak against it, according to a Note given me by Mr. John Stephens, an
Honest young Gentleman of Lincoln's Inn. The Effect thereof, is:

At the Parliament 27 Hen. 8. Cap. 26. the Shires of Wales were Divided, and
the Land of Lour limited in Pembrook-shire. At the Parliament 34 Hen. 8. Cap.
28. Caustiffan, Usterloys, and Laughern, by the same former Act being in
Pembrook-shire, were by the said last Act appointed in Carmarthen: Since which
time, the Land of Lour has been reputed in Carmarthen-shire. William Phillips
of Ficton, seized of the Lands of Lour; and having Issue two Daughters,
Elizabeth being Married to George Owen Esquire, and Mary to Alban Stepneth
Esquire; the said George and Alban, without the Consent of their Wives, and by
the Constraint of Sir John Parrot Knight, levied a Fine to Morgan Phillips, of
the said Land of Lour, in Carmarthen-shire; whereas it is in Pembrooke-shire:
So that the intent of the Bill Preferred by John Phillips (he seeing his Estate
void) is to strengthen his Estate, and to over-through the Right, Title and
Interest of the said George. Which being showed to the House, and put to the
Question, the greater Voice was, No, No, No, and so the Bill was Rejected.

Amendments in the Bill against Blasphemous and Usual Swearing, A Bill against
Swearing.
was Read, and ordered to be engrossed. To this Bill

Mr. Glascock spoke and said: Man is made of two Parts, Mr. Glascock speaks to
it.
a Soul and a Body; and there are two Governments, one Imperial, the other
Sacerdotal; the First belonging to the Commonwealth, the Other to the Church.

Swearing is a thing Moral, and touches the Soul; and therefore fitter to be
spoken of in a Pulpit than a Parliament. If the God of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob has sworn, That his Plague, shall not depart from the House of the
Swearer, Why should not we seek to suppress this Vice, which brings a plague
which breeds Mortality, that breeds Destruction, Desolation and utter Ruin of
the Commonwealth?

If He forbid us to Swear, and we fear not his Commandments, Think you a
Penalty of Ten Shillings, as is here set down, will make us refrain this
Iniquity? I may speak of this Bill, as a Painter which made a most Artificial
Table of the Waves of the Sea, so Lively, that to the Judgment it seemed the
very Sea. Another Painter, in the same Table, Painted a Tree, so Lively, as it
might be thought it were growing out of the Sea: There grew a Question, Which
was the most Curious Work-manship; and the Deciding of this Controversy was
referred to the Judgment of a third Skillful Painter; who gave his Judgment of
the Tree, thus: O valde been! sed hic non erat locus.

So may I say of this Bill: It is as hard for this Penalty to restrain this
Sin, as it is for Religion to spring out of the Common Law, and to take Effect.
Aristotle says, That a Men may be Bonus Civis, and yet not Bonus Vir. And
though I abhor the Sin, yet I deny not, but the Sinner may be a good Member.
Moses when he saw God, could but see his Back-Parts only; and no Man ever saw
more: But these Swearers Swear by all his Parts so perfectly, as if they had
seen Film all over.

Philip King of France made a Law, That the Swearer should be Drowned. Another
Law was made, That a certain Sum should be paid presently, so soon as he had
Sworn, or else the Swearer to lose his Head. We use so much Lenity in our Law,
as we had as good make no Law. For we give a Penalty, and to be taken upon
Conviction before a Justice of Peace: Here Is wise stuff! First, Mark what a
Justice of Peace is, and we shall easily find a Cap in our Law. A Justice of
Peace is a Living Creature, that for half a Dozen of Chickens will Dispense
with a whele Dozen of Venal Statutes: We Search and Ingross; they retail. These
be the Basket-Justices, of whom the Tale may be Justified, of a Justice whom I
know, to whom one of his Peor Neighbors coming, said: Sir, I am very highly
Rated in the Subsidy-Book; I do beseech you to help me. To whom he answered, I
know thee not. Not me? (quoth the Countryman) Why, He gives the Justices of
the Peace in the Country, a severe Lath.
your Worship had my Team, and mine Owen such a Day; and I have been ever at
your Worship's Service. Have you so? (quoth the Justice) I never remember I had
any such Matter; not so much as a Sheeps Tail. So, unless you offer Sacrifice
unto these Idol-Justices, of Sheep and Oxen, they know you not. If a Warrant
come from the Lords of the Council to Levy a Hundred Men, he will Levy Two
Hundred: And, what with Chopping in and Crossing out, he will gain a Hundred
Pounds by the Bargain. Nay, if he be to send forth a Warrant upon a Man's
Request, to have any setch't in upon Suspicion of Felony, or the like, he will
write you the Warrant himself; and you must put Two Shillings in his Pocket, as
his Clerk's Fee, (when, God knows, he keeps but two or three Hindes) for his
better Maintenance.

Why, we have had here Five Bills: One against Swearing, another for Going to
Church, Good Ale, Drunkenness, and -- This is as good to them as a Subsidy, and
Two Fifteens. Only in that Point I mislike the Bill; for the rest, I could wish
it good Passage.

Sir Francis Hastings, Sir Francis Hastings.
amongst other Speeches in this Bill said: That such Justices were well worthy
to be looked up in an Ambry; But he wished, That All might not be Censured for
one evil One; who though he neglected both the Care of Conscience and Country,
which he should not do; yet doubtless many did not so, as being touched in
Conscience to remember, That our long Peace should make us careful to please
Him, in doing Justice, that had preserved us, and was the Author of our Peace:
even God himself. So the Bill was put to the Question, and Ordered to be
Engrossed.

Mr. Wiseman moved the House, to remember two things: One that it had been an
ancient Custom in Parliament, sometimes to call over the House; which was not
yet done. Mr. Wisman moves for a Parliament-Collection.
The Other, That where heretofore a Collection had been used for the Poor; That
those which went out of the Town before the Parliament ended, would ask Leave
of the Speaker, and pay his Money.

Sir Edward Hobby said, The Gentleman that last spoke, Moved you: but I would
Remove you a little further. May it please you, It has been a most Laudable
Usage, That some Contribution or Collection should be made amongst us in pios
usus. And I pray you let us not forget our Parliamental Charity. Every Knight
paid Ten Shillings, and every Burgess Five Shillings, to be thus disposed of:
part of the Whole to the Minister, part to the Servants here, and part to the
Poor; the rest at you disposements. The last time our Charity ransomed a
Prisoner, for his Father's good Desert. The last time Sir Robert Wroth, and Mr.
Fettyplace were Collectors. It rests in you, either to appoint them now, or
choose others.

Mr. Fettyplace said: It is true, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Fetty place shows how the
last was disposed of.
I was Collector the last time, and there was paid out of the Money Collected,
to the Minister Ten Pounds, to the Sergeant Thirty Pounds, to Mr. John Leveson,
for the Redemption of Mr. Fox's Son, that made the Book of Martyrs, Thirty
Pounds. There was Money given to Seven Prisons: the two Compters, Ludgate, and
Newgate in London, to two in Southwark, and one in Westminster. How old the
Custom is, I know not, but how good it is, I know. For my own part, having one
undergone that Service a ready; I humbly pray that it would please you to
appoint another.

Mr. Tate said: Charity proceeding from Conscience, and not from Custom, breeds
Obedience to God, and pleases God: and so went on, and spoke for a Town in his
Country, lately Burnt; That it would please the House to contribute somewhat to
the Poor's loss there.

Mr Roger Downs, brought in the Bill for Ratlesdale with some Amendments.

The Bill for Assurance of a Jointure to Lucy Countess of Bedford, being
Engrossed, passed the House; and was sent up to the Lords.

A Bill for the Denization of certain Persons, viz. William Millet, Ann Pope,
George Chambers, Peter Eaton, and Nicholas Tooley, being Engrossed, passed the
House; and was likewise sent up to the Lords with the other.

The Bill for Confirmation of diverse Letters Patent, made by Edw. 6. to Sir
Edward Seymor Knight, his Grandfather; being Engrossed, passed, and was sent
to the Lords.

The Bill for the better Observation of certain Orders in the Exchecquer,
Engrossed, and passed, and sent up to the Lords.

The Bill for Avoiding of trifling Suits, being Engrossed and passed, was sen
to the Lords.

Sir Robert Wroth said; Mr. Speaker, The Use has been, That the general Bills
should be first Read, and then the private, and they that carry them, to give
some brief Commendation of them.

Mr. Speaker said: Who shall carry these Bills? And all desired, That Mr.
Comptroller, and Mr. Secretary Hobart, would be pleased to present them.

Sir Walter Rawleigh brought in the Bill for Shop-Books, with some Amendments.
One was in the Title; for that it was thought to be an Imputation to Merchants.

And another thing I would move the House in, he said, and that is, That there
might be a Proviso for Sums under Five Pounds. And because the greater part of
the Committee were against it; I thought fit to move it here. And all the House
cried, No.

Mr. Tate brought in the Bill touching Sir Anthony Maney, to which Mr. Johnson
of Gray's Inn excepted; and showed, That his Wife was a Maney, and though
himself were far off in Remainder, yet he desired the House would be pleased to
except his Right, for (said he) Nemo sapit qui sibi non sapit. And therefore I
presume to speak for my self. And I hope the House will not give passage to the
Bill.

Mr. Boys showed, He was so far off, as at least in the Seventeenth Degree;
and so the House called to the Question, whether it should pass? And all cried,
I, I, I.

Mr. Davis brought in a Bill, Mr. Davis moves in the Bill for the
Painter-stainers against the Plaisterers.
for the Painter-Stainers, for the remedy of certain Abuses done by the
Plaisterers, to the prejudice of that Company. He showed, That this Bill was
preferred the last Parliament, and, upon special Suit of the Citizens of London
of this House, the Bill was let Slip, and a promise made, That the Lord Mayor
should finally end it betwixt the two Companies. But after the same Parliament
was done, the Plaisterers went from their words, so now the poor Men complain
to you for Redress. And since the beginning of this Parliament, the Plaisterers
are contented to enter into Bond; but they will Break that too, no doubt, being
but of small value: And the Painter's Trade, if it be not helped by us, will go
down: which is the finest Trade in the World; For, Courtiers, Knights, Lords,
Earls, Kings, yea Emperors have used it. They only desire to Work in Oil, as a
thing incident to their Trade, to make Pictures by the Life, to draw Armory,
and Paint in Glass-work, Houseing, and the like. Now if their be One Hundred
Apprentices, not Four come to the perfection of Painting by the Life, and all
their Trade and Gain in the other things, is by the Plaisterers now usurped,
who are only to meddle with Loame, Mortar, and the like, yet the
Painter-stainers have given them leave to use their Four Principal Colors, etc.

Mr. Spicer said: Mr. Spicer Seconds it.
As I wish no Man should meddle with another business, so I wish that no Trade
should meddle one with another Mysteries: I know the Colors belong to the
Painters, the gross and Groundwork to Plaisterers; and briefly Mr. Speaker,
Quam quisque norit artem in hac se exerceat.

So it was put to the Question for Engrossing, and all cried, The Bill Ordered
to be Engrossed.
I, I, I.

The Amendments in the Bill for Avoiding of double payment of Debts upon
Shop-Books, were Read.

Mr. Beeston showed, how good this Bill would be to keep Young Men from running
too far in Debt, Mr. Beeston about Book-Debts.
and avoiding double Payment. He gave an Example of a Mercer, That gave a Piece
of Velvet for a Kindness done; but dying Sixteen Years after the Delivery, the
Executor of this Man sued the Gentleman. He desired to see the Book; and there
was Entered, Delivered such a Day, to such a Man, so Much. The Gentleman
advised with Council, what to do: They told him, No Remedy, but to Wage his
Law. The Manner thereof being told him, rather than he would have his Credit
drawn in Question, he paid it. He further said, They have two kind of Books;
the one where the Particulars be, and that upon Payment, is lightly Crossed:
The other General, where the Gross Sum is; and that is called, The Book
Dormant: Out of which, if you see not your Self Crossed, perhaps you, or your
Executors may pay for it Twenty Years after.

It was put to the Question; and the House being Divided, the I, I, I, had 154.
and the No's 88. So the I, I, I, got it by 66.

Mr. Speaker said: First, I am by Her Majesty's Commission; Mr. Speaker gives
an Account of the Queens Speech.
to make Report unto you of that Notable and Excellent Speech, which Her
Majesty delivered. I shall deliver unto You, but a Shadow of that Substance:
But I greatly Rejoice, that so many were there present, who are well able to
supply to others the True Report of Her Majesty's Speech.

IT pleased Her Majesty to show, In what gracious sort She accepted our
Loyalty. She said, She Rejoiced not so much to be a Queen, as to be a Queen
over so Thankful a People; and that God had made Her a Means to save us from
Shame, Tyranny, and Oppression. She did Accept of our intended Present, which
(she said) manifested our Love and Loyalty; most graciously affirming, That She
was never any greedy Griper, or fast Holder; and what We did present, She would
not hoard up; but Our Eyes should see the Bestowing of it.

For the Thanks which were yielded Her, for Her great Regard of Us, She willed
me to return Her Thanks to You most Graciously; and to tell You, That Her Heart
never inclined to pass any Grant, but upon Suggestion that it was for the Good
of Her Subjects; and now that the Contrary appeared, She took it Graciously,
that the Knowledge thereof came from Her Subjects.

She said: She ever set the last Judgment before Her Eyes; and never Thought
arose in Her, but for the Good of Her People. If Her Grants were abused to
their Hurts, it was against Her Will; and She hoped, God would not lay their
Culps and Offenses to Her Charge, and the Principal Members not touched. And
had it not been for these Her good Subjects, She had fallen from Lapse into
Error.

Those that did speak against them, She thought spoke out of no Spleen, or
Displeasure to the Grants; but to deliver the Grief of their Hearts, which
above any Earthly Treasure She respected.

She said: She was not allured with the Royal Authority of a KING, neither did
She Attribute any thing to Her Self; but all to the Glory of GOD. She said: The
Cares and Troubles of a Crown, are known only to them that Wear it: And were it
not more for Conscience Sake, than any Desire or Want of Disposition in Her,
these Patentees should not escape without Condign Punishment. She desired not
to Reign longer, than that Her Government and Reign should be for our Good. She
said: We might well have a Prince of more Wisdom and Sufficiency; but of more
Love and Affection we should never have.

Her Majesty delivered a Commandment to Mr. Comptroller, and Mr. Secretary,
That the Gentlemen of the Country should be brought to Kiss Her Hand, before
they departed.

The Amendments in the Bill of Painting, were Read; and Mr. Lythe stood up, and
said: Mr. Speaker, We have been troubled with two P, P 's. this Parliament;
that is, The Painters, and the Plaisterers: Methinks, a Third P. would do very
well; and that is, Put it out of Doors.

Mr. Davies said: Let me add the next Letter, Q. To end this Controversy, I
pray let it be put to the Question; or else one of his P 's. that it may be
Passed.

The Bill touching Perjury and Subornation of Perjury, was Read and Committed:
The Place of Meeting to be at the Middle-Temple-Hall, and the Time, Thursday in
the Afternoon.

Wednesday, December. 2. A Bill for certain Orders amongst Watermen.

A Bill for Explanation of the Statute 23 Reginae, touching Recusants, was Read
and Committed: The Place of Meeting to be in the Court of Wards; and the Time,
to Morrow in the Morning.

A Bill to prohibit Transportation of Iron-Ordnance, beyond- Seas.

A Bill to secure the Patronage of Rotharston to Thomas Venables, Esquire.

Mr. Francis Moore brought in a Bill, for Confirmation of a Charter of King
Edward the Sixth, to the City of London, touching St. Bartholomews-Bridewel,
and St. Thomas Apostles: It was put to the Question; and, after Commitment,
ordered to be Engrossed.

A Bill for the Amending of a Common-Road-Way, called Double-Sole-Green,
between Kentish-Town, and the City of London.

A Bill to Reform the Abuses in Weights and Measures, by the Default of the
Clerk of the Market, and other Officers, Read: To which, -- A Bill about
Weights and Measures. Mr. Fretswick speaks to it.


Mr. Fretswick, Knight of Darby-shire, spoke, and said: In that I speak being
least Worthy, I hope it will be deemed to proceed from Affection, not
Presumption. Besides, I have learnt it for a Rule in this House: It is better
to venture Credit, than Conscience.

There are Three things to be considered in this Bill; The Inconvenience, the
Necessity of the Remedy, and the Convenience of Punishment. For the
Inconveniency; no Man but knows it, who knows the State of his Country: In
Mine, there is nothing more generally complained of, than the Inequality of
Measures. The Rich have two Measures; with One he Buys, and Ingrosseth Corn in
the Country; that is the Greater: With the Other he Retails it at Home, to his
poor Neighbors; that is the Lesser. This is the great and just Complaint of All.

So, after many other Matters moved upon the Statutes, the Bill was Committed:
The Time of Meeting, appointed on Saturday in the Afternoon, in this House.

The Bill for more Diligent Resort to Churches on Sundays, A Bill for more
diligent Resort to Church. Mr. Owen against it.
was Read.

Mr. Roger Owen spoke to it, and said: That he misliked the Bill, for Two
Respects: The One, for the Penalty; the Other, in respect of the Party
punishing: This is the Justice.

For the First: The Penalty is Twelve Pence. It is well known, the poorest
Recusant in England, as well as the Rich, ought to pay his Twenty Pounds; and
for want of Lands and Goods, his Body is Liable. And therefore, we shall doubly
pinch him; which is against the Law.

For the Other: Touching the Justice, I think it too great a Trouble, and they
already are laden with a Number of Penal Statutes; yea, a whole Alphabet, as
appears by Hussy, in the time of Henry the Seventh. And this is so obvious,
that a Justice of Peace his House, will be like a Quarter Sessions, with the
Multitude of these Complaints.

I think also, it is an Infringment of Magna Charta; for That gives Trial per
Pares; but This, by Two Witnesses, before a Justice of Peace. And by this
Statute, if a Justice of Peace come into the Quarter Sessions, and say, It is a
good Oath, this is as good as an Indictment. Therefore, for my part, away with
the Bill.

Sir Francis Hastings said: I never in my Life before, Sir Francis Hastings
opposes him.
heard Justices of the Peace Taxed in this Sort: For ought I know, Justices of
Peace are Men of Quality, Honesty, Experience, and Justice. I would ask the
Gentleman that last spoke, but Two Questions: The First, Whether he would have
any Penalty at all Inflicted? The Second, If in the First Statute, or in This,
an easier Way for the Levying of this Twelve Pence, can be? If he deny the
First, I know his Scope; if the Second, no Man but himself will deny it. And to
speak so in Both, is neither Gravely, Religiously, nor Rightly spoken.

And therefore, for God's, the Queen's, and the Country's sake, I beg the Bill
may be Committed.

Sir Carry Reynolds said: Sir Carry Reynolds for the Bill.
The Sabbath is ordained for Four Causes. First, To Meditate on the Omnipotency
of God. Secondly, To Assemble our selves together, to give God Thanks. Thirdly,
That we might thereby be the better enabled to follow our own Affairs.
Fourthly, That we might Hallow that Day, and Sanctify it.

King James the Fourth of Scotland, in the Year 1512. and King James the Sixth,
in the Year 1579. or 1597. did Erect, and Ratify a Law, That whosoever kept
either Fair, or Market upon the Sabbath, that his Goods should be presently
given to the Poor. A Man gathering but a few Sticks on that Day, was stoned to
Death, because that was thought to be a Profanation of the Sabbath. In France,
a Woman refraining to Sanctify the Sabbath, Fire appeared in the Air unto her;
this moved her not: It came the second time unto her House; and yet this moved
her not: It came the third time, and devoured all that ever she had, but a
little Chird in the Cradie.

But, to come nearer our selves: In the Year 1583. the House of Paris Garden
fell down, as they were at the Bear-Baiting, Jan. 23. on a Sunday, and Four
Hundred Persons fore Crushed; yet by God's Mercy, only Eight were Slain
outright.

I would be a Suitor to the Honorable Persons that sits about the Chair, That
this Brutish Exercise may be used on some other Day, and not the Sabbath; which
I wish with my Heart, may be observed: And I doubt not, but great Reformation
will come, if this Bill does but Pass. To the better effecting whereof, I
humbly pray, That if there be Imperfections in it, it may be Committed.

Sir George Moore said: (...).
I have read, That the Tongue of a Man is so tied in his Mouth, that it will
Stir still. It is tied deep in the Stomach with certain Strings, which reach to
the Heart; to this end, That what the Heart does offer, the Tongue may utter;
what the Heart thinks, the Tongue may speak. This I know to be true, because
I find in the Word of Truth, [Out of the Abundance of the Heart, the Mouth
speaks.] For the Gentleman that inveighs so much against Justices, it may
proceed out of the Corruption of his Heart; However, I mean not to search it,
or answer him: Only, I turn him to Solomon, and mean to answer him with Silence.

Without Going to Church, or Doing Christians Duties, we cannot be Religious;
and by Religion we learn both our Duties to God, and the Queen. In doing our
Duty to God, we shall be the better able to do our Duty to our Prince; and the
Word bids us, That we should give unto God, that which is due unto God. Et
Caesari quae sunt Caesaris.

Amongst many Laws which we have, we have none for Constraint of God's Service:
I say none, though one were made primo Reginae; because that Law is no Law,
which takes no Force; for Executio Legis vita Legis.

Then let not us give such Cause of Comfort to our Adversaries; that having
drawn a Bill in Question for the Service of our God, we should stand so much in
questioning the same. Once a Month coming to Church, excuses us from the Danger
of the Law, but not from the Commandment of God, who says, Thou shall
Sanctify the Sabbath Day; that is, every Sabbath.

This Bill ties the Subject to so much, and no more; which being agreeable to
the Law of God, and the Rule of Policy, I see no Reason we should stand so
strictly in giving it a Commitment.

Mr. Bond said: I wish the Sabbath to be Sanctified, according to the precise
Rule of God's Commandment: Mr. Bond against the Bill.
But I wish that St. Augustine's Rule may be observed in the Manner; Non
jubendo, sed docendo, magis monendo quam minando.

I like not that such Power should be given to the Justices of Peace; for, Who
almost are not grieved at the Luxuriant Authority of Justices of Peace? By the
Statute of 1 Ed. 3. they must be good Men and Lawful; no Maintainers of Evil,
but Moderate in Execution of Laws. For Magistrates are Men, and Men have
always attending on them two Ministers, Libido and Iracundia. Men of this
Nature, do subjugate the Free Subject: Clerks can do much, Children more, and
Wives most.

It is dangerous therefore, to give Authority in so dangerous a thing as this;
which I hold worth your second Thoughts, Quae solent esse Prudentiores.

Her Majesty, all the Time of Her Reign, has been Clement, Gracious, Meek, and
Merciful; yea, choosing rather Delinquere, I know not how to term it, in
Lenity, but not in Cruelty. But by this Statute, there is a Constraint to come
to Divine Service; and for Neglect, all must pay, Plectentur Achivi. The Poor
Commonalty, (whose Strength and Quietness, is the Strength and Quietness of us
all) he only shall be Punished, he Vexed. For, will any think, that a Justice
of Peace will contest with so good a Man as himself? No: This Age is too Wise.
I leave it to this House, Whether it stands with Policy, when Four Subsidies,
and Eight Fifteens be now Granted, to bring the Poorer Sort into a greater
Fear, by these and such like Laws; Malus Custos Diuturnitatis Metus. And in the
Gracious Speech, which Her Majesty lately delivered unto us, She used this
Phrase, That She desired to be beloved of Her Subjects: It was a Wise Speech of
a Wise Prince; for an Historian says, Timor excitat in vindictam.

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I mislike the Bill, in that Point touching Justices,
as also touching Taxation. And I will only say thus much, with Paphnutius in
the Nicene-Council; Absit, quod tam grave jugum fratribus nostris imponamus.

Mr. Comptroller said; I am sorry, after Forty Three Years under her Majesty's
happy Government, that we should now Dispute or Commit a Bill of this Nature.
Mr. Comptroller for the Bill.
And I wonder that any Voice durst be so bold, or desperate to cry, Away with
this Bill.

The old Statute gives the Penalty, this new one only speedy means to Levy
it. And I much marvail that Men will or dare accuse Justices of the Peace,
Ministers to her Majesty, without whom the Commonwealth cannot be. If this
boldness go on, they will accuse Judges, and lastly, the Seat of Justice it
self. That all Justices should be thus generally accused, this is mere
Barbarism indeed; when her Majesty shall have Understanding thereof, it will
be no Contentment unto her, and a Scandal unto us all.

Mr. Glascock said; Mr. Glascock's Apology for having Taxed the Justices of
Peace.
In that I am Taxed to Tax Justices of the Peace, I am to pray the House, to
give me leave to make an Apology for my self.

Mr. Speaker, I will not deny That that I spoke Yesterday; but upon my
Salvation I speak, and protest it in mine own Conscience, I spoke it only of
the Inferior sort of Justices. Against these I will not speak that I spoke
last, but other matter in other terms, they be like the Wise Men of Chaldee,
that could never give Judgment, till they saw the Intrailes of Beasts. Our
Statutes Penal be like the Beast called (...) Born in the Morning, at his full
Growth at Noon, and Dead at Night: So these Statutes are quick in Execution,
like a Wonder for Nine Days; and that is a Wonder they continue so long; soon
after they be at the height: but by the end of a Year, they are carried Dead in
a Basket to the Justices House.

Mr. Speaker said: The Speaker Opposes, and tells him, He must justify his
Calumnies.
Mr. Glascock, you speak from the Matter and Purpose, and this you have spoken,
you must justify.

Mr. Martin said: I am the rather willing to speak, in that I would willingly
have an end of this Matter. Mr. Martin.
I think we all agree upon the Substance, That it is fit the Sabbath should be
Sanctified. The other Matter, which is the Impediment, I know it is a Grief;
but I leave it, as Matter more fit to be decided at a Committee, than here.

And therefore, for the Honor of the Queen, and of Her Government, I wish it
may be Committed without any further Argument.

Sir Robert Wroth said: I think the Office of a Justice of Peace, is too good
for him that exclaims against it; Sir Robert Wroth would have Glascock brought
to answer at the Bar.
and I think, he will never have the Honor to have it. It were good that he
named them; and that he were enjoined to tell who they were he spoke so meanly
of: Otherwise, Honest Men will be loath to Serve the Queen, when they shall be
slandered without Proof. Which the House is against.
Therefore, I would that he might Answer it at the Bar. And all cried, No, No,
No.

Mr. Johnson said: Mr. Johnson Seconds Sir Robert Wroth.
This Bill is an excellent good Bill. And I have observed in all Speeches yet
spoken, it has been interlarded with other Matter. The Gentleman now
protests He spoke of Basket-Justices. I appeal to the whole House, whether
his Definition was not General; viz. A Justice of Peace is a kind of living
Creature, that for half a Dozen of Chickens will dispense with a Dozen of Penal
Statutes. I think it is well known, that the Honorable, that sit about the
Chair, and all the rest of Her Majesty's Privy Council, have, and do hold the
same Place; and this touches Them, as well as Inferior Justices. And
therefore, I humbly pray, He may answer it at the Bar, and that it may not be
put off with Silence.

Mr. Hide said: Every Man agrees, this Bill has good Matter; Mr. Hide for the
Bill.
and we all consent to the Substance, though dissent to the Form. Some have
more Wit, some more Understanding than others. If they of meaner Capacity and
Judgment speak Impertinently, let not us in a Spleen straight ways cry, Away
with the Bill: But let us give it the same Favor, that we give to Bills of far
inferior Nature, and of less Moment; That is, a Commitment.

So the Bill was committed to the former Committees; The Bill committed.
the Place of Meeting appointed, the Exchequer-Chamber; and to Morrow in the
Afternoon, the Time.

Mr. Doyley said: Mr. Speaker, I would move but one Question, Mr. Doyley moves
against the Slanderers of Justices.
that is, What shall be done against those two general Slanderers of Justices
of the Peace?

Mr. Mountague, Junior, said: The words Luxuriant Authority, Mr. Mountague
seconds.
and, the heavy Yoke of a Justice of Peace, are words dangerous, and hurtful,
and prejudicial to Her Majesty's Honor: And therefore, I think fit, they
should both be called to the Bar, to answer it.

Mr. Glascock said: I protest again, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Glascock's Protestation.
I spoke it only of those Justices, that make it their Living to gain by their
poor Neighbors.

Sir Francis Hastings said: If all things spoken should rest within the Walls
of this House, Sir Francis Hastings against them.
I could well be content to be Silent. But when this Scandal (which I wish
might be so Reformed, it might be made an Example) shall be blazed abroad, as a
general Slanderous Imputation of Justices, and the Stirrers up thereof not
punished; this perhaps, would touch the Credit of those whose Credit, I think,
cannot well be Tainted.

He that sits against me, ( pointing at Mr. Bond) is my Countryman; and I am
sorry, he should thus lose his Way: But my Conscience tells me, Amicus
Socrates, amicus Plato; sed magis amicus veritas. Two dangerous and seditious
Speeches have been made by him: But I hope, the House will not conceive so
basely of Justices of the Peace, or their Authority, who deserve well of Queen
and Country, because it comes from him. I say no more. I know what it is:
Howsoever, it is a Luxurious Speech, and not to be suffered. In speaking
against the Bill, he showed the little good Will he had to the Passage of the
Bill. He likened his Speech to Paphnutius's Speech, who spoke in a
General-Council to defend Religion; but this Man speaks to Oppugn it.

Have we now lived Forty Three Years under Her Majesty's Happy and Religious
Government, and shall we now dispute, Whether it is fit to come to the Church?
Parry desired no more, who in that Place (Pointing to the Right Side of the
Chair) so soon as the Bill touching Seminaries was brought in, called it a
Bloody Bill, a Tyrannical Bill, a Bill of Confiscation of Goods. I pray how far
stretches this Grande Jugum? But to a poor Twelve Pence. The Speech was
Insolent; and in regard to Her Majesty's Honor, I wish it might be answered
There, (Pointing to the Bar.) And the House said, No, No, No.

Mr. Bond said: Mr. Bond's Apology for himself.
I would be loath, that any Speech of mine should offer any offense, being
spoken in the behalf of the Country for which I Serve. I know their grievous
Complaints against the Execution of Laws by Justices. The word, Luxuriant, as I
used it, I wish may be Construed in this Sense: All Penal Laws refer their
Execution to Justices of the Peace. In that Respect, because the Authority of
Justices of the Peace, seemed to me to be too Powerful over the Subject; in
that Respect, I thought it Luxuriari: But I think far otherwise of these
Church-Neglecters.

Mr. Martin said: Luxuriari is to abound, and therefore the Poet says,
Luxuriatur agris. And I wish, all those that would slander Her Majesty's
Government, by Color of their Authority, in Oppressing the Subjects; that they
may Perish.

A Bill against Drunkards, and common haunters of Alehouses and Taverns; upon
Ingrossment it was Read, and Passed.

A Bill for Reformation of Abuses committed, A Bill against Abuses in Inns, etc.
in Inns, Taverns, Alehouses, and Victualling-Houses, was Read. To which,

Sir Walter Rawleigh said, Sir Walter Rawleigh against it.
That if a Man had a Manor which might inquire for the Defaults of Ale-selling
by full measure, This Privilege was now lost by this Bill. Another, there was a
dissability for ever after, of being an Innkeeper. How dangerous this might be
to the Inheritance of those that had Inns, some at One Hundred Pounds per
annum; and how dangerous to the Innkeepers, that might by negligence of a
Servant suffer, he left that to the discretion of the House.

Mr. Brown of Gray's Inn, showed, That Sixteen Hundred Quarters of Malt was
saved by this course taken in Somersetshire; that Mr. Phillips could testify,
who is now Knight of the Shire. And that in Wells, the Lord Chief Justice of
England affirmed, That Fifty Quarters of Malt, and Fifty Quarters of Barley
were saved in one Year.

Mr. Sergeant Harris said: If two False Witnesses come before a Justice, and
swear against a Man for a little short Measure, he is without Remedy; and every
Punishment ought to be Secundum qualitatem delicti: And for so small a Matter,
Disability is too great a Punishment.

A Bill to avoid the Double Payment of Debts upon Shop-Books, was Read.

Mr. Brown of Grays Inn found, indeed, a considerable Fault in this bill, by
reason of the Generality, which was Debts, and not set Debts upon Shop-Books.
So it was found to be true, and the Bill was like to be cast out; for the House
would not have had it mended.

Sir Robert Wroth said: I have been of this House these Forty Years; and ever
knew, that a Bill before Passage might be Amended: So it was in the Bill for
Tillage, the Last Parliament. Wherefore I would wish, That it might rest until
to Morrow, and then to be Amended. And all cried, I, I, I.

On Thursday, December. 3. A Bill for the Repairing and Amending of Two Bridges
over the River of Eden, in the County of Cumberland, adjoining to the Walls of
the City of Carlisle; was Read the second Time, and Committed: The Place
appointed for Meeting, was, the Checquer-Chamber, to Morrow in the Afternoon.

A Bill for Curriours.

A Bill for Strengthening the North-Parts, and for Building of a Peer at
New Haven, Read the second Time, and Committed: The Committee to Meet in the
Exchecquer-Chamber, to Morrow in the Afternoon.

A Bill to avoid Idleness, and for setting the Poor on Work: Which Bill is in
manner of a Monopoly; for there be certain named in it, who undertake to keep
Fifty Thousand Poor on Work, in making Pins, Wool-Cards, Needles, etc.

A Bill for Reformation of Abuses in Buying and Selling of Spices, and other
Merchandises, was brought from the Committee, and Ordered to be Engrossed.

A Bill for the Enlargment of a Jointure to Rachel, Wife of Edward Nevill of
Burling, in the County of Kent, Esquire.

A Bill for the Perfecting of the Jointure of the Lady Bridget, Countess of
Sussex, Wife of the Right Honorable Robert Earl of Sussex, Read and Committed.

A Bill for the Confirmation of the Sale of certain Lands, sold by Lewis Lord
Mordant, etc. Read and Committed to the former Committees.

Mr. Edward Mountague said: Mr. Speaker, Mr. Mountague's Charitable Motion.
I will make a Charitable Motion, which I hope will tend to a Charitable End;
and briefly, it is this: That no private Bill may Pass in this House, but the
Procurers to give something to the Poor.

Mr. Secretary Cecil said: My Motion is stirred up, Secretary Cecil seconds it,
with some Alteration.
with the like Charitable Affection, which first moved the Gentleman that last
spoke; only I disagree from him in the Manner. We see the Streets full of
Soldiers, some Maimed, some Poor; but all Distressed. Our ordinary begging
Poor are all Provided for, and Statutes made for their Maintenance. I would
only move thus much to the House, That this Contribution proceeding out of our
Charity, might be only employed to the Relief of them who have ventured their
Lives to defend Us. The House said it was a good motion, and so generally
agreed unto it.

Mr. Richard Messenger said: Mr. Messenger for the same.
I would but move the House only, that they which have already had any Bill
passed this House, this Parliament, may also be Contributary, as well as they
which are to come.

Mr. Mountague said: Mr. Mountague particularizes the Sums.
Because I offered to the Consideration of this House, this motion first, I
will presume also more particularly to deliver my Opinion. I think, for every
private Bill for Sale of Lands, Ten Pounds, a reasonable Benevolence; and for
every Estate for Life, or for Jointure, Five Pounds.

Mr. Ravenscroft said: I would only move to know, whether this should remain as
a perpetual, or temporary Order for this Parliament?

Mr. Secretary Cecil said: The House only means it for this present; and all
said, I, I, I. And so the Order was entered accordingly.

Mr. Dannet, Mr. Dannet's Speech, and Motion against the Pirates of Dunkirk and
Newport.
a Burgess for Yarmouth, said: Mr. Speaker, the Duty that I owe to my
Sovereign, and Country, makes me bold to crave your Patience to hear me.

The Matter that I shall speak of, is twofold; The First, concerns the honor
of the Queen. The Second, the safety of our Country. Two very high points for
me to handle; and require a more Eloquent Discourse than I am able to make. I
will use no Circumstance, or with superfluous Matter abuse the time, which is
precious, but to the Matter.

I have been of the Parliament Five or Six times, and I have always observed
by this House, (and I would willingly be resolved by the Honorable about the
Chair) that all the Wars of Her Majesty are offensive, and I do not hear the
contrary: How then comes it, that such a Number of Her Majesty's Subjects be
Spoiled, Robbed, Beaten, Wounded, themselves taken and used with such extreme
Torture, Racked, Carried away, Imprisoned, Ransomed, Fined, and some times
Executed, and all this time no Wars? But, give me leave to say, for these Ten
Years, I am sure, the Subjects of this Land on the Seacoasts have undergone
these Tyrannies. And by whom? Even by two base Towns, Dunkirk and Newport.

Dunkirk began with Two Ships, and are now increased almost to Twenty; they be
at home at Supper, and the next Day here with us. I must needs confess, that
the great Charge that I know the Lord Admiral is at Continually, by lying ready
to take these Pirates, is much; but send to take them, they straight Fly home.
If our Ships return, they are straight here again. I dare boldly say, they have
done England more hurt since they began, than all France, either in the time of
Hen. 8. Edw. 6. or Queen Mary.

If it be so, that these Two base Towns shall so affront the Power of this
Land, I see no Reason they should be suffered: For it is a great Dishonor both
to the Queen, and the Kingdom.

I have heard many say, That the Navy of England is the Walls of the Kingdom:
and yet, we suffer our Ships still to be Destroyed; some to be Burnt, some to
be Sunk before our Faces.

We may compare our Seamen to Sheep, Feeding upon a Fair Mountain, in the
midst whereof stands a Grove full of Wolves. Why, Mr. Speaker, we are so
plagued with them, that they are so bold, as now and then to take our
Harvest-Men tardy by Ambuscadoes.

I speak it with Grief, and it was Reported unto me by a Scottish-Man, that
Duke Albertus, and the Infanta should openly publish, That they would pull down
so many of the Walls of England, that they would easily make an Entry: and it
had been better for Sea-Coast-Men to have given the Queen an Hundred Subsidies,
that they had been long since Suppressed.

My humble Motion is, That it would please the House to enter into
Consideration of these things, For the Honor, Good, and Safety, both of the
Queen and Kingdom.

'Mr. Peake said: Mr. Peake.
I must needs show unto this House (upon so good an occasion offered) how
grievously the Town of Sandwich (for which I serve) is vexed, and almost
undone; insomuch, as that in that Town there is neither Owner, Master, nor
Mariner that has not felt it.

Her Majesty is continually at Charges; but what insueth or comes of it, I
never yet knew. In the County of Kent at Shooters-Hill, Gads-Hill, Barram-Down,
etc. if there should be several Roberies Committed, and the Justices look
nothing to it, it would be taken in ill part. Every day Men come home, their
Goods, and al they have is taken away; yea, their very Apparel. And if the
Ships might be also carried away; they would do it. This would be Amended and
looked unto; we have need to Cherish this Subject: For I think him to be the
best and most necessary Member of the Commonwealth, I mean the Navigator.

Mr. Martin said: Mr. Martin.
I like not these Extravagant Speeches in the Manner, though I mislike them not
in the Matter; they are like to Men whose Houses being on Fire, forgetting
themselves, run out into the Streets like Madmen, for Help. That that Cottage
of Dunkirk (the Flourishing Estate whereof, is a dishonor to our Nation)
should so much offend us, when we never offer to oppress them, is a Marvail. I
think there is no Man but understands the Grief, and no Man which readily
knows the Remedy.

I wish, that those who first propounded this Matter to the House, had also
laid down some Project, though never so small, of Remedy: otherwise such
cursory Motions as these, cannot but be very Distasteful to the House.

'Mr. Hithe said: Within these Twelve Days, one Man lost Two Hundred Pounds
only by the Dunkirkers, who took the same away from him.

Mr. Secretary Cecil. said: Secretary Cecil seconds the Motion.
My Speech shall only tend to advance the Motion of the Gentleman that spoke
first in this Point. If we would have Remedy, we are to consider two things.
First, That it will be a Matter of Charge: and Secondly, That there must be a
Distribution thereof: For the first, I leave it to you; for the second, it is
out of my Element: withal I must excuse them that have Authority to Remedy
this; for unless you would have a continual Charge unto Her Majesty, by having
Ships to lie between Us and Dunkirk, it is impossible but that at sometimes
these Robberies will be Committed. The Business is Committed.
And I could very well agree to bring this Motion to some Head, being a Matter
in my Opinion very Considerable, in a Committee. Mr. Dannet
And all said, I, I, I.

Mr. Dannet said: I would only move the House, That some Masters of Ships and
Seamen might be sent for to attend the Committee. So it was agreed to be
Committed, And the place and time appointed for Meeting, in the
Exchecquer-Chamber, on Saturday in the Afternoon.

A Bill for Levying of Fines, within the County of the City of Chester,
Engrossed, and put to the Question, passed, and then sent up by Mr. Secretary
Herbert and others, with another Bill to the Lords.

Mr. Tate said: I would only move the House, That whereas an Information is
Exhibited by the Earl of Huntington against a Member of this House, Mr.
Belgrave by Name, into the Star Chamber, containing no matter of Substance or
Note, other than matter very dishonorable to this House: I therefore humbly
pray, it may be referred, to be considered of by the Committee for the
Privileges of this House. And all said, I, I, I. He delivered the Information
to the Speaker.

A Bill for the Reuniting of Eye and Dunsden to the Manor of Sunning, Read the
second time, and Committed to certain Committees, in the Committee Chamber
presently.

A Bill for the Denization of certain Persons, viz. Josepho Lopo, etc was Read,
and put to the Question, and Ordered to be Engrossed.

A Bill to avoid double Payment of Debts, A Bill against double payment of
Book-Debts.

Mr. Lock begins to speak, falls a trembling, and fits down again.

Mr. Bacon speaks to it.


was Read.

To this Bill Mr. Zacharias Lock began to speak, but for very Fear shook, so
that he could not proceed, but stood still a while, and at length sat down.

Mr. Bacon speaking of this Bill, said, That Bills were wont to be Committed
with Pleasure; but now we would scarce hear them with Patience. The Merchants
Books, he said, were springing Books, every Year they would increase, etc.

Mr. Henshaw, Mr. Henshaw.
amongst other Speeches said: That it was as easy to cross a Merchants Book,
which a Man might see at all times, as to Give the Merchant a Bond; who when he
had many thrust together, perhaps, would entreat the Gentleman to come some
other time for it, who if he should in the mean time Die, his Executors are
without remedy, etc.

Mr. Sergeant Harris said: Serj. Harris.
These Merchants Books are like Aarons Rod, ever Budding, and like Basingstoak
Reckonings, over Night Five Shillings Six Pence, if you pay it not it is grown
in the Morning to a just Noble This Debt, is a Sleeping Debt, and it will lull
young Gentlemen into Merchants Books, with the Golden Hooks of being trusted by
the Merchant, and his Expectancy after his Fathers Death. These are Matters
dangerous, and I think hurtful; therefore I think it a good Bill, etc.

Mr. John Harris said: Where it is said, Mr. John Harris.
There can be no Wager of Law against a Merchants Book in London, it is true:
But first the Merchant must Swear the Debt, etc.

Mr. Thomas Jones said: It is now my chance to Speak something, Mr. Jones.
and that without Humming or Hawing. I think this Law is a good Law; Even
Reckoning makes long Friends; As far goes the Penny, as the Penny's Master.
Vigilantibus non dormientibus jura subventunt. Pay the Reckoning over Night,
and you shall not be troubled in the Morning. If ready Money be Mensura
Publica, let every Man cut his Coat according to his Cloth. When his old Suit
is in the Wain, let him stay till that his Money bring a new Suit in the
Increase. Therefore, I think the Law to be good, and I wish it a good Passage.

Mr. Hackwell of Lincoln's Inn said: Mr. Hackwell.
I am a Man of that Rank and Condition, that I never sell, and seldom buy, and
pay ready Money; and the safest course this Bill offers to me for my particular.

But the great Mischief that will redound by it to the Commons, is that which
makes me speak. I am not Transported with such Vehemence; but if I may be
answered, I will lay down the Bucklers. This Bill has a good Face, but an ill
Body. It has a very good Headpiece, I mean the Title. It is like Daniel's
Image; It has a Head of Gold, a Body of Silver, Thighs of Brass, Legs of Iron,
and Feet of Clay.

If I may pray you to put on a great deal of Patience, for a little time; I
will make it somewhat plain: We must lay down the Respects of our own Persons,
and put on others, and their Affections for whom we speak, for they speak for
Us.

If the Matter which was spoken of, touch the Poor, then think me a poor Man:
he that speaks must be sometimes a Lawyer, sometimes a Painter, sometimes a
Merchant, sometimes a mean Artificer. Most Men desire forbearance; this Bill
destroys it; which tends to the Gain and Good of the Creditor, and Good also of
the Buyer: but seeking to avoid a Mischief, we fall into an Inconvenience.

For the manner is unproportionable and unjust. If the Buyer be so negligent
that he will not care to see himself discharged, must we needs make a Law to
help his folly? The Proverb is Caveat emptor. If this Law goes forwards, the
augmentation of confidence in his ancient habilliments can not be preserved.
For if it be a hard Year, the poor Artificer, who has Wife and Children, and
Household to maintain, and lives by the Sweat of his Brows, can not live; for
he has not money to buy all with the Penny; but perhaps he has Credit, which
perhaps may help his present necessitous Estate.

And besides, I can teach you all a Trick, how for Twelve Pence you may avoid
this Statute; and that is, File an Original Writ within the Year, and so let it
lie dormant.

After which Motion, The Bill passed.
the House after four Hours Argument (and sitting till three quarters of an
hour after Twelve) was divided. The I, I, I. had 151. Voices, and the No's 102.
so the Bill passed by 49. Voices.

Then the No's should have fetched the Bill, and go out with it, because it
was at the passage of the Bill: but because the time was past, and it was very
late, and several Committees to sit this afternoon, they were dispensed withal.

Friday December. 4. A Bill for the Repealing of a Statute made 14. Reginae for
the length of Kersies.

A Bill touching Weights and Measures.

A Bill for the Confirmation of the Authority of the Mayor, Aldermen and
Citizens of London, touching St. Katharin's Creed-Church London, was Committed,
the place and time appointed for Meeting, Doctors Commons, on Friday next at
two of the Clock in the afternoon.

A Bill entitled, an Act for the Assuring of the Patronage of the Vicarage of
Rotherston, to Thomas Venables Esquire, brought in by Mr. Clayfeild of Grays
Inn, who showed, That all the Parties were agreed to the Bill, and called at
the Committee to the Amendments, was put to the Question, and Ordered to be
Engrossed.

A Bill for Dreining of certain Grounds in the Fenny Countries, after
Commitment, now brought in by Sir Robert Wroth, who certified the House only of
one little Amendment, and the Omission of a long and Frivulous Proviso, was
also put to the question and Ordered to be Engrossed.

A Bill to prevent Perjury and Subornation of Perjury, and unnecessary expenses
in Suits in Law, after commitment yesterday, it was brought in by the Collector
of this Journal, who was Chosen to Report it to the House.

He showed, That the Committees had only put in the word [That] and commanded
him to offer to the Consideration of the House, the substance of the Bill etc.
and so he Recited it. As also, that there was Disputed an Exception, That no
Suits might be removed that were under Forty Shillings; but for that, perhaps,
it would be thought to be prejudicial to the Prerogative of the Courts at
Westminster, the Judges in the upper House would not so willingly assent to the
Passage of this Bill.

Lastly, because by long and Ancient Custom and Common Law, Suits might be
Removed, etc. now being an Innovation, and because we know not how beneficial
this Law will be, therefore it was thought by the Committees convenient, that
it should have a time of Probation, until the end of the next Parliament: And
so it was put to the Question, and Ordered to be Engrossed.

A Bill for Reformation of Abuses in Sheriffs, and other inferior Officers,
for not Executing Writs and Proclamations, was Committed; the time and place
appointed for Meeting, the Midle-Temple-Hall, on Monday in the afternoon.

A Bill for making of Fustians within this Realm and profit to the
Commonwealth by the same, was Committed, and the place and time of Meeting
appointed, the Exchequer-Chamber, on Tuesday in the afternoon.

A Bill prohibiting Fairs and Markets to be holden on the Sunday, was
Committed to the former Committees for the Sabbath; and the time of Meeting to
be to morrow. Sir Edward Hobby said, It pleased the House about the beginning
of the Parliament, to appoint certain Committees, to receive the Complaints,
and hear Causes touching the Privileges of the House; we have met, but never
above three or four at one time together.

May it please the House, That the Committees Names may be Read, and that
warning may be given to all to meet to morrow in the afternoon, at the Court of
Wards, there to Debate those matters that shall happen questionable. And also,
I am to move you, to take notice of an Information exhibited in the
Star Chamber, against a Member of this House, which it pleased you to Commit
over upon Information thereof to be decided at the Committee: And all said, I,
I, I.

Mr. Phillips said, It pleased the House to Commit a Bill, for Reformation or
Explanation of the Law made 39. Reginae. The Committees met, and entered into
three Considerations: First, whether the Act of 39. Reginae Entitled, An Act
to Reform Deceipts, and breaches of Trusts touching Lands given to Charitable
Uses, should stand in force, or no, as now it is? And all generally agreed it
should not.

The Second was, whether Reformation thereof should be by Explanation or
Abroation? And in the end it was concluded, it should be by Abrogation.

The third was, whether it should be Abrogated by the general Repeal of
Statutes, or that there should be a particular Statute for that purpose: And
'twas agreed, that it should be done by a particular Statute.

And for that purpose, being so Commanded by the Committee, I have drawn a
Bill, referring it to the Wisdom of the House to be Considered of; The Title
is, An Act for the good Execution of Charitable Uses in this Statute
particularly mentioned.

Doctor Carry, and the Clerk of the Crown, brought a Bill from the Lords, for
the Suppressing of the multitude of Alehouses, and Victualling-Houses; which
was presently Read.

Mr. Johnson upon hearing this Bill Read, said, Methinks, there is an apparent
Fault; and that is, the Fill gives liberty to Justices of the Peace to search,
etc. which by the Generality thereof, is as well within Corporations as
without; and therefore, good to be considered of.

A Bill for continuance of diverse Statutes, and for Repealing of some others.

Mr. Sergeant Harris, moved, That the Statute for Tillage, might be continued,
and said, If we shall continue and discontinue (upon every slight motion) good
Laws, we shall do like little Children, which make babies, then beat them, then
pull them in pieces.

A Bill for the Relief of the Poor, brought in by Sir Robert Wroth.

The substance of the Information of which, Mr. Tate the last day spoke of: And
also Sir Edward Hobby this day. An Information by Edward Coke Her Majesty's
Attorney, Mr. Attorney Coke.
who shows, That the Queen Calls her Parliament, and that her self is the
Chief Peer thereof. And that it was called for diverse Weighty Causes and
Matters. And therein further showed, that the Town of Leicester in the County
of Leicester, is an Ancient Burrough-Town. And that the said Borough sends
Burgesses to the Parliament House. And whereas the Parliament began the Twenty
Seventh Day of October, and they Chose George Belgrave of Belgrave Esquire in
the said County of Leicester to be Burgess for the said I own, supposing the
said George Belgrave to come with the good liking and free consent of the Earl
of Huntington (without whose Advice the said Town neither has nor will choose
any Burgess) whereas indeed, he is a noted Enemy to the said Earl of
Huntington, and finding and fearing they would not Choose him, because of the
same, he the said Belgrave, against the said Election prepared and put on his
back, a blew Coat with a Cognizance, being a Bulls-head set upon the sleeve of
the same, and thereby they imagined him to be the said Earls man, Chose him as
aforesaid. And the rather to make himself sure of the said Election, he
offered, upon his Corporal Oath, to affirm that he was servant to, and in good
Favor with the said Earl: with this lewd Practice, the said Earl being much
grieved and offended, the same being being greatly to his prejudice (having the
Election of a Burgess there) to the dishonor of Her Majesty and the House of
Parliament, that any Member thereof should be Chosen by such Covin and indirect
Practice, Prayed, etc.

It was agreed, that the Subsidy-Bill should be Read to morrow, and the House
called.

Saturday December. 5. A Bill for the grant of Four entire Subsidies, and Eight
Fifteens and Tenths, granted by the Temporalty, Read.

Mr. Symnel said, I am not against this Bill of Subsidy; for, far be it from
me, that any such Thought should harbor in my Heart, for I am of that Opinion
which Cicero the famous Orator was of, That whosoever would live in safety,
must abide necessity. But all that I have to say is this, That we would be
humble Suitors to their Honors that sit about the Chair, That it would please
them to move Her Majesty; That that most gracious and general free Pardon which
it will please Her Majesty to bestow upon us, might have no more shortness,
than it had at the beginning of Her Reign; For if Her Majesty out of Her
Goodness took Compassion upon us, when we had nothing so many Penal and
Intrapping Laws, as we now have; I hope that seeing the Statutes do abound, it
will please Her, That Her Grace would Superabound. This is my most humble
Motion, and this I do most humbly Pray, That the House would Consider of it.

It was put to the Question, for the Passing of the Subsidy-Bill, and all cried
I, I, I. and not one No.

And it was Moved by Sir Edward Hobby, That it might presently be sent up to
the Lords with all the House, and not by the Privy Council alone, for the more
honor thereof; which was well liked, and agreed unto.

Mr. Boyce, brought in the Bill touching the jointure of Rachel the Wife of
Edward Nevil of Burling in Kent.

A Bill for the more diligent Resort to the Church on Sundays, was Read.

Mr. Roger Owen said: That he was of the same Opinion he before had been of,
for Amendment of the said Bill; and that himself was as willing for the Passing
thereof, as any other. And he desired, that his Error, if it were Answered,
might be judged Error Amoris, and not Amor erroris. And that as God had given
him a Heart to understand, and Lights and Lungs to Cool the Heat of his Heart;
so, God had given him Understanding to cool and temper the Heat of his Soul.
And so he Proceeded, and made a brief Repetition, with some Arguments for
Confirmation of the same Speech he first made.

Mr. Winch said: I much marvail, That the Gentleman which last spoke, would
speak against this Bill, allowing so well the matter. I know him well, and his
Bringing up, and both his Sufficiency and Zeal, which I very well know, and am
well persuaded of.

His Speech consisted of four Points: The first I heard not, The second was,
because it repugned Magna Charta; The words being, Nemo Capiatur, nemo
imprisonetur, etc. nisi per pares, aut per legem terrae. The third, because, in
Repeal of the Statute of 1 Reginae, Authority is taken from the Justices of
Assize. The Fourth, the 23 Reginae not Repealed, etc. which he Answered all,
but not fully.

Sergeant Harris, moved two Doubts in the Bill; First, That it was by
Information, which appeared after to be vitium Scriptoris; for it was
Information by Jury: now [by Jury] was written over [Information] in the
interlining, and the Caret made before [Information] whereas it should have
been after: the other was, That Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was taken from the
Queen, which indeed I could not find well Answered. So the Bill was put to the
question, and the most Voices were I, I, I.

At the Committee in the Afternoon in the House, for some Course to be taken
against Dunkirk.

Mr. Fettyplace showed a remedy three manner of ways. First, there is a
Transportation of Ordnance, which being carried to the Low Countries, he
carries it to Dunkirk, or our Enemies: which if it were hindered, doubtless our
Enemies would find want in time. Secondly, the Law of Tonnage and Poundage.
Thirdly, it has been offered to the State, that the Maritine parts might save
themselves freely. And I take it to be a Rule in policy, We should not yield
that to our Friends which may be fitting to our Foes against us.

It was concluded at this Committee, that all the Coast-Town Men of the
Committee, should meet together in the Afternoon on Monday, and consider of
some Course, and relate the same to the Committee.

Mr. Wingfield showed me the Bill Touching Fenns, which was Exhibited the last
Parliament, and passed both Houses, but Advised upon by Her Majesty, for some
respects, Entitled, An Act for the recovering of Three Hundred Thousand Acres
more or less, of Wastes, Marish and Watery grounds in the Isle of Ely, and in
the Counties of Cambridge, Huntington, Northampton, Lincoln, Norfolk, Suffolk,
etc. On the left side, on the Top of the Bill was written, in Roman Letters,
Soit baylle as Signieurs. And close to the same, in another hand, A cest Bill
avecque les amendments and la provision a celle Communes les Suis sont
Assentu's. And underneath the Provision, Annexed to the Act on the left side
thereof, close to the writing, was written; Soit baylle Aux Communes, And on
the back under the Title aforesaid was written thus.

.2..3.

He showed me also, the Bill for Fenns in this Parliament, entitled, An Act
concerning the Dreining and Recovery from the Water of certain over-Flown
Grounds in the Counties of Norfolk, and Suffolk, etc.

December, 6.

December, 7. A Bill for Ludgate.

A Bill Touching the Countess of Sussex her Jointure.

A Bill Touching Cox and Dethick.

A Bill for the better making of Woollen Cloth.

A Bill prohibiting Markets and Fairs to be kept on the Sunday, was brought in
from the Committee by Mr. Doyly, and put to the question, and agreed to be
engrossed.

A Bill concerning the Assize for Feuel, was read and Committed; the place of
meeting the Court of Wards; and to Morrow in the Afternoon, the time.

A Bill for the better Execution of the Good and Charitable Uses hereafter in
this Statute mentioned. It was Committed to the former Committees.

Mr. Bacon said: I am, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Bacon reports, about a New Bill for
Insurances, etc.
to tender to this House the Fruit of the Committees Labor, which tends to the
comfort of the Stomach of this Realm; I mean the Merchant, which, if it quail,
or fall into a Consumption, the State cannot Choose but shortly be Sick of that
Disease. It is inclining already.

A Certainty of Gain, is that which this Law provides for. And by Policy of
Assurance, the safety of Goods is Assured unto the Merchant; this is the
Loadstone that draws him out to adventure, and to streach even the very
Punctillio of his Credit.

The Committees have drawn a New Bill, far different from the Old; the first
limited power to the Chancery, this to certain Commissioners by way of Oyer
and Terminer. The first, that it should only be there; this, that only upon
Appeal from the Commissioners it should be finally Arbitrated. But lest it
should be thought to be very vexatious, the party Appellant must lay in
deposito, etc. And if upon Hearing it goes against him, must pay double Costs
and Damages; we thought this course fittest for two Reasons:

First, Because a Suit in Chancery is too long a course, and the Merchant
cannot endure delays.

Secondly, Because our Courts have not the knowledge of their Terms, neither
can they tell what to say upon their Cases, which be Secrets in their Science,
proceeding out of their Experience.

I referr the Bills, both Old and New, to your considerations, wishing good
Success therein, both for comfort of the Merchants, and Accomplishment of our
desires. The Bill is, entitled. An Act for Policy of Assurance used amongst
Merchants.

Sir Edward Hobby said: It was the good pleasure of this House, Sir Edward
Hobby.
to referr the consideration of an Information Exhibited against a Member of
this House, one of the Burgesses for the Town of Leicester; viz. Mr. Bellgrave:
the Scope and purpose of which Information, pretends an Abuse to be done to
this High Court.

The Gentleman himself was at the Committee, and did acknowledge the substance
of the Suggestion, but denied the Circumstance. Some of the Committees Censured
it to be an Enormous fault, to invest himself (for so the words of the
Information are) in a blew Coat: but others were of a contrary opinion, because
they were satisfied upon Allegations Alleged, that it was done ad reducendam
vexationem, which had been offered unto him, and so he thought to right himself
this way.

Besides, I am to inform the House, that this information is put in Sedente
Curia, and therefore thought by the Committees some disgrace to the same. And,
because this Gentleman should not take benefit of this Pardon; therefore the
Information is now put in, as I said, Sedente Curia, which I wish the House to
Note. And, because he should be debarred of remedy against the party, he has
therefore caused the same to be Exhibited, in Mr. Atturney-Generals name.

May it please the House, because he desires to be heard, and being now here,
that he may speak for himself, in that he told the Committees he had some
special matter to deliver unto you; and if he shall be found Culpable, he would
most willingly abide your Censures. But because some other Bills were to be
read, of importance, this was referred over till some other time.

A Bill for continuance of diverse Statutes, and repeal of some others. Mr.
Francis Moor desired it might be read, and also the Exposition of the Justices
upon the Statute of 39. Reginae concerning Rogues; which if it please the
House, he thought fit to be Annexed to that Statute.

Mr. Bacon said: Mr. Facon speaks against a Bill and dashes it.
There were never yet but two Articuli; the one Articuli super Chartas, when
the Sword stood in the Commons Hands; the other Articuli Cleri, when the Clergy
of the Land bare sway, and that done upon deliberation and grave advise.

I beseech you remember, these are done by Judges, and privately, and perhaps
in a Chamber. And shall we without scanning, or view, Enact them? It befits not
the Gravity of this House. And so after a long speech, dashed it.

Doctor Stanhop and Dr. Carry, brought a Bill from the Lords, Entitled, An Act
for the more Peaceable Government of the parts of Cumberland, Northumberland,
Westmorland, and the Bishopric of Durham.

A Bill to prevent the double-payment of Debts, sent up to the Lords by Mr.
Comptroller and others. And a desire withal, to have a conference with some
few Touching the Bill sent from them of Eye and Dunsden, to be reunited to the
Manor of Sunning.

The cause of this Conference, came from a Motion made by Mr. Serj. Harris, who
said, That for some especial cause and interest, it was desired (which I
learned after what it was, by Mr. Fettyplace Burgess of London) that there was
an admitting of all Assurances; so the Londoners barred of their right, which
they had, by reason this Eye and Dunsden were part of the Land assured to the
City of London for the Loan of Twenty Thousand Pounds Lent to the Queen, to be
repaid at a certain time. And, if this Act should thus pass, they were barred.

The Lords returned word, That Ten of them would meet. And so Twelve of our
House were Chosen to meet them, to Morrow in the afternoon.

Mr. Bacon, Mr. Bacon.
upon a question that should have been propounded to the House, whether the
Statute 39 Elizabeth Touching Charitable Uses, should be the General Act, or
the particular Act Exhibited by Mr. Philips, said, amongst many other things:
That the last Parliament, there were so many other Bills for the Relief of the
Poor, that he called it a Feast of Charity. And now this Statute of 39
Elizabeth, having done so much good, as it was delivered to the House. And the
Lord Keeper, having told him, that he never revoked but one decree of the
Commissioners, we should do a most Uncharitable Action to repeal and subvert
such a mount of Charity; and therefore said, That we should rather tenderly
foster it, then roughly cry, away with it.

I speak (quoth he) Mr. Speaker, even out of the strings of my Heart, which
does Alter my ordinary Form of speech; for I speak not now out of the Fervency
of my Brain, etc. So he spoke something more against the Bill, put in by Mr.
Philips for Repeal, by reason Bishops Lands were put in, and Inrolments, which
he said, was a good Fetch and Policy for the sole practices of the Chancery.

Mr. Philips answered, Mr. Philips against Mr. Bacon.
That he would not speak as he had spoken, rather out of Humor than out of
Judgment; neither had he brought to the House a Market-Bill, or Mercers Bill
concerning the State. And so after many persuasions for the Bill, and bitter
Answers to Mr. Bacon, he ended with a desire, to put it to the Question,
whether it should be Repealed by the public Act, or his private Bill.

Mr. Johnson moved, That the Question might be, Whether it should be as well in
the General Law, as the particular?

Mr. Glascock said: Glascock contra Philips.
I think the Gentleman that last spoke (Mr. Johnson a surveyor) has better
Skill in Measuring of Land, than Men's Consciences. I think it is a good Law,
and fit still to stand on Foot: For if we lose Religion, Let us lose Land too.
It will be a good Cause, That every Man, if not for Religion sake, yet for his
Lands sake, which is his whole estate, will Abandon the setting up of those
Houses again, because he will not part therewith; therefore I think it in
Policy fit still to stand.

So after long dispute, till almost one of the Clock, it was put to the
Question, Whether it shall be Repealed by the General Law of repeal, and
continuance of Statutes. And the most voices were I, I, I, and so it was Agreed.

On Tuesday, December the 8th, A Bill to prohibit Transportation of Ordnance.
An Act prohibiting the Transportation of Iron Ordnance beyond the Seas, by way
of Merchandise, was Read.

Sir Edward Hobby said: Sir Edward Hobby.
I may resemble this Bill to a Gentleman, who told a Story of a Skilful
Painter, who had Painted a Tree standing in the midst of the Sea; and the
Judgment of another Skilful Painter being asked, his Answer was, Valde been sed
hic non erat Locus. So I say this Bill, is an Excellent Bill, the matter Foul,
the request and remedy Good and Honest; but this is not our mean of Redress.

Her Majesty, in the late Proclamation, took notice thereof; and no doubt but
she will Redress it. And for us now, to enter again, in bringing in, or
allowing Bills against Monopolies, it is to refuse Her Majesty's Gracious
Favor, and Cleave to our own affections.

I think therefore, if we will be dealing herein, by Petition will be our only
Course; this is a matter of Prerogative, and this no place to dispute it.

Mr. Fettyplace said: I know Her Majesty receives yearly by Custom, for the
Transportation of these Ordnance, Three Thousand Pounds by the Year; there be
four kind of Ordnance now usually Transported: Mr. Fettyplace to the same Bill.
The first, a Faulcon, of the least Weight and Bore. The second, a Minnion, a
little heavier, and of a bigger Bore. The third, a Saker, of somewhat a
greatter Bore. And the fourth, a Demy-Culvering, being of the greatest Bore.

Now, Mr. Speaker, they that do Transport Ordnance, do Transport in this
manner: If it be a Faulcon, She shall have the weight of a Minnion; and so if a
Saker, the weight of a Demy-Culvering; the Reason thereof is, Because when they
are brought beyond Sea, they will there new bore them to a greatter size; as,
the Saker to the Demi-Culvering-Bore.

Besides, Mr. Speaker, Eight Tun of Iron Ordnance, will make five Tuns of good
Iron.

But perchance, it will be Objected, That if we Restrain the Transportation of
Iron Ordnance, they will use Brass.

I say, under Favor, That they cannot, because they want Brass.

And again, where you may furnish a Ship for 200. or 300. Pounds with Iron
Ordnance, you cannot furnish Her with Brass Ordnance for 1400. Pounds. And it
is now grown so common, that if you would send Merchandise beyond the Seas in
strangers Bottoms, they will not carry them, unless you will ballast their
Ships with some Ordnance.

The Ordnance be carried to Callis, Breast, Embden, Lubeck, Rochel, and other
places. All these be Confederates with Spain, and friends with Dunkirk. So that
in helping them, we do not only hurt our Friends, but succor the Spaniards,
their Friends, and our Enemies.

If the Queen, would but forbid the Transportation of Ordnance for seven years,
it would breed such a Scarcity of Ordnance with the Spaniard, that we might
have him where we would: some in that time, no doubt, the Sea would devour;
some would be taken, and the Store which he now has, scattered, and thereby
his Force weakened. They have so many Iron Ordnance in Spain out of England,
that they do ordinarily sell a 100. weight of Iron Ordnance, for seven Ducats
and an half, Spanish. And if the Spaniard do make it a Capital matter, but to
Transport an Horse or a Gennet, much more ought we to have special Care herein,
when we shall hereby Arm our Enemies against our selves.

I think therefore, to proceed by way of Bill, would favor of Curbing Her
Majesty's Prerogative: but to proceed by way of Petition, it is a safe Course,
and pleasing; and we ought the rather to be induced thereunto, because we have
already found it Successful.

Mr. Brown the Lawyer said: There is a Law already in the point. And that is 33
Hen. 8. Cap. 7. and 2 Ed. 6. Cap. 36. which prohibiteth the Transporting of
Gun-metal. Mr. Brown for the Bill by way of Petition.
And although Guns were not then made of Iron, yet now they are. And therefore
perhaps you will say, it is out of the Statute.

But it was lately adjudged, in Worlington and Symon's Case, to be clearly
within the very Letter of the Law. And I am sure, Guns are made of Gun-metal;
and whosoever Transporteth Guns, transports Gun-metal, and it is within the
danger of the Law.

But that which I would move, is, only this; That we might be Petitioners to
Her Majesty to revoke that Patent: And then Currat Lex.

Sir Walter Rawleigh said: Sir Walter-Rawleigh for the same.
I am sure heretofore one Ship of Her Majesty's, was able to beat twenty
Spaniards; but now by reason of our own Ordnance, we are hardly matched one to
one. And if the Low Countries should either be subdued by the Spaniards, or
yield unto him, upon a conditional Peace, or shall join in Amity with the
French, as we see them daily inclining, I say there is nothing so much
threatens the Conquest of this Kingdom, or more, than the Transportation of
Ordnance. And therefore, I think it a good and speedy course, to proceed by way
of Petition, lest we be cut off from our desires, either by the Upper House, or
before, by the short and sudden ending of the Parliament.

Mr. Carry said: Mr. Carry, for the same by Bill.
We take it for an Use in the House, That when any great and weighty Matter, or
Bill is here handled, we straight-ways say, It touches the Prerogative, and
that must not be meddled withal; and so, that we that come here to do our
Countries Good, bereave them of that good help we may justly Administer unto
them.

Mr. Speaker, Qui vadit plane, vadit Sane: Let us lay down our Griefs in the
Preamble of the Bill, and make it by way of Petition, and, I doubt not, but Her
Majesty, being truly informed of it, will give her Royal Assent.

Mr. Secretary Herbert said: The making of Armentaria, Secretary Herbert for
proceeding by Petition, to prohibit Ordnance.
is a Regality, only belonging to the Power of the King and Crown of England;
and therefore no man can either Cast, or Transport without License. It stood
perhaps with the Policy of former times, to suffer Transportation: But as the
times alter, so does the Government; and now, no doubt, but it is very hurtful
and pernicious to the State. And therefore, I am of Opinion, That it is very
fit this Transportation should be staid. And I concur only with them, which
would have it by way of Petition, and not by Bill.

Mr. William Hackwell of Lincoln's Inn said: Mr. Hackwell.
I know the Authority of the worthy Councellor that last spoke, will ingeminate
your Censures to yield to his Objection: Yet notwithstanding, I beseech you, to
suppose him to be a man of my Condition, or me to be a man of his Sort; so I
doubt not but, our Persons being equalized, the matter will soon be Decided.

Where he says, Transportation is necessary to aid our Friends, and retain
their Alliance. I Answer, this is the Subtilty and Covetousness of our Friends,
who finding the Inestimable Gain and Treasure they get by Ordnance brought from
us, do not only desire them for Gain, but also, to gain to themselves
Confederates, by which means Succouring our Friends, we Aid our Enemies. For
look whatsoever we give them, we deduct from our selves.

Now, let us stop this Transportation of Ordnance, and that greatly weakens
their Forces, by which means, they will never be able to encounter us hand to
hand. Our Ordnance, that precious Jewel of this Realm, (even worth all we have)
is familiarly sold in the Countries of our Confederates, as any thing within
this Land; but this being stopped, they will be forced to take Supply from
their Ports to their Ships; from their Ships to the Field, and from the Field
to other places.

Sir Francis Hastings said: Sir Francis Hastings for Petitioning it.
How swiftly and sweetly Her Majesty apprehended our Griefs, I think there is
no Subject but knows. For us then to deal in a matter so highly touching Her
Prerogative, we shall not only give her Majesty just Cause of Offense, but just
cause to Deny our Proceeding by Bill.

I think, therefore, by laying open our Griefs in a Petition, it will move Her
Majesty as much, being a Case of this Consequence, as our first Motion by Mr.
Speaker, has done. And therefore, I am of Opinion, there is no way but this
for our safety.

Sir George Moore said: Sir George Moore for Petition.
It is a vain thing to Dispute of the matter, when the manner only is in
question: and as vain to lose the matter by our long Dispute of the manner. The
late Experience of Her Majesty's Love and Clemency toward us, and Care over
us, strikes such an awful Regard into my Heart, I wholly dislike this
Proceeding by Bill, and do only Approve of the former motion, by way of
Petition.

Mr. Laurence Hide said: Mr. Laurence Hide is to preceed by Bill in it.
It is doubted by some, this Bill will not Pass, by reason of the sudden
ending of the Parliament: For that I think, if we give not too much scope to
private Bills, This Bill would quickly Pass; and I see no Reason, but we may
proceed by Bill, and not touch Her Majesty's Prerogative; For Her Majesty is
not more careful and watchful of Her Prerogative, than the Noble Prince, King
Henry 8. Her Father, and King Edward 6. Her Brother, were: Then there was no
doubt nor mention made of Prerogative. And therefore I think our soundest and
surest Course is by way of Bill.

Mr. Comptroller said: Mr. Comptroller plead, for Petition.
I wish we should deal in such manner, as we may have our desire. And that in
Duty we should proceed to speak unto the Queen by way of Petition, and not by
way of Bill and Contestation. We must Note, that Her Self and Her Prerogative
will not be forced. And I do not hold this Course by Bill, to stand either with
Respect or Duty.

Mr. Swale of the Temple said: Mr. Swale for the Bill.
I would but move thus much to the House: If we let slip this Law, and proceed
by way of Petition, then there is no Law to Prohibit, but the Law of 33 Hen. 8.
and 2 Ed. 6. and those Laws give so small a remedy, that it is no Recompense
for the loss of the thing.

Mr. Sergeant Harris said: It has been thought, Serj. Harris.
that the former Statutes do not reach to Ordnance made of Iron. But may it
please the House to Commit the Bill, there shall be showed to the Committee
Four or Five Precedents, and late Judgments, that Iron Guns comes within these
Laws.

Mr. Solicitor Fleming said: The Gentleman that last spoke, Solicitor Fleming.
The Bill Committed.
said very true; For it was lately in Michael's Case in the Exchequer. So it
was Committed, and the time appointed for Meeting, to be this Afternoon in the
House.

Mr. Belgrave said: Mr. Belgrave moves his own Case.
Mr. Speaker modestly forbids me to speak in mine own Case, that so nearly
concerns me; but necessity compels me to Appeal to this High Court.

True it is, there is an Information Exhibited against me in the Star Chamber,
by the procurement of an Honorable Person of the Upper House, (the Earl of
Huntington) in the Name of Mr. Atturney-General, for a Misdemeanor Committed to
this Court.

The Substance of that Information I do Confess, yet I am to be an humble
Suitor to this House, to understand, Whether an Information is to be Exhibited
(this House sitting) against any Member thereof? And for my own part, I do
submit my self to abide such Censure, as this House shall think in their
Wisdoms convenient.

Sir George Moore viewing the Information, said: Sir George Moore desires there
may be a Conference.
I find the words thereof to be against the High Court of Parliament, which is
as well the Upper-House, as this House. And therefore I wish, there might be a
Conference with the Lords therein. For this House is but Part, and a Member of
the Parliament; and therefore we solely cannot Proceed.

Mr. Sergeant Harris said: Sergeant Harris opposes it.
In 36 Hen. 8. when Ferri's Case was, who was a Member of this House, Did we
not Proceed without any Conference with the Lords? Here ought to be Libera
Suffragia, and no man of this House to be Chosen by Friends, or Mediation of
any Great Man. Neither ought we to be tied by any Blew-Coat in the World; but
as our Persons are Privileged, so should our Speech be. And therefore I see no
Reason to Confer with the Lords, when we may proceed of our selves.

Sir Edward Hobby said: Sir Edward Hobby for the Conference.
If the Case were but plain of it self, I should be of the Gentleman's mind that
last spoke; but I am given to understand, and also desired to Inform the House,
That this Information was put into the Star Chamber by some kind of Order from
the Lords, and therefore very convenient a Conference should be had.

Sir Francis Hastings (Brother to the Earl of Huntington) said: Sir Francis
Hastings reports the Case.
To enter into consideration of this Cause by report, I will; and otherwise I
cannot. I know no man but respects the Honorable Person himself. And for
this Gentleman, Mr. Bellgrave, I ever took him, and so still do, to be a man of
very good Carriage: To condemn him, I do not mean; but I humbly Pray, that a
course for his Honor may be taken; and the matter so handled, that the Honor
of the Person may be saved, the Gentleman freed from further Offense; and this
Cause ended with good conclusion.

Mr. Dale said: Id possimus quod Jure possimus; and therefore, resting in doubt
herein, the safest course is a Conference.

Mr. Tate said: It is not good to utter sudden Thoughts in great matters; Our
Dispute may seem to have this end, either to Incur the danger of our
Privileges, by not regarding this Cause; or, to pry too near into Her
Majesty's Prerogative, by Examining Informations exhibited into the
Star Chamber; wherefore I think we ought to be Petitioners, ( not verbum
Petitioners) or at least, to show our Griess to the Lords. And if by an Order
from them, as was alleged, this Information was put in, methinks, in Reason, a
Conference were good, to Examine the Cause, and inform this House truly thereof.

Mr. Skipwith the Pensioner, Mr. Skipwith for Belgrave.
said: If I knew or did think there were any Wrong done to the Earl of
Huntington, I would rather be a Petitioner for this Gentleman, unto him, than I
would be a Protector of him against him.

I know Mr. Belgrave wrote his Letter to my Lord, and that it pleased his
Honor to answer him: and that he offered to follow his Honor in that sort, as
is fitting for a Gentleman of his Worth: and rather His Honor, than any man's
in England.

This, I take it, may satisfy the House for Answer to the first part of the
Information, which contains a Dishonor offered to the Earl.

For the Second, which is, Deceiving of the Burgesses: I do assure this House,
they were both willing and worthy to be deceived. I know they had given their
Voices, and desired Mr. Bellgrave to undertake it.

For the Wrong to this Court, I hope this Court has wisdom enough to Right it
self, without any Course in the Star Chamber: yet by your Favors, I may say
thus much. That if we should Punish him for coming Indirectly to this Place, we
should Punish three parts of the House; for none ought to be Chosen, but those
that be resident and sworn Burgesses of the Town.

Sir Robert Wroth said: Sir Robert Wroth brings a precedent.
This matter needs not so much Dispute. In the last Year of Queen Mary, in the
Case between Pleadal and Pleadal, it pleased the Lords of the Star Chamber,
Sedente Parliamento, to bind the one, at the Suit of the other, to appear 12
days after the Parliament; and this was adjudged to be an Infringment of the
Lberties of this House.

Mr. Davis said: The Information savours more of Wit than Malice; and therefore
I think, that upon Conference with the Lords, the matter may be brought to a
good end. I therefore humbly pray it may be put to the Question, and that the
Bill may be sent for out of the Star Chamber.

Mr. Carry said: As I take it, Mr. Speaker, the Course has been, that if the
House has been desirous to see any Record, you, Mr Speaker, should send a
Warrant to the Lord Keeper to grant forth a Certiorari to have the Record
brought into this House: And upon view thereof, perhaps this matter of Dispute
would have an end.

Sir Francis Hastings offered to speak again in this matter; Sir France
Hastings Speaks Again. Mr. Bacon interrupts him, And they contend a while with
reproaches.
but Mr. Bacon interrupted him, and told him, It was against the Course of the
House. To which he Answered; He was old enough to know when, and how often to
speak. To which Mr. Bacon Answered; It was no matter for that; but he needed
not to be so Hot in an ill Cause. To which Sir Francis replied: In several
matters of Debate, a man may speak often: so I take it is the Order. He
(pointing to Mr. Bacon) talks of Heat: If I be so hot as he Was Yesterday,
then put me out of doors. The only thing that I would say, is this:

I wish a Conference may be had with the Lords, because the matter may be
brought to some friendly end; For God knows what may lie in the Deck after the
Parliament, and I suspect it the more, because the Information is filed, and no
Process sued out.

Mr. Greenvil said: I wish that in our Conference, A Conference agreed by the
Lords.
we do not neglect our Privileges, and that we may be a means of Mediation.

So Mr. Comptroller, and others, were sent to desire a Conference, which was
agreed unto by the Lords, and the time appointed to be on Thursday Morning at
Eight of the Clock.

Mr. Speaker, said, I am to certify you from the Lords, of a great disorder
committed by the Pages and Servants, as well of the Lords themselves, as of
your Servants; So that not only Abuse is offered, but Weapons and Blood drawn.
For remedy whereof, the Lords have given strict Commandment, That their
Servants keep peaceable and quiet Order: and that neither their Pages,
Attendants, nor Servants; do stand upon the Stairs, or nearer the House than
the Stair-foot. They desire, that every Member of the House would do the like
to their Servants, and so expressly to Charge and Command them. And I would move
you, That you would be pleased the Sergeant might go forth, and signify so much
from you unto the Company without; and all said, I, I, I.

Mr. Wiseman said: The disorder, Mr. Speaker speaks of, is now grown so great,
that they have their Passes and Repasses; and men dare not go down the Stairs
without a Conductor.

So the Sergeant went and delivered the Message, and the Abuse was well
Reformed.

The Bill for Assuring of a Jointure to the Countess of Sussex.

Mr. Sergeant Yelverton, Dr. Carry, and Dr. Stanhop, came from the Lords; and
Sergeant Yelverton signified the Lords Desire of a Conference in the Bill for
Patents made by the Queen, and Grants to her, etc. Which the Lords did the more
Respect, because it was recommended to them from the House; the time appointed
to Morrow Morning at Eight of the Clock: the Number 20. So after they went out,
it was agreed, They should meet with a convenient Number; and then they were
called in again according to the Ceremony of the House; and the Houses
resolution delivered to them.

Mr. Serj. Harrts said: Mr. Speaker; The Ancient Use has been always to double
or treble the Number. The last Committee were about Sixty. I think, by reason
they were Committees, and are best informed, that they should attend the Lords.
And so it was agreed. His conceit was, Sell the great Bell to buy the little
Bell a Clapper.

In the afternoon, in the House, the Bill for Fustians was to be debated; but
by reason the Devonshire-Men made a Faction against it, after small Dispute, it
was put to the Question; whether it should be further Disputed in? And most
said, No, No; and there were some Six I, I, I, the rather for that it had a
Prohibition for bringing of Millan Fustians; and also, a desire to be made a
Corporation. But Mr. Francis Bacon, kept such a quoil to have the Bill
concerning Charitable Uses put to the Question, which was then also to be
debated, that this Bill was clean hushed up.

On Wednesday, December 9. A Bill for Establishing of certain Conveyances and
State of Lands, betwixt one Sandis and Harris.

A Bill Touching Gavel-kind Lands, ordered to be Engrossed.

A Bill for the Erecting of a Haven on the North-part of Devonshire, ordered to
be Engrossed.

A Bill for the Trinity-House, Entitled, An Act for maintenance of Shipping,
and Increase of Seafaring men, committed, and the time appointed for meeting,
is this Afternoon.

A Bill for the Confirmation of the Mayor of London's Authority in St.
Katharines, etc. ordered to be Engrossed.

A Bill for the True making of Cloth, was committed; the time of Meeting, to
Morrow, and the place, the Exchequer-Chamber.

After the reading of this Bill, Dr. Newcoman offered a Proviso to be added to
the Bill, for saving the Aulnager's Right, and the Queens Customs; Sir Edward
Hobbys Brief of Bellgraves Case, to be debated at the Conserence.
and the House bade him keep it, and offer it to the Committee.

Sir Edward Hobby offered a Brief to the House, of the Conference that should be
had with the Lords, Touching Mr. Bellgraves matter. The effect whereof being
read to the House, was this, viz.

The Conference with the Lords, must consist of two points. First, Touching an
offense Committed by Mr. Bellgrave; Secondly, for the Infringing of the Liberty
of the House.

For the First, that the Commons would do nothing therein, until a Conference
with them. For the Second, to know the reason of their Lordships appointment of
the Information, and to bring it to some end. The House agreed to the points,
and allowed of them.

A Bill for the more peaceable Government of the Counties of Northumberland,
Cumberland, Westmorland, and the Bishopric of Durham; the first Reading.

The points to be considered of, in the continuance of Statutes, were read, and
offered still to dispute, whether the Statute of Tillage should be continued.

Mr. Johnson said, In the time of Dearth when we made this Statute, it was not
considered, Mr. Johnson about the Statute for Tillage to have it repealed.
that the hand of God was upon us. And now Corn is Cheap, and if too Cheap, the
Husband man is undone, whom we must provide for; for he is the Staple-man of
the Kingdom, and so, after many Arguments, he concluded it was fit to be
Repealed.

Mr. Bacon said, The Old commendation of Italy by the Poet, Mr. Bacon opposes
it.
is, Potens viris atque Ubere, Gleba. And it stood not with the Policy of the
Kingdom, that the wealth of the Kingdom should be Engrossed into a Few
Pasturers Hands. And, if you will put in so many Provisoes as he desired, you
will make so great a window out of the Law, that we shall put the Law out of
the Window. The Husbandman is a strong and hardy Man, the good Footman, which
is a Chief observation of good Warriors, etc. So he concluded, the Statute was
not to be Repealed.

Sir Walter Rawleigh said: I think this Law fit to be repealed; Sir Walter
Rawleigh to have it repealed.
for many poor men are not able to find Seed to Sow so much Ground as they are
bound to Plow, which they must do; or incur the Penalty of the Statute.

Besides, all Nations abound with Corn: France offered the Queen to serve
Ireland with Corn at Sixteen Shillings a quarter, which is but Two Shillings a
Bushel; if we should sell it so here, the Plowman would be beggared. The
Low-Country-Man and the Hollander, who never Sow Corn, have by their industry
such Plenty, that they will serve other Nations. The Spaniard, that often
wants Corn, had we never so much Plenty, would never be beholding to the
Englishman for it, neither to the Low-Country-Man; nor to France; but will
fetch it even of the very Barbarian. And that which the Barbarian has been
sueing for these 200 Years (I mean for Traficque of Corn into Spain) this King
in Policy has set at Liberty of himself, because he will not be beholding unto
other Nations. And therefore I think the best Course is, to set it at Liberty,
and leave every man Free, which is the Desire of a true Englishman.

Mr. Secretary Cecil said: I do not dwell in the Country, Secretary Cecil of a
contrary mind.
nor am I acquainted with the Plough. But I think that whosoever does not
maintain the Plough, destroys the Kingdom.

There was the last Parliament, great Arguments on this Point, and after a
deliberate Disputation, the Passing of this Bill was concluded.

My Motion therefore shall be, That this Law may not be Repealed, except former
Laws may be in Force and Revived. Say, that a Glut of Corn should be: Have we
not a sufficient remedy by Transportation, which is allowed by the Policy of
all Nations? I cannot be induced or drawn from this Opinion, upon Government of
Foreign States; I am sure, when Warrants go from the Council, for levying of
men in the Countries, and the Certificates be returned to us again, we find the
greatest part of them to be Plow-men. And excepting Sir Thomas Moore's Utopia,
or some such fained Commonwealth, you shall never find, but the Plowman is
chiefly provided for; the neglect whereof, will not only bring a general, but a
particular indemnity to every man.

If, in Ed. 1. his time, a Law was made for the Maintenance of the Fry of Fish;
and in Hen. 7. time, for the preservation of the Eggs of wild Foul, shall we
now throw away a Law of more Consequence and Import? If we debar Tillage, we
give scope to the depopulator; and then if the poor, being thrust out of their
Houses, go to dwell with others, straight we catch them with the Statute of
Inmates. If they wander abroad, and be stubborn, they are within the danger of
the Statute of Rogues. If they be more humble and urgent Beggars, then are they
within the Statute of the poor to be Whipped and Tormented: So by this means,
undo this Statute, and you endanger many Thousands. Posterior dies discipulus
prioris. If former times have made us wise to make a Law, let these latter
times warn us to preserve such a good Law. All that I can say is, this Policy,
Nature, Charity, and Honor, do desire of these Proceedings in Charitable uses.

Mr. Selby desired, that the County of Northumberland might be exempted out of
the Statute, because it was so nigh the Scots; and the Country was so infested
with the Plague, that, not only whole Families, but whole Villages have been
swept away with that Calamity. And so he made a long Speech to that effect.

Mr. Sergeant Yelverton; and Doctor Carry came from the Lords, to desire that
the Conference touching Letters Patents might be prolonged, until Friday
Morning at eight of the Clock, which was Assented unto.

It was put to the Question, whether the Bill for Tillage should be Committed?
And most said, I, I, I. Then whether Northumberland should be exempted upon Mr.
Selbies Motion? And all said, I, I, I.

Another matter which the Committees for the continuance of Statutes doubted
of, was, whether Mr. Dormer's Proviso should be put into the Bill for Tillage.

Mr. Davis said: May it please you, Mr. Speaker, the Gentleman is at the Door
(Mr Dormer by Name) ready to attend with his Council, to satisfy the House; and
Prayed, they might be admitted; and all said, I, I, I.

Mr. Dodderige of Council, with Mr. Dormer, said: Mr. Speaker, It pleased Her
Majesty to License Mr. Dormer under Her Letters Pattents, with a Non obstante
this Statute, to enclose 300 Acres of Ground. And he humbly prays the House,
to accept and admit of this Proviso; for the Saving of his Letters Patents, the
rather for these Reasons: 1. In respect the Ground enclosed, is a small
quantity. 2. The Country is apt for Pasture, and not for Tillage. 3. This
ground is a kind of Marish ground, and too moist and soft, and altogether unfit
for Tillage. 4. In that Her Majesty has granted her Letters Patents, and that
they concern Her Prerogative. So he delivered the Proviso, and Mr. Dormer his
Letters Pattents, and went forth.


Mr. Sergeant Harris said: Ubi non est ordo, ibi est Confusio; Mr. Speaker,
diverse Gentleman stand before the Door, which breeds a confused Sound when the
question is propounded. May it please you, that every man take his place. This
is both seemly, and the Ancient Custom; which they all did.

Mr. Speaker said: I will put it to the Question, whether this Proviso of Mr.
Dormer's shall be received. It was put to the Question twice, and in my
Conscience, the I, I, I, were the greater number: But the No's, Noes, would
needs have the House divided. So the door being set open, no man offered to go
forth.

Mr. Martyn said: Mr. Speaker, I have observed it, that ever, this Parliament,
the No's upon the division of the House have carried it; the Reason whereof, as
I conceive it, is, because diverse are loath to go forth for Fear of losing their
Places; and many that cry I, I, I, will sit still with the No's. I therefore do
but move this unto the House, that all those that have given their I, I, I,
would according to their Consciences, go forth. And for my part, I Will begin.
And so went forth.

Sir Walter Rawleigh rose up to Answer him, but Mr. Comptroller, Sir John
Fortescue, and all the House seeing them, Rose up in a Hurry to go forth, and
did not hear him. Whereupon, himself and Mr. Secretary, it seemed, and they of
the No's, took some displeasure, as may appear by the Speech after. The I, I,
I, were 178. and the No's 134. so the I, I, I, got it 44 Voices. And after the
House was quiet.

Mr. Secretary Cecil said: I am glad to see the Parliament so full, which used,
toward the end, to grow thin. Secretary Cecil's Notice of the disorders of the
House.
And therefore I think it convenient we agree of some good Orders.

The Reputation of this House has ever been Religiously maintained, by Order
and Government; but now Error has so crept in amongst us, that we know not
what is Order, what Disorder.

The Gentleman that last spoke (meaning Mr. Martin) first brake Order; for
after the Question put, and the House agreed to be divided, he spoke
perswadingly to draw those out of the House who perhaps meant it not.

Besides, he laid an Imputation upon the House, that according to their
Consciences, men would not so much as remove out of their places: But I think
there is no man here that is so Fantastical, that though they be for the Bill,
yet for their Places sake, they will not alter their Rooms: For this House is a
House of Gravity, Conscience, and Religion.

I think it therefore fit, he should answer this Imputation at the Bar; we have
all this Parliament, been against Monopolies, and now we our selves Protect
one: But I see that men that have desired to be Popular, without the House, for
speaking against Monopolies, do also labor to be private within; but that I
regard not. This I know, that good sums of money have been profer'd for the
furtherance of this Proviso.

But now it is past, I would now move you, That because we have spent some
superfluous time in this division, and because the Affairs of this Parliament
cannot possibly be dispatched, so soon as the Parliament must end, because of
the performance of that Gift we have given her Majesty, which is nothing, if it
comes not in due time.

Therefore, that the House would be pleased after this day, to Sit in the
Afternoons, for we consume our best time now in unnecessary Disputation.

Mr. Comptroller said: Mr. Comptroller's Reply to Cecil.
I think that notwithstanding any thing that has been last said, However our
Orders have been heretofore broken, yet the Gentleman that spoke (meaning Mr.
Martyn) brake no Order of the House, by speaking: For the House favored him
with Silence, and therefore admitted to him liberty of Speech.

I hat his Speech was either Persuasive, or offered any Imputation to the
House, I neither perceive it, or conceive it so; for it was only a Caution to
the House, that former Orders were broken, and therefore now to be remedied and
amended. And surely, for not removing out of Places, I have heard fault found
before this time, and therefore the Gentleman is not now to be taxed.

That this should be a Monopoly, I can see no Reason: For it has been agreed,
that Her Majesty may dispense with any penal Law; and that is no Monopoly, no
more is this. And I am not of his mind, that so great sums of money have been
offered, the quantity of Land being but little, and his Cause both good and
just.

And for my part, I do protest, I neither knew nor have heard of any. For the
last part of his Motion, which was the best, to sit twice a day, I do concur
with him; and will be ready, as a Member of this House, to give my Attendance.

Sir Walter Rawleigh said: Sir Walt. Rawleigh resents their not giving him time
to Speak.
I thought I had deserved of the House, to have been heard to speak, as well as
he that spoke before the Division. And in that I offered to speak, and was not
heard, I had Wrong. For him that last spoke out of Humor, and not out of
Judgment, notwithstanding, I think it to be a Monopoly, and the Speech to be
both Persuasive, and to lay a great Imputation upon the House. And this is all
I would have said before.

Mr. Martyn offered to speak, and Asked the Speaker, If he might Answer? The
House cried, I, I, I. No (quoth the Secretary) you must stand at the Bar. And
the House cried No, No, No.

Then Mr. Secretary desired, it might be put to the Question, Whether he should
speak or No? And so it was, and not Twenty said No. Then it was put to the
Question, Whether he should speak at the Bar, or No? And Mr. Brown the Lawyer
stood up and said, Mr. Speaker, Par in Parem non habet Imperium, we are all
Members of one Body, and One cannot Judge of Another.

So being put to the Question, there were not above twelve I, I, I, that he
should stand at the Bar.

Whereupon Mr. Martyn standing in his Seat, showed the Cause of his Speech to
have been, only for the Order of the House, and not out of any Persuasive
meaning that he had; For he protested, he neither knew the Man, nor the Matter.

On Thursday December. the Tenth, A Bill for the Denization of certain Persons,
viz. Josepho Lupo, and others, was Read: And because the said Josepho Lupo had
neither Father nor Mother English, the House respited the Bill.

A Bill for the Weavers, was put to the Question, and Committed; the time and
place of Meeting to be this Afternoon, in the Exchequer-Chamber.

The Bill for the Assize for Wood, was Ordered to be Engrossed.

The Bill touching the taking away Gavel-kind-Custom in Kent; was Read. A Bill
about Gavel-kind, etc.


And Mr. Francis Moore said: He thought the Bill a very Idle and frivolous
Bill, and Injurious; For, Mr. Moore against Repealing it.
if a man take a Wife, by the Custom she shall have a Moiety; but now if we
make it go according to the Common Law, she shall have but a Third part.

So if the Father committed a Felony, and be Hanged; the Son shall not lose his
Inheritance; because the Custom is, The Father to the Bough, and the Son to the
Plough, which at the Common Law he should lose.

Mr. Serj. Harris said: I think this Bill a very good Bill; Serj. Harris to
have it Repealed.
for it defeats a Custom which was first devised for a Punishment, and Plague
upon the Country: For when the Conqueror came in, the Reason of this Custom,
was, To make a Decay of the great Houses of the Old English; for if a man of
800. l. Per Annum. had eight Children, now it must be divided into eight Parts;
And then, if they had Children, it must be subdivided again usque in non
quantum, where, if it had gone to one, as by the Common Law, it would still
have Flourished.

Mr. Boys, amongst many Reasons showed, Mr. Boy's of a contrary mind
It would in Kent be a great loss to the Queen, in her Subsidy; for by reason
of these Subdivisions, there were many Ten-Pound men. And whosoever knows the
state of our Country, shall find, more under Ten Pound men, than above, come to
the Queen; and now, if these being divided into several hands, should now go
according to the Common Law; this would make the Queen a great Loser.

This Bill being put to the Question, The Bill is Rejected.
the No's were the greater; yet the I, I, I, would needs go forth; and upon
division, it appeared, the I, I, I, were but 67. and the No's, 138. and so the
the Bill was Rejected.

The Bill for suppressing Alehouses, A Bill to Suppress Tipling-Houses.
and Tippling-houses, was Read.

Mr. Francis Moore offered a Proviso to the House, Mr. Moore.
and showed: That he was of Council, and had a standing Fee, from the
Corporation of Vintners in London; And showed, That they were an Ancient
Corporation, and had ever used (by force of diverse Charters of Kings of this
Realm) to sell Wine; and now by this Bill, all was inhibited. And therefore
Prayed the Provise might be received, which was received.

M. Johnson said: Mr. Johnson against it.
If this Bill should Pass, it would breed a great Confusion of Government; for
by this Law, the Justices of the County may enter into the Liberties of any
Corporation, and License Sale of Wine and Beer. Besides, he must be Licensed by
four Justices; perhaps there be not four Justices in a Corporation. Admitting
Power were not given to the Foreign Justices; now when these four Justices have
enabled him by this Law, they have no Power by this Law upon his misbehaviour
to put him down; and so very Insufficient, and impossible to be Mended.

Sir Robert Wroth said: Sir Rob. Wroth against it.
The Bill is, That no Man shall, etc. but he must be allowed in the
Quarter Sessions by four Justices. And what pain and Charge this will be to a
poor man, to go with some of his Neighbors 20 or 30 miles for a License: And
what a monstrous Trouble to all the Justices, I refer it to your considerations.

The Speaker certified a Message from the Lords.

Sir Edward Hobby said: We attended the Lords this morning, touching the
Information against Mr. Belgrave; and in the end concluded, That forasmuch as
it concerns Their as well as Our Privileges, they desire some time to
Consult; and then will send us word of their Resolutions.

Doctor Stanhop, and Doctor Hone, brought a Bill from the Lords; Entitled, An
Act for the Stablishment of the Remainder of certain Lands of Andrew Ketleby
Esquire, to Francis Ketleby. And so they departed.

Mr. Spicer said: If I should not agree to the Substance of the Bill, I were no
good Commonwealths-man And if I should agree to the Form, I should scarce think
my self a good Christian; for I may justly say of this Bill, Nihil est ubi
error non est.

Mr. Laurence Hide moved, That in respect it came from the Lords, we would give
it a Commitment.

Mr. Sergeant Harris said: If this Bill should pass, as was well said, we all
should lose the Liberties of our Corporations: And Her Majesty's Justices at
the Sessions, Serj. Harris against it.
should be troubled with Brables of Alehouses. The Statute of Ed. 6. has had
Approbation these half Hundred Years, and I wish we may not Repeal a good Law
to make a worse.

Mr. Richard Brown said: Mr. Brown against it.
Wines heretofore have been at Ten Pound a Tun; and the Laws are, That Wines
should be sold at Two Pence the Quart, and Her Majesty Receives One Thousand
Six Hundred Pounds a Year Custom for them. If now this Statute should stand,
that Four Justices should License the sale of Wines, this would be a wrong to
diverse Licenses, which are made by Pattentees of her Majesty, and a beggaring
of all Vintners. And he that now keeps an Inn; if he pleases not the Justices,
he shall be turned out. And withal, there is a Clause of disability, which is
most grievous.

Sir Robert Wroth said: It seems the House does distaste this Bill, and I doubt
of the Passing of it. I would but move the House to remember, That it is an
Ancient Custom, that for Reverence sake to the Lords of the Upper-House, we
only deny the Bill a Commitment, and so let it lie in the Deck, and not put it
to the Question for Engrossing.

Sir George Moore said: Sir George Moore against it.
I will be bold to give my Reason, and leave the Consideration thereof unto
you. I wish it might be Committed; for, for ought I hear yet, a Proviso might
help all.

The Old Statute is, The next Justice; this is, The Justices of the
Quarter Sessions. It is intended, that all Justices every Quarter Sessions give
their Attendance. There have been oftentimes Letters from her Majesty's
Privy Council, and Orders from Her Majesty her self, who looks down with a
gracious Eye upon the Meanest of Her Subjects, touching these Ale-House-Keepers.

Therefore I wish, That we do not cast it forth, but give it the ordinary and
due Consideration of other Bills, by way of Commitment.

Mr. Wiseman said: I am very Respectful of the Place from whence this Bill
comes; if the Parliament be short, as there is no other likelihood; and time so
precious with us, that we Sit in the Afternoons: and this Bill Incurable, and
not to be mended; and the former Laws so Politic, that I think we shall not
make a better: for my part I think it needless to be Committed, but to be put
to the Question.

For the Point, that Four Justices of the Peace should License, etc. by this
Statute, though they deserve to be suppressed; yet there is no Power limited of
Suppression. Besides, there is a Statute that Badgers and Loaders shall be
Licensed under -- Justices hands in the Quarter Sessions. I know my self, that
even when the Justices are going out of Town, and even ready to take Horse, the
Clerk of the Peace will bring 40. or 50. to be signed by one: and then another,
he straight puts to his hand, because he will not stay; and knows no more of
the Man, or the Matter, than he that never read them. And so would this
Statute, if it should go forwards, be Abused.

Mr. Bond said: Mr. Bond moves for a Proviso.
'If this Act pass for a Law, notwithstanding any exceptions that have been
taken; I humbly desire you all, that one Proviso may be put in, and that is;
That no Retainer or Servant to a Justice of Peace, be admitted to be an
Ale-house-Keeper, Vintner or Victualler; unless he shall be Chosen by a Jury of
Twelve Men at the Leet, or Law-day of that Burrough-Town, wherein he desires
to Victual. I know, and speak what I know very well, that more disorder, and
more Misrule is usually kept in the Houses of such kind of men, than in all the
Country besides, if this stand not for a Law, order may be taken for such kind
of Offenses.

The Law before, allows two Justices, I wish these Protecting Justices may
not have the same Power; for as some be Magistrates, so they are men. I know
many Abuses touching Authority given to men that be Tipplers. I am a
Devonshire-man, and I speak plainly from the Heart of him that hates Popery,
and defies Puritanism. I add further, that I am Her Majesty's Subject, to whose
Sacred Self, I acknowledge my self in all duty bound, and I Pray with the
Psalmist, her Enemies Confundentur.

Mr. Speaker, I know what I speak, and I have Reason to speak thus, by Reason
of some Imputation that has been Offered me by one whom in Charity, I Pray God
Forgive.

Mr. Martyn said: Mr. Martyn for putting it to the Question.
The Gentleman that last spoke, it seems spoke out of his Grief of mind in
being galled by some Tongue-metal. And I think there is no man that feels
blows, but would be glad to be eased of them. I cannot therefore blame him to
purge and defend himself by this Apology. But that has led us out of the
Alehouse. Yet I wish that we might make a quick Return, by putting it, without
further Disputation, to the question.

So it was put to the Question, It is Rejected
whether it should be Committed, and all said No, No, but Mr. Wingfield, at
which the House Laughed.

Then the Questions upon the continuance of Statutes, were offered to be Read.
The Bill concorning Ordnance called for.
But the House called for the Bill concerning Ordnance: yet the Clerk fell to
Read the Questions, but still the House cried, Upon the Bill for Ordnance.

At length, Mr. Carry stood up and said: In Whom it lies to choose what Bill
shall be Read.
In the Roman Senate, the Conful always appointed what should be read, and what
not; So may our Speaker, whose place is a Consul's place: If he err, or do not
his duty fitting to his place, we may remove him, and there have been
Precedents for it. But to appoint what business should be handled, in my
Opinion we cannot. At which Speech some Hissed.

Mr. Wiseman said: Mr. Wiseman's Opinion.
I Reverence Mr. Speaker, in his place: But I make great difference between the
Old Roman Consuls and him. Ours is a municipal Government, and we know our own
Grievances better than Mr. Speaker; and therefore it is fit, that every man
Alternis vicibus should have those Acts be called for, he conceives most fit:
And all said, I, I, I.

Mr. Hackwell said: I wish nothing may be done, but by Consent; that breeds the
best Concordance. My desire is, Mr. Hackwel's Motion about it.
The Bill for Ordnance should be Read; If you, Mr. Speaker, do not think so, I
humbly Pray it may be put to the Question.

Mr. Comptroller stood up and said: Mr. Comptroller speaks against these
Disorders.
I am sorry to see this Confusion in this House. It were better we used more
Silence and spoke in Order. Yesterday you ordered the Bill for the Continuance
of Statutes should be Read; now in an humor, you cry Ordnance, Ordnance. I pray
you, that we first Decreed, let us stick to, and not do and undo upon every
Idle motion.

Mr. Secretary Cecil said: I will speak shortly, Secretary Cecil Composes it.
because it best becomes me; neither will I trouble your Patience long, because
the time permits it not. It is a Maxim, Praestat otiosum esse, quam nihil
agere. I wish the Bill for continuance of Statutes, etc. may be Read, and that
agrees with the precedent Order of this House, and more with the Gravity
thereof: yet, because this Spirit of Contradiction may no more trouble us, I
beseech you let the Bill for Ordnance be Read: And that is the Houses Desire.

The Bill against Transportation of Iron-Ordnance, Gun-metal, 'and Shot, was
Read; And

Sir Robert Wroth Informed the House, That a Ship is now upon the River, ready
to go away Laden with Thirty Six pieces of Ordnance.

It was put to the Question, Whether the Statute concerning the Poor should be
continued, and all cried I, I, I.

Mr. Secretary Cecil said: Secr. Cecil about Maimed Soldiers.
I am sorry that I have so great Occasion to Recommend to the Houses
Consideration the miserable estate of Maimed Soldiers.

War is a Curse to all People, and especially the poor Creatures that come from
the Wars Poor, Friendless, and Unhappy. I am glad you are resolved this
Statute shall be kept alive; whereby in some measure, those poor maimed Souls
shall be provided for; For, both Religion and Charity wills us to fall into
Consideration of Amendment.

I do not this out of Popularity, because I have been often times taxed by the
men of War, and more than any Gentleman of England. For when I have seen
Soldiers deceived by their Captains, I have taxed them for it, and that makes
me odious unto them. A Captain is a man of Note, and able to keep himself: but
a Soldier is not.

I wish not any to think, that I do speak of all Captains, for I make a
difference between the Corn, and the Chaff. The Statute is is, That the poor
Soldier must be Relieved, either by the Country where he was Born, or out of
which he was Pressed: But if that were amended, and only to be relieved in the
Country where he was Born, this would yield a more certainty and greater
Relief. For in a man's Country, either Charity, Kindred, or Commiseration will
breed Pity: But out of the Country, where he was Pressed, that cannot be
expected. For the multitude pressed out of some little Shire, grows to be
greater, and the Charge more than in some other three Shires. As in London,
where there be many Parishes, infinite Households, and Numbers Pressed: Besides,
there be diverse Shires subject to great Levies, and the division so small, that
it is a mere trifle; as in Lancashire, in respect of the Vicinity to Ireland,
where the Disease of the War is. If it may please you, that a Commitment may be
had, I shall be ready to attend it; at which time I will speak further. And so
a Commitment was appointed.

Mr. Francis Moore said: There is a Bill for the Reducing of the two Statutes
for Soldiers, into one; it has lain in the Deck this fortnight: If it had
been Read, it might have been Committed.

Mr. Swale said: Mr. Swale about the Tax for Dover-Haven
There was a Doubt, whether the Tax for Dover-Haven should be continued by
force of the Statute; the Tax is of Three Pence a Tun for the burden of every
Ship: He said, That the Seamen and Merchants, for want of sufficient
maintenance, were turned to Fishermen. And the Fisherman, if he made but two
Tuns of Trayn-Oyl with the Blubber of New Foundland Fish, this causes the Ship
to be Taxed for the whole Burden; which is grievous to the Subject: Much Money
has been Levied, It comes to at least One Thousand Marks a Year, and the Haven
never the better. Nay, Mr. Speaker, it is grown into a Proverb, If a Tax be
once on foot, God shield it continues not as Dover-Haven.

Mr. Boys said: Mr. Boys plea is to continue it.
There was great Reason to continue the Tax, in respect of the continual
maintenance of the Haven, which is the best in England for all Necessities: It
will ship as many men in three hours, as any other Haven in a day. And he said,
That besides former Expenses, there is now above Four-Hundred-Pounds-worth of
Stones for the Reparation thereof ready upon the Haven.

Sir John Fortescue said: Sir John Fortescue seconds him.
The Proverb is, Tractent fabrilia fabri. The Gentleman that first spoke, had
not so good Instructions, as he might have had: There be Brew-houses and
Bake-houses for the Provision of Victuals for Shipping; the Haven will receive
Ships of Three Hundred Tuns, and is most necessary for the passing of all
Merchants: The Tax is small, and times may be when the Haven shall need a great
Tax at one time; And if this should be taken away, what then? And therefore, I
think it most fit to be Continued.

Mr. Comptroller said: And the Comproller speaks for it.
Me thinks we take a very Imprudent Course, to go about at this present, to
take away a Tax which maintains Dover-Haven: We are now in Dispute, how to
defend our selves from the Dunkirkers, and to strengthen our own Havens. If we
take away this Tax, we shall weaken this Haven, which is the most necessary
Haven of England, and therefore, I would wish no man to wrong the State so
much, and to be so respectless of the Good of the Navy, by speaking out of any
particular humor of his own.

Sir Walter Rawleigh said: Sir Walter Rawleigh of the same Persuasion.
There be diverse Havens which have been Famous, and now are gone to Decay, as
Lynmouth, and Setow, and Winchelsey; Rye is of little Receipt, Sandwich, (as a
Burgess of that Town said this Parliament, Mr. Peake) is even a going. The Tax
being employed as it should be, I hold it both good and necessary; and there is
no Trade of Fishermen to Newfound-Land, but by this Haven of Dover, which if
the Tax be taken away, and that go to Decay, Her Majesty shall lose one of the
best, and most necessary Havens of England, which has all the Commodities that
Mr. Chancellor showed, and lies opposite to all our Enemies Countries, who may
soon be with us, and we not able to resist them and help our selves, should we
want this Haven. And so it was Committed.
I think it therefore fit this matter should be Considered of, and Committed;
And so it was.

Mr. Speaker said: Mr. Speaker informs the House how long they are to Continue.
I am to deliver unto you, Her Majesty's Commandment; That for the better and
more speedy dispatch of Causes, we should Sit in the Afternoons; which being
Moved at the first here, and Her Majesty taking notice thereof, well likes and
approves of it. And likewise, That about this day Seven-night, Her Majesty's
Pleasure is, This Parliament shall be ended.

The House sat this Afternoon.

A Bill was Returned in, to Confirm the Assurance of the Manors or Farms of
Sayeburie, alias, Sadgeburie, and Obden and other Hereditaments to Samuel Sand
Esquire, and John Harris Gentleman, and their Heirs.

A Bill for the Relief of the necessity of Soldiers, and Mariners, was Read
the first time.

Mr. John Hare Moved: That Bills might only be Read the first or second time,
and not put to the Question in the Afternoon.

Sir Edward Hobby. I Approve of the Motion that the Gentleman made, And I ever
held this for a Rule, Mane Consilium, Sero Convivium, etc.

Mr. Richard Messenger Moved: That the Collectors for the Ten Pound, and Five
Pound upon every private Bill, might be Chosen by the House; And no private
Bills might be sent up to the Lords, before the Fee be paid.

The Question was in the House, Whether the Fish-mongers of London, their
Proviso should be added to the Statute of Continuances. And the Fishmongers
were Admitted to the Bar by their Council, which was Mr. Nicholls of the Middle
Temple.

He first showed, That the Fishmongers of London were an Ancient Corporation:
And that they had ever Twelve Men as Factors for them, to buy Fish on the
Seacoasts, and send it Fresh hither to London, to be bought of the whole
Company, and so sold in the Market, whereby Fish was then far Cheaper than now
it is. For now some Six Persons Ingross all to themselves, and sell it at a
dearer Rate by Retail, to the utter undoing of the rest of the Fishmongers,
because then every Man sold for himself.

Secondly, The Fish sold, is seldom sweet, and ever unsavory, and the
Fishmongers cannot Distrain, because they be tied up by that Statute.

Thirdly, a Subversion of the Corporation follows thereupon, and an
Extinguishment of all Grants made unto them by former Kings of this Realm, and
of the Confirmation made by Her Majesty: And diverse other Reasons were
delivered by him.

A Bill for the Relief of the Poor.

On Friday December. 11. A Bill for the Reparation of two Bridges over the River
of Eden, etc. was Ordered to be Engrossed.

A Bill for Comprehending, and Continuing the Maintenance of good and
profitable Arts, and Trades, for the Commonwealth. The Effect of it was, That
every man which had, or could invent any Art, or Trade, should for his Life
Monopolize the same to his own Use, and he that could Add to, or Refine the
same, should do the like.

Mr, Fettyplace showed: That the Bill was unprofitable, and not good, for many
Reasons.

First. It was too General, because it speaks of Arts, as well Invented, as
to be Invented.

Secondly: The Bill shows not, That they will be profitable to the
Commonwealth; and whatsoever they be, this Bill allows: For diverse Arts have
been devised in London, that should be wrought by one Man, which could not be
done heretofore with Forty; this is, said he, unprofitable, because it sets
not many hands on work.

Thirdly: It will breed Confusion; because if but a little Addition be made by
another, a new License is granted to this Man. And now, if to that Addition
another shall add, that will be ad infinitum, and so breed Confusion. Whereupon
he Concluded, That he for his part thought fit the Bill should be quashed; and
diverse cried Away with it.

I wished, That the Bill might be Read again, and considered, because we
allowed of these kind of Patents once before this Parliament: Namely, in the
License for making Tyn by Mills, out of the Old Rubbish in Cornwall, upon the
Motion of Sir Walter Rawleigh; and this Bill desired no more in effect.

Next, for the Incertainty; upon Consideration of the Bill by some few
Committees, the same might be mended, and he that performed many special
devices might be Inserted.

Besides, he that invented any Art, or Trade, it was reason he should have some
Privilege; because it would be an Encouragement to others. For, Nemo nascitur
Artifex, and no man could come to that Perfection upon the first knowledge of
it, but being taught by the first Inventor for a Season.

Also the Proposition of the Gentleman that last spoke, did not hold in all
Arts, that the work of many should be done by one. For it is Profitable for the
Commonwealth, if Water may be brought to every Man's House for Ten Shillings
Value, where it could not be done for Ten Pounds cost, as by the
Water-work-device at London. So, of Iron-Mills in the Low Countries, and of the
Corn-Mills upon the Thames. So of shooting and Charging of Ordnance, and Fire
Works, and the like; and generally of Arts, and Sciences, that can not be done
by Poor; but must be done by Persons Judicial and of Skill, and those that have
a more Natural Inclination to come to Perfection in those things, than every
base Beggar.

For his last Proposition, I said, Non est Confusio in certa Scientia.

Mr. Singy said: The Author of the Bill perhaps, was a Sugar-Man, for he used
the word Refiner of Arts. So, it was put to the Question to be read the second
time; And all said, No, No. But when Mr. Speaker said: All those that will have
this Bill read the second time, say, I, I, I: Sir Richard Knightly said No,
Aloud; at which the House Laughed, and not one said, I, I.

A Bill for Weights and Measures, was called for.

Mr. Doyly showed, That he had the Bill, and had attended two Days, and none of
the Committees would Meet; he Prayed, the House would either command the
Committees to Meet, or Discharge him of the Bill.

There was a Conference betwixt the Upper-House, A Conference betwixt both
Houses.
and the Lower House in the Painted-Chamber, which was thus:

Secretary Cecil, with the rest of the Lower House, Secretary Cecil speaks in
the name of the Commons.
came to the Lords, as they were sitting at the Table; and going to the
upper-end thereof, said to this effect.

That if their Lordships had already concluded what to do in the Bill of
Patents, they then had no Commission to proceed. And if they had altered the
Bill in any point, with amendments, they had no Commission.

But if their Lordships had done neither, but only were desirous to be resolved
of any doubt, which they in their Wisdoms conceived, and would willingly
thereabouts confer with them, they would most willingly accomplish their
desires: for they had sufficient Warrant from the House so to do.

The Lord Buckhurst, Lord Treasurer, The Lord- Treasurer Answers him.
after a little Whispering with the Lords, answered, That he would not have us
preoccupate their Judgments with a Speech both Strange, Improper, and
Preposturous, etc.

Mr. Secretary Cecil said, He could not Answer their Lordships without Order
from the other Committees, and therefore Prayed they might confer together;
(...)
which was Granted.

So they went forth into another Room, and there considered what Answer to
make. And soon after, they returned again, and Mr. Secretary said,

My Lords, We of the Lower House are very sorry your Lordships should conceive
otherwise than well of our Speech and good Intent. Your Lordships termed our
Speech (for so I may say, because I spoke in the behalf, and the name of all
the Committees) strange, improper, and preposterous. My Lords, I think it not
Strange, for it is not unknown unto your Lordships, We be all Members of One
Body, and as we cannot be without your Lordships, so your Lordships cannot be
without Us. And when we are desirous, it pleases your Lordships out of your
Favor, to vouchsafe Us a Conference; so when your Lordships be willing, it
pleases Us out of the desire we have to be observant, to yield thereunto;
neither have your Lordships been more willing to Gratify Us with your Favors,
than We of the Lower House have been willing to further your Lordships Desires,
with our best Furtherance.

And therefore, my Lords, it is no Strange thing to have a Conference; neither
our Speech Strange, because it tended to draw us to some particular point of
Conference.

For the Epitheton Improper: I am to tell your Lordships, That I delivered no
more than I was Commanded, nor no less than I was Required. And therefore, by
your Lordships Favor, no cause it should deserve the Title of Improper.

And, I take it by your Lordships Favors, it was not Preposterous; For the
First Matter we took should be handled, was the Doubts which we Imagined your
Lordships had conceived of the Bill: And if your Lordships had ought else
conceived, I thought fit to show your Lordships, that we then came without
Commission.

So, my Lords, I hope I have made it appear, That the Speech was neither
strange, improper, or preposterous.

But We of the Lower House, who be here Committees, do beseech your Lordships,
that you would not conceive otherwise of Us, than we deserve. And your
Lordships shall find Us ever ready in all Dutiful Service, as coadjuting
Members of one United Body, the House of Parliament.

So after, withdrawing themselves a little from the Table, the Lords Whispered
together, and at length calling Us, the Lord Treasurer said:

The Lords were satisfied with our Answer, (...)
and were very glad they found Us so Conformable; by which they doubted not but
we should well agree for the Conference, whereby the Bill might have the better
Passage.

Mr. Secretary Cecil, answered: That he was very glad their Lordships did
conceive aright of them; and that the Committees, because they were many, and
would not be troublesome to them with multiplicity of Speeches, had chosen for
their Speakers to Satisfy their Lordships, Mr. Bacon, Mr. Bacon, etc. to
manage the Conference.
Mr. Sergeant Harris, Mr. Francis Moore, Mr. Henry Mountague, and Mr. Boys.

So the Lords called Mr. Attorney General to them; who began to make
Objections; and Mr. Bacon answering Mr. Attorney, again Objected; and Mr.
Sergeant Harris, before he had fully ended, began to answer. To which, Mr.
Attorney said: Nay, Good Mr. Sergeant, Leap not over the Style, before you come
at it: Hear me out I pray you, and conceive me aright. So when he had done, Mr.
Sergeant Answered:

I beseech your Lordships to hear me, and that I may answer without check or
Control, which I little Respect, because it is as light, as Mr. Attorney's
Arguments. And so he proceeded to answer. So the Conference brake up until the
next Morning, at which time the Lords said: They would send us word when they
were ready.

In the Afternoon.

A Bill for the Relief of Theophilus Adams, Touching certain Obligations
supposed to be made void, by a Proviso contained in the Statute 39. Reginae
cap. 22. Entitled. An Act for the Establishment of the Bishopric of Norwich,
and the Possessions of the same, against a certain pretended, concealed, Title
made thereunto.

A Bill for Reformation of Abuses in Selling and Buying of Spices, and other
Merchandises.

A Bill that no Fair, or Market, should be kept on Sundays.

On Saturday, December. 12. A Bill to confirm the Assurance of the Manors and
Farms of Sagebury, alias, Sadgbery, and Obden, and other Hereditaments, to
Samuel Sands Esquire and John Harris Gentleman, and their Heirs, being Engrossed,
was put to the Question, and was Passed.

A Bill for Redress of certain Abuses used in Painting, A Bill about Painters
and Plaisterers.
was moved by Sir George Moore, and some others, that this Bill might be let
slip, and the Cause referred to the Lord Mayor of London, because it concerned
a Controversy between the Painters and Plaisterers. To which,

Mr. Davis Answered, That the last Parliament this Bill should have Passed this
House; but it was referred as now desired, and Bonds made by the Plaisterers
for performance of the Orders made by the Lord Mayor; yet all will do no Good,
wherefore, Mr. Speaker, I think it good it should be put to the Question.

Sir Stephen Somes stood up, and desired, That my Lord Mayor might not be
troubled with them: but that it might be put to the Question; and it seemed
likely to go against the Painters.

But I stood up, as it was putting to the Question, and showed, That in the
Statute of 25. Ed. 3. cap. 3. Plaisterers were not then so called, but Dawbers,
and Mudd-Wall-Makers; who had for their Wages by the day Threepence, (...)
and his Knave Three-Half-Pence (so was his Labourer called;) they continued so
until King Hen. 7th's. time, who brought into England with him, out of France,
certain Men that used Plaster of Paris, about the Kings Ceilings and Walls,
whose Statute-Labourers these Dawbers were.

Those Statute-Labourers learned, in short time, the Use of Plaster of Parts,
and did it for the King, and increased to be many; then sueing to the King for
his Favor to Incorporate them, who fulfilled their desire, and Incorporated
them by the Name of Gipsarii; which was for Clay or Mudd, alias Morter-makers,
Anno 16 Hen. 7. Being no Freemen, for all their Incorporation, they obtained
the Kings Favorable Letters to Sir William Remington, then Lord Mayor of
London, and the Aldermen, to allow them Freemen. Which was granted.

At which time came in Four of them, and paid Ten Shillings a piece for their
Freedom, and in Three Years, after that manner, came in the Number of Twenty;
but they paid Four Pounds a piece for Their Freedom.

They Renewed their Patent in King Hen. 8's. time, and called themselves
Plaisterers, alias, Morter-makers, for the Use of Loame and Lime.

They made an humble Petition, and Supplication after this, to Sir John Monday
then Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen, to grant them Orders for the better Rule and
Government of their Company, in these words:

We the good Folks of Plaisterers in London, of Plaster and Loame of the said
City, for the Redress of certain Abuses of Lath-Plaister, and Loame wrought in
the said Crafts, etc. And then had allowed unto them Search for their Company,
for the Use of Lath, Loame, and Lime.

In all their Incorporations, at no time, they had any words for Colors;
neither yet in their Ordnances. For all they were Incorporated by the name of
Plaisterers; yet all King Hen. 8's. time, they were called Dawbers, as
appears in the accounts of the Chamber of London, paid to such and such
Dawbers, for so many Days so much, and to their Laborers so much.

The Plaisterers, never laid any Colors in the Kings Houses, nor in the
Sherifs of London, but this Year; they wore no Livery or Clothing the
Seventeenth of King Hen. 8.

They have been suffered to lay Alehouse Colors, as Redlead and Oaker, and
such like, and so now they intrude themselves into all Colors.

Thus they take not only their own Work, but Painting also, and leave nothing
to do for the Painter.

Painters, and Stainers, were two several Companies in King Edw. 3. time. One
for Posts, and all Timber-work to Paint. And the other, for Painting and
Staining of Cloth; of great continuance; both Companies were joined into one,
by their own Consent, and by the Consent of the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen of the
City.

The Nineteenth Year of Edw. 4. The Painters had Orders allowed them for the
Use of Oil, and Colors especially named, in Hen. 4's. time, from the Lord
Mayor and City. Painters can not work without Colors, their only mixture being
Oil and Size, which the Plaisterers do now Usurp and Intrude into.

Painters have her Majesty's Letters Patents Dated Anno 24. Reginae, forbidding
any Artificer the Use of Colors and Oil or Size after the manner of Painting,
but such as has been or shall be an Apprentice with a Painter, Seven Years at
the least.

And where the Plaisterers do Object, That the Painters do Abridge other
Companies of their Colors; That is most apparently untrue: For Goldsmiths use
Colors, but not after the manner of Painting, and work without Oil, or Size,
by enamelling. Leather-sellers Color their Leather, but not after the manner
of Painting, but work without Oil or Size. Book-binders use Colors, but
neither with Oil or Size, So Cutlers use Varnishing, and Gilding. So Glasiers
use Colors, with nealing in the Oven. Brick-layers use Colors, but neither
with Oil nor Size, and Joyners likewise do use Varnish.

Workmanship and Skill is the Gift of God; and not one in ten proves a
Workman, yet it is requisite, that all such as have been brought up all the
days of their life in a Trade, and cannot attain to that Excellency of Skill
that is required, should live by the baser part of their Science, when they can
not attain to the better; which is in working in Oil and Size, those flat
Posts, and Windows, etc.

If Plaisterers be suffered to Paint, Workmanship in Painting will decay; for
no Workman will keep an Apprentice Four or five Years to Practice, and not able
to get a Penny, unless he might now and then get somewhat toward his Meat and
Drink in laying of Oyl-Colours, as on Posts, etc.

Experience teaches us now, That amongst the Number of There Hundred there are
not now Twelve sufficient Workmen in the City of London; yet one of these (
Francis De Miter such was his Poverty) was fain for his Releif to Wife and
Children, to wear upon the Lord Mayors Day, a Blew Gown, and a Red Cap, and to
carry a Torch, he being Fifty Years Old.

One man will lay and Paint more Colors in a day, than ten men can grind,
which grinding of Colors, should be the Relief of such as cannot Attain to
Workmanship, and that is taken away by the Plaisterers, and the poor men the
Painters, their Wives and Children, go a Begging for want of Work.

Besides, Painting of Cloth is decayed, and not One Hundred Yards of new
Painted Cloth made here in a Year, by reason of so much painted Flanders pieces
brought from thence. So that the Painters have nothing to live on, but laying
of Oyl-Colours on Posts, Windows, etc.

It is a curious Art, and requires a good Eye, and a steadfast Hand, which the
infirmity of Age decays quickly, and then Painters go a begging.

Plaisterers take money generally from the highest Personage, to the lowest or
meanest Cottage, whose Walls must needs be made. Painters take money but of a
few, for their delight. Painters give to the Plaisterers six kind of Colors,
commonly used; (as the Bill imports) to be laid with Size, and not with Oil.
And for every Twenty Shillings earned with Oyl-Colours, there is Ten Pound
earned with Size-Colours, they being every man's money.

These Walls, The Bill passed.
thus Curiously Painted in former Ages, the Arms so Artificially Drawn, the
Imagery so perfectly done, do Witness our Forefathers Care in Cherishing this
Art of Painting. So, I think the Bill is very reasonable, and fit to pass, And
so it did.

Mr. Attorney General, and Doctor Carry came from the Lords, and showed, Their
Lordships were ready for a Conference, touching the Bill concerning Patents,
and that they had given power to their Committees, fully and finally to
determine the same; and desired, that our Committees might come with the like
Power, which was granted; but a great Number cried, No, No.

A Bill for Reformation of Abuses, in Buying and Selling of Spices, and other
Merchandises. This Bill was called the Garbling Bill.

It was put to the Question for the passage, and the House was divided, And the
I, I, I, were Ninety Five, and the No's Forty One. So the Bill passed.

There was a Question in the House, upon the Bill for the Relief of Soldiers,
Whether the Old Levy of Two Pence a Parish should stand, or Six Pence a Parish?

To which, Secretary Cecil moves for the poor Soldiers.
Mr. Secretary Cecil said: The Law for the Relief of Soldiers, I take to be
both just and Honorable, and that Misery which proceeds from Obedience, Worthy
to be Pitied and Relieved; for their Obedience has showed it self, even by
Sacrificing their Bloods for our Goods; and there is liker to be a continuance,
than a decay of their Miseries. I dare boldly say it, there is never a Soldier
Relieved with such a Contribution, as his Misery requires, and his Service
has deserved. And therefore I think Six Pence a Parish, at the least.

So they went to the Conference, and the House sent up these Bills, viz.

1. The Bill against Fairs and Markets on Sundays. 2. The Bill to prevent
Perjury and Subornation, etc. 3. The Bill to prevent Abuses in Sherifs, and
other Officers. 4. The Bill concerning making of Hats. 5. The Bill for Garbling
of Spices. 6. The Bill for Redress of Abuses in Painting. 7. The Bill for
making a Harbor or Key on the North side of Devon. 8. The Bill for Assurance
of certain Lands to Sands and Harris. And, Mr. Secretary Cecil was entreated
to deliver them unto the Lords.
The Bill for the Redress of Abuses and mis-employment of Goods and Lands given
to Charitable Uses, was Read the first time.

Mr. Solicitor General Fleming Moved, That although the Order of the House was,
A Bill should not be Read twice in one morning; yet in respect that this was a
Bill of great Consequence, he Prayed, That it would please the House it might
be Read again. And it accordingly was. And so it was by Order presently
Committed.

Mr. Snigg said: I would humbly pray the House, that the Bill of Clothing which
has at length taken, and laid open the Theft of England, which we have so long
followed with Hue and Cry, I mean the Tayntor, may be Read. It Robs God of his
Honor, and us of our Clothing.

Mr. Brown said: And I humbly present unto this House, the natural Born Child
of us all, I mean the Bill against Transportation of Ordnance, which is
Amended, and a Proviso added, with License, etc. And I humbly pray the
Amendments may be Read; And the Bill put to the Question. And so they were,
after a little Dispute, and Ordered to be Engrossed.

The Bill for Maimed Soldiers, was Read, To which Mr. Roger Owen spoke,
showing that he was commanded by all the Justices of the Peace for Salop, to
Deliver unto the House the poor Estate of the County, and therefore prayed, a
Proviso might be added to exempt that County.

But it was replied to him, That he went about to Deck up his particular
Cabin, when the Ship was on Fire.

In the Afternoon.

A Bill for the Establishing of the Remainder of certain Lands of Andrew
Ketleby Esquire; to Francis Ketleby, was Committed, and the place and time of
Meeting was the Court of Wards, On Monday Morning by Eight of the Clock, and
the Council on both sides to be there.

A Bill for the more diligent Repair to the Church on Sundaies, was Read; A
Bill for diligent Repairing to Church, etc.
To which

Mr. Bond said: This Bill as it is now Engrossed, much differs from the
First, which was here presented, which I the better like of; notwithstanding,
in my Opinion the Bill is altogether needless, and diverse Reasons move me to
think it both inconvenient, and unnecessary.

Every Evil in a State, is not to be met with in a Law. And as it is in the
natural, so it is in the politic Body, that sometimes the Remedy is worse
than the Disease. And therefore particular Laws against particular Offenses,
produce Novelty, and in Novelty Contempt. Hippedmans Miletius, offered to
Reward any Man Bountifully, which could invent a Good and New Law. But
Aristotle condemns that Policy. And the best Orator, Demosthenes, condemns
that State which will admit of any Innovation; although it be good in it self.

If this Bill pass, there will two imputations happen to the State, which
Wisdom wills us both to Foresee and Shunn. The First, an Infamy to our
Ministers, that our Adversaries may say, This is the Fruit of your Labor, to
have Preached away your Audience out of the Church.

The Second, No less, but a greater Imputation upon our Archbishops, Bishops,
Arch-Dearons, and other Ecclesiastical Governors; that they be either remiss
in their Authority, or else that their Prerogative has not so much Power as a
Twelve-Pence Fine. And doubtless these Imputations cannot be avoided, if we
give the Jesuits such Head, Scope, and Comfort, as they in their Writings do
greedily Apprehend.

I do conceive, Mr. Speaker, great difference between the Law, 1. Eliz. when
time was, and this Law, 44. Eliz. as now it is: then the People were newly
taken from Massing and Superstition; now are planted in Truth, and rooted in
Religion; the Light did then scarce appear unto them, which now shines with
Glorious Beams upon our Teachers, and Ecclesiastical Judges. And as the Malice
of the Adversary was only kindled against them in the Beginning; so is it
stretched forth to put down, and Flameth like a consuming Fire to devour our
Doctrine.

These Reasons aforesaid, were the Groundwork of Osorius's Foundation in his
Epistle unto Her Majesty, to give Advantage to spoke Evil. I will give but a
Reason or two more, and so end.

Suppose, that a neglector of Church Service, comes to the Sessions, there to
be Examined, alleging an Excuse, many businesses so concern the door not to
be known, that to speak Truth would be his undoing. And not to speak Truth,
would be a Wound unto his Conscience: and to say his Business were a mere
Mockery; and to say an untruth, an Apparent Danger.

If this Law may stand for a Law, me thinks, I see what Breach of Charity will
happen. Say there be Forty in a Parish absent, the Churchwarden presents some,
and not others; it will be Objected unto him. Wherefore should I be presented
and not he? my Wife, my Servant, my Friend, and not his? Will not this be a
great Breach of Unity and Peace?

Just Prosecution will be infinitely Cumbersome, and partial connivance subject
to Quarrel; notwithstanding this Statute, we leave Power to the Ecclesiastical
Judge; whose course is to proceed to Excommunication, and so an Excommunicato
capiendo must be had; this is as great a Charge as the Indictment in the
Statute 1 Eliz. In this Statute, a Witness or two must be brought to the
Sessions. He must be presented to the Grand Jury, and so Indicted. This will
cost Five Shillings, a Noble, or Ten Shillings, which is as much as the Charge
in the first Statute. So because this Bill is Scandalous to the Clergy,
Scandalous to the State, and Repugnant to Charity, and Crambe recocta; I pray
it may receive the like entertainment the former Bill had, viz. to be Rejected.

Sir Francis Hastings said: I shall speak upon great Disadvantage: Sir Fran.
Hastings Answers him.
I perceive this Member of our House, has taken Studied Pains to disturb the
passage of this Bill; to which I shall not so well Answer, because I cannot so
well carry away the particulars of this Politic, but not Religious Discourse.

If it be Religion to be Obedient at pleasure, If I could be Zealous to Day,
and Cold to Morrow: I could Subscribe to all that he has said. We cannot do a
more acceptable thing to God, nor a more Dutiful Service to the State, than to
bring Men to Fear God.

Religion and Policy may well stand together; but as that Policy is most
Detestable, which has not Religion to warrant it: So is that Religion most
happy, that has Policy to back and maintain it. I know the Jesuits and Priests
be out of square, and be at Jar amongst themselves; I pray God it be not to
make a Breach amongst us, who be yet at Unity.

Wit well Applied, is a profitable thing, but ill Applied, Dangerous in
whosoever does abuse it. There is no Man of Sense and Religion, but thinks he
is far from Religion (pointing to Mr. Bond) that made the Speech first. He
said, It would be an Imputation to our Ministers, That Speech was both absurd
in Judgment, and Scandalous in Uttering; as though by the Ministers of the
Word, we loath to hear of our Sins, or reconcile our selves unto God.

The Second, That it was an Imputation to Archbishops, Bishops, etc. I am so
far from blaming their Government, that I Renounce that position, and am very
sorry, that the strength of their Authority, stretches not so far as I could
wish it did in this Point.

But methinks this Law should rather be a Credit to the Ministers, That now we
having gone to Church these Forty Three Years our selves, and are so fervent in
Religion; desire also, that others may do the like.

I beseech you, give me leave to wipe away a Grievance, which it seems, the
Gentleman that last spoke, imputes unto me; he has made a protestation that
be is no Papist, I appeal to you all, if I said he was. And I say, he is no
Puritan, if he be not a Papist; for if there be ever a Puritan in England, it
is a Papist. I Learned of Doctor Humfries, who was sometimes my Tutor, a
Division of Four Sorts of Puritans.

1. The Catholics, who hold a Man cannot Sin after Baptism.

2. The Papist, who is such a Merit-Monger, that he would not only save himself
by his own Merits, but by the Merits of others also.

A 3d. Sort, are the Brownists, or Family of Love. A Sect too well known in
England: I would they never had so been.

The 4th. and last Sort, are, your Evangelical Puritans, which rely wholly upon
the Scriptures, as upon a sure Ground. And of these, I would we had many more
than we now have.

Mr. Glascocke, Mr. Spicer, and diverse others, made several Speeches; but
because it grew Dark, I could not Write them.

Doctor Carry came from the Lords, and brought a Bill concerning Captains,
Soldiers, and Mariners, and other the Queens Servants in the Realm. Also
another Bill for the Maintenance of the Navy, Increase of Mariners, and the
Avoiding the scarcity of Victuals.

It was showed by Doctor Bennet, upon occasion of Speech of the Multitude of
Recusants, that there were Thirteen Hundred, nay, Fifteen Hundred Recusants in
Yorkshire, which he vouched upon his Credit were presented in the
Ecclesiastical-Court, and before the Council at York.

So, after diverse other Speeches and Arguments, it was put to the Question,
Whether the Bill should be Engrossed? The Substance whereof was, That if any
Man came Eight times in the Year to the Church, and read the Divine Service
Twice every Sunday and Holyday in his House, with his whole Family, that should
be a sufficient Dispensation.

This was utterly misliked, yet diverse that were minded to overthrow the Bill,
went forth with the Proviso, because they would have it joined with the Bill to
overthrow it. Whereupon the House was divided, and upon division it appeared
thus, the I, I, I, were One Hundred Twenty Six, and the No, Noes Eighty Five.
So the Proviso passed.

Then it was put to the Question for Passing of the Bill, but then diverse
Reasons were showed to the contrary. Mr. Bonds, two Reasons of prejudice to
Ministers, and the Clergy, and the danger by Breach of Charity, That the
Information was a thing contrary to Magna Charta, That there might be a
Conviction without inquiry, etc.

Sir Walter Rawleigh showed, Sir Walt. Rawleigh against the Bill.


That all the Churchwardens of every Shire, must come to the Sessions to give
Information to the Grand Jury. Say then there be 100 and 20 Parishes in a
Shire; there must now come Extraordinarily 200 and 40 Churchwardens; and say,
that but Two in a Parish Offend in a Quarter of a Year, that makes Four Hundred
and Eighty persens (with the Offenders) to appear. What great Multitudes this
will bring together! What Quarrelling and Danger may happen, besides giving
Authority to a mean Churchwarden! How prejudicial this may be! with diverse
other Reasons against it As also, he said, There was some Ambiguities and
Equivocations therein, the Proviso being newly added, being a plain Toleration
from coming to Church. And that the Parson could not present or constrain any,
if they read Service at Home.

So it was put to the Question, thrice together; and because the Truth could
not be discerned, the House was again divided. And the I, I, I, went forth and
were 105. and the No's within were 106. so it was lost by one Voice. But the I,
I, I, said, they had Mr. Speakers Voice, which would make it even. And then it
grew a Question, whether Mr. Speaker had a Voice?

Sir Edward Hobby, who was of the I, I, I, side, said, Query, Whether the
Speaker have a Vote?
That when Her Majesty had given us leave to Choose our Speaker, she gave us
leave to choose one out of our own Number, and not a stranger. He is a Citizen
of London, and a Member, and therefore he has a Voice.

To which it was Answered, by Sir Walter Rawleigh, The Speaker declares he has
not, by Custom, any Vote.
and confirmed by the Speaker himself, That he was fore-closed of his Voice, by
taking of that Place which it had pleased them to impose upon him, and that he
was to be indifferent for both Parties. And withal showed, That by the Old
Order of the House, The Bil was lost.

Mr. Boyer, Secretary to the Lord Buckhurst, said: A Complaint of Foul Play,
etc.
Mr. Speaker, I think it not lost, for there has been foul and great Abuse
Offered in this matter. A Gentleman that would willingly have gone forth,
according to his Conscience, was pulled back. Though I much Reverence my
Masters of the Temple, and am much bound to the Benchers of the Midle-Temple,
yet if it will please the House, and you, Mr. Speaker, to Command me to Name
him, I will. The greatest Voice said No; yet Mr. Secretary Cecil, willed him to
Name him. And he said, Mr. Dale of the Midle-Temple.

Sir Walter Rawleigh said: Why? if it please you, Sir Walt. Rawleigh Accuses
himself of a Weakness.
it is a small matter to pull one by the Sleeve, for so have I done my self
often times. And a great Stir was in the House.

Mr. Comptroller, after some silence, said: The Comptroller takes him up for it.
We have been often troubled by Physicians, (meaning Mr. Bond,) and they have
been spoken against: He troubled us with Aristotle, and other Books. If he had
staid there, it had been well. But I think, we had need of Physicians to stay
our Heads, and Cool our Heats and Humors, not fitting a Court of Parliament;
For it is a most intolerable Disorder.

I do think the Offense an heinous Offense, both against God and this Assembly;
for the First, in that every man is to go according to his Conscience, and not
by Compulsion. And for the other Gentleman, ( meaning Sir Walter Rawleigh) that
said, he had often done the like, I think he may be ashamed of it; for large is
his Conscience, that in a matter of this Consequence, will be drawn either
forward or backward by the Sleeve. And I think it fit, it is so Heinous, that
he answer it at the Bar ( meaning Mr. Dale.) But because Sir Walter Rawleigh
was last named, it was taken to be meant of him.

Mr. Secretary Cecil said: I am sorry to see this disorder, Is Seconded by
Cecil.
and little do you know how for disorder the Parliament is Taxed. I am sorry I
said not, Slandered. I hoped as this Parliament began gravely, and with
judgment, so we should have ended modestly, and at least with discretion. I
protest I have a Libel in my Pocket against the Proceedings of this Parliament.

The Offense, that the Gentleman that last spoke, spoke of, I confess is great
and punishable. And this I wish may be inflicted on him, that he whose Voice
may be drawn either forward or backward by the sleeves, like a Dog in a string,
may no more be of this House; and I wish for his Credit sake, he would not.
But, that it should be so great as to be called to the Bar, I see no Reason;
neither do I know, why any in this House should speak so Imperiously, as to
have a Gentleman of his Place and Quality (pointing to Sir Walter Rawleigh)
called to the Bar.

For the matter it self, the No's were 106. and the I, I, I, 105. Mr. Speaker
has no Voice; and though I am sorry to say it, yet I must needs confess lost
it is, and farewell it.And so the House rose confusedly, it being after six a
Clock.

There was another Gentleman (a Noe) pulled out, as well as the other was kept
in, and therefore it had happened even as before; howsoever, Mr. Edward John's
and Mr. Barker pulled Mr. Lyonel Ducket out.

Sunday December. 13.

Monday December. 14. there was a great Eclipse about Noon.

A Bill against the multiplicity of Printers.

A Bill against Bankrupts, lewd Apprentices, and evil Factors.

The House was divided upon the second Reading of the Bill, the I, I, I, were
35. and the No's 45. so the Bill was not to be Read the third time, being lost
by ten Voices.

A Bill for the Cloth-workers of London, Ordered to be Engrossed.

A Bill for the Recovery of many Hundred Thousand Acres of drowned Grounds in
the I Will of Ely, and in the Counties of Cambridg, Huntington, Northampton,
Lincoln, Norfolk, Suffolk, etc. was Ordered to be Committed.

A Bill for the Denization of certain Persons, viz. Josepho Lupo, and one
Questor, and others, etc.

Mr. Fettyplace showed: That Questor, as he was Informed, had neither Father
nor Mother English, and therefore not fit to be Endenizen'd.

Mr. Brown said: This Questor is a Factor for Merchants, Strangers, and an
Ingrosser of Fish, and keeps a Warehouse here in London. And now, because he
would Defraud the Queen of a double Subsidy, being an Alien Stranger, he would
be Indenizen'd.

Sir Walter Rawleigh said: I know Questor well, he has served the Queen long,
and done Her good service, he has been these 36. Years in England, and has
ever showed himself a good Subject; and for his good Service, I see no Reason
but he should be permitted to pass with the rest.

Mr. Secretary Cecil said: I know this man Questor well; this Testimony I am
able to give of him, that he is a man of good Substance, and of Quality, and
of his quality I know not an honester man in England; he has done good Service
both to the Queen, and to the State; and that to my knowledge. For the matter
of Custom, I know her Majesty is well pleased therewith, and therefore no
Defrauding. That he should be an Ingrosser of Fish for Strangers, it may be;
but I think he is not. I protest if I knew he were, I should hate him as I do
hate Monopolies. It is no great matter if we put him in, for the Bill may be
quashed either in the Upper-House, or Her Majesty may dash him out, at her
Pleasure. The Committee, that was appointed this Forenoon in Ketlebies Case in
the Court of Wards, is appointed to be this afternoon in the same place.
Because the Council who were Committees, and the Cause being of great Weight,
Five Hundred Pounds Per Annum, were to go presently to end the Conference with
the Lords, touching Patents, for they tarried for them.

Mr. Francis Moore brought in the Bill for continuance of some Statutes, and
Repeal of some others, with two Provisoes touching Dover-Haven, (and the longer
was accepted) I leave it, quoth he, to the Consideration of the House, to take
whether they list, or to refuse both; and here stayed whilst the Clerk of the
Crown and a Doctor brought two Bills from the Lords, which had past this House,
viz. The Exchequer-Bill without any amendment, only a short Proviso added to
the end, the Effect whereof was:

That upon Order in the open Court, it should be Lawful for any Officer, Clerk,
etc. to award Process, and drive the Parties to Plead Quo titulo, etc. which
was Prohibited by the Bill. The second was the Bill touching the jointure of
Lucy Countess of Bedford, with some amendments, and a Proviso.

Mr. Secretary Cecil said: If ever there was a time to look to the Ports and
Havens, it is now. If you remember, Cecil about Dover-Haven.
what place is Ex opposito to Dover, what Neighbors we have, and how greatly
that Haven does stand us in stead, I believe you would be more willing to add,
than to take any thing away from the maintenance thereof. I wish therefore, to
end this Controversy, that this may be the Question, Whether of these two
Provisoes shall be added to the Law? But I think the greatest is best, and
largest, and I should be loath to Detract any thing from that Contribution: So
the greater was taken.

Amendments in the Bill of Assurance, used amongst Merchants.

Mr. Hackwell said: I think, Mr. Speaker, we do not give that Favor to a Bill
which lies dormant in this House, as the Bill meriteth. It was well said, by
one, that Ships were the Walls of our Kingdom; which if we suffer to Decay, as
I am certainly assured they are Decaying, not only a quarter, or third part,
but even half, and as our strength Diminishes, so our Enemies increase.

And therefore Mr. Speaker, it being for a public Good, and general Happiness
to us all, I wish so profitable a Bill may be Read, and have good passage; it
is Entitled, A Bill touching Soldiers, Mariners, and maintenance of Shipping.

A Bill for the Repealing of an Act made 14 Eliz. concerning lengths of
Kersies, was Committed.

A Bill for Confirmation of Letters Patents, to the Hospitals of St.
Bartholomews, Bridewell, and St. Thomas the Apostle.

The Act for Confirmation of Statutes put to the Question, and agreed to be
Engrossed.

Sir Edw. Hobby moved the House, to have their Opinions touching the Proviso
sent down from the Lords, with the Exchequer-Bill, which was Engrossed in
Parchment; for he somewhat doubted of it, and thought it ought to be in Paper;
for all Amendments that come from the Lords use to be in Paper, and not in
Parchment, but agreed, That it was well, and according to the course of the
House to be in Parchment.

The Bill for the Repairing and Amending two Bridges, near Carlisle over the
River of Eden, in the County of Cumberland, being Engrossed, it was Read and
Passed, and sent up to the Lords by Sir Edward Hobby and others. And the Copy
of the Information against Mr. Bellgrave, under the Hand of the Clerk of the
Star Chamber.

The Bill concerning the Assize for Feuel, Ordered to be Engrossed and Passed.

Mr. Davis moved, and showed, That a Servant of Mr. Hudlestons (Knight for
Cumberland) I think, being some twelve months since, hurt in the Hand, went
unto one Mathews a Surgeon by Fleet-Bridg, who for Ten Pound undertook the
Cure; the Man gave him a Bill of Ten Pound for the said Cure, which, he the
said Mathews could not perform, without leaving a great Scar, and withal a
little lameness in his hand, notwithstanding he paid the Surgeon Eight Found:
but upon what suggestion I know not, Mathews has sued Mr Hudlestons man for
the whole Ten Pound, and Arrested him upon an Execution, into the Counter. The
man told him, he was Mr. Hudlestons man, and that his Master was a Member of
this House, and a Knight of a Shire, and that he was thereby privileged from
Arrest, and wished to be discharged. But Mathews, and the Sergeant said, they
cared not for his Master, nor his Privilege; and said, that he was not
privileged from an Execution. And so being carried to the Counter, he told the
like to the Clerks, who affirmed likewise, that Privileges would not stretch
to Executions, and therefore would not discharge him.

And therefore I Pray, that both the Clerks, Mathews, and the Sergeant, may be
sent for. And so it was Ordered, they should Appear to morrow in the Forenoon.

The Bill against ordinary and usual Swearing, was ordered to be Engrossed, and
so Passed.

The Bill that Concerns Captains, Soldiers, and Mariners, which came from the
Lords, was Read the first time.

The Bill for Relief of the Poor, was brought in with Amendments, and agreed to
be Engrossed.

In the Afternoon.

The Bill touching the Weaving of Silk and Gold Laces, after a little Debate,
by the greater part, it was Rejected. The Reasons against the Bill were: 1.
That it was Incroaching a Liberty to have two miles compass. 2. That it was too
General; silk Wares, and all other Stuffs. 3. That it was a Prohibition of
making or selling of Norwich Stuffs. 4. That the search in the Bill, was too
General, and the Forfeiture too great. 5. That it was a discommodity to have
all Silk Stuffs. For Statute-Lace with a third of Silk, will show and sell
better; so of Stuffs for Childrens Coats. That the Search was General as well
within Liberties, as without.

I offered to speak before the Question was half asked, but could not be
suffered, the No's were so great. And it being put to the Question, overruled,
and the Bill Rejected.

A Bill, A Bill about the City, etc.
that the City of London should have full Power and Government over, and in the
Liberties of St. Katherines, Read. To which Bill,

Mr. Wiseman spoke, and said: Mr. Wiseman Argues against it.
That diverse particular Persons, had Purchased Lands within the Liberty; and
had given much more for the same, in respect of the Privilege, than otherwise
they would have done. And now this Bill wipeth away all their Right. And Mr.
Speaker, I hope I may speak it without Offense, This Parliament has been more
troubled with Bills for Incroaching Liberties about the City of London, than
any three Parliaments before.

Sir Steven Some said: I am bound to defend London, Sir Stev. Some for the City.
and I cannot, under your Favor, suffer the Imputation laid against us: For,
Mr. Speaker, I say to you, these Privileges are the very sink of Sin, the
Nurcery of naughty and lewd People, the Harbor of Rogues, Thieves, and
Beggars, and maintainers of idle Persons; for when our Shops and Houses be
Robbed, thither they fly for Relief and Sanctuary, and we cannot help our
selves.

The City seeing this, Purchased it of the Lord Thomas Howard, supposing to
have had all the said Privileges; but finding the contrary by Experience, they
now are enforced to sue for your Favors, to have it pass by Act of Parliament.
This is the Cause, and I leave it to your Considerations: whereupon it was put
to the Question, and the House was Divided, and the I, I, I, were 94. and the No's 86.

On Tuesday December. 15. A Bill to make the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments
of Edward Lucas Gentleman Deceased, Executor of the last Will and Testament of
John Flowerdewe Esquire, Deceased, liable to the payment of certain Legacies,
given by the last Will of the said John Flowerdewe; and for the payment of
diverse other Debts, owing by the said Lucas, in his life time.

Mr. Snigg moved, to have the Bill for Clothing Read, which was Read,
accordingly.

Mr. Phettiplace, prayed the House to have consideration, whether the Merchants
were fit to have Consideration for Cockling and Squales, and so to make
abatement to the Clothier. And he thought not, because in outward show, it
seemed good; yet there lurks a hurt to the Merchant. And so it was put to the
Question, and Ordered to be Engrossed.

One Anthony Mathews a Surgeon, who dwelt about Fleet-Bridg, caused a Sergeant
to Arrest one Curwyn, Servant to Mr. Hudleston Knight, for Cumberland. It
appeared, that Curwin was a Solicitor, and a Servant to the said Mr. Hudleston
for three Years space; and had solicited his great Cause in the Star Chamber,
betwixt Delebar and himself; the Truth of the Case was this: Curwin falling
into talk with another, about Fleet-Bridg, touching Mr. Hudlestons Cause; they
fell out there, and Fought, and Curwin was Hurt sore in the Hand; so he went to
this Mathews, being the next Surgeon, who dressed him; and after, it was
agreed, that Mathews should have for the Cure Ten Pounds, viz. Four Pounds in
hand, and Mr. Hudlestons and his Bill for the Payment of the other Six Pounds
when the Cure was done. Which Bill was Read openly. Now, it was Averred and
Confessed, the Cure was done, and that Four Pounds more was Paid, and Mathews
contented to forbear the other Forty Shillings until the next Term following;
but it was not paid. Whereupon the said Mathews (it being three Years since
due) caused Curwin to be Arrested. And Mr. Hudleston showed this to the House,
and Offered (so he might have his man free) to pay the money due. And because
it was Averred, that the Sergeant knew not of the said Curwins being Mr.
Hudlestons man, but only was told that he was one of New-Ian; which indeed was
true, and he lay there in his Brothers Chamber, yet served Mr. Hudleston; and
the Sergeant offered to Swear the same. But the Sergeant said, That after he
was Arrested, Curwin told him he was Mr. Hudlestons Man. And Mathews said, If
you let him go, I will be Answered by you; look you to it. Whereupon the
Sergeant confessed he kept him; and if he had Offended, he submitted himself.

So the House Awarded, the Sergeant should be Discharged, paying his Fees; and
that Mathews should pay them: And Mathews, to pay his Fees, and remain Three
Days in the Sergeants Custody, for procuring the Arrest: And that Curwin should
have his Writ of Privilege; And so he had.

This Matter was argued diversely, Whether he should be privileged or no: And
some thought not; but at length I stood up, and showed the House, That he ought
to be privileged; for we had given Judgment in the like Case, of the Baron of
Waltons Solicitor this Parliament. And thereupon it was put to the Question;
And Ordered he should be Privileged.

The House called to have the Bill of Ordnance Read, and sent up.

Sir Edward Hobby said: I shall move you in a Matter, which though is seems
distasteful in the beginning; yet I doubt not, but it will be very pleasing in
the ending. I am given to understand, and I know it to be true, for I saw it,
That the Lords have a Bill in their House, Touching Transportation of Ordnance;
far more larger in Matter, and more stricter in Punishment, than ours is. And,
where we stand so much upon the Words (without License) and spend time therein,
they make no such scruple, but puts it absolute.

Besides, I dare presume to Inform you, that the Gentleman that had the Patent,
has made a voluntary and willing Surrender thereof; laying the same even at
Her Majesty's Feet, which Her Majesty most Graciously and Willingly Accepted.

Now my Motion is this, I know their Bill is coming, and that the Parliament
will be short: If we shall read Ours, and they send Theirs; this will breed
Disputation, perhaps Confusion; and so, in so good and necessary a Cause, just
nothing done, but both neglected. Therefore my desire is, we may tarry for
Theirs. But the House would have it Read, viz. A Bill against Transportation of
Money, Coin, Plate, Ordnance, etc.

On Wednesday December. 16. A Bill for the Change of the Sirnames of those that
shall Marry the two Daughters and Heirs of William Waller Esquire into the Name of
Debden, was read the first time.

A Bill for Relief of the Poor, was Read and Ordered to be Engrossed.

A Bill to make the Lands and Tenements of Edward Lucas Gentleman, Deceased,
Executor of the last Will and Testament of John Flowerdewe Esquire Deceased, liable
to the payment of certain Legacies given by the last Will of the said
Flowerdewe; and to the payment of diverse other Debts, owing by the said Lucas,
in his Life time; was read, and Ordered to be passed.

The Bill for the Appeasing of certain Controversies, between Francis Ketleby,
and Andrew Ketleby, and Jane his Wife. The Substance of which is, that the
Matter shall be referred to Sir Robert Cecil, Sir Walter Rawleigh, Sir Francis
Hastings, Sir Edward Stafford, etc. And their Award to stand Good.

A Bill for the necessary Relief of Soldiers, and Mariners, was read, and
Ordered to be passed.

A Bill for the true making of Woollen-Cloth, was read, and Ordered to be
passed with a Proviso.

In the Afternoon.

A Bill concerning Captains, Soldiers, and Mariners, A Bill, about Soldiers
and Mariners, etc.
was read the second time; and by Reason of the Generality of the Bill, it was
much excepted against, by Sir Walter Rawleigh, and others.

Mr. Glascock said; Mr. Speaker, Mr. Glascock speaks to it; and against
Justices of the Peace.
I have something Touching this Bill to deliver to the House, in discharge of
my Conscience. And I do humbly and heartily pray you all, to hear me patiently
and quietly, without Interruption.

I have been observed Mr. Speaker, to be an Enemy to Justices of the Peace, and
to have spoken Irreverently, and much against them: For my own part, I mind now
to make my last Speech for this Parliament, and this Protestation withal: That
I never used any Irreverent Language toward those, whose Honesty joined with
their Authority, and make themselves Famous, under the Title of Upright
Justices. My Speech, was never uttered against them, but against two sorts of
Justices, that have Authority at the Commission of Musters; (for a I within the
County, are Authorized Generally by the word Justices) by whom I would be loath
to be Yoaked, or Commanded. The first is, the Uncircumcised Justice of Peace;
the other, The Adultering Justice of Peace.

The Uncircumcised Justice, Two sorts of Justices of the Peace: called
Uncircumcised, Adultering Justices.
is he; who from base Stock and Lineage, by his Wealth, is gotten to be within
the Commission. And I call him Uncircumcised, because he has not cut off the
Foreskin of his Offenses; and so by his Virtue, wiped away the blot or stain
of Baseness in his Birth and Lineage.

The Adultering Justice is he, that is a Gentleman-Born, Virtuous, Discreet,
and Wise; yet Poor and Needy. And so only for his Virtues and Qualities, put
into the Commission. This Man, I hold unfit to be a Justice, though I think him
to be a good Member in the Commonwealth. Because, I hold this for a ground
Infallible, That no poor Man ought to be in Authority; my Reason is this, he
will so Bribe you, and Extert you; that the sweet Scent of Riches and Gain,
takes away and confounds the true Taste of Justice and Equity. For the
Scripture says, Munera excacant ocules Justorum; and Justice is never
Imprisoned and Suppressed, but by Bribery. And such kind of Ministers I speak
of. And I call him an Adulterating Justice because, look how many Bribes he
takes, so many Bastards he begets to the Commonwealth.

Then let us see, whence these Justices do come, and how they be made. It
cannot be denied, but all Justices are made by the Lord Keeper; then he is in
fault, and none else. For my own Opinion, I have ever held him to be a Man both
Honorable, Grave, and Wise; so Just, that never was the meanest Subject so
Wronged that he ever Complained.

Therefore, his Justice cannot be Taxed. I, but his Care may, for he only
makes them. No, I may more easily Excuse him, than our selves; for he makes
none, but such as have Certificates Commendatory from the Justices of Assize.
Why then they be in fault; for impossible it is, my Lord Keeper should know the
Quality and Sufficiency of them himself, but only Per aluim, in trust, as by
the Justices of Assize. No, the Gall lies not there; for they neither (by
Reason they are not always rideing one Circuit) are well acquainted with the
natures of those secret Justices; but when any desires to be a Justice, he
gets a Certificate from diverse Justices of the Peace in the Country, to the
Justices of Assize, Certisying them, of their Sufficiency and Ability. And they
again make their Certificate (believing the former) to the Lord Keeper, who at
the next Assizes, puts them into Commission. And thus is the Lord Keeper
abused, and the Justices of Assizes abused, and the Country Troubled with a
Corrupt Justice, put in Authority.

The Cause comes only from the Justices themselves. And who be they? Even all
of you here present, or most of us. My Suit, therefore is, That you will
abstain from such Commendations, and hold your Hands from Writing Iniquity, and
doing so Sinful a Deed, as to Commend an unworthy Person, and not to Commend a
Worthy, and Deserving Subject. And I think this a position both true and
public, that it is as great a Sin to add to the Unworthy, as to detract from
the Worthy. And Mr. Speaker, if these Men may be excepted out of the Bill; I
will not only be ready to go, but to run forth to have so good a Law
Established.

Then Mr. Townshend (the Collector of this Journal) stood up and showed, That
in too much Generality, there never wanted Error. And so in this Bill, being
too General, namely, all from the Age of Eighteen to Sixty must appear at
Musters, and may be Pressed; no exception of any, and therefore no Profession
exempted.

It is not unknown unto you, that by Profession, I am a Lawyer, and therefore,
unfit to be a Professor of the Art of War. Therefore, I pray, that it would
please the House, if they would Commit the Bill; to Commit it to be returned on
the last Day of the next Parliament; or else, that, as a Worthy Gentleman
(Sergeant Heal) the last Parliament in a Bill of this nature, moved, to have
an Exception or Proviso, for all Sergeants; A Motion made in Mirth.
it would please you to admit of a Proviso for all Lawyers. At which the House
Laughed heartily, it being done for Mirth. And diverse Motions of the like
nature, were made.

On Thursday December. 17. Sir Edward Hobby showed, The Parliament was now in the
Wane; and Order had been taken Touching the Information delivered to this House
in Mr. Bellgraves Case, but nothing done therein. And (as it seems by not
taking out of the Process) a Prosecution of the Cause is intended, against the
said Mr. Bellgrave.

I think it therefore fit, because the chief scope of the said Information
seems to be Touching a Dishonor offered to this House, that it would please
you, that it might be put to the Question, Whether he has Offended this House,
yea, or no? If he has, he desires to be Censured by you. If he has not, it
will be a good Motive to the Honorable here present, who are Judges of that
Court, for their Satisfaction, in clearing the Gentleman of that Offense, when
it comes before them.

Mr. Speaker moved the House; That because the Parliament was like to end on
Saturday, it would please them to send the Bill of Ordnance to the Lords. And
that they might be moved to retain all private Bills in their Hands, until the
Ten Pounds or Five Pounds was paid, according to our former Order.

So the House cried, Mr. Secretary Cecil, who went, and did accordingly. And
then they proceeded in the Motion, concerning Mr. Bellgrave.

Mr. Comptroller said: I know the Gentleman to be an honest Gentleman, and a
good Servant to his Prince and Country: And for his Offense to this House, I
think it very fit to clear him: And do wish it may be put to the Question. If
it please you he may be cleared; I will be ready to vouch your Sentence for his
Offense to this House, when it comes there. But, if any other Matter appears
upon opening the Cause, with That we have not to do withal.

Mr. Secretary Cecil said: Touching this great Offense in the Country; I have
heard it spoken of diversely: but for my own part, I am rather apt to move
Consideration against him, that drew the Bill (one Mr. Diott) and that he
should be well Punished, who being a Member of this House, should seek to
diminish the Prerogative of this High Court of Parliament, by praying Aid of
the Star Chamber, for an Offense done to Us, this Court Sitting. And I desire
that two things may be Considered:

First, That the Gentleman (Mr. Diott) make an Apology for his Action in
drawing of the Information.

And Secondly, That this Gentleman Mr. Bellgrave, may be cleared here; which
will be a good inducement to the Lords, not to censure him heavily there.

Mr. Ravenscrost said: The Gentleman (Mr. Diott) is holden in the Reputation of
an honest Man. And we ought not to proceed against a Fellow-Member, till he be
called. It is not Apparent unto Us, that he made it; the Information is under
Mr. Attorneys Hand, and therefore, ought to be intended his; for now it is of
Record under his Hand, against which we can receive no Averment of Speech of
others, other than the Gentleman's own words viva vocae. And that I think he
will not confess. And so there was no more said of this Matter.

It was put to the Question, Whether he should be cleared of the Offense to the
House; Yea, or No? And all cried, I, I, I, but only Young Mr. Francis Grantham,
who gave a great No: At whom the House Laughed, and he Blushed.

Sir. Francis Hastings said: Sir Fr. Hastings against Extravagant Speeches.
Mr. Speaker, Because I see the House at so good Leisure; I will be bold to
remember some Matters passed this Parliament, and deliver my Opinion, with
desire of Reformation: I mean not to Tax any Man.

Diverse Speeches have been used concerning Justices of the Peace, so Slanderous
and Defamatory; with so unwonted Epethites, with such Slanderous Definitions; a
Testimony of Levity for the one, and scant sound Judgment for the other.

And therefore, I do humbly pray the Honorable here present, that those
Justices which serves Religiously, Dutifully, and Carefully, may be
Countenanced.

The Church and Commonwealth are two Twins, which Laugh and Live together.
Long have we joyed in Her Majesty's Happy Government, and long may we.

We have two strong Enemies; Rome, and Spain; from thence all our Rebellions
have Proceeded, and by Treasons Hatched there, the Sacred Life of our Sweet
Sovereign has been sought, and endangered.

The boldness of the Jesuits, and Seminaries, The Insolence of the Jesuits.
is greatly increased, and they be very diligent to pervert, which their often
and ordinary Published Pamphlets, to every Man's view, well Testifies, and
Apparently shows the Perverseness of their Spirits, and Corruptness of their
Hearts. And the Multitude being Perverted: What Danger this may breed to the
State, and our Sovereign Queen, Judge you.

For my part, I am, and will be ready to lay my Life at Her Feet, to do Her
Service; We had need to have special Care of them, for themselves do brag they
have Forty Thousand true Hearted Catholics (for so they call them) in
England; besides, their retinue, poor Catholics and Neuters, and I know not
what. It is therefore fit, we look to this dangerous Case, and not to think our
selves secure, because we find no harm: For it is a true Position; That
Security without Providence, is most Dangerous.

I conclude only with this desire, that those who have Supreme Authority, will
look that those who have inferior Government, may do faithfully: And that we
may be kept in Obedience.

Mr. Wingfeild, spoke to the same effect: And because it had pleased the House,
that the Clerks Servant should serve this Parliament, in his Masters steed,
(Mr. Onslowe who was sick) that the House would in regard of his faithful
Service, and diligent attendance, give Twelve Pence a piece; or what they
should think good, every man in his discretion. That Motion was liked, and
agreed to be gathered the next morning.

In the Afternoon.

A Bill for the Changing of the Surnames of William Waller Esquire, A Bill to
Change the Name of Wallers, to Dibdens.
and his two Daughters; and the Names of them, that should Marry them, into the
Name of Dibden; was Read the second time.

Sergeant Yelverton and Doctor Hone, brought a Bill from the Lords, Entitled,
An Act for Reformation of Deceipts and Frauds of certain Auditers and their
Clerks, in making of diverse particulars.

Sergeant Harris spoke to the Bill of Waller: Serj. Harris, to the Bill of
Waller.
In Law there is a Bastard and a Mulier: And a Bastard has the Name of the
Mother; a Mulier, of the Father. If a man come into a Poulterers Shop to buy a
Wood-Cock or Hen, he buys it by the name of a Cock. And if it be a Goose,
whether it be a Goose, or a Gander, he buys it by the name of a Goose. And
surely Sirs, because the Land came by a Match (by a Woman) with the Dibdens, he
would have it go with the Name of the Woman. I think he deserves the name of a
Goose, if not of a Wood-Cock for his Conceit; which, though it be a mere Toy, I
wish it good passage. For there is an Order, that upon every private Bill,
something must be given to the Poor, which will do them much good, and no harm,
to the preferrers thereof.

A Bill for the Assize of Bread, was this day Read, and Ordered to be Committed.

A Bill for Reduction of all Brewers within two miles of the City of London, to
the Company of Brewers there.

A Bill against Ingrocers, and Forestallers of Butter and Cheese.

A Bill against Cozening with False Dice.

A Bill for Reformation of Abuses in Physicians.

On Friday December 18. As the Speaker was coming to the House in the morning,
the Pardon was delivered unto him; which he took, and deliverd it to the House;
which they sent back again, because, it was not brought according to course.

The Collection for the Clerk of the Parliaments Servant, supplying his masters
Place of Twelve Pence a piece, according to Mr. Wingfeilds Motion Yesterday,
was made; which amounted to about Twenty Five Pounds.

Mr. Boyer, Secretary to the Lord Treasurer, sitting in the middle of the
House, on the left side, as you come in, next to Mr. Skipwith of Lincoln's Inn,
swoonded upon a sudden, and was Recovered within a quarter of an hour. It was
said he had a spice of the Falling Sickness: he was carried out by the Sergeant
of the House, and three of his men, into the outer Room. It was strange, to
hear the diversity of Opinions touching this Accident. Some saying it was Malum
Omen; others, that it was Bonum Omen.

Mr. Attorney General brought the Pardon, Entitled, An Act for the Queens
Majesty's most Gracious General, and Free Pardon. He came assisted on the Right
hand, by Doctor Carry, and on the Left hand, by Doctor Stanhop; he also
delivered unto us again, our Subsidy Bill, Entitled, An Act for the grant of
Four Entire Subsidies, and eight Fifteens and Tenths, granted by the Temporalty.

The Bill for Auditors, was brought from the Committee, by Mr. Secretary Cecil.

Mr. Hackewell made a Motion, that the Speaker might say something touching the
transportation of Ordnance, That seeing the Bill in the lower House is fallen
into an everlasting sleep, and that he knew not thereof before this day, he
could not be blamed for that which he could not have spoken before this time:
but nothing was replied, or done.

The Subsidy of the Ciergy was sent in a Roll according to the usual Acts; to
which, Sir Edward Hobby took exceptions, because it was not sent in a long skin
of Parchment under the Queens Hand and Seal: so it was sent back, and then the
other was sent.

Quere of Mr. Phetyplace and Sir Robert Wroth, What was done with the Money,
viz. 10 s. of every Knight, and 5 s. of every. Burgess, collected for the Poor,
and how it was agreed to be distributed?

On Saturday, December. 19. about nine of the clock in the morning, this day
being appointed to be the last day of the Parliament, and her Majesty appointed
to come to the House, as the House sat quietly one talking with another, about
a hundred being in the House,

Mr. Wiseman stood up and said, Mr. Speaker, because I see our business is at
an end, and that now we have little to do but only to attend her Majesty's
pleasure, A Case put by Mr. Wiseman, discussed, etc.
I will be bold to put a Case to the House upon one of our new Statutes of
Rogues, offering the Resolution thereof to your considerations, the Case being
common, and sit by every man here to be understood. It is thus: A woman is
begotten with Child in one house, and before she appears to be with Child,
she goes away and serves in another house in another County. My Question is,
Where this woman shall be relieved, and where this child shall live?

Mr. Brown of the Court, said, In my opinion, the woman is to be relieved, and
the child also, where it is gotten: for their Masters may look better to them,
than let their servants be so lewd: And therefore this coming by his
negligence, or want of care, or perhaps by his too much familiarity with his
servants, I see no reason but he in whose house the child is gotten, should be
charged with both.

Sir George Moore said, Partus sequitur ventrem; the Child follows the
Mother; and therefore where the Statute allows help to the Mother, there is
relief also to be given unto the Child.

Mr. Phetyplace said, I know not how it is in the Country, or in other places;
but in the City I am sure, the man of the house is ever the reputed Father,
till the true Father be known, or confessed by the Mother. If the Father be
known, and able to keep the Child, then by the Law he is constrained to
relieve the woman and the Child; if he be not able, the use with us in London
is, That the Child shall be delivered to some Hospital, or to the Parish,
there to be relieved.

Mr. Wiseman said, I think I am not to be debarred from speech, for this is not
More Parliamentario, but that I may deliver my Opinion: And I shall rather
hold, she is to be relieved by neither, but that it should be accounted for her
own sin and her own impiety; and the example of Penury (in no relief) is better
than any Admonition. And if some straight and severe course be not used, the
sin is so common, that in short time we shall have nothing more common,
especially when we do use such cockering of them as we now do, and count it a
matter of charity to relieve them.

Mr. Francis Moore thought, that both in charity and by law, they both ought to
be relieved, by the express words of the Statutes.

Mr. Speaker moved the House to know their pleasures, whether they would
adjourn the House till one of the clock; and as they were rising,

Mr. Herbert Crofts said, Mr. Speaker, though my Motion perhaps may seem
unseasonable, yet I beseech the House to consider with me, a Speech that
consisted yesterday of four parts ( it being Mr. Hack-well 's Speech) laying
open the dangerous mischiefs that come by transportation of Ordnance; and that
due reformation thereof may be had for restraint of private transporting. I
would only put the House in mind, and you also, Mr. Speaker, that the
Gentlemen which yesterday moved it, desired that Mr. Speaker might say
something thereof to her Majesty in his Speech to be inserted; which I do again
desire the more earnestly, because our Bill is fallen, as he said, into an
everlasting sleep, and we have no remedy but by her Majesty.

Mr. Speaker said, If it please you, I mean upon the Motion the Gentlemen made
yesterday, to say something therein both for your satisfaction and performance
of my duty; and therefore this matter shall need no further to be moved. With
which the House rested well satisfied, and so rose.

But it is to be noted, That the Speaker said not one word in his Speech to her
Majesty touching the matter; which was greatly murmured at, and spoken against
amongst the Burgesses, that the House should be so abused; but nothing was done
therein.

In the Afternoon,

About one of the clock, diverse Gentlemen met together in the House, whither
the Speaker came, and after the Privy-Counsellors; where, after sitting some
half an hour at past two, they went up to the Upper House, and staid there at
the Gallery-door about half an hour; and at length the door was opened: And the
Lords of the Upper House being all sat, and her Majesty under a rich Cloth of
Estate, The Q. (...).
the Speaker went to the usual place at the bar; where, after three Reverences
made, and the like done in their times by all the Commons, the Speaker said to
this effect.

THat Laws were not first made with humane Pen, The Speakers Speech.
but by divine Ordinance; that Politic Laws were made according to the evil
conditions of men; and that all Laws served not for all times, no more than one
Medicine for all Diseases: If he were asked what was the first and chiefest
thing to be considered of, he would have said, Religion: If, what is the
second? Religion: If what is the third? Religion. So Religion is all in all;
for Religion breeds Devotion, Devotion breeds Zeal and Piety to God, which
breeds Obedience and Duty to the Prince; and Observance of the Laws, which
breeds Faithfulness, Honesty, and Love, three necessary and only things to be
wished and observed in a well-governed Commonwealth. And that her Majesty, by
planting true Religion, had laid such a foundation, upon which all these three
Virtues were so planted and builded, that they could not easily be rooted up
and extirpated: and therefore we did acknowledge, we ought and do acknowledge,
we will praise God and her Majesty for it.

And then he descended to speak of Governments and Laws of Nations; amongst and
above all which, he principally preferred the Laws of this Realm; which, he
said, were so many and so wise, that there was almost no offense, but it was
met with in a Law.

Notwithstanding her Majesty being desirous, for the good of her Realm, to call
a Parliament for redress of some Laws, and for making some new; Her dutiful and
loving Subjects, having considered of them, have made some new, and amended
some old; which they most humbly desire may be made Laws by her most Royal
Assent, which gives life unto them.

And so, after thanks given for the Pardon, by which we dread your Justice and
admire your Mercy, and a Prayer, That she would accept, as a testimony of our
Loves and Duties offered unto her with a free heart and willing spirit, four
entire Subsidies, and eight Fifteenths and Tenths, to be collected of our Lands
and Livelihoods; (in speaking whereof, he mistook, and said, Four entire
Fifteenths and eight Subsidies; but he was remembered by some of the Counsel
that stood near about him, and so spoke right as aforesaid:) And also pardon
craved for his offenses, if either he had forgotten himself in words or action,
he ended.

To which, the Lord Keeper answered thus in effect.

First, AS touching her Majesty's proceeding in the Laws for her Royal Assent,
The L. Keepers Speech in answer.
that should be as God should direct her sacred spirit. Secondly, For your
presentation of four entire Subsidies, and eight Fifteens and Tenths; And
thirdly, Your humble thank-fulness for the pardon for them and your self; I
will deliver her Majesty's Commandment with what brevity I may, that I be not
tedious to my most gracious Sovereign.

First, She says touching your proceeding in the matter of her Prerogative,
that she is persuaded Subjects did never more dutifully; and that she
understood you did but obiter touch her Prerogative, and not otherwise but by
humble Petition: and therefore that thanks that a Prince may give to her
Subjects, she willingly yields. But she now well perceives that private
respects are privately masked under public pretenses.

Secondly, Touching the presentation of your Subsidies, she specially regards
two things, both the persons, and the manner: For the first, he fell into
commendations of the Commonalty; for the second, the manner, which was speedy,
not by persuasion, or persuasive inducements, but freely, and of duty, with
great contentment. In the thing which we have granted, her Majesty greatly
commends your confidence and judgments; and though it be not proportionable
to her occasions, yet she most thank fully receives the same, as a loving and
thank-ful Prince. And said that no Prince was ever more unwilling to exact or
receive any thing from the Subject than she our most gracious Sovereign; for we
all know she never was a greedy Grasper, nor straight-handed keeper: And
therefore she commanded me to say, That you had done (and so she takes it)
dutifully, plentifully, and thank-fully.

For your self, Mr. Speaker, her Majesty commanded me to say, That you have
proceeded with such wisdom and discretion, that it is much to your
commendation, and that none before had deserved more. And so he ended, after an
Admonition given to the Justices of Peace, That they would not deserve the
Epethites of prowling Justices, Justices of Quarrels, who counted Champerty
good Chevesance; suing Justices, who did suck and consume the Wealth and Good
of the Commonwealth; and also to those who do lie, if not all the year, yet at
least three quarters of the year, at London.

After this Speech ended, the Clerk of the Crown read the Titles of several
Acts. To the general Acts which were allowed, the Clerk of the Parliament
answered, Le Roygne le veult: To the private Acts to be passed, Soit come il
est desire: To the general Acts not passed, Le Roygne s'advisera: And so to the
other. To the Subsidies and Pardon, as in the last Parliament. Which done,

The Lord Keeper said, Parl. dissolved.
It is her Majesty's pleasure, that this Parliament shall be dissolved; and she
gives license to all Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, to depart at their
pleasure: And so

God save the Queen.

And all the Commons said aloud,

AMEN.

Nomina Militum Comitat. Civium Civitatum, and Burgensium Villar. sive
Burgorum, ac Baronum quinque Portuum, veniend. ad Parliamentum summonit. apud
Civitatem Westminster. septimo die Octobris, Anno Regni Eliz. Reginae 43o. 1601.
Bedfordshire.
Com. Bedford, Oliverus St. John Ar. Edwardus Radcliffe Miles. Villa Bedford,
Humfridus Winch Ar. Thomas Fanshawe Ar.

Buckinghamshire.
Com. Buckingham, Francis Fortescue Ar. Alexander Hamden Ar. Villa Buckingham,
Christopherus Hatton Ar. Robertus Newdegate Ar. Burgus Wiccombe, Richard Blunt
Ar. Henry Fleetwood Ar. Burgus de Alisbbury, Johannes Lilly Ar. Richard Moore
Ar.

Berkshire.
Com. Berks, Richard Lovelace Miles. George Hide Ar. Villa Novae Windsor,
Julius Caesar Legum Doctor. John Morris Miles. Burgus de Reading. Francis Moore
Ar. Anthony Blagrave Ar. Burgus de Wallingford, Thomas Fortescue Ar. Henry
Doyly Ar. Burgus de Abbington, Robertus Rithe Ar. (...)

Cornwall.
Com. Cornwall, Walterus Rawleigh Miles. Johannes Arundell de Trerise, Ar.
Burg. de Dunh. alias Lancest. Johannes Eker Ar. George Downhault Ar. Burgus de
Leskard, Thomas Edmonds Ar. Sampson Leonard Ar. Burgus de Lestwithell,
Richardus Camwell Ar. Nicholaus Sanders Ar. Burgus Truro, Thomas Harris
Servien. ad Legem. William Daniel Ar. Burgus Bodwyn, Willielmus Law Ar.
Johannes Piggott Ar. Burgus Hilston, Hanibal Vivian Ar. Willielmus Twisdin Ar.
Burgus Saltashe, Robertus Cross Miles. Alexander Nevill Ar. Burgus Camelford,
Willielmus Cornesewe Gener. Anthony Turpin Gener. Burg. Portpigh. alias Westlo.
Johannes Hare Ar. Richardus Verney Ar. Burgus Grandpound, Johannes Astell Ar.
(...) Burgus de Castlowe, Johannes Hamon Ar. Robertus Yaverly Gener. Burgus de
Penry, Edwardus Seymor Ar. Richardus Messenger Gener. Burgus Tregonny,
Lodovicus Darcy Ar. Thomas Trevor Gener. Burgus de Bossenny, Jeronymus Horsey
Ar. Willielmus Hackwell Gener. Burgus de St. Ives, (...) Thomas Breton Gener.
Burgus de Fowey, Carens Rawleigh Miles. Willielmus Courtney Jun. Miles. Burgus
de Michael, Willielmus Chumley Ar. Georgius Chidley Ar. Burgus de St. Jermins,
George Carew Ar. John Osborne Ar. Burgus de Newport, Johannes Leigh Miles.
Tobias Matthew Ar. Burgus de St. Mawes, Robertus Killegrewe Ar. Radolphus Hare
Ar. Burgus de Killington, Milo Ramford Gener. Johannes Roll Gener.

Cumberland.
Com. Cumberland, Willielmus Hudleston Ar. Gerrardus Lowther Ar. Civitat.
Carlisle, Henricus Scroope Ar. (...)

Cambridgeshire.
Com. Cantabridg. Johannes Cuts Miles. Johannes Cotton Miles. Villae
Cantabridg. Robertus Wallys Gener. Johannes Yaxley Gener. Vniversitas
Cantabridg. (...) (...)

Cheshire.
Com. Cestr. Petrus Leigh Miles. Thomas Holcroft Ar. Civitas Cestr. Hugo
Glasier Ar. Thomas Gamill Ar.

Darbyshire.
Com. Derby, Francis Leake Ar. Petrus Frechvill Ar. Villa Derby, Petrus Ewer
Ar. John Baxter Ar.

Devonshire.
Com. Devon, Willielmus Courtney Senior, Miles. Edwardus Seymor Ar. Civitas
Exon. Johannes Heal Servien. ad Legem. Johannes Howell Ar. Burgus Totnes,
Leonardus Darr Gener. Pilippus Holditch Gener. Burgus Plymouth, Jacobus Bagg
Mercator. Willielmus Stallenge Mercator. Burgus Barnestaple, Edwardus Hancocke
Gener. Richardus Martyn Gener. Burgus Plimpton, Willielmus Strowde Miles.
Johannes Heal Gener. Burgus Tavestock, Henricus Gray Ar. Walterus Wentworth
Ar. Burg. Dartm. Clift. Hardres, Johannes Treherne Gent. Willielmus Bastard Ar.
Burgus Beerealston, Carolus Lister Ar. Johannes Langford Gener. Burgus
Tiverton, (...) (...)

Dorsetshire.
Com. Dorset, Edmondus Vnedall Miles. Georgius Trenchard Ar. Burgus de Pool,
Robertus Miller Ar. Thomas Billott Gener. Burgus de Dorchester, Henricus
Bronker Miles. Matheus Chubb Gener. Burgus de Lime, Johannes Fitz-James Ar.
Nicholaus Throgmorton Ar. Burgus de Weimouth, Johannes Peyton Miles. Walterus
Cope Ar. Burgus de Melcomb Reg. Richardus Swayne Ar. Edwardus Reynolds Gener.
Burgus de Birtport, Robertus Napper Miles. Richardus Warberton Ar. Burgus de
Shaftsbury, Arthurus Messenger Gener. Johannes Budden Gener. Burgus de Warham,
Johannes Stafford Miles. Edmondus Scott Gener. Burgus de Corf-castle, Johannes
Durning Gener. Johannes Davies Gener.

Essex.
Com. Essex, Henry Maynard Ar. Francis Barrington Ar. Burgus de Colchester,
Robertus Barker Ar. Richardus Simnell Gener. Burgus de Malden, Willielmus
Wiseman Ar. Richardus Weston Ar. Burgus de Harwich, (...) (...)

Eborum.
Com. Ebor. Thomas Fairfax Miles. Edwardus Stanhopp Miles. Civitat. Ebor.
Johannes Bennet Legum Doctor. Henricus Hall Ar. Villa de Kingston super Hull,
Johannes Lister Mercator. Johannes Graves Mercator. Burgus de Scardborough,
Willielmus Ewre Ar. Edwardus Stanhopp Ar. Burgus de Knaresborough, Henricus
Slingsbye Ar. Willielmus Slingsbye Ar. Burgus de Rippon, Christopherus Hawkins
Leg. Doct. Johannes Thorneborough Ar. Burgus de Richmond, Cuthbert Pepper Ar.
Talbot Bows Ar. Burgus Heydon, Matheus Pattison Gener. Christopherus Hilliard
Ar. Burgus Buroughbrigg, Thomas Fairfax Ar. Richardus Whaley Ar. Burgus Thuske,
Johannes Mallery Ar. (...) Burgus Aldsborough, Edwardus Cecill Miles. Richardus
Thackeston Ar. Burgus Beverley, Radolphus Ewyns Gener. Edwardus Francis Ar.

Gloucestershire.
Com. Gloucestr. Edwardus Winter Miles. Johannes Throgmorton Ar. Civitat.
Gloucestr. Lucas Garnons Ar. Willielmus Oldsworth Ar. Burgus Cyrencester,
Richardus Brown Ar. Richardus George Ar. Burgus Tewksbury, (...) (...)

Huntingtonshire.
Com. Huntington, Jervasius Clifton Miles. Oliverus Cromwell Ar. Burgus
Huntington, Willielmus Beecher Ar. Thomas Chitchley Ar.

Hertfordshire.
Com. Hertford, Robertus Cecill Miles, Secr. Reginae. Henricus Carry Miles.
Villa St. Albans, Radolphus Carry Ar. Henricus Frowick Ar.

Herefordshire.
Com. Hereford, Thomas Conisby Miles. Herbert Crofts Ar. Civitat. Hereford,
Walterus Hurdeman Ar. Thomas Jones Ar. Burgus Lemster, Thomas Conisby Ar.
Johannes Warnecombe Gener.

Kent.
Com. Kanc. Henricus Nevill Miles. Francis Fane Ar. Civitat. Canterb. Johannes
Boys Ar. Johannes Rogers Gener. Civitat. Roffen, Edwardus Hobby Miles. Thomas
Walsingham Miles. Burgus de Maidston, Thomas Flood Miles. Johannes Leviston
Miles. Burgus de Queenborough, Michael Sands Miles. Nicholaus Thornton Gener.

Lincolnshire.
Com. Lincoln, Johannes Sheffield Ar. Willielmus Wray Miles. Civitat. Lincoln,
George Anton Ar. Francis Ballingham Ar. Villa Boston, Anthony Erby Ar. Henry
Capell Ar. Villa Magna Grunsby, Thomas Dom. Clinton and Say. Edwardus Skipwith
Ar. Villa Stanford, Robertus Wingfield Ar. Edwardus Watson Ar. Burgus Grantham,
Oliverus Manners Ar. Thomas Horseman Ar.

Leicestershire.
Com. Leicestr, Henry Hastings Ar. Willielmus Skipwith Ar. Burgus Leicester,
Georgius Bellgrave Ar. Willielmus Heyricke Ar.

Lancashire.
Com. Lancaster, Richardus Haughton Miles. (...) Burgus Lancaster, Jeronymus
Bows Miles. Carry Reynell Miles. Burg. de Preston in Andern. Johannes Brograve
At. Duc. Lanc. (...) Villa Liver-pool, Edwardus Anderson Ar. Henry Calveley Ar.
Burgus de Newton, Thomas Langton Baron of Walton. Richard Ashton Gener. Villa
Wygon, Rogerus Downs Ar. Johannes Poultney Ar. Burgus Clithero, Johannes
Osbasdeston Ar. Anthonius Deering Ar.

Middlesex.
Com. Midd. Johannes Fortescue Mil. Canc. Scac. Robertus Wroth Miles. Civitat.
Westminster. Thomas Knivet Miles. Willielmus Cook Ar. Civitat. London. Stephanus
Somes Miles. Johannes Crook Ar. Recordat. Thomas Phetyplace Mercator. Johannes
Pinder Mercator.

Monmouthshire.
Com. Monmouth, Thomas Somerset Ar. Henricus Morgan Ar. Burgus Monmouth,
Robertus Johnson Ar. (...)

Northamptonshire.
Com. Northampton, Johan. Stanhopp Miles. vic. hosp. R. William Lane Miles.
Civitat. Peterborough, Nicholaus Tuston Ar. Goddard Pemberton Gener. Villa
Northampton, Henry Hickman Legum Doctor. Francis Tate Ar. Villa Barkley, Edw.
Mountague Ar. Johannes Down Ar. Burgus Higham Ferris, Henry Mountague Ar.
(...)

Nottinghamshire.
Com. Nottingham, Carolus Cavendish Miles. Robertus Perpoint Ar. Villa
Nottingham, William Gregory Gener. William Greyns Gener. Burgus de Estretford,
Roger Manors Jun. Ar. Robertus Kidman Gener.

Norfolk.
Com. Norf. Bassingburmus Gaudy Miles. Henricus Gaudy Miles. Civitat. Norwich,
Alexander Thurston Mercator. Johannes Pettus Mercator. Villa Lyn Reg. Robertus
Mansell Miles. (...) Villa Magna Yarmouth, Henry Hubbard Ar. Thomas Dannet
Gener. Villa Thetford, Henry Warner Ar. Thomas Knivett Ar. Burgus
Castle-rising, John Peyton Esquire (...)

Northumberland.
Com. Northumberland, Robertus Carry Miles. William Selby Jun. Ar. Villa Novae
Castrae sup. Tine. William Gennison Alderman. George Selby Alderman. Burgus de
Morpeth, George Savill Ar. John Brown Ar. Villa Barwick, William Selby Sen.
Ar. David Waterhouse Ar.

Oxfordshire.
Com. Oxon. Will. Knowls Mil. Comp. hosp. Reg. Radolphus Walcopp Ar. Civitat.
Oxon. Francis Leigh Ar. George Calsield Ar. Vniversitas Oxon. (...) (...)
Burgus de Woodstock, Laurence Tanfield Ar. William Scot Gener. Burgus de
Banbury, Anthony Cope Miles. (...)

Rutlandshire.
Com. Rutland, Johannes Harrington Miles. Edwardus Noell Ar.

Surrey.
Com. Surrey, Will. Dom. Howard de Effingham. George Moore Miles. Burgus de
Southwark, Matheus Dale Esquire Zacharias Lock Esquire Burgus de Rygate, (...) (...)
Burgus de Gilford, Robertus Moore Ar. William Jackson Gener. Burgus de Gatton,
Matthew Brown Knight. Richard Sands Esquire Burgus de Haselmer, Francis Wooley Ar.
John Clarke Ar.

Staffordshire.
Com. Stafford, Thomas Gerrard Miles. Johannes Edgerton Miles. Civitat.
Litchfield, Anthony Diott Esquire Robertus Brown Esquire Villa Stafford, Edward
Stafford Miles. William Essex Ar. Burgus Novae Cast. super Lin. Edwardus
Mannering Gener. Thomas Trentham Gener. Burgus de Tamworth, George Egeocke Ar.
Robert Burdett Esquire

Shropshire.
Com. Salop. Johannes Egerton Ar. Roger Owen Ar. Burgus Salop. George Barker
Esquire Reginold Scriven Esquire Burgus Bridgnorth, Thomas Hord Ar. Edward Bromely Ar.
Burgus Ludlow, Robertus Berry Gener. Thomas Camerland Gener. Burgus Magnae
Wenlock, John Brett Ar. William Leighton Jun. Esquire Villa Castri Episcopi,
Alexander King Esquire Hayward Townshend Esquire

Southamptonshire.
Com. Southampton, Henry Wallopp Miles. Edward Moore Miles. Civitat. Winton.
Edward Cole Gener. Thomas Fleming Gener. Villa Southampton, Thomas Fleming
Sollicitor-Gen. Thomas Lambert Ar. Villa Portsmouth, John Moore Recordator.
Edward Jones Ar. Burgus de Yarmouth, William Cotton Ar. Stephan. Theobald Ar.
Burgus de Peters-field, William Kingsmell Esquire John Swynerton Jun. Esquire Burg. de
Newp. alias Medena, Thomas Crompton Esquire Richard James Esquire Burgus de
Stockbridge, Edward Savage Esquire Thomas Grimes Esquire Burgus de Newton, Robert Wroth
Esquire Robert Cotton Esquire Burgus de Christ-church, Henry Mere of the Middle-Temp.
Simon Wills Ar. Burgus de Whitchurch, Thomas Henshawe Esquire Thomas Crompton Legum
Doctor. Burgus de Lemminton, Francis Darcy Miles. Thomas Ridley Legum Doctor.
Villa Andevor, Henry Ludlow Esquire Richard Hide Esquire

Suffolk.
Com. Suff. Henry Glemham Miles. Calthrop Parker Ar. Burgus Gippewich, Michael
Stanhopp Esquire Francis Bacon Esquire Burgus Dunwich, John Suckling Esquire Francis Mingay
Esquire Burgus Ortford, John Townshend Miles. Richard Knightly Miles. Burgus
Aldborough, Martin Sutvill Esquire Francis Corbett Esquire Burgus de Sudbury, Philip
Gaudy Esquire Edward Glascock Esquire Burgus de Eye, Edward Hunings Esquire Anthony Gaudy
Esquire St. Edmondsbury, (...) (...)

Somersetshire.
Com. Somerset, Mauricius Barkley Miles. Edwardus Philips Ar. Civitat. Bristol,
George Snigg Ar. Recordator. John Hopkins Alderman. Civitat. Bathon, Willielmus
Sherston Alderman. Willielmus Heath Alderman. Civitat. Wellen, Jacob Kirton Ar.
George Vpton Ar. Burgus Tanton, Daniel Down Legum Doctor. John Bond Gener.
Burgus Bridgwater, Francis Hastins Miles. Alexander Popham Ar. Burgus de
Minehead, Francis James Legum Doctor. Lodwick Lashbrooke Gener.

Sussex.
Com. Sussex, Charles Howard Esquire Robert Sackvill Esquire Civitat. Cicestr. Adrian
Stoughton Ar. Recordator. Stephen Barnham Ar. Burgus de B. William Harvie
Miles. Michael Hicks Esquire Burgus de Mildhurst, Richard Brown Sen. Ar. Michael
Heydon Ar. Burgus de Lewis, George Goring Esquire Percival Heart Miles. Burgus
Shoreham, Johannes Morley Ar. Robertus Booth Ar. Burgus Brember, Thomas Sherley
Jun. Miles. Henry Boyer Ar. Burgus Steyning, Thomas Sherley Jun. Miles.
Robertus Boyer Ar. Burgus Estringsteed, Henry Compton Ar. George Rivers Ar.
Burgus Arundel, Thomas Palmer Ar. Thomas Baker Sen. Ar.

Westmerland.
Com. Westmerland, George Wharton Ar. Thomas Strickland Ar. Burgus de Apleby,
John Morris Ar. Thomas Caesar Ar.

Wiltshire.
Com. Wilts, Edmondus Carry Miles. Edwardus Hungerford Miles. Civitat. Novae
Sarum, Egidius Tooker Ar. Johannes Puxton Gener. Burgus de Wilts, Edward Morgan
Miles. Hugo Samford Ar. Burgus de Downton, Thomas Penruddock Ar. Edward Barker
Gener. Burgus de Hindon, Thomas Thin Esquire George Pawle Esquire Burgus de Westbury,
Matthew Ley Esquire Henry Jackman Esquire Burgus de Calne, Lyonel Ducket Esquire Richard
Low Esquire Burgus de Vizes, Egidius Phetyplace Esquire Robert Drew Gener. Burgus de
Chippingham, Robert Barkeley Ar. Edward Wymarke Ar. Burgus de Malmsbury,
William Monson Miles. Sidney Mountague Esquire Burgus de Crickelade, George Gifford
Miles. Robert Master Legum Doctor. Burgus de Magna Bedwyn, Anthony Hungerford
Esquire Luines Monck Esquire Burgus Ludgersall, Robertus Penruddocke Esquire James Kirton
Gener. Burgus Veteris Sarum, Robertus Turner Ar. Henry Hide Esquire Burgus Wotton
Basset, Johannes Wentworth Esquire Johannes Rice Esquire Burgus Marleborough, Richardus
Diggs Esquire Laurence Hide Esquire

Worcestershire
Com. Wigorn. Thomas (...) Thomas (...) Civitat. Wigorn. Rowland Barton Gener.
Christopher Dighton Gener. Burgus Evesham, (...) (...) Burgus de Droitwich,
John Bucke Esquire Humfry Wheeler Esquire Burgus Bewdley, (...) (...)

Warwickshire.
Com. Warwick, Fulke Grevill Esquire Robert Digby Miles. Civitat. Coventry, Henry
Breres. Thomas Sanders. Burgus Warwick, John Townshend Gener. William Spicer
Gener.

Barons Quinque Portuum.
Hastings, Thomas Sherley Jun. Miles. Richard Lile Jurat. Winchelsey, Moylus
Finch Miles. Hugh Beeston Ar. Rye, Arthur Gorges Miles. John Minge Gener.
Rumney, Thomas Lake Esquire Thomas Culpepper Gener. Hithe, William Knight Mayor.
Christopher Toldersby Ar. Dover, George Fane Esquire George Newman Legum Doctor.
Sandwich, Peter Manwood Ar. Edward Peake Gener.

Wallia.
Com. Montgomery, Edward Herbert Esquire Villa Montgomery, John Harris Esquire Com.
Radnor, Jacob Price Esquire Villa Radnor, Stephen Price Esquire Com. Denbigh, -- Villa
Denbigh, -- Com. Pembrooke, John Philips Esquire Villa Pembrooke, John Longer
Gener. Com. Cardigan, Richard Price Esquire Villa Cardigan, Richard Delabar Esquire
Com. Flint, William Ravenscroft Esquire Villa Flint, John Price Gener. Com.
Carmarthin, John Vaughan Miles. Villa Carmarthin, Walter Rice Esquire Com.
Carnarvan, William Jones Esquire Villa Carnarvan, Nicholas Griffin Gener. Com.
Brecon. (...) Villa Brecon. Henry Williams. Com. Glamorgan, Tho. Herbert Ar.
Secretary Reg. Villa Cardiffe, (...) Com. Anglesey, Thomas Holland Esquire Villa
Beaumorris, William Morris Ar. Com. Merioneth, Robert Lloyd Ar. Villa de
Haverford-west, John Cannor Gener.

The Copy of the Spanish General's Letter for Ireland, written to the Irish
Catholics, and showed by Mr. Secretary Cecill to the Parliamenthouse.
Dominus Johannes de Aquilla Magister Belli Generalis, and Regis Catholici
Hispaniarum Dux in Dei bello quod pro fide tenenda in Hibernia geritur.

OMnibus Hiberniae Catholicis in Quinzale, Corchen Civitate, and in omnibus
aliis Villis, Civitatibus and Castris degentibus, Salutem and pacem in eo qui
est vera salus imprecatur.

Ad nostras pervenit aures editum fuisse Libellum quoddam in Civitate Cork,
sub nomine pro Regis confectum, quod cum multa a veritate maxim aliena
contineat, eaque Aures proborum offendunt. Nec simplicium animos forte seductos
in errorem deductant, and a veritate averstant; coactus sum falsa esse
ostendere, veritatem aperire, paucisque innuere praetextum, and praeclarissimam
Regis nostri Philippi intentionem in hoc bello Apostolica Authoritate a nobis
Administrandum; and (ut verum fatear) possem sacillime convitia quod nobis
objiciunt in ipsos retundere, and voluptatem quam maledicendo sumpsere, illam
male audiendo amittere. Caeterum novimus ut debiles and inermes Muliercola ad
convitia fugere: Sed hiis praetermissis, ad objecta, solida veritate and ex
Christiana Modestate respondere.

Imprimis, Commoneamini nos velle subditos praetensos Reginae Angliae ab
obedientia and debita per dei legem servitute abducere, and ad nos aggregare.
Quod maxima ex part a veritate alienum est. Neminem enim persuadere conamur ut
debitam servitutem secundum dei Legem deneget suo Principi. Sed hene nostis
ante multos Annos ipsam Elizabetham ( for so said Mr. Secretary, he bluntly
called her that same Elizabeth) privatam esse Regno, subditosque omnes
absolutos esse a Juramento Fidelitatis per supremum Pontificem, cui Regnans in
excelsis Bex Regum omnimodum potestatem tradidit, ut evellat, distruat,
plantet, aedificet, ita ut ipsos Reges temporales si ad spirituale aedificiem
expediret, eosque ad depositionem a Regno private, quod factum esse in Regnis
Angliae and Hiberniae a pluribus Pontificibus supremis, viz. Pio quinto,
Gregorio decimo tertio, and nunc Clemento octavo, omnibus notum est, quorum
Diplomata extant apud nos (Catholicis Loquor) non protervis Haereticis qui a
Fide Romanae Ecclesiae declinaverunt; nam cum Caeci sunt, and Caecorum Duces
and sundamenta veritatis prorsus ignorant, etiam in hoc dissentire a nobis non
mirum est. Sed nostri fratres Catholici in simplicitate fidei Romanae
ambulentes, and Ecclesia Catholica consentientes, quod est columna and
fundamentum veritatis, omnia ista facile percipiant.

Ergo restat quod Hiberni qui vobis adherent nil adversus legem Dei and
fidelitatem debitam, imo secundum divina praecepta and obedientiam quam supremo
Pontifici debent cooperentur.

Secundo asseritis, nos Hispanos blanditiis, and fictitiis adulationibus
Hibernos demulcire atque and multa beneficia in illos exhibere, quod in nostram
aversissimam est natura, sed hoc mo in principio facere, ut simplicium animos
ad nos convertentes, in posterum credulitatem circa illos exercentes,
sanguinolentam naturam nostram ostendemus. Proh Deum immortalem! quis non
miretur acerbam and indicibilem credulitatem audaciamque vestram in his verbis
ostensam?

Quis est enim qui non novit crudelitatem maximam quam vos Angli adversus
miseros Hibernicos exercivistis, and exercere non desistitis, vos inquam ab
ipsorum animis fidem Catholicam quam coluerunt Patris eorum in quo salus
aeterna consistit auferre conamini crudeliores profecto Vrsis and Leonibus, qui
tantum temporalem vitam auferent, vos tamen aeternam and spiritualem. Quis
temporalia omnia istius florentissimi Regni demolitus est nisi Anglus? videte
hoc, and confundamini. Nos vero, Patriam dulcissimam and foelicissimam
Hispaniam omnibus scilicet bonis refertam vicem Catholicorum dolentes,
relinquimus, and eorum Clamoribus incitati, qui Coelum Terramque attingunt, and
aures supremi Pontificis and Regis nostri Philippi pulsantes, misericordia
moti, Ad vos Milites, Argentum, Aurum, and Arma liberali manu tandem mittere
decreverunt, non ut erga vos Hiberni Catholici crudelitatem (ut isti singunt)
exercerunt, sed ut foeliciter vos a Diaboli faucibus ereptos, a Tyrannide
liberos, ad pristinam vestram ingenuitatem redigant, ut libere positis fidem
Catholicam profiteri.

Ergo dilectissimi in Christo, postquam jam quod per tot ante annos desiderio
desiderastis praecibus and lacrimis efflagitastis, and impetrastis, and jamjam
Supremus Pontifex Vicarius Christi in Terris vobis imperat ut Arma in
Defensionem vestrae fidei sumatis, vos omnes moveo and horior atque contestor
Omnes in quam ad quos istae Litterae pervenerint, ut quam citissime in vestra
fuerit potestate ad nos cum Amicis and Armis conveniatis. Qui hoc fecerit nos
paratos inveniet, Arma nostra and ceteraque possidemus ipsis communicabimus.
Qui aliter enim spretis nostris Conciliis saluberrimis, secerit and in salibra,
and Anglorum obedientia permanserit, tanquam Haereticum and Hostem, and
Ecclesiae invisum usque ad necem prosequimur.

Doryum de Laguia.

After the Parliament, at the end of Hillary-Term next following, the Lord
Keeper, by her Majesty's express Command, made a Speech in the Star Chamber, on
the 13th of February, all these Personages being present, viz.
Sir Thomas Egerton, Lord Keeper of the great Seal. The Archbishop of
Canterbury. The Lord Buckhurst, Lord Treasurer of England. The Earl of
Shrewsbury. The Earl of Worcester. Sir William Knolls, Controuler of her
Majesty's Household. The Bishop of London. Sir John Fortescue, Chancellor of the
Exchequer. Sir John Popham, Lord Chief Justice of England. Mr. Secretary
Herbert. Sir Edmond Anderson, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. Sir (...)
Peryam, Lord Chief Baron. Mr. Baron Clarke. Mr. Baron Savelle. Mr. Justice
Fenner. Mr. Justice Kingsmell. Mr. Justice Warberton.
After a silence made, and some few Motions made by Mr. Atturney-General, and
the Queens Counsel, and some others, the Crier of the Court again made silence,
and the Lord Keeper putting off his Hat, and then putting it on again, spoke to
this effect.

My Lords,

I Am by her Majesty's commandment to deliver unto you her gracious pleasure,
The Lord Keeper's Speech in the Starchamber.
and those things which out of her Princely wisdom and care she has thought
fit to be made known.

I scarce know how to enter into this matter, and I am sorry that now in
speaking I shall lay open the looseness of the times: neither are her Majesty's
Proclamations regarded, neither her Councils Letters respected, neither her
late-made Statutes and Decrees obeyed, nor put in so due execution as they
ought.

These things deserve to have a more round and strict course than have been
used; and we deserve not so gracious a Pardon as it has pleased her most
gracious Majesty, out of her mere goodness, lately to bestow upon us: but this
only to diverse persons and offenses, of those which live in degree of private
men.

But I am to speak of Offenses of Mayors, Justices of Assize, A Charge for the
keeping of Lent strictly.
and men of that condition. The time of Lent and abstinence from Flesh, if it
be not duly observed, what Dearth and Penury will not almost ensue? And
therefore was the time of Lent well placed, even in the Spring, and the
beginning of the increase of Beasts. Her Majesty's express command is, That it
be strictly observed, and that with this caution, That where fault shall be
found, that there extremity shall be inflicted, and that no toleration of such
offenses shall be suffered.

Next, That ye inquire what Places and persons are fit to be suppressed and
looked unto; Ordinary-tables, Tippling-houses, some even Brothel-houses or
worse, in which both of Muttons, Veals, and Lambs, there is continually made an
unmeasurable expense.

But consider who are the men that devour the Substance of the Land, which
should sustain us all; what kind of men be they? even your discoursers, which
do introduce Novelties, and slander the State; the most pestilent, seditious,
and dangerous Members of the Land. In rooting out these men, you shall show the
best part of your duties to God and her Majesty; which her Majesty expressly
charge you to take special heed of.

I am also to remember you what good Laws were lately made for the punishment
of vagrant Rogues and sturdy Beggars, To relieve poor Soldiers.
and for the provision of poor Soldiers; the neglect of which duty, in not
seeing these good Laws executed, will draw Gods curse and displeasure upon us:
And therefore order by you ought to be taken, that those which be poor be
relieved, and idle persons suppressed, which do mispend the good gifts of God
plentifully bestowed upon us: That you look the poverty of Soldiers be
relieved according to their quality and degree, and that twenty pounds by the
year be not given to some, when others, far poorer, have but forty shillings by
the year: And therefore look that those Laws that were last made be not last,
but first put in execution. These be matters and crimes, which if they be not
amended, the Commonwealth and State may still stand, and languish, though not
perish.

But there is another matter of great importance, which if it be not looked
unto, will overthrow even the body of the State it self; which none can or will
deny, unless he be given over to a senseless stupidity. It is not unknown what
Plots have been and are laid against the Queens Person (whom God preserve) and
the body of the State, by those we call Jesuits, unnatural Vipers ready to eat
out the belly of their Mother; who being now grown to some strength and head,
do proceed with more violence and greater malice in their actions, than ever
heretofore.

They have made unto them an Archpriest and Ruler, About Jesuits and secular
Priests, their practices.
the principal Agent against God, the Queen, Religion, and the State, because
they might execute their dangerous Enterprises and Designs with a kind of
conjoined Unity. They do not stick to determine even in the height of their
pride, great, yea even the greatest matters. In this the Secular Priest is no
Agent, neither dangerous in that degree to the State: for as there be degrees
of Offenses, so are there degrees of Offenders. But I excuse not the Secular
Priest, and therefore therein I pray you mistake me not; for what Writings and
Books have been extant and are given out, of their Quarrels and Controversies!
and I warn you to take heed of them.

There be three Workers in the subversion of the State: First, the Jesuit;
secondly, the secular Priest; and thirdly, a kind of Parson of our own
Religion, yet as he thinks of a more pure spirit, disliking only the
government of the Church and State. These her Majesty's pleasure is, That you
should be more diligent to search out than you have been, and to observe who
entertains these in their houses which be of the Catholic Roman Religion.

Those that incur the danger of the Law, let them now look for execution,
howsoever offenses heretofore have been tolerated by Magistrates not doing of
their duties. Many are Justices of the Peace, but what do they but maintain
Quarrels, Stirs, Controversies and Dissension betwixt their Neighbors? We have
two evident Examples; the one in Gloucestershire, the other that was moved this
morning, viz. in Sir Thomas Throgmorton's Case.

The thirst after this Authority, Concerning Justices of the Peace.
proceeds from nothing but an ambitious humor of gaining of Reputation
amongst their Neighbors, that still when they come home, they may be presented
with Presents, and that they may sit high on the Bench in the Quarter Sessions,
that they may maintain and buy Titles. Is there any more fervent than others in
the business of the Commonwealth? he straight has given him the Epethite of a
busy Jack: but I know there be many good, and I wish their number were
increased; but who be they? even the poorer and meanest Justices, by one of
which more good comes to the Commonwealth, than by a hundred of greater
condition and degree. And thus much I had in commandment to say to Justices of
Peace, to Commanders, to Constables, and other inferior Officers.

To you who be Justices of Assize, there yet remains, by her Majesty's
express commandment, a further Charge and Admonition to be delivered: That you
see the great offenses, which heretofore have not been, to be hereafter
punished. And her Majesty said, she has chosen you to be Justices for your
wisdom and integrity; and she has divided you by two's in several Circuits, to
ride twice every year, that the one might be aiding and assisting to the other,
not only to try a Nisi prius, or decide some petty Cause, but with special
care and diligent observance, to look into the disorders of your Circuits,
suppose for the purpose in Norfolk, although truly I think that County is best
governed; and I would say more, if he which rides that Circuit were absent.

To examine Justices touching Misdemeanors, to inform her Majesty how many
Alehouses they have pulled down, how many Priests they have taken, and who
harbor them; and of all these matters to give an account to her Majesty at
your return, that she taking notice from you, the good Justices may be
rewarded, and the evil removed.

Your not doing of this, breeds nothing but impunity, which is dangerous in
the State, and the very root of Sedition and Rebellion: And Clemency of this
nature, is Crudelis Clementia, but the other Securitas Salutaris. Her Majesty
commanded me to say unto you, that she would have you spend more time in
understanding the faults and grievances in every of your Circuits, than you
have heretofore done; for she says, that she has not been informed of any
more than of one only.

This you may well do, and she commands it to be done, the times being so
peaceful, which I hope will continue. And as God has blessed her Majesty these
Forty four years amongst us, so I hope God will yet lengthen her days: for the
continuance of which, we ought all to pray for.



FINIS.
AN Alphabetical TABLE Of the most material BILLS, DEBATES, and other Matters
Contained in this BOOK.
A ACcomptants; a bill for satisfaction against them p. 83 Ale complained of by
Mr. Johnson, that it is as strong as Wine, and will burn like Sack p. 181
Alehouses; a bill to suppress their multitude p. 135 No man to frequent any
within two miles of his own dwelling p. 196
Alehouse-keepers: Corporal punishments moved to be inflicted on them p. 181
Mr. Glascock opposes it Ibid.
Aliens, their children to pay strangers customs p. 10 Alisbury: a bill
concerning their Highway-land p. 119 Apparel; a bill to reform excess in it,
passed p. 7, 125 Armor and Weapons; a bill touching them p. 105 Arrest
complained of p. 134, etc. Artillery, where was but Iron, now Brass p. 59
Assurance of Land: a bill for it p. 132, 143 Attendants made joint Committees
with Lords, as had been usual in former Parliaments of this Queen; but was not
so in aftertimes p. 5 Attorney General reflected on p. 141 Attorneys their
number: see Suits their multiplicity Inconvenient that Scriveners should act as
such p. 209
Auditors; a bill to prevent fraud in them and their Clerks p. 146 Award: a
bill to establish one p. 111

B Bastardie, a bill against it p. 106 A Case put about it by Mr. Wiseman,
discussed p. 133
Beating the servant of a Member, argued p. 259, 260 Beggars: a bill for their
extirpation p. 105 Berwick; a bill for that Town p. 26 Bill, after engrossed,
not to be looked into p. 209 One returned by the Lords, because sent up in
Parchment, when it should have been Paper p. 89
Bills, not to be brought into the House obscurely p. 189 Bishops Leases; a
bill about them p. 186 Bishopric, the greatest in England but 2200 l. per an.
p. 187 Blades: a bill for true making those of Daggers, Swords and Rapiers p.
115 Blasphemers to be severely punished p. 188 An Instance of the great scandal
caused by them Ibid.
Blood: a bill for the restitution of Sir Tho. Perrot p. 73 Book-debts; the
bill largely debated p. 282, 283 An Example of a Mercer p. 271
Bread; a bill for its lawful Assize p. 74 Bridges; a bill for their repairing
p. 110, 114 Brokers retailing: a bill for them p. 97 Brownists deserve to be
rooted out p. 76 A Sect too well known in England p. 320
Buildings; a bill for restraint of new ones p. 77 Bullion, a bill to prevent
its transportation p. 226 Debated and spoken to p. 227
Burgesses, two in competition p. 193 A Saying of Sir Edward Hobby concerning
them Ibid.
L. Burleigh, the oldest Parliament Man p. 93

C Caps: see Hats Captains and Soldiers p. 5, 6, 136 Cards for Wool; a bill to
prevent their importation p. 110 Case of Thomas Fitz-herbert p. 27 Cask: see
Clap-board. Catalogue of the names of Parliamentmen p. 337 Causey; a bill to
mend that of Egham p. 114 Cecil Sir Robert (Secretary) his large Speech p. 182,
183, 184 His saying Sir Robert Wroth had offered 100 l. per an. toward the War
with Spain p. 185
Chancellor, (Sir Christopher Hatton) his Speech p. 2 Charitable Uses: a bill
to prevent deceits and breaches of trust about them p. 97 Charter: a bill to
confirm that of K. Edw. 6. to the Hospitals about London p. 227 Surgeons. A
bill to provide able ones for Sea p. 93 A bill for the well ordering of them p.
114 A Case concerning a Cure p. 324
Church: a bill against wilful abstaining from it, debated p. 227, 228 A bill
for more diligent repair to it, argued at large p. 273, 274, 275
Clap-board; a bill concerning it p. 73 Clergy; the benefit of it taken from
them that steal away women without their consent p. 85 Clothes; a bill
concerning several sorts p. 72, 98 Cloth Northern; a bill against stretching
and Taintering p. 113 Cloathworkers: a Committee for them p. 222 Coaches; a
bill to restrain their superfluous and excessive use p. 132 Colchester: a bill
concerning its Haven and Paving p. 74 Collection for poor Soldiers by the
Lords p. 43, 146 The like by the Commons p. 43 How disposed of p. 269
Command from the Queen to sit in the afternoons for dispatch, being to sit but
a week longer p. 309 Commons called over p. 15, 28 Choose their Speaker p. 15,
53 Attend the Queen in the Council Chamger, where the Speaker makes a Speech p.
261 Fall on their knees while the Qu. speaks p. 263 Are bidden to rise p. 264
Conveyances original by the Queen: a bill p. 6 Cordwayners; a bill concerning
them p. 23 Corn; a bill to stay it within the Realm p. 92 Correction: a bill
for houses to be erected p. 87 Cottages; a bill against erecting and
maintaining them p. 10 Counsel to attend on several occasions p. 28, 139, 140
Coin: a bill to prevent its transportation p. 201 Curriers: a bill concerning
them p. 23 Customs: a bill to advance them p. 200

D Debates with some beat p. 297 Debts of Sir Henry Hatton: a bill concerning
them p. 106 Defaulters noted p. 28 Defeasances; a bill for enrolling and
exemplifying of them p. 109 Delays; a bill to prevent them in Executions upon
Judgments p. 135 Deprivation of Edm. Bonner late Bishop of London p. 68 And of
diverse other Bishops p. 85
Devon; a bill for a Key in the North part, in the River of Severn p. 144
Disorder in the House noted and reproved p. 301 Disms and Tenths; a bill for
their payment p. 6 Dominions why not enlarged p. 48 Doors of the Lords being
shut, complained of, commanded to be opened p. 57 Their shutting excused p. 174
Dover-peer; a bill for its maintenance p. 23 Spoken to by Sir Walter Rawleigh
p. 309 And by Secretary Cecil p. 323
Doubt propounded and resolved p. 96 Double-Soal-Green, a Highway near London,
ordered to be amended p. 272 Draining certain grounds: a bill for it p. 91
Drake Sir Francis resolved to be sent to Sea against the Spaniards p. 65
Dunkirk -- Pirates spoken against by Mr. Dannet: his motion p. 280, 281 It
began with two Ships p. 280
Dunkirkers trouble our Fishermen p. 58 Durham: Writs upon Proclamations upon
Exigents to be current in that County Palatine p. 7

E Ecclesiastical Judges; a bill against their excessive Fees p. 110 Eclipse, a
great one about noon p. 322 Election: a Letter about a disturbance in the
Election of Knights of the Shire p. 190 Embroiderers; a bill to reform their
abuses p. 222 Essex Earl created Earl Marshal, and took his place p. 90 His
rising p. 208 His matters p. 248 His going into Ireland, 300000 l. spent since
p. 199
Exchequer: a bill touching the exactions there p. 17 A bill concerning Process
and Pleadings there p. 21 A bill for the observation of Rules there p. 143
Exeter: a bill for confirming Letters Patents to the Merchant-adventurers
there p. 115 A bill for uniting certain Churches into one Parish p. 193
Excuses for Lords absence to be made by Peers, and not by others p. 135 Eye
and Dunsden Security to the City for 20000 l. lent to the Queen p. 290 A bill
to reunite them to the Manor of Sunning, debated Ibid.


F Family of Love: see Brownists. Felonies hereafter to be committed, their
punishment p. 108 Fifteens and Tenths: see Subsidies. Fish salted: a bill
concerning them p. 69 Fishing, how prejudicial to the Lord Admiral p. 237
Fishmongers admitted to the Bar with Counsel p. 309 Forcible Entries: a bill to
explain the Statute of 8 Hen. 6. concerning them p. 11 Forestallers: a bill
against them p. 102 Forms of speech in French at the passing of Acts p. 12, 13,
49, 50 Foul play in the House complained of, and briskly argued p. 321 A great
stir about it Ibid.
French King made great by the Queens supports p. 182 Fuel: a bill for the Size
of it p. 146 Furnaces: see Glass-houses. Fustians: a bill about them p. 113

G Gaging: Brewers and others to be heard about it p. 24 Garbling: a bill for
reforming abuses in it p. 121 Gavil-kinde; a bill to alter the nature of it p.
113 Arguments about it p. 303
Glass-houses and Furnaces, a bill about them p. 27 Government of Cumberland,
Northumberland, Westmerland, and Durham: a bill to make it more peaceable p.
136 Grammar School of Tunbridge, a bill to assure its maintenance p. 11
Grammar-Schools, a bill for good order in them p. 113 Grants made to her
Majesty, a bill to confirm them; as also Letters Patents made by her p. 133

H Hartlepool; a bill for maintenance of their Poor p. 22 Hats and Caps: a bill
for their true making p. 253 Hawkers; a bill against them p. 210 Heal
(Sergeant) hum'd and laughed at p. 205 Is showed his mistake Ibid.
Hemp; its sowing in England opposed by Sir Walter Raleigh p. 188 Herrings: see
Fish salted. Horses; a bill for their breed and increase p. 133 To have Horse,
Armor, and Weapons p. 7
Horse-stealing, a bill to prevent it p. 6, 106 Hospitals; a bill for their
erection p. 106 A bill for that of Lamborn p. 10 A bill for that of Bristol p.
88 A bill for that of Warwick p. 93 A bill for that of S. Bartholomew p. 221 A
bill for Nevil's Hospital in Yorkshire p. 111
House: the Lord De la Ware petitions for his place in it p. 83 Hue and Cry; a
bill touching it p. 105 Husbandry and Tillage, a bill for its increase p. 5 A
bill against its decay p. 97


I Impropriations; a bill to relieve the Poor out of them p. 107 Enclosures and
Inmates; a bill to restrain them near London and Westminster p. 77 Enclosures
and Tillage, a bill concerning them p. 105 Innes, etc. a bill to reform
disorders in them p. 17 See it debated p. 278
Innovation complained of against the Lords p. 93 Their resolution thereupon p.
94 Invasions, greater intented than ever heard of p. 33 Inventions new; a bill
to monopolize them, thrown out p. 311 Journal; the Lord Treasurers motion about
it p. 83 Jointure; a bill to assure it p. 9 See p. 95, 98, 142.
Judges joined Committees with the Lords p. 5 Justices of Peace, their
luxuriant power a Grievance p. 275 A hot contest about them p. 275, 276, 277 A
fling at them by the by p. 268 Reflected on from the Queen p. 151 Further
Reflections p. 355 A motion against their slanderers p. 277
Jurors; a bill for their relief p. 69

K L. Keeper, (Sir John Puckering) his Speech in Parliament p. 32 Answers the
Speaker of the Commons p. 36 Replies to him p. 37 His second Reply p. 47 (Sir
Tho. Egerton) his Speech p. 79, 80, 81 He answers the Speaker p. 150 His Speech
in the Star Chamber, by the Queens command p. 353
Kersies; a bill to repeal a Statute made 14 Reginae p. 284

L Laborers: a bill to explain the Statute 5 Reginae p. 89 Lands: Bills for
sale of them p. 9, 88, 96 Forfeited for Treason, confirmed to the Queen p. 40
Proceedings thereupon Ibid. See Bills for other Sales p. 70, 136
Laws superfluous and burdensome: a bill to abridge and reform them p. 103
Often spoken against, and argued by many p. 180, 193
Lease from her Majesty, a bill to confirm it p. 91 Leases made by Archbishops
and Bishops: a bill about them p. 107 Lessees to enjoy their Leases against all
Patents p. 96 Letters Patents for Lincoln, a bill to confirm them p. 67 Libel
complained of, called The Assembly of Fools; but found to be an old Toy p. 217
License to depart given by the House p. 23, 27 Licenses for Marriage, their
abuses moved against p. 104 Lincoln and Nottingham; a bill to confirm Statutes
Merchants there p. 114 Logwood: a bill to establish it in dying of Cloth, etc.
p. 111 London: a bill to confirm the authority of the Lord Mayor in St.
Katherines p. 224 The Sheriffs committed 35 H. 8. p. 196
Longford Estover; a bill for rebuilding of it p. 103 Lords temporal present at
a dissolution of Parliament p. 12 Both spiritual and temporal at commencement
p. 13, 129
Losses casual: a bill for relief of prisoners and others so impoverished p.
107

M Maltsters; a bill to suppress their multitude p. 103 Manors and Lands: a
bill to give leave to alienate p. 113 Mariners; a bill for their increase and
maintenance p. 86 A bill for well ordering them and Seamen p. 113
Marshals man brought before the Lords for an Arrest p. 87 Message from the
Queen by Mr. Speaker about Monopolies p. 248 Seconded by Mr. Secretary Cecil p.
249 Joyfully received p. 252 Thanks ordered to be returned p. 253 A motion to
record it; and further spoken to p. 257, 258 Another from the Queen by Mr.
Comptroller p. 261
Misdemeanors in lewd and idle persons: a bill to prevent them p. 133 Mistake
about an Adjournment p. 102 About the Question p. 66 About the manner of
receiving Bills p. 94
Money transported impoverisheth the Realm p. 21 Better for this Kingdom if
none in the world p. 225
Monopolies, their Grievance p. 130 Several smart Speeches on that subject p.
230, etc. See much more to the same purpose p. 238, 239, 240, etc.
Morter-makers, alias Plaisterers p. 314 Mortmain; a bill touching it p. 21
Motions made by several p. 61, 68 One by Sir Arthur Gorge, about Justices,
noted by Secretary Cecil p. 204 Another by the Speaker in behalf of the Clerk
p. 16
Musters, etc. a bill concerning them p. 133 Lawyers to be exempted: a pleasant
motion p. 329


N Naturalization; several bills for several persons. See p. 11, 40, 44, 69,
78, 144 Navy; a bill for its maintenance p. 137 Navigation: see Mariners.
Newcastle: a bill to confirm Statutes Merchant acknowledged there p. 124
Newport: see Dunkirk. Two base Towns p. 280
Non-residents: see Pluralities. Northampton: a bill for the Town p. 106
Norwich; a bill to establish that Boshoprick against a concealed Title p. 90
Nottingham: see Lincoln.

O Obedience: a bill to continue the people in it p. 55 The Heads of it Ibid.
Order of the Lords about Painters and Plaisterers p. 147, 148 For the relief
of Maimed Soldiers p. 42
Ordnance: a bill to prohibit their transportation p. 291 Debates, some for the
bill, and some for petitioning the Queen to revoke her Patent p. 291, 292, etc.
The bill asleep in the Lower House p. 333 The Speaker promises to mention it in
his Speech to the Queen; but does not p. 334 Which caused a Murmur Ibid. It is
further spoken to Ibid.
Orford-Haven, a bill for its preservation p. 9 Outlawries secret: a bill to
avoid them p. 11

P Painters and Plaisterers to be heard p. 144 Their Case debated p. 270, 271
See more p. 313, 314, 315
Painting; a bill to prevent abuses in it p. 114 A bill of no great moment p.
191
Pamphlets published by Jesuits and Seminaries p. 331 Pardon free, several
bills for it p. 29, 49, 147, 335 To be craved for extravagant Speeches in the
House p. 252 Thanks for the same p. 12, 150, 335 It passes at once reading;
whereas other bills have three p. 44
Parishes, of 8800 and odd, not above 600 afford a competency p. 218 Paris
garden; a bill to reunite the Manor p. 121 Parliament summoned to begin Nov.
12. prorogued to Feb. 4. 1588. p. 1 Dissolved, March 29. 1589. p. 29 Passed
into Acts 16 public, and 8 private Bills Ibid. Began, Nov. 19. 1592. p. 31
Dissolved, Apr. 10. 1593. p. 50 We have no account of the number of Bills.
Began, October. 24. 1597. p. 79 Dissolved, Feb. 9. 1597. p. 99 Passed into Acts
24 public, and 19 private Bills p. 127 48 Bills refused that had past both
Houses Began, October. 27. 1601. p. 129 Dissolved, December. 19. 1601. p. 333 Passed
into Acts 19 public, and ten private Bills p. 151
Parliament Man privileged, and his servant, for fourteen days p. 225 One of
them swooneth in the House p. 332 Several Conjectures about it Ibid.
Patents: Committees named for them p. 103 Patents and Patentees: a List of
them Ibid. Pawn-takers: see retailing Brokers. Pedigree of the Marquess of
Winchester p. 195 Pelts: see Sheepskins. People; a bill to increase them p. 90
Perjury; a bill to prevent it p. 221 Petty Larceny, its punishment p. 71
Phesants and Partridges: a bill to preserve them p. 132 Pins: a bill to avoid
their importation p. 92 Plaintiff to pay the Defendant costs, being in Prison
for want of Bail, if the Suit go against him p. 123 Plaisterers: see Painters.
Pluralities, a bill against them largely debated p. 218, 219, 220 Plymouth, a
bill for the Haven p. 74 Prayer: a Copy of that used daily in the Commons
House p. 179 Preamble to the bill of Subsidy p. 70 Precedent; a notable one p.
233 Precedents that Warrants of new Election ought to go from the Speaker, the
Parliament sitting p. 192 Printers; a bill against their multiplicity p. 322
One over Guild-hal-gate p. 217
Privileges of Parliament canvass'd p. 254, 255 Privilege, not to say what
they list, but Yea or No p. 37 Broken by an Arrest, complained of p. 225
Privie-Counsellors; irreverence to them blamed by the Queen p. 47 Probate of
Wills, its abuses moved against p. 104 Process; a bill for its better execution
p. 70 Proclamations upon Fines at Common Law to be abridg'd p. 7 Proctors: all
the Spiritual Lords but one, had two p. 4 Protest of the Commons p. 95 Proviso
for the Lard Powes and Sir Edward Herbert p. 25 Proxies ordinary and
extraordinary p. 34 and 38, 39 Purchasers; a bill to assure their Lands p. 68
Purveyors: a bill to reform their disorders p. 17 The Queens care about them
signified by Mr. Speaker p. 24


Q QUEEN comes to the Upper House p. 2, 4, 31, 45, 129, 334 She makes a Speech
her self p. 48 Swears by God she will punish Cowards Ibid. She makes another
Speech p. 263, 264, 265, 266
Quaere, Whether the Speaker have a voice p. 321 The Speaker declares he has
none by custom Ibid. What was done with the money raised for the Poor p. 333


R Raleigh Sir Walter; his sharp Speech, and great silence after it p. 235 He
complains for liberty of speech p. 302 He blushes p. 232
Rapesdale in Lancashire; a bill for its Inhabitants p. 107 Recusants and
Sectaries very pernicious to Government p. 46 Recusants Popish, restrained to
some place p. 40 A bill about them p. 61
Relief of Thomas Hasilrig Esquire; a bill p. 18 Of George Ognel Esquire; a bill p. 20
Of the City of Lincoln; a bill p. 25
Remainder of certain Lands of Andrew Kettleby to be established on Francis
Kettleby p. 135 Repeal of a branch of a Statute of 4 and 5 Phil. and Mary p. 73
Roan made Admiral, threatens England p. 58 Robbing in the daytime, though none
in the house, not admitted to Clergy: a bill p. 96 Robberies: a bill to
suppress them p. 105

S Sabbath Breakers: Examples of Gods judgments upon them p. 274 School of
Tunbridge, a bill for it p. 22 Schoolmaster: a bill to maintain one at Wanting
p. 103 Secrets of the House misrepresented and discovered; complained of p. 18
Sectaries: see Recusants. Seditious persons, a bill to punish them p. 38
Sergeant of London sent for on an Arrest p. 85 Sheeps skins; a bill touching
their transportation p. 102 Sheriffs: a bill to reform abuses in them and their
Underofficers p. 141 Ships: one English beat twenty Spanish, till they got our
Guns p. 293 One of the Queen's a petty Princes wealth p. 59 One ready laden
with 36 Pieces of Ordnance p. 307
Shop-books: a bill to prevent double payment of debts upon them p. 111
Silk-weavers: a bill to reform their abuses p. 222 Sollicitors; a Bill about
them Ibid. Their Character p. 201 None to solicit but without fee p. 222 No
Mechanic tradesman to be one Ibid.
Soldiers: see Captains. A bill to reform sundry abuses done by them in the
War p. 95 A Collection for them p. 41 Absent Members of both Houses to pay
double p. 43 Mr. Secretary Cecil's passionate Speech for maimed Soldiers p.
307
Spain; the practices of that King against England p. 183, 184 The Spanish
General's Letter to the Irish Catholics p. 351
Speaker: Sir George Snag: He is presented: excuses himself; is approved: His
Thanks; and Petitions allowed p. 4, 5 Edward Coke Esquire: His excuse not allowed;
his Petitions granted p. 53 His Speech p. 35 He speaks again p. 36 His Speech
to the Queen p. 45
Sergeant Yelverton: His excuses, Petitions, etc. p. 82 He gives a Caution p.
101
John Crook Esquire, Recorder of London: His Speech p. 131 and 149 He gives an
account of the Queens Speech p. 71, 272 He makes his Speech p. 334

Speeches of many worthy Members upon several occasions p. 56, 57, 58, 59, 60,
61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66 Spinners; a bill concerning them p. 73 Spur: a Motion
about an ancient custom of putting off the Spurs before entrance of Members
into the House p. 181 Stanes Bridge; a Bill for its reparation p. 110
Star Chamber: persons present there p. 353 Statutes; a bill to repeal certain
of them p. 19 See p. 74 Stealing of horses: a Proviso against it p. 189 A bill
about stealing Oxen, Sheep, etc. p. 69
Stealers of Corn and Fruit; a bill against them p. 112 Stews: their Case like
that of Alehouses p. 181 Being suppressed, every house is a Bawdy House Ibid.
Sub-poena; one served on a Member p. 212 Argued p. 213 Reasons offered for
allowing it Ibid.
Subsidies: a bill for them requires not the Queens consent p. 49 Several Bills
for them p. 9, 126, 142 Sir Walter Raleigh moves for them p. 197 Is seconded p.
198 How Edward the third raised money for his Wars p. 205
Succession: a bill brought in about it by Mr. Peter Wentworth and Sir Henry
Bromley p. 54 Her Majesty highly displeased therewith Ibid. They are first
confined to their lodgings, and at last committed to several Prisons Ibid.
Suits; a bill touching their multiplicity, and the excessive number of
Atturneys p. 17 Sunday: a bill to prevent Markets and Fairs on that day p. 142
A bill to avoid Contracts made on that day p. 194 Whether taking a wife on that
day be void Ibid.
Supreme: Kings of England have been so from Henry the third's time p. 36 And
before the Conquest p. 37
Sussex and Surrey: a bill against decay of Highways there p. 114 Swearing: Mr.
Glascock speaks to the Bill, and lashes the Country-Justices p. 267, 268
Swearers: see Blasphemers.

T Taxes not so great as heretofore p. 81 Instance in Edward the third, and
other Kings Ibid.
Tellers and Receivers: a bill p. 85 Tenancy by Courtesy by the man, and
Tenancy in Dower by the woman, to be lost in case of Adultery, the Bill cast
out p. 222 Tenements not to be made of great houses p. 77 Tenths: see Disms and
Fifteens p. 104 A bill for the Clergies better answering to the Queen Ibid.
Term: a bill to shorten that of Michaelmas p. 204 London-Burgesses oppose it
p. 207 And therefore are not of the Committee Ibid.
Thorns, that prick, and yield no fruit, compared to multiplicity of Laws p.
180 Tidings glad, the Queens Message about Monopolies p. 258 Tillage: see
Husbandry. Largely debated p. 299, 300, 301
Timber, its marking and sizing p. 76 Tin: Sir Walter Raleigh urged to speak
about it, for several reasons p. 235 Tipling-houses: a bill to suppress them p.
304 A Proviso for the Vintners Ibid. Several Speeches about it p. 304, 305
Tobacco-pipes, a Monopoly, an idle conceit p. 247 Tower of London: a bill for
a Preacher there p. 110 The Prison of the House of Commons p. 260
Mr. Townshend of Lincolns-Inne, the Collector of this Journal p. 239 He puts
in a bill, and speaks to it p. 200 He makes a Motion Ibid. He delivers a bill,
and speaks to it p. 221
L. Treasurer made Lord Burleigh, and seated accordingly p. 97 Trifling Suits:
a bill to prevent them p. 136 Trinity, the Lower House a new person in it p.
260 Trinity-house; a bill for it, committed p. 298 Tryers of Petitions p. 3,
33, 131 Trust: a bill against imbezeling the Queens goods, chattels or treasure
p. 28 Tunbridge: see Grammar School. Turks: the Spaniards provision against
them p. 184

U Vagrant: see Seditious. Vicarage of Rotherston; a bill to confirm its
Patronage p. 284 Victualing-houses: see Innes. Undersheriff of Surrey
committed to the Fleet p. 135 Uncharitable action to subvert a mount of Charity
p. 291 Votes, when equal, the Negative by custom carries it p. 134 Vouchers: a
bill to reform their abuses p. 89 Use in the House p. 293 Uses charitable; a
quoil about the Bill p. 298 Usher (Gentleman-) to the Lords, his request by the
Lord Steward p. 133

W Wandering persons, pretending to be Soldiers or Mariners; a bill against
them p. 112 Walls so curiously painted, witness our Forefathers care in
cherishing the art of Painting p. 316 Wanting, a Town in Berkshire; a Bill for
mending its Highway p. 103 A bill for its Town-lands p. 105
Ward (her Majesty's) Arthur Hatch: a bill to enjoy a Rectory and Parsonage p.
87 War a curse to all people, especially the Poor p. 307 Warrants for new
Elections, whence to proceed p. 192 Watches in the night; a bill for settling
them p. 193 Weapons: see Armor. Weavers: see Spinners. Their Bill put to the
Question p. 303
Weeping for joy at the Queens Message p. 252 Weights false so numerous, that
we need no other metal to make Bells and Battlements for Churches p. 190
Weights and Measures; the bill expunged p. 197 A Groat makes all good Ibid.
Whirpool of the Princes profits; what so called p. 320 Whispering with the
Lords p. 311 Wife has no goods; therefore shall not pay p. 228 Will and
Testament of George Durant: a bill to perform it p. 102 Lord Cobham deceased: a
bill to confirm it p. 136
Wish of Mr. Johnson, and his good opinion of the Queen p. 236 Wood; the bill
for its Assize ordered to be engrossed p. 303 Woollen Clothes: a bill for them
p. 68 Word; the Ministers of it induced not to seek Bishoprics p. 187
Workhouse for the Poor: see Hospitals. Workmanship and skill the gift of God
p. 314 Writ of Prorogation p. 2 Writs of Error to save discontinuance in the
Exchequer p. 6 Of Covenant p. 25
Wye the River; a bill for a Bridge over it p. 115

Y Yarmouth: a bill to repeal part of their Charter p. 117 A bill for better
measuring of seven miles from it p. 122


Z Zeal to her Country, there will never be Queen with greater p. 266 The Queen
shows much in her Message to the House p. 248



