portrait of John Trapp ^a Effigies IOHANNIS TRAPP: A. M. Aetat: Suae. 59. 1660.


A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION UPON These following Books of holy Scripture;
Proverbs of Solomon, Ecclesiastes, the Song of Songs, Isaiah, Jeremiah,
Lamentations, Ezekiel and Daniel.

Being a Third Volume of ANNOTATIONS Upon the whole BIBLE.

By John Trapp M. A. once of Christ-Church in Oxford, now Pastor of Weston
upon Avon in Gloucestershire.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Nevil Simmons, Bookseller in
Kederminster, and are to be sold by Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in Paul's
Churchyard, and by Thomas Basset in Dunstans Churchyard in Fleet Street, Anno
Dom. 1660.

To the Worshipful, his much honored Friends, Edward Stephens of Sadbury Esquire
together with the Worshipful Colonel Thomas Stephens Esquire and his thrice-Worthy
Consort Mris Katharine Stephens: as also to their only Son, Mr. Thomas Stephens
the younger.
Much honored and dearly beloved in the Lord:
I No sooner bethought me of this Dedication, then there came likewise into my
mind that Apostolical Distinction of true Christians into Fathers, Young men,
and Little children, 1 John 2.12, 13. All these (taken conjunctim) Saint John
had by a most kind compellation, called Little children, ver. 1. My little
children, says he, these things write I unto you (as in an Epistle Dedicatory)
that ye sin not; sc. sinningly, as chap. 3.6. and mortally, as chap. 5.16. But
if any man do sin, (as alas we can do no less) we have an Advocate with the
Father (appearing for us, as a Lawyer appears for his Client, Heb. 9.24.)
even Jesus Christ the just one, Vorstius.
(the Judges own Son) and he is the propitiation (that is, the Propitiatour, by
a Metalepsis) for our sins. Learn this in general, says the holy Apostle,
(...). Tit. 1.9.
and hold it fast, as with both hands; for it is of the very foundation.

As for particulars, I have yet somewhat more to say to you (divisim) severally
and asunder. And first, for you, Little children, or Babes in Christ, who have
had your spiritual Conception, Gal. 4.19. Birth, 1 Pet. 1.23. and are now in
your childhood, 1 Cor. 3.12. Heb. 5.13. as well appears, 1. Because your
sins are forgiven you for his names sake, ver. 12. for an assurance whereof,
God has given you the Sacrament of Baptism; to signify, as by sign; to
ascertain you, as by seal; to convey to you, as by instrument, Christ Jesus
with all his benefits. 2. Because ye have known the Father, in some degree at
least, whilst he has inwardly sealed you up by his Spirit, set his mark upon
you, and sent you word, as it were, how well he loves you. Now then, the
lesson that I have to lay before you, Little Ones, is only this, That it is the
last hour; and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now there are
many Antichrists abroad, ver. 18. look well to your selves therefore that ye be
not beguiled (as little ones are apt to be) that ye fall not from your own
stedfastness, but (for a Preservative) grow in grace, and in the knowledge of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: to him be glory both now and for ever, Amen.
2 Pet. 3.18.

Next, for you, Fathers; you that are old Disciples (as Mnason is called, Acts
21.16.) you that are already gray headed, and experienced Christians, Saints of
the first magnitude, Ephesians. 4.13. such as the Psalmist celebrateth, Psalm
92.14. I grant that ye have known him that is from the beginning, ver. 13. and
I say it again, (for your singular commendation and encouragement) Ye have
known him that is from the beginning, ver. 14. even that Ancient of days,
whose head and hair are white like wool, as white as snow, Rev. 1.14. You know
him I say, with a knowledge, not only Apprehensive and Disciplinary, but also
Affective and Directive of your whole life. Nevertheless, I must friendly
forewarn you of this one thing, Old Melancthon was much delighted with that
saying of Achilles in Philostratus, (...).
(though ye know it already) Love not the world, neither the things that are in
the world, ver. 15. It Is strange you should (and yet it is often seen you do)
dote over impotently on these things here below; even then when you have one
foot in the grave, and should have the other foot in heaven, whether ye are
hasting. The higher the Sun, the shorter, surely, should be the shade. The
nearer to the Sea, the sooner should come in the tide. And as in a Piramide,
the higher you go, the lesser compass you find: So ought it to be with you,
Reverend Fathers, upon whose heads God has set a silver crown of hoary hairs
already; and will shortly set upon them an immarcessible crown of glory.

Lastly, for you, Young men, that are not only past the spoon, but come to a
well-grown age in Christ, (...)
I have to praise you for this, and again I praise you, that ye have in a good
measure overcome that wicked One, the Troubler, ver. 13, 14. because ye are
strong, and the word of God abides in you, ver. 14 But yet, as strong as ye
are, and the glory of young men (Heb. of choice young men) is their strength,
Prove. 20.29. well improved by you, because made use of against the devil; yet
let me caution you also, as well as Elder Saints, to beware of the world; a
subtle, a sly enemy, and very insinuative into the best breasts: Love not the
world, neither the things that are in the world, is your lesson too, ver. 15.
Divorce the flesh from the world, and then your Adversary the Devil can do you
no hurt.

Hitherto (worthy Sirs) you have heard the beloved Disciple (only glossed, and
paraphrased a little) and a better you cannot hear: for he was a secretis to
the wonderful Counselor, and leaned on his bosom. Shall I now take the humble
boldness, (Gentlemen) after so great an Apostle, to bespeak you severally in
like sort; only with a little inversion of the Apostles order?

And, first, for you, Sir* (the Grand-sire, the Antientest and most honorable
of this thrice-worthy Ternio) besides your singular sagacity, and prudence,
both civil and sacred, (the holy Apostles character of a Father) these four
Notes of an old man in Christ are all fairly pensil'd out and exemplified in
your religious and righteous life, and practice (absit verbo invidia) as in any
man's I know alive, at this day.

1. Such an one is exceeding humble; as Abraham was, Genesis 18.27. I am but dust
and ashes: as Jacob was, Genesis 32.10. I am less then the least of thy loving
kindnesses, Lord: as David was, Psalm 22.6. I am a worm and no man: as Nehemiah
was, when he prayed for pardon of his Reformations, chap. 13, 22. As Paul was
with his Minimissimus sum (so Estius rendereth him, Ephesians. 3.8.) as Ignatius
was, with his Tantillitas nostra our utmost meanness: as Austin was, with his
Non sum dignus, quem tu diligas, I am utterly unworthy of thy least love: as
blessed Bradford was with his Miserrimus peccator Ioh. Bradford: as Mr Dod and
Mr. Cleaver (your, and my old and good acquaintance) were; with whom, we well
remember, it was usual, Agur like, to vilify, yea to nullify themselves to
the utmost. And this comes, 1. From increase of light. 2. From much and long
experience of their unavoidable failings and infirmities.

2. He is very heavenly minded; as having by the constant practice of
mortification comfortably subdued his corruptions, seen through the vanity and
vexation of outward things, set one foot upon the battlements of heaven, had
here much sweet intercourse and communion with God, gotten a full gripe of
Christ, laid fast hold upon eternal life; for the full fruition whereof, he
therefore dearly and daily longs and labors. Hence also it comes to pass, that
this good old Saint, this earthly Angel, is so heavenly in his Spirit, fruitful
in good speeches, innocent in his life, abundant in deeds of Piety and Charity,
still doing something that may further his reckoning, and add weight to his
crown, which he ever eyeth, and even reaches after. The former instances might
be here called over again; all whose humility was not more low, then their aims
were lofty.

3. This good old disciple of Christ is very able to bear, and forbear: like as
a man at maturity, can bear with little childrens follies, and not set his w^t
to theirs, as we use to phrase it. Thus Abraham bore with Lots rudeness: Moses
with the peoples petulancies, and insolences: Paul, with the buffoneries, and
indignities put upon him by the Corinthians and Galathians: Ye have not injured
me at all, says he, Gal. 4.12. Your disrespects and affronts reach me not: I
am far above them, I am out of your gunshot So Fulgentius, an Ancient of the
Church, being abused by one who was far his inferior, Maluit tolerare, quam
deplorare.
put it off with Plura adhuc pro Christo toleranda, This is a small Trial: I
must frame to bear more yet for Christ As an old Porter that had been beaten to
the Cross, he went singing under his burden; holding it no small grace,
Elegantissimum Oxymoron. Casaub.
to be disgraced for the name of Jesus, as it is said of those Disciples of our
Savior, Acts 5.41. who soon after his Ascension, were, all upon the sudden,
of Babes, become Grandees in Grace.

4. Lastly, he is much affected with the state of others: Good Abraham could
not rest in his bed that night, for thinking of poor Sodom, Genesis 19.27. as
Luther observes. But especially he is affected with the welfare, or ill-fare
of the Churches; as being himself of a public, that is, of a noble spirit; and
as a living member of Christ's mystical Body, he feels twinges, whenever
others are hurt in the least. See this in Daniel, Nehemiah, EZra, but
especially in Paul, upon whom lay the care and cumber of all the Churches:
(...). 2 Cor. 11.28.
it came upon him as an armed man, and gave him no rest or respite. Cyprians
Cum singulis pectus meum copulo, is well known. And of Calvin it is recorded in
his life, by Beza, that he was no otherwise affected toward the Churches,
though far remote, then if he had born them on his own shoulders. This is a
sure Note of a Father. Indeed Babes and young men are so cumbred with their own
corruptions, have so much work of their own to do within doors, that they have
little leisure, or list, to look abroad: Neither are they therefore so much
affected with other men's conditions.

To speak, a little, of those two also, in their order. And first of the young
man in Christ: Where let it be, I beseech you, no trouble or offense of heart,
(singultus cordis, some render it, 1 Samuel 25.31.) to You (Noble Colonel,
together with your Jungat epistola quos junxit conjugium: immo charta non non
dividat, quos Christi nectit amor. Hier. praefat. in Proverb.
elect or choice Lady) to be set among the second sort of good Christians:
though I must needs say, for your very eximious and exemplary Piety and
Prudence, you may well claim place in the upper form of this lower world. But
you know who it was that said long since, Cicero.
Honestum est ei, qui in primis non potest, in secundis tertiisve consistere:
And to have a door-keepers place in Gods house, David held no small preferment,
Psalm 84.10. But to go on with our business: A young man in Christ may be thus
Characterized.

1. He is strong in grace; but withal, he has some one (or more) strong
corruption (suppose Passion, evil Concupiscence, Worldliness, or the like) that
holds him play, and puts him shrewdly to it: so that sometimes he could almost
find in his heart to sin: My feet were almost gone, my steps had well-nigh
slipped, Psalm 73.2. But afterward, he better bethinks himself, forbears and
forgoes it, as a man would do a Serpent in his way, or poison in his meats. He
makes strong resistance, and renews his well-knit resolutions against sin. A
mighty combat and coil there is other whiles: as it uses to be in a
thunderclap, caused by a hot dry vapor, wrapped up in a cold moist cloud, which
ends in a great rumble and dreadful crack. Patient Job, and devout David for
instance: the one abhorring himself for his impatient out bursts: the other
be-beasting himself, for his precipitancy, his rash resolves, one time, when
sick of the Fret, Psalm 73.22.

2. Next, the weapons of this young man's warfare are not carnal, (such as
natural reason, shame of the world, fear of Hell, etc. have put into his hand)
but spiritual, mighty through God to the pulling down of Satan's strongest
holds, the digging down of his deepest trenches, 2 Cor. 10.5. He fights against
the enemies of his soul, with Gods own Arm, and with Gods own Armor: he is
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might: and taking the sword of his
Spirit (mingling with faith in his heart the Precepts, Menaces and Promises) he
lays about him lustily, and prevails accordingly, driving the field of that
old Manslayer.

3. He is much affected with his success. If he get the better in any measure;
so that he does not so much, and often break out, as he was wont: if his
corruption be any whit abated, his strength increased a little, he is
mavelous glad and thankful. Was not David so when disarmed by the discretion
of Abigail, 1 Samuel 25.
and detained from shedding innocent blood? As on the other side, if wounded
and worsted at any time, he is all amort, sorely, disquieted, restless as on a
rack; like a man thrust thorough the body, he bleeds and sinks, till with
Peter, he run to Christ the right Surgeon in this case, (with tears in his
eyes, bitter complaints in his mouth, and utmost self-abhorrency in his heart)
and is cured, set right again.

4. Lastly, He proves at length more then a Conqueror, through Christ that
loves him; and whose work it is, to send forth judgment unto victory, Mat.
12.20. Gr. thrust it forth with violence, (...).
the Devil and the world in vain opposing the work of true grace (called
judgment in that Text) which shall surely be perfected: Because ye have
overcome that wicked one, says Saint John, 1 Epist. 2.14 Yea ye over-overcome,
(...).
says Saint Paul, Romans 8.37. because ye do gather strength by opposition, (as
that Giant that fought with Hercules, is fabled to do, by his falling to the
earth) ye conquer, even by being conquered: Ant^^us.
you do daily get ground, and out-grow your corruptions, which are already laid
a bleeding and a dying at your feet: And God shall bruise Satan under your feet
shortly, Romans 16.20. So that the broken horns of that old red Dragon shall be
the Trumpets of your triumph, and the Cornets of your joy.

Lo, Sir, this is that Miles Christianus, that Pancratiastes Evangelicus: which
whilst You (a Colonel once in the best of Armies, and yet still so, by your
well-becoming Praenomen) shall strive to personate, and go on to express, you
shall War a good warfare, holding faith and a good conscience: which some
having put away (Gr. expeld, (...).
as Amnon did Tamar, as Colleges do rakehells, without all hope of re-entry)
concerning faith have made shipwreck, 1 Timothy 1.18, 19. When as you, Noble Sir,
continue constant in, and to the Truth which is according to godliness, Tit.
1.1. and a hearty hater of all heresies, and heterodoxies whatsoever. For the
which your faithfulness, and firmness in adhering to Gods holy cause, and
promoting his Kingdom, your Reward is sure with him, though not all presently
paid you. A Christian Soldier may have a very great arreer: Paul speaks as if
all his Pay were then to take up, when all his warfare was accomplished, 2 Timothy
4.7, 8.

Lastly, for You (Sweet Sir, Mr. Thomas Stephens the younger, for whom my
hearts desire and prayer to God is and shall be, that of David's servants for
young Solomon, 1 Kings 1.47. or that of Hector in Homer, for his Son Astyanax,
-- (...).)

May it be your great care now betimes, I beseech you, to know the God of your
Fathers, and to serve him with a perfect heart, and a willing mind, Lactant.
1 Chronicles. 28.9. Deum cognoscere, and colere, est totum hominis. If you be yet
no more then a Babe in Christ, One of his little children, for Innocence and
Ignoscency, it shall suffice: till such time at least, as you come unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. till you grow up to
more maturity, and increase with the increase of God, Colos. 2.19 Only it
behooveth You, Sir, as such a Babe, to see 1. That Christ be formed in you of a
truth; that You be indeed a partaker of the divine Nature, and of the Life of
God; that You have some of every grace, though but a little: -- inest sua
gratia parvis.

2. That you be very sensible of your weakness, and discontentedly contented
with it: Like as a child is often troubled that he is not able to run, lift,
labor as men do; and he will be doing as he can at men's actions.

3. As Babes are very hungry; never well, but when the teat or spoon is in the
mouth, or vitail in the hand: so should You, Sir, hunger and thirst after
grace, and the means of grace; as a newborn babe desire earnestly the sincere
milk of Gods word, that you may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. Grow, I say, not in
Notion but Motion; not in light so much as in heat, in gifts as in graces.
There are that have the spiritual rickets, grow big in the head, but decay in
the vitals. Be you none such.

4. Lastly, As Children are naturally apt to imitate their Parents; whether in
good, as Jehosaphat did his Father David: or in evil, as Isaac did his Father
Abraham: so let it be Your great endeavor, to tread in the holy footsteps (as
of Your Mother Lois, and of Your Grandmother Eunice, 2 Timothy 1.5.
both of them famous in the Church: so especially) of Your Renowned Grandfather
and Father: in whose imparallel examples You have a very Globe of precepts; and
by passing into the likeness of which surpassing patterns, You shall become of
a young Saint, an old Angel: of a young Well-wisher to the Public, a worthy
and Well-accomplisht Patriot; able and apt to serve God and Your Country in
places of noblest Note, and highest Employment, as Your Progenitors have done
in their Generations. And hereunto if either my poor prayers, Mr. J. T. Student
of Christ-Church, Oxon.
as a Suitor at the Throne of grace, or my Sons utmost endeavors, as a Tutor
made choice of by Your best friends, for Your ingenuous Education, may
contribute any thing, I dare assure You of both.

To draw to an end of this Prefatory discourse, which begins to swell beyond
the bounds of an Epistle; You may very well say, Sir, as Solomon once did,
Prove. 4 3, 4, 5. I was my Fathers Son, tender, and dearly beloved in the sight
of my Mother. He taught me also, and said unto me, Let thine heart retain my
words: keep my commandments and live. Get wisdom, ge^ understanding, forget it
not, etc. Your religious Mother also has not been behind, I dare say, to
lesson her Lemuel, with What my Son! and what the Son of my Womb! and what the
Son of my Vows* Prove. 31.2. You may please to peruse what I have written upon
those two Texts, and the rest, now presented and put into Your hands, in both
parts of this third Volume upon the holy Bible. Wherein, if any thing occurr
that may be of use, either to Your much honored Parents, or to Your
well-beloved self for Their and Your Increase and Furtherance in Knowledge and
Holiness, I shall take it for a sufficient Operae precium: and yet hope too,
that for the gift (how mean soever) bestowed upon me (how unworthy soever) for
the behoof of many others, thanks may be given to God by many on my behalf, 2
Cor. 1.11.

Now the very God of peace multiply grace, mercy and peace upon you all, from
the greatest to the least, and upon his whole Israel. This is the unfeigned,
and shall be the constant desire of Him who is, and will be,

Noble Gentlemen, Yours in all due observance, till death, John Trapp.
Welford this 24. of October, 1659.
Reverendo Clarissimoque Viro D. Johanni Trappo.
SI nova Coelicolas incessunt gaudia Vates,
Cum nitet illorum Pagina luce nova:
Majores solito Majorum turba triumphos
Nunc agit, ingenii munera, Trappe, tui.
Par prius ille novo nuper donavit amictu
Londinas, patrii gloria magna soli.
Attamen hanc operam minime tu sumis inanem.
Par illud decoras tu quoque luce nova.
Et par posterius, quod sol minus attigit ille,
Adjicis, and decoras hoc quoque luce nova.
Integer ergo tua jam macte Quaternio luce,
Nec non laetitia, quae fluit inde, nova.
Et nostras etiam subeunt nova gaudia mentes,
Cum lucem cernunt lumina nostra novam;
Lucem, quae tenebras divino codice pellit,
Qualis inest scriptis, Trappe diserte, tuis.
Quis non laetatur, quis non sibi plaudit abunde,
Accipiens foetum te peperisse novum?
Quis non Thesaurum paucis ait emero nummis?
Et, quam splendescet Bibliotheca mihi!
Laetitiae tantus quum sis Coelestibus Author,
Tantus item Nobis, sunt mihi vota duo:
Saepius ut per te laeti reddamur Utrique,
Nec non contingant Omnia Laeta Tibi.
Barfordiae, October. 31. 1659. (...). Tho. Dugardus.

Errata in the Major Prophets.
PAge 26. line 15. read labruscam; p. 34. l. 46. for one r. once; p. 56. l. 22.
r. handily; p. 57. l. 54. r. disjected; p. 61. l. 1. r. Arms; p. 81. l. 28. r.
Strabo; p. 97. l. 1. for sin r. him; p. 100. l 10. r. to frowardness; p. 106.
l. 4. r. a few hundreds; p. 118 l. 28. r. Jews; p. 227. l. 44. r. how is it; p.
229. l. 1. for couse r. intercourse; p. 253. l. 8. r. glories; p. 276. l. 33.
r. Gods holy day; p. 286. l. 19. r. unroosted; p. 293. l. 4. r. promote; p.
318. l. 13. for reigns r. reineth; p. 329. l 19. for in r. is; p. 330. l. 19.
for obeyed r. begged; p. 357. l. 43. r. Sarah; p. 360. l. 57. r. wrestle a
fall; p. 386 l. 24. for set r. let; p. 404. l. 48. for since r. sin is; p. 422.
l. 58. for laughter r. mirth; p. 444. l. 14. r. grate; p. 446. l. 52. for draw
r. dare; p. 462. l. 5. for wars r. wares; p. 483. l. 13. r. haunty; p 510. l.
38 for only r. duly; p. 519. l. 37. r. multiscium; p. 522. l. 57. r. as well as
a Mountain; p. 531 l. 42. for confortable r. conformable; p. 550. l. 6. r.
thrattling; p. 552. l. 43. for bebore r before; p. 555. l. 2. r. Hermotimus
Clazomenius; p. 560. l. ^^. r. hircus hirtus.

SOLOMONIS PANAPETOS: OR A COMMENTARY Upon the BOOKS of Proverbs, Ecclesiastes,
AND THE SONG of SONGS.

Wherein the Text is Explained, some Controversies are Discussed, diverse
Common-Places are Handled, and many remarkable matters Hinted, that had by
former Interpreters been pretermitted.

Besides sundry other Texts of Scripture (which occasionally occur) are fully
opened, and the whole so intermixed with pertinent Histories, as will yield
both pleasure and profit to the judicious Reader.

BY JOHN TRAPP, M.A. Pastor of Weston upon Avon in Glocestershire.

King Solomon was wiser than all men: and his Fame was in all Nations round
about. And he spoke three thousand Proverbs, and his Songs were a thousand and
fi^e. 1 Kings 4.31, 32.

The Queen of the South came from the uttermost parts of the Earth, to hear the
Wisdom of Solomon. Matthew. 12.42.

(...). Plato.

Quem poenitet peccasse, paene est innocens. Seneca.

The Second EDITION.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Ibbitson, MDCLX.

A TABLE OF SUCH Texts of SCRIPTVRE as in the Annotations on the PROVERBS are
occasionally Explicated.
Genesis 1.1. Page 14 Genesis 4.23. 66 Exodus 34.7. 78 Levit. 17.7. 76 Deuteronomy. 13.5. 112
Deuteronomy. 23.18. 9 Judge. 8.16. 65 Judge. 18.31. 115 1 Samuel 21.7. 39 1 Samuel 25.6. 90
2 Samuel 7.11. 70 2 Samuel 12.4. 63 2 Samuel 12.9. 80 2 Samuel 12.10. 24 2 Samuel 16.4.
108 1 King. 9.26. 4 Esth. 10.9. 134 Job 23.2. 125 Psalm. 5.3. 30 Psalm. 10.9, 10.
28 Psalm. 19.11. 14 Psalm. 23.4. 15 Psalm. 26.12. 74 Psalm. 50.18, 19. 22 Psalm.
56.7. 77 Psalm. 76.5. 63 Psalm. 105.18. 35 Psalm. 111.9. 52 Psalm. 119.4, 5. 73
Psalm. 119.69. 33 Psalm. 120.4. 70 Psalm. 134.3. 13 Psalm. 138.4, 5. Page 19 Psalm.
139.17, 18. 34 Isa. 4.5. 72 Isa. 6.13. 57 Isa. 26.3. 10 Isa. 27.4, 5. 106 Isa.
28.10 48 Isa. 36.5. 87 Isa. 37.23. 44 Isa. 45.11. 94 Isa. 45.24. ibid. Isa.
49.23. 86 Isa. 50.10. 21 Isa. 52.7. 48 Isa. 57.2. 10 Isa. 57.10. 81 Jer. 8.20.
75 Jer. 17.9, 10. 95 Ezekiel. 16.42. 85 Ezekiel. 22.9. 88 Dan. 4.10. 31 Hos. 5.1. 96
Hos. 7.10. 32 Hos. 12.7. 58 Zach. 5.4. 33 Zach. 6.1. 105 Mat. 25.26. 31 Mark
6.22. 24 Mark 9.50. 119 Luke 10.24. 121 Luke 12.29. 104 Luke 15.30. 86 Luke
18.4. Page 100 Luke 22.25. 44 John 4.27. 35 John 12.27, 28. 104 Acts 4.36. 126
Acts 19.10. 76 Acts 17.28. 92 Romans 7.8. 27 1 Cor. 2.8. 42 1 Cor. 6.9. 133 1
Cor. 7.34. 8 2 Cor. 9.6. 62 Ephesians. 4.30, 31. 93 Philip. 4.12. 54 Coloss. 4.21.
79 1 Thessalonians. 4.4. 24 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. 20 1 Timothy 2.14. 83 1 Timothy 5.2, 23. 37 1 Timothy
6.3. 23 Heb. 4.13. 95 Heb. 12.25. 98 James 1.26. 83 James 2.19. 25 2 Pet. 3.15.
46 1 John 5.18. 70 3 John 10. 53 Rev. 4.6. 92 Rev. 10.9. 69 Rev. 14.11. 95 Rev.
16.11. 25 Rev. 18.5. 59
A Table of such Texts of SCRIPTVRE as in the Annotations on Ecclesiastes and
Canticles, are occasionally Explicated.
Genesis 3.5. Page 290 Genesis 27.28. 253 Genesis 47.9. 255 Exodus 12.41. 232 Exodus
34.24. 281 1 Samuel 10.2. 301 2 Samuel 23.6, 7. 328 1 Kings 4.33. 223 Ezra 8.27.
296 Job 14.1. 258 Job 26.14. 245 Job 36.13. 253 Job 38.31. 241 Psalm. 19.11. 309
Psalm. 30.7, 8. 268 Psalm. 37.22. 238 Psalm. 45.2. 325 Psalm. 52.3. 293 Psalm.
68.11. 218 Psalm. 73.6. 322 Psalm. 76.4, 5. 334 Psalm. 76.12, 11. 248.322 Psalm.
90.11. 248 Psalm. 139.16. 299 302 Psalm. 144.4. 2^9 Isa. 3.6. 294 Isa. 27.4. 298
Isa. 28.17. 302 Isa. 29.22, 23. 266 Isa. 36.5. 285 Isa. 44.22. 334 Isa. 59.19.
330 Jer. 45.1. 228 Dan. 5.30. 232 Nah. 1.10. 279 Zach. 1.19, 20. 328 Zach. 3.7.
327 Zach. 6.3, 4. 252 Mark 7.22. 260 Mark 14.41. 301 Luke 3.5. 224 Luke 11.41.
266 John 8.57. 326 Acts 13.6. 218 Acts 17.11. 295 Acts 18.^. 241 Romans 8.10, 11.
229 1 Cor. 3.19. 230 1 Cor. 7.29. 285 1 Cor. 12.31. 266 2 Cor. 7.9. 289 2 Cor.
11.10. 247 Gal. 2.9. 331 Phil. 3.9. 327 Phil. 4.16. 326 1 Timothy 4.10. 278 1 Timothy
6.4. 274 2 Timothy 3.4. 227 Heb. 4.1. 222 Heb. 9.11. 327 Heb. 11.13. 325 James
5.13. 283 1 Pet. 5.5. 322 Rev. 4.6. 221 Rev. 16.1. 278
Books formerly published by this Author.
1 Gods Love Tokens, and the Afflicted man's Lessons: in a Treatise upon Rev.
3.19.

2 The true Treasure, etc. A Discourse concerning the Divinity and Excellency
of the holy Scriptures: out of Heb. 1.1.

3 A Commentary upon the whole New Testament, together with a Decad of common
places. The second Edition much enlarged by the Author, and printed in folio.

4 A Commentary upon the twelve Minor Prophets, together with a Treatise,
called, The righteous man's Recompense, etc. out of Mal. 3.16, 17, 18.

There is shortly to be published a Commentary upon the Pentateuch, and upon
the following Books of holy Scripture as far as to the Book of Ezra. That upon
the Pentateuch formerly published, is much enlarged, and the other newly added,
both in folio.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION UPON THE PROVERBS of SOLOMON.
CHAP. I. Verse. 1. The Proverbs.]
OR, Master-sentences, Maxims, Axioms, Speeches of special precellency and
prodominancy: (...) Dominari, quae vita dominae and moderatices esse debent.
(...).
Received Rules that must overruled matters, and mightily prevail in the minds
of men. The principal (no doubt) they are of those three thousand, mentioned, 1
King. 4.32. and far beyond those golden layings of Phocylides (profanely
preferred before these holy parables by that Apostate Julian, De Euripide
Cicero pronu^ciavit plures esse in eo sententias quam verba.
ansu nefario) as having in them more sentences than words, and being so far
above all humane praise for weight and worth, that (as Salast writes of
Carthage) I had better speak nothing of them, than too little, since too much is
too little.

Of Salomon] who better (a deal) deserves to be styled Master of the
Sentences, than Peter Lombard; and to be esteemed (...), as one says of
Homer; or as another says of Hierome, Zenophon.
that he was a man quem nullum scibile latuit, that knew all that was knowable
by a man. (...). Euripid. (...). Demost. (...). Thucyd. and Diodor.


King of Israel] Eccles. 1.1. King of Jerusalem, which was now the Israel of
Israel, as Athens was (in its flourish) said to be the Greece of Greece, yea,
the Soul, and Sun, and eye of Greece; yea the common School of all mankind. For
King Solomon exceeded all the Kings of the Earth, both in Riches, and in
Wisdom. And all the world sought to see Solomon, to hear his Wisdom which God
had put into his heart, 1 King. 10.23, 24. For the more wise the Preacher was,
the more he taught the people knowledge, and cause them to hear, and searched
forth many Parables, Eccles. 12.9. Even words of delight, verse. 10. See the
Note there.

Verse. 2. To know Wisdome] That is, to give others to know, to wise them, as
Dan. 12.3. to give the knowledge of salvation, Luke 1.77. to show men great and
mighty things which they know not, Jer. 33.3. but may here hence be taught,
better than out of Lipsius his Bee-hive, or Machiavels Spiderweb.

Verse: 3. To receive the instruction] Tertullian calls the Bible (and the
Proverbs by a specialty) Nostra digesta, from the Lawyers; and others our
Pundects, from them also. Is there not a thin veil laid over them, which is
more rarefied by reading, and at last wholly worn away* Surely as by much
reading the Statute-book men grow worldly-wise; And as a friend (it is
Chrysostomes comparison) that is acquainted with his friend, will get out the
meaning of a letter or phrase, which another could not that is a stranger; so
it is in Scripture. And herein (as one well observes) the poorest Idiot being
a sound Christian, goes beyond the profoundest Clarks that are not sanctified,
that he has his own heart instead of a Commentary to help him to understand
even the most needful points of the Scripture.

Verse. 4. To give subtilty] Serpentine subtilty, Genesis 3.1. sacred sagacity, a
sharp wit, a deep reach, a Spirit that searches all things, yea, the deep
things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. and transformeth a man into the ^ame Image from
glory to glory, Pet. Mar^. in Romans Ep. dedicat.
^ Cor. ^.1^ Equidem sc^^ m^^tos ess^ qui h^c non redan^^ and non p^^cos qui ea
rideant, nosque inf^nire arbit^ntur, faith Peter Martyr (...) velim, etc. that
is, I wot well there be many that will not believe it, and not a few that will
deride it, and think we are ^ad in ascribing so much to the Scriptures. But oh
that they would be entreated to make trial a while, and to take to the reading
of the Bible! Male mihi sit (...) eum in (...) causa jure au^im) nisi ^andem
capiantur sentient dentiqua quamtum divina hac ab humanis distent, etc. Let me
never be believed, if they perceive not a plain and palpable difference
betwixt these and all humane writings whatsoever. And to the same purpose
Erasmus, Erasm. Praefat. in Lucam.
expertus sum in ^^cipso, says he, I can speak it by experience, that there
is little good to be gotten by reading the Bible cursorily and carelessly: But
do it duly and diligently, with attention and affection, and you shall find
(...) an efficacy, as is (...) be found in no other Book that can be named.

To the simple] ^atuo (...) fatuello (Lipsius this diminutive) to the
silly-simple, whose learning hangs not in his light, who holds not (...) wise
to be taught, that is not uncounsellable, unperswad^^le. (...) qui sibi sapit,
Chytra^s.
he is two fools that it wise in his own eyes, Pr^^^ 3. (...) ^^noro, sed
ignorantiam meam non ignoro. Little though it (...), ^et this I know, that I
know but little.

Arist. Ethic. lib. 1. Job 1^.12. Eccles. 11.10.
To the young man Though rude and rash, ^ead-long and ^ead long ^ntameable and
untractable, as a wilde-asse-colt; though (...) lusts, 2 Timothy 2.22. and madly
set upon sin, yet he may cleanse his ways, by cleaving to Gods Word, Psalm.
119.9. and become a young Saint, an old Angel whereas otherwise, like young
Lapwings, he is apt to be snatched up by every Buzzard.

Verse. 5. A wise man will hear] Hearing and seeing are by Aristotle called the
learned senses, because by these doors, learning, yea life enters into the
soul, Isa. 55.3. David Chytrous, when he lay a dying, lift up himself to hear
the discourses of his friends that sat by him, and said, that he should dye
with better cheer, if he might dye learning something.

Si mori^und^^ etiam si quid ^idic ^sset Meich. Adam.
And will increase learning] Take heed what you hear: unto you that hear, shall
more be given, Mark. 4.24. See the Note there; Only ponder, and apply what
you hear. For they that do otherwise, are like the Wolf, who never attain to
any more divine learning than to spell Pater; but when they should come to put
together, and to apply it to their souls, they say Agnus, their minds running a
madding after the profits and pleasures of the world, and they thinking those
little less than mad, tha^ run to and fro to increase knowledge, Dan. 12.4.

Verse. 6. To understand a Proverb, and the Interpretation] Or, the sweetness
thereof, there being nothing so sweet to a good soul, as the knowledge of dark
and deep mysteries; Psalm. 119.103. Heb. Me^it ^a^ unde. fortasse Graecum (...)
and Lati^um Mel. Rivet.
where the same word is used. The little Book of the Revelation was in John's
mouth sweet as honey, Rev. 10.9, 10. See the Note there.

And their dark sayings] Dark to those that are acute obtusi, that have not
their senses exercised to discern both good and evil, Heb. 5.14. Legum
obscuritates non assignemus culpae scribentium sed inscitiae non ass quentium,
says he in Gellius. If the Law be dark to any, the fault is not in the
Lawgiver, but in those that should better understand it.

Verse. 7. The fear of the Lord is the beginning] Or the chief and principal
point The head or first fruits; the head and heigh.
of wisdom (as the word here signifies) yea, wisdom it self, Job 28.28. This
Solomon had learned by the instruction of his Father (as it is in the next
verse) who had taught it him of a child. Prove. 4.4. with Psalm. 111.10. and
therefore sets it here in the beginning of his works, as the beginning of all:
Hoc est enim totus homo.
As in the end he makes it the end of all, Eccles. 12.13. yea, the All of man,
without which he counts him not a complete man, though never so wise to the
world-ward. Heathen Sages, as Seneca, Socrates, etc. were wise in their
Generation, and had many excellent gifts, but they missed of the main; there
was no fear of God before their eyes: Being herein as Alchimists, who miss of
their end, but yet find many excellent things by the way. These Merchants
found goodly pearls, but the pearl of price they failed of, Mat. 13.45, 46. The
Prophet calls the fear of God our treasure, Isa. 33.6.

But fools despise] Fools; so are all such as fear not God, being abominable,
disobedient, and to every good work reprobate, or injudicious, Tit. 1.16. Evil
is Hebrew for a fool; Nebul^ of Nabal, Fool of (...). When one highly commended
the Cardinal Julian to Sigismund, he answered, Tamen Romanus est, Yet he is a
Popeling; So, yet he is a Fool, because void of Gods true fear. Behold they
have rejected the word of the Lord, (...). Arist. Rhe^.
and what wisdom is in them? Jer. 8.9.

Verse. 8. Hear the instruction of thy Father, etc.] It is not fit to disobey
God, thy Father, nor thy Teacher, says Aristotle. Our Parents, said Hierocles,
are (...), our houshold-gods: and their words should be received as Oracles;
This is a principal fruit of the fear of God, which it here fitly follows:
like as in the decalogue, the Commandment for honoring of Parents, is set
next of all to those of the first Table, nay, is indeed (as Philo says of it)
(...), a mixed Commandment.

Verse. 9. For they shall be an ornament] Virgil. Plato.
A man's wisdom makes his face to shine, Eccles. 8.1. Tum pietate gravem, etc.
(...). Neither gold, nor precious stone so glistereth, says Plato, as the
prudent mind of a pious person. Nothing so beautifies as grace does; Moses and
Joseph were fair to God, and favored of all men. A Crown of Gold, a Chain of
Pearl, are no such Ornaments as are here commended.

Verse. 10. If sinners entice thee] To an ill bargain, to a match of mischief,
as Ahab did Jehosaphat, as Potiphers wife would have done Joseph: and truly,
that he yielded not, was no less a wonder, than that those three Worthies
burnt not in the midst of the fiery furnace. But as the Sunshine puts out
fire, so did the fear of God the fire of lust.

Consent thou not] But carry a severe rebuke in thy countenance, as God does,
Psalm. 80.16. To rebuke them is the ready way to be rid of them.

Verse. 11. If they say] The Dragon bites the Elephants ^ar, and thence sucks
his blood; because he knows that to be the only place that he cannot reach
with his trunck to defend. So deal the red Dragon and his Angels; with good
words and fair speeches they deceive the hearts of the simple, ^om. 16.18. With
much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the flattering of her lips she
forced him, Prove. 7.21.

Come with mee] If sinners have their Come, should not Saints much more* Come
let us go to the house of the Lord, Isa. 2.3. Come, let us walk in the light of
the Lord, Verse. 5. Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the
Lord of Hosts: I will go also, Zech. 8.21. should we not incite, entice, when,
and provoke one another? (...).
Heb. 10.24. sharpen and extimulate, as Prove, 27.17. rouse and stir up each
other to love and good works, 2 Pet. 1.13.

Verse. 12. Let us swallow them up alive] As the Devil does, 1 Pet. 5.8. 2 Timothy
2.26. Homo homini demon. The poor Indians have been heard to say, It had been
better that their Country had been given to the Devils of Hell, than to the
Spaniards: and that if the cruel Spaniards go to Heaven when they dye, they
(for their parts) desire not to come there.

Verse. 13. We shall find all precious substance] But those that rake
together, rem, rem, quocunque modo rem, that count all good fish that comes to
net, will in the end catch the Devil and all.

Fill our houses with spoil] Not considering, that they consult shame to their
houses by cutting off many people, and sinning against their own souls, Hab.
2.10. He that brings home a pack of plaguey clothes, has no such great booty
of it.

Verse. 14. Let us all have one purse] How much better were a wallet to beg from
door to door, than such a cursed hoard of evil-gotten goods?

Verse. 15. Walk not thou in the way with them] God will not take the wicked by
the hand, Psalm. 26.
Job 8.20. Why then should we? Gather not my soul with sinners, says David. O
Lord let me not go to Hell where the wicked are: for Lord, thou know I
never loved their company here, said a good Gentlewoman when she was to dye,
being in much trouble of conscience.

Verse. 16. For their feet run to evil] By the abuse of their locomotive
faculty, given them to a better purpose. They run, as if they should not come
time enough, they take long strides toward the burning lake, which is now but a
little before them.

Verse. 17. Surely in vain the net] Which is to say, Silly birds pick up the
meat, but see not the net, and so become a prey to the fowler. If the fruits of
the flesh grow out of the trees of your hearts (says blessed Bradford) surely,
Sermon of Repent. page 70.
surely, the Devil is at Inn with you; you are his birds, whom when he has
well fed, he will broach you, and eat you, chaw you, and champ you world
without end, in eternal woe and misery.

Verse. 18. And they lay wait] Their sin will surely find them out. No doubt
this man is a Murderer, Nemo nequitiam gorit in pect^re, qui non idem Nemesin
in tergo.
said those Barbarians, Act. 28.4. whom though he had escaped the Sea, yet
vengeance suffers not to live. Surely I have seen yesterday the blood of
Naboth, 1 King. 9.26. Murder ever bleeds fresh in the eye of God: to him many
years, yea, that eternity that is past, is but yesterday.

Verse. 19. Which takes away the life] The greater wealth, the greater spoil
awaits a man: As a tree with thick and large ^oughs, every man desires to lop
him. Trithemius writes, that the Templars at the request of Philip King of
France, were put down, and extinct upon pretext of heresy, but indeed, because
they were rich, and Philip sore longed after their possessions. Cyprus for its
great wealth, Sixtus Rufus. Virgil. Isidor.
became a spoil to the Romans. Auri sacra fames, etc. (...). Covetousness is
daring and desperate: it rides without reins, as Balaam did after the wages of
wickedness, the Mammon of iniquity, Luke 16.9.

Verse. 20. Wisdome] Hebrew, Wisdoms: That is, the most absolute and sovereign
wisdom, the Lord Jesus, in whom are bid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, Col. 2. who also is made unto us of God wisdom, righteousness, etc.
1 Cor. 1.30.

Cries without] The Hebrew word signifies often, to shout for joy, as Psalm.
81.2. Levit. 9. ult. Christ surely cried sweetly, the roof of his mouth was
like the best Wine that goes down sweetly, Cant. 7.9. with a desire did he
desire our salvation, though he well knew it should cost him so very dear,
Luke 22.15.

She utters her voice] Verbis non solum deserti^, sed and exertis. In the
last day, that great day of the feast Jesus stood and cried, saying. If any man
thirst, let him come unto me end drink, John 7.37.
etc.

Verse. 21. In the cheef place of concourse] Veritas non quaerit angulos. Christ
as his manner was, preached in the Synagogues. Paul disputed in the market,
with whomsoever he met, and preached in the midst of Mars-hill, Act. 17.17.22.
And at Rome his bonds in Christ were manifest in all Caesar's Court, Phil. 1.13.
and in all other places.

Verse. 22. How long ye simple ones] The fatuelli that are easily persuaded
into a fools Paradise. These are the best sort of bad men: The Apostle calls
them (...), Romans 16.18. Optimi putantur Pointifices, (says Papirius Massonius
a Popish Writer) si vel leniter mali sint; In vita Pauli. 3.
vel minus honi quam caeteri mortale esse salent. Those are thought to be very
good Popes, that are not stark naught, or that have any good at all in them.
These Simplicians are much better than scorners, that delight in their
scorning, but far beyond those fools that hate knowledge. See a like gradation,
Psalm. 1.1. with the Note there. Peccata non sunt paria Nemo repent fit
turpissimus. All sins are not alike sinful: and wicked men grow worse and worse.

Verse. 23. Turn you at my reproof] He that reproves, and then directs not how
to do better, is as he that snuffs a Lamp, but poures not in oil to maintain
it.

Behold I will pour out my spirit] Now if men make their hearts as an Adamant,
lest they should hear, etc. and wilfully withstand the Spirit, let them read
their neck-verse in the following words, and in that parallel Text, Zach. 7.11,
12, 13. Resisting the Spirit is a step to the unpardonable sin.

Verse. 24. Because I have called, and ye refused] If any ask, why did God
suffer them to refuse, and not make them yield? I answer with Augustine,
Doctiorem quarat, qui hanc quaestionem ei explicet. Let him look one that can
tell him, for I cannot.

Verse. 25. But ye have set at naugh^] As those recusant guests in the Gospel,
that pretended they therefore came not, because they had bought Farms and Oxen,
but indeed it was because their Farms and Oxen had bought them. They had either
so much to do, or so little to do, that they could not make use of so fair an
offer, so sweet advice and advantage.

And would none of my reproof] Ruinam praecedunt stillicidi^. It is a sure
presage and desert of ruin, when men will not be ruled. The Cypress, Prove.
29.1.
the more it is watered, the more it is withered. The tree that is not for
fruit, is for the fire. The earth that bears thorns and briars only, is
rejected, etc. Heb. 6.8.

Verse. 26. I will also laugh] Quod Deus loquitur cum risu, tu legas cum fletu.
If God laugh, thou have good cause to cry. Augustine.
Note here the venomous nature of sin, which is so offensive to God, as it
makes him (against his ordinary wont) merry at his Creatures misery, who
otherwise delights in mercy, Mich. 7.18.

When your fear cometh] That terrible tempest, Lactan. Instit. S^lust.
Job 15.21, 22. Psalm. 11.6, Tullus Hostilius (a profane Prince) set up and
worshipped at Rome two new Gods, viz. Pavor and Pallor* as Lactantius
testifies. Cataline was wont to be afraid at any sudden noise, as being
haunted with the furies of his own evil conscience: Daniel. Thua^.
So was our Richard the third after the murder of his two innocent Nephews,
and Charles the ninth of France after the Paristan Massacre: These Tyrants
became more terrible to themselves, than ever they had been to others.

Verse. 27. When your fear comes as desolation] Scilicet, of war, which lays
heaps upon heaps; and leaves not a stone upon a stone, A^at. 24.

As a whirlewind] Suddenly and irresistibly, and with a terrible noise and
fragor.

Verse. 28. Then shall they call, etc. This was Saul's misery, The Philistims are
upon me, and God will not answer me. This was Moa^s curse, Isa. 10.12. This
was the case of David's enemies, Psalm. 18.41. A doleful case it is surely, when
a man shall lose his prayers, and shall nor be a button the better for all his
pretended orisons and devotions. Prove. 28.9.
He that turns away his ear from hearing of the Law, even his prayer shall
be abominable. If God answer him at all, it is according to the Idols of his
heart, Ezekiel. 14.3. with bitter answers. as Judge. 10.13, 14. Or if better, yet
it is but as he answered the Israelites for Quails, and afterward for a King,
better have been without Deus saepe dat iratus quod negat propitius. Giftless
gifts God gives sometimes, Josh. 24.20. He will consume you after that he
has done you good.

Verse. 29. For that they hated knowledge] These are the worst sort of sinners,
verse. 22. that not only slight knowledge, but hate it, as thieves do a torch
in the night; Herodot.
curse it, as Ethiopians do the scorching Sun; fly against it, as Batts do
against the light. This is the condemnation, this is Hell aforehand, John 3.20.

And did not chuse] (...). Refuse the evil, Isa. 7.
and choose the good: choose the things that please God, Isa. 56.4. that wherein
he delights, Isa. 65.12. Such a choice made Moses, Heb. 11.25. and Joshuah,
chapter 24.15. and Mary, Luke 10.42.

Verse. 30. They would none of my Counsel] These are condemned and menaced, as
well as those that despised or execrated Gods reproof. So also in the precedent
verse, not only they that hated knowledge, but that did not choose the fear of
the Lord.

They despised all my reproof] Hebrew, They execrated, blasphemed it.

Verse. 31. Therefore shall they eat of the fruit] Eat as they baked, drink as
they brewed. They that sow the wind of iniquity, shall reap the whirlewind of
misery. Aequum est ut faber quas fecit compedes ipse gest it.

And be filled with their own devices] Their Never-enough shall be quit with
fire enough in the bottom of Hell.

Verse. 32. For the turning away] Whereas it might be objected, that meanwhile
wicked men live at ease and prosper. It is granted, but withal asserted, that
these fatted Oxen are but fitted for the slaughter. The Sunshine of prosperity
ripens the sin of the wicked apace. Bernard calls it misericordiam omni
indignatione crudeliorem, a mercy that he had no mind to. What good is there
in having a fine suit with the plague in it? As soon may a man miscarry upon
the soft sands, as upon the hard rocks.

Horat. Psalm. 112.
Verse. 33. shall be quiet from the fear] Impavidum ferient ruinae. He shall
not be afraid of evil tidings. His Ark is pitched within and without; tossed
it may be, but not drowned, shaken, but not shivered, etc.

CHAP. II. Verse 1. My Son]
FAtherly and filial affection ought to be betwixt Teacher and hearers. But
who is their Father? 1 Samuel 10.12. O my Father, my Father, said he to the
dying Prophet, 2 King. 13.14. Dwell with me, and be unto me a Father and a
Priest, said that Idolatrous Micah to the wandering Levite, Judge. 17.10. Spec.
Europ.
Popish Novices do so observe their Patres (as they call them) that though they
command them a voyage to China or Peru, without dispute or delay they presently
set forward. Tu and Asinus unum est^te (said one once to a young Novice, that
being to enter into a Monastery, asked his counsel how he should carry
himself?) Come Children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the
Lord* Psalm. 34.11.

Verse. 2. So that thou incline thine ^ar] Lie low at Gods feet, and say, Speak
Lord, for thy Servant hears. His Saints sit down at his feet, every one to
receive his word, Deuteronomy. 33.3. they are compared to a Garden of Cucumbers, Isa.
1.8. which when ripe, lie on the ground. Surely as waters meet and rest in low
valleys, so do Gods graces in lowly hearts.

And apply thy heart] Attention of body, intention of mind, and retention of
memory are indispensibly desired of all wisdoms Scholars; Act. and Men.
such as King Edward the sixth, who constantly stood up at the hearing of the
Word, took notes, which he afterward diligently perused, and wrought the
Sermon upon his affections by meditation.

Verse. 3. If thou cryest after knowledge] Been orasse est been studuisse, James
1.17
said Luther. Knowledge is Gods gift, James 1.5. and must be sought at his
hand, fith he is the Father of lights, and sells us eye salve, Rev. 3.17.

And liftest up thy voice] As resolved to give God no rest till thou have it. A
dull suitor begs a denial. Then shall men know if they follow on to know the
Lord, Hos. 6.3. Teach me, teach me, says David often. Lord show me thy
glory, said Moses newly come from the Mount.

Verse. 4. If thou seek her as silver] Opulentissima metalla quorum in alta
latent vena, says Seneca, your richest metals lie lowest. Sen. Epist. 23.
Viscera terrae extrahimus, ut digito gestetur gemma, quam petimus, says
Pliny: We draw out the very bowels of the earth, that we may get the gem that
we desire. Lib. 2. c. 65.
Shall we not do as much for this pearl of price, the knowledge of God and his
Will, of our selves, and our duties? Beg we must, verse. 3. but withal we
must dig too, verse. 4. and continue to do so, searching for her, as for hid
treasures. Ora and labora; for else, the talk of the lip only brings want,
Prove. 14.23. What man finding a rich Mine of Gold or Silver, is content with
the first Oar that offers it self to his view, and does not dig deeper and
deeper till he become owner of the whole treasure? So here, Then shall ye
know if ye follow on to know the Lord, Hos. 6.3. if ye cease not till ye get
all the dimensions of knowledge mentioned by the Apostle, Ephesians. 3.18. till ye
see that blissful sight, Ephesians. 1.18, 19.

Verse. 5. Then shall thou understand] Then shall thou be as those noble Romans
were, chap. 15.14. full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to
admonish others; in fine, a well-accomplisht Christian, that has Christian for
his name, and Catholic for his surname. Such a Catholic as Austin describes,
when he says, ^oni Catholici sunt, qui and fidem integram sequuntur, and
bonos mores. Those be good Catholics, that believe well, and live well. These
be not those ancient Roman Catholics.

Verse. 6. Out of his mouth comes knowledge] If it could be said by the divine
Chronologer, Bucholc.
Ex Adami sapientissimi doctoris ore pr^manavit, tanquam ex so^^e quicquid in
mundo est utilium doctrinarum, disciplinarum, scientiae and sapientiae, Out of
Adams mouth (even after the Fall) as out of a fountain slowed all the
profitable knowledge, skill, and wisdom in the world: how much better may the
same be said of the only wise God, who is wonderful in Counsel, and excellent
in working, Isa. 28.29. Platonici lumen mentium esse dixerant ad discenda
omnia, eundem ipsum Deum a quo facta font omnia. The Platonists said, Aug. de
civ. Dei.
that God the Maker of all was that light of the mind whereby we learn all.

Verse. 7. He lays up sound wisdome] Hebrew Substance, reality, that which
has a true being, in opposition to that which is not; so riches are described,
Prove. 23.5. Heaven only has a foundation, earth has none, Heb. 11. Job 26.7.
but is hanged upon nothing. Grace has solid substance in it and true worth:
whereas opinion only sets the price upon all outward things. The Prophet Amos
complains of the Epicures of his time, that they are the Lambs out of the
flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the stall, they drank Wine in bowls,
and chanted to the sound of Viols, etc. Amos 6.4, 5, 6. This to some might seem
brave and desirable. But verse. 13. the Prophet in true judgment thus speaks to
them. Ye which rejoice in a thing of naught, etc. ye embrace a shadow, ye
pursue after things that profit not, but perish in the use: 1 Cor. 6.13.
for Meats for the belly, and the belly for Meats; but God will destroy both it
and them.

Some sense the Text thus: The Lord says up sound wisdom for the righteous,
etc. when he is in distress, then he has such quietness of spirit, soundness
and presence of mind, that in the must of his straits he is in a sufficiency
Not so the wicked, Job 20.22.

He is a buckler to them] The body cannot be wounded, but through the
buckler, if skilfully handled: Happy art than O Israel; who is like unto thee,
Deuteronomy. 33.29.
O people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help? etc.

Verse. 8. He keeps the paths of judgement] Well may they walk uprightly that
are so strongly supported. Gods hand is ever under his; they cannot fall
beneath it. He keeps the feet of his Saints, 1 Samuel 2.9.

Verse. 9. Then shall thou understand righteousness] Not as cognoscitiva
standing in speculation; But as directiva vitae, a rule of life. Knowledge is
either Apprehensive only, or Affective also. This differs from that, as much
as the light of the Sun (wherein is the influence of an inlivening power) from
the light of Torches.

Verse. 10. Is pleasant to thy soul] Spiritual joy mortifies sin: His mouth
hankers not after homely provision, that has lately tasted of delicate
sustenance: Pleasure there must be in the ways of God, because therein men
let out their souls into God, that is the fountain of all good, hence they so
infinitely distaste sins tasteless fooleries: Creed mihi res severa est verum
gandium, says Seneca. True joy is a solid business.

Becman. (...).
Verse. 11. Discretion] Hebr. Thoughtfulness, or good advisement. Cogito quasi
coagito. Notat sercitatem, such as is that of the wife to please her husband, 1
Cor. 7.34. casting this way and that way how to give best content: Or that of
the good huswife to build her house, Prove. 14.1.
studying in every business how to set every thing in order: As the Carpenter
studies how to set every part of the frame in joint.

(...)
Verse. 12. That speaks froward things] As if his mouth were distorted, or the
upper-lip stood where the nether should. See Act. 20.30.

Verse. 13. To walk in the ways of darkness] As Thieves, Drunkards, Dicers, and
our other Solifugae that abuse even Gospel Light, that put not light under a
bushel, but under a dunghill, that when they have walked themselves aweary in
these by-ways (high ways to hell) sit down in darkness, and in the shadow of
death, Luke 1.79. which posture imports, 1. Continuance there. ^. Content, as
well a paid of their scat. These hate the light because their ways are evil:
Jo^. 3.
The light stands in the light of their wicked ways, as the Angel did in
Balaams way to his sin.

Verse. 14. Who rejoice to do evil] It is their meat, drink, sport. Prove. 4.27*
and 10.23. they cannot be merry unless the Devil be their play-fellow. This
is reckoned as an aggravation of Jerusalems sin, Jer. 11.15. Melior est
tristitia iniqua patientis quam latitia iniqua facie^tis.
When thou do evil, then thou rejoycest. But better is the sorrow of him that
suffers evil, than the jollity of him that does evil, says Austin.

Verse. 15. Whose ways are crooked] How justly may God say to such, as the Crab
in the Fable did to the Serpent when he had given him his deaths wound for his
crooked conditions, and then saw him stretch himself out straight, At opo^tuit
sic vixisse: It is too late now, you should have lived so.

And they froward] Absurd, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. Men made up of mere incongruities,
solacising in opinion, (...).
speeches, actions, all.

Verse. 16. From the strange woman] Forbidden thee by God, as strange fire,
strange Gods, etc.

Which flattereth with her lips] Whose lips are nets, whose hands are bands,
whose words are cords to draw a man in as a Fool to the stocks, or an Ox to
the slaughter.

Verse. 17. Which forsakes the guide of her youth] That is, Her Husband, as
Helena, Becman.
Herodias, Bernice, Act. 25.13. and other odious Harlots. Adulterium quasi ad
alterum, vel ad alterius torum. This Wanton never wants one though her Husband
be ever so near.

And forgets the Covenant of her God] Marriage is a mixed Covenant, partly
Religious, and partly Civil: The parties tie themselves first to God* and then
to one another. The bond is made to God, who also will be ready enough to take
the forfeiture. For Whores and Adulteresses God will judge, H^b. 13.3.

Verse. 18. For her house inclines unto death] Terence calls Harlots Cruces,
quia juvenes macerent and affligant. Venery is deaths best Harbinger: Venus ab
antiquis (...) dicta. Jacob. Re^ias.
She provideth, says one, not for those that are already born, but for those
that shall be born. Of Pope Paul the fourth (that old Goat) it went for a by
word, Eum per candem partem animam profudisse, per quam acceperat. Pope John
the twelfth being taken with an Adulteress, was stabbed to death by her
Husband. Alexander the Great, and Oth^ the third, Barns.
lost their lives by their lusts. But how many (alas) by this means have lost
their souls! Fleshly lusts (by a specialty) fight against the soul, 1 Pet.
2.12. And nothing has so much enriched hell (says one) as beautiful faces.

And her paths unto the dead] Hebrew, El Rhephaim to the Giants: (...). Sept.
(...) projecti sunt.
To that part of hell where those damned monsters are, together with those
sensual Sodomites, who giving themselves over to fornication, and going after
strange flesh, are thrown forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of
eternal fire, Jude 7.

Verse. 19. None that go unto her return again] Some of the Ancients have here
hence concluded, that Adultery is an unpardonable sin: But all manner of sin,
and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men (says our Savior) save only the
sin against the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 12.31. True it is, that a Whore is a deep
ditch, and a strange woman is a narrow pit. Prove. 23.27. That Whoredom, and
Wine, and new Wine, take away the heart, Hos. 4.11. That such are said to be
destitute of understanding, and to have lost, even the light of nature, Prove.
6.32. Romans 1.28. to be past feeling, and given up to a dead and dedolent
disposition, Ephesians. 4.18, 19. to be impudent, Jer. 2, 3. (wherefore also they
are compared to dogs, Deuteronomy. 23.18. 2 Samuel 3.8.) and for most part impenitent,
(...). Hom.
Eccles. 7.28. Grace (as One well observes) is seated in the powers of Nature.
Now carnal sins disable nature, and so set us in a greater distance from grace,
as taking away the heart, etc. Howbeit all things are possible with God, Mark.
9.26, 27. And though few have awakened out of this snare of the Devil, yet some
have, as David, and that woman Luke 7.37, 50. lest any humbled sinners should
despair.

Verse. 20. That thou may walk in the way] This is another work of wisdom,
as to keep us from bad company, so to put us into good, where much good may be
learned. Dr. Tailor, Martyr, rejoiced that ever he came in prison, Act. and Mon.
there to be acquainted with that Angel of God, John Bradford (so he called
him.) Latimer and Ridley (while they lived) kept up Cra^mer by intercourse of
Letters, and otherwise, from entertaining counsels of revolt. Ibid.
A child having been brought up with Plato, returned home to his Fathers
house, Sen. de ira lib. 3 cap. 11.
and hearing his Father to chide, and exclaim furiously in his anger, used
these speeches to his Father, I have never seen the like with Plato.

Verse. 21. For the upright shall dwell in the land] Of Canaan, a type of
Heaven; for by these outward and corporal things, inward, spiritual, and
eternal are understood. Here the Wiseman speaks after the manner of Moses Law
under which he lived, Deuteronomy. 11. And howsoever upright men suffer hardship and
hunger here, yet they enjoy great tranquillity and felicity, as seeing God in
all, and depending wholly upon him for help. Well for the present, and it will
be better hereafter; This is the upright man's Motto. Heaven (thinks he) will
make amends for all. He that sees visions of glory, will not matter with St.
Stephen a shower of stones; how much less will he think much though the Lord
give him the bread of adversity, and water of affliction? Isa. 30.20.

Verse. 22. But the wicked shall be cut off] Certainly, suddenly, utterly, cum
maxim velint vivere, when they have feathered their nests, and set up their
rest, and reckon upon long life, as the fool in the Gospel: God will shoot at
them with an arrow suddenly, and fetch them off when they least look for it.
The wicked may dye sinning: The Saints shall not dye till the best time; not
till that time when, if they were but rightly informed, they would even desire
to dye.

Shall be rooted out] Heb. plucked up, as degenerate plants, Ex^rientur, sed
exurentur; God shall likewise destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee away,
and pluck thee out of thy dwelling place, and root thee out of the land of the
living, S^lah. Psalm. 52.5.

CHAP. III. Verse. 1. My Son forget not]
WE should be able to say to Wisdom, as Coenis did to her Lady Antonia,
Frustra, Domina, jussisti: haec enim atque caetera omnia quae mihi imperas, Dio
in respons.
ita semper in memoria habeo ut ex ea deleri non possint. You need not, Madam,
bid me do your business, for I so remember your commands, as I need never be
minded of them.

Jussa sequi tam velle mihi, quam posse, necesse est,
I am ready, to my power, to do your pleasure.
But let thine heart keep] As the Ark kept the two Tables, as the Pot kept the
hidden Manna.

Verse. 2. For length of dayes] A sweet mercy, and generally desired, Psalm.
34.12. Short life is reckoned as a curse, Psalm. 55.24. yet in some case, it is
a blessing, (...). Dion. Prus. Orat. 28.
1 King. 14.13. Isa. 57.1. (...), God takes away his from the evil to come; as
when there is a fire in an house or Town, men carry out their Jewels; but then
God makes them up in his Cabinet, they do enter into peace, their souls go to
heaven, they rest in their beds, their bodies rest sweetly and safely in the
grave till the resurrection of the Just, Isa. 57.2. And is not this far better
than the longest life here? Length of days may prove a curse, when it brings
shame, sorrow, etc. as it did to Cain, Cham, etc.

And peace shall they add to thee] Without which, to live is nothing else but
to lie a dying. Rebecca for want of this, was weary of her life; so was Elijah
when he sat under the Juniper tree. All the days of the afflicted are evil,
Prove. 15.15. (...), they dwell together, they do not live together, said
Themistocles of married folk that agree not. Non ille diu vixit, sed diu fuit,
said Seneca of one. And again, Non multum navigavit, sed multum jactatus est.
He was tossed much up and down, but sailed not far, as being driven about by
contrary winds.

Shall they add to thee] Multiplicem pacem significat, says one, Peace,
peace, as Isa. 26.3. that is, a multiplied peace with God, with ones self, with
others, or a renewed continued peace, to day, to morrow, and every day: Or a
perfect, sheer, pure peace.

Verse. 3. Let not mercy and truth forsake thee] That is, true mercy, not that
which is natural or moral only, but that which is right, both quoad fontem,
and quoad finem. They that do otherwise, as heathens and hypocrites, lay up
their treasure in the eyes and ears of men, which is a chest that has neither
lock nor key to keep it.

Bind them] That is, my Commandments. He seems to allude to Deuteronomy. 6.8. See
the Note there.

Verse. 4. So shall thou find favour] As did Joseph, Moses, David, he was a
man after Gods own heart, and whatsoever he did pleased the people. It is God
that gives credit, he fashioneth men's opinions, and inclines their hearts, as
Ezra often acknowledges with much thankfulness, Chap. 7.27. etc.

Verse. 5. Trust in the Lord] To trust in God is to be unbottomed of thy self,
and of every creature, and so to lean upon God, that if he fail thee thou
sinkest. Confidence is the least, and yet the best we can render to the Lord,
for hereby we acknowledge his Sovereignty, and set the Crown upon his head, as
it were. See Judge. 9.15.

And lean not to thine own understanding] Which because men do, hence it is
many times, that the fairest blossoms of their endeavors wither, and the
unprobablest things do come to pass: God loves to confute men in their
confidences, as he did the Philistims in their Champion Goliath. We must not
therefore trust, no not Trust it self, but God on whom it relies, who is
therefore called our Trust. They trust not God at all, that do it not alone. He
that stands with one foot on a rock, and another foot upon a quicksand, will
sink and perish as certainly, as he that stands with both feet on a quicksand.
Lord lead me to a Rock that is higher than I, says David. Whither when he
was once got, then he sat and sang, The Lord is my rock and my salvation,
etc. Psalm. 27.1. Surely as one said of general Councils, they seldom were
successeful, because men came with confidence, leaning to their own
understanding, and seeking for victory, rather than verity: so it holds as true
in other like cases.

Verse. 6. In all thy ways acknowledge him] Ask counsel at his mouth, aim at
his glory, be evermore in the sense of his presence, and light of his
countenance. It is reported of a worthy Divine of Scotland, Zacheus convert.
preface.
that he did even eat and drink, and sleep eternal life. This is to walk with
God, this is to live by Faith, this is to see him that is invisible ( Moses his
optic) this is to go the upper way, even that way of life that is above to the
wise, that he may depart from Hell beneath, Prove. 15.24. See the Note there.

And he shall direct thy paths] As he carefully chose out the Israelites way
in the wilderness; not the shortest, but yet the safest for them: So will God
do for all that make him their guide. The Athenians had a conceit, that their
Goddess Minerva turned all their evil counsels into good unto them. The Romans
thought that their Vibilia (another heathenish Deity) set them again in their
right way, when at any time they were out. All this, and more than this, is
undoubtedly done by the true God for all that commit their ways unto him, and
depend upon him for direction and success. Lo this God is our God for ever and
ever: he will be our guide even unto death. Psalm. 4^.14


Verse. 7. Be not wise in thine own eyes] Bis desipit qui sibi s^pit. He is
two fools that is wise in his own eyes. This (...) marres all. Socrates his Hoc
scio quod nihil scio, gat him the name of the wisest among men. Arachu^ apud
Ovid. Metamor, lib. 6.
Consilii sati^ in me mihi -- is the proud man's posi^. Hec that would be wise,
must be a fool, that he may be wise, 1 Cor. 3.18. Intus existens prohibet
alienum: A conceit of wisdom bars out wisdom.

Fear the Lord] This makes a modest opinion of a man's self. Joseph a man famous
for the fear of God, when Pharaoh expected from him an interpretation of his
dream, as having heard much of his skill, It is not in m^^, said he, Genesis
41.16.
God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace. Lo he extenuates his own gifts,
and ascribes all to God. Wherefore suddenly after, as Joseph had said to
Pharaoh, Without me shall God make answer to Pharaoh, so Pharaoh is heard say
to Joseph, Without thee shall no man lift up his hand or foot in all the Land
of Egypt, verse. 44. So that here was exemplified that holy Proverb^ Prove. 22.4.
By humility and the fear of the Lord, are riches, and honor, and life. The
Original runs thus, By humility the fear of the Lord are riches, etc. There is
no And in the Hebrew. Humility and the fear of the Lord are so near akin (this
being the Mother of that) as if the one were predicated of the other, as if
they were one and the same grace.

And depart from evil] Another effect of this clean fear of God, as David
calls it, Psalm. 19.9. Cave, spectat Ca^o, was a watch word among the Romans.
A reverend and religious man had these words following written before him in
his study, Noli peccare: Nam Deus videt, Angeli astant, Diabolus accusabit,
Conscientia testabitur, Infernus cruciabit. Take heed of sin; for God sees
thee, Angels stand by thee, the Devil will accuse thee, thy Conscience will
testify against thee, and Hell will torture thee. Psalm. 134.4 Hos. 3.5.
But besides all this, there is mercy with God that he may be feared: and the
children of Israel shall fear the Lord and his goodness.

Verse. 8. It shall be health to thy navel] That is, Thou shall be in good
plight both for the outward and inward man: Thy bones full of marrow, thy
breasts full of milk, thy spirit also lively and lifted up in the ways of the
Lord. And as it is with children in the womb (for to these is the allusion
here) that by the navil nourishment is ministered unto them, yea, even to the
strengthening of the inward parts: So the godly in the Church are ^ed and bred
by the Faith and fear of God; And as without marrow in the bones, Munster.
Mercer. T.W and others in loc.
no part of man, no not that which is of greatest value and force, is able to
do any thing: So the strength that they have from God, is as the marrow which
strengthens the bones, and makes them apt to do good things; And as a man
that has his bones filled with marrow, and has abundance of good blood and
fresh spirits in his body, he can endure to go with less clothes than another,
because he is well lined within: So it is with a heart that has a great deal
of grace and peace, he will go through difficulties and troubles, though
outward comforts fail him. Act. and Mon. fol. 1358.
It is recorded of Mr. Saunders Martyr, that himself should tell the party that
lay in the same bed with him in prison, that even in the time of his
examination before Steven Gardener, he was wonderfully comforted, not only in
spirit, but also in body he received a certain taste of that holy Communion of
Saints, whilst a most pleasant refreshing did issue from every part and member
of the body to the seat and place of the heart, and from thence did ebb and
flow to and fro unto all the parts again.

Verse. 9. Honor the Lord with thy substance] Freely expending it in pious and
charitable uses, Exodus 25.19. Deuteronomy. 26.2. See the Notes there. See also my
common place of Alms.

Verse. 10. So shall thy Barus be filled] The Jews at this day, though not in
their own Country, Godw. Heb. Antiq. 277. Thegualer ^ischilshe the guasher.
nor have a Levitical Priesthood, yet those who will be reputed Religious
amongst them do distribute the tenth of their increase unto the poor, being
persuaded that God does bless their increase the more; for their usual Proverb
is, Decima, ut dives fias. Pay thy Tithes, that thou may be rich. See the
Note on Mat. 5.7.

Verse. 11. Despise not the chastening of the Lord] Slight it not, but sit
alone, Lam. 3.28. and consider, Eccles. 7.14. Some think it a goodly thing to
bear out a cross by head and shoulders, and wear it out as they may, never
improving it: As a Dog, that getting out of the water into which he is cast,
shakes his cars; or as a man, that coming out of a shower of rain, dryes again;
and all is as before. Perdidistis fructum afflictionis, says Austin of such
Scapethrifts. Thus the proud Greeks (having lost two Castles in Chersonesus,
Miserrimi facti estis, and pessimi permansistis. Aug. de civit. Dei, l. 1. c.
33. Turk Hist. fol. 185.
taken from them by the Turks) commonly said, that there was but an Hogsty
lost, alluding to the name of that Country: Whereas that was the first footing
that the Turks got in Europe, and afterward possessed themselves of the
Imperial City of Constantinople. Shortly after, Anno 1358. Callipolis also
being lost, the mad Greeks, to extenuate the matter, when they had any talk
thereof, in jesting-wise commonly said, Ibid. 186.
that the Turks had but taken from them a bottle of Wine. So Galicum the Roman
Emperor, hearing that Egypt was revolted, said, Quid? fine lino Aegyptio esse
non possumus? What? cannot we be without the hemp of Egypt? So when Callice
was taken from us by the French, the Court-Parasites to ease Queen Mary's mind
(which yet they could not) said, Englands Elisab.
that it was only a refuge for runnagate Heretics; and that no true Roman
Catholic ought to deplore, but rather rejoice at the damage.

Virgil.
At Regina gravi jam dumdum saucia cura
Vulnus alit veni^ --
^eyl. Geog.
Monsieur de Cords used to say, that he would be content with all his heart
to lie in hell seven years, on condition that Callice were taken from the
English. And a considerate English Captain being asked by a proud Frenchman,
When will ye fetch Callice again? Gravely replied, Quando peccata vestra erunt
nostris graviora, when your sins shall weigh down ours. God is to be seen in
every thing we suffer since light afflictions not improved, are but as a drop
of wrath fore-running the great storms, a crack fore-running the ruin of the
whole.

Neither be weary of his correction] This is the other extreme, despair and
despondency of spirit. Non quia dura, sed quia molles patimur. Sen.
See my Love Tokens, page 44. etc.

Verse. 12. For whom the Lord loveth] The Saints afflictions proceed often from
love displeased, offended. And yet we have some now that tell us that God is
never displeased with his people, though they fall into Adultery, or the like
sin, no not with a Fatherly displeasure; that God never chastises his people
for any sin, no not with a Fatherly chastisement. But he (though a Father)
does alter the set of his looks toward his child, who is wanton upon his
love, and lets down the diligence of his just observance and duty.

In whom he delighteth] Quem unice diligit, whom he cockers above the rest of
his children. That Son in whom he is well pleased, says Mercerus, quem
approbat, whom he makes his White-boy, So Theophylact, Qui excipitur a numero
flagellatorum, excipitur a numero filiorum. He that escapes affliction, may
well suspect his adoption. See my Love Tokens p. 54, 55.

Verse. 13. Happy is the man] Though afflicted, if withal instructed, Si
vexatio det intellectum. Bought wit is ever best prized. Blessed is the man
whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and thereby reachest him out of thy Law, Psalm.
94.12. Schola crucis, schola lucis. Gods house of correction, is his School of
instruction. See my Love Tokens, p. 145, 146. etc.

And the man that gets understanding] Heb. That draws out understanding,
viz. de thesauro suo, out of the good treasure of his heart, as that good
Scribe instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven. The Chaldee has it, ja^iang,
Matthew. 13.5^.
scaturire facit, that has so profited in spiritual understanding, that he
can readily bring it forth to the benefit of others.

Verse. 14. For the Merchandise of] That is, the profit that is gotten by making
use of it. (...), says a Father. Seldom is any man weary of taking money.
Sing a Song of Utile, and men will lend their ears to it. The Jassians in
Strabo, delighted with the Music of an excellent Harper, ran all away, as soon
as the Market-bell rang, save a deaf old man, and he too, as soon as he heard
of it. Now Godliness is profitable to all things, as having the Promises of
both lives, and the Promises are exceeding great and precious things, 2 Pet.
1.4. even the unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3.8. who brings gold tried in
the fire, and that which is better, Rev. 3.18. For one grain of Grace is far
beyond all the gold of Ophir, and one hours enjoyment of God to be much
preferred before all the King of Spains annual Entradoes. What is Gold and
Silver but the guts and garbage of the earth? And what is all the pomp and
glory of the world, but dung and dogs-meat? Phil. 3.7, 8. I esteem them no
better (surely) that I may win Christ, said St. Paul, that great trader both by
Land and Sea, 2 Cor. 11.23.25, 26. Let me be put to any pain, Phil. 3.
to any loss, tantundum ut Jesum nanciscar, so I may get my Jesus, said
Ignatius. This gold we cannot buy too dear, what ever we pay for it. The wise
Merchant sells all to purchase it, Matthew. 13.44, 46. Every true Son of Jacob
will be content to part with his broth for the birthright, to purchase
spiritual favors with earthly, Psalm. 134.3. The Lord that made heaven and
earth, bless thee out of Sion, which is to say, the blessings that come out of
Sion, are choice, peculiar, precious, even above any that come out of heaven
and earth. Hag. 2.7. When God is shaking all Nations, the Saints shall come
with their desirable things (so some read the words) Colligent omnes thesauros
su^s, says Calvin, they shall gather up all their treasures.

Verse. 15. She is more precious than Rubies] Or, Pearls, Principium cul^enque
omnium rerum precii Margarita teneus. Plin. Gesner. hist. de Aquat. lib. 4.
Card. su^t. lib. 7.
which of old were most highly esteemed, as Pliny testifies; Nostra aetate
mult is aliis gemmis post ponuntur. Now adays there are many other gems of
greater price, as Rubies, Carbuncles, etc. Cardan tells us, that every precious
stone has an egregious virtue in it: Every spiritual grace has we are sure,
and is of more value than large demains, stately buildings, and ten thousand
rivers of Oil. If the Mountains were Pearl, the huge Rocks Rubies, and the
whole Globe a shining Chrysolite, yet all this were not to be named in the
same day with wisdom.

Verse. 16. Length of days is in her right hand] This is the same in effect
with verse. 2. See the Note there, (...), said Socrates, the same again may be
profitably said over; Solomon wanted neither matter, nor words, and yet he
repeats and inculcates (for his Readers greater benefit) the same matter in the
self-same words almost. Seneca.
Nunquam satis dicitur quod nunquam satis discitur. As to the Text, health and
long life is that which every man covets. Now, Non domus and fundus, He^^^.
non aris acerv^ and auri Aegroto domini deducant corpore febres. Riches avail
not in the day of wrath, but righteousness delivers from death, Prove. 10.2.
The honorable garter cannot cure the Gout, nor the chair of estate ease the
Colic, nor a Crown remove the headache. Nugas the Scythian despising the rich
presents and ornaments, that were sent unto him by Michael Paleologus Emperor
of Constantinople, Pachymer. Hist. lib. 5.
asked, whether those things could drive away calamities, diseases, or death?
No; this they cannot do; as Henry Beauford (that rich and wretched Cardinal)
found by woeful experience in the reign of Henry the sixth. For perceiving death
at hand, he asked, Wherefore should I dye being so rich? If the whole Realm
would save my life, I am able either by policy to get it, or by riches to buy
it. Fox Martyrol. vol. 1. p. 925.
Fie, quoth he, will not death be hired? will money do nothing? No; money in
this case bears no mastery. Death (as the jealous man) will not regard any
ransom, neither will he rest content though thou offer many gifts, Prove. 6.35.

Aug. de civit. Dei. l. 5. c. 25.
And in her left hand riches and honour] Bonus Deus Constantinum Magnum tantis
terrenis implevit muneribus, quant^ optare nullus auderet. The good Lord heaped
so much outward happiness upon his faithful Servant Constantine the Great, as
no man ever durst to have wished more, says Austin. If God give his People a
Crown, he will not deny them a crust: If they have bona throni, the good
things of a Throne, they shall be sure of bona scabelli, the good things of
the footstool.

Verse. 17. Her ways are ways of pleasantnesse] Such as were those of Adam
before his fall, strawed with Roses, paved with Peace. Some degree of comfort
follows every good action, as heat accompanies fire, as beams and influences
issue from the Sun. Which is so true, that very Heathens, upon the discharge of
a good conscience, have found comfort and peace answerable. This (says One) is
praemium ante praemium, a fore-reward of well-doing. In doing thereof (not
only for doing thereof) there is great reward, Psalm. 19.11.

Verse. 18. She is a tree of life] A tree that gives life, and quickens: or
(as one interprets it) a mo^^ assured sign of eternal life: whatsoever it is,
he alludeth, no doubt, to the tree mentioned, Genesis 2.9. and 3.22. See the
Notes there.

And happy is every one that retains her] Though despised by the world as a
poor Sneak, a contemptible caytiff. We usually call a poor man, a poor soul: a
poor soul may be a rich Christian: as Roger surnamed Paupere censu was Son to
Roger Bishop of Salisbury, Goodwins Catal. p. 338.
who made him Chancellor of England.

Verse. 19. The Lord by wisdome] By his essential wisdom, by his eternal word,
Prove. 8.30. the Lord Christ, who is the beginning of the Creation of God, Rev.
3.14. See the Note on John 1.3. In the beginning God created the Heaven and the
Earth, Genesis 1.1. that is, In his Son, as some interpret it, Heb. 1.2. Col.
1.16. This interpretation is grounded upon the Jerusalimy Targum, who
translates that, Genesis 1.1. bechochmatha, in sapientia. So does Augustine and
others: and for confirmation they bring Joh. 8.25. but that is a mistake, as
Beza shows in his Annotations there.

He established the Heaven] Heb. He aptly and trimly framed and formed them
in that comeliness that we now see. The Heavens declare the glory of God, and
the firmament shows his handiwork, ( Psalm. 19.1.) Upon the third Heaven he
has bestowed a great deal of curious skill and cunning workmanship, (...).
Heb. 11.10. But of that no natural knowledge can be had, nor any help by
humane arts, Geometry, Optics, etc. For it neither is aspectable, nor
moveable. The Visible Heavens are (for the many varieties therein, and the
wonderful motion of the several spears) fitly called (...). Coelum maxim co
nomine intelligunt Graci. Mercer.
The Original word here used, ratione conjugationis plus aliquid significat
quam paravit, vel stabilivit. Conen, Mirum in modum disposuit. He has
cunningly contrived. And hence happily our ancient English word Koning, and by
contraction King, coming of the Verb Con, which signifies (as Becanus notes)
Possum, Scio, Andeo, I can, I wot, I dare do it.

Verse. 20. The depths are broken up] viz. Those great channels and hollow places
made in the earth, to hold the waters, Genesis 1.9. that they may not overflow the
earth; and this the very Philosophers are forced to confess to be a work of
divine wisdom. Others by depths here understand fountains and floods breaking
out, and as it were flowing from the nethermost parts of the earth, even as
though the earth did cleave it self in sunder, to give them passage.

And the clouds drop down the dews] Clouds (the bottles of rain and dew) are
vessels as thin as the liquor that is contained in them; there they hang, move,
though weighty with their burden. How they are upheld, and why they fall here,
and now, we know not, and wonder.

Verse. 21. Let not them depart] Ne effluant haec ab oculis tuis, says the
Vulgar: Ne haec a tuis oculis deflectant in obliquum huc and illuc. So Mercer.
Let thy eyes look right on, Chap. 4.25. look wishly and intently on these great
works of God, and his wisdom therein set forth and conspicuous, as on a
theater. Eye these things, as the Steersman does the Load-star, (...).
as the Archer does the mark he shoots at, 2 Cor. 4.18. or as the Passenger
does his way, which he finds hard to hit, and dangerous to miss. Yea let them
be the delight of thine eyes, with the sight whereof thou can not be sated
or surfeited.

Verse. 22. So shall they be life unto thy soul] For by these, men live, and
this is the spirit of my life, says Hezekiah, Isa. 38.16. Even what God has
spoken, and done, verse. 15. A godly man differs from a wicked, as much as a
living man from a dead carcass. The wicked are stark dead, and stone cold. The
Saints also want heat sometimes, but they are soon made hot again; because
there is life of soul in them, as Charcoal is quickly kindled, because it has
been in the fire.

And grace unto thy neck] Or to thy throat, that is, to thy words uttered
through the throat. See the Note on chap. 1.9.

Verse. 23. Then shall thou walk in thy way safely] Fidneialiter, says the
Vulgar, confidently and securely. Every Malvoy shall be a Salvoy to thee: thou
shall ever go under a double guard, the Peace of God within thee, Phil. 4.7.
and the Power of God without thee, 1 Pet. 1.5. Thou shall be in league also
with the stones of the field, and the beasts of the field shall be at peace
with thee, Job 5.23.

Verse. 24. Thou shall not be afraid] See this exemplified in David, Psalm. 3.5,
6. Peter, Act. 12.6. and Mr. Rogers our late Protomartyr, Act. and Mon. fol.
1356.
who when he was warned suddenly to prepare for the fire, he then being sound
asleep in the prison, scarce with much shogging could be awaked.

Thy sleep shall be sweet] As knowing that God (thy Keeper, Psalm. 121.4, 5.)
does wake and watch for thee, Psalm. 120.1. Wicked men's sleep is often
troublesome, through the workings of their evil consciences; Daniel^ Hist. of
Eng.
as our Richard the third (after the murder of his own two innocent Nephews)
had fearful dreams, insomuch that he did often leap out of his bed in the
dark, and catching his sword (which always naked stuck by his side) he would go
distractedly about the Chamber, every where seeking to find out the cause of
his own-occasioned disquiet. So Charles the ninth of France, after that bloody
Massacre of Paris, was so inwardly terrified, that he was every night laid to
sleep, Thu^n. lib. 57.
and wakened again with a set of Musicians.

Verse. 25. Be not afraid] Or, thou shall not be afraid. Nec si fractus
illabatur orbis. Sudden evils do commonly dis-spirit people, and expectorate
their abilities, they be at their wits end. But let a David walk through the
vale of the shadow of death (that is, the darkest side of death, death in its
most horrid and hideous representations) he will not fear, no though he
should go back again the same way: for thou art with me, says he. He had
God by the hand, and so long he feared no colors, Psalm. 23.4.

Verse. 26. For the Lord shall be thy confidence] The Hebrew word here used,
signifies both unconstant folly, Eccles. 7.27. and constant hope, Psalm. 78.7.
And Rabbi Solomon says, that he had found in the Jerusalem-Targum this Text,
thus censured and expounded, The Lord shall be with thee in thy folly; that
is, he shall turn to thy good, even thine inconsiderate and rash enterprises,
if thou addict thy self to the study of wisdom.

And shall keep thy foot from being taken] In the snare which thou wast near
unto, by choosing, rather to be held temerarious, than timorous.

Verse. 27. Withold not good from them to whom it is due] Either by the Law of
equity, or of charity: For there is a debt of love, Romans 13.8. that we must
ever be owing, and ever pay. And as we say of thanks, Gratiae habendae and
agendae, Thanks must be given and held as still due, so must this debt of
love. Quicquid Clerici habent, pauperum est, says Hierome; Its true (in a
sense) of others, as well as of Ministers. The poor (Gods poor) are the owners
of that we have, we are but stewards and dispensers of Gods bounty to his
necessitous servants: Now if our receipts be found great, and our layings out
small, God will cast such bills back in our faces, and turn us out of our
stewardship. They are fools that fear to lose their wealth by giving, but fear
not to lose themselves by keeping it.

When it is in the power of thy hand] When thou have opportunity and ability;
for we must not stretch beyond the staple, that were to mar all: Neither
when a price is put into our hands, may we play the fools and neglect it: But
wheresoever God sets us up an Altar, Prove. 17.16
we must be ready with our Sacrifice of Alms: for with such Sacrifices God is
well-pleased, Heb. 13. See my common place of Alms.

Verse. 28. To morrow] Bis dat qui cito dat, while ye have time, do good to
all: your beneficence must be prompt and present; who can tell what a
great-bellyed day may bring forth? Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her hands
unto God, Weo^s^.
Psalm. 58.32. currere faciet manus suas ad Dominum, to note their speediness in
giving, Isa. 23.18.
says one. Tyrus also, when converted once, makes haste to feed and cloathe
Gods poor Saints with the money and Merchandise she was wont to heap up and
hoard.

Verse. 29. Devise not evil against thy neighbour] Heb. Plow not evil, i. e.
plot not. One of the Rabbines renders it, Suspect not, shun evil surmises, 1 Timothy 6.4. Most unkindnesses among friends grow upon mistakes, misprisions;
charity is candid, and takes every thing in the best sense, and by the right
handle. 1 Cor. 13.

Verse. 30. Strive not with a man without cause] If men's hearts were not bigger
than their suits, there would not be half so many. It is a fault to go lightly
to Law, but especially with such as have done thee no harm. Zuinglius renders
this Text thus: Ne temere litem cum quoquam suscipias, quo minus superior
factus, malum tibi retribuat. Others, sim mendax, nisi rependat tibi malum.
Life of Card. Wolsey.
How Cardinal Wolsey, when he became Lord Chancellor, paid home Sir James
Paulet, for setting him by the heels, when as yet he was but a poor
Schoolmaster, is well known. How much better Archbishop Cranmer, of whom the
proverb passed, Do my Lord of Canterbury a shrewd turn, and you shall have him
your friend for ever after: Act. and Mon.
And Robert Holgat Archbishop of York, of whom it is recorded, that in the
year 1541. he obtained a benefice in a place where one Sir Francis Askew of
Lincolnshire dwelt, by whom he was much troubled and molested in Law; Upon
occasion of these suits, he was fain to repair to London, where being, he
found means to become the Kings Chaplain, and by him was made Archbishop of
York, and President of the Kings Council for the North. The Knight
beforementioned, happened to have a suit before the Council there, and doubted
much of hard measure from the Archbishop, whose adversary he had been. But
he, remembering the rule of the Gospel, Godw. Catalog. 625.
to do good for evil, yielded him all favor, that with justice he might;
saying afterward merrily to his friends, he was much beholden to Sir Francis
Askew: for that had not he been, he must have lived a hedge-Priest all the
days of his life.

Verse. 31. Envy not the oppressor] That grows rich by unjust quarrels and
vexatious Law-sutes. It is not for nothing surely that our Savior, Luke 12.15.
after, Who made me a Judge? adds, Take heed and beware of covetousness:
Implying, that most men go to Law with a covetous o^ a vindictive mind: whereas
if they will needs wage Law, they should do it as Charles the French King made
war with our Henry the seventh, more desiring peace, than profit or victory. It
should be with men in this case, as it was with St. Austin and Hierom in their
Disputations; It was no matter who gained the day, they would both win by
understanding their errors.

Verse. 32. For the froward is abomination] The Vitilitigator, the Wrangler, the
Common-barreter, though he may prosper in the world, yet God cannot abide him,
his money will perish with him. He will one day say to his cursed heaps of
evil-gotten goods, as Charles the fifth, Emperor, Phil. Morn.
in his old age did of his victories, trophies, riches, honors; he cursed
them all, saying, Abite hinc, abite long. Avaunt, be packing, hence, away.

But his secret] They shall be of his Cabinet-councel, that choose rather to
lie in the dust, than to rise by evil arts, by wicked principles; such were
Joseph, Micaiah, Daniel, etc.

Verse. 33. In the house of the wicked] His wife, children, family, possessions;
all are accursed; his fine clothes have the plague in them: Or his house, which
is his Castle, the flying roll of Curses (that is ten yards long, and five
yards broad) shall remain in the midst of it, and consume it, Zach. 5.4.

But he blesses the habitation of the just] ^abvenaki, casam expouit and
tuguriolum egregio sensu, says Mercer. The poor little cottage or tenement of
the righteous, there is a blessing in it, there is contented godliness which is
greatest gain; the bessing of God which makes rich, (...). Here are the gods
(could the Philosopher say of his poor habitation, meaning his heathenish
household gods) what ever else is wanting to me. How much more may a Saint say
so of his God, who will awake for him, and make the habitation of his
righteousness prosperous? Job 8.6.

Verse. 34. Surely he scorneth the scorner] Those proud haughty scorners (
Prove. 21.24. with 1 Pet. 5.5.) who jeer at this Doctrine, Facit ut aliis siut
ludibrio, ubi in calamitatem incider^nt, Rab. Levi.
and at those that believe it. Surely God scorneth these scorners (for he
loves to retaliate) he that sits in heaven laughs a good at them, Psalm.
2.4. he makes them also (in his just judgment) a derision to others, and
punishes them with the common hatred of all; Contempt being a thing that man's
nature is most impatient of, and in carnal reason, Tallying of injuries is but
justice.

But he gives grace to the lowly] Though oppressed by scorners, yet shall
they be no losers, for God will give grace, and he will give glory, verse. 25.
(grace and glory? what things be these!) and no good thing will he withhold
from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.11. Humility is both a grace and a
vessel to receive grace. And as he that goes into a Pond or River to take up
water, puts the mouth of his vessel downward, and so takes it up: In like sort,
he that looks for any good from God, must put his mouth in the dust, and cry
out, Lord, I am not worthy, etc: Non sum digniis, at sum indigens. Psalm. 70.5.
I am poor and needy, make haste unto me, O God, etc.

Verse. 35. The wise shall inherit glory] Not have it only, but inherit it, Hoc
est proprio, perfecto and perpetuo jure possidebunt, as Pelican, they shall
have it as their proper, perfect, and perpetual right.

But shame shall be the promotion of fools] A fair promotion they come to, but
good enough for them, unless they were better. If they attain to high places
and preferments, these prove but as high Gibbets to bring them to more disgrace
in this world, and torment in the next. Some there be that read the Text thus,
But shame takes away the foolish; that is, it carries both them and their
hope away in a pinch of time, or twinkling of the eye, as it were.

CHAP. IV. Verse. 1. Hear ye Children]
AUdite se^em, juvenes, quem juvenem senes audierunt: Hear me now an old man,
O ye youths, whom old men once gladly heard, when I was but a youth; with this
speech Augustus pacified his mutinous Army.

-- Aspice, vultus
Sol Pha^tonti, apud Ovid. Me^.
Ecce meos, utinamque oculos in pectore posses
Inserere, and patrias intus deprendere curas.
Behold my looks; and O that thou could see
Mine anxious thoughts, and careful heart for thee!
Verse. 2. For I give you good Doctrine] The common cry is, who will show us any
good? and every man will lend both ears to a good bargain. The doctrine here
delivered is good every way (whether you look to the Author, Matter, or Effect
of it) and is therefore worthy of all men to be received, (...) a verbo (...)
quod est accipere.
as the Hebrew word here used for Doctrine, imports. The vulgar renders it,
Donum bonum tribuam vobis. I will give you a good gift, even that good part
that shall never be taken from you.

Verse. 3. For I was my Fathers Son] q. d. I that am now so famous for wisdom,
was once as wise as a wild Ass-colt. But I had the happiness to be taught and
tutoured by the best and wisest man in his generation, and therefore you should
the rather regard my Doctrine. Plato praised God that he was Pupil to Socrates,
Bucholcerus that he was bred under Melanchthon, Mr. What^ley under Mr. D^ds
Ministry, and I under Mr. Ballams at Evesham. Holy David was far beyond any of
these, as being divinely inspired, and rarely qualified. Such a heart so well
headed, and such a head better hearted, was not to be found among the sons of
men, for he was a man after Gods own heart; his counsel to his Son therefore
must needs be very precious and ponderous. See some of it for a taste, 1 Chronicles. 28.9, 10.

Tender, and only beloved] Filiu^ (...). The Greeks commonly called their
children (...), the Latin Chari, Darlings, as He in Plantus, Domi domitus fui
usque cum Charis meis. Plaut. Menech. Act. 1. Scen. 1.
I was hardly handled at home together with my dear children,

In the sight of my Mother] Who had other children, 1 Chronicles. 3. but Solomon
she loved best, because he had most grace. And as a special fruit of her love
she gave him excellent counsel in her Lemuels lesson, Prove. 31. His fall was
therefore the more blameworthy, because he had been so piously educated.

Verse. 4. He taught me also] As Cato taught his own children, and took it for
no disgrace, though so great a man. Nurture is as necessary for children as
nourishment, Ephesians. 6.4. which they that neglect to bestow upon them, are
peremptores potius quam parents, not Parents, but Paricides. One cause of
Julians Apostasy were his two heathenish Tutors, Libanius and Jamblicus, from
whom he drank in great profaneness. Doubtless David had Nathan the Prophet,
and the best he could get, to breed up his son in the best things, but yet so
as himself had a main stroke in the business.

And said unto mee] Jacobus Valentinus, and some others grounded an opinion
from these words, Praefat. in Cant. Canti^.
that Solomon received this whole Book of Proverbs following from his Father
David; but that is no way likely. The substance of his Fathers Doctrine, he
briefly sets forth in this, and the five following verses, and then proceeds in
his own words.

Retain my words] As the good stomach does food, as the good earth does seed,
that is* been occatum, and occultatum, says One.

Verse. 5. Get wisdom, get understanding] Compara sapientiam, compa^a
intelligentiam. So Chrysostom. Comparate saeculares, comparate vobis biblia,
animae pharmaca. Get you Bibles by all means, whatever they cost you: you may
better want bread, light, etc. than the knowledge of the Scriptures. Austin
makes mention of some that neglected the means of knowledge, because knowledge
puffs up; and so would be ignorant, that they might be humble, and want
knowledge, that they might want pride. This was to do as that foolish
Philosopher, that plucked out his eyes to avoid the danger of uncleanness; or as
the silly Friar, to whom Sir Thomas Moore wrote thus.

Tu been cavisti ne te ulla occidere possit
Litera: Nam nota est litera nulla tibi.
But men must get knowledge, and lest it puff them up, swelling them beyond
measure, they must get humility laid on as a weight to keep them down.

Forget it not] For so much a man learns as he remembers. The promise also of
salvation is limited to the condition of keeping in memory what we have
received, 1 Cor. 15.2.

Verse. 6. Forsake her not, etc.] Wisdom is her own reward: if she forsake us,
it is because the desertion is first on our part. But she cannot but be
justified of her own true children: falling stars were never but Meteors:
Temporaries were never Christians indeed. What wonder though some hold falling
from grace, since they mistake common grace for true grace? Hence Bellarmine
says, That which is true grace, veritate essentiae, only may be lost, not
that that is true veritate firmae soliditatis: which latter being rightly
understood, may be called special, as the other common grace.

Love her, and she shall keep thee] viz. From recidivation and utter Apostasy,
caused by the overflow of iniquity, Mat. 24.12. 2 These. 2.10, 11. This to
prevent, Let knowledge and affection, like two individual twins, grow up
together, and mutually transfuse spiritual vigor into each other.

Verse. 7. Wisdom is the principal thing] Say the world what it will, a dram of
this wisdom, is worth a pound of wit. Let others censure with the Scribes, let
me wonder with the multitude. And for wealth, he is rich, not that has the
world, but that can contemn it. As for honor, Magnos homina virtute meti^^tur
non fortun^ prudentes. Nepos. (...).
Virtue is a thousand Escuchious: And that is the true Nobility, whereof God is
the top of the kin, Religion the root: For without this, well may a man be
notable or notorious, but truly Noble he can never be. Lastly, For learning,
the Greeks express learned, and good, by one word, as if they were not learned
that are not good; and the Scripture calls a wicked man generally a fool.

With all thy getting get] With any pains, for any price. This gold cannot be
bought too dear. Make Religion thy business, other things do by the by: as
Aristotle studied Philosophy in the morning, that was his (...) but eloquence
in the afternoon, that was his (...). Or as Caesar swimming through the waters
to escape his enemies, Major fuit cura Casari libellorum quam purpura.
carried his books in his hand above the waters, but lost his robe.

Verse. 8. Exalt her, and she shall] Have an high and honorable esteem of her,
and her children. Rabbi Solomon, out of the Talmudists, renders it, search for
her, minutatim in ca singula consectans, do it diligently, as holding every
parcel of her precious, as men do the very filings of gold.

Verse. 9. A Crown of glory] The Psalmist shows by prophesying, Psalm. 138.4, 5.
and 119.72. that even Kings, coming to taste the excellency of the comforts of
godliness, and to feel the power of Gods Word, should sing for joy of heart,
and greatly acknowledge the excelling glory of God and godliness.

Verse. 10. Hear, O my Son, and receive] How slippery an age youth is, and how
easily it slips into sinful courses and companies the wise man well knew; and
therefore cease not to inculcate and repeat the same thing over and over.
Liquidae sunt puerorum memoria.

Verse. 11. I have led thee in right paths] Impii ambulant in circuitu, The
wicked walk the round, so does the Devil (that great Peripatetick) Job 1. How
long will thou go about, O thou backsliding daughter? Jer. 31.22. How long will thou run Retrograde, or turn aside unto crooked ways? Psalm. 125.5. The ways
of the Lord are right, and the righteous shall walk in them: but the
transgressors shall fall therein, Hos. 14.9.

Verse. 12. And when thou runnest] Having a good mixture of zeal and knowledge;
so that thy zeal does quicken thy knowledge, and thy knowledge guide thy zeal.
For that the soul be without knowledge, it is not good: And he that (so)
hastes with his feet (being indiscreetly zealous) sins, Prove. 19.2.

Thou shall not stumble] Or if thou do, thou shall recover thy stumbling, and
so get ground. But say thou do so stumble as to fall; in falling forwards is
nothing so much danger as backward. So he that is earnest in good, though he
may carry some things indiscreetly, yet is far better than an Apostate.

Verse. 13. Take fast hold of instruction] Nam magnum certamen sustines adversus
haereticos and Epicureos, says a Jew-Doctor upon this Text, Heretics and
Epicures will seek to wring it from thee, by wrench and wile. Therefore hold
fast the faithful word, as thou have been taught, Tit. 1.9. Hold it as with
tooth and nail, against those gain-fayers, that would snatch it from thee. For
th^^^ are many unruly and vain talkers, etc. and so there are many loose and
lewd walkers too, that would bereave thee of the benefit of what thou have
learned: but hold fast that which is good: Let it not go, Ne languescas,
furcease not, slake not, give not over striving against sin and sinners.

Verse. 14. Enter not into the path of the wicked] Qui male vivunt, and pejus
credunt, says One, which live ill, and believe worse. Qui aquo animo malis
immiscetur, malus est, says another. He that is well content to keep company
with those that are naught, Fullers holy state. 162.
is himself naught. The River Dee in Merionith-shire, running thorough
Pimblo-meer, remains entire, and mingles not her streams with the waters of the
Lake. See 1 Cor. 5.9, 10, 11.

(...) incessit felicitavit. Ita (...) and (...) Gracis, Ga^^. (...).
And g^ not in the way] Ne tibi plac^^^ via malorum; So the Vulgar. Think not
thy self happy in their company, applaud not their way. Verbum ^undi
significationem felicitatis habet in multis linguis. The Hebrew word to go
signifies also to be happy: and Solomon happily here would take it in both
senses.

Verse. 15. Avoid it, pass not by it] As ye would not come near a
carrion-carkass, as the Seaman shuns sands and shelves (the Apostles simile, 2
These. 3.6.) as ye would be loath to come near those that have the plague-fore
running upon them. Evil men endanger good men, as weeds the Corn, as bad humors
the blood, or as an infected house the neighborhood. Nemo errat sibi ipsi,
Seneca.
sed dementiam spargit in proximos. Intireness with wicked Consorts is one of
the strongest chains of Hell, and binds us to a participation both of sin and
punishment. Hence so many words about it here: Abundans caut^la, etc. This heap
of words is not without great use and emphasis: there is earnestness, and not
looseness in this repetition.

Verse. 16. For they sleep not] So much are they set upon it: Or as empty
stomachs can hardly sleep, so neither can graceless persons rest, till gorged
and glutted with the sweetmeats of sin, with the murthering-morcels of
mischief. The Devil their task-master will not allow them time to sleep: Which
is very hard bondage: they have eyes full of Adultery, and that cannot cease to
sin. 2 Pet. 2.


Unless they cause some to f^ll] Protagoras (as Plato relates) boasted of
this, that whereas he had lived threescore years, forty of them he had spent
in corrupting of young men that conversed with him.

Verse. 17. For they eat the bread of wickedness] As Tartarians feed upon dead
carcasses of Horses, Asses, Cars, Dogs, yea when they stink, and are full of
Magots, P^tcham valley of V^n.
and hold them as dainty as we do Venison. As Spiders feed upon Acomite; as
Mithridates, and the Maid in Pliny, upon Spiders, or as the Turkish
Gally-slaves upon Opium; they will eat near an ounce at a time, as if it were
bread (the tithe whereof would kill him that is not accustomed to it) and can
neither sleep nor live without it.

Verse. 18. But the path of the just is as the shining light] He sets forth
betime in the morning, and travels to meet the day: He proceeds from virtue to
virtue, till at length he shine as the Sun in his strength, Mat. 13.

Verse. 19. Is as darkness] That little light they had by nature they imprison,
(...). Romans 1.18.
Romans 1. and are justly deprived of. And as for those sparkles of the light of
joy and comfort that hypocrites have, it is but as a flash of lightning which
is followed with a thunderclap, or like the light smitten out of the flint:
first, they cannot warm themselves by it, not see to direct their ways. 2. It
will quickly go out. 3. And after that, they must lie down in sorrow, Isa.
50.10.

They know not at what they stumble] They stumble sometimes at Christ himself,
1 Pet. 2.8. and at his word, being disobedient; whereunto also they were
appointed. A shrewd sign of reprobation. The Vulgar renders it, Ne sciunt ubi
corruant, They know not how soon they may drop into Hell, which even gapes for
them, Isa. 29.33.

Verse. 20. My Son, attend to my words] Still he calls for attention, as
knowing our dullness, and sickle headedness. It fated with the Prophet Zachary
as with a drowsy person, who though awaked and set to work, is ready to sleep
at it, Zach. 4.1. It fares with many of us, as with little children, who though
saying their Lessons, yet must needs look off, to see the feather that flies by
them.

Verse. 21. Let them not depart] See the Note on Chapter 3.21.

In the midst of thy heart] As in a safe Repository, a ready repertory.

Verse. 22. For they are life] See the Note on Chap. 3.22. and on Chap. 3.16.

And health unto all their flesh] Sin is the cause of sickness, 1 Cor. 11.20.
Joh. 5.14. Sin no more, le^t a worse thing come unto thee. But the joy of the
Lord is a man's strength, Neh. 8.10. and such a merry heart does good, like a
medicine, Prove. 17.22. As sin is an universal sickness, Isa. 1.5, 6. like those
diseases wherein Physicians say, are corruption totius substantiae, a corruption
of the whole substance, as the Heretic, etc. So Grace is a Catholicon, a
general cure, like the herb Panace, which is said to be good for all diseases:
whence also, A (...) and (...).
says Pliny, it has its name.

Verse. 23. Keep thy heart] Filth-free, as much as may be: keep a constant
counterguard against all inroads made by flesh, world and Devil. Keep the heart
always supple and soluble; for else thou can not be long in spiritual
health. Quod sanitas in corpore, id sanctitas in cord. Keep it ever well in
tune, and then all shall go well. If in a Vio^ I find the trebble-string in
tune, I make no question of the base; that goes not out so easily: So here.

For out of it are the issues of life] That is, as of natural, so of spiritual
actions. Hinc ^ons boni and peccandi origo, says Hierome. It is the fountain,
Mat. 15.19. the root, Mat. 7.17, 18. the treasury or storehouse, Luke 6.49.
the Primum mobil^, the great wheel, the Pharos that commands the Haven, the
chief Monarch in this Isle of Man, that gives Laws to all the Members, Romans 7.
Keep it therefore with all custody, or with all caution: or if the Devil cast
poison into it (as he will) cleanse it after. It is in vain to purge the
stream, where the spring is defiled: but if the spring be clear, the streams
will soon clear themselves.

Verse. 24. Put away from thee a froward mouth] To the keeping of the heart, a
careful watching over the mouth, eyes, feet, etc. does much conduce: For these
outward parts abused, as they receive defilement from the heart, so they
reflect defilement also upon it. They stain the soul, and dispose it to further
evil. Christ had a pure heart; therefore his eyes were not bewitched, not his
ears enchanted, neither was there any guile found in his m^uth.

And perverse lips put far from thee] Because it is a duty of no small
difficulty, James 3.2, 3, etc. therefore he redoubleth his Exhortation. The
words of the wise are as nails fastened, etc. E^cles. 12.1.

Verse. 25. Let thine eyes look right on] E regione, vel in rectum, Let them be
fixed upon right objects. Get that Stoical eye of our Savior, get a Patriarks
eye, be well skilled in Moses his Optics, Heb. 11.27. have oculum in metam,
which was Ludovicus Vives his Motto. Do as Mariners, that have their eye on the
Star, their hand on the Stern. A man may not look intently upon that that he
may not love. Mat. 24.2.
The Disciples were set a gogge by beholding the beauty of the Temple. If
therefore thine eye offend thee (or cause thee to offend) pull it out of the
old Adam, and set it in the new man. If thou use it not well, thou will wish
that thou had pulled it out indeed, as Democritus did.

Verse. 26. Ponder the path of thy feet] Viz. By the weights of the word. Look
to thine affections; for by these Maids Satan wooes the Mistress. Take heed
where you set Gunpowder, (...).
fith fire is in your hearts. Austin thanks God that his heart and the
temptation did not meet together. Walk accurately, tread right, Gal. 2.14. step
warily, lift not up one foot, till you find firm footing for another, as
those, Psalm. 35.6. The way of this world is like the vale of Siddim, slimy and
slippery. Cavete. We have an Eve, a Tempter (each one) within us, our own
flesh, says Bernard. And Nem^ sibi de suo palpet: quisque sibi Satan est,
says another Father, we have enough to watch for our halting: the Devil also
casts his club at us, that we may stumble and fall, and be broken, and
snared, and taken, Isa. 8.15.

Verse. 27. Turn not to the right] Keep the Kings highway, keep within Gods
precincts, Cic. in Offic.
and ye keep under his protection. The Heathen Orator could say, A recta
conscientia ne latum quidem nugnem discedendum. A man may not depart an
hairs-bredth all his life long from the dictates of a good conscience.

Remove thy foot from evil] Bestir thee no otherwise than if thou had trod
upon a Snake. Abhor that which is evil, Romans 12.9. abstain from all appearance,
all shows and shadows of it, 1 These. 5.22. Run from the occasions of it; come
not near the doors of her house, Prove. 5.8.

CHAP. V. Verse 1. My Son, attend unto my Wisdom.]
ARistotle could say, that young men are but cross and crooked hearers of moral
Philosophy, and have much need to be stirred up to diligent attendance. Ethic.
lib. 7. cap. 3, 4.
Fornication is by many of them held a peccadillo: And Aristotle spares not to
confess the disability of moral wisdom to rectify the intemperance of nature:
which also he made good in his practice; for he used a common strumpet to
satisfy his lust.

Verse. 2. That thou may regard discretion] Or, that thou may keep in thy
thoughts, as Job did, Chap. 31.1. Why then should I think upon a Maid? Out of
the hearts of men proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, etc. says
our Savior, Mark. 7.21. Many men's hearts are no better than stews and
brothel-houses, Psalm. 104.
by reason of base and beastly thoughts and lusts that muster and swarm there,
like the flies of Egypt. There is that Leviathan, and there are creeping
things innumerable. Yea, the hypocrite, who outwardly abstains from gross sins,
yet inwardly consents with the thief, and partaketh with the Adulterer, that
is, in his heart and fancy, supposing himself with them; and desiring to do
what they do, Psalm. 50.18, 19. This is mental adultery, this is contemplative
wickedness. So it is also to recall former filthiness with delight, Ezekiel.
23.21. She multiplied her whoredoms in calling to remembrance the days of
her youth, wherein she had played the harlot. Surely as a man may dye of an
inward bleeding; so may he be damned for these inward boilings of lust and
concupiscence, if not bewailed and mortified, Jer. 4 14. The thoughts of the
wicked are abominable to the Lord. Prove. 15.26. To look and lust is to commit
Adultery, Matthew. 5.28. Therefore desire not her beauty in thy heart. Prove. 6.25.

And that thy lips may keep knowledge] As Joseph did in answering his wanton
Mistress, Genesis 39. as he in St. Austin did, that replied to his minions, Ego
sum, It is I, At ego non sum, but it is not I.

Verse. 3. For the lips of a strange woman drop] Take heed therefore how thou
exchange any words at all with her. But if thou be first set upon, Jun in vita
sua.
as Joseph was by his Mistress, and as Franciscus Junius was by those impudent
Queans at Lions in France (whither he was sent by his Father for
learning-sake) who night and day solicited him; then to keep thee from the
bitter-sweet lips of these Enchantresses, let thy lips keep knowledge, answer
them (as Joseph did) with the words of truth and soberness, Act. 26.25. with
gracious and wholesome words, 1 Timothy 6.3. such as have a cooling and healing
property in them, with Scripture Language, which the Devil and his Agents
cannot answer or away with. When therefore thou art tempted to this of any like
sin, say, No; I may not, I dare not; for it is forbidden in such a place, and
again in such a place, How then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against
God? Genesis 39.9. Lo this is the way, walk in it. Let thy lips keep knowledge,
and it shall keep thee from the lips of a strange woman, though they drop as an
honeycomb, and seem to have plenty of pleasure and sweetness in them.

Drop as an hony-comb] But is like that honey spoken of by Pliny, that had
poison in it, as being sucked out of poisonous herbs and flowers. In the Cadiz
voyage, at Alvelana three miles from Lisbon, many of our English Soldiers
under the Earl of Essex perished by eating of honey, purposely left in the
houses, and spiced with poison, as it was thought. Speed. 12.10.
How much better is it to be preserved in brine, than to rot in honey? to
mortify lusts, than to enjoy them? Romans 8.13. Voluptatem vicisse voluptas est
maxima, says Cyprian, nec ulla major est victoria, quam ea, quae e
cupiditatibus refertur. De bon^ pudicit.
There is no such pleasure, as to have overcome an offered pleasure; neither is
there any greater conquest, than that that is gotten over a man's corruptions.

Verse. 4. But her end is bitter as wormwood] The pleasure passes, In amore
^^iltum est amari.
the sting remains; for in the froth of this filthy pleasure is bred that
hell-worm of guilt that never dies.

Principium dulce est, sed finis amoris amarus:
Laeta venire Venus, tristis abire solet.
Diana of the Ephesians was so artificially pourtrayed, that she seemed to
smile most pleasantly upon such as came into her Temple, Dulcis acerbita^
amarissima voluptas. Tertul.
but to frown at those that went out: So does sensual pleasure. Heus tu
scholastice, dulce and amarum gustulum carpis, etc. said the Harlot to
Apuleius. Hark Scholar, it is but a bitter sweet that you are so fond of. Plus
aloes quam mellis habet, know thou not that there will be bitterness in the
end? Speed, Walsing.
The Chroniclers have observed of our Edward the third, that he had always
fair weather at his passage into France, and foul upon his return: Such is the
way of the Harlot: The sin committed with her is as the poison of Aspes. When
an Asp stings a man, Plutarch.
it does first tickle him so as it makes him laugh, till the poison by little
and little get to the heart, and then it pains him more than ever before it
delighted him. See Luke 6.25. and 16.25. Heb. 12.15, 16. Job 13.26. Eccles.
7.27, 28.

Verse. 5. Her feet go down to death] The Romans were wont to have their
Funerals at the gates of Venus Temple, to signify that lust was the harbinger,
Plutarch.
and hastener of death, says Plutarch. As for Whores, they were of old shut
out of the City, and forced to seek places among the graves. Lib. Advers. 13.19.
Hence they were called Maechae bustuariae; de scortis dictum inter busta
prostrantibus, says Turnebus. See the Note on Chap. 2.18.

Her steps take hold on hell] Whither she is hastening, and hurrying with her
all her stallions and paramours. (See the Note on Chap. 2.18, 19.) and where,
by how much more deliciously they have lived, by so much more they shall have
of sorrow and torment, Rev. 18.7.

Verse. 6. Lest thou should ponder] q. d. Lest thou should persuade thy
self that thou may embrace the bosom of a stranger, and yet lay hold upon
the paths of life by repenting thee of thy folly (this was Solomon's error
sometimes, Eccles. 1.17. and 2.3.) thou art utterly deceived herein, for her
ways are moveable, so that thou observest not whither she tends, she
wanders here and there (and thou with her) yet not so wide as to miss of hell;
lo that is the center whereunto she is rolling, that is the rendezvous for all
her associates in sin.

Verse. 7. O ye children] See Chap. 4.1. Shechem though at ripeness of age, yet
is called a child, Genesis 39.19. Neque distulit puer. And the young man (or the
child) deferred not to do the thing. A child he is called, that is, a fool,
quia non ratione sed affectu rapitur, says an Interpreter, because not reason,
but lust over-ruld him. Vere^.
As for thee, thou shall be as one of the fools in Israel, said she to her
libidinous brother Amnon, 1 Samuel 23.13.

Verse. 8. Remove thy way far from her] The Jesuits boast (but believe them who
will) that they can dally with the fairest women without danger. But he that
would not be burnt, must dread the fire: He that would not hear the bell,
must not meddle with the rope.

Quid facies facies Veneris cum veneris ante?
Non sedeas, sed eas; ne pereas, per eas.
Romans 13.13. Exodus 23.7.
Chambering and wantonness, is a deed of darkness and dishonesty.

Come not nigh the doors] Keep thee far from an evil matter, says Moses; The
plague (and worse) is at the Harlots house; (...). 1 Timothy 6.
stand off. To venture upon the occasion of sin, and then to pray, Lead us not
into temptation, is all one, as to thrust thy finger into the fire, and then to
pray that it may not be burnt. Was not he a wise man that would haunt
Taverns, Theaters, and Whore-houses at London all day, Sheph. Sincere convert.
232.
but yet durst not go forth without private prayer in the morning, and then
would say at his departure, Now Devil do thy worst?

Verse. 9. Lest thou give thine honour] i. e. Whatsoever within thee, or without
thee, may make thee honorable or esteemed, as the flower of thine age, the
comeliness of thy body, the excellency of thy wit, thy possibility of
preferment, that good opinion that the better sort had of thee, etc. How was
David slighted by his own children and servants after he had thus sinned?
Confer, 1 Samuel 2.30. with 2 Samuel 12.10. Chastity is a man's honor, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4.

Castus quasi (...) ornatus. (...) ab (...) v^^erabilis. Deuteronomy. 32.33.
And their years] i. e. according to some, thy wealth, that thou have been many
years in gathering, (...) quasi (...).

To the cruel] That is, to the harlot, and her bastardly brood, whom thou must
maintain. The Hebrews expound it of the Devil. To the cruel, i. e. Principi
gehennae, says Solomon, Angelo mortis, says another, to the Prince of Hell,
to this Angel of Death; Aczar the Hebrew word properly signifies (says one)
the poison of the Asp, which paineth not at first, but is deadly.

Verse. 10. Lest strangers be filled] This sin is a purgatory to the purse,
though a paradise to the desires. How soon had the Prodigal ((...) quasi (...))
wasted his portion when once he fell among Harlots (those sordida poscinummia,
Luke 15.
those crumenimulgae?) Ask me never so much gift, and I will give it, said
Shechem, Genesis 34.12. what pledge shall I give thee? and she said, Thy signet,
thy bracelets, etc. Genesis 37.18. and if she had asked more, she might have had
it. Ask what thou will, and it shall be given thee, said Herod to his dancing
Damosel: Nay, he swear to her, that whatsoever she should ask, he would give
it her to the half of his Kingdom, Mar. 6.22. so strongly was he enchanted
and bewitched with her tripping on the toe, and wanton dancing, This detestable
sin is able to destroy Kings, as Solomon's Mother taught him. Prove. 31.3. (...)
tripudiabat Baccharum m^re.
And surely Solomon by the many women that he kept, was so exhausted in his
estate (for all his great riches) that he was forced to oppress his subjects
with heavy taxes and tributes, which occasioned the revolt of ten Tribes. The
whore lies in wait for a prey, Prove. 23.20. and by means of a whorish woman, a
man is brought to a morsel of bread, to extreme beggary, Prove. 6.26.

Verse. 11. And thou mourn at the last] Heb. And thou roar, Zeph. 3.5.
as being upon the rack of an evil conscience, and in the suburbs of Hell, as
it were: whiles the just Lord makes thee, even here, possess the sins of thy
youth, and writes bitter things against thee. The word signifies to roar as a
Lion, or as the Sea, (...) est m^rit agitatio. Hom. Iliad. H. vide Eustath.
Venus ab antiquis (...) dicta.
or as the Devil does. For the Devils believe and tremble, or roar, James 2.19.
Grecians ascribe the Original (...) to the roaring of the Sea.

When thy flesh and thy body] By the word here rendered body, there are that
understand the radical humor, the natural moisture that maintains life: and is
much impaired by this sensual sin. Avicenna doubted not to say, that the
emission of a little seed more than the body could well bear, was a great deal
more hurtful, than the loss of forty times so much blood; Gouts, Palsies,
Epilepsies, etc. often follow upon this sin: But the French disease is the
natural fruit of it, such as will stick by men when their best friends forsake
them. Jesabel is cast into a bed, and they that commit adultery with her, into
great tribulation, Rev. 2.20. The Popish libidinous Clergy are smitten with
ulcers, Rev. 16.11. Their Pope Paul the fourth died, ex nimio Veneris usu,
Runius de vit. Pontif.
says the Historian, by wasting his strength in filthy pleasure, as the flame
consumes the candle.

Verse. 12. And say, How have I hated, etc.] When cast out with the Prodigal,
and has nothing left him but a diseased body, a distressed soul, then all too
late, he fills the air with doleful complaints of his former folly, and cries
out as he did, Totum vitae meae tempus perdidi, quia perdite vixi. Bern.
O what a wretch, what a beast, what a madded Devil was I, so woefully to waste
the fat and marrow of my dear and precious time, the flower of mine age, the
strength of my body, the vigor of my spirits, the whole of mine estate, in
sinful pleasures, and sensual delights, etc. Lo here is a kind of repentance,
Nunquam sero si serio.
which though late, yet if it were true, would be accepted. The Mole, they
say, begins to see when he dies, and not till then. Oculos incipit aperire
moriendo, quos clausos habuit vivendo. But it is a rare thing, and seldom
seen, To stat. ex Plinio. Eccles. 7.28.
that any whoremonger does truly repent. One such man among a thousand have I
found, says Solomon (perhaps he meant himself) but a woman among all those
have I not found. And yet Scultetus tells us, that Dr. Speiser Minister of
Ansborough in Germany, preached there so powerfully, Anno 1523. Scultet. Annal.
page 118.
that the common harlots there tolerated, left their filthy trade of life, and
became very honest women.

And my heart despised reproof] Experience shows, that they that are once given
up to this sin, are more graceless, profane, and incorrigible than others,
deriders and contemners of all good counsel, having lost even the very light of
nature, and so set in their sin, and so wedded and wedged to their wicked
ways, as that they cannot be removed, but by an extraordinary touch from the
hand of Heaven.

Verse. 13. Nor inclined mine ear] I would not so much as hear them, much less
obey their voice. Intus existens prohibet alienum. The songs of those Sirens
had so enchanted him, that it was past time of day to give him counsel. If you
speak against his sweet sin, and dissuade him from that, he shrinks back into
the shell, and lets his hood hearken. All that is of Davy Duttons dream, (as
the proverb is) and therefore Surdo fabulam, he will in no wise give ear to
you.

Verse. 14. I was almost in all evil] Abraham Ben-Hezra reads it in the future
tense, Brevi ero in omni malo, I shall shortly be in all evil: and so his
repentance here appears to be poenitentia sera, Iscariotica, such as was that
of Judas, and of those Popelings, Rev. 18.19. a desperate repentance, and not
toward God, Act. 20.21. not a repentance for sin, as it is offen sivum Dei, and
aversivum a Deo, an offense against God, and a turning away from him. Such a
repentance in this man had been, Plut. in Pom
(as the Romans said of Pompey) (...), a fair and happy daughter of an ugly and
odious Mother, of his sin I mean, the sight whereof had sent him to Christ.

In the midst of the Congregation] i. e. openly and before all men. And this
he brings as an aggravation of his misery, that there were so many
eyewitnesses thereof. No unclean person can have any assurance that his sin
shall always be kept secret, no not in this life. The Lord has often brought
such (sometimes by terror of conscience, sometimes by frenzy) to that pass,
that themselves have been the blazers and proclaimers of their own secret
filthiness. Hildersh. on John 4.
Yea obseve this (says One) in them that are the cunningest in this sin, that
(though no body peradventure can convince them evidently of the fact) yet every
body (through the just judgment of God) condemns them for it. As the Lord
sees their secretest villainies, even so oft-times he testifies against them,
according to that which he threatens, Mal. 3.5. I will be a swift witness
against the adulterers.

Verse. 15. Drink waters out of thine own Cistern] After other preservatives
from fornication (as not to think of, or speak with the harlot, not to come
near the doors of her house, etc. but to consider of the many mischiefs that
follow upon it, a diseased body, a damned soul, a poor purse, etc.) Here the
Wiseman prescribes wedlock as a remedy properly ordained by God for that end,
1 Cor. 7.2, 9. And because not the having of a wife, but the loving of her
keeps a man honest; therefore it follows, verse. 19. Let her ^ee as the loving
Hind, etc.

And running waters] Heathen writers also set forth a wife by waters: as Hesiod
bids men not to pass over a running water without prayers to the Gods; Hesiod.
in Ergis.
that is, not to render unto their wives due benevolence, till they have sought
God, as Johannes Grammaticus interprets it. A pious Precept, Marriage as well
as meats must be sanctified by the word and prayer: and God be called in to
bless this physic to the soul. Lust makes the heart hot and thirsty: God
therefore sends men to this Well, to this Cistern, Confer Isa. 65.1. The
Hebrews call a woman (...) i. e. perforata, Genesis 1.27.

Verse. 16. Let thy fountains be dispersed.] Thy fountains, that is, thy
children: Let thine end in marrying be, that thou may have a numerous
offspring, that may be as an Infantry to the Kingdom of Heaven. Lawful
Marriage is usually blessed with many children: and the contrary, Hos. 4.10.
Erasmus tells of one Comb, Erasm. in chiliad.
a young woman in Euboea, that being married to one whom she liked, became
Mother and Grandmother to a hundred children. Erasm. de instit. matrim.
The same Author tells of an English man, a cripple, that married a blind
woman, lived very lovingly with her, and had by her twelve lusty boys that had
no defect or deformity.

Verse. 17. Let them be only thine own] Siut, vel erunt, let them be, or they
shall be: It is both an exhortation and a promise; q. d. Far be it from thee
to be a pander to thine own bed (as the Lituanians, of whom Maginus relates,
that they have their connubii adjutores, their coadjutours in wedlock, and
prize them far above all their acquaintance:) God also will bless thee with an
honest wife, that shall be true to thy bed, and not obtrude upon thee children
to keep, that are not thine. Saint Paul gives charge, that no man go beyond,
Hieronym. Chrysostom. Heinsius.
or defraud his brother in the matter, that is, in re Venerea, in the matter of
the marriage bed (as some expound it) but that every one possess his vessel,
that is (say they) his wife, that weaker vessel, in sanctification and honor,
1 These. 4.4, 5, 6.

Verse. 18. Let thy fountain be blessed] Or thy fountain shall be blessed, thy
wife shall be fruitful, as Psalm. 128. that Psalm for Solomon, whose many wives
brought him but few children. We read but of one Son that he had (who was
none of the wisest neither) and two daughters, both of them subjects. Our Henry
the 8th. (though blameworthy for women too) was more happy in King Edward his
Son (that Orbis deliciae) and his two Daughters, both Sovereigns of an Imperial
Crown.

Rejoice with the wife of thy youth] As Isaac did, who was the most loving
husband that we read of in holy-writ. Ezechiels wife was the delight of his
eyes, he took singular complacency in her company. This conjugal joy is the
fruit of love, which therefore he commends to all married men, in the next
words.

Verse. 19. Let her be as the loving Hind, etc.] The Hind and the Roe are the
females of the Heart and Roebuck: of which creatures it is noted, Inter utrumque
ardor amoris summus, ut Oppianus de cervis agens scribit.
that of all other beasts they are most inamoured (as I may so speak) with
their mates, and even mad again in their heat, and desire after them. This
being taken in a good sense, may set forth the ardent affection that husbands
should bear to the wives of their bosoms; so they are called too, because they
should be as dear to them, as the hearts in their bosoms. A wife is the most
proper object of love, Col. 3.18. above Parent, Friend, Child, or any other,
though never so dear to us.

And be thou ravished alwaies] Heb. Err thou always in her love: Mercer.
velut extra te sis and rerum aliarum obliviscare. It implies (says one) a
lawful earnest affection, so as, first, to oversee some blemishes and defects!
Love is blind. In facie naevus causa decoris erit. Secondly, so highly to
esteem her, Ovid.
and so lovingly to comport with her, that others may think him even to dote on
her. Howbeit muli^rosity must be carefully avoided, as a harmful error: and
that saying of Hierome duly pondered and believed, Quisquis in uxorem ardentior
est amator, adulter est. As a man may be drunk with his own drink, and a
glutton by excessive devouring of his own meat: so likewise one may be unclean
by the intemperate or intempestive abuse of the marriage bed: which ought by no
means to be stained or dishonored with sensual excesses.

Verse. 20. And why will thou my Son] The premises considered, there is no
reason for it, but all against it. Nothing is more irrational than irreligion,
and yet nothing more usual with the Devil than to persuade his vassals that
there is some sense in sinning, and that they have reason to be mad. And
truly, though there were no Devil, yet our corrupt nature would act Satan's part
against it self: it would have a supply of wickedness (as a Serpent has of
poison) from it self, it has a spring within to feed it. Nitimur in vetitum
semper, petimusque negata. Nothing would serve the rich man's turn, but the poor
man's Lamb; if Ahab may not have Naboths Vineyard, he has nothing. The more
God forbids any sin, the more we bid for it, Romans 7.8. Nay but we will have a
King said they, when they had nothing else to say why they would.

Verse. 21. For the ways of man, etc.] Turpe quid acturus te sine test time.
Aus^^.
A man that is about any evil, should stand in awe of himself, how much more of
God? since he is (...), All eye, and beholds the secretest of thine actions:
The Proverb is, Si non cast, saltem caute, carry the matter, if not honestly,
yet so closely and cleanly, that the world may be never the wiser. How
cunningly did David art it to hide his sin? but it would not be: there is
nothing covered that shall not be revealed, Luke 12.2. If I make my bed in
Hell (said he, Psalm. 139.8. as indeed the places where fornicatours use to
lodge are little better) Behold thou art there: This God alleges as a
forcible reason against this sin, Jer. 13.27. I have seen the lewdness of thy
whoredoms. And Jer. 29.23. Even I know, and am a witness, says the Lord.

Verse. 22. His own iniquities shall take the wicked] As so many Sergeants set
on by God: who will surely hamper these unruly beasts (that think to shift and
escape his fingers) with the cords of their own sins, binding them hand and
foot, and bringing them to condign punishment. So that, say the Adulterer be
not punished by the Magistrate, or come off by commutation, yet he shall feel
himself in the gall of bitterness, and bond of perdition, he shall find that
he has made a halter to hang himself. No body can be so torn with stripes, as
a mind is with the remembrance of wicked actions. Tiberius felt the remorse of
conscience so violent, that he protested to the Senate, Taci.
that he suffered death daily.

Verse. 23. He shall dye without instruction] To spend the span of this
transitory life after the ways of ones own heart, is to perish for ever. But
oh what mad men are they that bereave themselves of a room in that City of
Pearl, for a few dirty delights, and carnal pleasures!

CHAP. VI. Verse. 1. My Son, if thou be Surety]
THe wiseman having exhorted his Son to marry, rather than burn, and to
nourish a family, rather than to haunt Harlots houses, to the end that he may
show himself a good Oeconomick, and provide for the comfortable subsistence of
wife and children, he bids him here beware, 1 Of unadvised suretiship. 2 Of
idleness, two great enemies to thrift, without which there can be no good house
kept. The royalty of Solomon could not have consisted for all his riches,
without forecast and frugality.

Verse. 2. Thou art snared] i. e. Endangered to slavery or poverty, or both.
Hence the proverb, Sponde, noxa praesto est: Give thy word, and thou art not
far from a mischief. Shun therefore suretiship, if fairly thou can: or if
not, propound the worst, and undertake for no more than thou can well perform
without thy very great prejudice: ne, ut leo cassibus irretitus dixeris, Si
praescivissem? lest thou being got into the hamble trambles come in too late
with thy tools Had I wist.

Thou art taken] For a bargain binds a man by the Law of Nature, and of
Nations. Judah, though in a shameful business, would make good his engagement
to the Harlot, Genesis 38.23. Every godly man will do so, though it be to his own
hinderance, Psalm. 15.4. The Romans had a great care always to perform their
word; insomuch that the first Temple built in Rome was dedicated to the
goddess Fidelity. The Athenians were so careful this way, that Atticus testis
is used for one that keeps touch; and Attica fides is sure hold; as contrarily,
Punica fides, there was no hold to be taken of Carthaginian promises. Of a
certain Pope and his Nephew, it is said, that the one never spoke as he
thought, the other never performed what he spoke. Romans 13.
This was small to their commendation. Debt is a burden to every well-minded
man, neither can he be at rest, till he come to Owe nothing to any man but
this, that ye love one another. When Archbishop Cranmer discerned the storm
which afterward fell upon him in Queen Mary's days, Act. and Mon. vol. 2. p.
1541.
he took express order for the payment of all his debts, and engagements;
which when it was once done, a most joyful man was he, says Master Fox in his
life. For bills and obligations do mancipate the most free and ingenuous
spirit, and so put a man out of aim, that he can neither serve God without
distraction, nor do good to others, nor set his own state in any good order;
but lives and dies entangled and puzzled with cares and snares; and after a
tedious and laborious life passed in a circle of fretting thoughts, he leaves
at last, instead of better patrimony, a world of intricate troubles to his
posterity, who are also taken with the words of his mouth.

Verse. 3. When thou art come into the hand] For the borrower is servant to the
lender, Hieron. ad Celantiam.
Prove 22.7. And Facile ex amico inimicum facies cui promissa non reddes, says
Hierom. A friend will soon become a foe, if unfriendly and unfaithfully dealt
with. Not keeping time makes a jarre in payments (and so in friendship too) as
well as in Music.

Ezekiel. 32.2. and 34.18.
Go, humble thy self] Crave favor and further time of the Creditour: say,
Doubt not of your debt, only forbear a while. Cast thy self at his feet, as to
be trodden (so the Hebrew word here signifies) Stick not at any submission,
so thou may gain time, and get off, and not be forced to run into the
Usurers Books, that Amalec or licking people, which as Cormorants fall upon the
borrowers, and like Cur-doggs, suck your blood only with licking, and in the
end kill you, and crush you, rob you, and ravish you, Psalm. 10.8, 9, 10.

And make sure thy friend] For whom thou stand engaged; call upon him to
save thee harmless. For as Alphius the Usurer sometimes said of his Clients,
Horat. Epod. Colum. de re rust. l. 1. c 7.
Optima nomina non appellando mala fieri; Even good Debtors will prove slack
pay-masters if they be let alone, if not now and then called upon. Some read
the words thus: Multiply thy friends, or solicit them, viz. to intercede for
thee to the Creditor, and to keep thee out of this brake.

Verse. 4. Give not sleep to thine eyes, etc.] Augustus wondered at a certain
Knight in Rome, that owed much, and yet could sleep securely; Dio.
and when this Knight dyed, he sent to buy his bed, as supposing there was
something more than ordinary in it, to procure sleep. The opportunity of
liberty and thriving is to be well husbanded, lest some storm arising from the
cruelty of Creditors, or mutability of outward things, over-whelm a man with
debt and danger, as the whirlwind does the unwary traveller upon the Alps with
snow. Now if such care be to be taken that we run not rashly in debt to men,
how much more to God? If to undertake for others be so dangerous, how should
we pray with that godly man, August.
From my other-mens sins good Lord deliver me? If we are so to humble our
selves to our fellow creatures in this case, how much more should we humble
our selves under the mighty hand of God, Jam. 4.10.
that he may lift us up in due season? If this be to be done without delay,
where the danger reaches but to the outward man; how much more speed and
earnestness should be used in making peace with God, whose wrath is a fire
that burns as low as hell, and getting the black lines of our sins drawn over
with the red lines of his Sons blood; and so utterly razed out of the book of
his remembrance?

Verse. 5. As a Roe from the hand, etc.] This creature may be taken, but not
easily tamed: It seeks therefore by all means to make escape, Called. Paraph. in
Cant. 8.14.
and when it flees, looks behind it, holding it no life, if not at liberty.

And as a bird] A most fearful creature, and desirous of liberty, Nititur in
sylvas quaeque redire suas.
that Avis Paradisi especially, that being taken, never gives over groaning,
till let go again.

Verse. 6. Go to the Ant thou sluggard] Man that was once the Captain of Gods
School, is now (for his truantliness) turned down into the lowest form, as it
were, to learn his A b c again, yea to be taught by these meanest creatures.
So Christ sends us to School to the birds of the air, and Lilies of the field,
to learn dependence upon divine Providence, Matthew. 6. and to the Stork, Crane,
and Swallow, to be taught to take the seasons of Grace, and not to let slip
the opportunities that God puts into our hands, Jer. 8.7. This poor
despicable creature the Ant, is here set in the chair to read us a Lecture of
sedulity and good husbandry. What a deal of grain gets she together in Summer?
What pains does she take for it, laboring not by daylight only, but by
Moonshine also? What huge heaps has she? What care to bring forth her store,
and lay it a drying on a Sunshine day, left with moisture it should putrify,
etc. Not only Aristotle, Aelian, and Pliny, but also Basil, Ambrose, and
Hierom have observed and written much of the nature and industry of this poor
creature; telling us withal, that in the Ant, Be, Stork, etc. God has set
before us, as in a picture, the lively resemblance of many excellent virtues,
which we ought to pursue and practice. These, says One, are very laicorum
libri, the true Laymens books, the images that may teach men the right
knowledge of God, and of his will, of themselves and their duties.

Verse. 7. Which having no guide, overseer, etc.] How much more then should man,
who has all these, and is both ad laborem natus, and ratione ornatus, born to
labor, and has reason to guide him? Only he must take heed that he be not
Antlike, wholly taken up about what shall we eat, or what shall we drink, etc.

Verse. 8. Provideth her meat in the Summer] She devours indeed much grain made
chiefly for the use of man; But deserves (says an Interpreter) for this very
cause, to be fed with the finest wheat, and greatest dainties, that all men
may have her always in their eye: Diligent men to quicken their diligence, and
sluggards to shame them for their slothfulness.

And gathers her food in harvest] That may serve in Winter. It is good for a
man to keep somewhat by him, to have something in store, and not in diem
vivere, Quint^l.
as the fowls of heaven do. Bonus Servatius facit bonum Bonifacium, as the
Dutch Proverb has it. A good saver makes a well-doer. Care must be taken ne
Promus sit fortior Condo, that our layings-out, be not more than our
layings-up. Let no man here object that of our Savior, Care not for to morrow,
etc. There is a care of diligence, and a care of diffidence, a care of the
head, and a care of the heart; the former is needful, the latter sinful.

Verse. 9. How long will thou sleep, O sluggard?] The ear we say, is first up
in a morning: Call a sleeping man by his name, and he will sooner awake and
answer to it than to any thing else. The Wiseman therefore thus deals with the
sluggard, that he may go forth and shake him, as Sampson, not giving way to
excessive sleep, which comes as a Publican (says Plutarch) and takes away a
third part of our lives at least. Lib. 3. cap. 5.
Pliny said to his Nephew, when he saw him walk out some hours without
studying, Poteras has horas non perdere, You might have put these hours to
better uses. May not the same be said to the sleepy sluggard? Whiles the
Crocodile sleeps with open mouth, the Indian Rat shoots himself into his body,
and ea^s up his intrails. Whilst Ishbosheth slept upon his bed at noon, Baanah
and Rechab took away his head. Epaminondas a renowned Captain, finding one of
his Sentinels asleep, thrust him through with his sword: And being chid for so
great severity, replied, Talem eum reliqui qualem inven^, I left him but as I
found him. It must be our care that death serve us not in like sort, that we
be not taken napping, and so killed with death, Rev. 2.21. The bird
Onocrotalus is so well practiced to expect the Hawk to grapple with her, that
even when she shuts her eyes she sleeps with her beak exalted, as if
she would contend with her Adversary, to teach us continual vigilance,
resembling those who were wont to sleep with brazen balls in their hands, which
falling on vessels purposely set on their bed-sides, the noise did dissuade
immoderate sleep. Sen. Epist.
Nullus mihi per otium exit dies, partem etiam noctium studiis vendico, says
Seneca. I let no day pass me idly, some part of the night also I spend in
study. Our King Alfred, Anno 872. cast the natural day into three parts; eight
hours he spent in prayer, study and writing, eight in the service of his body,
and eight in the affairs of his State. Which space (having then no other engine
for it) he measured by a great wax-light divided into so many parts, Daniels
Chro. 13.
receiving notice by the keeper thereof, as the several hours passed in the
burning. The Jews divided likewise the day into three parts, the first ad
Tephilla, for prayer; the second ad Torah, for reading the Law; the third, ad
Malachah, for work; no talk of sleep. Their work would (likely) keep them
waking. As for the Law, what Servilius Scevola said of the Civil Law, Tenenti
codicem somnus obrepat, and cadentem faciem pagina sacra suscipiat. Hier. ad
Eust.
holds more true of the Divine, Jus civil scriptum est vigilantibus non
dormitantibus, The Law was not written for sleepers, but wakers. Jerome
exhorted some godly women to whom he wrote, not to lay the Bible out of their
hands, until being overcome with sleep, and not able any longer to hold up
their heads, they bowed them down, as it were, to salute the leaves, below
them, with a kiss. And for prayer, David would not fall asleep at it, but break
his sleep for it, Turk. Hist. fol. 297. Eg^eroch ex radice gnarach ordinavis,
acicum disposuit: vaz^. sappel ex radice ^sap^ah speculando expectavit. Hinc
^sopheh sp^culator.
Ps. 119.62. and 147. He was at it at midnight, at day-dawn, and In the morning
will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up, Psalm. 5.3. Two military
words he there makes use of (to show his wakefulness at his work) (Soldiers
are not the greatest sleepers: Caesar was no less vigilant, than valiant:
Scanderbeg from his first coming to Epirus never slept above two hours in a
night) he would not only pray, but marshal up his prayers, put them in good
array; and when he had so done, he would be as a Spy upon a Tower, to see
whether he prevailed, whether he got the day: The Spouse slept, but her heart
waked; and as repenting of that half-sleep also (which yet the night and foul
weather persuaded) she promises to get up early, Cant. 5.2. with 7.12. Our
Savior was up and at prayer a great while before day, Mark. 1.35. The holy
Angels are styled Watchers, (...).
Dan. 4.10. And they are three times pronounced happy that watch, Luke 12.37,
38, 43. Watch therefore.

Verse. 10. Yet a little sleep] Heb. Sleeps, so slumbers, Though he speaks in
the plural, and would have much, yet all is but a little in his pretense and
conceit. He asks a little, but he will not be denied: Augustine.
Sed finite panlulum ibit in longum. First, he must have sleep, having slept,
he must have slumbers; (sleep will not quickly be rubed out of his eyes)
having slumbered, he must fold his hands. Compressis sedere manibus, to fit
with hands folded up, Live. lib. 7.
is used by the Latins in a like sense.) He tumbles on his bed, as a door on
the hinges, Prove. 16.14. a man must come with a lever to help him off his Couch.

Verse. 11. As a traveller, and thy want as an armed man] That is, speedily and
irresistibly. Men must sweat out a living, and earn their bread before they eat
it, 2 These. 3.12. Think not to have wealth without working; as Cities and Towns
are said to have fallen into Timotheus his toil as he was sleeping (with so
much ease he took them in. Hippocrat.
) Spontaneae lassitudines morbos praecedunt, Roamings and reachings fore-run
diseases: so does sluggishness usher in penury: when as manus motitans, the
nimble hand makes rich, Prove. 10.4. and in all labor there is abundance,
Prove. 14. Salust.
But Nae illi falsi sunt qui diversissimas res expectant ignaviae voluptatem
and pramia virtutis: They are utterly out that think to have the pleasure of
idleness, and the plenty of painfulness.

Verse. 12. A naughty person] Lo, every idle man is a naughty man: is, or ere
long will be; For by doing nothing, men learn to do evil, Nihil agenda male
agere discunt.
said the Heathen: And, thou wicked and slothful servant, says our Savior,
Mat. 25.26. He puts no difference betwixt Nequam and Nequaquam, and idle and
an evil person. The Devil also will not long suffer such an one to be idle,
but will soon set him to work. Idleness is the hour of temptation.

A wicked man] Or, an unprofitable man, vir nihili, good for nothing, but to
eat, and drink, and sleep, and sport, and sit, and talk, and laugh, and be
merry. These are Ciphers, nay, they are excrements in humane society; Mr.
Wheatly.
that live in the world to no purpose, yea, to bad purpose. Oh it is good
(says One) to do something whereby the world may be the better; and not to
come hither merely as Rats and Mice, only to devour victuals, and to run
squeaking up and down.

Walks with a froward mouth] Graditur ore perverse. Nothing more usual with
Idlebies, than to go tatling up and down* prying, and spying, (...). 2 These.
^.11
and carrying tales and rumors, 1 Timothy 5.13. See the note there. It is nothing
that they can do; they will say the more therefore.

Verse. 13. He winketh with his eyes] He is restless in evil, and with his odd
tricks and gesticulations seeks to spread mischief; even there, where he dares
not otherwise discover himself. Or the sense may be this: Though he speak
froward things, though he slander and detract, etc. to the hurt of the
hearers, yet as if he spoke nothing but truth, and out of deep affection to
the party, he seeks to assure it by the constancy of his countenance, by the
gravity of his gate, and by the motion of his fingers, to make believe that it
is so indeed, when as in truth it is neither so, nor so.

Verse. 14. Frowardness is in his heart] What marvel then though he solecise
with his hand, though he twinkle with his eye, and tinkle with his feet, (...).
etc. When he speaks fair, believe him not: for there are seven abominations
in his heart, Prove. 26.25. Even those seven next mentioned here, Verse. 16, 17,
18, 19. as Aben-Ezra conceives upon that Text.

He^ devises mischief continually] Heb. At all times. Pliny speaks of the
Scorpion, that there is not one minute, wherein it does not put forth the
sting. The soul of a wicked man is in a sling, restless, and violently tossed
about by Satan, who acts and agitates him, 1 Samuel 25.29.
Ephesians. 2.2. See Mic. 2.1. Hos. 7.6.

He sows discord] And so shows himself a true breathing Devil, a Disciple of
Machiavel, whose Maxim was, Divide, and impora, make division, and get
dominion. Archb. Abbots Answer to D. Hills three reasons.
In the year 1579 Allen at Rhemes instructed his Emissary seducers sent over
into England, to make way for their great project of perdition in eighty eight,
by dividing the people under the terms of Protestant and Puritan, and provoking
them thereby to real and mutual, both hate and contempt. And what laboring
there is now by the Jesuitical party to heighten out unhappy differences, that
they may make themselves Masters of all, who sees not? Herein they deal (says
Gregory, of the like factors for the Devil in his time) as the Master of the
Pit, who often sets two Cocks to fight together to the death of both, that after
mutual conquest, he may sup with both their carcasses. The Jews, before they
were banished out of this Kingdom, threw bags of poison into the wells and
fountains that the people were to drink of, and thereby endeavored to poison
them all: so do our seeds-men of sedition.

Verse. 15. Suddenly shall he be broken without remedy] A dismal doom: Broken
and not bruised only, suddenly broken, when they least dream or dread the
danger. And this without remedy; no possibility of peecing them up again, or
putting them into a better condition. See this exemplified in Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.
and Deeg, Psalm. 52.

Verse. 16. These six things does the Lord hate] That is, he detesteth,
damneth, punishes them in the sluggard, whose soul is the sink of all these
ensuing evils. Where note, That sin makes wicked men the object of Gods hatred,
the Saints of his pity: As we hate poison in a Toad, but we pity it in a
man: in the one, it is their nature, in the other, their disease.

Yea seven are an abomination to him] Or, That seventh his soul abhors, that
sowing of discord among brethren heightneth and compleateth his hatred of the
rest. Septimum abominatio anima illius.


Verse. 17. A proud look] Heb. Haughty eyes. Men's hearts usually and chiefly sit
and show themselves in oculis, in loculis, in poculis, in their eyes, purses,
Profecto oculis animus inhabitat. Plin. Ep. ad Evagr.
and cups. The Latins speaking of an arrogant disdainful person say, that he
does supercilium attollere, look loftily. Odi fastum istius Ecclesia, said
Basil, I hate the proud stateliness of that Western Church: the Church of Rome
he means, Quid verum fit neque sciunt, neque sustinent discerere. Ibid.
which even in those purer times began to look big, and despise all other in
comparison of it self. This he somewhere calls (...), the Western eye-brow,
which occasioned at length that lamentable separation of the Eastern or Greek
Church from communion with the Latin: The other four Patriarcks dividing
themselves from the Bishop of Rome, and at their parting, using these, or the
like words: Thy greatness we know, thy covetousness we cannot satisfy, D.
Field of the Church. Gerson. Carleton.
thine intolerable insolency we can no longer endure, live to thy self, etc.
God himself resists a proud person in a special manner, 1 Pet. 5.5. and that
afar off, Psalm. 138.6. he cannot abide the sight of him, Looks aloof at him.
For whereas all other vices fly from God (says Boethius) Pride lets fly at
him. Sola Superbia se Deo opponit.
No wonder therefore though his soul abhor it, when it buds especially, Ezekiel.
7.10. and testifies to a man's face, Hos. 7.10. breaking forth as the
Master-pock of the soul in big-swoln words, proud gate, Bubbles of vanity. 2
Pet. 2.18.
ridiculous gestures, garish attire, lofty and haughty looks, that hate of
Heaven and gate to Hell. David could not endure it in any of his, Psalm. 101.5.
No more could Queen Elizabeth in the greatest favorite about her. Dissension
once falling out between her and Essex about a fit man for government of
Ireland, he forgetting himself, and neglecting his duty, uncivilly turns his
back, as it were in contempt, with a scornful look. She waxing impatient,
Camdeus Elisab. 494.
gave him a cuff on the ear, bidding him begone with a vengeance, etc. For
avoiding of all discontents and distempers this way occasioned, it were to be
wished, that men would first get humble hearts, (the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. makes
humble-mindedness the first virtue, as here a proud look is made the first
vice, the Master-root.) And then, that they would enter into a Covenant, as Job
did (with his own eyes at least, Chap. 30.1.) such a Covenant as was once made
at a meeting of the borderers in the marches between England and Scotland:
Security was given and confirmed on both sides by Oath (according to custom)
and proclamation made, Ibid. 279.
says mine Author, that no man should harm other by word, deed, or look.

A lying tongue] Heb. A tongue of lying, viz. That has learned the trade, and
can do it artificially. A Friar, a lier, was the old proverb here, passing for
current of that evil Generation, those loud and lewd liers, The proud have
forged lies against me, Psalm. 119.69. Assunt mendacium mendacio (so the Hebrew
has it) they ^ew one lie to another, until their iniquity be found to be
hateful, Psalm. 36.2. A righteous man (how much more the righteous God?) hates
lying: But a wicked man (for his lying) is loathsome (Heb. stinketh) and comes
to shame, Prove. 13.5. Pilate (for instance) of whom Egesippus says, that he
was Vir nequam and parvi faciens mendacium, A naughty man, and that made light
of a lie. It may seem so by that scornful question of his, What Is truth? Joh.
18.38. Tacitus also is by Tertullian said to be mendaciorum loquacissimus:
where he speaks of Christians, he writes so many lines, so many lies. Liers
pervert the end for which God created speech* which was, to give light to the
notions of the mind. Hence (...).

And hands that shed innocent blood] This is fitly subjoyned and set after a
lying tongue; because bloodshed is often occasioned by lying.

-- nil est audacius illis
Deprensis: iram atque animos ex crimine sumunt. Juvenal.

Ruffians revenge the lie given them with a stab. Persecutors (as in the French
Massacre) give out that Christians are the worst of men, not fit to live for
their notorious enormities, and therefore not to be pitied if taken from the
earth. Those that kill a Dog (says the French Proverb) make the world believe
he was mad first: so they always belied the Church, and traduced her to the
world, and then persecuted her; first took away her veil* and then wounded her,
Cant. 5.6. The Devil was first a slanderer and liar, and then a murderer. He
cannot murder, without he slander first. But God will destroy them that speak
lies, the Lord will abhor the bloody and deceitful man, Psalm. 5.6.

Verse. 18 An heart that devises wicked imaginations] This is the old Beldame,
the Mother of all the foregoing and following mischiefs; and is therefore fitly
set in the midst of the seven, as having an influence into all. From the eyes,
the Wiseman descends to the mouth, from the mouth, to the hands, from the
hands, to the heart, from thence to the feet, and so takes the parts in order
as they stand: But as for the heart, it transfuseth its venom into all the
rest, and may say to them all, as the heart of Apollodorus the Tyrant seemed to
say to him, who dreamed one night that he was fleaed by the Scythians, and
boiled in a Caldron, and that his heart spoke to him out of the kettle, (...).
It is I that have drawn thee to all this. Those in Hell cry so doubtless.

Feet that be swift] As if they should come too late. This is a foul abuse of
the locomotive faculty given us by God for better purpose, that we should be
swift to hear, run to and fro to increase knowledge, Dan. 12. walk in the way
that is called holy, go from strength to strength, taking long strides toward
Heaven, Psalm. 84.7. Those then that walk in a contrary road, and make all
possible haste to heap up sin upon sin, must needs be abominated and accursed
of God.

Verse. 19. A false witness that speaks lies] Heb. That blows abroad lies, as
with a pair of bellows, that vents them boldly and freely in open Court, in the
face of the Country. These Knights of the Post can lend an oath for a need, as
they did Jesabel against Naboth, and like those in the history, will not stick
to swear that their friend or foe was at Rome and Interamna both at once. God
often thundereth against such, to show his utter hatred of them: and has,
threatened that the winged flying-book that is full of curses within and
without, shall overtake them ere they get home, and shall rest in the midst of
their houses, to consume them with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof,
Zach. 5.4.

And him that sows discord] See the Notes on verse. 14. and 16. Unity among
brethren is fitly compared to a Cable-Rope, which will not easily break but if
once cut asunder, its hard to tie a knot upon it; what ill officers then are
Breed-bates, and boutefeus?

Verse. 20. My Son, keep thy Fathers Commandement] The commandments of
religious Parents, are the very commandments of God himself, and are therefore
to be as carefully kept as the apple of a man's eye, Prove. 7.2. See the Note
one Chap. 1.8.

Verse. 21. Bind them continually] Observe them with as much care and
conscience, as thou art bound to do the Law of God given by Moses, Deuteronomy. 6.8.
See the Note there.

Ducet and perducet.
Verse. 22. When thou go, it shall lead thee] No such guide to God as the
Word, which while a man holds to, he may safely say, Lord, if I be deceived,
thou have deceived me; If I be out of the way, thy word has misled me.

When thou sleep, it shall keep thee] If thou sleep with some good
meditation in thy mind, it shall keep thee from foolish and sinful dreams and
fancies, and set thy heart in a holy frame, when thou awakest. He that raketh
up his fire at night, shall find fire in the morning. How precious are thy
thoughts (that is thoughts of thee) unto me, O God? Psalm. 139.17. what
follows? When I awake, I am still with thee, verse. 18.

Verse. 23. For the Commandment is a Lamp] Or Candle, whereof there is no small
use when men go to bed, or rise betime. He that has the Word of Christ richly
dwelling in him, may lay his hand upon his heart, and say as dying
Oecolampadius did, Hic sat lucis. Here Is plenty of light. Under the Law all was
in riddles; Moses was veyled. And yet that saying was then verified, Et latet
and lucet. There was light enough to light men to Christ the end of the Law.

And reproofs of instruction] Or corrections of instructions. A lesson set on
with a whipping is best remembered. See the Note on Chap. 3.13.

Verse. 24. To keep thee from the evil woman] Heb. From the woman of evil, that
is wholly given up to wickedness, as Aaron says of the people, Exodus 32.22.
and as Plautus, In fermento tota jacet uxor. In this sense Antichrist is called
the man of sin, 2 These. 3.

From the flattery of the tongue] This is the proper effect of Gods word, hid
in the heart, as an amulet. Bellerophon and other Heathens, without this
preservative, abstained from Adultery, either for love of praise, or fear of
punishment, or opinion of merit, but this was not properly chastity, but
continency, which kept them from the outward act, sed non sine dolor, not
without inward lustings and hankerings after strange flesh. Vellem, si non
essem Imperator, said Scipio, when a fair Harlot was offered to him, I would if
I were not a General.

Of a strange woman] Filthiness (as also swearing and drunkenness) in a woman
is most abominable. Hence (among other reasons, says one) the whorish woman is
called the strange woman.

Salust.
Verse. 25. Lust not after her beauty] Aureliae Orestillae praeter formam nihil
unquam bonus landavit. Aurelia Orestilla had beauty indeed, but nothing else
that was praiseworthy, (...) Aelian. ver. hist. lib. 12. c. 1.
says the Historian. How much better Aspasia Milesia, of whom Aelian reports,
that she was Fair and Modest? And the Lady Jane Gray whose excellent beauty
was adorned with all variety of virtues, as a clear Sky with stars, as a
princely Diadem with Jewels. Some women are like Helen without, Hecuba within;
but it is a small praise to have a good face, and a naughty nature, a beautiful
countenance, and a base life.

In thine heart] See the Note on Mat. 5.28. and on 1 Cor. 7.34.

Propers. Paguin.
Neither let her take thee with her eye-lids] Si nescis, oculi sunt in amore
duces. Some render it, Neque to capiat splendoribus suis, Let her not take thee
with her glitterings, and gay habiliments, or head-tires. Cyprian and Austin
say, that superfluous attire is worse than whoredom, because whoredom only
corrupts chastity, but this corrupts nature. Hierome says; that if women adorn
themselves so as to provoke men to lust after them, though no evil follow upon
it, yet those women shall suffer eternal damnation, because they offered poison
to others, though none would drink it.

Verse. 26. For by means of a Whorish woman] See the Note on Chap. 5.10. These
creatures know no other language but that of the Horsleeches daughter, Give,
give, and may fitly be compared to the Ravens of Arabia, that full-gorged have
a tuneable sweet record; but empty, screech horribly: or to Carrion-crows, that
flock to a dead carcass, not to defend it, but to devour it; and no sooner have
they bared the bones, but they are gone. Daniels Chronicle.
Thus Dame Alice Pierce (King Edward the thirds Concubine) served him whiles
he lived, all was here as she would; and when this King lay a dying, she
packt away what she could snatch, even to the rings on his fingers, and so
left him.

Corpus, opes, animum, famam, vim, lumina, Scortum
Debilitat, perdit, necat, aufert, cripit, orbat.
Will hunt for the precious life] As Potiphars wife did for Joseph's, Genesis
39.14. And surely it was a great providence of God, that upon her false
accusation, he had not been presently put to death. Into prison he was
thrown, and so laden with fetters, that the iron entered into his soul, i. e.
eat into his flesh, Psalm. 105.18. and all by means of this Whorish woman,
Mantud^.
whose lust turned into hatred. Aut te ardenter amat, aut te capitaliter odit.
See more in the Note on Prove. 5.11.

Verse. 27. Can a man take fire] Lest any man should reply, I will see to my
self, and save one from the forenamed mischiefs. I have more wit than to trust
any Harlot, and more skill than to let it come abroad to my disgrace and
detriment: The Wiseman answers, that it is as possible to take a live-coal
from the hearth, and bear it in a man's bosom, without burning his clothes, or
to walk upon fire without scorching his feet, as to attempt any thing in this
kind, and to escape scot-free. Flagitium and flagellum sicut acus and filum.
Sin and punishment go linked together with chains of Adamant. Thy clothes will
stink at least of that fire, thy feet will blister at least with those coals.
If the great shower blow over thee, yet thou shall be wet with the after-drops.

Verse. 28. Can one go upon hot coals?] Similitudes are never set out to confirm
or confute, but to adorn and illustrate, giving unto their matter a certain
kind of lively gesture, and stirring up thereby men's drowsy minds to the
consideration and acknowlegement of the truth, and to the pursuit and practice
of virtue and godliness. Of the great use of Similes, we may read in Chrysostom.
Hom. in Genesis 13. Origin in Levit. 10. August. de doctrina Christ. lib. 2. Greg.
Moral. lib. 3. cap. 36. etc.

Verse. 29. So he that goes in to his neighbour] That suspiciously converseth
with her alone, though happily with no intent of corrupting her. Joseph shunned
the company of his Mistress, he would not be with her alone, Genesis 39.10.
Chambering and secret familiarity with women is forbidden as a deed of darkness
and dishonesty, Romans 13.13. How much more then wanton touches and dalliance.
Sit not at all with another man's wife, sit not down upon the bed with her,
says Siracides, Chap. 9. Christ's Disciples marvelled that he talked with the
woman of Samaria, Solus cum sola, says Beza. But he might do that, Joh. 427.
that we must beware of, lest concupiscence kindle. Abraham might see Sadome
burning, but Lot might not look that way.

Shall not be innocent] Shall not be held so, howsoever shall suffer in his
name, be he never so honest (besides that hereby he tempts the Devil to
tempt him to uncleanness.) Now the Proverb is, Oculus and fama non patiuntur
jocos. A man's eye and his name will bear no jest. And he was no fool that
said, Negligere quid de se quisque sentiat, non solum arrogantis est, sed and
dissoluti. He is not only a proud, but a lewd person, that takes no thought
what others think and talk of him. Provide we must for things honest, not
only before the Lord, but also before men, 2 Cor. 8.20 21.

Verse. 30. Men do not despise a Theef] We use to say, A liar is worse than a
thief; Potior est fur quam qui assidue mentitur. (...). Suidas.
and Siracides says the same of a constant liar, Chap. 20. But that an
Adulterer is worse than a Thief, the Holy Ghost here assures us, and his
reasons are unanswerable. For first, his necessity pleads for him, he must
either steal or starve, and this does somewhat excuse him, a tanto as they say,
but not a toto; For as a man should rather dye than lie, so he should rather
perish than purloin or pilfer. But what excuse has the Adulterer? non ventris
inediam patitur, sed cordis indigentiam, he wants not meat, but wit; he
preserves not his body, but destroys his soul.

Verse. 31. He shall restore seven-fold] i. e. Manifold, according as the Law
limiteth, though it be to the utmost of what the Thief is worth. But what
restitution can the Adulterer make? should he make him amends with as much
more? The Thief steals out of want, the Adulterer of wantonness.

Verse. 32. Lacks understanding] Being wholly carried by sensual appetite,
against the dictates both of Religion, and of Reason. Beetles love dunghils
better than ointments, and Swine love mud better than a garden. Luther tells of
a certain Grandee in his Country, so besotted with the sin of Whoredom, he
was not ashamed to say, that if he might ever live here, and be carried from
one Whore-house to another, there to satisfy his lusts, he would never desire
any other heaven. This filthy man did afterward breathe out his wretched soul
betwixt two notorious Harlots.

Loniceri theat. histor. p. 5^^.
Destroys his own soul] It is not therefore leve peccatum, a small sin, as
the Popes Canonists call it. Divine Justice does not use to kill Flies with
Beetles.

Verse. 33. A wound and dishonor shall he get] Either from the husband of the
Adulteress, or from the Magistrate, who will put him to death, according to the
Law of God, Levit. 20. Deuteronomy. 22. and of diverse Nations, with whom Adultery is a
capital crime.

And his reproach shall not be wiped away] See the Note in Chap. 5.9. How often
read we of David, that he was upright in all things, save only in the matter
of Uriah? What an indeleble blot is that still upon him?

Verse. 34. For jealousy is the rage] Howbeit he may not kill the Adulterer
though taken in the act, Custos utriusque tabula.
but prosecute the Law against him, and appeal to the Magistrate, who is the
Lord Keeper of both Tables. But if no Law will releeve a man, yet let him know,
that he shall do himself no disservice by making God his Chancellor.

CHAP. VII. Verse. 1. My Son, keep my words]
ARistotle has observed, and daily experience makes it good, that man shows
his weakness no way more than about moderating the pleasure of his Tasting and
Touching; For as much as they belong to him, not as a man, but as a living
creature. Turpe est senescere atatem, non tamen senescere lasciv^am. Nazianz.
Now therefore as where the hedge is lowest, there the beast leaps over
soonest: So Satan will be sure to assault us, where we are least able to
withstand him. And whereas old men have no cause to be secure ( David was old,
when he went in to Bathsheba, and Lot not young when he defloured his two
daughters: Of the Brabants it is said, that quo magis senescunt, to magis
st^^l^escunt, Contra (...) and (...): and Sen^^c quasi Semint^^.
the elder the foolisher: And the Heathen Sages say, Metuendam ^sse senectam,
quod non veniat sola, that old age is to be feared, as that which comes not
alone, but being it self a disease^, it comes accompained with many diseases
both of body and mind) young men especially whom the Greeks call (...) of
(...) to be hot, and (...) of (...) to boil, and who think they have a license
helluari, scortari, fores effringere, to drink and drab, which they count and
call a trick of youth, have but more than need to be constantly and carefully
cautioned and called upon (as here they are) to fly fornication, 1 Cor. 6.8. to
fly youthful lusts, 2 Timothy 2.22. with post-haste to flee them, to abstain from
fleshly lusts (Tanquam a mellito veneno) which war against the soul, 1 Pet.
2.11. The body cannot be so wounded with weapons, as the soul is with lusts.
Holy Timothy (so temperate a young man, 1 Timothy 5.23.
that Saint Paul was fain to prescribe him physic, bidding him no longer to
drink water, but a little wine for his stomachs sake, and his often
infirmities, contracted happily by his too much abstinence, for the better
keeping under his body, and bringing it into subjection) is in the same Chapter
by the same Apostle exhorted, 1 Timothy 5.2
to exhort the younger women with all Purity: Whereby is intimated, that
through the deceit of his heart, and the slipperiness of his age, even while
he was pressing those young women to purity, some impure motion might press in
upon him; Which though but a stranger to Timothy (as Peter Martyr and others
observe out of that passage in Nathans parable, 2 Samuel 12.5. that lust was to
David) yet might prove a troublesome inmate if not suddenly ejected. It is no
marvel therefore that the Wiseman is so exceeding earnest with his Son about
the business of abhorring harlotry, the hatefulness whereof he now paints out
in a parable, setting it forth in liveliest colors.

Verse. 2. Keep my Commandments and live] i. e. Live happily, Isa. 48.17. I am
the Lord that teaches thee to profit; therefore keep my Commandments; as if
God should say, it is for thy profit that I command thee, and not for mine own.
In doing thereof there is great reward, says David, Psalm. 19.
and present reward, says Solomon here; Do it and live. In the Courts of
earthly Princes, there is (...), delays and changes. Men are off and on in
their promises: they are also slow and slack in their performances. But it is
otherwise here: The very entrance of thy word gives light, Psalm. 119.130. And
the very onset of obedience gives life. It is but Hear, and your souls shall
live, Isa. 55.3. Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, Rev. 22.12.

And my Law as the apple of thine eye] With all chariness and circumspection.
The least mote offends the eye, and the least deviation violates the Law. Sin
is homogeneal, all of a kind, though not all of the same degree: as the least
pibble is a stone, as well as the hugest rock, and as the drop of a bucket is
water, as well as the main Ocean. Hence the least sins are in Scripture
reproached by the names of the greatest; Malice is called manslaughter: Lust,
Adultery, etc. concupiscence is condemned by the Law, even the first motions of
sin, though they never come to consent, Romans 7.7. Inward bleeding may kill a
man. De minutis non curat lex, says the Civilian: But the Law of God is
Spiritual, though we be carnal. And as the Sunshine shows us atoms and
motes, that till then we discerned not, so does the Law discover and censure
smallest failings. It must therefore be kept curiously, even as the apple of
the eye: as that little man in the eye that cannot be touched, (...) ab
but he will be distempered. Careful we must be, even in the minutula
legis, the punctilios of duty. Men will not lightly lose the least ends of
gold. (...) Nequa enim auri tantum massas toll^nt, sed and bractcol^s.


Verse. 3. Bind them upon thy fingers] That thou may have them always in
sight: as God has his people, Isa. 49.16. Behold I have graven thee upon the
palms of my hands: thy walls are continually before me. The Hebrews here refer
fingers to action, heart to meditation and retention. Men should have the Law
of God at their fingers ends. (Any of us Jews, says Josephus, being asked of
any point of the Law, answers it as readily as if he had been asked his own
name) they should also be doers of the word, and not hearers only. The hand
is (...), the instrument of action. Aristot.
David lifted up both his hands to the word, as if he would pull it to him
with both hands, as if he would do the deed in good earnest. Psalm. 119.48
The Heavens are the work of Gods fingers, Psalm. 8.3. The Law should be of
ours.

Verse. 4. Say unto wisdom, thou art my Sister] q. d. If thou must needs have a
Lady to set thy love upon, Let me commend a Mistress to thee more amiable and
affable than any that thou can meet with; and that is Heavenly Wisdom. Say
unto her, thou art my Sister, etc. Christ often wooes his Spouse by this title,
My Sister, my Spouse. As the nearest affinity is Spouse, so the nearest
consanguinty in Sister. There are all bonds to knit us to Christ, there shall
be all to knit Christ to us, if we fall in with Wisdom: this is to become a
kin to Christ, Mat. 12.56. And that is the truest nobility, where God himself
is top of the kin, and Religion the root, in regard whereof all the rest
(riches, retinue, etc.) are but shadows and shapes of nobleness.

Call understanding thy kinswoman] i. e. Be thoroughly and familiarly
acquainted with her. Surely as in nature he is accounted a singular Idiot,
that knows not his own sisters or near kinsfolk: so in Religion, he is
strangely simple and stupid, that is not acquainted with the grounds of
behavior* and comfort, as they are contained in the word.

Verse. 5. That they may keep thee] The wisdom from above can and will preserve
a man from hankering after strange flesh. The worlds wisards have been most of
them tackt and tainted with this vice, and that by a just hand of God upon
them, for the contempt of Religion, Romans 1.28. which is indeed the most
excellent preservative. Hence when the Apostle had said, 1 Timothy 4.7. exercise
godliness, he adds (as a motive) Godliness is profitable to all things, verse.
8. See further for this, Prove. 23.26, 27. and 2.16. and 6.23, 24. with the
Notes there.

Verse. 6. I looked through my casement] Little did this young fool think whose
eye was upon him: less did he heed the all-seeing eye of Heaven. Solomon was
observing his subjects carriages, and found a miscarriage. Magistrates, as they
have many eyes upon them (whence also they have their name in the Hebrew
tongue) so they are to have their eyes upon many, Nagid a Neged, quod in eam
omnes conjiciam oculos.
watching when other men sleep, and observing what other men slight. The Poets
feign, that Jupiter over-looks the world, and that Somnus or Sleep durst never
come a near him. A King that sits in the Throne of Judgment, scatters
away all evil with his eyes, Prove. 20.8.

Verse. 7. Among the simple ones] The word signifies such a one as may be soon
persuaded, easily drawn any way by a twined thread, with a wet finger.
Fatuellus, Cor ejus in virium flecti.
such as whom it is no hard matter to cousen, and collude with.

Verse. 8. Near her corner] Which he should have balked, according to Chap.
5.8. See the Note there. Men's own inconsideration, security and dallying with
the beginnings of sin, or with the occasion, does usually tempt the Devil to
tempt them; and he feeling their pulse thereby which way it beats, fits them a
pennyworth, provides them of mates, sets one Delilah or other to bind them
(as she did Sampson) with the green withs of fleshly pleasure. But let a man
divorce the flesh from the world, and the Devil can do him no hurt.

Verse. 9. In the black and dark night] Thinking to obscure himself: but Solomon
saw him, how much more God, cui obscura patent, muta respondent, silentium
confitetur, before whom night will convert it self into noon, and silence prove
a speaking evidence? Foolish men think to hide themselves from God, by hiding
God from themselves. See Psalm. 139.11, 12.

Verse. 10* And behold there met him a woman] Fit Lettice for such lips; a fit
helve for such a hatchet. Every corner is full of such dust-heaps, the Land is
even darkened with them, as Egypt once was with the locusts, Exodus 10.15.

With the attire of an Harlot] See the Note on Chap. 6.25. The Hebrew word here
signifies a set habit or ornament finely fitted to the body: vestitus in quo
plicae, says Lavater, pleated garments, plaited hair, etc. let such take heed
of the plica polonica, (...) pro (...) qua^i nudato pudendo, ut cum ad
concubitum accenderet.
that dreadful disease.

And subtle of heart] Or, Trussed up about the breasts, with her upper-parts
naked: So Leus Ben. Gersom. Erat nudo collo and pectore, cord tenus, etc. She
met him with her naked-breasts (at this day too commonly used by such as would
be held no Harlots) yea, with something else naked (as some sense this text)
which modesty forbids to name.

Verse. 11. Her feet abide not in her house] As the modest woman's do, Tit. 2.5.
who is therefore called domiporta, set forth by the snail, which carries her
house on her back, and compared to the Vine, that grows by the house side,
Psalm. 128. The Egyptian women ware no shoes, that they might the better keep
home. Of the Italian women, it is said, that they are Magpyes at the door,
Heylins Geog.
Saints in the Church, Goats in the Garden, Devils in the House, Angels in the
Streets, and Sirens in the Windows.

Verse. 12. Now she is without] See the Note on verse. 11. and further observe,
that the former faults, loudness of language, stubbornness against an husbands
lawful commands and restraints, and this of gadding up and down to see and to
be seen, albeit they be not certain signs, yet they are strong presumptions
of a whorish disposition.

Verse. 13. So she caught him and kissed him] Strange impudency in this strange
woman, who has not her name for naught. Potiphars wife was such a beast: so
was Messalina the Empress, wife to Claudius, Joane Queen of Naples, and other
prodigious strumpets, of the kind of those whom they call Borboritae. We have
heard (says a grave Divine) of Virgins, D. Hall.
which at first seemed modest, blushing at the motions of an honest love; who
being once corrupt and debauched, have grown flexible to easy entreaties to
unchastity; and from thence boldly lascivious so as to solicit others,
Martin. Vivald. in candelabro. cap. de confess. Mercer.
so as to prostitute themselves to all comers, yea, (as our Casuists complain
of some Spanish stews) to an unnatural filthiness.

Verse. 14. I have peace-offerings] Sacris abutitur ut scoleratis mos est, she
pretends Religion to her filthy practices: So did those wicked women that lay
with Elies sons at the door of the Tabernacle, 1 Samuel 2.22. So did King Edward
the fourth, his holy whore, as he used to call her, Speed.
that came to him out of a Nunnery when he list to call for her. And such were
those Kedeshoth, or common whores, so called in Hebrew, because such
abomination was committed under a pretext of Religion, Genesis 38.21. Deuteronomy. 23.17.
But what an odd thing was that of David, that would not lie with Bathsheba
till purified? Does he make conscience of ceremonial, and none of moral purity?

This day have I paid my vows] A votary then she was (by all means) and so
more than ordinarily religious. So was Doeg, why else was he detained before
the Lord? 1 Samuel 21.7. A Doeg may set his foot as far into Gods Sanctuary as a
David. That many Popish Votaries are no better than this huswife in the text,
see the Lisbon-Nunnery, etc. besides those thousands of Infants skulls found in
the fish-pools by Gregory the Great.

Verse. 15. Therefore came I forth] As having much good cheer at home; Sine
Cerere and Libero frig^t Ven^^.
as at all peace offerings they had. Gluttony is the gallery that
libidinousness walks through.

Diligently to seek thy face] Or thy person, not thy purse, thee, not thine do
I seek. Quis credit?

And I have found thee] By a providence no doubt, God must have a hand in it,
or else it is marvel. God has given me my hire (said Leah) because I have
given my Maid to my Husband, Genesis 30.18. See 1 Samuel 23.7. Zach. 11.5.

Verse. 16. I have decked my bed] Lest happily by being abroad so late, he should
question where to have a bed, she assures him of a dainty one, with curious
curtains.

Verse. 17. With Myrrh, Aloes, etc.] This might have minded the young man, that
he was going to his grave; for the bodies of the dead were so perfumed. Such a
meditation would have much rebated his edge, cooled his courage. Jerusalems
filthiness was in her skirts: and why? she remembered not her latter end, Lam.
1.9. As the stroaking of a dead hand (they say) cures a tympany; and as the
ashes of a viper applied to the part that is stung, draws the venom out of it:
so the serious thought of death will prove a death to fleshly lusts. Mr. Wards
Sermons.
I meet with a story of one that gave a loose young man a Ring with a
deaths-head, with this condition, that he should one hour daily (for seven
days together) look and think upon it; which bred a strange alteration in his
life.

Verse. 18. Until the morning] But what if death draw the curtains, and look in
the while? If death do not, yet guilt will. And here beasts are more happy in
carnal contentments, than sensual voluptuaries; for in their delights they
seldom surfeit, but never sin; and so never find any cause or use for pangs
of repentance, as Epicures do, whose pleasure passes, but a sting stays
behind. Job calls sparks the sons of fire, being engendered by it upon fuel;
as pleasures are the sons of men's lusts, when the object and they lie and
couple together: And they are not long-lived; they are but as sparks, they dye
as soon as begotten.

Verse. 19. For the good man is not at home] Heb. The man, not my man, or my
husband, etc. the very mention (how much more the presence?) of such a man
might have marred the mirth.

Verse. 20. He has taken a bag of mony] And so will not return in haste. Let
not the children of this world be wiser than we: Lay up treasure in Heaven;
provide your selves baggs that wax not old, Luke 12.33. Do as Merchants, that
being to travel into a far Country, deliver their money here upon the Exchange,
that there they may receive it. Evagrius in Cedrenus bequeathed three hundred
pound to the poor in his will; but took a bond beforehand of Synesius the
Bishop for the re-payment of this in another life, according to the promise of
our Savior of an hundred fold advantage.

Verse. 21. With much fair speech] Fair words make fools fain. This Circe so
enchanted the yonker with her fine language, that now she may do what she will
with him, for he is wholly at her devotion.

Verse. 22. He goes after her straightway] Without any consideration of the
sad consequents. Lust had blinded and besotted him, and even transformed him
into a brute. Nos animas etiam incarnavimus, says one. Many men have made
their very spirit a lump of flesh, and are hurried on to Hell with greatest
violence. Chide them, you do but give physic in a fit; counsel them, you do
but give advice to a man that is running a race; be your counsel never so
good, he cannot stay to hear you, but will be ready to answer, as Antipater
did when one presented him with a book treating of happiness, he rejected it,
and said (...), I have no leisure to read such discourses.

As an Ox goes to the slaughter] When he thinks he goes to the pasture; or
as those Oxen brought forth by Jupiters Priest, with garlands unto the gates,
but it was for a slain-sacrifice, Acts 14.13. Fatted ware are but fitted for
the shambles.

Numella. Beza in loc.
Or as a fool to the correction of the Stocks] Such stocks as Paul and Silas
(yet no fools) were thrust into, feet and neck also, as the word there
signifies, Acts 14.24. This the fool fears not till he feels; till his head
be cooled, and his heels too, till he has slept out his drunkenness, and
then he finds where he is, and must stick by it. See this exemplified, Prove.
5.11. How many such fools have we now adays (Mori morantur quocunque sub axe
morantur) that rejoice in their spiritual bondage, and dance to Hell in their
bolts (as one says) nay, are weary of deliverance? They sit in the stocks when
they are at prayers, and come out of the Church when the tedious Sermon runs
somewhat beyond the hour, like prisoners out of a Gaol. The Devil is at I^ne
with such (says Master Bradford) and the Devil will keep holy day, as it were
in Hell, in respect of such, says another.

Verse. 23. Till a dart strike through his liver] i. e. Filthy lust, that fiery
dart of the Devil, Plato in hepate (...) ponit. Horat Ode 1. lib. 4. and Ode
25. lib. 5. Ovid. Trist.
pointed and poisoned (as the Sythian darts are said to be) with the gall of
Asps and Vipers. Philosophers place lust in the liver. Mathematicians subject
the liver to Venus, the Poets complain of Cupids wounding them in that part.

Cor sapit, and pulmo loquitur, fell commovit iras:
Splen ridere facit, cogit amare jecor.
Or (as some sense it) till the Adulterer be, by the Whores husband or
friends, or by the hand of justice, deprived of life, perhaps in the very act,
as Zimri and Cozbi were by Phineas in the very flagrancy of their lust.

Verse. 24. Hearken now therefore] Call up the ears of thy mind, to the ears of
thy body, that one sound may pierce both. Solomon knew well how hard it was to
get ground of a raging lust, even as hard as to get ground of the Sea. Hence
he so sets on his exhortation.

Verse. 25. Let not thine heart] Think not of her, lust not after her. Thoughts
and affections are sibi mutuo causae. Whilst I mused the fire burned, Psalm. 39.
so that thoughts kindle affections, and these cause thoughts to boil. (See Job
31.1.) See therefore that evil thoughts, though they rush into the heart, yet
they rest not in it.

Verse. 26. For she has cast down many] That have let in death at those
windows of wickedness, those loop-holes of lust, that have dyed of the wound in
the eye. Aliorum perditio tua sit cautio. See thou another man shipwrackt,
look well to thy tacklings.

Yea, many strong men have been slain by her] The valor of man has often been
slaved by the wyses of a woman. Witness many of your greatest Martialists, who
conquered Countries, and were vanquished of vices, being captivarum suarum
captivi. The Persian Kings commanded the whole world, and were commanded by
their concubines. So was Alexander, Sampson, Hercules, whom some make to be
the same with Sampson.

Lenam non potuit, potuit superare leaenam:
Quem fera non potuit vincere, vicit hera.
Verse. 27. Her house is the way to hell] The shortest cut to utter destruction.
This, if well believed, would make the young man stop or step back, as if he
had trod upon a serpent.

Sed vivunt homines tanquam mors nulla sequatur:
Aut velut infernus fabula vana foret.
Going down to the Chambers of death] Both temporal and eternal. Lo those
Hoasts that welcome men into their Inn with smiling countenance, will cut
their throats in their beds. The Sirens are said to live in green meadows,
Natal. Comes.
and to have by them ever an heap of dead men's bones.

CHAP. VIII. Verse. 1. Does not Wisdom cry?]
ANd shall a Harlot be sooner heard than she? Shall men prefer dross before
gold, acorns before wheat, a swine-sty before a Sanctuary? dirty delights and
sensual pleasures, before peace that passes all understanding, Xenophon.
joy unspeakable and full of glory? Heathen stories tell how Hercules (when he
was young) was courted by Virtue on the one hand, and Pleasure on the other;
But Pleasure lost her sweet words upon him, he hearkened to Virtue rather:
Shall not we to Wisdom?

Put forth her voyce] In her Ministers, who are Cryers by office, and must be
earnest, Isa. 58.1. See an instance in holy Bradford; I beseech you, says He,
I pray you, I desire you, I crave at your hands with all my very heart; I ask
of you with hand, pen, tongue, and mind; in Christ, through Christ, for
Christ, Act. and Mon. 1490.
for his Name, Blood, Mercy, Power, and Truths sake, my most entirely beloved,
that you admit no doubting of Gods final mercies toward you, etc. Here was a
lusty Crier indeed. And such another was Mr. Perkins, of whom it is said, that
in expounding the Commandments (when he was Catechist of Christ's College)
he applied them so home to his hearers, Mr. Fullers Holy-state, p 90.
that he made their very hearts fall down, and their hairs stand upright.

Verse. 2. She stands in the top of high places] That is, says an
Interpreter, in the lofty Oracles of the Patriarchs and Prophets.

Verse. 3. At the entry of the City] Heb. At the mouth; for as words go out of
the mouth, Rod. Bain.
so do men out of the City; only men go and come at their pleasure, Sed volat
emissum semel irrevocabile verbum. A word once uttered cannot be recalled.

At the coming in at the doors] Every where Christ offers himself; hence
arises this phrase, My salvation is gone forth, but to little purpose, through
men's singular perverseness. Indeed if the Lord would set up a Pulpit at the
Alehouse door, they would hear oftener. But since he does not, they will run to
hell as fast as they can; And if God cannot catch them, they care not, they
will not return.

Verse. 4. Unto you, O men, I call] O viri praestantes (so some render it) O ye
eminent men, whether for greatness of birth wealth, or learning. The Pharisees
and Philosophers for their learning are called the Princes of this world, 1
Cor. 2.8. Sed sapientes sapienter in infernum descendunt, says one, and
potentes potenter t^rquebuntur, says another. But the world by wisdom knows
not God, 1 Cor. 1.21. and not many wise men, not many mighty, not many noble
are called, verse. 26. And yet they shall not want for calling, if that would do
it; for unto you, O mighty men I call. Sed surdo plerunque fabulam, but all to
little purpose, for most part. They that lay their heads upon down-pillows
cannot so easily hear noyses. Courts and great places prove ill air for Zeal.
Divitibus ideo pietas deest, quia nihil deest. Rich men's wealth proves an
hindrance to their happiness.

And my voice is to the Sons of men] i. e. To the meaner sort of people. See
Psalm. 49.2. These usually, (...).
like little fishes, bite more than bigger. The poor are Gospellized, says our
Savior. Smyrna was the poorest, but best of the seven Churches. Certain it is,
that many of the meaner sort hold that they are not bound to look after
Scripture-matters, but that it is for rich men and Scholars only to do so. We
have nothing, say they, to live by, but these hands. How can day-labourers,
(...); Chrysostom. Hom. 22. ad Pop. Antioch.
and poor Craftsmen intend such things? The baser sort of people in Swethland
do always break the Sabbath, saying, that it is only for Gentlemen to keep
that day. See Jer. 5.4. Joh. 7.49. But Paul (a poor Tent-maker) could say, Our
conversation is in heaven, and Gods people are afflicted and poor, yet they
trust in the Name of the Lord, Zeph. 3.12. Who ever richer than Adam in
Paradise? Poorer than Job on the dunghill? yet in Paradise Satan foiled Adam,
on the dunghill Job foiled Satan. Think not that poverty can excuse from duty:
Poor men also must listen to wisdoms voice, or it will be worse with them;
there is yet but a beginning of their sorrows.

Verse. 5. O ye simple] If ye be not set in sin, resolved of your way, as
good as ye mean to be: If yet there be any place left for persuasion. See
the Note on Chap. 1.4.

And ye fools] Ye that have already made your conclusion, and are wiser in
your own conceit, than seven men that can render a reason.

Ver. 6. I will speak of excellent things] (...) Ruling-cases,
Master-sentences, Axioms of state, principles for Princes. I have written for
them the great things of my Law, Hos. 8.12. Solomon calls the Scriptures, Lords
of Collections, as some sense that Text, Eccles. 12.11.

Shall he right things] Right for each man's particular purposes and occasions.
Athan^s.
The Scriptures are so pe^^^^l, that every man may think they speak de se, in
re sua, of him, and his (...). In all the Commandments of God there is so much
rectitude, and good reason (could we but see it) that if God did not command
them, yet it were our best way to practice them.

For my mouth shall speak truth] Heb. Shall meditate truth, i. e. I will
neither speak falsely nor rashly, but upon due deliberation, and undoubted
certainty, See my True treasure, page 122.

Verse. 8. All the words] The Rabbine have a saying, That there is a mountain of
sense hanging upon every tittle of the Scriptures.

There is nothing froward or perverse in them] Some places of Scripture may
seem to cross other places, but they do only seem so. Men may think they are
like the accusers of Christ, never a one speaking like the other; but those
that understand them, shall find them like Nathan and Bathsheba, both speaking
the same things. The old Rabbis could not reconcile Ecclesiastes (some
passages in it) to the rest of the holy Scriptures, and had therefore some
thoughts to conceal it from the people. But this was their weakness, Kabuenaki.
and would have been their wickedness.

Verse. 9. They are all plain to him that understandeth] Plain in things
necessary to salvation; for as all duties, so all truths, do not concern all
men. God does not expect or require that every man should be a Doctor in the
chair; but those points that direct to duty here, and salvation hereafter, are
clear, express, and obvious to them that desire to understand them; for some
there are, Bern.
qui ut liberius peocent, libenter ignorant. It was a smart answer which Mr.
Durant a witty and learned Minister of the Reformed Church of Paris, gave to a
Lady of suspected chastity, and now revolted. When she pretended the hardness
of the Scripture: Why? said he, Madam, what can be more plain, than Thou
shall not commit Adultery. Had she not been failing in the practice of what
she could not but know, she had found no cause to complain of the difficulty
of that, which she could not know.

Verse. 10. Receive mine instruction, and not money] That is, Rather than money,
as, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, that is, rather than sacrifice.
Knowledge of the Scriptures is the greatest riches, Col. 3.16. Let the word of
Christ^ dwell richly in you, 1 Cor. 1.5. The Corinthians were enriched in all
knowledge. Plato gave three hundred flourens for a Book that he liked. Called
Sophron.
Dionysius said, that Aristippus was always craving money of him; but Plato
desired nothing but Books. What spending of money, and lavishing out of the bag
is there for humane learning? And yet Aristotle himself could say, that a
little knowledge, though but conjectural, about heavenly things, is to be
preferred above much knowledge, though certain, about inferior things.

Verse. 11. For Wisdom is better than Rubies] See the Note on Chap. 3.15.

Verse. 12. I Wisdom dwell with Prudence] I draw all into practice, and teach
men to prove by their own experience, what that good, and holy, and acceptable
will of God is. Of the most that would be held knowing men, it may well be
said, as Tully says the Proverb went of the Athenians; that they used their
wisdom, as men do artificial teeth, for show only: And that they did scire
quae recta sunt, sed facore nolle, know what was right, but had no mind to do
accordingly. Socrates said, there was no difference between (...) and (...),
Wisdom, and Prudence or Moderation; Xenoph. de dictis and factis Socrat.
Since he that knows good things to do them, and evil things to avoid them, is
to be held a wise man, and none else.

And find out knowledge of wit^y inventions] Tending to piety; Not those
toylsome toys, sophismata, quae nec ignoranti nocent, nec sci^ut en^ juvant,
Seneca.
that are hard to come by, but of no use or worth, proof or profit: These are
but laborious loss of time, as Aristotle has it, like an Olive, of Date-stone,
(...). Arist.
hard to crack the one, or cleave the other, but nothing, or nothing worth
ought, when cracked or cloven within either. Wisdom finds her Scholars
somewhat else to do, than to be so busily idle. Witty she allows them to be,
but not wittily wicked, not wise to do evil, inventers of (...) or idle things.
Walk circumspectly, says she, not as fools, but as wise, ^^ing the times,
understanding what the will of the Lord is, and putting it in speedy execution.
Ephesians. 5.^5, 16, 17.
Keep therefore and do it, for this is your wisdom, etc. Deuteronomy. 4.6. (See the
Note there) this will speak you far more witty than those Wits of the World,
who seek out many inventions, Eccles. 7.28. but all to no purpose, and become
vain in their imaginations, their foolish heart being darkened, ^^m. 1.21.

Verse. 13. The fear of the Lord] Which is an high point of heavenly wisdom
(Chap. 1.7.) to the praise whereof this therefore appertains. There are that
make this verse an explanation of the former, thus; I find out the knowledge
of witty inventing, such as are the fear of the Lord, the hatred of evil, yea,
of inward evils, as Pride, Arrogance, etc. Odi fastum istius Ecclesiae. I hate
the pride of that Romish Church, said Basil long since. I hate vain thoughts,
But thy Law do I love, Psalm. 119.113. I hate and abhor lying, verse. 163. Yea, I
hate every false way, both in my self, and others, verse. 104. Thou hate the
works of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate, Rev. 2. Gods people partake of the
Divine nature, and so have God-like both sympathies and antipathies; they not
only leave sin, but loath it, and are at deadly feud with it. They purge
themselves (by this clean fear of God, Psalm. 19.7.) from all pollutions, not of
flesh only, worldly lusts, and gross evils, but of spirit also, that lie more
up in the heart of the Country, as Pride, Arrogance, etc. so Perfecting
holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. There may be some kind of pride in
sincerity, and of humility in hypocrisy. But hypocrisies humility is followed
with pride, and sincerities pride with humility: This latter humility is the
better. And here only it is seemly for virtue to come behind vice. Hypocrisy
is proud, because it is humble; Sincerity is humble, because it is proud.

And the evil way] That is, Custom of committing sin. Viam pro frequentatione
accipiunt Hebraei. And this the godly man does, not that he may appear to do
so, Velleius.
sed quia aliter facere non potuit, (as one falsely and flatteringly said of
Cato) but because having his heart seasoned with this holy fear, he can do no
otherwise.

Verse. 14. Counsel is mine, etc.] Christ is wise in heart, and mighty in
strength, Job 9.4. his Churches both Counselor, Isa. 9.6* and Champion, Isa.
37.23, 24. And though she be but a Virgin daughter of Zion, yet she
despises her adversary, and laughs him to scorn, verse. 22. because she has
one that is in love with her, and will fight her quarrel, who is, De Achille
Homeurs. De Achille C^ullus. Tho 2.2. q. 10. a^t. 10. (...), Hes. (...). Hom.
(...).
Hostibus hand tergo sed forti pectore notus.


Verse. 15. By me Kings reign] How then can the Schoolmen defend Thomas
Aquinas in that Paradox, Dominium and praelatio introducta sunt ex jure humano,
Dominion and Government is of man? This crosses the Apostle, Romans 13.1, 2. and
the wisest of the Heathens.

Verse. 16. And Nobles] So called in the original, from their liberality and
bounty. Hence Luke 22.25. This word is expressed by (...). Bountiful, or
Benefactors, such as are ingenuous, free, munificent, endued with that free
Princely spirit, Psalm. 51.14.

Even all the Judges of the earth] Though happily they be reckoned in the rank
of bad men, but good Princes; such as was Galba, and our Richard the third,
Plin Secund. Dion. Cass.
and Trajan, much magnified for a good Emperor, and yet a Drunkard, a
Baggerer, and a cruel Persecutor.

Verse. 17. I love them that love mee] The Philosopher could say, that if moral
virtue could be seen with mortal eyes, she would stir up wonderful loves of
her self in the hearts of the beholders. How much more then would the Wisdom
of God in a Mystery? 1 Cor. 2.7. that essential wisdom of God especially, the
Lord Jesus, who is totus desiderabilis, altogether lovely, Cant. 5.16. the
desire of all Nations, Hag. 2.7. whom whosoever loves not, deserves to be
double accursed, (...).
1 Cor. 15.22. My love was crucified, said Ignatius, who loved not his life
unto the death, Rev. 22.11. Neither was there any love lost, or can be; For I
love them that love me. And if any man love me, my Father will love him, and
I will love him, and will manifest my self unto him, and we will come unto
him, and make our abode with him, Joh. 14.21, 23. Men do not always
reciprocate, nor return love for love. For my love, Psalm. 109.4, 5. they are
mine adversaries; Yea, they have rewarded me hatred for my love. David lost
his love upon Absalom. Paul upon the Corinthians. Old Andronicus the Greek
Emperor upon his graceless Nephew of the same name. But here is no such danger,
it shall not be easy for any man to out-love Wisdom.

For whereas some one might reply, You are so taken up with States, Ob.
and have such great Suitors, Kings, Princes, Nobles, Judges, as verse. 15, 16.
that it is not for mean men to look for any love from you.

Not so, says Wisdom, for I love them that love me, Sol.
be they never so much below me. Grace be with all them that love the Lord
Jesus insincerity. Tantum velis, and Deus tibi praeoccurret, says Nazianzen.
Ambulas, si amas: Ephesians. 6.23.
Non enim passibus ad Deum, sed affectibus curritur, says Augustine, Thou
walk if thou love; Thou actest if thou affectest.

They that seek me early] As Students sit close to it in the morning. Aurora
musis amica.

Verse. 18. Riches and honor are with mee] I come not unaccompanied, but bring
with me that which is well worth having. The Muses (though Jupiters daughters,
and well deserving) yet are said to have had no Suitors, because they had no
portions. Our Henry the eighth, when he dyed, Engl. Elis.
gave his two daughters, Mary and Elizabeth, but ten thousand pounds apeece.
But this Lady is largely endowed, and yet (such is men's dullness) she is put to
solicit Suitors, by setting forth her great wealth. See the Note on Matthew. 6.33.

Verse. 19. My fruit is better than gold] This Wisdom is as those two golden
Pipes, Zach. 4. through which the two Olive-branches do empty out of themselves
the golden oils of all precious graces, into the Candlestick, the Church;
Hence grace is here called fruits, and Cant. 4.16. Pleasant fruits, and fruits
of the Spirit, Gal. 6.22.

Verse. 20. I lead in the way of righteousness] Which is to say, I got not my
wealth per fas atque nefas, by right and wrong, by wrench and wile. My riches
are not the riches of unrighteousness, the Mammon of iniquity, Luke 16.9. but
are honestly come by, and are therefore like to be durable, v. 18. or (as
others render it) ancient. St. Hierom somewhere says, that most rich men are
either themselves bad men, or heirs of those that have been bad. There is a
profane Proverb amongst us, Happy is that child, whose Father goes to the
Devil. It is reported of Nevessan the Lawyer, that he should say, He that
will not venture his body, shall never be valiant; he that will not venture
his soul, never rich. But Wisdoms walk lies not any such way. God forbid,
says she, that I, or any of mine should take of Satan, Genesis 14.23.
from a thread even to a shoo-latchet, lest he should say, I have made you
rich.

Verse. 21. To inherit substance] Heb. That that is, (...)
that that has some tack or substance in it, some firmity, or solid
consistency. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? Outward things
are not, but only in opinion, in imagination: In semblance, not in substance.
The pomp of this world is but a fancy, Act. 25.33. the glory of it a conceit,
Matthew. 4. the whole fashion of it a mere notion, 1 Cor. 7.31. Riches get them
great Eagles wings, Prove. 23.5.
they fly away without once taking leave of the owner, leaving nothing but the
print of their talons in his heart, to torment him. When we grasp them most
greedily, we embrace nothing but smoke, which wrings tears from our eyes, and
vanishes into nothing. Only true grace is durable substance; the things above
outlast the days of heaven, and run parallel with the life of God, and line of
eternity.

Verse. 22. The Lord possessed mee] Not created me, as the Arrians out of the
Septuagint pressed it, to prove Christ a creature. (...).


Before his works of old] Heb. Ante opera suo, ante tunc, id est, priusquam
quis dicere potest, tunc, before there was any either now or then, before all
time, therefore from all eternity* For whatsoever was before the world and time
(that was created with the world) must needs be eternal.

Verse. 23. I was set up] Coronata sum, I was crowned, so some render it.
Inuncta fu^, I was anointed (^o others) for King, Priest, and Prophet of my
Church. And to this high honor I grew not up by degrees, but had it presently
from before all beginnings.

Verse. 24. When there were no depths] In mentioning Gods works of Creation,
some observe here, that wisdom proceeds from the lower elements to the
superior and heavenly bodies: She begins with the earth, verse. 23. goes on
here to the waters, and so to the air called Streets (rendered Fields) verse. 26.
that is, the vast element of the air; which compared with the far less elements
of earth and water, must needs seem exceeding large, spacious, and open, as
streets, or fields. Lastly, by the highest part of the dust of the world, the
Hebrew Doctors understand the element of fire, Judicium sit penes Lectorem. Let
the Reader judge.

Verse. 25. Was I brought forth] Or, begotten: Thus Wisdom describes her
eternity in humane words and expressions, for our better apprehension. Which
while Arrius either knew not, or weighed not, he here hence took occasion to
oppose the Deity of our Savior, and to propagate that damnable error in the
Eastern Churches, to the ruin of many souls. This Archheretick Arrius sitting
on the stool to ease nature at Constantinople, voided there his entrails. And
now Mahometisme is there as the excrement of Arrius.

Verse. 26. Nor the fields, nor the highest] See the Note on verse. 24.

Verse. 27. When he prepared the heaven] Or caused them to be prepared, took
order to have it done, viz. by me, who was with him, and by whom he made the
worlds, Joh. 3.35.
Heb. 1.3. Joh. 1.3. Col. 1.16. For the Father loves the Son, and has put all
things into his hand.

When he set a compass] Or, drew a circle round about the earth, meaning the
Out-spread firmament of heaven, Genesis 1.6. Howbeit the Hebrews understand it of
the world of Angels, called by them the third world, or the third heaven;
whereunto St. Paul also seems to allude, 2 Cor. 12.2.

Verse. 28. When he established the clouds above] That they might be kept
there, as it were in Tuns and Bottles, till he would have them to pour down
their dew, or rain.

Verse. 29. When he appointed the foundations] That it should remain
unmovable, though it hang in the air, as it were by Geometry.

Ovid.
Terra pilae similis nullo fulcimine nixa,
A^re suspenso tam grave pendet ^nus.
Verse. 30. Then I was by him] Accursed then for ever be that blasphemous
assertion of the Arrians, (...), There was a time when he was not. This
Scripture so much abused by them, makes utterly against them. But Heretics
pervert the Scriptures, says St. Peter, 2 Pet. 3.15. A metaphor from those who
put a man upon the rack, and make him speak that which he never thought.
Tertullian calls Marcion the Heretic, Mus Ponticus, because of his arroding
and gnawing the Scripture, to make it serviceable to his errors.

(...).
As one brought up with him] Or, as a nourisher; that is, as a maintainer and
upholder of that his excellent workmanship of Creation, Heb. 1.3. The
Septuagint render it, I was with him making all fine and trim, Eram apud cum
aptans; so Irenaeus.

More pueri qui alatur, and risum captans ac concilians. Mercer.
Rejoicing alwayes] Or, laughing with him. This (as the very Jews are forced to
confess) does notably set forth that unspeakable sweetness and joy that the
blessed God finds in the apprehension of his own wisdom, which (say they) is
one and the same with God himself.

Verse. 31. Rejoicing in the habitable part] That is, In the humane nature,
wherein the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily, by means of the hypostatical
union. Or in the Saints, whose hearts the Lord Christ inhabiteth by faith. Or
in the work of Creation, which Christ did without either tools or tool.

Verse. 32. Now therefore hearken unto me^] Audite senem juvenes, said Augustus
to his seditious Soldiers, and had audience: And shall not Wisdom, that is so
ancient, as before the Creation, so eminent, as to make and conserve a world,
so gracious with the Father, etc. shall not she be hearkened to?

For blessed are they] And blessedness is the mark that every man shoots at.

Verse. 33. Hear instruction, and be wise] This way wisdom enters into the
soul. Hear therefore: For else there is no hopes; Hear howsoever. Austin coming
to Ambrose to have his ears tickled, had his heart touched.

Verse. 34. Waiting at the posts of my doors] At the Schools and Synagogues, say
the Hebrews, where men should come in with the first, and go forth with the
last, as door-keepers do, which was the office that David desired, Psalm. 84.

Verse. 35. For who so finds me, finds life] Lest any man should hold it
too hard a task to wait at Wisdoms gates (as Princes guards, or as the Levites
did in the Temple) she tells them what they shall have for so doing.

And shall obtain favour] Which is better than life; Gods favor is no empty
favor; It is not like the Winters Sun, that casts a goodly countenance when it
shines but gives little heat or comfort. As air lights not without the Sun, nor
wood heats without fire, so neither can any thing yield comfort without Gods
favor.

Verse. 36. Wrongeth his own soul] Rapit animam suam. He plunders his own soul
of its happiness: yea, he cruelly cuts the throat thereof, being ambitious of
his own destruction.

CHAP. IX. Verse. 1. Wisdome]
HEbr. Wisdoms in the plural; and this, either honoris causa, for honors
sake, or else by an Ellypsis, as if the whole of it were Wisdom of Wisdoms,
as the Song of Songs for a most excellent Song, Cant. 1.1. Junius renders it
Summa sapientia: See the Note of Chap. 1.20.

Has builded her house] That is, the Church, 1 Timothy 3.15. See the Note there.

She has hewn out her seven pillars] Pillars, and polished pillars. Any thing
is good enough to make up a mud-wall; but the Churches Pillars are of Marble;
and those, not rough, but hewn; her safety is accompanied with beauty.

Verse. 2. She has killed her Beasts] Christ provideth for his the best of the
best, fat things full of marrow, wines on the lees, etc. Isa. 26. his own flesh
which is meat indeed, his own blood which is drink indeed, Joh. 6.55. besides
that continual feast of a good conscience, whereat the holy Angels (says
Luther) are as Cooks, and Butlers, and the blessed Trinity joyful guests.

She has mingled her Wine] That it may not inflame or distemper. Christ spoke
as the people were able to hear, lisping to them in their own low language; So
must all his Ministers accommodating themselves to the meanest capacities.
Mercers note here is, Cum sobrietate tractandae Scripturae. The Scriptures are
to be handled with sobriety.

She has also furnished her table] So that it even sweats with variety of
precious viands wherewith her guests are daily and daintily fed. Mr. Latimer
says, That the assurance of Salvation, is the sweetmeats of this stately
Feast. But what a do^t was Cardinal Bobba, who speaking in commendation of the
Library of Bonony (which being in an upper-room has under it a
Victualling-house, Angel. Roccha in Vatican. p. 395.
and under that a Wine-cellar) had thought he had hit it, in applying
thereunto this Text, Wisdom has built her an house, has m^ngled her wine,
and furnished her table?

Verse. 3. She has sent forth her Maidens] So Ministers are called (in
prosecution of the allegory, for it is fit that this great Lady should have
suitable attendants) to teach them innocence, purity, and sedulity, as Maidens;
keeping the word in sincerity, and not adulterating and corrupting it, as
Vintners often do their Wines, or Hucksters their Wares. Hence Isaiah also
puts the Prophets and Evangelists in the Feminine gender, Mebashereth, Isa.
52.7.

She cries upon, etc.] She, together with her maids, cries; she puts not
off all the business to them, but has a hand in it her self. We are workers
together with God, says Paul.

Verse. 4. Who so is simple] and withal perswadeable; that have not yet
contracted that callum obductum, corneas fibras, brawny breasts, horney
heart strings.

She says to him] It is Christ then that speaks in his Ministers, He that
hears you, hears me: Ye received it not as the word of man, but as it is
indeed, the Word of the ever-living God.

Verse. 5. Come eat of my bread] Stand not off in a sinful modesty; say not, I
am not worthy, etc. but come, for the Master calls you, as they said to the
blind man, who therefore came. And those reculant guests, by not coming when
invited, might not taste of Christ's Supper; for they were unworthy, Matthew. 22.

And drink of the wine which I have mingled] Lo here a full feast, not a dry
feast. Liranus notes on this Chapter, that the Eucharist was anciently
delivered in both kinds: But because of the danger of spilling the blood, the
Church ordained that Laymen should have the bread only. Caranza.
The Council of Constance comes in with a Non-obstante against Christ's
institution, withholding the Cup from the Sacrament.

Verse. 6. Forsake the foolish] No coming to this Feast in the tottered rags of
the old Adam; You must relinquish your former evil courses and companies. There
are that read the words thus, Forsake, O foolish ones, viz. your own ways, and
live.

And go in the way of understanding] Renounce your vices, and practice the
contrary graces. True repentance stands in an entire change of the whole man,
from all that is evil, to all that is good.

Verse. 7. He that reproves a scorner] This, with the three next verses, may
seem to come in by way of Parenthesis: And they do not obscurely intimate, what
manner of hearers Ministers mostly meet with, viz. such as our Savior did,
(...)
Luke 16.14. But the Pharisees that were covetous, derided, or blew their noses
at him, as One renders it. And such as long before him the Prophet Isaiah did,
Chap. 28.10. Precept upon precept, line upon line, etc. One observes that that
was a scoff put upon the Prophet: And is as if they should say, Here is nothing
but line upon line, precept upon precept. The very sound of the words in the
Original (Zau le zau, kau, lakau) carries a taunt, as scornful people by the
tone of their voice, and riming words, scorn at such as they despise.

Verse. 8. Reprove not a scorner] See my Commonplace of Admonition. Look how
Dogs prefer loathsome carrion before the sweetest odours, and would fl^e in the
faces of such as would drive them from it: So is it here.

And he will love thee] When he has well considered he will; though for
present he may seem to do otherwise* As Asa swaggered with the Prophet, and put
him in prison. We read in the Ecclesiastical History, that Agapetus Bishop of
Rome, being sent by Theodatus King of Goths to Constantinople on an Embassage
to Justinian, and having obtained a peace, he was earnestly entreated by the
Emperor to subscribe and confirm the Heresy of Eutyches. This when he
utterly refused to do, the Emperor threatened him in case he did not. Agapetus
thereto boldly replied, I had a desire to wait upon Justinian, whom I took to
be a most pious Prince, but now I perceive him to be a most violent
persecutor, a second Dioclesian. With this free reproof, and Gods blessing
withal, Justinian was so wrought upon, that he presently embraced the true
Faith; and banishing Bishop Anthemius, a great propagator of the Eutychian
Heresy, Funcius.
he set up Menna an Orthodox Divine in his room, whom Agapetus consecrated, if
Platina may be believed. David loved Nathan the better while he lived, for
dealing so plainly with him: Aug. Comp.
And named him a Commissioner for the declaring of his Successor, 1 King. 1. So
Alipius loved Austin for reproving him.

Verse. 9. Give admonition to a wise man] This is an Alms that the poorest may
give, and be never the poorer, but the better. For by instructing another, a
man engages himself, lest he hear, Physician heal thy self, Turpe est
doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum. See my common place of Admonition.

Verse. 10. The fear of the Lord] See the Note on Chap. 1.7. Here it is given as
a reason why wise men are the better for sharp and seasonable admonition,
because the fear of the Lord is in them. This makes them, when they are
reproved of all, fall upon their faces, worship God, and say, God is in you of
a truth, 1 Cor. 14.26. What shall we say unto my Lord? What shall we speak?
How shall we justify our selves? God has found out the iniquity of thy
servants, etc. Genesis 44.16.

And the knowledge of the holy] That is, of the holy God. Holy is here in the
plural number, importing the Trinity of Persons, as likewise Josh. 24.19.
Howbeit we may well take in here, holy Angels and Saints, whose Kingdom is in
Daniel said to be the same with the Kingdom of God, Dan. 7.22, 27. and whose
knowledge is the right understanding of Gods will revealed in his Word.

Verse. 11. For by me thy daies] This verse depends upon verse. 6. See the Note
on verse. 7. Those that embrace wisdom, shall be paid for their pains, either
in money, or monies-worth: Either they shall dye, as Abraham did, with a good
gray-head, or else with Josiah, they shall live long in a little time, and then
live for ever in Heaven. Henoch had the shortest life of any of the ten
Patriarchs: But then he was recompensed in the longest life of his Son
Methusalah, but especially, in that God took him to glory. Besides, that though
he departed the world soon, yet fulfilled he much time, as Mr. Hooker has
it. Eccles posit. l. 4. p. 168.


And the year of thy life shall be encreased] Heb. They shall increase the
years of thy life. That is, they that survive thee, shall perpetuate thy
memory, thy good name shall never dye. Some live to be their own Executors for
their good name; and yet they see them (not honestly) buried before themselves
dye: Nay, many are as those, Job 27.15, 23. hissed and kicked off this Stage of
the World, buried before they are half dead. There is scarce a vicious man,
whose name is not rotten before his carcass. On the other side, a good man's
name is oft-times the heir to his life. Or, if obscured for a time, as the
Martyrs were, yet as the Sun breaks through the cloud that masketh it, so God
shall bring forth their righteousness as the light, and their judgment as the
noonday, Psalm. 37.6.

Verse. 12. If thou be wise, thou shalt] The benefit shall be thine own.
Plutarch reports of the Palm Tree, that it yields to the Babylonians 360.
several commodities; And is therefore in great esteem amongst them. How should
men esteem of found wisdom, since there is a (...) in it, 1 Timothy 4.8. a
thousand commodities to be reaped by it?

Thou alone shall bear it] Thy scorning shall not, as thou think, hurt him
that tendereth thy salvation. For as the air, when beaten, is not hurt, no, nor
so much as divided, but returns to his place, and becomes thicker: Ita animus
recti conscius, and ad optima erectus, non admittit irridentium flatus, nec
sentit, says One; so an honest heart, set for Heaven, slights the contempts of
graceless persons, and pitties them that jeer when they should fear, as much as
good Lot once did his profane Sons in Law. His words to such are like those of
the Prophet; Be not ye mockers, lest your bands be increased; Isa. 28.22.
with 10. See verse. 7. of this Chapter.

Verse. 13. A foolish woman is clamorous] This woman is Folly, as that woman
sitting in the Epah is wickedness, Zach. 5.7. Lavater is of opinion, that as by
Wisdom is meant Christ, so by this foolish woman here is meant Antichrist; to
whom therefore he finely fitteth and applies all the following words.

Is clamorous] Folly is full of words, and of a lavish tongue: her factours are
extreme talkative, and usually lay on more words than the matter will bear: A
great deal of small talk you shall usually have from them. A fool also is full
of words, Eccles. 10.14
says Solomon, and this fond custom of his is there expressed by way of
imitation, in his vain tautologies: A man cannot tell what shall be; and what
shall be after him who can tell? Eccles. 10.24. The basest things are ever the
most plentiful. Some kind of Mice breed a hundred and twenty young ones in one
nest; whereas the Lion and Elephant bear but one at once; so the least wit
yields the most words. Aristophanes and Lucian, when they describe fools, they
call them (...), Gapers, or Open-mouthed. Guiltiness is ever clamorous, and the
most lewd are most loud, Act. 7.27, 28.

Verse. 14. For she sits at the door] In a Harlots habit, to see and be
seen, the guise and garb of Harlots. Tully wittily compares the Greek tongue
to an ambitious strumpet, quae multo luxu superfluat, which overlasheth in too
much bravery: But the Latin tongue to an honest and modest Matron, cui nihil
deest quod ad honestum pertineat mundiciem, That wants nothing pertaining to a
necessary neatness. Such a like comparison between Wisdom and Folly is here
made by Solomon.

Mat. 24.
Verse. 15. That go right on their way] She fights at the fairest, seeks to
seduce the forwardest. They shall deceive if it were possible, the very elect.
Flies settle upon the sweetest perfumes, when they are cold, and corrupt them.

Mat. 7.
Verse. 16. Who is simple] Wisdoms own words, verse. 4. Take heed, says our
Savior; they come unto you in sheeps clothing, but trust them not: for with
fair words and flattering speeches, they deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans
16. Samuel himself could not have spoken more gravely, severely, divinely to
Saul, than the f^iend at Endor did; when the Devil himself puts on gravity and
religion, who can marvel at the hypocrisy of men?

Verse. 17. Stolen waters are sweet] Forbidden pleasures are most pleasing to
Sensualists, who count no mirth but madness, no pleasure, unless they may have
the Devil to their play-fellow. Venison is nothing so sweet, they say, as when
it is stolen.

Ovid.
Quod licet ingratum est; quod non licet, acrius urit:
Sic interdictis imminet ager aquis.
Men long to be meddling with the murdering morsels of sin, which nourish not,
but rent and consume the belly that receives them. Many eat that on earth, In
terris manducant quod apud inferos digerant. Augustine.
that they digest in Hell.

Verse. 18. That the dead are there] See the Notes on Chapter 2.18. and 7.27.

CHAP. X. Verse. 1. The Proverbs.]
PRoperly so called. (See Chap. 1.1.) For the nine former Chapters are a kind
of common places, or continued discourses, premised as a Preface to these
ensuing wise and grave sentences tending much to the information of the mind,
and reformation of the manners, and containing things profitable for all sorts
of people. They are not unfitly compared by a Divine to a bag full of sweet and
fragrant spices, which shuffled or shaken together, or taken single, yield a
sweet odor: Or to stars in the firmament, each in it self glorious and
independent of another, yet all receive their light from the Sun.

A wise Son makes a glad Father] Children are certain cares, (...). Plut.
but uncertain comforts. Every Son should be an Abner, that is, his Fathers
light; and every Daughter an Abigail, her Fathers joy. Eve promised her self
much in her Cain, and David did the like in his Absalom. Sed, fallitur augario
spes bona saepe suo, they were both deceived. Samuel succeeds Eli in his cross,
as well as his place, though not in his sin; and had cause enough to call his
untoward children (as Augustus did) tres vomicas, tria carcinomata, so many
ulcerous sores, mattery impostumes. Virtue is not as Lands, inheritable. All
that is traduced with the seed, is either evil, or not good. Let Parents labor
to mend by education, what they have marred by propagation; And when they have
done all, pray God persuade Japhet, lest else they be put to wish one day, as
Augustus did, Sueton. c. 6.
O that I had never married, or never had children. And let children cheer up
their Parents, as Joseph, Samuel, and Solomon did; and as Epaminondas, who was
wont to say, Corn. Nepos.
Se long maximum suarum laudum fructum capere quod ^arum spectatores haberet
parents, that he joyed in nothing more, than that his Parents were yet alive,
to take comfort in his brave achievements. For otherwise, God will take them
in hand, as he did Abimelech, to whom he rendered the wickedness done to his
Father, Judge. 9.5. And as he did Absalom, whom he trussed up in the height of
his rebellious practices, with his own immediate hand; Or else he will punish
them in, and by their posterity, which shall either be none ( Prove. 20.20.
compared with 2 Samuel 14.7.) or worse than none; as he, Mr. Fullers Holy-state.
who when his aggrieved Father complained that never man had so undutiful a
child as he had; yes, said his son (with less grace than truth) my
Grandfather had.

The heaviness of his mother] The Mother is mentioned (though the Father happily
as heavy) first, as most faulted it her children miscarry, Prove. 24.15. Next,
as most slighted by them, Prove. 15.20. And lastly, as most impatient of such an
affliction. Rebecca was weary of her life by reason of the daughters of Heth
brought in to her by Esau, Genesis 27.45. If they lie lusking at home, mothers
have the misery of it; if they do worse abroad, the worst is made of it to the
mother at home, by fame that loud liar.

Verse. 2. Treasures of wickedness] Our Savior calls it Mammon of iniquity,
Luke 16.^.
that next odious name to the Devil. Most men's care is how to grasp and get
wealth for their children, -- rem rem, quocunque modo rem. Virtus post nummos,
etc. But what says a grave Author? Mr. Bolton.
Better leave thy child a Wallet to beg from door to door, than a cursed heard
of evil-gotten goods. There is for most part lucrum in arca, damnum in
conscientia, gain in the purse, August.
but loss in the conscience.

But righteousness delivers from death] Piety, though poor, delivers from
the second death, and from the first too, as to the evil of it. For as Christ
took away the guilt of sin, not sin it self; so he has taken away, not death,
but the sting of death from all believers; making it to such, of a curse, a
blessing; of a punishment, a benefit; of a Trap-door to hell, a Portal to
heaven; a Postern to let out temporal life, but a Street-door to let in eternal
life.

Verse. 3. The Lord will not suffer the soul of the righteous] That refuses to
enrich himself by evil arts, and to rise by wicked principles. For it might be
objected, If I strain not my conscience, I may starve for it. Ob. Sol.
Fear not that says the Wiseman, Faith fears not famine; Necessaries thou
shall be sure of, Psalm. 37.25, 26. Psalm. 34.11. Superfluities thou art not to
stand upon, 1 Timothy 6.8. The Hebrews by righteousness in the former verse
understand Almsdeeds, as Dan. 4.24* 27. (See the Note on Matthew. 7.1.) and so
the sense here may be. (...).
The righteous, though he give much to the poor, shall ^^e never the poorer;
since not getting, but giving is the way to thrive. See my Commonplace of Alms.

But he casts away the substance of the wicked] For either they lose it, or
live beside it, and are little the better for it. He that gotteth riches, and
not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and in his end be
a fool: God will make a poor fool of him quickly. Quo mihi divitias queis non
conceditur ^ti? Jer. 17.11.
And the like may be said of the illiberal and tenacious person. See the Note
on Chap. 3.27. Niggards fear to lose their wealth by giving, but fear not to
lose their wealth and souls, and all, by keeping it.

Ob. Sol.
Verse. 4. He becomes poor] Lest any should say, If God do all, we need do the
less; Doing you must be, says the Wiseman, or else the beggar will catch you
by the back; Labor also you must with your hands, working the thing that is
good, that ye may have to give to him that needs, Ephesians. 4.28.

But the hand of the diligent] Or of the nimble, that do motitare, says
Kimchi, are active and agile, that will lose nothing for looking after, but
take care of smallest matters that all go right, being frugal and parcimonious
of time, husbanding the opportunity of thriving and plenty. How did Boaz follow
the business himself? How were his eyes in every corner, on the servants, and
on the Reapers, yea on the Gleaners too? He does even lodge in the midst of
his husbandry, Ruth 2. and 3. as knowing well the truth of that proverbial
sentence, Columel.
Procul a villa sua dissitus jacturae vicinus. He that is far from his
business, is not far from loss.

Verse. 5. He that gathers in Summer] A well-chosen season is the greatest
advantage of any action; which as it is seldom found in haste, so it is too
often lost in delay. The men of Issachar were in great account with David,
because they had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do,
and when to do it, 1 Chronicles. 12.32. So are they in great account with God for
their wisdom, who observe and use the season of well-doing.

But he that sleeps in harvest] i. e. That lets slip his opportunity; as
Plutarch writes of Hannibal, that when he could have taken Rome he would not;
when he would, he could not. And as its storied of Charles King of Sicily and
Jerusalem, that he was called Carolus Cunctator, Charles the Lingerer, not (in
the sense as Fabius) because he stayed till opportunity came, but because he
stayed till opportunity was lost.

Verse. 6. Blessings are upon the head] Plentifully and conspicuously; they
shall abound with blessings, Prove. 28.20. As the fear of the Lord is not only
in them, but upon them, 2 Chronicles. 19.7. so blessings of all sorts, a confluence
of all spiritual and temporal comforts and contentments, shall be, not only
with them, but upon them, so that nothing shall hinder it. See Gal. 6.16. They
are blessed, and they shall be blessed, Genesis 27.33. Neither shall any roaring
or repining Esau be able to reverse it.

But violence covers the mouth of the wicked] They shall be certainly
shamed, condemned, executed; as Haman whose face they covered, Esth. 7.8. and
shortly after strangled. And as Sir Gervaise Ellowayes Lieutenant of the Tower,
hanged on Tower Hill, for poisoning Sir Thomas Overbury his prisoner. This Sir
Gervaise being on the Gallows, freely confessed that he had often in his playing
at Cards and Dice, wished that he might be hanged, if it were not so and so,
and therefore confessed it was just upon him.

Verse. 7. The memory of the just is blessed] Demetrius had a good report of the
truth, 3 John 12. In the Hebrew tongue the same word signifies a good name,
and a blessing. This is one of those blessings mentioned verse. 6. that shall
be heaped upon holy men. Holy and reverend is his Name, Psalm. 111.9. How comes
Gods Name to be reverend, but by being holy? Be good, and do good, so shall
thy name be heir to thy life; yea, when thou art laid in thy grave, thy stock
remains, goes forward, and shall do, till the day of Doom.

But the name of the wicked shall rot] and stink as putrified flesh. Hypocrites
then must be detected, though they carry it never so clearly; how else shall
they be detested, and stink above ground? Simon Magus so handled the matter,
that Philip mistook him for a Believer, and baptized him; but Peter soon smelt
him out, and laid him open in his colors. He that perverteth his ways shall
be known. Prove. 10.9. The Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of
iniquity, for all their cunning contrivances, Psalm. 125.5.

Verse. 8. The wise in heart shall receive Commandement] i.e. Submit to Gods
holy Word without replies and cavils. This is check to the brave gallants of
our age, which exercise their ripe heads and fresh wits in wrestling with the
truth of God, and take it for a glory to give it a foil. The Athenians
encountered with Paul, and had argument for argument against him, that Christ
was not the Savior of the world, that he was not risen from the dead, etc.
This showed they were not wise in heart, though reckoned chief among the worlds
wisards.

But a prating fool shall fall] Or, Be beaten; such a fool was Diotrephes, 3 John (...).
10. Who prated or trifled against Saint John with malicious words, and might
have been therefore surnamed Nugax, as Rodulphus (that succeeded Anselm in the Sea of Canterbury) was. Godw. Catal.


Verse. 9. He that walks uprightly, walks surely] Because keeping within
Gods Precincts, he keeps under his protection: as the King undertakes to
secure him that travels the high way, and betwixt Sun and Sun. He is tutus sub
umbra l^onis, safe under the hollow of Gods hand, under the shadow of his wing,
Psalm. 91.1.

Shall be known] All shall out to his utter disgrace. See verse. 7. Or he
shall be known, by some exemplary judgment of God inflicted upon him, for a
terror to others; as one that is hanged up in Gibbets.

Verse. 10. He that winketh with the eye] That is, loath to stand to those
truths that shall bring him to suffering. Or he that winketh wiles; for all
winking is not condemned. See Joh. 13.34.

Causes sorrow] scil. To his own heart, sins against his own soul: or
causes sorrow, i. e. sin, for so sorrow is taken for sin, Eccles. 11.10.

But a prating fool shall fall] He that runs himself upon needless danger,
shall come to ruin. See Prove. 28.25. and the Note above, verse. 8.

Verse. 11. The mouth of a righteous man is a well of life] Vena vitae ^s justi.
A fountain runs after it has run, so does a good man's mouth uncessantly utter
the words of truth and soberness, more perennis aquae. Act. 25.26.
See the reason hereof, Psalm. 37.30 31. The Law of his God is in his heart,
that Law of his mind, Romans 7.23. that counterpane of the written Law, Heb.
8.10. that good treasure, Matthew. 12.35. that is daily drawn out, and yet not
diminished, Salienti aquarum fonti undas si tollas, nec exhauritur, nec
extennatur, sed dulcescit. Take water from a well, it loses nothing, but
becomes better and sweeter.

But violence covereth] See the Note on verse. 6.

Verse. 12. Hatred stirs up strifes] Especially when hatred is grown from a
passion to an habit; which is, when the heart is so settled in an alienation and
estrangement from the person hated, that it grows to wish, and desire, and seek
his hurt. I could like that exposition well if it were not Calvin's, said
Maldonat; and that reformed Religion, if Luther had not had a hand in it, said
George Duke of Saxony.

But love covers all sins] See the Note on 1 Pet. 4.8. and on 1 Cor. 13.4.
Love has a large mantle. If I should find a Bishop committing Adultery, (said
Constantine the great) I would cover that foul fact with mine Imperial Robe,
rather than it should come abroad to the scandal of the weak, Eusebius.
and the scorn of the wicked. Love either dissembleth a trespass (if it be
light) or by a wise and gentle reproof seeks to reclaim the offender, claps a
plaster on the sore, and then covers it with her hand, as we have seen
Chirurgions do. See the Note on Levit. 19.17. Lutherus commodius sentit quam
loquitur, dum effervescit, said Cruciger: So Melancthon, Sciebam horridius
scripturum Lutherum quam sentit. The sayings, doings of others are reverenter
glossanda, to have a reverent, a fair, and favorable gloss put upon them, as
one said once of the Pontifician Laws. This is love.

Verse. 13. In the lips of him, etc.] Grace is poured into his lips, as Psalm.
45.2. and he poures it out as fast, for the good of others; who do therefore
admire him, as they did our Savior, Luke 4.22.

But a Rod is for the back] That since he will not hear the word, he may hear
the Rod, and smart for his uncounsellableness, Mic. 6.9. He that trembles not
in hearing, shall be broken to pieces in feeling, says Bradford.

Verse. 14. Wise men lay up knowledge] To know when to speak, and when to be
silent. It is a great skill to be able to time a word, Isa. 50.4. to set it
upon the wheels, Prove. 25.11. How forcible are right words? Job 6.25.

But the mouth of the foolish] An open mouth is a purgatory to the Master. Nemo
stultus tacere potest, Eccles. 10.
says Solon. A fool tells all, says Solomon. And, Vt quisque est
dissolutissima vitae, ita est solutissimae linguae, says Seneca. A fools bolt
is soon shot, and as soon retorted oft-times upon himself.

Verse. 15. The rich man's wealth, etc.] Wealthy worldlings think themselves
simply the better and the safer for their hoards and heaps of riches. The best
of us are more ready to trust in uncertain riches, than in the Living God, who
gives us all things richly to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6.17. Surely this should humble
us, that riches that should be our rises to raise us up to God, or glasses to
see the love of God in, our corrupt nature uses them as clouds, as clogs, etc.
yea sets them up in Gods place, and says to the fine gold, Thou art my
confidence, Job 31.24.

The destruction of the poor is their poverty] They are devoured by the richer
Cannibals ( Psalm. 14.4.) as the lesser fish are by the greater. Men go over the
hedge where it is lowest. Poor and afflicted are joined together, Zeph. 3.12.
So are to want, and to be abased, Phil. 4.12.

Verse. 16. The labor of the righteous, etc.] If the righteous man may but
sweat out a poor living, get enough to bear his charges home to Heaven, have
enough to serve his turn here, be it but food and raiment, he is content.
Cibus and potus sunt divitiae Christianorum. The true Christian desires but
meat and drink. 1 Timothy 6.8.


The fruit of the Wicked] Or the revenues of the wicked are wasted upon their
lusts, which to seek to satisfy, is an endless labor: besides the danger of
fathomless perdition, 1 Timothy 6.4.

Verse. 17. He is in the way of life] Rich fools refuse reproof; hold
themselves above admonition (Tange montes and fumigabunt) and are therefore by
the just judgment of God, led through a fools Paradise, into a true Prison.
Divitibus ideo amicus de^st, quia nihil deest. Rich men have few faithful
counselors.

Verse. 18. He that hides hatred, etc.] These are dangerous creatures that
thus lie at the catch, and wait advantages to do a man mischief, as Cain dealt
by Abel, Absalom by Amnon, Joab by Amasa, Judas by Jesus, Tuta frequensque via
est, etc.

And he that utters a slander, is a fool] Because he has no command of his
passions, as the former seems to have, because close in cloaking his malice,
who yet is a fool too before God.

Verse. 19. In the multitude of words] In multiloquio stultiloquium. Many words
are hardly well managed. Non est ejusdem, says one, It is seldom seen that a
man of many words miscarries not.

But he that refraineth his lips] As Elihu did, Job 32.11. and as Epaminondas
is worthily praised by Plutarch for this, quod nemo plura nosset, and pauciora
loqueretur; that no man knew more, and spoke less than he did.

Verse. 20. The tongue of the just is as choice silver] He scatters pearls,
Mat. 7.6. he throws abroad treasure, Mat. 12.35. even Apples of Gold in
shrines of Silver, Prove. 25.11. I will turn to the people a pure language,
says God, Zeph. 3.9. a lip of excellency, Prove. 17.7. the language of Heaven.
As William the Conqueror sought to bring in the French tongue here, by
enjoining children to use no other in schools, Lawyers to practice in French;
no man was graced, Daniels Hist.
but he that spoke French, etc.

The heart of the wicked is little worth] Est quasi parum, is as little as need
to be. He is ever either hatching Cockatrice Eggs, or weaving Spiders Webs,
as the Prophet has it: Vanity or villainy is his whole study, and his daily
discourse. Isa. 59.5.


Verse. 21. The lips of the righteous feed many] A great housekeeper he is,
has his doors ever open; and though himself be poor, yet he makes many rich,
2 Cor. 6.10. he well knows, that to this end God put Honey and Milk under his
tongue, Cant. 3.11. that he might look to this Spiritual lip-feeding: to this
end has he communicated to him those rivers of water, Joh. 7.38. that they may
flow from him, to quench that world of wickedness, that being set on fire of
Hell, would set on fire the whole course of Nature, Jam. 3.6. They are empty
vines that bear fruit to themselves, Hos. 10.1. (...).
Those are void houses, we say, where the doors daily open not. The people hung
upon our Saviors lips, as the young Bird does on the Damms bill, Luke 19.43.
Bishop Ridley preached every Lord's Day, and Holy Day, except let by some
weighty business: Act. and Mon. fol. 1559.
to whose Sermons the people resorted (says Master Fox) swarming about him
like Bees, and coveting the sweet juice of his gracious discourses. Look how
Joseph nourished his Fathers household with Bread according to their Families,
or according to the mouths of their Families, Genesis 47.12. So does the
righteous man those of his own charge especially. Chepi tappam.
Welfare Popery for that (says a grave Divine.) I have heard old folks talk,
M. Sam. Hier.
that when in those days they had Holy-bread (as they called it) given them at
Church, they would bear a part of it to those that did abide at home: So should
Masters of Families carry home the bread of life to their Households.

But fools dye for want of wisdome] By their either refusing or abusing the
food of their souls (as the Pharisees) they pine away in their iniquities,
Levit. 26.39.

Verse. 22. The blessing of the Lord it makes rich] As is to be seen in the
examples of the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and others. Whereas there
is a curse upon unlawful practices though men be industrious as in Jeho^achim,
Jer. 22. And all our policies without prayer are but Arena sine calce, Sand
without Lime, they will not hold together.

And he adds no sorrow with it] Those three vultures shall be driven away
that constantly feed on the wealthy worldlings heart; Care in getting, Fear in
keeping, Grief in losing the things of this life. God gives to his wealth
without woe, store without sore, gold without guilt, one little drop whereof
troubles the whole sea of all outward comforts. Richard the third had a whole
Kingdom at command, and yet could not rest in his bed for disquietment of mind.
Polydor Virgil thus writes of his Dream that night before Bosworth-field: That
he thought all the Devils in Hell pulled and haled him in most hideous and ugly
shapes, and concludes of it at last: I do not think it was so much his dream,
as his evil conscience that bred those terrors.

Verse. 23. It is a sport to a fool to do mischief] He is then merriest, when
he has the Devil for his play-fellow: He danceth to Hell in his bolts, and is
passing well a paid for his woeful bondage. Was he a Father or a Monster (think
you) that playing with his own Child, for a pastime, put his thumbs in the
boys eyes, and thrust out the balls thereof? Speed.
This was Robert de Beliasme Earl of Shrewsbury in the reign of our Henry the
first, Anno Dom. 1111. And what a mad sport was that of Joab and Abner, 2 Samuel
2.14. to see and set those youngsters of Helkath Hazzurim to sheath their
swords in their fellows bowels? And that of Nero, who set the City of Rome on
fire for his pleasure, whiles he played on his Harp the destruction of Troy?

But a man of understanding has wisdome] Viz. For his sport or delight. It is
his meat and drink, his Honey and Honeycomb, etc. Lib^nter omnibus omnes opes
concesserim, ut mihi liceat, vi nulla interpellante, isto modo in literis
vivere, says Cicero. I would give all the wealth in the world, Lib. 9. Epist.
that I might live altogether in my Study, and have nothing to trouble me. Leo.
Digges. Slatt. o^ 1 Ep. to Thessal. Ep. dedic Peach. Comp Gentle. Idem in his
valley of vanity. p. 116.
Creed mihi extingui du^ce esset Mathematicarum artium studio, says another;
Believe me, it were a dainty death, to dye studying the Mathematics. Nusquam
requiem inven^ nisi in libro and claustro, says a third; All the comfort I
have is in a Book, and a Cloister, or Closet. Mentior if my soul accord him
not, says learned Doctor Slatter. The old Lord Burley (Lord high Treasurer) to
his dying day would carry always a Tullies Offices about him, either in his
bosom or pocket. And the Emperor Charles the Fifth, took such delight in the
Mathematics, that even in the midst of his whole Army, in his Tent, he sat
close at his study; having for that purpose as his instructor, Turrianus of
Cremona evermore with him. So sweet is the knowledge of Human Arts to those
that have tasted them: How much more the knowledge of the Holy (which says
Agur, is to ascend up into Heaven, Prove. 30.3, 4.) to those mature ones, who by
reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil? Heb.
5.14. See Psalm. 119.103. Job 23.12. Romans 7.22.

Verse. 24. The fear of the wicked shall come upon him] A sound of fear is in
his ears: in prosperity the destroyer shall come upon him, Job 15.21. Pessimus
in dubiis Augur Timor -- Thus it befell Cain, Statius in Thebaid.
Saul, Belshazzer, Pilate (who for fear of Caesar delivered up Christ to be
Crucified, and was afterward by the same Caesar kicked off the Bench; yea off
the Stage of the world) those wicked Jews that feared that the Romans would
come and take away both their place and Nation, John 11.48. which accordingly
befell them some forty years after; Hic rogo, non furor est, ne moriare, mori?
at which time some of them also killed themselves, lest they should be taken
by the enemy. The like may be said of our Richard the third, (see the Note on
Verse. 22.) and Henry the Fourth of France, after his revolt to Popery. He being
persuaded by the Duke of Sully, not to readmit the Jesuits, which had been
banished by the Parliament of Paris, answered suddenly, Give me then security
for my life: Camde^s Elisab. pref.
and afterward admitted them into his bosom, making Father Cotton his
Confessor, and using them ever with mavelous respect; yet was stabbed to the
heart by Ravilliac, through their instigation. Excellent is that of Solomon,
Prove. 29.25. The fear of man brings a snare: but who so puts his trust in
the Lord (as Hezekiah did, 2 King. 17.4, 5. and our King Edward the Sixth, and
that peerlesse Queen Elizabeth) shall be safe.

But the desire of the righteous shall be granted] Provided that these be the
lawful desires of honest hearts. If such ask and miss, it is because they ask
amiss, Jam. 4.3. either they fail in the matter, as Moses in his desire to
enter into the promised Land, or in the manner, as the Church in the Canticles,
chap. 5.3. Virtutem exoptant, intabescuntque relicta, they would, and they
would not: Pe^^.
There is a kind of wambling willingness and velleity, but it boyls not up to
the full height of resolution for God, and utmost endeavor after the thing
desired: Now affection without endeavor is like Rachel, beautiful but barren.
Or lastly, they fayl in the end, either of Intention, Jam. 4.3. or of Duration,
Luke 18.1. they draw not near with that true heart, Heb. 10.22. that is,
content either to wait, or to want the thing desired, being heartily willing
that God should be glorified, though themselves be not gratified. Let them but
bring this true heart, and they may have any thing. See the Note on Matthew. 5.6.

Verse. 25. As the whirlwind passes away] The whirlwind is terrible for the
time, but not durable: Lo such is the rage of Tyrants and Persecutors. Nubecula
est, cito transibit, said Athanasius of the Arrian Persecution. Our Richard the
third, and Queen Mary, had, as the bloudiest, so the shortest reigns of any
since the Conquest: Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their
days. Dioclesian, Eusebius. de vit. Constable. lib. 3.
that cruel Persecutor, giving over his Empire, decreed to lead the rest of his
life quietly. But he escaped not so: For after that, his house was wholly
consumed with Lightning, and a flame of Fire that fell from Heaven; he hiding
himself for fear of the Lightning, dyed within a little while after. Then
terrors took hold on him as waters, a tempest steals him away in the night.
The East wind carries him away and he departs; and as a storm hurleth him
out of his place; for God shall cast upon him, and not spare: he would fain
flee out of his hand. Men shall clap their hands at him, and shall hiss him
out of his place; as Job elegantly and emphatically sets it forth, Job 27.20,
21, 22, 23.

But the righteous is the everlasting foundation] Or, is the foundation of the
world, as firm as the worlds foundation, which remains unmovable. The Hebrews
sense it thus, The righteous is the foundation of the world, which, but for
their sakes, would soon shatter, and fall to ruin. Sanctum semen statumen
terrae, Absque stationibus non staret mundus.
Isa. 6.13. I bear up the pillars of it, says David, Psalm. 75.3.

Verse. 26. So is the sluggard to them that send him] Habent aulae suum cito,
cito, What thou do, do quickly, said our Savior to the Traitor. He cannot
away with dullness and oscitancy in any of his, but condemns it in those slow
things the Hebrews, Heb. 5.11. and commands them double diligence, (...).
Chap. 6.11, 12. Not slothful in business, fervent in spirit, serving the Lord,
Romans 12.11. A dull heart makes no riddance. Baruc accendit seipsum, Neh. 3.20.
repairing earnestly, and so finished his task in shorter time. Let
Ambassadors, Ministers, Messengers, etc. nimble up their business, or look for
no thank. What a deal of content gave Cranmer to Henry the eighth, by his
expediting the business of the Divorce both at home and abroad in foreign
Universities? And what a deal of distaste gave Wolsey by the contrary?

Verse. 27. The fear of the Lord prolongeth dayes] Heb. Adds days, viz.
Beyond expectation or likelihood in a course of nature, Genesis 27.41. The days
of mourning for my Father are at hand, said bloody Esau, and then will I slay
my brother Jacob. But threatened men (if they fear God especially, Eccles. 8.12,
13.) live long. For even Isaac who dyed soonest, lived above fifty years beyond
this. See the Note on Exodus 20.12.

But the years of the wicked shall be shortned] Be not overmuch wicked,
neither be thou foolish: Why should thou dye before thy time? Eccles. 7.17.
Sin brings death, and the worst of deaths, an unseasonable death, when it were
better for a man to do any thing than to dye; for to such, death is a Trap-door
to hell: And as their friends are scrambling for their goods, the worms for
their bodies, so are the Devils for their souls.

Verse. 28. The hope of the righteous shall be gladness] The righteous does not
so fear God, verse. 2.7. but that he hopes in him also. See Psalm. 130.4, 5. and
that with such an hope as makes not ashamed. Deo confisi nunquam confusi: The
righteous has hope in his death, Prove. 14.32. his Motto is, Cum expiro, spero,
My hope lasts beyond life.

But the expectation of the wicked] As Esau came from hunting with his head
full of hopes, but went away with his heart full of blanks, and his face full
of blushing.

Verse. 29. The way of the Lord is strength] The joy of the Lord (that joy of
hope, spoken of in the precedent verse) is their strength, Neh. 8. the peace of
God within them, and the power of God without them bears up their spirits under
whatsoever pressures; such can boldly say, It is well with me for the present,
and it will be better hereafter.

But destruction] Such as they shall never be able, either to avoid, or to
abide.

Verse. 30. The righteous shall never be removed] Or they shall not be removed
for ever, though for a while they may seem to be so.

But the wicked shall not inhabit the earth] God sits upon the circle of the
earth, to shake them out thence, as by a Canvase.

Verse. 31. The mouth of the just, etc.] Heb. Buddeth forth, as a fruit-tree, to
which the tongue is fitly and finely here resembled. Hence speech is called the
fruit of the lips.

But the froward tongue shall be cut out] As a fruitless tree is cut down to
the fire. Nestorius the Heretic his tongue was eaten off with worms. Nestorii
lingua vermibus exesa.
Archbishop Arundels tongue rotted in his head. From Miriams example, Number. 12.
the Jew Doctors gather, that Leprosy is a punishment for an evil tongue, and
in special for speaking against Rulers. The Lady de Breuse had by her virulent
and railing tongue more exasperated the fury of King John (whom she reviled as
a Tyrant and a Murderer) than could be pacified by her strange present (of
four hundred Kine, and one Bull, all milk-white, Speeds Chron. fol. 572.
except only the ears which were red) sent unto the Queen.

Verse. 32. The lips of the righteous] He carries, as it were, a pair of
balances betwixt his lips, and weighs his words before he utters them. Et
prodesse velens and delectare -- willing to speak things both acceptable and
profitable. The wicked throws out any thing that lies uppermost, though never
so absurd, obscene, defamatory, etc.

Era pu^o nosci tinnit^, sed pectora verbis:
Sic est, namque id sunt utraque quale sonant^
CHAP. XI. Verse. 1. A false Balance is abomination]
SEe the Notes on Lev. 19.36. Deuteronomy. 25.15. This kind of fraud falls heaviest
upon the poor, Amos 8.5. who are fain to fetch in every thing by the penny.
Hither may be referred corruptions in Courts, and partialities in
Church-businesses. See that tremend charge to do nothing by partiality, or by
tilting the balance, Hos. 12.7.
1 Timothy 5.21. Those that have the balances of deceit in their hand are called
Canaanites (so the Hebrew has it) that is, mere natural men, Ezekiel. 16.3. that
have no goodness in them, no not common honesty; they do not as they would be
done by, which very Heathens condemned.

Verse. 2. When pride cometh] Where Pride is in the Saddle, Shame is on the
Crupper, tanquam Nemesis a tergo. He is a proud fool, says our English
Proverb. Proud persons whiles they leave their standing, and would rise above
the top of their places, they fail of their footing, and fall to the bottom.

But with the lowly is wisdome] Which makes the face to shine. Pride proceeds
from folly, and procures contempt. But God gives grace to the humble, that is,
(as some sense it) good repute and report amongst men. Who am I? says Moses,
and yet who fitter than he to go to Pharaoh? He refused to be Pharaohs
daughters Son; he was afterward called to be Pharaohs God, Exodus 7.1.
Aben-Ezra observes, that the word here rendered lowly, signifies bashful,
shame-faced, Qui prae vtrecundia sese abdunt, that thrust not themselves into
observation. The humble man, were it not that the fragrant smell of his many
virtues betrays him to the world, would choose to live and dye in his
self-contenting secrecy. Hence humility is by Bernard compared to the Violet,
which grows low to the ground, and hangs the head downward, and besides, hides
it self with its own leaves.

Verse. 3. The integrity of the upright shall guide them] An elegant allusion in
the original. Their uprightness shall lead them whither they would, and secure
them from danger: They fulfill the Royal Law, James 2.8. keep the Kings
highway, and so are kept safe, whiles those that go out of Gods Precincts are
out of his protection.

But the perverseness of transgressors] Of prevaricators, that run upon rough
Precipices. These are by the Prophet Amos likened to horses running upon a
rock, where first they break their hoofs, and then their necks, Amos 6.12.

Verse. 4. Riches profit not in the day of wrath] Neither their silver, nor
their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of the Lords wrath, Zeph.
1.18. Isa. 13.7. Yea, they carried away the richer Jews, when the poorer sort
were left to till the land, 2 King. 24. The great Caliph of Babylon (whom all
the Mohammedan Princes honored above all others, as the true successor of
Mahomet, and the grand Oracle of their Law) being taken together with his City
by the great Cham of Tartary, was by him set in the midst of his infinite
Treasure, and willed to feed thereon, and make no spare; In which order the
covetous wretch kept for certain days, Turk. hist. fol. 113.
miserably dyed for hunger, in the midst of those things, whereof he thought
he should never have enough. Wherefore should I dye being so rich? said that
wretched Cardinal Henry Beauford Bishop of Winchester in Henry the sixths time.
Fic, quoth he, will not death be hired? Act. and Mon. fol. 925.
will money do nothing? His riches could not reprieve him.

But righteousness delivers from death] See the Note on Chap. 10.2.

Verse. 5. The righteousness of the perfect] This is the same in effect with
verse. 3. Nunquam satis dicitur, quod nunquam satis discitur. Seneca.


But the wicked shall fall by his own wickedness] Or, In his own wickedness:
he shall fall out of one wickedness unto another, whiles he draws iniquity
with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart-rope, Isa. 5.18. Thus
Babylons sins are said to reach unto Heaven, quasi concatenatus funis, Rev.
18.5. Therefore she is fallen, she is fallen, certo, brevi, penitus, nondum
tamen. Flagitium and flagellum, ut acus and filum. Sin and punishment are
inseparable companions.

Verse. 6. The righteousness of the upright shall deliver them] As Noah's
integrity prevailed for his safety. Many are the troubles of the righteous;
but, out of them all, they are sure to be delivered. No Country has more
venomous creatures, than Egypt, none more Antidotes: So godliness has many
troubles, and as many helps against trouble. As Moses hand, it turns a Serpent
into a Rod: And as the tree that Moses cast into the waters of Marah, it
sweetneth the bitter waters of affliction: Well may it be called the Divine
Nature: For as God brings light out of darkness, etc. so does grace.

But transgressors shall be taken in their own naughtiness] Taken by their
own consciences (those bloodhounds) and by the just judgments of God which
they shall never be able to avoid or abide: Though now they carry themselves
as if they were out of the reach of his Rod, or had gotten a protection.

Verse. 7. When a wicked man dies, his expectation shall perish] He died
perhaps in strong hopes of Heaven, as those seem to have done that came rapping
and bouncing at Heaven-gates, with Lord, Lord, open unto us, but were sent away
with a Non novi vos, Depart, I know you not, Mat. 7.

And the hope of unjust men] Etiam spes valentissima perit. So some render it;
his most strong hope shall come to nothing. He made a bridge of his own
shadow, and thought to go over it, but is fallen into the brook: He thought
he had taken hold of God: but it is but with him, as with a child that
catches at the shadow on the wall, which he thinks he holds fast, but he
only thinks so.

Verse. 8. And the wicked comes in his stead] Thus it befell Haman, and Daniels
enemies, and those inhumane Edomites, Lam. 4.21. And Herod with his Hacksters,
Act. 12. It is a righteous thing with God, 2 These. 1.6, 7. though to men it
seem an incredible paradox, and a news by far more admirable, than acceptable,
that there should be such a transmutation of conditions on both sides, to
contraries: But thus it falls out frequently. John Martin of Briqueras (a mile
from Angrogne in France) vaunted every where, Act and Mon. fol. 871.
that he would slit the Ministers nose of Angrogne. But behold himself was
shortly after assaulted by a Woolf, which bit off his nose, so that he died
mad thereof.

Verse. 9. An Hypocrite with his mouth destroyeth] That is, the flatterer,
slanderer, evil counselor, but especially the Heretic; as the Valentinians,
Tertul.
qui artificium habuerunt, quo prius persuaderent quam docerent, by their
Pithanology, by good words, and fair speeches, they deceive the hearts of the
simple, Romans 16.19. they bring men into the Lions mouth, as that old seducer
did, by telling them of an Angel that spoke to them, and so make prize of them,
Col. 2.8. and drag Disciples after them, Act. 20.30.

But through knowledge shall the just be delivered] He is too wise to be
flattered, and too knowing to be plucked away with the error of the wicked,
Zanch. Misc. (...)* Dion.
1 Pet. 3.17, 18. Zanchius was set upon by Socinus; but the Heretic lost his
labor. Wherefore add to your virtue knowledge, 2 Pet. 1.5. and have your
senses exercised to discern good and evil, Heb. 5. ult.

Verse. 10. When it goes well with the righteous] When they are set in place of
Authority, all the Country fare the better for it. All cannot choose but do
well, so long as thou rulest well, said the Senate to Severus the Emperor. And
Ita nati estis (said he in Tacitus) ut bona malaque vestra ad rempublicam
pertineant. Public persons are either a great mercy, or a great misery to the
whole Country.

And when the wicked perish, there is shouting] For by their fall, the people
rise; and their ruin is the repair of the City.

Cum mors crudelem rapuisset saeva Neronem,
Credibile est multos Romam agitasse jocos.
Verse. 11. By the blessing of the upright the City is exalted] This is given in
as a reason of that public joy in the welfare of the just; Because they are of
public spirits, and will by their good deeds, good doctrines, good counsels,
and good prayers, Lucan.
promote the public good to their utmost. Catonis mores erant -- Toti genitum
se credere mundo. Saints are clouds, Heb. 12.1. that water the earth, as a
common blessing.

But it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked] Whether he be a seeds-man
of sedition, or a seducer of the people, a Sheba, or a Shebna, a carnal
Gospeller, or a godless Politician (whose drift is to formalize and enervate
the power of truth, till at length they leave us a heartless and sapless
Religion) one of these sinners may destroy much good, Eccles. 9.18.

Verse. 12. He that is void of wisdom despises his neighbour] Not remembering
that he is his neighbor, cut out of the same cloth, the shears only going
between, and as capable of Heaven as himself, though never so poor, mean,
deformed, or otherwise despicable. None but a fool will do so, none but he
that has a base and beggarly heart of his own, as the words signify.

But a man of understanding holds his peace] That is, refraineth his tongue
from such opprobrious language, speaks the best he can of another, thinks
with himself, Aut sumus, aut fuimus, aut possumus esse quod hic est. Or if
himself be slighted or reviled, objecta probra digno supplicio punit, festivo
scilicet contemptu and oblivione, vel si tanti est, misericordia elevat. He
knows it is to no purpose, to wash off dirt with dirt, and is therefore as a
dumb man, etc.

Verse. 13. A talebearer reveals secrets] Heb. A Peddler, See the Note on
Levit. 19.16. and on 1 Timothy 5.13. Si sapis arcano vina reconde cado. God
forbids us to chaffer with these petty-chapmen, Prove. 20.19.

Concealeth the matter] Tacitus to him is the best Historian, primus in
Historia. He is a rare friend, that can both give counsel, and keep counsel.
One being hit in the teeth with his stinking breath, wittily excused it, that
it was by reason of the many secrets committed to him, and concealed by him so
long, till they were even rotten in his bosom.

Verse. 14. Where no counsel is, the people fall] As where no Pilot is, the ship
miscarrieth. The Vulgar renders it, Ubi non est gubernator, corruit populus.
Tyranny is better than Anarchy: And yet, Woe also to thee O Land, whose King is
a child, that is, wilful, and uncounsellable, as Rehoboam, who was a child at
forty years old; when as his Father was a man at twelve. Age is no just measure
of wisdom; and royalty without wisdom is but eminent dishonor. Solomon the
wise chose him an excellent Council of state, whom Rehoboam refused to hear,
being as much more wilful than his Father, as less wise; all head, Turk. Hist.
Keckerm. Politic. Ulysses interrogat quaie regnum esset Cyclopicum? responde^
Silenus, (...).
no heart, losing those ten tribes with a churlish breath, and returning to
Jerusalem lighter by a Crown than he went forth. He and his green-headed
Council was like Acribiades and his Army, where all would be Leaders, none
Learners. Or it may be it was now in Israel, as once it was in Persia (and as
now it is in Turkey, when the Great Turk stands at the dangerous door) where if
any Counselor delivered any thing contrary to the Kings mind, flagris
caedebatur, he was chastised with Rods: Or as in Regno Cyclopico ubi (...),
where no man cared for better counsel, but each one did what was good in his
own eyes. Such cannot long subsist.

But in the multitude of Counsellors] So they be good Counselors; better
than Balaam was, better than Achitophel, better than those of Aurelius, Tertul.
Apol.
by whom the good Emperor was even bought and sold. One special thing the
Primitive Christians prayed for the Emperor, was, that God would send him
Senatum fidelem, a faithful Council. There were in Josiah's days horrible
abominations: And why? The Princes were as roaring Lions, the Judges Wolves,
etc. Zeph. 3.3. Queen Elizabeth was happy in her Council (by whom she was
most-what ruled) and grew amiable to her friends, and formidable to her enemies
both at home and abroad. Wisdom is better than strength, says Solomon; And,
Romani sedendo vin^unt, said they of old. Pol^b.
The welfare of a State is procured and preserved, not so much by a multitude
of worthy Warriors, as of wise Counselors; as Cleon in Thucydides long since
observed, Thucyd. lib. 3.
and as we have blessedly found in this present Parliamentum benedictum, more
truly so styled, than that was in the 25. of Edward the third.

Verse. 15. He that is surety for a stranger shall smart for it] Hebr. Shall
break, prove a bankrupt. See the Notes on Chap. 6.1, 2, 3, etc.

Verse. 16. A gracious woman retains honour] Such a one as is set forth in
Lemuels Lesson, Prove. 31. such as was Sarah, Deborah, Abigail, Ester, Queen
Elizabeth, of whom a great French Princess gave this Elogium, Thuan. Hist.
lib. 124.
that she was gloriosissima, and omnium quae unquam sceptrum gesserunt
felicissima foemina, the bravest and happiest woman that ever swayed Scepter.
Piety, Sobriety, Purity, Charity, and Chastity (maugre the venomous tongues of
all Hell-born slanderers, such as Sanders, Rhiston, and other Romish raylers,
Sanderus lupa^ Anglicanam appellat. Rhistonus nostram leaenam, etc. Speed. 1236.
and dead Dogs that barked against her) were her inseparable companions: never
suffering any Lady to approach her sacred presence, of whose stain she had but
the least suspicion.

And strong men retain riches] By their industry and good husbandry: that they
may maintain their Wives honor, and bear up their port according to their
place. Others render it, Improbi apprehendunt divitias. Wicked men catch at
wealth, sc. in the choice of their wives. And indeed among Suitors, both in Love
and in Law, Money is a common medler, and commonly drives the bargain and
business to an upshot.

Proti^^s ad ce^sum: Juvenal.
de moribus ultima fiat
Quaestio. -- good enough if goods enough.
Verse. 17. The merciful does good to his own soul] His chief business is with
and for himself: how to set all to rights within, how to keep a continual
Sabbath of soul, a constant composedness. He will not violate his Conscience to
get or retain riches, as verse. 16. or purchase earth, with the loss of heaven.
Corpus sive corpor quasi cordi^ por, i. e. puer sive famulu^; ^a forma qua
Mancipor. Quintipor. Camer.
And in as much as the body is the souls servant (and should therefore be
neither supra negotium, nor infra negotium, but par negotio, fit for the souls
business) it ought not to be pined or pinched with penury, and overmuch
abstinence, as those Impostors, Coloss. 2.23. and our Popish Merit-mongers that
starve their Genius, and are cruel to their own flesh. These shall one day
hear, Who required these things at your hands?

Verse. 18. The wicked works a deceitful work] By defrauding his Genius, and
afflicting his flesh (as verse. 17.) he thinks he does a very good work; (some
Emperors have left their Thrones, and thrust into a Monastery, there to
macerate themselves with much fasting and coarse clothing, out of an opinion of
promoting their souls health thereby.) But bodily exercise profits little, 1 Timothy 4.8. And as the pride of Virginity is as soul a sin as impurity* Augustine.
so is it in this case. The Formal faster loses his labor, Isa. 58.3. Zach.
7.5. In seventy years they kept sevenscore Fasts in Babylon: yet amongst them
all not one Fast to God. There are that render it thus, Improbus comparat
praemium falsum, The wicked gets a false reward: all that he has is but the
things of this life, quae nec vera sunt, nec vestra. For the very fashion of
this world passes away: And surely, every man walks in a vain show, or
shadow, surely he disquieteth himself in vain: he heapeth up riches, and
knows not who shall gather them, Psalm. 39.6. They that dig in Mines, or
labor in Mints, have gold enough about them, but are little the better for it.
A Sumpter-horse bears much treasure on his back all day: but is cased of it at
night, and turned into the Stable with his back full of galls and bruises. So
shall it be with wicked rich men at death: so, that they have no great bargain
of it.

(...), in locis irrig^is.
But to him that sows righteousnesse] And so sows upon blessings (as the
Apostles Greek has it, 2 Cor. 9.6. See the Note there, and on Gal. 6.7, 8.)
upon well watered places, Eccles. 11.1. To such shall be a sure reward: Only he
must have patience; and not look to sow and reap, all in one day. Jam. 5.7. See
the Note there.

Verse. 19. As righteousness tends to life] Hebr. Lives, for godliness has
the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. 1 Timothy 4.8.
And this is that sure reward spoken of in the former verse: For he that sows
to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. 6.8. which
indeed is the only life that deserves so to be called and counted.

So he that pursues evil] That follows it hot-foot, as Asael followed Abner,
that is wholly carried after it, and thinks to have a great catch of it, that
works all uncleanness with greediness, Ephesians. 4.19. This the Prophet calls a
spirit of whoredom, a strong inclination, a vehement impetus to that and other
sins, an adding drunkenness to thirst, rebellion to sin, till wrath come upon
them to the utmost. Hell gapes for such sinners.

Verse. 20. They that are of a froward heart, etc.] Not only those that pursue
and practice wickedness, but they also that harbor it in their hearts, are
hated of God, Luke 16.15. A man may dye of inward bleeding: a man may be damned
for contemplative wickedness. Jer. 4.14. The Schools do well observe, that
outward sins are majoris infamiae, but inward heart-sins are majoris reatus, as
we see in Devils.

But such as are upright in their way] The Antithesis requires that he should
say, such as are upright in heart. But he chooses rather to say in their way,
not only because a good heart ever makes a good life, but to meet with such as
brag of the goodness of their hearts, when their lives are altogether loose
and licentious. Whereas holiness in the heart (as the Candle in the Lanthorn)
well appears in the body; These boasters are ignorant, Revel. 3.17. proud, John
9.41. carnal, Romans 8.6. therefore stark naught. Prove. 19.2.

Verse. 21. Though hand join in hand, etc.] Hebr. Hand to hand, that is, out of
hand, by and by, as some interpret it. Munster renders it. Though plague follow
upon plague, the wicked will not amend. Others, though there be a combination,
(...).
a conspiracy of wicked doers, as if (Giant-like) they would fight against God,
and resist his wrath, yet they shall never be able to avert or avoid it. The
wicked shall be turned into Hell, yea whole Nations that forget God, Psalm.
9.17. God stands not upon multitudes: he buried the old World in one universal
grave of waters. And turning the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes,
condemned them with an overthrow, 2 Pet. 2.6. This is a good sense. Howbeit I
cannot but incline to those that expound Hand to hand, for Father and Child,
in regard of the following hemistich, But the seed of the righteous shall be
delivered. As if the Prophet should say. The wicked traduce a cursed stock of
sin to their Children, and shall therefore be punished in their own person, or
at least in their posterity. Psalm. 49.11, 13, 14. This their way is their
folly: yet their posterity approve their sayings. Therefore like sheep they are
laid in the grave, death shall feed on them, etc.

Verse. 22. As a Jewel of gold in a Swines snout] It is a small praise says
one, to have a good face and an evil nature. No one means, says another, has
so enriched Hell as beautiful faces. Aureliae Orestillae praeter formam nihil
unquam bonus laudavit, says Salust. In Aurelia Orestilla, there was nothing
praiseworthy but her beauty. Art thou fair? says an Author: be not like an
Egyptian Temple, or a painted Sepulcher. Art thou foul? let thy soul be like
a rich pearl in a rude shell.

Si mihi difficilis formam naturae negavit: Sapph. ap. Ovid.

Ingenio formae damna rependo meae.
So is a fair woman which is without discretion] Sic dignitas in indigno est
ornamentum in luto, says Salvian. Fair and foolish ones abuse their beauty to
pride and incontinency, and so give occasion to some Diogenes to say, O quam
bona domus and malus hospes. O fair house, but ill inhabitant.

Verse. 23. The desire of the righteous is only good] i. e. So far as he is
righteous, or spiritual; he delights in the Law of God after the inward man,
willing in all things to live honestly, Heb. 13.18. Evil motions haunt his
mind otherwhiles, but there they inhabit not. Lust was a stranger to David, as
Peter Martyr observes out of Nathans Parable; There came a Traveller to this
rich man, 2 Samuel 12.4. The main stream of his desires, the course and current
of his heart ran upon God and godliness, Psalm. 119.4, 5. And Psalm. 39.1, 3. He
resolved to do better than he did. The spirit ever lusts against the flesh;
howbeit when the flesh gets the wind and hill of the spirit, all is not so well
carried. As the Ferry-man plyes the Oar, and eyes the shore home-ward where he
would be; yet there comes a gust of wind that carries him back again: so it is
often with a Christian. But every man is with God so good as he desires to be.
In vita libro scribuntur qui quod possunt faciunt, et si quod debent, non
possunt. ^ern.
They are written in the book of life, that do what good they can, though they
cannot do as they would.

But the expectation of the wicked is wrath] i. e. The good they expect proves
to be indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, Romans 2.8, 9. woeful
perplexities and convulsions of soul, which will be so great and so grievous,
as will make them rave and rage with madness and fury, especially because they
looked for a better state.

Verse. 24. There is that scatters, and yet increaseth] Bounty is the most
compendious way to plenty; neither is getting, but giving the best thrift. The
five loaves in the Gospel, by a strange kind of Arithmetic, were multiplied
by Division, and augmented by Substraction. So it will be in this case.

But it tends to poverty] St. Austin descanting upon those words, Psalm. 76.5.
They have slept their sleep, all the rich men, and have found nothing in their
hands (for so he reads that Text) And why is this? says He, Nihil invenerunt
in manibus suis, quia nihil posuerunt in manu Christi. They found nothing in
their own hands, because they feared to lay up any thing in Christ's hands.
Manus pauperum gazophylacium Christi, says another Father; The poor man's hand
is Christ's treasury.

Verse. 25. The liberal soul shall be made fat] See the Note on Matthew. 5.7. and
my Commonplace of Alms.

Verse. 26. The people shall curse him] i. e. Complain and cry out of him; as
the people of Rome did of Pompey in another case. Nostra miseria tu es Magnus.
In another case, I say, for in this I must acquit him, remembering that speech
of his, when, being by his office to bring in Corn from a far Country for the
peoples necessity, and wished by his friends to stay for a better wind, he
hoysed up sail, and said, Necesse est ut eam, non ut vivam; There is a
necessity of my going, not so of my life; If I perish, I perish. Hence he was
the peoples Corculum, or Sweetheart, as it is said of Scipio Nasica.

Verse. 27. He that diligently seeks good] Hebr. He that is up betime to
promote the public good, as Joseph, who came not in till noon to eat meat, as
Nehemiah, who willingly brake his sleep, and traded every talent for his
peoples comfort: As Scipio Africanus, who usually went before day into the
Capitol in cellam Jovis, and there stayed a great while, quasi consultans de
Rep. cum Jove, Gell. lib. 7. cap. 1.
as consulting with his God about the Weal-publike; whence his deeds were
pleraque admiranda, says mine Author, amiable and admirable, the most of them.
And as Daniel, who though sick, yet rose up, and did the Kings business, Chap.
8.27.

It shall come to him] It shall come certainly, suddenly, irresistibly, and (as
we say of foul weather) unsent for; God will say to such as Aulus Fulvius did
to his traiterous son, and then slew him, Non Cat^linae te genui, sed patriae.
The Lord shall pour upon him, and not spare, because he cruelly oppressed,
spoiled his brother by violence, and did that which is not good among his
people, therefore he shall dye in his iniquity, Ezekiel. 18.18.

Verse. 28. He that trusts to his riches shall fall] Riches were never true
to any that trusted to them. The rich Churl that trusted and boasted that he
had much goods laid up in store for many years, when, like a Jay, he was
pruning himself in his boughs, he came tumbling down with the arrow in his
side, Luke 12.15, 16. etc. So did Nebuchadnezzar, Belteshazzar, Herod, etc. The
righteous also shall see and fear, and laugh at such a one, saying, Lo this is
the man that made not God his strength, but trusted in the abundance of his
riches, and strengthened himself in his wickedness, Psalm. 52.6, 7. But I am like
a green Olive tree, etc. verse. 8. Agreeable whereunto is this that follows
here. But the righteous shall flourish as a branch, whiles the wicked, Foenea
quadam felicitate temporaliter florent, Aug. Epist. 120.
and exoriuntur ut exurantur, flourish and ruffle for a time, but shall be
soon cut down like the grass, and wither as the green herb.

Verse. 29. He that troubles his own house] Either by prodigality, or
excessive parsimony, Prodigi singulis auribus bina aut terna dependent
patrimonia, says Seneca, we have known great Rents soon turned into great
Ruffes, and Lands into Laces. For parsimony and cruelty, see the Note on Chap.
15.27.

Shall inherit the wind] That is, shall bring all to nothing; as he did that
having wasted his estate, vainly vaunted that he had left himself nothing,
praeter coelum and coenum. Livius.
His substance shall fly up like smoke into the air, and nothing be left to
maintain him on earth. And when all his goods are gone, his liberty must go
after (for this fool shall be servant to the wise in heart) if not, his life;
as that notorious unthrift Apicius, who having eaten up his estate, and finding
by his account that he had no more than two hundred thousand Crowns remaining,
Dio.
thought himself poor, and took down a glass of poison.

Verse. 30. The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life] i. e. The commodities
and comforts that one may every way receive from a righteous person (for est
aliquid quod a viro bono etiam tacente discas, Seneca.
says Seneca, somewhat a man may learn from a good man, even when he says
nothing) are more than can be imagined. Plutarch reports, that the
Babylonians make three hundred and threescore several commodities of the
Palm Tree, and do therefore greatly honor it. Should not we much more honor
the multivarious gifts of God in his righteous ones for our good? For whether
it be Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas -- All is ours, 1 Cor. 3.

And he that wins souls] And uses singular art and industry therein, as
Fowlers do to take birds (for so the Hebrew word imports) or Fishermen fishes,
He is wise, and wiseth others, as Daniel has it, Chap. 12.3. he is just, and
justifies others, he shall save a soul from death, Jam. 5.20. He shall shine
as a star in heaven. And this is instanced as one special fruit of that tree of
life mentioned in the former Hemistich: This is a noble fruit indeed, since one
soul is more worth than a world, as he has told us, who only went to the
price of it, Matthew. 16.26.

Verse. 31. The righteous shall be recompensed] i. e. Chastened, afflicted,
judged of the Lord, that they may not be condemned with the world, (for their
sufferings are not penal, but medicinal, or probational) and they have it here
in the earth (which is their house of Correction) not in Hell.

Much more the wicked] Nahum 1.9. Non surget hic afflictio, these shall be
totally and finally consumed at once. See the Note on 1 Pet. 4.17, 18. See also
my Love Tokens, page 69. etc.

CHAP. XII. Verse. 1. Whosoever loves instruction, loves knowledge.]
HEre is showed, that Adversity is the best University, says an Interpreter.
Schola crucis, schola lucis, Corrections of instruction are the way of life.
Vexatio dat intellectum.
Men commonly beat and bruise their links, before they light them, to make them
burn the brighter. God first humbles whom he means to illuminate; as Gideon
took thorns of the wilderness and briers, and with them he taught the men of
Succoth, Judge. 8.16. See my Treatise on Rev. 3.19. page 152. etc. Mr. Ascham
was a good schoolmaster to Queen Elizabeth, but affliction was a better, as
one well observes. That verse was much in her mouth.

Non ignara mali miseris succurrere disco. Virgil.
But he that hates reproof] Whether it be by the rebukes of men, or the Rod
of God, he is brutish: tardus est, he is fallen below the stirrup of reason,
he is a beast in man's shape; nothing is more irrational than irreligion. That
sapless fellow Nabal would hear nothing; there was no talking to him, no
dealing with him; but as Horse and Mule that have no understanding, Psalm. 32.9.
Basil complains of the Western Churches, that they were grown so proud, Epist.
ad Evagr.
ut quid verum sit neque sciant, neque sustineant discere, that they neither
knew what was truth, nor would be taught better. Such are near to ruin, and
that without remedy, Prove. 29.1. See the Note there.

Verse. 2. A good man obtains favor of the Lord] Or, Has what he will of
God, id quod vult a domino impetrat; quia ejus voluntas est ipsissima Dei
voluntas, nec aliud vult. Thus Mercer out of Rabbi Levi. Thus it is written of
Luther, that by his prayers he could prevail with God at his pleasure. When
great gifts were offered him, he refused them with this brave speech, Valde
protestatus sum me nolle sic satiari a Deo. I solemnly protested to God, that I
would not be put off with these low things. And on a time praying for the
recovery of a godly useful man, among other passages, he let fall this
transcendent rapture of a daring Faith, Fiat mea voluntas, Let my will be
done; and then falls off sweetly, Mea voluntas, Domine, quia tua; My will,
Lord, because thy will. Here was a good man, here was a blessed man; according
to that Rule, Beatus est qui habet quicquid vult, and nihil male vult. Blessed
is he that has what he will, and wills nothing but what he should.

But a man of wicked devices] Such as no good man is; he does not plot or plow
mischief, he does not cater and make provision for the flesh, Romans 13. there
is no way of wickedness found in him; the peace is not broken betwixt God and
him, because his mind never yields to sin, Romans 7.25. Psalm. 139
he walks not after the flesh, but after the spirit, therefore no
condemnation, Romans 8.1. If an evil thought haunt his heart (as eftsoons it
befalls) it is the device of the man, he is not the man of such devices. The
wicked (on the contrary) is wholly made up of sinful thoughts and purposes, and
is in the midst of them; therefore God will call him to an heavy reckoning,
Jer. 6.19. Rev. 2.23.

Verse. 3. A man shall not be established by wickedness] For he lays his
foundation upon fire-work, and brimstone is scattered upon his house top: if
the fire of God from Heaven but flash upon it, it will be all on a light flame
immediately. He walks all day upon a mine of gunpowder; and has God with his
armies ready to run upon the thickest bosses of his buckler, and to hurl him
to Hell. How can this man be sure of any thing? (...).
Cain built Cities, but could not rest in them. Ahab begat seventy sons, but
not one successor in the Kingdom. Phocas having built a mighty wall, heard
from Heaven; Though thy walls were as high as Heaven, sin is under it, and will
subvert it. (...). Sin has no settledness.

But the root of the righteous shall not be moved] For though shaken with
winds, yet they are rooted as trees: like a Ship at Anchor, they wagg up and
down, yet remove not. God is my Rock, I shall not be greatly moved, Psalm.
62.2. Nay, I shall not be moved at all, verse. 6. the gates of Hell cannot do
it, Mat. 16.18. None can take them out of Gods hands, John 10.28. for he has
laid help upon one that is mighty, Psalm. 89.19.

Verse. 4. A virtuous woman is a Crown to her husband] Heb. A valiant woman, an
able huswife, such as Bathsheba commends to her son, Chap. 31. and as Paul
describes, Tit. 2.4, 5. She is said to be a Crown to her husband, not a Ring
for his finger, (...). Naz.
or a Chain of gold for his neck, but a Crown or Garland for his head, a chief
and choice Ornament, as Sarah was to Abraham, as Livia to Augustus, as Placilla
to Theodosius, as Nazianzens Mother to her Husband etc.

Is as rottenness in his bones] Not a disgrace only to him, but a disease, and
such a disease, as is far worse than a quartan Ague: for there be two good
days for one bad; but here a continual pain, and hardly curable. The wise man
here expresses the mischief of an evil wife, by a very apt similitude. And
that of Hierome is not much behind it, Sicut in ligno vermis, ita perdit virum
suum uxor malefica. As the worm eats into the heart of the tree, and destroies
it, so does a naughty wife her husband. All evils (as elements) are most
troublesome, when out of their proper place, as impiety in Professors,
injustice in Judges, dishonor and discomfort in a wife, etc.

Verse. 5. The thoughts of the righteous are right] He feeds his thoughts upon
the best objects; those especially mentioned in that little Bible, Phil. 4.8.
Finally brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
etc. if there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things.
If worse, break in, as they will, he justles them out, and rids the room of
them. See the Note on Chap. 11.23.

But the counsels of the wicked are deceit] Not their rash thoughts only, but
also their deliberate ones are how to circumvent others, or to cloak their own
wickedness. Genesis 6.
Every imagination, the whole frame of their thoughts is evil, only evil, and
continually evil. If good thoughts look into a wicked heart, they stay not
there, as those that like not their lodging: The flashes of lightnings may be
discerned into the darkest prisons. The light that shines into an holy heart,
is constant, like that of the Sun, which keeps due times, and varies not the
course for any of these sublunary occasions.

Verse. 6. The words of the wicked are to lie in wait for blood] As they think
not, Mat. 5.
so neither speak they the language of the righteous. Ye are the light of the
world; and because the light stands in the light of their wicked ways, as the
Angel in Balaams way to his sin, therefore they hate the Saints; and (as all
hatred is bloody) seek their lives, mixing cruelty with their craft, as Cain,
Herod, Julian, etc. The old Serpent lends them his seven heads to plot, and his
ten horns to push. Their own study and exercise also has made them expert and
skilful in their hellish trade; and the taste of blood has made them as hungry
as hounds after it. Thus I kept the ban-dogs at staves end (said Nicholas
Shetterden, Martyr) not as thinking to escape them, but that I would see the
Foxes leap above ground for my blood, Act. and Mon.
if they can reach it (so it be the will of God) yet we shall see them gape
and leap for it.

But the mouth of the upright shall deliver them] Shall defend harmless men
that are helpless, Prove. 24.11. Hence those many Apologies of Tertullian,
Apollonius, Arnobius, and others for the Primitive Christians under
persecution. Hence we had that unparralleld piece, Calvin's Institutions, which
was written upon this occasion. Francis King of France, willing to excuse his
cruelty exercised upon his Protestant Subjects, to the German Princes (whose
friendship he then desired) wrote to them, that he only punished Anabaptists
for their contempt of the Scriptures, and of all Civil Government. Calvin
(though then but five and twenty years of age) not able to bear that blur cast
upon the Reformed Religion under the name of those Sectaries, Scultet. Annal.
454.
set forth that excellent work, as well to vindicate the truth, as to plead for
the innocence of those that professed it.

Verse. 7. The wicked are overthrown, and are not] Say that the righteous cannot
prevail by their Apologies for themselves and others, God will take the matter
into his own hand, and avenge them, Luke 18.7. as he did the Primitive
Christians, and the French Protestants, upon their merciless Persecutors. Tu
vero Herodes sanguinolente time. As Beza warned Charles the Ninth, Author of the
Massacre.

But the house of the righteous shall stand] Gods house the Church shall (as
the Gloss applies this Text) The mountain of the Lord shall be exalted above
all mountains. The Church, as it is highest in the favor of God, so it shall
be highest in it self: when the enemies shall be in that place that is fittest
for them, the lowest, that is the footstool of Christ. There is a Council in
Heaven will dash the mould of all contrary Counsels upon earth, Psalm. 2. Gaudeo
quod Christus dominus est: alioqui totus desperassem. I am glad yet that Christ
is King: For otherwise I should have been utterly out of hope, writes Miconius
to Calvin, upon the view of the Churches enemies.

Verse 8. A man shall be commended according to his wisdome] And all wisdom
consists in this, Ut Deum quis cognoscat and colat, says Lactantius, That a
man rightly know and worship God. This did not Apollonius, (...). Plut.
whom yet Philostratus commends, that he was non doctus, sed natus sapiens,
not instructed, but born wise. (See the contrary, Job 11.12) Nor Archimides,
who yet had the name and note (says Plutarch) of a Divine, and not Human
wisdom. Nor Aristotle, whom yet Averroes admires as the very Rule and Copy
that Nature invented, wherein to set forth the utmost of Human perfection: And
further says, that his doctrine was the chiefest truth, and his understanding
the utmost extent of human wisdom. These were wise, I confess, in their
generations, and so accounted: But by whom? Not by Saint Paul; he had another
opinion of them. See Romans 1.22, 23. 1 Cor. 2.6. Not by our Savior, Matthew.
11.25. Not by any that are rightly instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven, and
have their senses exercised to discern good and evil. The Italians arrogate to
themselves the monopoly of Wisdom, in that Proverb of theirs, Italus sapit
ante factum, Hispanus in facto, Germanus post factum. Italians, say they, both
seem and are wise: whereas Spaniards seem wise, and are fools; Frenchmen seem
fools, and are wise; Portugals neither are wise, nor so much as seem so. Thus
the Jesuits (those great Clerks, Politicians, and Wisards of the world) do
vaunt that the Church is the soul of the World, the Clergy of the Church, and
they of the Clergy. But what says that great Apostle that knew more than
twenty of them? He that glories, let him glory in the Lord: for not he that
commends himself is approved, (no nor he whom the world cries up for a wise
man) but he whom the Lord commends, 2 Cor. 10.18.

But he that is of a perverse heart] As all are that are not heavenly-wise, and
that show not out of a good conversation their works with meekness of wisdom,
Jam. 3.13, 17. But so did none of those Heathen Sages, Romans 1.26
whom God for their unthankfulness, gave up unto vile affections, and vicious
conversation; and so set a Noveri^t Universi, as it were, upon them, Know all
men, that these men know nothing aright, and as they ought to know; Romans 1.22
professing themselves to be wise, they proclaim themselves fools.

Verse. 9. Better is he that is despised] Viz. Of others, and has no
extraordinary opinion of himself, but sticks close to his business, and has
help at hand when he pleases, a servant at his beck and check. This was the
case of Galleacius Caracciolus that noble Marquess, in his exile at Geneva for
conscience sake. See his life set forth in English by Mr. Crashaw.

Than he that honors himself and lacks bread] That standing upon his
Pantofles, and boasting of his Gentility (as those Spanish Hidalgoes) ruffle it
out in brave apparel, but has not a penny in his purse, yea, not sometime
food sufficient to put in his belly. Spaniards are said to be impudent
braggers, and extremely proud in the lowest ebb of fortune. If a Spaniard have
but a Capon, H^yl* Geog.
or the like good dish to his supper, you shall find the feathers scattered
before his door the next morning.

Verse. 10. A righteous man regards the life of his beast] There be beasts ad
usum, and ad esum. Some are profitable alive, not dead, as the Dog, Horse,
etc. Some dead, not alive, as the Hog: some both, as the Ox. There is a
mercy to be showed to these dumb Creatures, as we see in Eleazar, Genesis 24.32.
And the contrary in Balaam, who spurred his Ass till she spoke, Numb. 22.27.
Otherwise we shall make them groan under the bondage of our corruption, Romans
8.21. and he that hears the young Ravens, may hear them: for he is gracious.
Exodus 22.
The restraint that was of eating the blood of dead beasts, declared, that he
would not have tyranny exercised on them whiles they are alive.

But the tender mercies of the wicked] If any such thing there were; but they
have no such bowels left, with Judas, no such tenderness, scarce common
humanity: Cannibal-like, they eat up Gods people as they eat bread, feeding
upon them alive, and by degrees; and dealing by them as the cruel Spaniards do
by the Indians; S. Fran. Drakes World encompass.
They suppose they show the wretches great favor, when they do not for their
pleasure whip them with cords, and day by day drop their naked bodies with
burning Bacon, which is one of the least cruelties that they exercise toward
them. In the sixth Council of Toledo it was enacted, that the King of Spain
should suffer none to live within his Dominions that profess not the Roman
Catholic Religion. In pursuance of which Decree, Philip King of Spain said, he
had rather have no Subjects than Protestants: And out of a bloody zeal suffered
his eldest Son Charles to be murdered by the cruel Inquisition, because he
seemed to favor that profession. When the Spaniards took Heidelberg, they took
Monsieur Mylius an ancient Minister: and after they had abused his Daughter
before his eyes, tied a small cord about his head, which with truncheons they
wreathed about till they squeezed out his brains. What should I speak of the
French Massacres, and late Irish immane and monstrous murders, equalling it
not, exceeding that at Athens, taken by Sylla, which yet, says Appian, was
(...), a merciless Massacre: Or that of Prolomeus, Lathurus King of Egypt, who
slew thirty thousand Jews at once, and forced the rest to feed upon the flesh
of their slain fellows: Or lastly, that of the Jews committed upon the
inhabitants of Cyrene, whom they not only basely Butchered, but afterward ate
their flesh, drank their blood, and clothed themselves with their Skins, as
Dio relates in the Life of Trajan the Emperor?

Verse. 11. He that tilleth his Land shall be satisfied, etc. This is true of
all other lawful Callings manual or mental, the sweat of the brow or of the
brain. Sin brought in sweat, Genesis 3.19. and now not to sweat increases sin;
Men must earn their bread before they eat it, 2 Thessalonians. 3.12. and be diligent
in their Callings to serve God and Men, themselves and others, with the
fatness, and sweetness thereof; and then they have the promise, they shall be
fed, Psalm. 37.7.

Dum de mor.
But he that follows vain persons, etc.] It is hard to be a good fellow and
a good husband too. Qui aequo animo malis immiscetur, malus est, says one, He
that delights in bad company cannot be good.

Verse. 12. The wicked desires the net of evil men] i. e. He so furiously
pursues his lusts, as if he desired destruction, as if he would out-dare God
himself; as if the guerdon of his gracelesness would not come time enough, but
he must needs run to meet it. Jun. in loc.
Thus Thrasonical Lamech, Genesis 4.23. thinks to have the odds of God, seventy to
seven. Thus the Princes of the Philistims, (whilome plagued) came up to Mizpeh
against Israel (who were there drawing water, 1 Samuel 7.
i. e. weeping abundantly before the Lord) as it were to fetch their bane.
Thus Pope Julius the third will have his Pork-flesh, al despito de dio. And
Doctor Story will curse Queen Elizabeth in his daily grace before meat, and yet
say in open Parliament, Act. and Mon. 19^5.
that he saw nothing to be ashamed of, much less to be sorry for, but that he
had done no more against the Heretics, yea against the Queen her self in the
days of her sister Mary. This Story escaping out of Prison, got to Antwerp,
and there received Commission under Duke D' Alva to search all ships coming
thither, for English books. But one Parker an English Merchant, trading to
Antwerp, laid his net fair to catch this foul bird, causing secret notice to
be given to Story, that in his ship were store of heretical books, with other
intelligences that might stand him instead. The Canonist conceiving that all
was cock-sure, hasted to the ship, where with looks very big upon the poor
Mariners, each Cabin, Chest and corner above-board were searched, and some
things found to draw him further on; so that the hatches must be opened, which
seemed to be unwillingly done, and great signs of fear were showed by their
faces. Speeds hist. of great Britain, fol. 1174.
This drew on the Doctor to descend into the hold; where now in the Trap the
Mouse might well gnaw, but could not get out; for the hatches went down, and
the sails hoysed up, which with a merry gale were blown into England, where ere
long he was arraigned and condemned of high Treason, and accordingly executed
at Tiburn, as he had well deserved.

Verse. 13. The wicked is snared by the transgression of his lips] His heart is
often so full of venom that it cannot be hid, but blisters his tongue, and
breaks out at his lips to his own ruin, as it befell Story, Campian, Garnet,
and other Popish poysonful Spiders, who were swept down by the hand Justice,
and drew their last thread in the Triangle of Tiburn. Detexit facinus fatnus,
and non implevit; as Tacitus says of one that was sent by the Senate to
dispatch Nero, but bewrayed, and betrayed himself.

But the just shall come out of trouble] They suffer sometimes for their bold
and free invectives against the evils of the times, or otherwise for
discharging their consciences, but they shall surely be delivered. There is
yet one man (says Ahab) Micaiah the son of Imlah, by whom we may inquire of
the Lord, but I hate him, for he does not prophecy good concerning me, but
evil. It is very probable that Micaiah was that disguised Prophet, who brought
to Ahab the fearful message of displeasure and death for dismissing Benhadad;
for which he was ever since fast in Prison, deep in disgrace. But God with the
temptation made a way for him to escape. So he did for Peter, Act. 12. Paul, 2 Timothy 4. All the Apostles, Act. 4. John Baptist indeed was without any law,
right, or reason beheaded in prison, Act. and Mon. fol. 1423.
as though God had known nothing at all of him, said George Marsh the Martyr.
And the same may be said of sundry other faithful witness to the truth, but
then by death they entered into life eternal. Mors fuit aerumnarum requies,
which was Chaucers Motto; besides that, heaven upon earth they had during their
troubles. Philip Lansgrave of Hesse, being a long time prisoner under Charles
the fifth, was demanded what upheld him all that while, Respondit, divinas
consolationes Martyrum se sensisse, he answered, that he had felt the divine
comforts of the Martyrs. The best comforts are usually reserved for the worst
times.

Verse. 14. A man shall be satiated with good, etc.] There are empty Vines that
bear fruit to themselves, Hos. 10.1. And as empty Casks sound loudest, and base
metal rings shrillest: so many empty Tatlers are full of discourse, sed cui
bono? as he said. Plato and Xenophon thought it fit and profitable that men's
speeches at meals should be written. And if Christians should so do, what
kind of books would they be? Mat. 12. Mal. 3.
And yet for every idle word account must be given; as for every good word
there is a book of remembrance. Much fruit will redound by holy speeches, to
our selves, much to others. Paul shows that the very report of his bands did
a great deal of good in Cesars house. A poor captive Maid was the means of
Naamans conversion: As afterward the words of his servants were greater in
operation with him, than the words of the great Prophet Elisha. One seasonable
truth, falling upon a prepared heart, has often a strong and sweet influence.
Sometimes also, though we know that which we ask of others as well as they
do; yet good speeches will draw us to know it better, by giving occasion to
speak more of it, wherewith the Spirit works more effectually, and imprints it
deeper, so that it shall be a more rooted knowledge than before; for that
satiates the soul that is graciously known; and that is graciously known, that
the Spirit seals upon our souls. In the morning therefore sow thy seed, and in
the evening withold not thy hand, for thou know not whether shall prosper,
this or that, or whether they both shall be alike good, Eccles. 11.6.

And the recompense of a man's hands shall be given unto him] He shall eat the
fruit of his doings, Isa. 3.10. For the talk of the lips (if that be all)
tends only to penury, Prove. 14.13. Nos non eloquimur magna, sed vivimus,
said they of old. Origens teaching and living were said to be both one. He
cannot look to be satisfied with good by the fruit of his mouth, qui operibus
destruit quod recte docet, who says one thing, and does another. A smoothe
tongue, and a rough hand carries away double judgment.

Verse. 15. The way of a fool is right in his own eyes] He thinks his own wit
best, Arachne ap. Ovid.
Consilii satis est in me mihi, he will not part with his Commonwealth of
bables, for the Tower of London. And such a fool is every natural men, Job
11.12. wise enough, happily in his generation (so is the Fox too) wise with such
a wisdom, as (like the Ostrich-wings) makes him outrun others upon earth, and
in earthly things, but helps him never a whit toward heaven; nay hinders him,
and hangs in his light, as it fared with the Pharisees, Matthew. 21.31. Of such
it may be said, as Quintilian said of some over-weeners of themselves, that
they might have proved excellent Scholars if they had not been so persuaded
already; so might many have been wise, if they had not been conceited of their
own wisdom; and saved, if not over-well persuaded of their good estate to
Godward. They clasp and hug the barn of their own brain with the Ape, till
they strangle it.

-- At parit ut vivat regnetque beatus.
Hor. Ep. 2.
Cogi posse negat. --
But he that hearkneth to counsel is wise] He that suspecting his own
judgment, takes advice of wiser than himself, seldom miscarries. There is
that self-love in many, that they think their Molehill a Mountain, their
Kestril an Eagle, their Goose a Swan. And being self-conceited, they love to
be flattered. Not so the wise man; he knows that humanum est errare. And that
Triste mortalitatis privilegium est licere aliquando peccare. He is therefore
glad of good counsel, and thankful for a seasonable reproof. Let the righteous
smite me.

Verse. 16. A fools wrath is presently known] He has no power over his
passions. Hence (...) a fool, and (...) suddenly, rashly, is from the same
root. Like Tow, he is soon kindled, like a pot, he soon boyls, and like a
candle whose tallow is mixed with brine, as soon as lighted he spits up and
down the room. A fool utters all his mind, Prove. 29.11. The Septuagint
render it, All his anger. (...).
For, as the Hebrews well note in a Proverb they have, A man's mind is soonest
discovered, bekis, bekos, becognos, in loculis, in poculis, in ira, in his
purse, in his drink, in his anger. See my Commonplace of Anger.

But a wise man covers shame] By concealing his wrath, or rather by
suppressing it, when it would break forth to his disgrace, or the just grief of
another. Ovid.
Ut fragilis glacies, occidit ira mora. This was Saul's wisdom, 1 Samuel 10.27.
And Jonathans, when incensed by his Fathers frowardness, he went a shooting, 1 Samuel 12.35. And Ahashuerosh, when in a rage against Haman, he walked into the
Garden. The Philosopher wished Augustus when angry, to say over the Greek
Alphabet; Ambrose desired an Angels Authority, Gal. 1.8. Theodosius to repeat
the Lords Prayer, before he decreed any thing.

Verse. 17. He that speaks truth shows forth righteousness] will be ready
to help the truth in necessity, and will do it boldly (as the word signifies)
even with a courage, not budging, for Charity rejoices not in unrighteousness,
but rejoices in the truth, 1 Cor. 13.6.

But a false witness utters deceit] Colors his sycophancies with plausible
pretenses, and faceth down an untruth, Psalm. 119.69. The proud have forged a
lie against me. The Hebrew has it, Assuunt mendacium mendacio, they eek out
one lie with another, they are loud and lewd liars; as Egesippus says of
Pilate, that he was Vir nequam et parvi facieus mendacium. What is truth? said
he scornfully to our Savior, q. d. Thy life is in question, and do thou
talk of truth?

Verse. 18. There is that speaks lies like the piercing, etc.] False witnesses
do so, with a witness. As Doeg, Psalm. 52.2. And his fellow-hacksters with their
murdering weapons in David's bones, Psalm. 42.10. whereby they killed him alive,
and buried him in their throats, those gaping graves, open sepulchers.
Ahimelech and his fellow-Priests were killed with the tongue, as with a Tuck or
Rapiet; so was Naboth and his sons; so was our Savior Christ himself. Reckon
thou Shimei and Rabshekeh among the first and chiefest Kil-Christs (says one)
because ever an honest mind is more afflicted with words, than with blows. Act.
2.23. and 3.15.
You shall find some (says Erasmus) that if death be threatened, can despise
it; but to be belied they cannot brook, nor from revenge contain themselves.
How was David enraged by Nabals railings? Moses by the Peoples murmurings?
Jeremy by the derisions of the rude rabble? Chap. 20.7, 8,

But the tongue of the wise is health] Or, a medicine, as the Tench is to the
wounded fishes, or as that Noble Lady Elianors tongue was to her Husband Prince
Edward (afterward Edward the first) who being traitorously wounded by a
poisoned knife in the holy land, Speed. Camden.
was perfectly cured by her daily licking his rankling wounds, whilst he
slept, and yet her self received no harm; So sovereign a medicine is a good
tongue, anointed with the virtue of love and wisdom. Wholesome words, as
certain salves or treacles, cure the wounds of afflicted hearts, and extract
the poison infused by evil tongues.

Verse. 19. The lips of truth shall be established for ever] Veritas odium
parit: Truth breeds hatred: a good Mistress she is, but he that follows her
too close at heels, may hap have his teeth struck out. He that prizeth truth,
shall never prosper by the possession or profession thereof, says Sir Walter
Rawleigh. Hist. lib. 1. c. 1.
This is most true (for most part) of the truth of the Gospel, Gal. 2.5. the
Doctrine according to godliness, 1 Timothy 6.3. sweet in the mouth, but bitter in
the belly, Rev. 10.9. very pleasant in it self, but the publishing of it
(whereby the fruit of it might come to the rest of the members) is full of
trouble and anguish. How many faithful witnesses of the truth have lost their
lives in the defense of it? All which notwithstanding, the lips of truth shall
be established, says the Spirit here. Great is the truth, and shall prevail.
He that loses his life in Christ's cause, shall find it in Heaven, his name
also shall be famous upon earth, the Generation of the upright shall be
blessed.

The lying tongue is but for a moment] As is to be seen in Gehezi, in Ananias
and Sapphira, in Doeg and others, Psalm. 52.5. God shall likewise destroy thee
for ever, and root thee out of the land of the living. Did he not deal so by
Julian, Ecebolius, Latomus, Bomelius, Pendleton, Harding, and other, both
ancient and modern Renegadoes and Apostates? How are they brought into
desolation as in a moment? they are utterly consumed with terror, Psalm. 73.19.

Verse. 20. Deceit is in the heart of them, etc.] Incendiaries and Make-bates,
Counselors of contention, have twenty devices to make trouble, and to put all
into a combustion; but they shall either be defeated of their purposes, or
have small joy of their achievements; witness our late English Boutifeaus,
with the whole Nation of Ignatius, whose practice is to machinate mischief, and
breed hate; being herein no less dangerous than once those Jews were, who
before they were banished hence, threw bags of poison into the wells and
fountains that the people were to drink of, and so endeavored to poison them
all. The just judgment of God upon Nicholas Saunders Priest, (the firebrand
of Ireland, Anno 1580. spent with famine, and forsaken of all succor) is most
worthy to be kept in perpetual remembrance. He being impatiently grieved at
the evil success of his rebellion with Earl Desmond; and seeing that neither
the Popes blessing, B. Carletons thankf. remem. page 49.
nor the consecrated banner, nor the plume of Phoenix feathers (so said to be
at least) sent from Rome could do him any help, lost himself, and ran stark
mad, wandering up and down in the Mountains and Woods, and finding no comfort,
died miserably. Thus God met with a restless and wretched man: and that foul
mouth was stopped with famine, that was ever open to sow sedition, and stir up
rebellions against the state.

But to the counselors of peace there is joy] They shall have peace for
peace: peace of conscience, for peace of Country, pax pectoris, for pa^
temporis; they shall be called and counted the children of peace, yea, the
children of God, have the comfort and credit of it, Matthew. 5.9. (see the Note
there) as Augustus Caesar, and our Henry the seventh had; who as he went into
banishment together with the public peace, so he brought it back with him at
his return; and was afterward wont to say, If we Princes should take every
occasion that is offered, the world should never be quiet, but wearied with
continual wars.

Verse. 21. There shall no evil happen to the just] First, for evil of sin, God
will not lead him into temptation, but will cut off occasions, remove
stumbling blocks out of his way: devoratory evils, (as Tertullian calls them)
he shall be sure not to fall into. That Evil one shall not touch him, 1 John
5.18. viz. tactu qualitativo, as Cajetan expounds it, with a deadly touch;
nibble he may at their heels, but cannot reach their heads; shake he may his
chain at them, but shall not set his fangs in them; or, so far thrust his sting
into them, as to infuse into them the venom of that sin unto death, verse. 17.
Next for evil of pain; Though many be the troubles of the righteous, Psalm. 34.
and they fall into manifold temptations, Jam. 1.2. they go not in step by step
into these waters of Marah, but fall into them, being as it were precipitated,
plunged over head and ears; yet are bidden to be exceeding glad, as a Merchant
is to see his ship come laden in. Their afflictions are not penal, but
probational, not mortal, but medecinal, etc. By this shall the iniquity of
Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, the taking away of his sin, Isa.
27.9. Look how the scourging and beating of a garment with a stick, drives out
the moths and the dust, so does afflictions corruptions from the heart; and
there is no hurt in that, no evil happens thereby to the just.

But the wicked shall be filled with mischief] To treasure up sin, is to
treasure up wrath, Romans 2. Every bottle shall be filled with wine, Jer. 13.12.
the bottle of wickedness, when once filled with those bitter waters, will sink
to the bottom: The Ephah of wickedness, when top full, shall be born into the
land of Shinar, and set there upon her own base, Zach. 5.8, 11. He that makes
a match with mischief, shall have his belly full of it, Hos. 4.17. Prove. 14.14.
he shall have an evil, an evil, an only evil, Ezekiel. 7.5. that is, judgment
without mercy, as St. James expounds it, Chap. 2.13. Non surgit hic afflictio,
as the Prophet Nahum has it, Chap. 1.9. affliction shall not rise up the
second time: God will have but one blow at him, he shall totally and finally
be cut down at once. The righteous are smitten in the branches, but the wicked
at the root, Isa. 27.8. those, he corrects with a rod (yea, with the rods of
men) hominum debilium, of weak or old men, as the word signifies, 2 Samuel 7.11.
but, these, with a grounded staff, Isa. 30.32, and yet the worst is behind
too. For whatsoever a wicked man suffers in this world, is but hell typical, it
is but as the falling of leaves; the whole tree will one day fall upon them. It
is but as a drop of wrath fore-running the great storm, a crack fore-running
the ruin of the whole building: It is but as a paying the use-mony required
for the debt that must be paid at last.

Verse. 22. Lying lips are abomination to the Lord] Who has therefore threatened
to cut them off, Psalm. 12.3. and to broil them on coals of Juniper, Psalm.
120.4. which burn sweetly, fiercely, lastingly: and to make them eat their
false words, Act. and Mon. fol. 1825.
as Master Jews of Manchester made the Summoner (that came to cite his wife)
eat the citation, by setting a dagger to his heart.

But they that deal truly, are his delight] He desires truth in the inward
parts, Psalm. 51.6. and all his, are children that will not lie, Isa. 63.8. they
will rather dye, than lie; Nec prodam, nec mentiar, said Firmus in Augustine:
Non ideo negare volo, ne peream; sed ideo mentiri nolo, ne peccem, said that
good woman upon the rack, mentioned by Hierome. As they love in the truth, 2
John 1. so they speak the truth in love, Ephesians. 4.15. and are therefore dear to
the Father in truth and love, 2 John 3. especially since they do truth, as well
as speak it, 1 John 6. and do not more desire to be truly good, than they hate
to seem to be so only.

Verse. 23. A prudent man concealeth knowledge] scil. Till he finds a fit time
to vent it; for then, the lips of the wise do spread abroad knowledge, Chap.
15.7. he is no niggard where there is need, but loves not to outlash.
Taciturnity is a virtue with him, Tacitus a good historian. Curtlus. lib. 4
Persae magnam rem sustineri posse non credunt ab eo cui tacere grave sit. The
Persians hold not him fit for great employments, that cannot keep counsel,
says Curtius.

But the heart of fools proclaims foolishness] In it is, and out it must:
Pleni rimarum sunt, they can keep no counsel, hold no secrets, must needs tell
all, whatever come of it: ut qui nec tacere nec prudenter loqui noriut, they
can neither hold their tongue, nor use it to purpose. The Moralist advises
(...) either to say nothing, or that which is better than nothing. And Socrates
being asked by one how he might have the reputation of a wise man? Frist, said
he, thou must hold thy tongue oftener than speak: Secondly, thou must learn how
to frame thy speeches.

Verse. 24. The hand of the diligent shall bear rule] i. e. It shall make rich,
and so get preferment: for regina pecunia, Money bears the Mastery, and is a
common medler in most businesses. Agathocles, by his industry, gat to be King
of Sicily, Crumwel to be Earl of Essex, Cranmer to be Archbishop of
Canterbury, etc.

But the slothful (or deceitful) shall be under tribute] Cajetan renders it,
Dolus erit ad liquefactionem. Deceitful dealing shall melt to nothing. (...)
tributum, fic dictum quia paulatim liquescere facit facultates. Buxtorf.
The same word signifies both melting and tribute, because too much tribute
wastes men's estates; as when the spleen swells, the rest of the body consumes.
King John's exactors received from his subjects no less sums of curses, than
of coin: He gathered money the sinews of war, but lost their affections,
the joints of peace. He had a troublesome reign, ill beloved of his people; and
far a less King, only by striving to be more than he was; the just reward of
violations: what tribute he paid to the Popes Legate at his absolution (eight
thousand Marks, besides other huge sums, Mat. Paris.
insomuch as that John Florentinus the Legate was nicknamed Ferentinus, for
bearing away so much money) I need not here relate. Speed.
And yet this King was not slothful (for his endless turmoils kept his body
still in motion, his mind in passions, and his prowess in ure) deceitful, I
cannot deny him, in breaking promise with His Subjects about their just
liberties: But a great part of that blame may well lie upon his
Court-parasites, who suggested, that now he was a King without a Kingdom, a
Lord without a Dominion, and a Subject to his Subjects, etc. Wicked
Counselors; as if it were not enough to be above men, Daniel.
but to be above mankind, as those Princes would be, that would not be under
the Law.

Verse. 25. Heaviness in the heart of a man makes it stoop] Grief is like Lead
to the soul, heavy and cold; it sinks downward, Homer. Odyss. 1. Man's mind is
like the stone Tyrrhenus, which so long as it is whole, swimeth, but being once
broke, sinketh.
and carries the soul with it; (...). How decrepit was David grown with much
grief at seventy years of age? The like we may say of Jacob, who attained not
to the days of the years of the life of his Fathers, Genesis 47.9. as being a man
of many sorrows. And this, some think, was the reason that our Savior Christ,
at little past thirty, was reckoned to be toward fifty, Joh. 8.57. He was the
man that had seen affliction by the rod of Gods wrath, Lam. 3.1.

But a good word makes it glad] Such as was that of our Savior to the poor
Paralytick, Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee. The promises
are called a good word, (...).
Jer. 29.10. so David found them, Psalm. 119.92. Physic for the soul (more
truly so called than the Library at Alexandria) cordials of comfort, breasts of
consolation, Isa. 66.11. Wells of salvation, Isa. 12.3. (...) miseriarum (as
Plato said of Wine and Music) that which mitigates man's miseries; and without
which Wine, Music, merry company, etc. will prove but miserable comforters,
and at the best, but the Devils Anodynes.

Verse. 26. The righteous is more excellent than his neighbour] Let him dwell by
whomsoever; he is ever a better man than his neighbors; he is a Prince of
God amongst them, as Abraham was amongst the Hittites. The Jews say, that those
seventy souls that went with Jacob into Egypt, were as much worth as all the
seventy Nations in the world. Nemo me major, nisi qui justior, said Agesilaus,
when he heard the King of Persia styled The great King, i. e. I acknowledge
none more excellent than my self, unless more righteous; none greater, unless
better. Upon all the glory shall be a defense, Isa 4.5. that is, upon all the
righteous, those only glorious, those excellent of the earth, Psalm. 16.2. that
are sealed up to the day of redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. Now whatsoever is sealed
with a seal, that is excellent in its own kind, as Isa. 28.25. hordeum
signatum, excellent barley. The poorest Vilage is an Ivory palace, in quo est
Pastor and credentes aliqui, says Luther, if it have in it but a Minister, and
a few good people.

But the way of the wicked seduceth them] i. e. The wicked will not be
persuaded of the just man's excellency; he cannot discern, nor will be drawn
to believe that there is any such gain in godliness, any such worth in
well-doing, any such difference betwixt the righteous and the wicked, betwixt
him that serves God, and him that serves him not. He therefore goes another
way to work, but is fearfully frustrated; For who ever yet hardened himself
against God, and prospered? Job 9.4. They think themselves far better than the
righteous; and so they were indeed, if they could find that felicity in wicked
ways, which their deceitful hearts promise them. But this they can never do.

Verse. 27. The sloathful (or deceitful) man roasteth not that which he took in
hunting] He shall never enjoy his evil-gotten goods; but though he heap up
silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay, he may prepare it, but
the just shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide the silver, Job 27.16,
17. I read of a false Butcher, that having stolen an Ox, and caused it to be
dressed on his wedding day, was on that very day apprehended, and not long after
executed. I read of Tecelius, the Popes Pardonmonger in Germany, that having by
sale of Indulgences scraped together a huge mass of money, and returning for
Rome, he was met, and eased of his cash by an odd fellow, who being
afterward prosecuted for a felon, produced a pardon for future sins granted
him by Tecelius himself, and being thereupon acquitted by the Judge, he
roasted that which that other old Fox had taken in hunting.

But the substance of a diligent man is precious] Great in value, whatsoever it
be in quantity; as a small box-full of Pearls, are more worth than mountains
of pibbles. Ps. 37.16. Prove. 15.16. and v. 2. The house of the righteous has
much treasure, though there be but curta suppellex, Res angusta domi, he is
without that care in getting, fear in keeping, grief in losing, those three
fell Vultures that feed continually on the heart of the rich worldling, and
dissweeten all his comforts. Jabal that dwelt in Tents, and tended the herds,
had Jubal to his brother, the Father of Music, Jabal and Jubal, diligence and
complacence, good husbandry and a well-contenting sufficiency dwell usually
together.

Verse. 28. In the way of righteousness is life] And life (in any sense) is a
sweet mercy, a precious indulgence. Life natural is but a little spot of time
between two Eternities, before and after, but it is of great consequence (for
ex hoc momento pendet Aeternitas) and given us for this purpose, that glory may
be begun in grace, and we have a further and further entrance into the
Kingdom of heaven here, as Peter says, 2 Ep. 1.11.

And in the path thereof there is no death] Christ has unstinged the first
death, and made it of a punishment, a benefit; Mors janua vitae, porta coeli.
Bern.
of a postern to let out temporal life, a street-door to let in eternal life.
Surely the bitterness of this death is past to the righteous, there is no gall
in it (as the Hebrew word there signifies) nay there is honey in it, as once
there was in the corpse of Sampsons dead Lion. And for the second death, there
is no danger; for they shall pass from the jaws of death, to the joys of
heaven; Yea, though hell had closed her mouth upon a child of God, it could as
little hold him, as the Whale could Jonah; it must (perforce) regurgitate, and
render up such a morsel.

CHAP. XIII. Verse. 1. A wise son hears his Fathers instruction.]
HEbr. Is the instruction (or discipline) of his Father; Philostratus.
he was not natus sapiens (as Apollonius) sed factus, not born wise to
salvation, but made so by his Fathers discipline, as Solomon, Prove. 4.4. See
the Note there.

But a scorner hears not rebuke] Or, hears and scareth, as Lots sons in
law, as Elies sons, and (afterward) Samuels. Samuel succeeds Eli in his cross,
as well as in his place, though not in his sin of indulgence. God will show,
that grace is by gift, not by inheritance, or education. Ciceroni degenerem
fuisse fili^^^ constat, and sapiens ille Socrates liberos habuit matri
similiores quam patri, says Seneca. Cicero had a son nothing like him; so had
Socrates.

Verse. 2. A man shall eat good by the fruit of his mouth] See the Note on Chap.
12. verse. 14. and on Chap. 10. verse. 6. and on Mat. 12.37.

Verse. 3. He that keeps his mouth] As the guard keeps the gates in a
siege. God has set a double guard of lips and teeth before this gate; and yet
unless he himself set the watch, and keep the door, all will be lost, Psalm.
141.3.

But he that opens wide his lips] As she did her feet, to multiply her
Whoredoms, Ezekiel. 16.25. (...) Gaping-mouthed men are noted for fools by Lucian
and Aristophanes. Scalig Arab, Prove. cent. 1. Prove. 75.
An open mouth is a purgatory to the Master say we. And cave ne feriat lingua
tua collum tuum, say the Arabians in their Proverb; Take heed that thy tongue
cut not thy throat.

Verse. 4. The soul of the sluggard desires, etc.] Vult, and non vult piger (so
the Vulgar reads it) The sluggard would, and he would not: he would have the
end, but he would not use the means; he would sit at Christ's right hand, but
he would not drink of his cup, or be baptized with his baptism. Lyra compares
these men to Cats that would fain have fish, but are loath to wet their feet.
(This is an English Proverb; for Lyra was a famous English Jew, and flourished
in the year of Grace, 1320.) Affection without endeavor is like Rachel,
beautiful, but barren.

But the soul of the diligent shall be made fat] i. e. Those that work as well
as wish, that add endeavors to their desires, as 2 Cor. 8.11. David ravished
with the meditation of the good man's blessedness, presently conceives this
desire and purlues it; not, Oh that I had this happiness! but, Oh that I could
use the means, that nay ways were so directed, Psalm. 119.4, 5.

Verse. 5. A righteous man hates lying] Hates it as hell, Romans 12.9. (...)
I hate and abhor lying says David, Psalm. 119.163. and yet among other
corruptions, he had an inclination to this sin. See how roundly he tells
three or four lies together, 1 Samuel 21.2.8. and 1 Samuel 27.8, 10. but he both
hated it in himself, and prayed against it, Psalm. 1^9.29.

But a wicked man is loathsome] Stinks above ground; a liar especially is
looked upon as a Pest. Riches cannot make a man so graceful, as lying will
disgrace him; for a poor man walking in his integrity, is better than a rich
man that is a liar, Prove. 19.22. Hence the liar denies his own lie, because he
is ashamed to be taken with it. Some read it thus; A wicked man makes others
loathsome, and casts shame upon them, sc. by raising or reporting lies of
them, by blasting or blemishing their good names. Thus Core and his Accomplices
sought to cast an odium on Moses; the Pharisees upon our Savior, the Arrians
upon Athanasius, the Papists upon Wicliffe, whom Bi^ius slanders for his
missing the Bishopric of Worcester, to have fallen upon that successful
contradiction; Epiphan.
like as the spiteful Jews said Paul did, because he could not obtain the
Highpriests daughter to wife.

Verse. 6. Righteousness keeps him that is upright] That, though belyed or
otherwise abused, he will not let go his integrity, Job 27.5. David's feet
stood on an even place, Psalm. 26.12. The Spouse, though despoiled of her veil,
and wounded by the watch, yet cleaves close to Christ, Cant. 5. Not but that
the best are sometimes disquieted in such cases; for not the evenest weights,
but at their first putting into the balance; somewhat sway both parts thereof,
not without some show of inequality; which yet after some little motion, settle
themselves in a meet poize and posture.

But wickedness overthrows the sinner] Hebr. the sin, as if the man were
transformed into sins image. What is the transgression of Jacob? Is it not
Samaria, Lips. Antiq. lect.
Mic. 1.5. Tubulus quidam paulo supra Ciceronem Praetor fuit^ homo tam projecte
improbus ut ejus nomen non hominis sed vitii esse videretur, says Lipsias. The
Pope is called the Man of sin, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. to note him Merum scelus, says
Beza, made up merely of sin.

Verse. 7. There is that makes himself rich] Such (...) (as the witty Gretian
calls them) there are not a few, that stretch their wing beyond their nest,
that bear a port beyond their estate, that trick up themselves with other men's
plumes, laying it on above measure in clothes, fair building, etc, when not
worth a groat, but dye in prison, or make a fraudulent composition. This is no
better before God than rapine and robbery.

There is that makes himself poor, etc.] As the new-elected Pope does, when in
his Lateran procession, he casts among the people pieces of brass and copper,
B. Halls Sermon.
saying, Silver and gold have I none, but such as I have I give you. So the
Friats are a race of people (says one that has been long amongst them) that
are always vowing obedience, Spec. Europ.
but still contentio^s: Chastity, yet most luxurious: Poverty, yet every where
scraping and covetous. No Cappucine may take or touch silver; at the offer of
it he starts back, as Moses from the Serpent; B. Halls Epist. 5. D c. 1. Godw*
Catal.
yet he carries a boy with him that takes and carries it, and never complains
of either metal or measure. We had in King Stephens days a rich Chancellor of
England, who yet was, and would be called Roger paupere censu.

Verse. 8. The ransom of a man's life are his riches] They may help a man out at
a dead lift, and get him a release out of captivity, or a lease of his life.
Slay us not, say they, Jer. 41.8. for we have treasures in the field, etc. So
he forbore and slew them not among their brethren. Some read it thus, The
price of a man's life are his riches. It costs him his life that he is rich, as
Naboth, and as many Turkish Visiers. Dio in Calig.
In the days of Caligula the Tyrant, publicum crimeu fuit, divicem fuisse, it
was crime enough to be rich: And in the reign of Henry the second of France,
many were burned for Religion as was pretended: but indeed, Hist. of Council of
Trent. 387.
to satiate the covetousness of Diana Valentina the Kings Mistress, to whom he
had given all the confiscations of goods made in the Kingdom, for cause of
heresy.

But the poor hears not rebuke] He scapes many times as not considerable, as
not worth a chiding, as under law. In a Tragedy there is no place for a poor
man but only to dance, as Arrian has observed upon Epictetus.

Sol non patitur celipsin, sed videtur tautum p^^i.
Verse. 9. The light of the righteous rejoyceth] As the Sun rejoices to run his
race, and seems sometimes to suffer eclipse, but does not. A Saints joy is as
the light of the Sun, fed by heavenly influence, and never extinct, but
diffused through all parts of the world.

But the Lamp of the wicked shall be put out] Their joy is but as the light of
a Candle, fed by base and stinking matter, soon wasting and ending in an
offensive snuff. The light of the wicked shall be put out, and the spark of
his fire shall not shine. The light shall be dark in his Tabernacle: and his
Candle shall be put out with him. Job 18.5, 6. Ecquandone vidisti stammam
stipula exertam claro strepitu, largo fulgore, cito incremento, sed enim matter
alevi, Apuleius in Apolog.
caduco ine endio, nullis requiis? Solomon compares it fitly to a handful of
brush-wood, or s^are thorn under the pot. Eccles. 7.6.

Verse. 10. Only by pride comes contention] Hebr, dabit jurgium. Pride if there
be no cause of contention given will make it. Transcend^, non obedio, perturbo,
is the Motto written upon prides tripple-crown. A proud person is full of
discontent: nothing can please him, etc. Just like one that has a swelling in
his hands, something or other touches it still, and drives him to outcries.
Pride makes a man drunk with his own conceits, Hab. 2.5. The proud man is as
he that has transgressed by wine: And drunkards we know are quarrelsome. The
Corinthians had riches, and gifts, and learning: and carried aloft by these
waxen wings, they domineered and despised others, 1 Cor. 4.8. they were divided
and discontented, 1 Cor. 3.3. and these over-flowings of the gall and spleen
came from a fullness of bad humors. Pride is a dividing distemper: gowty swollen
legs keep at a distance: bladders blown up with wind spurt one from another,
and will not close: but prick them, and you may pack a thousand of them in a
little room.

But with the well-advised is wisdome] The meekness of wisdom (as St. James
has it, Chap. 3.13.) of the which we may well say as Tertullus said to Felix,
Acts 24.2. By thee we enjoy great quietness. It was a great trouble to Hama^
to lead Mordecai's Horse, which another man would not have thought so. The
moving of a straw troubles proud flesh: whereas humility if compelled to go
one mile, will go two for a need: yea, as far as the shoes of the Gospel of
peace can carry it. The wisdom from above is peaceable, Jam. 3.

Verse. 11. Wealth gotten by vanity shall be diminished] De male quasitio ^ix
gauget tertius haeres. Horat.
Ill gotten goods fly away without taking leave of the owner: leaving nothing
but the print of talons to torment him. Prove. 23.5. Many when they have a loss
in their riches, it is as it were raked out of their bellies, Joh 20.15. A
piece of their very heart goes with it.

But he that gathers by labor, shall encrease] Howbeit sometimes it is
otherwise; Master, we have labored all night and taken nothing. Behold, Luke 4.
is it not of the Lord of Hosts, that the people shall labor in the very fire,
and the people shall weary themselves for very vanity? Hab. 2.13. There is a
curse upon unlawful practices, though men be industrious, as in Jehojakim, Jer.
22.

Verse. 12. Hope deferred makes the heart sick] Hopes hours are full of
eternity: and how many see we lie languishing at Hopes Hospital, as he at the
Pool of Bethesda? Spes in terronis incerti nomen boni spes in divinis nomen est
certissimi, Heb. 11.1. Hope unfailable, Romans 5.5. is founded upon faith
unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5.

But when the desire cometh] As come it will to those that wait patiently upon
God: (for waiting is but hope and trust lengthened) Deo confisi, nunquam
confusi. The vision is but for an appointed time; therefore wait, Hab. 2.3. you
shall be well paid for your patience. We are apt to antedate the Promises, and
to set God a time, as they ( Jer. 8.20.) looked for Salvation at Summer at
furthest: We are short breathed, short-spirited: But as God seldom comes at
our time, so he never fails at his own: and then he is most sweet, because most
seasonable.

Verse. 13. Who so despises the Word, shall be destroyed] Bishop Bonners
Chaplain called the Bible (in scorn) his little pretty Gods Book. Lindan. pa^.
lib. 1. cap. 9. Commonitorium. Bell.
Gifford and Rainold, said, it contained doctrinam peregrinam strange doctrine,
yea, some things profane and Apocryphal. The more modest Papists account
Traditions the touchstone of doctrine, and foundation of faith: And repute the
Scriptures to be rather a kind of storehouse for advice in matters of
Religion. We account them the Divine beam, and most exact balance. Cor and
animam Dei, the heart and soul of God, as Gregory calls them; the best
fortress against errors, as Austin, etc. though some of our sublimated
Sectaries blaspheme that blessed Book as a dead letter, and a beggarly element.

But he that fears the Commandement] That honors the Scriptures, and
trembles at the Word preached, as King Edward the sixth did (that second
Josiah) and as Queen Elizabeth (his sweet sister Temperance, as he used to call
her) who when the Bible was presented to her as she rode triumphantly through
London after her Coronation, she received the same with both her hands: and
kissing it, laid it to her breast, saying, that it had ever been her delight,
and should be her Rule of Government.

Verse. 14. The law of the wise is as a well of life] Or, the Law to the wise is
a fountain, etc. whence he may draw the best directions and helps to holiness
and happiness. It confines him to live in that element where he would live,
(as if one were confined to Paradise where he would be) though there were no
such Law. The wicked, on the contrary, leaps over the pale after profit and
pleasure, and falls upon the snares of death; as Shimei sought his Servants,
lost himself.

Verse. 15. Good understanding gives favour] See this exemplified in Joseph,
David, Daniel, Paul, Acts 27.43. and 28.2. God often speaks for such in the
hearts of their enemies, who cannot but admire their piety and patience, and
spend more thoughts about them than the world is aware of; as Darius did about
Daniel when cast into the Den. Natural conscience cannot but do homage to the
Image of God stamped upon the natures and works of the godly; when they see in
them that which is above the ordinary nature of men, or their expectation, they
are afraid of the Name of God, whereby they are called, Deuteronomy. 28.9, 10. and are
forced to say, Surely this is a wise and understanding Nation, Deuteronomy. 4.6. God
is in this people of a truth, 1 Cor. 14.25. Certainly this was a righteous man,
Luke 23.47.

But the way of transgressors is hard] Or rough and rugged. Satan is a rough
harsh Spirit, (hence Devils are called Sheguirim, hairy ones, Levit. 17.7.
Satyrs, Isa. 34.14.) So are all his; (...), fierce, heady, high-minded, 2 Timothy
3.3, 4. living in malice and envy, hateful and hating one another, Tit. 3.3.
Such were Ishmael, Esau, Saul, Antiochus, (that little Antichrist) the Pope,
that (...), and our Richard the third; who well knowing it was no good policy
to play the Devil by half deal, resolved to leave never a rub to lie in the way
that might hinder the running of his bowl: and hence was he so infinitely hated
of all.

Verse. 16. Every prudent man deals with knowledge] Observes circumstances,
and deports himself with discretion: thrusts not himself into unnecessary
dangers, carves not a piece of his heart but to those he is well assured of.
See an instance of this prudence in Ezra, chap. 8.22. in Nehemiah, (chap. 2.5.
He calls it not the place of Gods Worship, (such an expression that Heathen
King might have disgusted) but the place of his Fathers Sepulchers,) in Esther,
who concealed her Stock and Kindred till she saw her time; in Christ, when he
was tried for his life: in Paul, Acts 23.6. and Act. 19.10. he lived two years
at Ephesus, and spoke not much against the Worship of their great Goddess
Diana, verse. 37. The prudent shall keep silence in an evil time. Amos 5.13.
It Is not good provoking evil men that are irreformable: nor safe pulling a Bear
or mad Dog by the ear.

But a fool lays open his folly] Plasheth it, and sets it a sunning, as it
were, by his headlong headstrong exorbitances: by his inconsiderate courses
he openly bewraies and proclaims what he is: he sets his folly upon the cliffe
of the rock, that it should not be covered, Ezekiel. 24.7.

Verse. 17. A wicked messenger falls into mischief] Incurs the displeasure and
just revenge of them that sent him: Or at least, of God, in case of their
slacknesse. How much more then wicked Ministers, those Messengers of the
Churches, Jer. 4^.10. (...).
2 Cor. 8.23. that do the Lords work negligently, that corrupt his Message, 2
Cor. 2.17. that huckster it and handle it craftily and covetously, good evil,
and evil good, etc. Who is blind but my servant? or deaf as my messenger? Isa.
42.19. Such an Ambassador was once worthily derided in the Roman State. As at
another time, a certain stranger coming on Embassage to the Senators of Rome,
and coloring his hoary hair, and pale cheeks, with vermilion hue, a grave
Senator espying the deceit, stood up, and said, What sincerity are we to
expect at this man's hands, whose locks, and looks, and lips do lie? It was an
honest complaint of a Popish Writer, We (says he) handle the Scripture,
tantum ut nos pascat and vestiat, that we may pick a living out of it, and are
therefore fain to preach placentia, and so to put men into a Fools Paradise.
But shall they thus escape by iniquity? Psalm. 56.7. have they no better
Medicums?

But a faithful Ambassador is health] To him that sends him, to those he is
sent to, and to himself: So is a faithful Minister that delivers the whole
counsel of God, all that he has in Commission, Jer. 1.17. Ezekiel. 3.17.

Verse. 18. Poverty and shame] These two are fitly set together; for poverty is
usually slighted, if not shamed, Jam. 2.16.

Nil habet infelix paupertas durius in se
Quam quod ridiculos homines facit. --
The world looks over a poor, though virtuous man. Luke 15. This thy son, not
this my brother. And why? but because in poverty. How much more an
uncounselable and incorrigible man, as here, and that Prodigal had been, till
he came to himself.

But he that regards reproof, shall be honoured] Though not happily enriched,
he shall be of good account with the wise and godly, though in meaner
condition. Mr. Fox being asked whether he knew such an honest poor man, who
had received succor and good counsel from him in time of trouble, answered, I
remember him well; I tell you I forget Lords and Ladies to remember such.

Verse. 19. The desire accomplished is sweet to the soul] Tota vita boni
Christiani sanctum desiderium est, says Augustine. The whole life of a good
Christian is one holy desire; he even spends and exhales himself in continual
sallyes as it were, and expressions of strongest affection to God, whom he
has chosen, and with whom he has much sweet intercourse; he cannot be at
rest without some comings in from him every day: And then, O the joys, the
joys, Mrs. Kath. Brettergh.
the unconceivable joys! as she once cried out. O that joy! O my God, when
shall I be with thee? These were the dying words of the young Lord Harrington:
He was in heaven aforehand, as having let out his holy soul into God, Fun.
Sermon. by Mr. Stock.
the fountain of all good.

But it is abomination to fools to depart from evil] To be pulled from their
vain delights, though never so sinful, never so destructive: Esau for a mess of
pottage sold his birthright. Cardinal Burbon would not part with his part in
Paris, for a part in paradise. Theotimus in Ambrose, being told that
intemperance would be the loss of his eyesight, cried out, Vale lumen amicum.
He would rather lose his sight, than his sin; so does many a man his soul. The
Panther loves man's dung, they say, so much, that if it be hanged a height from
him, he will leap up, and never leave till he has burst himself in pieces to
get it; and this is the way they get that creature. Like policy uses Satan, by
base lusts to draw many to hell. It was a speech of Gregory Nyssen, He that
does but hear of Hell, is without any further labor or study taken off from
sinful pleasures. Men's hearts are grown harder now adays.

Verse. 20. He that walks with wise men, shall be wise] He that comes where
sweet spices and ointments are stirring, does carry away some of the sweet
savor, though he think not of it; so he that converseth with good men, shall
get good. Holiness is such an Elixar, as by Contaction (if there be any
disposition of goodness in the same metal) it will render it of the property.
A child having been brought up with Plato, Sen. de ita l. 3. c. 11.
and afterward hearing his Father break out into rage and passion, said, I
have never seen the like with Plato.

But a companion of fools shall be broken] There is an elegancy in the
Original that cannot be Englished. Bid by a companion or friend of fools
here, understands those that take delight in Jesters, Stage Players, and such
idle companions, unprofitable burdens, -- fruges consumere nati, the botch and
canker of the Commonwalth. Plutarch.
Theatra juvenes corrumpunt, says Plato, -- ludi praebeut semina nequitiae,
says Ovid. The Lacedaemonians would not admit of them, that so they might not
hear any thing contrary to their laws, whether in jest, or in earnest. Func.
Chron.
And Henry the third Emperor of Germany, when a great sort of such fellows
flocked together at his wedding, sent them all away, not allowing them so much
as a cup of drink, Anno Dom. 1044.

Verse. 21. Evil pursues sinners] Hard at heels. Flagitium and flagellum, ut
acus and filum. Sin and punishment are linked together with chains of adamant.
Of sin we may say as Isidore does of the Serpent, Tot dolores, quot colores,
so many colors, so many dolours: The wages of sin is death, but the gift of
God is eternal life, Romans 6. ult. The same in effect with this sentence of
Solomon.

But to the righteous good shall be repaid] Or he (that is God) shall repay
good. Now he is a liberal play master, and all his retributions are more than
bountiful. Never did any yet do, or suffer ought for God, that complained of an
hard bargain. L. Brooks discourse of Episcop.
God will recompense your losses (says that thrice noble Lord Brook, who lost
his precious life in this late unhappy wars at Litchfield) as the King of
Poland did his noble servant Zelislaus; having lost his hand in his wars, he
sent him a golden hand. Caius (Agrippa having suffered imprisonment for wishing
him Emperor) when he came afterward to the Empire, the first thing he did
was to prefer Agrippa, and gave him a chain of gold, as heavy as the chain of
iron that was upon him in Prison. Those that lose any thing for God, he seals
them a bill of Exchange, of a double return, nay an hundred fold here, and
eternal life hereafter.

Verse. 22. A good man leaves inheritance to his childe] Personal goodness is
profitable to Posterity: God gives not to his servants some small annuity for
life only (as great men use to do) but keeps mercy for thousands of
generations of them that fear him, Exodus 34.7. Where the Masorites observe Nun.
Rabbath, a great N in the word Not for keeps; to note the large extent of
Gods love to the good man's posterity. God left David a Lamp in Jerusalem, 1
Kings 15.4. although his house were not so with God, 2 Samuel 23.5.

And the wealth of the sinner is laid up for the just] as Nabals was for David,
Hamans for Mordecai, the Canaanites for the Israelites. Howbeit this holds not
perpetually and universally in every wicked person; for some of them are full
of children, and leave the rest of their substance for their babes, Psalm.
17.14. Hereupon their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for
ever, etc. they call their Lands after their own names (as Cain called his new
built City after the name of his son Henoch, Genesis 8.4.) This their way is their
folly, or is their constant hope (for the word signifies both) and their
Posterity approve their sayings, and vote the same way, Psalm. 49.11, 13. But
together with their lands, they bequeath their children their sins and
punishments, which is far worse than that legacy of Leprosy that Joab left his
issue, 2 Samuel 3.29. Confer Job 27.16, 17. Isa. 61.5.

Verse. 23. Much food is in the tillage of the poor] Who have but a little, and
look well to it. That of the Poet is well known -- Laudato ingentia rura,
Exiguum colito -- It is best for a man to have no more than he can master, and
make his best of. Vigil. Geog. lib. ^. Lib. 1. cap 3.
The ground should be weaker than he that tills it, says Columella. The
earth is a fruitful mother, and brings forth meat meet for them by whom it is
dressed, Heb. 6.7.

But there is that is destroyed for want of judgement] viz. in plowing and
sowing, Isa. 28.26. or in managing and husbanding what he has gotten, for the
best. For non minor est virtus quam quaerere, parta tueri. We must be good
husbands, and see that Condus be fort^or Promo, our comings in more than our
layings out. Bonus Servatius facit bonum Bonifacium, says the Dutch man in his
blunt Proverb, A good saver, makes a well-doer.

Verse. 24. He that spares his rod, hates his son] It is as if one should be
so tender over a child, as not to suffer the wind to blow upon it, and
therefore hold the hand before the mouth of it, but so hard as he strangleth
the child: It is said of the Ape, that she huggeth her young one to death; so
do many fond Parents, who are therefore peremptores potius quam parents,
rather Paricides than Parents. Eli would not correct his children: God
therefore corrected both him and them. David would not once cross his Absalom,
and his Adonijah, Bern.
and he was therefore singularly crossed in them ere he dyed. The like befell
old Andronicus the Greek Emperor, in his unhappy Nephew of the same name; and
Muleasses King of Tunes, in his son Amida, whom he cockered so long, till
Absolom-like he rose against his father; Turk hist. 745.747.
and possessing himself of the Kingdom, put out his father and brethrens eyes,
slew his Captains, polluted his Wives, and took the Castle of Tunes.

But he that loves him, chasteneth him betimes] And this is a God-like love,
Prove. 3.12. Rev. 3.19. See the Notes there. (...). Arist. Ethic. l. 2.
Correction is a kind of cure says the Philosopher, the likeliest way to save
the childs soul; where yet, curam exigeris, non curationem, says Bernard, it
is the care of the child that is charged upon the Parent, not the cure, for
that is Gods work alone. But he usually works by this mean, and therefore
requires that it be soundly set on, if need so require. A fair hand, we say,
makes a foul wound. A weak dose does but stir bad humors and anger them, not
purge them out. In some diseases the Patient must be let blood, even ad
deliquium animae, till he swoon again. So here. Quintilian tells us of some
faults in a child that deserve not a whipping. And Chrysippus is ill spoken of
by some, because he first brought the use of the rod into the Schools. It was
he (I trow) that first offered that strict and tetrical division to the world,
Aut mentem aut restim comparandam. Either a good heart, or a good halter for
your self, and yours. The condemned person comes out of a dark prison, and goes
to the place of Execution; so do children left to themselves, and not nurtured,
come from the womb their prison to the fire of hell their execution. Severitas
tamen non sit tetra, sed tetrica: Corrections must be wisely and moderately
dispensed. Sidonius Ep. lib. 4. Col. 4.21.
Parents provoke not your children to wrath, lest they be dispirited, and,
through despondency, grow desperate, or heartless. Our Henry 2. first crowned
his eldest son Henry whilst he was yet alive, and then so curbed him, that,
through discontent, he fell into a Fever, whereof he dyed before his Father.
A Prince of excellent parts, Daniels hist.
who was at first cast away by his Fathers indulgence; and afterward by his
rigor.

Verse. 25. The righteous eats to the satisfying of his soul] Have he more or
less, he has that which satisfies him. Nature is content with a little, grace
with less; Cibus and potus sunt divitia Christianorum. If Jacob may but have
bread to eat, and clothes to put on, it suffices him; and this he dare be
bold to promise himself. Beg his bread he hopes he shall not; but if he
should, he can say with Luther (who made many a meal with a broyled herring)
Mendicato pane hic vivamus; Luth. in Psalm. 132.
annon hoc pulchre sarcitur in eo quod pascimur pane cum angelis, and vita
aterna, Christo, and sacramentis? Let us be content to fare hard here: Have
we not the bread that came down from heaven?

But the belly of the wicked shall want] Because their belly prepares deceit,
Job 15.35. not their heads only; Job 20.22. Mic. 6.14, 16.
they take as much delight in their witty wickedness, as the Epicure in his
belly-timber, therefore in the fullness of their sufficiency they are in
straights, they are sick of the bulimy, or doggish appetite.

CHAP. XIV. Verse. 1. Every wise woman builds her house.]
QUavis pia and perita. Every holy and handy woman builds her house; not
only by bearing and breeding up children, as Rachel and Leah builded the house
of Israel, Ruth, 4.11. but by a prudent and provident preventing of losses and
dangers, as Abigail, as also by a careful plotting, and putting every thing to
the best: like as a Carpenter that is to build an house, lays the plot and
platform of it first in his brain, forecasts in his mind how every thing shall
be, and then so orders his stuff, that nothing be cut to waste. Lo such is the
guise of the good housewife. As the husband is as the head from whom all the
sinews do flow; so she is as the hands into which they flow, and enable them
to do their office.

But the foolish plucketh it down with her hands] With both hands earnestly:
she undoes the family, Sicut ut liguo vermis, ita perdit virum suum mulier
malefica. Hier.
whereof she is the calamity, be she never so witty, if withal she be not
religious and thrifty, heedy and handy. Be the husband never so frugal, if the
wife be idle, or lavish, or proud, or given to gadding and gossipping, etc.
he does but draw water with a sieve, or seek to pull a loaded cart through a
sandy way without the help of a horse; it little boots him to bestir himself,
for he puts his gets into a bag with holes, Hag. 1.6. He labors in the very
fire, Hab. 2.15. as Cowper Bishop of Lincoln did, whose wife burnt all his
Notes that he had been eight years in gathering, lest he should kill himself
with over much study (for she had much ado to get him to his meals) so that
he was forced to fall to work again, Young, his benefit of Afflict. 153.
and was eight years in gathering the same Notes wherewith he composed his
Dictionary, that useful book. How much happier in a wife was that learned Gul.
Budaeus? Conjux mea, says he, sic mihi morem gerit, ut non tractet
negligentius libros meos quam liberos, etc. My wife seeing me bookish, is no
less diligent about my Books, than about my Barus, whom she breeds up with
singular care and tenderness. How well might he have done (having such a
learned helper) as a Country man of his did, of whom Thuanus reports, quod
singulis annis singulos libros and liberos, Reip. dederit, that he set forth
every year a book and a child, Andreas Tiraquellius.
a book and a child? But this by the way only.

Verse. 2. He that walks in his uprightness, fears the Lord] He is in the
fear of the Lord all day long, Prove. 23.17. he walks in the fear of the
Lord, and in the comforts of the Holy Ghost, Act. 11.31. The fear of the Lord
is upon him, so that he takes heed and does it, 2 Chronicles. 19.7. for he knows
it shall be well with them that fear God, that fear before him, Eccles. 8.12.
Gods Covenant was with Levi of life and peace, for the fear wherewith he
feared God, and was afraid before his Name. Hence the Law of truth was in his
mouth, and iniquity was not found in his lips: he walked with God in peace and
equity, and did turn many from iniquity, Mal. 2.5, 6. He that truly fears God,
is like into Cato, of whom it is said, that he was Homo virtuti simillimus,
and that he never did well, that he might appear to do so, sed quia aliter
facere non potuit, but because he could not do otherwise.

But he that is perverse in his ways, despises him] Sets him aside, departs
from his fear, dares to do that before him, that he would be loath to do
before a grave person. Thus David despised God, when he defiled his neighbors
wife, 2 Samuel 12.9. Not but that even then he had God for his chief end, but
he erred in the way, thinking he might fulfill his lust, and keep his God too
(he would not forgo God upon any terms) as Solomon thought to retain his
wisdom, and yet to pursue his pleasures. Hence his partial and temporary
Apostasy (as the word here rendered perverse imports) his warping and writhing
from the way of righteousness (as the Septnagint here interpret it) which was
interpretative, (...) ^ortuose incedens
a despising of God, a saying, He sees it not.

Verse. 3. In the mouth of the foolish, is a rod of pride] wherewith he beats
others, and lays about him like a Madman; or rather like a mad Dog, he bites
all he meets, and barks against God himself: till he procure the hate of God
and men, and smart for his petulancy; being beaten at length with his own rod,
as the Lion beats himself with his own tail.

But the lips of the wise shall preserve them] From the aspersion of false and
foolish tongues. Their good names are oyled, so that evil reports will not
stick to them. Dirt will stick upon a mud wall, not so upon marble. Or if they
lie under some undeserved reproach for a season, either by a real or verbal
Apology they wade out of it, as the eclipsed Moon, by keeping her motion,
wades out of the shadow, and recovers her splendour, Isa. 54.17.

Verse. 4. Where no Oxen are, the Crib is clean] The Barn and Garners are empty.
Neque mola, neque farina, no good to be got without hard labor of men and
Cattle. Let the idle man's Motto be that of the Lilly, Neque laborant, neque
neut. They neither toil nor spin, Matthew. 6.28. Man is born to toil, as the
sparks fly unwards, Job 5.7. And Spinster they say is a term given the greatest
women in our Law. Our lives are called the lives of our hands, Isa. 57.10.
because to be maintained by the labor of our hands.

But much increase is by the strength of the Oxe] This is one of those beasts,
that serve ad esum and ad usum, and are profitable both alive and dead. An
Heathen counsels good husbands that would thrive in the world, to get first
an House, then a Wife, and then an Ox that lustily ploweth, and brings in
much increase. Bid applies this text to painful Preachers (set forth by Oxen,
1 Cor. 9.9. Rev. 4.7. for their tolerance and tugging at the work) where these
labor lustily, there is (commonly) a harvest of holiness, (...) of (...) dust.
a crop of comfort. Only they must be dustily diligent.

Verse. 5. A faithful witness will not lie] Nec prece nec precio, he cannot
lend an oath for a need before a Magistrate. Nay, he will not lie upon any
condition. See the note on chap. 13.5.

But a false witness will utter lyes] Or, he that tells lies will be a false
witness: he that makes light of a lie, will not stick at Perjury. That was a
foul blur to the Romans of old (if true) that Mirrhanes the Persian General
charge upon them, Romany promittere promptum est, Procop. lib. 1. de bell.
Persi^
promissis autem quanquam juramento firmatis minime stare. The Romans will
presently promise any thing, but perform no promise though confirmed with an
oath. Of the Romists at this day it is written by an Italian (no stranger to
the Court of Rome,) that their Proverb is, Mercatorum est, non Regum, stare
juramentis? It is for Merchants, not for Princes, to stand to what they have
sworn. Fides cum haeretic is non est servanda is their position: and their
practice is according. They play with Oaths as the Monkey does with his
Collar, which he does slip on for his Masters pleasure, and slip off again for
his own. Pascenius scoffs King James for the invention of the Oath of
Allegiance.

Verse. 6. A scorner seeks wisdom, and finds it not] Or, he seeks
wisdom, and he seeks it not. He seeks it not seriously, seasonably, duly:
he seeks it as a Coward seeks his adversary, with a hope he shall not find him:
or a man seeks his false coin, which he has no joy to look upon. What Is truth
said Pilate? in a jear to Christ; but staid not the answer. How can this man
give us his flesh to eat, said those carnal Capernaites? John. 6. and away they
went; who if they had stayed out the Sermon, might have been satisfied in the
point. Herod sought to see Christ, but never sent for him, nor went to him: and
when the Lord Christ was brought before him, he looked upon him no otherwise
than as upon some Jugler to show him some Tricks, and make him sport; and is
therefore answered with silence.

But knowledge is easy to him that does understand] In any Science the worst
is at first: as the root of the Herb Moly in Homer, is said to be black and
unsightly, but the leaf lovely, and the fruit pleasant. The more a man sees
into heavenly Mysteries, the more he may. I love them that love me, Prove. 8.17.
says Wisdom, and those that seek me early shall find me: Provided that they
be not proud persons, but come with a desire to learn, and a resolution to
practice. He that comes to a fountain to fill his pitcher, must first wash it,
and then put the mouth of it downward to take up water: So he that would have
heavenly knowledge, Deuteronomy. 33.3.
must first quit his heart of corrupt affections, and high conceits, (Intus
existens prohibet alienum) and then humble himself at Gods feet, every one to
receive his words. See the Note on Chap. 8.9.

Verse. 7. Go from the presence of a foolish man] If he be a proud fool, as
verse. 6. a scorner and derider of good counsel, and one that knows not how to
lisp out the least syllable of savoury language: Break off society with such,
as soon as may be; for what good can be gotten by their company or
conference? Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? They infect
the very air they breathe upon, Dabhar a word, Debher a Pest.
and are therefore called (...), Pests (according to the Septuagint) Psalm. 1.1.
their tongues have the very plague in them, their breath as fire shall devour
you, Isa. 33.10. Non potest vir ille fine convitiis quenquam a quo dissentit
vel in levissimis nominare, says Dr. Rivet concerning Bishop Montague. That
man has not the power to forbear railing at any one that dissents from him,
though in never so small a matter. Is there any good to be gotten by such? 2 Timothy 2.17.
Do not their words eat as a gangrene?

Verse. 8. The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way] His wisdom
begins in the right of himself, and ends in the right knowledge of God, that
he may walk worthy of God in all well-pleasing, worthy of the calling
wherewith he is called, that high and heavenly calling, Heb. 2.1. to the
fruition of high and heavenly privileges, to an Angelical and convincing
conversation, such as may draw hearts, or daunt them. We use to say of him
that knows his place, and carries himself accordingly, Such a man understands
himself well enough: So here.

But the folly of fools is deceit] Or, is to understand deceit, to know the
Devils depths, to search his skull for carnal arguments that they may cum
ratione insanire, be mad with show of reason, and deceive the hearts of the
simple. This their way is their folly; yet their posterity (as wise as their
fool-fathers) approve their sayings, abbet their practices, Psalm. 49.13.

Verse. 9. Fools make a mock of sin] A sport or pastime of it, Prove. 10.23. (See
the Note there) they dance with the Devil all day, and yet think to sup with
Christ. But what says the Heathen Historian, Nae illi falsi sunt qui
diversissim as res expectant, ignaviae voluptatem, and praemia virtutis. In
good truth they are utterly out, that take their swinge in sin, and yet look
for the reward of virtue. No, their sweet meat must have sour sauce. God also
will laugh at their destruction, and mock when their fear comes: And then
they all shall be damned that had pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2.12.
yea double-damned, because they jeared, when they should have feared, 2 Pet.
2.13.

But among the righteous there is favour] That, though they sin of infirmity,
yet for as much as they are sensible and sorrowful for their failings, and see
them to confession, God will never see them to their confusion. Homo agnoscit,
Deus ignoscit, Man repents, and God remitteth; yea, he compasses his
returning people with favor as with a shield, he re-accepts them with all
sweetness through Christ, who is the propitiation for their sins, 1 John 2.2.

Verse. 10. The heart knows his own bitterness] None can conceive the terrors
and torments of a heart that lies under the sense of sin, and fear of wrath. A
little water in a leaden vessel is heavy. Some can bear in their grief better
than others: But all that are under this affliction have their back burden.
Jobs stroke was heavier than his groaning, and yet his complaint was bitter
too. Chap. 23.2. Some holy men (as Mr. Leaver) have desired to see their sin in
the most ugly colors, Dr. Sibbes.
and God has heard them. But yet his hand was so heavy upon them, that they
went always mourning to their graves: And thought it fitter to leave it to
Gods wisdom to mingle the portion of sorrow, than to be their own choosers.

And the stranger does not intermeddle with his joy] None but such as are of
the family of Faith, can conceive the surpassing sweetness of spiritual joy.
Gal. 6.
The Cock on the dunghill knows not the worth of this Jewel. It is joy
unspeakable, 1 Pet. 1.8. Such as none feel but those that stir up sighs
unutterable, Romans 8.26. It is joy unspeakable, and full of glory, a hansel of
Heaven, a foretaste of eternal life. It is the peace that passes all
understanding; they that have it, Phil. 4.7.
understand not the full of it, nor can relate the one half of it. Paul said
somewhat to the point, when he said, I do over-abound exceedingly with joy:
(...). 2 Cor. 7.4. Chrysostom.
but words are too weak to utter it. Father Latimer said somewhat, when he
said it was the sweetmeats of the feast of a good conscience. But sermo non
valet exprimere, experimento opus est. It is a thing fitter to be believed,
than possible to be discoursed. Tell a man never so long what a sweet thing
honey is, he can never believe you so well, as if himself taste it. Those that
never yet tasted how good the Lord is, are far from intermedling with the just
man's joy. Act. and Mon. fol. 1668.
The World wonders (says Mr. Philpot Martyr) how we can be so merry in such
extreme misery. But our God is omnipotent, which turns misery into felicity.
Believe me, there is no such joy in the world, as the people of Christ have
under the Cross: I speak it by experience, etc. Another holy Martyr, Richard
Collier, after his condemnation sang a Psalm: Ibid. 1533.
Wherefore the Priests and the officers railed at him, saying, He was out of
his wits.

Verse. 11. The house of the wicked shall be overthrown] As Phocas his high
walls were, because sin was at the bottom. Brimstone also shall be scattered
on the top, Job 18.15. As it befell Dioclesian, whose house was wholly consumed
with fire from Heaven: Wherewith himself also was so terrified, that he died
within a while after. Eusebius. de vit. Constable. lib. 5.


But the Tabernacle of the upright shall flourish] The wicked have houses, and
are called the Inhabitants of the earth, Rev. 12.12. The upright have
Tabernacles or Tents that were transportative, and taken down at pleasure: Here
they have no continuing City, no mansion-place: And yet that they have shall
flourish. Our bed is green, the beams of our house are Cedar, and our rafters
of Firr. Cant. 1.16, 17. See 2 Samuel 23.4.

Verse. 12. There is a way that seems right unto a man] Sin comes clothed
with a show of reason, Exodus 1.10. And lust will so blear the understanding,
that he shall think that there is great sense in sinning. Adam was not
deceived, 1 Timothy 2.14. That is, he was not so much deceived by his judgment
(though also by that too) as by his affection to his wife, which at length
blinded his judgment. The heart first deceives us with colors; and when we
are once a doting after sin, then we join and deceive our hearts, James 1.26.
using fallacious and specious sophisms, to make our selves think that lawful to
day, which we our selves held unlawful yesterday; and that we are possessed of
those graces whereto we are perfect strangers.

But the end thereof are the ways of death] Via multiplex ad mortem. The very
first step in this evil way, was a step to Hell: But the journies end (if men
stop not, or step not back in time) is undoubted destruction. Some flatter
themselves, as Micah, Judge. 17.13. They fly to the Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord: And think to take Sanctuary and save themselves there from
all danger; as the Jews fable that Og King of Bashan escaped in the flood by
riding astride upon the Ark without. Wherein it falls out often as it did with
the riflers of Semiramis her tomb; who, where they expected to find the
richest treasure, met with a deadly poison. Or, as it does with him, that lying
asleep upon a steep rock, and dreaming of great matters befallen him, starts
suddenly for joy, and so breaks his neck at the bottom. As he that makes a
bridge of his own shadow, cannot but fall into the water: So neither can he
escape the pit of Hell, who lays his own presumption in place of Gods promise,
who casts himself upon the unknown mercies of God, etc.

Verse. 13. Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful] Nulla est sincera voluptas.
Labor est etiam ipsa voluptas. Of carnal pleasures a man may break his neck,
before his fast. All this avails me nothing, said Haman. Omnia fui, and nihil
profuit, said that Emperor. Vanity of vanity, all is vanity, said Solomon, and
not vanity only, but vexation of spirit. Nothing in themselves, and yet full
of power and activity to inflict vengeance and vexation upon the spirit of a
man; so that even in laughter, the heart is sorrowful. Some kind of frothy and
flashy mirth wicked men may have; such as may wet the mouth, but not warm the
heart, smooth the brow, but not fill the breast: It is but a cold armful, as
Lycophron says of an evil wife; as they repent in the face, Mat. 6.16. so they
rejoice in the face, (...). Lyc.
not in the heart, 2 Cor. 5.12. Rident and ringuntur; there is a snare or a
cord in the sin of the wicked, that is, to strangle their joy with, but the
righteous sing and are merry, Prove. 29.6. Others may revel, they only must
rejoice, Hos. 9.1.

And the end of that mirth is heaviness] They dance to the Timbrel and Harp,
but suddenly they turn into Hell, Job 21.12, 13. and so their merry dance ends
in a miserable downfall. Luke 6.
Woe be to you that laugh now. Those merry Greeks (that are so afraid of
sadness, that they banish all seriousness) shall one day wring for it.
Adoniah's guests had soon enough of their good cheer and jollity: So had
Belshazzar and his combibones optimi. Thou mad fool, what do thou? Eccles. 2.
says Solomon to the mirth-monger, that holds it the only happiness to laugh
and be fat. Know thou not yet there will be bitterness in the end?
Principium dulce est, sed finis amoris amarus, The candle of the wicked shall
be put out in a vexing-snuff. Their mirth (as Comets) blazeth much, but ends in
a pestilent vapor. As lightning it soon vanishes, leaves a greater darkness
behind it, and is attended with the renting and roaring thunder of Gods wrath.

Verse. 14. The Back-slider in heart shall be filled with his own waies] He
has made a match with mischief, he shall soon have enough of it; he has
sold himself to do wickedness, and he shall be sure of his payment; he has
drawn back to perdition, he has stolen from his colors, run away from his
Captain, (...).
Heb. 10.38. he shall have Marshal-Law for it. God will serve such odious
Apostates, as Theodorick King of Goths did a Deacon, that to engratiate with
this Arrian Prince, turned Arrian; instead of preferring him, he cut off his
head. Or as that Turk served the traitor that betrayed the Rhodes: His
promised wife and portion were presented; but the Turk told him that he would
not have a Christian to be his Son-in-law, but he must be a Musulman, that
is, a believing Turk both within and without. And therefore he caused his
baptized skin (as he called it) to be taken off, and him to be cast in a bed
strawed with salt, that he might get a new skin, and so he should be his
Son-in-Law. But the wicked wretch ended his life with shame and torment.

But a good man shall be satisfied from himself] For he has a spring within
his own breast, he needs not shark abroad: he has an Autarkie, a
self-sufficiency, 1 Timothy 6.6. Hic sat lucis, said Oecolampadius claping his
hand on his breast, when sick, and asked whether the light did not offend him?
Another being likewise sick, and asked how he did? answered, My body is weak,
my mind is well. Mr. Bolton.
A third, when the pangs of death were upon him, being asked by a very dear
friend that took him by the hand, whether he felt not much pain? Truly no,
said he, the greatest I find is your cold hand. These good men knew within
themselves, that they had in Heaven a better, and a more enduring substance,
Heb. 10.34. within themselves they knew it; not in others, not in books, but in
their own experience and apprehension, in the workings of their own hearts.
Their knowledge was, non in eodicibus, sed incordibus: They could feelingly
say, that in doing of Gods will (not only for doing it, or after it was now
done, but even whiles they were doing of it) there was great reward, Psalm.
19.11. Righteousness is its own reward, and is never without a double joy to
be its strength: Gaudium in re, gaudium in spe, gaudium de possessione, Bern.
gaudium de promissione, gaudium de praesenti exhibitione, gaudium de futura
expectatione, joy in hand, and in hope, in present possession, and in certain
reversion.

Verse. 15. The simple believes every word] You may draw him any way with a wet
finger, persuade him, to any thing, as Rehoboam that old Baby. (...), was a
very good rule of Epicharmus. Be not light of belief: Try before you trust,
look before you leap. Bern. de bono desert.
Alioqu^ saliens antequam videas, casurus es antequam debeas. Wisdom would,
that as men should not be over censorions (This man blasphemeth, said they of
our Savior) so neither overcredulous, as the giddy-headed Galathiaens were to
their seducing Doctors, Chap. 1.6. I wonder that ye are so soon removed, etc.
Let us leave to the Papists Ministrorum muta officia, populi caeca obsequia,
their Ministers dumb services, their peoples blind obediences: And ever count
it a singular folly to take men's bare authority in matters of faith, and not to
prove the spirits whether they are of God, 1 John 4.1. as those noble Beraeans
did, and are worthily renowned for it, Act. 17.

But the prudent man looks well to his goings] He looks not so much what
others believe, or not believe, do or not do, as what he is bound to believe
or do. He pins not his faith to another man's sleeve, he frames not his pace
by another man's practice, but walks by line and by rule, treads gingerly, steps
warily, lifts not up one foot till he finds sure footing for the other, as
those Psalm. 35.6. This is to walk exactly, accurately, not as fools, but as
wise, (...).
Ephesians. 5.15.

Verse. 16. A wise man fears and departs from evil] He trembles at the
judgments, whiles they hang in the threatenings, meets God with entreaties of
peace, and so redeems his own sorrows. Solo auditu contremisco, says Hierom,
Speaking of that terrible text, Ezekiel. 16.42. I tremble at the very hearing of
it. So Erasmus repeating those words, Ezekiel. 3.18. His blood will I require at
thy hands; These, says he, are fulmina, non verba, not words, but
thunderbolts. A good child, if but threatened only, will amend his fault; yea,
if he but hear others threatened. Daniel was more troubled than Nebuchadnezzar
was, Dan. 4.18. Habakkuck, when in a vision he saw the judgments of God that
were to come upon the Caldeans, it made his very heart to ache and quake within
him, Chap. 3.16.

But the fool rages, and is confident] Some render it Rangeth, and is
confident, transit and confidit (so the Vulgar, and Original will well enough
bear it) he passes on from sin to sin, like a mad man, and yet persuades
himself that all shall do well; such a desperate fool was Balaam, though the
Angel met him with a drawn sword, yet he would needs on; and what was the
issue? he dyed by the sword of Israel, though he seemed a friend to Israel.
Not to be warned, is both a just presage and desert of ruin.

Verse. 17. He that is soon angry, deals foolishly] Alexander in his hot
blood slew his dearest friend, whom he would have revived again with his
heart-blood.

-- Qui non moderabitur irae
Infectum velit esse dolor quod suaserit and men's.
Rash anger differs from madness (says Seneca) in nothing, but in time only.
See my Commonplace of Anger.

And a man of wicked devices is hated] i. e. He that bears a grudge,
intending revenge (as one that only wants, and therefore waits a fit time, as
Absalom did for Amnon) this is a dangerous man, and deservedly detested of all:
It is counted Manhood, indeed its Doghoo^^ The Curs of Congo they say, bite,
but never bark: Esau threatened Jacob. (...) ^^ius lentus in meditando, ubi
prorupisset, tristioribus dictis atrocia facta conjungebat. The more he
meditated revenge, the more did time and delay sharpen it; and the further off
be threatened, the heavier the stroke fell; therefore he was generally hated,
as an odious miscreant.

Verse. 18. The simple inherit folly] Acceperunt per successionem seu
hareditario jure, so one renders it, they are as wise as their forefathers,
and they are resolved to be no wiser. Me ex ea opinione quam a majoribus
accepi de cultis deorum, nullius unquam movebit oration, said Tully. I will
never forsake that way of divine service, that I have received from my
forefathers, for any man's pleasure, or by any man's persuasion. The Monarch of
Morocco told the English Ambassador for King John, that he had lately read
Saint Paul's Epistles, which he liked so well, Heyl. Geog.
that were he now to choose his Religion, he would, before any other, embrace
Christianity. But every one ought, says he, to dye in the religion received
from his Ancestors, and the leaving of the faith wherein he was born, was the
only thing that he disliked in that Apostle.

But the prudent are crowned with knowledge] They know that dies diem docet:
and therefore are not so wedded to their old Principles, Superstitions and
Fopperies, but that they can, as right reason requires, relinquish and abjure
them, glorifying the Word, Acts 13.48
Acts 13. And receiving the truth in love, 2 These. 2.10. whereby it soon comes
to pass, that they get good repute and report of all men (as Demetrius had)
yea and of the truth it self, 3 John 12. which is the Crown of all
commendation. Haud velim Erasmi gloria aut nomine vehi, says Luther. I care
not to be cried up as Erasmus is, etc.

Verse. 19. The evil bow before the good] Here they do so many times, as Joseph's
brethren before him in his greatness, as Saul before Samuel, Balshazzar before
Daniel, Eusebius.
the persecuting tyrants before Constantine the great; yea one of them, viz.
Maximinus Galerius, being visited with grievous sickness, not only proclaimed
liberty to the poor persecuted Christians, but also commanded their Churches to
be re-edified, Cresius
and public Prayers to be made for his recovery. So Ezra 6.10. Pray for the
Kings life, and for his Sons: some of which had dyed in their minority, for the
rest therefore Prayer must be made by the Church. That place is well known, Isa.
49.23. Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their Queens thy nursing
mothers: they shall bow down to thee with their faces toward the earth, and
lick up the dust of thy feet, etc. The Prophet seems to allude to the manner of
the Persians: Pictorum solea basiare regum. Martial.
who when they were to speak to their King, did first kiss the pavement
whereon he trod. Howsoever natural consciences cannot but do homage to the
Image of God, stamped upon the natures and practices of the righteous (as is
afore-noted,) and the worst cannot but think well of such, and honor them in
their hearts. In the life to come these things shall have their full
accomplishment, and at the last day when the Saints shall judge the world, and
Christ shall have put all things under his feet, so that they shall have power
over the Nations, Rev. 2.26.

Verse. 20. The poor is hated] i. e. Less loved, little respected, as Genesis
29.31. Mal. 1.5. Luke 14.26. The Heathen could say, (...). Adversity finds few
friends. Et cum fortuna statque caditque fides. Few will appear for suffering
Saints, (This Job and David much complain of; but as when a Deer is shot, the
rest of the Herd push him out of their company; so here, Tempora si fueriut
nubila, solus eris. The same Hebrew word that signifies Winter, (an Emblem of
Poverty,) signifies reproach. This thy son, Luke 15.30. Not this my brother,
Joseph.
because in poverty. The Samaritans would not once own the Jews when they were
at an under, but disavow them, as they did to Antiochus Epiphanes. But when in
prosperity, then they would curry favor with them, and call them their sweet
Cousins. When it was sometimes disputed among the Romans in the Council, using
to deifie great men, whether Christ, having done many wonderful works, should
be received into the number of the gods? it was resolved that he should not,
Propter hoc, quod paupertatem praedicarit and elogerit, quam mundus contemnit,
because he preached poverty, and chose poor men whom the world cares not for.

Purchase.
But the rich man has many friends] Such as they are, ollares amici,
trencherflies, such as follow the scent, and (like Bohemian Curtes) will fawn
upon a good suit. As for faithful friends, divitibus ideo amicus deest, quia
nihil deest, says one, few such to be found, such as with Ittai the Gittite,
and Hushai the Archite will stick close to a David when stripped of all.
Josephus relates of the Jews, that they were very careful how they received
Proselites in Salomons time, because then the State of the Jews flourished.

Verse. 21. He that despises his neighbor, sinneth] His poor neighbor: Where
the hedge is low, the beast will easily break over: None usually are so
trampled on with the feet of pride, and contempt, by the great Bulls of Basan,
as the necessitous and afflicted. Hence poor and afflicted are set together,
Zeph. 3.12. so are to want, and to be abased, Phil. 4.11. This is a great sin
says Solomon, it is to commit sin, and to be convinced of the Law, as
transgressors, says Saint James, chap. 3.9.

But he that has mercy on the poor, happy is he] His sins shall be remitted,
his necessities relieved, and the blessings of God multiplied upon him, even a
(...). See my Commonplace of Alms.

Verse. 22. Do they not err that devise evil] Heb. That plow it and plot it,
that dig it and delve it, that whet their wits and beat their brains about it;
Toto errant calet
do not these err? are they not heavenly wide, utterly out? shall they not
miss of their purpose, and meet with disappointment? witness those
Babel-builders, Genesis 11. those Kil-Christs, Psalm. 2. those State Traitors,
Sheba, Shebna, etc. diverse English Traitors who drew their last thread in the
Triangle of Tiburn. Knute the first Danique King, caused the false Edrics head
to be set on the highest part of the Tower of London: Daniels Hist. 19.
therein performing his promise of advancing him above any Lord in the Land.
Traitors always become edious, though the treason be commodious. Philip Duke
of Austria, Parei Hist. prof. madul. 769.
paid the Ambassadors of Charles the fourth (who had betrayed their trust) in
counterfeit coin: whereof when they complained, he answered, that false coin
was good enough for false knaves: James the first King of Scots, was murdered
in Perth, by Walter Earl of Athol, in hope to attain the Crown: Hect. Boeth.
but his hopes failed him. Crowned indeed he was, but with a Crown of red hot
Iron clapped upon his head, being one of the tortures wherewith he ended at once
his wicked days and devises.

But mercy and truth shall be to them that devise good] Mercy and truth were
the best that David could wish to his fast friend Ittai, 2 Samuel 15.20. These
two Attributes of God shall cause that good devises shall not miscarry. His
mercy moves him to promise, his truth binds him to perform, 2 Samuel 7.18, 21.
For thy words sake, and according to thine own heart have thou done all these
things. According to thine own heart, that is, of mere mercy, out of pure and
unexcited love, thou did give thy Word and Promise, and for thy words sake
thou have performed it.

Verse. 23. In all labor there is profit.] In all honest labor: for there are
that do wickedly with both hands earnestly; and what profit have such of all
their labor, etc. Eccles. 1.3. do they not take pains to go to Hell? There
are also that labor about (...), toylsome toys, that pay not for the pains,
that do magno conatu magnas nugas agere. Such a one was Paleottus Archbishop
of Bonony, who made a great book of the shadow of Christ's Body in a ^^ndon; and
it was commented upon by the Professor there. This Aristotle calls laborious
loss of time. The Apostle calls upon men to labor, working with their hands
the thing that is good: so shall they have, (...)
not for their own uses only, but also to give to him that needs, Ephesians. 4.28.

But the talk of the lips tends only to penury] Great talkers are
doe-littles, for most part, Corniculas citius in Africa, quam res rationesque
solidas in Turriani scriptis invenies, says one, Turrian, was a very wordy
man, ye cannot find matter for words in him. (...). The Athenians fought
against Philip with words and messages, says one: but Rabshekah could tell
Hezekiah, that war was to be made (so is work to be done) not with words, and
the talk of the lips, but with counsel and strength, Isa. 36.5. And why stand
you looking upon one another? get you down to Egypt, said Jacob to his sons,
Genesis 42.1.

Verse. 24. The crown of the wise is their riches] An ornament, an encouragement
in well-doing, and an instrument of doing much good, if God give an heart
thereto: for quid cervo ingentia cornua cum, desit animus? To what end is a
treasure, if a man have lost the Key that leads to it?

Vel mihi da clavem, vel mihi toll seram. But the foolishness of fools is
folly] That is, of rich fools: such as was Pope Clemens the fifth, of whom the
Historian says, Papa hic ditior quam sapientior, that he was more wealthy
than wise. The Crown of the wise is their riches; but yet give them a fool, you
put a sword into a mad man's hand; the folly of such fools will soon be
foolishness. Why? was it not foolishness before they were rich? yes, but now it
is become egregious foolishness. (...), the earth cannot bear the insolences
of such. Set a beggar on horseback, etc.

Verse. 25. A true witness delivers souls] Or lives that lie at stake. He
that helps the truth in such a necessity, does a worthy work. To walk about
with slanders, is to shed blood, Ezekiel. 22.9. Way was made to that bloody French
massacre, by false reports cast abroad by the Fryar-lyars, that the Protestants
under pretense of Religion, met by night that they might feed daintily, and
then lie together promiscuously. He that has a mind to hang his Dog, (says
the French Proverb) will first give out that he is run mad. John 8.48.
The Devil was first a liar, and then a murderer from the beginning.

Verse. 26. In the fear of the Lord is strong confidence] The reverential fear
of God, is monimentum, munimentum, ornamentum. The wise man had said, verse. 24.
The Crown of the wise are their riches, and chap. 18.11. he will tell us, that
the rich man's wealth is his strong City. Now, lest any should hereby be
brought to think of riches more highly than is meet, he gives us to know, that
wealth severed from the fear of God, can neither adorn us, nor secure us. Great
is the confidence of a good conscience. Our God whom we serve is able to
deliver us, and he will deliver us out of thine hand, Dan. 3.17. Hezekiah
pulled down the brazen Serpent, 2 King. 18.5.
for he trusted in God. At ego rem divinam facio, But I am sacrificing, said
Numa, when they told him the enemy was at hand. Non sic Deos coluimus, aut sic
vivimus ut illi nos vincerent, said the Emperor Antoninus. We are bold to
believe that God will deal better with us than so.

And his children have a place of Refuge] i. e. Gods children run to his name
and are safe. Or, the children of him that fears God. For God will bless those
that fear him, both small and great, Psalm. 115. If I can but once find the
fear of God in those about me, Selnecer.
said Reverend Claviger, satis habeo, satisquo mihi, meae ^xori, filiis, and
filiabus prospexi, I shall have enough for my self, wife and children; they
will be all cared for.

Verse. 27. The fear of the Lord is a fountain of life] So said to be, both for
the constant faithfulness, as never failing, and for the gracious effects, viz.
Blessings of all sorts; 1 Temporal, Prove. 22.4. Riches, Honor, Life. 2
Spiritual, Mal. 4.2. Such shall grow up as the Calves of the stall, fat and
fair-liking. 3 Eternal, Psalm. 31. O how great things, etc. eye has not seen,
etc. It shall be always well with them, Eccles. 8.12. And though many
afflictions, etc. yet he that fears God, shall come out of them all, Eccles.
7.18.

To depart from the snares of death] Satan that mighty hunter, has laid snares
for us in all places: And the way of this world is like the vale of Siddim,
slimy and slippery, full of lime-pits and pitfalls, snares and
stumbling blocks, laid on purpose to maim us or mischief us. He that fears
God, comes off without hurt, by remembering that (which as short as it is, yet
our memories are shorter) Cave, Deus videt. Take heed, God sees thee. A godly
man had these verses written before him on a Table, in his study; Ne pecces,
Deuteronomy ipse videt, tuus Angelus astat:
Accusat Satanas and lex, men's conscia culpae:
Mors incerta furit: cruciat te lurid us Orcus:
Et manet aeternum tristi damnatio poena.


Verse. 28. In the multitude of people is the Kings honour] For that is a sign of
peace, plenty, prosperity, and just government, as in Salomons days, when
Israel and Judah were many, as the sand which is by the Sea in multitude,
eating, and drinking, and making merry, Flor. hist. lib. 4
1 King. 4.20. and as in Augustus his days, when Christ (the Prince of Peace)
was born into the world, cuncta atque continua totius generis humani aut pax
fuit, aut pactio. Ferdinand the third, King of Spain, reigned full 35 years: In
all which time, nec fames nec pestis fuit in regnosuo, says Lopez, Gloss. in
prolog part. 1.
there was neither famine nor pestilence throughout that Kingdom. What
incredible waste of men has war lately made in Germany (that stage of war) in
Ireland, and here in this Kingdom, besides what formerly? In the Civil
dissentions between the houses of York and Lancaster, were slain eighty Princes
of the blood royal, and twice as many Natives of England, as were lost in the
two Conquests of France. Dan. Hist.
The dissentions between England and Scotland, consumed more Christian blood,
wrought more spoil and destruction to both Kingdoms, and continued longer,
than ever quarrel we read of did between any two people of the world. Camd.
Elis. 165.
Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, etc. Tu vero Herodes sanguinolente time,
as Beza covertly warned Charles the ninth, author of the French Massacre. Many
parts of Turkey lie unpeopled: most of the poor being enforced with Victuals
and other necessaries, to follow their great armies in their long expeditions;
of whom, Turk. Hist.
scarce one of ten ever return home again, there by the way perishing, if not
by the enemies sword, yet by want of victuals, intemperateness of the air, or
immoderate pains-taking. Hence the Proverb, wherever the Great Turk sets his
foot, there grass grows not any more.

Verse. 29. He that is slow to anger, is of great understanding] The wisdom
from above is first pure, then peaceable, tractable, etc. Thunder, Hail,
Tempest, neither trouble nor h^^ caelestial bodies. Anger may rush into a wise
man's bosom, not rest there, Eccles. 7.9. it dwells only where it domineers,
and that is only where a fool is Master of the family. A wise man either
receives it not, or soon rids it. Be slow to wrath, (...), ira, horror, furor,
wrath, war, jar, strife, etc.
is a lesson that God has engraven (as one wittily observes) in our very
nature. For the last letter that any child ordinarily speaks is R. and
that is the radical letter of all words of strife and wrath, almost in all
languages.

But he that is hasty of spirit, exalts folly] He sets it up upon a pole,
as it were; he makes an Oyes, and proclaims his own folly, by his ireful
looks, words, gestures, actions, as that furious Friar Feuardensius does in his
book called Theomachia Calvinistica; where he took up his Pen with as much
passion and wrath, as any soldier takes up his sword. Such another hasty fool
was Friar Alphonsus the Spaniard, who reasoning with Mr. Bradford Martyr, Act.
and Mon.
was in a wonderful rage chafing with Om, and Cho; so that if Bradford had been
any thing hot, one house could not have held them.

Verse. 30. A ^ound heart is the life of the flesh] A heart well freed from
passions and perturbations holds out long, and enjoys good health: Neither
causes it molestation of mind, or want of welfare to others. R. Levi.
It is the life of fleshes (in the plural) not only its own, but other men's
bodies are the better (at least not the worse) for it; whereas the envious and
angry man rangeth and rages; and like a mad Dog biting all he meets, sets
them (as much as in him lies) all a madding, and undoes them.

But envy is the rottenness of the bones] A corroding and corrupting disease it
is, like that which the Physicians call Corruption totius substantiae, it dries
up the marrow; and because it cannot come at another man's heart, this hell-hag
feeds upon its own, tormenting the poor carcass without and within. It is the
moth of the soul, and the worm (as the Hebrew word signifies) of the bones,
those stronger parts of the body; it is the same to the whole man, that rust is
to Iron (as Antisthenes affirms) it devoureth it self first, as the worm does
the Nut it grows in. Socrates called it serram animae, the souls saw; and
wished that envious men had more ears and eyes than others, that they might
have the more torment by beholding and hearing of other men's happinesses, For
invidia simul peccat and plectitur, expedita justitia. Like the Viper, it is
born by eating through the dams belly: Like the Be, it loses its sting and
life together: like the little Fly, to put out the Candle, it burns it self:
like the Serpent Porphyrius, it drinks most part of its own venom; like the
Viper that leapt upon Saint Paul's hand to hurt him, but perished in the fire;
or as the Snake in the Fable, that licked off her own tongue, as envying teeth
to the file in the forge. In fine, Envy slays the silly soul, Job 5.2. as it
did that fellow in Pausanias, who envying the glory of Theagenes a famous
wrestler, Pausan. Eliac. p. 188.
whipped his Statue (set up in honor of him after his death) every night so
long, till at length it fell upon him, and killed him.

Verse. 31. He that oppresses the poor, reproacheth his Maker] Since it is he
that makes poor, and that makes rich, and (thereby) kills and makes alive,
1 Samuel 2.6, 7. Rich men only seem to be alive. Hence David sending his
servants to that Pamphagus, 1 Samuel 25.6.
that rich cormudgin Nabal, speaks on this sort, Psalm. 88.5.
Thus shall ye say to him that lives (there is no more in the Original) as if
rich men only were alive; poor people are free among the dead (free of that
company, as David was) when they are crushed and oppressed, especially by rich
Cormorants and Cannibals, Psalm. 14.4. A poor man's livelihood is his life, Luke
8.43. for a poor man in his house is like a snail in his shell, crush that, and
you kill him. This reflects very much upon God, the poor man's King (as James
the fourth of Scotland was called) who will not suffer it to pass unpunished;
for he is gracious. As unskilful Hunters may shoot at a beast, but kill a man:
So do these oppressors, hit God the poor man's maker.

But he honors him that has mercy on the poor] Quibus verbis nihil
gravius, nihil efficacius dici potuit: God takes it for an honor; how should
this prevail with us? Honor the Lord with thy substance, Prove. 3.8. and take
it for a singular honor, that he will vouchsafe to be thus honored by thee,
as David did, (...) Heb. 12.23.
2 Samuel 29. How exceedingly shall such be honored in that great Panegyris at
the last day, when the Judge shall say, Come ye blessed, etc. I was hungry,
and ye fed me, etc. Mat. 25.

Verse. 32. The wicked is driven away in his wickedness] Being arrested by death
(as a cruel Sergeant) in the Devils name, he is hurried away, and hurled into
hell, as dying in his sins, and killed by death, Rev. 2.23. And oh what a
dreadful skreek gives the guilty soul then to see it self launching into an
infinite Ocean of scalding lead, and must swim naked in it for ever!

But the righteous has hope in his death] Death to the righteous, as the
valley of Achor, is a door of hope to give entrance into Paradise; to the
wicked it is a trap-door to Hell. (...).
Improbi dum spirant, sperant: justus etiam cum expirat, spe^at. Aelian tells
how he once heard a dying Swan sing most sweetly and melodiously, which in her
life time has no such pleasant note. As on the other side Sirens are said to
sing curiously while they live, but to roar horribly when they dye. Such is the
case of the godly and the wicked when they come to dye.

Verse. 33. Wisdom rests in the heart of him, etc.] He sets not his good
parts and practices a sunning, as vainglorious fools use to do, that they may
be cried up, Epist. ad Julian. consolator.
and applauded. As Hierome calls Crates the Philosopher (we may call the whole
Nation of them so) Gloriae animal, popularis aurae vile mancipium, a base
hunter after praise of men. The truly wise concealeth himself till he sees a
fit time, and may be compared to the red Rose, which though outwardly not so
fragrant, is inwardly far more cordial than the Damask, being more thrifty of
its sweetness, and reserving it in it self; Or, to the Violet which grows low,
hangs the head downward, and hides it self with its own leaves: Whereas the
Marrigold (of nothing so good a smell) opens and shuts with the Sun; which when
it is set, it hangs down the head, as forlorn and desperate. So, that which is
in the midst of fools is made known. Jehonadab must needs see what zeal Jehu
has for the Lord of Hoasts; His piety is shored up by popularity, etc.

Verse. 34. Righteousness exalts a Nation] True Religion and the power of
godliness is the beauty and bulwark of a State: So are good Laws enacted and
executed. Deuteronomy. 28.13.
This made the faithful City ( Isa. 1.21.) to be the Princess of Provinces,
Lam. 1.1. that land, a land of desire, an heritage of glory, Jer. 3.19. even
the glory of all Nations, Ezekiel. 20.6. Josephus calls that Commonwealth, (...),
and Prospers conceit is, that Judae^ were so called, because they received jus
Dei. It was said of old, Angli quasi Angeli, and Anglia regnum Dei. England was
called the Kingdom of God; and Albion quasi Olbion, Polyd. Virg.
a happy Country, the Paradise of pleasure, and Garden of God. Now the Lord is
with us, while we are with him, etc. But if we cast off the yoke of his
obedience, as Capernaum, though lifted up to heaven, we shall be brought down
to hell. Sins are the Snuffes that dim our Candlestick, and threaten the
removal of it: The leven that defiles our Passeovers, and urges God to pass
away and depart from us; The reproach that will render us a Proverb and a
byword, Deuteronomy. 28. an astonishment and an hissing, Jer. 25.9. like Sodom and
her sisters, a reproach and a taunt, Ezekiel, 5.15. which to prevent, Isidor.
Currat poenitentia, ne praecurrat sententia. Mittamus preces and lachrymas
cordis legatos. Cyprian.
Let us break off our sins, and cry mightily to God; For otherwise a dismal
change, a sad removal of our Candlestick may be as certainly foreseen, and
foretold, as if visions and letters were sent us from heaven, as once to those
seven Churches of Asia, Rev. 2. and 3.

Verse. 35. The Kings favor is toward a wise servant] As was Pharaohs toward
Joseph, Solomon's toward Jeroboam, Dariusses toward Daniel, Henry the eighths
toward Cromwell, whom for his wisdom and faithfulness, he raised from a mean
man (son to a Blacksmith) to be first Master of his Jewel-house, then Baron of
Okeham in Rutlandshire, then Knight of the Garter, Earl of Essex, Lord great
Chamberlain, and lastly, ordained him his Vicar general. Speed.
And if Kings do thus, what will not the King of Kings do for every faithful
and wise servant of his, whom he has made Ruler over his household, Mat. 24.45.
Verily, I say unto you, that he shall make him Ruler over all his goods, verse.
47. yea, partaker of his Masters joy, Mat. 25.

But his wrath is against him that causes shame] Such as was Jeroboam at
length, Haman, Shebua, Ziba, Gehezi, Ahitophel, Judas, etc. It fares with many
Princes, as it does with the creature called Millipeda, which the more feet it
has, the slowlier it goes. Corrupt servants hinder the course of Justice,
that it cannot run down as a torrent. This reflects upon their Lords, and at
length falls heavily upon themselves.

CHAP. XV. Verse. 1. A soft answer turns away wrath]
IT is easier to stir strife than to stint it. Hard to hard will never do: But
lay a flut upon a pillow, and you may break it with ease. Frangitur ira gravis
quando est responsio suavis. What more boisterous than the winds? tamen iidem
imbribus sopiuntur, says Pliny, yet are they laid with soft showrs. How soon
was David disarmed by Abigails gentle Apology, and made as meek as a Lamb? So
were the hot and hasty Ephraimites by Gideons mild and modest answer, Judge. 8.
By long forbearing is a Prince persuaded, and a soft tongue breaks the bones,
Prove. 25.15. Howbeit some persons must be more roughly dealt with (or they
will never have done: Nettles hardly handled sting not as they will if gently
touched) in some cases especially, as when Gods glory is engaged. When Servetus
condemned Z^inglius for his harshness, he answers, In aliis mansuetus ero, Ep.
ad S^rv^^.
in blasphemiis in Christum non ita. In other cases I will be mild; but in
case of blasphemies against Christ, I have no patience. So Luther in a Letter
to Staupicius, Inveniar sane superbus, etc. modo impii silentii non arguar dum
Dominus patitur. Let me be counted proud or passionate, so I be not found
guilty of sinful silence when the cause of God suffers. Madness in this case
is better than mildness: Moderation here is mere mopishness, nay it is much
worse.

But grievous words stir up anger] Heb. make it to ascend, viz. into the
nostrils, as fire in a chimney, when blown up with bellows. Some men have quick
and hot spirits: yea, some good men, as those two brethren, sons of thunder,
how soon was their choler up? Luke 9.55. Now, hard and harsh words do cast Oil
upon the flame, and set their passions a float; and then there is no ho with
them. Fertur equis auriga, nec audit currus habenas. How was Saul enkindled by
Doeg, and David by Nabals currishness? Rehoboam with one churlish breath, lost
ten Tribes; And Adrian the Emperor gave the Crier great thanks, who when he
was bidden to quiet the tumultuous people with an imperious (...), Dio in vit.
Adr.
Hold your tongues, he held out his hand only; and when the people listened
with great silence (as the manner was) to hear the Cry, Hoc vero, inquit,
Princeps vult. This is that, said he, that the Emperor requires of you, viz.
to be silent. The best answer to words of scorn and petulancy (says One) is
Isaacs Apology to his brother Ishmael, patience and silence, (...). Either
reply not at all, or else so that all may be well betwixt you.

Verse. 2. The tongue of the wise uses knowledge aright] Heb. deals kindly with
her, offers her no abuse, by venting her unseasonably, and making her
over-cheap, and little set by. Eloquence wisely ordered is very commendable,
and avails much: Daniels Hist.
But what a poor praise was that to the Duke of Buckingham, that speaking to
the Londoners in the behalf of that Usurper Richard the third, he gained the
commendation, that no man could deliver so much bad matter in so good words and
quaint phrases? Here was eloquentiae satis, sapientiae parum. The tongue was
given us for better purpose; 'twas David's glory, and he used it accordingly.

But the mouth of fools pours out foolishness] Heb. Bubbleth it out, blurteth
it out, as a fountain casts out its waters, with a great force and swiftness:
non quid, Quicquid in buccam.
sed quantum, is all their care, being talkative above measure, and forward to
utter whatsoever comes into their chaps.

Verse. 3. The eyes of the Lord are in every place] He is (...), All-eye: and
his providence like a well-drawn picture, that vieweth all that come into the
room, Rev. 2. I know thy works, and thy labor, not thy works only, but thy
labor in doing them. And as for the Offender, though he think to hide himself
from God, by hiding God from himself, yet God is nearer to him than the bark is
to the tree; for in him all things subsist, Col. 1.17. and move, Vide Sen. Ep.
ad Lucil. 34.
Act. 17.28. understand it of the minds motions also. And this the very Heathen
saw by natures rush-candle. For Thaeles Milesius being asked, whether the gods
knew not when a man does ought amiss? yea, said he, if he do but think amiss.
Interest animis nostris and cogitationibus. Sen.
Deus intimior nobis intimonostro, says another, God is nearer to us, than we
are to ourselves. Repletively he is every where, though inclusively no where.
Nusquam est, and ubique est. As for the world, it is to him as a Sea of glass,
Rev. 4.6. corpus diaphanum, a clear transparent body, he sees through it.

Beholding the evil and the good] The evil are first mentioned, because they
make question of this truth. But what says a worthy Divine yet alive? Think
not that he who is invisible, cannot see; God, like the Optic virtue in the
eye, sees all, and is seen of none. No man needs a window in his breast (as the
Heathen Momus wished) for God to look in at; every man before God is all
window, Job 34.22. The eyes of Christ are as a flaming fire, Rev. 1.14. And the
school of nature teaches, that the fiery eye needs no outward light, that sees
extra mittendo, by sending out a ray, etc.

Verse. 4. A wholesome tongue is a tree of life] As uttering words that have a
healing property in them, pure, precious and profitable; not unlike that tree
of life in the midst of Gods Garden, that would have given immortality to the
eaters. See August. de Civit. dei lib. 15. cap. 20.

But perverseness therein is a breach of the spirit] That is, in the
conscience which it goreth and gasheth; and in the heart, which it defiles and
disposes to further evil: it leaves both a sting and a stain in a man's own
soul; besides the much mischief that it does to the spirits and manners of
other men that are corrupted by it. Gods Spirit also is not a little grieved
and vexed, when the godly man suddenly falls (as sometimes he does) into
bitter words, clamours, and evil-speakings: these are even as smoke to the
eyes, and make the Spirit of God ready to loathe and leave his lodging, as the
Apostle intimates, Ephesians. 4.30, 31. There are that thus translate the Text, But
the mischievousnesse of it is as a breach made by the wind; and set this sense
upon it, as a blustering wind, which throws down trees and houses, does much
harm; so a violent and venomous tongue causing troubles and calamities, is very
pernicious and hurtful, Job 8.2. Pray we therefore with David, Psalm. 120.
Deliver me Lord from a lying lip, and a deceitful tongue, etc.

Verse. 5. A fool despises his Fathers instruction] Heb. Entertains it with
contumelious and opprobrious language, as a mad man does a potion offered him
for his health. Hierome often renders the word, to blaspheme; and indeed to
reject good counsel, of a Father especially, with scorn and reproach, is
blasphemy in the second Table.

But he that regards reproof, is prudent] Wise he is, and wiser he will
be. This made David prize and pray for a reprover, Psalm. 141.5. And it is said
of Gerson (that great and wise Chancellor of Paris) that he took pleasure in
nothing more, In vita Gers.
quam si ab aliquo fraterne and charitative redargueretur than in a friendly
reproof. The like is reported of Sir Anthony Cope, by Dr. Harris, Samuels fun.
Epist.
who preached his Funeral; and of that famous man of God Mr. William Wheatly,
by Mr. Scudder, who writes his life. He was glad, says he, Mr. Wheatlyes
Archery p. Pref.
when any of the righteous smote him, and would take it well, not from his
superiors only, but from his equals, and far inferiors.

Verse. 6. In the house of the righteous, is much treasure] Every righteous man
is a rich man, whether he has more or less of the things of this life. For
first, he has plenty of that which is precious. Secondly, Propriety; what he
has is his own; he holds all in Capite-tenure in Christ, he shall not be
called to account as an usurper. All is yours, 1 Cor. 3.22. because you are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods. And although he has little (many times) in
present possession, yet he is rich in reversion; rich in bills and bonds, rich
in an apparent pledge, that is worth all the world besides; that is, in Christ;
for having given us his son, how shall he not with him give us all things
also? Romans 8.

But in the revenues of the wicked are trouble] For besides the curse of
unsatisfiableness, in the very pursuit of them, he meets with many grievances,
fears, jealousies, disgraces, interruptions, discontentments, and then after
the unsanctified enjoyment of them, follows the sting of conscience that
dissweetens all, and that will unexpressibly vex and torment him through all
eternity. He has swallowed down riches, and he shall vomit them up again;
God shall cast them out of his belly, etc. Job 20.15. Disgorge he shall surely
those murdering morsels, either by remorse and restitution in the mean time,
or with despair and impenitent horror hereafter.

Verse. 7. The lips of the wise disperse knowledge] They are the lights of the
world, and they diffuse light wherever they come, (...). Phil. 2.
shining as Lamps or Luminaries, and seeking to save themselves, and those that
hear them. How did those learned Scribes (our famous Reformers) bring forth
their rich treasure, and liberally disperse it; by preaching, writing and every
way trading their Talents for the Churches good? Farellus with his Talent, Hic
est ille Farellus qui Genevenses, Novocomenses, Monipelgardenses, etc. Christo
lucrifecit. Melch. Adam in vit.
gained to the Faith five Cities of the Cantons, with their territories.
Wickliff, Hus, Luther, Calvin, etc. how active and fruitful were they in their
Generations to dispread and scatter light over the Christian world, to wise and
win souls to Christ? Prove. 11.30. These surely shine as stars in Heaven, Dan.
12.3. that like stars by their light and influence, made such a scatter of
riches upon earth. Every Star (says one) is like a purse of Gold, out of which
God throws down riches and plenty upon the sons of men. And as it is the nature
of gold to be drawn forth marvellously, Zinch. de oper. dei part. 2. l. 3. c.
6.
so that, as the learned affirm, an ounce of gold will go as far as eight pound
of silver: so it is the nature of sound knowledge to be spreading and diffusive.

But the heart of the foolish does not so] Or, is not right. It Is little worth,
Prove. 10.20. as having no true treasure in them, but froth and filth, vanity
and villainy: hence they do not only not disperse knowledge (which they have
not, Psalm. 14.4.) but patronize and promote ignorance and error, sow Cockle,
as fast, as wiser men do Corn; and are as busy in digging descents to Hell, as
others are in building stair-cases for Heaven.

Verse. 8. The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination] Their very incense
stinks of the hand that offers it, Isa. 1.13. Good words may be uttered, but
we cannot hear them, because uttered with a stinking breath: and good meat may
be presented, but we cannot eat of it, because cooked or brought to Table by
a nasty sloven. Works materially good, may never prove so formally and
eventually, viz. when they are not right quoad fontem, and quoad finem. 1 When
they proceed not from a right principle, a pure heart, a good conscience, and
Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5. 2 When they tend not to a right end, the glory of
God in our own or other men's salvation. Christus opera nostra non tam actibus
quam finibus pensat. Zanchius.
The glory of God must consume all other ends, as the Sun puts out the light of
the fire.

Cant. 4.11 Psalm. 141.2 Hos. 14.2
But the prayer of the righteous is his delight] His music, his hony-drops,
his sweetest perfume, his Calves of the lips, with which, when we cover his
Altar, he is abundantly well-pleased. For as all Gods senses, nay his very
soul is offended with the bad man's sacrifice, Isa. 1.13, 14, 15. (his sharp
nose easily discerns, and disgusteth the stinking breath of his rotten lungs,
though his words be never so sented and perfumed with shows of holiness.) So
the prayer that proceeds from an upright heart, though but faint and feeble,
does come before God, even into his ears, Psalm. 18.6. and so strangely charms
him, Isa. 26.16. (see the Margin) that he breaks forth into these words, (...)
Incantamentum.
Ask me of things concerning my sons, and concerning the works of my hands
command ye me, Isa. 45.11. O that we understood the latitude of this Royal
Charter! then would we pray always with all prayers and supplications in the
Spirit; then would we watch thereunto with all perseverance, (...).
and not faint, or shrink back, Ephesians. 6.18. Luke 18.1.

Verse. 9. The way of the wicked is abomination] Not his sacrifices only, but
his civilities; all his actions natural, moral, recreative, religious, are
offensive to all Gods senses (as the word signifies.) The very plowing of the
wicked is sin, Prove. 21.4. all they do is defiled, yea their very consciences.
Their hearts, like some filthy bog or fenn, or like the lake of Sodom, send up
continual poisonous vapors unto God: And he not able to abide them, sends
down eftsoons a counterpoison of plagues and punishments, Psalm 11.6. Romans 1.18.

But he loves him that follows after righteousness] Although he fulfill not
all righteousness, yet if he make after it with might and main (as the word
signifies) if he pursue it and have it in chase (as ravenous creatures have
their prey) if by any means he may attain to the resurrection of the dead,
Phil. 3.11. That is, that height of holiness that accompanies the
resurrection: This is the man whom God loves. Now Gods love is not an empty
love: It is not like the Winter Sun, that casts a goodly countenance when it
shines, but gives little warmth and comfort. Thou meetest him that rejoices,
and works righteousness, Aug.
those that remember thee in thy ways, Isa. 64.5. that think upon thy
commandments to do them, Psalm. 103. qui faciunt praecepta, et si non
perficiant, that are weak, (...).
but willing, Heb. 13.18. that are lifting at the latch, though they cannot do
up the door: Surely (shall every such one say) In the Lord have I righteousness
and strength, Isa. 45.24. Righteousness, that is, mercy to those that come over
to him, and Strength to enable them to come, as the Sea sends out waters to
fetch us to it.

Verse. 10. Correction is grievous unto him that forsakes the way] He pleases
himself in his out-straies, and would not be reduced; he is in love with his
own ruin, and takes long strides toward Hell, which is now but a little before
him. And if any man seek to save him, Jude 23.
with fear pulling him out of the fire, he flies in his face. This is as great
madness, as if they whom our Savior had healed or raised, should have raged
and railed at him for so doing.

And he that hates reproof shall die] He that is imbittered by rebukes, and
not bettered by chastisements, shall die, (...) say the Septuagint; shall die
shamefully, yea, shall die eternally, as the next verse shows, shall be
swallowed up of Hell and destruction, which even now gapes for him. They that
will not obey that sweet command, Come unto me all ye, etc. shall one day
have no other voice to obey, but that terrible Discedite, Go ye cursed into
everlasting flames.

Verse. 11. Hell and destruction are before the Lord] Tophet is prepared of old;
and where ever it is, as it skils not curiously to enquire (below us it seems
to be, Pareus in loc.
Rev. 14.11. and ubi sit sentient qui curiosius quaerunt) so it is most
certain, that Hell is naked before God and destruction uncovered in his sight,
Job 26.6. We silly fishes, see one another jerked out of the pond of life, by
the hand of death; but we see not the drying pan and the fire that they are
cast into, that die in their sins, and refuse to be reformed. Cast they are
into utter darkness Matthew. 8.12. In tenebras ex tenebris infaeliciter exclusi,
Aug. Hom. 16.
infelicius excludendi. Howbeit this thickest darkness hides not from God, but
the light shines as the day, Psalm. 139.12. he perfectly knows the state of
the dead and the damned. Oh that men knew more of it! and did believe in any
measure that eternity of extremity that is there to be endured! Oh that they
would be forewarned to fly from this wrath to come! Oh that they were wise,
that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end, those
quatuor novissima! Deuteronomy. 32.29. Utinam ubique de Gehenna dissereretur, says
Chrysostom. He that does but hear of Hell, is without any further labor or
study taken off from sinful pleasures, says Nyssen. But if a man had but one
glimpse of it, it were enough (says Bellarmine) to make him not only turn
Christian and Sober, but Anchorite and Monk; to live after the strictest rule
that can be. But alas we cannot get men to think of it, till they be
plunged headlong into it.

Esse aliquos manes, etc. --
Vel pueri credunt nisi qui nondum aere levantur. Juvenal.

No, though one should come from the dead to testify unto them, they would not
be persuaded, Luke 16.31.

How much more then the hearts of the children of men] Though deep and
deceitful, full of turnings and windings, Multae sunt in animo late^rae, multi
recessus, says Tully; yet God can fathom and find them out, Jer. 17.9, 10.
He searches the hearts and reins, which yet are the most remote and abstruse
of all the entrails, covered from the eye of the Anatomist with fat and flesh,
etc. By hearts and reins understand thoughts and affections; the reins being
the seat of the strongest affection, that which is for Generation. Lo these are
pervious and patent to the eyes of God, yea dissected, quartered, (...). -- Lux
altissima coeli Occultum nihil esse sin^t, latebrasque per omnes Intrat.
Claudian.
cleft in the back bone (as the Apostles word, Heb. 4.13. signifies) how much
more then their evil actions? these cannot possibly be hid from Gods
all-seeing eye, though they dig deep to secure themselves, as those
Gun-powder-traitors; though they throw thereupon wood, stones, and rubbish; all
these to God would be but as spectacles to make their sins appear the greater,
or as perspectives to multiply them.

Verse. 12. A scorner loves not one that reproves him] Nay he hates those
that reprove him in the gate, Amos 5.10. as Ahab did Micaiah, Herodias John
Baptist, the Pharisees our Savior, etc. Bishop Ridley lamenting a little
before his death, the state of England, even of the greatest Magistrates, some
(the Kings highness excepted) evermore unkindly and urgently against those that
went about most busily and wholesomely to cure their sore backs, spurned
privily, and would not spare to speak evil of them, even to the Prince himself;
and yet would they toward the same Preachers outwardly bear a jolly
countenance, and fair face. As for Latimer, Lever, Bradford and Knox, their
tongues were so sharp, they ripped so deep in their galled backs, to have
purged them, no doubt, of their filthy matter that was festered in their
hearts, of unsatiable covetousness, of filthy carnality, and voluptuousness, of
intolerable ambition and pride, of ungodly loathsomeness to hear poor men's
causes, and to hear Gods word. Act. and Mon. 1616.
And these men of all others, these Magistrates then could never abide, etc.
Thus that godly Martyr, and much more to the same purpose.

Neither will he go unto the wise] Men should run to and fro to increase
knowledge, 2 King. 4.23.
Dan. 12.4. The Shunamite rode ordinarily to the Prophet on the Sabbaths, and
other holy days. Those good souls, Psalm. 84.7. passed on from strength to
strength, setting the best foot forwards for like purpose; yea those that were
weak and unfit for travel, would be brought to the ordinances upon horses, in
chariots, and in litters, Isa. 66.20. But now the Scorner holds it not worth
while to put himself to this pains; and is ready to say with Jeroboam, It is
too much for men to go up to Jerusalem, to go up to the mountain of the Lord to
learn his ways, Isa. 2.3. Yea, he set watchers to observe who would go from
him to Judah to worship, that he might shame them at least, if not slay them,
Hos. 5.1. He would never have gone to the Prophet to be reproved, and when
the Prophet came to him, he stretched forth his hand to apprehend him. So Herod
had a desire to see Christ, but could never find a heart to go to hear him:
And yet our Savior looked, that men should have come as far to him, Mat. 12.42.
as the Queen of Sheba came to Solomon.

Verse. 13. A merry heart makes a cheerful countenance] It sits smiling in the
face, and looks merrily out of the windows of the eyes. This is not, till faith
have healed the conscience, and till grace have hushed the affections, and
composed all within. Saint Stephen looked like an Angel, when he stood before
the Council, Act. 6. and the Apostles went away rejoicing, Act. 5. There are
that rejoice in the face only, and not in the heart, 2 Cor. 5.12. this is but
the hypocrisy of mirth, and we may be sure that many a man's heart bleeds
within him when his face counterfeits a smile. It is for an Abraham only to
laugh for joy of the promise, Psalm. 119.162.
and for a David to rejoice at the word as one that finds great spoil;
wherein the pleasure is usually as much as the profit. Christ's Chariot wherein
he carries his people up and down in the world, and brings them at length to
himself, is paved with love, Cant. 3.9, 10. he brings them also into his
Wine-cellar, Cant. 2.4.
where he cheers up their hearts, and clears up their countenances; and this
is praemium ante praemium, Heaven aforehand: These are some few Clusters of
the Grapes of the Celestial Canaan.

But by the sorrow of the heart the spirit is broken] As the looks are marred
so the spirits are dulled, and disabled, as a limb out of joint can do nothing
without deformity, or pain. Dejection takes off the wheels of the soul, hinders
comfortable intercourse with God, and that spiritual composedness, that
habitual cheerfulness, that Sabbath of spirit that every man should strive to
enjoy. Afflictions (says one) are the wind of the soul, passions the storm.
The soul is well carried, when neither so be-calmed, that it moves not when it
should, nor yet tossed with tempests of wrath, grief, fear, care, etc. to move
disorderly. Of these we must be careful to crush the very first
insurrections; storms rise out of little gusts, but the top of those mountains
above the middle region are so quiet, that ashes (lightest things) are not
moved out of place.

Verse. 14. The heart of him that has understanding seeks knowledge] As an
hungry man seeks meat, or a covetous man gold, the more he has, the more he
desires. Moses was no sooner off the mount where he had seen God face to face,
but he cries, Lord show me thy glory. David that knew more than his teachers,
cries ever and anon, Teach me thy statutes. Job 23.12.
Job prefers knowledge before his necessary food: Chrysippus was so studious,
that he would not take time to eat his meat, but had perished with hunger if
his maid Melissa had not put meat into his mouth. John eat the book that the
Angel gave him, Rev. 10.9. Jacobus de Voragine, and Petrus Comestor, had their
names from devouring the Bible. Let fools feed on foolishness, as swine do on
swill, as flies do on botches, as carrion kites do on stinking carcases, as
Tartarians do on dead Camels, Asses, Dogs, Cats, etc. The Wiseman finds no
such sweetness in the most delicate and dainty dishes, as in the search after
divine knowledge, Psalm. 119.103. Even Aristotle says, that a little knowledge,
though conjectural, about heavenly things, is to be preferred above knowledge,
though certain, about earthly things. And Agur says, it is to ascend into
heaven, Prove. 30.4.

Verse. 15. All the days of the afflicted are evil] The guilt of sin puts a
sting into afflictions, and makes them very grievous. Pla^t.
Nihil est miserius quam animus hominis conscius, said the Heathen. Such an
affliction, may well be called as Am. 6.6. shebharim, a breaking to shivers,
for then God is a terror to man, Jer. 17.17. and runs upon the thick bosses of
his bucklers, Job 15.26. Himself is also a Magor-missabib to himself: so that
he is for the time, in the very suburbs of Hell, and ready to become his own
deathsman, as Judas. Hence Anselm, Mallem purus a peccato, says he, Geheunam
intrare, qua peccati sorde pollutus, coelorum regna tenere.

But he that is of a merry heart, has a continual feast] The sincere heart,
the quiet conscience, will not only stand under greatest pressures, as Paul, 2
Cor. 1.9, 12. but goes as merrily to dye in a good cause, as ever he did to
dine, as diverse Martyrs; be the air clear or cloudy, he enjoyes a continual
serenity, and sits continually at that blessed feast, whereat the blessed
Angels are Cooks and Butlers (as Luther has it) and the three Persons in
Trinity gladsome guests. Mr. Latimer says, that the assurance of heaven is the
sweetmeats of this feast. There are other dainty dishes, but this is the
Banquet. Another says, In minimo maximum est, bonamens in corpore humano: quae
si ad sit, deliciosius vivit etiam is qui teruntium non habet in orb, quam si
in unum hominem sexcentos confles Sardanapalos. All other feasts to this are
stark hunger. It is a full feast, a lasting feast, not for a day, as that of
Nabal, not for seven days, as that of Sampson, no nor of ninescore days, as
that of Ahashuerosh, but a durable continual feast, without intermission of
solace, or interruption of society. Vis ergo o homo semper epulari? vis nunquam
tristis esse? (says Bernard) been vive. Will thou therefore, O man, never be
sad? will thou turn thy whole life into a merry festival? get and keep a good
conscience. The Heathen Philosopher could say, (...). Diogen.
A good man keeps holy day all the year about.

Verse. 16. Better is a little with the fear of the Lord] This is one special
consideration that keeps up the good heart in continual comfort. Contented
godliness is great riches -- Misera est magni custodia census. Great treasures,
Juvenal.
bring great troubles. It is not the great Cage that makes the bird sing. It is
not the great estate that brings always the inward joy, the cordial contentment.
The little Lark with a wing sees further than the Ox with a bigger eye, but
without a wing. Birds use not to sing when they are on the ground; but when got
into the air, or upon the top of trees. If Saints be sad, it is because they
are too busy here below, and ( Martha-like) troubled about many things, with
neglect of that one thing necessary. They that will be rich, pierce themselves
thorough with many sorrows. If the bramble bear rule, fire will rise out of it
that will consume the Cedars; the lean Kine will soon eat up the fat, and it
shall not be seen by them. It is hard to handle these thorns hard, and not to
prick ones fingers. Riches (though well got) are but as Manna; those that
gathered less, had no want, and those that gathered more, it was but a trouble
and annoyance to them.

Verse. 17. Better is a dinner of herbs where love is] Mensa consecrata est
amicitiae, says one. The Table is dedicated to friendship, and an absurd thing
it is there to raise quarrels, or to revenge wrongs, as Absalom did when he
killed his brother Amnon; as Alexander did when he killed his friend Philotas;
and as the Great Turk when he intends the death of any of his great Bashaws,
he invites them to a feast, in the midst whereof he commands the black gown
to be cast upon their shoulders, and then they are presently taken from Table,
and strangled. Isaac made a feast for Abimelech and Phicol, to show that he
was heartily reconciled to them, Genesis 26.30. The Greeks had their (...), or
love feasts for like purpose. Among the Latins (as Varro testifies) it was
held a complete feast, Varro In veter. fragm.
si belli conveniant homines, si temporis sit habita ratio, si locus fit non
ingratus, si non negligens apparatus, if they were merry men that met, if they
sat not overlong, nor over late; if the place were pleasant, and the cheer
indifferent. Green Herbs (it seems) was a great dish with them, which therefore
they called Holus ab (...), as if they thought no dish were wanting, if that
were set upon the Table. These Herbs they are called (...) Acetaria, Becman.
because they used to dip them in vinegar; and thereunto if they had bread
(which they called Panis of (...)) they held, they had all that heart could
wish, or need require.

Verse. 18. A wrathful man stirs up strife] Miscet lites, he mingleth strife
with his meat, and feeds upon chafing-dishes. Such troublesome guests Augustine
forbad his table by these two verses written round about it.

Possid in vit.
Quisquis amat dictis aliorum rodere famam,
Hanc mensam vetitam noverit esse sibi.
This is the worst music at meat that may be. But some men maledictis
aluntur, ut venenis capreae. David met with such hypocritical mockers in
feasts, that most uncivilly gnashed upon him with their teeth, Psalm. 35.16.
Hence much mischief many times arises: For, as Basil notes, ira excitat
rixam, rixa parit convicia, convicia ictus, ictus vulnera, and saepe vulnera
more consequitur. Wrath stirs up strife, strife causes ill words, ill words
draw on blows, bloodshed, and loss of life sometimes.

But he that is slow to anger, appeaseth strife] Is as busy to stint strife,
as the other to stir it; brings his buckets to quench this unnatural fire
betwixt others, and puts up injuries done to himself, as Jonathan did when his
Father flung a Javelin at him, he rose from Table, and walked into the field.
David also, though provoked, yet he, as a deaf man heard not, and was as one
dumb, in whose mouth there was ^^ reproof. Such peaceable and peacemaking men
are blessed of God, and ^^ghly esteemed of men; when wranglers are to be
shunned as perilous persons. Make not friendship with an angry man, says
Solomon, Prove. 22.24. And they are not much to be regarded, that with every
little offensive breath, or disgraceful word, are blown up into rage, that will
not be laid down without revenge or reparation, to cure their credits.

Verse. 19. The way of a slothful man, is as a hedge of thorns] Perplexed and
let some; so that he gets no ground, makes no riddance; he goes as if he
were shackled, when he is to go upon any good course, so many perils he
casts, and so many excuses he makes: this he wants, and that he wants, when
in truth it is a heart only that he wants; being woefully hampered, and
inthralled in the invisible chains of the Kingdom of darkness, and driven
about by the Devil at his pleasure. This will be a bodkin at these men's hearts
one day, to think, I had a price in my hand, but no heart to make use of it; I
foolishly held, Germani dicunt Anser est in porta.
that a little with ease was best, and so neglected so great salvation,
shifting off him that spoke to me from Heaven, Heb. 12.25. and pretending some
Lion in the way, some Goose at the gate, when I was to do any thing for my
souls health. Never any came to Hell (says one) but had some pretense for
their coming thither.

V^a strata.
But the way of the righteous is made plain] Or, Is cast up as a Causey, a
Gabbatha, John 19.13. a rode raised above the rest. There seems to be an
allusion to that bank or causey that went from the Kings house to the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 26.16, 18. 1 King. 10.5. 2 Chronicles. 9.11. And the sense is, that the godly
by much practice of piety, having gotten an habit, dispatch duty with delight,
and come off with comfort; See Isa. 40.31.

Verse. 20. A wise Son makes a glad Father*] See the Note on chap. 10.1.

Verse. 21. Folly is joy to him that is destitute of understanding] See the Note
on chap. 10.23.

But a man of understanding walks uprightly] And he does it with delight, as
the opposition implies. Christ's burden is no more grievous to him, Sinceritas
screnitatis matter, si^e qua tranquillitas omnis tempestas est. Isidor.
than the wing is to the bird, Matthew. 11.30. 1 John 5.3. His sincerity supplies
him with a serenity; the joy of the Lord, as an oil of gladness makes him lithe
and nimble in ways of holiness: And this spiritual joy in some is an habitual
gladness of heart, which constantly, after assurance, is found in them; though
they feel not the passions of joy: but in others there are felt at sometimes
the vehement passions of joy, but not any constant gladness.

Verse. 22. Without counsel purposes are disappointed] The word here rendered
Counsel, signifies Secret; because counsel should be kept secret; which to
signify, the old Romans (as Servins testifies) built the Temple of Consus
their God of Counsel, sub tecto in Circo, in a public place, but under a
covert. And it grew to a proverb, Romani sedendo vincunt. The Romans, by
sitting in Counsel, conquer their enemies. But what a strange man was Xerxes
(and it prospered with him accordingly) who in his expedition against Greece,
called his Princes together, but gave them no freedom of speech, Val. Max.
lib. 9. cap. 5.
nor liberty of Counsel? Lest (said he to them) I should seem to follow mine
own counsel, I have assembled you: And now, do you remember, that it becomes
you rather to obey, than to advise. Daniels Hist.
Such another was that James that reigned in Scotland, in our Edward the
fourths time. He was too much wedded (says the Historian) to his own opinion,
and would not endure any man's advice (how good soever) that he fancied not;
he would seldom ask counsel, but never follow any. See the Note on chap.
11.14.

Verse. 23. A man has joy by the answer of his mouth] It reflects comfort upon
a man when he has spoken discreetly to the benefit and good content of
others. Some degree of comfort follows every good action, as heat accompanies
fire; as beams and influence issue from the Sun; which is so true, that very
Heathens upon the discharge of a good conscience, have found comfort, and peace
answerable.

A word spoken in due season, how good is it] One seasonable truth falling on a
prepared heart, has often a strong and sweet operation. Galeacius was converted
by a similitude used by Peter Martyr reading on 1 Corinthians. Junius was reduced
from Atheism, by conference with a countryman of his. Luther having heard
Staupicius say, that that is kind repentance which begins from the love of
God, ever after that time the practice of repentance was the sweeter to him.
Also this speech of his took well with Luther, Melch. Adam.
Doctrina praedestinationis incipit a vulneribus Christi. The doctrine of
predestination begins at Christ's wounds. Melancthon tells how that one time,
when Luther (as he was naturally passionate) fell into a great distemper upon
some provocation, he quickly quieted him by reciting this verse.

Vince animos iramque tuam qui catera vincis. At the hearing hereof Luther
curbs in his passion, and smiling, said, Non volumus de his amplius, sed de
aliis colloqui. Joban. Man^. loc. com.
We Will talk no more of these matters.

Verse. 24. The way of life is above to the wise] He goes an higher way than
his neighbor, even in his common businesses, because they are done in Faith
and Obedience. He has his feet where other men's heads are, and (like an
heavenly Eagle) delights himself in high-flying. Busied he may be in mean low
things, but not satisfied in them as adequate Objects. A wise man may sport
with children, but that is not his business. Domitian spent his time in
catching flies, and Artaxerxes in making hafts for knives, but that was the
baseness of their spirits. Wretched worldlings make it their work to gather
wealth; as children do to tumble a snow-ball; they are scattered abroad
throughout all the land (as those poor Israelites were, Exodus 5.12. to gather
stubble) not without an utter neglect of their poor souls. But what, I wonder,
will these men do when Death shall come with a Writ of Habeas corpus, and the
Devil with a Writ of Habeas animam, when the cold grave shall have their
bodies, and hot hell hold their souls? O that they that have their hands elbow
deep in the earth, that are rooting and digging in it, as if they would that
way dig themselves a new and a nearer way to hell; O that these greedy moles,
these insatiate muck-worms would be warned to fly from the wrath to come, to
take heed of hell beneath, and not sell their souls to the Devil for a little
pelf, as they say Pope Silvester did for seven years enjoyment of the Popedom!
Oh that they would meditate every day a quarter of an hour (as Francis Xaverius
counseled John 3. King of Portugal) on that divine sentence, What shall it
profit a man to win the whole world, and lose his own soul! He should be a
loser by the sale of his soul, he should be (that which he so much feared to
be) a beggar, begging (in vain) though but for a drop of cold water to cool
his tongue.

Verse. 25. The Lord will destroy the house of the proud] Where he thinks
himself most safe, God will pull him (as it were by the ears) out of his
Tabernacle, he will surely unroost him, unnest him; yea though he has set
his nest among the stars, as he did proud Lucifer, who kept not his first
estate, but left his habitation, Jude 6.
which indeed he could hold no longer; for it spued him out into hell, that
Infernus ab inferendo dictus. See the Note on Chap. 12.7. and 14.11.

But he will establish the border of the widow] Not the rest of her goods
only, but the very utmost borders of her small possession. She has commonly
no great matters to be proud of, (...)
nor any Patrons to stick to her, and stickle for her. She has her name in
Hebrew of Dumbness, because either she cannot speak for her self (death having
cut off her head, her husband, who was wont to speak for her) or if she do
speak, her tale cannot be heard, Luke 18.4. God therefore will speak for her
in the hearts of her greatest opposites and oppressors. He also will do for
her, and defend her borders; as he did for the Shunamite, and for the
Sareptan, and for the poor Prophets widow (whose debts he paid for her) and
for the widow of Naim, whose son he raised unrequested, Luke 7.13. Especially
if she be a widow indeed, 1 Timothy 5. such as Anna was, Luke 2. A vine whose
root is uncovered thrives not; a widow whose covering of eyes is taken away,
joys not. But in God the fatherless finds mercy, Hos. 14.3. and he will
cause the widows heart to sing for joy, Job 29.13.

Verse. 26. The thoughts of the wicked are abomination] Let him not think to
think at liberty, Thought is not free, as some fools would have it. To such God
says, Hearken, O earth, Behold I bring evil upon this people, even the fruit
of their thoughts, Jer. 6.19. The very Heathen could say, Fecit quisque quantum
voluit, what evil a man wills he does. And Incesta est and sine stupro quae
stuprum cupit. He that lusts after a woman, has lain with her in his heart.
If I regard iniquity in mine heart, says David, shall not God find this out,
and for it reject my prayer? Psalm. 66.18. Kimchi (being sowred with Pharisaical
leven) makes this strange sense of that Text; If I regard iniquity only in my
heart, so that it break not forth into outward act, the Lord will not hear me,
that is, he will not hear so as to impute it, or account it a sin. But was not
this coedem Scripturaerum facere (as Tertullian has it) to murder the
Scripture, or at least to set it on the rack, so to make it speak what it never
intended, to force it to go two miles, when it would go but one?

But the words of the pure are pleasant words] Such as God books up, Mal. 3.16.
and makes hard shift to hear, as I may so say, for he hearkens and hears,
ibid. The rather, because these pleasant words are the fruits and products of
that law of grace within, that good treasure, that habit of heavenly mindedness
they have acquired. For though the heart of the wicked be little worth, and as
little set by; Yet the tongue of the just is as choice silver, Prove. 10.20.
(See the Note there.) He mints his words, and God lays them up as his riches,
yea looks upon them as apples of gold in pictures of silver, Prove. 25.11. as
gold put in a case of cut-work of silver, which is no less precious, than
pleasant. See Eccles. 12.10. with the Note there.

Verse. 47. He that is greedy of gain, troubles his own house] Fires his own
nest, while he thinks to feather it; fingers that that will burn in his purse,
will prove lucrum in arca, damnum in conscientia, gain to his purse, Augustine.
but loss to his conscience. Add hereunto, that the covetous man's house is
continually on a tumult of haste and hurry; Up, up, up, says he; to bed, to
bed; quick at meat, quick at work, etc. what with labor, and what with passion
and contention, he and his household never live at hearts-ease and rest. Thus
it was in the houses of Laban and Nabal.

But he that hates gifts, shall live] Viz. Gifts given to pervert, or buy
justice: The fire of God shall devour the Tabernacles of such corrupt Judges,
Job 15.

So for those that are bribed out of their Religion, Joh. Egnat. Gelli d^al. 5.
Stratagema nunc est Pontificium, ditare multos, ut pii esse desinant. The
Papists propose rewards to such as shall relinquish the Protestant Religion,
and turn to them, as in Ausburgh, where they say there is a known price for it,
of ten Florens a year. In France, where the Clergy have made contributions for
the maintenance of Renegado Ministers. Thus they tempted Luther, Specul Europ.
Hem. Germana ills bestia non curat aurum.
but he would not be hired to go to hell; and thus they tempted that noble
Marquess of Vicum, Nephew to Pope Paul the fifth, who left all for Christ, and
fled to Geneva, but he cried out, Let their money perish with them, that
prefer all the worlds wealth before one days communion with Jesus Christ, and
his despised people.

Verse. 28. The heart of the righteous studieth to answer] His tongue runs not
before his wit, (...).
but he weighs his words before he utters them (as carrying a pair of
balance betwixt his lips) and dips his words in his mind ere men see what
color they are of, as Plutarch says Phocion did. He has his heart (not at
his mouth, but) at his right hand, says Solomon, to make use of, when he sees
his time. Melancthon, when some hard question was proposed to him, would take
three days deliberation to answer it. And in his answer to Staphylus, he
ingenuously confesses, or rather complains, Quos fugiamus habemus, quos
sequamur nondum intelligimus; We know whom we are to fly from (meaning the
Papists) but whom to follow, we as yet know not. Such divisions there were
amongst themselves, and such lack of light, at the beginning of the
Reformation, that it was an ingenuous thing to be a right reformed Catholic.
A young man, one Vincentius Victor (as Chemnitius relates it) when learned
Augustine demurred, and would not determine the point concerning the original
of a rational soul, censured boldly the Fathers unresolvedness, and vaunted;
that he would undertake to prove by demonstration, that souls are created de
novo, by God. For which peremptory rashness, the Father returned the young man
a sober reprehension, a mild answer, (...) significat respondere, humiliare,
negotiari.
as the Hebrew word here used imports; not so sharp as that of Basil to the
Emperors Cook (who yet well enough deserved it.) For when the fellow would
needs be pouring forth what he thought of such and such deep points of
Divinity which he understood not, Basil rounded him up with, (...). It is for
thee, man, to look well to thy porridge-pot, and not to meddle with these
disputes.

Verse. 29. The Lord is far from the wicked] He was so from the proud Pharisee,
who yet gat as near God as he could, pressing up to the highest part of the
Temple. The poor Publican, not daring to do so, stood aloof off; yet was God
far from the Pharisee, near to the Publican. Videte magnum miraculum (says
Augustine) Altus est Deus; erigis te, and fugit a inclinas te, and descendit ad
te, etc. Behold a great miracle: God is on high, thou liftest up thy self, and
he flies from thee; thou bowest thy self downward, and he descends to thee.
Low things he respects, that he may raise them, proud things he knows a far
off, that he may depress them. When a stubborn fellow being committed, was no
whit mollified with his durance, but the contrary: One of the Senators said to
the rest, let us forget him a while, and then he will remember himself. Such
is Gods dealing with those that stout it out with him. I will go and return to
my place, till they acknowledge their offense, and seek my face; in their
affliction (if ever) they will seek me early, Hos. 5.15.
Hos. 5.15. And it proved so, Chap. 6.1.

But he hears the prayer of the righteous] The Lord is near to all that call
upon him, Psalm. 145.18. His ears are in their prayers, 1 Pet. 3.12. Yea, he
can feel breath, when no voice can be heard for faintness, Lam. 3.56. when the
flesh makes such a din, that it is hard to hear the Spirits sighs, he knows
the meaning of the Spirit, Romans 8.26, 27. and can pick English out of our
broken requests; (...).
yea, he hears our afflictions, Genesis 16.11. our tears, Psalm. 39.12. our
chatterings, Isa. 38.14. though we cry to him but by implication only, as the
young Ravens do, Psalm. 147.9. It is not with God as with their Jupiter of
Creet, Non vacat exiguis. Lucian Dialog.
that had no ears, that was not at leisure to attend small matters, that had
cancellos in coelo, as Lucian feigns, certain crevises or chinks in heaven,
thorough which, at certain times, he looks down upon men, and hears prayers;
whereas at other times he hears them not though they call upon him never so
long, never so loud. Neither is it with God as with Baal, that pursuing his
enemies, could not hear his friends; nor yet as with Diana, that being present
at Alexanders birth, could not at the same time preserve her Ephesian Temple
from the fire. Am I a God at hand, says the Lord, and not a God afar off? Jer.
23.23. Yes, yes, he is both, and delights to distinguish himself from all
dunghil-deities by hearing prayers. Hereby Manasseh knew him to be the true
God, 2 Chronicles. 33.13. and all Israel hereupon cried out with one consent, The
Lord he is God, the Lord he is God, 1 King. 18.39. See the Note on verse. 8.
of this Chapter.

Verse. 30. The light of the eyes rejoices the heart] Light and sight are very
comfortable. He was a mad fool that being warned of wine by the Physicians, as
hurtful to his eyes, cried out Vale lumen amicum; If they will not bear with
wine, they are no eyes for me. Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing
it is to behold the Sun, Plutarch.
Eccles. 11.7. Eudoxus professed, that he would be willing to be burnt up by
the Sun presently, so he might be admitted to come so near it, as to behold
the beauty of it, and to see further into the nature of it.

And a good report makes the bones fat] Fama bona, vel auditio bona. A good
name, or good news. Ego si bonam famam servasso, sat dives ero, says he in
Plautus. It is riches enough to be well reputed and reported of. It is (...),
Xenophon.
the sweetest hearing. It pleased David well, that whatsoever he did, pleased
the people. It pleased St. John well, that his friend Demetrius had a good
report of the truth, 3 John 12. and he had no greater joy than to hear that
his children walked in the truth. Pindarus could say, that the Bath does not so
refresh the bones, as a good name does the heart.

Verse. 31. The ear that hears the reproof of life] That is, lively and
life-giving reproofs. Veritas aspera est, verum amaritudo ejus utilior and
integris sensibus gratior quam meretricantis linguae distillans favus. Truth is
sharp, but be it bitter, Joh. Saris. de nugis curialium.
yet is it better and more savoury to sound senses, than the hony-drops of a
flattering tongue.

Verse. 32. He that refuses instruction, despises his own soul] Is a sinner
against his own soul, as Core and his accomplices were; and sets as light by it,
as if it were not worth looking after. Oh is it nothing to lose an immortal
soul, to purchase an ever-living death? will thou destroy that for which Christ
dyed? 1 Cor. 8.11. What shall a man give in exchange for his soul? There is no
great matter in the earth but man, nothing great in man but his soul, said
Faverinus, Whose image and superscription is it but Gods? Give therefore unto
God the things that are Gods, by delivering it up to his discipline.

But he that hears reproof, gets understanding] Hebr. Possesses his
heart. This is like that sentence of our blessed Savior, Mat. 20.22. Luke
21.19.
In your patience possess ye your souls] They have need of patience that must
hear reproof; for man is a cross creature, and likes not to be controlled or
contraried. But suffer (says that great Apostle) the words of exhortation;
suffer them in Gods name, sharp though they be, and set on with some more than
ordinary earnestness. Better it is that the vine should bleed than dye. Sinite
virgam co^ripientem, ut sentitatis malleum conterentem. Certes, when the Lord
shall have done to you according to all the good that he has spoken
concerning you, 1 Samuel 25.30, 31.
and has brought you to his Kingdom, This shall be no grief unto you, or
offense of heart (as he said in a like case) that you have hearkened to
instruction, and been bettered by reproof.

Verse. 33. The fear of the Lord is the instruction of wisdome] See the Note on
Chap. 1.7.

And before honor is humility] David came not to the Kingdom till he could
truly say, Lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty, etc. Psalm.
131.1. Abigail was not made David's wife, till she thought it honor enough, to
wash the feet of the meanest of David's servants, 1 Samuel 25.40. Moses must be
forty years a stranger in Midian, before he become King in Jeshurun, he must
be struck sick to death in the Inn, before he go to Pharaoh on that
honorable Embassage. Luther observed, that ever (for most part) before God set
him upon any special service for the good of the Church, he had some fore fit
of sickness. Surely, as the lower the ebb, the higher the tide: So the lower
any descend in humiliation, the higher they shall ascend in exaltation; the
lower this foundation of humility is laid, the higher shall the roof of honor
be over-laid.

CHAP. XVI. Verse. 1. The Preparations of the heart in man]
HE says not of man, as if it were in man's power to dispose of his own heart;
but in man, as wholly wrought by God; for our sufficiency is not in ourselves,
but in him (as we live, so) we move, Act. 18.28. (understand it of the
motions of the mind also.) It is he that fashioneth the hearts of men, Psalm.
33.13. shaping them at his pleasure. He put small thoughts into the heart of
Ahashuerosh, but for great purposes. And so he did into the heart of our Henry
8. about his Marriage with Katherine of Spain, Scult. Annal. dec. 2. ep. dedic.
the Rise of that Reformation here, Quam desperasset atas praterita, admiratur
praesens, obstupescet futura, as Scultetus has it, which former ages despaired
of, the present admireth, and the future shall stand amazed at.

And the answer of the tongue is from the Lord] For though a man have never so
exactly marshalled his matter in hand, (...) disponere, ordinare, and aciem
instruere significat.
as it were in battle array (as the Hebrew word here imports, and as David
using the same word, says, he will marshal his Prayer, and then be as a spy
upon a watchtower, to see what became of it, whether he got the day, Psalm.
5.3.) though he have set down with himself both what and how to speak; so that
it is not only scriptum in animo, sed sculptum etiam, as the Orator said, yet
he shall never be able to bring forth his conceptions, without the
obstetrication of Gods assistance. The most eloquent Demosthenes, (...).
being sent sundry times in Embassage to Philip King of Macedony, thrice stood
speechless before him, and thrice more forgot what he intended to have spoken.
Likewise Latomus of Lovain (a great Scholar) having prepared a set speech to
be made before the Emperor Charles the fifth, was so confounded when he came
to deliver it, that he uttered nothing but nonsense, and thereupon fell into a
fit of despair. So Augustine having once lost himself in a Sermon, and wanting
what else to say, fell upon the Ma^ichees (a point that he had well studied)
and by a good Providence of God, converted one there present, that was infected
with that error. Digressions are not always unuseful: Gods Spirit sometimes
draws aside the doctrine to satisfy some soul which the Preacher knows not.
But though God may force it, yet man may not frame it; and it is a most happy
ability to speak punctually, directly, and readily to the point. The
Corinthians had elocution as a special gift of God: And St. Paul gives God
thanks for them, that in every thing they were enriched by him, in all
utterance, and in all knowledge, 1 Cor. 1.5.

Verse. 2. All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes] Every man is apt
enough to think well of his own doings, and would be sorry but his penny
should be good silver. They that were born in hell, know no other heaven;
neither goes any man to hell, but he has some excuse for it. Quintilian could
say, Sceleri nunquam defuisse rationem: As covetousness, so most other sins go
cloaked and colored. August.
Sed sordet in conspectu judiciis quod fulget in conspectu estimantis. All is
not gold that glisters. A thing that I see in the night may shine; and that
shining proceed from nothing but rottenness. Bern.
Melius est pallens aurum, quam fulgens aurichalcum; That which is highly
esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16.15.

But the Lord weighs the spirits] Not speeches and actions only, as Prove.
5.21. but men's aims and insides. Men see but the surface of things, and so are
many times mistaken; but Gods fiery eyes pierce into the inward parts, and
there discover a new found world of wickedness. He turns up the bottom of the
bag, as Joseph's steward did; and then out come all our thefts and mis-doings,
that had so long lain latent.

Verse. 3. Commit thy works unto the Lord] Depend upon him alone for direction
and success; this is the readiest way to an holy security and sound settlement.
Hang not in doubtful suspense, as Meteors do in the air, Luke 12.29. Neither
make discourses in the air (so one renders it) as those use to do, whose hearts
are haunted with carking cares. Let not your thoughts be distracted about
these things. So the Syriack has it. But cast your burden upon the Lord, Psalm.
55.22. by a Writ of remove, as it were. Yea cast all your care upon God, for
he cares for you, 1 Pet. 5.7. I will be Careless according to my name, said
John Careless Martyr. Commit the matter to God, and he will effect it, Psalm.
37.5.

And thy thoughts shall be established] Never is the heart at rest till it
repose upon God; till then it flickers up and down, as Noah's Dove did upon the
face of the Flood, and found no footing, till she returned to the Ark. This is
certain (says a Revered Divine, Mr. Case.
yet living) so far as a soul can stay on, and trust in God, so far it injoyes
a sweet settlement and tranquillity of spirit; Perfect trust is blessed with a
perfect peace: A famous instance for this we have in our Savior, Now is my
soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father save me from this hour; but for
this cause came I to this hour, Father glorify thy name, Joh. 12.27, 28. All
the while the eye of his humanity was fixed upon deliverance from the hour of
temptation, there was no peace nor rest in his soul; because there he found
not only incertainty, but impossibility; For this cause came I to this hour.
But when he could come to this, Father glorify thy name, when he could wait
on, acquiesce in, and resign to the will of his Father; we never hear of any
more objection, fear, or trouble. Thus he.

Plato finem bujus mandi bonitatem Dei esse affirmavis.
Verse. 4. The Lord has made all things for himself] that is, for his own glory,
which he seeks in all his works; and well he may; for first, he has none
higher than himself, to whom to have respect: And secondly, he is not in
danger (as we should be in like case) of being puffed up or desirous of
vainglory. Or thus, He has made all things for himself, that is, for the
demonstration of his goodness, De Doctr. Christiana.
according to that of Augustine, Quiabonus est Deus sumus; and in quantum
sumus, boni sumus. We owe both our being and well-being, and the glory of all
to God alone, Romans 1^. ult.

Bern.
The wicked also for the day of evil] i. e. of destruction. Hereof Dei voluntas
est ratio rationum; nec tantum recta sed regula. Howbeit, whereas Divines make
two parts of the decree of Reprobation, viz. Preterition and Predamnation; All
agree for the latter (says a learned Interpreter) that God did never determine
to damn any man for his own pleasure, but the cause of his Perdition was his
own sin. And there is a reason for it. For God may (to show his Sovereignty)
annihilate his creature, but to appoint a reasonable creature to an estate of
endless pain, without respect of his desert, cannot agree to the unspotted
justi^e of God. And for the other part of passing over, and forsaking a great
part of men for the glory of his Justice, the exactest Divines do not attribute
that to the mere will of God, but hold, that God did first look upon those men
as sinners, at least in the general corruption brought in by the Fall; For all
men have sinned by Adam, and are guilty of high Treason against God.

Verse. 5. Every one that is proud in heart, etc.] That lifts up himself against
God, and his righteous Decree, daring to reprehend what they do not comprehend
about the doctrine of Reprobation, as those Chatters, Romans 9.20. These, whiles
like proud, and yet brickle clay, they will be knocking their sides against
the solid and eternal Decree of God (called Mountains of brass, Zach. 6.1.)
they break themselves in pieces. So likewise do such as stumble at the word,
being disobedient, whereunto also they were appointed, 1 Pet. 2.8. How much
better were it for them to take the Prophets counsel, Hear, and give ear, be
not proud, for the Lord has spoken it. Give glory to the Lord your God (let
him be justified and every mouth stopped, subscribe to his most perfect
justice, though it were in your own utter destruction, before your feet stumble
upon the dark mountains, etc. Jer. 13.15, 16. That was a proud and Atheistical
speech of Lewis the eleventh, St salvabor, salvabor; si vero damnabor,
damnabor. If I shall be saved, I shall be saved; and if I shall be damned, I
shall be damned; and there is all the care that I shall take. Not unlike to
this was that wretched resolution of one Ruffus, of whom it is storied, that
he painted God on the one side of his shield, and the Devil on the other, with
this mad Motto, Si tu me nolis, iste rogitat. If thou will not have me, here
is one will.

Though hand join in hand] See the Note on Chap. 11.21. Some make hand in hand
to be no more than out of hand, Immediately, or with ^ase; for nothing is
sooner, or with more ease done, than to fold one hand in another. God shall
spread forth his hands in the midst of them, as he that swimmeth spreads
forth his hands to swim, and he shall bring down their pride together with the
spoil of their hands, Isa. 25.11. The motion in swimming is easy, not strong;
for strong strokes in the water would rather sink, than support. God with
greatest facility can subdue his stoutest adversary, when once it comes to
handy-gripes, when once his hand joins to the proud man's hand (so some sense
this text) so that they do manus conserere, then shall it appear that it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10.

Verse. 6. By mercy and truth iniquity is purged] Lest the proud person hearing
these dreadful threats should fall into despair, here is a way showed him how
to escape. By mercy and truth, that is, by the goodness and faithfulness of
God, by his love that moved him to promise pardon to the penitent, and by his
truth that binds him to perform; iniquity (though never so hateful, be it
blasphemy or any like heinous sin, Mat. 12.31.) is purged or expiated, viz.
through Christ, who is the propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2.2. See Chap.
14.22. with the Note.

And by the fear of the Lord men depart from evil] As in the former clause were
declared the causes of Justification, so here the exercise of Sanctification,
for these two go ever together. Christ does not only wash all his in the
fountain of his blood opened for sin and for uncleanness, Zach. 13.1. but
heals their natures of that swinish disposition, whereby they would else
wallow again in their former filth. The Layer and Altar under the Law situated
in the same Priests Court signified the same, as the water and blood issuing
out of Christ's side, viz. The necessary concurrence of Justification and
Sanctification in all that shall be saved: that was intimated by the Laver and
water, this by the Altar and blood.

Verse. 7. When a man's ways please the Lord] Sin is the only makebate that
sets God and man at difference. Now when God is displeased, all his creatures
are up in arms to fetch in his rebels, and to do execution. Who then would set
the briars and thorns against him in battle? would he not go through them?
would he not burn them together? Let him then take hold of my strength, says
God, that he may make peace with me, and he shall make peace with me, Isa.
27.4, 5. And not with God only, but with the Creature too that gladly takes
his part, and is at his beck and check. Laban followed Jacob with one troop;
Esau met him with another: both with hostile intentions. But God so wrought for
Jacob whom he had chosen, that Laban leaves him with a kiss, Esau meets him
with a kiss. Of the one he has an Oath, Tears of the other, Peace with both.
Who shall need to fear men, that is in league with God?

Verse. 8. Better is a little with righteousness, and] A small stock well
gotten, is more comfortably enjoyed and bequeathed to Posterity, than a cursed
hoard of evil gotten goods. The reason why people please not God, and are
contrary to all men (as this verse refers to the former) is, because they
prefer gain before God, and care not how they wrong men, so they may have it.
See Chap. 15.16.

Verse. 9. A man's heart devises his way, but God directs his steps] Man
purposes, God disposes of all, Prove. 19.21. Events many times cross
expectation, neither is it in man to order his own ways, Jer. 10.23. This the
Heathen saw, (...). Thucyd. Dio.
and were much troubled at, as the Athenians were, when their good General
Nicias lost himself and his Army in Sicily. So the Romans, when Pompey, Cato,
and others, worthy Patriots, were worsted by Julius Caesar; Brutiu a wise and
valiant man overthrown by Antonius, cries out, (...), etc. O miserable virtue,
thou art a mere slave to fortune. Christians have learned better language, and
can set down themselves with founder reason, if crossed of their designs or
desires; they know it is the Lord; they are dumb, because it is his doing, and
they are punished less than their deserts, Ezra 9.13. Pompey (that seeing all
to go on Casars side, said there was a great deal of mist over the eye of
Providence) did no better than blame the Sun, because of his sore eyes.

Verse. 10. A divine sentence is in the lips of the King] It is, or should be.
His words usually pass for Oracles, and many times stand for Laws: It should
be his care therefore to speak as the Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4.11. yea so to
speak, and so to do, as one that shall be judged by the Law of Liberty, Jam.
2.12. (Or as some read it) as they that should judge by the Law of Liberty. Our
old word Koning, and by contraction King, comes of Con (says Becanus) which
comprehends three things, Possum, Scio, Audio, I can do it, I know how to do
it, and I dare do it. If either he want power, or skill, or courage to do
justice, the people instead of admiting his divinations, will cry out of him,
as the Romans did of Pompey, miseria nostra Magnus est. This Grandee is our
great misery.

His mouth transgresses not in judgement] viz. If he ask counsel at Gods
mouth, as David did, and execute Justice, Justice, as Moses speaks, Deuteronomy.
16.20. that is, pure Justice, without mud or mixture of selfish affections,
sparing neither the great for might, nor the mean for misery.

Verse. 11. A just weight and balance are the Lords] i. e. Are commanded and
commended by him. See Chap. 11.1. Deuteronomy. 25.14, 15, 16. with the Notes.

All the weights of the bag are his work] i. e. His Ordinance, and therefore
not to be violated. Yea they are judicia Domini, as the Vulgar here reads the
former clause, Gods Judgments. Let no man therefore go beyond or defraud his
Brother in buying and selling, for God is the Avenger of all such: 1 These. 4.
Gal. l. 11. c. 18 Colum. lib. 1.
Surely his Magistrates must not transgress in judgment, lest they prove but
fures publici, as Cato called them; latrones cum privilegio, as Columella,
public thieves; scabs, as the Prophet Isaiah terms them, chap. 5.7. and lest
their regiment without righteousness appear to be but robbery with authority:
So neither must private persons cheat and deceive their Brethren by false
weights and measures, etc. lest they be looked upon as the botches of the
Commonwealth, and enemies to civil society.

Verse. 12. It is an abomination for Kings to commit wickednesse] It is so for
any man, but especially for great men. Peter Martyr told Queen Elizabeth in an
Epistle, that Princes were doubly obliged to God, first, as men, secondly, as
chief men. When I was born into the world, said Henry the fourth of France,
French Chrom
there were thousands of others born besides my self; what have I done to God
more than they? it is his mere grace and mercy which does bind me more unto
his justice, for the faults of great men are never small. Thus he. It is
reported of Tamberlane, that warlike Scythian, that having overcome Bajazet
the Great Turk, he asked him whether ever he had given God thanks for making
him so great an Emperor? who confessed ingenuously, he never thought of it.
To whom Tamberlane replied, that it was no wonder so ungrateful a man should
be made a spectacle of misery. For you, says he, being blind of one eye,
and I lame of a leg; was there any worth in us, why God should set us over two
great Empires of Turks and Tartars, Leunclav. Annal. Tur^^c.
to command many more worthy than our selves? Good turns aggravate
unkindnesses; and men's offenses are increased by their obligations.

For the Throne is established by righteousness] Politicians give many
directions for the upholding and conserving of Kingdoms; but this of Solomon
is far beyond them all. See it exemplified, Jer. 22.13, to 20. Shall thou
reign, because thou closest thy self in Cedar? did not thy Father eat and
drink, and do judgment and justice, and then it was well with him? etc.

Verse. 13. Righteous lips are the delight of Kings] i. e. Of good Kings, such
as David was, who loved Nathan never the worse, but the better, for dealing
plainly with him, gave him free access to his bedchamber, and named him a
Commissioner for the declaring of his Successor, 1 King. 1. King Edward the
sixth took much delight in Latimer that faithful Preacher; and Queen Elizabeth
enquired much after Dearing, after she had once heard him telling her in a
Sermon, that once it was Tanquam Ovis, but now Velut indomita Juvenca, etc. But
Dearing was without her Privity laid up fast enough by the Bishops, and kept
far enough from coming near the Court any more.

And they love him that speaks right] They should do so; but it falls out
somewhat otherwise oft-times. Ahab hated Micaiah, and looks upon Elijah as a
troubler of Israel: Alas! what had these righteous ones done? they taxed his
sin, they foretold his judgment; they deserved it not, they inflicted it not,
they were therefore become his enemies, because they told him the truth. Truth
breeds hatred, as the fair Nymphs are feigned to do the ugly Faun^s and
Satyrs. Most Princes are led by their Parasites, who sooth them up in their
sins, and smooth them up with fair words, which soak into them, as oil does
into earthen vessels. David was none such, Psalm. 101. he went not attended,
says one, ut nunc fit, magno agmine Aionum, Negonum, Ga^eonum, Palponum,
Gnathonum, Balatronum, with a great sort of Sycophants, Court-parasites,
Flatterers, etc. but had the best he could pick to be next his Person, and
loved them that spoke right.

Verse. 14. The wrath of a King is as messengers of death] In the plural number,
the better to set forth the danger of a Kings displeasure. Omne trabis secum
Caesris ira malum. Ovid.
Thou shall surely die Abimelech, 1 Samuel 22.16. Adonijah shall be put to death
this day, etc. 1 Kings 2.24. Hang Haman on the tree that is fifty cubits high,
etc. Hunc Pugionem tibi mittit Senatus, etc. Queen Elizabeth was so reserved,
that all about her stood in a reverent awe of her very presence and aspect, but
much more of her least frown or check; wherewith some of them who thought they
might best presume of her favor, have been so suddenly daunted and
planet-stricken, that they could not lay down the grief thereof, but in their
grave. Spe^^.
One of these was Sir Christopher Hatton Lord Chancellor, who died of a flux
of Urine and grief of mind. Camden. Elis. 406.
Neither could the Queen, having once cast him down with a word, raise him up
again, though she visited and comforted him.

But a wise man will pacify it] Either by some prudent speech, or politic
device, as Abigail did David, and David Saul, as Benhadads servants did Ahab,
and as our King Edward the first his servant did him. For this King venturing
his life, Act. and Mon.
by spurring his horse into a deep river, only to be revenged on his servant
that had incensed him by a saucy answer; was soon pacified when once he saw
him on his bended knees, exposing his neck to the blow of the drawn sword,
wherewith the King pursued him.

Verse. 15. In the light of the Kings countenance is life] As when it is well
with the head, it is the better with all the members; and as when the sky is
clear, the bodies of men are in better temper. When David had given Ziba the
Land, I humbly beseech thee, said he, that I may find grace in thy sight my
Lord the King, 2 Samuel 16.4. As if he should say, I had rather have the Kings
favor, than the Lands. Artabazus (in Xenophon) complained when Cyrus had given
him a Cup of Gold, and Chrysantas a kiss in token of his special favor;
saying, that the Cup that he gave him was not so good Gold, as the kiss that
he gave Chrysantas.

Ovid.
Ut mala nulla feram nisi nudam Caesaris iram,
Nuda parum nobis Caesaris ira mali est?
And his favor is as a cloud of the latter rain] that refreshes the ground
after drought, and ripeneth the Corn before Harvest. In the Island of Saint
Thomas, Abbots Geog. 251.
on the back side of Africa, in the midst of it is an Hill, and over that a
continual cloud wherewith the whole Island is watered. Christo optime congruit
haec sententia, says Lavater here. This saying of Solomon may very fitly be
applied to Christ the King immortal. He shall come down like Rain upon the
mowen grass, as showers that water the earth, Psalm. 72.6. one cast of his
countenance, is more worth to a David than all the worlds wealth, Psalm. 4.7, 8.
yea more worth than the corporal presence of Christ: therefore he tells his
Disciples, they shall be great gainers by losing of him; For I will send you
the Comforter; who shall seal up my love to you, and shed it abroad in your
hearts.

Verse. 16. How much better is it to get wisdom than gold] q. d. It is
unspeakably better to get grace than gold; for what is gold and silver, but the
guts and garbage of the earth? and what serves it to, but the life that now is,
the back and belly? and what is the happiness that a man has in much store of
it, Psalm. 39.
but skin-deep, or rather imaginary? Surely man walks in a vain show, in
heaping up riches, etc. That I speak not of the uncertainty of riches, their
commonnesse to the wicked also, the insincerity of the comforts they yield, and
their utter insufficiency to fill the infinite heart of man. Non enim plus
satiatur cor auro quam corpus aura. The contrary of all which is true of
heavenly wisdom. How much better is it therefore, etc?

Verse. 17. The highway of the upright is to depart from evil] That is his
rode, Psalm. 139.
his desire, and endeavor, his general purpose, though sometimes (by mistake,
or violence of temptation) he step out of the way, and turn aside to sin; yet
there is no way of wickedness in him. His endeavor is, with Paul, to walk in
all good conscience, to shape his course by the chart of Gods Word, to shun sin
as a Serpent in his way, as poison in his meats.

He that keeps his way, preserves his soul] As if a man be out of Gods
precincts, he is out of his protection. He shall keep thee in all thy ways,
not in all thine out-strayes. He that leaves the highway, and takes to
by-waies, traveling at unseasonable hours, etc. if he fall into foul hands,
he may go look his remedy; The Law allows him none.

Verse. 18. Pride goes before destruction] A bulging wall is near a downfall:
swelling is a dangerous symptom in the body, so is pride in the soul. Sequitur
superbos ultor a tergo Deus. Seneca.
Surely, as the swelling of the spleen is dangerous for health, and of the
sails for the over-bearing of a little vessel, so is the swelth of the heart by
pride. Instances hereof we have in history not a few. Pharaoh, Adonibezek,
Agag, Haman, Herod, etc. Xerxes, Harod.
having covered the Seas with his ships, and with two millions of men, and
passed over into Grecia, was afterward (by a just hand of God upon him for his
prodigious pride) forced to fly back in a poor fishers boat, which being
over-burdened, had sunk all, if the Persians, by the casting away of
themselves, had not saved the life of their King. It was a great fore-token of
Darius his ruin, Q. Curt.
when in his proud Ambassie to Alexander, he called himself the King of Kings,
and Cousin of the gods, but for Alexander, he called him his Servant. The same
Senators that accompanied proud Seianus to the Senate, conducted him the same
day to prison; they which sacrificed unto him as to their god, Dio in Tiberio.
which erst kneeled down to adore him, scoffed at him, seeing him dragged from
the Temple to the Gaol, from supreme honor, to extreme ignominy. Sigismund the
young King of Hungary, beholding the greatness of his Army, in his greaT
jollity, hearing of the coming of the Turks, proudly said, what need we fear
the Turk, who need not at all to fear the falling of the heavens; which if they
should fall, yet were we able with our Spears and Halberts, Turk. hist. fol.
208.
to hold them up from falling upon us? He afterward shortly received a
notable overthrow, lost most of his men, and was himself glad to get over
Danubius in a little boat to save his life. What should I speak of Bajazet the
terror of the world, and as he thought, superior to fortune, yet in an
instant with his state in one battle overthrown into the bottom of misery and
despair, Ibid. 287.
and that in the midst of his greatest strength?

Verse. 19. Better it is to be of an humble spirit] An humble man is worth his
weight in gold; he has far more comfort in his losses, than proud Giants have
in their rapines and robberies. Truth it is, that meekness of spirit commonly
draws on injuries. A Crow will pull wool from a Sheeps side, she durst not do
so to a Wolf or Mastiff. Howbeit it is much better to suffer wrong than to do
it, to be patient, than to be insolent, to be lowly in heart, and low of
port, than to enjoy the pleasures or treasures of sin for a season.

Verse. 20. He that handles a matter wisely, shall find good] Doing things
with due deliberation and circumspection, things of weight and importance
especially; (for here Deliberandum est diu, quod statuendum est semel) we may
look for Gods blessing, when the best that can come of rashness is repentance.
Youth rides in post to be married, but in the end finds the Inn of
repentance to be lodged in: The best may be sometimes miscarried by their
passions to their cost, as good Josiah was, when he encountered the King of
Egypt, and never so much as sent to Jeremy, Zephany, or any other Prophet then
living, to ask, Shall I go up against Pharaoh or not?

And who so trusts in the Lord, happy is hee] Let a man handle his matter
never so wisely, yet if he trust to his own wisdom, he must not look to
find good. God will cross even the likeliest projects of such, and crack the
strongest sinew in all the arm of flesh. The Babylonians held their City
impregnable, and boasted (as Xenophon witnesses) that they had twenty years
provision aforehand; but God confuted their carnal confidence. The Jews in
Isaiah, when they looked for an invasion, looked in that day to the Armor of
the house of the Forest, and gathered together the waters of the lower Pool,
numbered the houses, and cast up the ditches to fortify the wall; but they
looked not all this while to God their Maker, etc. therefore they had a day of
trouble, and of treading down, and of perplexity, by the Lord God of Hosts in
the valley of Vision, Isa. 22.5, 8, 9, 10. where the beginning is
creature-confidence, or self-conceitedness, the end is commonly shame and
confusion, in any business. Whereas he that in the use of lawful means rests
upon God for direction and success, though he fail of his design, yet he
knows whom he has trusted, and God will know his soul in adversity.

Verse. 21. The wise in heart shall be called prudent] He shall have the style
and esteem of an intelligent, though not happily of an eloquent man. Of some it
may be said, Solin. Praefat.
as Solinus says of his Poly-histor to his friend Antius, Fermentum (ut ita
dicam) cognitionis, ei magis inesse, quam bracteas eloquentiae deprehendas, you
may find more worth of wisdom in them, De libris A^^ici scriptum reliquit
Cicero ces hoc ipso fulsse ornates quod ornamenta negligerent.
than force of words. Bonaventure requires to a perfect speech, Congruity,
Truth, and Ornament. This latter some wise men want; and it is their Ornament,
that they neglect Ornament, as Tully writes of Atticus, and as Beza writes of
Calvin, that he was facundiae contemptor and verborum parcus, sed minime
ineptus scriptor, a plain, but profitable Author.

And the sweetness of the lips increases learning] That is, eloquence with
prudence edifieth, and is of singular use, for the laying forth of a man's
talent to the good of others. As one being asked whether light was pleasant?
replied, That is a blind man's question; (...).
so if any ask whether eloquence and a gracious utterance be useful in the
Church of God? It is an insulse and inficete question. Zanchy speaking of
Calvin and Viret (who were Preachers together at Geneva when he first came
thither out of Italy) uses these words, Zanch. Miscel. Ep. ded.
Sicut in Calvino insignem doctrinam, sic in Vireto singularem eloquentiam, and
in commovendis affectibus efficacitatem admirabar, i. e. As Calvin I admired
for excellent learning, so did I Viret no less for his singular eloquence, and
efficacy in drawing affections. Beza also was of the same mind, as appears by
that Epigram of his, Gallica mirata est Calvinum Ecclesia nuper,
Quo nemo docuit doctius:
Et miratur adhuc fundentem mella Viretum,
Quo nemo fatur dulcius.


Verse. 22. Understanding is a wellspring of life] Vena vitae: as the heart is
the principle of life, the brain of sense; so is wisdom in the heart, of all
good carriage in the life, and of a timely laying hold upon eternal life:
besides the benefit that other men make of it, by fetching water thence as from
a common Well.

But the instruction of fools is folly] When they would show most gravity, they
betray their folly; they act not from an inward principle, therefore they
cannot quit themselves so, but that their folly at length will appear to all
men that have their senses exercised to discern betwixt good and evil. There
are that read the Text, Castigatio stultorum stuititia est, It is a folly to
correct or instruct a fool; for it is to no more purpose than to wash a
Blackmore, etc.

Verse. 23. The heart of the wise teaches his mouth] Frames his speech for
him, and seasoneth it with salt of grace, ere it sets it, as a dish before the
hearers. Nescit paenitenda loqui qui proferenda prius suo tradidit examini,
says Cassiodere. Lib. 10. Ep. 4.
He cannot lightly speak amiss, that weighs his words before he utters them.
The voice which is made in the mouth, is nothing so melodious as that which
comes from the depth of the breast. Heart-sprung speech has weight and worth
in it.

And adds learning to his lips] By restraining talkativeness, and making him
as willing to hear as to speak, to learn as to teach, to be an Auditour as an
Orator.

Verse. 24. Pleasant words are as an hony-comb] Dainty and delicious, such as
the Preacher set himself to search out, Eccles. 12.10. Such as his father David
found Gods words to be, Psalm. 119.103. Wells of salvation, Isa. 12.2. Breasts
of consolation, Isa. 66.11. The hony-drops of Christ's mouth, Cant 4. Oh hang
upon his holy lips, as they did, Luke 19. ult. Have thou found honey with
Sampson? Eat it as he did, Prove. 25.6. Eat Gods book as John did, Rev. 10.9.
find fatness and sweetness in it, Psalm. 63.5. Get joy and gladness out of it,
Psalm. 51.8. And if at any time the word in searching our wounds, put us to pain
(as honey will cause pain to exulcerate parts) let us bear it, and not be like
children, who though they like honey well, yet will they not endure to have it
come near their lips, when they have sore mouths.

Sweet to the soul, health to the bones] i. e. Satisfactory to the mind, and
medicinal also to the body, which many times follows the temperament of the
mind. Alphonsus King of Sicily is said to have recovered of a dangerous
disease by the pleasure that he took in reading Q. Curtius; and some others in
like sort by reading Livy, Aventine, etc. But these were Physicians of no value
to that of David: Unless thy Law had been my delight, Psalm. 119.92.
I should then have perished in mine affliction. Look how those that are fallen
into a swoon, may be fetched again with cold water sprinkled on their faces,
or with hot water poured down their throats; so those that are troubled in
mind, may by patience and comfort of the Scriptures recover hope.

Verse. 25. There is a way that seems right to a man] This we had before,
totidem verbis, Prove. 14.12. See the Note there. And think not this a vain
repetition; but know, that it is thus redoubled, that it may be the better
remarked and remembered. Nothing is more ordinary, or more dangerous, than
self-delusion. To deceive another is naught, but to deceive thy self (which yet
most men do) is much worse; as to belie ones self, kill ones self, etc. is
counted most abominable. To warn us therefore of this greatest wickedness, it
is that this sentence is re-iterated.

Verse. 26. He that labors, labors for himself] He earns it to eat it,
he gets it with his hands to maintain the life of his hands, as it is
therefore also called, Isa. 57.10. Animantis cujusque vita in fuga est, says
the Philosopher; Life will away if not repaired by aliment. Et dii boni; Seneca.
quantum hominum unus exercet venture! O what a do there is to provide meat for
the belly! There are that make too much ado, whiles they make it their God,
Phil. 3.19. as did that Nabal, Pamphagus, those in St. Paul's time, that served
not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies; and our Abbylubbers, Quorum
luxuriae totus non sufficit orbis; O monachi vestri stomachi, etc. See my
common place of Abstinence.

For his mouth craveth it of him.] Heb. Bows down to him, or upon him; Quippe
quam suum cogit os. Castalio. Sueton. in Tiber.
Either as a suppliant, or as importunately urgent; The belly has no ears,
necessity has no Law. Malesuada fames will have it, if it be to be had.
Drusus, meat being denied him, did eat the very stuffings of his bed; but that
was not nourishment. The stomach of man is a monster, says one; which being
contained in so little a bulk as the body, is able to consume and devour all
things: and yet is not consumed of it self, nor destroyed by that heat that
digesteth all that comes into it.

Verse. 27. An ungodly man diggeth up evil] i. e. He ransacketh and raketh out
of the dust, out of the dunghill, such old evils as have long lain hid, to lay
in the Saints dishes, and to upbraid them with. Thus the Manichees dealt by
Austin, when they could not answer his Arguments, they hit him in the teeth
with his youthful follies; whereunto his reply was only this, Quae vos
reprehenditis, ego damnavi. What you discommend in me, I have long since
condemned. The malicious Papists did the like to Reverend Beza, reprinting his
Wit-wanton Poems (put forth in his youth) on purpose to despite him; and
objecting to him his former miscarriages which he had sorely repented. This
when one of them did with great bitterness, all the answer he had, was, Hic
homo invidet mihi gratiam Christi. This man envies me the Grace of Jesus
Christ. Neither dealt Aaron and Miriam much more gently with their Brother
Moses, Numb. 12.1. when they spoke against him, because of the Ethiopian woman,
whom he had married. Who was this Ethiopian woman, but Zipporah? (for an
Ethiopian and a Midianite are all one.) And when did he marry her? many a year
ago, Exodus 2. But they were resolved to pick a hole in Moses coat; and having
nothing else to fasten on, they dig up this evil, and throw it as dirt in his
face.

In his lips there is a burning fire] The tongue (in its shape and color)
resembles a flame of fire. It is often set on fire of Hell, James 3.
and it self sets on fire the whole course of nature. Their breath, as fire,
shall devour you, Isa. 33.10. as the fire of Aetna devoured Empedocles, that
would needs go too near it. But what shall be given unto thee, or what shall
be done unto thee thou false tongue? (false, though thou speak the truth, if
with a mind to do mischief:) Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of
Juniper, yea that very fire of Hell from whence thou wast enkindled, Psalm.
120.3, 4.

Verse. 28. A froward man sows strife] The Belialist, before mentioned, verse.
27. as he digs, so he sows; but as ill seed as may be, that which comes not
up, but with a curse, as cud-weed, and devils-bit: he is a sedulous seeds-man
of sedition; this bad seed he sows in every furrow, where he can find
footing.

And a whisperer separateth even very friends] A pestilent pick-thank that
carries tales, and so sows strife. Such were Doeg and other abjects that tare
David's name, and ceased not, Psalm. 35.15. tossing it with their carrion-mouths,
as Dogs, buzzing into Saul's ears ever and anon, that that might set him a gog
against him. Such also were those malicious Makebates, the Pharisees, who when
they thought the Disciples had offended, spoke not to them, but to their
Master, why do thy Disciples that which is not lawful? As when they thought
Christ offended, they spoke not to him, but to his Disciples. Thus these
whisperers went about to separate very friends, to make a breach in the Family
of Christ, by setting off the one from the other. The words of such whisperers
are as wounds, and they go down into the innermost parts of the belly, Prove.
18.8. They are like the wind that creeps in by the chinks and crevises in a
wall, or the cracks in a window, that commonly prove more dangerous than a
storm that meets a man in the face upon the Champion.

(...)
Verse. 29. A violent man enticeth his neighbour] As those seducers at Ephesus
dragged Disciples after them, Act. 20.30. compelling them by their persuasions
to embrace distorted doctrines, such as cause convulsions of conscience. Such
are said to thrust men out of Gods ways, Deuteronomy. 13.5. As Jeroboam did the house
of Israel, as Julian and other cunning persecutors did in the primitive times;
(...).
prevailing as much by their tifing tongues, as by their terrifying sawes, Heb.
11.37. they were sawn asunder, they were tempted. The Apostle ranks and reckons
their alluring promises among their violent practices. But though they speak
fair, believe them not; for there are seven abominations in their hearts, Prove.
26.25.

Verse. 30. He shuts his eyes to devise froward things] Wicked men are great
students, they beat their brains, and close their eyes, that they may revolve
and excogitate mischief with more freedom of mind. They search the Devils
scull for new devices: and are very intentive to invent that which may do hurt;
their wits will better serve them to find out an hundred shifts or carnal
Arguments, than to yield to one saving truth; though never so much cleared up
to them.

Moving his lips, he brings evil to passe] Mumbling and muttering to
himself, Lib. 1. dever. oblig.
and so calling the Devil into counsel, he has him at hand to bring about the
business. Bartolus writes of Doctor Gabriel Nele, that by the only motion of
the lips, without any utterance, he understood all men, perceived and read
every man's mind in his countenance. If Nele could do so, how much more the
Devil? Cognata sunt (...), ut (...) and (...). Juvenal. sat. 13. In Epist. ad
Heb. sermon. 7. Arsatius succeeded Chrysostom, being an old dotal of eighty
years, quem ^isces facundid rana agilitate superabant.
who besides his natural sagacity, has had so long experience, and both knows
and furthers those evil plots and practices, that himself has injected into
wicked hearts.

Verse. 31. The hoary head is a Crown of glory] Old age and Honor are of great
affinity in the Greek Tongue. God gave order, that the aged should be
honored, Levit. 19.32. See the Note there.

Credebant hoc graude nefas, and morte piandum,
Si juvenis vetulo non assurrexerat.
There is a certain plant (which our Herbalists call Herbam impiam, or wicked
cud-weed) whose younger branches still yield flowers to overtop the Elder. Such
weeds grow too rife abroad. It is an ill soil that produces them.

If it be found in the way of righteousnesse] Canities tunc venorabilis est,
quando eagerit quae cauitiem decent, etc. says old Chrysostom. Hoarinesse is
then only honorable, when it does such things as become such an age; else it
is mucor potius quam canities, rather filthy mouldinesse, than venerable
hoar-headednesse. Manna, the longer it was kept against the command of God, the
more it stank. What can be more odious than an old Goat, an old fornicatour,
etc? What more ridiculous than puer centum annorum, a child of fourscore or an
hundred years old? Turgis and ridiculosa res est elementarius senex, says
Seneca. Sen. Epist. 62. ad Lucil.
An A B C-old-man is a shameful sight. Nectarius, that succeeded Nazianzen at
Antioch, had little else to commend him to the place, but a goodly gray beard,
and a graceful countenance. Veneranda canities, and vultus sacerdote dignus
Baron.
Whereas of Abraham it is reported that he went to his grave in a good old age,
or as the Hebrew has it, with a good gray head. Pluck out the gray hairs of
virtues, and the gray head cannot shine with any great glory.

Verse. 32. He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty] Unruly passions
are those Turks (says One) that we must constantly make war with: Those
Spaniards with whom (as another says) whoever made peace, Live. Hist. l. 9.
gained nothing but repentance; Pax erit in fida, pax incerta, as Livie says
of that which the Romans made with the Samnites, a peace worse than war, De
civ. Dei, lib. 3. cap. 28.
as Austin says of the peace brought in by Sylla. Men must be at deadly feud
with those lusts that war in their members, Jam. 4.1. fighting against their
souls, 1 Pet. 2.11. These to conquer, is the noblest, and most signal victory,
since in subduing of these, we overcome the Devil, Ephesians. 4.26. Jam. 4.7. As in
yielding to them, we give place to him, and entertain him into our very
bosoms. Passionate persons, though they be not drunk, yet are not they their
own men: But have so many lusts, so many Lords, conquering Countries (as
Alexander) vanquished of vices: Or as the Persian Kings, who commanded the
whole world, but were commanded by their Concubines. How much better
Valentinian the Emperor, who said upon his deathbed, that among all his
victories one only comforted him; And being asked what that was? He answered,
I have overcome my worst enemy, mine own naughty heart.

Latius regnes, avidum domando Horat. lib. 2. Carm.

Spiritum, quam si Lybiam remotis
Gadibus jungas, and uterque Paenus
Serviat uni.
I cannot better English it, than by Solomon's next words, He that rules his
spirit, is better than he that takes a City. See this exemplified in Jacob,
who did better (when he heard of the rape of Dinah) in holding his peace, than
his Sons did in taking and pillaging the City Shechem. Genesis 34. None was to
triumph in Rome, that had not got five victories: Isidor. Tranq.
He shall never triumph in heaven, that subdueth not his five senses himself.

Verse. 33. The lot is cast into the bosome] This sentence at first sight seems
light and unworthy of the place it holds in this book. But as every line in the
holy Bible is pure, precious, and profitable, so this sets forth a matter of
very great moment, viz. that the providence of God extends to the disposing
of all things, even those things also, that in regard of us, are merely
contingent and casual. Lottery is guided by providence, as in the finding out
of Achan, designing of Saul to be King, dividing the Land among the
Israelites, etc. Chance-medley is providence, Exodus 22. Cambyses lighting off
his horse (after he had been showing great cruelty to them of Athens) his
sword flew out of his scabberd and slew him. Disponit Deus membra pulicis and
culicis, says Austin, God disposes of Gnats and Flies. Birds flying seem to
fly at liberty, yet are they guided by an overruling hand, Matthew. 10.26. he
teaches them to build their nests, Psalm. 84.4. (...) in the word (...) for a
nest there is written bigger than ordinary, to imply so much, say Hebricians;
he also provides them their meat (their several meats in due season) the young
Raven especially, Hist. animal. lib. 9. cap. 31.
Psalm. 147.9. if that that be true that Aristotle reports. This doctrine of
Gods particular Providence rightly resented, yields incredible profit and
comfort. See my Love Tokens, page 11, 12.

CHAP. XVII. Verse. 1. Better is a dry morsel, and quietness therewith]
THough there be not so much as a little Vinegar to dip in. See Chap. 14.17.
with the Note there. The Hebrew word properly signifies a morsel of bread, as
Rabbi Elias tells us. So then, better is a crust of course bread without any
other cates or dishes (never so little, with love and peace) than an house-full
of Sacrifices; that is, of good cheer, usually at offering up of Sacrifices,
Prove. 7.14. And hereunto Saint James seems to allude, Chap. 5.5.

Verse. 2. A wise servant shall have rule over a Son, etc.] God has a very
gracious respect unto faithful servants, and has promised them the reward of
inheritance, Col. 4.24. which properly belongs to Sons. This falls out
sometimes here, as to Joseph, Joshuah, those subjects that married Salomons
Daughters, 1 King. 4.10, 14. but infallibly hereafter, when they shall come
from East and West to sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the Kingdom
of Heaven: and to enter into their Masters joy, but the children of the
Kingdom shall be cast out, Mat. 8.11, 12.

Verse. 3. The fining-pot is for silver, etc.] God also has his fire in Zion,
and his furnace in Jerusalem, Isa. 31.9. his conflatories, and his crucibles,
wherein he will refine his, as silver is refined, and try them as gold is
tried, Zech. 13.9. Not as if he knew them not, till he had tried them; for
he made them, and therefore cannot but know them: As Artificers know the
several parts and properties of their works. Sed tentat ut sciat, id est, ut
scire nos faciat, says Augustine. He therefore tries us, that he may make us
know what is in us, what dross, what pure metal; and that all may see that we
are such, as (for a need) can glorify him in the very fires, Isa. 84.15. that
the trial of our faith being much more precious than of gold that perishes;
though tried in the fire, may be found to praise, and honor, and glory, 1
Pet. 1.7.

Verse. 4. A wicked doer gives heed to false lips] It is an ill sign of a
vicious nature, to be apt to believe scandalous reports of godly men. If men
loved not lies, they would not listen to them. Some are of opinion, that
Solomon having said, God tries the hearts, does in this and the two next
following verses instance some particular sins so accounted by God, which yet
pass amongst men for no sins, or peccadilloes at the utmost, seeing no man
seems to receive wrong by them: such as these are; to listen to lying lips, to
mock the poor, to rejoice at another man's calamity, and the like. Lo they that
do thus, though to themselves and others they may seem to have done nothing
amiss, yet God that tries the hearts, will call them to account for these
malicious miscarriages.

Verse. 5. He that mocketh the poor, etc.] See the Note on Chap. 14.31.

And he that is glad at calamities, shall not be unpunished] He is sick of
the Devils disease, (...), which Job was not tainted with. Chap. 31. as the
Edomites, Ammonites, Philistims, and other of Sions enemies, Lam. 1. were. How
bitterly did the Jews insult over our Savior, when they had nailed him to the
Cross? And in like sort they served many of the Martyrs, worrying them when
they were down, as Dogs do other Creatures: and shooting sharp arrows at them,
when they had set them up for marks of their malice and mischief. Herein they
deal like barbarously with the Saints, as the Turks did with one John de Chabes
a Frenchman, Turk. Hist. fol. 756.
at the taking of Tripolis in Barbary. They cut off his hands and nose, and
then when they had put him quick into the ground to the waste, they for their
pleasure shot at him with their arrows, and afterward cut his throat. Mr. John
Deuly Martyr, being set in the fire with the burning flame about him, sang a
Psalm; Then cruel Doctor Story commanded one of the tormentours to hurl a
faggot at him, whereupon, being hurt therewith upon the face, Act. and Mon.
fol. 1530.
that he bled again, he left his singing, and clapped both his hands upon his
face. Truly, said Doctor Story to him that hurled the faggot, Thou have marred a
good old song. This Story being after the coming in of Queen Elizabeth,
questioned in Parliament for many foul crimes, and particularly for persecuting
and burning the Martyrs, he denied not but that he was once at the burning of
an Herewigge (for so he termed it) at Uxbridge; Ibid. 1918.
where he cast a faggot at his face as he was singing of Psalms, and set a
winnebush of thorns under his feet a little to prick him, etc. This wretch was
afterward hanged, drawn and quartered, and so this Proverb was fulfilled of
him, Anno. 1571.
He that is glad at calamities, shall not be unpunished.

Verse. 6. Childrens children are the Crown of old men] That is, if they be not
children that cause shame, as verse. 2. and that disgrace their Ancestors, stain
their blood. If they obey their Parents counsel, and follow their good example,
for otherwise, they prove not Crowns, but corrosives to their aged Sires, as
did Esau, Absalom, Andronicus, and others.

And the glory of children are their Parents] If those children so well
descended do not degenerate, as Jonathan the son of Gershom, the son of
Manasseh (or rather of Moses, as the Hebrews read it with a Nun suspensum)
Judge. 18.31. and as Elies, Samuels, and some of David's sons did. Heroum filii
noxae: Manasseh had a good Father, but he degenerated into his Grandfather
Ahaz, as if there had been no intervention of a Hezekiah. So we have seen the
kernel of a well-fruited-plant degenerate into that crab or willow that gave
the original to his stock. But what an honor was it to Jacob, that he could
swear by the fear of his Father Isaac? To David, that he could (in a real and
heavenly complement) say to his Maker? Truly Lord, I am thy servant, ^^am thy
servant, the son of thy handmaid, Psalm. 116.16. To Timothy, that the same Faith
that was in him, had dwelt first in his Mother Lois, and his Grandmother
Eunice? 2 Timothy 1.15. To the children of the Elect Lady? etc. To Mark, that he
was Barnabas his sisters son? To Alexander and Rufus (men mentioned only,
Eusebius. (...).
Mark. 15.21.) but famously known in the Church to be the sons of Simon of
Cyrene? To the sons of Constaintine the Great, to come of such a Father, whom
they did wholly put on, says Eusebius, and exactly resemble? To be descended
of those glorious Martyrs and Confessors that suffered here in Queen Mary's
days?

Verse. 7. Excellent speech becomes not a fool] A Nabal, a sapless worthless
fellow, in whom all worth is withered and decayed, qui nullas habet dicendi
vires, as Cicero has it, that can say no good, except it be by rote, or at
least by book: what should he do discoursing of high points? God likes not
fair words from a foul mouth. Christ silenced the Devil, Odi homine^ ignava ^
p^r^^ philosopha sententia.
when he confessed him to be the Son of the most high God. The leapers lips
should be covered, according to the Law. The Lacedaemonians, when a bad man had
uttered a good speech in their Council-house, liking the speech, but not the
speaker, commanded one of better carriage to give the same counsel, and then
they made use of it. The people of Rome swear they would not believe Carbo, Live.
though he swear.

Much less do lying lips a Prince] Or any ingenuous man, as some render it. A
Princes bare word should be better security than another man's oath, said
Alphonsus King of Arragon: When Amurath the Great Turk was exhorted by his
cruel Son Mahomet to break his Faith with the Inhabitants of Sfetigrade in
Epirus, he would not hearken, saying, Turk Hist. fol. 328.
That he which was desirous to be great amongst men, must either be indeed
faithful of his word and promise, or at leastwise seem so to be: thereby to
gain the minds of the people, who naturally abhor the government of a
faithless and cruel Prince. What a foul blur was that to Christian Religion,
that Ladislaus King of Hungary should, by the persuasion of the Popes Legate,
Ibid. 291.
break his oath given to this Amurath at the great battle of Varna, and thereby
open the mouth of that dead Dog, to rail upon Jesus Christ? And how will the
Papists ever be able to wipe off from their Religion that stain that lies upon
it, ever since the Emperor Sigismund, by the consent and advice of the Council
of Constance, brake his promise of safe conduct to John Hus and Hierome of
Prague, and burnt them? But they have a rule to walk by now, Fides cum
haereticis non est servanda, Promises made to Heretics are not be observed.
And it is for Merchants, say they, and not for Princes, to stand to their
oaths, any further than may stand with the public good. This Divinity they may
seem to have drawn out of Plato; who, in his third Dialogue of the
Commonwealth, says, that if it be lawful for any one to lie, it may be
lawful doubtless for Princes and Governors, that aim therein at the
Weal-publike. But God by the mouth of his Servant and Secretary Solomon here,
assures us it is otherwise.

In vita Apollon. l, 3. c. 14.
Verse. 8. A gift is as a precious stone, etc.] Heb. As a stone of grace. Like
that precious stone Pantarbe, spoken of in Philostratus, that has a mavelous
conciliating property; or the wonder-working Loadstone, that among other
strange effects reckoned up by Marbodeus and Pictorius, does possessores suos
disertos and Principibus gratos reddere, make those that have it, well-spoken
men, and well accepted of Princes.

Whithersoever it turns, it prospereth] Most men are (...), and love with
shame, Give ye. Yet some Persian-like spirits there are (as has been made
good before by the examples of Luther, Galeabrius, and some others) that regard
not silver, and as for gold (in such a way) they have no delight in it, Isa.
13.17. But these are black Swans indeed. The most sing, Quis nisi mentis inops
oblatum respuat aurum? Who but a fool would refuse offered gold?

Verse. 9. He that covers a transgression, seeks love] In friendship faults
will fall out: These must be many of them dissembled, and not chewed, but
swallowed down whole, as Physick-pills; for else they will stick in a man's
teeth, and prove very unpleasant. See the Note on Prove. 10.12.

But he that repeateth a matter, separateth very friends] He that is so soft
and sensible of smallest offenses, so tender and ticklish that he can put up
nothing without revenge, or reparation: He that rips up and rakes into his
friends frailties, and makes them more in the relating, having never done with
them, he shall soon make his best friends weary of him, nay, to become enemies
to him.

Verse. 10. A reproof enters more into a wise man, etc.] A word to the wise is
sufficient: A look from Christ brake Peter's heart, and dissolved it into tears.
Augustus being in a great rage, ready to pass sentence of death upon many, was
taken off by these words of his friend Mecaenas, (...). Dio in Aug. ^^^^. Maul.
loc com.
written in a Note, and cast into his lap, Tandem aliquando surge carnifex.
When Luther was once in a great heat, Melancthon cooled him and qualified him
by repeating that verse, Vince animos, iramque tuam, qui caetera vincis. Master
you passions, you that so easily master all things else.

Than an hundred stripes into a fool] Hic enim plectitur, sed non flectitur;
corripitur, sed non corrigitur. Beaten he is, but not bent to goodness;
amerced, but not amended. The Cypress, the more it is watered, the more it is
withered, Ahaz was the worse for his afflictions, so was the railing Thief.
Jeroboams withered hand works nothing upon his heart. He had herein as great a
miracle wrought before him (says a reverend man) as St. Paul had at his
Conversion, Dr. Preston.
yet was he not wrought upon, because the Spirit did not set it on.

Verse. 11. An evil man seeks only rebellion] viz. How to gain-stand and
mischieve those that by words or stripes, seek to reclaim him: Some read it
thus, The rebellious seeks mischief only, he is set upon sin, he shall be
sure of punishment. No warnings will serve obdurate hearts; wicked men are even
ambitious of destruction: Judgments need not go to find them out, they run to
meet their bane, they seek it, and as it were send for it. But this they need
not do, for a cruel messenger shall be sent against him. God has forces
enough at hand to fetch in his Rebels, viz. good and evil Angels, Stars,
Meteors, Elements, other creatures, reasonable, unreasonable, insensible. The
stones in the wall of Aphek shall sooner turn Executioners than a rebellious
Aramite shall escape unrevenged; Not to speak of Hell Torments prepared for the
Devil and his Angels, and by them to be inflicted on Rebels and Reprobates.

Verse. 12. Let a Bear robbed of her Whelps meet a man] A Bear is a fierce and
fell creature, the Shee-bear especially, as Aristotle notes, but most of all
when robbed of her Whelps, which she licketh into form, and loves without
measure. To meet her in this rage is to meet death in the face, and yet that
danger may be sooner shifted and shunned, than a furious fool set upon
mischief: Such were the primitive Persecutors, not sparing those Christians
whom Bears and Lions would not meddle with. Such an one was our bloody Bonner,
Act. and Mon.
who in five years space took and roasted three hundred Martyrs, most of them
within his own Walk and Diocese. Such another was that merciless Minerius, one
of the Popes Captains, Ibid.
who destroyed two and twenty Towns of the innocent Merindelians in France,
together with the inhabitants; and being entreated for some few of them that
escaped in their shirts to cover their nakedness, he sternly answered, that
he knew what he had to do, and that not one of them should escape his hands,
but he would send them to hell to dwell among Devils.

Verse. 13. Who so rewards evil for good, etc.] Ingratitude is a monster in
nature, and does therefore carry so much more detestation, Nihil est tam
inhumanum, etc. quam committere, ut beneficio non dicam indignus sed victus
esse videare, Cic.
as it is more odious even to themselves that have blotted out the image of
God. Some vices are such as nature smiles upon, though frowned at by divine
Justice; not so this. Licurgus would make no law against it, because he
thought none could be so absurd as to fall into it. Amongst the Athenians
there was an action (...) of a Master against a servant ungrateful for his
manumission, not doing his duty to his late Master: Such were again to be made
bondslaves. Val. Max. lib. 2. cap. 1. Zonaras in Annal. Turk. hist. 642.
Who can choose but abhor that abominable act of Michael Balbus, who that night
that his Prince (Le^ Armenius) had pardoned and released him, got out and slew
him? And that of Mulcasses King of Tunes, who cruelly tortured to death the
Manifet and Mesner, by whose means especially he had aspired to the Kingdom;
grieving to see them live, to whom he was so much beholding: And that of Dr.
Watson Bishop of Lincoln in Queen Mary's days, Act. and Mon. fol. 1843.
who being with Bonner at the Examination of Mr. Rough Martyr (a man that had
been a means to save Watsons life in the days of King Edward the sixth) to
requite him that good turn, detected him there to be a pernicious heretic,
who did more hurt in the North parts than a hundred more of his opinion.
Whereunto may be added that of William Parry, who having been for Burglary
condemned to dye, was saved by Queen Elizabeth's pardon: But he (ungrateful
wretch) sought to requite her by vowing her death, anno Dom. 1584. Speed. fol.
1178.
To render good for evil is divine, good for good is humane, evil for evil is
brutish, evil for good is Devilish.

Evil shall not depart from his house] i. e. From his Person and Posterity,
though happily he may escape the lash of man's Law for such an abhorred villainy.
See this fulfilled in Saul's family, for his unworthy dealing with David; in
Muleasses and many others. Jeremy (in a spirit of Prophecy) bitterly curses
such, and foretells the utter ruin of them and theirs, Chap. 18.20, 21. etc.
shall evil be recompensed for good? says he, Therefore deliver up their
children to the famine, and let their wives be widows. Let a cry be heard
from their houses, etc.

Verse. 14. The beginning of strife is as when one lets out water] It is easier
to stir strife than stint it. Lis litem generat: As water, it is of a spreading
nature. Do therefore here, as the Dutchmen do by their banks; they keep them
with little cost and trouble, because they look narrowly to them, and make them
up in time. If there be but the least breach, they stop it presently,
otherwise the Sea would soon overflow them.

Fertur in arva furens cumulo, Virgil. Aneid. 2.
camposque per omnes
Cum stabulis armenta trahit.
The same may fitly be set forth also by a similitude from fire; which if
quenched presently, little hurt is done; As if not, behold how great a wood a
little fire kindles, James 3.5.
says Saint James. If fire break out but of a bramble, it will devour the
Cedars of Lebanon, Judge. 9.15. Cover therefore the fire of contention, as
William the Conqueror commanded the Coverfeu-bell.

Therefore leave off contention before it be meddled with] Antequam
commisceatur. Stop or step back, before it come to further trouble. Satius est
recurrere quam male currere, better retire than run on, in those ignoble
quarrels especially, ubi and vincere inglorium est and atteri sordidum,
wherein, whether he win or lose, he is sure to lose in his credit and
comfort. We read of Francis the first King of France, that consulting with his
Captains how to lead his Army over the Alps into Italy, whether this way or
that way? Amaril his fool sprang out of a corner, where he sat unseen, and
bad them rather take care which way they should bring their Army out of Italy
again. It is easy for one to interest himself in quarrels, but hard to be
dis-ingaged from them, when he is once in. Therefore Principiis obsta,
withstand the beginnings of these evils, and study to be quiet, 1 These. 4.11.
Milk quenches wildfire. Oil (says Luther) quenches lime; so does meekness
strife.

Verse. 15. He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just,
etc.] To wrong a righteous man in word only is a grievous sin; how much more
to murder him under pretense of Justice? as they did innocent Naboth; as the
bloody Papists do Christ's faithful witnesses, and as the Jews did Christ
himself, crying out, We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to dye, etc. This
is to play the Thief or Manslayer cum privilegio, this is to frame mischief by
a Law, Psalm. 94.20. The like may be said of that other branch of in justice,
the justifying of the wicked. Bonis nocet, qui malis parcit. He wrongs the
good, that spares the bad: better turn so many wild-Boars, Bears, Wolves,
Leopards loose among them, than these monstrous men of condition, that will
either corrupt them, or otherwise mischieve them. For thou know this people
is set upon mischief, Exodus 32.22. They cannot sleep, unless they have hurt
some one. Neither pertains this Proverb to Magistrates only, but to private
persons too; who must take heed how they precipitate a censure: Herein David
was to blame in pronouncing the wicked happy, and condemning the Generation of
Gods children, Psalm. 73. for the which oversight he afterward shames and
shents himself, yea be fools and be beasts himself, as well he deserved, verse.
22.

Verse. 16. Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool? etc.] Wealth
without wit, is ill bestowed. Think the same of good natural parts, either of
body or mind: so, for authority, opportunity, and other advantages. Whereto
serve they if not rightly improved and employed? Certainly they will prove no
better than Uriahs letters to those that have them; or as that sword which
Hector gave Ajax; which so long as he used against his enemies, served for
help and defense; but after he began to abuse it to the hurt of hurtlesse
beasts, it turned into his own bowels. This will be a bodkin at thy heart one
day, I might have been saved, but I woefully let slip those opportunities that
God had thrust into my hands, and wilfully cut the throat of mine own poor
soul, by an impenitent continuance in sinful courses, against so many
disswasives. Oh the spirit of fornication, that has so besorted the minds of
the most, that they have no heart to look after Heaven, while it is to be had,
but trifle and fool away their own salvation!

Verse. 17. A friend loves at all times] Such a friend was Jonathan, Hushai the
Archite, Ittai the Gittite, who stuck close to David when he was at his
greatest under. B. Morton.
But such faithful friends are in this age all for the most part gone in
Pilgrimage (as he once said) and their return is uncertain. David met with
others, besides those above mentioned, that would be the causes, but not the
companions of his calamity; that would fawn upon him in his flourish, but
forsake him in his trouble. My lovers and friends stand aloof, etc. The
Ancients pictured Friendship in the shape of a fair young man, bare-headed,
meanly apparelled, having on the outside of his garment written, To live and
to dye with you, and on his forehead Summer and Winter. His breast was open, so
that his heart might be seen; and with his finger be pointed to his heart
where was written Long, Prope, Far and near. Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, being
wounded and overthrown by the Duke of Alenzon, at the battle of Agincourt, was
rescued by his brother King Henry the fifth, who bestriding him, delivered him
from danger, etc. Speed.


And a Brother is born for adversity] Birth binds him to it, and although at
other times fratrum concordia rara, brethren may jar and jangle, yet at a
straight, and in a stresse, good nature will work, and good blood will not
belie it self. And as in the natural, so in the spiritual brotherhood, Misery
breeds unity. Ridley and Hooper, that when they were both Bishops, differed so
much about Ceremonies, could agree well enough, and be mutual comforts one to
another, when they were both prisoners. Esther concealed her kindred in hard
times; but Gods people cannot. Moses must rescue his beaten brother out of the
hand of the Egyptian, though he venture his life by it.

Verse. 18. A man void of understanding strikes hands] Of the folly and misery
of rash suretyship, See Chap. 6.1, 2, etc. with the Notes there.

In the presence of his friend] Or, before his friend, that is, before his
friend do it, who was better able, and more obliged. Thus like a Woodcock he
puts his neck into the ginne, his foot into the stocks as the Drunkard; and
then has time enough to come in with the fools had I wist, and to say as the
Lion did when taken in the toil, Si praescivissem: If I had foreseen this. But
why should there be amongst men any such Epimetheus, such a Postmaster, an
after-wit?

Verse. 19. He loves transgression that loves strife] Its strange that any
should love strife, that Hell-hag, (...). And yet some, like Trouts, love to
swim against the stream; like Salamanders, they live in the fire of contention;
like Phocion, they hold it a goodly thing to dissent from others; like Pyrrhus,
they are a people that delight in war, Psalm. 68.30. Like David's enemies, I am
for peace, says he, (that was his Motto) but when I speak of it, Psalm. 120.7.
they are for war. These unquiet spirits are of the Devil doubtless, that
turbulent creature, that troubler of Gods Israel. He knows, that where envying
and strife is, there is confusion and every evil work, James 3.16. and that he
loves transgression, that loves strife; he takes pleasure in sin, which is
the cause of his unquietness. Good therefore and worthy of all acceptance, is
the counsel of the Psalmist; Cease from anger, and forsake wrath; fret not thy
self in any wise to do evil, Psalm. 37.8. He that frets much, will soon be
drawn to do evil. An angry man stirs up strife, and a furious man abounds in
transgression, Prove. 29.22. Hence our Savior bids, Have salt within your
selves, that is, mortify your corruptions, and then, be at Peace one with
another, Mark 9.50. Hence also Saint James says, that the wisdom from above
is first pure, and then peaceable. And Saint Paul often joins faith and love
together; there can be no true love to, and good agreement with men, till the
heart be purified by faith from the love of sin.

And he that exalts his gate, seeks destruction] Eventually he seeks
it, though not intentionally: that exalts his gate, that is, his whole house,
(a part being put for the whole) which he that builds over-sumptuously, is in
the ready rode to beggary, the beggar will soon have him by the back, as they
say; quaerit rupturam, he will shortly break. Others read the words thus, And
he enlarges his gate that seeks a breach, that is, say they, he that
picketh quarrels, and is contentious, sets open a wide door to let in many
mischiefs.

Verse. 20. He that has a froward heart, finds no good] Who this is that
has a froward heart, and a perverse tongue, Solomon shows; Prove. 11.20. viz.
the hypocrite, the double-minded man, Jam. 1.8. that has an heart and a heart,
Psalm. 12.2. One for God, and another for him that would have it, as that
desperate Neapolitan boasted of himself. And as he has two hearts, so two
tongues too, 1 Timothy 3.8. wherewith he can both bless and curse, talk
religiously or profanely according to the company, James 3.10, 11. speak
Hebrew and Ashdod, the language of Canaan, and the language of Hell; like those
in an Island beyond Arabia, of whom Diodorus Siculus says, that they have
cleven tongues, Antiq. l. 3.
so that therewith they can alter their speech at their pleasure, and perfectly
speak to two persons, and to two purposes, at once. Now how can these Monsters
of men expect either to find good, or not to fall into mischief? How can they
escape the damnation of Hell, whereof hypocrites are the chief inhabitants,
(...). Mat. 24.31.
yea the freeholders as it were? for other sinners shall have their part with
the Devil and hypocrites.

Verse. 21. He that begets a fool, does it to his sorrow] Solomon might
speak this by experience, and wish as Augustus did, Utinam coelebs vixissem,
aut orbus periissem. Hof. 4,
O that I had either lived a batchelour, or died childlesse! to bring forth
children to the murderer, children to the Devil, that old manslayer; Oh what
a grief is this to a pious Parent! how much better were a miscarrying womb, and
dry breasts? What heavy moan made David for his Absalom, dying in his sin? How
does many a miserable Mother weep and warble out that mournful ditty of hers in
Plutarch over her deceased children, Quo pueri estis profecti? poor souls
what is become of you!

And the Father of a fool has no joy] No more than Oedipus had, who cursed his
children when he died, and breathed out his last, with Per coacervat^^ percat
domus impia luctus.

No more than William the Conqueror had in his ungracious children: or Henry
the second, who finding that his sons had conspired against him with the King
of France, Daniel fol. 112
fell into a grievous passion, cursing both his sons, and the day wherein
himself was born; and in that distemperature departed the world, which himself
had so often distempered.

Verse. 22. A merry heart does good, like a medicine] (...): So the Septuagint
render it. And indeed, it is (...) that makes (...). All true mirth is from
rectitude of the mind, from a right frame of soul. When Faith has once healed
the conscience, and grace has hushed the affections, and composed all within,
so that there is a Sabbath of Spirit, and a blessed tranquillity lodged in the
soul, then the body also is vigorous and vigetous, for most part, in very good
plight, and healthful constitution, which makes man's life very comfortable. For
si vales, been est. And (...). Go thy ways, says Solomon, to him that has a
good conscience, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart,
Eccles. 9.7, 8, 9.
since God accepts thy works. Let thy garments be always white, and let thy
head lack no ointment. Live joyfully with the wife of thy youth, etc. be
lightsome in thy clothes, merry at thy meats, painful in thy calling, etc.
these do notably conduce to, and help on health. They that in the use of lawful
means wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with
wings as Eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; they shall walk, and not
faint, Isa. 40.31.

But a broken spirit dries the bones] By drinking up the marrow and radical
moisture. See this in David, Psalm 32.3. whose bones waxed old, whose moisture
or chief sap was turned into the drought of Summer: his heart was smitten, and
withered like grass; his days consumed like smoke, Psalm. 102.3, 4. his whole
body was like a bottle in the smoke, Psalm. 119.83. he was a very bag of bones,
and those also burnt as an hearth, Psalm. 102. Aristotle in his book of long and
short life assigns grief for a chief cause of death. And the Apostle says as
much, 2 Cor. 7.10. See the Note there, and on Prove. 12.25. All immoderations,
says Hippocrates, are great enemies to health.

Verse. 23. A wicked man takes a gift out of the bosome] i. e. closely and
covertly, as if neither God nor man should see him. The words may be also read
thus, He (that is the corrupt Judge) takes a gift out of the wicked man's
bosom; there being never a better of them, as Solomon intimates by this
ambiguous expression. Stapleten.
Rain is good, and ground is good, yet ex little conjunctione fit lutum. So
giving is kind, and taking is courteous; yet the mixing of them makes the
smooth paths of justice foul and uneven.

Verse. 24. Wisdom is before him that has understanding] Or, Vultut index
animi. Profecto oculis animus inhabitat. Plin.
the face of an understanding man is wisdom, his very face speaks him wise,
the government of his eyes, especially, is an argument of his gravity. His eyes
are in his head, Eccles. 2.14. he scatters away all evil with them, Prove.
20.8. He has oculum irretortum, as Job had, chap. 31. and Joseph had oculum
in metam (which was Ludovicus vives his Motto) his eye fixed upon the mark; he
looks right on, Prove. 4.25. he goes through the world as one in a deep muse,
or as one that has haste of some special business, and therefore over-looks
every thing besides it: He has learned out of Isa. 33.14, 15. that he that
shall see God to his comfort, must not only shake his hands from taking gifts
(as in the former verse) but also stop his ears, from hearing of blood, and
shut his eyes from seeing of evil. Vitiis nobis in animum per oculos est via,
says Quintilian; Quintil. declam.
sin enters into the little world, through these windows, and death by sin, as
fools find too often by casting their eyes into the corners of the earth,
suffering them to rove at random without restraint, by irregular glancing, and
inordinate gazing. In Hebrew the same word signifies both an eye and a
fountain; to show (says one) that from the eye, as from a fountain, flows both
sin and misery. Shut up therefore the five windows, that the house may be full
of light, as the Arabian Proverb has it. We read of one, that making a
journey to Rome, and knowing it to be a corrupt place, and a corrupter of
others, entered the City with eyes close shut; neither would he see any thing
there but Saint Peter's Church, which he had a great mind to go visit. Alipius
in Austin being importuned to go to those bloody spectacles of the gladiatory
combats, resolved to wink, and did; But hearing an outcry of applause, looked
abroad, and was so taken with the sport, that he became an ordinary frequenter
of those cruel meetings.

Verse. 25. A foolish Son is a grief to his Father] See the Note on chap. 10.1.
and 15.20.

Verse. 26. Also to punish the just is not good] The righteous are to be
cherished and protected, as those that uphold the state. Semen sanctum statumen
terrae, Isa. 6.13. What Aeneas, Sylvins said of learning, may be more properly
said of righteousness, Vulgar men should esteem it as silver, Noblemen as
gold, Prines prize it as pearls. But they that punish it (as persecutors do)
shall be punished to purpose, when God makes inquisition for blood. Psalm. 9.


Nor to strike Princes for equity] Righteous men are Princes in all Lands, Psa.
45. yea they are Kings in righteousness, as Melchisedec. Indeed they are
somewhat obscure Kings, as he was, but Kings they appear to be, by comparing
Mat. 13.17. with Luke 10.24. Many righteous, says Matthew, many Kings, says
Luke. Now to strike a King is high treason: Daniels Hist. 198.
And although Princes have put up blows, as when one struck our Henry the
sixth, he only said, Forsooth you do wrong your self more than me, to strike
the Lords anointed: Another also that had drawn blood of him when he was in
prison, he freely pardoned, when he was restored to his Kingdom, saying;
Alas, poor soul, he struck me more to win favor with others, than of any
evil will he bare me. So when one came to cry Cato mercy, for having struck
him once in the Bath, he answered, that he remembered no such matter. Likewise
Lycurgus is famous for pardoning him that smote out one of his eyes; yet he
that shall touch the apple of Gods eye (as every one does that wrongeth a
righteous man for equity especially) shall have God for a revenger. And it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10.

Verse. 27. He that has knowledge, spares his words] Taciturnity is a sign of
solidity, and talkativeness of worthlesness. Epaminondas is worthily praised
for this (says Plutarch) that as no man knew more than he, so none spoke less
than he did.

And a man of understanding is of an excellent spirit] Or, of a cool spirit.
The deepest Seas are the most calm, Where river smoothest runs, deep is the
ford,
The Dial stirs, yet none perceives it move, etc.


Verse. 28. Even a fool when he holds his peace, etc.] (...). O that you
would altogether hold your peace, and it should be your wisdom, says Job to
his friends that spoke much, but said little, Job 13.5.

CHAP. XVIII. Verse. 1. Through desire a man having separated himself, etc.]
HEre the reading that is in Margin (me thinks) is the better. He that
separates himself (either from his friend, as the old interpreter makes the
sense, or from any thing else that he has formerly followed) seeks
according to his desire (seeks to satisfy his own hearts lust, and to
compass what he coveteth) and intermedleth with every business (stirs very
busily in every thing that is done, and leaves no stone unrowled, no course
unattempted, whereby he may effect his design, and come off with his credit.)
The practice hereof we may observe in the Pharisees (those old Separatists)
who slandered all that our Savior did; and in their pertinacious malice, never
left till they had slain him, for a deceiver of the people. So the Donatists
separated, and affirmed, that there were no true Churches but theirs. They were
also divided among themselves in minutula frustula, into small sucking
Congregations, as Austin says, whose arguments not being able to confute, they
reproached him for his former life, when he was a Manichee. In like sort dealt
the Anabaptists with Luther, whom they held more pestiferous than the Pope.
Muncer wrote a book against him (dedicating it to the illustrious Prince
Christ) and rails at him, Scultet. Annal. 238.
as one that wanted the Spirit of Revelation, and savoured only the things of
the flesh. Apologet. Narrat. p. 6.
Our Separatists (the better sort of them) have said, that the differences are
so small between themselves and us, that they can for a need, come to our
Churches, partake in the Sacraments, and hold communion with us as the Churches
of Christ, etc. But if so, how then dare they separate, and intermeddle with
every business, that they may have some specious pretense for it? Turks wonder
at English for cutting or pinking their clothes, counting them little better
than mad to make holes in whole cloth, which time of it self would tear too
soon. Men may do pro libitu (as some render through desire in this Text) as
they will with their own; but woe be to those that cut and rend the seamless
coat of Christ with causeless separations.

Verse. 2. A fool has no delight in understanding, but that his heart may
discover it self] Or, in discovering his own heart, i. e. in following his own
humor, against all that can be said to the contrary. He is wilful, and so
stands as a stake in the midst of a stream, lets all pass by him, but he
stands where he was. It is easier to deal with twenty men's reasons, than with
one man's will: He has made his conclusion, you may as soon remove a rock as
him. Quecquid vult valde vult, quicquid vult sanctum est. His will is his rule,
and when a man has said and done his utmost to convince him by force of
reason, he shall find him like a Mill-horse, just there in the evening where
he began his morning circuit. Some think that Solomon here taxes not so much
the wilfulness, as the vain-gloriousness and ostentation of fond fools, who
seem to delight in wisdom; but it is only for a name, and that they may by
setting their good parts a sunning, gain the applause and admiration of the
world, for men singularly qualified. But why should any affect the vain praises
of men, and not rest content with the Euge of a good conscience? The blessed
Virgin was troubled, when truly praised of an Angel. Moses had more glory by
his veil, than by his face. Christ (beside the veil of his humanity) says, See
you tell no man, etc.

Verse. 3. When the wicked comes, then comes contempt] It comes into the world
with him, so the Hebrew Doctors expound it. He is born a contemner of God, of
his people, and of his ordinances, being vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind,
Col. 2.18. and having a base esteem of others, in comparison of himself; Thus
vain man would be wise, yea the only wise, though man be born like a wild
Asses colt, Job 11.12. and so he could not but confess, would he but consult
a while with himself. But he does with himself, as some people do by Dogs and
Monkeyes, which they know to be paltry carrion beasts, and yet they set great
store by them, and make precious account of them, merely for their minds sake.

And with ignominy, reproach] These two he shall be sure of, according to
that, 1 Samuel 2.30. They that despise me shall be lightly esteemed, and Prove.
3.34. Surely God scorneth the scorners (see the Note there) he pays them in
their own coin, over-shoots them in their own bow, makes them to meet with such
as will mete them out their own measure, and for their contempt repay them
(with ignominy) reproach.

Verse. 4. The words of a man's mouth are as deep waters] Fitly are the words of
the wise resembled to waters (says one) in as much as they both wash the
minds of the hearers, that the foulness of sin remain not therein, and water
them in such sort that they faint not, nor wither by a drought and burning
desire of heavenly doctrine. Now these words of the wise are of two sorts; some
are as deep waters, and cannot easily be fathomed, as Sampsons Riddles, and
Solomon's Apophthegms, so very much admired by the Queen of Sheba, 2 Chronicles. 9.
some again are plain, and flow so easily as a flowing brook, that the simplest
may understand them. The same may be affirmed of the holy Scriptures (those
words of the wise, and their dark sayings, Prove. 1.6.) The Scriptures says
one, are both text and gloss, one place opens another, one place has that
plainly, that another delivers darkly. The Rabbius have one saying, That there
is a mountain of sense hangs upon every Apex of the word of God. And another
they have, Nulla est objectio in lege quae non habet solutionem in latere, i.
e. There is not any doubt in the Law, but may be resolved by some other Text.
Parallel Scriptures cast a mutual light one upon another; and is there not a
thin veil laid over the word, which is more rarefied by reading, and at last
wholly worn away? A friend (says Chrysostom) that is acquainted with his
friend, will get out the meaning of a letter or phrase, which another could not
that is a stranger; So it is in the Scripture.

Verse. 5 It is not good to accept the person of the wicked] Indeed, it is so
bad, as can hardly be expressed, and is therefore here set forth by the figure
Liptote, which is say Grammarians, cum minus dicitur, plus intelligitur, when
little is said, Vt ap. Virgil. Nec nulla innata est inaratae gratia terra.
Georg. 2.
but more is understood. This accepting of persons, declared here to be so
very naught, is either in passing sentence of judgment, of which see Levit.
19.15. with the Note; or otherwise in common conversation, of which read Jam.
2.1, 2, 3, 4. with the Note.

To overthrow the righteous in judgement] Which is the easilier done, because
they cannot quarrel and contend, as the wicked can. The fools lips enter into
contention, verse. 6. they have an art in it, they are dexterous at it, it is
their trade and study to brabble and wrangle, to set a good face upon an ill
matter, to rail and out-brave, to set men further at odds, and to imbitter
their spirits one against another. This is a trick they have learned of their
father the Devil; and this their graceless speeches do as directly tend unto,
as if they had legs to go unto contention.

Verse. 6. A fools lips enter into contention] See the Note on verse. 5.
Vehementer doleo, quia vehementer diligo. Atque sit cum maesto vultis, oculis
demissis, cum quadam taerditate and vocis plangitu procedit maledictio. Bern.


And his mouth calls for strokes] By his desire upon others; but by desert
and effect upon himself.

Verse. 7. A fools mouth is his destruction] See the Notes on Chap. 10.14. and
12.13. and 13.3.

Verse. 8. The words of a talebearer are as wounds] See the Note on Chap.
12.18. He that takes away a man's good name, kills him alive, and ruins him
and his posterity; being herein worse than Cain, for he in killing his
brother, made him live for ever, and eternallized his name. Some read, are as
the words of the wounded: they seem to speak out of wounded troubled hearts,
and then their words go down into the belly, they go glib down, pass without
the least questioning.

Verse. 9. He also that is slothful in his work] As he must needs be that
goes pedling about with tales, and buzzing evil reports into the ears of those
that will hear them. See 1 Timothy 5.3. with the Note there. Lata negligentia
dolus est, says the Civilian.

Is Brother to him that is a great waster] Est frater Domini disperditionis,
will as certainly come to poverty, as the greatest waste-good. A man dies no
less surely (though not so suddenly) of a Consumption, than of an Apoplexy.

Verse. 10. The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower] Gods attributes are called
His Name; because by them he is known as a man is by his name. These are said
to be Arx roboris a Tower so deep, no pioneer can undermine it; so thick, no
Canon can pierce it; so high, no ladder can scale it. A rock, an old rock, Isa.
26.4. yea, munitions of rocks, Isa. 33.16. rocks within rocks, a Tower
impregnable, inexpugnable.

The righteous runs to it] All creatures run to their refuges, when hunted,
Prove. 30.26. Psalm. 104.18. Prove. 18.11. Dan. 4.10, 11. Judge. 9.50, 51. which
yet fail them many times; as the Tower of Shechem did, Judges 9. as the strong
hold of Sion did those Jebusites that scorned David and his host, as conceited
that the very lame and blind (those most shiftless creatures) might there
easily hold it out against him, 12 Sam. 5.6, 7. The hunted Hare runs to her
form, but that cannot secure her: the traveller to his bush, but that when once
wet through, does him more hurt than good; as the Physicians did the
haemorroisse, Mark. 5. But as she, when she had spent all before, came to
Christ, and was cured: so the righteous being poor and destitute of wealth
(which is the rich man's strong City, (...) John 10.
verse. 11.) and of all humane helps (God loves to relieve such as are forsaken
of their hopes) runs to this strong refuge, and is not only safe, but set
aloft, as the word signifies, out of the gunshot. None can pull them out of
his hands. Run therefore to God by praying, and not fainting, Luke 18.1. This
is the best policy for security. That which is said of wily persons that are
full of fetches, of windings and of turnings in the world, that such will never
break, is much more true of a righteous praying Christian. He has but one
grand policy to secure him in all dangers, and that is, to run to God.

Verse. 11. The rich man's wealth is his strong City] It is hard to have wealth,
and not to trust to it, Matthew. 19.24. 1 Timothy 5.17. See the Notes there. But
wealth was never true to those that trusted it: there is an utter uncertainty,
1 Timothy 5.17. a nonentity, Prove. 23.5, 6. an impotency to help in the evil day,
Zeph. 1.18. an impossibility to stretch to eternity, unless it be to destroy
the Owner for ever, Eccles. 5.13. James 5.1, 2, etc. A wicked man beaten out of
earthly comforts, is as a naked man in a storm, and an unarmed man in the
field, or a ship tossed in the Sea without an Anchor, which presently dasheth
upon rocks, or falls upon quicksands. Totam igitur anchoram sacram figamus
in Deo, qui solus nec potest, nec vult fallere. Cast we Anchor therefore upon
God, who neither can nor will fail us, says a learned Interpreter.

And as an high wall in his own conceit] It is conceit only that sets a price
upon these outward comforts, and bears men in hand, that thereby, as by an high
wall, they shall not only be secured, but secreted in their lewdness, from
the eyes of God and men. (...), etc. Cedr.
But what said the Oracle to bloody Phocas? Though thou set up thy walls as
high as Heaven, sin lies at the foundation, and all will out, yea all be
overturned.

Verse. 12. Before destruction the heart of a man is haughty]
Creature-confidence and high-mindednesse, are the Dives his diseases, and go
therefore yoaked together, as here, so 1 Timothy 6.17. Charge the rich that they
be not high-minded, nor trust to uncertain riches. Magna cognatio ut rei sic
nominis, divitiis and vitiis, Wealth and Wickedness are of near alliance, and
are not far from destruction, or breaking to shivers, as the word signifies.
So bladder-like is the soul, that filled with earthly vanities, though but
wind, it grows great, and swells in pride; but pricked with the least pin of
divine Justice, it shrinks and shrivels to nothing. See more in the Notes on
Chap. 16.18. and 15.33. and 12.2.

Verse. 13. He that answers a matter before he hears it] Solomon had said
before, that even a fool when he holds his peace, is counted wise, Chap.
17.28. and in many passages of this blessed book, he sets forth, that a great
part of man's wisdom is showed in his words. To be over-forward to answer,
before the question be fully propounded or expounded, is rash, if not proud
boldness, and reflects shame upon them that do it. Likewise to be slow to
hear, swift to speak (has not God given us two ears, and one tongue, to teach
us better?) to precipitate a censure, or pass sentence before both Parties be
heard, to speak evil of the things that a man knows not, or weakly and
insufficiently to defend that which is good, against a subtle adversary; Austin
professes this was it that hardened him, and made him to triumph in his former
Manichism, that he met with feeble opponents, and such as his nimble wit was
easily able to overturn. Oecolampadius said of Carolostadius, that he had a
good cause, but wanted shoulders to support it.

Verse. 14. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity] Some sorry shift a
man may make to bustle with, and to rub through other aylements and
aggrievances, disasters or diseases, sores or sicknesses of the body (as the
word here properly imports) Let a man be sound within, and (upon good terms)
at peace with his own conscience, and he will bravely bear unspeakable
pressures, 2 Cor. 1.9, 12. Paul was merry under his load, because his heart was
cheary in the Lord; as an old beaten Porter to the Cross, maluit tolerare quam
deplorare, his stroke was heavier than his groaning, as Job, chap. 23.2.
Alexander Aphrodiseus gives a reason why Porters under their burdens go
singing; because the mind being delighted with the sweetness of the music,
Problem. 1. Numb. 78.
the body feels the weight so much the less. Their shoulders while sound, will
bear great luggage; but let a bone be broken, or but the skin rubbed up and
raw, the lightest load will be grievous. A little water in a leaden vessel is
heavy; so is a little trouble in an evil conscience.

But a wounded spirit who can bear?] q. d. It is a burden importable, able to
quail the courage, and crush the shoulders of the hugest Hercules, of the
mightiest man upon earth; who can bear it? The body cannot, much less a
diseased body (And if the soul be at unrest, the body cannot but co-suffer.)
Hence Job preferred, and Judas chose strangling before it. Bilney and Bainbam,
Act. and Mon. fol. 938.
after they had abjured, felt such an hell in their consciences, till they had
openly professed their sorrow for that sin, as they would not feel again for
all the worlds good. Daniel chose rather to be cast into the den of Lions,
than to carry about a Lion in his bosom, an enraged conscience. The primitive
Christians cried likewise, Ad Leones potius quam ad Lenones adjiciamur. What a
terror to himself was our Richard the third, after the cruel murder of his
two innocent Nephews; and Charles the ninth of France, after that bloody
massacre? He could never endure to be awakened in the night, without music,
or some like diversion. But alas! if the soul it self be out of tune, these
outward things do no more good, than a fair shoe to a gowty foot, or a silken
stocken to a broken leg.

Verse. 15. The heart of the prudent gets knowledge] Such as can keep the
bird singing in their bosom, and are free from inward perturbations, these by
meditating on the good Word of God, and by listening to the wholesome words
(...) others, get and gather knowledge; that is, great store of all sorts of
knowl^^^e, that which is divine especially, and tends to the perfecting of the
soul.

Verse. ^^ A man's gift makes roomth for him] This Jacob knew well, Genesis 43.11.
and therefore ^^de his Sons take a present for the Governor of the Land,
though it were but of every good thing a little. So Saul, 1 Samuel 9.7.
when to go to the man of God to enquire about the Asses. But behold, said he
to his servant, if we go, what shall we bring the man? what have we? See
more in the Note on Chap. 17. verse. 8. and 23.

Verse. 17. He that is first in his own cause seems just] The first tale is
good till the second be heard. How fair a tale told Tertullus for the Jews
against Paul, till the Apostle came after him, and unstarcht the Orators trim
speech? Judges had need to get and keep that (...) that Alexander boasted of,
to keep one ear clear and unprejudiced, for the defendant; for they shall meet
with such active Actors or Pleaders, as can make Quid libet ex quolibet,
Candida de nigris and de candentibas atra, as can draw a fair glove upon a foul
hand, blanch and smooth over the worst causes with goodly pretenses, as Ziba
did against Mephibosheth, Potiphars wife against Joseph, etc. He must
therefore (...) (as the Athenian Judges were sworn to do) hear both sides
indifferently: and as that Levite said, Judge. 19. Consider, consult, and then
give sentence, doing nothing by partiality or prejudice.

Verse. 18. The lot causes contentions to cease] As it did, Josh. 14.2. Where
it is remarkable, that Joshua that lotted out the Land, left none to himself;
and that portion that was given him, and he content withal, was but a mean
one in the barren mountains. So again, Act. 1.26. where it is remarkable, that
this Joseph called Barsabas, seeing it was not Gods mind by lot to make choice
of him now to succeed Judas in the Apostleship, was content with a lower
condition; therefore afterward God called him to that high and honorable
office of an Apostle, if at least this Joseph Barsabas, were the same with that
Joseph Barnabas, Act. 4.36. as the Centurists are of opinion. See the Note on
Chap. 16.23.

Verse. 19. A brother offended is harder to be won, etc.] Whether it be a
brother by race, place, or grace; Corruption optimi pessima: Those often that
loved most dearly (if once the Devil cast his club betwixt them) they hate most
deadly. See this exemplified in Cain and Abel, Esau and Jacob, Polynices and
Eteocles, Romulus and Remus, Caracalla and Geta, the two sons of Severus the
Emperor, Robert and Rufus the sons of William the Conqueror, the Civil
dissentions between the houses of York, and Lancaster (wherein were slain
eighty Princes of the blood royal) the dissentions between England and
Scotland, Daniel. 192.
which consumed more Christian-blood, wrought more spoil and destruction, and
continued longer than ever quarrel we read of did between any two people of
the world. As for Brethren by profession (and that of the true Religion too)
among Protestants, you shall meet with many divisions, and those prosecuted
with a great deal of bitterness. Eucholcer.
Nullum bellum citius exardescit, nullum deflagrat tardius quam Theologicum. No
war breaks out sooner, or lasts longer, than that among Divines, or as that
about the Sacrament; a Sacrament of love, a Communion, and yet the occasion (by
accident) of much dissension. Melch. Adam in vita.
This made holy Strigelius weary of his life. Cupio ex hac vita migrare ob duas
causas, says he. For two causes chiefly do I desire to depart out of this
world; First, That I may enjoy the sweet sight of the Son of God, and the
Church above; Next, Ut liberer ab immanibus and implicabilibus odiis
Theologorum, that I may be delivered from the cruel and implacable hatreds of
dissenting Divines. There is a most sad story of those that fled to Frankford
hence in Queen Mary's time; yet among them there were such grievous breaches,
that they sought the lives one of another; Great care therefore must be taken,
that brethren break not friendship: Or if they do, that they reunite and piece
again as soon as is possible.

Verse. 20. A man's belly shall be satisfied with the fruit of his mouth] See
the Notes on Chap. 12.14. and 13.2.

And with the increase of his lips shall he be satisfied] It is worthy the
observing, says an Interpreter here, that Solomon does vary his words: He
speaks sometimes of the mouth, sometimes of the lips, sometimes of the
tongue, as verse. 21. to show that all the instruments or means of speech shall
have, as it were, their proper and just reward.

Verse. 21. Death and life are in the power of the tongue] That best and worst
member of the body, as Bias told Amasis King of Egypt, Plutarch.
an unruly evil set on fire of Hell, says Saint James of an ill tongue (as
contrarily a good one is fired with zeal by the Holy Ghost, Act. 2.) Fire we
know is a good servant, but an ill Lord; If it get above us once, there is no
dealing with it. Hence it is, that as the careful householder lays a strict
charge upon his children and servants to look well to their fire: So does
Solomon give often warning to have a care of the tongue. For by thy words shall
thou be justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned, says a greater
than Solomon, Mat. 12. Cave ne f^riat lingua tua cellum tuum. Scalig.
The Arabians have a Proverb, Take heed that thy tongue cut not thy throat. A
word and a pest grow upon the same root in the Hebrew; to show, says one, that
an evil tongue has the pestilence in it: It spits up and down the room, as the
Serpent Dipsas, or as a Candle, whose tallow is mixed with brine.

Verse. 22. Whosoever finds a wise, etc.] Whosoever, after much seeking (by prayer to
God, and his own utmost industry, as Genesis 24. Isaac went forth to pray, and his
servant went forth to seek) finds, a fit and faithful yoak-fellow (called
here a wife, that is, a good wife, Hilbah. id est, umbra ipsius, quomodo
Menander (...) dixit.
as Eccles. 7.1. a name is put for a good name, and as Isa. 1.18. wool is put
for white wool: every married woman is not a wife; a bad woman is but the
shadow of a wife, according to Lamechs second wives name, Zillah) he finds a
good thing, a singular blessing, and such as should draw from him abundance of
thanks. He may well say as they were wont to do at Athens, when they were
married, (...). I have left a worse condition, and found a better. Zenodo. prove.
If any be the worse for a wife (for a good wife especially) it is from his
own corrupt heart, that like a Toad, turns all it takes into rank poison

Verse. 23. The poor uses intreaties] Speaks supplications, comes in a submisse
manner, uses a low language, as a broken man. How much more should we do so to
God? quanta cum reverentia, quanto timore, Bern.
quanta ad Deum humilitate accedere debet e palude sua procedens and repens
vilis ranuncula? creeping into his presence with utmost humility and reverence.

Verse. 24. A man that has friends, etc.] For Cos amoris amor, Love is the
whet-stone or lodestone (rather) of Love. Marce, ut ameris, ama. Martial.
Love is a coin that must be returned in kind.

And there is a friend, etc.] Such a friend is as ones own soul, Deuteronomy. 13.6. a
piece so just cut for him, as answers him rightly in every joint. This is a
rare happiness.

CHAP. XIX. Verse. 1. Better is the poor that walks in his integrity]
THat poor, but honest man, that speaks supplications, Chap. 18.23. but abuses
not his lips to lewd and loose language, is better than that rich fool that
answers him roughly and robustiously (as Nabal did David's messengers) and
otherwise, speaks ill, thinks worse. We usually call a poor man a poor soul: a
poor soul may be a rich Christian, and a rich man may have a poor soul.

Verse. 2. Also that the soul be without knowledge, Lib. 3. Eth.
it is not good] An ignorant man is a naughty man. Ignorant sane improbus omnis,
says Aristotle. Every bad-minded man is in the dark; neither can any good come
into the heart, but it must pass through the understanding; and the difference
of stature in Christianity grows from different degrees of knowledge. The
Romans were full of knowledge, and therefore full of goodness, chap. 15.14.

And he that hastes with his feet sinneth] Or, wandreth out of the way. As
he that is out of his way, the faster he rides or runs, the farther he is
out; so is blind zeal. It is like metal in a blind horse, that running upon
the rocks and precipices first breaks his hoofs, and then his neck: Or like the
Devil in the possessed, that cast him sometimes into the fire, and sometimes
into the water.

Verse. 3. The foolishness of a man perverteth his way] So that all goes cross
with him, Lev. 26.21.
and God walks contrary to him; as it befell our King John, Queen Mary, and
Henry the fourth of France. King John saw and acknowledged it in these words,
Mat. Paris.
Posiquam, ut dixi, Deo reconciliatus, me ac mea regna (proh dolor!) Romanae
subjeci Ecclesiae, nulla mihi prospera, sed omnia contraria advenerunt. Ever
since I submitted to the Sea of Rome, nothing has prospered with me.

And his heart frets against the Lord] As the cause of his calamity. Birds of
prey, that have been long kept in the dark, when they get abroad, are out of
measure raging and ravenous; so are ignorant spirits, they let fly on all
hands (when in durance especially) and spare not to spit their venom in the
very face of God; as did Pharaoh, when that thick darkness was upon him; the
King of Israel that said, Behold this evil is of the Lord, and what should I
wait for the Lord any longer? 2 King. 6.33. Mahomet the first Emperor of the
Turks, being wonderfully grieved with the dishonor and loss he had received
at the last assault of Scodra, Turk hist. fol. 423.
in his choler and frantic rage most horribly blasphemed against God, saying,
that it were enough for him to have care of heavenly things, and not to cross
him in his worldly actions.

Verse. 4. Wealth makes many friends] Res amicos invenit, says he in Plautus.
Wine, says Athenaeus, has (...), a force in it to make friendship. Wealth we
are sure has; but as that is no sound love that comes out of cups, it is but
ollaris amicitia; so neither are they to be trusted, that wealth wins to us.
Hired friends are seldom either satisfied, or sure; but like the Ravens in
Arabia, that, full gorged, have a tuneable sweet record, but empty, screetch
horribly. Flies soon fasten upon honey, and vermin will haunt a house where
food is to be gotten.

But the poor is separated from his neighbour] Who either turns from him as a
stranger, or against him, as an enemy. Nero being condemned to dye, and not
finding any one that would fall upon him, and dispatch him, cried out, Itane,
nec amicum, nec inimicum habeo? Have I now neither friend, nor foe, that will
do this for me?

Verse. 5. A false witness shall not be unpunished] Many poor people care not
to lend their rich friend an oath at a need: And many rich, though they think
ill of Pillory-perjury, yet they make little conscience of a merry lie. Neither
of these shall pass unpunished. And this sentence may be to them, as those
knuckles of a man's hand were to Baltasar, to write them their destiny, or as
Daniel was to him, to read it unto them.

Verse. 6. Many will entreat the favor of the Prince] Yea, lie at his feet, and
lick up his spittle, not being loyal in love for conscience, but submiss in
show for commodity. (...). Orph. in Arg.
Every man will be thrusting in where any thing is to be gotten. The Poets
make Litae or Petitions to be the daughters of Jupiter, and ever about him, to
signify, says the Mythologist, that Princes and great ones are seldom
without suppliants and suitors.

And every man is a friend, etc.] See the Note on Chap. 17.8.

Verse. 7. All the brethren of the poor do hate him] How much more then his
hired friends? These are like Crows to a dead Carcass, which if they flock to
it, it is not to defend, but to devour it; and no sooner have they bared the
bones, but they are gone. See the Note on Chap. 14.20.

Verse. 8. He that gets wisdome] Hebr. He that gets, or possesses an
heart; For we are born brutes, and are compared to the horse and mule that
have none understanding, Psalm. 32. Hearts we have all, but our foolish hearts
are darkened, Romans 1.21. yea, a deceived heart has turned us aside that we
cannot deliver our souls, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand? Isa.
44.20. Well may the rich have many friends, but not many hearts; For without
wisdom no man can love his own soul, much less can he truly love another.
Therefore by how much better it is for a man to love his own soul as he ought,
than to be beloved of others for his gifts; by so much it is better to get
wisdom, than to get wealth.

Verse. 9. A false witness, etc.] See Verse. 5.

Verse. 10. Delight is not seemly for a fool] Dignitas in indigno est ornamentum
in luto, says Salvian: Health, Wealth, Nobility, Beauty, Honor, and the like,
are ill bestowed upon a wicked man, who will abuse them all to his own and
other men's undoing. Secunda res etiam sapicutum animos fatigant; quanto magis
insolescent stulti rerum successu prospero? Salust.
The wisest have enough to do to manage these outward good things: What may we
then expect from fools? (See the Note on Chap. 14.24.) if they make wise men
fools, they will make fools mad men.

Much less for a servant to rule over Princes] As Abimelech that bramble did
over the Cedars of Lebanus: as Tobiah the Servant the Ammonite sought to do
over Nehemiah, and the Princes of Judah: As the servants of the Emperor
Claudius did over him and the whole State (which occasioned that verse to be
pronounced on the Theater, (...))

As Becket and Wolsey affected to do in their Generations: And as the
Bridgemaker of Rome, who styles himself Servus servorum, a servant of servants,
and yet acts as a Dominus Dominantium, and Rex Regum, Lord of Lords, and King
of Kings. Round about the Popes Coin are these words stamped, That Nation that
will not serve thee, shall be rooted out. His Janissaries also the Jesuits are
as a most agile sharp sword, whose blade is sheathed at pleasure in the bowels
of every Commonwealth, but the handle reaches to Rome and Spain. This made
that most valiant and puissant Prince, Henry the fourth of France, when he was
persuaded by one to banish the Jesuits, say, Give me then security for my
life.

Verse. 11. The discretion of a man deferreth his anger] Plato, when angry with
his servant, would not correct him at that time, but let him go with Vapulares
nisi irascerer, I am too angry to beat thee. A young man that had been brought
up with Plato, returning home to his Fathers house, Sen. de ita, lib. 3. c. 11.
and hearing his Father chide and exclaim furiously, said, I have never seen
the like with Plato. See the Note on Chap. 14.29. Anger, by being deferred, may
be diminished, so it be not concealed for a further opportunity of mischief,
as Absoloms toward Amnon, and Tiberiusses, whom the more he meditated revenge,
Lentus in meditando ubi prorapisset, etc. Tacit.
the more did time and delay sharpen it: And the farther off he threatened, the
heavier the stroke fell.

And it is his glory to pass over a transgression] Heb. To pass by it, as not
knowing of it, or not troubled at it: Thus David was deaf to the railings of
his enemies, and as a dumb man, in whose mouth are no reproofs. Socrates, when
he was publicly abused in a Comedy, laughed at it: Polyagrus vero seipsum
strangulabat, says Aelian; but Polyagrus, not able to bear such an indignity,
hanged himself. Augustus likewise did but laugh at the Satyrs and buffooneries
which they had published against him: and when the Senate would have further
informed him of them, he would not hear them. The manlier any man is, the
milder and readier to pass by an offense: this shows, that he has much of God
in him (if he do it from a right principle) who bears with our evil manners,
and forgives our trespasses, beseeching us to be reconciled. (...). Act. 13
When any provoke us, we use to say, We will be even with him: There is a
way whereby we may be not even with him, but above him, and that is, forgive
him. Wink at small faults especially. Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit vivere.
He that cannot lie, is not fit to live.

Verse. 12. The Kings wrath is at the roaring of a Lion] Heb. Of a young Lion,
which (being in his prime) roars more terribly; sets up his roar with such a
force, that he amazeth the other Creatures whom he hunteth, Ambros. He^s.
lib. 6. cap. 5.
so that (though far swifter of foot than the Lion) they have no power to fly
from him. Kings have long hands, strong clutches: Good therefore is the wise
man's counsel, Eccles. 8.2, 3, 4. See the Note on Chap. 16.14, 15.

Verse. 13. A foolish Son is the calamity of his Father] Children are certain
cares, but uncertain comforts. Let them prove never so towardly, yet there is
somewhat to do to breed them up, and bring them to good. But if they answer not
expectation, the Parents grief is unexpressible. See the Note on Chap. 10.1.
and 15.20. How many an unhappy Father is tempted to wish with Augustus, O
utinam caelebs vixissem, orbusque perissem?

And the contentions of a wife are a continual dropping] Like as a man that
has met with hard usage abroad, thinks to mend himself at home; but is no
sooner sat down there, but the rain dropping through the roof upon his head,
drives him out of doors again: Conjugium Conjurgium. De discordi conjugio
Theomistocles dixit, (...).
Such is the case of him that has a contentious wife; a far greater cross than
that of ungracious children, which yet are the Fathers calamities and
heart-breaks. Augustus had been happy if he had had no children: Sylla, if he
had had no wife. All evils, as elements, are most troublesome, when out of
their proper place, as impiety in Professors, injustice in Judges, discomfort
in a wife. This is like a tempest in the Haven, most troublesome, most
dangerous.

Verse. 14. House and riches are the inheritance of the Fathers] Viz. More
immediately. God gives them to the Parents, and they leave them to their
children, being moved thereto by God: Though a carnal heart looks no higher
than Parents, cares not so he may have it, whence he has it. It is Dos non
Deus that makes marriages with them; good enough, if goods enough; money is the
greatest medlet, and drives the bargain and business to an upsho^. Mostly, such
matches prove unhappy and uncomfortable. How can it be otherwise, since Hic
Deus nihil fecit? God indeed had a hand in it, but for their just punishment,
that so followed after lying vanities, and so forsook their own mercies.

But a prudent wife is of the Lord] Nature makes a Woman, Election a Wife; but
to be prudent, wise, and virtuous, is of the Lord. A good, wife was one of the
first real and royal gifts bestowed on Adam. God set all the creatures before
him ere he gave him a wife; that seeing no other fit help, he might prize
such a gift, not a gift of industry, but of destiny, as one says; for
Marriages are made in Heaven, as the common sort can say, and as very Heathens
acknowledge. The Governor of Eskichisar hearing Othoman the Great Turk his
relation of a fair Lady whom he was in love with, and had highly commended for
her virtues, seemed greatly to like of his choice, saying, that she was by the
divine providence appointed only for him to have. Turk. Hist. fol. 136.


Verse. 15. Slothfulness casts into a deep sleep] Sloth brings sleep, and
sleep poverty. See this excellently set forth, Chap. 6.9, 10, 11. See the Notes
there, and on chap. 10.4.

Verse. 16. He that keeps the Commandment, keeps his own soul] This is the
first fruit of shaking off sloth and sleepiness. He that stirs up himself to
take hold of God, Isa. 64.7. and to take hold of his Covenant, Isa. 56.4. to
love the name of the Lord, and to be his servant, verse. 6. to love him, and
keep his Commandments, Exodus 20.6. to do that little he does out of love, if
it be no more than to think upon his Commandments to do them, Psalm. 103.18.
this man's soul shall be bound up in the bundle of life, he shall find his
name written in the book of life. For in vitae libro scribuntur omnes qui quod
possunt, faciunt, etsi quod debeut non possunt, says Bernard. Their names are
written in Heaven who do what they can, though they cannot do what they ought.
If there be a willing mind, 2 Cor. 8.12.
God accepts, according to what a man has, not according to what he has not.
Aug. Exchir. cap. 32.
And here also, Nolentem praevenit Deus ut velit, volentem subsequitur ne
frustra velit. God that gives both to will and to do, causes his people to
keep his Commandments, Ezekiel. 36. Isa. 26.
and works all their works in them, and for them. Lex jubet, gratia juvat:
petamus ut det, quod ut habeamus jubet. Aug. in Exodus quast. 55.
The Law commands, but Grace helps; let us beg that God would make us to be
what he requires us to be.

But he that despises his waies] That is, Gods ways, chalked out in his
word. See the Note on chap. 13.13. Or, He that despises his own ways, Aut
mentem aut restim comparandum. Chrysip.
lives carelessly, and at random; walks at all adventures with God, cui vita
est incomposita, and possime morata contra gnomonem and canonem Decalogi, a
loose and lawless person, he shall dye, not a natural death only (as all do)
but spiritual and eternal. There is but an inch betwixt him and hell, which
already gapes for him, and will certainly swallow him up.

Verse. 17. He that has pity upon the poor, lends, etc.] This is a second
fruit of shaking off sloth, and working with the hands the thing that is good,
Ephesians. 4.28.
that one may have to give to him that needs. He does not give it, but lend
it, God accepts it both as (...), as a gift, and a Love, says Basil: Nay,
Orat. de Eleemos.
he lends it upon usury, Faeneratur Domino; and that to the Lord, who both
binds himself to repay, and gives us security for it under his own hand here.
He will pay him again to be sure of it, (...) in Piel, he will fully and
abundantly repay him; mostly in this world, but infallibly in the world to
come. Evagrius in Cedrenus bequeathed three hundred pounds to the poor in his
Will; but took a bond beforehand of Synesius the Bishop, for the repayment of
it in another life; And the very next night, (says the history) after his
departure, appearing to him in his shape, delivered in the bond cancelled, and
fully discharged.

Verse. 18. Chasten thy Son while there is hope] See the Note on chap. 13.24.

Verse. 19. A man of great wrath shall suffer punishment] He that lays the
reins in the neck, and sets no bounds to his wrath, whether in chastising his
child, or otherwise, shall be sure to smart for it: shall bring himself and
his friends into great trouble. Such therefore as are choleric should pray
much, and prevent all occasions of wrath; as Callius and Cotis, because they
would not be stirred up to anger, burned their enemies letters before they
were read. The like did Pompey to the Letters of Sertorius, and Casar to
Pompey's Letters.

Verse. 20. Hear counsel, and receive instruction] Or, correction. Here he
directs his speech to the younger sort, and exhorts them, 1 To hear counsel,
that is, to keep the Commandment, as verse. 16. 2 To receive correction of
Parents, as verse. 18. as the only way to sound and lasting wisdom: For
Vexatio dat intellectum; Piscator ictus sapit; Quae nocent docent, etc. Or
Solomon may here bring in the Father thus lessoning his untoward child, whom
he has lashed. For to correct, and not instruct, is to snuff the Lamp, but
not pour in oil to feed it.

Verse. 21. There are many devises in a man's heart] They may purpose, but God
alone disposes of all. See the Note on chap. 16.1.9. Some think to rise by ill
principles, but it will not be. Some to be rich, but God crosses them, and
holds them to prisoners pittances, to hard meat, as we say. Some, to live
long, and to enjoy what they have gotten: but they hear, Thou fool, Luke 12.
this very night shall thy soul be taken from thee, etc. Some set themselves
to root out true Religion, to dethrone the Lord Christ, etc. But God sees and
smiles, looks and laughs, Psalm. 2. The counsel of the Lord, that shall stand
when all is done. Christ shall reign in the midst of his enemies: the stone cut
out of the mountains without hands, shall bring down the golden Image with a
vengeance, and make it like the chaff of the Summer-floor, Dan. 2.35. Sciat
Celfitudo vestra and nihil dubitet, (says Luther in a letter to the Electour
of Saxony) long aliter in coelo quam Noribergae de hoc negotio conclusum esse.
Scult. Annal.
Let your highness be sure that the Churches business is far otherwise ordered
in Heaven, than it is by the Emperor and States at Norinberg. And Gaud eo quod
Christus Dominus est; alioqui totus desperassem. I am glad that Christ is King;
for otherwise I had been utterly out of heart and hope, says holy Myconius in
a Letter to Calvin, upon the view of the Churches enemies.

Verse. 22. The desire of a man is his kindness] Or, his mercy. Many have a
great mind to be held merciful men, and vainly give out what they would do, if
they had wherewith; and perhaps they speak as they think too (this may be one
of those many devises, those variae and vanae cogitationes in the heart of a
man, verse. 21.)

But the poor man is better than a liar] For though he has nothing to give,
yet having a giving affection, he is better than a liar, that is, than such a
rich man, who before he was rich would brag what he would do if he were
rich, and yet now is a niggard.

Saturatus pernoctabit, He shall not go supperless to bed.
Verse. 23. The fear of the Lord tends to life, etc.] Life, saturity, and
security from evil (from the hurt, if not from the smart of it) are all assured
here to those that fear God. Who would not then turn spiritual purchaser? See
Chap. 22.4.

Verse. 24. A slothful man hides his hand in his bosome] The Latins say, He
wraps it in his cloak, Manum habet sub pallio.
He puts it in his pocket say we. Erewhiles we had him fast asleep; and here
going about his business, as if he were still asleep; so lazy that any the
least labor is grievous to him, he can hardly find in his heart to feed
himself, so to uphold the life of his hands, which he should maintain with the
labor of his hands, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. and with the sweat of his brows, Genesis 3.
Very sucklings get not their milk without much tugging and tyring themselves at
the Dug.

Verse. 25. Smite a scorner, and the simple will leware] Alterius perditio, tua
sit cautio, says the Wiseman. See thou another man shipwrackt? look well to
thy tackling. Poena ad paucos, etc. Let but a few be punished, and many will
be warned and wised; any will, but the scorner himself, who will not be
better, though braid in a mortar. This scorner may very well be the sluggard
mentioned in the former verse. Smite him never so much, there is no beating any
wit into him. Pharaoh was not a button the better for all that he suffered;
but Jethro taking notice of Gods heavy hand upon Pharaoh, and likewise upon the
Amalekites, was thereby converted, and became a Proselyte, as Rabbi Solomon
notes upon this Text.

Verse. 26. He that wastes his father] That spoileth, pilfereth, pillageth,
preyeth upon his father; Not so much as saying with that Scape-thrift in the
Gospel, Luke 15.
Give me the portion that falls to my share. Idleness and incorrigibleness
lead to this wickedness, as may appear by the context.

Verse. 27. Cease my son to hear the instruction] Beware of false Prophets, Mat.
7.24. See the Note there. Take heed also what books ye read; for as water
relisheth of the soil it runs through, so do the soul of the Authors that a man
reads.

Verse. 28. An ungodly witness scorneth judgement] As if he were out of the
reach of Gods rod. Eccles. 8. Psalm. 50.
And because judgment is not presently executed, therefore his heart is set in
him to do wickedly, he looks upon God as an Abbettor of his perjury. His mouth
devoureth iniquity, as some savoury morsel. But know they not that there will
be bitterness in the end? Let them but mark what follows.

Verse. 29. Judgments are prepared for scorners] For these scorners (that
promise themselves impunity) are judgments, not one, but many, not appointed
only, but prepared long since, and now ready to be executed.

CHAP. XX. Verse. 1. Wine is a mocker, etc.]
FOr (first) it mocks the Drunkard, and makes a fool of him, promising him
pleasure, Decepit ebrietas Lotum quem Sodoma non decepit. (...).
but paying him with the stinging of an Adder, and biting of a Cockatrice,
Chap. 23.32. (See the Note there.) Wine is a comfortable creature, Judge. 9.12.
one of the chief lenitives of humane miseries, as Plato calls it; but excess of
wine, 1 Pet. 4.3. is (as one well says) Blondus demon, dulce venenum, suave
peccatum; quam qui in se habet, se non habet; quam qui facit, non facit
peccatum, sed totus est peccatum. That is, a fair spoken Devil, a sweet poison,
a sin which he that has in him, has not himself, and which he that runs
into, runs not into a single sin, but is wholly turned into sin. Secondly, It
renders a man a mocker, even one of those scorners, for whom judgments are
prepared, as Solomon had said in the foregoing verse. See Hos. 7.5. Isa. 28.1.
1 Samuel 25. Abigail would not tell Nabal of his danger till he had slept out
his Drunkenness, lest she should have met which a mock, if not with a knock.

Strong drink is raging] All kind of drink that will alienate the
understanding of a man, and make him drunk; As Ale, Beer, Sider, Perry,
Metheglin, etc. Of this Pliny cries out, Hei, mira vitiorum solertia inventum
est quemadmodum aqua quoque inebriaret. Portentosum sane potionis genus! Lib.
14 cap. ult.
quasi non ad alium usum natura parens humano generi fruges dedisse videatur.
So witty is wickedness grown now, that there is a way invented to make a man
drunk with water; a monstrous kind of drink surely! as if Dame nature had
bestowed corn upon us to such a base a base. See the Note on Chap 23.29. Saint
Paul very fitly yoaketh together Drunkards, and Raylers, 1 Cor. 6.9.

And whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise] For when the wine is in, the
wit is out. They have a practice of drinking the Out's, as they call it; all
the wit out of the head, all the money out of the purse, etc. And thereby
affect the title of Roaring Boys, by a woeful Prolepsis (doubtless) here for
hereafter.

Verse. 2. The fear of a King is as the roaring of a Lion. See Chap. 16.14. and
19.12.

Verse. 3. It is an honor for a man to cease from strife] To stint it rather
than to stir it; to be first in promoting peace and seeking reconciliation, as
Abraham did in the controversy with Lot, Memento (said Aristippus to
Aeschines, Plutarch. de cohib. ira.
with whom he had a long strife) quod cum essem natu major, prior te
accesserim. Remember said he, that though I am the elder man, yet I first
sought reconciliation. I shall well remember it, said Aeschines, and whiles I
live, Laer. l. 2.
I shall acknowledge thee the better man, because I was first in falling out,
and thou art first in falling in again.

But every fool will be medling] Or mingling himself with strife; he has an
itching to be doing with it, to be quarrelling, brabling, lawing. Caesar. com.
Once it was counted ominous to commence actions, and follow suits. Now nothing
more ordinary, for every trifle, treading upon their grass, or the like. This
is as great folly, as for every slight infirmity to take Physic.

Verse. 4. The sluggard will not plow by reason of the cold] So the spiritual
sluggard either dreams of a delicacy in the ways of God (which is a great
vanity) or else if heaven be not to be had without the hardship of holiness,
Christ may keep his heaven to himself. Mat. 19.22.
The young man in the Gospel went away grieved that Christ required such things
that he could not be willing to yield to. The Hebrews have a common Proverb
amongst them; He that on the even of the Sabbath has not gathered what to
eat, shall not at all eat on the Sabbath: Meaning thereby, that none shall
reign in heaven, that has not wrought on earth. Man goes forth (says the
Psalmist) to his work, and to his labor until the evening, Psalm. 104.23. So
till the Sun of his life be set, he must be working out his salvation. This
is to work the work of him that sent us, as our Savior did. Which expression
of working a work, notes his strong intention upon it, as Jer. 18.18. to devise
devices, notes strong plotting to mischief the Prophet. So Luke 22.15. With a
desire have I desired, etc. yea how am I straightned, till it be accomplished?
Luke 12.50. Lo Christ thirsted exceedingly after our salvation, though he knew
it should cost him so dear. Is not this check to our dullness and sloth?

Verse. 5. Counsel in the heart of a man is like deep water] See Chap. 18.4. As
the red Rose, though outwardly not so fragrant, is inwardly far more cordial
than the Damask, being more thrifty of its sweetness, and reserving it in it
self: So it is with many good Christians.

But a man of understanding will draw it out] And surely this is a fine skill
to be able to pierce a man that is like a vessel full of wine, and to set him
a running.

Verse. 6. Most men will proclaim every one his own goodness] As the Kings of
Egypt would needs be called (...), Bountiful, or Benefactors; many of the
Popes Pit and Bonifacii, etc. The Turks will needs be styled the only
Musulmans, or true Believers; as Papists the only Catholics. The Swenk
feldians (Stinkfeldians, Scblussenb,
Luther called them from the ill savor of their opinions) entitled themselves
with that glorious name, The Confessors of the glory of Christ. Histor. Dav.
Georg.
David George that monstrous Heretic, that was so far from accounting
Adulteries, Fornications, Incests, etc. for being any sins, that he did
recommend them to his most perfect Scholars, as acts of grace, and
mortification, etc. yet he was wonderfully confident of the absolute truth of
his tenets, and doubted not but that the whole world would soon submit to him,
and hold with him. He wrote to Charles the Emperor, and the rest of the
States of Germany, an humble and serious admonition (as he styled it) written
by the command of the Omnipotent God, diligently to be obeyed, because it
contained those things whereupon eternal life did depend.

But a faithful man who can finde] Diaconos paucitas honorabiles fecit, says
Hierome. The paucity of pious persons makes them precious. Perraro grati
reperiuntur, says Cicero. It is hard to find a thankful man. Faithful friends
are in this age all for the most part gone in Pilgrimage, Daniels Hist.
and their return is uncertain, said the Duke of Buckingham to Bishop Morton,
in Richard the third his time.

Verse. 7. The just man walks in his integrity] Walks constantly; not for a
step or two only, Continenter ambulat.
when the good fit is upon him. See the Note on Genesis 17.1.

His children are blessed after him] Personal goodness is profitable to
posterity; yet not of merit, but of free grace, and for the promise sake; which
Jehu's children found and felt to the fourth Generation, though himself were a
wicked Idolater.

Verse. 8. A King that sits in the Throne of Judgment, etc.] Kings in their
own persons should sit and judge of causes sometimes; to take knowledge (at
least) what is done by their officers of Justice. I have seen the King of
Persia many times to alight from his horse (says a late Traveller) only to do
justice to a poor body. The Preachers Travels, by John Cartwright.
He punishes theft and manslaughter so severely, that in an age a man shall
hardly hear either of the one, or of the other.

Verse. 9. Who can say I have made my heart clean?] That can I, says the proud
Pharisee, and the Popish Justitiary. Non habeo Domine, quod mihi ignoscas; I
have nothing Lord for thee to pardon, said Isidore the Monk. When Saint Paul,
that had been in the third Heaven, complains of his inward impurities, Romans
7.15. and though he should have known no evil by himself, yet durst he not
look to be thereby justified, 1 Cor. 4.4. And holy Job could say, Job 9.30, 31.
If I wash my self with snow-water, and make my hands never so clean; yet God
would plunge him in the ditch, so that his own cloths should abhor him. And if
thou Lord should mark iniquities, says David, who should stand before thee?
Psalm. 130.3.

Verse. 10. Diverse weights, and diverse measures, etc.] See the Notes on chap.
11.1. and 16.11. Now if the very weights and measures are abomination, how much
more the men that make use of them? And what shall become of such as measure to
themselves a whole six days, but curtal Gods seventh, or mis-imploy it?

Verse. 11. Even a child is known by his doings, etc.] Either for the better,
as we see in young Joseph, Sampson, Samuel, Solomon, Timothy, Athanasius,
Origin, etc. It is not a young Saint, an old Devil; but a young Saint, an old
Angel: Or for the worse, as Canaan the son of Ham (who is therefore cursed with
his Father, because (probably) he had a hand in the sin,) Ismael, Esau,
Vajezatha, the youngest son of Haman, Esth. 10.9. Hebricians observe, that in
the Hebrew this youths name is written with a little Zain, Amama.
but a great Vau, to show, that though the youngest, yet he was the most
malicious against the Jews, of all the ten. Early sharp, say we, that will be
thorn.

Verse. 12. The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, etc.] There are that have ears
to hear, and hear not; that have eyes to see, and see not: for they are a
rebellious house, Ezekiel. 12.2. Now when God shall say to such, as Isa. 42.18.
Hear ye deaf, and look ye blind, that you may see; when he shall give them
an obedient ear, and a Scripture-searching eye, senses habitually exercised to
discern both good and evil, Heb. 5.14. so that they hear a voice behind them,
saying, This is the way, etc. and they see him that is invisible, as Moses:
then is it with them as it is written, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, etc.
i. e. Natural eye never saw, natural ear never heard such things; 1 Cor. 2.9, 10
But God has revealed them to us by his Spirit.

Verse. 13. Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty] In sleep there is no use
either of sight or hearing, or any other sense. And as little is there of the
Spiritual senses in the sleep of sin, Zach. 4.1. It fared with the good Prophet
as with a drowsy Person, who though awake and set to work, yet was ready to
sleep at it; and Peter, James, and John, if the Spirit hold not up their eyes,
may be in danger to fall asleep at their prayers, Matthew. 26. and so fall into
Spiritual poverty: for if Prayer stands still, the whole trade of Godliness
stands still. And a powerless Prayer, proceeding from a spirit of sloth, joined
with presumption, makes the best men liable to punishment for profaning Gods
Name: so that he may justly let them fall into some sin, which shall awaken
them with smart enough. See chap. 19.15. with the Note.

Verse. 14. It is naught, it is naught, says the buyer] Or, says the
possessour; and so Melancthon reads it: as taxing that common fault and folly
of slighting present mercies, but desiring and commending them when they are
lost. Virtutem incolumem odimus, sublatam ex oculis quarimus invidi, Israel
despised the pleasant land, Psalm. 106.24. and the precious Manna, Numb. 11.6.
and Solomon's gentle Government, 1 King. 12.4. Our corrupt nature weighs not
good things till we want them; as the eye sees nothing that lies upon it.

Verse. 15. There is gold and a multitude of rubies] Quintilian defines an
Orator, Vir bonus, dicendi peritus. A good man, (...).
that can deliver himself in good language. Such a master of speech was St.
Paul, who was therefore by those Heathen Lystrians called Mercury, because he
was the chief Speaker, Acts 14.12. Such before him was the Prophet Isaiah, and
our Savior Christ, who spoke as never man spoke, his enemies themselves being
Judges. Such after him was Chrysostom, Basil, Nazianzen, famous for their holy
eloquence. So were Mr. Rogers and Mr* Bradford Martyrs: in whom it was hard to
say, whether there were more force of eloquence and utterance in preaching,
Act. and Mon. fol. 1782. Justin. lib. 1.
or more holiness of life and conversation, says Mr. Fox. Now it Darius could
say, that he preferred one Zopyrus before ten Babylons: And if when one desired
to see Alexanders Treasures and his Jewels, he bade his Servants show him not
(...), but (...), not his talents of silver, and such other precious things,
but his friends: Liban. exemplar. Progym. Chri. 1.
What an invaluable Price think we does the King of Heaven set upon such
learned Scribes, as do out of the good treasure of their hearts, throw forth
good things for the use of many?

Verse. 16. Take his garment] and so provide for their own indemnity. See the
notes on chap. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

And take a pledge of him for a strange woman] i. e. for a Whorish woman,
utcunque tibi sit cog nita, vel etiam cognata. He that will undertake for such
a ones debts, or run in debt to gratify her, should be carefully looked to,
and not trusted without a sufficient pawn. Eusebius. in vit. Constant.
How can he be faithful to me that is unfaithful to God? said Constantinus
Chlorus to his Courtiers and Counselors?

Verse. 17. Bread of deceit is sweet to a man] Sins murthering-morsels will
deceive those that devour them. There is a deceitfulness in all sin, Heb.
3.13. a lie in all vanity, Jer. 2.8. The stolen waters of adultery are sweet,
Prove. 9.17. but bitterness in the end: such sweet meat has sour sauce.
Commodities craftily or cruelly compassed, yield a great deal of content for
present. But when the unconscionable Cormorant has swallowed down such riches,
he shall vomit them up again; God shall cast them out of his belly, Joh. 20.15.
Either by remorse and restitution in the mean time, or with despair and
impenitent horror hereafter.

His mouth shall be filled with gravel] Pane lapidoso, as Seneca has it, with
grit and gravel, to the torment of the teeth, that is, terror of the
Conscience, and torture of the whole man. Such a bitter-sweet was Adams Apple,
Esaus mess, the Israelites Quails, Jonathans Honey, the Amalekites Cates after
the sack of Ziklag, 1 Samuel 30.16. Adonijahs Dainties, 1 King. 1. which ended in
horror; ever after the meal is ended, comes the reckoning. Men must not think
to dine with the Devil, and then to sup with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the
Kingdom of Heaven: to feed upon the poison of Asps, and yet that the Vipers
tongue shall not slay them, Job 20.16. When the Aspe stings a man, it does
first tickle him, so as it makes him laugh, till the poison by little and
little gets to the heart, Speed in Q. Elizah.
and then it pains him more than ever it delighted him. So does sin. At
Alvolana in Portugal three miles from Lisbon, many of our English Soldiers
under the Earl of Essex perished, by eating of Honey, purposely left in the
houses, and spiced with poison, as it was thought. And how the treacherous
Greeks destroyed many of the Western Christians, French and English, marching
toward the Holy Land, by selling them meal mingled with Lime, is well known out
of the Turkish History.

Verse. 18. Every purpose is established by counsel] That thy proceedings be
not either unconstant or uncomfortable, Deliberandum est diu quod statuendum
est semel.
deliberate long ere thou resolve on any enterprise. Advise with God
especially, who has said, Woe be to the rebellious children that take
counsel, but not of me, etc. Isa. 30.1. David had able Counselors about him:
but those he most esteemed and made use of, were Gods testimonies, Psalm.
119.24. Thy testimonies also are my delight, and the men of my counsel. Princes
had learned men ever with them, called (...) Remembrancers, Monitors,
Counselors, as Themistocles had his Anaxagoras, Alexander his Aristotle,
Scipio his Panaetius and Polybius: of which latter Pausanias testifies,
Pasuan. lib. 8.
that he was so great a Politician, that what he advised never miscarried. But
that is very remarkable that Gellius reports of Scipio Africanus, that it was
his custom before day to go into the Capitol in cellam Jevis, and there to
stay a great while, quasi consultans de Rep. cum Jove, as if he were there
advising with his God concerning the Commonwealth: Gell. lib. 7.
Whence it was that his deeds were pleraque admiranda, admirable for the most
part, says the Author. But we have a better example: David in all his
streights went to ask counsel of the Lord, 1 Cor. 1.30. Isa. 9.6.
who answered him. Do we so, and God will not fail us, for he has made Christ
wisdom unto us, and a wonderful Counselor.

And with good advice make warre] Ahab in this might have been a Precedent to
good Josiah. He would not go against Ramoth-Gilead, till he had first advised
with his false Prophets. But that other Peerless Prince, though the famous
Prophet Jeremy was then living, and Zephaniah, and a whole College of Seers,
yet he does not so much as once send out of doors to ask, shall I go up
against the King of Egypt? Sometimes both grace and wit are asleep in the
holiest and wariest breasts. The Soldiers rule among the Romans was, Non
sequi, Vege^. l. 1. c. 17 Lucian.
non fugere bellum: Neither to fly, nor to follow after war. The Christian
Motto is, Nec temore nec timide, be neither temerarious nor timorous. And
that is a very true saying of the Greek Poet, Lucian.
(...)
(...).


Verse. 19. He that goes about as a Tale-bearer] Therefore make not such of thy
counsel: For if they can give counsel, yet they can keep none. See the note on
chap. 11.13.

Therefore meddle not with him that flattereth] Tale-carriers and flatterers
are neither of them fit Counselors. These will say as you say, be it right or
wrong; those will tell abroad all that you say, and more, too to do you a
mischief. The good Emperor Aurelius was even bought and sold by such evil
Counselors. And Augustus complained when Varus was dead, that he had none now
left, that would deal plainly and faithfully; with him.

Verse. 20. Who so curses his father, etc.] See the Notes on Exodus 21.17. and
on Mat. 15.4. Parents usually give their children sweet and savoury counsel;
but they, for want of grace, listen rather to flatterers and whisperers,
vilipending their Parents advice, and vilifying them for the same, as Elies
sons did.

His lamp shall be put out in obscure darkness] Heb. In blackness of darkness.
These are those raging waves of the Sea, foaming out their own shame, -- to
whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever, Jude 13. An exquisite
torment, such are sure of in hell, whom the Holy Ghost curses in such
emphatical manner, in such exquisite terms; Besides the extreme misery they
are likely here to meet with, who when they ought to be a lamp to their
parents, 1 King. 15.4. (as Abner was, or by his name should have been) do seek
to put out their lamp, to cast a slur upon them, and to quench their coal that
is left, as she said, 2 Samuel 14.7. It may very well be that the temporal
judgment here threatened, is, that such a graceless child shall dye childless,
and that there shall be Nullus cui lampada tradat.

Verse. 21. An inheritance may be gotten hastily, etc.] By wishing and working
the death of Parents, or by any other evil arts whatsoever. See an instance
hereof in Achan, Achab, Gehezi, Adonijah his leaping into the Throne without
his Fathers leave. Jehoahaz also, the younger son of Josiah, would needs be
King after his Father, putting by his eldest brother Jehoiakim; but he was
soon put down again, and put into bands by Pharaoh Necho, 2 King. 23. He
pourtrayed the Ambitionist to the life, that pictured him snatching at a Crown,
and falling, with this Motto, Sic mea fata sequor.

Verse. 22. Say not thou, I will recompense evil] Much less, swear it, as some
miscreants do: to whom, Est vindicta bonum, and vita dulcius ipsa. In reason,
tallying of injuries is but justice. It is the first office of justice (says
Tully) to hurt no body, unless first provoked by injury. Whereupon Lactantius,
O quam simplicem veramque sententiam (says he) duorum verborum adjectione
corrupit! O what a dainty sentence marred the Orator by adding those two last
words! How much better Seneca! immane verbum est ultio. Non minus mali est
injuriam refer quam infer. La et. Instit. l. 6. c. 20.
Revenge is a base word, but a worse deed; it being no less an offense to
requite an injury, than to offer it, as Lactantius has it. The mild and milken
man (as his name speaks him) was such an enemy to revenge, that he dislikes
the waging either of law, or of war with any that have wronged us. Wherein
though I cannot be of his mind, yet I am clearly of opinion, that not revenge
but right should be sought in both. Neither can I hold it valor, but
rashness, in our Richard the first, who being told as he sat at supper, that
the French King had besiedged his Town of Vernoil in Normandy, protested, that
he would not turn his back until he had confronted the French; and thereupon
he caused the wall of his palace that was before him to be broken down toward
the South, and poasted to the Seacoast immediately into Normandy.

But wait on the Lord] Who claims vengeance as his, Deuteronomy. 32.35. Romans 12.19.
(See the Notes there) and will strike in for the patient, as he did Number. 12.2.
While Moses is dumb, God speaks; deaf, God hears and stirs. Make, God your
Chancellor, in case no law will relieve, and you shall do your selves no
disservice. If compelled to go a mile, rather than revenge, go two; yea, as far
as the shoes of the preparation of the Gospel of peace will carry you, and God
will bring you back with everlasting joy, Isa. 35.10. This is the way to be
even with him that wrongs you, nay to be above him.

Verse. 23. Diverse weights are an abomination] In righting and revenging
themselves men are apt to weigh things in an uneven balance, to be
overpartial in their own cause, and to judge that an heinous offense in
another, that is scarce blameworthy in themselves. It is best therefore to lay
down all injuries at Gods feet, who will be sure to give a just recompense to
every transgression, Heb. 2.2. and will else turn his wrath from our enemies to
us, for our diverse weights and false balances. See the Note on verse 10. of
this Chapter.

Verse. 24. Man's goings are of the Lord] See the Notes on Chap. 16.1, 9. God
brought Paul to Rome by a way that he little dreamed of. Austin once
traveling lost his way, Aug. in Enchirid. ad Laurent. cap. 17.
and fetching a compass came safe to the place he intended; whereas had he
kept the right way, he had been caught by an armed band of the Donatists that
lay in wait for him. The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, Psalm.
37.23. and he finds himself sometimes crossed with a blessing: As when Isabel
Queen of England was to repass from Zeland into this Kingdom with an Army, in
favor of her son against her husband, she had utterly been cast away, had
she come to the port intended, being there expected by her enemies; but
Providence (against her will) brought her to another place where she safely
landed. Good therefore, and worthy of all acceptance is the Wise-mans counsel,
In all thy ways acknowledge GOD, and he shall direct thy path, Prove. 3.6. See
the Note there.

Verse. 25. It is a snare to a man who devoureth, etc.] He does as a fish that
swallows the hook, as the Eagle that stole the flesh from the Altar with a coal
sticking to it, that set the whole nest on fire, etc. What a sad end befell
Cardinal Wolsey, Act. and Mon.
whilst he sought more to please the King than God, as himself said? And what
a revenging hand of God pursued his five chief Agents that were most
instrumental for him in that sacrilegious enterprise? One of them killed his
fellow in a duel, and was hanged for it. A third drowned himself in a Well. A
fourth fell from a great estate to extreme beggary. Dr. Allen (the last and
chiefest of them) being Archbishop of Dublin, was cruelly slain by his
enemies. Scult. Annal. tom. 2. p. 332.
Utinam his and similibus exemplis edocti discant homines res semel Deo
consecratas timide attrectare! says Scultetus, who relates this story; I would
men would take heed by these and the like examples how they meddle with things
once consecrated to God. If Divine Justice so severly punished those that
converted Church goods (though not so well administered) to better uses,
doubtless, because they did it out of selfish and sinful principles and
intentions; what shall become of such as take all occasions to rob God, that
they may enrich themselves? Luth. in Genesis 47
Spoliantur parochiae and Scholae non aliter ac fi fame necare nos velint,
says Luther, Parishes and Schools are polled and robbed of their mantenance,
as if they meant to starve us all.

And aftervews to make inquiry] viz. How he may devour that tid bit without
kecking, and not find it hard meat on his conscience. But a man may easily eat
that on earth, Speeds Chron. fol. 826.
that he shall have time enough to digest in hell. The fear of this made Queen
Mary restore again all Ecclesiastical livings assumed to the Crown, saying,
that she set more by the salvation of her own soul, than she did by ten
Kingdoms. Ibid. 496.
And upon the like motive King Lewis of France (about the year 1152.) cast the
Popes Bulls (whereby he required the fruits of vacancies of all Cathedral
Churches of France) into the fire, saying, He had rather the Popes Bulls
should roast in the fire, than his own soul should fry in hell.

Verse. 26. A wise King scatters the wicked] Dreins the Country of them by his
just severity, yet with due discretion, as appears by the latter words, and
brings the wheel over them, Blunts Voyage page 12. Zevecat. in observe. polit.
compared with Isa. 28.27, 28. The Turks justice will rather cut off two
innocent men, than let one offender escape. The Venetians punish with death
whosoever shall mis-imploy a penny of the public stock to his own private
profit. Durescite, durescite, o infoelix Lantgravic, said the poor Smith to the
Lantgrave of Thuring, that was more mild than was for his peoples good. The
sword of Justice must, I confels, be furbushed with the oil of mercy; but yet
there are cases wherein severity ought to cast the scale.

Verse. 27. The spirit of a man is the candle of the Lord] Some read it, The
breath of a man, that is, his life, is the candle of the Lord, and sense it
thus Look how men deal by their Lights or Lamps, so does God by our Lives; Some
we put out as soon as lighted: others we let alone till half wasted, and others
again till Wax, and Week, and all be consumed. So some dye younger, some older,
as God pleases. But the word Neshamah here used, as it holds affinity with the
Hebrew Shamajim Heaven, so it does with the Latin word Men's the Mind, or
reasonable Soul, which indeed is that light that is in us, by an excellency,
Matthew. 6.23. that spirit of a man that knows the things of a man, 1 Cor. 2.11.
that candle that is in a man's belly or body, as in a Lanthorn, making the least
more perspicuous. This is true by a specialty of that Divine faculty of the
Soul, Conscience, which is frequently called the Spirit of a man, as being
planted of God in all and every part of the reasonable Soul; where she
produces occasionally several operations, being the Souls Schoolmaster.
Monitor, and Domestical Preacher; Gods spy, and Man's over-seer; the principal
Commander, and chief Controuler of all his doings and desires.

Conscia men's ut cuique sua est, ita concipit intra Ovid.

Pectora pro facto spemque metumque suo.
Surely it is a most Celestial gift (says one.) It is so of God and in man,
Bifeild on 1 Pet. 2.
that it is a kind of middle thing betwixt God and man; less than God, and yet
above man. Huet. of Conf.
It may be called our God (says another) in the sense that Moses was Pharaohs:
having power to control and avenge our disobediences, with greater Plagues
than ever Moses brought on Egypt. Auson.
Therefore that was no evil counsel of the Poet. -- Imprimis reverere teipsum.
And, Turpe quid ausurus, te, sine test, time.

Verse. 28. Mercy and truth preserve the King] These are the best guard of his
Body, and supporters of his Throne. Mildness and righteousness, leuity and
fidelity do more safeguard a Prince than munitions of rocks, or any warlike
preparations: amidst which Henry the fourth of France perished, when Queen
Elizabeth of England lived and dyed with glory. That French King being
persuaded by the Duke of Sully not to re-admit the Jesuits, answered; Give me
then security for my life. But he was shortly after stabbed to death by their
instigation: when our Queen, that stuck fast to her Principles, was not more
loved of her Friends than feared of her Foes, being protected by God beyond
expectation. Our King John thought to strengthen himself by gathering money, the
sinews of War: but meanwhile he lost his peoples affections, those joints of
peace, and came after endless turmoyls to an unhappy end. So did our late
Sovereign of bleeding memory.

Verse. 29. The glory of young men is their strength] sc. If well used, in
following their Callings, and fighting for their Countries, as those young men
of the Princes of the Provinces did, 1 King. 20.20. and not in quarrelling and
Duelling, as those yongsters of Helketh-hezzurim, 2 Samuel 2.
who sheathed their swords in their fellows bowels.

And the beauty of old men is their gray-head] That silver crown of hoary hairs
(says one) which the finger of God does set upon their heads, makes them
Venerable in all places where they come: so that they carry an authority or
majesty with them, as it were. See the Note on chap. 16.31.

Verse. 30. The blownesse of the wound cleanseth] Some must be beaten black and
blew, ere they will be better: neither is wit any thing worth with them till
they have paid well for it. The Jews were ever best when in worst condition.
The Athenians, Non nisi atrati, would never mend till they were in mourning.
And, Anglica geus est optima fleus, and pessima rident,

As a great Statesman said of this Nation. Physicians commonly cure a
Lethargy by a Fever. Chirurgians let their Patients blood sometimes, etiam ad
deliquium animae. The Scorpion heals his own wounds: and the Viper being beaten
and applied cures his own biting. Surely as the scourging of the garment with a
stick, beats out the mothes and the dust: so do corrections corruptions from
the heart; and as launcing lets out filth, so does affliction sin.

CHAP. XXI. Verse 1. The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord]
BE Kings never so absolute, and unaccountable to any, yet are they ruled and
overruled by Him that is higher than the highest, Eccles. 5.8. Gods heart is
not in the Kings hand, as that foolish Prince in Mexico pretends, when at his
Coronation he swears that it shall not rain unseasonably, neither shall there
be Famine or Pestilence during his Reign in his Dominions: but the Kings heart,
that is, his will, desires, devices, resolutions, are Gods to dispose of; he
turns them this way or that way, with as much ease as the Plowman does the
watercourse with his paddle, or the Gardener with his hand. Thus he turned the
heart of Pharaoh to Joseph, of Saul to David, of Nebuchadnezzar to Jeremy, of
Darius to Daniel, of Cyrus (and afterward of Alexander the great) to the
Jews, of some of the Roman Persecutors to the Primitive Christians, and of
Charles the fifth (who ruled over twenty eight flourishing Kingdoms) to the late
Reformers, Melanchthon, Pomeran, and other famous men of God: whom when he had
in his power (after he had conquered the Protestant Princes) he not only
determined not any thing extremely against them, Act. and Mon. fol. 1784.
but also entreating them gently, he sent them away, not so much as once
forbidding them to publish openly the Doctrine that they professed: albeit all
Christendom had not a more prudent Prince than he was (says Mr. Fox) nor the
Church of Christ almost a sorer enemy.

Verse. 2. Every way of a man is right in his own eyes] See the Note on chap.
16.2. Such is our sinful Self-love, that Suffenus-like we easily admire that
little Nothing of any good that is in us: we so clasp and hugg the barn of our
own brain, with the Ape, that we strangle it: we set up a Counter for a
thousand pounds; and boast of those graces whereunto we are perfect strangers.
We turn the perspective, and gladly see our selves bigger, others lesser than
they are: we flatter out own souls, as Micah did his, Judge. 17.13. Wherein it
falls out often as it did with the riflers of Semiramis her tomb, who where they
expected to find the richest Treasure, met with a deadly Poison. Seem we
never so just, because first in our own cause, God (as Solomon says of a man's
Neighbor) comes and searches us, and then things appears otherwise. Luke 16.15.

Verse. 3. Is more acceptable to the Lord] Qui non vult ex rapina holocaustum,
as Heathens could see and say, by the light of Nature. The Jews thought to
expiate their miscarriages toward men, and to set off with God, by their
Ceremonies and Sacrifices, Isa. 1. Jer. 7. Mich. 6. Some Heathens also (as that
Roman Emperor) could say, Non sic Deos coluimus ut ille nos vinceret, We have
not been at so much charge with the gods, that they should give us up into the
enemies hands. But the Scripture gave the Jews to understand, that to obey was
better than sacrifice, that God would have mercy and not sacrifice, and that
for a man to love God above all, and his Neighbor as himself, is more than all
whole Burnt-offerings and sacrifices, Mar. 12.33. The Heathens also were told
as much by their Sages, as Plato in his book entitled, (...): where Socrates
reprehending the gilt-horned Bulls of the Grecians, and the sumptuous
sacrifices of the Trojans, at length infers: (...), etc. It were a grievous
thing if the gods should more respect men's offerings and Sacrifices than the
holiness of their hearts, and the righteousness of their lives, etc. Aristotle
in his Rhetoricks, (...), etc. says he: It is not likely that God takes
pleasure in the costliness of sacrifices, but rather in the good conversation
of the sacrificers.

Verse. 4. An high look, and proud heart] See the Note on Prove. 6.17.

And the plowing of the wicked is sin] As they plot and plow mischief (being
the Devils hindes and drudges) so all their actions natural, moral, spiritual,
are turned into sin; whether they plow, or play, or pray, or eat, or sleep, to
the impure and unbeleeving all things are impure, Tit. 1.15. Their proud or
bigswoln heart is full of filthy corrupt matter, that woozeth out still and
offends the eyes of Gods glory. Every thing they do is as an evil vapor
reaking from that loathsome dunghill, worse than those that came up from the
five Cities of the plain. Pride is like Copress, which will turn wine or milk
into Ink; or leaven, which turns a very Passover into pollution; or as the
Sanies of a plaguesor, which will render the richest Robe infectious.

Verse. 5. The thoughts of the diligent tend only, etc.] The word rendered
diligent, signifies one that is sedulous and sollicitous in his business, that
weighs circumstances, and waits opportunities, that sits down first, Qui res
omnes suas ordina facit loco and tempore, etc. Cujus limitatae and velut
judicio decisae actiones omnes. Mercer.
and counts his costs. Luke 12.28. that considers seriously, and then executes
speedily: Such an one was Abraham's servant, Genesis 24. Joseph, Boaz, Daniel. And
how should such a man choose but thrive? See the Note on Chapter 10.4. A
sufficiency he is sure of, though not of a superfluity.

But of every one that is hasty] And headlong; that resolving to be rich,
graspeth greedily all he can come at, accounting all good fish that comes to
hand, and not sticking at any injustice or cruelty that may make for his
advantage. The beggar will catch this man ere long, the usurer will get him
into his clutches, and leave him never a feather to fly with. There is a curse
upon such precipitate practices, though men be never so industrious, as in
Jehoiachim, Jer. 22. and Saul, 1 Samuel 14. Those that making more haste than
good speed to be rich, reach at things too high for them (which David would
not do, Psalm. 131.1.) may be likened to the Panther, which loves the dung of
man so much, as if it be hanged a height from it, it will skip and leap up,
and never leave, till it have burst it self in pieces to get it.

Verse. 6. The getting of treasures by a lying tongue] As do Seducers,
Sycophants, Flatterers, corrupt Judges (that say with shame Give ye) mercenary
pleaders (that sell both their tongues and silence, and help their Clients
causes as the Wolf did the sheep of his cough, by sucking his blood) witnesses
of the post (that can lend an oath, as Jezabels hired Rake-hels did, and will
not stick to swear (if they may be well paid for it) that their friend or so
was at Rome and at Interamna both at once) false Chapmen, that say the best of
their worst commodities, and cheat the unwary buyer. These and the like, though
for a while they may thrive and ruffle, yet in the end they prosper not, but
perish with their wealth, as the Toad does with his mouth full of earth. God
blows upon their cursed hoards of evil-gotten goods, scatterinrg them as chaff
before the wind: Destruction also dogs them at the heels, both temporal and
eternal. This they are said to seek, sc. eventually, though not intentionally;
they seek it, because they not only walk in the way to it, but run and fly
with posthaste, as if they were afraid that they should come too late, or that
hell should be full before they got thither. Thus Balaams Ass never carries
him fast enough after the wages of wickedness. Set but a wedge of gold before
Achan, and Joshuah, that could stop the Sun in his course, cannot stay him from
fingering of it. Judas in selling his Master, what he does, does quickly. But
with what issue? What got Balaam but a sword in his ribs? Achan, but the stones
about his ears? Judas, but the halter about his neck? besides a worse thing in
another world. Thus many a wretched worldling spins a fair thread to strangle
himself both temporally and eternally; by covetousness they not only kill
others, Prove. 1.19. but desperately drown themselves in perdition and
destruction, 1 Timothy 6.9. Fuge ergo, dives, ejufmodi exitum (as St. Ambrose
concludes the story of Ahabs and Jezabels fearful end) sed fugies ejusmodi
exitum si fugeris hujusmodi flagitium. Fly, O rich miser, such an end. Such an
end you shall avoid, if you carefully fly from such sinful courses.

Verse. 7. The robbery of the wicked shall destroy them] Heb. Shall saw them,
that is, shall bring upon them exquisite and extreme torments, such as the
Prophet Isaiah, and those Martyrs, Heb. 11.37. were put unto unjustly; such as
Agag suffered justly, and those barbarous Ammorites, 2 Samuel 12.31. Some render
it, dissecabit eos, shall cut them in twain, as that evil servant, Luke 12.46.
and those blasphemers of Daniels God, Dan. 3.29. Others render it, shall abide
upon them, or dwell with them. Their ill-gotten goods vanish, but their
punishment remains: Their stolen venison is soon eaten up, but the shot is not
yet paid, there is a sad reckoning behind; God will rake out of their bellies
those tid bits, those murdering morsels. Besides that, for their last dish is
served up astonishment and fearful expectation of just revenge. The Hebrew word
here translated destroy, signifies also to terrify and fear; They shall be a
Magormissabib to themselves, Dio in Sever.
as Pashur was, Jer. 20.3, 4. running from chamber to chamber to hide from the
hand of Justice (as that notable thief Bulas in the days of Severus the
Emperor) but they shall not escape, their sin will find them out; God will
pour upon them, and not spare, whether they be private thieves, Gell. lib. 11.
cap. 16.
or those public robbers, qui in auro and purpura visuntur (as Cato once said)
that are clad with purple, and have gold chains about their necks; corrupt
Judges, who judge for reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous
from him. Such were Empson and Dudley in their generation. Such was Judge
Belknap in Richard the seconds days, who being about to subscribe the Articles
against proceedings of Parliament, said, there wanted but a Hurdle, Speed* 747.
a Horse, and a Halter to carry him where he might suffer for assenting to
them. And that of these public Thieves Solomon chiefly speaks here, we may
well think by the following clause, showing the cause of their sore and sharp
punishment, because they refuse to do judgment.

Verse. 8. The way of man is froward and strange] And therefore strange, because
froward, various and voluble; so that you know not where to have him, he is so
unconstant, nor what to make of him, he is so uncertain, and unsettled;
double-minded, Jam. 1.8. double-tongued, 1 Timothy 3.8. versut ulus and
versatilis, Qui tantum constans in levitate sua.

Folieta Galeazo reports of Sfortia Duke of Millain, that he was a very
Monster, made up and compact of Virtue and Vice. Such of old were Alcibiades,
and likewise Julian the Apostate, of whom Marcellinus says, that by his
vicious errors Obnubilabat gloriae multiplices cursus, he stained his many
praiseworthy parts and practices* Galba, and our Richard the third, are said
to have been bad men, good Princes. And of King Henry the eighth, says Mr.
Camden, Fuerunt quidem in eo rege magnae virtutes, nec minora vitia, confuso
quodam temperamento mixtae, that is, there was a strange mixture of great
Virtues, and no less Vices found in this King.

But as for the pure, his work is right] For why? He works by rule; and
therefore all his actions are uniform; He is also one and the same in all
estates of life, 2 Cor. 1.17, 18
as gold is purged in the fire, shines in the water. Did I use lightness?
(says St. Paul) or is therewith me, Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay? No, But as God is
true, so our word toward you was not Yea and Nay. I did not say, and unsay; do,
and undo, etc.

Verse. 9. It is better to dwell in a corner of the house-top] Their house-tops
were made flat by order of the Law. The sense is then, A man had better abide
abroad, sub dio, exposed to wind and weather, yea to crowd into a corner, and
to live in a Little-ease, than to cohabit in a convenient house with a
contentious woman, that is ever brawling and brangling, that turns conjugium
into conjurgium by inserting the Dogs letter (r) and leading her husband a Dogs
life. Such a one was Zillah, Peninnah, Xantippe, the wife of Phoroneus the Law
giver, Bruson. lib. 7. cap. 22.
who upon his deathbed told his brother, He had been a man happy if he had
never married. Aristotle affirms, that he that has miscarried in a wife,
Arist. in Rhet.
has lost more than half the happiness of his life. Rubius Celer, and Albutius
Tertius were held happy among the Romans, because the former had lived with a
wife three and forty years, and eight months, the latter five and twenty years,
sine querela, without quarrelling or contending. And this they gave order
should be engraven upon their Grave-stones. See the Note on Prove. 19.13.

Verse. 10. The soul of the wicked desires evil] Sinful self-love (the
choakweed of all true love) prompteth the wicked man to envy the good, and wish
the evil of all but himself. Hard-hearted he is, and inhumane, unless it be
in a qualm of kindness (as Saul to David, the Egyptians to the Israelites) or
merely in dissimulation, as John Oneale father to the Earl of Tyrone, Camd.
Elis.
that Rebel, 1598. inscribed himself in all places, I am great John Oneale,
friend to the Queen of England, and foe to all the world. (...), said one
wicked Emperor, (...), said another, striving to outvie him, Dio.
When I dye, let the world be confounded. Nay, whilst I live let it be so,
said the other Monster.

His neighbor finds no favor in his eyes] Whether he sink or swim, it is no
part of his care. What cares that churl Nabal, though worthy David dye at his
door, so long as himself sits warm within, feeding on the fat, and drinking of
the sweet? The Priests and the Levites saw the wounded man that lay half dead,
and lent him no help; It was well they fell not upon him and dispatched him, as
dogs fall upon a man that is down; or as when a Deer is shot, the rest of the
Herd push him out of their company. Such cruel beasts David complains of, Psalm.
69.26. And such fierce salvages St. Paul foretells shall be in these last and
worst days. Hard hearts shall make hard times, 2 Timothy 3.3.

Verse. 11. When the scorner is punished, etc.] See the Note on Prove. 19.25.

And when the wise is instructed] Or, when he accurately considers the wise,
and observes both their integrity and their prosperity by Gods blessing
thereupon (for the word imports both) he resolves to play the wiseman.

Verse. 12. The righteous man wisely considers, etc.] He fore-seeth its
fearful fall, and is not offended at their present prosperity* For God, he
knows, will shortly overturn it. This consideration cures hi^ of the fret, as
it did David, Psalm. 37. It does also instruct him in many points of heavenly
wisdom, as it did the Church, Isa. 26.11. 1 Cor. 10, 11. The destruction of
others should be an instruction to us, that we may wash our feet in the blood
of the wicked, Psalm. 52.6.

Verse. 13. Who so stops his ear at the cry, etc.] This was fulfilled in
Pharaoh, Haman, the rich glutton, Hatto Archbishop of Mentz, Mauricius the
Emperor, and many others, who might have better provided for their own comfort
in sickness, and other exigences, had they been more pitiful to poor people.
Whereas now, when they shall lie tossing and tumbling upon their sick beds,
roaring as Bulls, and tabring upon their breasts etc. Nah. 2.7.
God will not hear them, Men will say, It is good enough for them: All hearts,
by a Divine hand, will be strangely set off from the merciless, as it befell
Scianus.

Verse. 14. A gift in secret pacifieth anger] That is, say some, alms rightly
performed, as Matthew. 6.1. pacifieth Gods displeasure (confer Dan. 4.27.) And
the Jews at this day write this sentence of Solomon (in an abbreviature) upon
their Alms-box. This sense suits well with the verse afore-going. Buxtorf.
Synag. Jud.
But I conceive the Wise-mans drift here, is to show how prevalent gifts are
(if closely conveyed) especially (which takes away the shame of open receiving)
and what a pave they have to an amicable reconciliation. Thus Jacob pacified
Esau, Abigail David, Hezekiah the Assyrian that came up against him, 2 King.
18.24, 25. Howbeit this does not always do the deed. Our Chronicler tells us,
that the Lady de Bruise had by her virulent and railing tongue more exasperated
the fury of King John (whom she reviled as a Tyrant, and a murderer of her
husband) than could be pacified by her strange present ( viz. four hundred
Kine, Speed. 572.
and one Bull, all Milk-white, except only the ears which were red) sent unto
the Queen. See the Note on Chap. 17.8.

Verse. 15. It is joy to the just to do judgment] They love it dearly; and
therefore cannot but rejoice in it exceedingly. I rejoice at thy word, as one
that finds great spoil, Psalm. 119.162. wherein the pleasure is usually as
much as the profit. Besides, as every flower has its sweet savor: so every
good duty carries meat in the mouth, comfort in the performance. Hence the
Saints alacrity in Gods service, so far as they are spiritual. I delight in the
Law of God, Romans 7.
after the inward man, says Saint Paul, who yet but a little before complained
of a clog.

But destruction shall be to the workers of iniquity] Wicked men are great
workmen; they put themselves to no small pains in catering for the flesh to
fulfill the lusts thereof, yea and this they do with singular delight (as the
opposition implies) they weary themselves to commit iniquity, Jer. 9.5. and yet
they give not over, but lie grinding day and night in the Mill of some or other
base lust. Now what can come of this better than utter destruction: which
indeed is the just hire of the least sin, and will befall the workers of
iniquity, as sure as the coat is on their back, or the heart in their body?

Verse. 16. The man that wandreth out of the way] Let him wander while he will,
that deviateth from the truth according to godliness, he cannot possibly
wander so far as to miss of Hell. God has sworn in his wrath, that no such
vagrants shall enter into his rest, Isa: 50.11.
Psalm. 95. Nay, This shall they have of my hand, Prove. 2.18. See the Note.
they shall lie down in sorrow, they shall rest with Rephaims: if at least they
can rest in that restless resting place of hellfire, in that
Congregation-house of gehermal-giants; where is punishment withour pity,
misery without mercy, sorrow without succor, crying without comfort, mischief
without measure torments without end, and past imagination.

Verse. 17. He that loves pleasure, etc.] Luxury is attended by beggary.
Pleasure may be had, but not loved. Isaac loved Venison (a little better happily
than he should;) Esau loved hunting, hence he grew profane, and though not a
beggar, Seneca.
yet worse. The Prodigal in the Gospel spent his substance with riotous living
Luke 16.13. So did Apicius the Roman, who hearing that there were seven
hundred Crowns only remaining of a vast estate that his Father had left him,
Valor.
feared want, and hanged him. M. Livius another waste-good boasted when he
died, that he had left nothing for his heir, praeter coelum and coenum, more
than air and mire. Roger Ascham, Schoolmaster to Queen Elizabeth, Camb. Elisab.
and her Secretary for the Latin tongue, being too much addicted to dicing and
cock-fighting, lived and died a poor man.

Verse. 18. The wicked shall be a ransome] Heb. Copher, a cover, or an
expiation: as Achan was for Israel; and as those condemned persons among the
Heathens, Budaeu^.
that in time of pestilence or contagious infection, were offered up by way or
public expiation, with these words, (...). Be thou a reconciliation for us.
To this custom Saint Paul seems to allude, 1 Cor. 4.13. Thus, when Saul's sons
were hanged, Gods wrath was appeased, 2 Samuel 21. and when guilty Jonah was cast
into the Sea, all was calm. Thus God gave Egypt for Isreal's ransom: yea Seba
and Ethiopia, Isa. 43.3. And although he may seem sometimes to sell his people
for naught, and not to increase his wealth by their price, Psalm. 44.12. yet
when it comes to a critical point, I will give men for thee, and people for thy
price, Isa. 43.4. See Prove. 11.8. with the Note there.

Verse. 19. It is better to dwell in the wilderness] Among ravenous beasts, and
venomous serpents, in greatest danger, and want of all necessary accommodation.
This is so much worse than the housetop, as an angry and vexatious woman
(which like a mad dog, bites all about her, and makes them as mad as her self)
is worse than her that is not so much angry as unquiet, brawling (as Dogs bark
sometimes in the night) of custom or fancy, and not provoked by any. See supra
verse. 9.

Verse. 20. There is a treasure to be desired] He had said before, He that
loves Wine and Oil shall not be rich. Here he shows, that though these
things may not be loved or lavished, yet they may, and must be had and heaped
up in a way of good husbrandry for necessity, yea for honest affluence; that
we may not only live, but live comfortably; that we may not only have
prisoners pittance, so much as will keep us alive, but that we may have plenty
of things desirable, both for profit, as treasure, and for delight, as oil. And
these things must not be foolishly wasted (as they are usually by unthrifts)
lest that make the wife that wants, angry and unquiet, as in the former verse.

Verse. 21. He that follows after righteousness] Though (for such a measure
of it as he desires) he cannot overtake or compass it. If he be but doing
at it, Si faciat praecepta, etiamsi non perficiat, if he think upon Gods
Commandments to do them, Psalm. 103.18. If, though he cannot open the door,
yet he is lifting at the latch, he shall be accepted, yea rewarded. He that
follows after righteousness and mercy, as an Apprentice follows his Trade,
though he be not his Craftsmaster, shall surely find righteousness, with
life and honor to boot. And is not that a good thing, a treasure to be
desired?

Verse. 22. A wise man scaleth the City of the mighty] Wisdom is that (...),
that is profitable for all things; of singular and sovereign use, as in
domestic and politic, so in Military affairs and businesses. Here Prudence is
made out to be better than Puissance, and one wise man to be too hard for
many mighty, though got into the strongest Garrisons. In War wisdom is better
than strength, says Solomon more than once, Eccles. 9.16. and Chap. 7.19. How
did Archimedes hold out Syracuse against the Roman General, by his singular
skill and industry? And how many strong Cities have been scaled and surpized by
warlike wiles and stratagems? as Babylon by Cyrus first, Dio.
and afterward by Zopyrus; Jerusalem by Pompey, taking the opportunity of the
seventh day Sabbath, wherein he knew the superstitious Jews would not stir to
defend themselves, and many others that might out of Histories be instanced.

Verse. 23. Who so keeps his mouth, and his tongue] As he that keeps his
doors fast locked, preserves himself from danger: See the Note on Chap. 13.3.
The large and loose use of the tongue brings a man often to diverse straights and
miseries.

Verse. 24. Proud and haughty scorner is his name] An ill name he gets him, and
lies under the common reproach of a proud peevish person. He seeks renown by
his rage and revenge, as Lamech that vaunted of his valor this way to his
wives; Alexander Pheraeus, who consecrated the javelin wherewith he had slain
Polyphron; Caelius the Lawyer, that gloried to be held the most froward and
frample Roman alive, etc. But God loadeth such a man with disgrace, as here,
and gives him his due character. Men also will hate him, and despise him for a
son of Belial, as Nabals servants said of him; for a mad frantic fellow, being
once enraged, cares not what he says, as Jonas; what he does, as Saul, who
dealing in proud wrath, was so kindled by the Devil, that he could not be
quenched till he fell into the unquenchable lake: Besides the infamy that will
never be washed off, the brand of reproach, like that of Dathan and Abiram,
who rose up in proud wrath against Moses and Aaron, and are therefore worthily
stigmatized with a This is that Dathan, Numb. 26.9. like that other, This is
that King Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. and as we commonly say of such an one, that
he is a proud fool.

Verse. 25. The desire of the sloathful kills him] He only wishes well to
himself; but refusing to labor, pineth away in his iniquity, Lev. 26.39.
Neither grace nor wealth is had with wishing, Nemo casu fit Sapiens, Epist. 77.
says Seneca. Some have a kind of willingness and velleity, a kind of
wambling after the best things, but it does not boil up to the full height of
resolution for God.

Pers.
Virtutem exeptant, contabescuntque relicta, Carnal men care not to seek after
him whom yet they would fain find, says Bernard, Cupientes consequi sed non
and sequi; have heaven they would, but stick at the hard conditions; like faint
Chapmen, they bid money for heaven, but are loath to come up to the full price
of it. Balaam wished well to heaven, so did the young Pharisee in the Gospel,
that came to Christ hastily, but went away heavily. Herod of a long time
desired to see Christ, but never stirred out of doors to see him. Pilate asked
Christ, What is truth? but never stayed his answer. The sluggard puts out his
arm to rise, and pulls it in again, he turns upon his bed, as the door does
upon the hinges, which yet comes not off for all the turnings, but hangs still:
and this is his utter undoing. Men must not think that good things (whether
spiritual or temporal) will drop out of the clouds to them, Aemuli ipsius
dormientem pinxeram. Plut. in Sylla.
as Towns were said to come into Timotheus his toil while he slept. Now
perform the doing of it, says Saint Paul to those lazy Corinthians, 2 Cor.
8.12. A thirsty man will not only long for drink, but labor after it. A
covetous man will not only wish for wealth, but strive to compass it. Yet not
every covetous man, I confess; For in the next verse it is said of the sluggard,

Verse. 26. He coveteth greedily all day long] But these greedy constant
covetings come to nothing, he makes nothing of them. Meteors have matter
enough in the vapors themselves to carry them above the earth, but not enough
to unite them to the element of fire, therefore they fall and return to their
first principles. So is it with our wishers and woulders. Many came out of
Egypt, that never came into Canaan; And why? the Land they liked well, but
complained with those Spies, of the strength of the Anakims, and the
impossibility of the Conquest, therefore their Carcases fell in the wilderness,
their sluggishness slew them. They lusted and had not, they killed (themselves
with coveting, as in the former verse) and desired to have (as here) but could
not obtain. Jam. 4.2.

But the righteous gives and spares not] Neither necessity nor niggardise
hinders him; he has it, and he holds that he has no more than he gives.
He is both painful and pitiful; and what he cannot do for the poor himself,
he stirs up others to do, so far is he from forbidding or hindering any from
showing mercy. Some render the words thus, The righteous gives, and forbids
not. Give a portion (says he to his richer friend) to seven, and also to
eight, for thou know not what evil shall be up on the earth, Eccles. 11.2.
See the Note there.

Verse. 27. The sacrifice of the wicked, etc.] See the Note on Chap. 15.8.

How much more when he brings it, etc?] As Balaac and Balaam did, Number. 23.1,
2. As those that present ex rapina holocaustum, a sacrifice of what they have
got by rapine and robbery: And as those likewise that ask good things at Gods
hand, that they may consume them upon their lusts, Jam. 4.3. Let the wicked
bring his sacrifice with never so good an intention, he is an abomination; but
if with an evil mind, his dissembled sanctity is double iniquity: As if a man
think by observing the Sabbath to take out a license to walk licentiously all
the week long; or by praying in a morning, to get a dispensation to do evil all
day after. Mr. Shepherds Sincere convert. p. 232. Breerwood, Enquire.
I have read of one, that would haunt the Taverns, Theaters, and Whore-houses
at London all day; but he durst not go forth without private prayer in the
morning, and then would say at his departure, Now Devil do thy worst. The
Circassians are said to divide their life betwixt rapine and repentance. The
Papists (many of them) make account of confessing, as Drunkards do of vomiting.
Sands his relat. of West. Religion
When we have sinned, say they, we must confess, and when we have confessed,
we must sin again, that we may also confess again, and make work for new
indulgences and jubilees.

Verse. 28. A false witness shall perish] See the Note on Chap. 19.5. The
Scythians had a Law, that if any man did duo peccata contorquere, bind two
sins together, a Lie and an Oath, he was to lose his head, because this was
the way to take away all faith and truth amongst men.

But the man that hears, speaks constantly] He testifies confidently what
he knows assuredly; he is always also in the same tale, as Paul was in the
plea to the chief Captain, to Felix, to Festus, and to Agrippa. Not so
Bellarmine. How often does that loud Liar forget himself, and write
contradictions? As for instance, In one place he affirms, that it can by no
means be proved by Scripture, that any part of Scripture is the very word of
God. Par. in Apoc. 22.16. Bell. de verb. Dei, l. 1. c 2.
Sed mendax redarguit seipsum, says Pareus. But the Liar confutes himself, by
saying elsewhere, Besides other arguments to evince the divinity of the
Canonical Scripture, it gives sufficient testimony to it self.

Verse. 29. A wicked man hardens his face] Procaciter obfirmat vultum suum, so
the Vulgar renders it. The false witness, verse. 28. impudently defends, or at
least extenuates and excuses his falsities. Frontem perfricat, assuens
mendacium mendacio, as the Hebrew has it, Psalm. 119.69. He thinks to make
good one lie by another, to outface the truth, (...) Act. 27.
to overbear it with a bold countenance. It seems to be a metaphor from a
Traveller that sets his face against the wind and weather, and holds on his
journey, though he be taking long strides toward destruction.

But as for the upright he directs his way] He proceeds warily, weighs his
words before he utters them, and delivers nothing but the naked truth: And
truth is like our first Parents, most beautiful when naked. Some Interpreters
take this verse, as setting forth the difference between the wicked and the
godly, without any relation to the false and true witness, verse. 28. And then
it is Sententia sapiente digna, says one, Tam paucis verbis tam profundum
sensum cumulans, a sentence worthy of Solomon, as having so much in a little.

Verse. 30. There is wisdom against the Lord] That is, they are all to no
purpose. If God deny concourse and influence, the arm of humane power and
policy (as Jeroboams) shrinks up presently. See Psalm. 2.1, 2, 3. and 33.10, 11.
and 62.3. See the Note on Chap. 19.21. Excellently Gregory, Divinum consilium
dum devitatur, impletur: humana sapientia dum reluctatur, comprehenditur. Gods
decree is fulfilled, by those that have least mind to it: Humane wisdom,
whiles it strives for masteries, is over-mastered.

Verse. 31. The horse is prepared against the day, etc.] A very serviceable
creature, and in battle full of terror; so swift in service, that the Persians
dedicated him to their god, the Sun, (...), as Pausanias has it. But as the
Sun in heaven can neither be outrun, nor stopped in his race; so neither by men
(though wise) nor by means (though likely) can Gods purposes be disappointed.
An horse is a vain thing for safety; Neither shall he deliver any by his great
strength. Psalm. 33.17.

But safety (or victory) is of the Lord] He gives it to which side he
pleases; as he did to the Israelites in the conquest of Canaan, though they
had no horses to help them, as their adversaries had, and Charets too, both
Egyptians and Canaanites.

CHAP. XXII. Verse. 1. A good name is rather to be chosen]
HEb. A name, as Chap. 18.22. a wife, for a good wife (better no wife than an
ill wife, so better no name than an ill name.) This good name proceeding from a
good conscience, this honor from virtue, Isa. 43.4. this perfume of faith and
obedience, this splendour and sparkle of the white stone, which only shines
upon heavenly hearts, is far more desirable than great riches. For first, These
often take away the life of the owners thereof, Prove. 1.19. the greater wealth,
the greater spoil awaits a man; As a tree with thick and large boughs, every
man desires to lop him. Whereas a good name saves a man often from that danger,
as it did Jonathan whom the people rescued. Secondly, Riches breed and bring
their cares and cumbers with them. Qui habet terras, habet guerras, says the
Proverb: Many Law-sutes and other vexations, etc. when a good name, as a
precious ointment powered out, gets loving favor, with which it is therefore
fitly coupled in this Text. Thirdly, Riches are enjoyed but till death at
utmost; but a good name out-lives the man, and is left behind him for a
blessing, Isa. 65.15. See Prove. 10.7. with the Note there. Other people went
beyond Gods Israel in wealth and riches, but none in fame and renown, 2 Samuel
7.23. Deuteronomy. 4.6. Fourthly, Riches are often gotten by fame; let a man's name be
up, and there will be great recourse to him; But let him once crack his
credit, and riches cannot repair him: Infamy will not be bought often with
money. Lastly, Riches are common to good men with bad men; but a good name
(truly so called) is proper to Gods peculiar, confined to the Communion of
Saints. He was therefore a better husband than Divine that first called Riches
Bona, Goods: And that Heathen was nearer the truth than many profligate
professors of it, who said, Ego si bonam famam servasso, Plaut.
sat dives ero. That is, If I may but keep a good name, I have wealth enough.

And loving favor rather than silver and gold] Which what is it else but white
and red earth? And therefore no way fit to come in competition with good repute
and report among the best, such as Christ had, Luke 2.52. and Joseph, and
Daniel, and David, and Demetrius, Joh. 3.12. and they had it as a special
favor from God, who fashions men's opinions, and hides his people from the
strife of tongues, Job 5.

Verse. 2. The rich and the poor meet together] They have mutual need one of
another, and meet many times, as it were, in the midway, by an alteration of
their condition. They that were full were hired forth for bread, and the hungry
are no more hired, 1 Samuel 2.5. The mighty are put down from their seats, and
those of low degree are exalted, Luke 1.53.

The Lord is the maker of them all] The maker of the men, the maker of their
estates, and the maker of that change and alteration which often happens;
that the one might become grateful, the other humble. See Job 31.15.

Verse. 3. A prudent man foreseeth an evil, etc.] Prevision is the best means of
prevention. A wise man's eyes are in his head, Eccles. 2.14. his heart is also
at his right hand, Eccles. 10.2. The Chinese say of themselves, that all other
Nations of the world see but with one eye, they only with two. The Italians
give out, that they only do sapere ante factum, look before they leap,
forecast an evil before it befall them. But these are praises proper to them
that have learned holy and heavenly wisdom, that by certain sights and signs
discern a tempest in the clouds, and seek seasonable shelter under the hollow
of Gods hand, under the shadow of his wings. Such prudent persons were Noah,
Joseph, Jonadab, Josiah, the Christians at Pella, etc.

But the fool passes on] Pusheth on without fear or wit, as being resolved to
have his will, what ever it stand him in.

And is punished] As a just reward of his rashness. Sin ever ends tragically.
Flagitium and flagellum, ut acus and filum. Who ever waxed fierce against God
and prospered? Job 9.4.
With the froward thou will wrestle, says David, Psalm. 18.16. Upon the wicked
God shall rain snares, etc. Psalm. 11.6. And then, ut leo cassibus irretitus
dixit, sipraescivissem, as the Lion when he was caught in the Hunters toil,
said, If I had fore-known this mischief, I would have shunned it. So these
after-wits, these post-masters, these Epimetheusses shall come in (but all too
late) with their Fools Had-I-wist, which they should have timously foreseen and
prevented.

Verse. 4. By humility and the fear of the Lord] Heb. The heel of humility, etc.
The humble heart that lies low, and hearkens what God the Lord will say unto
it, that follows him trembling, as the people followed Saul, 1 Samuel 13.7. shall
have hard at the heels of it riches, a sufficiency, if not a superfluity, and
honor, which is to be chosen before riches v. 1. (See the Note there) and
life above the danger of those thorns and snares mentioned in the next verse;
not life present only, but length of days for ever and ever. Psalm. 21.4. O
the (...), the heaped up happiness of a man that humbles and trembles before
the Lord! He that does the former, cannot but do the latter; Hence that close
connection of these two graces in this Text, By humility the fear of the Lord so
the original runs without the grammatical copulative And, to show, that they go
always together, yea, the one is as it were predicated of the other; neither
want they their reward. Riches, honor, life; What things be these? Who would
not turn spiritual purchaser?

Verse. 5. Thorns and snares are in the way of the froward] In opposition to the
reward of righteousness, verse. 4. which is to say, The ungodly are not so: Or
if they have riches, they prove thorns to them to prick and choke their souls;
If honor, and long life to enjoy it, these prove snares to them. Of carnal
hearts it may be said as Pharaoh said, of the Israelites, They are entangled
in the Land, the wilderness has shut them in, Exodus 14.3. They have treasures
in the field, of Wheat, Barley, and Oil, as those ten men had, Jer. 41.8. and
are therefore loath to dye: And yet before they dye (live they never so long in
all abundance of riches and honors) God can bring them to that pass, that
Charles the fifth was at, whom of all men the world judged most happy; Philip
of Mornay reports of him, that he cursed his honors in his old age, his
victories, trophies, riches, saying, Abite hinc, abite long e. Away, away, get
you far away.

He that does keep his soul, shall be far from them] As well from the wicked
man's miseries, as his misdemeanors; he keeps aloof from both, he dares not
meddle with the hole of the Asp, lest he meet with a sting. Custos animae
elongabit se, etc. Moneo te iterumque monebo (says Lactantius to his
Demetrian) ne oblectamenta ista terrae pro magnis aut veris bonis habere te
credas: Lactant. de opifici^ Dei.
quae sunt non tantum fallacia quia dubia, verum etiam insidiosa quia dulcia.
Set not thine heart upon the Asses, since thou art in election for a Kingdom,
and the hearts of all Israel are upon thee.

Verse. 6. Train up a child in the way he should go] Or, according to his
measure and capacity, dropping good things by degrees into his narrow-mouthed
vessel, and whetting the same upon his memory by often repeating, Deuteronomy. 6.6.
Shanan and Shanah, repetere sicut in acuendo.
as the knife by often going over the whetstone (it is Moses his comparison)
becomes keen and useful; This is the way to make them expert and exact, and to
secure them from Satan, for we are not ignorant of his wiles. It is reported
of the Hearts of Scythia, that they teach their young ones to leap from bank to
bank from rock to rock, from one turf to another, by leaping before them, which
otherwise they would never practice; by which means when they are hunted, no
beast can ever take them. So if men exercise their children unto godliness
whiles they are young, Satan that mighty hunter shall never have them for his
prey: They will not be young Saints, old Devils (as the profane Proverb has
it) but young Saints, old Angels. Now as all children should be carefully
catechized, and well principled; so those Timothies especially, that are
designed to the work of the Ministry. Quintilians Orator must from two or
three years old be inured and accustomed to the best and purest words, very
well pronounced unto him, by his Nurses, Parents, Handmaids, as soon as ever
he begins to babble. Quanto id in Theologo futuro expetendum, curandumque
magis? Amama in ^^^ib.
How much more (says a learned man) should this be done by one that is to be
a Divine?

Verse. 7. The rich rules over the poor] And that with rigor, as Pharaoh did
over Israel; as those imperious Mammonists in St. James his time that oppressed
and subjugated their poorest brethren, trampling upon them with the feet of
intolerable insolency and cruelty, Jam. 2.6. Yet now our flesh is as the flesh
of our brethren, our children as their children, said those poor Jews in
Nehemiah, who pleads their cause most effectually, Chap. 5.7, 8, 9. etc. Ubi
quot verba, tot tela, quae nimirum animam divitum percellant, fodicent and
lancinent, as one says in another case; he sets upon them with irresistible
Rhetoric, and makes them restore (which yet rich oppressors are very hardly
drawn to do.) Every grain of riches has a vermin of pride and ambition in it,
1 Timothy 6.17. See the Note there. Men's blood rises together with their good,
and they think that every thing must be as they would have it. But especially
if they have drawn the poor into their nets, Psalm. 10.9. that is, into their
bonds, debts, morgages, as Chrysostom expounds it, then they not only rob,
but ravish them; to their cruelty they join dishonesty, there is neither equity
or mercy to be had at their hands.

Verse. 8. He that sows iniquity, shall reap vanity] The Usurer and cruel
Creditor sows his money, his mammon of iniquity (that ungain grain) upon his
poor debtors; and whether it be a barren year, or a fruitful, a good soil, or
a bad, Luna affert menstruos sensus, he has his constant pay, yea, his use
upon use, according to that Greek verse, (...). Now can such increase be
blessed? Shall not those that thus sow the wind, be sure to reap the whirlewind?

And the rod of his anger shall fail] That is, that tyrannical power which he
exercises upon others as his underlings, shall be broken. God will take out
of his hand the rod wherewith he has beaten his fellow servants, and waste it
upon his own back to the very stump.

Verse. 9. He that has a bountiful eye shall be blessed] How Amalec the
licking people (as the name imports) I mean the Nation of Usurers and proud
lenders shall speed, has been spoken already. Now on the other side, the
bountiful eye, the cheerful giver (as the Septuagint, and after them St. Paul,
render, (...). Sept.
or rather expound this Text) shall be abundantly blessed; for he gives with
all his heart, he draws out, not his sheaf only, but his soul to the hungry,
Isa. 58. Dat been, dat multum, quia dat cum munere vultum, he spares it out of
his own belly to give to the hungry, as some have here gathered from the word,
his bread, that which was appointed for his own eating; he voluntarily fasteth
from a meal now and then, that he may bestow it upon the needy, and he shall
not lose his reward.

Verse. 10. Cast out the scorner] Or the evil Interpreter, that construes every
thing to the worst, and so sows dissension. This is an evil instrument, and
must be cashiered good company; the place where such a Trouble-town lives,
longs for a vomit to spue him out. There is nothing that may not be taken with
either hand: It is a spiritual unmannerliness to take it with the lest (as that
proud Pharisee did, Luke 7.34.) and to cast it as an apple of contention
amongst others. They that do thus, are the pests of Families, and other
societies, and must therefore be carefully cast out with scoffing Ishmael, as
ever we desire to avoid strife, suits at Law, reproach, and many more
mischiefs.

Verse. 11. He that loves pureness of heart] That is vexed at his inward
pollutions, and affects (what he can never fully effect) to be pure as God
is pure, 1 John 3.3. He that has gotten that pure lip, Zeph. 3.9. called here
the grace of his lips, Prove. 31.26.
and elsewhere the Law of grace; He that can skill of those good words that do
ingratiate with God and man, Genesis 49.21. compared with Deuteronomy. 33.23. He is fit
to make a Courtier, a Favorite; such as was Joseph, Mordecai, Daniel, who
though he used not always verbis byssinis, soft and silken words, but
delivered heavy messages from God to Nebuchadnezzar and Belshazzar, yet God so
wrought their hearts (though Tyrants) that they greatly honored him, and
highly preferred him. And when, out of his love to pureness of heart, he chose
rather affliction than sin, to be cast to the Lions, than to bear a Lion in
his own bosom by offending his conscience: God made the Kings heart yearn
toward him, etc. So that this plain-dealing Daniel prospered in the reign of
Darius, and in the reign of Cyrus the Persian, Dan. 6.28.

Verse. 12. The eyes of the Lord preserve knowledge] That is, knowing persons:
Those in the former verse that love truth in the inward parts, and hold this a
rule, Truth must be spoken, however it be taken; these, howsoever they may
suffer for a season, as Daniel in the den, Micaiah in the stock-house, yet the
watchful providence of God will preserve them, and provide for them. He will
clear their innocence, and so plead for them in the hearts of greatest Princes,
that they shall find the truth of this divine Proverb, and the falsity of that
other so common amongst men, Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit; Flattery
gets friends, but truth hatred.

And he overthrows the words (or matters) of the transgressors] That is, of
the Court-parasites, who speak only pleasing things, and saepe leonum laudibus
murem obruunt, flatter abominably, as those Acts 12. did Herod, as the false
Prophets did Ahab. God will confute and convince their soothing words, 2 King.
21.13.
of singular vanity; he will also overthrow their matters, attempts, practices,
as a man wipeth a dish, turning it upside down. See in that claw-back
Amalekite, 2 Samuel 1.4, 5, 6. etc. in Ahitophel, Haman, Scianus, etc.

Verse. 13. The sloathful man says, There is a Lion, etc.] The Lion is not so
fiere as is painted, says the Spanish Proverb; much less this sluggards Lion,
a mere fiction of his own brain to cover and color over his idleness. He
pretends two Lions for failing; first, Leo est Foris, There is a Lion abroad,
or in the field (where his work lies, Psalm. 104.23.) and another in the
streets: A likely matter, Lions haunt not in streets, but in Woods and
Wildernesses. Here is no talk of Satan that roaring Lion, that lies couchant in
the sluggards bed with him, and prompts him to these senseless excuses. Not yet
of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who will one day send out summons for
sleepers, and tearing the very caul of their hearts in sunder, send them
packing to their place in hell, Matthew. 10. But to hell never came any yet that
had not some pretense for their coming thither. The flesh never wants excuses.
Corrupt nature needs not be taught to tell her own tale. Sin and shifting came
into the world together; and as there is no wool so coarse, but will take some
color: so no sin so gross, but admits of a defense. Sin and Satan are alike in
this, they cannot abide to appear in their own likeness. Some deal with their
souls as others deal with their bodies; when their beauty is decayed, they
desire to hide it from themselves by false glasses, and from others by
painting; so their sins from themselves by false glosses, and from others by
idle excuses.

Verse. 14. The mouth of a strange woman] Diabolus capite blanditur, venire
oblectat, cauda ligat, says Rupertus. These shee-sinners (as their stallions
call them) are most dangerous. See the Notes on Chap. 2.16. and 5.3. Solomon
had the woeful experience of it, Eccles. 7.26. and Sampson, Judge. 16. who Lenam
non potuit, potuit superare leaenam,
Quem fera non potuit vincere, vicit hera.


How did David moyl himself in this deep pit, Psalm. 57.
and there might have stuck in the mire, had not God drawn him out by a
merciful violenc and pureged him with hyssop from that abhorred filth?

He that in abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein] As the Jesuits (those
odious Connubisanchfugae Commeretricitegae) too often do; though they boast
that they can talk and dally with the fairest women without danger, and the
people must believe no otherwise, but that when they are kissing a woman, they
are giving her good counsel. David George, that execrable Heretic, was so far
from accounting Adulteries, Fornications, Incests, etc. for being any sins,
Hist. David. Georgii,
that he did recommend them to his most perfect Scholars as acts of grace and
mortification; and was confident that the whole world would submit to his
doctrine. Peccatum peccatum trabit, as the Hebrew Proverb has it. One sin
draws on another, and the latter is often a punishment of the former; God, by a
peculiar kind of revenge, (...).
delivering up such to a reprobate sense, or a mind disallowed, or abhorred of
God, as the Apostles word ( Romans 1.28.) signifies.

Verse. 15. Foolishness is bound in the heart, etc.] As a pack or fardle is
bound to an horses back. Error and folly be the knots of Satan, wherewith he
ties children to the stake to be burnt in hell. Better see their brains dashed
out against the stones (says one) than suffer the ignorance of God to abide in
their heads. Therefore that we may loose the bands of death, and works of the
Devil, Parents must bring their sons in their arms, and their daughters upon
their shoulders to the house of God, that they may learn to know him, Isa.
49.22. They must also see to their profiting, and exact of them a daily growth,
nurturing, as well as nourishing them, Ephesians. 6.4. (the one being as needful as
the other) and using the rod where words will not do; so to chase away that
evil by chastisement (seasoned with admonition, and seconded with prayer) that
else will prove pernicious to their souls. Eli brought up his sons to bring
down his house. David's sons were undone by their Fathers fondness. A fair hand,
(...).
we say, makes a foul wound. Correction is a kind of cure, says Aristotle;
and God usually blesses it to that purpose. Corrections of instructions are
the way of life, Prove. 6.23.

Verse. 16. He that oppresses the poor, etc.] By fraud or force, or any
indirect means. This man lays his foundation in fire-work, Job 20. he walks
upon a Mine of Gunpowder; brimstone is scattered upon his habitation, Job
18.15. if but a flash of Gods lightning light upon it, all will be on fire,
all blown up and brought to nothing.

And he that gives to the rich] Either to ingratiate and curry favor for
countenancing their oppressive practices; or with a mind to get more than they
give (for so says one, that clause, To increase their riches, must here be
repeated) which is a more artificial kind of selling their gifts, than if they
had professedly set them to sale, as the Greek Orator observes. Both these
take a wrong course to be rich. Isocr. ad Demon.
The way were to give to the poor, and not to oppress them, Psalm. 76.11. 1 Timothy
6.17.
and to bring presents to him that ought to be feared, since it is he alone
that gives us all things richly to enjoy.

Verse. 17. Bow down thine ear and hear] Here begins, say some Interpreters, the
third book of Solomon's Proverbs (as the second began at Chap. 10.) And indeed
he here seems to assume a new kind of bespeaking his son, different from his
discourse in the twelve preceding Chapters; and much like that in the nine
first.

And apply thy heart, etc.] q. d. Call up the ears of thy mind to the ears of
thy body, that one sound may pierce both at once; otherwise thou will be like
the Wolf in the fables thou will never attain to any more divine learning, than
to spell Pater, and when thou should come to put together, and to put thy
heart to it (as Solomon's phrase here is) instead of Pater thou will say Agum,
thy mind running a madding after profit and pleasures of the world, as has
been once before noted.

Verse. 18. For it is a pleasant thing if thou keep them within thee] Heb. In
thy belly, that is, in thine inwards. Truth it is, that St. John found the
little book he ate (whether we understand it of the Revelation only, or of
the whole Bible, which Bishop Bonners Chaplain called in scorn his little
pretty Gods-book, it much matters not) bitter in his belly, though sweet in his
mouth, Rev. 10.10. because Ministers find it grievous, to be kept from making
known the whole counsel of God to their people. But the Word of God attentively
heard, and by an after meditation well digested and incorporated into the soul,
is sweeter than honey, as David felt it; and yields more pleasure than all the
tasteless fooleries of this present world.

They shall withal be fitted in thy lips] Thou shall need no other help to
discourse: thou shall get a singular dexterity and volubility of holy language,
being able to utter thy mind in pure Scripture ( Loquamar verba Scripturae,
says that incomparable Peter Ramus, Utamur sermon Spiritus sancti, etc.) thou
shall so speak and so do, as one that must be judged by that law of liberty,
Jam. 2.12.

Verse. 19. That thy trust may be in the Lord] Only a divine word can beget a
divine faith, and herein the Scripture excells all humane writings, none of
which can bring our hearts to the obedience of faith. I can speak it by
experience says Erasmus, that there is little good to be got by the
Scripture, Erasm. Praef. in Lucam.
if a man read it cursorily and carelessly: But if he exercise himself therein
constantly and conscionably, he shall feel such a force in it, Pet. Mart.
Praf. in com. in Ep. ad Romans
as is not to be found again in any other book whatsoever. I know, says Peter
Martyr, that there are many that will never believe what we say of the power
of Gods word hidden in the heart; and not a few that will jear us, and think
we are mad for saying so. But O that they would but be pleased to make trial,
Malee mihi sit (ita enim in tanta causa jurare ausim) nisi tandem capiantur.
Let it never go well with me (for so I am bold to swear in so weighty a
business) if they find not themselves strangely taken and transformed into the
same image, if they pass not into the likeness of this heavenly pattern. The
Ephesians trusted in God so soon as they heard the word of truth, they believed
and were sealed, Ephesians. 1.13. And the Thessalonians faith was famous all the
Churches over, when once the Gospel came to them in power, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5, 8.

To thee, even to thee] Men must read the Scriptures as they do the
Statute-books, holding themselves as much concerned therein as any other,
threatening themselves in every Threat, binding themselves in every Precept,
blessing themselves in every Promise, resolving to obey God in all things: as
convinced of this, that these are verba vivenda, non legenda, words to be
lived; and not read only.

Verse. 20. Have not I written to thee excellent things?] Heb. Princely things,
Principles for Princes; Rare and Royal sentences. The word signifies (say some)
the third man in the Kingdom for Authority and Dignity. Others read the words
thus, Have not I three times written for thee concerning Counsels and
Knowledge, meaning his three books, Proverbial, Penitential, Nuptial. Key of
the Bible by Mr. Roberts.
The Canticles were penned perhaps in his younger years (says one) when his
affections were more warm, active and lively in spirituals. The Proverbs in his
manly ripe age, when his Prudence and parts were at highest, most grave, solid,
settled. Ecclesiastes in his old age, etc.

Verse. 21. That I might make thee know the certainty] And so find firm footing
for thy faith, Luke 1.3, 5. These words of God are true, says the Angel, Rev.
21.9. These words are faithful and true, Rev. 22.24. void of all insincerity
and falsehood. How can it be otherwise, when as they are, as Gregory speaks,
Cor and animae, the very heart and soul of the God of truth? Greg. in Reg. 3.
there must needs be a certainty in these words of truth, neither need we
hang in suspense. When some took Christ for John Baptist, some for Elias, Mat.
16.
some for Jeremias; But whom say ye that I am? to teach that Christ would not
have men stand doubtful, halt between two, be in Religion as beggars are in
their way, ready to go which way soever the staff falls; but to search the
Scriptures, and grounding thereon, to get a certainty, a full assurance of
underderstanding, Col. 2.2. so as to be able to say, We have believed,
therefore have we spoken, 2 Cor. 4.13.

Verse. 22. Rob not the poor, etc.] Here some Caviller will be apt to cry out,
Object.
Quid dignum tanto feret hic promissor hidlu? After so promising a Preface, and
such wooing of attention, we looked for some new matter, and that of best note
too. But behold here is nothing, but what we had before. Sol. Phil. 3 1.
It is truth, says the Wise man; and yet I must tell you, that to write the
same things, to me indeed is not grievous, but for you it is safe. See the
like, Psalm. 49.1, 2, 3, etc. The scope of the Psalm is to show the happy and
secure estate of the Saints in trouble, Object: Sol.
and the slippery condition of the wicked when at their height. Now whereas
some might object and say, this is an ordinary argument, we have heard of it an
hundred times. The Psalmist answers, that yet this is the great wisdom that
he will speak of, and the dark saying that he will open. And hereunto he
makes a solemn Oyez. Hear this all ye people, and give ear all ye Inhabitants
of the World, etc.

Because he is poor] As the greater fish devour the lesser, and as the Mastiff
falls upon the Cur, and worries him, only because he is bigger than the other.
This is a brutish ferity. See Psalm. 10. And if those that relieve not the poor
shall be damned, surely they that rob them shall be double-damned.

Neither oppress the afflicted] The poor man must needs be an afflicted man,
obnoxious to all manner of injuries and hard usages. But God who is the poor
man's King (more truly so called, then James the fourth of Scotland was) takes
order here, that no man oppress or wrong him, either at the gate of his house,
whither he comes a begging, or at the gate of the City, where he sues for
redress of injury; Gel. l. 11. c. 18.
let not might suppress right, lest some Cato complain (as once) and not
without cause, that poor Thieves sit in the stocks, when greater Thieves sit on
the seats of Judicature.

Verse. 23. For the Lord will plead their cause] Without fee, for those that
come to him forma pauperis, and without fear of their oppressors, against whom
he will plead with pestilence and with blood, Ezekiel. 38.22. as he did against
the house of Saul for the poor Gibeonites, and against Ahab for Naboth.

And spoil the soul (or life) of those that spoiled them] A poor man's
livelihood is his life, Mark. 12. ult. Luke 8.43. He is in his house as a
Snail in his shell, crush that, and you kill him quite. God therefore who loves
par pari refer, to pay oppressors home in their own coin, will have life for
life, if they may escape so, and not be cast to hell among those cruel ones,
Prove. 5.9. See the Note. O that these Cannibals would think of this, before the
cold grave hold their bodies, and hot hell hold their souls.

Verse. 24. Make no friendship with an angry man] Anger is a short madness, it
is a leprosy breaking out of a burning, Lev. 13.5. and renders a man unfit for
civil society: for his unruly passions cause the climate where he lives to be
like the torrid Zone, too hot for any to live near him. The Dog-dayes continue
with him all the year long, he rages, and eats firebrarnds, so that every
man that will provide for his own safety, must fly from him, as from a
netling, dangerous, and unsociable creature, fit to live alone as Dragons and
wild Beasts, or to be looked on only through a grate, as they; where, if they
will do mischief, Turk hist.
they may do it to themselves only: As Bajazet the great Turk, who being taken
by Tamberlain and carried up and down in an iron Cage, beat out his own brains
against the bars thereof.

Verse. 25. Lest thou learn his wayes] As a man is an imitating creature, and
easily conformed to the company he keeps. Sin is also very spreading, and
more infectious than the plague: This of rash anger especially, whereunto being
naturally inclined, we shall easily get an habit of frowardness. Intireness
with wicked consorts is one of the strongest chains of hell, and binds us to a
participation both of sin and punishment.

And get a snare to thy soul] This is all thou art like to get by such men's
company. An angry man (a master of anger (as the Hebrew here has it) or rather
one that is mastered by his anger, and enslaved thereunto) is fitly compared by
one to a Cock of the game, that quarrelsome creature, that is still bloody with
the blood either of others or of himself; he flies upon his best friends
sometimes, as Alexander did, and slayes those whom he would revive again with
his own heart blood. Dogs in a chase bark often at their best friends.

Verse. 26. Be not thou of them] See the Notes on Chap. 6.1, 2, 3.

Verse. 27. If thou have nothing to pay] And yet art gotten into the Usurers
furnace, he will leave thee at last neither metal nor matter.

Verse. 28. Remove not the ancient land-mark] Unless ye covet a curse, Deuteronomy.
27.17. (...) Eccles. 10.8.
Let Levellers look to it, and know that property is Gods Ordinance, Act. 5.4.
Psalm. 17.14. That Magistracy is the hedge of a Nation; and that he that breaks
an hedge, a Serpent shall bite him: That the Ministry is Christ's own
Institution, Ephesians. 4.11. And that Lay-preachers may look to speed as Nadab and
Abihu, as Uzzah and Uzziah, or as other Usurpers. See the Note on Deuteronomy. 1^ 14.

Verse. 29. See thou a man diligent] God loves nimbleness: what thou do, do
quickly said Christ to Judas, though it were so ill a business that he was
about. Princes love such and employ them, as Pharaoh did Joseph, and those that
were men of activity among his brethren. Solomon also made use of Jeroboam for
the same reason; though that was not the wisest act that ever he did, 1 Kings
11.28. How dear was Daniel to Darius, because though sick, yet he dispatched
the Kings business? What Favorites to our Henry 8, were Wolsey, Cromwell,
Cranmer, for like reason? A diligent man shall not fit long in a low place. Or
if he do all the days of his life, yet if his diligence proceed out of
conscience, he shall stand before the King of Kings when he dies. And surely if
Salomons servants were held happy for this: and the greatest reward Solomon
could promise the diligent, is this in the text, what an unconceivable honor
must it needs be to look for ever upon the face of God, and (Angel-like) stand
in his presence?

CHAP. XXIII. Verse. 1. When thou sit to eat]
SEe my common place of Abstinence.

Consider diligently what is before thee] And feed with fear, Jude 12. Lest
thou lose by thy luxury that praise and preferment, that thou had gotten by
thine industry, chap. 22.9.

Non minor est virtus quam quaerere parta tueri: Verse. 2. And put a knife to
thy throat] Put into thy throat, (as Aben-ezra reads it) rather than offend by
inordinate appetite. Some read it thus, For thou put a knife to thy throat,
if thou be a man given to appetite. Thou shortnest thy life, and diggest as it
were thine own grave with thine own teeth. Meat kills as many as the Musket;
the board as the sword. Chrysostom.
Tennis mensa sanitatis matter: but much meat, much malady.

Verse. 3. Be not desirous of his dainties] It is a shame for a Saint to be a
slave to his Palate. Isaac loved venison too too well, the Disciples are
cautioned by Christ, Luke 21.34. who well enough knew where they were weakest.

For they are deceitful meat] There is a hook under that bait: it may prove as
dangerous as Ionathans honey, of which he had no sooner tasted, but his head was
forfeited. There is a deceitfulness in sin, Heb. 3.13. a lie in vanity, Jon.
2.8. transit voluptas, manet dolor. -- dolor est etiam ipsa voluptas.

Verse. 4. Labor not to be rich] The Courtier is still at his lesson. Many
gotten into Princes Palaces, into places of profit, fat offices, mind nothing
more than the feathering of their own nests, raising of their own houses,
filling of their own coffers. Such were Shebna, Haman, Sejanus, of whom Tacitus
makes this report. Palam compositus pudor, intus summa adipiscendi libido,
Quicquid non acquiritur damnum est. Sen.
that he made show of modesty, but was extreme covetous; insomuch says Seneca,
that he thought all to be lost that he got not for himself. How much better
Joseph, Nehemiah, Daniel, etc. who being wholly for the public, as they had
nothing to lose, so they had as little to get, but were above all price or sale.

Cease from thine own wisdome] Cast away that carnal policy that would prompt
thee to get rem, rem, quocunque modo rem, wealth of any fashion. This wisdom
is by Saint James fitly styled, earthly, sensual, devilish. Earthly, managing
the lusts of the eye to the ends of gain: Sensual, managing the lusts of the
eye to ends of pleasure: and Devilish, managing the pride of life unto ends of
power, James 3.15. with 1 John. 2.14.15.

Verse 5. Will thou set thine eyes, etc.] Hebr. Will thou cause thine eyes to
fly after, etc.? Will thou fly a fools pitch, and go hawking after that that
cannot be had? or if had, will not pay for the pains, countervail the cost?
Will thou cast a leering look after such vanities?

Upon that which is not] That has no solid subsistence, though the foolish
world call it substance. (...).
The fashion of this world passes away, 1 Cor. 7.31. The Greek word there
used, intimates, that there is nothing of any firmness or solid consistence
in the Creature. Heaven only has a foundation. Heb. 11.10. Earth has none,
but is hanged upon nothing, as Job speaks. Ye rejoice in a thing of naught,
says the Prophet to them that drank wine in bowls etc. Amos. 6.6, 13.

For riches certainly make themselves wings] As the Heathens feigned of their
God Plutus. Under these wings let the Master hide himself, as Esaias 28.15. yet
with those wings will they fly away, without once taking leave, leaving nothing
but the print of talons in his heart to torment him. Riches (says one) were
never true to those that trusted them: To fly from us, they make themselves
great Eagles wings: to fly to us, or after us, Ne passerinas quidem, Augustine.
not so much as old sparrows wings. Temporals (says another) are as
transitory, as a hasty headlong torrent, a shadow, a ship, a bird, Mr Bolton.
an arrow, a post that passes by, or if you can name any thing of swifter
wing, or sooner gone.

Verse. 6. Eat thou not the bread of him that has an evil eye] That is, of a
miserly muckworm, that wishes thee choked for so doing, even then when he
makes greatest show of hospitality and humanity.

Verse. 7. For as he thinks in his heart, so is he] Men's cujusque is est
quisque. The man is as his mind is, or as he thinks in his heart, so he
speaks; he cannot so dissemble, but that eftsoons he blurteth out some word,
or shows some sign of his sordid disposition. Some read it thus: For as he
grudgeth his own soul, so he will say unto thee, eat, drink, etc. As he starves
his own Genius, and cannot afford himself a good meals-meat, so he grudgeth at
his guests whom yet he bids welcome. Christ does not so, Cant. 5.1.

Verse. 8. The morsel which thou have eaten] That is, That which thou have
eaten, shall be so ill-sauced, that thou shall wish it up again, and thou shall
repent thee of thy complements, or of whatsoever other good speech thou have
used at table: which was the salt wherewith our Savior used to besprinkle the
dishes wherever he dined.

Daniels hist.
Verse. 9. Speak not in the ears of a fool] That is, Of a wilful fool, that
seldom asks Counsel, but never follows any, as it is said of James King of
Scotland. See the notes on Prove. 9.7, 8. and on Mat. 7.6.

Verse. 10. Remove not the ancient land-mark] See the Note on chap. 22.28.

Verse. 11. For their Redeemer is mighty] The thunder of his power who can
understand? Job 26.14. And who knows the power of his wrath? Psalm. 90.11. Oh
contend not with him that is mightier than thou. Eccles. 6.10. God Almighty is
in a special manner the Guardian of his Orphans, and the great Master of the
Wards.

Verse. 12. Apply thy heart unto instruction] Make thine heart to come to it,
though never so averse. Call in thy scattered thoughts, and busy them about
the best things, Anima dispersa fit minor. This is the wise man's Counsel to the
younger sort. But because surdis plerunque fabulam, few youths will be better
advised, therefore he bespeaks their Parents and Tutors in the next words.

Verse. 13. Withold not correction from the Childe] See the Note on chap.
13.24.

He shall not dye] Or if he do, yet not by thy default: Thou have delivered
thine own soul howsoever. If a Blackmore enter into the Bath, though he become
not white by it, Yet the Bath-master has his pay, says Keyserspergius. The
Physician has his see whether the Patient recover or dye.

Verse. 14. And shall deliver his soul from hell] Fond and foolish Parents are
peremptores potius quam parents, rather Paricides than Parents: ^ern. Epist.
12^
since Qui non, cum potest, servat, occidit, by not saving their Children, they
slay them; by cockting them in their sin, they pitch them headlong into Hell.

Verse. 15. My son, if thine heart be wise] Si vexatio det intellectum, if
either by instruction or correction I may make thee wise or well-spoken, Bonum
birum, dicendi peritum (as Quintilians Orator) cotus laetitia dissiliam, I
shall be a joyful man indeed. Saint John had no greater joy than to hear that
his children walked in the truth. 3 John ^.
And St. Paul could never be thankful enough for such a mercy, 1 Thessalonians. 3.9.

Even mine] Or, even as I; viz. was a comfort to my Parents.

Verse. 17. Let not thine heart envy sinners] Who have they never so much here,
they have but a pension, an annuity, a state of life granted them in the utmost
and most remote part of our Inheritance.

But be thou in the fear of the Lord all day long] An excellent means to cure
one of the fret: Probatum est. Only it must be used constantly. Men must wake
with God, walk with him, and lie down with him, be in continual communion with
him, and conformity unto him. This is to be in Heaven aforehand.

Verse. 18. For surely there is an end] Viz. Of their pomp and prosperity, dum
fanea quadam felicitate temporaliter floreant, as Augustine has it, Aug. Ep
120.
whiles as grass they flourish, and then de-flourish.

And thine expectation shall not be cut off] As the wickeds shall, Psalm. 37.38.
Cheer up therefore, and do not despond: Flebile principium melior fortuna
sequatur, as Queen Elizabeth was wont to say, whiles she was yet a prisoner.
Then she envied the Milk-maid that sang so merrily: But if she had known what a
glorious reign she should have had for four and forty years, she would not have
envied her.

Verse. 19. Hear thou my son, and be wise] Hearing is one of the learned senses,
as Aristotle calls it. Wisdom enters into the soul by this door, as folly
did at first, when the woman listened to the old Serpents illusions. This sense
is first up in a morning: and this preface the Wiseman purposely premiseth to
his following discourse; as well knowing how hardly young men are drawn off
from drinking matches, and Good-fellow-meetings.

And guide thine heart in the way] That is to say, let knowledge and affection
be as twins, and run parallel: let them mutually transfuse life and vigor, the
one into the other. Practice Gods Will as fast as thou understandest it. The
Tigurine translation reads it, Vt beatum fit in via cor tuum, that thine heart
may be blessed in the way.

Verse. 20. Be not amongst Wine-bibbers] Follow not the custom, nor company of
such; thou know not what thou may be drawn to do, though of thy self
averse to such evil courses. Noah got no good by the luxurious old world (
Matthew. 24.38.) with whom he lived: Nor Lot by the intemperate Sodomites, Ezekiel.
16.49. Vriah (a good man) was at length over-perswaded to over-drink himself, 2 Samuel 11.13. Let him that stands take heed last he fall. That evil servant that
presumes to eat and drink with the drunken, (...).
shall be cut off in the middle, Matthew. 24.49.

Among ^i^tous caters of flesh] Amongst flesh-mongers, qui crapula indulgent,
that pamper their panches, In cute curanda plus aequo operaci. See my
Commonplace of abstinence. These be all for themselves, as Nabal was,
Helluantursibi carnem (so the Hebrew runs) they ravin up flesh for themselves.

Verse. 21. For the drunkard -- shall come to poverty] Nay, to eternal misery in
Hell, 1 Cor. 6.10. but few men fear that: beggary they hold worse than any
hell. Per mare pauperiem fuginal, per saxa, per ignes. Herat.
But poverty to such is but a prelude to a worse matter.

Verse. 22. Hearken to thy father, etc.] See the Note on chap. 1.8.

And despise not thy mother when she is old] Dr. Taylour Martyr said to his Son
among other things, when he was to suffer; When thy mother is waxed old,
forsake her not, Act. and M on. 138.
but provide for her to thy power, and see that she lack nothing: for so will
God bless thee, and give thee long life upon Earth, and prosperity.

Verse. 23. Buy the truth and sell it not] Every parcel of truth is precious,
as the filings of gold, as the Bezar-stone, when beaten, are carefully looked
to, and preserved. Hold last the faithful word, as with both hands, Tit. 1.9.
Strive together for the faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1.27. Be zealous for it,
Jude 3. (...), Either live with it, or dye for it. As we have received it as a
legacy from our forefathers (who sealed it with their blood, and paid dear for
it) so we must transmit it to our Posterity pure and entire, Arrii (...).
Nestorii (...).
whatever it stands us in. They were so religious that they would not exchange
a letter or syllable of the faith, wherewith Christ had betrusted them. So
zealous in buying the truth, that they would give five marks and more for a
good book (and that was more money than ten pound is now) Some gave a load of
hay for a few Chapters of Saint James, or of Saint Paul in English, sitting up
all night in reading and hearing, etc. What a deal of charge was the Queen of
Sheba at for Salomons wisdom? The wise Merchant for the pearl of price? Act.
and Mon. fol. 756.
Hieron and Reuchlin for their Hebrew-learning? Pro singulis horis singulos
aureos numerabant. Reuchlin gave a crown an hour to the Jew that read to him.
Mat. 13.44.
Hieron ventured his life to repair by night to a Jew-doctor.

Verse. 24. The Father of the righteous, etc.] See the Note on chap. 10.1.

Verse. 26. My son give me thy heart] There is a strange strife, not of earthly
but of spiritual powers after the possession of man's heart: and through man's
transgression Satan has gotten strong hold thereon, Act. 5.3. Luke 22.3. Once
he strove about a dead man's body, Jude 9. but doubtless his purpose was
therein to have set up an Idol for himself in the hearts of the living. If
Satan can get the heart, he is safe: and so is Satan's Vicar. It was a
watchword in Pope Gregory the thirteenths time; in Queen Elizabeth's days, My
son give me thy heart; Be in heart a Papist, and then go to Church, dissemble,
do what ye will. Among the Heathens, when the beast was cut up for sacrifice,
the first thing the Priest looked upon was the heart: and if the heart were
naught, the sacrifice was rejected. As among the Jews Philo observes, that the
heart, and the horns, or brains were never offered with the sacrifices: for
they are the fountains and secret cells, wherein lurks, and out of which flows
all impiety. But whatever was in the type, this is in the truth: As the heart
is by nature, the Lord will have none of it: yet till the heart be renewed and
given to the Lord, he will accept nothing can come from man, Esaias 29.13. and
66.3. Jer. 42.20. Of the heart God seems to say to us, as Joseph did to his
brethren concerning Benjamin, Genesis 43.3. Ye shall not see my face without it.
The heart is Christ's bed of spices, Cant. 6.2. wherein the delights, Psalm.
50.17. and for which he wishes, Deuteronomy. 5.29. O that there were such an heart,
etc.

And let thine eyes observe my ways] Look well to thy pattern so fairly pensild
out unto thee: take true stitches out of this perfect sampler; take right
strokes after this incomparable Copy. The Hebr. here has it, Let thine eyes
run through my ways: Get a full prospect of them, and diligently peruse them:
Fix and feed thine eyes upon the best objects; and restrain them from gazing up
on forbidden beauties, lest they prove to be windows of wickedness, and
loopholes of lust.

Verse. 27. For an whore is a deep ditch] Fitly so called, quod nullus neque
modus neque finis sit in amore meritricio, because lust is boundless,
bottomless. He is a perfect slave that serves a whore. See the Note on Prove.
22.14.

Verse. 28. She also lies in wait] Terence calls harlots Cruces crumeninculgas,
sordida poscinummia, etc. base beg-pennies, pickpurses, etc. See the Notes upon
chap. 7.

And increases the transgressors amongst men] Nothing has ever so enriched
helas the whorish woman. Vide ubi supra.

Verse. 29. Who has woe? who has sorrow?] Whoredom is usually ushered in by
drunkenness. Est Venus in vinis. Hence, Rev. 17.4. the Whore comes forth with
a cup, as with an instrument fit for the fulfilling of her lust; even as of old
every one did openly bear in his hand at Rome the badge of that Art that he
professed. Solomon therefore having warned his yonker of Whoredom, fitly shows
him next the mischief of drunkenness; and this he does by way of admiration or
interrogation, that the Drunkard may (will he, nill he) see, as in a glass,
and so abhor his own absurdities, miseries, and mischiefs. The best that can
come of drunkenness is repentance (that fairest daughter of so foul a mother)
and that is not without its woe and alas, its sorrow and redness of eyes with
weeping for sin? But few drunkards are taken in that fault.

Who has babling] A great deal of small, talk, telling all that is within.

Condita cum verax aperit praecordia Liber. Herat.
When the Wine is in, the Wit is out.

Who has redness of eyes] Oculorum suffusio, the Vulgar reads suffossio.
Drunkards have usually red and rich faces, Nasos instar coctilis cancri,
Laveter.
Noses like a boyld Lobster; plenty of Pustulaes or Quots, as they call them.
Briefly, Drunkenness, like another Africa, is never without some new monster
of mischief.

Verse. 30. They that tarry long at the Wine] These men do not want time, but
waste it. Pliny, if he were alive, would surely say to such, as once he did to
his Nephew, Poteras has horas non per didisse, Thou might have spent thy
time much better. How may those Wine-bibbers more justly lament their loss,
than good Bernard did, and say each man for himself, Totum vitae meae tempus
perdidi, quia perdite vixi?

Verse. 31. Look not thou upon the Wine] Many men dye of the wound in the eye.
It is not unlawful to look; but because of looking comes lusting, therefore
Laws are to be laid upon our looks. Vitiis nobis in animum per oculos est via,
says Quintilian. If we do not let in sin at the window of the eye, or by the
door of the ear, it cannot enter into our hearrs.

When it moves it self aright] When it sparkles, and is Vinum Cos (as they
call the best Wine at Paris and Lovain) that is, Vinum Coloris, Odoris,
Saporis, Bee-hive of Rome, prefac.
optimi, Wine of the best color, smell, and savor.

Verse. 32. At the last it biteth like a Serpent] Lo such is the guilt of sin,
such the end and effect of drunkenness, torments here, and tortures in hell.

Verse. 34. Thine eyes shall behold stranger women] See the Note on verse. 29.
Venture aestuans mero, spumat in libidinem, says Hierom. A belly filled with
wine, (...). Aristop. Vina parant animos Veneri. Ovid.
foameth out filthiness. Wine is the milk of Venus, says another. Drunkenness
is the gallery that lechery walks through, says a third.

Thine heart shall utter perverse things] Prepostorous, distorted, dislocated
matters: soliciting thy Neighbors Wife to wickedness, or otherwise vomiting
out that which God hates, and godly men abhor.

Verse. 35. Yea, thou shall be as he, etc.] Thy brains shall crow, and thou
shall be of Copernicus his opinion, that the earth turns round. Thou shall also
be fearlesse of the greatest danger, and not refuse to sleep upon a Mast-pole,
dance upon a Weathercock, etc.

Verse. 36. They have stricken me] A drunken man, we say, takes no hurt, feels
no smart, is turned into a very stock. Dionysius the Heracleot felt not needles
thrust into his fat belly. Pliny mentions certain Bears, that being sound
asleep, cannot be wakened with the sharpest prickles. Mathiol. in Dioscorid.
Mathiolus reports of the Asses of Hetruria, that feeding upon Hen-bane, they
fall into such a dead sleep, that being taken for dead, they are half hideled,
ere they can be arowsed. Lo such is the Drunkards lethargy: neither is he
more insensible than sensual, and irrecoverable.

CHAP. XXIV. Verse. 1. Be not thou envious against evil men.]
HEbr. Men of evil, such as are set upon sin, as are like Caracalla, qui nihil
cogitabat boni, qui id non didicerat; quod ipse fatebatur, says Dio; who never
thought of any good, etc. Envy not such an one his pomp, any more than we do
a dead corpse his flowers, and gayity. See chap. 23.17.

Neither desire to be with them] That is, to be in their estate, so thou
might be at their stay. This has been the folly of some of Gods people, as
David notes, Psalm. 73.10. For the which they have afterward befooled and
be-beasted themselves, as he did, verse. 22.

Verse. 2. For their heart studieth destruction] Great students they are,
wittily wicked: but they consult shame and confusion to them and theirs.

And their lips talk of mischief] The mischief that they machinate, budgeth and
blistereth out at their tongues ends. They are even big with it, and not
well, till delivered.

Verse. 3. Through wisdom is an house builded] q. d. I Will show thee a better
project; would thou thrive and grow great? Exercise godliness, wish not
wickedness. See the Notes on chap. 3.16, 17.

Verse. 4. With all precious and pleasant riches] Riches imply, 1 Plenty of that
which is precious and pleasant. 2 Propriety; they must be good things that are
our own: And hereunto oeconomical prudence much conduces. God bestows
abundance on the wicked ex largitate, only out of a general providence: but
upon his people that are good husbands, ex promisso, by virtue of this and the
like promises.

Verse. 5. A wise man is strong] See the Note on Chap. 21.22.

Verse. 6. For by wise counsel] See the Note upon chap. 20.18. This Salust
delivers, as the sentence of the wisest Sages. But Solomon said it long before.

Verse. 7. Wisdom is too hard for a fool] Hebr. Too high; his pericranium
comprehends it not, neither indeed can do, 1 Cor. 2.14. He puts off the study
of it, pretending the impossibility of reaching to it.

He opens not his mouth in the gate] He were two fools if he should, for
whiles he holds his tongue, he is held wise.

(...).
Verse. 8. Shall be called a mischievous person] Hebr. A master of sinful
musings, an Artist at any evil. Josephus says of Antipater, that his course of
life might fitly be called, a Mystery of mischief, quae altissimas egerat
radices, etc.

Verse. 9. The thought of foolishness is sin] The Schools do well observe,
that outward sins are majoris infamiae, of greater infamy: but inward
heart-sins are majoris reatus, of greater guilt, as we see in Devils. See the
Note on Chap. 14.22.

And the scorner is an abomination to men] Witness Julian, Lucian, Porphiry,
Julius Scaliger, that proud Hypercritick (qui neminem praese duxit hominem)
Laurentius Valla, who jeared at other Logicians, and extolled his own Logic as
the only best, calling it, Logicam Laurentiuam.

Trithem.
Jupiter hunc coeli dignatus honor fuisse^,
Censorem linguae sed timet ipse suae.
But what an odious scorner was Quintinus the Libertine, of whom Calvin
complains, that he scoffed at every one of the holy Apostles? Paul he called a
broken Vessel, John a foolish Youth, Peter a Denyer of God, Matthew an Usurer.
Calv. Inst. Advers. Libert. cap. 9.
En quomodo ille foetoris gurges putido ore suo blasphemare audebat! says
Calvin. See how this stinking elf dust bark and blaspheme the Saints. The
basest can mock; as the abjects did David, Psalm. 35.15. and Tobiah the servant
did Nehemiah, Chap. 2.10. Scorners are the most base spirits. The Septuagint
call them Pests, Psalm. 1.1. incorrigible, Prove. 20.1. proud persons, chap.
3.34. naught, Prove. 9.12, etc.

Verse. 10. If thou faint in the day of adversity] Afflictions try what sap we
have: as hard weather tries what health. Withered leaves fall off in a wind:
rotten boughs break when weight is laid on them, so do earthen vessels when
set empty to the fire. As is the man, so is his strength, said they to Gideon,
Joseph's bow abode in strength (though the Archers sorely grieved him, and shot
at him, and hated him) and the arms of his hand were made strong by the hands
of the mighty God of Jacob, etc. Genesis 49.23, 24.

Verse. 11. If thou forbear to deliver them, etc.] That is, that are wrongfully
butchered. Here, not to save a man (if it be in our power) is to destroy him,
Mark 3.4. Job brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the prey out of his
teeth. The people rescued Jonathan, and Ebedmelech Jeremy. Chap. 29. Act. and
Mon. fol. 1899.
Henry 8. delivered his Queen Katherine; and King Philip with his Spaniards
kept the Lady Elizabeth from the cruel mercies of Stephen Gardener, who had
designed them destruction; Sir George Blage, (one of King Henry the Eighths
Privie-chamber) being condemned for an Heretic, was yet pardoned by the King.
He coming afterward to the Kings presence, Ah my Pig, Act. and Mon. fol. 1135.
Ibid. 1862.
says the King (for so he was wont to call him) Yea, said he, if your Majesty
had not been better to me than your Bishops were, your Pig had been roasted
ere this time. But what a bloody mind bore Harpsfield, Archdeacon of
Canterbury, who being at London when Queen Mary lay a dying, made all
post-haste home to dispatch those whom he had then in cruel custody.

Verse. 12. If thou say, behold we knew it not, etc.] As no wool is so
coarse, but will take some color; so there is no sin so foul but will admit of
some excuse. Ignorance is commonly pleaded; we know not this man's Case, the
Justice of his Cause, the means of his Rescue, etc. But be not deceived, God is
not mocked. They that would mock him imposturum faciunt and patientur, cozen
themselves, as the Emperor said of him that sold glass for Pearl. Isidor.
Psalm. 11.4.
Deo obscura clarent, muta respondent, silentinm confitetur. Gods eyes behold,
his eyelids try the children of men. The former points out his knowledge, the
latten his critical descant.

Does not he that pondereth the heart consider?] No man needs a window in his
breast (as the Heathen Momus wished) for God to look in at; for every man before
God is all window, Job 34.22. and his eyes are as a flaming fire, Revel. 1.14.
that need no outward light, that see extra mittendo by sending out a ray etc.
that see through that transparent body, the world, called a sea of glass. Revel.
4.6.

Verse. 13. My son, eat thou honey because it is good] Profitable and pleasant,
wholesome and toothsome. So, and much more than so is divine knowledge. Plutarch
tells of Eudoxus, that he would be willing to be burnt up by the Sun presently,
so he might be admitted to come so near it, as to learn the nature of it. How
sweet must it needs be then to know Christ and him crucified? etc. sweeter it
was to David, than Live-honey dropping from the comb, Psalm. 19.10. and
119.103. The believing Hebrews knew within themselves, that there should be a
reward, and that their expectation should not be cut off, Heb. 10.34. They drew
the circumference of Gods promises to the center of their hearts, and so living
by faith, they had the sweetmeats of the feast of a good Conscience, as Master
Latimer has it: they tasted of that honey, the sweetness whereof none can
find by any discourse (how elegant soever) so well as by eating of it, as
Augustine speaks.

Verse. 15. Lay not wait, O wicked man, etc.] (...), Plut. (...).
as that Heathen said. God dwells with the righteous, molest him not therefore,
beat not up his quarters. The Scythians (says he in Plutarch) though they have
no Music or Vines amongst them, yet they have Gods. So whatever the Saints
want, they want not Gods gracious presence with them. And if wicked men had but
so much knowledge of God, as Pilates Wife had in a Dream, they would take heed
of having any thing to do with these just men.

Verse. 16. For a just man falls seven times] i. e. often. Seven times a day,
as the Vulgar and many of the Fathers read it, who also understand this text of
falling into sin, and rising again by repentance. But the opposition carrys
it to the other sense, of falling into trouble. And the next verse speaks as
much, Rejoice not when thine enemy falls, etc. Gods Saints are bound to
rejoice when they fall into diverse temptations, Jam. 1.2. What though they fall
into them? not go in step by step, but be precipitated, plunged over head and
ears. Say they fall not into one but many crosses, Jam. 1.2.
(as they seldom come single, but like Jobs messengers one at the heels of
another) yet be exceeding glad, (says the Apostle) as a Merchant is to see his
ships come laden in. For though ye fall, ye shall arise, and though ye sit in
darkness, the Lord shall give you light, Mic. 7.8.

But the wicked shall fall into mischief] i. e. into remediless misery. Non
surget hic afflictio, Nahum 1.9. As they shall have an evil, an only evil
without mixture of mercy, Ezekiel. 7.5. so they shall totally and finally be
consumed at once. If Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, before whom Hamon
has begun to fall, he shall fall to some purpose, Esth. 6.13. A Jew may fall
before a Persian, and get up and prevail. But if a Persian or other Persecutour
begin to fall before a Jew, he can neither stay nor rise. There is an invisible
hand of Omnipotency that strikes in for his own, and confounds their opposites.

Verse 17. Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth] If thou do, it is a sure sign
of devilish hatred, ((...) being the devils disease) what good will, innocence,
or ignoscency soever thou make show off. Job clears himself of this fault,
Job 31.24. and so does David notably, Psalm. 35.13, 14. See his practice, 2 Samuel
1.11, 12. Caesar wept when Pompey's head was presented to him, and said,
Victoriam volui, non vindictam. See the Notes on Mat. 5.44. and on Romans 12.19.

Verse. 18. Lest the Lord see it] viz. Thy pride and cruelty, as he will, for he
is (...) All-eye, and (...), if he see, he will kindle and turn the wheel upon
thee, as he threatened to do upon Edom, for looking with liking upon Isreal's
calamity. For prevention hereof, think thus with thy self; Either I am like
mine enemy, or else I am better or worse than he. If like him, Ezekiel. Obad. 12.
why may not I look for the like misery? If better, who made me to differ? If
worse, what reason then have I to insult?

Verse. 19. Fret not thy self because of evil men] We are wondrous apt to be
sick of the Fret; hence so many precepts to this purpose. See chap. 23.17. and
24.1.

Verse. 20. For there shall be no reward] He shall suffer both pain of loss, and
pain of sense, which whether is the more grievous, is hard to determine. Sure
it is, that the tears of hell are not sufficient to bewail the loss of heaven:
their worm of grief gnaws as painfully as their fire burns. Depart from me ye
cursed, sounds as harsh in their ears, as that which follows, into everlasting
flames.

Verse. 21. My son, fear the Lord and the King] Who would not fear thee O King
of Nations? Psalm. 76.11.
for unto thee does it appertain, Jer. 10.7. God is the prime and proper object
of fear. Whence by an Appelative proper, he is called Fear by the Psalmist. The
Greeks call him (...) (as some think) from the fear that is due to him. Princes
also must be feared and honored, 1 Pet. 2.17. as those that are invested with
Gods Authority, and entrusted with the administration of his Kingdom upon
earth, by the exercise of vindictive and remunerative Justice. And whiles they
be just, ruling in the fear of God, 2 Samuel 23.3. and commanding things
consonant to the word and will of God, they must be obeyed for conscience sake,
Romans 13.3. otherwise not. See the note on Acts 4.19.

And meddle not with them that are given to change] i. e. with seditious
spirits, that affect and effect alterations, law less persons (as Saint Paul
calls them) Malcontents, (...).
to whom (...) the present government is ever grievous, as Thucydides notes.
Such were Kore and his accomplices; Absalom, Sheba, the ten tribes that cried,
Alleva jugum, Ease our yoke; and before them, those in Samuels time that cried,
Nay but we will have a King. Novatus has still too many followers, of whom
Saint Cyprian, under whom he lived, thus testifies, Novatus rerum novarum
semper cupidus, arrogantia inflatus, that he was an arrogant innovatour. These
turbulent spirits prove often the pests and boutefeaus of the state they live in:
and it is dangerous having to deal with them.

Verse. 22. For their calamity shall rise suddenly] When they think they have
made all cock-sure: Had Zimri-peace that killed his master? Had Absalom, Sheba,
Rhodolphus Duke of Suevia, Sanders, Story, Parry, Campian, Daniels Hist.
the powder-plotters, Raviliac, etc. Knute the first Danique King caused the
false Edrics head (that had been his Agent) to be set upon the highest part of
the tower of London: therein performing his promise of advancing him above any
Lord in the Land. James the first, King of Scots, was murdered in Perth by
Walter Earl of Athol, in hope to attain the Crown. Crowned indeed he was, but
not as his witches and sorcerers had ambiguously insinuated, with the Crown of
that Realm, but with a Crown of red hot Iron, clapped upon his head, Speed. Chron.
being one of the tortures wherewith he ended at once his wicked days and
desires.

And who knows the ruin of them both?] i. e. That both God and the King will
inflict upon the Rebels; Or of them both, i. e. both of the King if a Tyrant,
and of those that seditiously move against him.

Verse. 23. These things also belong to the wise] As subjects must know their
duties, so Magistrates theirs: neither may they hold themselves too wise to
learn. God can send even a Solomon to School to the Raven, to the Pismire, yea
to the Lillies of the Field; as being able to teach the wisest man by the
weakest Creature.

It is not good to have respect of Persons] Hebr. to know faces, to regard not
so much the matter as the man, to hear Persons speak and not Causes, to judge
not according to truth and equity, but according to opinion and appearance, to
fear or favor. This cannot be good, lawful, or safe, Job 13.13. He will
surely (or thoroughly) reprove you, (not verbally only, but penally too) if you
secretly accept Persons. Of Trajan it is said, that he neither feared nor hated
any man; but that he heard the Causes of his Subjects without praejudicate
impiety, judiciously examined them without sinister obliquity, and sincerely
judged them without unjust partiality.

Verse. 24. Him shall the people curse] Hebr. They shall run him through, with
their evil wishes for his evil sentence: he shall be generally hated, and set
against, as was Herod, Pilate, Festus, Ferres, etc.

Verse. 25. But to them that rebuke him shall be delight] Those Judges that
reprove and punish the wicked shall (besides the Euge of a good Conscience,
which is far better than the worlds Plaudite) delight themselves in the Lord,
and reign in the affections of all good men, who shall eftsoons also say, Gods
blessing be on such a good Judges heart, for he saves the innocent, and
punishes the wicked, etc. As he has done worthily in Ephrata, so he shall be
famous in Bethlehem, Ruth 4.11. See Job 29.11, 12.

Verse. 26. Every man shall kiss his lips] That is, shall do him honor, as
Genesis 41.40. All the people shall kiss at thy mouth, says Pharaoh to Joseph:
and Samuel kissed Saul when he anointed him King, 1 Samuel 10.1. and, Kiss the
Son, says David, Psalm. 2.11. That is, give unto him the honor due unto his
name.

Verse. 27. Prepare thy work without, etc.] God would have all his to be not
good men only, but good husbands too; to order their affairs with discretion,
Lib. 18. cap. 1
and to take their fittest opportunities for dispatch of household businesses.
Pliny has a saying to like sense with this, Aedificandum, says he, consito
agro, and tunc quoque cunctanter, Let building alone till thy field be tilled,
vined, planted, etc.

Verse. 28. Be not a witness against thy neighbor without cause] That is,
Without calling, being not thereunto required: for this would speak thee
spightful, rash, and revengeful, as in the next verse.

And deceive not with thy lips] When called to be a Witness, speak thy mind
simply and plainly, (...).
without preface or passion, without varnish of fine words, whereby to mislead
the Judge, or deceive the Jurors, to bolster out a bad cause, or outface a
good.

Verse. 29. Say not, I will do so to him, as he has done to me] Nothing is
more natural than revenge of wrongs: and the world approves it as right temper,
true touch: As, to put up wrongs is held towardise, and unmanliness. But we
have not so learned Christ. Nay, those that never heard of Christ, have spoken
much against this vindictive disposition. See the Note on chap. 20.22. and on
Mat. 5.39. Romans 12.17.

I will render to the man according to his works] But is not that Gods Office?
And will you needs leap into his Chair, wring the Sword out of his hand? or at
least, will you be a Pope in your own cause, depose the Magistrate, or appeal
from him to yourself? What Luciferian pride is this? Nemo te impune lacessit?
Is not God the God of recompenses?

Verse. 30. I went by the field of the slothful] Not purposely to spy faults
(for Nemo curiosus quin malevolus) but my business lay that way, and I was
willing to make the best of every thing that came before me.

By the vineyard of the man void of understanding] Hebr. That had no heart,
that is, that made no use of it, that was not Egregie cordatus homo, as one
describes a wise man.

Verse. 31. And lo it was all grown over with thorns] So is the Spiritual
sluggards soul with lusts and sins, under the which lurketh that old Serpent.

Verse. 32. Then I saw and considered it well] I made my best use of it for mine
own instruction. A Be can suck honey out of a flower, which a Fly cannot do.
So a spiritual mind can extract good out of every object and occurrence, even
out of other men's faults and follies; he can gather grapes of thorns, and figgs
of thistles, as here. Well therefore may grace be called the Divine Nature, 2
Pet. 1.4. for as God draws light out of darkness, good out of evil, etc. so
does grace, by an heavenly kind of Alchymy, as I may so say.

And received instruction] Exemplo alterius qui sapit, ille sapit. The worse
others are, the better should we be; getting as far off from the wicked as
we can, in our daily practice, and saving our selves from this untoward
generation.

Verse. 33. Yet a little sleep] Mercer makes this to be the lesson that the
Wiseman both learnt himself, and also lays before others, viz. to be content
with a little sleep, to be up and at it betimes, etc. that the beggar catch us
not. But I rather incline to those that think, that he here brings in the
sluggard pleading for his sloth: and by an elegant Mimesis imitates and
personates him, saying as he used to do, yet a little more sleep, a little
more slumber, etc. A little, and yet sleeps, in the plural. A little he would
have, but a little will not serve his turn. See the Note on chap. 6.9, etc.

Verse. 34. So shall thy poverty come] Swiftly and irresistably. Seneca calls
Sloth the Nurse of beggary, the Mother of misery.

CHAP. XXV. Verse. 1. These also are Proverbs of Solomon, which the men]
Solomon has his thousand out of this his Vineyard of three thousand Proverbs
(1 King. 4.32.) and these men of Hezekiah that kept (and yet communicated) the
fruit thereof, Prima sequmtem bonestum est in secundi^ tertiisque confistere.
Gic. de Orat.
their two hundred, Cant. 8.12. It is good for men to be doing what they are
able for the glory of God, and good of others: If it be but to Copy out another
man's Work, and prepare it for the Press: Them that any way honor God he will
honor: that is a bargain of his own making, and we may trust to it.

Verse. 2. It is the glory of God to conceal a thing] That what we conceive not,
we may admire (mirari non rimari) and cry out with Paul, O the depth! Romans
11.33.
as the Romans dedicated to their Goddess Victoria a certain Lake, the depth
whereof they could not dive into. God is much to be magnified for what he has
revealed unto his people in the holy Scriptures, for their eternal good. But
those unsearchable secrets of his (such as are the union of the three Persons
into one Nature, and of two Natures into one Person, his wonderful Decrees, and
the no less wonderful execution thereof etc.) these make exceeding much to the
glory of his infinite Wisdom, and surpassing greatness; Aristot.
in speaking whereof our safest eloquence is our silence, since tantum recedit
quantum capitur, says Nazianzen, much like that Pool spoken of by Polycritus,
which in compass at the first, scarce seemed to exceed the breadth of a
shield; but if any went in to wash, it extended it self more and more.

But the honor of Kings is to search out a matter] As Solomon did that of the
two Harlots, 1 King. 3. Job 29.16.
There are that divide this Book of Proverbs into three parts. In the nine
first Chapters things of a lower nature, and fit for instruction of youth, are
set down and described. Next, From thence to this five and twentieth Chapter
the wise man discourses of all sorts of virtues and vices, suitable to all
sorts of People. Lastly, From this Chapter to the end he treats (for the most
part) of higher matters, as of King-craft, and State-business.

Verse. 3. The Heaven for height, etc.] It is a wonder that we can look up to so
admirable an height, and that the very eye is not tired in the way. If this
ascending line could be drawn right forwards, some that have calculated
curiously, have found it 500 years journey to the starry sky. Other
Mathematicians say, that if a stone should fall from the 8th Sphere, and should
pass every hour 100 miles, it would be 65. years or more before it would come
to ground. I suppose there is as little credit to be given to these, Aug de
Civit. Dei. l. 16.
as to Aratus the Astrologer, who boasted that he had found out and set down
the whole number of the stars in heaven: or as to Archimedes the Mathematician,
that said, Sphinx Philosoph.
that he could by his Art cast up the just number of all the sands both in the
habitable and inhabitable parts of the world.

And the earth for depth] From the surface to the center, how far it is cannot
be known exactly, as neither whether hell be there: but that it is somewhere
below may be gathered from Rev. 14.11. and other places: Ubi sit sentient, qui
curiosius quaerunt.

And the heart of Kings is unsearchable] Profundum sine fundo. God gave Solomon
a large heart, even as the sand that is on the Seashore, 1 Kings 4.29. A vast
capacity, an extraordinary judgment, and wisdom to reserve himself. No bad
cause was too hard for him to detect, no practices which he did not smell out,
no complotter which he did not speedily entrap in their wiles, as Adonijah.

Verse. 4. Take away the dross from the silver] The holy Prophets were not
only most exactly seen in the peerless skill of Divinity, but most exquisitely
also furnished with the entire knowledge of all things natural. Hence their
many Similies wherewith they learnedly beautify their matter, and deck out
their terms, words, and sentences, giving thereunto a certain kind of lively
gesture, attiring the same with light, perspicuity, easiness, estimation, and
dignity: stirring up thereby men's drowsy minds to the acknowledgement of the
truth, and pursuit of godliness.

Verse. 5. Take away the wicked] Who are compared elsewhere also to dross, Ezekiel.
22.19. and fitly: for as dross is a kind of unprofitable earth, and has no
good metal in it; so in the wicked is no good to be found but pride,
worldliness, etc. Forbisher in his voyage to discover the Straits, being tossed
up and down with foul weather, snows, and unconstant winds, returned home,
having gathered a great quantity of stones, which he thought to be minerals,
from which when there could be drawn neither gold nor silver, nor any other
metal, we have seen them (says Master Camden) cast forth to mend the high
ways. Evil Counselors about a Prince, Camd. Elisah. fol. 189.
are means of a great deal of mischief, as were Do^g, Haman, Rheoboams and
Herod's flatterers, Pharoahs sorcerers, etc. Of a certain Prince of Germany it
was said, Esset alius, si esset apud alios; He would be another man, if he were
but amongst other men. Say they be not so drossie, but that some good oar is to
be found in them, yet all is not good that has some good in it. It is
Scaligers Note, Malum non est nisi in bono. The original nature of the Devil is
good, wherein all his wickedness subsisteth. When one highly commended the
Cardinal Julian to Sigismund; he answered, Tamen Romanus est, yet he is a
Roman, and therefore not to be trusted. Those Cardinals and Popish Bishops
being much about Princes, have greatly impoysoned them, and hindered the
Reformation. Zuinglius fitly compares them to that wakeful Dragon that kept the
golden fleece, as the Poets have feigned. They get the royalty of their ear,
and then do with them whatsoever they list. David therefore vows, as a good
Finer, to quit the Court of such dross, Psalm. 101.4. and gives order upon his
deathbed to his Son Solomon, to take out of the way those men of blood, 1
King. 1. that his throne might be established in righteousness.

Verse. 6. Put not forth thy self in the presence of the King] Ne te ornes coram
rege. Compare not, vye not with him in apparel, furniture, housekeeping, etc.
as the Hebrews sense it. This was the ruin of Cardinal Wolsey, and of Viscount
Verulam.

And stand not in the place of great men] Exalt not thy self, but wait till God
shall reach out the hand from Heaven and raise thee, Psalm. 75.5, 6, 7, 8.
Adonijah is branded for this, that he exalted himself, saying, I will be King,
1 King. 1.5. When none else would lift Hildebrand up into Peter's Chair, he gat
up himself: Quintil. lib. 9. cap. 2.
For who (said he) can better judge of my worth than I can? Harden thy
forehead (said Calvus to Vatinius) and say boldly, that thou deservest the
Praetorship better than Cato. Ambition rides without reigns, as Tullia did over
the dead body of her own father, to be made a Queen. See my commonplace of
Ambition.

Verse. 7. For better it is that it be said unto thee] From this Text our
Savior takes that Parable of his, put forth to those that were bidden to a
feast, Luke 14.10. Now, if before an earthly Prince, men should carry
themselves thus modestly and humbly, how much more before the King of heaven?
And if among guests at a feast, how much more among the Saints and Angels in
the holy assemblies? That is an excellent saying of Bernard, Omnino oportet nos
orationis tempore curiam intrare coelestem, in qua Rex regum stellato sedet
solio, circumdante innumerabili and ineffabili beatorum Spirituam exercitu.
Quanta ergo cum reverentia, quanto timore, Bern. de diverse.
quanta illuc humilitate accedere debet e palude sua procedens and repens vilis
ranuncula? At prayer-time we should enter into the Court of heaven, where
sits the King of Kings with a guard of innumerable blessed Spirits. With how
great reverence then, with how great fear and self-abasement should we come,
like so many vile Vermin creeping and crawling out of some sorry pool or
puddle?

Verse. 8. Go not forth hastily to strive] Contention is the Daughter of
Arrogance and Ambition, Jam. 4.1. Hence Solomon (whose very name imports peace)
persuades to peaceablenesse very often in this Book; and sets forth the mischief
or strife and dissension. Stir not strife (says he) but make haste to stint
it, (...). Heredot.
(so the words may be rendered) you may do that in your haste that you may
repent by leisure. Hasty men, we say, never want woe. If every man were a law
to himself (as the Thracians are said to be) there would not be so much
lawing, warbling and warring as there is. There is a curse upon those that
delight in War, (as King Pyrrhus did) Psalm. 68.30. but a blessing for all the
children of peace, Mat. 10. who shall also be called the Children of God, Mat.
5. Paul and Barnabas had a sharp, (...).
but short fit of falling out, Acts 15.39. Hierom and Austine had their
bickerings in their Disputations, but it was no great matter who gained the
day; for they would both win by understanding their errors.

When thy Neighbor has put thee to shame] That is, when thine Adversary has
got the upper hand, and foiled thee. Those are ignoble quarrels, says one, Vbi
vincere inglorium est, atteri sordidum; wherein whether a man get the better or
the worse, he is sure to go by the worse, to sit down with loss in his name,
state, or both.

Verse. 9. Debate thy cause with thy Neighbor, etc.] What shall I do then (may
some say) if I may not right my self by law? You may, says he, so you do it
deliberately: and have first privately debated the cause out of desire of
agreement, and moved for a compremise. See Mat. 18.15.

And discover not the secret of another] Merely to be revenged on him for some
supposed injury. There are that in their rage care not what they disclose to
the prejudice of another. Charity charge the contrary, 1 Cor. 13. It claps a
plaster on the sore, and then covers it with her hand, as Chirurgions use to
do, that the world may be never the wiser.

Verse. 10. Lest he that hears it put thee to shame] Repute thee and report
thee an evill-conditioned fellow, a back-biter, and a talebearer, one not fit
to be trusted with secrets, etc. True it is, that dearest friends are in some
cases to be accused and complained of to those that may do good upon them; as
Joseph brought his brethrens evil report to his father, and as the household of
Chloe told Paul of the Corinthian contentions. But this must be done wisely and
regularly, with due observation of circumstances, as Solomon elegantly sets
forth in the following Proverb.

Verse. 11. A word fitly spoken] Hebrew, spoken upon his weels, that is, rightly
ordered and circumstantiated, spoken with a grace, and in due place. It is an
excellent skill to be able to time a word, Isa. 50.4. to set it upon the
wheels, as here. How good are such words? Prove. 15.23. how forcible? Job 6.25.
How pleasant? even like apples of gold in pictures, or lattices, of silver, not
only precious for matter, Eccles. 12.10. but detectable for order, as gold put
in a case of silver cut-work.

Verse. 12. As an ear-ring of gold, etc.] Ut inauris aurea, etc. A seasonable
word falling upon a tractable ear, has a redoubled grace with it; as an
ear-ring of gold, and as an ornament of fine gold, or as a diamond in a diadem.
It is an hard and happy thing to suffer the words of exhortation, to digest a
reproof, In vit. Jo. Gers.
to say with David, Let the righteous smite me, etc. to be of Gersons
disposition, of whom it is recorded, that he rejoiced in nothing more, quam si
ab aliquo fraterne and charitative redargueretur, than if he were friendly and
freely reproved by any one. Every vice does now go armed: touch it never so
gently, yet like the nettle, it will sting you. If you deal with it roughly and
roundly, it swaggereth, as the Hebrew did with Moses, who made thee a man of
authority? etc. Exodus 2.14. Earrings and ornaments are ill bestowed upon such
uncircumcised ears.

Verse. 13. As the cold of snow in the time of harvest] Harvest men of all men,
beat the heat of the day: being far from shade or shelter, far from springs of
water, parched and scorched with heat and drought, in those hotter countries
especially. Now as the cold of snow or ice (which in those countries they kept
under ground all the year about to mix with their wines) would be most welcome
to such; so is a trusty and speedy messenger: for by his good news he greatly
reviveth the longing and languishing minds of those that sent him: who during
the time of his absence, through fear and doubt, were almost half dead. This is
much more true of Gods faithful messengers, Job 33.23. whose very feet are
therefore beautiful, and message most comfortable, to those that labor and
languish under the sense of sin, and fear of wrath.

Verse. 14. Whosoever boasts himself of a false gift] as Ptolomy surnamed (...),
from his fair promises, slack performances: As Sertorius the Roman, that fed
his creditours and clients with fair words, but did nothing for them,
(Pollicitis dives quilibet esse potest) As that Pope and his Nephew, of whom it
is recorded, that the one never spoke as he thought, the other never performed
what he spoke. Lastly, as the Devil who promised Christ, excelsa in excelsis,
Matthew. 4.
mountains on a mountain, and said, All this will I give thee, when as that
All, was just nothing, more than a show, a representation, a semblance, or if
it had been something, yet it was not his to give: for the earth is the Lords,
and the fullness thereof. Physicians call their drugs (...) gifts, and yet we
pay dear for them. Apothecaries set fair titles upon their boxes and
gally-pots, but there is oftentimes aliud in titulo, aliud in pyxide, nothing
but a bare title. Such are vain boasters, pompous Preachers, Painted
hypocrites, Popish priests: such as was Tecelius, that sold indulgences in
Germany, and those other Massemongers in Gersons time, that preached publicly
to the people, that if any man would hear a mass, he should not on that day be
smitten with blindness, nor dye a sudden death, nor want sufficient sustenance,
etc. These were clouds without rain, that answer not expectation, Jude 12.

Verse. 15. By long forbearing is a Prince perswaded] If he be not overhasty,
his wrath may be appeased, and his mind altered. Our Henry the third gave
commandment for the apprehending of Hubert de Burgo, Earl of Kent: who having
sudden notice thereof at midnight, got him up and fled into a Church in Essex.
They to whom the business was committed, finding him upon his knees before the
high-altar, with the Sacrament in one hand, and a cross in the other, carried
him away nevertheless unto the Tower of London. Roger Bishop of London taking
this to be a great violence, and wrong offered unto the holy Church, Godw.
Catal. page 194.
would never leave the King until he had caused the Earl to be carried unto
the place whence he was fetched. And this it is thought, was a means of saving
the Earls life. For though order was taken he should not escape thence, yet it
gave the Kings wrath a time to cool, and himself leisure to make his Apology:
by reason whereof, he was afterward restored to the Kings favor, and former
places of honor. So true is that of the Philosopher, Maximum irae remediumest
dilatio; Sen. de ira.
And that of the Poet.

Ovid.
Ut fragilis glacies, interit ira mora. There are that read and sense the words
thus: By meekness a Prince is appeased, that is, when he sees that he is not
opposed, that his Subjects repine not, rebel not against him. An old Courtier
of Nero's being asked how he had escaped that Lions mouth? answered, Injurias
ferendo, and gratias agendo, by taking shrewd turns, and being thankful.

A soft tongue breaks the bones] Though it be flesh and no bones, yet it
breaks the bones: that is, stout and stern spirits, that otherwise would not
yield. Thus Gideon broke the rage of the Ephraimites, Judge. 8.1. etc. and
Abigail David's, by her humble and dutiful oration, 1 Samuel 25. See the Note on
Prove. 15.1.

Verse. 16. Have thou found honey? eat so much as is sufficient] i. e. Be
moderate in the use of all lawful comforts and contentments. (...), says the
Orator, Isac.
for there is a satiety of all things, and by excess the sweetest comforts will
be dis-sweetned; as Epictetus also observed. It is therefore excellent counsel
that the holy Apostle gives, 1 Cor. 7.29. that those that have wives be as if
they had none, etc. that we hang loose to all creature comforts, and be
weanedly affected toward them; considering that Licitis perimus omnes. We
generally most of all over-shoot our selves in the use of things lawful; as
those recusant guests did, Matthew. 22. and the old world, Luke 17.26.27.

Hebraei ponunt rarum pro ca^o, ut 1 Samuel 3.
Verse. 17. Withdraw thy foot from thy Neighbors house] This is an honey that
thou may surfeit on, therefore make thy foot precious or rare (so the
Original has it) at thy Neighbors house, by too-oft frequenting whereof thou
may become cheap, nay burdensome. At first thou may be Oreach (as the
Hebrew proverb has it) i. e. welcome as a Traveller that stays for a day. At
length thou will be Toreach, a charge, a burden. And lastly by long tarrying,
thou shall be Boreach, an outcast, hunted out of the house, that thou have so
immodestly haunted. It is a very great fault among many, (says one) that when
they have found a kind and sweet friend, they care not how they overlay him, or
abuse his courtesy. But as we say in our common proverb, it is not good to
take too much of a frank horse.

Verse. 18. Is a Maul, and a Sword, and a sharp Arrow] A Maul, Hammer, or Club
to knock out his brains, and make them fly about the room, as the Hebrew word
imports. A Sword, or Murdering weapon, Psalm. 42.10. and 57.5.
to run him through and let out his bowels. And a sharp Arrow, to pierce his
flesh, and strike through his very heart. Lo here the mischief of an evil
tongue, thin, broad, and long, like a Sword to let out the Life-bloud of the
poor innocent; nay, to destroy his soul too, as seducers do, that bear false
witness against the truth of God, and by their cunning lies, deceive the
hearts of the simple.

Verse. 19. Confidence in an unfaithful man, etc.] In a Prevaricator, a
Covenant-breaker, a perfidious Person, such as Ahitophel was to David, Jobs
miserable comforters to him. (He compares them to the brooks of Tema, chap.
6.16, 17. in a moisture they swelled, in a drought they failed) Egypt to
Israel, a staff or broken reed, whereon if a man lean, it will go into his
hand and pierce it, Isa. 36.6. the Roman Senate to Julius Caesar, whom they
killed in the Council Chamger with twenty three wounds, and this was done a
pluribus amicis quam inimicis quorum non expleverat spes inexplebiles (says
Seneca) by most of his pretended friends, whose unreasonable hopes he had not
satisfied. Sen. li. 3. de ira.
How good is it therefore to try before we trust, yea to trust none that are
not true to God? David durst not repose upon Saul's fair promises, whom he knew
to be moody and slippery. The French say in their Proverb, When the Spaniard
comes to parl of peace, then double-bolt the door. The Hollanders make no
conditions with the Spaniard (whom they know to hold that Machiavellian
heresy, Fides tam diu servanda est quamdiu expediat,) but such as are made at
Sea, and sealed with great Ordnance. Calvin and other Protestant Divines were
called to the Council of Trent, but durst not venture thither, quia me vestigia
terrent, as the Fox in the Fable said: they had not forgot how John Hus, and
Hierome of Prague sped at the Council of Constance, although they had the
Emperors safe conduct. They knew that Turks and Papists concur in this, as
they do in many other Tenets, That there is no faith to be kept with dogs,
that is, with Christians, as Turks understand it, with Heretics, as Papists.

Verse. 20. As he that takes away a garment in cold weather] Music in mourning
is held most unseasonable: that was an Heathenish custom that the Jews had
taken up, Matthew. 9.23. Cantabat moestis tibia funeribus, says Ovid. Fast. lib.
4.
We should rejoice with those that rejoice, and weep with those that weep.
Nabla and lyra lugentibus ingrata, says Plutarch. Music and mourning agree
like Harp and Harrow, like thin clothing and cold weather, or like Nitre and
Vinegar, says Solomon. There are that read the words otherwise, and
accordingly sense them. Thus: As he that puts on a garment in the cold
season, or Vinegar on Nitre; so is he that sings songs to a sad heart. That
is, Junius.
Tristitiam dissolvit cantus, ut vestes discutiunt frigus, and acetum dissolvit
nitrum. As a garment warmeth the body, and Vinegar dissolveth Nitre, so a sweet
singer, by his delightsome ditty, cheareth up the pensive soul, and drives
sorrow out of it. See 1 Samuel 16.24. 2 King. 3.15. Dan. 6.19.

Verse. 21. If thine enemy be hungry] Elisha did so: he feasted his
Persecutours, (2 King. 6.) by a noble revenge; and provided a table for those
who had provided a grave for him. Those Syrians came to Dothan full of bloody
purposes to Elisha: he sends them from Samaria full of good cheer and jollity.
Thus, Dr. Hall's contempt.
thus should a Christian punish his pursuers: no vengeance but this is Heroical
and fit for imitation.

Verse. 22. For thou shall heap coals of fire] By heaping courtesies upon him,
thou shall win him over to thy self: as the King of Israel did those Syrians
he feasted. They came no more after that by way of ambush or incursion into
the bounds of Israel. In doing some good to our enemies, we do most to our
selves.

And the Lord shall reward thee] However men deal with thee. It may be they
may prove dross that will not be melted, dirt that will not be mollified, but
moulter to nothing, crumble to crattle as stones, etc. as having no metal of
ingenuity or good nature in them. But desist not, despond not, God will reward
thee, and his retributions are more than bountiful. Or (as the words may be
read) God will pacify for thee, as he did Saul for David. Never did a
charitable act go away without a blessing: God cannot but love in us this
imitation of his mercy, who bids his Sun to shine upon the evil and unthankful:
and that love is never fruitless.

Caecias nubes attrahit.
Verse. 23. The North Wind drives away raine] Hence Homer calls it (...), the
fair-weather-maker, and Hierom, the airs Beesome. There is a Southerly wind,
that attracts clouds, and ingenders rain.

So does an angry countenance, a backbiting tongue] The ready way to be rid of
Tale-bearers, is to brow-beat them: for like Whelps, if we stroke them, they
leap upon us and defile us with fawning; but give them a rap, and they are
gone: so here. Carry therefore in this case a severe rebuke in thy countenance,
as God does, Psalm. 80.16. Be not a re-setter to these privy Thieves, a
receptacle for these mures nominis, as one calls them: the Tale-hearer is as
blameworthy as the Talebearer, and he that loves a lie, as he that makes it.
Revel. 22. See Psalm. 15.3. Romans 1.31.

Verse. 24. It is better to dwell, etc.] See the note on chap. 21.9. and 19.13.

Verse. 25. As cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is good news] This and many
more of these Proverbs Solomon might well utter out of his own experience: for
he sent out into far Countries for Gold, Horses, and other Commodities, 1
King. 9.26. besides Ambassies of state, and enquiries into the natures and
qualities of foreign parts and peoples. Of the Conversion of other Countries to
the faith, he could not then hear, as we now may, and lately have good news
from New England. Neither had he the happiness to hear that, which we have not
only heard, but seen and handled of the Word of life, 1 John 1.1. He had (...)
the Promise, but we have (...) the joyful tidings, the sum of all the good
news in the World, as the Angels, those first Messengers cleped it, Luke 2.10.
Jesus is a short Gospel, and the good news of him should drown all
discontents, yea make our very hearts dance Levaltoes within us: as Abraham's
did, though he heard of him only by the hearing or the ear, or saw him afar
off. Heaven is called a far Country, Matthew. 25.14. good news from thence
brought in by the hand of the Holy Ghost, witnessing with our spirits that we
are the Sons of God, and if Sons, then Heirs of that far Country, of that
fair City, whose maker and builder is God, how welcome should that be to us,
and how inexpressibly comfortable? See 1 Pet. 1.8.

Verse. 26. A righteous man falling down before the wicked] i. e. Doing any
thing (though by mere frailty) unbeseeming his Profession, or that redounds not
to the scandal of the weak only (as Gal. 2.11.) but to the scorn of the wicked
(as 2 Samuel 12.14.) is as a troubled fountain, etc. is greatly disgraced and
prejudiced. What a blemish was it for Abraham to fall under the reproof of
Abimelech? for Sampson to be taken by the Philistims in an Whore-house? for
Josiah to be in-minded of his duty by Pharaoh Necho? for Peter to be drawn by a
silly Wench to forswear his Master, etc? was not the Fountain here troubled,
when trampled by the feet of these beasts? the Spring corrupted, when
Conscience is thus defiled and gashed? Let it be our care to cleanse this
spring of all pollutions of flesh and spirit: as a troubled fountain will
clear it self, and as sweet water made brackish by the coming in of the salt,
yet if naturally it be sweet, at length it will work it out.

Verse. 27. It is not good to eat too much honey] For it breeds choler, and
brings diseases.

So for men to search their own glory] i. e. To be desirous of vainglory, Gal.
5.26. to seek the praise of men, to hunt after the worlds plaudite, to say to
it, as Tiberius once answered Justinus, Situ volueris ego sum, Si tu non vis
ego non sum, I am wholly thine, I am only thy Clay and Wax; this is base and
in-glorious; this is to be Gloriae animal, popularis aurae vile mancipium, the
creature of vainglory, Hier. ep. ad Julian. Consolater.
a base slave to popular applause, as Hierome calls Crates the Philosopher, who
cast his goods into the Sea, merely for a name. Some do all for a name, as
Jehu and the Pharisees; like Kites they flutter up a little, but their eye is
upon the carrion. The Chaldee Paraphrast by their glory, understands the
Majesty of the Scriptures, (which to David were sweeter than honey) These we
must search, but not over-curiously: Ne qui scrutatur majestatem, opprimatur
aegloria, as the vulgar here has it, lest prying into Gods Majesty, we be
oppressed by his glory.

Verse. 28. He that has no rule over his own spirit] Cui non est cohibitio in
spiritum suum, that reigns not in his unruly affections, but suffers them to
run riot in sin, as so many headstrong Horses, or to ride upon the backs one
of another, like Kine in a straight. This man being not fenced with the wall of
Gods fear, lies open to all assaults of Satan and other enemies, Ephesians. 4.26,
27. Jam. 4.7. as Laish, Judge. 18. or Hazor, that had neither gates nor bars,
Jer. 49.31. or the Hague in Holland, which the inhabitants will not wall, Heyl.
Geog.
as desiring to have it counted rather the principal Village of Europe, than a
lesser City.

CHAP. XXVI. Verse. 1. So honor is not seemly for a fool.
Honor is the reward of virtue, dignity should wait upon desert. Sed dignitas
in indigno est ornamentum in luto, as Salvian. Honor is as fit for a fool, as
a Gold-ring for a Swines snout. Seeds prima and vita ima, will never suit. The
order of nature is inverted when the vilest men are exalted, Psalm. 12.8. it is
a foul incongruity, and of very evil consequence. Cicer. de divina^ lib. 2.
For thereby themselves will be hardened, and others heartened to the like
prosperous folly ( Felix enim scelus virtus vocatur, says Tully) The study of
virtue also will be neglected when fools are preferred, and Gods heavy Wrath
poured out in full measure upon these uncircumcised Vice-gods (as I may in the
worst sense best term them) who mis-represent him to the world by their ungodly
practices, as a wicked, crooked, unrighteous Judge.

Verse. 2. As the Bird by wandering, and the Swallow] i. e. As these may fly
where they will, and no body cares or is the worse. So here. And as Birds tired
with much wandering, and not finding where to rest, return again to their Nest,
after that they have beat the air with weary wing: so the causeless curse
returns to the author. Cursing men are cursed men.

So the curse causlesse shall not come] What was David the worse for Shimei's
rash raylings? or Jeremy for all the Peoples cursings of him? chap. 15.10. Or
the Christian Churches for the Jews cursing them in their daily Prayers, with
a Maledic Domine Nazaraeis? or the reformed Churches for the Popes
Excommunications, and Execrations, with Bell, Book and Candle? The Pope is like
a Wasp, no sooner angry but out comes a sting: which being out is like a fools
dagger, rattling and snapping without an edge. Sit ergo Gallus in nomine
Diabolorum, The Devil take the French, said Pope Julius the second, Annal.
Gallie.
(as he was sitting by the fire and saying his Prayers) upon news of his Forces
defeated by the French at the battle of Ravenna. Was not this that very mouth
that speaks great things and blasphemies? Revel. 13.5. And (as qualis herus
talis servus, like master, like man) a certain Cardinal entering with a great
deal of pomp into Paris, when the people were more than ordinarily earnest with
him for his fatherly benediction; Quandoquidem, said he, hic populus vult
decipi, decipiatur in nomine diaboli. Forasmuch as this people will be fooled,
let them be fooled in the Devils name. And another Cardinal, when at a Diet
held at Ausborough, the Prince Electors Ambassador was (in his Masters name)
present at Mass, but would not as the rest did, kiss the consecrated Charger;
the Cardinal, I say, that sung Mass, being displeased thereat, cried out, Si
non vis benedicticum, Anno Dom. 1559. Bucholcer.
habeas tibi maledictionem in aeternum. If thou will not have the blessing,
thou shall have Gods curse and mine for ever. Let them curse, but bless thou:
when they arise, let them be ashamed, but let thy servants rejoice, Psalm.
109.28.

Verse. 3. A whip for the horse] Viz. To quicken his slow pace. A bridle for the
ass, wherewith to lead him in the right way: for he goes willingly but a
foot-pace, and would be often out, but for the bit, and besides, he is very
refractory, and must be held in with bit and bridle, Psalm. 32.9.

And a rod for the back of fools] (...). A fool will be the better for beating.
Vexatio dat intellectum. Due punishment may well be to these horses and asses
(so the Scripture terms unreasonable and wicked men) both for a whip to incite
them to good, and for a bridle to reign them in from evil. God has rods
sticking in every corner of his house for these froward fools, and if a rod
serve not turn, he has a terrible sword, Esaias 27.1. So must Magistrates.
Cuncta prius tentanda. If a rod will do, they need not brandish the sword of
Justice; nor do as Draco did, who punished with death every light offense. This
was to kill a fly upon a man's forehead with a beetle, to the knocking out of
his brains.

Verse. 4. Answer not a fool according to his folly] When either he curses
thee, as verse 2, or cries out upon thee for giving him due correction ( verse
3.) for every public person had need to carry a spare handkerchief, to wipe
off the dirt of disgrace and obloquy cast upon him for doing his duty. Pass
such an one by in silence, Chrysostom.
as not worthy the answering. Sile, et funestam dedisti plagam, say nothing,
and you pay him to purpose. Hezekiah would not answer Rabshakeh, nor Jeremy
Hananiah, chap. 28.11. nor our Savior his adversaries, Mat. 26.26. John 19.9.
he reviled not his revilers, he threatened not his open opposites, 1 Pet. 2.23.

Lest thou also be like unto him] As hot and as headlong as he; for a little
thing kindles us, and we are apt to think that we have reason to be mad, if
evil-intreated: to talk as fast for our selves, as he does against us, and to
give him as good as he brings: so that at length there will be never a wiser of
the two, and people will say so.

Verse. 5. Answer a fool according to his folly] Cast in somewhat that may sting
him, and stop his mouth. Stone him with soft words, but hard arguments, as
Christ dealt with Pilat: lest he lift up his crest, and look upon himself as a
conqueror, and be held so by the hearers. In fine, when a fool is among such
as himself, answer him, lest he seem wise. If he be among wise men answer him
not, and they will regard rather quid tu taceas, quam quod ille dicat, thy
seasonable silence, than his passionate prattle.

Verse. 6. He that sends a message by the hand of a fool] The worth of a
faithful messenger he had set forth, Chap. 15.13. here, the discommodity of a
foolish one: Such as were the Spies Moses sent, Number. 13. and 14. So when the
Prophet proves a fool, the spiritual man is mad ( Hos. 9.7.) things go on as
heavily, as if feet were wanting to a traveller, or as if a messenger had lost
his legs.

Rodulph. Bain.
Verse. 7. The legs of the lame are not equal] Locum habet proverbium cum is qui
male vivit, been loquitur, says an Interpreter. This Proverb hits such as
speak well, but live otherwise. Uniformity and Ubiquity of obedience are sure
signs of sincerity; but as unequal pulse argues a distempered body, so does
uneaven walking show a diseased soul. A wise man's life is all of one color
like it self: and godliness runs through it, as the woof runs through the warp.
But if all the parts of the line of thy life be not straight before God, it is
a crooked life. If thy tongue speak by the talent, but thine hands scarce work
by the ounce, thou shall pass for a Pharisee, Mat. 23.3. They spoke like
Angels, lived like Devils; had heaven commonly at their tongues end, but the
earth continually at their fingers end. Odi homines ignava opera, Philosopha
sententia, said the Heathen, that is, I hate such Hypocrites, as have mouths
full of holiness, hearts full of hollowness. A certain stranger coming on
Embassage to the Senate of Rome, and coloring his hoary hair and pale cheeks
with vermillion hiew, a grave Senator espying the deceit, stood up and said,
What sincerity are we to expect at this man's hand, whose locks, and looks, and
lips do lie?

Verse. 8. As he that binds a stone in a sling] A precious stone is not fit
for a sling (where it will soon be cast away and lost) no more is honor for a
fool. See verse. 1. Aben-Ezra says, that Margemah here rendered a Sling,
signifies Purple, and senseth it thus; As it is an absurd thing to wrap a
Pibble in purple, so is it to prefer a fool, as Saul did Doeg, as Ahasuerosh,
Human.

Verse. 9. As a thorn goes up into the hand, etc.] He handles it hard, as if
it were another kind of wood, and it runs into his hand. So do profane persons
pervert and pollute the holy Scriptures, to their own and other men's
destruction. By a Parable here the Hebrews understand either these Parables of
Solomon, or the whole Book of God. At this day no people under Heaven do so
abuse Scripture as the Jews do. For commending (in their familiar Epistles)
some Letter they have received, they say, Eloquia Domini, eloquia pura: The
words of my Lord are pure words. When they flatter their friends, Pateat, say
they, accessus ad aditum sanctitatis tuae. Weemse.
Let me have access to the sanctuary of thy holiness. When they would
testify themselves thankful, Nomini tuo psallam, I will sing praise to thy
Name. When they complain, friends forsake them, Lord, say they, thou go not
forth with our armies. When they invite their friends to a Banquet or a
Wedding, In thee have I trusted, let me not be put to confusion. Lo thus do
these witless wicked wretches abuse Gods Parables, and take his Name in vain.
Whereas the very Heathen could say, Non loquendum de Deo sine lumine, God is
not to be talked of lightly, loosely, disrespectively. Thou shall fear that
glorious and fearful Name, Jehovah thy God, says Moses their own Lawgiver,
Deuteronomy. 28.58.

Verse. 10. The great God that formed all things] As he made all, so he
maintains all; even the evil, and the unthankful. God deals not as that cruel
Duke of Alva did in the Netherlands, Grimston.
some he roasted to death (says the Historian) starved others, and that even
after quarter, saying, Though he promised to give them their lives, he did not
promise to find them meat. But as he has given them their lives (forfeited in
Adam) so he allows them a livelihood, gives them their portion in this life,
fills their bellies with his good treasure, but withal sends leanness into
their souls: or if he fat them, it is to fit them for destruction, as fated
ware is fitted for the shambles.

Verse. 11. As a dog returns to his vomit] A homely comparison (able to make
a true Christian ready to lay up all) but good enough for the odious Apostate,
to whom it is applied. Such an one was Judas, Julian, Ecebolius, Baldvinus,
Islebius, Agricola that first Antinomian, who did many times promise amendment,
and yet afterward fell to his error again. After that, he condemned his
error, and recanted it in a public Auditory, and printed his revocation; yet
when Luther was dead, he relapsed into that error; so hard a thing is it to
get poison out, when once swallowed down. Harding (Bishop Jewels Antagonist)
was in King Edwards days, a thundering Preacher against Popery, wishing he
could cry out against it as loud as the Bells of Oseney: so that by his
preaching many were confirmed in the truth. All which to be so, they can
testify that heard him, and be yet alive, says Mr. Fox. See an excellent
Letter of the Lady Jane Grays to him, whiles she was Prisoner in the Tower,
Act. and Mon. fol. 1291. wherein she wills him to remember the horrible History
of Julian of old, and the lamentable case of Spira alate, etc.

Verse. 12. See thou a man wise in his own conceit?] This foolish wiseman, or
wise foolish-man (for whether of the two to call him I know not, as the
Chronicler says of Sir Thomas Moore) is that Dog spoken of in the former
verse; that fore-thinks not the evil that follows upon his returning to his
filthy vomit; which being made much worse by the heat of the Sun and open air,
makes him much more sick than before he had been. Semblably, the witless
wicked man, insensible of the evil of his way, and highly conceited thereof,
goes boldly on till there be neither hope of better, nor place of worse. See
the Note on chap. 3.7. and my commonplace of Arrogance.

Verse. 13. The slothful man says, There is a Lion] See the Note on cha. 22.
verse. 13.

Verse. 14. As the door turns upon his hinges] But comes not off, unless
lifted or knocked off: So neither comes the sluggard out of his feathered nest,
(where he lies soaking and stretching) unless hard hunger or other necessity
rouse and raise him. As abroad there is a Lion, so at home there is a Lurk, a
Lurdain, and a Losel, that lives in the world to no purpose, yea to bad
purpose; and being wise in his own conceit, will not accept of better counsel.
Those whose heads are laid upon down-pillows, are not apt to hear noyses; no
more are those that live at ease in Zi^n, to hearken to wholesome advice. Or if
sometimes they have a kind of willingness and velleity to do better; yet it
is but as the door that turns on the hinges, but yet hangs still upon them.

Verse. 15. The slothful hides his hand in his bosome] See the Note on chapter
19.24.

Verse. 16. Than seven men that can render a reason] Yea though they were the
seven Wisemen of Greece, they were all fools to him. The proud Pharisees
rejected the counsel of God, and would not be baptized of John, Luke 7.30.
Belly-policy teaches the Sluggard a great many excuses, which he thinks will
go for wisdom: because by them he thinks to sleep in a whole skin.

Verse. 17. He that passes by and medleth, etc.] Two kind of studies have I
always hated (says one) studium partium, and studius novarum rerum. They that
enter strife without calling (says another) do commonly hazard themselves
into trouble without comfort. This was Jehosaphats folly at Jabesh Gilead, and
(as some think) Josiah's when he went up against Pharah Necho: thinking thereby
to ingratiate with the Assyrian, Pharaohs professed enemy. It is from idleness
usually, that men are thus busy in other men's matters, without thank, or other
benefit. 1 Timothy 5.13. and 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. and therefore this Proverb fitly
follows the former. Howbeit this is not always true: for charity may move men
to interpose for a right understanding, and a good accord betwixt disagreeing
parties. Neither in this case must a man affect to be held no medler, since
blessed are the peacemakers. And though it be for most part a thankless
office (for if a man have two friends, he often loses one of them) yet our
reward is with God: and if by seeking to part the scuffle, we derive some blows
upon our selves, yet the Euge of a good conscience will salve that well enough.
That which is here forbidden, is, for a man to make himself a party and
maintain one side against another. And yet where it is for God and his truth,
this may be done too: as when Queen Elizabeth not only sat as Umpire betwixt
the Spaniard, French, and Hollanders (so as she might well have taken up that
saying of her Father, Camdens Eliz. 196.
Cuiadhaereo, praeest, He whom I side with, carries it) but afterward, when
she saw her time, undertook the protection of the Netherlanders against the
Spaniard: wherein all Princes admired her fortitude; and the King of Sweden
said, that she had now taken the Diadem from her head, and set it upon the
doubtful chance of war. Ibid.
This was done, Anno 1585.

Is like one that takes a Dog by the ears] Where he loves not to be handled,
but about the neck rather. The Dutch have a like Proverb, To take a dog by
the tail. (...).
The Greeks, To take a Lion by the beard, or a Bear by the tooth, to thrust
ones hand into a Waspes-nest, to stir up a Scorpion, etc.

Verse. 19. Am not I in jest?] The wicked man's mirth is usually mixed with
mischief; it is no sport, unless he may have the Devil his Play-fellow: no good
fellowship without Horse-play. Salt-jests, and dry flouts, to the just grief or
disgrace of another, is counted facetious and fine. But St. Paul calls it
foolish, Ephesians. 5.4. (...).
and further says, that for such things sake the wrath of God comes upon the
children of disobedience. Quid mihi cum fabulis, cum jocis? says Bernard, what
has a Christian to do with jesting and jearing? We allow an Horse to praunce
and skip in a pasture; which if he does when backed by the Rider, we count him
an unruly and unbroken Jade. So, howsoever in Heathens and Atheists, God may
wink at jocularity and dicacity, yet he looks for better things from his own
people. Creed mihi, res severa est verum gaudium, says Seneca. True mirth is a
severe business. But what a mad man Robert de Beliasme Earl of Shrewsbury, Anno
Dom. 1111. delighting to do mischief, and exercise his cruelty, and then to
say, Am not I in jest? An example hereof he showed upon his own Son; who being
but a child and playing with him, the father for a pastime, Speeds Chron. 473.
put his thumb in the boys eyes, and thrust out the balls thereof.

Verse. 20. Where no wood is, there the fire goes out] Lignis ignis
conservatur: so is strife by evil tongues, these are the Devils bellows and
boutefeaus. Ye shall conceive chaff, ye shall bring forth stubble, your breath
as fire shall devour you, Isa. 33.11. Such is the breath of Tale-bearers. A
cover-feu bell would do well for these Incendiaries, that else may set on fire
the whole course of Nature, Jam. 3.6. See the Note on Chap. 16.28.

Verse. 21. So is a contentious man] Hebr. A man of contentions, Vir biliosus
and bellicosus, a man made up of discords (as Democritus said the world was)
that loves to live in the fire, as the Salamander does: the dog-dayes continue
with such all the year long, and like mad dogs, they bite and set a madding
all they can fasten on, as did Sheba, Korah, and Judas, who set all the
Disciples a murmuring at the oil poured on Christ's head. So Arrius set all the
Christian world on a light fire, and Pope Hildebrand cast abroad his firebrands.

Verse. 22. The words of a talebearer, etc.] See chap. 18.8.

Verse. 23. Burning lips and a wicked heart, etc.] The tongue of the righteous
is as fined silver, but glosing lips upon a false heart is no better than
dross upon dirt: counterfeit friends are naught on both sides, having os
maledictum and cor malum, as Luther renders this Text; a bad mouth, and a worse
heart. Wicked men are said to speak with an heart and a heart, Psalm. 12. as
speaking one thing, and thinking another, drawing a fair glove on a foul hand.
These are dangerous to be dealt withal: for like Serpents, they can sting
without hissing; like curre dogs, suck your blood only with licking, and in
the end kill you and cut your throats without biting: so cunning and close are
they in the conveyance of their collusion. Squire sent out of Spain to poison
Queen Elizabeth, anointed the pummel of her saddle with poison covertly, Camd.
Eliz. ^7.
and as it were doing somewhat else, praying with a loud voice, God save the
Queen. When those Romish Incendiaries, Gifford, Hodgeson, and others, had set
Savage a work to kill the said Queen, they first set forth a Book to persuade
the English Catholics to attempt nothing against her. So, Parsons, when he
had hatched that nameless villainy the Powder Plot, set forth his book of
Resolution, as if he had been wholly made up of devotion. Caveatur osculum
Iscarioticum. It is the property of a godly man to speak the truth from his
heart, Psalm. 15.

Verse. 24. He that hates, dissembleth with his lips] And so heaps sin upon
sin, till he be transformed into a breathing devil. This is meant not so much
of the passion of hatred, as of the habit of it; when it has wholly leavened
the heart, and lies watching its opportunity of doing mischief. The Devil is at
Inn with such (as Mr. Bradford phraseth it) and was as great a Master, Sermon.
of Repent.
long before the Florentine Secretary was born, as since.

Verse. 25. When he speaks fair, believe him not] (...). Take heed whom you
trust, beware of men, Matthew. 10.17. bless your selves from your pretended
friends, and pray with David to be delivered from lying lips, and from a
deceitful tongue. Admit they not only speak us fair, Psalm. 120.1.
but do us many kindnesses, yet believe them, as little as David did Saul.
(...). Soph. Virgil. Martial
Enemies gifts are giftlesse gifts, said one Heathen. And -- timeo Danaos and
dena ferentes, says another.

Munera magna quidem misit, sed misit in hamo:
Et piscatorem piscis amare potest?
Verse. 26. Whose hatred is covered by deceit, etc.] He shall be detected and
detested of all, sooner or later. God will wash off his varnish with rivers of
brimstome. Love, as it is the best armor, so it is the worst cloak, and will
serve dissemblers, as the disguise Ahab put on, and perished 1 King. 22.

Verse. 27. Whosoever diggeth a pit, shall fall thereinto] This is the same with
Psalm. 7.15. Where-hence it seems to be taken. See the Note there. Heathen
writers have many Proverbs to like purpose. See Erasm. Chiliad.

And he that rolleth a stone, it will return upon him] Cardinal Benno relates a
memorable story of Pope Hildebrand, or Greg. 7. that he hired a base fellow to
lay a great stone upon a beam in the Church, where Henry 4. the Emperor used
to pray, and so to lay it, that it might fall (as from the top of the Church)
upon the Emperors head, and kill him. But whilst this Caytiff was attempting
to do it, the stone with its weight drew him down, and falling upon him,
dashed him in pieces upon the pavement. The Thracians in Herodotus being
offended with Jupiter for raining unseasonably upon them, shot up their arrows
at him, which soon after returned upon their own pates.

Verse. 28. A lying tongue hates those that are afflicted by it] False love
proves to be true hatred, by the evil consequent of its ruin and destruction
to the party flattered, and betrayed by a smooth supparasitation. There are
that thus read the Text, The false tongue hates those that smite it, etc.
Truth breeds hatred: as the fair Nymphs did the ill-favored Fauns and Satyrs.

CHAP. XXVII. Verse. 1. Boast not thy self of to morrow.]
Exodus 13.14.
THat is, of what thou will do hereafter, in quovis tempore postero. See 1 Samuel
28.19. Petrarch. lib 3. Memurah. ad finem.
Jam. 4.14. He was a wise man, that being invited to a feast on the next
morrow, answered, Ex multis annis crastinum non habui, for these many years I
have not had a morrow day to promise for any business. But what luxurious fools
were those Sybarites, Aelian.
that intending a feast, did use to invite their guests a whole year before?

Nescis quid serus vesper v^hat. Hinc Haebrei eventae appella^t filios temporis.
For thou know not what a day may bring forth] A great-bellied day. Whiles a
Woman is yet with child, none can tell what kind of birth it will be, Luke
12.16, 17. Time travelleth with Gods Decrees, and in their season brings them
forth; but little does any man know what is in the womb of to morrow, till God
has signified his will by the event. David in his prosperity said, that he
should never be moved, but he soon after found a sore alteration: God confuted
his confidence, Psalm. 30. So the evil which men intend against us, may prove
abortive, either dye in the womb, or else they may travel with mischief, and
bring forth a lie, that is, somewhat contrary to that they intend; but Fata
viam invenient -- Stat sua cuique dies. See Judge. 5.28, 29, 30. 1 King. 20.10.
Accidit in puncto quod non speratur in anno.

Verse. 2. Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth] Unless it be in
defense of thine innocence, as David, Psalm. 7. or when the concealing of thy
goodness may turn to the hinderance of the truth, or to the hurt of the
Church, or impairing of Gods glory, as Paul, 2 Cor. 11. and 12. Let a man do
worthily in Ephrata, and he shall be famous in Bethlehem: he need not be his
own Trumpeter, as Jehu, the proud Pharisee, and other arrogant vainglorious
Bragadochioes. (See my common place of Arrogance) God will take order that
those that honor him, be honored of all, and that fame shall attend virtue,
as the shadow does the body. Say that wicked men will not speak well but ill of
us, 3 John 12.
yet we have a testimony in their Consciences (as David had in Saul's, Daniel in
Dariuso', etc.) Demetrius has a good report of all good men, and of the truth
it self: and that is enough for him; since, not he that commends himself (or
has the worlds applause) is approved, but he whom the Lord (and his people)
commends, 2 Cor. 10.18. Haec ego primus vidi, was a vainglorious brag that
Zabarel had better held in. And haec ego feci, proves men to be no better than
Faeces, says Luther wittily; these brags are but dregs; Laus proprio sordescit
in ore; Quod magnificum resciente a^io fuisset, ipso qui gesserat reconsente
vanescit. Plin Ep. 8. l. 1
That which had been much to a man's commendation, if out of another man's mouth,
sounds very slenderly out of his own, says Pliny. Let her works (not her
words) praise her in the gates, Prove. 31.31. as they did Ruth, All the City of
my people knows that thou art a virtuous woman, Ruth 3.11. She was so, and she
had the credit of it. So had the Virgin Mary, and yet she was troubled when
truly praised of the Angel. They shall be praised of Angels in Heaven, who have
eschewed the praises of men on earth, and blush when but justly commended,
speaking modestly and meanly of their own good parts and practices. Saint Luke
says, Levi made a great feast, Luke 5.27, 28. But when himself speaks of it,
Matthew. 9.10. he says only, that Christ came home and eat bread in Levies
house, to teach us the truth of this Proverb, that another man's mouth should
praise us, and not our own. Like as in the Olympic games, those that overcame
did not put the Garlands on their own heads, but stayed till others did it for
them; so here.

Verse. 3. But a fools wrath is heavier than them both] Himself cannot rule nor
repress it, but that he dies of the sullens sometimes, as that fool Nabal did.
Much less can others endure it without trouble and regret; especially when so
peevish and past grace, as to be angry with those that approve not, applaud not
his folly. How angry was Nebuchadnezzar, how much hotter was his heart than his
Oven, against those three Worthies, for refusing to fall down before his golden
Mawmer? How unsufferable was Herod's anger in the Massacre at Bethlehem, and the
primitive Persecutors for the two first ages after Christ? that I come no
lower. See my Commonplace of Anger.

Verse. 4. Wrath is cruel, and anger is outragious] Or, overflowing all the
banks, or carrying all before it as an impetuous Land-floud, and therefore most
intolerable, as verse. 3. but behold a worse matter: Envy is an evil that none
can stand before, for it knows neither end nor measure: as appears in the
Devil, and his Patriarch Cain; in Saul, the Pharisees, those spiteful Jews,
Acts 13.45. And to this day they do antiquum obtinere, bear the old grudge to
us Christians, cursing us in their daily Orisons, calling us Bastard-gentiles,
professing that if their Messiah were come, rather than we should have any
part in him, or benefit by him, they would Crucify him an hundred times over.
They have a saying amongst them, Optimus qui inter gentes est d^gnus cui caput
conteratur tanquam Serpenti. The best of us Gentiles is worthy of the Serpents
punishment, viz. to have his head bruised, etc. so great is their envy still
against Christians, who pity them and pray for them: and truly, it is no more
than need, since by the question here propounded, we may easily guess, how
potent this quick-sighted and sharp-fanged malignity envy is; indeed the
venom of all vices is found in it: neither will it be drawn to embrace that
good which it envies to another, as too good for him, Act. 13.44, 45.

Verse. 5. Open rebuke is better than secret love] For after the nature of Pills,
Rebuke, though it be not toothsome, yet it is wholesome; and a sure sign of a
faithful friend, if rightly managed. See my Commonplace of Admonition. Secret
love, that either sees nothing amiss in a friend, or dare not say so, is
little worth in comparison. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart,
Levit. 19.17
but (as an Argument of thy love) thou shall reprove him plainly (but wisely)
and not suffer sin upon him, much less further it, and be his broker or pander
in it, as Hirah the Adullamite was to his friend Judah, and Jonadab to his
Cousin Amnon, 2 Samuel 13.5.

Verse. 6. Faithful are the wounds of a friend] And are therefore to be prayed
for: but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful, or to be detested, and
therefore prayed against: so some read the words, and make the opposition. See
this done by David, Psalm. 141.5. Knocks from a righteous man he would take for
kindnesses: but the precious oils of the wicked (answerable to their kisses
here) he would cry out of, as the breaking of his head; for so Mercer,
Ainsworth, and others read that text, and the Septuagint accords, saying, let
not the oil of the sinner supple my head; by oil meaning flattering words, as
Psalm. 55.22. Reproofs and Corrections, though sharp and unpleasant, yet if
looked upon as issuing from that love that lies hid in the heart, they are
faithful, that is, fair and pleasant, as the Chaldee interprets it.

But the kisses of an enemy are deceitfull] i. e. his glosing and closing with
us for a further mischief, (such as were the kisses of Joab, Judas, Absalom and
Ahitophel) are not to be fancied, but deprecated and detested. See the note on
chap. 26.23. Theophrastus has in his character drawn out these kissing
cutthroats, Cap. (...).
who can be affable to their enemies, and disguise their hatred in
commendation, while they privily lay their snares: men Italienated, that can
salute with mortal embracements, and clasp you in those arms which they mean to
embrue in your dearest blood. Camd. Elis. Anno. 1591.
These treacherous kissers are of kin to that mad Hacket, hanged in Queen
Elizabeth's days, who bit off his honest schoolmasters nose, as he embraced him,
under color of renewing their love, and ear it down before the poor man's face.
So, and no better are the kisses, that is, the fawnings and flatteries of
perfideous persons.

Verse. 7. The full soul loatheth an honey comb] Heb. treads it under feet as
dung or dogs-meat. Chrysostom reports the saying of a certain Philosopher to
the same purpose. Anima in satietate posita etiam favis illudit. The sated soul
rejects finest fare, and most sweetest sustenance. This holds true in
spirituals too. The honey of Gods holy word, how is it trampled on by those
stall-fed beasts, in whom fullness has bred forgetfulness, saturity security?
Our soul loatheth this light meat, said they of their Manna, when once cloyed
with it. The Pharisees found no more sweetness or savouriness in our Saviors
own Sermons, than in the white of an egg, or a dry chip. Our Nation is also
sick of a spiritual plethory or plurifie: we begin to surfeit on the bread of
life. Now when God sees his mercies lying under Table, it is just with him to
call to the enemy to take away. Behold, therefore I will deliver thee to the
men of the East, -- who shall eat thy fruit, and drink thy milk, Ezekiel. 25.4.

But to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet] Hunger is the best Cook,
say the Dutch, the best sauce, say we, experience proves it so: how sweetly
does it season homely cates, Jejunus stomachus raro vulgaeria tem^it. Horat.
coarse fare? Artaxerxes Memor being put to fly for his life, fed hungerly on
barley-bread, with dried figs, and said, he never made a better meal in all his
life. Huniades once driven out of the field by the Turks, and lighting upon a
shepherd, craved for Gods sake of him something to eat: who brought him to a
poor cottage not far off, causing to be set before him bread and water with a
few Onions: who in the pleasant remembrance of that passed misery, Turk Hist.
fol. 310.
would oftentimes after in his greatest banguers say, that he never in his life
fared better or more daintily, than when he supped with this shepherd.

Verse. 8. As a bird that wandereth from her nest] Does it of inconstancy, and
often meets with misery: whereas God had taken order that none should molest a
bird upon her nest. Deuteronomy. 22.6, 7.

So is a man that wandreth from his place] A vagrant, an idleby, or a
busy-body, that keeps not his station, abides not in the calling wherein he was
called, 1 Cor. 7.20. exposed to misery and mischief, to ruth and ruin, Numb.
16.32. 2 Samuel 6.6, 7. 2 Chronicles. 26.19. Jonah 1. Jude 6. Psalm. 107.4. An honest
man's heart is where his calling is: such an one when he is abroad, is like a
fish in the air, whereinto if it leap for recreation or necessity, yet it soon
returns to its own element.

Verse. 9. Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart] Sweet ointment sensum
afficit, spiritum reficit, cerebrum juvat, affects the sense, refreshes the
spirit, comfort the brain.

So does the sweetness of a man's friend by hearty counsel] It is as a fresh
gale of sweet air to him that lives among walking dung-hils, open sepulchers.
It preserves the soul as a pomander, and refreshes it more than musk or civet
does the brain. The Counsel of such especially (Ministers I mean) of whom the
Scripture says, that they are unto God a sweet savor of Christ unto them that
are saved, 2 Cor. 2.15. These are they that can sell us oil for our lamps, that
we may buy for our selves, Mat. 25.9. Such a Counselor may be an Angel, nay a
God to another, as Moses was to Aaron: the comfort given by such (as the
blessing of Parents) is usually most effectual, because they are in Gods room.
See Job 33.23. If there be a messenger with him, an interpreter, one among a
thousand, Unus e millibus, not Vnus e similibus as the Vulgar reads it falsely,
and from the purpose.

Verse. 10. Thine own friend and thy Fathers friend forsake not] To forsake a
friend (an old friend especially) is to forsake ones self: for a friend is a
second self, and friendship (as wine) is commendable from its oldness. What a
Price set Solomon upon Hiram, who had been his fathers friend? 1 King. 5, and
how did he seek his love, as a precious inheritance left him (as it were) by
his father? and how courteously for his fathers sake, likewise dealt he with
Abiathar, that had dealt disloyally with him?

Neither go into thy brothers house] Cajetan reads it, (and perhaps better) Thy
brothers house will not come in the day of thy calamity, When thine old friend
will visit thee and stick close to thee; as Jonathan did to David, and
Onesiphorus to Paul. David complains of his carnal kindred; My lovers and my
friends stand a far off from my sore, and mine acquaintance stand aloof; Psalm.
88.18.
as the Priest and Levite did from the wounded man, when the Samaritan, a
stranger, but a neighbor indeed, relieved him.

Verse. 11. My son, be wise, and make my heart glad] See the note on chap.
10.1.

Verse. 12. A prudent man foreseeth the evill] See the note on Chap. 22.3.

Verse. 13. Take his garment that is surety] See the note on chap. 20.16.

Verse. 14. He that blesses his friend with a loud voice] Qui leonum laudibus
murem obruit, that extols a man above measure, as the false Prophets did Ahab,
and the People Herod, that praises him to his face: In vita Alphons.
which when a Court-parasite did to Sigismund the Emperor, he gave him a sound
box on the ear. A Preacher in Constantines time, ausus est Imperatorem in os
beatum dicere, Eusebius. de vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 4.
says Eusebius, presumed to call the Emperor a Saint to his face: but he went
away with a check. When Aristobulus the Historian, presented to Alexander the
great book that he had written of his glorious acts; wherein he had
flatteringly made him greater than he was, Alexander (after he had read the
book) threw it into the River Hydaspes, and said to the Author, It were a good
deed to throw thee after it.

Rising early in the morning] As afraid to be prevented by another, or that he
shall not have time enough all day after to do it in.

Verse. 15. A continual dropping] See the note on chap. 19.24.

Verse. 16. Whosoever hides her, hides the wind] i. e. One may as soon hide
the wind, or hold it from blowing, as hide her shame, or hush her brawling. The
wife should make her husband her covering, (when she is abroad especially) but
many wives are so intemperate and wilful, that a man may as well hide the wind
in his fist, or oil in his clutch-fist, as his wives infirmities. Let this be
marked by those that venture upon shrews, if rich, fair, well-descended, in
hope to tame them, and make them better.

Verse. 17. Iron sharpeneth Iron] One edge-tool sharpeneth another: so does the
face of a man his friend. Ipse aspectus viri boni delectat, says Seneca. Let
us whet one another to love and good works, says Paul, as boars whet their
tusks, Heb. 10.24. (...). 2 Timothy ^.6. (...).
as mowers whet their sithes. Thus Paul was pressed in spirit by the coming of
Timothy, Acts 18.4. and extimulates Timothy to stir up the gift of God that
was in him. Thus Peter roused up those to whom he wrote, ex veterno torporis
and teporis, out of their spiritual lethargy, 2 Pet. 1.13. And thus those good
souls spoke often one to another, for mutual quickening in dull and dead times,
Mul. 3.10, 17. See my notes on that text. As ambergris is nothing so sweet
in itself, as when compounded with other things; So godly and learned men are
gainers by communicating themselves to others. Conference has incredible
profit in all sciences. Cast alio renders this text thus: Ut ferrum ferro, Of
Jabad unire, adunare.
sic homines alii aliis conjunguntur; as iron is to iron, so are men joined and
soldred to one another, viz. in a very straight bond of love and friendship.

Verse. 18. Whosoever keeps the fig tree, shall eat, etc.] Of the
continually-renewed fruits thereof, for when the ripe figs are pulled off,
others shortly come in their place. The Egyptian fig tree is reported by
Solinus to bear fruit seven times in a year: such as is good both for meat and
medicine, as Galen observes, and after him Dioscorides.

So he that waits on his master shall be honoured] That is, Liberally
maintained, and highly promoted; As Joseph was wherever he served. The
Heathens were very cruel to their servants; putting an engine about their necks
(called (...)) and it reached down to their hands, that they might not so much
as lick off the meal when they were sifting it. These poor servants were in
worse case than the Jews Oxen, 1 Cor. 9.8. But such as are faithful and
serviceable, however their Masters deal with them (they should deal well with
them, Deuteronomy. 15.12, 13, 14.) God will bestow upon them a Child's part, even the
reward of inheritance, (...).
Col. 3.22, 23, 24. Their Masters also, if faithful and beloved, as they
partake of the benefit, viz. of their good service, so they will be beneficial
to them. Beneficentiae recompensatores, as Bullinger after Theophilact renders
that text, 1 Timothy 6.2.

Verse. 19. As in water face answers to face, etc.] Men's fancies differ as
much as their faces: So the Chaldee interprets it. But they do better that
give this sense, that in regard of natural corruption, all men look with one
countenance, and have one visage: since whole evil is in man, and whole man in
evil, neither by nature is there ever a better of us. In the heart of the
vilest person we may see, as in a mirror, our own evil hearts. For as there
were many Marii in one Caesar, so are there many Cains and Judasses in the best
of us. And as that first Chaos had the feed of all Creatures, and wanted only
the Spirits motion to bring them forth, Genesis 1.1, 2. so there is a (...), a
common seed-plot of sin in us all: there wants but the warmth and watering of
Satan's temptations to make it bud, Ezekiel. 7.10. And though there were no Devil,
yet our naughty nature would act Satan's part against itself: It would have a
supply of wickedness, (as a Serpent has poison) from it self: It has a spring
to feed it. Hence our Savior charge his own Disciples to take heed of
surfeiting, drunkenness, and distracting carefulness, Luke 21.34. (who would
ever have suspected such monsters to lurk in such holy bosoms?) And Saint Paul
saw cause to warn so pure a soul as young Timothy to fly youthly lusts, and to
exhort the younger women with chastity: 1 Timothy 5.2.
thereby intimating, that whiles he was exhorting them to chastity, some impure
motion might steal upon him unawares. Corruption in the best will have some
flurts.

Verse. 20. Hell and destruction are never satisfied] Hell and the Grave have
their name in Hebrew from their unsatisfiablenesse, being always craving more,
and that with assiduity and importunity. And this fitly follows upon the former
verse (as Aben-Ezra well observes) that men may be frighted by the remembrance
of Hells wide mouth gaping for them, from following the bent of their sinful
natures: and that those that here have never enough, shall once have fire
enough in the bottom of hell.

So the eyes of men are never satisfied] That is, their lusts, their carnal
concupiscence: to seek to satisfy it is an endless piece of business,
Quaecunque videt oculus, ea omnia desiderat avarus, says Basil, the covetous
man hankereth after all that he beholds, the curse of unsatisfiablenesse lies
heavy upon him: His desire is a fire, riches are fuel, which seem to slake the
fire, but indeed they increase it. He that loves silver shall never be
satisfied with silver, Eccles. 5.10. No more shall he that loves honor,
pleasure, etc. Earthly things cannot so fill the heart, but still it would have
more things in number, and otherwise for manner. (...) and (...) of (...).
And therefore the particles in the Hebrew that signify And, and Or, come of a
word that signifies to desire: because the desires of a man would have this and
that, and that and another; and does also tire it self, not knowing whether to
have this, or that, or the other, etc.

Verse. 21. As the fining pot for silver, etc.] Man is naturally apt to be much
taken, (...). Xenophon. (...).
and even tickled with his own commendation, as Felix was with Tertullus his
flatteries; as Demosthenes was when they poynted at him as he passed by, and
said, This is that famous Orator. But let every man prove his own work, says
Paul, Gal. 6.4. and testimonium tibi perhibeat conscientia propria, non lingua
aliena, says Austin; let thine own Conscience, and not another man's tongue
praise thee. Or if needlessly they will do it, Let it refine us (as here) to
more humility, and more care of sound holiness; let it, by the fining-pot,
melt us, and make us better. This is the right use of it.

Verse. 22. Though thou should bray a fool, etc.] The Cypress Tree, the more
it is watered, the more it is withered: So it is with the wicked; humbled they
are, but not humble; low, but not lowly; wearied in sin, as Babylon was in the
greatness of her way, Isa. 47.13. but not weary of it. Of these Augustine,
Perdidistis, says he, utilitatem calamitatis, miserrimi factis estis, De civ.
Dei, lib. 1 cap. 33
and pessimi permansistis, ye have lost the fruit of your afflictions: ye
have suffered much, and are never the better. By this the iniquity of Jacob
shall be purged, and this is all the fruit, the taking away of his sin. And if
this be not done, God will say as once, In thy filthiness is lewdness:
Because I have purged thee, Esaias 27.11.
and thou wast not purged, thou shall have thy will, thou shall not be purged:
but then I will have my will to; for I will cause my fury to rest upon thee,
Ezekiel. 24.13. how likest thou that?

Verse. 33. Be thou diligent to know the state, etc.] Hebr. Knowing thou shall
know the face of thy flocks: alluding, belike, to those shepherds, that know
their sheep asunder by their visages, and can call them by name, as Joh. 10.

And look well to thy Herds] Heb. Set thy heart to them. That is, be very
inquisitive and sollicitous of their welfare. Leave not all to servants, though
never so faithful: but supervise and over-see business, as Boaz did. His eyes
were in every corner, on the Servants, on the Reapers, on the Gleaners: He
lodged in the midst of his husbandry. He was not to learn, that the Masters eye
feeds the Horse, and the Masters foot soyls the Land; Arist. Ocoon. lib. 1.
cap. 6.
and that Procul a villa sua dissitus, jacturae vicinus, as Columella has it.
He that is far from his Husbandry, is not far from poverty. And unless the
Master be present, Lib. 1. Cap.
says the same Author, (it will be as in an Anmy where the General is absent)
cuncta officia cessant, all businesses will be hindered. He must be as the
great Wheel to set all a work, or little will be done.

(...). Verse. 34. For riches endure not for ever] Whether they be riches of
inheritance or of purchase, they will waste without good husbandry. The royalty
of Solomon could not have consisted for all his riches, had he not been
frugal. Our Henry the third merited to be called Regni dilapidator, a
waste-Kingdom. But what a great husband (perhaps too great) was Lewis the
eleventh of France, of whom ye shall find in the chamber of accounts a
reckoning of two shillings for new sleeves to his old dublet, and three
halfpence for liquor to grease his boots? Anno 1461. Pertinax the Emperor
also was a singular good husband: for the which, as the rich gallants derided
him, so others of us, Quibus virtus luxuris potior, laudabamus, who prized
Virtue above Luxury, commended it in him, says Dio the Historian, who writes
his life. Dio in pertinaci


Verse. 35. The hay appears, and the tender grasse] And the due time must be
taken to take it in for fodder, in the hard winter. The earth is alma Matter, a
bountiful Mother to man and beast. It is (as one well says) marsupium Domini,
the Lords great Purse. The Stars also are Gods Storehouses, which he opens
to our profit, Deuteronomy. 28.12. Every Star is like a purse of gold, says one, out
of which God throws down riches, which good men gather, bad men scramble for.
By their influence they make a scatter of Corn, Hay, Fruits of all sorts. And
good husbands cut Hay not only in the valleys where there is great store, but
upon the mountains too, as soon as it is ready, lest heat or wet mar it. Note
here by the way, 1 How good the Lord is, that stoops so low as to teach us
thrift. 2 How perfect the holy Scripture is, that instructs us in these meaner
matters also.

Verse. 36. The Lambs are for thy cloathing] Ad esum and ad usum, for food and
raiment, a profitable creature. Some Creatures are profitable alive, not dead,
as the Dog, Horse, etc. Some dead, not alive, as the Hog. Some both, as the
Ox; yet none so profitable as the Sheep.

And the Goats are the price of thy field] Wherewith thou may pay thy rent,
and besides hire tillage, or it may be purchase Land, and have money in thy
purse to do thy needs with.

Verse. 37. And thou shall have Goats milk enough] And this was anciently
accounted good cheer indeed. By Goats-milk understand all manner of Whitmeat,
as they call it; and see how sparingly they lived in those days, content with
that they had at hand, and not running every hands-while to the Butchers, or
Drapers, as now. Or if the men being harder wrought, had stronger meat
sometimes, yet the Maidens were well content with a more slender diet. Apelles
painted a servant with his hands full of tools (to show that he should be
work-brittle) with broad shoulders (to bear hard usage) with Hindes feet (to
run about his businesses) with Asses ears, and his mouth shut (to signify that
he should be swift to hear, slow to speak) lastly, with a lean belly, (that he
should be content with coarse fare, spare diet, etc.)

CHAP. XXVIII. Verse. 1. The wicked fly when none pursues.]
NOne but their own Consciences; Facti sunt a cord suo fugitivi, as Tertullian
has it. Such a fearful Fugitive was bloody Cain, who cried out, when there
were yet few or none to pursue him, Genesis 4. Josh. 24.12
Every man that meets me, shall kill me. Such were those cursed Canaanites,
that were chased by Gods Hornet sent amongst them, that is, by the bloud-hounds
of their own consciences. Such were those Syrians, that struck with a Panick
terror, fled for their lives, and left their rich Camp for a booty to the
Israelites, Deuteronomy. 28.
2 King. 7.7. The shadow of the Mountains seemed armed men to guilty Gaal.
Judge. 9.36. The Burgundians expecting a battle, thought long thistles were
lances. God sends a faintness into the hearts of the wicked, and the sound of
a shaken leaf frights them. In Arithmetic, of nothing comes nothing, yet they
fear where no fear is: As Cardinal Crescentius feared a fancied devil walking
in his Chamber like a great Mastiff, Act. and Mon.
and couching under his table as he was writing Letters to Rome against the
Protestants: As Richard the third thought he saw in his sleep diverse Images
like terrible Devils, Polyd. Virgil.
pulling and haling at him, after he had, Joab-like, slain two men more
righteous than him, his two innocent Nephews: As Charles the ninth of France,
Thuan.
after the cruel Massacre, could neither sleep nor wake without Music to
divert his self-accusing thoughts; so hotly was he haunted and followed with
the furies of his own Conscience: As the Spanish Fleet in eighty eight, Venit,
vidit, fugit, as the Zelanders thereupon stamped their new coin. Carltons
Remembrancer. Speed. 1206.
The Hollanders also stamped new moneys with this invincible Armado (as the
Spaniards in their pride had styled it) having this Motto, Impius fugit, nemine
sequente, The wicked fly when no man pursues. I pity the loss of their souls
(says a reverend man) that serve themselves as the Jesuit in Lancashire,
followed by one that found his Glove, with a desire to restore it him, Mr. Sam.
Ward
but pursued inwardly with a guilty conscience, leaps over a hedge, plunges
into a Marle-pit behind it unseen and unthought of, wherein he was drowned.

But the righteous is bold as a Lion] Conscientia pura semper secura, a good
Conscience has sure confidence; and he that has it, sits, Noah like, Medius
tranquillus in undis, quiet in the greatest combustions, freed, if not from the
common destruction, yet from the common distraction; for he knows whom he has
trusted, and is sure, that neither life nor death, nor things present, nor
things to come, Romans 8.38.
can ever sunder him from Gods love in Christ. He is bold as a Lion, says the
Text: yea as a young Lion, that is in his hot blood, and therefore fears no
other creature; yea when he is fiercely pursued, he will never once alter his
gate, though he dye for it. No more will the righteous man his resolution
against sin, such is his Christian courage. Daniel chose rather to be cast to
the lions, than to bear a lion in his own bosom, to violate his conscience.
The primitive Christians chose rather to be abandoned, ad leones, quam ad
lenones, they preferred affliction before sin. And this their persecutors
counted not courage and magnanimity, but wilfulness and obstinacy; Tertul. in
Apolog.
But they knew not the power of the Spirit: nor the privy armor of proof, that
the righteous have about their hearts, that insuperable faith whereby some have
stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, etc. Heb. 11.33.34.
and whereby they do all daily encounter, and conquer that roaring lion, the
devil, quenching his fiery darts, etc. Ephesians. 6.

Verse. 2. For the transgression of a land, many are the Princes] Either many at
once, or many ejecting and succeeding one another, to the great calamity and
utter undoing of the People; as may be seen in the books of Judges and Kings,
as in the Roman state after Nero's death, by the succession of Galba, Otho, and
Vitellius. What a deal of trouble was here in the time of the Heptarchy? and in
the dissensions of the two houses of York and Lancaster? causing the death of
twice as many natives of England, Daniels hist. 249.
as were lost in the two conquests of France: besides 80 Princes of the blood
royal slain. And all this is said to be for the transgression of a land, thus
chastised by the LORD. Elihu tells Job, that the hypocrite is set to reign for
the peoples sin, Job. 34. and Levit. 26. it is threatened as an heavy curse: If
ye still trespass against me, I will set Princes over you that shall hate
you; mischievous, odious Princes, odious to God, malignant to the People. And
Isa. 3.4. I will give children to be their Princes, and babes shall rule over
them. How many Kings had the ten Tribes after their defection from the house of
David, and not one good one amongst them all? And what got most of the Roman
Cesars by their hasty honors, nisi ut citius interficorentur (says one) but
to be slain the sooner? Very few of them till Constantine, but died unnatural
deaths. If ye do wickedly, ye shall perish, both you and your King, 1 Samuel
12.25.

But by a man of understanding and knowledge] As one sinner may destroy much
good, Eccles. 9.18. so one excellently wise man (called here a man of
understanding knowledge, there is no copulative in the Original) the state may
be prolonged, there may be a lengthening of its tranquillity, it may be
delivered by the pureness of thine hands, Job 22.30. See 2 Samuel 20.16. etc.
Eccles. 9.13. etc. Jer. 5.1. Religious and prudent Princes especially, may do
much in this case, 2 King. 22.20.

Verse. 3. A poor man that oppresses the poor, etc. Such an oppressor bites
hard (as a lean louse does) makes clean work, plunders to the life, as they say
omnia corradit and converret. Poor men should pity poor men, as knowing the
misery of poverty: but to oppress or defraud their comperes, is greatest
inhumanity, as that merciless fellow servant did, Matthew. 18.28. etc. A Weesel
is a ravenous beast as well as a Lion, a Sparrow-hauk as greedy as an Eagle,
and more mercy is to be expected from those more noble creatures, than from the
base and abject.

Verse. 4. They that forsake the Law, praise the wicked] As Machiavel does Caesar
Borgia, that bipedum nequissimum, proposing him for a pattern to all Christian
Princes; as Onuphrius (the Popes Biographer) does Hildebrand or Gregory 7th in
five books written of his noble acts, and great virtues; whom Cardinal Benno
truly describes to have been a murderer, an adulterer, Epiphan. barc^. 38.
a conjurer, a Schismatic, an heretic, and every way as bad as might be.
Epiphanius tells us that there were a sort of brainsick heretics that cried
up Cain, and were therefore called Cainites. They also commended the Sodomites,
Korah, Judas the traitor, etc. In the book of Judith, the act of Simeon and
Levi upon the Shechemites is extolled, and there was one Bruno that wrote an
Oration in commendation of the devil.

But they that keep the law, contend with them] Moved with a zeal of God, they
cannot be silent: As Craesus his dumb son, they cry out, Will thou ^ill my
father, dishonor my God, etc? Good blood will never belie it self, good metal
will appear. How did young David bristle against black-mouthed Goliath, and
enter the lists with him? Do not I hate them that hate thee? says he, Psalm.
139.
Yea, I hate them with a perfe^^ hatred, I cast down the gauntlet of defiance
against them, I count them mine enemies. Asa cannot bear with Idolatry, no not
in his own mother. Our Edward the sixth would by no means yield to a toleration
for his sister Mary, though solicited thereunto by Cranmer and Ridley, for
politic respects. Mihi qu^dem Auxentius non alius erit quam diabolus, quamdiu
Arrianus, said Hilary, I shall look upon Auxentius as a devil, so long as he is
an Arrian. It was the speech of blessed Luther, who though he was very earnest
to have the Communion administered in both kinds, contrary to the doctrine and
custom of Rome, yet if the Pope (says he) as Pope, commanded me to receive it
in both kinds, I would but receive it in one kind: since to obey what he
commands as Pope, is a receiving of the mark of the beast.

Verse. 5. Evil men understand not judgement] They are wise to do evil, but to
do good they have no knowledge: their wits work not that way, they are bard and
brutish as horse and ass, Psalm. 32. Yea they fall beneath the stirrup of
reason, and know not their owner, which yet the ox and ass does, Esa. 1.3. no
wiser at 70 years old, than at seven. Ut liberius peccent, libenter ignorant,
not willing to know what they are, not minded to practice.

But they that seek the Lord understand all things] Not all that is possible to
be known, De Baldo dice^e solebant nihil unquam cum ignorasse.
as Averroes says, Aristotle did, as the Civilians say their Baldus did, as
the Papists say Tostatus did: but they understand all things needful to
salvation, and they often meditate on the last judgment.

Verse. 6. Better is the poor, etc.] See chap. 19.1.

Verse. 7. He that keeps the law, is a wise son] It is neither good nature,
nor good nurture, or breeding that can prove a man to be truly wise: but
obedience to Gods statutes, Deuteronomy. 4.6. Alphonsus King of Spain, surnamed the
Wise, was a rank fool, and an arrant Atheist: so are all the worlds Wisards.

But he that is a companion to riotous men] Or, that feeds gluttons, whose
belly has no bottom.

Ingluvies and tempestas, barathrumque macelli. They say the Locust is all
belly, which is joined to his mouth, and ends at his tail, such are riotous
belly-gods: to feed such, is to cast away all and bring an indeleble infamy
upon the family.

Verse. 8. He that by usury and unjust gain, etc.] Usury is condemned by the
very Heathens, Aristot. Ethic. lib. 4. c. 1. The ancient Law of the Romans make
the usurer a thief and worse, the Hebrews make him a biting thief, who gnaweth
the debtor to the very bones: yea the most toothlesse usury (that usual plea)
has sharp gummes, which bite as sore as an old dog, or an hungry fly: and
under show of licking whole, sucks out the heart blood. Let those who plead for
it consider, that God dispenses with no usury ( Ezekiel. 18.8.) whether neshec or
tarbith, biting or toothless; that the lender deals not as he would be dealt
withal, that the Gospel makes these sinners worse than other sinners, when it
says, Sinners lend to sinners to receive the like, Luke 6.34. but these to
receive more, that at Rome (this day) all usurers are excommunicated monthly;
that the Canon Law drives them from the Sacrament, denies them burial, makes
their will no will, as though their goods were not their own; that no man of
note in all antiquity ( Jews and Manichees excepted) for 1500 years after
Christ, has ever undertaken the defense of usury: that Chrysostom is very
fierce against it, comparing it to the stinging of an asp, which casts a man
into a sleep, whereof he dies, etc.

He shall gather it for him that will pity the poor] God will provide him an
executor never mentioned in his will: or his heir (being a better man) shall
freely distribute what he has wrongfully raked together, Eccles. 2.21. Job
27.16,

Verse. 9. He that turns away his ear from hearing, etc.] Heb. that causes
his ear to decline the Law, that wilfully slights the opportunities of hearing,
and frames excuse, trusting to his good prayers (as they call it) and conceits
that he can better bestow his time at home: this man prays for a curse, and
shall have it, as Saul had; He would not hear Samuel; God will not hear nor
answer him in his distress. This was (as the Hebrews call it) Mensuram contra
mensuram, to pay him home in his own coin. Prove. 14.2^
The back-slider in heart shall be filled with his own ways. See the Note on
chap. 1.28.

Even his prayer shall be abominable] See Chap. 15.8.

Verse. 10. Who so causes the righteous to go astray, etc.] This follows fitly
upon the former. Seducers and Sectaries dissuade men from hearing the Law in
public assemblies, and carry them into by corners, under a pretense of prayer:
like Moals they do all their mischief by working under ground, as Epiphanius
observes: they shall therefore perish in their own pit. If the blind lead the
blind, etc. See the Note on chap. 26.27.

But the upright shall have good things in possession] They shall not be so led
away with the error of the wicked, as to fall from their own steadfastness, 2
Pet. 3.17. or to forfeit their hereditary right to the Kingdom, because both
the deceived and the deceiver are with the Lord, Job 12.13, 16. and it is
impossible for the elect to be fundamentally and finally seduced, Mat. 24.24.
since they are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation: 1 Pet. 1.5.
heaven is kept for them and they for heaven; how then should they miss of it?

Verse. 11. The rich man is wise in his own conceit] He sacrifices to himself,
as Scianus did; to his drag and net, as the Babylonians did; Scianus sihi
sacrificabat. Dio. Hab^k. 1.16
he thanks his wit for his wealth, and takes upon him as if there were none
such. (See 1 Timothy 6.17. with the note there) Like Isis her Ass, that had gone
so often to the temple of that Goddess, that at length she thought her self
worshipful. Every grain of riches has a vermin of pride and self conceit in
it, and a very small wind will blow up a bubble.

But the poor that has understanding] That is well versed in the bigger volume
of Gods Word, and in the lesser volume of his own heart, (which is better to
him than any Expositor, for the right understanding of the Scriptures) this
poor wiseman searches him out, finds the rich man's folly, and if need be,
tells him of it, giving him a right character of himself. Sed divitibus fere
ideo talis amicus deest, quia nihil deest.

Verse. 12. When righteous men do rejoice, there is great glory] That is, there
is cause of common joy to all: for they have public spirits, and rectified
judgments, neither can they be merry at heart when it goes ill with the
Church. All comforts are but Icabods to them, if the Ark be taken; all places
but Hadadrimmons, if the Church be in heaviness. Terentius under Valens the
Arrian Emperor, asked nothing but that the Church might be freed from Arrians:
And when the Emperor tore his Petition, he said, that he would never ask any
thing for himself, if he might not prevail for the Church; for that, his
happiness was laid up in hers.

But when the wicked rise, a man is hidden] That is, when Tyrants are set up, a
man, that is, a good man (for God reckons of men by their righteousness, Jer.
5.1.) is hidden, lies close, and has no heart to show himself, lest he should
suffer either in his own person, or in his possession. Thus the man Moses fled
and hid himself from Pharaoh, David from Saul, Eliah from Ahab, Obadiahs
clients from Jezabel, Jeremiah from Jehojakim, Joseph and the Child JESUS from
Herod, those Worthies, of whom the world was not worthy, ( Heb. 11.38.) from
Antiochus (that little Antichrist) and other Persecutors, and the Christian
Church from the greater Antichrist, Revel. 12. so that she was not to be sought
in tectis and exteriori pompa, sed potius in carceribus and speluncis, in
Palaces of worldly pomp, but in Dens and Dungeons, as Hilary has it: She fled
into the Wilderness, into her place, from the face of the Serpent, Rev. 12.14.

Verse. 13. He that covers his sins, shall not prosper] Sin is a Traitor, and
must not be hid: for if so, now it sucks a man's breast, shortly it will suck
his blood. Sin is a sore, and must be opend; a sickness, and must be declared
to the Physician; the concealing of one circumstance may endanger all. Sin is a
deformity that must be uncovered, or God will never cover it: see it we must
to confession, or see it we shall to our confusion. If Job had covered his
transgression as Adam (or after the manner of men) he had undone himself, Job
31.33. It is the manner of men (and they have it from Adam) to palliate their
sins, and plead for them, to eleviate and extenuate them, to mince and excuse
them. Sin and Shifting came into the world together. Sin and Satan are alike in
this, they cannot abide to appear in their own color. Some deal with their
souls, as others do with their bodies: when their beauty is decayed, they
desire to hide it from themselves by false glasses, and from others by
painting: so their sins, 3 John 2.
from themselves by false glosses, and from others by excuses. These must not
look for Gaius's prosperity. The Sunshine also of their outward prosperity
ripens their sin apace, and so fits them for destruction. Never was Ephraims
case so desperate, Hosea 4.
as when God said. Ephraim is joined with Idols, let him alone. Nor Jerusalem
so near destruction as when God said, My fury shall depart from thee, I will
be quiet, and no more angry, Ezekiel. 16.42. To prosper in sin, is the greatest
unhappiness that can befall a man, out of Hell.

But whosoever confesses and forsakes them, etc.] Confession of sin must be
joined with confusion of sin, or all is lost. Papists use confession as
Drunkards use Vomiting, that they may add drunkenness to thirst. Profane
people use it as Lewis the eleventh of France did his Crucifix; he would swear
an oath and then kiss it, and swear again and then kiss it again: So they sin,
and confess they do not well, nor will they strive to do better. As they
sorrow not to a transmentation with those Corinthians, so they confess not to
an utter abandoning of their wicked courses. They confess, as those Israelites
did, Numb. 14.40. We have sinned, we will go up. They might as well have
said, We have sinned, we will sin, for God had flatly forbidden them to go
up at that time. They confess as Saul did, I have sinned, viz. in humouring
the people, yet honor me, said he, before the people. As the Philistians
confessed Gods hand, yet sent away the Ark so do these. They that confess and
forsake not, are only dog-sick: when they have disgorged their stomachs, they
will return to their vomit.

Shall have mercy] Confess the debt, and God will cross the book: he will
draw the red lines of Christ's blood over the black lines of our sins, and
cancel the handwriting that was against us. No sooner could David cry peccavi,
I have sinned, but Nathan said, Transtulit peccatum tuum Dominus, God has
taken away thy sin: yea, transtulit, He has translated it, he has caused thy
sin to pass over from thee to Christ, Isa. 53.6. Romans 4.8. Confession is the
Souls vomit, and those that use it, shall not only have ease of conscience, but
Gods best comforts and cordials to restore them again. Cum homo agnoscit, Deus
ignoscit, says Augustine. It is not here, Confess and be hanged, but Confess
and be saved. In the Courts of men it is safest to say, Non feci, (quoth
Quintilian) I did it not, Per Miserere mei tollitur ira Dei.
to plead Not guilty. Not so here, Ego feci, is the best plea, I did it, I have
done very foolishly. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, etc. Judah (that is
Confession) got the Kingdom from Reuben: it is the way to the Kingdom. No man
was ever kept out of Heaven for his confessed badnesse; many are, for their
supposed goodness.

Verse. 14. Blessed is the man that fears alwayes] That is in the fear of the
Lord all day long, chap. 23.17. Duo sunt timores Dei, servilis and amicalis,
says Bid. There is a twofold fear of God, Servile and Filial, perfect love
casts out the former, breeds and feeds the latter. By this fear of the Lord it
is that men depart from evil, that they shake off security, that they abound in
Gods work, that they may abide in his love, that they set a jealous eye upon
their own hearts, and suspect a Snake under every Flower, a snare in every
Creature, and do therefore feed with fear, and rejoice in fear, pass the
whole time of their sojourning herein fear, yea work out their whole salvation
with fear and trembling. O the blessedness of such!

But he that hardneth his heart] As a perfect stranger to Gods holy fear (the
contrite heart ever trembles at Gods Word, Isa. 57.17.) Why have thou hardened
our hearts from thy fear, ( Isa. 63.17.) which (as Fire does Iron) mollifies
the hardest heart, and makes it malleable. Fear is a fruit of repentance, (2
Cor. 7.11. yea what fear) which intenerates the heart, and makes it capable of
Divine impressions, as Josiah. On the other side, the Jews feared not God
because of a rebellious heart, Jer. 5.22, 23.

Shall fall into mischief] Manifold mischief, ruin without remedy, chap. 29.1.
The incestuous person, though delivered up to Satan, repented and recovered:
but he that is delivered up to an hard heart, to a dead and dedolent
disposition, is in a manner desperate and deplored; he heaps up wrath against
the day of wrath, Romans 2. This made a reverent man once say; If I must be put
to my choice, I had rather be in Hell with a sensible heart, than on earth with
a reprobate mind. A hard heart is, in some respect, worse than Hell: since one
of the greatest sins is far greater in evil, than any of the greatest
punishments, as one has well observed.

Verse. 15. As a roaring Lion, Latrocinium cum privilegio.
and a ranging Bear] Regiment without righteousness turns into tyranny; and
becomes no better than robbery by authority. Look how the Lion frayes the poor
beasts with his roaring, so that they have no power to stir, and then preys
upon them with his teeth; And as the Bear searches them out and tears them
limb-meal: So deal Tyrants with their poor Subjects, Zeph. 3.3. Her Princes
within her are roaring Lions, her Judges evening Wolves, they gnaw not the
bones till the morrow. Such were those Cannibals in David's days, that eat up
Gods people as they eat bread, Psalm. 14.4. such those miscreants in Micah, who
did eat the flesh of Gods people, and flayd their skin, that brake their bones,
and chopped them in pieces as for the pot, chap. 3.3. Much like those American
Cannibals, who when they take a Prisoner, feed upon him alive, and by degrees:
cutting off from his body now a meal and then a meal, which they roast before
his eyes, searing up the wounded place with a firebrand, to staunch the blood,
to the unutterable aggravation of his horror and torment. Such a Lion Rampant
was Nero, 2 Timothy 4.17. I was delivered, says St. Paul, out of the mouth of the
Lion. Tertullian calls him, The Dedicator of the condemnation of the
Christians; whom he used as bad almost as the Spaniards at this day do the
poor Indians, under pretense of converting them to the faith. Their own Writers
tell us, that within the space of forty years twenty seven millions of people
were destroyed, and that with such cruelties as never were heard of before. Let
every good man bless himself out of the paws and jaws of these bloody
Catholics, more savage and fierce than the wild beasts, as they soon show when
armed with power, as were easy to instance. See the Babylonian cruelty
Graphically described, Jerem. 51.34. and see whether it be not matched and
overmatched by mystical Babylon. The ranging Lion, and ravening Bear is nothing
to that Man of Sin, that has dyed all Christendom with the blood of Gods
Saints, and dunged it with their carcases. This Ostrich can digest any metal,
especially money: witness his incredible exactions, here in England, anciently
called the Popes Ass. This Cannibal is a Pickrel in a Pond, or Shark in the
Sea, devours the poorer, as they the lesser Fishes: Not unlike that cruel
Prince mentioned by Melanchton, who to get money of his miserable Subjects,
used to send for them, and if they refused to furnish him with such sums of
money as he demanded, he would first knock out one of their teeth, and then
another, threatening to leave them none at all.

Verse. 16. The Prince that wants understanding] As every Tyrant does, Psalm.
14.4. (though they think they deal wisely, as Pharaoh, Exodus 1.10.) for they
usually come to untimely ends, as most of the Caesar's till Constantine: Ad
generum Cereris sine caede, etc.
and as our Richard the third, and Queen Mary, whose reigns are the shortest of
all the Kings since the Conquest. Bloody and deceitful men live not half their
days: or if they do, it is for a further evil unto them, Isa. 65.20.

But he that hates Covetousnesse] Covetousness in the original has its name
from peircing or wounding: and fitly, both in respect of others, Prove. 1.19.
and himself, 1 Timothy 6.10.

Verse. 17. A man that does violence unto the bloud] The Hebrew word Adam, here
rendered Man, Baxt^rf.
has one letter in the Original less than the rest: to show, that a
bloud-shedder is not worthy to be called a man.

Shall flee to the pit, let no man stay him] i. e. Let him dye without mercy,
let no man mediate for him, lest he pay down, as Ahab did, life for life,
People for People, 1 King. 20.42. lest he draw upon the Land guilt of blood,
Numb. 35.33, 34. and hinder the Manslayer from repentance to salvation never
to be repented of. To blame then are the Papists that open Sanctuaries to
such; and if a Cardinal put his red hat upon the head of a murderer going to
execution, he is delivered from death. See Deuteronomy. 19.13. with the note there.

Verse. 18. Who so walks uprightly shall be saved] See the Note on chap.
10.9. Shall be saved; A little word, but of large extent. It properly notes
the privative part of a man's happiness, deliverance from evil: but is put here,
and every where almost, for the positive part too: fruition of good as well as
freedom from evil: it comprehends 1 Malorum ademptionem. 2 Bonorum adeptionem.

But he that is perverse in his wayes] Heb. In his two ways, shall fall in one
of them. Evil shall hunt the wicked man to destroy him; and albeit he may
shuffle for a season from side to side, as Balaams Ass did, to avoid the
Angels sword, yet he shall not escape mischief. Let our Politic Professors
look to it, that can tune their Fiddle to the base of the times, that can shift
their sayls to the sitting of every wind, that like the Planet Mercury, can be
good in conjunction with good, and bad with bad.

Verse. 19. He that tilleth his land shall have plenty] At fugiens molam fugit
farinam; Men must earn it ere they eat it: and not think that bread and other
good things will drop out of the clouds to them, as Towns were said to come in
to Timotheus his toyls while he slept. Plut. in Sylla.
See chap. 12.11.

Shall have poverty enough] As the Prodigal had, Luke 15. and Pythias, who in a
bravery entertained Xerxes his whole Army, but was so poor at length, that he
perished through want of meat.

Verse. 20. A faithful man shall abound in blessings] God will bless him, and
all that bless him, Genesis 12.3. See the note there. Men also shall rise up and
call him blessed, saying, as Deuteronomy. 33.29. Happy art thou O Israel; who is like
unto thee O People, saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, etc. Stars,
though we see them sometimes in a puddle, in the bottom of a Well, nay in a
stinking Ditch, though they reflect there, I say, yet they have their situation
in Heaven: So Gods faithful servants, though in a low condition, yet are they
fixed in the region of happiness. See Lev. 26. and Deuteronomy. 28.

But he that makes haste to be rich, shall not be innocent] Nevessan (a
better Lawyer than good Christian) was wont to say, He that will not venture
his body shall never be valiant, he that will not venture his soul shall never
be rich. But let their money perish with them, that ( Shimei-like) by seeking
their servants, lose their souls; or ( Jonas-like) care not to be cast over
shipboard, so the ship of their worldly wealth may be in safety. Francis
Xaverius counseled John the third King of Portugal, to meditate every day a
quarter of an hour on that Divine sentence, What shall it profit a man to win
the whole world, and lose his own soul? See 1 Timothy 6.9. with the note. What a
woeful Will was that of rich, but wretched Hubertus, I yield, said he, my goods
to the King, my body to the Grave, my soul to the Devil?

Verse. 21. To have respect of persons is not good] See the note on Chap. 24.23.

For, for a piece of bread] For a trifle, he will transgress, and sell his
soul dog-cheap for a groat, or less money. Cato in Gellius hits M. Caelius in
the teeth with his baseness, that for a morsel of bread he would sell either
his tongue or his silence. And the false Prophets in Ezekiels days would do
the like, Ezekiel. 13.19.

Verse. 22. He that hastes to be rich has an evil eye] He is sick of the lust
of the eye, 1 John 2.16. (for all sinful lusts are (...) sicknesses) coveting
his neighbors goods, envying his prosperity, and begrudging him every bit he
eats at his table, chap. 23.6, 7. See the note there.

And considers not that poverty shall come upon him] Etiamsi per mare
pauperiem fugiat, per saxa, per ignes. Though he run as fast from beggary as
he can hye, yet it will overtake him and catch him by the back, Job 27.16.17.
Surely as the stars that went before the wisemen; went when they went, and
stayed when they stayed: so riches fly the faster from a man the more eagerly
he follows them; but then stay when a man's wind is stayed. In the fullness of
his sufficiency he shall be in straights, says Zophar, concerning the mind,
Job 20.22. He is poor in the midst of his riches: but God will strip him of
all, and make a poor fool of him, Jer. 17.11.

Verse. 23. He that rebukes a man shall find, etc.] He that binds a mad man, or
rouseth up one in a lethargy, has but little thank for present: so here. In
the sweating-sickness, they that were kept awake escaped: but the sickness was
deadly to them that were suffered to sleep. Let us keep one another awake
(says a Reverend man) an unpleasing work on both sides: Dr. Sibbes.
but we shall one day thank such. See how well Master Gilpins plain-dealing
with the Bishop of Durham succeeded, in his life written by B. Carlton. p. 58.

Verse. 24. He that robs his father or his mother] As that idolatrous Micah
did his mother of her gold, as Rachel did her father of his gods, Judge. 17.2.
as Absalom did David of his Crown. Thus though it may seem a light sin, it
is as much greater than stealing from another, as paricide is than
manslaughter, or as Reubens incest was, than another man's defiling his
neighbors wife. Egone patri sur ripere quicquam possim? Terent.
Our Parents are our household gods, as that Heathen could say: and to give them
cause of grief, must needs be an offense of a deep dye, of a crimson color,
condemned by the very Pagans.

Verse. 25. He that is of a proud heart, etc.] Latus animo. He that through
pride and ambition, cannot keep within bounds of his calling or condition, but
thinks great thoughts of himself, and therefore seeks great things for himself,
this man, if crossed, is easily kindled, and shall be made lean; God will tame
him, and take him a link lower, as we say, Isa. 2.11, 12, 13. See chap. 13.10.
with the note. This bigness of heart, is but as the bigness of a blown bladder,
etc.

But he that puts his trust in the Lord, shall be fat] He shall laugh and be
fat, as the saying is, he shall live at a great deal of hearts ease, and others
shall live quietly by him. That which would break a proud man's heart, will not
break an humble man's sleep. He is content with his present condition, be it
better or worse, has a self-sufficiency, 1 Timothy 6.6. studies to be quiet,
seeks peace and ensues it, depends upon God for direction, and success in all
businesses; and what should ayl this man, but that he may grow fat? the Irish
would ask him, (if they knew his wealth) what he meant to dye?

Verse. 26. He that trusts to his own heart is a fool] He that says, Consilii
satis est in me mihi, I am wise enough to order my own business, and need no
advice of others, seek no success from above ( Ajax acknowledged no other God
but his sword, Polyphemus but his belly) this man is a fool, a proud fool, and
he shall be sure to be hampered.

But whose walks wisely] Taking others into counsel, and God above all, as
David, I will hearken, says he, what the Lord God says unto me: He shall be
delivered, either from trouble, or in it: either with an outward or an inward
deliverance. He shall enjoy a blessed composedness, a sweet Sabbath of spirit
howsoever, being mediis tranquillus in undis, as Noah was, etc.

Verse. 27. He that gives unto the poor shall not lack] Eleemosyna ars omnium
questuosissima, says Chrysostom. Not getting but giving is the way to wealth.
God will bless the bountiful man's stock and store, his barn and his basket,
Deuteronomy. 15.10. his righteousness and his riches together shall endure for ever,
Psalm. 112.

But he that hides his eyes] i. e. that when he has a fit object and
opportunity of showing mercy offered him, frames excuse, and pretends this
thing, and that, to his worldly and wicked retentions; that uses his wits to
save his halfpenny, but will not use his eyes to affect his heart with pity,
Is. 58.7.

Shall have many a curse] Men shall curse him, and call him a Pamphagus, a
churl, a hog in a trough, a fellow of no fashion, etc. God shall also curse
him, and set off all hearts from him, as he did from Haman; in his necessity,
he will shut his ears to such a man's moans in misery, and hide his eyes from
his supplication, Psalm. 55.1. Isa. 1.15. Finally, he shall have judgment
without mercy, that has showed no mercy, Jam. 2.13. an evil, an only evil
shall befall him; Ezekiel. 7.5. his punishments shall come close together, and God
shall so set them on, as no creature shall be able to take them off.

Verse. 28. When the wicked rise, men hide themselves] They are glad to skulk
and shelter themselves from that fierce storm. See the note on verse 12.

But when they perish, the righteous increase] When either they dye, or are
deposed from their dignities, the righteous swarm as an hive of bees in a warm
sunny day: as they did when Constantine came to the Crown, and here, when Queen
Elizabeth came as a fresh spring after a sharp winter, and brought the ship of
England from a tempestuous sea to a safe harbor.

CHAP. XXIX. Verse. 1. He that being often reproved hardens his neck.
Zech. 7.
AS an untaimed heifer, that pulls away the shoulder and detracteth the yoke.
Solinus.
Or as the creature called Monoceros, the Unicorn, interimi potest, capi non
potest, Corripimur sed non corrigimur. Aug.
may be slain, but not taken: so those that refuse to be reformed, hate to be
healed, will not bend, shall surely and severely be broken, certissime
citissimeque confringentur, they shall certainly and suddenly be dashed in
pieces as a potters vessel, that cannot be pieced together again, Isa. 30.13,
14. Jer. 15.12. Shall iron break the Northern iron and the steel? and shall not
the fierce wrath of God shatter and shiver out a silly sinner, that will needs
stout it out with him: and yet is no more able to stand before him, than a
glasse-bottle before a Cannon-shot? Let Elies sons, and such refractaries
look for ruin: The Prophet fitly compares them to headstrong horses, that get
the bit into their mouths, run desperately upon the rocks, and so in short time
break first their hoofs, and then their necks. Queen Elizabeth, in talking with
Marshal Biron, (whom the French King sent Ambassador to her, Anno 1601,)
sharply accused Essex, (who had lately lost his head) of obstinacy, Camd. Elis.
fol. 562
rash counsels, and wilful disdaining to ask pardon: and wished that the French
King would rather use mild severity than careless clemency, and cut off the
heads of treacherous persons in time, etc. This might have terrified Biron from
those wicked attempts, which he was even at this time plotting against his
King, had not his mind been besotted. But the power of his approaching fate did
so blind him, that within few months after he underwent the same death that
Essex did: though nothing so piously and christianly: as having hardened his
neck against wholesome counsel. Now if men harden their hearts, God will harden
his hand, and hasten their destruction, and that without remedy.

Verse. 2. When the righteous are in authority] Or are increased, as chap.
28.28. See the note there.

The people mourn] Hebrew, sigh (as the oppressed Israelites in Egypt did)
where they dare not speak out. But what a bloody tyrant was Sylla, who put to
death M. Plaetorius, only for sighing at the cruel execution of M. Marius?
Act. and Mon. fol. 1164.
So one Lancelot was burnt in Giles his fields, for pitying the cruel death of
a couple of Martyrs.

Verse. 3. Who so loves wisdom rejoices his father] See the Note on Chap.
10.1.

But he that keeps company with Harlots] See the note on chap. 5.9. Those she
sinners (as they call them) are costly Creatures, and they that keep them care
not what cost they cast away upon them.

Verse. 4. The King by judgment stablisheth the land] This one piece of
Salomons Politics has much more good advice in it, than all Lypsius his
Beehive, or Machiavels Spider-web.

But he that receives gifts] Heb. A man of oblations, that is, (as some
interpret it) A man that sacrilegiously medleth with things dedicated to pious
uses, and makes a gain of them to himself. See chap. 20.25.

Verse. 5. A man that flattereth his neighbor, etc.] A smooth-boots, Glaber.
as the word signifies, a butter-spoken man; see Isa. 3.12. or a divided man:
for a flatterers tongue is divided from his heart.

Verse. 6. In the transgression of an evil man there is a snare] Or, a cord,
viz. to strangle his joy with, to check and choke all his comforts: in the
midst of his mirth he has many a secret gripe, and little knows the world
where his shoe pincheth him. Every fowl that has a seemly feather, has not
the sweetest flesh; nor does every tree that brings a goodly leaf, bear good
fruit. Glass gives a clearer sound than Silver, and many things glister
besides Gold. The wicked man's jollity is but the hypocrisy of mirth: it may
wet the mouth, but not warm the heart; smooth the brow, but not fill the
breast; we may be sure, that as Jezabel had a cold heart under a painted
complexion, so many a man's heart aches and quakes within him, when his face
counterfeits a smile.

But the righteous sing and rejoyce] Good men only may be glad, and none have
any reason to rejoice but they, Hos. 9.1. The Papists have a Proverb, Spiritus
Calvinianus est Spiritus melancholicus: and the mad world are easily persuaded
by the Devil, that there is no comfort in a Christian course; that your precise
fellows live a melancholy and Monkish kind of life, and have no joy of any
thing. Herein the Devil deals like those inhospitable salvages in America, that
make great fires, and set forth terrible sights upon their Country-shore,
purposely to affright Passengers from landing there. And as those wicked Spies
brought up an evil report of the Land of Canaan, and thereby discouraged the
people: so does the Devil and his Impes, of the purity of religion, and power
of godliness, as uncouth and uncomfortable; when in truth there is no sound
comfort without it, no true joy but in it. Though Saul could not be merry
without a Fiddler, Ahab without Naboths Vineyard, Hamon without Mordecaies
courtesy, yet a righteous man can be merry without all these. Yea as the Lilly
is fresh, beautiful, and looks pleasantly, though among thorns, so can he
amidst troubles. Paul (than whom never any out of Hell suffered more,) did not
only glory in tribulation, but over-abound exceedingly with joy, 2 Cor. 7.4.

Verse. 7. The righteous considers the cause of the poor] The cause, not the
person of the poor, for that is forbidden in the Law, Levit. 19.15. The great
must not be favored for their might, nor the mean for their misery: but
Justice, Justice must be done to all, as Moses has it, that is, even law and
execution of right (as the Oath runs that is given to our Judges) without
respect of persons. The cause of the poor and needy must come into equal
balance with the rich and mighty: lest he be trampled on by those fat bulls
of Basan, to his utter undoing. For a poor man in his house, is like a Snail in
his shell, crush that, and ye kill him.

But the wicked regards not to know it] Unless there were more to be got by
it. Felix had soon enough of Paul's defense, because he expected some bribe from
him, but nothing came. How ill-willing was that unjust Judge ( Lu^. 18.) either
to take knowledge of, or to take course for the relief of the poor Widow?
Aperi bursam, apperiam buccam, says the greedy Lawyer: they that cannot lavish
money out of the bag, are little welcome to these Cr^menim^lga, as one calls
them, these Purse-suckers, that will weigh your gold, but not your cause; and
if a man put not into their mouths, they even prepare war against him, Mich.
3.5.

Verse. 8. Scornful men bring a City into a snare] The Vulgar renders it,
Pestilent persons undo a City or a State, as Nahash did the Ammonites, 1 Samuel
11.2, 11. and as his son Hanan did much more, 2 Samuel 10.4. with 12.31. Mocking
is catching, as the Pestilence: and no less pernicious to the whole Country.
Giraldus Cambrensis tells of three Irish Kings, that being derided for their
rude habits and fashions, rebelled, and set the Country in a combustion. And
the young King of France jesting at William the Conquerours great belly,
whereof he said he lay in at Rouen, so irritated him, as he being recovered of
a sickness, entered France in the chiefest time of their fruits, making spoil of
all in his way, till he came even to Paris, where this scornful King then was,
to show him of his visiting: Dan. Chron. 42
and from thence marched to the City of Mants, which he utterly sacked and
ransackt, razed and harased.

But wise men turn away wrath] They stand in the gap, and divert the Divine
displeasure, Psalm. 106.23. Ezekiel. 13.5. Their persons are in acceptance; God
will look upon them, and do much for them, when he is most of all angry with
the wicked, Exodus 32.10, 14. Job 22. ult. Genesis 18.32. Their prayers also are
prevalent: something the Lord will yield thereunto, when most bitterly bent
against a people, Matthew. 24.20. and when unchangeably resolved upon their
ruin, he takes course to silence such, pray not for this people. Sanctum semen
statumen terrae, Isa. 6.13. The innocent shall deliver the Island, Job 22.30.

Verse. 9. If a wise man contendeth with a foolish man] Such fools were the
Pharisees (though for their worldly wisdom called Princes of this world, 1
Cor. 2.8.) Matthew. 11.16, 17. Christ piped to them, John mourned to them,
neither wrought upon them: such was their peevishness and pertinacy in evil,
that they rejected the counsel of God against themselves, Luke 7.30. being
ingrati gratiae Dei, as Ambrose has it, receiving the grace of God in vain, as
Paul, turning good nourishment into vicious humors, as foul stomachs use to
do: And as Wine a strong remedy against Hemlock, yet mingled with it, doubles
the force of the poison: so was it with the most powerful means of grace,
mingled with their obstinacy and unbelief. Tigers are enraged with perfumes,
and Vultures killed with Oil of Roses, as Aristotle writes.

Verse. 10. The bloodthirsty hate the upright] As Cain did Abel for his
goodness, 1 John 3.12. and as many bloody Villains still, who bear about, and,
so far as they dare, make use of Cains club to knock on the head Gods
righteous Abels. All hatred is bloody, but especially the habit of hatred. No
sight pleased Hannibal better than a ditch running over with man's blood.
Nothing would satisfy Farnesius the Popes Champion, but to ride his horse up
to the skirts in the blood of the Lutherans. Charles the ninth of France (Author
of the Parisian Massacre) looking upon the dead Carcass of the Admiral, that
stank by being long kept unburied, uttered this most stinking speech: Quam
suaviter olet cadaver inimici? How sweet is the smell of an enemies carcass?
And the Queen Mother of Scotland, beholding the dead bodies of her Protestant
Subjects, whom she had slain in battle, said, that she never saw a finer piece
of Tapistry in all her life.

But the just seek his soul] In a good sense, as Psalm. 142.4. Seek the
salvation of it, as Christ did of his deadliest enemies, as Paul did of his
Countrymen the Jews, of whom five times he received forty stripes save one, 2
Cor. 11.24. As the Disciples did of those spiteful Pharisees, that had
causelessly accused them, Matthew. 15.2, 12. as that Martyr Master Saunders did,
My Lord (said he to Bishop Bonner) you seek my blood, Act. and Mon. fol. 1358.
and you shall have it. I pray God you may be so baptized in it, that you may
hereafter loath bloud-sucking, and so become a better man. And another time,
when Steven Gardener being prettily nipped and touched by the same Sanders,
said, Carry away this frenzy fool to Prison; he answered, that he did give
God thanks which had given him at the last a place of rest and quietness,
where he might pray for the Bishops conversion. If ye will not hear me speak
for my self, said another Martyr, Ibid.
then send me to my Prison again among my Toades and Froggs, which will not
interrupt me, whiles I pray to God for you.

Verse. 11. A fool utters all his mind] He is full of chinks, and can hold
nothing, his heart lies so near his mouth, that all will out suddenly, (...) a
fool, and (...) suddenly, is from the same root. He has little command of
himself at any time, but especially when he is angry: then he sputters and
spues out all that he has in his heart. The Septuagint here translate, (...).
A fool utters all his anger, he pulls out his wooden dagger, and cares not
whom he hits. Bishop Bonner in his Visitation, because the Bells rang not at
his coming into Hadham, nor the Church dressed up as it should, called Doctor
Bricket Knave and Heretic; and striking at him, gave Sir Thomas Josselin, who
then stood next to the Bishop, a good flewet under the ear: whereat the Knight
somewhat astonished at the suddenness of the quarrel, said, What means your
Lordship? have you been trained up in Will Summers his School, to strike him
that stands next you? The Bishop still in a rage either heard not, or would not
hear. And when Mr. Fecknam would have excused him by his long imprisonment in
the Marshalsey, whereby he was grown testy, he replied merrily, Act. and Mon.
fol. 1340.
So it seems Mr. Fecknam: For now that he is come forth of the Marshalsey he
is ready to go to Bedlam. See Chap. 14.23.

But a wise man keeps it in till afterwards] Or, in an inner room, Beachor in
interiori aliquo loco, in ulteriore animi recessu.
in the bottom and bosom of his mind, till he see a fit season; as knowing
well that all truths are not fit for all times, but discretion must be used,
and taciturnity counted a virtue. The Rabbis have this saying amongst them,
Masora sepes legi, decimae divitiis, vota sanctimoniae, silentium sapientiae.
Silence is no less a mound to wisdom, than vows are to holiness, tything to
riches, or their Masorites pains to the Law. Open-heartednesse is a fruit of
fool-hardinesse. Gird up therefore the loins of your minds with the golden
girdle of meekness, Dirke Ab^th.
of wisdom; and keep your mouth with a bridle, while the wicked is before you,
Psalm. 39.

Verse. 12. If a ruler hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked] He shall
have his Aiones and Negones, that will say as he says, and fit his humor to a
hair, as Doeg did Saul's, as the false Prophets did Ahabs, as Herod's Courtiers
did him on his birth-day-feast, etc. These were fit helves for such hatchets,
fit lattice for such lips, fit servants for such masters. Mobile mutatur semper
cum principe vulgus. Claudian.
Like Prince, like people. The common sort are like a flock of Cranes: as the
first fly, all follow: Or as in a beast, the whole body follows the head.
Rulers are the Looking-glasses according to which most men dress themselves.
Their sins do much hurt, as by Imputation (2 Samuel 24. the Prince sinned,
Delirant reges, plectuntur Achivi.
the People suffered) so by imitation: for man is a creature apt to imitate,
and is led more by his eyes than by his ears. Magis intuentur quid fecerit
Jupiter, quam quid docuit Plato, says Augustine. Jupiters adulteries drew the
people to like wantonness. Hence Chaerea in Terence, Haec ego non facerem quae
Jupiter fecit? says he, Should I make dainty of doing that which Jupiter did?
Height of place ever adds two wings to sin, Example and Scandal, whereby it
soars higher, and flies much farther. Let Rulers therefore look to it: Let them
not be partakers of other men's sins, 1 Timothy 5.22. (they have enough of their own
to answer for, Potentes potenter torquebuntur) let them take heed that the
iniquity of their heels (of those that follow them at the heels) does not
compass them about, Psalm. 49.5.

Verse. 13. The poor and the usurer meet together] That is, the poor and the
rich, as chap. 22.2. because commonly Usurers are rich men, and many rich men
usurers. The Lord lighteneth both their eyes, That is, he gives them the light
of life, Joh. 1.8. and the comforts of life, Matthew. 5.45. so that their eyes
are lightened, as Jonathans were after he had tasted of the wild honey, 1 Samuel
14. Others read it thus: The poor and the deceived (or crushed by the usurer)
meet together, that is, condole, or comfort one another: because they are both
in the dark, as it were of poverty and misery, they can do one another but
little help, more than by commending their cases to God; who thereupon
enlightneth them both: that is, either he supplies their wants, and so their
eyes are opened, as Jonathans were: or else gives them patience, as he did
those believing Hebrews, chap. 10.32. But call to remembrance the former days
in the which after ye were illuminated (viz. to see the glory that shall be
revealed, whereof all the sufferings of this life are not worthy, Romans 8.18.)
Ye endured a great fight of affliction. If we read it, The poor and the usurer
meet together: the Lord enlightneth both their eyes, understand it thus; The
poor man he enlightneth by patience, the usurer by repentance, and grace to
break, off his sins by righteousness, and his iniquity by showing mercy to
the poor as Zacheus, Matthew, and those usurious Jews did, Neh. 5.

Verse. 14. The King that faithfully judges the poor, etc.] An office not
unbeseeming the greatest King to sit in person to hear the poor man's cause.
James the fourth of Scotland was for this cause called the poor man's King. I
have seen (says a late Traveller) the King of Persia many times to alight from
his horse, only to do justice to a poor body. Help O King, said the poor woman
to Jehoram: And if thou will not hear and right me, why do thou take upon
thee to be King? said another woman to Philip King of Macedony. Cic. pro Milone.
It is a mercy to have Judges modo audeant quae sentiunt, as the Orator has
it, so that they have courage to do what they judge fit to be done. Inferior
Judges may be weighed and swayed by gifts or greatness of an Adversary to pass
an unrighteous sentence: Not so a King, he neither needs, nor fears any man:
but is, if he be right, (as one says of a just Law) an heart without
affection, an eye without lust, a mind without passion, a treasurer which
keeps for every man what he has, and distributeth to every man what he
ought to have.

Phocyl.
(...). Lo such a Prince shall sit firm upon his throne; his Kingdom shall be
bound to him with chains of Adamant, as Dionysius dreampt that his was; he
shall have the hearts of his Subjects, which is the best lifeguard, and God
for his protection; for he is professedly the poor man's Patron, Psalm. 9. and
makes heavy complaints of those that wrong them, Isa. 3. and 10. Amos 5. and 8.
Zeph. 3.

Verse. 15. The rod and reproof give wisdome] If reproof do the deed, the rod
may be spared, and not else. Chrysippus is by some cried out upon as the first
that brought the use of a rod into the schools; but there is no doing without
it; for children are foolish, apt to imitate others in their vices, before they
know them to be vices; and though better taught, yet easily corrupted by evil
company, as young Lapwings are soon snatched up by every Buzzard. Now therefore
as moths are beaten out of Garments with a rod, so must vices out of childrens
hearts. Vexatio dat intellectum, Smart makes wit; it is put in with the rod of
correction. See chap. 22.15.

But a child left to himself brings his mother, etc.] For her fondness in
cockering of him, and hiding his faults from his father, lest he should correct
or casheer him. Mothers have a main hand in education of the children, and
usually Partus sequitur ventrem, the birth follows the belly, as we see in the
Kings of Judah, whose mothers are therefore frequently nominated. No wonder
therefore though the mother deeply share in the shame and grief of her darlings
miscarriages. See chap. 15.20.

Verse. 16. When the wicked are multiplied, transgression encreaseth] As says
the Proverb of the Ancients; wickedness proceeds from the wicked. Miserable
man has by his fall from God contracted a necessity of sinning against God.
And when a rabble of Rebels are gotten together, are grown many and mighty,
they make account to carry all before them, and not to suffer a godly man to
live, as in Spain, and where the Inquisition is admitted. But the righteous
shall see their fall; shall see it and rejoice at it, as the Hebrew Doctors
expound this text by comparing it with Obad. 12.13. Thou should not have
looked on the day of thy brother in the day of his calamity, neither should
thou have rejoiced over the children of Judah, Alterius Perditio tua ca^tio.
etc. The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance (being moved with
a zeal of God, he shall rejoice with trembling) he shall wash his feet in the
blood of the wicked, (beholding their ruin he shall become more cautious) so
that a man shall say, (any man but of an ordinary capacity shall make this
observation) Verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily he is a God
that judges in the earth, Psalm. 58.10, 11. that will sink to the bottom the
bottle of wickedness, when once filled with those bitter waters, Genesis 15.16.

Verse. 17. Correct thy Son and he shall give thee rest] He will grow so
towardly, that thou shall with less ado rule him when grown up, or at least,
thou shall have peace within, in that thou have used Gods means to mend him.

Yea, he shall give delight] See chap. 10.1. The often urging this nurturing of
Children, shows that it is a most necessary, but much neglected duty.

Verse. 18. Where there is no vision the people perish] Or, are barred of all
virtue, laid naked and open to the dint of Divine displeasure, scattered,
worsted, and driven back. Great is the misery of those Brasileans of whom it is
said, that they are sine fide, sine rege, sine lege, without faith, King, or
Law. And no less unhappy those Israelites about Asa's time, that for a long
season had been without the true God, and without a teaching Priest, and
without Law, 2 Chronicles. 15.3. Then it was that Gods people were destroyed for
lack of knowledge, Hos. 4.6. And not long after, that they sorrowfully
complained that there was no more any Prophet among them, nor any that knew how
long, Psalm 74.9. no Minister ordinary or extraordinary. How did it pity our
Savior to see the people as sheep without a Shepherd? This troubled him more
than their bodily bondage to the Romans, which yet was very grievous, Mat.
9.36. And what good heart can but bleed to think of those once flourishing
Churches of Asia and Africa, now overspread partly with Mahumetanisme, and
partly with Heathenisme; and that by the most miserable occasion might befall;
namely, famine of the Word of God, through lack of Ministers! What a world of
Sects, Superstitions, and other horrible abuses got into the Church of Rome,
when Prophecy was suppressed, and reading the holy Scriptures inhibited? And
what a slaughter of souls ensued thereupon? Mat. Paris. Hist.
Letters were framed by some, as sent from Hell to the Popish Clergy, Anno
1072. wherein the Devil and his Angels give them many thanks for such a number
of souls sent them down daily, by their neglect of Preaching, as had never been
before: Hence it was, that in this Kingdom, at the first Reformation, for want
of Ministers, Readers were sent: Whence one of the Martyrs wished that every
able Minister might have ten Congregations committed to his charge, till
further Provision could be made. For of preaching it may be said, as once David
did of Goliah's sword, There is none to that, for Conversion of souls: as where
that is wanting, people go tumbling to hell thick and threefold.

But he that keeps the Law, happy is he] Though to want the Word preached and
sincerely handled, rightly divided (for as every sound is not Music, so every
Pulpit-discourse is not a Sermon) be a great unhappiness, a ready road to utter
ruin: yet is not the bare hearing of it that that renders a man blessed,
unless he hide it in his heart with David, and lift up his hands too to the
practice of it, Psalm. 119.48. The words of the Law are verba vivenda non
legenda, as one said, words to be lived and not read only. Let not your lives
be Antinomians, no more than your opinions, says another. That is a monstrous
opinion of some Swenckfeldians, that a man was never truly mortified till he
had put out all sense of sin, or care of duty: Wendeli^^s.
if his conscience troubled him about such things; that was his imperfection,
he was not mortified enough. Some of our Antinomians are not far from this.
Their predecessors in Germany held, that the Law and works only belong to the
Court of Rome: that good works are perniciosa ad salutem, Bucholcer.
hurtful and hindersome to salvation; that that saying of Peter, Make your
calling and election sure by good works, was dictum inutile, an unprofitable
saying; and Peter did not understand Christian liberty: that so soon as a man
begins to think how he should live godlily and modestly, Vita Dev. Georg.
he wandreth from the Gospel. David George was so far from accounting
Adulteries, Fornications, Incests, etc. for being any sins, that he did
recommend them to his most perfect Scholars, as acts of grace and
mortification. This fellow was sure somewhat a kin to those Carpocratian
Heretics in Saint John's days, who taught that men must sin, and do the will
of all the Devils, Epiphan.
otherwise they could not enter into heaven.

Verse. 19. A servant will not be corrected by words] Some Servants will not,
but must have blows. If words will do, they must be chidden with good words,
and not reviled. Christians must be no brawlers, but gentle, showing all
meekness to all men, Tit. 3.2. And Masters must do the same things,
forbearing threatening, knowing that their Master also is in Heaven, neither is
there respect of persons with him, Sidon. Epist.
Ephesians. 6.9. Severitas nec sit tetra nec tetrica, says Sidonius. But because
some Mastigiae are of so servile a disposition, that they must be beaten to
their work, like those Phrygians, Qui non nisi flagris castigantur, that will
do nothing longer than scourged to it: or the Russian Women, Heyl. Geog.
that love that Husband best that beats them most, and think themselves else
not regarded, unless two or three times a day well-favouredly swadled;
therefore let him that knows his Masters will, and yet (out of stoutness,
sullenness, or laziness) will not do it, be beaten with many stripes: let him
be buffeted for his faults, 1 Pet. 2.20. and made serviceable in all things,
not gainsaying, not purloyning, Tit. 2.9, 10.

Verse. 20. See thou a man that is hasty in his words] Or Matters: that weighs
not his words before he utters them, but over-soon shoots his fools-bolt, let
it light where it will, hit or miss, it matters not; that had rather be
reckoned temerarious than timorous, and is with child till delivered of an
abortive birth: that rashly rusheth on the weightiest businesses, and holds it
loss of time to take counsel; this hasty headlong man, as he never wants
woe, so (because he is no less headstrong than headlong, wise in his own
conceit, than witless in every man's else) there is more hope of a Natural than
of him, and sooner he will be wrought upon. Scaliger tells us the nature of
some kind of Amber is such, o^al. Exercit. 140. Number. 12.
that it will draw to it self all kind of stalks of any Herb, except Basilisk,
an Herb called Capitalis, because it makes men heady, filling their brains
with black exhalations. Thus those Hastings, who by the fumes of their corrupt
wills, are grown headstrong, and withal are conceited (as cha. 26.12.) will
not be drawn by that which draws others that are of lower parts and capacities;
it being easier to deal with twenty men's reasons, than with one man's will. Good
therefore is the counsel of St. James, Be swift to hear, slow to speak, etc.
and of the Preacher, Eccles. 5.2. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy
heart be hasty to utter any thing before God, in Prayer, Vows, and especially
in preaching. It was a wise speech of Aristides, who being required of the
Emperor to speak to something propounded ex tempore, (...).
answered, propound to day, and I will answer to morrow, for we are not of
those that spit or vomit things, but of those that do them carefully and
accurately. Demosthenes in like manner, when it was objected unto him, that he
came premeditated to plead, answered, that he, if it might be possible, would
plead, Non tantum scripta sed etiam sculpta, not things written only, but even
engraven. And when Eccius told Melancthon that it was little for his praise,
that he was so long ere he answered his adversaries arguments (he would take
three days sometimes to think on it) he replied, Nos non quaerimus gloriam,
sed veritatem, we seek not victory but verity.

Verse. 21. He that delicately brings up his servant] A master that would be
(as he ought) both loved and feared by his servants, must see to two things, 1
The well-chusing; and 2 The well-using of them. This Solomon himself (that thus
advises here) was not so well advised of; for he saw that Jereboam (who gave
occasion, as it is conceived, of uttering this Proverb) was meet for the work,
and therefore (not examining his religion) entertained him into his service,
yea placed him over the family of Joseph, admitted him into so much
familiarity, and so let loose the bridle of domestical discipline to him, that
he took state upon him as a young master in the house, and soon after turned
traitor, and would needs be as his son, and more. The like is to be seen in
Abner, Ishbosheths servant, who grew so haughty and haunty, that he might not
be spoken to, 2 Samuel 3. And in Zimre, whom his master Elah so favored and
esteemed, that he made him captain over the half-part of his charets. But this
beggar thus set on horseback, rides without reigns to the ruin of his master
and his whole house, 1 King. 16.11. So true is that of the Poet.

(...).
Asperius nihil est humili dum surgit in altum
Tobiah the servant is so insolent there is no dealing with him.

Verse. 22. An angry man stirs up strife] See Chapter 15.18. and 16.21.

And a furious man] Hebr. A master of fury, or one that is mastered and
overmatched by his fury, that has no command of his passions, but is
transported by them, or (as some make the metaphor, and the Original will well
bear it) is wedded to them, as a man is to his wife: commanded by them,
Plutarch.
as the Persian Kings were by their Concubines, being captivarum suarum
captivi, slaves to their slaves. Such a man being big with wrath, not only
breeds contention, but brings forth transgression in great abundance, he sets
his mouth against heaven, and his tongue walks through the earth, etc. Psalm.
73. he lets fly on both hands, and lays about him like a mad man.

Verse. 23. A man's pride shall bring him low] For it sets God against him, and
Angels, and men, not good men only, but bad men too, and those that are as
proud as themselves. For whereas one drunkard loves another, and one thief
another, etc. one proud person cannot endure another, but seeks to undermine
him, that he alone may bear the bell, carry the commendation, the praise and
promotion. See chap. 11.12. and 15.33. and 18.12.

Verse. 24. Whosoever is partner with a thief, hates his own soul] Since to hold the
bag is as bad as to fill it; to consent to sin, or to conceal it, as bad as ^o
commit it. By the one as well as by the other, a man may easily become, as
Coraeh did, a sinner against his own soul, and cruelly cut the throat of it.
Let our public thieves look to this. See Isa. 1.23.

He hears cursing and bewrays it not] See Levit. 5.1. with the Note. To
conceal treason is treason, so here. Have no fellowship therefore with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. Let me be counted proud
or pragmatical, says Luther, rather than found guilty of sinful silence, Luth.
Epist. ad Staupi^.
whiles my Lord suffers.

Verse. 25. The fear of man brings a snare] This cowardly passion expectorates
and exposes a man to many, both sins and sufferings. And albeit faith, when
it is in the heart, quelleth and kills distrustful fear, and is therefore
fitly opposed to it in this sacred sentence: yet in the very best, Sense fights
sore against Faith when it is upon its own dunghill, I mean, in a sensible
danger. Natures retraction of it self from a visible fear, may cause the pulse
of a Christian that beats truly and strongly in the main point (the state of
the soul) to intermit and faulter at such a time, as we see in the example^ of
Abraham, Isaac, David, Peter, others, who showed some trepi^ation and timidity,
and like fearful birds and beasts, fell into the pits and toyls of the Hunter,
and hazzarded themselves to Gods displeasure. The Chameleon is said to be the
most fearful of all Creatures, and does therefore turn himself into so many
colors, to avoid danger, which yet will not be. God equally hates the
timorous, and the treacherous. Fearful men are the first in that black bedrole,
Rev. 21.8.

Tectus and ^^tus.
But he that trusts in the Lord shall be safe] Or, set on high, as on a rock,
his place of defense shall be munitions of rocks, Isa. 33.15. far out of
harms-way; he shall be kept safe, as in a tower of brass, or town of war. Even
the youth shall faint and be weary, and the youngmen shall utterly fall; But
they that wait upon the Lord shall mount up with wings as Eagles, etc. Isa.
40.30, 31. Like as the Cony that flies to the holes in the rocks does easily
avoid the dogs that pursue her, when the Hare that trusts to the swiftness of
her legs, is at length overtaken and tore in pieces: So here.

Verse. 26. Many seek the Rulers favour] More than the love of God: and so cast
themselves into a second snare, besides that, verse. 25. But as he that truly
trusts in God, will easily expel the fear of man: so he that looks upon God as
Judge of all, from whose sentence there is no appeal, will rather seek his face
than the favor of any earthly Judge whatsoever. Especially, since whether the
Judge clear him or cast him, the judgment he passes is from the Lord.

Verse. 27. An unjust man is an abomination to the just] Who yet hates, non
virum sed vitium, not the person of a wicked man, but his sin, (as the
Physician, hates the Disease, (...).
but loves the Patient, and strives to recover him) he abhorres that which is
evil, perfectly hates it, Psalm. 139.22. hates it as hell (so the Greek word
signifies, Romans 12.9.) hates it in his dearest friends, as Asa did in his
mother Maacha, hates it most of all in himself, as having the Divine Nature
transfused into him (whereby he resembles God) and that life of God, whereunto
sin (he knows) is a destructive poison, a sickness unto death, Arist. Rhetor.
1 John 5. Hence his implacable and no less impartial hatred of all, as well
as any sin, for all hatred is (...) (as Aristotle has it) to the whole kind.
It was said of Antony, that he hated a Tyrant, not Tyranny; it cannot be said
of a Saint, he hates sinners, not sin, but the contrary.

And he that is upright in the way, is abomination to the wicked] So, there is
no love lost betwixt them. The Devil has set his limbs in all wicked people,
they are a Serpentine seed, a viperous brood, and the old enmity continues,
Genesis 3.15. see the Note there. Antipathies there are in Nature, as between the
Elephant and Boar, the Lion and Cock, the Horse and the Stone called Taraxippe,
etc. But this is nothing to that betwixt the godly and the wicked; and why? but
because the ones works are good, and the others evil: and because the just man
condemns the unjust by his contrary courses; yea, he affrights his heart, and
terrifies him with his presence and company.

CHAP. XXX. Verse. 1. The words of Agur the son of Jakeh]
THe Vulgar renders it, Verba Congregantis filii Vomentis, taking these proper
Names for appellatives: as if the Penman of this Chapter meant to tell us,
Aelian. Hist. var.
that he would here give us his sacred Collectanies, or Miscellanies, such as
he had taken up from the mouths of wisest men, who had vomited or cast them
up, in a like sense as that Painter in Aelian drew Homer vomiting, and all the
other Poets licking it up. This Agur (whether he lived in Salomon's days, or
Hezekiah's) was an excellent man (as the word Gheber here used imports) Vir
bonus and prudens, minus tamen clarus (as one says of Jesse, David's father) a
godly wise man, though nothing be elsewhere spoken of him in Scripture. Some
think, that being requested by Ithiel and Ucal, two of his Disciples, to give
them a lesson, Socrates-like, he answered, Hoc unum scio, quod nihil scio. This
one thing I know, that I know nothing: Surely I am more brutish than any man,
sc. of my self, further than taught of God: for every man is a brute by his own
understanding, as Jeremy has it. Jer. 10.
But I rather incline to those that take Ithiel and Ucal for Christ; whose
goodness and power (those two pillars of a Christians faith, as Jachin and Boaz
were of Salomons Temple) is by these two names deciphered: and whom he
propounds as the matter of his Prophecy. Now because sense of misery must
precede sense of mercy: neither can any be welcome to Christ, but the weary and
heavy laden, therefore he first bewails his own brutishness (fetching it up as
low as Adam fallen, verse. 2. and aggravating it in that he had not yet acquired
better abilities, verse. 3.) Next he flies to Ithiel and Ucal by the force of a
particular faith ( Ithiel God with me, and Ucal God Almighty, through whom I
can do all things.) This, this was the right ready way of coming to Christ: and
him that thus comes, he will in no wise cast out, Joh. 6.37. There is a good
Interpreter that paralelling this text with Jer. 9.23, 24, reads it thus.
Muffet.
A gathering together of the words of Agur the Son of Jakeh; Let the excellent
man say, Let God be with me, let God be with me, and I shall prevail.

Verse. 2. Surely I am more brutish than any man] Or, Surely I have been brutish
since I was a man. See how this good man vilifies, yea nullifies himself to the
utmost. This was true humility, that like true Balm ever sinks to the bottom;
when Hypocritical, as Oil, swims on the top. Humilit as ab humo, because it
lays a man flat on the ground. Agur had seen Ithiel and Vcal; hence he sees
so little by himself, Job 42.5. Now mine eyes have seen thee: wherefore I
abhor my self etc. Woe is me for I am undone, says Esaias, for mine eyes have
seen the King the Lord of Hosts, chap. 6.5. He that looks intently upon the
Sun, has his eyes dazeled: so he that beholds the infinite excellencies of
God, considers the distance, cannot but be sensible of his own naughtiness,
nothingness. It is fit the foundation should be laid deep, where the building
is so high. Agurs humility was not more low, than his aims lofty: Who has
ascended up into heaven, etc. It is an high pitch that he flies, for he knew
well, that godliness as it begins in the right knowledge of our selves, so it
ends in the right knowledge of God.

And have not the understanding of a man] Or, Neither is there in me the
understanding that was in Adam. Man when he came first out of Gods Mint, Tanta
fuit Adami recens conditi stupiditas, ut major in infantes cadere non possit.
Socin.
shone most glorious in knowledge, righteousness, and holiness. Socinians feign
him silly, and therein betray their own silliness. He had a large measure of
objective knowledge, both in Natural things, and Supernatural; which we have
lost in him, 1 Cor. 2.14. This we should with Agur here sit down and bewayl, as
those in Ezra did the burnt Temple, chap. 3.12.

Verse. 3. I neither learned wisdome] As he had it nor by nature, Nemo nascitur
artifex.
so neither had he attained unto it by any pains or skill of his own. There is
a spirit indeed in man (a reasonable soul and a faculty of reasoning) But the
inspiration of the Almighty gives understanding, Job 32.8. Not that Agur
neglected the means of knowledge, or put off the study of it (as Salomons fool,
Prove. 24.7.) from a conceit of the impossibility of reaching to it. Neither yet
was he of their mind of whom Austine makes mention, that they cast off the
care of knowledge, because knowledge puffs up; and so would be ignorant that
they might be humble, and want knowledge that they might want pride. This was
to do as the Philosopher that plucked out his eyes, to avoid the danger of
uncleanness. In Apolog.
Sed nihil aliud egit quam quod fatuitatem suam urbi manifestam fecit, says
Tertullian, wherein he proclaimed his own folly to all the country. But holy
Agur here assures us, that flesh and blood never revealed these high things
that follow unto him, but as Paul was an Apostle, so was he a Prophet not of
men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father, Gal. 1.1. even the
Father of light, Jam. 1.17. In Natures School nothing is to be learned
concerning Ithiel and Vcal. Confess. lib. 3.
Saint Augustine though much taken with Cicero's Hortensius, yet because he
found not the name of Christ in it, he could not so heartily affect it. The
Philosophers much magnify the mind of man as full of Divine light and
perspicacy; when the truth tells us that it is Meus oblita Dei, vitiorumque
oblita caeno.

There is nothing great in the earth but man, nothing in man but his mind: Si
consque scandis, caelum transcendis (said Fav^rinus the Philosopher) if you get
up thither, you ascend beyond heaven. But Agur had not so learned Christ. He
talks of natural blindness and other evils born with him. Erras si tecum vitia
nasci putes; supervenere, ingesta sunt. You are out Agur (says Seneca) if you
talk on that manner: blindness is not natural to you, but adventitious. Quia
sibi quisque virtutem acquirit, ^^^inem e sapientibus unquam de ea gratias Deo
egisse. Lib. 3. de not. Deor. Deorum quidem munus est quod vivimus, etc. Sen.
Agur bewails his loss in Adam: This Natures eye never saw, and therefore heart
never rued. Those that were born in hell, knew none other heaven, as the
Proverb is. Agur tells us here, that he never learned true wisdom from any man,
but must thank God for that measure thereof that he had attained to. On the
contrary, Tully tells us, that inasmuch as every man acquires to himself that
virtue that he has, no wise man ever yet gave God thanks for it. And Seneca
says, It is of the gods that we live, but of our selves that we live well
and honestly. How different are the Saints in Scripture from the worlds wisards?

Nor have the knowledge of the holy] That is, of the Angels; as Dan. 4.13, 17.
and 8.13. whom Jacob saw ascending and descending ( Genesis 28.12. compared with
the next verse of this Chapter, and with John 1.51.) Moses made them looking
intently into the Mercy Seat. Exodus 25.18, 19. Peter sets them forth as
stooping down to look wishtly and earnestly into the Mystery of Christ, (...).
1 Pet. 1.12. which was hid from them till the discovery, and ever since, that
they are great students in it, Ephesians. 3.10. But how should Agur or any man else
due cannot tell the form and the quintessence of things, that cannot enter into
the depth of the Flower, or the Grass he treads on, that cannot understand the
nature and properties of so small a Creature as an Ant or Be, (Pliny tells of
one that spent eight and fifty years in learning out the nature of the Be,
Lib. 11. cap. 9.
and yet had not fully attained unto it) How is it possible, I say, that the
wisest Naturalist should have the wit to enter into the deep things of God? Eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, etc. 1 Cor. 2.9.

Verse. 4. Who has ascended up into heaven, or descended?] Who, but the Son of
man which is in heaven, 1 John 3.13? who, but the holy Angels upon that Son of
man, the Ladder of life, Joh. 1.51? Who, but those that have (in some measure)
the knowledge of those holy ones, verse. 3. the knowledge of God in Christ,
which is life eternal, Joh. 17.3. Heaven aforehand? Holy Agur holds it out to
us here, that to know heavenly things, is to ascend into heaven. Even Aristotle
says, that a little knowledge, (though but conjectural) about heavenly things,
is to be preferred above much knowledge, though certain, about inferior
things: De ^^lo t^m. 99
and yet he knew no heaven beyond the moveable heavens, neither acknowledged
any body, or time, or place, or vacuum there. The truth is, no natural
knowledge can be had of the third heaven, nor any help by Human Arts: for it is
neither aspectable nor moveable. As no man has seen God at any time, so, nor
Heaven, the Throne of God: only the only begotten Son of God which is in the
bosom of the Father, he has declared both him and Heaven, Joh. 1.18. as
that, there are many Mansions, Crowns, Scepters, Kingdoms, Glories, Beauties,
Angelical entertainments, beatifical Visions, sweetest varieties, felicities,
eternities. And yet all this, or whatsoever more can be said of Heavens
happiness, is not the one half (as she said of Salomons Magnificence) of what
we shall find in that City of Pearl. To express it, is as impossible, as to
compass the Heavens with a span, or contain the Ocean in a Nut-shel. Let there
be continual ascensions thither in our hearts: let us lift up hearts and hands
to God in the Heavens, and he will shortly send his Chariots for us, as Joseph
did for his Father: fetch us riding upon the Clouds, convoy us by his Angels
through the air, as through the enemies Country, and puts us into that Panegyris,
that General Assembly, and solemn celebrity of holy and happy souls, Heb.
12.23. As in the mean space, how should we every day take a turn or two with
Christ upon Mount Tabor? get up to the top of Pisgah with Moses, and take a
prospect of Heaven? turn every solemnity into a School of Divinity? Say, as
Fulgentius, when he saw the Nobility of Rome sit mounted in their bravery, Si
talis est Roma terrestris, qualis est Roma caelestis? If Rome be such a
glorious place, what is Heaven? What Music may we think there is in Heaven,
said another good soul, when he sat and heard a good Consort of Music. This,
this is the principal end, and most profitable use of all Creatures! Cum scalae
nobis and alae fiant, when they become Ladders and Wings to us, to mount up to
Heaven.

Who has gathered the Wind in his fists, etc.] None but God the great
Wonder-worker, the right Aeolus, that brings the winds out of his treasures,
Psalm. 135. and bids them at his pleasure Peace and be still. We read of a
Whirlwind raised by the Devil, Job 1.19. and of a Tempest laid by the
Magicians. Herodotus in Poly^nia. But it cannot be said, as 1 King. 19.11.
that God was not in that Wind: for he has the royalty of all the Creatures,
though he suffer the Devil to play Rex sometimes, for ends best known to
himself.

Who has bound the waters in a garment] Those above the Firmament, in Clouds
(through which they distill and drop down, as water would do if bound up in a
garment) those below in Channels and Bottles, as the Psalmist has it. Water is
naturally above the earth, as the garment above the body: and would (but for
the providence of God) prove as the shirt made for the murdering of Agamemnon,
where the head had no issue out, etc. See my notes on Genesis 1.

What is his name] God is above all name (to speak properly.) When Manoah
enquires after his name, the answer is, It Is Wonderful: that is, I am called as
I am called; but such is thy weakness that it passes thy conception: this
Ocean will not be measured by thy Muscle-shel. Multa nomina and lumina sibi
finxerunt Infideles. The Heathens had many names for their Dunghil-deities: but
the Africans called an unknown God whom they worshipped, Lib. de Isid. and
Osirid.
Amon, that is, Heus tu quis est? Hark, who art thou? as Plutarch relates.

And what is his Sons name?] Christ has many names in holy Scripture, as Isa.
9.6, 7. So Jehovah our righteousness, Messiah the Prince, Dan. 9. whereunto
answers in the New Testament, the Lord Christ: but who can declare his
generation? Isa. 53.8. whether that eternal generation, or that in the fullness
of time, the mystery whereof was beyond words? Our safest eloquence here will
be our silence, our greatest knowledge a learned ignorance. Only we have here
a clear testimony of the distinction of the Persons; and that the Son is
coequal and con-substantial with the Father, since He is also (as the Father)
above all name and notion.

If thou can tell] But so can none: No man knows the Son but the Father,
neither does any man know the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will
reveal him, Matthew. 11.27. The Son is so like the Father here, that if you know
the one, ye cannot but know the other, Joh. 14.7, 8, 9. Milk is not so like
milk. Non tam ovum ovo simile. He is the brightness of his Fathers glory, and
the express Image of his Person, Heb. 1.3. See the Note there. And if we
desire a glass wherein to behold the face of God the Father, and of his Son,
here is one held forth in the next verse.

Verse. 5. Every word of God is pure: Oda septima Pind. tanta fuit admirationis
apud Rhodios ut fuerit scripta in templo aure is literis, etc. Joh. Manl. loc.
Com. 414.
he is a shield] Albeit all the sacred sentences contained in this blessed book
are pure, precious, and profitable, yet as one star in Heaven out-shineth
another, so does one Proverb another, and this is among the rest, velut inter
stellas, luna minores, an eminent sentence often recorded in Scripture, and far
better worthy than ever Pindarus his seventh Ode was, to be written in letters
of gold. Every word of God is pure, purer than gold tried in the fire, Rev.
3.17. purer than silver tried in a furnace, and seven times purified, Psalm.
12.6. Julian (therefore that odious Apostate) is not to be hearkened to, who
said, there was as good stuff in Phocillides, as in Solomon, in Pindarus his
Odes, as in David's Psalms. Nor is that brawling dog Porphyry to be regarded,
who blasphemously accuses Daniel the Prophet, and Matthew the Evangelist,
Spec. Europae.
as writers of lies. Os durum! The Jesuits (some of them) say little less of
Saint Paul's Epistles; which they could wish by some means censured and
reformed, as dangerous to be read, and savouring of heresy in some places.
Traditions they commonly account the touchstone of doctrine, and foundation of
faith; the Scriptures to be rather a Commonitorium (as Bellarmine calls it) a
kind of storehouse for advice, Greg. in 3. Reg.
then Cor and animam Dei, the heart and soul of God, as Gregory calls them, a
Fortress against Errors, Firmamentum contra errores. Aug. in Johan. 1. Tract.
2. Possevin. Appar. sac. verbo Pat. Antiq
as Augustine. The Apostle calls concupiscence sin; at non licet nobis ita
loqui: but we may not call it so, says Possevine the Jesuit. The Author to the
Hebrews says, Marriage is honorable among all men: but the Rhemists on 1 Cor.
7.9. say, that the marriage of Priests is the worst sort of incontinency.
Christ says, the Sin against the Holy Ghost has no remission. Bellarmine
says, that it may be forgiven. The Council of Constance comes in with a
non-obstance against Christ's institution; Lib. 2. de Pae^it. cap. 16. Montan.
in 1 Cor. 14.
withholding the Cup from the People at the Sacrament. And a Parisian Doctor
tells us, that although the Apostle would have sermons and service celebrated
in a known tongue, yet the Church for very good cause has otherwise ordered
it. Bishop Bonners Chaplain called the Bible in scorn, his little pretty Gods
book, and judged it worthy to be burnt, tanquam doctrina peregrina, as strange
doctrine. Gilford and Raynolds said it contained some things profane and
apocryphal. Others have styled it the mother of heresy, and therefore not fit
to be read by the common people, lest they suck poison out of it. Prodigious
blasphemy! Of the purity and perennity of the holy Scriptures, See more in my
True treasure, page 85.139.

He is a shield to them that put their trust in him] See Genesis 15.1. with the
note, and Prove. 29.25.

Buxtorf. Tiberias.
Verse. 6. Add thou not unto his words] As the Jews at this day do by their
traditions, which they arrogantly call Mashlamnutha, Completio, perfectio,
because they think that thereby the Law is completed and perfected, as the
Artemonites, Brightm. upon Rev. p. 292.
(and after them the schoolmen) corrupted the Scripture out of Aristotle and
Theophrastus, turning all into questions and quillets. As Mahomet joined his
Alfurta, his service book, an horrible heap of all blasphemies, to the three
parts of holy Scripture (as he divides them) the Law, Psalms, and Gospel: As
the Papists add their humane inventions, and unwritten verities, which they
equallize unto, if not prefer before the book of God, as appears by that
Heathenish decree of the Council of Trent. And when at the Council of Basil,
the Hussites denied to receive any doctrine that could not be proved by
Scripture; Jacob Revius hist. Pontif. p. 235.
Cardinal Cusan answered that Scriptures were not of the being of the Church,
but of the well-being, and that they were to be expounded, according to the
current rite of the Church; which if it change its mind, the judgment of God
is also changed. Lastly, such add to Gods Word, as wrest it, and rack it,
making it speak that which it never thought: causing it to go two miles where
it would go but one; gnawing and tawing it to their own purposes, as the
Shoo-maker taws his upper-leather with his teeth. Tertullian calls Marcion the
heretic, Mus Ponticus, of his arroding and gnawing the Scripture, to make it
serviceable to his errors.

Lest he reprove thee] Both verbally and penally; both with words and blows.
Lest he severely punish thee, as one that adds to his will, or imbaseth his
coin.

And thou be found a lier] As all Popish forgers and foysters at this day are
found to be. God has ever raised up such as have detected their impostures,
and vindicated the purity and perfection of the sacred Scriptures.

Verse. 7. Two things have I required of thee] Two special requests he had among
many: for our present condition is a condition of singular vanity and
indigency; we get our living by begging; and are never without somewhat to be
required of God; never without out wants and aylments, and suits for supplies.

Deny me them not] See here both his familiarity with God in Prayer, and his
importunity: for a lazy Sut^r beggs a denial: Agur therefore re-enforceth his
request: it was honest, else he would never have begun it: but being so, he is
resolved to follow it. So does David with his one thing which he did desire,
and he would desire, Psalm. 27.4. he would never give it over. So Jacob would
have a blessing, and therefore wrastles with might and slight: and this he does
in the night and alone, and when God was leaving him, and upon one leg. He
had a hard pull of it, and yet he prevailed. Let me go, says God: No, thou
shall not go, says Jacob, till I have my request. It is not unlawful for us
to be unmannerly in Prayer, to be importunate, and after a sort impudent, (...)
Luke 11.8. Propter improbitatem.
Luke 18.8. Was not the Woman of Canaan so? Matthew. 15.22. She came for a Cure,
and a Cure she would have: and had it too, with an high commendation of her
heroical faith. Christ, he was no Penny-father, he had more blessings than one,
even the abundance of Spirit for them that ask it. When poor men make requests
to us, we usually answer them as the Echo does the voice, the answer cuts off
half the Petition: if they ask us two things, we think we deal well if we grant
them one. Few Naamans, that when you beg one talent, will force you to take
two. But God heaps mercies upon his Suppliants: and blames them for their
modesty in asking. Hitherto you have asked me nothing. Nothing to what you
might have done, and should have had. Ask that your joy may be full. Thou
should have smitten five or six times (said the Prophet to the King of
Israel, 2 King. 14, 18.19.
that smote thrice only) then had thou smitten Syria till thou had consumed
it.

Before I dye] q. d. I intend to be a daily Suter for them whilst I live: and
when I dye, I shall have no more to do in this kind. Every one as he has
some special grace or gift above others, and as he is dogged with some special
temptation or violent corruption, so he has some great request. And God holds
him happily in hand about it all his life-long, that he may daily hear from him,
and that a constant intercourse may be maintained. Thus it was with David,
Psalm. 27.4. and with Paul, 2 Cor. 12.8, 9. In this case we must resolve to
give God no rest, never to stand before him, but ply this Petition: and yet
take heed of prescribing to him, of limiting the holy one of Israel: say with
Luther, Fiat voluntas mea: Let my will be done: but then he sweetly falls off,
with Mea voluntas, Domine, quia tua. My will Lord, but because it is, and no
further than it is thy will too.

Verse. 8. Remove far from me vanity and lyes] i. e. All sorts of sins, those
lying vanities that promise much happiness to those that pursue them, but
perform little enough: shame at the best, but usually death, Romans 6.21, 23.
Free me both from the damning, and from the domineering power of sin, both from
the sting and stain of it, from the guilt and filth, from the crime and curse,
from the power and punishment. Let my person be justified, and my lusts
mortified. Forgive me my trespasses, and deliver me from evil.

Give me neither Poverty nor Riches] So that God must give to be poor as well
as to be rich. He makes holes in the Money-bag, Hag. 1.6. and he stops the
secret issues and drains of expense, at which men's estates run out, they know
not how nor when. Agur would have neither Poverty (for the many inconveniences
and discomforts that attend it) nor yet riches, (for the many cares, cumbers,
and other evils not a few that follow them) but a mediocrity, a competency, a
sufficiency without superfluity. A state too big (he knew) is troublesome, as
well as a shoe too big for the foot. They say, it is not the great Cage that
makes the Bird sing: sure we are, it is not the great estate that brings
always the inward joy, the cordial contentment. Glass keeps out wind and rain,
but lets in the light, and is therefore useful in building. A moderate estate
is neither so mean, as to expose a man to the injuries, nor so great, as to
exclude a man from the influence of heaven. A staff may help a Traveller, but a
bundle of sta^es may be a burden to him: so may too great an estate to a godly
man.

Feed me with food convenient for me] Heb. with food of mine allowance, or
which thou see fit to allow me: so much as my demensum comes to, the piece
that thou have cut for me, the portion that belongs unto me, the bread of the
day for the day; Give me daily bread, that I may in diem vivere, as Quintilian
says the Birds do, the little Birds, that have their meat brought in every
day by their Dams without defeatment. And hereunto the original here seems to
allude. Pomponius Atticus thus defines riches, Divitiae sunt, ad legem naturae
composita paupertas. Riches are such a Poverty or Mediocrity, as has enough
for Natures uses. If I may have but offam and aquam, a morsel of meat, a
mouthful of water, and convenient clothing, I shall not envy the richest
Craesus or Crassus upon earth. See the notes on Matthew. 6.11. and 1 Timothy 6.8.

Verse. 9. Lest I be full and deny thee, etc.] Fullness breeds forgetfulness,
saturity security, Deuteronomy. 32.15. See the note there, and 1 Timothy 6.17. with the
note; Every grain of riches has a vermin of pride and ambition in it. A man
may desire them, as one desires a ship to pass over the Sea, from one Country
to another. But to many they prove hindrances to Heaven, remora's to religious
practices. Many in their low estate could serve God, but now resemble the Moon,
which never suffers eclipse but at her full; and that is by the earths
interposition between the Sun and her self. Even an Agur full fed may grow
wanton, and be dipping his fingers in the Devils sauce: yea so far may he
forget himself, as to deny the Lord (or as the Hebrew has it, belie him)
disgrace his housekeeping, and cast a slur upon his work and wages by his
shameful apostasy; yea (as Pharaoh-like) to ask, who is the Lord? as if such
were petty-gods within themselves, and could by the help of their Mammon do
well enough without him. Salomons wealth did him more hurt than his wisdom did
him good, Eccles. 2. It was his abundance that drew out his spirits, and
dissolved him, and brought him to so low an ebb in grace.

Or, lest I be poor and steal] Necessity is an hard weapon; we use to say,
Hunger is an evil Counselor; Necessitas durum telum. Fames malesuada, audax
paupertas.
and Poverty is bold or daring, as Horace calls it. The baser sort of people in
Swethland do always break the Sabbath, saying, that it is only for Gentlemen
to keep that day. And the poorer sort amongst us (some of them I mean that have
learned no better) hold theft in them, Petrilarceny at least, a peccadillo, an
excusable evil; for either we must steal, say they, or starve: the belly has
no ears, our poor children must not pine and perish, etc. And truly men do not
despise (i. e. not so much despise) a Thief, if he steal to satisfy his soul
when he is hungry, says Solomon (Prove. 6.30.) in his argument that an
Adulterer is worse than a Thief: though a Thief be bad enough, shut out of
Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9. But if he steal for necessity ((...), says the Greek
Proverb, there is no remedy but a barking stomach must be quieted) men do the
more excuse him, Job 36.21.
a tanto, though not a toto. But God says flat and plain, Thou shall in no
case steal. Let him that stole steal no more, but let him labor with his
hands, and depend upon Gods Providence: let him prefer affliction before sin,
and rather dye than do wickedly. But want is a sore temptation, as Agur
feared, and that good man felt, mentioned by Master Perkins, who being ready to
starve, stole a Lamb: and being about to eat of it with his poor Children, and
(as his manner was afore-meat) to crave a blessing, durst not do it: but fell
into a great perplexity of conscience, acknowledged his fault to the Owner, and
promised restitution; if ever able to make it.

And take the name of my God in vain] He says not, lest I being poor, steal
and be fined, burnt in the hand, whipped, etc. No; but lest I take thy name in
vain; that is, cause thy name to stink among the ungodly, open their mouths,
break down the banks of blasphemy, by such a base sin committed by such a
forward Professor. Good men take Gods Name in vain, no way so much, as by
confuting and shaming their Profession, by a scandalous conversation, such as
becomes not the Gospel of Christ; Moreover, they count sin to be the greatest
smart in sin; as being more sensible of the wound they therein give the glory
of God, than of any personal punishment.

Verse. 10. Accu^e not a servant unto his Master] Unless it be in an Ordinance,
for the benefit of both. Much less may we falsely accuse Wives to their
Husbands (as Stephen Gardener and other Court-parasites did King Henry the
eighth his Wives to him, of Adultery, Heresy, Conspiracy, etc.) Children to
their Parents (as the Jesuits, the Popes Bloud-hounds did Charles, eldest Son of
Philip King of Spain, for suspicion of Heresy: whereupon he was murdered by
the cruel Inquisition) one friend to another, a sin that David could not
endure, Psalm. 101. and Christ the Son of David as deeply disliked it in the
Pharisees, those make-bates, that by accusing his Disciples to him one while,
and him to his Disciples another while, sought to make a breach in his Family,
by setting off the one from the other.

Lest he curse thee, and thou be found guilty] Lest to cry quittance with thee,
he rip up thy faults, such as it will be for thy shame, Et dici potuisse, and
non potuisse r^f^lli.

He that speaks what he should not, shall hear of what he would not. Put them
in mind to speak evil of no man, falsely and rashly, without cause and
necessity. And why? For we our selves also (even I, Paul, and thou Titus) were
sometimes foolish, disobedient, etc. Tit. 3.1, 2, 3. and may happily hear of it
to our shame and sorrow, (if we irritate others thereunto) by way of
recrimination.

Verse. 11. There is a generation that curses their father] An evil and an
adulterous generation doubtless, a bastardly brood, as were those in the
Gospel: (...). Mat. 12. (...). Mat. 3.
a generation of Vipers that make their way into the world by their Dammes
death. These monsters of men are doomed to destruction, Levit. 20. Hell gapes
for them, as also it does for such as revile or denigrate their Masters,
Magistrates, Ministers, Benefactours, Ancients. There is a certain Plant which
our Herbalists call Herbam impiam, or wicked endweed, whose younger branches
still yield flowers to overtop the elder. Such weeds grow too rife abroad: It
is an ill soil that produces them. But of this, before.

Verse. 12. There are a generation that are pure, etc.] As the ancient Puritans
the Novatians, Donatists, Catharists, Illuminates. Non habeo Domine cui
ignoscas, said one Justitiary, I have done nothing Lord that needs thy pardon.
Ye are those that justify your selves, says Christ to the Pharisees. All
these things have I done from my youth, what want I yet? said one of them, that
far over-weened his own worth, and ra^ed himself above the market. In all my
labors they shall find none iniquity in me: (says guilty Ephraim) that were
sin, Hos. 12.8. that were a foul business to find iniquity in Ephraim, whose
iniquities were (yet) grown over his head, as appears throughout that whole
Prophecy. That Man of Sin the Pope, will needs be held sinless, and sundry of
his Votaries say, they can supererrogate. And are there not amongst us even
amongst us, such Sinners before the Lord, that stand upon their Pantofles, and
proudly ask, who can say, black is their eye? There is a generation of these,
that is, a continual succession of them. Such dust-heaps you may find in every
corner.

And yet is not washed from their filthinesse] Either of flesh or spirit; 2
Cor. 7.1.
they wallow in sin like Swine, and welter in wickedness, which is filth and
blood, Isa. 4.4. the vomit of a Dog, 2 Pet. 2.22. the excrement of the Devil,
the superfluity or garbage of naughtiness, and the stinking filth of a
pestilent Ulcer, as the Greek words used by St. James, chap. 1.21. do
signify. (...).
The whole world lies in wickedness, 1 John 5.19. as a Lubber in a Lake, as a
Carcass in its slime. Nil mundum in mundo: and yet who so forward to boast or
their good hearts to Godward?

Verse. 13. Oh how lofty are their eyes] The eyes are the seat of pride and
disdain, which peep out at these windows. The Hebrews have a saying, that a
man's mind is soonest seen in oculis, in loculis, in piculis, in his eyes,
expenses, cups. See chap. 6.17.

Verse 14. There is a generation whose teeth, etc.] These are sycophants, and
greedy gripers, Speed.
of whom before, often, in this book. In the year 1235. there were spread
through England certain Roman usurers, called Caursin^ quasi capientes ursi,
devouring bears (quoth Paris) who had entangled the King, Nobles, and all that
had to do with them. These were called the Popes Merchants.

Sanguisuga. Hirudo ab haerendo. Non missura cutem nisi plena cruoris hirudo.
(...).
Verse. 15. The Horse-leech has two daughters] That is, two forks in her tongue,
whereby she first pricketh the flesh, and then sucketh the blood. Hereunto
Solomon seems to resemble those cruel cormorants spoken of in the former
verse. By the horse-leech some understand the devil, that great red Dragon, red
with the blood of souls, which he has sucked and swallowed, 1 Pet. 5.8.
(seeking whom he may let down his wide gullet, whiles he glut-gluts their
blood, as the young Eaglets are said to do ( Joh. 39.30.) by a word made from
the sound.) By the horse-leeches two daughters they understand, Covetousness
and Luxury: whom the devil has long since espoused to the Romish Clergy. Jegna
legundum.


Cujus avaritiae totus non sufficit orbis,
Cujus luxuriae meretrix non sufficit omnis.
Verse. 16. The grave] Which in Hebrew has its name of craving. It is a
Sarcophagus, feeds on flesh, and it as little appears as once in Pharaohs lean
kine; or as in those that having a flux, take in much, but are neither fuller
nor fatter. The word here used, may be rendered Hell, called by the Latins,
Infernus ab Inferendo, from the devils continual carrying in souls to that
place of torment.

And the barren womb] Barren women are most desirous of children, which yet are
certain cares, but uncertain comforts. How impatient was Rachel? how
importunate was Hannah? One has well observed, that the barren women in
Scripture had the best children, as being the fruit of their faith, and the
product of their prayers. The Vulgar renders it, Os vulva, and Mercer Orificium
matricis, referring it not to barren, but to incontinent women; such as was
Messala, and other insariate punks, quarum libido non expletur virili semine
vel coitu.

The earth that is not filled with water] That can never have enough at one
time, to serve at all times. That is a strange earth or country that Pliny
speaks of, ub siccit as dat lutum, imbres pulverem, where drought makes dirt,
and rain causes dust. And yet so it is with us (says a Divine.) The plentiful
showers of Gods blessings rained down upon us, are answered with the dusty
barrenness of our lives. The sweet dews of Hermon have made the hill of Sion
more barren. Oh I how inexcusable shall we be? etc.

And the fire that says not, It is enough] Fire is known to be a great
devourer, turning all combustibles into the same nature with it self. How many
stately Cities has this untamable element turned into ashes? It is an
excellent observation of Herodotus, that the sparks and cinders of Troy are
purposely set before the eyes of all men, that they might be an example of this
Rule; That great sins bring great punishments from God upon the sons of
men. Scipio having set Carthage on fire, (...)
and beholding the burning, foresaw and bewailed the destiny of Rome: which as
it has been often burnt already, so it shall be shortly to purpose: the Kings,
mariners, and merchants, standing aloof and beholding the smoke of her burning,
Rev. 17.16. and 18.8, 9. God will cast this rod of his wrath into the fire,
burn this old whore, that has so long burnt the Saints for Heretics, and
refused to be purged by any other nitre or means whatsoever: therefore all her
dross and trash shall pass the fire. This is so plain a truth, that even the
Papists themselves subscribe to it. Hear what Ribera a learned Jesuit says,
Ri^ in loc.
Roman non solum o^ pristinam impietatem, etc. That Rome as well for its
ancient impiety, as for its late iniquity, shall be destroyed with an horrible
fire, it is so plain and evident, that he must needs be a fool that does but go
about to deny it.

Verse. 17. The eye that mocketh at his Father] As Ham did at Noah. And
despises to obey his mother, or, despises the wrinkles of his mother, as some
read it, that looks upon her with disdain, as an old withered fool.

The Ravens of the valley shall pick it out] God takes notice of the offending
member, and appoints punishments for it: Horat. pascere in cruce corvo^ pro
suspendi possuit. Ep 7. (...)
By the Law such a child was to be put to death, and here is set down what
kind of death, hanging upon a tree, which the Greeks also call a being cast to
the crows or ravens. Thus the Scripture is both Text and gloss: one place opens
another; the Prophets explain the Law, they unfold and draw out that Arras that
was folded together before. The ravens of the valleys or brooks are said to be
most ravenous; Corvi fluviatiles.
and the young Eagles or Vultures smell out carcases, and the first thing they
do to them, is to pick out their eyes. Effossos oculos voret atro guiture
corvus. Will^t on Levis.
They are cursed with a witness whom the holy Ghost thus curses in such
emphatical manner, in such exquisite terms. Let wicked children look to it, and
know, that Vultu saepe laeditur pietas, as the very Heathens observed: that a
proud or paltry look cast upon a parent, is a breach of piety punishable with
death, yea with a shameful and ignominious death. Let them also think of those
infernal ravens and vultures, etc.

Verse. 18. There be three things which are too wonderful] The wisest man that
is, cannot give a reason of all things: as of the ebbing and flowing of the
sea, of the colors in the rainbow, of the strength of the nether chappe, and
of the heat in the stomach, which consumes all other things, and yet not the
parts about it. Agur here confesses himself gravelled in four things at least,
and benighted.

Verse. 19. And the way of a man with a maid] That is, either with a close and
chaste virgin, that is kept close from the access of strangers, and goes covered
with a veyl; or else with a maid, that though defloured, yet would pass for a
pure virgin, and is so taken to be till her lewdness is discovered. It is
expressly noted of Rebecca to her commendation, that though fair to look upon,
yet she was a virgin, neither had any man known her, Genesis 24.16. there are
that pass for virgins, and yet it cannot be said of them, that man never knew
them.

The saurum cum virgo tuum vas fictile servet,
Vt fugias quae sunt noxia, tuta time.
Verse. 20. So is the way of an adulterous woman] The strumpet when she has
eaten stolen bread, has such dexterity in wiping her lips, that not the least
crumme shall stick to them, for discovery. So that Agur here shows it to be as
hard to find it out, as the way of an Eagle in the air, the way of a serpent on
a rock, etc. Unless taken in the manner, she stoutly denies the action. And if
so taken, yet -- nihil est audacins illis, Juvenal Saty^. 6.

Deprensis, iram atque animos a crimine sumunt.


Verse. 21. For three things the earth is disquieted] Such trouble-towns are
odious creatures, the places where they live, long for a vomit to sp^e them
out. As they live wickedly, so they dye wishedly, there is a good
worlds-riddance of them, as there was of Nabai, and of those in Job 27.23. with
15. who were buried before half-dead; being hissed and kicked off the stage of
the world, as Phocas was by Heraclius.

And for four which it cannot bear] The very axle-tree of the world is even
ready to crack under them, the earth to open and swallow them up.

Verse. 22. For a servant when he reigneth] As Jeroboam, Saul, Zimri, Herod,
Heliogabalus, Phocas. See the Note on chap. 19.10. Vespasian only of all the
Emperors, is said to have been better for his advancement.

For a fool when he is filled with meat] When his belly is filled with Gods hid
treasure, Psalm 17.14. when he prospers and has what he will. Prosperity is
hard meat to fools, Luxuriant animi rebus plerunque secundis. Ovid.
they cannot digest it. They grow giddy (as weak heads do after a cup of
generous wine) and lay about them like madmen: the folly of these rich fools,
is foolishness with a witness, Prove. 14.24. See the Note there.

1 Samuel 1.6.
Verse. 23. For an odious woman when she is married] Such an one was Peninnah,
who vexed good Hannah, to make her to thunder, as the Original has it. Such
was Jesabel, Herodias, Messalina Wife to the Emperor Claudius, who was her
Agent to effect her sinful purposes, and her Patient to sustain her lewd
conditions. Dio in Claudio.
She compelled also other Roman Ladies to be as lewd as her self, and those
that would not, she hated, and banished them from the Court

And an handmaid that is heir to her mistris] That succeeds her in the
Marriage Bed: her good and her blood will rise together, as we see in Hagar.
Hence that counsel of the Greek Poet: (...).
Never make thy Maid thy Mistress.


Such Hens will be apt to crow, such Wives to breed disturbance in the Family.

Verse. 24. There be four things] made up thus in quaternions (as the 119. Psalm
is in octonaries, and those in an Alphabetical order) for help of memory.

Which are little upon the earth, but exceeding wise] God is maximus in
minimis, very much seen in the smallest Creatures. In formicis major anima quam
in Elephantis, in nanis quam in gigantibus. The soul is more active in Ants
than Elephants, in Dwarfes than in Giants. Who has despised the day of small
things? Zech. 4.10.

Ovid.
A can^ non magno saepe tenetur aper. The Creatures, next to the Scriptures, are
the best Lay-mans-Books; whereby we may learn to know God and our selves
savingly. Ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the Fowls of the
Heaven, and they shall tell thee, Job 12.1.

Verse. 25. The Ants are a people not strong] A feeble folk, but notable for
their forecast. See chap. 6.6, 7. Let us be so, but specially in Spirituals.

Verse. 26. The Conies are but a feeble folk] But what they want in strength,
they have in wisdom, whiles they work themselves holes and buroughs in the
earth, Martial.
Gaudet in effossis habitare cuniculus antris, secures her self in the rocks
and stony places; It shall be our wisdom to work our selves into the rock
Christ Jesus, where we shall be safe from hellish hunters.

Verse. 27. The Locusts have no King] They are all belly, which is joined to
their mouths, and ends at their tayls: hence they make such havoc where
they come in those Eastern-countries. See Joel 2. where they are called Gods
great army. For though they have no King to command them, yet they go forth by
bands, and march all in a company, to teach men concord and combination in
lawful affairs and attempts. For, Conjuncti pollent etiam vehementer inertes.

Those Locusts in the Revelation (whereby is meant the Popish Clergy) have
their King Ahaddon, the Pope, Revel. 9.11. to whom they appeal from their
lawful Sovereign; yea the rebellion of a Clergie-man against his Prince, is not
treason says Sa the Jesuit, quia non est Principi subjectus, because he is
the Popes subject. And when the English Clergy whipped King Henry the second
for a Penance for Beckets death, one of the Popes Legates said unto him, Domine,
noli minari, etc. Sir, never threaten us, Jacob. Revin. de vit. Pontif.
for we fear no menaces of men, as being of such a Court as uses to command
Kings and Emperors.

Verse. 28. The Spider takes hold with her hands] Some render it the Ape: and
the Hebrew Semamith is somewhat like the Latin Simia, a Creature that is very
witty, active, and imitative, taking hold with his hands (such as they are) and
doing strange feats; being therefore much in Kings Palaces, who delight to look
upon them, as Solomon did for recreation. If we take it for the Spider, she
does her work painfully and curiously, spins a finer thread than any woman can
do, builds a finer house than any man can do, in manner and form like to the
tent of an Emperor. This base Creature may teach us this wisdom, says one,
not to be bunglers or slubberers in our works, but to be exact in our Trades,
and labor so to excel therein, that our doings may be commendable and
admirable.

Verse. 29. There be three things that go well] And all for our learning, to
teach us in our several stations to deport our selves in all gravity, maintain
our dignity, and show our magnanimity. Only let your conversation be as
becomes the Gospel of Christ, says Paul, Phil. 1.27. There is a (...), a
comeliness and suitableness of carriage belongs to every calling, and this
must be carefully kept. Vellem si non essem Imperator, said Scipio to one that
offered him an Harlot, I would, if I were not a General. And remember that thou
art a Kings Son, said Menedemus to Antigonus: that will be a retentive to thee
from unseemly practices. Should such a man as I fly? Neh. 6.11. -- and Turnum
fugientem haec terra videbit? It is a pusilanimity to yield so much to men: The
Lion will not alter his gate, though he dye for it. We should learn regnum in
pectore gerere, to be of noble resolutions. It is a common saying amongst us,
Such a man understands himself well, that is, he understands his place, worth,
dignity, and carries himself accordingly.

Verse. 32. Lay thy hand upon thy mouth] That is, better bethink thy self,
commune with thine own heart, and be still. Repent thee, as Job did in like
case, chap. 39.37, 38. Quem paenitet peccasse, pene est innocens. Senec. Agram.
It is not the falling into the water that drowns one, but the lying in it.

Verse. 33. So the forcing of wrath] Too much stirring in an offensive matter
brings forth brawling, lawing, warring, fighting. Patientia laesa fit furor.
The most patient that is may be put beyond all patience if much provoked.
Abner bare long with Asahel, but sped him at length. Abused mercy turns into
fury. See Prove. 15.1.

CHAP. XXXI. Verse. 1. The words of King Lemuel]
LEmuel's Lesson, Bathsheba's Catechism. Lemuel she calls him, because God had
owned him; (2 Samuel 7.14. I will be his Father, and he shall be my Son) and was
with him so long as he was with God, according to 2 Chronicles. 15.2. Indeed when he
grew discinct and dissolute, then Gods soul sat loose to him, and was
disjoynted from him, Jer. 6.8. and the rather, because he had had the benefit
of better education. His father had taught him, and had taken much pains with
him, Aristippus dictus est (...) quod cum matter Are^a do^n^sse^. 1 King. 11.9.
Prove. 4.4. His mother also had counseled and cautioned him betimes, not to
give his strength to Wine and Women. And yet he was most inordinate in his love
to these two, Eccles. 2. This was almost as great an aggravation of his Sin,
that he had been better taught and brought up, as that other, that he forsook
the Lord that had appeared unto him twice. The words of King Lemuel they are
called, because though composed by his Mother, yet for his use in the same
sense, as Psalm. 127. is styled, A song of degrees of Solomon, or for Solomon,
though made by his Father: who tells him there, that which he found true by
experience. Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord, etc. for by all his
Wives, Solomon had none but one Son, and him none of the wisest neither.

Verse. 2. What, my son! and what, the son of my womb!] An abrupt speech,
importing abundance of affection; even more than might be uttered. There is an
Ocean of love in a Parents heart, a fathomless depth of desire after the
Childs welfare, in the mother especially. Some of the Hebrew Doctors hold,
that this was Bathsheba's speech to her son after his fathers death: when she
partly perceived which way his Genius leaned and lead him: that then she
schooled him in this sort, q. d. Is it even so my son, my most dear son, etc. O
do not give thy strength to women, etc.

Verse. 3. Give not thy strength to women] Waste not unworthily the fat and
marrow of thy dear and precious time, the strength of thy body, the vigor of
thy spirits, in sinful pleasures, and sensual delights. See chap. 5.9.

Nor thy ways to that which destroys Kings] Venery is called by one, Deaths
best Harbinger. It was the destruction of Alexander the great, of Otho the
Emperor (called for his good parts otherwise, Miraculum mundi) of Pope Sextus
the fourth, (qui decessit tabidus voluptate, says the Historian, dyed of a
wicked waste) and of Pope Paul the fourth, of whom it passed for a Proverb, Eum
per candem partem animam profudisse per quam acceperat. The Lacedemonian
Commonwealth, was by the hand of Divine Justice utterly overturned at Leuctra,
for a rape committed by their Messengers on the two Daughters of Scedosus. And
what befell the Benjamites on a like occasion, is well known out of Judge. 20.
that I speak not of the slaughter of the Shechemites, Genesis 34. etc.

Verse. 4. It is not for Kings to drink wine] i. e. To be drunk with Wine,
wherein is excess, Ephesians. 5.18. where the Apostle determines excessive drinking
to be downright drunkenness, viz. when as Swine do their bellies, so men
break their heads with filthy quaffing. This, as no man may lawfully do, so
least of all Princes: for in maxima liberate minima est licentia. Men are
therefore the worse, because they are bound to be better.

Nor for Princes strong drink] Or as some read it, where is the strong drink?
It is not for Princes to ask such a question. All heady and intoxicating drinks
are by statute here forbidden them. Of Bonosus the Emperor it was said, that
he was born, non ut vivat, sed ut bibat, not to live, but to drink; and when,
being overcome by Probus, he afterward hanged himself, it was commonly jested,
that a tankard hung there, and not a man. But what a Beast was Marcus Antonius,
(...). Strabo. Camd. Elis.
that wrote (or rather spued out) a book concerning his own strength, to bear
strong drink? And what another was Darius King of Persia, who commanded this
inscription to be set upon his Sepulcher, I was able to hunt lustily, to drink
wine soundly, and to bear it bravely? That Irish Rebel Tiroen, Anno 1567. was
such a Drunkard, that to cool his body when he was immoderately inflamed with
Wine and Uskabagh, he would many times be buried in the earth up to the chin.
These were unfit men to bear rule.

Verse. 5 Lest they drink and forget the Law] Drunkenness causes
forgetfulness, (hence the Ancients feigned Bacchus to be the son of
forgetfulness) and stands in full opposition to reason and religion: when the
Wine is in, the Wit is out. Plutarch. in Sympos.
Seneca says, that for a man to think to be drunk, and yet to retain his right
reason, is to think to drink rank poison, and yet not to dye by it.

And pervert the judgment, etc.] Pronounce an unrighteous sentence: which when
Philip King of Macedony once did, the poor woman, whose cause it was, presently
appealed from Philip now drunk, to Philp when he should be sober again. The
Carthaginians made a Law, that no Magistrate of theirs should drink wine. The
Persians permitted their Kings to be drunk one day in a year only. Solon made a
Law at Athens, that drunkenness in a Prince should be punished with death. See
Eccles. 10.16, 17.

Verse. 6. Give strong drink to him, etc.] To those that stand at the bar,
rather than to them that sit on the bench. Wine makes glad the heart of man,
Judge. 9.13. Psalm. 104.15. Plato calls Wine and Music the (...): Mitigaters of
men's miseries. Hence that laudable custom among the Jews at Funerals, to
invite the friends of the deceased to a feast, and to give them the cup of
consolation, Jer. 16.7. And hence that not so laudable, of giving Wine, Bacchus
and afflictis requien^ mortalibus affert. Tibul.
mingled with Myrrh, to crucified Malefactors, to make them dye with
lesssense. Christ did not like the custom so well, and therefore refused the
potion. People should be most serious and sober when they are to dye: since in
Death, as in War, non licet bis errare, if a man miss at all, he misses for
all and for ever. Vitellius trepidus, d^in tem^lentus
Vitellius therefore took a wrong course, who looking for the messenger Death,
made himself drunk to drown the fear of it.

And Wine unto those that be of heavy hearts] Heb. bitter of spirit, as Naomi
was, when she would needs be called Marah, Ruth 1.20. as Hannah was, when she
pleaded that she had neither drunk Wine nor strong drink (though at that time
she had need enough of it) but was a Woman of a sorrowful spirit, 1 Samuel 1.15.
as David was, when his heart was leavened and sowred with the greatness of his
grief: and he was pricked in his reins, (...)
Psalm. 73.21. This grief was right, because according to God, 2 Cor. 7.11. so
was that bitter mourning, Zach. 10.12. and Peter's weeping bitterly. These
waters of Marah, that flow from the eyes of repentance, are turned into wine,
they carry comfort in them; there is a clear shining after this rain, 2 Samuel
23.4. Such April-showers bring on May-flowers.

Dejicit ut revelet, premit ut solatia praestet:
Enecat ut possit vivificare Deus.
Verse. 7. Let him drink and forget his Poverty] And yet let him drink
moderately too, lest he increase his sorrows, as Lot did, and not diminish
them: for drunkenness leaves a sting behind it, worse than that of a Serpent,
or of a Cockatrice, Prove. 23.32. Wine is a prohibited ware among the Turks:
which makes some drink with scruple, others with danger; The baser sort, when
taken drunk, are often bastinadoed upon the bare feet. And I have seen some,
(says mine Author) after a fit of drunkenness, lie a whole night crying, and
praying to Mahomet for intercession, Blu^t^ voyage, p. 105.
that I could not sleep near them, so strong is conscience, even where the
foundation is but imaginary,

Verse. 8. Open thy mouth for the dumb] i.e. Speak wisely and freely for those
that either cannot, or may not speak for themselves. Thus Nicodemus spoke for
our Savior, Joh. 7.51. Paphnutius in the Council for the married Clergy, Pliny
to Trajan for the persecuted Christians, the Elector of Saxony for Luther, etc.
Oecolampadius says, that wise men only open their mouths, for a fools mouth
is never but open. Oecolamp. in Job 33.
Hence (...) Gapers are put for fools in Lucian and Aristophanes.

Verse. 9. Plead the cause of the poor and needy] These are Gods great care, as
appears in many texts. Job comforted himself in this, Job 29.15, 16
that he had been eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, a father to the poor,
etc. Ebedmelech is renowned for pleading the cause of the poor Prophet, and so
should Pharaohs Butler have been if he had done it sooner. Master Holt who was
of Counsel to Master Pryn (when so unjustly censured in the Star Chamber) but
refused, (through cowardice) to sign his answer according to promise, being
overawed by the Prelates, bewailed his own baseness to his wife and friends*
New discoveries of the Prelates tyranny. p. 47, 48.
And soon after falling sick for conceit only of the miscarriage of that cause,
he dyed, never going to the Star Chamber after that bloody sentence.

Verse. 10. Who can find a virtuous woman] Good Wives are rare commodities, and
therefore precious and highly to be prized, even above Rubies. The Hebrews put
rarum pro charo, (...). Arist. Ethic.
as 1 Samuel 3.2. and Prove. 25.7. Let thy feet be precious in thy neighbors
house, that is, let them seldom come there, lest thou become over-cheap and
under-valued. It is easy to observe that the New Testament affords more store
of good Women than the Old. When Paul came first to Philippi, few or none came
to hear him but women, Acts 6.13. but they drew on their husbands, and it soon
became a famous Church. What a rare piece was Priscilla, who better instructed
Apollo, ventured her life for Paul, Romans 16.4. and was such a singular help to
her husband, that she is mentioned before him, as the more forward of the two,
Romans 16.3? Like as was also Manoahs wife, Exodus 18.24, 25
and Nazianzens mother. Salomons mother was behind none of them, as appears by
this Poem, either composed by Solomon as a character of her (as some have
thought) or else by her self, for his direction in the choice of a good wife,
which would be worthy his pains, though he should fetch her as far as men
do rubies, Procul prae unionibus precium ejus. What a way sent Abraham and
Isaac for good Wives for their Sons!

Verse. 11. The heart of her husband does safely trust in her] He is confident
of her love, care, and fidelity: he dare trust her with his soul-secrets, etc.
he doubts not of her chastity, secrecy, or care to keep his family.

So that he shall have no need of spoyl] i. e. of necessary commodities: for
these she will provide as plentifully by her industry, as if she had shared in
the spoils of a sacked and ransackt City. The Turks, when they took
Constantinople, were so enriched, Turk. Hist. fol. 347.
that it is a Proverb amongst them at this day, if any grow suddenly rich, to
say, He has been at the sacking of Constantinople.

Verse. 12. She will do him good and not evil, etc.] She is constant in her
conjugal affection, and sticks to him, as Sarah did to Abraham, in all changes
and chances whatsoever. She leaves not off her kindness to the living, and to
the dead, Ruth 2.20. See that notable example of the Lady Valadaura in Lud.
Vives.

Verse. 13. She seeks wool and flax] This was held no shame for Salomons wife.
Augustus Caesar taught his Daughters to Spin and Card: he wore no Garments but
what his Wife and Daughters made him. The like is reported of Charles the great.
Spinster they say is a term given the greatest women in our Law. Rebecca was a
dainty Cook, so was Thamar David's daughter, 2 Samuel 13. By Mahomets Law, the
grand Turk himself must be of some trade.

And works willingly with her hands] As if her hands did desire to do, what
she put them to do: for so the Original sounds; She works with the will of
her hands. The vulgar renders it, with the counsel of her hands, as if her
hands were oculatae. She discreetly and cheerfully rids her work, with fervor
and forecast.

Verse. 14. She is like the Merchants ships] That is, she gets wealth apace, yea
though she stir not off her stool, and studies how to buy every thing at best
hand, though she send far for it. Of the Low-Country-men it is said, Peterent
coelum navibus Belgae, si navibus peti posset. So the good Houswife would do
any thing to further thrift.

Verse. 15. She rises also while it is yet night] That is, betime in the
morning, a great while before day, as our Savior also did to pray, Mark 1.35.

And a portion to her maids] She neither pines, nor pampers them: but allows
them that which is sufficient. Three things says Aristotle a man owes to his
Servants, (...).
work, meat, and correction.

Verse. 16. She considers a field and buyeth it] Here Is is the fruit of her
pains and providence. The Manus motitans, the stirring hand makes rich, Pro.
10.4. and a wise woman builds her house, Prove. 14.1. See the Notes. She
considers of the convenience of this field, and then casts about how she may
compass it.

Verse. 17. She girdeth her loins with strength] She flies about her work, and
sets on it with a courage. We have read of women, in whom besides their Sex,
there was nothing woman-like or weak, such were Semiramis, Zenobia, Blandina,
that brave Hungarian woman, who in an assault at the Siege of Buda, thrusting
in among the Soldiers, upon the top of the Fort, with a great Sithe in her
hand, Turk. Hist. fol. 741.
at one blow struck off two of the Turks heads as they were climbing up the
rampire. The like is reported of Marulla a Maid of Lemnos, who seeing her
Father slain in the Gates of the City by the Turks, Ibid. 413,
which hoped to have surprised it, took up the Weapons that lay by him, and
like a fierce Amazon notably revenged his death.

Verse. 18. She perceives that her merchandise is good] She feels the sweet of
it: and is heartened to redouble her diligence: as a Draught-horse feeling his
load coming, draws the harder. The good soul does the same. For having once
tasted how sweet the Lord is, it can never have enough of him: but is carried
after him with strength of desire, as the Doves to their Columbaries, as the
Eagles to the Carcases, Psalm. 84.1, 2, 3. No reason would satisfy Moses: but
when God had done much for him, he must still have more, Exodus 33.12, 13, 14,
17, 18, 19. and 34.9.

Verse. 19. She lays her hands to the Spindle] Notwithstanding her late
purchase, and planting a vineyard, verse. 16. and other out-businesses.
Lucretia inter ancillas ad Lucernam fila ducebat. Life and Death of Card. Wols.
p. 69. Act. and Mon. fol. 957.
See the Note on verse. 13. The two Cardinals Wolsie and Campeius coming from
King Henry the eighth on a message to Queen Katharine of Spain, a little before
the divorce, found her with a skain of red silk about her neck, being at work
with her maiden. And Queen Anne of Bullen kept her Maids, and all that were
about her, so busied in sowing and working, that neither was there seen any
idleness then amongst them, nor any leisure to follow such pastimes as are
usually in Princes Courts.

Verse. 20. She stretches out her hand to the poor] She labors with her
hands to that purpose, Ephesians. 4.28. and finds by experience, that not
getting, but giving is the way to thrive. See my commonplace of Alms.

Yea she reaches forth her hands to the needy] Nittily needy, as one phraseth
it. To those that are extremely poor, she not only stretches, but reaches,
not her hand only, but both hands; yea she has her Almoners to give to those
that she cannot go to: as Queen Anne of Bullen had. Ibid.
For besides what she dealt and distributed by the hands of others, she carried
ever about her a certain little purse: out of which she was wont to scatter
about daily some alms to the needy; thinking no day well spent, wherein some
man had not fared the better by some benefit at her hands. The like is storied
of Placilla wife to the Emperor Theodosius, that for her courtesy and bounty
to the poor, she was called (...), The poor man's friend.

Verse. 21. She is not afraid of the snow] As she is liberal to the poor, so her
chief care is for those of her own house, that they may be accommodated. For
she knows that to stretch beyond the staple, were to mar all; and not to
provide for her own, were to be worse than an infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8.

Verse. 22. Her clothing is silk and purple] Suitable to her Husbands condition,
who is a principal man, Lib. de cultu foem.
verse. 23. That Is excellent counsel that Tertullian gives Women, Vestite vos
serico pietatis, byssino sanctitatis, purpura pudicitia. Cloth your selves
with the silk of piety, with the satin of sanctity, with the purple of
modesty, etc.

Verse. 23. Her husband is known in the gates] Is renowned and noted for his
wives worth, besides that he is a ruler in Israel.

Verse. 24. She makes fine linen and sells it] Such sindons as our Saviors
dead Body was wrapped in, and for girdles, read 2 Samuel 18.11. Isa. 3.24. Jer.
2.32. It was anciently no shame for a Queen to make gain of her handiwork.

Verse. 25. Strength and honor are her clothing] See verse. 22. She is not of
those quae fulgent monilibus, sordent moribus, that are well-habited, but
ill-mannered. No, she is inwardly decked with Spiritual attire, such as
renders her glorious in the eyes of God and Angels. The joy of the Lord is her
strength, so that she laugheth at the time to come. This daughter of Sarah, so
long as she does well, and has the E^ge of a good Conscience, is not afraid
with any amazement (as women are apt to be) 1 Pet. 3.6. Gaudebat Crispina cum
tenebatur, Aug. in Psalm. 137.
cum audiebatur, cum damnabatur, cum ducebatur. So did Mistress Anne Askew,
Alice Driver, and many other gracious women, that suffered for the Truth in
Queen Mary's days: Strength and honor was their clothing: and they rejoiced at
the time to come: they went as merry to dye, as to dine: and cheared up one
another with this, That although they had but a bitter breakfast, yet they
should sup with Christ in joy.

Verse. 26. She opens her mouth with wisdome] Her mouth is not always open,
but duly shut, and discreetly opened: her words are few, true, and ponderous;
the stream and current of her conference tends either to wisdom or kindness,
that is, to duties either of piety or charity. The Jesuits forbid Women to
speak of God and his ways, either in good sort or in bad: and to meddle only
with the distaff. But the good Women in both Testaments, Abigail, Hannah,
Hester, the Virgin Mary, Priscilla, Lois, etc. never heard of this new doctrine.
Tatianus tells us, that in the Primitive Church every Age and Sex among the
Christians, were Christian Philosophers: yea that the very Virgins and Maids,
as they sat at their work in wool, were wont to speak of Gods Word. Hist.
Eccles. lib. 34 cap. 37.
And Nicephorus writes, that the Christians, even as they labored or journied,
were wont to sing Psalms: and that thereby there was at a certain time a Jew
converted. It were surely a great grace (says Lambert the Martyr) if we might
have the Word of God diligently and often spoken, and sung unto us in such
wise, that women and children might understand it. Then should it come to
pass, Act. and Mon. fol. 1015.
that Crafts-men should sing Spiritual Psalms sitting at their work, the
Husbandman at his Plow, the good Huswife at her Wheel, as wishes St. Hierome.

And in her tongue is the law of kindnesse] It is worthy the mark (says the
Chronicler) that Edward the first, and his Grandson Edward the third, the best
of our Kings, Daniel 262.
had the two best Wives: Ladies of excellent virtue, that drew evenly with them
in all the courses of Honor, that appertained to their side. The first of
these Edwards being traitorously wounded (whiles he was yet Prince) in the
Holy Land (as they called it) by the poisoned knife of an Assassine, Speed 646.
Cavid. in Middlesex. f. 432.
the Lady Elinor his Wife extracted the Poison with her tongue, licking daily,
whilst her Husband slept, his rankling wounds, whereby they perfectly closed,
and yet her self received no hurt. So sovereign a medicine is a Wives tongue,
anointed with the virtue of kindness and affection.

Verse. 27. She looks well to the ways of her houshold] She has an oar in
every boat, an eye in every business; She spies and pryes into her Childrens
and Servants carriages, and exacts of them strict conversation and growth in
godliness: She over-looks the whole Family no otherwise than if she were in a
Watchtower, Speculatur itinera domus suae.

Arist. 1. Rhet. lib. 1.
And eats not the bread of idlenesse] She earns it before she eats it.
Aristotle also commends (...), laboriousness in a woman, and joins it with
temperance and chastity, which are preserved by it. So is taciturnity and sober
communication, for which she is commended in the former verse. For as idleness
is the seed of talkativenesse, 1 Timothy 5.13. so painfulness is a singular help
against it. Queen Katharine of Spain, wife to our Henry the eighth, was not
more busy in her calling, than prudent in her carriage. She had been
counseled to it by Ludovicus Vives, who came into England with her, and was
Master to her Daughter the Lady Mary. See the note on ver. 19. of this Chapter.

Verse. 28. Her children arise up and call her blessed] As they grow to any
bigness, and consider their beholdingness, so they bless her, and bless God for
her: they bless the time that ever they were born of her, and so virtuously
bred by her: being ready to say of her, as once Deborah said of Jael, Judge.
5.24. Blessed above women shall Jael the wife of Heber be, blessed shall she be
above women in the tent. Blessed be the womb that bare us, and the paps that
gave us suck.

Her husband also] whom she commanded by obeying, as Livia did her Husband
Augustus.

And he shall praise her] Praise is due to virtue. And albeit -- laudis non
indiga virtus, Illae sed est proprio plane contenta theatro; Virtue is her own
reward, and she is the best woman, and best to be liked, says Thucidides,
Honos alit arts. Virtus laudata crescit. Omnes laudis studio incenduntur.
de cujus laud vel vitu perio minimus sit sermo, of whose praise or dispraise,
there is least said abroad: yet for as much as praise is a spur, and virtue
grows by it, why should it be denied to those that deserve it? Is not a Garland
here made up by the hand of the Holy Ghost, and set upon the head of this
excellent Huswife? Neither is it any disparagement, that her own Husband and
Children commend her; for her business lying most within doors, who so fit to
praise her as those that were ever present with her? and yet neither do they
more praise her by their words, than by their lives, formed by her to a right
posture.

Verse. 29. Many daughters have done vertuously] By the benefit of a better
nature, or civil education, or for praise of men, or for a quiet life: sure it
is, that all unsanctified Women, though never so well qualified, have failed,
both quoad fontem, and quoad finem, for want of faith for the principle, and
Gods glory the aim of their virtuous actions. And therefore though they be suo
genere, praiseworthy, yet they are far short of this gracious Matron. The
civil life without faith is but a beautiful abomination, a smoother way to
hell. Melius est pallens aurum quam fulgens aurichalcum, Bern.
better is pale gold than glittering copper. Say the world what it will, a dram
of holiness is worth a pound of good nature. Prefer that before this (in the
choice of a Wife especially) as ye would do a piece of gold for weight,
rather than for workmanship, for value, than for elegancy, like that French
coin in the Historian, in qua plus formaequam ponderis, wherein there was more
neatness than weightiness. Of carnal women, though never so witty, well-spoken,
and well-deeded too, we may say, as the Civil Law does of those mixed beasts,
Elephants and Cammels, operam praestant, natura fera est, they do the work of
tame Creatures, but they have the nature of wild ones.

But thou excellest them all] As the only Paragon of the world, the Female
glory, the wonder of Women-kind.

Verse. 30. Favor is deceitful] Some marry by their eyes, and some by their
fingers ends; Dos non Deus makes such marriages: but they commonly prove
unhappy. There Is esh, esh, fire, fire of debate and discord betwixt that Ish
and Ishah, that Man and Wife, where Jah is not the Match-maker, as the
Cabbalists have collected: Favor will fade, and beauty wither; an herd of pox
will mar the fairest face, and of a Nireus make a Thersites. Forma bonum
fragile est, says one Poet. Res est forma fugax, says another. Ovid. Seneca.
But better than they both, the Prophet Esaias, All flesh is grass, and the
glory thereof as the flower of the field. All these outward accoutrements are
non tantum fallacia quia dubia, verum etiam insidiosa quia dulcia, says
Lactantius; as there is no trusting to them, so there is great danger in them,
as Absalom and his Sister Tamar found in their beauty.

But a woman that fears the Lord] That is indeed the crown of all
commendation: as that which makes one all glorious within, amiable and
admirable beyond belief. Nicostratus in Aelian, himself being a cunning
Artisan, finding a curious piece of Work, and being wondered at by one, and
asked what pleasure he could take to stand gazing as he did on the Picture,
answered; Had thou mine eyes, thou would not wonder, but rather be ravished
as I am at the inimitable Art of this rare Piece. So if men had Saints eyes to
see the beauty of Holiness, the excellency of the New Creature, they would
prize and prefer it before the shining rubbish of all Earths beauty and
bravery. But as Augustus in his solemn Feasts gave to some Gold, to others
Gawdes and Trifles, so does God to some give his Fear, to others Beauty,
Wealth, Honor, and with these they rest contented. But what says the
Psalmist? The Lord that made heaven and earth bless thee out of Sion. q. d.
The blessings that come out of Sion are choice blessings, even above any that
come out of Heaven and Earth.

She shall be praised] Shall live and dye with honor. The body of Honor is
Virtue, the soul of it, Humility. Whosoever rises without the one, or stands
without the other, embraces but the shadow of a shadow, may be notable or
notorious, cannot be truly noble.

Verse. 31. Give her of the fruit of her hands] God would have desert dignified,
good parts praised. Here he seals up his approbation and good liking of what
her Husband and Children had said of her in the former verses. He takes it
well when we speak good of his people, and holds himself honored in their just
praises. Give her her fall due, says God, both within doors and without: let
her eat of the Vineyard that she has planted, live of the Land that she has
purchased, enjoy the fruit of her own labors, have both the comfort and the
credit of her worthy parts and practices: she being (as she here stands
described) not unlike that precious Stone among the Troglodytes which is
therefore called Hexacontalithos, Solin. Poly-hist. cap. 44.
because within its own little compass it has the radiant colors of
threescore other stones of price.

Deo soli Gloria*
A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION UPON Ecclesiastes, or the Preacher.
CHAP. I. Verse. 1.
THE Words] Golden words, weighty and worthy of all acceptance, grave and
gracious Apophthegmes, or rather Oracles, meet to be well remembered: Solomon's
Sapiential Sermon of the Sovereign good, and how to attain to it; Solomon's
Soliloquie, so some style it; others, his sacred Retractations; others, his
Ethics, or Tractate de Summo bono, of the chiefest good, Serranus.
compiled and composed with such a picked frame of words, with such pithy
strength of sentences, with such a thick series of demonstrative arguments,
that the sharp wit of all the Philosophers compared with this Divine discourse,
seems to be utterly cold, and of small account; (...). Arist. Experientia
optima magistra.
their elaborate Treatises of Happiness to be learned dotages, and laborious
loss of time. How many several opinions there were amongst them concerning the
Chief Good in Solomon's days, is uncertain: diverse of them he confuteth in
this book, and that from his own experience, the best School-dame. But Varro
(the learned of the Romans) reckons up 280 in his time; and no wonder,
considering man's natural blindness, not unlike that of the Syrians at Dothan,
Aug. de civ. Dei lib. 18.
or that of the Sodomites at Lots door. What is an eye without the optic
spirit, but a dead member? and what is all humane wisdom without divine
illumination, but wickedness of folly, yea foolishness of madness, as our
Preacher not without good cause calls it? A spirit there is in man, says
Elihu (viz. the light of reason, and thus far the Animal-man goes, and there
he makes an halt, Eccles. 7.15.
he cannot transcend his orb) but the inspiration of the Almighty gives them
understanding, Job. 32.8. God had given Solomon wisdom above any man; Abulensis
says, above Adam in his innocence (which I believe not:) He was (...) (as
Macarius was called) a man at twelve years old. Niceph.
His Father had taught him, Prove. 4.4. His Mother had lessoned him, Prove. 31.1.
The Prophet Nathan had had the breeding of him. But besides, as he was
Jedidiah, loved of God, so he was (...), taught of God. And being now, when he
penned this Penitential Sermon, grown an old man, he had experimented all this
that he here affirms. So that he might better begin his speech to his
scholars, than once Augustus Caesar did to his soldiers, Audite senem juvenes,
quem juvenem senes audierunt, Young men, hearken to me an old man, whom old
men hearkened unto when I was yet but young. Have not I written for you
excellent things in counsels and knowledge? Prove. 22.20. Or, Have I not written
three books for thee, (so some read those words) Proverbial, Penitential,
Nuptial? See the Note there.

-- Nescis temerarie, nescis
Ovid. Metam.
Quem fugias, ideoque fugis.
Job. 4. Esaias. 55.
Surely if thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that speaks unto thee,
thou would incline thine ear and hear, thou would listen, as for life it
self. Know thou not that I am a Preacher, a Prince, Son of David, King in
Jerusalem, 2 Cor. 3.1. Regis epistolis acceptis, quo calamo scriptae sint,
ridiculum est quaerere. Greg. Luke 13.28. Bellarminus Solomonem inter reprobos
numerat.
and so do come multis nominibus tibi commendatissimus, much commended to thee
in many respects? But need I, as some others, epistles of commendation to my
Readers, or Letters of commendation from them? Is it not sufficient to know,
that this book of mine, (both for matter and words) is the very work of the
Holy Ghost speaking in me, and writing by me? For Prophecy comes not by the
will of man, but holy men of God speak it as they are moved by the holy Ghost,
2 Pet. 1.21. And albeit this be proof good enough of my true (though late)
repentance, whereof some have doubted, some denied it, yet take another.

Of the Preacher] Or, of a preaching Soul, (for the Hebrew word Koheleth, is of
the feminine gender, and has Nephesh, Soul, understood) or of a person
reunited and reconciled to the Church, Anima congregata, and cum Ecclesia se
colligens. Cartw.
and in token of reconciliation to God, readmitted by him to this Office in
his Church; like as Christ sealed up his love to Peter after his shameful fall,
by bidding him feed his lambs; and to the rest of the Apostles that had basely
forsaken him, by saying to them after his resurrection, Peace be unto you: As
my Father has sent me, even so send I you, Receive ye the holy Ghost, John
20.21. See the like mercy showed to St. Paul, 1 Timothy 1.12. Howbeit some learned
men here observe, that it is no new thing in the Hebrew tongue, to put feminine
names upon men, as Ezra is called Sophereth, descriptrix, a Shee-scribe, in the
very same form as Solomon is here called Koheleth, a Preacheress; and the
Gospel-preachers Mebaseroth, Psalm. 68.11. with Esaias 52.7. either to set forth
the excellency and elegancy of the business, or else to teach Ministers to keep
themselves pure as Virgins; whence they are also called Wisdoms Maids, Prove.
9.3. and Christ's Paranymphs, John 3.29. to present the Church as a chaste
Virgin to Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2.

The Son of David] So Christ also is said to be, Mat. 1.1. as if David had been
his immediate father. The glory of children are their fathers, Prove. 17.6. to
wit, if they be godly and pious. The Jews made great boasts that they were the
seed of Abraham, Mat. 3.9. John 8.33. And that caitiff Elymas the Sorcerer,
Act. 13.6.
had surnamed himself Barjesus, or the son of Jesus, as if he had been of
nearest alliance to our Savior, of whom all the families of heaven and earth
are called. Ephesians. 3.
What an honor is it now accounted to be of the posterity of Latimer,
Bradford, Ridley, etc? How much more of David, that man of renown, the Father
of our princely Preacher, who himself took also not scorn to teach and do the
office of a Preacher, Psalm. 32.9. and 34.11. though he were the Governor of
Gods people, Psalm. 78.71. and head of many Heathen, Psalm. 18.43? The like may
be said of Joseph of Arimathea, who of a Counselor of State became a preacher
of the Gospel: so did Chrysostom a noble Antiochian, Ambrose Lieutenant and
Consul of Millain, George Prince of Anhalt, Earl Martinengus, John a Lasco a
noble Polonian, and sundry others of like quality and condition: Psalm. 138.4,
5. and 119.72. the Psalmist shows by prophesying, that they that have tasted of
the joys of a crown, shall leave the throne and palace, to sing with the
Saints, and to publish the excelling glory of God and godliness.

King in Jerusalem] and of Jerusalem. The Pope will allow the Duke of Millain
to be King in Tuscany, but not King of Tuscany: Solomon was both, Prove. 1.1.
See the Note there. Spec. Europ.
Hither came the Queen of Sheba from the utmost parts of the earth to hear him:
here he wrote this excellent book, these words of delight, which he had
learned from that one Shepherd, the Lord Christ, chapter 12.10, 11. and has left
them faithfully set down for the use of the Church; so honoring learning with
his own labors, as Sylverius said of Caesar. Here lastly it was that he
soveraigned over Gods own peculiar, the people of his purchase, Israel, Gods
firstborn, and in that respect higher than the Kings of the earth, Psalm.
89.37. So that if Maximilian the Emperor of Germany could say, Rex hominum
Hispanus, asinorum Gallus, regum ego, Joh. Mant.
The Spaniard is King of Men, the French is King of Asses, and I am King of
Kings; how much better might Solomon have said so!

Verse. 2. Vanity of Vanities] Or, most vain vanity: therefore no happiness here
to be had but in the reverential fear of God, chap. 12.13. and this is the sum
of the whole Sermon, the result of the Discourse, the impartial verdict brought
in by one that could best tell; and he tells it over and over, that men might
the sooner believe him, without putting themselves to the fruitless pains of
trying any further conclusions. Sin has hurled confusion over the world, and
brought a vanity on the creature. This our first parents found, and therefore
named their second son Abel, or Vanity. David comes after, and confirms it,
Psalm. 144.4. Adam is as Abel, or, Man is like to Vanity; Adam is Abels mate.
Omnis Adam est totus Abel. Nitsub, fundatus, constitutus.
there is an allusion in the Original to their two names: yea, All-Adam is
all-Abel, when he is best underlaid, (so the Hebrew has it) every man at his
best estate, when he is settled upon his best bottom, is altogether vanity:
Surely, Selah, It Is so, It Is so, you may seal to it, Psalm. 39.5. But who (alas)
has believed our report? These outward things are so near to us, and so
natural to us, that although we can say (nay swear) with the Preacher, Vanity
of Vanities, a heap, a nest of vanities, It is naught, it is naught, says the
buyer, yet, when gone apart, we close with them, Fulg. triumphs Romanos
ludosve cum spectarit appellavit vanitatem. Author vitae apud Sur. Procop. lib.
2. de bello Vand.
albeit we know they are naught, and will come to naught, 1 Cor. 2.6. Neither
will it ever be otherwise with us, till with Fulgentius we have found, after
much trial, the vanity of all earthly triumphs: till with Gilimer King of
Vandalls led in triumph by Bellisarius, we cry out, as here, Vanity of
Vanities, all is vanity: till with Charles the fifth Emperor of Germany, (whom
of all men the world judged most happy,) we cry out with detestation to all
our honors, pleasures, trophies, riches, Philip. Morn.
Abite hinc, abite long, Get you hence, let me hear no more of you.

Verse. 3. What profit has a man] What durable profit? Quid residui? what
overplus, what more than will serve to satisfy back and belly? Isa. 57.10.
Our life is called the life of our hands, because it is maintained by the
labor of our hands. Si ventri been, si lateri, as he in Horace says, If the
belly may be filled, the back fitted, that is all that can here be had, and that
most men care to have: Which if they have (some have but Prisoners pittance, so
much as will keep life and soul together) yet Quid amplius, as the Vulgar
renders this text, what have they more to pay them for their pains? Surely when
all the account is subducted (such a laboring man's happiness resolved into its
final issue and conclusion) there rests nothing but ciphers. This should make
us more moderate in our desires and endeavors after earthly things: since we do
but labor in the very fire, and weary our selves for very vanity, Hab. 2.13.
They that seek after the Philosophers stone, they must use so much gold, and
spend so much gold: and then they can turn as much into gold by it, as they
have spent in making of it: and so they have their labor for their pains: Quid
emolumenti? What profit has a man? Do we not see many take a great deal of
pains to go to hell? whereinto at length they are turned as a Sumpterhorse is
at night, after all his hard travel, with his back full of galls and bruises.

Verse. 4. One generation passes away, etc.] Therefore no happiness here,
because no assurance of life or long continuance.

Omnia sunt hominum tenui pendentia filo:
Et subito casu, quae valuere ruunt.
Xerxes, looking upon his huge Army, wept, to think that within less than an
hundred years, not one of those many should be left alive. Mortality is the
stage of mutability: Mere man is but the dream of a dream, but the generation
of a fancy, but an empty vanity, but the curious picture of nothing, a poor
feeble, unable dying flash. How then can he here work out unto himself an
happiness worth having? Hab. 2.6.
Why should he lay up and load himself with thick clay, as if his life were
rivetted upon eternity?

But the Earth endures for ever] As a stage, whereon the several Generations
act their parts, and go off: as the center of the world, and seat of living
creatures, it stands firm and unmovable.

That was an od conceit of Platoes, that the earth was a kind of living
creature, having stones for bones, rivers for veins, trees for hairs, etc. And
that was worse of Aristotle, teaching the worlds eternity: which some
smatterers in Philosophy fondly strive to maintain out of this text; not
rightly understanding the force of the Hebrew phrase, For ever, which oft-times
and here signifies a periodical perpetuity, a long indefinite time, not an
infinite: See 2 Pet. 1.3, 10. The whole Engine shall be changed. By ever then
is meant, till the end of all things.

Plutarch. (...). Paus. Psalm. 19.3.
Verse. 5. The Sun also ariseth] That sweet and swift creature, (the Persians
deified it:) So sweet, that Eudoxus Professed himself willing to be burnt up
by the Sun presently, so he might be admitted to come so near it, as to learn
the nature of it. So swift, that the Persians dedicated an horse to their God
the Sun, as the swiftest on earth to the swiftest in heaven. He courseth about
the world with incredible speed, and rejoices as a Giant to run a race. He
exceeds the Eagles flight, more than it goes beyond the slow motion of a
snail. Whether it run nearer the earth now by 9976 German miles, than it did in
Ptolomies days (as some Mathematicians affirm) I know not. But that, being of a
fiery nature, Hom. 8. ad pop. Antioch.
it should, contrary to the nature of fire, (which is to fly upward) send down
its beams, its heat, light, and influence, this I admire with Chrysostom, as a
gracious work of God, in making this great Servant of the world, (...).
(as his name in Hebrew signifies) so sweetly serviceable.

And hastes to the place] Heb. pants, as if tired and even breathless. A
figurative speech, like that Dan. 9.21. where the Angel Gabriel is said to fly
swiftly, or with weariness of flight, to inform Daniel. For use hereof, hear
the Poet.

Soles ucidere and redire possunt, Nobis cum seme^l occidit brevis lux, Nox est
perpetua una d^rmienda. Catull.
The Sun does set and rise,
But we contrariwise.
Sleep after one short light,
An everlasting night.
Verse. 6. The wind goes toward the South, etc.] It is a very small thing at
first, a little vapor rising out of the earth; but by circuiting and whirling
about, it gathers strength, now rushing toward the South, and anon toward the
North, Virg. Aneid.
etc. the Original is very lively in expressing the manner of it. Vna Eurusque
Notusque ruunt, etc. The restlesness of these insensible creatures, and
diligence in doing their duties, as it taxes our dullness and dis-affection, so
it re-minds us of the instability of our states, and that we should seek and
set up ou^ rest in God alone. All earthly things are to the soul, but as the
air to the stone; can give it no stay, till it come to God the center.

Verse. 7. All the Rivers run into the Sea] And the nearer they come to the Sea,
the sooner are they met by the tide; sent out, as it were, to take their
tribute, due to the Sea, that seat and source of waters. Surely as the Rivers
lead a man to the Sea, so do all these Creatures carry him to God by their
circular motion. A circle (we say) is the perfectest figure, because it begins
and ends; the points do meet together, the last point meets in the first from
whence it came; so shall we never come to perfection or satisfaction, till our
souls come to God; till he make the circle meet. A wise Philosopher could say,
that man is the end of all things in a semicircle; that is, All things in the
World are made for him, and he is made for God; to whom he must therefore
hasten.

Unto the place from whence the Rivers come] Sc. from the Sea, through the
pores and passages of the earth, where they leave their saltness. This is
Solomon's opinion (as it was likewise the opinion of the ancient Philosophers)
which yet Aristotle finds fault with, and assigns another cause of the
perennity of rivers, of their beginning, and original, Hinc Poetae flugunt
Inachum fluvium ex Oceano genitum.
viz. that the air thickened in the earth by reason of cold, does resolve and
turn into water, etc. This agrees not with that which Solomon here says by the
instinct of the Holy Ghost. And therefore Averroes is by no means to be
hearkened unto in that excessive commendation he gives Aristotle, viz. That
there was no error in his writings, Alsted. Chronol. p. 460.
that his doctrine was the chiefest truths, and that his understanding was the
utmost that was by any one attainable, himself the rule and pattern that Nature
invented to show her most perfect skill, etc.

Verse. 8. All things are full of labour] Labor est etiam ipsa voluptas. Chiron,
cum ob justitiam Dii permitterent ut perpetuo viver^t, maluis mori, quod
offenderetur taedio rerum semper eodem tenure recurrentium.
Molestation and misery meet us at every turn: The whole world is a Sea of
glass (for its vanity;) mingled with fire (for its vexation) Rev. 4.6. Vota
etiam post usum, fastidio sunt, All things are sweeter in the ambition, than in
the fruition. There is a singular vanity in this splendid misery. One well
compares it to a beautiful Picture, drawn with white and red colors in
sackcloth: which afar off is very lovely; but near by, it is like the filthy
matter of a sore or wound, purulent rottenness, or the back of a galled horse.
No man ever yet found any constant contentation in any state: yet may his
outward appearance deceive others, and another him.

Man cannot utter it] If Solomon cannot, no man can: for what can the man do
that comes after the King? chap. 2.12.

The eye is not satisfied with seeing] Though these be the two learned senses,
(as Aristotle calls them) whereby Learning is let into the soul: yet no man
knows so much, but he would know more. Herillius therefore, and those other
Philosophers that placed the happiness of a man in the knowledge of Natural
causes and events, were not in the right. There is a curse of unsatisfiableness
lies upon the creature. The soul, that acts in and by the outward senses,
flickers up and down, as Noah's Dove did, but finds no firm footing; sharks and
shifts from one thing to another for content, as the Be does from flower to
flower for honey, and desires still more things in number, and new things for
manner. Hence the particles in the Hebrew that signify And and Or, (...) and
(...) of (...)
come of a word that signifies to desire: because the desires of Man would
have this, and that, and that, and another: and does also tire it self, not
knowing whether to have this or that, or that or the other, so restless it is,
after utmost endeavors of plenary satisfaction; which this life affords not.

Verse. 9. The thing that has been it is that which shall be] History therefore
must needs be of noble and necessary use: because, by setting before us what
has been, it premonisheth us of what will be again: Plato in Cratylo. Macrob.
Joseph. Plin.
since the self-same fable is acted over again in the world, the persons only
are altered that act it. Plato will therefore have History to have its name,
(...) of stopping the flux of endless errors, and restless uncertainties. His
conceit of a general revolution of all things after thirty thousand years
expired, is worthily exploded, and learnedly confuted by St. Austin. De Civ.
Dei, lib. 12. cap. 13. but in no wise confirmed by this text, as some would
have it, and Origin among the rest. Plato might happily hint at the general
Resurrection, called the Regeneration by our Savior, Mat. 19.28. See the Note.

Verse. 10. Is there any thing whereof it may be said, See, this is new?] Hoc
ego primus vidi, says Zabarel. But how could he tell that? Many men have been
so befooled. We look upon Guns and Printing as new inventions; the former
found out by Birchtoldin the Monk, Anno Dom. 1380. the other by Friar Faustus,
Anno 1446. But the Chinese are said to have had the use of both these long
before. Should we then so eagerly hunt after Novelties, those mere
New-nothings, till we lose our selves in the chase? Nil admirari prope res est
una Numici. Get spiritual eyes rather to behold the beauty of the New Creature,
(all other things are but nine days wonderment) the bravery of the new
Jerusalem: Yea get this natural itch after novelties killed by the practice of
mortification: and get into Christ, that thou may be a new creature. So shall
thou have a new name upon thee, Isa. 62.2. A new Spirit within thee, Ezekiel.
36.27. New alliance, Ephesians. 2.14. New attendance, Psalm. 91.11. New wages, new
work, Isa. 62.11. A new Commandment, 1 John 2.8. A new Covenant, Jer. 31.33. A
new way to Heaven, Heb. 10.20. And a new Mansion in Heaven, Joh. 14.2. 2 Cor.
5.8.

Verse. 11. There is no remembrance of former things] None, to speak of. How
many memorable matters were never recorded? How many ancient records long since
perished? How many fragments of very good Authors are come bleeding to our
hands; that live (as many of our Castles do) but only by their ruins? God
has by a Miracle preserved the holy Bible from the injury of times and
Tyrants, who have sought to abolish it. There we have a true remembrance of
former things, done in the Church by Abraham and his offspring: when the
Grandees of the Earth; Ninus, Belus, etc. lie wrapped up in the sheet of shame,
or buried in the grave of utter oblivion. Diodorus Siculus confesses, that all
Heathen antiquities, before the Theban and Trojan Wars, are either fabulous
relations, or little better. Ezra (that wrote one of the last in the Old
Testament) lived before any Chronicles of the world now extant in the world.

Neither shall there be any remembrance] Unless transmitted to posterity by
Books and Writings, which may preserve and keep alive their memory, and
testify for their Authors, that such have one day lived. -- Quis nosset
Erasmum,
Chilias aeternum si latuisset opus?
Niniveh that great City is nothing else but a sepulture of her self: no more
shall Rome be ere long. Time shall triumph over it, when it shall but then live
by fame (if at all) as others now do.

Verse. 12. I the Preacher was King over Israel] And so had all the helps that
heart could wish: the benefit of the best Books and Records, that men or money
could bring me in; the happiness of holy conference, beside mine own plentiful
experience, and therefore you may well give credit to my verdict. Mr. Fox had a
large Commission under the Great Seal to search for all such Monuments,
Manuscripts, Registers, Legier-books, as might make for his purpose in setting
forth that worthy Work, the Acts and Monuments of the Church of England. And
the like had Polydor Virgil for the framing of his History: though with unlike
success: for he had the ill hap to write nothing well, says one, Peacham.
save the life of Henry the seventh, wherein he had reason to take a little
more pains than ordinary, the Book being dedicated to Henry the eighth his Son.
See the note on verse. 1.

Verse. 13. And I gave my heart to seek and search out by wisdome] God had given
Solomon a large heart, and great store of wisdom: and this made him not more
idle, but more industrious, more sedulous and serious in seeking and searching
out by wisdome] i. e. by the best skill that he had, maturely and
methodically, the causes, properties, and effects, with the reason of all
things that are, and are done under heaven. Neither did he this in pride and
curiosity, (as Hugo de Sancto Victore here sharply censureth him) but soberly
and modestly, setting down his disquisitions and observations of things
Political and Natural for the use of posterity. And forasmuch as these are now
lost (because happily too much admired and trusted to, 1 King. 4.3^
by those that had the use of them under the first Temple, in and with the
which some Jews say they were burnt) what an high price should we all set upon
this and the other two Books of Solomon, the wisest of men, as (not Apollo,
but) the true God of Heaven has called him, and commended him unto us? Surely,
as in the Revelation, Heaven never opened but some great Mystery was revealed,
some Divine Oracle uttered: So we may be confident, that the Holy Ghost never
sets any Penman of Scripture a work, but for excellent purpose. And if we
dis-regard it, he will complain of us, as once, Hos. 8.12.
I have written for them the great things of my Law; but they were counted as a
strange thing. As for those other worthy Works of Solomon (the fruits of this
privy search into the natures of the Creatures here mentioned) that the injury
of time has bereft us of; how much better may we say of them, Rolloc. de
vocatione, p. 130.
than a godly and learned man once did of Origens Octapla? Hujus operis
jacturam deplorare possumus, compensare non possumus, This great loss we may
well bewayl, but cannot help.

Verse. 14. I have seen all the works that are done,] I have seen them, and set
down mine observations of them, 1 King. 4.33. Pliny did somewhat like unto this
in his Natural History; which work of his says Erasmus, Non minus varium est
quam ipsa rerum natura: imo non opus, sed the saurus, sed vere mundus rerum
cognitu dignissimarum, it has as much variety in it as Nature her self has.
To speak truth, it is not a Work but a Treasury, nay a world of things most
worthy to be known of all men.

And behold all is vanity and vexation of spirit] Nothing in themselves, and
yet of sufficient activity to inflict vengeance and vexation upon the spirit of
a man: so far are they from making him truly happy. They do but feed the
soul with wind (as the text may be rendered) wind gotten into the veins is a
sore vexation.

Verse. 15. That which is crooked cannot be made streight] Most men are so
wedded and wedged to their wicked ways, that they cannot be rectified but by
an extraordinary touch from the hand of Heaven: (...). Hes.
Hesiod speaking of God says, that he can easily set crooked things straight,
and only he. Holy Melanchthon being himself newly converted, thought it
impossible for his Hearers to withstand the evidence of the Gospel. But after
he had been a Preacher a while, he complained, that old Adam was too hard for
young Melanchthon; and yet besides the singular skill and learning that God had
given him (for the which he merited to be called the Phoenix of Germany) Ad cum
modum in hoc vitae theatro versatum Philippum Melanchthonem apparet, says a
friend and Scholar of his, i. e. It well appears, that Melanchthon was
(Solomon-like) on this wise busied upon the Theater of his life, that seeing
and observing all he could, he made profit of every thing; and stored his heart
(as the Be does her Hive) out of all sorts of flowers, for the common benefit.
Howbeit he met with much crosness and crookedness that wr^ng many tears from
him (as it did likewise from St. Paul, Phil. 3.18.) not in open enemies only,
as Eccius, and other Papists, but in professed friends, as, Flaccius, Osiander,
Melch. Adam in vita. Mel Melanchthon mortuus tantum, non ut blasphemus in Deum
cruci affigitur. Zanch. Miscel. ep. ded.
etc. who not only vexed him grievously whiles alive, but also fell foul upon
him when he was dead, as Zanchius complains. Of all Fowl we most hate and
detest the Crows, and of all Beasts the Jackalls (a kind of Foxes in Barbary)
because the one diggs up the graves and devours the flesh, the other picks out
the eyes of the dead. But (to return to the text) sinful men grow aged and
crooked with good opinions of themselves, and can seldom or never be set
straight again. The Pharisee sets up his Counter for a thousand pound, I am not
as other men, says he, nor as this Publican, he stands upon his comparisons,
nay upon his disparisons, and although he turn aside unto his crooked ways (as
Sampson did to his Dalilah) yet he thinks much to be led forth with the
workers of iniquity, Psalm. 125.5. Hab. 2. Luke 13.11.
but cries, Peace shall be upon Israel. How many are there, that having laden
themselves with thick clay are bowed together, as he in the Gospel was, and can
in no wise lift up themselves? They neither can not will (O curvae in terras
animae, etc.) but are frample and foolish.

(...).
The Greek word for crooked, comes of an Hebrew word that signifies a fool, and
every fool is conceited; he will not part with his babble for the Tower of
London: Try to streighten these crooked pieces, and they will sooner break than
bend, venture all than mend any thing. Plato went thrice to Sicily to convert
Dionysius, and could not do it. A wiser than Plato complains of a perverse and
crooked generation, Deuteronomy. 32.5. See Acts 2.40. Phil. 2.15. It is the work of
Gods Spirit only, by his corrective and directive power, to set all to rights,
Luke 3.5. Philosophy can abscondere vitia, non abscindere, chain up corrupt
nature, but not change it.

And that which is wanting cannot be numbred] and stultorum infinitus est
numerus, so the Vulgar renders it, there is a numberless number of fools, such
as are wanting with a witness; witless, saplesse fellows, such as have
principium laesum, their brains cracked by the first fall, and are not cured of
their Spiritual phrenzie, by being reunited to the second Adam. Of such fools
there are not a few; (...). Deteriorum magna est natio, boni singulares. Cic.
ad Attic.
all places are full of them, and so is Hell too; the earth is burdned, the air
darkened with the number of them, as the Land of Egypt was with the Flies that
there swarmed. Bias the Philosopher could say, that the most were the worst;
and Cicero, that there was a great Nation of bad people, but a few good. Rari
quippe boni, says Juvenal: there is a great paucity of good people. And those
few that are, find not a few wants and weaknesses in themselves, quae tamen non
nocent, si non placent, these hurt us not, if they please us not; for God
considers whereof we are made, and will cast out condemnation for ever, Lud. de
Dieu. Euphor. Amama. Psalm. 19.
as one renders that place, Matthew. 12.10. Triste mortalitatis privilegium est,
^icere aliquando peccare. Our lives are fuller of sins than the Firmament is of
stars, or the Furnace of sparks. Nimis augusta res est nuspiam errare. David
saw such volumes of infirmities, and so many Erratas in all that he did, that
he cries out, Who can understand his errors? O cleanse thou me from secret
sins.

Verse. 19. I communed with mine own heart, saying, etc.] Here Hugo de Sancto
Victore proceeds to censure Solomon (as he had done before, verse. 13. See the
note there) of pride and vainglory, but with greater pride. For Puerilis
jactantiae est accusando illustres viros suo nomini famam quaerere. It is a
childish vanity to seek for fame by aspersing better men. Hicronym.
Solomon might without boasting say of himself, as here he does, Lo, I am come
to great estate; or, I have greatned and added wisdom above all that have been
before me. Does not God say as much of him, 2 King. 3. and 4. and 5. and 10?
And had he not good reason to praise himself in this sort? For whereas some
might here object, that the cause that men get not happiness by the knowledge
of Natural Philosophy is, because they understand it not: That cannot be, says
the Wiseman, for I have out-gone all that went before me in wisdom and
perspicacity; and yet I can do no good on it: try you another while, if you
think you can out-doe me. I think a man may break his neck before his fast of
these sublunary felicities.

Verse. 17. And to know madness and folly] That by comparing of contraries, I
might the sooner find and fish out what I sought for. Sed frustra fui, but I
disquieted my self in vain. Philosophandum igitur, sed paucis; there is a
deceit in Philosophy, Col. 2.8. and he who chooses to hold fast this lying
vanity, does by his own election forsake mercy, Jon. 2.8.

Verse. 18. For in much wisdom is much grief] And herein children and fools
have the advantage; as they want wit, so they want woe; as little is given to
them, so little is required of them. Nihil scire vita jucundissimae, (...).
Soph.
To know nothing is the bravest life, as the Greek Proverb has it. But this
must be taken with a grain of salt; and we must know, that heavenly wisdom
has infinite pleasure; and so far, as all other Arts and Sciences are
subservient to it, and regulated by it, they afford to the mind an incredible
delight and sweetness.

CHAP. II. Verse. 1. Go to now, I will prove thee with mirth.
THe merry Greeks of the World think that they have the only life of it, that
there is no such happiness as to laugh and be fat, to sing Care away, and to
lie carousing and melting in sinful pleasures; yea though they perish therein,
as the Duke of Clarence did in his Butt of Malmesey. But a little time will
confute these fools, says Solomon, and let them see, that it is better to be
preserved in brine, than to rot in Honey Flies and Waspes use to come to honey
and sugar, and such sweet things; so does Beelzebub (the god of flies) to the
hearts of Epicures and voluptuaries. Behemoth haunteth the fennes, Job 40.21.
Here therefore this Wiseman was utterly out, and made an ill transition from
the search of wisdom, to the pursuit of pleasures; from the school of
Socrates, to the herd of Epicurus. For though these hoggs may grunt out their
[Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we shall dye;] yet if death but draw the
curtain, and look in upon them, all the mirth is marred, and they put into as
great an agony as Belshazzar was at the sight of the handwriting that was
against him.

Verse. 2. I said of mirth, it is mad] q. d. Thou mad fool, what do thou? Yet
is not mirth amiss, so it be moderate; nor laughter unlawful (as some
Anabaptists in Calvin's time held) so that it be well limited. Carnal mirth,
and abuse of lawful things does mightily weaken, intenerate and emasculate the
spirit; yea, it draws out the very vigor and vivacity of it, and is therefore
to be avoided. Some are so afraid of sadness, that they banish all
seriousness; they affect mirth as the Eel does mud, or the Toad ditches. These
are those that dance to the Timbrel and Harp, but suddenly turn into Hell, Job
21.

Verse. 3. Yet acquainting my heart with wisdome] i. e. resolving to retain my
wisdom; but that could not be: For whoredom, and wine, Hos. 4.11.
and new wine take away the heart; they dull and disable nature, and so set us
in a greater distance from grace; they fight against the soul, 1 Pet. 2.12
Arist. de mirah. auscul. lib. 8.
and take away all sent and sense of heavenly comforts; Much like that parcel
of ground in Sicily, that sends such a strong smell of fragrant flowers to
all the fields thereabouts, that no Hound can hunt there. And here I believe
began Solomon's Apostasy, his laying the reigns in the neck to pursue sinful
pleasures, pleasing himself in a conceit, that he could serve God and his lusts
too. A Christian has ever God for his chief end; and never sins with
deliberation about this end; he will not forgo God upon any terms; only he
erres in the way, thinking he may fulfill such a lust, and keep God too: But
God and sin cannot cohabit; and Gods graces groaning under our abuses in this
kind, cry unto him for help, who gives them thereupon (as he did to the wronged
Church, Rev. 12.14.) the wings of an Eagle: after which, one lust calls upon
another, as they once did upon their fellow soldiers, Now Moab to the spoil,
till the heart be filled with as many corruptions, as Solomon had Concubines.

Verse. 4. I made me great works] I took not pleasure in trifles, as Domitian
did, in catching and killing flies with his Penknife; or as Artaxerxes did, in
making hafts for Knives; or as Solomon the great Turk did, in making notches of
horn for Bows; but I built stately houses, planted pleasant Vineyards, etc. A
godly man may be busied in mean low things, but he is not satisfied in them as
adequate objects, he trades for better commodities, and cannot rest without
them.

I builded me houses] Curious and spacious, such as is the Turks Seraglio, or
palace, said to be more than two miles in compass. William Rufus built
Westminster hall, and when it was done, found much fault with it, for being
built too little; Daniels hist.
saying, It was fitter for a chamber, than for a hall for a King of England,
and took a plat for one far more spacious to be added unto it.

I planted me vineyards] That no pleasant thing might be wanting to me. To
plant a vineyard is a matter of much cost and care, but it soon quits cost by
bearing, first, plenty of fruit in clusters and bunches, many grapes together.
Secondly, by bearing pleasant fruit, no fruit being more delectable to the
taste than is the grape; nor more comfortable to the heart, than is the wine
made of the grape, Judge. 9.13. Solomon had one gallant vineyard at Baalhamon,
that yielded him great profit, Cant. 8.1.

Verse. 5. I made me gardens] so called, because guarded and enclosed with a
wall, Cant. 4.12. like as we call garments quasi gardments in an active
acception of the word: because they guard our bodies from the injury of wind
and weather. The Hebrew word (...) Began comes likewise from a word that
signifies to protect or guard. And there are that give this for a reason, why
the Lord forbad the Jews to keep swine, because they are such enemies to
gardens, whereof that country is very full.

And Orchards] Heb. Paradises, famous for curious variety and excellency of all
sorts of trees and forcin fruits; resembling even the garden of God for amenity
and delight. Athenaeus, Diod. lib. 2. cap. 4. Q. Curt. lib. 5.
And herein perhaps he gratified Pharaoh's daughter (the Egyptians took great
pleasure in gardens) like as that King of Assyria did his wife Horto pensili,
with a garden that hung in the air, to his incredible cost.

Verse. 6. To water therewith the Wood] i. e. the gardens or hort-yards that
were as large as little woods: Christ's garden in the Canticles as it has a
wall ( Verse. 5.) so a well to water it, and make it fruitful.

Verse. 7. I got me servants, etc] Too many by one, sc. Jeroboam, who rent ten
tribes from his son. I^ is well observed by an Interpreter, that Solomon,
among all his delights, got him not a Fool or Jester, which some Princes cannot
be without, no not when they should be most serious. It is recorded of Henry
the third King of France, that in a Solemn procession at Paris, he could not
be without his Jester, Epic. hist. Gallicae.
who walking between the King and the Cardinal, made mirth to them both. There
was sweet devotion the while.

Melanch. in Hesiod.
I had great possessions of great and small cattel] (...) pecudes, and postea
synechdochic^s opes significant: sic pecunia a pecude. So chesita signifies in
Hebrew both money and a lamb.

Verse. 8. I gathered me also silver and gold] Gold of Ophir (now called Peru)
where the Spaniards are said to meet with more gold oar, than earth: Besides
his great gifts from other Princes, as Hiram, Queen of Sheba, etc. his royal
revenue, Petrarch.
his tributes from foreign nations, subdued by his Father David, to a very great
value. Sixtus the fourth was wont to say, that a Pope could never want money,
while he could hold a pen in his hand. His predecessor John 22. left in his
treasury to his heirs 250 tonnes of gold. Boniface the 8. being plundered by
the French, Heidfield.
was found to have more wealth (says mine Author) than all the Kings of the
earth could have raised by one years revenue. It should seem by the peoples
complaint after Solomon's death, 1 King. 12.4. that he lay over heavy upon them
by his exactors, and gold-gatherers, which caused the revolt of the ten tribes.
One act of injustice, often loses much that was justly gotten. Kedarlaomer and
his fellow-Kings were deprived of the whole victory, because they spared not a
man whom they should have spared. Ill-gotten gold has a poysonful operation,
and will bring up the good food, together with ill humors, Job 20.15.

And the delights of the sons of men] These drew out his spirits, and dissolved
him, and brought him to so low an ebb in grace; his wealth did him far more
hurt than his wisdom did him good: it is as hard to bear prosperity, as to
drink much wine and not be giddy: it is also dangerous to take pleasure in
pleasure, to spend too much time in it; as Solomon, for seven years spent in
building Gods house, spent thirteen in his own. Lovers of pleasures are set as
last and worst in that catalogue of wickedness in the last days, (...).
2 Timothy 3.4.

Verse. 9. Also my wisdom remained with mee] Outward things are dead things,
and cannot touch the soul, (a lively spirit) unless by way of taint: Solomon,
if not at first, yet at length, was fearfully tainted by them, making good that
of the Poet, Stultitiam patiuntur opes --
Ardua res haec est, opibus non tradere mores, Martial.

Et cum tot Croesos viceris, esse Numam.


Verse. 10. And what soever mine eyes desired, etc.] I fed them with pleasant
pictures, shows, sights, and other objects of delight, which yet have plus
deceptionis quam delectationis, able to entice, and ready to kill the
entangled: Lactant.
How many are there that have died of the wound in the eye? David knowing the
danger, prays, Psalm. 119.37. Turn away mine eyes from beholding of vanity.
Job steps one degree further, from a prayer to a vow, chap. 31. yea from a vow
to an imprecation, ver. 7. If our first parents fell by following the sight of
their eyes, and lust of their hearts, what can Solomon or any of us promise our
selves, qui animas etiam incarnavimus, who have made our very spirit a lump of
flesh, prone to entertain vice, yea to solicit it?

For my heart rejoiced in all my labour] This is not every worldlings
happiness. For some live not to enjoy what they have raked together, as that
rich fool in the Gospel: others live indeed, but live beside what they have
gotten, as not daring to diminish ought; but defrauding their own genius, and
denying themselves necessaries. So did not Solomon, and yet he found not the
good he sought for neither, as he tells us in the next words. Nor is it want
of variety in these pleasures, but inward weakness, an emptiness, and
insufficiency in the creature. In heaven the objects of our delight and
blessedness shall be, though uniform, yet everlastingly pleasing.

Verse. 11. Then I looked on all the works] A necessary and profitable practice,
well worthy our imitation, viz. to recognize and review what we have done, and
to how little purpose we have wearied our selves, in the multitude of our
counsels, Esaias 47.13. God looks upon men, and if any say, I have sinned and
perverted that which was right, and it profited me not, He will deliver his
soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the light, Job 33.27, 28.
Tully could tell Nevius, that if he had but well weighed with himself those
two words, Quid ago? What do I? Orat. pro Quintio.
his lust and luxury would have been cooled and qualified.

And behold, all was vanity and vexation of spirit] In the very pursuit of them
is much anguish, many grievances, fears, jealousies, disgraces, interruptions,
discontentments. Next, it is seldom seen, that God allows to the greatest
darlings of the world a perfect contentment. Something they must have to
complain of, that shall give an unsavory verdure to their sweetest morsels,
and make their very felicity miserable. Yet all this avails me nothing, so
long as I see Mordecai, says Haman the Kings minion. Lastly, after the
unsanctified enjoyment, follows the sting of conscience, that will
inexpressibly vex and torment the soul throughout all eternity.

And there was no profit under the sun] Nullae emolumenta laborum, nothing but
labor for travel, no contentation but desperation, no satisfaction but
endless vexation; as children tire themselves to catch a butterfly; which when
they have caught, profits them nothing, only fouls their fingers. Or rather as
the dropsical body, by striving to quench thirst by drinking, does but increase
the disease, and in the end destroy it self.

Verse. 12. For what can the man do that comes after the King?] q. d. who is
it that can out-doe me in this review and discovery? Neither is this a
vainglorious vaunting of his own virtues, but an Occupation or prevention of
an objection, thus.

Obj. It may be thou have not perfectly known the difference of things, and so
have not rightly determined.

Sol. To this he answers, that he has so quit himself in searching and trying
the truth in these points, that it is not for any other to go beyond him. And
having removed this rub, having carried this dead Amasa out of the way, that
might have hindered his Hearers march, he proceeds in his discourse.

Verse. 13. Then I saw that wisdom excels folly] i. e. Philosophy and Humane
wisdom, though it cannot perfect the mind, nor make a man happy, yet it is as
far beyond sensuality and brutishness, as light is beyond darkness. Those
that seek for the Philosophers Stone, though they miss of their end, yet they
find many excellent things by the way: So, Philosophers, Politicians,
Moralists, though they missed of the pearl of price, yet they sought out other
goodly pearls (with that wise Merchant, Mat. 13.45.) for the which they have
their just praise and profit.

Verse. 14. The wise man's eyes are in his head] He judiciously pondereth things
past, (...). Descrip. of the world, chap. of China. Heyl. Geog.
and prudently orders things present, and providently fore-seeth to prevent
dangers likely to ensue. The Chinese use to say of themselves, that all other
Nations of the world see but with one eye, they only with two. Italians tell
us, that whereas Spaniards seem wise and are fools, Frenchmen seem fools and
are wise; Portugals neither are wise, nor so much as seem to be so; they
themselves both seem wise and are so. This I could sooner believe, if from a
better mouth than their own. Romani, sicut non acumina, ita non imposturas
habent, says Bellarm. The Romans (those wittiest of the Italians) are neither
very subtle, nor very simple.

But the fool walks in darknesse] He has neither fight nor light, but is
acted and agitated by the Prince of Darkness, who holds his black hand before
the eye of such men's minds, and blinds their understandings; dealing with them,
as Pliny says the Eagle deals with the Heart, she lights upon his horns and
there flutters up and down, filling his eyes with dust borne in her feathers,
that at last he may cast himself from a rock, and so be made a prey unto her.

One event happens to them all] As did to Josiah and Ahab in the manner of both
their dying in battle. They may be all wrapped up together in a common calamity,
Aug.
and Sapientes sapienter in gehennam descendant, the worlds great wise men go
very wisely down to hell: there (for want of saving grace) fools and wiser men
meet at one and the same Inn, though by several ways; at one and the same
Haven, though from several coasts.

Verse. 15. As it happens to the fool, so it happeneth] It is with men, as
with Counters, though in the account one stand for a penny, another for a
pound; yet in the bag there is no difference: so here in the event, all our
wisdom is soon refuted with one black Theta, which understanding us not,
snappeth us unrespectively without distinction, and puts at once a period to
our reading, and to our being.

And why was I then more wise] This is a piece of peevishness, a childish
folly we are all prone to, viz. to repent us of our best pains if not presently
paid for it; so short spirited are we, that unless we may sow and reap all in
a day, unless all things may go with us as well as we could wish, we repent
us of our repentance with David, Psalm. 73.13. hit God in the teeth with our
obedience, as those hypocrites in Esaias, chap. 58.2, 3. and as that elder
brother in the Parable, that told his father he had never been worth a Kid to
him for all his good service. But what? is God like to break, or to dye in our
debts, that we are so hasty with him? This was good Barucks fault, and he is
soundly chidden for it, Jer. 45.1. with chap. 36.1, 2. Good men often find it
more easy to bear evil, than to wait till the promised good be enjoyed. It
was so with those Christian Hebrews, chap. 10.34, 36. whom therefore the
Apostle there tells, they had need of patience, or tarriance, to carry Gods
time. (...).
It needs not repent the wise of this world (much less the children of Light)
of any good they have done or gotten (however it prove with them) since some
degree of comfort follows every good action, as hear accompanies fire, as beams
and influences issue from the Sun. And this is so true, that very Heathens upon
the discharge of a good Conscience, have found comfort and peace answerable.

Verse. 16. For there is no remembrance of the wise] viz. unless he be also
wise to salvation: for then he shall be had in everlasting remembrance. Or
otherwise, either he shall be utterly forgotten (as being not written among the
living in Jerusalem, Esaias 4.3.) or else he shall not have the happiness to be
forgotten in the City where he had so done, Eccl. 8.10. I mean where he had
been either a dogmatical, or at least a practical Atheist, as the very best of
the Philosophers were, Romans 1. and 1. Cor. 1. the choysest and the most picked
men amongst them, 1 Cor. 3.21.

And how dies the wise man? as the fool] See the Note on verse. 14* and 15.
wise men dye as well as fools, Psalm. 49.10. good men dye as well as bad, Ezekiel.
21.4. yet with this difference; that the righteous has hope in his death,
which to him is neither total, but of the body only, nor perpetual, but for a
time only, till the day of refreshing. See both these, Romans 8.10, 11.

Verse. 17. Therefore I hated life] i. e. I less loved it than I had done; I
saw mortality to be a mercy, with Cato; I was neither fond of life, Vsque
adeone mori miserum Virgil.
nor afraid of death, with Q. Elizabeth. I preferred my Coffin before my
Cradle, my Burial-day before my Birthday, chap. 7.1. A greater than Solomon
threatens those that love life, with the loss of life, Luke 17.33. and has
purposely set a particular vanity and vexation upon every day of our life, that
we may not dote upon it, since we dye daily. Sufficient to the day is the evil
(that is, the misery) thereof. Quicquid boni est in mundo, says Austin, what
good thing soever we have here, is either past, present, or to come. If past,
it is nothing: if to come, it is uncertain: if present, yet it is unsufficient,
unsatisfactory. So that, whilst I call to mind things past (said that
incomparable Q. Elizabeth) behold things present, and expect things to come,
Camb. Eliz. fol. 325.
I hold them happiest that go hence soonest.

Verse. 18. Yea, I hated all my labour] i. e. I was sorry to think, that I had
been so eager and earnest in getting a great estate, which now I must leave,
and to whom I know not; sure I am, to those that never took any pains for it.
And herein we see the corruption of our nature discover it self, in that we are
so wedded to the things of this world (especially if gotten by our own art and
industry) that we think much to be divorced from them by death, and to leave
them to others, when our selves can enjoy them no longer. Henry Beauford that
rich and wretched Cardinal, Bishop of Winchester, and Chancellor of England, in
the reign of Henry 6. when he perceived that he must dye, Act. and Mon. fol.
925.
and that there was no remedy, murmured at death, that his riches could not
reprieve him till a further time. For he asked, wherefore should I dye, being
so rich? If the whole Realm would save my life, I am able either by policy to
get it, or by riches to buy it. Fie, (quoth he) will not death be hired? will
money do nothing?

Latimer, in a Sermon before King Edward the 6. tells a story of a rich man,
that when he lay upon his Sick bed, there came one to him and told him, that
certainly, by all reason they can judge by, he was like to be a man for
another world, a dead man. As soon as ever he hears but these words (says
Latimer) What must I dye? said he, send for a Physician; wounds, sides, heart,
must I dye? wounds, sides, heart, must I dye? and thus he goes on, and there
could be nothing got from him, but wounds, sides, heart, must I dye? Must I
dye and go from these? here was all: here is the end of a man that made his
portion to be in this world. If this man's heart had been ripped up after he was
dead, there might have been found written in it, The God of this present world.

Sermon. on Psalm. 17.14. April 3. 1643. before the L. Mayor.
Mr. Jeremy Burroughes relates in print of another rich man, that had sometime
lived near unto him; who, when he heard his sickness was deadly, sent for his
bags of money, and hugged them in his arms, saying: Oh! must I leave you? Oh!
must I leave you? And of another, who when he lay upon his sick bed, called
for his bags, and laid a bag of gold to his heart, and then bad them take it
away, it will not do, it will not do.

Mr. Rogers in his Treatise of love, tells of one, that being near death, clapped
a twenty shillings piece of gold into his own mouth, saying, Some wiser than
some, I Will take this with me, howsoever.

Verse. 19. And who knows whether he shall be a wise man] A friend or an
enemy, an acquaintance or a mere stranger: riches often change masters. How many
by a just hand of God dye childless; or else leave that they have to
dingthrifts, that will spend it as merrily, as ever their parents got it
miserably? scatter with a fork as it were, what they have wretchedly raked
together? Our Henry 2. some few hours before he died, saw a list of their
names, who conspired with the King of France, and Earl Richard (his son and
successor) against him; And finding therein his son John (whom he had made
Earl of Cornwall, Sommerset, Nottingham, Derby, and Lancaster, and given him a
vast estate) to be the first; he fell into a grievous passion, both cursing
his sons, and the day wherein himself was born: Dan. hist. 112.
and in that distemperature departs the world, which so often himself had
distempered.

Verse. 20. Therefore I went about to cause my heart, etc.] i. e. I set my self
to take off the edge of my affections from these outward comforts that are so
uncertain, (...). Symmachus. Metaph. ab equis, quos qui agitant circumagunt.
and so unsatisfactory; and to take another course for the attaining of true
happiness. The Hebrew word signifies, I set a compass, I turned round, or I
turned short again upon my self, by a reflex act of my mind, as Ephraim did,
Jer. 31.19, 20. as the prodigal did when he came to himself, who before had
been besides himself in point of salvation: and as Solomon elsewhere prays,
that the captive people may bethink themselves, or (as the Hebrew has it)
bring back to their heart, 1 King. 8.47. return and discern between the
righteous and the wicked, Mal. 3.18. Thus David examined his ways, and finding
all to be naught and stark naught, (contrary to that of God, who reviewing his
works, found all good and very good) he bethought himself of a better course,
he turned his feet to Gods testimonies, Psalm. 119.59. Set not thy heart upon
the asses, said the Prophet to Saul, forasmuch as better things abide thee, the
desire of all Israel is to thee.

Verse. 21. For there is a man whose labor is in wisdome] This seemed to
Solomon (whose own case it was like to be) so unworthy a thing, and such a
vexation of spirit, that he can never say enough of it; but could find in his
heart to cry out with the Poet, (...), I am thrice miserable, nay ten times,
nay an hundred, nay a thousand times so, that am born to be a provident and a
perfect drudge of an idledrone, or perhaps of a mere stranger.

This is also vanity and a great evill] Not privation of good only, a nothing;
but a position of evil, a sad thing; an inconveniency not to be avoided by
the most circumspect prudence: (...)
for it is written, He takes the wise in their own craftiness. And again, The
Lord knows the thoughts of the wise (their inward disceptations, (...).
their debating the matter with themselves) that they are vain, 1 Cor. 3.19,
20. The rich fool talked to himself (as fools use to do) and set down how every
thing should be, Luke 12.17. but it proved somewhat otherwise, ere he was a day
elder.

Verse. 22. For what has a man of all his labour] What makes he of it (every
thing reckoned) see chap. 1.3. what takes he with him when he dies, more than
a poor winding sheet? as that Great Emperor of Egypt caused to be proclaimed
at his funeral, Caron. Chron.
that that shirt of his (there hanged up for the purpose) was all that he now
had of all his labor, and great atchivements. Saladine the mighty Monarch of
the East is gone, and has taken no more with him than what you see, said the
bare Priest that went before the bier. Carrion. Chron.
See the Note on 1 Timothy 6.7.

Verse. 23. For all his days are sorrows, etc.] All the days of the afflicted
are evil, Prove. 1^.15. and every day has a sufficient evil laid upon it by
God, Matthew. 16.34. Few and evil were the days of Jacobs pilgrimage. Genesis 47.9
God gave him not a draught only of the cup of affliction, but made him a
diet-drink. Man is born to trouble (says Eliphaz, Job 5.7.) as the spark flies
upward. (...), etc. Isocr.
Man and Miserable are in a manner terms convertible: He that remembers that
himself is a man, will not think much of any sorrow betides him, says the
Heathen Orator. For, Si nisi res cujus nulla est contraria votis
Vivere nemo potest, vivere nemo potest.


Yea, his heart takes no rest in the night] As a clock can never stand still,
so long as the plummets hang thereat; so neither can a worldlings heart for
cares and anxieties. These gnats will not suffer him to sleep, these flies of
Egypt are continually stinging him, Nocte ac die non dabunt requiem, as those
Tyrants, Jer. 16. Night and day he is disquieted with them; he lies upon a
pillow stuffed with thorns. Not so the godly man, he contracts his cares into a
narrow compass, communes with his own heart upon his bed; and having made all
even with God, sleeps undisturbed, Psalm. 3. and 4. Jacob rests sweetly when his
head lay upon a hard stone at Bethel: Ahasuerosh cannot rest, though upon a Bed
of Down, but calls for the Chronicles. It was wisely done of Burleigh L.
Treasurer, to put off his cares together with his clothes, Camden.
when he laid by his Gown, he would commonly say, Lie there Lord Treasurer, and
so quietly compose himself to take his sleep. In nothing be careful (says the
Apostle) but let the peace of God guard your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus,
Phil. 4.6, 7.

Verse. 24. There is nothing better for a man, etc.] This may seem to savor of
Epicurisme; as may also some following passages of this book. For which cause
some of the old Jew-Doctors were once in a mind to hide this whole book out of
the way; and not suffer the common sort to (...) any more. But this they needed
never to have done: for the Preacher expressly calls carnal mirth madness, in
this very chapter; and shows that the happiness of a man stands in fearing
God, and keeping his Commandments, chap. 12. All which is poynt-blank against
Atheism and Epicurisme. And whereas here and elsewhere the liberal use of the
Creatures is commended and commanded; this is done in opposition to, and
detestation of such parsimonious penny-fathers, as deny themselves that
necessary and honest affluence that God has permitted and afforded them:
living sordidly, that they may grow rich suddenly, although they know not how
soon they may leave all, nor yet to whom.

This also I saw that it was from the hand of God] It is he that fills our
hearts, as with food, so with gladness, Acts 14.17. He can curse our
blessings, make our table a snare, sauce that we eat, spice that we drink, with
his fierce wrath, as he did the Quails to those Israelites. He can dissweeten
our Delicates, either with sickness, Job 33.20. or sorrow, Psalm. 107.17, 18.
or sudden terror, 1 Samuel 30.16, 17. and 1 King. 1.41. Adoniah's feast ended in
horror; astonishment was served up for their last dish. Let God therefore be
sought, for a comfortable use of the Creature, and then be merry at thy meat,
and put sorrow from thy heart, chap. 9.7. Eat the fat, and drink the sweet,
etc. for the joy of the Lord is your strength, Nehem. 8.10.

Verse. 25. For who can eat? or who can hasten, etc.] And yet I have found, (and
so shall you) that tranquillity and true happiness (the Kindgom of God) does
not consist in meats and drinks. A Turk may believe sensualities in his fools
paradise: but no servant of God is a slave to his palate.

Verse. 26. Wisdom and knowledge] To get these things rightly, and to use them
comfortably.

To gather and to heap up] Converrere and congerrere, to rake and scrape
together; the muck-worms occupation.

That he may give] As he did the Egyptians goods to Israel, Nabals to David,
Hamans to Mordecai.

CHAP. III. Verse. 1. To every thing there is a season.
A Set time, such as we can neither alter nor order. This is one of those keys
that God carries under his own girdle, Act. 1.7. To seek, to do or get any
thing before the time, is to pull apples before they are ripe, says a Father,
which set the teeth on edge, Fom^ importuni tempore decerpunt. Tertul.
and breed stomack-worms. They labor in vain that would prevent the time
prefixed by God, as those hasty Ephraimites in Egypt, 1 Chronicles. 7.22. with
Psalm. 78.9. those heady Israelites in the Wilderness, Numb. 14.40. Moses would
be acting the Judge before his time, Exodus 2.12. he is therefore sent to keep
sheep in Midian, verse. 15. David staid Gods leisure for the Kingdom; those in
Esther, for deliverance, they knew that God would keep his day exactly, as he
did with the Israelites in Egypt, Exodus 12.40, 41. Ev^n the self-same day,
when the four hundred and thirty years foretold were expired, Gods people were
thrust out of Egypt. So Dan. 5.30. In that night was Belshazzar slain; because
then exactly the seventy years were ended. And as God fails not his own time,
so he seldom comes at ours, J^r. 8.20. for he loves not to be limited. We are
short-breathed, short-sighted, apt to antedate the promises in regard of the
accomplishment, Hab. 2.2. And no less apt to out-stand our own markets, to let
slip opportunities of grace, which are ever headlong, and (once past)
irrecoverable. O if thou had known at the least in this thy day, Heb. 2.3.
Psalm. 32.6
etc. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? Therefore shall
every one that is godly seek thee in a time when thou may be found. There is
a certain time set for men to come in and be saved; as Alexander set up a
Taper, when he besieged a Town: as Tamerlan hanged out first a white flag, and
then a red. Many a man loses his soul as Saul did his Kingdom, by not
discerning his time. Esau came too late: so did the foolish Virgins. If the
gate of grace be over-past, the gate shut, the drawbridge taken up, there is
no possibility of entrance. Heb. 4.1 (...).
Let us therefore fear lest a promise being left us, and an overture made us of
entering into Gods rest, any of us should seem to fall short, or come late, a
day after the fair, an hour after the feast. God, who in his eternal Counsel
has appointed things to be done, has also ordained the opportunity and time
wherein each thing should be done; which to neglect is such a presumption, as
he usually punishes with final hardening, Ezekiel. 24.13.

Verse. 2. There is a time to be born, and a time to dye] We do not hear the
Wiseman say, There is a time to live. What is more fleeting than time? yet
life is not long enough to be worthy the title of time. Death borders upon our
birth, and our cradle stands in our grave. Orimur, Morimur. Multos ostendunt
terris bona faeta, nec ultra
Esse si^unt. -- Finisque ab origin pendet.
How many have we seen carried from the Womb to the Tomb; from the birth to the
burial? Ab utero ab urnam.
And what a short cut has the longest liver from the grave of the womb, to the
womb of the grave? Men chop into the earth before they are aware many times;
like as he that walks in a field covered with snow, falls suddenly into a marle
pit.

A time to plant, etc.] In point of good husbandry fit seasons are to be
observed, or else little increase can be expected. God also, the great
vine-dresser, plants and plucks up more Churches or particular persons at his
pleasure, Esaias 5.1. to the 8. Mat. 15.13. Jerusalem (that plant of renown) is
now of an Eden become a Sodom; and that which Moses threatened, Deuteronomy. 28.49.
etc. fulfilled to the utmost. Susa in Persia signifies a Lilly, and was so
called for the beauty and delectable sight: Now it is called Valdac, of the
poverty of the place. Niniveh that great City, that once had more people within
her walls, than are now in some one Kingdom, is at this day become a sepulture
of it self, a little Town of small Trade, where the Patriarch of the Nestorians
keeps his ^eat at the devotion of the Turks. Frid. secund. Imper.


Roma diu titubans variis erroribus acta
Corruet, and mundi desinet esse caput.
Verse. 3. A time to kill] viz. To cut off corrupt members by the sword of
Justice, or of War, ne pars sincera trahatur: There is a cruel mercy, says
one, there is a pious cruelty, says another. But cursed is he that does the
Lords work negligently: and cursed is he that (in a good cause, and upon a
good calling) keeps back his sword from blood, Jer. 48.10. But that soldier
can never answer it before God, that strikes not more as a Justice of Peace,
than as a soldier of fortune.

A time to break down, and a time to build up] This and the rest, though every
one knows to be so in common experience, yet one and the same thing (in effect)
is often repeated, that it may be once remembered: viz. that this whole world is
nothing else but a mass of mutabilities; that every man, every State, every
thing is a planet, whose spherical revolutions are some of longer, some of
shorter continuance. Omnia versantur in perpetuo ascensu and descensu, there is
a perpetual ascending and descending of life and state.

Verse. 4. A time to weep, and a time to laugh] Only we must not invert the
order, but weep with men, that we may laugh with Angels; lay godly sorrow as a
foundation of spiritual joy. Surely out of this eater, comes meat; out of this
strong, sweet: strong and sweet refreshments follow upon penitential
performances: these April showers bring on May flowers. Tertullian says, that
he was nulli rei natus nisi poenitentiae, born for no other purpose, but to
repent: but then, he that truly repents, de peccatis dolet, and de dolor
gandet, is grieved for his sins, and then is glad of such a grief. Those that
so sow in tears shall reap in joy: whereas those that will not (in an evil
time, Esaias 22.12.
especially when God calls to weeping and mourning, and even thrusts men down
as it were with a thump on the back) weep here, where there are weeping
handkerchiefs in the hands of Christ, are like to have their eyes whipped out in
hell, and to howl with devils.

A time to mourn] Matter enough of mourning we shall be sure of (and we
should be soberly sensible of it) whiles we are in this vale of misery, valley
of tears, in hoc exilio, in hoc ergastulo, in hoc peregrinatione, (as Bernard
has it) in this Prisonhouse, Purgatory, Pilgrimage, in this place of
banishment and bondage, how can we look for better? God set us not here, as
he did Adam in Paradise, to take his pleasure, or as he did Leviathan in the
Sea, to sport and dally. We must not think to do as the people of Tombutum in
Africa, who are said to spend their whole time in singing and dancing. The way
of this world is like the wilderness of Sin, or the vale of Siddim, Camd.
Elisab.
or the Pacifique Sea, which Captain Drake found tempestuous and troublous
above measure. Many miseries and molestations both, Satanical and secular, we
are sure to meet with, to make us mourn. Hierome complains that he had furrows
in his face, and Isicles from his lips with continual weeping. Origin is
thought to have died of grief. Chrysostom calls the days of his life, the days
of his sorrow. Basil was made old and unprofitable for Gods Church, before his
time, with travel and trouble. Rebecca is weary of her life, so is Elijah;
Naomi will be Naomi no longer, but Marah-Paul veyls all his top-sayls, and
sits down in the dust, 1 Timothy 1.15. besides his sympathizing with others, 2
Cor. 11.29, 30.

And a time to dance] Or skip as young Cattle do at springtide. Here is
nothing for mixed immodest dancings. Quid opus est talibus sa^^amentis? What
need people provoke themselves to that evil they so naturally incline to? Nemo
sobrius saltat, said the Heathen Orator, No sober man will offer to dance.
Chrysostom. Augustine.
Where there is dancing, there the Devil is, says a Father: and cannot men
be merry, unless they have the Devil for their Play-fellow? Dancing (says
Another) is a circle, whose center is the Devil, but busily blowing up the
fire of lust, as in Herod, that old Goat.

Sander. schism. Ang. lib. 1.
Verse. 5. A time to cast away stones] As when King Henry the eighth pulled down
the Abbyes and other religious Houses, (as they called them) saying, Corvorum
nidos esse penitus disturbandos, ne iterum ab cohabitandum convolent, that the
Crows nests were to be pulled in pieces, Acts and Mon.
that they might never nestle there any more. And herein he did but as
Cardinal Wolsey did before him: for he, by the Popes own license* had a little
before, pulled down forty Monasteries, and taken their stones and revenues, to
build and endow his two Colleges at Oxford, and Ipswich. Elapidation is a
piece of the Churches happiness, Esa. 5.2.

And a time to gather stones together] As in building Forts, Castles,
Colleges, Bridges, Causeys, such as was that, 1 Chronicles. 26.16, 18. 1 King.
10.5. 2 Chronicles. 9.11. See 2 Chronicles. 16.6.

A time to embrace] With honest conjugal embracements (as the Chaldee
Paraphrast interprets it) not with those libidinous embracings of the bosom of
a stranger, R^pertus.
Prove. 5.20. No time for such, 1 Pet. 4.3. Diabolus capite blanditur, ventre
oblectat, cauda ligat.

And a time to refrain] As in times of common calamity: for should we then
make mirth? Ezekiel. 21.10. Should not the Bridegroom come forth of his chamber,
and the Bride out of her Closet? Joel 2.16. Some of the Ancients do very much
note the manner of Noah's going into the Ark, Ambros. de Noe and Arca, cap 21
and how the father and the sons went together, the mother and her daughters
in Law went together: God himself dividing at that time those whom himself had
joined together. Others tell us, that and bruta ipsa intra Arcam, quamdiu
diluvium duravit, continuerint, the very brute creatures coupled not in the
Ark, during the deluge. There is both an intemperate and an intempestive abuse
of the marriage Bed, which ought to be kept undefiled, Heb. 13.3. and not
stained and dishonored with either unseasonable or sensual excesses, and
uncleanness; which God will certainly plague, (though they lie without the
walk of humane censure) without true and timely repentance. Sculte. Annal.
Lutheri nuptias amici etiam improbabant, etc. Luthers marrying a wise then
when all Germany was in a hurly-burly, Quoniam vero ipsum Luth^rum quodammodo
trist^orem esse ceruo and perturbatum ob vitae mutationem, omni studio and
benevolentia consolari eum cupio.
and all Saxony in heaviness for the death of their good Elector Frederick
(Luthers greatest friend) was no small grief to his best friends; and afterward
also to himself, as Melanchthon testifies in an Epistle to Camerarius.

Verse. 6. A time to get] Heb. to seek: for men do but seek here, they do not
properly get what they cannot long hold. How much better therefore were it to
seek God? Cujus inventio est ipsum semper quaerere, (as Nyssen has it here)
the finding of whom is always to seek him, and in seeking of whom there is so
great reward, Heb. 11.6. Seek ye me, and ye shall live, Amos 5.4. Seek him
that makes the seven Stars and Orion, verse. 8. Seek him in a time when he may
be found, Psalm. 32.6. Now is the ^ccepted time, now is the day of Salvation,
(...). Naz. Aug.
2 Cor. 6.2. Take the present Now and be serious, and then God scorns to do as
Heathen Idols did, viz. to say to the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain,
Isa. 45.9. How greedy are men of getting gain? Get God, and you get all: Habet
omnia qui habet habentem omnia.

And a time to lose] There is an uncertainty in riches, 1 Timothy 6.27. a
deceitfulness, Mark 4.19. alye, Joh. 2.8. they were never true to those that
trusted them, Mim^^s.
subject they are to vanity or violence, Matthew. 6. How seldom do Gamesters
grow rich? Vitrea est fortuna; cum splende^, frangitur. And as they say of the
metal, they make glass of; it is nearest melting, when it shines brightest in
the fire: so are many rich men nearest ruin, when at greatest luster, as
Haman, Herod, Pythius, etc.

A time to keep] It Is good for a man to keep somewhat by him. Bonus Servatius
facit bonum Bonifacium, according to the Dutch blunt Proverb, Eccles. 11.1.
A good Saver, makes a good wel-doer. See the Note on Prove. 6.8.

And a time to cast away] To cast bread upon the waters, upon those poor
Creatures that pinched with penury, water their plants, feed upon tears. And
although bread and other comforts cast upon such may seem cast down the waters,
because no hope of recompense, yet thou shall be recompensed at the
Resurrection of the Just (says Christ to such) and blessed in the mean while,
Luke 14.14. Temporalia Dei servis impensa non pereunt, sed paer^uriunt, Alms
perishes not, but is put to use.

Verse. 7. A time to rent, and a time to sew] As in making a new, or translating
an old garment. Fuller.
Turks wonder at English for pincking or cutting their clothes, and making
holes in whole cloth, which time of it self would tear too soon. It was a
custom among the Jews, to rent their clothes in case of sad occurrences. The
Prophet Ahijah rent Jeroboams new garment in twelve pieces, to show that God
would rend the Kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, 1 King. 11.31. Schismatics
rend the Church, Heretics the Scriptures: God will stitch up all in his own
time, and heal the breaches thereof, Psalm. 60.2.

A time to keep silence, and a time to speak] It is a singular skill to time a
word, Isa. 50.4. to set it upon its wheels, Prove. 25.11. as Abigail did for her
family, 1 Samuel 25. as Esther did against Haman. And it is an happy thing when a
man can pray as one once did, Det Deus ut sermo meus adeo commodus sit, quam
sit accommodus, God grant my speech may be as profitable as it is seasonable.
He that would be able to speak when and as he ought, (...). Pythagorica.
Cuspin. de Coesarib. 475.
must first learn silence, as the Pythagoreans did of old, as the Turks do at
this day, Perpetuum silentium tenent ut muti, they are not suffered to speak:
Discamus prius non loqui, says Hierome upon this text. Let us first learn not
to speak, that afterward we may open our mouths to speak wisely. (...). Cic.
de Amici^.
Silence is fitly set here before speaking, and first takes its time and turn.
It is a good rule that one gives, either keep silence, or speak that that is
better than silence.

Verse. 8. A time to love, and a time to hate] Yet I like not his counsel that
said. Ama tanquam osurus, odi tanquam amaturus. Let a man choose whom he may
love, and then love whom he has chosen. Let love be without dissimulation:
abhor the evil, cleave to the good, Romans 12.9. Hate we may (but then it must
be) Non virum, sed vitium, not the man, but his evil qualities; whereof also we
must seek to bereave him, that he may be totus desiderabilis, altogether
lovely, Cant. 5.16.

A time of war, and a time of peace] Time (says an Interpreter) is a circle;
and the Preacher shuts up this passage of time in a circle. For having begun
with a time to be born, and a time to dye, he ends with a time of war,
which is a time of dying, and with a time of peace, which is a time, wherein
people, by bringing forth, are multiplied.

Verse. 9. What profit has he that works, etc.] i. e. How can any man by any
means he can use, help, Cui bono.
or hinder this volubility and vanity that he meets with in every creature?
What profit? see the Note on chap. 1.3. whereunto this verse relates, as being
a conclusion of the principal argument.

Verse. 10. I have seen the travel that God, etc.] Not Fortune, but Providence
orders all cross occurrences: a wheel there is within a wheel, Ezekiel. 1. then
when men may think things run on wheels, at sixes and sevens* as they say.
Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, 1 Pet. 5.6. His holy hand has
a special stroke in all our travels. He both ordains, Act. 2. and orders
all, Genesis 50.20. altering the property, Romans 8.28. and disposing them to good,
raising profit from all. Thus men afflicted Job for covetousness, the Devil
for malice, chap. 1. God, for trial and exercise of his graces; to be
exercised therein, says the text, or (as the word signifies) to be humbled
therewith, to hide pride from man, Job 33. to tame and take him a link lower.
Their hearts are brought down, Isa. 29.4.
says the Prophet, they speak out of the ground that erst set their mouths
against Heaven, and said, I am, and besides me there is none.

(...) ab or natu, Mundus a mundicie.
Verse. 11. He has made every thing beautiful, etc.] Plato was wont to say, that
God did always (...) work by Geometry. Another sage said, Pondere, me sura,
numero, Deus omnia fecit, God has done all in number, weight, and measure;
made and set all things in comely and curious order and equipage: he has also
prefined aforehand a convenient and beautiful season for every thing; ordering
the disorders of the world to his own glory and his Churches good.

Also he has set the world in their heart] i. e. He has given to men the
Creature to contemplate; together with an earnest desire to search into Natures
secrets. (...) Romans 1.22.
The Vulgar renders this Text thus, Et mundum tradidit disputationi little, And
he has delivered the world to their disputations. But so foolishly and
impiously have men disputed of God, of his Providence, of his Judgments, of
the chief happiness, etc. that they have reasoned, or rather wrangled away the
truth: being neither able to find out the beginning nor end of the causes or
uses of Gods works. See Romans 1.21, 22. Veritatem Philosophiae quaerit,
Theologia invenit, Religio possidet, said Picus Mirandula; Philosophy inquires
after truth, Divinity finds it out, and Religion only improves it.

Glossa Minor.
Verse. 12. I know that there is no good in them] i. e. No other good, but for a
man to rejoice and do good in his life, i. e. Frui praesentibus and facere
quod in futuro profit, to enjoy things present, and to do that that may do him
good a thousand years hence: to expend what he has upon himself, and to extend
it unto others that are in necessity; this is to lay up in store for himself a
good foundation against the time to come, this is to lay hold upon eternal
life, 1 Timothy 6.18, 19.

2 Thessalonians. 3.
Verse. 13. And enjoy the good of all his labour] They that will not labor must
not eat, says the Apostle: As they that do shall enjoy the good of all their
labor, eat the labor of their hands, and be thrice happy, Psalm. 12.8, 12.
Jabal and Jubal, Genesis 4. Valeat possessor oportes, Si comportatis rebus bone
cogitat uti. Horat. Psalm. 43.5.
Frugality and Music, good husbandry and good content, dwell together? and yet
not always, but where God gives the gift. He gives strength to labor, and
health to enjoy the good of our labor. This the rich fool in the Gospel either
knew not, or considered not: Eat, drink, and be merry, said he to himself: but
God was not in all his thoughts. How much better David? Hope in the Lord, says
he to himself and others, and be doing good: dwell in the Land, and verily thou
shall be fed, Psalm. 37.3.

Verse. 14. I know that whatsoever God does it shall be for ever] i. e. That his
Decree is unchangeable, that his counsel shall stand, Prove. 19. that the Sun
may sooner be stopped in his course, than God hindered of his will, or in his
work: since his power and grace is irresistible. Nature, Angels, Devils, Men,
may all be resisted, and so miss of their design; Not so God: For who has
resisted his will? Vain men, whiles (like proud, and yet brittle clay) they
will be knocking their sides against the solid and eternal Decree of God, break
themselves in pieces, 1 King. 1.
as Adoniah did. And whilst, with Pompey, vanquished by Julius Caesar, they
complain that there is a great mist upon the eye of Divine Providence, they do
but blame the Sun, because of the soreness of their blear eyes. Certain it is,
and Solomon knows it (though the best of Heathens doubted of it when they saw
good men suffer, bad men prosper) that every Creature walks blindfold; only he
that dwells in light sees whither they go: and that the Charrets of all effects
and actions come forth from between those mountains of Brass, Gods provident
Decrees and counsels most firm and immutable, Zach. 5.6.

That men should fear before him] And not lay the reigns in the neck, casting
away all care upon pretense of Gods decree, as that French King did, Ludo. 11.
that thus desperately argued, Si salvabor, salvabor; si vero damnabor,
damnabor; If I shall be saved, I shall be saved, and if I shall be damned, I
shall be damned; therefore I will live as I list. This was to suck poison out
of a sweet flower, to dash against the Rock of ages, to fall into the pit (like
a profane beast) which was dug for better purpose, Exodus 21.23.
to stumble at the word (an ill sign, and yet an ordinary sin) whereunto also
they were appointed, 1 Pet. 2.8. A bridge is made to give men safe passage over
a dangerous River: but he that stumbleth on the bridge is in danger to fall
into the River: So here.

Verse. 15. That which has been, is now, etc.] viz. With God, to whom all
things are present, Romans 4.17. 2 Pet. 3.8. Jer. 1.5, 6, 7. Hence God is said to
know future things, Exodus 3.9. John 18.4. not to foreknow them. For indeed
neither foreknowledge nor remembrance are properly in God, since his whole
Essence is wholly an eye or a mind; it is the example or pattern of all things,
so that he needs but to look upon himself, and then he sees all things, as
in a glass. The eye of man beholds many things at once, as Ants in a molehill:
but if it will see other things at the same time, it must remove the sight. The
mind of man can take in a larger circuit, even a City, a Country, a World: but
this it does only in the lump or whole mass of it; for else it must remove
from form to form, and from thought to thought. But God takes all at once most
steadfastly, and perfectly. All things without him are but as a point or ball,
which with as much ease he discerns, as we turn our eyes.

And God requires that which is past] Or enquireth, asks, that which is
bygone; he bespeaks it as present, calling those things that are not as if
they were. Non aliter scivit Deus creatae quam creanda, says Austin. God knew
things to be created, as if they had been before created.

Verse. 16. The place of judgment, that wickedness was there] i. e. That wrong
reigned in the places of Judicature, that Justice was shamefully perverted, and
public Authority abused to public injury. Cato saw as much in the Roman
States, and complained, that private robbers were laid in cold irons, A. Gell.
lib. 21. cap. 16.
when public thieves went in gold chains, and were clothed in Purple.
Another, not without cause, complains, that even among us Christians, some
follow the administration of Justice as a trade only; with an unquenchable and
unconscionable desire of gain: which justifies the common resemblance of the
Courts of Justice to the Bush, whereto whiles the Sheep flies for defense in
ill weather, he is sure to lose part of his fleece. Such wickedness saw the
Wiseman in the place of Judgment, where he least looked for it. God himself
looked for judgment, but behold a scab, Isa. 5.7. So the Hebrew has it.

Verse. 17. I said in my heart, God shall judge, etc.] He did not deny the
Divine Providence, as Averroes for this cause did; much less did he turn
Atheist with Diagoras, because he could not have Justice done upon a fellow
that had stolen a Poem of his, and published it in his own name. But he
concluded within himself, Psalm. 37.
that God would surely take the matter into his own hand, Judge those
unrighteous Judges, right and relieve the oppressed, bring forth their
righteousness as the light, and their innocence as the noonday, if not in this
world, yet certainly at that great Assizes to be held by his son. (Because
he has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness, whereof he has given assurance to allmen, etc.) Act. 17 31.
His petty Sessions he keeps now, letting the Law pass upon some few corrupt
Judges by untimely death, disgraces, banishment, remorse of conscience, etc.
(as he did upon Judge Morgan, that condemned the Lady Jane Gray, Judge Hales,
Belknap, Empson, Dudley, that I speak not of Pilate, Felix, etc.] reserving the
rest till the great Assizes, 1 Timothy 5.24. Some he punishes here, lest his
Providence, but not all, lest his patience and promise of Judgment should be
called into question; as Austin well observes. His two and twenty learned
Books, De civitate Dei, were purposely written to clear up this truth. And so
were Salvians eight Books, De gubernatione Dei, and de justo praesentique ejus
judicio.

Verse. 18. That they might see that they themselves are beasts] It is reckoned
a great matter that wicked men are made to know themselves to be but men, and
no more, Psalm. 37 22.
Psalm. 9.20. But God will make good men see and say with David, Ambr. in Psalm.
72.
So foolish was I and ignorant: I was as a Beast before thee. Pulchre addidit,
Apud te, says Ambrose upon those words; Elegantly said the Psalmist, Before
thee, because in respect of God, what is man but an unreasonable Beast? He that
is wisest among men, Socrat. apud Platon.
said Socrates, (who himself was held the wisest of men) if he be compared to
God, Simia videbitur, non sapiens, he will seem rather an Ape than a wise man.
Eram apud te sicut bestia. Mercer.
David calls himself not a Beast only, but Beasts in the plural, Behemoth; or
at least, a very great Beast, not an Ape, but an Elephant. And this is that
which God would have all good men see, h^mmah lahem, (as this text has it)
themselves to themselves, in their humble account of themselves, as holy Agur
did, Prove: 30. 2. See the Note there.

Verse. 19. For that which befalls the sons of men] As hunger, thirst, heat,
cold, diseases, aches, and other ill accidents.

Noc te tua plurima Pentheu Labeutem texit pietas.
As the one dieth] They are sure to dye, both of them.

Yea they have all one breath] They breathe in the same air, and exspire alike,
in respect of the body.

So that a man has no preheminence] Unless it be in reason and speech, which
he frequently abuses to his own utter destruction. But otherwise, Nos aper
auditu praecellit, aranca tactu,
Vultur odoratu, lynx visu, simia gustu.


Verse. 20. All are of the dust] See the Note on Genesis 3.19.

Verse. 21. Who knows the Spirit] q. d. Who but a man that is spiritually
rational, and rationally spiritual? 1 Cor. 2.16.
Who but he that has the mind of Christ? that has seen the Insides of Nature
and Grace? Whether Plato and Tully believed themselves in what they wrote
touching the immortality of the soul, is a great question.

Verse. 22. Whether I perceive] He resumeth his assertion, v. 13. and
concludes. See chap. 2.24.

CHAP. IV. Verse. 1. So I returned, and considered.
Here Is a second instance of corruption in civil State, added to that, chap.
3.16. to fill up the nest of vanities.

And behold the tears of such, etc.] Heb. Tear; as if they had wept their
utmost, Expletur Iachrymis egeriturque dolor. Ovid.
Et vix unicam lachrymulam extorquere possent, and could hardly squeeze out one
poor tear more, for their own ease. For as Hindes by calving, so men by weeping
cast out their sorrows. Job 39.3. Now tears are of many sorts: Lachrymas
angustiae exprimit crux: Alsted.
lachrymas poenitentiae, peccatum: lachrymas sympathia, affectus: lachrymas
letitiae, excellentia gandii: denique lachrymas nequitiae, vel hypocrisis vel
vindictae cupiditas. Oppression draws tears of grief: Sin, tears of repentance:
affection, tears of compassion: good success, tears of joy: hypocrisy, or
spite, tears of wickedness.

And they had no comforter] This was Jobs doleful case, and David's, Psalm.
69.21. and the Churches in the Lamentations, chap. 1.2. Affert solatium
lugentibus suspiriorum societas, says Basil. Pity allays misery: but
incompassionateness of others, increases it. This was one of Sodoms sins,
Ezekiel. 16.49. and of those Epicures in Amos, chap. 6.6. The King and Haman sat
drinking in the gate; but the whole City of Susan was in heaviness, Esth. 3.15.

And on the side of their oppressors, etc.] The oppressed Romans sighed out to
Pompey, Nostra miseria tu es Magnus. The world has almost as many wild Beasts
and Monsters, as it has Landlords, in diverse places. It is a woeful thing,
surely, to see how great ones quaff the tears of the oppressed, and to hear
them make music of shricks.

Verse. 2. Wherefore I praised the dead] Because they are out of the reach of
wrong-doers; and if dead in the Lord, they have entered into peace, they do
rest in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness, Isa. 57.2. But if
otherwise, men had better do any thing, suffer any thing here, than dye: since
by death (as by a trap-do^e) they enter into those terrors and torments that
shall never either mend or end. Men, (like silly fishes) see one another caught
and jerkt out of the Pond of life; but they see not (alas) the fire and pan
into the which they are cast, that dye in their sins. Oh! it had been better
(surely) for such; if they had never been born, as Christ said of Judas; than
thus to be brought forth to the murderer, (to that old Manslayer,) to be
hurled into Hell, Hos. 4.
there to suffer such things, as they shall never be able to avoid or abide.

Verse. 3. Yea better is he than both they] The Heathen could say, Optimum non
nasci: proximum mori. Life is certainly a blessing of God, though never so
calamitous. Why is living man sorrowful? says the Prophet: Lam. 3.39
and it is as if he should say; Man, if alive, has some cause of comfort,
amidst all his miseries: if he may escape though but with the skin of his teeth,
and have his life for a prey, he should see matter of thankfulness, and say,
Job 19.20 Lam. 3.
It is the Lords mercy that I am not consumed, that I am yet on this side hell.
But those that have set their hearts upon earthly things, if ever they lose
them, they are filled almost with unmedicinable sorrows; so as they will praise
the dead above the living, and wish they had never been born. These are they
whom Solomon in this sentence is by some thought to personate.

Verse. 4. That for this a man is envied of his neighbour] This is another piece
of life's vanity; that as greater men will lie heavy upon you and oppress you,
so meaner men will be envying at you, and oppose you; as Cain did Abel, Saul's
Courtiers did David, the Peers of Persia, Daniel; the Scribes and Pharisees,
our Savior: Every Zopyrus shall be sure to have his Zoilus. The garment of
righteousness, party-colored with all variety of graces, is a great eyesore
to the wicked, and makes the Saints maligned. See Prove. 27.4. with the note
there.

Verse. 5. The fool foldeth his hands together] A graphical and lively
description of a Sluggard, fitly called a fool, (...), a naughty person. Thou
idle and evil servant, Matthew. 25.26. God puts no difference betwixt Nequaquam
and Nequam, a drone and a naughty-pack, seem he never so wise in his own eyes,
Prove. 26.16. and have he never so much reason to allege for himself (as in the
verse here next following) a fool he is, and so he will soon prove himself.
For, he folds up his hands, and hides them in his own bosom, Prove. 26.15. A
great many chares he is likely to do the while. See the Note on Prove. 19.24.
And as ( Neque mola, neque farina, nothing do, nothing have) he cateth hit
own flesh, he makes many an hungry meal, he has a Dogs life, as we say; Ease
slays this fool, Prove. 1.32. poverty comes upon him as an armed man. Grief
also slayes him, Prove. 21.25. envy consumes his flesh, and he is vexed at the
plenty of painful persons; and because he cannot come at, or rather pull out
their hearts, he feeds upon his own.

Verse. 6. Better is an handful with quietnesse] This is the sluggards plea;
whereby he boulstereth himself up in his wickedness, and would make you
believe that he did, non sine ratione insanire, not play the Madman without
good reason. To what end (says he) should a man toil and tire out himself with
hard labor to compass commodity, making a drudge and a beast of himself for a
little pelf; since he knows not who shall have the spending of it, and he is
sure to be either squeezed by his Superiors, as verse. 1. of this Chapter, or
else envied by his neighbors, as verse. 4? Is not a little with ^ase better? a
penny by begging better than two pence by true labor? It is well observed by
an Interpreter, that this sentence uttered by the sluggard, is in its true
meaning, not much different from that of the Wiseman, Prove. 17.1. but ill
applied by him. Good words are not always to be trusted, from ill men
especially.

Verse. 7. Then I returned, and saw vanity, etc.] i. e. another extreme of
vanity, visible wherever the Sun is seen. Dum vitant stulti vitium, in
contrariae current: Fools whiles they shun the sands, rush upon the rocks; as
Herod would needs prevent perjury by murder. The sluggard here, seeing those
that do best to be envied of others, resolves to do just nothing. Again, the
covetous Miser, seeing the sluggard lie under so much infamy for doing nothing,
se laboribus conficit, undoes himself with over-doing. Sed nemo ita perplexus
tenetur inter duo vitia, quinexitus pateat, absque tertio, says an Ancient:
But no man is so held hampered betwixt two vices, but that he may well get
off, without falling into a third. What need Eutyches fall into the other
extreme of Nestorius? or Stancarus of Osiander? or Illyricus of Strigelius? but
that they were for their pride justly given up to a spirit of giddiness.

Verse. 8. There is one alone, and there is not a second] A matchless Miser, a
fellow that hardly has a fellow, a solivagant or solitary vagrant, that dare
not marry for fear of a numerous offspring. Child he has none to succeed him,
nor brother to share with him, and yet there is no end of all his labor: he
takes uncessant pains, and works like an horse, neither is his eye satisfied
with riches, that lust of the eye (as St. John calls covetousness) is as a
bottomless gulf, 1 John 2.15
as an unquenchable fire, as Leviathan that wants room in the main Ocean, or
as Behemoth, (Job 40.23.) that trusts that he can draw up Jordan into his
mouth.

Neither says he, for whom do I labor and bereave] Si haec duo tecum verba
reputasses, Orat. pro Quintio.
Quid ago? respirasset cupiditas and avaritia panlulum, says Cicero to Nevius.
If thou would but take up those two words, and say to thy self, What do I?
thy lust and covetousness would be somewhat rebated thereby. But lust is
inconsiderate and headlong: neither is any thing more irrational than
irreligion. The rich glutton bethought himself of his store, and resolved to
take part of it. Luke 12.17 1 Cor. 9
So did Nabal; but this wretch here has not a second: he plants a Vineyard,
and eats not of the fruit, etc.

And bereave my soul of good) i. e. deprive my self of necessary conveniences
and comforts, and defraud my Genius of that which God has given me richly to
enjoy, 1 Timothy 6. Or, bereave my soul of good, of God, of grace, of heaven,
never thinking of eternity, 1 Timothy 6.18
of laying up for my self a good foundation, that I may lay hold upon eternal
life: but by low ends, even in religious duties, making earth my throne, and
heaven my footstool. This is vanity in the abstract; this is a sore travel,
because Nulla emolumenta laborum, no good to be gotten by it, no pay for a man's
pains. But as the Bird that sits on the Serpents eggs, by breaking and
hatching them brings forth a perilous brood, to her own destruction; so do
those that sit abrood on the worlds vanities.

Verse. 9. Two are better than one] Friendly society is far beyond that
wretched alonenesse of the covetous Caitiff, verse. 8. He joins house to house,
and land to land, that he may live alone in the earth, Esaias 5.8. Horat.
Quin fine rivali seque and sua solus amato. Let him enjoy his moping
solitariness, if he can. It is not good for man to be alone, Genesis 2. Aristot.
Polis. 1.
says God. And he that loves to be alone, is either a beast or a god, says
the Philosopher. Man is (...), a sociable creature, he is Natures good fellow,
and holds this for a Rule, Optimum solatium sodalitium, There is great comfort
in good company: next to communion with God is the communion of Saints. Christ
sent out his Apostles by two and two, Mar. 6.7. He himself came from Heaven to
converse with us; and shall we like Stoics, sty up our selves, and not daily
run into good company? The evil spirit is for solitariness, God is for
society. He dwells in the Assembly of his Saints; yea, Dupla and compaginata
pleraque fecit Deus, ut coelum and terram, solemn and lunam, marem and foeminam.
Orig. in Genesis 1 Vid E^^sm. in Adagio (...).
there he has a delight to dwell, calling the Church his Chepht sibah, Esaias
62.4. and the Saints were David's Chaphtfibam, his delight, Psalm. 16.2. Neither
does God nor good men take pleasure in a stern froward austerity, or wild
retiredness: but in a mild affablenesse and amiable conversation.

Verse. 10. For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow] Provided, that
they hold together, and be both of a mind. That which is stronger shoreth up
that which is weaker. While Latimer and Ridley lived, they kept up Cranmer by
intercourse of Letters and otherwise, from entertaining counsels of revolt.
Bishop Ridley being Prisoner in the Tower, had the liberty of the same; to
prove, belike, whether he would go to Mass or no: which once he did. And Mr.
Bradford being there Prisoner, and hearing thereof, Act. and Mon. fol. 1930.
wrote an effectual Letter to persuade him from the same, which did Mr. Ridley
no little good; for he repented, etc. Bishop Farrar also being in the
King's Bench Prisoner, was traveled withal by the Papists in the end of Lent,
to receive the Sacrament at Easter in one kind; who after much persuading,
yielded to them, and promised so to do. But, by Gods good providence, the
Easter-even, the day before he should have done it, was Bradford brought to the
same Prison, Ib. 1457.
where, the Lord making him his instrument, Bradford only was the means that
the said Bishop revoked his promise, and would never after yield to be spotted
with that Papistical pitch. Ibid.
Dr. Tailor for like cause rejoiced that ever he came into prison there to be
acquainted with that Angel of God, John Bradford: so he called him, for the
good he received from him. One man may be an Angel to another in regard of
counsel and comfort: nay, a God to another, as Moses was to Aaron. Though he
fall he shall arise, for the Lord puts under his hand, Psalm. 37.24.

But woe to him that is alone] Because Satan is readiest to assault, when none
is by to assist: Solitariness therefore is not to be affected, because it is
the hour of temptation.

For he has not a second to help him up] As Elizabeth Cowper the Martyr in
Queen Mary's days had, who being condemned, and at the stake with Simon
Miller, when the fire came unto her, she a little shrank thereat, crying once
Ha; when Simon heard the same, he put his hand behind him toward her, and
willed her to be strong and of good cheer: for, Good Sister, said he, Ib. 1981.
we shall soon have a joyful and sweet supper: it is but winking a little and
you are in heaven. With these, and the like speeches she being strengthened
stood still and quiet, as one most glad to finish that good work. It was
therefore a devilish policy in Julian and other Heathen Persecutors, to banish
Christians into far Countries one from another, and to confine them to Isles
and Mines, where they could not have access one to another.

Verse. 11. Again, if two lie together, then they have heat] Heat of zeal and
good affection. Did not our hearts burn within us, said those two Disciples,
Luke 24.
when Christ once made the third with them, and by holy conference kindled
them? So when Silas and Timotheus came from Macedonia, Paul was pressed in
spirit, Acts 18.5. Warm he was before, but now all of a light fire, as it were.
Those dull daughters of Jerusalem, by hearing the Spouse describe her beloved,
as she does from top to toe, were fired up with desire to join with her in
seeking after him whom her soul loved. The lying together of the dead body of
one with the bones of Elisha, gave life to it: so does good company give life
to those that are dead in sin. Let two cold flints be smitten together, and
fire will come forth: So let two dull Christians confer and communicate their
soul-secrets, and it shall not repent them, they shall find the benefit of it.
Can thou bind the sweet influences of the Pleiades? says God to Job, chap.
38.31. These Pleiades be the seven Stars, that have all one name, because they
all help one another in their work; which is to bring the Spring; and like
seven Sisters, so are they joined together in one constellation, and in one
company. We see that God will have the sweetest works in Nature to be
performed with mutual help. The best time of the year, the sweetest warmth
comes with these Pleiades; and the best time of our life comes when we lie
together in true love and fellowship. No sooner had the Philippians received
the Gospel, but they were in fellowship to a day, Phil. 1.5. They knew, that as
sincerity is the life of Religion, so is society the life of sincerity.

Verse. 12. And if one prevail against him, etc.] Vis unita fortior. God bade
Gideon to go down to the Camp of the Midianites: and if he feared to go, then
to take with him his servant Phurah. 1 Samuel 26
Jonathan will not go without his armor-bearer, David without Abishai. Christ,
when to begin his Passion in the Garden, took Peter, James, and John with him,
for the benefit of their prayers and company, Psalm. 122.3 Cant. 7. Matthew. 16.
though they served him but sorrily. My dove is but one, Cant. 6.9. Jerusalem
is a City compact together. The Church is terrible as an Army with banners: the
gates of Hell cannot prevail against her. Unity has victory, but division
breeds dissolution, as it did once in this Island when Caesar first entered it.
Dum singuli pugnant universi vincuntur, says Tacitus of the ancient Britans.
The Turks pray daily, that the differences amongst us Christians may be
heightened, Camer. medit. Hist. cen. 2. cap 23. Rich. Axiom. Polit. p. 86
for that will soonest undo us. And one of their Emperors, when his Council
dissuaded him from a War against the Germans, because of their multitude,
said, that he feared them not, because sooner would his fingers be all of one
length, than their Princes all of one mind.

And a threefold cord is not easily broken] A proverbial confirmation well
interpreted by Lyra; Quanto plures and boni in amicitia conjuncti sunt, tanto
status little melioratur. The more they are that unite, so they be good, the
better it is with them. See 2 Samuel 10.9, 10, 11, 12. We lose much of our
strength in the loss of friends; our cable is as it were untwisted. Hence
David so bemoans the loss of Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.
and made him an Epitaph. Hence St. Paul counted it a special mercy to him that
Epaphroditus recovered, Phil. 1.27.

Verse. 13. Better is a poor and wise childe] Such as was Joseph, David, Daniel,
and his three Camerades, etc. apt to learn, ready to receive instruction, and
as careful to follow it. And well does the Preacher join poverty with wisdom;
for, Nescio quomodo bonae mentis soror est paupertas, says he in Petronius:
and, Paupertas est Philosophiae vernacula, Poverty is the proper language of
Philosophy; and wisdom is undervalued and little set by. Those wisest of the
Greeks were very poor, Alian. l. 2
Aristides, Phocion, Pelopidas, Epaminondas, Socrates, Ephialtes. So were those
Worthies of whom the world was not worthy, Heb. 11.38. They wandered about in
Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, being destitute, etc. Sweet Smelling Smyrna was
the poorest of all the seven Churches, Revel. 3.
yet has the richest price set upon it. Lactantius dyed miserable poor, so did
Theodorus Gaza that learned Greek. Of Archimedes thus sings Silius, Sil. lib. 14
Nudus opum, sed cui coelum terraeque patebant.

But I am fully of Aeneas Sylvius his judgment; that Popular men should esteem
wisdom as silver, Noblemen as gold, Princes as pearls. Of Queen Elizabeth
(that peerlesse Princess) it is said, Camb. Eliz.
that she hated no less than did Mithridates, such as despised virtue forsaken
of fortune:

Erasm.
Than an old and foolish King] Brabanti quo magis senescunt, eo magis
stultescunt. So do many men of quality, Monarchs and others, weak and yet
wilful, short-witted, and yet self-conceited; such as were Saul, Rehoboam,
Jehoiakim, Nebuchadnezzar, our Henry the third, called Regni dilapidator, and
that James that reigned in Scotland in our Edward the fourths time; Daniels
Hist.
of whom it is storied, that he was so much wedded to his own opinion, that
he could not endure any man's advice (how good soever) that he fancied not;
Ibid.
he would seldom ask counsel, but never follow any. Xerxes in his expedition
against Greece, Val. Max. lib. 9 cap. 5.
is reported to have called his Princes together, and thus to have spoken to
them; Lest I should seem to follow mine own counsel, I have assembled you: and
now do you remember, that it becomes you rather to obey than to advise.

Verse. 14. For out of prison he comes to reign] As Valentinian the Emperor,
Sultan Mustapha the great Turk, Daniels hist. fol 480.
Anno Dom. 1622. Our Henry the fourth, who was crowned the very same day, that
the year before he had been banished the realm. As on the other side, Henry
the sixth was sent again prisoner to the Tower the same day that he had been
carried through the City as it were in triumph, and had heard the shouts of the
commons in every street, crying, God save King HENRY: Lo, He that had been
the most potent Monarch for Dominions (says the Chronicler) that ever England
had, Speed. 881.
was not now the master of a molehill, nor owner of his own liberty. So that
in him it appeared, that mortality was but the stage of mutability; when a man
born in his Kingdom, yea born to a Kingdom, became thus miserably poor.
Furthermore, Henry Holland Duke of Excester, grandchild to John of Gaunt, may
serve as a fit instance and example to all, how uncertain Adams sons are of
any continuing greatness. For, (says Phil. Commines) I once saw him run on
foot bare-legged after the Duke of Burgundies train, Date obolum Bellisario.
begging his bread for Gods sake: but he uttered not his name, Speed. 887.
he being the nearest of the house of Lancaster, and brother in Law unto King
Edward the fourth, from whom he fled. And being known what he was, Burgundy
gave him a small pension to maintain his estate.

Verse. 15. I considered all the living, etc.] He means the multitude (that
shallow-brain'd, but great and many-headed beast) making defection from their
old Prince, though never so prudent; and setting up his own son against him
(as they dealt by David more than once) merely out of an itch of instability,
Omnes Solemn orientem adorant, contenmunt occidentem. Macro, expirante Tiberio,
Caium fovebat Cui Tiberius, Tu recte, inquit, Macro, (...). Dio.
and affectation of novelty. Now as this is to others, so to Kings also a
vexation, to see already the common aspect of their people bent upon another
object before the time; to behold them worshipping the rising sun, as the
Proverb is, and themselves laid aside, in a manner, as broken vessels out of
request, in comparison. Crowns have their cares and crosses, and high seats are
never but uneasy. O vilis pannus! O base clout! said one King concerning his
diadem: were it but known how many molestations and miseries do attend thee,
Nemo foret qui te tollere vellet humo, no man would deign to take thee up lying
at his feet. Antoninus the Philosopher said often, that the Empire was Malorum
Oceanus, an ocean of mischiefs: and another caused it to be written upon his
tomb, Felix si non imperitassem, Happy had I been if I had never reigned. It
is seldom seen (as before has been observed) that God allows unto the
greatest darlings of the world a perfect contentment, be they never so well
deserving. Something they must have to complain of, that shall give an unsavory
verdure to their sweetest morsells, and make their very felicity miserable.

Verse. 16. There is no end of all the people] i. e. They are infinitely
discontented and restless in their desires after a new and another Governor.
(...), as Thucydides long since observed, the present government be it never so
good, is always grievous. O that I were made Judge in the Land, 2 Samuel 15.4.
said Absalom. O that thou were, said the people, who yet had soon enough of
him. And so had they of their new King Saul, whom contra gentes, they would
needlessly have, after the manner of all other nations, 1 Samuel 8.6, 7. How soon
did the Baptist grow stale to the Jews (that had lately heard him gladly) and
was no more set by than a reed shaken with the wind? John 5. Mat. 11.
How suddenly did they change their note concerning Christ, from Hosanna to
Crucifige? The common people are like to children (says an Interpreter) that
rest not contented with any Schoolmaster: and like to servants that love to
change every year their masters. People are desirous to hear new Preachers, as
Feasters to hear new Songs, and new Instruments, Ezekiel. 33.32.

CHAP. V. Verse. 1. Keep thy foot.
QVa. d. Would thou see more of the worlds vanity than hitherto has been
discoursed? get thee to the Sanctuary, as David did, Psalm. 73. For as they that
walk in a mist, see it not so well as those that stand on a hill: so they that
have their hands elbow-deep in the world, cannot so easily discern what they
do, as those that go a little out from it. To the House of God therefore, to
the Temple and Synagogues, to the Churches and Oratories steer thy course, take
thy way. Only see to thy feet, i. e. keep thy senses and affections with all
manner of custody, from the mire of wicked and worldly matters. Shoes we have
all upon our feet, that is, (to speak in St. James his phrase) filthiness and
superfluity of naughtiness in our hearts, Jam. 1. Exodus 3.5. Josh. 5.15.
that must be put off at Gods School-door, as God taught Moses and Joshuah.
And Pythagoras (having read Moses belike) taught his scholars as much, when he
says, (...), Put off thy shoes when thou sacrificest, and worshippest. His
followers the Pythagorians expounded his meaning, when they would not have men,
(...), but (...), worship God carelessly, or by the way; but prepare themselves
at home aforehand. And Numa Pompilius (one that had tasted of his learning)
would not have men worship the Gods (...), by the by, and for fashion, but
(...), Plutarch.
at good leisure, and as making Religion their business. In the Law of Moses,
the Priests were commanded to wash the inwards and the feet of the sacrifice in
water. And this was done, (...), says Philo, not without a mystery, sc. to
teach us to keep our feet clean when we draw nigh to God. Antonius Margarita
in his Book of the Rites and Ceremonies of the Jews, tells us, that before
their Synagogues they have an iron plate, against which they wipe and make
clean their shoes before they enter: and that being entered they sit solemnly
there for a season, not once opening their mouths; but considering who it is
with whom they have to do. Thus it was wont to be with them: But alate, though
they come to their Synagogues with washen hands and feet; yet for any show of
devotion or elevation of spirit, Spec. Europ.
they are as reverent (says one that was an eyewitness) as Grammar-boys are
at school when their master is absent: Their holiness is the mere outward work
it self, being a brain-less head, and a soul-less body. And yet upon the walls
of their Synagogues they write usually this sentence, Euxtorf. Abbreviat. p.
186.
by an abbreviature, Tephillan belo canvannah ceguph belo neshamah: i. e. A
prayer without affection, is like a body without a soul. Solinus reports of
the Cretians, that they do very religiously worship Diana: and that no man may
presume to come into her Temple, Adem numinis praterquam nudus vestigia null^^
licito ingreditur. cap. 16.
but barefooted: Satan Dei aemulus, the Devil is Gods ape: he led these
superstitious Ethnicks captive, as the Chaldeans did the Egyptians, naked and
barefoot, Esaias 20.2, 4.

When thou go to the House of God] Called the Gate of Heaven, Genesis 28.17.
such as none but the righteous may enter, Psalm. 118.20. the beauty of holiness,
the place of Angels, (...).
and Archangels, the Kingdom of God, yea Heaven it self, as Chrysostom calls
it. The French Protestants called their Meeting House in Paris, Paradise. The
primitive Christians called such places (...), (whence Kirkes, Council. Laodic.
cap. 28.
Churches) and the Lords Houses, and Basilicas, Kingly palaces. Now it is held
an uncivil thing to come to the palace of a King with dirty shoes, or to cat
at his table with foul hands. Men wash their hands every day of course, but
when to dine with a Prince, they wash them with balls. So it should be here;
when we come to Gods house, we should come with the best preparation we can
make; we should also be there with the first, and stay till the last, as
door-keepers use to do; which office in Gods House David held an high
preferment. And whiles we are there, let our whole deportment be as in the
presence of the great God, whom we must look full in the face, and be ready
to hear, as those good souls, Act. 10.33. Now therefore we are all here present
before God, say they, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God.
Neither must we hear only with the hearing of the ear, but with the obedience
of the heart and life, (for so the Original word here signifies) Genesis 3.17.
Because thou have heard, that is, obeyed the voice of thy wife, etc. hearing
diligently without distraction, and doing readily without sciscitation.

Than to give the sacrifice of fools] i. e. The formalities and external
services of profligate professors, that think to set off with God for their
sins, by their sacrifices; for their evil deeds, by their good. Hence they
burden Gods altar, and even cover it with their sacrifices; sticking in the
bark, and gnabling upon the shell of holy services, not once peircing to the
heart, or tasting of the kernel thereof: and are therefore abominable, because
disobedient, and to every good work reprobate, Tit. 1.16. How many be there at
this day, that not only pray by tale, as Papists do by their beads, but turn
over other duties of Religion as a mere task; holding only a certain stint of
them, as Malt-horses do their pace, or Mill-horses their round, merely out of
form and custom, those banes and break-necks of due devotion? These do not
only lose their labor, but commit sin, Esaias 1.14. compass God with a lie,
Hos. 11.12. because they wash not their feet before they compass Gods altar.
Cicero.
The Heathen Orator can tell these fools of the people, Deum non superstitione
coli velle, sed pietate, that God requires the heart in all holy duties, John 4
24.
and must be served in Spirit, even totocorde, id est amore summo, more vero,
ore fideli, re omni.

Hoc non fit verbis: Marce, ut ameris, ama. Martial.
For they consider not that they do evill] That they despite him with seeming
honors, with displeasing service, which is double dishonor; with seeming
sanctity, which is double iniquity, and deserves double damnation. This they so
little consider, that they think God is greatly beholden to them, and does them
no small wrong, that he so little regards and rewards them, Esa. 58.3. Mal.
3.14. Non sic Deos coluimus ut ille nos vinceret, Antonin. Philis. referente
Vulcat. Gal.
said that Emperor going into the field against his enemy. We have not so
served the Gods, that they should serve us no better, than to give the enemy
the better of us.

Verse. 2. Be not rash with thy month] From hearing, the Preacher proceeds to
give directions for speaking, whether it be of God or to him. For the first,
the very Heathens could say, Non loquendum de Deo sine lumine, Pythag.
We may not speak of God without a light, i. e. without a deliberate
premeditation, and well-advised consideration. In speaking of God, says one,
Mr. Hooker.
our best eloquence is our silence. And if we speak at all on this subject,
says another, no words will so well become us, as those quae ignorantiam
nostram praetendunt, Jul. Scalig.
that most discover our small knowledge of him: How little a portion or
pittance is heard of him, says holy Job, (chap. 26.14. The Hebrew word
signifies a little bit or particle, nay a little piece of a word, such as an
echo resoundeth) But the thunder of his power who can understand? it is
ineffable, because unconceivable. Here, if ever, Claudicat ingenium, delirat
linguaque mensque, Lucret.


But although Hierome thinks it best to understand the Preacher here of a
speaking of God, yet others, and for better reason, Hieron. in loc.
conceive his meaning to be rather of a speaking to God by prayer, and
particularly by a Vow, which implies a prayer, (as the Greek words (...) and
(...) import) Here then,

Let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing] Heb. Let not thine heart
through haste, be so troubled or disturbed, as to tumble over, and throw out
words without wisdom, in a confused manner, in a slubbering sort. But as there
was half an hours silence in heaven when the seventh seal was opened, Rev. 8.1.
and or ever the seven Trumpets sounded: so should there be a sad and serious
weighing of our petitions, before we utter them. Nescit poenitenda loqui, qui
proferenda prius suo tradidit examini, Cassiodor. lib. 10. Ep. 4.
He repents not of his requests, who first duly deliberates what to request.
Whereas he that blurts out whatsoever lies uppermost, as some good men have
done in their haste, and heat of passion, (as Job, chap. 6.5. David, Psalm.
116.11. Jeremy, chap. 15.10, 18. Jonah, chap. 4. who brawled with God instead
of praying to him) displeases God no less than the Muscovy-Ministers do their
hearers, if they mispronounce but any syllable in their whole Liturgy.

For God is in heaven, and thou upon earth] He is the High and Holy One; that
inhabiteth Eternity, Isa. 57.15.
and thou art Epalude sua procedens and repens vilis ranuncula, (as Bernard
has it) a base toad creeping or crawling out of a ditch: there is an infinite
distance and disproportion between Him and thee; therefore see to it that thou
come to him with all possible reverence, humility, and self-abasement. See Job
42.6. 1 King. 18.42. Matthew. 26.38. It is observable, that when the great Turk
comes into his Mosche, or Temple, he lays by all his State, and has none to
attend him all the while.

Therefore let thy words be few] But full, as the Publicans were, Luke 18.13.
O quam multa quam paucis! Oh how much in a little! said Tully of Brutus his
Epistle; so may we say of that Publicans prayer; how much more of the Lords
prayer, set in flat opposition to the Heathenish Battologies and vain
repetitions, usual with Pagans and Papagans, etc. See the Note on Mat. 6.7, 8,
9. It is reported of the ancient Christians of Egypt, Quod brevissimis and
raptim jaculatis orationibus uti voluerint, ne per moras evanesceret and
hebetaretur intentio, August.
that they made very short prayers, that their devotion might not be dulled by
longer doings. Cassian also makes mention of certain religious persons in his
time, Qui utilius censebant breves quidem orationes sed creberrimas fieri, etc.
who thought it best that our prayers should be short, but frequent: the one,
that there might be continual intercourse maintained between God and us: the
other, that by shortness we might avoid the Devils darts, which he throws
especially at us, while we are praying. These be good reasons; and more may
be added out of Matthew. 6. as that our Heavenly Father knows what we need,
etc. That which the Preacher here presses, is, the transcendent Excellency and
surpassing Majesty of Almighty God. I am a great King, says He, Mal. 1. And I
look to be served like my self. Hos. 14.2.
Therefore take unto you words, neither over curious, nor over careless, but
such as are humble, earnest, direct to the point, avoiding vain bablings,
needless and endless repetitions, heartless digressions, tedious prolixities,
wild and idle discourses of such extemporary petitioners, as not disposing
their matter in due order by premeditation (and withal being word-bound) are
forced to go forward and backward, like Hounds at a loss; and having hastily
begun, they know not how handsomely to make an end.

Verse. 3. For a dream comes through the multitude of business] When all the
rest of the senses are bound up by sleep, the soul enters into the shop of the
fancy, and operates there usually according to the businesses and employments
of the day past; Tertull. de anima, cap. 49.
and fierividentur quae fieri tamen non videntur, says Tertullian, those
things seem to be done in a dream, which yet are not seen to be done at all:
these are but vanae jactationes negotiosae animae, the idle toffings of a busy
mind. In like sort, a fool, a heartless, sapless fellow, (that being sensual
and void of the spirit of grace and supplications, has neither the affections
nor expressions of holy prayer) multiplies words without knowledge, thinks to
make out in words what he wants in worth, being (...), as Plutarch says of
Alcibicdes, one that could talk much, but speak little: His voice is known by
multitude of words. It is but a voice that is heard, it is but a sound that is
made, like the uncertain sound of a Trumpet, that none can tell what it
means, what to make of it. Corniculas citius in Africa, quam res ration^sque
solidas in Turriani scriptis reperias, says one: Beringer. Contra Id. Cum.
Lauret. Aristot. De divinat. per insom.
So here. If there be any worth of matter in the fools words, it is but by
chance, as Aristotle says, that dreams do by chance foretell those things
that come to pass. Let it be our care to shun as much as may be all lavish and
superfluous talkativenesse and tediousness, but especially in prayer: lest we
offer the sacrifice of fools, and God be angry with us. For as it is not the
loudness of a Preachers voice, but the weight and holiness of his matter, and
the spirit of the Preacher that moves a wife and intelligent hearer: so it is
not the labor of the lips, but the travel of the heart that prevails with God.
The Baalites Prayer was not more tedious than Elijah's short: yet more pithy
than short. And it was Elijah that spoke loud and sped in heaven. Let the fool
learn therefore to show more wit in his discourse than words, lest being known
by his voice, he meet (as the Nightingale did) with some Laconian that will
not let to tell him, Vox in es, praeterea nihil, Thou art a voice, and that is
all.

Verse. 4. When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it] See the Note
on Deuteronomy. 23.21. It is in thy power to vow or not to vow. Vovere nusquam est
praeceptum, says Bellarmine, We have no command to vow. That of David, Lib. 2.
de Monac. cap. 15.
Vow and perform to the Lord your God, is not purum praeceptum, says Mr.
Cartwright, a pure precept, but like that other, Be angry, and sin not; where
anger is not commanded, but limited. So neither are we simply commanded to
vow, but having voluntarily vowed, we may not defer to pay it; delays are
taken for denials, excuses for refusals.

For he has no pleasure in fools] He needs them as little as King Achish did,
2 Samuel 22.15
he abhors them, Psalm. 5.5. as deceitful workers, as mockers of God. Jephta in
vovendo fuit stultus, in praestando impius, Jephta was a fool in vowing, Hieron.
and wicked in performing. But he that vows a thing lawful and possible, and
yet de-deferres to perform it, or seeks an evasion, is two fools for failing;
since

Verse. 5. Better it is that thou should not vow] q. d. Who bad thee be so
forward? Why would thou become a voluntary Votary, Dicta factis deficientibus
erubescunt.
and so rashly engage to the loss of thy liberty, and the offense of thy God,
who expected thou should have kept touch, and not have dealt thus slipperily
with him? Thou have not lied unto men, but unto God, Acts 5.4. As the truth of
Christ is in me, says Paul, 2 Cor. 11.10. so he binds himself by an oath, as
the learned have observed. And as God is true, our word toward you was not Yea
and Nay: 2 Cor. 1.19, 20
for the Son of God who was preached among you by me was not Yea and Nay: but
in him all the promises of God are Yea, and Amen. Why? what of that, might some
say? and what is all this to the purpose? Very much: for it implies, that what
a Christian does promise to men (how much more to God?) he is bound by the
earnest penny of Gods Spirit to perform. He dares no more alter or falsify his
word, than the Spirit of God can lie. And as he looks that Gods promises should
be made good to him, so is he careful to pay that he has vowed to God; since
his is a Covenant of Mercy, ours of obedience, and if he shall be
All-sufficient to us, we must be Altogether his, Cant. 2.16.

Verse. 6. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin] Heb. Nec des, Give
not liberty to thy mouth, which of itself is so apt to overflow and run riot
in sinful and superfluous language. Reign it in therefore, and lay Laws upon
it, lest it cause thy flesh to sin, thy self to become a sinner against thine
own soul. Say to it in this case, as Christ did to those Pharisees in the
Gospel, Why temptest thou me thou hypocrite? or as the Witch said to Saul that
sought to her, Wherefore layest thou a snare for my life, to cause me to dye? 1 Samuel 28.9. Shall my prayer become sin, and my religious vows through
non-payment, a cause of a curse, Psalm. 109.7? When thou art making such an ill
bargain, say to thy mouth, as Boaz said to his Kinsman, At what time thou
buyest it, Ruth 4. Romans 6. ult.
thou must have Ruth with it, so thou must have Gods curse with it (for that is
the just hire of the least sin, how much more of thy crimson crime?) And let
thy mouth answer, No: I may not do it, I shall mar and spoil a better
inheritance, I shall anger the Angel of the Covenant; who if his wrath be
kindled, yea but a little, he will not pardon my transgression, for Gods an^ is
in him, Exodus 23.21. Who as he is Pater miserationum, the Father of mercies, so
he is eus ultionum, the God of recompenses, Psalm. 94.1. True it is that Anger
is not properly in God, Fury is not in me, Isa. 27.4. but because he chides and
smites for sin (as angry men use to do) therefore is Anger here and elsewhere
attributed to him, that men may stand in awe and not sin, since sin and
punishment are linked together with chains of Adamant.

Verse. 7. For in the multitude of dreams, and in many words] i. e. As in the
multitude of dreams, so in many words, etc. There may be some matter in some
of either: but neither of either wants their vanities. Dreams are of diverse
sorts. (See the Note on Genesis 20.3.) Epicurus judged them all vain. The
Telmisenses, Tertul. de anima c. 46.
nulla somnia evacuabant, says Tertullian, made no dreams to be vain. But
that some dreams are Divine, some diabolical, and some natural, Peculiare
solatium naturalis oraculi, as one speaks, good symptoms and indications of
the natural constitution, no wise man ever doubted. That of the Philosopher
has a truth in it, Aristot. Ethic.
Justum ab injusto non somno, sed somnio discerni, that a good man may be
distinguished from a bad, though not by his sleep, yet by his dreams in his
sleep.

But fear thou God] And so eschew this evil of fond babbling (in Gods service
especially) which is no less a vanity than plain doting; and procures Divine
displeasure. Fulgent.
Deum siquis parum metuit, valde contemnit. He that fears not Gods wrath, is
sure to feel it, Psalm. 90.11.

Verse. 8. If thou see the oppression of the poor] And so may be drawn to
doubt of Divine providence, and to withdraw thine awful regard to the Divine
Majesty, to forgo godliness, and to turn flat Atheist, as Diagoras and
Averroes did.

Horat.
Marvel not at the matter] Nil admirari prope res est una Numici. A wise man
wonders at nothing: he knows there is good cause why God should suffer it so to
be, and gives him his glory. Opera Dei sunt in mediis contrariis, says Luther,
Luther. in Genes. Nazian. Cypr.
Gods works are effected usually by contraries. And this he does (...), that
he may be the more marvelled at, says Nazianzen. Hence he commonly goes a way
by himself, drawing light out of darkness, good out of evil, Exodus 15.11
heaven out of hell: that his people may feelingly say, Who is like unto thee,
O Lord, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing Wonders? Verily there
is a reward for the righteous: verily he is a God that judgeeth in the earth,
Psalm. 58.11.

For he that is higher than the highest regardeth] And wherein they deal
proudly, Psalm. 76.12
he is above them, Exodus 18.11. and over-tops them, Psalm. 2.4. sets a day for
them, and sees that their day is coming. Psalm. 37.16. The most High cuts off
the spirit of Princes (he slips them off, as one should slip off a flower
between his fingers, or he cuts them off, as Grape-gatherers do the clusters
off the Vines, such a Metaphor there is in the Original) He is terrible to all
the Kings of the earth, those dread Sovereigns, those Hammers of the earth, and
Scourges of the world (as Attilas styled himself) such as Sennacherib, Mundi
flagellum.
whom God so subdued and mastered, that the Egyptians in memory of it, set up
his statue in the Temple of Vulcan with this inscription, Heredot.
(...). Let all that behold me, 2 Chro. 19.6
learn to fear God. It was therefore excellent counsel that Jehoshaphat gave
his Judges: Take heed what you do, for ye judge not for man, but for the
Lord, who is with you in the judgment. Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord
our God be upon you, take heed and do it. Look upon him that over-looks all
your doings, says he; and then learn to sit upon the Tribunal, in as great,
though not in so slavish a fear of doing wrong, as Olanes in the History did
upon the flayed skin of his Father Sisannus, nailed by Cambyses on the
Judgment Seat: or as a Russian Judge that fears the boiling Caldron, or open
battocking: or the Turkish Senate, when they think the great Turk to stand
behind the Arras at the dangerous door. In fine, let the Grandees and
Potentates of the Earth know, and acknowledge with Constantine, Valentinian,
and Theodosius, three great Emperors (as Socrates reports it of them) that
they are but Christi Vasalli, Christ's Vassals: and that as he is Excelsus super
Excelsos, High above all, even the highest, so he has other high ones at
hand, viz. the Holy Angels; who can resist the King of Persia, as Michael the
Prince did, Dan. 10.13. Fright the Syrians with a pannick terror, 2 King. 7.6.
smite the Assyrians with an utter destruction, Isa. 37.36. deliver Peter from
the hand of Herod, and from the expectation of the Jews, Exodus 12.
Acts 12.11. make a wonderful difference in the slaughter of the firstborn of
Egypt. Tyrants shall be sure, sooner, or later, to meet with their match. Look
what a hand the Ephori had over the King of Sparta, the Tribunes had over the
Roman Consuls, and the Prince Palsgrave of Rhine ought, by the ancient orders,
to have over the Emperor of Germany, (Palatino haec dignitatis praerogativa
est, ut ipsum Caesarem judicare and damnare possit, Parci Hist. pros. med. 771.
quoties scilicet lis ei ab aliquo Ordinum imperii movetur, the Palsgrave has
power to judge and pass sentence upon the Emperor himself, when any of the
States of Germany do sue him at the Law) the same and more has God and his
Angels over the mightiest Magnificoes in the world, Lebanon shall fall by a
mighty one, i. e. by an Angel, as some interpret it, Isa. 10.34.

Verse. 9. Moreover the profit of the Earth is for all] viz. For all sorts of
men, and for all kind of uses. Alma matter, Terra ferax. Then shall the Earth
yield her increase: and (therein) God, even our own God shall bless us, Psalm.
67.6. Can any of the Vanities of the Heathens give rain or grain? no, (...).
neither, Jer. 14.22. Can the Earth bring forth fruit of her self? So indeed
our Savior seems to say, first the Blade, then the Ear, after that the full
Corn in the Ear, Mark 4.28. but then it is after the good husband has sowed
it, and God by his blessing given the increase. The drift of the Preacher here,
is, to set forth the excellency of tillage first, and then to show the vanity
of it. Tillage is the life and blood of a Commonwealth: it is beyond all
pecuniary possessions. Jacob had money and other fruits of the Earth: Genesis 43.
and yet if Egypt, (the worlds Granary, as one calls it) had not supplied them
with Corn, he and his might have perished.

The King himself is served by the field] Not the Lion, Dragon, Unicorn, Rex
agro fit servus. Ar. Montan.
etc. But the Plough and the Ship are the supporters of a Crown. Some read it
thus, Rex agro servit, The King is a servant to the field; It concerns him to
have care of tillage, plantation of fruits, breeding of Cattle, etc. or else
all will soon run to wrack and ruin. King Uzziah loved husbandry, and used it
much, 2 Chronicles. 26.10. and Amos 7.1. we read of the Kings mowings. And Pliny
has observed, that Corn was never so plentiful and good-cheap at Rome, as
when the same men tilled the Land, that ruled the Commonwealth, Quasi gauderet
terra laureato vomere scilicet and aratore triumphali.

Verse. 10. He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with silver] As he
cannot fill his belly, nor cloth his back with it, so neither can he satisfy
his inordinate appetite and desire after it, though he had heaped and horded
it up, as the great Calyph of Babylon had, that covetous caytiff, starved to
death by Haalon brother to Mango, the great Cham of Cataia, in the midst of his
gold, silver, and precious stones, whereof, till then, he could never have
enough. Auri nempe fames parto fit major ab auro, Turk. hist. Prudentius.
A man may as soon fill a chest with grace, as an heart with wealth. As a
circle cannot fill a triangle: so neither can the whole world (if it could be
compassed) possibly fill the heart of man. Animarationalis caeteris omnibus
occupari potest, impleri non potest, Bern.
The reasonable soul may be busied about other things, but it cannot be
filled with them. Non plus satiatur cor auro, quam corpus aura, As air fills
not the body, so neither does money the mind. It cannot therefore be Man's
chiefest good (as Mammonists make it) since it does not terminate his appetite,
but that although he has never so much of it, yet is he as hungry after
more, as if he were not worth an halfpenny. Theocritus brings in the covetous
person first wishing, -- Mill meis errent in montibus agni.

(...), ardere. Hinc ardens appetitus.
That he had a thousand sheep in his flock. And this when he has gotten,
then, Pauperis est numerare pecus. He would have Cattle without number. The
Greeks derive their word for Desire, from a root that signifies to burn. Now
if one should heap never so much fuel upon a fire, it would not quench it, but
kindle it the more. So here. Surely as a Ship may be overladen with silver
even unto sinking, and yet have compass and sides enough to hold ten times
more: so a covetous wretch, though he has enough to sink him, Salust.
yet never has he enough to satisfy him. Cataline was ever alieni appetens,
sui profusus, not more prodigal of his own, than desirous after other men's
estates.

Verse. 11. When goods increase, they are increased that eat them] Servants,
friends, flatterers, trencher-men, pensioners, and other hang-bies, that will
flock to a rich man, as Crows do to a dead carcass: not to defend, but to
devour it. Caesar perished in the midst of his friends, whose boundless hopes
and expectations he was not able to satisfy. The King of Spain (were it not
for the West India Fleet) were never able to subsist: though he be by far the
greatest Prince in Christendom, Camden.
gives for his Motto, Totus non sufficit orbis, and has his Empire so far
extended, that he may truly say, Sol mihi semper lucet, The Sun ever shines
upon my Dominions; The Duke of Bavaria's house is so pestered with Friars and
Jesuits, that, notwithstanding the greatness of his Revenue, Heylin.
he is very poor: as spending all his estate on those Popish flesh-flies,
those inutiles and ribaldi, (Lyra's words upon this text) useless, needless,
ribaldry fellows.

Saving the beholding of them with his eyes] To see such a large retinue, such
a numerous family, as Job, who had a very great household, chap. 1.3. and
Abraham, who had a Trained band in his family, but especially as Solomon, who
had thousands of servants and work-folk. Whereunto I may add Cardinal Wolsey
his pompous family; consisting of one Earl, nine Barons, Knights and Esquires
very many, Chaplains and other servants (besides retainers) at bed and board,
Toto corpore aliquandiu volutatus. Sueton.
no fewer than four hundred. Or, to see so much wealth, and to tumble in it, as
Caligula the Emperor was wont to do, contrectandae pecuniae cupidine incensus,
loving to handle his money, to walk upon it with his bare feet, and to roll
amongst it with his whole body, as Suetonius relates. The like is reported of
Heliogabalus, who also, besides what he did eat, is said to have provided
himself (in case he should be in danger to be surprised by his enemies)
silken halters to hang himself withal, ponds of sweet water to drown himself,
gilded poisons to poison himself with, etc.

Verse. 12. The sleep of a laboring man is sweet] Sleep is the nurse of nature,
the wages that she pays the poor man for his uncessant pains. Somni finis est
salus animantis. Magir.
His fare is not so high, his care is not so great, but that without distemper
or distraction he can hug his rest most sweetly, and feel no disturbance,
until the due time of rising awakeneth him. These laboring men are as sound
as a Roche, as hungry as Hunters, as weary as ever was dog of day, as they say:
and therefore no sooner laid in their beds, but fast asleep, their hard labor
causing easy digestion, and uninterrupted rest. Whereas the restless spirit of
the rich wretch rides his body day and night: care of getting, fear of
keeping, grief of losing, these three vultures feed upon him continually. He
rowls a Sisyphus his stone; his abundance, like a lump of lead, lies heavy upon
his heart, and breaks his sleep: Much like the disease called the Mare or
Ephialtes; in which men in their slumber think they feel a thing as big as a
mountain lying upon their breasts, which they can no way remove. His evil
conscience eftsoons lasheth and launceth him, as it did our Richard 3. after
the murder of his two innocent nephews; and Charles 9. of France after the
bloody massacre. God also terrifies him with dreams, throws hand-fulls of hell
fire in his face, interpellat cogitantem, excitat dormientem, as Ambrose has
it, interrupts him while he is thinking, awakeneth him while he is sleeping,
rings that doleful peal in his ears, that makes him start and stare, Thou fool,
this night shall thy soul be taken from thee: Veni miser in judicium, Come,
thou wretch, receive thy judgment.

Verse. 13. There is a sore evil] Or, an evil disease, such as breaks the sleep,
Mala infamitas. Pagn. Plin.
Hinc pallor and genae pendulae, item furiales somni and inquies nocturna,
causing paleness, leanness, restlesness by night. This disease is the Dropsy
or Bulimy of covetousness, as seldom cured as Heresy, Frenzy, Jealousy,
which three are held incurable maladies.

Riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt] Worldlings sit abrood upon
their wealth, and hatch to their hurt; as the silly bird does the eggs of the
Cockatrice. Riches are called goods; but it has been well observed, that he
that first called them so, was a better Husband than Divine. Such an Husband
was he in the Gospel, who reckoned upon much goods laid up for many years. But
how come these goods to prove evil to the owners, but by the evil usage of
them? riches in themselves are of an indifferent nature; and it is through men's
corruption, ut magna sit cognatio and nominis and rei divitiis and vitiis, that
riches are weapons of wickedness, Engines of evil. Jer. 17.11.
He that gets riches, and not by right, shall die a poor fool.

Dum peritura parat, per male parta perit. He that keeps his riches (having
no quick silver, no current money) when God calls him to part with them for
pious and charitable uses, keeps them to his own greatest hurt. For the rust
of his canker-eaten gold shall rise up in judgment against him at that great
day, James 5.3.

Sic plures nimia congesta pecunia cura Juvenal. Sal. 10

Strangulat --
See the Note on Prove. 1.19.

Verse. 14. But those riches perish by evil travel] i. e. By evil trading,
trafficking, or other cross event and accident. They waste and wither either by
vanity or violence; they slip out of the hand, as the panting bird, or wrigling
Eel; there is no hold to be taken of them, no trust to be put in them, they
were never true to those that trusted in them. See the Note on Prove. 23.5.

Verse. 15. As he came forth of his Mothers womb] q. d. If riches leave not us
while we live, yet we are sure to leave them when we die. Haud ullas
portabis opes Acherontis ad undas: Nudus al^ inferna stulte vebere rate.
Propert.
Look how a false harlot leaves her lover, when arrested for debt, and follows
other customers: so is it here. And as Dogs, though they go along with us in
company, yet at parting they run every one to his own Master; so do these to
the world, when we come to leave the world. Death as a Porter stands at the
gate, and strips us of all our thick clay, wherewith we are laden. See the
Note on chap. 2.22.

To go as he came] Like an unwelcome guest, or an unprofitable servant, a
cipher, and excrement. Oh live, live, live, (says a Reverend man) quickly,
much, long; so you are welcome to the world. Else you are but hissed and kicked
off this stage of the world, as Phocas was by Heraclius. Nay, many (as Job
27.23.) who were buried before half dead, etc. Abn. fun. by Dr. Harris.


And shall take nothing of his labour] Ne obolum quo naulum Charonti solvant.
Some have had great store of gold and silver buried with them; and others would
needs be buried in a Monks cowl, out of a superstitious conceit of speeding
the better in another world; but it has profited them nothing at all, Eccles.
9.10.

Verse. 16. And this also is a sore evil] Malum dolorificum, so it will prove: a
singular vexation, a sharp corrosive, when Balaam and his bribes, Laban and his
baggs, Nabal and his flocks, Achan and his wedge, Baltasar and his bouls, Herod
and his harlots, Dives and his dishes, etc. shall part asunder for ever: when
they shall look from their deathbeds, and see that terrible spectacle, Death,
Judgment, Hell, and all to be passed through by their poor souls: Oh! what a
dreadful shrick gives the guilty soul at death, to see it self launching into
an ocean of scalding lead, and must swim naked in it for ever! Who therefore
(unless he had rather burn with Dives, than reign with Lazarus) will
henceforth reach out his hand to bribery, usury, robbery, deceit, sacrilege,
or any such like wickedness or worldliness, 1 Timothy 6.9
which drown men's souls in perdition and destruction? If rich men could stave
off death, or stop its mouth with a bagg of gold, it were somewhat like. But
that cannot be, as Henry Beauford, that rich and wretched Cardinal found by
experience; as the King of Persia told Constantine the Emperor, who had showed
him all the glory and bravery of Rome, Fulg.
Mira quidem haec, said he, sed ut video, sicut in Persia, sic Romae homines
moriuntur, i. e. These be brave things, but yet I see, that as in Persia, so at
Rome also, the owners of these things must needs die. Agreeable whereunto was
that speech of Nugas the Scythian Monarch, to whom when Michael Paleologus the
Emperor sent certain rich robes for a present, Pachymer. hist. lib. 5.
he asked, Nunquid calamitates, morbos, mortem depellere possent? whether they
could drive away calamities, sicknesses, death? for if they could not do so,
they were not much to be regarded.

What profit has he that has labored for the wind?] i. e. For just nothing.
See Hos. 12.1. Jer. 22.22. The Greeks express the same by hunting after, (...).
and husbanding the wind. The Apostle speaks of beating the air, 1 Cor. 9. as
he does, that fights with his own shadow, that disquiets himself in vain. The
four Monarchies are called the four winds of Heaven, Zech. 6.3, 4. And at the
Popes inthronization a wad of straw is set on fire before him, and one
appointed to say, Sic transit gloria mundi, The glory of this world is but a
blaze or blast.

Verse. 17. All his days also he eats in darkness] i. e. he lives besides
that he has; and cannot so much as be merry at meat. Hence is much sorrow,
wrath and sickness; especially, if spoiled of his goods which he made his god,
he is no less troubled than Laban was for his Teraphim, or Micah for his
Mawmet, Judge. 18. He is mad almost, and ready to hang himself for woe; having
much fretting, foaming, fuming anger, languor, ready to fly at God and men.

Verse. 18. It is good and comely for one to eat, etc.] Niggardise and baseness
is an ugly evil, making a man, though never so rich, to be vilipended and
despised of all. Nabal shall not be called Nadib, the vile person liberal, the
churl bountiful, Isa. 32.5. See the Notes on chap. 2.24. and 3.12.

Verse. 19. This is the gift of God] A gift of his right hand, donum throni, non
scabelli: 1 Timothy 6.6
Godliness only has contentedness. The comfort of wealth comes in by no other
door, than by the assurance of Gods love in bestowing it, and of his grace in
sanctifying it. God give thee the dew of Heaven, etc. Genesis 27. 28. Esau
likewise had the like, but not with a God give thee. A carnal heart cares not
how, so he may have it; hence his so little comfort and enjoyment. A godly man
will have God with it, or else he is all amort. Moses would not be put off
with an Angel to go along with them; Luther protessed, Valde protestatus sum me
nolle fio satiari. Luth.
when great gifts were offered him, that he would not be satisfied or quieted
with those rattles.

Verse. 20. For he shall not much remember, etc.] He vexes not at the brevity
or misery of his life: but looks upon himself as a stranger here; and
therefore if he can have a better condition, he uses it rather: as if a
traveller can get a better room in an Inn, 1 Cor. 7.
he will, if not, he can be content; for says he, it is but for a night.

CHAP. VI. Verse. 1. There is an evil that I have seen under the Sun.
THis wretched life is so pestered with evils, that the Preacher could hardly
cast his eye beside one or other of them. A diligent observer he was of humane
miseries, that he might hang loose to life, and the better press upon others
the vanity of doting upon it. One would wonder (surely) that our life here
being so grievously afflicted, should yet be so inordinately affected; and
that even by those that are in deaths often, that have born Gods yoke from
their youth, that have suffered troubles without, and terrors within, and who,
if they had hope in this life only, 1 Cor. 15.
were (by their own confession) of all men the most unhappy. And yet so it is,
God is forced to smoke us out of our clayie cottages, and to make life unto us
to be nothing better than a lingering death, that we may grow weary of it,
and breathe after a better, Aeterna vita vera vita. Aug.
where are riches without rust, pleasure with out pain, youth without decay,
joy without sorrow; Ubi nihil sit quod nolis, and totum sit quod velis, where
is all that heart can wish, etc. The skilful Surgeon mortifieth with
straight binding the member that must be cut off: So does God fit us for our
cutting off, Bern.
by binding us with the cords of afflictions. He cries not when God binds
him, Job 36.13. says Elihu of hypocrites; a Generation of men, than the which
nothing is more stupid and insensible; till at length, Hypocritis nihil
stupidius Pareus Isa. 28.
God making forcible entry upon them, does violently break that cursed Covenant
that they have made with Death and Hell, dash the very breath out of their
bodies with one plague upon another, turn them out of their earthly
Tabernacles, with a firma ejectione, and send them packing to their place in
Hell, from which they would not be stopped, by all those crosses, that, for
that purpose, he cast in their way.

And it is common amongst men] Proper to men, (for beasts are not subject to
this evil disease) and common to all sorts of men. One evil may well be common
among many, when many evils are so commonly upon one. It fell out to be a part
of Mithridates misery, that he had made himself unpoisonable. And Cato so left
this miserable life, Cic. in Tusc. quast.
ut causam moriendi nactum se esse gauderet, that he was glad of an occasion
to go out of the world.

Verse. 2. So that he wants nothing] Nothing but every thing, because he
dare not make use of any thing almost; but is Tantalized by his own baseness.
He famisheth at a full feast, he starveth at a fire side. And this is often
repeated in this book, because it can never enough be observed and abhorred.

Yet God gives him not power to eat thereof] i. e. He withholds his grace
from him, that he cannot use it to his comfort. Herein he is like a Stag that
has great horns, but no courage to use them: or rather like an Ass loaded with
gold and victuals, but feeding upon thistles. Pray we therefore, 1 Timothy 6.17.
that God would together with riches give us all things richly to enjoy. Vel
mihi da clavem, vel mihi toll seram. Either give me the key, says One, or
take away the lock. The Greeks describe a good householder to be (...), a good
husband, as in getting, keeping and setting out what he has to the best, so
in making good use of it, for his own and others behoof and benefit.

But a stranger eats it] God so providing, that if one will not, another shall;
that if the owner will not eat, but sit pidling or sparing, a stranger, and
perhaps an enemy shall take away. Deuteronomy 28.
That if men will not serve God with cheerfulness in the abundance of all
things, they should fast another while, and be forced to serve their enemies in
hunger, and thirst, and nakedness; and by the want of all be taught the worth
of them, carendo quam fruendo.

Verse. 3. If a man beget an hundred children] As Ahab did half an hundred,
after that God had threatened to cut off all his house, as it were in contempt
of the divine threatening: And as Proculus Caesar got twenty Maids with child in
fifteen days space, Lib. 7. Erasm. in Chisia. Hier, epist. 7.
as Pliny reports. Erasmus mentions a Maid of Euboea, called Comb, that
being married to an husband, brought him an hundred children. Like enough it
might be luctuosa foecunditas, as Hierom says of Laeta, who buried many
children.

And live many years] So that he be trisaeclisenex, as Nestor was of old, and
Johannes de temporibus, a Frenchman, not many ages since: to whom I may add
that old, Parre.
old, very old man, that died of late years, having been born in Henry the
sevenths days, or Edward the fourths.

And his soul be not filled with good] Though he be filled with years, and
filled with children, that may survive and succeed him in his estate, yet if
he be a covetous caytiff, a miserable muckworm, that injoyes nothing (as in
the former verse) is not Master of his wealth, but is mastered by it, lives
beside what he has, and dies to save charges. As he in Camd. Remains.


And also that he have no burial] He leaves nothing to bring him honestly
home, as they say, or if he do, yet his ungrateful greedy heirs deny him that
last honor, Jer. 22.19.
so that he is buried with the burial of an Ass, as Coniah; suffered to rot
and stink above ground, as that Assyrian Monarch, Isa, 14. 19, 20. and after
him Alexander the Great, who lay unburied thirty days together. So Pompey the
Great, of whom Claudian the Poet sings thus, Nudus pascit aves, jacet en qui
possidet orbem,
Exiguae telluris inops. --


And the like is storied of our William the Conqueror, and diverse other greedy
engrossers of the worlds good. See here the poisonful and pernicious nature of
niggardise and covetousness, that turns long life, and large issue, (those
sweetest blessings of God) into bitter curses: And withal take notice of the
just hand of God upon covetous old men, that they should want comely burial;
which is usually one of their greatest cares, as Plutarch observes. For giving
the reason why old men, that are going out of the world, should be so
earnestly bent upon the world, he says, it is out of fear that they shall not
have (...), friends to keep them whiles alive, and some to bury them when they
are dead.

I say that an untimely birth] I affirm it in the word of truth, and upon
mature deliberation, That an untimely birth (not only a naked young child,
(as aforesaid) that is carried ab utero, ad urnam, from the womb, to the tomb,
from the birth, to the burial) but an abortive, that coming too soon into the
world, comes not at all; and, by having no name, finds it self a name, as
Pliny speaks of the herb Anonymus.

Verse. 4. For he comes in with vanity, etc.] As nothing, being senseless of
good or evil. And departs in darkness, is buried in huggermugger. And his
Name shall be covered, etc. that is, there is no more talk of this abortive.

Verse. 5. Moreover he has not seen the Sun] A second privilege and
prerogative of the poor abortive. None are so miserable we see, but they may
be comparatively happy. It is ever best to look at those below us, and then
we shall see cause to be better contented.

This has more rest than the other] The Corn that is cropped as soon as it
appears, or is bruised in pieces when it lies in sprout, is better than the
old weed that is hated while it stands, and in the end is cut down for the
fire.

Verse. 6. Yea though he live a thousand years] Which yet never any man did (
Methusalah wanted thirty two of a thousand.) The reason thereof is given by
Occolampadius, quia numerus iste typum habeat perfectionis, ut qui constet e
centenario decies revoluto, because the number of a thousand types out
per^ection, as consisting of an hundred ten times told. But there is no
perfection here says he.

Yet has he seen no good] For, All the days of the afflicted are evil, says
Solomon. And man's days are few and full of trouble, Prove. 15.15 Job 14.1 Genesis
47.9
says Job. Few and evil are the days of my pilgrimage, says Jacob, and I
have not attained to the days of the years of the life of my Fathers, etc. For
Abraham lived one hundred seventy five years, and Isaac one hundred eighty,
near upon forty years longer than Jacob, but to his small comfort, for he was
blind all that time: yet nothing so blind as the rich wretch in the Text, qui
privatus interno lumine, tamen in hac vita din vult perpeti caecitatem suam, as
one speaks, who being blind as a Mole, lies rooting and poring uncessantly in
the bowels of the earth; as if he would that way dig himself a new and a nearer
way to Hell, and with his own hands adds to the load of this miserable life.
As he has done no good, so he has seen or enjoyed none; but goes to his
place (Do not all go to one place?) the place that Adam provided for all his
posterity, the house appointed for all living, as Job calls it, (...). Heb.
12.23
chap. 30.23. the Congregation-house, as One renders it. Heaven the Apostle
calls the Congregation-house of the firstborn, whose names also are there said
to be written in Heaven: But covetous persons, as they are called, the
inhabitants of the earth, Rev. 12. Jer. 17.13
in opposition to those Coelicola, Citizens of Heaven, the Saints; so their
names are written in the earth, because they have forsaken the Lord, Jer. 2.13
the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns that can hold no
water. What marvel then if they live long, and yet see no good? if they are
driven to that doleful complaint that Saul made, God has forsaken me, 1 Samuel
28.15
and the Philistims are upon me, sickness, death, hell is upon me, I am even
now about to make my bed in the dark, and all the comfort I can have from God
is, that dismal sentence, This shall ye have of mine hand, ye shall lie down
in sorrow, Isa. 50.11. Lo, this is the cursed condition of the covetous carl,
as he has lived beside his goods, having jaded his body, broken his brains,
and burdened his conscience; so he dies hated of God, and loathed of men; the
Earth groans under him, Heaven is shut against him, Hell gapes for him, 1 Cor.
6.8, 9. Phil. 3.18. Thus many a Miser spins a fair thread to strangle himself,
both temporally and eternally. O that they would seriously think of this before
the cold grave hold their bodies, and hot hell torment their souls! before
death come with a writ of Habeas corpus, and the Devil with a writ of Habeas
animam, as once to that rich fool, Luke 12.

Verse. 7. All the labor of man is for his mouth] That is, Dii boni quantum
hominum unus exercet venture! Seneca. Deus homini augustum ventrem, etc. Sergius
PP.
for food and raiment, as 1 Timothy 6. a little whereof will content nature, which
has therefore given us a little mouth and stomach, to teach us moderation, as
Chrysostom well observes; to the shame of those beastly belly-gods, that glut
themselves, and devour the creatures, as if they were of kin to that Pope that
was called Os porci, fatning themselves like boars, till they be brawned, and
having, as Eliphaz speaks, collops in their flank. A man would think by their
greedy and great eating, that their throats were whirl-pools, and their bellies
bottomeless: that they were like locusts which have but one gut, Aristot.
the Asse-fish that has his heart in his belly, or the Dolphin that has his
mouth in his maw, as Solinus says. Quicquid avi^^ volitat, quicquid piscium
natat, quicquid ferarum discurrit, nostris sepelitur ventribus.


And yet the appetite is not filled] And yet what birds soever fly, what
fishes soever swim, what beasts soever run about, are all buried in our
bellies, says Seneca. Heliogabalus was served at one supper with seven
thousand fishes, and five thousand fowls. He had also six hundred harlots
following him in Chariots, and yet gave great rewards to him that could invent
any new pleasure. His thirst was unquenchable, his appetite like the hill
Aetna, ever on fire after more. Now as in water face answers to face, Prove.
27.19
so does the appetite of a man to man; we are all as irregular if God suffer us
to range.

Verse. 8. For what has the wise more than the fool?] Nothing at all in this
vanity of humane nature, that it needs still new supply of nourishment to
preserve it. When a wise man has eaten, is he not again hungry? and must not
his hunger again be satisfied as well as a fools hunger? Indeed, as any man is
more wise, he is more temperate; he eats to live, not lives to eat. He needs
not much, nor is a slave to his appetite, or to his palate. He can feed upon
gruel (for a need) with Daniel, upon Coleworts with Elisha, upon a cake on the
coals, (...). Mat. 24.38
and a cruse of water with Elijah, upon locusts and wilde-honey with the
Baptist, upon Barley bread with the Disciples, upon an Herring or two, as
Luther, etc. This a fool can ill frame to. He eats as a beast with the old
world, and feeds without fear, Jud. 12. he caters for the flesh, Romans 13. ult.
and overchargeth it with surfeiting and drunkenness, Luke 21.34. he measures
not his cheer by that which nature requires, but that which greedy appetite
desires, as if therein consists his whole happiness.

What has the poor that knows to walk before the living] viz. The poor wise
man that lives by his wits, can serve the time, in St. Paul's sense (if ever he
meant it there, Romans 12.11.) and make an honest shift to rub through the world?
what has such a one more than a simpler man in this particular? does not his
hunger return, his stomach crave new nourishment? Animantis cujusque vita est
fuga, says the Philosopher: Were it not for the repair of nutrition, the
natural life would be soon extinguished.

Verse. 9. Better is the sight of the eyes, etc.] i. e. (as some sense it,)
Better it is to overlook dainty dishes, than to over-charge the stomach with
them; to fill the eyes than the belly, to gratify that, than to pamper this:
though that is a vanity too in the issue, and may prove a vexation of spirit,
may breed inward inquietation; the best that can come of it, is repentance, and
self-revenge, 2 Cor. 7.11. as in Epaminondas. Symmachus reads the words thus,
Melim est providere, quam ambalare ut libet, Better it is to provide, than to
walk at random. The Septnagint thus, Melius est videre quod cupias, quam
desiderare quod nescias, Better is it to see what thou desire, than to desire
what thou know not. The best Expositors make it an answer to an objection:
For whereas the rich man might reply, Better see wealth, than be always
seeking it; better have it, than hawk after it: The Preacher answers, that
Misery may be somewhat mitigated by this means, but never fully cured or
cashiered.

Verse. 10. That which has been, is named already] Or thus, That which is the
name of it, has been named already (viz. Eccles. 1.2, 3.) and it is known that
it is Adam, or earthly man. The very notation of his name, argues him mortal
and miserable; whether he be wise or foolish, rich or poor, etc. that alters
not the case: Homo sum, said one, humanum nihil a me alienum puto: I am a man,
(...), etc. Isoc.
and therefore may not think strange of misery, whereunto I am born, as the
sparks fly upward, Job. 5.7. he that forgets not that he is a man, will not
take it ill that evils befall him, says another. When Francis King of France
being held prisoner by Charles the fifth Emperor of Germany, saw the Emperors
Motto, Plus Ultra, written on the wall of his chamber, He under-wrote these
words, Job. Man. loc. com. p. 175.
Hodie mihi, cras tibi. To day is my turn to suffer, tomorrow thine. The
Emperor observed it, and wrote underneath that, Fatcer me esse hominem, I
confess I am a man, and therefore subject to misery. Metellus was by the Romans
counted and called Felix, Happy, so was Sylla, Dictue potim est quam fuerit
foelix Sylla. Solin. c. 7.
But he proved true that holy proverb, Better is the end of a thing, than the
beginning, for he died miserably of the lousie disease, that dashed all his
former happiness. The Delphian Oracle pronounced one Aglaus a poor contented
Arcadian, the only happy man alive. Solon preferred Tellus the Athenian, and
Cleobis, and Bitus also, before rich Croesus, telling him further, that he
might be called rich and mighty, Valor. Max lib. 7. cap. 3.
but not Blessed, till he had made an happy end; and so confuting his fond
conceit of an imaginary felicity. The Greeks, when they would call a man
thrice-miserable, they call him thrice a man. (...). Herodot.
The Hebrews, whereas they name a Be from the order of her working, a
Grass-hopper from devouring, an Ant from gnawing, an Adamant from
strokes-bearing, a Serpent from curious observing, a Horse from neying, etc.
they give man his name Adam, from the dust whereof be was made, and Enosh
sorry-man, sick of a deadly disease, and so no way fit to contend with God that
is much mightier than He, to require a reason of his judgments, which are
sometimes secret, always just. God has shut up all persons and things (as it
were close prisoners) under vanity, by an irresistible decree. To strive
against this stream, and by heaping riches, honors, pleasures, to seek to
break prison, and to withstand Gods will, is lost labor. Misery need not go to
find such out, they run to meet their bane: which yet will (as we say of foul
weather) come time enough, before it is sent for.

Verse. 11. Seeing there he many things that encrease] Seeing it is in vain to
wrestle or wrangle with God, to seek to ward off his blow, to mo^ up ones self
against his fire: Why should vain man contend with his Maker? Why should he
beat himself to froth, as the surges of the Sea do against the Rock? Why should
he (like the untamed Heifer unaccustomed to the yoke) gall his neck by
wrigling? make his crosses heavier than God makes them, by crosseness and
impatience? The very Heathen could tell him that, -- Deus crudelius urit Tibul.
Eleg. 1.

Quos videt invitos succubuisse sibi.


God will have the better of those that contend with him: and his own Reason
will tell him, that it is not fit that God should cast down the bucklers first:
and that the deeper a man wades, the more he shall be wet.

Verse. 12. For who knows what is good for man] He may think this and that to
be good, but is (mostly) mistaken and disappointed. Ambrose has well
observed, that other creatures are led by the instinct of Nature, to that which
is good for them. The Lion when he is sick, cures himself by devouring an Ape,
the Bear by devouring Ants, the wounded Dear, by feeding upon Dittany, etc. in
ignoras, O homo, remedia tuo, but thou, O man, know not what is good for
thee. He has showed thee, O man, what is good, says the Prophet; and what
does the Lord require of thee but this (instead of raking riches together) to
do justly, and to love mercy, and (instead of contending with him) to humble
thy self to walk with thy God? Micah 6.8.

For who can tell a man what shall be after him] When the Worms shall be
scrambling for his body, the Devils (happily) for his soul, and his friends for
his goods. A false Jesuit published in print, Camd Elis. Dilexi virum qui cum
corpore solveretur magit de Ecclesiarum statu, etc.
some years after Queen Elizabeth's death, that she died despairing, and that
she wished she might after her death, hang a while in the air, to see what
striving would be for her Kingdom: I loved the man (said Ambrose of
Theodosius) for this, that when he died, he was more affected with care of
the Churches good, than of his own.

CHAP. VII. Verse. 1. A good name is better than precious ointment.
YEa, than great riches, Prove. 22.1. See the Note. The initial letter of the
Hebrew word for Good here, is bigger than ordinary; and Majusculum.
to show the more than ordinary excellency of a good name and fame amongst men.
If whatsoever David does does please the people, Romans 1.2
if Mary Magdalens cost upon Christ be well spoken of in all the Churches, if
the Romans Faith be famous throughout the whole world, if Demetrius have a
good report of all good men, and St. John set his seal to it: this must needs
be better than precious ointments; the one being but a perfume of the
nostrils, the other of the heart: Sweet ointment, olfactum afficit, spiritum
reficit, cerebrum juvat, affects the smell, refreshes the spirit, comforts the
brain: A good name does all this and more. For,

First, As a fragrant scent, it affects the soul, amidst the stench of evil
(...) courses and companies: It is as a fresh gale of sweet air to him that
lives (as Noah did) among such as are no better than walking dunghills, and
living sepulchers of themselves, stinking much more worse than Lazarus did,
after he had lain four days in the grave. A good name preserves the soul as
a Pomander, and refreshes it more than musk or civil does the body.

Secondly, It comforts the conscience, and exhilatates the heart; cheers up the
mind amidst all discouragements, and fatteth the bones, Prove. 15.30. doing a
man good, like a medicine. And whereas sweet ointments may be corrupted by
dead flies, a good name, proceeding from a good conscience, cannot be so. Fly
blown it may be for a season, and somewhat obscured: but as the Moon wades out
of a cloud, so shall the Saints innocence break forth as the light, and their
righteousness as the noonday, Psalm. 37.6. Buried it may beee in the open
sepulchers of evil throats, but it shall surely rise again: A Resurrection
there shall be of names, as well as of bodies at the last day, at utmost. But
usually a good name comforts a Christian at his death, and continues after it.
For though the name of the wicked shall rot, his lamp shall be put out in
obscurity, and leave a vile snuff behind it, yet the righteous shall be had
in everlasting remembrance, they shall leave their names for a blessing, Isa.
65.15.

And the day of death, than the day of ones birth] The Greeks call a man's
birthday, (...), the beginning of his Nativity, they call the begetting of his
misery. Man that is born of a woman, is born to trouble, says Job, chap. 14.1.
The word there rendered Born, signifies also generated or conceived: to note
that man is miserable, even so soon as he is warm in the womb, as David has
it, Psalm. 51.5. If he lives to see the light, he comes crying into the world,
Ad Marc. cap. 11.
a flet is vitam anspicatur, says Seneca: Insomuch as the Lawyers defined
(...) by crying, and a still-born child is all one as dead in Law. Only
Zo^^sta^ is said to have been born laughing; but that laughter was both
monstrous and ominous. Justin. lib. 1.
For he first found out the black Art, which yet profited him not so far as to
the vain felicity of this present life. For being King) of the Bactrians, he
was overcome and slain in battle by Ninus King of the Assyrians. St. Austin,
who relates this story, says of man's first entrance into the world, Nondum
loquitur, and tamen prophetat, Ere ever a child speaks, he prophesies, by his
tears, of his ensuing sorrows. Nec prius natus, quam damnat no, No sooner is
he born, but he is condemned to the Mines or Galleys as it were of sin and
suffering. Hence Solomon here prefers his Coffin before his Cradle. And there
was some truth in that saying of the Heathen, Optimum est non nasci, proximum
quam celorrime mori. For wicked men it had been best not to have been born, or
being born, to dye quickly; since by living long they heap up first sin, and
then wrath against the day of wrath. As for good men, there is no doubt but the
day of death is best to them, because it is the daybreak of Eternal
Righteousness: and after a short brightness, as that Martyr said, gives them,
Malorum ademptionem, bonorum ademptionem, freedom from all evil, fruition of
all good. Hence the ancient Fathers called those days wherein the Martyrs
suffered, their birth-daies; because then they began to live indeed: since here
to live is but to lie a dying. Eternal life is the only true life, says
Austin.

Verse. 2. It is better to go to the house of mourning] To the terming-house (as
they term it) where a dead corpse is laid forth for burial, and in that respect
weeping and wailing, (...).
which is one of the dues of the dead, whose bodies are sown in corruption, and
watered usually with tears. It is better therefore to sort with such, to mingle
with mourners, to follow the Hearse, to weep with those that weep, to visit the
heavy-hearted (this being a special means of mortification) than to go to the
house of feasting, where is nothing but joy and jollity, slaying Oxen, and
killing Sheep, eating Flesh, and drinking Wine, yea therefore eating and
drinking, because to morrow they shall dye. Ede, Sardanapali vox belluina.
bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas. What good can be gotten amongst such
swinish Epicures? What sound remedy against life's vanity? It is far better
therefore to go to the house of mourning, where a man may be moved with
compassion, with compunction, with due and deep consideration of his doleful
and dying condition; where he may hear dead Abel by a dumb eloquence preaching
and pressing this necessary, but much neglected lesson, that this is the end of
all men, and the living should lay it to heart, or (as the Hebrew has it) lay
it upon his heart, work it upon his affections, inditurus est illud animo suo,
so Tremelius renders it, he will so mind it, Job 30.33 Psalm. 39.4, 5
as to make his best use of it, so as to say with Job, I know that thou will
bring me unto death. And with David, Behold, thou have made my days as a
span, etc. And as Moses, who when he saw the peoples carcasses fall so fast in
the wilderness, Lord teach us, said he, so to number our days, Psalm. 90.12
as to cause our hearts (of themselves never a whit willing) to come to wisdom.

Verse. 3. Sorrow is better than laughter] Here (as likewise in the two former
verses) is a collation, and praelation, Sorrow or indignation conceived for
sin, is better than laughter, i. e. carnal and profane mitth. This is (...),
as Nazianzen speaks in another case, a Paradox to the world, but such as may
sooner and better be proved than those Paradoxes of the ancient Stoics. The
world is a perfect stranger to the truth of this sacred position, as being all
set upon the merry Pin, and having so far banished sadness, as that they are no
less enemies to seriousness, than the old Romans were to the name of the
Tarquins. These Philistines cannot see how out of this Eater can come Meat, and
out of this Strong, Sweet; how any man should reasonably persuade them to turn
their laughter into mourning, and joy into heaviness, James 4.9. A pound of
grief, say they, will not pay an ounce of debt, a little mirth is worth a great
deal of sorrow; there is nothing better than for a man to eat and drink, and
laugh himself fat: Spiritus Calvinianus, Spiritus Melancholicus (a Popish
Proverb) to be precise and godly, is to bid adue to all mirth and jollity, and
to spend his days in heaviness and horror. This is the judgment of the mad
world, ever beside it self in point of Salvation. But what says our Preacher,
who had the experience of both, and could best tell? Sorrow is better, for it
makes the heart better; It betters the better part; and is therefore compared
to fire, that purges out the dross of sin, to water, that washes out the
dreggs of sin, yea, to eye-water, sharp, but sovereign. By washing in these
troubled waters, the conscience is cured, and Gods Naamans cleansed. By feeding
upon this bitter-sweet root, Gods penitentiaries are fenced against the
temptations of Satan, the corruption of their own hearts, and the allurements
of this present evil world. These tears drive away the Devil much better than
Holy Water, as they called it; they quench Hell flames, and as April showers,
they bring on a man the May-flowers, both of grace, 1 Pet. 5.5. and of glory,
Jer. 4.14. What an ill match therefore make our Mirth-mongers, that purchase
laughter many times with shame, loss, misery, beggary, rottenness of body,
distress, damnation, that hunt after it to Hell, and light a candle at the
Devil for lightsomeness of heart, by haunting Alehouses, Brothel-houses,
conventicles of good fellowship, sinful and unseasonable sports, and other vain
fooleries, in the froth whereof is bred and fed that worm that never dies? A
man is nearest danger, when he is most merry, said Mr. Greenham. And, God cast
not man out of Paradise, (says another Reverend Man) that he might here build
him another; but that, as that bird of Paradise, he might always be upon the
wing, and if at any time taken, never leave groaning and grieving till he be
delivered. This will bring him a Paradise of sweetest peace, and make much for
the lengthening of his tranquillity and consolation, Dan. 4.27. Oh how sweet a
thing is it, at the feet of Jesus, to stand weeping, to water them with tears,
to dry them with sighs, and to kiss them with our mouths! Only those that have
made their eyes a fountain to wash Christ's feet in, may look to have Christ's
heart a fountain to bathe their souls in.

Verse. 4. The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning] He gladly makes
use of all good means of minding his mortality; and holds it an high point of
heavenly wisdom, so to do. Hence he frequents funerals, mingles with
mourners, Monimenta quasi mentem momentia.
hears etiam muta clamare cadavera, makes every tomb a teacher, every Monument
a Monitor, lays him down in his bed, as in his grave, looks upon his sheets,
as his winding sheet. Ut somnus mortis, sic lectus imago sepulchri. If he
hears but the clock strike, sees the glass run out, it is as a Death-head to
preach Momento mori to him; he remembers the days of darkness, as Solomon
bids, Eccles. 11.8. acts death aforehand, takes up many sad and serious
thoughts of it, and makes it his continual practice so to do, as Job and David
did. The wiser Jews dug their graves long before, as that old Prophet, 1
King. 13.30. Joseph of Arimathea had his in his garden, to season his delights.
John Patriarch of Alexandria, (surnamed Eleemosynarius for his bounty to the
poor) having his tomb in building, gave his people charge it should be left
unfinished, and that every day one should put him in mind to perfect it, that
he might remember his mortality. The Christians in some part of the Primitive
Church, took the Sacrament every day, because they looked to dye every day.
Austin would not for the gain of a million of worlds be an Atheist for half an
hour, Quid hic facio? Aug. Descript. of the Isle of Man abbridg. Arist.
because he had no certainty of his life for so short a time. His Mother
Monica was heard often to say, How is it that I am here still? The women of the
Isle of Man (says Speed) whenever they go out of their doors, gird
themselves about with the winding sheet that they purpose to be buried in, to
show themselves mindful of their mortality. The Philosopher affirms, that man
is therefore the wisest of creatures, because he alone can number. Bruta non
numerant: this is an essential difference; Psalm. 90.12
but especially in that divine Arithmetic of so numbering his days, as to
apply his heart to wisdom. This speaks him wise indeed, right in his
judgment, right also in his affections: This will render him right in his
practice too; Pauperes de Lugduno.
as it did Waldus the Merchant of Lions; who seeing one suddenly fall down dead
before him, became a new man, and chief of those old Protestants, the poor men
of Lions, called also Waldenses from this Waldus.

Prove.
But the heart of fools is in the house of mirth] See the Note one verse 3. As
the heart of the wicked is light, and little worth, so it is their trade to
hunt after lying vanities (as the child does after Butter-flies) to rejoice in
a thing of nothing, Amos 6.13. he wilders away his time, either in weaving
spiders webs, or hatching Cockatrice eggs, Isa. 59.5. froth or filth ((...),
Mark 7.22.) is their recreation. Sad and serious thoughts they banish; and
therefore love not to be alone. They hate to hear of that terrible word Death:
as Lewis the eleventh of France commanded his servants not once to mention it
to him, though he lay upon his deathbed. They live and laugh, as if they were
out of the reach of Gods Rod, or as if their lives were rivetted upon eternity.
They can see death in other men's brows and visages, not feel it in their own
bowels and bosoms. When they behold any laid in their graves, they can shake
their heads and say, This is it we must all come to; but after a while all is
forgotten: As water stirred with a stone cast in to it, has circle upon circle
on the surface for present, but by and by all is smooth as before. As chickens
in a storm haste to be under the Hens wing; but, when that is a little over,
they lie dusting themselves again in the sunshine: So it is here. Good thoughts
fall upon evil hearts, as sparks upon wet tinder: or if they kindle there,
fools bring their buckets to quench them, run into merry company to drink, or
otherwise drive away those troublesome heart-qualms and melancholy dumps (as
they call them.) This is to excel in madness, etc. See the Note on Prove. 10.23.

Verse. 5. It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise] Sharp truth takes better
with an honest heart, than a smooth supparasitation. Seneca compares flattery
to a song or symphony: but it is a Sirens song, and our ears must be stopped to
it: for like the poison of Asps, it casts one into a sleep, but that sleep is
deadly. Those that had the Sudor Anglicus or sweating sickness, died assuredly,
if suffered to sleep: those then were their best friends that kept them waking,
though happily they had no thank for it: So are wise and merciful reprovers.
Faithful are these wounds of a friend, Prove. 7.26. See the Note there. David
was full glad of them, Psalm. 141.5. So was Gerson, who never took any thing
more kindly (says he that writes his life) than to be plainly dealt with.
The Be can suck sweet honey out of bitter Thyme, yea out of poisonous Hemlock:
So can a wise man make benefit of his friends, nay of his enemies. It is good
to have friends, (as the Orator said of Judges) modo audeant quo sentiunt, so
they dare deal freely: this an enemy will do for spite; and malice, though it
be an ill Judge, yet is a good Informer. Austin in an Epistle to Hierome,
approves well of him that said, there is more good to be gotten by enemies
railing, than friends flattering. These sing Satan's lullaby, such as casts into
a dead lethargy; and should therefore be served as Alexander the Great served
a certain Philosopher whom he chased out of his presence, and gave this
reason, because he had lived long with him, and never reproved any vice in
him, Or as the same Alexander dealt by Aristobulus the false Historian, who had
written a book of his Noble Acts, and had magnified them beyond truth, hoping
thereby to ingratiate and curry favor: Alexander having read the book, cast it
into the River Hydaspes, Curt.
and told the Author, it were a good deed to throw him after, Qui solus me sic
pugnantem facis.

Verse. 6. For as the crackling of thorns under a pot] Much noise, little fire;
much light, little heat: So here is much mirth, little cause; a blaze it may
yield, but is suddenly extinct; this blaze is also under a pot; the gallantry
of it is checked with troubles and terrors, it is insincere many times, it is
but the hypocrisy of mirth, as one calls it. It is truly and trimly here
compared to a handful of brushwood, or sear thorn under the pot. Apul.
Ecquando vidisti flammam stipula exortam, claro strepitu, largo fulgere, cito
incremento, sed enim materia levi, caduco incendio, nullis reliquiis, says
Apuleius: a very dainty description of carnal joy, and agreeable to this text.
Psalm. 58.9
And herewith also very well suits that of the Psalmist, Before your pots can
feel the thorns, he shall take them away with a whirlwind, both living, and in
his wrath: Fools themselves are but thorns twisted and folded together, Nahum
1.10. briers, Micah 7.4. brambles, Judge. 9.14. Their laughter is also fitly
compared to thorns; because it choaks good motions, scratcheth the conscience,
harbors the vermin of base and baggage lusts. And as themselves (like thorns)
shall be thrust away, and utterly burnt with fire in the same place, 2 Samuel
23.6. So their joy soon expireth, and proves to be rather desolation, than
consolation; as lightning is followed with rending and roaring; as Comets
out-blaze the very stars, but when their exhaled matter is wasted, they vanish
and fill the air with pestilent vapors. The Prophet Amos tells the wicked,
that their Sun shall go down at noonday, chap. 8.9. Surely as metals are then
nearest melting, when they shine brightest in the fire: and as the fishes swim
merrily down the silver-streams of Jordan, till they suddenly fall into the
dead Sea, where presently they perish: So it fares with these merry Greeks,
that flear when they should fear, and laugh when they should lament. Luke 6.25
Psalm. 118.1^
Woe to you that laugh, says Christ: How suddenly are they put out as the fire
of thorns!

Verse. 7. Surely oppression makes a wise man mad] viz. Till such time as he
has recollected himself, and summoned the sobriety of his senses before his
own judgment: till he has reasoned himself, and prayed himself out of his
distemper, as David did, Psalm. 73. Anger is a short madness, fury a frenzy;
and who so apprehensive of an injury, as the wise man? and who so wise, as not
sometimes to be over-carried by his passion to his cost? Oppression may
express that from the meekest Moses, that he may sorely repent, but knows not
how to remedy. Anger anteverts reason in the wisest sometimes, and especially
in case of calumny (for the eye and the good name will bear no jeasts, as the
Proverb has it) A man can better bear a thultch on the back, than a touch on
the eye. You shall find some, says Erasmus, that if death be threatened, can
despise it: but to be belyed, they cannot brook, nor from revenge contain
themselves. How could we digest that calumny (might Erasmus well think then)
that he basely casts upon our Profession in his Epistle to Bilihaldus?
Ubicunque regnat Lutherns, ibi literarum est interitus: duo tantum quaerunt,
censum, and uxorem. Wheresoever Luther prevails, learning goes down; wealth and
wives is all they look after. How ill himself, with all his wisdom, could
endure this kind of oppression, appears by his Hyperaspistes, and many other
his Apologies (for by his playing on both hands, Amama in Antibarb. praefat.
Nec Evangelicorum vitavit censuras, nec apud Episcopos and Monachos gratiam
inivit, he was beaten on both sides, which made him little less than mad; and
it was but just upon him. David's grief was, that his enemies traduced and
abused him without cause. Job and Jeremy make the same complaint, and were much
troubled. Defamations, they knew well, do usually leave a kind of lower
estimation many times, even where they are not believed. Hence Paul's Apologies
and self-commendation, even to suspicion of madness almost. Calumniare
audacter, aliquid saltem adhaerebit.
Hence Basil in an Epistle ad Bosphorum Episcop: Quo putas animum meum dolor
affecit fama calumnia illius quam mihi offuderunt quidam, non metuentes Judicem
perditurum omnes loquentes mendacium? Tanto videlicet ut prope totam noctem
insomnem duxerim, etc. with what grief do thou think (says He) did that
calumny oppress my mind, which some (not fearing the Judge, that shall destroy
all them that speak lies) did cast upon me? Even so much, that I slept not
almost all the night; so had the apprehended sadness possessed the secrets of
mine heart, etc.

And a gift destroys the heart] i. e. Corrupts it, makes it blind; and so
destroies it: Pliny.
as the Eagle lights upon the Hearts horns, flutters dust in his eyes, and so by
blinding him, brings him to destruction. See Deuteronomy. 16.19. with the Note. Let a
Judge be both wise (for his understanding) and righteous (for his will) a gift
will mar all, as it is there: it dazleth the eyes, and makes a wise man mad.

Verse. 8. Better is the end of a thing, than the beginning] No right judgment
can be made of any thing, unless we can see the end of it. God seems often to
go a contrary way to work; but by that time both ends be brought together, all
is as it should be, and it appears that he does all things in number, weight
and measure. Acts and Mon. fol. 1377.
We may learn (said Mr. Hooper Martyr in a certain letter exhorting to
patience) by things that nourish and maintain us, both meat and drink, to what
loathsome and abhorring they come unto, before they work their perfection in
us; From life they be brought to the fire; and clean altered from what they
were, when they were alive: from the fire to the trencher and knife, and all to
be hacked; from the trencher to the mouth, and as small ground as the teeth
can grind them; from the mouth into the stomach, and there so boiled and
digested before they nourish, that whosoever saw the same would loathe and
adhor his own nourishment, till it come to perfection. But as a man looks for
the nourishment of his meat, when it is full digested, and not before, so must
he look for deliverance when he has suffered much trouble, and for Salvation
when he has passed through the straight gate, etc. Let the wise man look to
the end, and to the right which in the end God will do him, in the destruction
of his oppressors; and this will patient his heart, and heal his distemper.
We have heard of the patience of Job, Job 5.
and what end the Lord made with him. Be ye also patient, you shall shortly
have help, if ye hold out waiting. Mark the upright man, and behold the just,
for (whatever his beginning or his middle be) the end of that man is peace,
Psalm. 37.37. Only he must hold out Faith and Patience; and not fall off from
good beginnings; for as the evening crowns the day, and as the grace of an
Interlude, is in the last Scene; so it is constancy that crowns all graces,
and he only that continues to the end, that shall be saved. Laban was very
kind at first, but he showed himself at parting. Saul's three first years were
good. Judas carried himself fair, usque ad loculorum officium, says
Tertullian, till the bag was committed to him. Many set out for Heaven wi^h as
much seeming resolution, as Lots wife did out of Sodom; as Orphah did out of
Moab; as the young man in the Gospel came to Christ. But after a while they
fall away, they stumble at the cross, and fall backwards. Now to such it may
well be said, The end is better than the beginning. Better it had been for
such never to have known the way of God, etc. Christ loves no lookers back: See
how he thunders against them, Heb. 10.26, 27, 38, 39. So does St. Paul against
the Galatians, because they did run well, but lying down in that heat, they
caught a surfeit, and fell into a consumption.

And the patient in spirit is better than the proud, etc.] Pride is the Mother
of impatiency, as infidelity is of pride. The just shall live by Faith, live
upon promises, reversions, hopes, wait deliverance, or want it, if God will
have it so. But his soul, which (for want of Faith to ballast it) is lifted up,
and so presumes to set God a time wherein to come or never come, 2 King. 6.33.
is not upright in him: some things he does, as it were a mad man, not knowing,
or greatly caring what he does, says Gregory. He frets at God, Greg. Pastor.
and rails at men, lays about him on all hands, and never cease, till in
that distemperature he depart the world, which so oftentimes himself had
distempered, Daniel.
as the Chronicler concludes the life of our Henry the second.

Verse. 9. Be not hasty in thy Spirit to be angry] The hasty man (we say)
never wants woe. For wrath is an evil counselor, and inwrappeth a man in
manifold troubles, mischiefs and miseries. It makes man alike the Be (that
vindictive creature) which to be revenged, loses her sting, and becomes a
drone: or like Tamar, who to be even with her Father in Law, defiled him and
her self with incest. Cease therefore from anger, and forsake wrath: fret not
thy self in any wise to do evil, Psalm. 37.8. Athenodorus counseled Augustus to
determine nothing rashly, when he was angry, till he had repeated the Greek
Alphabet. Ambrose taught Theodosius, in that case, to repeat the Lords Prayer.
What a shame is it to see a Christian act like Hercules furens, or like
Solomon's fool, that casts firebrarnds, or as that Demoniack, Mark 2.3. out of
measure fierce? That Demoniack was among the tombs, but these are among the
living, and molest those most, that are nearest to them.

For anger rests in the bosom of fools] Rush it may into a wise man's bosom,
but not rest there, lodge there, dwell there. And only where it dwells, it
domineers, and that is only, where a fool is Master of the family. Thunder,
hail, tempest, neither trouble nor hurt celestial bodies. See that the Sun go
not down upon this evil guest; see that the soul be not sowred or impured with
it; for anger corrupts the heart, as leaven does the lump, Aug. Epist. 87.
or vinegar the vessel, wherein it does continue.

Verse. 10. Say not thou, What is the cause? Granger.
etc.] This (says an Interpreter) is the continual complaint of the wicked
moody, and the wicked needy. The moody Papists would murder all the godly; for
they be Canaanites and Hagarens. The needy profane would murder all the
rich, for they are Lions in the grate. Thus He. It is the manner and humor of
too many (says another) who would be thought wise, Dr. Jermin.
to condemn the times in an impatient coffeehouse against them, especially
if themselves do not thrive, or be not favored in the times, as they desire,
and as they think they should be. And these malcontents are commonly great
Questionists, What is the cause? say they, etc. It might be answered, In
promptu causa est, Themselves are the cause; for the times are therefore the
worse, because they are no better. Hard hearts make hard times. But the
Preacher answers better, Thou do not wisely enquire concerning this, q. d.
The Objection is idle, and once to have recited it, is enough to have confuted
it. Oh if we had been in the days of our Forefathers (said those hypocrites,
Matthew. 23.30.) great business would have been done; I, no doubt of it, says
our Savior, when as you fill up the measure of your Fathers sins, and are
every whit as good at resisting of the Holy Ghost, as they were, Act. 7.51. Or
if there were any good heretofore more than is now, it may be said of these
Wise fools, as it was anciently of Demosthenes, (...). Plutarch.
that he was excellent at praising the worthy acts of Ancestors, not so at
imitating of them. In all ages of the world, there were complaints of the
times, and not altogether without cause. Henoch the seventh from Adam
complained, so did Noah, Lot, Moses, and the Prophets, Christ the Arch-Prophet,
and all his Apostles, the Primitive Fathers and Professors of the truth. The
common cry ever was O tempora! O mores! Number Ecclesias suat dereliquit Dominus?
said Basil, Has the Lord utterly left his Church? Is it now the last hour?
Father Latimer saw so much wickedness in his days, that he thought it could not
be, but that Christ must come to Judgment immediately: like as Elmerius a Monk
of Malmesbury from the same ground gathered the certainty of Antichrists
present reign. What pitiful complaints make Bernard, Bradwardine, Everard
Archbishop of Canterbury (who wrote a Volume called Objurgatorium temporis,
the rebuke of the time) Petrarch, Mantuan, Savanarola, etc? In the time of Pope
Clement 5. Frederick King of Sicily was so far offended at the ill government
of the Church, that he called into question the truth of the Christian
Religion, till he was better resolved and settled in the point by Arnoldus de
Villa nova, Rev. de vit. Pont.
who showed him, that it was long since foretold of these last and loosest
times, that iniquity should abound, that men should be proud, lewd, heady,
high-minded, etc. 1 Timothy 4.1. and 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4. Lay aside therefore
these frivolous enquiries, and discontented cryings out against the times,
which (in some sense) reflect upon God the Author of times (for can there be
evil in an Age, and he has not done it?) and blessing God for our
Gospel-priviledges, (which indeed should drown all our discontents) let every
one mend one, and then let the world run its circuits, take its course, Vadat
mundus quo vult: nam vult vadere quo vult, says Luther bluntly, Let the world
go which way it will: for it will go which way it will: The thing that has
been is that which shall be, Hieronym.
etc. Eccles. 2.9, 10. Tu sic debes vivere, ut semper praesentes dies meliores
tibi sinc quum praeteriti, says a Father, Thou should so live, that thy
last days may be thy best days, and the time present better to thee, than the
bypast was to those that then lived.

Vtilior est sapientia cum divitiis: So the Septu. here. In vit.
Verse. 11. Wisdom is good with an inheritance] So is it without it: but not so
good, because wealth is both an ornament, an instrument, and an encouragement
to wisdom. Aristides (says Plutarch) slandered and made justice odious by his
poverty: as if it were a thing that made men poor, and were more profitable to
others, than to himself that uses it. God will not have wealth always entailed
to wisdom, that wisdom may be admired for it self; and that it may appear,
that the love and service of the Saints is not mercenary and meretricious. But
godliness has the promises of both lives. And the righteous shall leave
inheritance to his childrens children. Or if he do not so, yet he shall leave
them a better thing: for by wisdom (abstracted from wealth) there is profit, 1
Cor. 12.31
or, it is more excellent or better (as the Hebrew word signifies) as the
Apostle in another case, And yet show I you a more excellent way, viz. that
graces are better than gifts: So here, that wisdom is better than wealth. And
if Jacob may see his children the work of Gods hands, framed and fitted by the
word of Gods grace (the wisdom of God in a mystery) this would better preserve
him from confusion, Psalm. 45.
and his face from waxing pale, than if he could make his children Princes in
all lands; yea, this will make him to sanctify Gods name, yea, to sanctify
the Holy One, and with singular encouragement from the God of Israel, Esaias
29.22, 23.

Verse. 12. For wisdom is a defense, and money, etc.] Heb. a shadow, viz. to
those that have seen the Sun, (as in the former verse) and are scorched with
the heat of it, that are under the miseries and molestations of life: Wisdom
in this case is a wall of defense, and a well of life: Money also is a
thorn-hedge, of very good use. Job 1.10. so it be set without the affections,
and get not into the heart, as the Pharisees (...) did, Luke 11.41. their
riches were got within them, and by choking the seed, kept wisdom out.

Wisdom gives life to them that have it] For God is both a Sun, and a shield
or shadow, he will give grace and glory, etc. Psalm. 84.11. Life in any sense is
a sweet mercy; but the life of grace and of glory may well challenge the
precellency: No marvel therefore though wisdom bear away the bell from wealth,
which as it serves only to the uses of life natural; so being misused, it
drowns many a soul in perdition and destruction, 1 Timothy 6.9. and proves the
root of all evil, chapter 16.10. yea it takes away the life of the owner thereof,
Prove. 1.19. See the Note there. It is confessed, that wealth sometimes gives
life to them that have it, as it did to those ten Jews that had treasures in
the field, Jer. 41.8. and does to those condemned men that can take a lease of
their lives. But Nabals wealth had undone him, if Abigails wisdom had not
interposed: And in the other life, money bears no mastery. Adam had it not in
Paradise, and in Heaven there is no need of it.

Verse. 13. Consider the work of God, etc.] q. d. Stoop, since there is no
standing out. See God in that thou suffer, and submit. God by a crooked tool
many times makes straight work; he avengeth the quarrel of his Covenant by the
Assyrian that rod of Gods wrath, though he thinks not so, Esaias 10.7. Job could
discern Gods arrows in Satan's hand, and Gods hand on the Arms of the Sabcan
robbers. He it is that kills and makes alive, says holy Hannah, he makes
poor and makes rich, he brings low and lifts up, 1 Samuel 2.6, 7. All is
done according to the counsel of his will; who as he may do what he pleases,
so he will be sure never to over-doe: his holy hand shall never be further
stretched out to smite, than to save, Esaias 59.1. This made David dumb, for he
knew it was Gods doing. It is the Lord, said Eli, let him do, Psalm. 39. 1 Samuel
3.18
and I will suffer, lest I add passive disobedience to active. Aaron his
Predecessor had done the like before him upon the same consideration, in the
untimely end of his untowardly children, Levit. 10.3. Jacob likewise in the
rape of Dinah, Genesis 34.5. Agnovit hand dubie ferulam divinam, says Pareus on
that text, he considered the work of God in it, and that it was in vain for
him to seek to make that straight which God had made crooked. There is no
standing before a Lion, no hoysing up sail in a tempest, no contending with the
Almighty. Whoever waxed fierce against God and prospered? Job 9.4. Who ever got
any thing by kicking against the pricks, by biting the rod which they should
rather have kissed? See Esaias 14.27. Job 9.12, 13. and 34.12.10. Set God before
your passions, when they are up in a hurry, and all will be hushed. Set down
proud flesh when it bustles and bristles under Gods fatherly chastisements, and
say soberly to your selves; shall I not drink of the cup that my Father (who is
also my Physician) has put into mine hands? stand under the cross that he has
laid on my shoulders? stoop unto the yoke that he hangs on my neck? Drink off
Gods cup willingly (said Mr. Bradford the Martyr) and at first when it is full,
lest if we linger we drink at length of the dregs with the wicked. Far
minora volo, ne graviora feram. That was a very good saying of Demosthenes (who
was ever better at praising of virtue than at practicing of it) good men should
ever do the best, and then hope the best. But if any thing happen worse than
was hoped for, let that which God will have done, be born with patience.

Verse. 14. In the day of prosperity be joyful] Here we have some fair days,
some foul: crosses (like foul weather) come before they are sent for; for as
fair weather (the more is the pity) may do hurt, so may prospenity, as it did
to David, Psalm. 30.6. who therefore had his interchanges of a worse condition,
(as it was but needful) his prosperity like checker-work was intermingled with
adversity. See the circle God goes in with his people, Circulus quidem est in
rebus humanis. Deus nos per contraria crudit. Naz. Orat. 7.
in that thirtieth Psalm, David was afflicted, verse. 5. he was delivered and
grew wanton. Then troubled again, verse. 7. cries again, 8, 9 God turns his
mourning into joy again. Thus God sets the one against the other, as it were in
aequilibrio, in even balance for our greatest good. Sometimes he weighes us in
the balance; and finds us too light: Then he thinks best to make us heavy
through manifold temptations, 1 Pet. 1.6. Sometimes he finds our water
somewhat too high, and then as a Physician no less cunning than loving, he fits
us with that which will reduce all to the healthsome temper of a broken spirit.
But if we be but prosperity-proof, there is no such danger of adversity. Some
of those in Queen Mary's days, who kept their garments close about them, wore
them afterward more loosely. Prosperity makes the Saints rust sometimes;
therefore God sets his Scullions to scour them and make them bright, though
they make themselves black. This scouring if they will escape, let Solomon's
counsel be taken, In the day of prosperity be joyful, i. e. serve God with
cheerfulness in the abundance of all things; and reckon upon it, the more wages
the more work: Is it not good reason? Solomon's Altar was four times as big as
Moses his; and Ezekiels Temple ten times bigger than Solomon's; to teach, that
where God gives much, he expects much. Otherwise God will curse our blessings,
Jer. 12.13
Mal. 2.2. Make us ashamed of our revenues through his fierce anger, and
destroy us after he has done us good, Josh. 24.20.

In the day of adversity consider] Sit alone, and be in meditation of the
matter, Psalm. 4.4
Lam. 3.28. commune with your own consciences and be still, or make a pause.
See who it is that smites thee, and for what, Lam. 3.40. Take Gods part against
thy self, as a Physician observes, which way nature works, and helps it.
Consider, that God afflicts not willingly, or from his heart; it goes as much
against the heart with him, Psalm. 119.75
as against the hair with us, Lam. 3.33. He is forced of very faithfulness to
afflict us, because he will be true to our souls and save them: he is forced
to diet us, who have surfeted of prosperity, and keep us short. He is forced to
purge us (as wise Physicians do some Patients) till he bring us almost to skin
and bone; and to let us blood even ad deliquium animae, till we swoon again,
that there may be a spring of better blood and spirits. Consider of all those
precious passages, Heb. 12.3. to 12. and then lift up the languishing hands,
and feeble knees. For your further help herein, read my Treatise called Gods
Love Tokens, and The afflicted man's Lessons, passim.

Verse. 15. All things have I seen in the days of my vanity] i. e. of my life,
which is so very a vanity, that no man can perfectly describe it, or directly
tell what it is. He came somewhat near the matter, that said, it was a spot of
time betwixt two eternities.

There is a just man that perishes in his righteousnesse] The first man that
dyed, dyed for Religion. How early did Martyrdom come into the world? How
valiant for the truth, and violent for the Kingdom have Gods suffering Saints
been ever since, preferring affliction before sin, and choosing rather to
perish in their righteousness, than to part with it? Ignatius triumphed in his
voyage to Rome to suffer, to think that his blood should be found among the
mighty Worthies; and that when the Lord makes inquisition for blood, he will
recount from the blood of righteous Abel, not only to the blood of Zacharias
son of Barachias, but also to the blood of mean Ignatius. Blessed are they that
are persecuted for righteousness sake, See the Note there.
Mat. 5.10.

And there is a wicked man that prolongeth his life] This (as the former event
likewise) proves a great stumbling block to many: to see good men perish, bad
men flourish and live long in sin, with impunity, credit, and countenance, as
Manasseh (that Monster of men) who reigned longest of any King of Judah.
Jeroboam lived to see three Successions in the Throne of Judah. Thus the Ivy
lives, when the Oak is dead. David George (that odious Heretic) lived to a
great age, and dyed in peace and plenty. Anne Stanhop Duchess of Somerset
(Wife of the Protector Edw. Seymor) after she had raised such Tragedies about
precedence with Queen Katherine, Camd. Eliz. fol. 356.
and caused the ruin of her Husband, and his Brother the Admiral, dyed Anno
1587. being ninety nine years of age. Length of days is no sure rule of Gods
favor. As Plants last longer than Sensitive Creatures, Ut victimae ad
supplicium saginantur, ut hostiae ad poenam co^o nantur. Mi^.-Foelix.
and Brute Creatures outlive the reasonable; so amongst the reasonable, it is
no news (neither should it trouble us) that the wickedly great do inherit
these worldly glories longer than the best; It is all they are like to have,
let them make them merry with it. Some wicked men live long, that they may
aggravate their judgment: others dye sooner, that they may hasten it.

Verse. 16. Be not righteous over much, neither make, etc.] Virtue consists in
a mediocrity. Omne quod est nimium. vertitur in vicium. Est modus in rebus.
Phil. 4.5. (...).
A rigid severity may mar all. Let your moderation be known to all men, prefer
equity before extremity: utmost right may be utmost wrong. He is righteous
overmuch, that will remit nothing of his right, but exercise great censures
for light offenses: this is (as one said) to kill a fly upon a man's forehead
with a beetle. Justice, if not mixed with mercy, degenerates into cruelty.
Again, he is righteous more than is meee, that makes sins where God has made
none; as those superstitiosuli of old, and the Papists at this day do with
their Touch not, Taste not, handle not: Which things have indeed a show of
wisdom in will worship, etc. Col. 2.21, 23. Will-worshippers are usually
over-wise, i. e. overweening, and too too well conceited of their own wisdom
and worth. Quisquis plus justo non sapit, ille sapit. Mart.
Hence it is, that they cannot do, but they must over-do, till wearied in the
greatness of their way, Isa. 57.10. they see and say that it had been best to
have held the Kings highway, chalked out unto them by the royal Law, James
2.8. that perfect Law of liberty, James 1.25. Via regia temperata est, Hieron.
in cap. 57 Isa.
nec plus in se habons, nec minus. The middle way is the way of God; neither
having too much, nor yet too little. Cic. 2. de finib.
True it is (says the Heathen Orator) that Nemo pius est qui pietatem caver,
No man is godly that is afraid of being so: But then it is no less true (and
the same Author speaks it) Modum esse religionis, Cic. pro them. sua. Nihil
minus expedit, quam agrum optime colere. Plin. Cic. de Orat. Jul. Solin. Polyh.
c. 45
nimium esse superstitiosum non oportere: that there is a reason in being
religious, and that men must see they be not superstitious. Solomon says,
that he that wrings his nose over hard, brings blood out of it. Pliny says,
he that tills his Land over-well, does it to his loss. Apelles said, those
Painters were too blame, qui non sentirent quid esset satis, that could not see
when they had done sufficient. It is reported of the River Nilus, that if it
either exceeed or be defective in its due overflowings of the Land of Egypt,
it causes famine; The planet Jupiter, situate betwixt cold Saturn, and hot
Mars, Lib. 2. c. 8
Ex utroque temperatus est; and salutaris, says Pliny, partakes of both, and
is benign and wholesome to the sublunary creatures.

Verse. 17. Be not wicked over-much] viz. Because thou see some wicked men
live long, and escape scot-free for the present, as verse. 15. For God may cut
thee short enough, and make thee die before thy time, i. e. before thou art fit
to die; and when it were better for thee to do any thing, rather than die, since
thou die in thy sins, which is much worse than to die in a ditch. Job 34.37
Deuteronomy. 29. Micah 7.3
Now they are overmuch wicked, and egregiously foolish, that add rebellion to
sin, drunkenness to thirst, doing wickedly with both hands earnestly, refusing
to be reformed, hating to be healed. These take long strides toward the
burning lake, which is but a little before them. The Law many times lays hold
of them, the gallows claims its right, they preach in a Tiburn-tippet, Psalm.
137.
as they say. Or otherwise, God cuts them off betime, even long before, as he
knows their thoughts and dispositions long before. We use to destroy hemlock
even in the midst of winter; because we know what it will do, if suffered to
grow. Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days, Psalm.
55.25. God cut off Elies two sons in one day, for their overmuch wickedness;
and further threatened their Father, that there should not be an old man left
in his house for ever, 1 Samuel 2.32. Wicked men die tempore non suo, as the
Text is by some rendered. The Saints die not till the best time, not till their
work is done (and then God sends them to bed; the two witnesses could not be
killed whiles they were doing it) not till that time, when if they were but
rightly informed, they would even desire to die.

Verse. 18. It is good that thou should take hold of this] i. e. Of this
golden mean; walking accurately by line and by rule, Psalm. 125.5
and continuing constant in thine integrity, not turning aside to the right
hand, or to the left. As for those that turn aside unto those crooked ways of
being just overmuch, by needless scrupulosity, or wicked overmuch, by
detestable exorbitancy, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of
iniquity, as cattle led to the slaughter, or malefactors to execution. When he
that fears God shall come out of them all. He shall look forthright, Prove.
4.25. and shall have no occasion of stumbling, 1 John 2.10. He shall also be
freed from, or pulled as a firebrand out of the fire, Zach. 3.2.

Verse. 19. Wisdom strengthens the wise, etc.] Prudence excels puissance,
and counsel valor. This made Agamenon set such a price upon Ulysses, Darius
upon Zopyrus, the Siracusans upon Archimedes, the Spartans upon Leonidas,
Justin. lib. 2.
who with six hundred men, dispersed five hundred thousand of Xerxes his Host.
Those that are wise to salvation, go ever under a double guard, the peace of
God with in them, the power of God without them. No Sultan of Babylon or Egypt
(who have that title from the Hebrew word here rendered Mighty men) did ever go
so well guarded. See the Note on Prove. 21.22.

Verse. 20. For there is not a just man upon earth] No, this is reserved for the
state of perfection in Heaven, where are the spirits of just men made perfect,
Aug de peccator. meritis, lib. 2. cap. 7.
Heb. 12.23. It was the cavil wherewith the Pelagians troubled Saint Austin,
whether it were impossible that by the absolute power of God a just man might
not live on earth without sin? But what have we to do here with the absolute
power of God? His revealed will is, That there is not a just man upon earth,
that does good, and sins not; nay, that sins not, even in his doing of
good. Our righteousness (whiles we are on earth) is mixed, as light and
darkness (dimness at least) in a painted glass dyed with some obscure and dim
color; it is transparent, and gives good, but not clear and pure light. Dr.
Stoughton, on Phil. 3.20.
It is a witty observation of a late learned Divine, that the present tense in
Grammar is accompanied with the Imperfect, the Future with the
Praeter-pluperfect tense; and thar such is the condition of our present and
future holiness. Our future is more than perfect, our present is imperfect
indeed, but yet true holiness and happiness. See the Note on Prove. 20.9.

Verse. 21. Also take no head] But be as a deaf man that hears not, and as a
dumb man, in whose mouth there is no reproof, Psalm. 38.13. If thou answer any
thing, say as he in Tacitus did to one that railed at him, Tu linguae, ego
vero aurium dominus, Thou may say what thou will, but I will hear as I list;
or as once a certain Steward did to his passionate Lord, when he called him
knave, etc. Your Honor may speak as you please, but I believe not a word that
you say, for I know my self an honest man. The language of reproachers must be
read like Hebrew, backwards. Princes use to correct the indecencies of
Ambassadors, by denying them audience. Certain it is, that he enjoyes a brave
composedness, that sets himself above the flight of the injurious claw. Isaac's
apology to his brother Ismael, viz. patience and silence, is the best answer to
words of scorn and petulancy, said learned Hooker. I care not for man's day, 1
Cor. 4.3
says Paul, Non curo vanum calumniatorem, I regard not a vain slanderer, says
Austin. Wicelius and Cochleus gave out, that we Lutherans betrayed the Rhodes
to the Turk, says Melanchthon. These impudent lies need no confutation, dicant
ipsi talia quoad velint, let them tell such loud and lewd lies as many as they
will. When a net is spread for a bird, says Austin, the manner is to throw
stones at the hedge. These stones hurt not the bird, but she hearing and
fearing this vain sound, falls into the net. In like manner says he, men that
fear and regard the vain sound of all ill words, what do they but fall into the
Devils net, who thereby carries them captive into much evil, many troubles and
inconveniences?

Lest thou hear thy servant curse thee] Who should in duty speak the best of
thee, though frample and froward, cross and crooked, 1 Pet. 2.18. Or by servant
understand base inferior people, such as were Tobiah the servant, Psalm. 35.15
the Ammonite, and those abjects that tare David's name, and ceased not.

Verse. 22. For oftentimes also thine own heart knows] Conscience is Gods spy,
and Man's over-seer; and though some can make a sorry shift to muzzle her for a
time, or to stop their own cars, yet ipsa se offert, ipsa se ingerit, says
Bernard, sooner or later she will tell a man his own to some tune, as they
say, she will not go behind the door to let him know, that he himself
likewise has cursed others, as now by Gods just judgment, others curse him.
The conscience of our own evil doings, though hid from the world, should meeken
us toward those that do amiss. See Titus 3.3. Say to your selves, Aut sumus,
ant fuimus, aut possumus esse quod hic est.

The wrong that David had done to Vriah, helped him to bear the barkings of
that dead Dog Shimei. Here then Take no heed unto all words, etc. as in the
former verse. For, nihil amarius quam id ipsum pati quod feceris, there is
nothing more bitter, than to suffer that which thou have done to others; Tertul.
because those sufferings sting the conscience with unquestionable conviction
and horror, as is to be seen in Adonibezek, who acknowledged with a regret, a
just remuneration, Judge. 1.7.

Verse. 23. I said I will be wise, but it was far from mee] Solomon here seems
to say of wisdom, as Nazianzen does of God the author of it, Tantum recedit,
quantum capitur. Not that wisdom it self does fly away, but because that they
who have most of it, do especially understand, Basil. tract. de fide.
that it exceeds the capacity of any one to be able to comprehend it (as
Basil gives the reason) so that they that think they have got demonstrations,
perceive afterward that they are no more than topicae aut sophisticae
rations, topical or sophistical arguments, as Lyra here notes. Bonus quidam
vir solebat esse solus, etc. says Melancthon. A certain well-meaning man was
wont to walk and study much alone, and lighting upon Aristotle's discourse
concerning the nature of the Rainbow, he fell into many odd speculations, and
strange conceits; and writing to a friend of his, told him, that in all other
matters, though dark and obscure, he had out-gone Aristotle, but in the matter
of the Rainbow he had out-gone himself. After this he came into the public
schools, Joh. Mant. loc. com. 536.
and disputed of that argument, Et toto prorsus coelo a veritate aberrabat suis
phantasi^, and then he came to see that he had been utterly out, and
strangely miscarried by those fantasies, which he had so strongly fancied.

Verse. 24. That which is far off and exceeding deep] Not the Minions of the
Muses, Mentemque habere queis bonam, and esse corculis datum est: Dousa.
For though they should eviscerate themselves, like Spiders, crack their
sconces, or study themselves to death, yet can they not understand all
mysteries, 1 Cor. 13.2
and all knowledge in natural things, how much less in supernatural? whereas
weak-sighted, and sand-blind persons, the more they strain their eyes to
discern a thing perfectly, the less they see of it, as Vives has observed. L.
Vives in Aug. de civ. dei. l. 2. c. ^
It is utterly impossible for a mere Naturalist that cannot tell the form, the
quintessence; that cannot enter into the depth of the flower, or the grass he
treads on, to have the wit to enter into the deep things of God, the mystery of
Christ which was hid from Angels till the discovery, and since that they are
still Students in it. Ephesians. 4.
David, though he saw further than his Ancients, Psalm. 119.99. yet he was
still to seek of that which might be known, verse. 96. Even as those great
discoverers of the New-found-lands in America, at their return were wont to
confess, that there was still a Plus ultra, something more beyond yet. Not
only in innumerable other things am I very ignorant (says Austin) but also in
the very Scriptures, multo plura nescio quam scio, Aug. Epist.
I am ignorant of many more things by odds, than I yet understand. This present
life is like the Vale of Sciaessa, near unto the Town called Patrae; of which
Solinus says, that it is famous for nothing but for its darksomeness, as being
continually overcast with the shadows of nine hills that do environ it,
Polyhist. c. 12.
so that the Sun can hardly cast a beam of light into it. Properemus ad
coelestem Academiam, Let us hasten to the University of Heaven, where the least
child knows a thousand times more than the deepest Doctor upon earth.

Verse. 25. I applied mine heart] Circuiviego and cor meum (so the Original
runs) I and my heart turned about, or made a circle to know, etc. He took his
heart with him, and resolved (hard or not hard) to make further search into
wisdoms secrets. Difficulty does but whet on heroic spirits: it does no whit
weaken but waken their resolutions to go through with the work. When Alexander
met with any hard or hazardous piece of service, he would say, Jam periculum
par animo Alexandri, He ever achieved what he enterprized, because he never
accounted any thing impossible to be achieved. David was well pleased with
the condition of bringing in to Saul the fore-skins of an hundred Philistims.
If a bowl run down hill, a rub in the way does but quicken it; as if up hill,
it slugs it. A man of Solomon's make, one that has a free, noble, princely
spirit, speaks to Wisdom, as Laelius in Lucan did to Caesar, Jussa sequitam
velle mihi, quam posse, necesse.

And to know the wickedness of folly] The sinfulness of sin, Romans 7.13. Sin
is so evil that it cannot have a worse Epithet given it. Mammon of
unrighteousness, Luke 16.11. is the next odious name to the Devil.

Even the foolishness of madnesse] That by one contrary he might the better
know the other. Folly may serve as a foil to set off wisdom; as Gardiners
suffer some stinking stuff to grow near their sweetest flowers.

Verse. 26. And I found more bitter than death] Amantes amentes: Amor amaror,
Plus aloes quam mellis habet. Know thou not that there is bitterness in the
end? Dulce and amarum gustulum corpis.
Heus scholastice, said the Harlot to Apuleius, Hark Scholar, your sweet bits
will prove bitter in the close.

Principium dulce est, at finis amoris amarus. The Pomegranate with its sweet
kernels, but bitter rind, is an emblem of the bitter-sweet pleasure of sin.
Speed. 710. Walfingh.
It is observed of our Edward the third, that he had always fair weather at
his passage into France, and foul upon his return, Laeta venire Venus, Solin.
cap. 27
tristis abire solet. The Panther hides her head, till she sees her time to
make prey of those other beasts, that drawn by her sweet smell, follow her to
their own destruction. The Poets fable, that pleasure and pain complained one
of another to Jupiter, and that (when he could not decide the controversy
betwixt them) he tied them together with chains of Adamant, never to be sundred.

The Woman] The wanton Woman, that shame of her Sex. A Bitch Moses calls her,
Deuteronomy. 23.18. St. Paul, a living Ghost, a walking Sepulcher of her self, 1 Timothy
5.6. Cum careat pura mente, cadaever agit. This I find, says Solomon: where I
is I with a witness; he had found it by woeful experience, and now relates it
for a warning to others. Says he, Quid facies facies Veneris cum veneris ante?
Non sedeas, sed eas: ne pereas, per eas.


Whose heart is suares and nets] Heb. Hunters snares: for she hunteth for the
precious life, Prove. 6.26. and the Devil by her hunts for the precious soul,
there being not any thing that has more enriched Hell than Harlots. All is
good fish that comes to these nets; 2 Timothy 2.26
but they are taken alive by the Devil at his pleasure.

And her hands as hands] To captivate and enslave those that haunt her, as
Dalilah did Sampson, as the Harlot did the young Novice, Prove. 7.22. as
Solomon's Moabitish mistresses did him, and as it is said of the Persian Kings,
that they were captivarum suarum captivi, Plutarch.
captives to their Concubines, who durst take the crown from their heads, or do
any thing to them almost, when others might not come near them uncalled, upon
pain of death, Est. 4.11.

Who so pleases God shall escape from her] As Joseph did, and Bellerophon,
though with a difference. Joseph out of a principle of Chastity, Bellerophon of
Continency. The continent person refrains either for love of praise, or fear of
punishment, but not without grief, for inwardly he is scalded with boiling
lust, as Alexander, Scipio, and Pompey were, when tempted with the
exquisiteness, and variety of choysest beauties, they forbear. Vellem, si non
essem Imperator. But now the Chaste man, who is good before God (one whom he
approves and takes pleasure in) is holy both in body and spirit, 1 Cor. 7.34.
and this with delight, out of fear of God, and love of virtue. God did much for
that libidinous Gentleman, who sporting with a Curtezan in a house of sin,
happened to ask her name, which she said was Mary: Mountaignes Essays.
whereat he was stricken with such a remorse and reverence, that he instantly
not only cast off the Harlot, but amended his future life.

But the Sinner shall be taken by her] See the Note on Prove. 22.14. The Poets
fable, that when Prometheus had discovered Truth to men, that had long lain hid
from them, Jupiter (or the Devil) to cross that design, sent Pandora (that is
Pleasure) that should so besot them, as that they should neither mind nor make
out after Truth and Honesty.

Verse 27. Behold this I have found] (...), I have found it, I have found it,
said the Philosopher, Vicimus, Vicimus, we have prevailed, we have prevailed,
said Luther, when he had been praying in his Closet, for the good success of
the consultation about Religion in Germany. So the Preacher here, Aperit sibi
diligentia januam veritatis. Amb.
having by diligence set open the door of truth, cries, Venite, videte, Come
and see my discoveries, in the making whereof I have been very exact, counting
one by one, Ne mole obruerer, lest I should be oppressed with many things at
once.

Verse. 28. Which yet my soul seeks, but I find not] There is a place in
Wiltshire called Stonage, for diverse great stones lying and standing there
together: of which stones it is said, Camden.
that though a man number them one by one never so carefully, yet that he
cannot find the true number of them, but that every time he numbers them he
finds a different number from that he found before. This may well show (as one
well applies it) the erring of man's labor in seeking the account of wisdom
and knowledge. For though his diligence be never so great in making the
reckoning, he will always be out, and not able to find it out.

One man among a thousand] Hand facile invenies multis e milibus unum. There is
a very great scarcity of good people. These are as Gideons three hundred, when
the wicked, as the Midianites, lie like Grasshoppers for multitude upon the
earth, Judge. 7. and as those Syrians, 1 King. 20.27. they fill the country,
they darken the air, as the swarms did the Land of Egypt: and there is plenty
of such dust-heaps in every corner.

But a Woman among all those have I not found] i. e. Among all my Wives and
Concubines, which made him ready to sing, Foemina nulla bona est. But that
there are, and ever have been many gracious Women, see (besides the Scriptures)
the Writings of many Learned men, De illustribus foeminis: It is easy to
observe (says one) that the New Testament affords more store of good Wives
than the Old. And I can say as Hierom does, Novi ego multas ad omne opus bonum
promptas, I know many Tabithaes full of good works. But in respect of the
discovery of hearts and natures whether in good or evil, it is harder to find
out thoroughly the perfect disposition of a Woman, than of Men. And that I take
to be the meaning of this text.

Verse. 29. That God has made man upright] viz. In his own Image, i. e.
knowledge in his understanding part, rightnesse in his will, and holiness in
his affections: his heart was a lump of love, etc. when he came first out of
Gods Mint he shone most glorious, clad with the royal robe of righteousness,
created with the imperial crown, Psalm. 8.5. But the Devil soon stripped him of
it, he cheated and cousened him of the Crown (as we use to do children) with
the apple, or whatsoever fruit it was that he tendered to Eve: Porrexit pomum
and surripuit paradisum. Bernard. Lib. 1. legis allegor.
He also set his limbs in the place of Gods Image, so that now, Is qui factus
est homo differt ab eo quem Deus fecit, as Philo says, Man is now of another
make than God made him. Totus homo est inversus decalogus, whole evil is in
man, and whole man in evil: Neither can he cast the blame upon God, but must
fault himself, and fly to the second Adam for repair.

But they have sought out many inventions] New tricks and devises, like those
poetical fictions, and fabulous relations, whereof there is neither proof nor
profit. The Vulgar Latin has it, Et ipse se infinitis miscuit quaestionibus,
And he has entangled himself with numberless questions, and fruitless
speculations. See 1 Timothy 1.4. and cap. 6.4. doting about questions, or
questionsick. Bernard reads it thus, Ipse autem se implicuit doloribus multis,
but he has involved himself in many troubles, the fruit of his inventions,
shifts and sherking tricks. See Jer. 6.19.

CHAP. VIII. Verse. 1. Who is as the Wise man?]
Velut inter stellas Luna minores
QUa. dic. He is a matchless man, a peerless Paragon, out-shining others, as
much as the Moon does the lesser Stars. Plato could say, that no Gold or
Precious stone does glister so gloriously, (...), as the prudent spirit of a
good man. Genesis 41.38
Thou art a Prince of God amongst us, said the Hittites to Abraham. Can we
find such a man as this Joseph, in whom the Spirit of God is, said Pharaoh to
his Counselors? Have thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like
him on the earth, etc? Job 1.8. My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in
all my house, and shall be of my Cabinet-Counsel, Numb. 12.7. To him God said,
Tu vero hic sta mecum, But do thou stand here by me, Exodus 34.5. Sapiens Dei
comes est, says Philo. Look how Kings have their Favorites whom they call
Comites, their Cousins and Companions, so has God. Nay, the righteous are
Princes in all Lands, Psalm. 45.16. Kings in righteousness, (compare Mat. 13.17.
with Luke 10.24.) the excellent Ones of the Earth, Psalm. 16.3. the Worthies of
the world, Hom. 55. in Matthew.
Heb. 11.5. fitter to be set as Stars in Heaven, and to be continually before
the Throne of God. Chrysostom calls some holy men of his time, (...), Earthly
Angels: and speaking of Babylas the Martyr, he says of him, Magnus at que
admirabilis vir, he was an excellent and an admirable man, Orat. contra
Gentiles.
etc. And Tertullian writing to some of the Martyrs, says, Non tantus sum ut
vos alloquar, I am not good enough to speak unto you. Oh that my life and a
thousand such wretches more might go for yours! Oh why does God suffer me and
other such Caterpillars to live (says John Careless Martyr, in a letter to
that Angel of God Mr. Bradford, as Dr. Tailor called him) that can do nothing
but consume the alms of the Church, and take away you so worthy a workman and
labourer in the Lords Vineyard, Acts and Mon. 1744.
etc?

And who knows the interpretation of a thing?] Wise a man may be, and yet
not so apt and able to wise others. Those wise ones that can wise others, so as
to turn them to righteousness, shall shine as the brightness of the firmament,
yea as the Stars, Dan. 12.3. they do so whilst upon earth; Wisdom makes their
very faces to shine, Acts 6 15.
as St. Stephens did, and as Holy Jobs, whiles he was in a prosperous
condition, Chap. 29.8, 9, 10. Jobab he was then the same (some think) that is
mentioned, Genesis 36.33.) as when in distress his name was contracted into Job.
And then (though himself were otherwise wise) he might want an Interpreter,
One of a thousand (for such are rare, every man cannot sell us this precious
oil Matthew. 25.9.) to show unto him his uprightness that is the righteousness of
his own experience, how himself has been helped and comforted in like case,
or, to clear up to an afflicted Job his spiritual estate, and to show him his
Evangelical Righteousness. Oh how beautiful are the feet of such an
Interpreter! I have seen thy face, (says the poor soul to such) as though I
had seen the face of God, Genesis 33.10.

A man's wisdom makes his face to shine] Godliness is venerable and reverend.
Holy and Reverend is his name, Psalm. 112. Gods Image is amiable and admirable:
Natural conscience cannot but stoop and do obeisance to it: What a deal of
respect did Nebuchadnezzar and Darius put upon Daniel? Alexander the Great upon
Jaddus the High Priest? Theodosius upon Ambrose? Constantine upon Paphnutius,
kissing that eye of his that was bored out for the cause of Christ, etc? Godly
men have a daunting presence, as Athanasius had, and Basil: to whom when Valens
the Arrian Emperor came, whiles he was in holy exercises, it struck such a
terror into him, Greg. Orat. de land Basilii.
that he reeled and had fallen, had he not been upheld by those that were
with him. Henry the second of France being present at the Martyrdom of a
certain Tailor, burnt by him for Religion, was so terrified by the boldness of
his countenance, Epit. hist. Gall. 82.
and the constancy of his sufferings, that he swore at his going away, that
he would never any more be present at such a sight.

And the boldness of his face shall be changed] Or, doubled: his conscience
bearing him out, and making him undaunted, as it did David, Psalm. 3. and the
Dutch Martyr Colonus, who calling to the Judge that had sentenced him to death,
desired him to lay his hand upon his heart, and then asked him whose heart did
most beat, his or the Judges? By this boldness Jonathan and his Armor-bearer
set upon the Garrison of the Philistims; David upon Goliath their Champion. The
Black-Prince was so called, not of his color, Speed. 688.
but of his valor and dreaded acts in battle.

Verse. 2. To keep the Kings commandement] Heb. Mouth, i. e. The express word of
command: go not here by guess, or good intention, lest you speed as that Scotch
Captain did, who, not expecting Orders from his Superiors, took an advantage
offered him of taking a Fort of the Enemies: Speed.
for which good service he was knighted in the morning, but hanged in the
afternoon of the same day for acting without order.

And that in regard of the Oath of God] Thine Oath of Allegiance to thy Prince:
This Papists make nothing of. (...).
Pascenius scoffs King James for the invention of it. They can swear with their
mouths, and keep their hearts unsworn, as she in the Comedy. Mercatorum est
stare juramentis, say they at Rome. They can assoil men of their allegiance at
pleasure, and slip their solemn Oaths, as easily as Monkies do their Collars.
And I would this were the sin of Papists only; and that there were not those
found even amongst us, that keep no oaths further than makes for their own
turn: like as the Jews keep none, unless they swear upon their own Torah, Weems.
brought out of their Synagogues.

Verse. 3. Be not hasty to go out of his sight] Turn not thy back
discontentedly; fling not away in a chase; for this will be construed for a
contempt: As it was in the Earl of Essex, Anno 1598. Dissension falling out
between the Queen and him about a fit man for Governor of Ireland, he
forgetting himself, and neglecting his duty, uncivilly turned his back, with a
scornful countenance. She waxing impatient, gave him a cuff on the ear,
bidding him be gone with a vengeance. He laid his hand upon his sword, the
Lord Admiral interposing himself, he swore a great oath, Camd. Elisch. fol.
494.
that he neither could, nor would swallow so great an indignity, nor would
have born it at King Henry the Eighths hands, and in great coffeehouse
hasted from the Court. But within a while after, he became submiss, and was
received again into favor by the Queen, who always thought it more just to
offend a man, than to hate him. Blunts voyage page 97.
The very Turks are said to receive humiliation with all sweetness; but to be
remorseless to those that bear up.

Verse. 4. Where the word of a King is, there is power] Ibi dominatio. He has
long hands, and can reach thee at a great distance; as Mithridates did when
with one letter he slew fourscore thousand Citizens of Rome, Val. Max. lib. 9
that were scattered up and down his Kingdom for Trading-sake. So Selimus the
Great Turk, Turk. hist. fol. 885
in revenge of the loss received at the battle of Lepanto, was once in a mind
to have put to death all the Christians in his Dominions, in number infinite.
Charles the Ninth of France, is reported to have been the death of thirty
thousand of his Protestant Subjects in one years space, Anno 1572. See Dan.
5.19.

And who may say unto him, What do thou] viz. Without danger. What safety can
there be in taking a Bear by the tooth, or a Lion by the beard? I dare not
dispute (said the Philosopher to the Emperor Adrian) with him that has thirty
Legions at his command, Neque in cum scribere, qui potest proscribere, Praescus
praesentem Pontisicem redarguit, and Polycraticon conscripsit. Jac. Rev. 145.
nor write against him that can as easily undo me, as bid it to be done. How
be it Elias, Micaiah, John Baptist, and other holy Prophets and Ministers have
dealt plainly with great Princes, and God has secured them. John Bishop of
Salisbury reproved the Pope to his face: and yet the Canonists say, that
although the Pope should draw millions of souls to Hell with him, none may dare
to say unto him, What do thou? But Philip the Fair made bold with his
Holiness, when he began his letter to him with Sciat Fatuitas Tua, etc. So did
the Barons of England in King John's days, Marcidi Ribaldi. Walsing. Epit.
hist. Gallic. p. 30. Godw. Catal.
when declaring against the Pope and his Conclave (by whom they were
excommunicated) they cried out thus in their Remonstrance, Fie on such rascal
ribals, etc. Adelmelect Bishop of Sherborn, Anno 705. reproved Pope Sergius
sharply to his face, for his Adultery. So did Bishop Lambert reprehend King
Pepin for the same fault, Anno 798. And Archbishop Odo, King Edwin; burning his
Concubines in the forehead with an hot Iron, and banishing them into Ireland.
Father Latimer dealt no less faithfully with King Henry the Eighth in his
Sermons at Court. And being asked by the King how he durst be so bold to
preach after that manner? he answered, that duty to God, and to his Prince had
enforced him to it: and now that he had discharged his conscience, his life
was in his Majesty's hands, etc. Truth must be spoken however it be taken. If
Gods Messengers must be mannerly in the form, yet in the matter of their
message to Great ones they must be resolute. It is probable that Joseph used
some kind of Preface to Pharaoh's Baker in reading him that hard destiny, Dan.
4.19
Genesis 40.19. Such likely as was that of Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar, My Lord, the
Dream be to them that hate thee, etc. or as Philo brings him in with an Utinam
tale somnium non vidisses, etc. But for the matter, he gives him a sound,
though sharp interpretation.

Verse. 5. Whosoever keeps the commandement] scil. The Kings commandment. He
that is morigerous, and goes as far as he can with a good conscience in his
obedience to the commands of his Superiors, Shall feel no evil, i. e. he
shall lack no good encouragement, Romans 13.3, 4. Or if men slight him, God will
see to him, Ephesians. 6.7, 8. as he did to the poor Israelites in Egypt, and to
David under Saul. Mordecai lost nothing at length by his love and loyalty to
God and the King. Sir Ralph Percy (slain upon Hegely-Moor in Northumberland by
the Lord Montacute, General for Edward the Fourth) he would no ways depart
the field, though defeated; but in dying, said, I have saved the bird in my
breast, Speed. 869.
meaning his oath to King Henry the Sixth, for whom he fought.

And a wise man's heart discerns both time and judgement] scil. When and how
to obey Kings commands, the time, the means and manner thereof, dispatching
them without offense to God or man. And this a wise man's heart discerns,
says the Preacher: it being the opinion of the Hebrews, that in the heart
especially the soul did keep her Court, and exercise her noble operations of
the understanding, invention, judgment, etc. Aristotle says, Sine calore
cordis anima in corpore nihil efficit, Without the heat of the heart, the soul
does nothing in the body. The Scripture also makes the heart the Monarch of
this Isle of Man.

Verse. 6. Because to every purpose there is time] Therefore the wise man
seeks after that nick of time, that punctilio of judgment, that he may do
every thing well, and order his affairs with discretion. A well-chosen season
is the greatest advantage of any action, which, as it is seldom found in
haste, so it is too often lost in delay.

Therefore the misery of man is great upon him] Because he discerns not,
apprehends not his fittest opportunity: hence he creates himself a great deal
of misery. When Saul had taken upon him to sacrifice, God intimates to him by
Samuel, that if he had discerned his time, he might have saved his Kingdom.
So might many a man his life, his livelihood, nay his soul. The men of Issachar
in David's days are famous for this, that they had understanding of the times,
to know what Israel ought to do, 1 Chronicles. 12.32. their posterity are set below
Stork and Swallow, for want of this skill, Jer. 8.7. and deeply doomed, Luke
19.44.

Verse. 7. For he knows not that which shall bee] Man's misery is the greater,
because he cannot foresee to prevent it; but he is suddenly surprised and
hit, many times on the blind side, as we say.

Nescia men's hominum fati sortisque futurae. Men are in the dark in regard of
future events. God only knows them, and is thereby often in Isaiah distinguished
from the dung-hill-deities of the Heathens. In his mercy to his people he gave
them Prophets to tell How long: and when these failed, the Church heavily
bewails it, Psalm. 74.9. Howbeit a prudent man fore-seeth an evil, and hides
himself, Amb. de Offic. l. 1. cap. 38.
Prove. 22.3. See the Note there. By the strength of his mind, says Ambrose,
he presageth what will follow, and can define what in such or such a case he
ought to do. Sometimes he turns over two or three things in his mind together,
of which conjecturing, that either all may come to pass jointly, or this or
that severally, or whether they fall out jointly or severally, he can by his
understanding so order his actions, as that they shall be profitable to him.

Verse. 8. There is no man that has power, etc.] Death, man is sure to meet
with, whatsoever he miss of; but when, he knows not neither. Of Doomsday
there are signs affirmative and negative, not so of death. Every one has his
own Balsam within him, say some Chymicks: Greg. Moral.
his own bane it is sure he has. Ipsa suis augmentis vita ad detrimenta
impellitur, Every day we yield somewhat to death. Stat sua cuique dies. Our
last day stands, the rest run. Virg. Ancid. Nulli cedo.
Death is this only King, against whom there is no rising up, Prove. 30. The
mortal Sith is Master of the Royal Scepter, and it mows down the Lillies of
the Crown, as well as the grass of the field, says a Reverend Writer: Mr. Ley,
his Monitor of Mortality.
And again, Death suddenly snatcheth away Physicians often, as it were in scorn
and contempt of medicines, when they are applying their preservatives or
restoratives to others: as it is storied of Caius Julius a Surgeon, who
dressing a soreeye, as he drew the Instrument over it, was struck with an
Instrument of death in the act and place where he did it. Besides diseases,
many, by mischances, are taken as a bird with a bolt, whiles he gazeth at the
bow.

There is no discharge in war] Heb. No sending, either of Forces to withstand
death, or of messages to make peace with him. The world and we must part; and
whether we be unstitcht by parcels, or torn asunder at once, the difference
is not great. Happy is he that after due preparation, is passed through the
gates of death ere he be aware, says one. Whether my death be a
burnt-offering (of Martyrdom) or a Peace-off^ring (of a natural death) I
desire it may be a Free-will-offering, a sweet sacrifice to the Lord, says
another.

Neither shall wickedness deliver] No; It is righteousness only that
delivers from death. The wicked may make a covenant with death, but God will
disanul it. Shall they escape by iniquity? says the Psalmist. What? have they
no better medium's? No; in thine anger cast down the people, O God. Isa. 28.15.
Psalm. 50.7.
Every man should dye the same day that he is born: the wages of death should
be paid him presently: but Christ beggs their lives for a season. He is the
Savior of all men, 1 Timothy 4.10. not of eternal preservation, but of temporal
reservation, that his Elect might lay hold on eternal life, and reprobates may
have this for a bodkin at their hearts one day, I was in a fair possibility of
being delivered.

Verse. 9. One man rules over another to his own hurt] Not only to the hurt of
his subjects, but to his own utter ruin, though after a long run happily, verse.
12, 13. Ad generum Cereris, etc. What untimely ends came the Kings of Israel
to, and the Roman Caesar's all (almost) till Constantine? Vespasianus unus
accepto imperio melior factus est, Vespasian was the only one amongst them,
that became better by the Office. Whiles they were private persons, there
seemed to be some goodness in them. But no sooner advanced to the Empire, than
they ran riot in wickedness: listening to flatterers, and hating reproofs,
they ran headlong to Hell, and drew a great number with them, by the
instigation of the Devil, that old Manslayer, whose work it was to act and
agitate them, for a common mischief.

Verse. 10. And so I saw the wicked buried] With Pomp and great solemnity,
funeral Orations, Statues, and Epitaphs, etc. as if he had been another Josiah,
or Theodosius: so do men over-whelm this mouse with praises proper to the
Elephant, as the Proverb has it.

Who had come and gone from the place of the Holy] That is, from the place of
Magistracy, Seat of Judicature, where the Holy God himself sits as chief
President, and Lord Paramount. Deuteronomy. 1.17, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. Psalm. 82.1.

And they were forgotten in the City where they had so done] A great benefit to
a wicked man to have his memory dye with him; which if it be preserved, stinks
in keeping, Pemble.
and remains as a curse and perpetual disgrace, as one very well senseth it.

Verse. 11. Because sentence against an evil work, etc.] Ennarrata sententia, a
published and declared sentence. So that it is only a reprieve of mercy, that a
wicked man has: his preservation is but a reservation to further evil, abused
mercy turning into fury. Hieron. in Ierem. Aeripedes dictae sunt Furia. Aries
quo altius erigitur, hoc figit fortius. (...). De utroque Dionysio. Val. l. 1.
cap. 2. Bucholc.
Morae dispendium fauoris duplo pensatur, says Hierom, Gods forbearance is no
quittance: he will find a time to pay wicked men for the new and the old. The
Lord is not slow, as some men count slownesse, 2 Pet. 3.9. Or if he be slow,
yet he is sure. He has leaden heels, but iron hands, the farther he fetches
his blow, or draws his arrow, the deeper he will wound when he hitteth.
Gods Mill may grind soft and slow, but it grindes sure and small, said one
Heathen. Tarditatem supplicii gravitate compensat, he recompenseth the delay of
punishment with an eternity of extremity, says another. He has vials of
vengeance, Rev. 16.1. which are large vessels, but narrow mouthed: they pour
out slowly, but drench deeply, and distill effectually. Caveto igitur, says
one, ne malum dilatum fiat suplicatum. Get quickly out of Gods debt, lest ye
be forced to pay the charges of a suit, to your pain, to your cost. Patientia
Dei quo diuturnior, eo minacior. God will not always serve men for a
sinning-stock, Poena venit gravior quo mage sera venit. Adonijah's feast ended
in horror: Ever, after the meal is ended, comes the reckoning.

Therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set] Heb. is full: So full of
wickedness, that there is no room for the fear of Gods wrath, till wrath come
upon them to the utmost. Intus existens prohibet alienum. God offers and
affords them heart-knocking time, Rev. 3.20. but they ram up their hearts, dry
their tears (as Saul) and are scalded in their own grease, stewed in their own
broth. The sleeping of vengeance causes the overflowing of sin: and the
overflow of sin causes the awakning of vengeance.

Verse. 12. Though a sinner does evil an hundred times] Commit the same sin an
hundred times over, which is no small aggravation of his sin, as numbers added
to numbers are first ten times more, then an hundred, then a thousand, etc. And
truly a Sinner left to himself would sin in infinitum (which may be one reason
of the infinite torments of Hell) he can set no bounds to himself, till he
become a brat of fathomless perdition. The Devil commits that sin unto death
every day, and often in the day. His Imps also resemble him herein. Hence their
sins are mortal, says St. John, rather immortal, 1 John 5.
as says St. Paul, Romans 2.5.

And his days be prolonged] By the long sufferance of God: which is so great,
that Jonah was displeased at it, chap. 4. Averroes turned Atheist upon it. But
Micah admires it, chap. 7.18. and Moses makes excellent use of it, when he
prays, Exodus 34. O Lord, let my Lord, I pray thee, go along with us, for it is
a stiff-necked people. As who should say, None but a God is able to endure this
perverse people; my patience and meekness is far too short: and yet Moses, by
Gods own testimony, was the meekest man upon earth. That the vilest of men may
live a long while is evident: but for no good will that God bears them; but
that heaping up sin, they may heap up wrath, and by abuse of Divine patience,
be fitted for the hottest fire in Hell, Romans 9.22. as stubble laid out a
drying, Nah. 1.10. or as Grapes let hang in the Sunshine, till ripe for the
Wine Press of wrath, Rev. 15.16. Surely as one day of man's life is to be
preferred before the longest life of a Stagge, or a Raven: so one day spent
religiously is far better than an hundred years spent wickedly. Non refert
quanta sit vitae diuturnitas, sed qualis sit administratio, says Vives. The
business is not, how long, but how well any man lives. Hierom reads this
verse thus, Quia peccator facit malum centies, and elongat ei Deus, ex hoc
cognosco ego, etc. Because a sinner does evil an hundred times, and God does
lengthen his days unto him, from hence I know that it shall be well with them
that fear God, etc. And he sets this sense upon it: Inasmuch as God so long
spares wretched sinners, waiting their return, he will surely be good to pious
persons. Symmachus, Aquila, and Theodotion read it thus: Peccans enim malus
mortuus est, long a aetate concessa ei, an evil man sinning is dead, a long age
being granted to him: dead he is in sin, though his days be prolonged.

Yet surely I know that it shall be well] q. d. This shall not stagger me, or
shake mine assurance of the Divine Providence: for I know well that yet God is
good to Israel, to the pure in heart, Psalm. 73.1. And although they dye young
(as (...), those whom God loves he soon takes to himself) yet it may be said
of them, as Ambrose says of Abraham, Mortuus est in bona senectute, eo quod in
bonitate propositi permansit, He dyed in a good old age, because he dyed in a
good sound mind: Or, as Hierom says of a godly young man of his time, Hier.
Epist.
that in brevi vitae spacio tempora virtutum multa replevit, he lived long in
a little time: for some men live more in a month than others do in many years.
They that dye soon (but in Gods fear and favor) though as Grapes they be
gathered before they be ripe, and as Lambs slain before they be grown, yet
(besides the happiness of Heaven) they have this benefit, they are freed from
the violence of the Wine Press that others fall into, and escape many storms
that others live to taste of. A good man (says a late Divine) prolongs his
days though he dye young, because he is ripe before taken from the tree: D.
Preston.
he even falls into the hand of God that gathers him.

Verse. 13. But it shall not be well with the wicked] Not always well, (...).
Nemo culpam gerit in pectore qui non idem Neme fin in tergo.
Isa. 3.12. for sin will be sure to find him out, Numb. 32.23. and he that
has guilt in his bosom, has vengeance at his back. Where iniquity breaks
fast, calamity will be sure to dine, and to sup where it dines and to lodge
where it sups. When iniquity is once ripe in the field, God will not let it
shed to grow again: but cuts it up by a just and seasonable vengeance. 2 Not at
all well; since prosperity slays these fools; and, as Sunshine ripens their
sin, and so fits them for ruin. Hence Bernard calls it, Misericordiam omni
indignatione crudeliorem. Poison in Wine works more furiously. The fatter the
Ox, the sooner to the slaughter.

Neither shall he prolong his dayes] Psalm. 55.23. Jer. 17.11. he dies tempore
non suo, Eccles. 7.17. though he lives long: he dies before he desires, and
when it were better for him to do any thing than to dye; since he has walked
in a vain show disq^ieting himself in vain, Psalm. 39.6. tumbling his tub to no
purpose, lengthening out his days as a shadow: the longer the shade, the
nearer the Sun is to setting. His Sun also sets in the burning Lake, and it
hasteneth to the descent: An end is come, is come, is come; see Ezekiel. 7.6, 7.

Because he fears not before God] But in Hypocrisy, before men, whose faces
he fears, and would be much ashamed, that they should see what he does in
secret, Ephesians. 5.12. But what says the honest Heathen? Si scirem homines
ignoraturos and Deos ignoscituros, tamen propter peccati turpitudinem, peccare
non vellem. Aug. de civ. Dei. l. 6. c. 10
A good resolution surely, if as well put in execution. Sed libertas affuit
scribenti, non viventi, says Austine of this Author, He was a better speaker
than liver. That of David was spoken from his heart, I foresee the Lord always
before my face, I set him at my right hand, etc. Psalm. 16.8. with Act. 2.25.
Be thou in the fear of the Lord all day long, Prove. 23.17.

Verse. 14. There is a vanity which is done upon the earth] Symmachus reads it
thus: Est difficile cognitu quod fit super terram, There is that done upon the
Earth that is hard to be understood. It has gravelled great Divines (as David,
Jeremy, Psalm. 73. Jer. 12. Habbak. 2. Lam. 3.33.
Habbakkuk,) to see good men suffer, bad men prosper. But it is but upon the
earth, that this befalls: here God must meet with his people, or no where, and
it is Non nisi coactus, (as that Emperor said of himself) that he does any
thing to their grief: Ille dolet quoties cogitur esse ferox.

Crudelem medicum intemperans aeger facit. Mimus.
An unruly Patient makes a cruel Physician. And as for the wicked, it is but
upon earth, that they live in pleasure, and lie melting in sensual and sinful
delights, nourishing their hearts as in a day of slaughter, Jam. 5.5. Once they
shall hear with horror, Son, remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy
good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: But now he is comforted, and
thou art tormented, Luke 16.25. The meditation of Eternity would much mitigate
this vanity. Dr. Hall's Remedy of Profaneness, p. 114.
What is that to the infinite? said the old Lord Brook to a friend of his,
discoursing of an incident matter very considerable, but was taken off with
this quick interrogation of that wise and Noble person.

Verse. 15. Then I commended mirth] A lawful lightsomenesse, and cheerfulness of
heart, which makes comforts to be much more comfortable, and troubles to be
far less troublesome. Bucholc.
Besides, acceptior est Deo grata laetitia quam diuturna quasi querula
tristitia. Cheerfulness is better pleasing to God, than sowrenesse and
sullenness: this provokes him to anger, Deuteronomy. 28.47. as that which puts a man
under the reign of continual unthankfulness (Is any man merry? let him sing,
Jam. 5.13.) makes him exceeding liable to temptations and perplexities,
disableth him to make benefit of Ordinances, indisposeth and unfitteth him for
duties of active or passive obedience, takes off the wheels of the soul, and it
makes as awkward, as a limb out of joint, that can do nothing without deformity
and pain.

Than to eat, and to drink, and to be merry] Although it be the bread of
sorrow that thou eatest, and the cup of affliction that thou drinkest, eat it,
and drink it merrily. The Epicures held that a man might be cheerful amidst
the most exquisite torments. 1 In consideration of his honesty and fidelity,
that he suffered for. 2 In consideration of those pleasures and delights that
formerly he had enjoyed, and now cheered up himself with the remembrance of.
How much better may Christians do it in consideration of those unutterable
joys and delights that they expect and hope for? Mendicato pane hic vivamus,
etc. says Luther. We may well be content, nay merry though we should beg
our bread here, to think that we shall one day feast with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Verse. 16. When I applied mine heart to know wisdome] i. e. The wisdom and
other excellencies of God shining plainly and plentifully in ruling the
affairs, and ordering the disorders of the world to his own glory.

For also there is that neither day nor night sees, etc.] i. e. Perdius and
pernox, by day and by night, I busied my self in this search, so that a little
sleep served my turn all the while. Nullus mihi per otium exiit dies, partem
etiam noctium studiis vendico, says Seneca, I studied day and night, and
followed it with all possible eagerness. Thuanus tells of a Countryman of
his, whom he called Franciscus Vieta Fontenejus, a very learned man, that he
was so set upon his study, that for three days together sometimes he would
sit close at it, sine cibo and somno, nisi quem cubito innixus, nec se loco
movens, capiebat, without meat or sleep, more than what for mere necessity of
nature, he took leaning upon his Elbow. Solomon seems by this text to have
been as sharp set for the finding out the way of Divine Administration, and the
true reason of Divine dispensations. But he got little, further than to see
that it far exceeded all humane capacity and apprehension. Majores majora
noverunt, and Deus det vobis plus sapere quam dico, says a Father, when he
said what he could to some one of Gods works of wonder, i. e. They who are
more learned know: and God grant you may understand more than I say.

Verse. 17. That a man cannot find out the work] No not the wisest that is; the
very best Empirick in this kind cannot. Let him labor never so much to find
it, he shall but be tossed in a Labyrinth, or as a wayfaring man in a desert.
Granger.
If a man cannot define any thing because the forms of things are unknown, if
he know not the creatures themselves, ab imo ad summum, from the lowest to the
highest, neither shall he know the reasons and manner of them. As a man may
look on a Trade, and never see the mystery of it, he may look on artificial
things, pictures, watches, etc. and yet not see the Art whereby they are made:
As a man may look on the letter, and never understand the sense: So it is here,
and we must content our selves with a learned ignorance. Si nos non
intelligimus quid quare fiat, Aug. in Psalm. 148.
debeamus hoc providentiae quod non fiat sine causa. If we understand not why
any thing is done, let us owe this duty to Providence, to be assured that it
is not done without cause.

CHAP. IX. Verse. 1. For all this I considered in mine heart.]
HE that will rightly consider of any thing, had need to consider of many
things: all that do concern it, all that do give light unto it, had need to be
looked into, or else we fall too short.

Sis ideo in parts circumspectissimus omnes. Even to declare all this] Or, To
clear up all this to my self. Symmachus rendered it, Ut ventilarem haec
universa, that I might sift and search out all these things by much tossing and
turning of the thoughts. Truth lies low and close, and must with much industry
be drawn into the open light.

That the righteous and the wise] These are terms convertible. The worlds
wisards shall one day cry out, Nos insensati, We fools counted their lives
madness, etc.

And their works] Or, Their services, actions, employments; all which together
with themselves are in the hand of God, who knows them by name, and exercises
a singular providence over them; so that they are kept by the power of God
through Faith unto salvation. The enemy shall not exact upon him, nor the son
of wickedness afflict him, Psalm. 89.22. What a sweet providence was it, that
when all the Males of Israel appeared thrice in the year before the Lord at
Jerusalem, none of their neighbour-Nations (though professed enemies to Israel)
should so much as desire their Land, Exodus 34.24? And again, that after the
slaughter of Gedaliah, so pleasant a Country (left utterly destitute of
inhabitants, and compassed about with such warlike Nations, as the Ammonites,
Moabites, Edomites, Philistims, etc.) was not invaded nor replanted by
forreiners for seventy years space, but the room kept empty, till the return of
the Naturals?

No man knows either love or hatred, etc.] That is, the thing he either loves
or hates (say some Interpreters) by reason of the fickleness of his easily
alterable affections. How soon was Amnons heart estranged from his Thamar, and
Ahashuerosh from his Minion Haman, the Jews from John Baptist, the Galatians
from Paul, etc? But I rather approve of those that refer this love and hatred
unto God (understanding them, (...), in a divine manner) and make the meaning
to be, that by the things of this life, which come alike to all (as the next
verse has it) no man can make judgment of Gods love or hatred toward him.
The sun of prosperity shines as well upon brambles of the wilderness, as
fruit trees of the Orchard; the snow and hail of adversity lights upon the best
gardens, as well as upon the wild waste. Ahab's and Josia's ends concur in the
very circumstances. Saul and Jonathan, though different in their deportments,
yet in their deaths they were not divided, 2 Samuel 1.23. How far wide then is
the Church of Rome, that borrows her marks, from the market, plenty or
cheapness? etc. And what an odd kind of reasoning was that of her Champions
with Marsh the Martyr, whom they would have persuaded to leave his opinions,
Acts and Mon. fol. 1411.
because all the bringers up, and favorers of that Religion (as the Dukes of
Northumberland and Suffolk for instance) had evil luck, and were either put to
death, or in prison, and in danger of life. Again, the favorers of the
Religion then used had wondrous good luck, and prosperity in all things, etc.

Verse. 2. All things come alike to all] See the Note on verse. 1. Health,
Wealth, Honors, etc. are cast upon good men and bad men promiscuously. God
makes a scatter of them as it were; good men gather them, bad men scramble for
them. Nihil est nisi mica panis.
The whole Turkish Empire, says Luther, is nothing else but a crust cast by
Heavens great Housekeeper to his Dogs.

And he that swears, as he that fears an oath] No surer sign of a
profane person, than common and customary swearing. Neither any so good an
evidence of a gracious heart, as not only to forbear it (for so one may do by
education, and civil conversation) but to fear an oath out of an awful regard
to the divine Majesty. Plato and other Heathens shall rise up and condemn our
common swearers: for they, when they would swear, said no more but Ex animi
sententia, Suidas.
or if they would swear by their Jupiter, out of the mere dread and reverence
of his name, they forbear to mention him. Clinias the Pythagorean, out of this
regard, would rather undergo a mulct of three talents, Acts and Mon. 865.
than swear. The Merindolians, those ancient French Protestants, were known by
this through all the Country of Province, that they would not swear, nor easily
be brought to take an oath, except it were in judgment, or making some solemn
covenant.

Verse. 3. This is an evil] Hoc est pessimum (so Hierome, the Vulgar, and
Tremellius renders it) this is the worst evil, this is wickedness with a
witness: scil, that since there is one event to all, graceless men should
therehence conclude, that since there is one event to all, graceless men should
therehence conclude, that it is a bootless business, a course of no profit to
serve God. Hence they walk about the world with hearts as full as hell, of lewd
and lawless lusts. Hence they run a madding after the pleasures of sin, which
with a restless giddiness they earnestly pursue: yea, they live and die in so
doing, says the Wiseman here, noting their final impenitency, that hate of
Heaven, and gate to Hell.

Ex primis per (...) eorum sermones. Lav. Joh. 24. Sic Benedic. 9. Alexand. 6.
and Leo. 10.
Verse. 4. For to him that is joined to all the living there is hope] These are
the words of those wicked ones, whose lives and hopes end together, whose song
is, Post mortem nulla voluptas, when life ends, there is an end of all. (Is
there not such language in some men's hearts? who knows whether there be any
such thing as a life to come? etc. Now I shall know, said that dying Pope,
whether the soul of man be immortal, yea or no: and whether that tale
concerning Christ have any truth in it. Oh wretch!

So a living Dog is better than a dead Lion] But so is not a living sinner
better that a dead Saint; for the righteous has hope in his death; and they
that dye in the Lord are blessed, Rev. 14.13. how much more if they also dye
for the Lord? these love not their lives unto the death, Rev. 12.11. but go as
willingly to dye, as ever they did to dine: being as glad to leave the world,
(for a better especially) as men are wont to be to rise from the board, when
they have eaten their fill, to take possession of a Lordship.

Cur non ut plenus vitae conviva recedis? Lucret.
Verse. 5. For the living know that they shall dye] Hence that Proverb amongst
us, As sure as death. Howbeit, that they think little of it to any good
purpose, appears by that other Proverb, I thought no more of it, than of my
dying-day.

But the dead know not any thing] So it seems to those Atheists that deny the
immortality of the soul, but they shall know at death that there is another
life beyond this, wherein the righteous shall be comforted, Luke 16.25
and their knowledge perfected, but the wicked tormented; and with nothing
more, than to know that such and such poor souls as they would have disdained
to have set with the Dogs of their flocks, are now sitting down with Abraham,
Job 30.1 Luke 13.28
Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of God, and themselves thrust out into utter
darkness, Augustine.
in tenebras extenebris infeliciter exclusi, infelicius excludendi.

Neither have they any more a reward] What? Psalm. 58.11
not a reward for the righteous? Not a certain fearful looking for of
judgment, and fiery indignation which shall devour evildoers? That were
strange. Heb. 10.27
But wicked men would fain persuade themselves so; ut liberius peccent,
libenter ignorant, Bern
2 Pet. 2.5. Of these things they are willingly ignorant.

For the memory of them is forgotten] This is true in part, but not altogether.
Joseph was forgotten in Egypt, Gideon in Israel. Exodus 1 Judge. 9
Joash remembered not the kindness which Jehoiadah had done to him, but slew his
son, 2 Chronicles. 24.22. Nevertheless, the foundation of God stands firm, having
this seal, the Lord knows them that are his; 2 Timothy 2 Mal. 3.16. Luke 10.20
and there is a book of remembrance written before him, for them that fear the
Lord, their names are written in Heaven, and the memory of the just is blessed,
Proverbs 10.7. See the Note there.

Verse. 6. Also their love and their hatred, etc.] Here is lie upon lie. The
Atheist, as he had denied knowledge to the dead, so here he denies
affections, as love, hatred, envy or zeal, as Hierome renders it. But it is
certain, that those that are dead in Jesus, do very dearly love God, and hate
evil with a perfect hatred. The wicked on the other side continue in that other
world, to hate God and goodness, to love such as themselves are, to stomach the
happiness of those in Heaven, etc.

Verse. 7. Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy] Vade, just, Go thy way thou
righteous man, live in cheerfulness of mind, proceeding from the testimony of a
good conscience: so Lyra senseth the words. Gods grace and favor turned brown
bread and water into manchet and wine to the Martyrs in prison. Rejoice not
thou, O Israel, for joy, as other people, for thou have gone a whoring from thy
God, Hos. 9.1. Thou eatest thy bane, thou drinkest thy poison, because to the
impure all things are impure, and without faith it is impossible to please God.
Prove. 29.6
In the transgression of an evil man there is a snare (or a cord to strangle
his joy with) but the righteous does sing and rejoice. He may do so, he must
do so; what should hinder him? he has made his peace with God, and is rectus
in curia, let him be merry at his meals, lightsome and spruise in his clothes,
cheerful with his wife and children, (...). Jam. 5.13
etc. Is any man merry at heart? says St. James, is he right set, and has
he a right frame of soul? is all well within? let him sing Psalms; yea as a
traveller rides on merrily, and wears out the rediousnesse of the way, by
singing sweet songs unto himself: so should the Saints, Thy statutes have been
my songs in the house of my pilgrimage, Psalm. 119.54.

Verse. 8. Let thy garments be always white] i. e. Neat, spruse, cleanly,
comely. Or by a metaphor it may signify, Be merry in good manner: for they
used to wear white clothing on Festivals, Devita theoretica Stuckius in Antiq.
conviv. Anton. Margarit.
and at Weddings, as Philo witnesses: At this day also the Jews come to their
Synagogues in white raiment the day before the Calends of September, which is
their New-years-tide. Purple was affected by the Romans, white by the Jews,
(see Jam. 2.2.) Hence Pilate clad Christ in purple, Matthew. 27.28. Herod in
white, Luke 23.11. Herod himself, Acts 12.21. was arrayed in royal apparel,
that is, in cloth of silver, says Josephus; which being beaten upon by the
Sunbeams, dazeled the peoples eyes, and drew from them that blasphemous
acclamation, The voice of God, and not of man.

And let thine head lack no oyntment] That thou may look smooth and handsome.
See Matthew. 6.16, 17. Ointments were much used with those Eastern people in
Banquetings, Bathings, and at other times, Luke 7.46. Mat. 26.7. By garments
here some understand the affections (as Col. 3.8 -- 12) which must always be
white, i. e. cheerful, even in times of persecution, when thy garments happily
are stained with thine own blood. By the head they understand the thoughts,
which must also be kept lithe and lightsome, as anointed with the oil of
gladness. Crucem multi abominantur, crucem videntes, sed non videntes
unctionem: Crux enim inuncta est, says Bernard. Many men hate the Cross,
because they see the Cross only; but see not the Ointment that is upon it: For
the Cross is anointed, and by the grace of Gods holy Spirit helping our
infirmities, it becomes not only light, but sweet; not only not troublesome,
Aug.
but even desirable and delectable. Martyr etiam in catena gaudet. Paul gloried
in his sufferings, his spirit was cheered up by the thoughts of them, as by
some fragrant ointment.

Verse. 9. Live joyfully with the Wife whom thou lovest] As Isaac (the most
loving Husband in Scripture) did with his Rebecca, whom he loved, (Genesis 24.67.)
not only as his Country-woman, Kins-woman, a good Woman, etc. but as his Woman:
not with an ordinary or Christian love only, but with a conjugal love, which
indeed is that which will make marriage a merry-age, sweeten all crosses,
season all comforts. She is called the Wife of a man's bosom, because she
should be loved as well as the heart in his bosom. God took one of man's ribs,
and having built it into a Wife, laid it again in his bosom: so that she is
flesh of his flesh, yea she is himself, as the Apostle argues, and therehence
enforces this duty of love, Ephesians. 5. Neither does he satisfy himself in this
argument, but adds there blow to blow, so to drive this nayl up to the head,
the better to beat this duty into the heads and hearts of Husbands.

All the days of the life of thy vanity] Love and live comfortably together,
as well in age as in youth, as well, in the fading as in the freshness of
beauty.

Which he has given thee] i. e. The Wife (not the Life) which he has given
thee. For marriages are made in Heaven, as the Heathens also held. God as he
brought Eve to Adam at first, so still he is the Paranymph that makes the
match, Prove. 18.22
and unites their affections. A prudent Wife is of the Lord, for a comfort, as
a froward is for a scourge.

All the days of thy vanity] i. e. Of thy vain vexatious life; the miseries
whereof to mitigate, God has given thee a meet-mate to compassionate and
communicate with thee, and to be a principal remedy: for Optimum solatium
sodalitium, no comfort in misery can be comparable to good company, that will
sympathize and share with us.

For that is thy portion] And a very good one too, if she prove good. As if
otherwise, Arist in Rhetor.
Aristotle says right, he that is unhappy in a Wife, has lost the one half at
least of his happiness on earth.

And in thy labor which thou take, etc.] They that will marry shall have
trouble in the flesh, 1 Cor. 7.28. let them look for it, and labor to make a
virtue of necessity. As there is rejoicing in marriage, so there is a deal of
labor, i. e. of care, cost, and cumber: Is it not good therefore to have a
Partner, such an one, as Sarah was to Abraham, a Piece so just cut for him, as
answered him right in every joint?

Verse. 10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might] We were
made and set here to be doing of something that may do us good a thousand
years hence, our time is short our task is long, our Master urgent, an anstere
man, etc. work therefore while the day lasts, yea work hard, as afraid to be
taken with your task undone. The night of death comes when none can work.
That Is a time not of doing work, but of receiving wages: Up therefore and be
doing, that the Lord may be with you, Praecipita tempus; mors atra impendet
agenti. Silius.
Castigemus ergo mores and moras. The Devil is therefore more mischievous
because he knows he has but a short time, Rev. 12.12
and makes all the haste he can to out work the children of light, in a quick
dispatch of deeds of darkness. O learn for shame of the Devil (as Latimer said
once in another case) therefore to do your utmost, because the time is short,
or rolled up, (...). 1 Cor 7.29
as sayls use to be when the ship draws nigh to the harbor. This argument
prevailed much with St. Peter to bestirre him in stirring up those he wrote
unto, because he knew that he must shortly put off his tabernacle, 2 Pet.
1.13, 14. The life of man is the lamp of God, says Solomon. God has set up
our lives as Alexander, when he sat down before a City, did use to set up a
light; to give those within to understand, that if they came forth to him
whiles that light lasted, they might have quarter: as if otherwise, no mercy
was to be expected.

Verse. 11. That the race is not to the swift] Here the Preacher proves (what
he had found true by experience) by the event of men's endeavors (often
frustrated) that nothing is in our power, but all carried on by a providence,
which often crosses our likeliest projects, that God may have the honor of all.
Let a man be as swift as Asahel or Atalanta, yet he may not get the goal, or
escape the danger. Speed.
The battle of Terwin in France (fought by our Henry 8.) was called the battle
of spurs, because many fled for their lives, who yet fell (as the men of Ai
did) into the midst of their enemies. At Muscle-borough-field many of the Scots
running away, so strained themselves in their race, Life of Edw. 6. by Sir John
Heywood.
that they fell down breathless and dead, whereby they seemed in running from
their deaths, to run to it; whereas two thousand of them that lay all day as
dead, got away safe in the night.

Nor the battle to the strong) As we see in the examples of Gideon, Jonathan
and his armor-bearer, David in his encounter with Goliath; Leonidas, who with
six hundred men worsted five hundred thousand of Xerxes host, Dan. 11.34. They
shall be helped with a little help. And why a little? that through weaker means
we may see Gods greater strength, Zach. 4.6. Not by might nor by power, but by
my Spirit, says the Lord, This Rabshakeh knew not, and therefore derided
Hezekiah for trusting to his prayers, Esaias 36.5. What can Hezekiah say to
embolden him to stand out? What? I say, says Hezekiah, I have words of my
lips, that is, Prayer, Prayer? says Rabshekah, those are empty words, an aerie
thing: for counsel and strength are for the war: so some read the words, and
not in a Parenthesis, as our Translation has it.

Neither yet bread to the wise] To the worldly wise. Those Young Lions do lack
and suffer hunger; but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing.
Psalm. 34.10 Prove. 30.8. Panem demensi.
Their daily bread day by day, food convenient for them, they shall be sure of.
Dwell in the land, and do good, and verily thou shall be fed, Psalm 37.5. by
virtue of a promise, and not by a providence only, as the young Ravens are.

Nor yet riches to men of understanding] Plutus is said by the Poets to be
blind, Epit. hist. Gallic.
and Fortune to favor fools. Of Pope Clement 5. the French Chronicler says,
Papa hic ditior fuit quam sapientior, This Pope was rather rich than wise.
Aristides was so poor, that he brought a flurre upon Justice (says Plutarch)
as if she were not able to maintain her followers. Phocion also, Pelopidas,
Lamachus, Aelian. lib. 2. Ibid. l. 5.
Ephialtes, Socrates, those Greek Sages, were very poor. Epaminondas had but
one garment, and that a sorry one too. Lactantius had scarce a subsistence.
Many wise men have been hard put to 't: Paupertas est Philosophiae vernacula,
says Apuleius.

Rhodigin. l. 29. c. 10.
Nor yet favor to men of skill] Rara ingeniorum praemia, rara item est merces,
says one, wit and skill is little set by: small regard or reward is given to
it; whereas popular men should esteem it as silver (said Aeneas Sylvius)
Noblemen as gold, Princes as pearls.

But time and chance happens to them all] i. e. Every thing is done in its
own time, and as God by his providence orders it, not as men will; much less
by hap-hazard: for that which to us is casual and contingent, is by God
Almighty fore-appointed and effected; who must therefore be seen and sought
unto in the use of means and second causes. And if things succeed not to our
minds, but that we labor in the fire, yet we must glorify God in the fire,
and live by faith.

Vivere spe vidi qui moriturus erat. Verse. 12. For man also knows not his
time] His end, say the Septuagint and Vulgar: What may befall him in after
time, say others.

Flebile principium melior fortuna sequatur,
Accidit in puncto quod non speratur in anno.
So are the Sons of men snared in an evil time] This is the reddition of the
former proposition. As the fishes are taken, etc. So are graceless men snared,
etc. Security ushers in their calamity: when they say peace and safety, then
sudden destruction breaks in upon them, as travel upon a woman with child, and
they shall not escape. 1 These. 5.3
God made fair weather before Pharaoh till he was in the heart of the red sea.
The old World, Sodom, Amnon, Belshazzar, Herod, the rich Fool, were all
suddenly surprised in the ruff of their jolity. Jerusalem had three years of
extraordinary great plenty, Joseph.
before her last utter destruction. Philosophers tell us, that before a Snow
the weather will be warmish; when the wind lies, the great rain falls, and the
air is most quiet, when suddenly there will be an Earthquake.

Verse. 13. This wisdom also have I seen] i. e. This fruit and effect of
wisdom have I observed, that through the iniquity of the times, it is slighted
and left unrewarded, if joined with a mean condition.

And it seemed great unto me] Though not unto the Many, who value not wisdom
if meanly habited) according to its worth, consider not, that Saepe sub attrita
latitat sapientia vest, that within that leathern purse may be a pearl of
great price, and in those earthen pots abundance of golden treasure. I know thy
poverty, but thou art rich, Revel. 2. The Cock on the dung-hil understands not
this: That which seems great to a Solomon, Multis pro vili sub pedibusque
jacet. Stultorum enim plena sunt omnia.

Verse. 14. There was a little City] Such as was Lampsacum besieged by
Alexander, and saved by Anaximenes; Rhodes besieged by the Great Turk, Rochel
by the French King, Geneva by the Duke of Savoy. This last a little City, a
small people environed with enemies, and barred out from all aid of neighbor
Cities and Churches, Brightman.
yet is strangely upheld. Well may they write as they do on the one side of
their coin, Scultet.
Deus noster pugnat pro nobis, Our God fights for us.

Verse. 15. Now there was found in it a poor wise man] Such as was Anaximener at
Lampsacum, and Archimides at Syracuse, Vat. Max. (...). Plut. lib. 14.
of whose wisdom Plutarch testifies, that it was above the ordinary
possibility of a man, it was divine: And of whose poverty Silius assures us,
that he was Nadus opum, sed cui coelum terraeque paterent.

By his warlike devises and engines he so defended his City against Marcelius
the Roman General, that the soldiers called him Briareus and Centimanus, a
Giant invincible, there was no taking of the Town, as Livy relates it. The City
of Abel was delivered by a wise woman that was in it, 2 Samuel 20. The City of
Coccinum in the Isle of Lemnos, See Judges 9.35 Turk. hist. 413.
by Marulla a Maiden of that City. Hippo could not be taken whiles Augustine
was in it; not Heidelberg, whiles Pareus lived. Elisha preserved Samaria from
the Syrians; and the Prophet Isaiah Jerusalem from the Assyrians. They shall
not shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with shields, nor cast a bank
against it, says the Lord, Isa. 37.33. Jeremy had preserved it longer, but
that his counsel was slighted. Indeed he was a Physician to a dying State,
Tunc etenim docta plus valet art malum.

Yet no man remembered that same poor man] Had he been some Demetrius
Phalareus, or such like Magnifico, he should have had an hundred statues set
up in honor of his good service. He should have heard Savior, Savior, as
Flaminius the Roman General did, or Father, Father, as Huniades after he had
defeated Mesites the Turk. But being poor, he is soon set aside, and neither
succored nor honored. This is Merces mundi, the worlds wages. The Dutch have
a Proverb, that a man should bow to the tree that has sheltered him in a
storm. But many well-deserving persons, Sed restituta serenitate abeuntes
vellicarent.
have cause to complain as Elias did when he sat under the Juniper; or as
Themistocles did, when he compared himself to a Plane-tree, whereunto his
Countrymen in a tempest would run for refuge; but when once took up, they
would not only leave him, but pull the leaves from him. Are you weary, said
he once to them, of receiving so many good turns from one man?

Verse. 16. Then said I, wisdom is better, etc.] This he had said before,
chap. 7.19. Prove. 21.22. (See the Notes there) but now upon this new occasion,
Nunquam satis dicitur, quod nunquam satis discitur. Sen.


Nevertheless the poor man's wisdom is despised] Hierome reads it thus, Et
sapientia pauporis quae despecta est, and verba ejus quae non sunt audita; that
is. And the wisdom of the poor man which is despised, and his words which are
not heard. According to which reading, the sense is, wisdom is better than
strength, yea even the despised wisdom of the poor man, etc. The Septuagint
and Vulgar Latin read it. Quomodo ergo sapientia pauperis contempta est and
verba ejus non audita! How therefore is the wisdom of the wise man despised,
and his words not heard! As making a wonder and a strange thing of it. Too
often it befalls Gods poor Ministers, either to be rejected with scorn, or if
heard, yet not regarded, much less rewarded, unless it be as Micaiah was by
Ahab, and Jeremiah by his Countrymen of Anathoth, Jesus Christ by the proud
Pharisees, John 7.14, 15, 27. St. Paul by the ungrateful Corinthians; 2 Cor. 4.7
His bodily presence, said they, is weak, his Sermons without Philosophy and
Rhetoric.

Verse. 17. The words of wise men are heard in quiet] The submiss words of a
poor man speaking with good understanding, are rather heard than the big and
boisterous words of proud fools. Fuit Nestorius homo indoctus, superbus, audax
and magnae loquentia, says Zanchy. Zanch Miscel.
Nestorius the Heretic was an ignorant, proud, bold, big-spoken man, and
prevailed very much thereby with some silly-simples. How much better
Chrysostom, of whom it is said, that he was graviter suavis, and suaviter
gravis; gravely sweet, and sweetly grave, and he was much admired for it?
Gentle showers and dews that distill leasurely comfort the earth; when dashing
storms drown the seed. The words of wise men are by one well compared to the
River Indus, Indus fluvius, and serere Orientem dicitur and rigare. Minut.
Felix in Octav.
which is said both to sow the East, and to water it; for so it may be said of
the words of the wise, that they are both semina and flumina, both seeds and
rivers: seeds, because they sow goodness in their hearers; rivers, because they
water that which is sown to make it to grow in them. But the cry of fools is
like a violent torrent, which washes away that which it sows, and does not
suffer it to continue in the ground.

More than the cry of him that rules among fools] Tremellius reads it, cum
stolidis suis, with his fools; i, e. cum suo stulto senatu, with his foolish
Counselors, who do commonly comply with him, to obtrude with great authority
his unreasonable and tyrannical edicts and mandates.

Verse. 18. Wisdom is better than weapons of war] As David found it in his
encounter with Goliath, Gideon in his stratagem against the Midianites, and our
renowned Drake in dissipating that invincible Armado, which being three years
in preparing with incredible cost, was by his wisdom within a month
overthrown, and confounded with the loss of one English Ship only, and not an
hundred persons. Romani sedendo vincunt. This was the glory of the Romans, that
they conquered the world by wisdom, not by weapons.

Vnus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem. Plutarch.
Not Achilles, but Ulysses is termed (...), the sacker of Cities; Cyneas took
more Towns by his policy, than Pyrrhus by his prowess.

But one sinner destroys much good] He may be as an Achan in the Army, as a
Jonas in the Ship, a trouble-town, a common mischief, a traitor to the State;
especially if he be an eminent man; as Jeroboam (that ringleader of
rebellion) and Manasseh, who made Judah also to sin, 2 King. 21.11. and so
brought such evil upon them, that whosoever heard of it, both his ears tingled,
verse. 12. Great men's sins do more hurt, 1 By Imitation, for Regis ad exemplum,
etc. 2 By Imputation, for plectuntur Achivi, the poor people pay for such men's
faults, as they did for David's, 2 Samuel 24. I shall close up this Chapter with
that memorable passage of a Reverend Writer, yet alive; If Englands fears were
greater, thy Reformation may save it, Jer. 5.1. If our hopes were greater, thy
sin and security might undo it, Eccles. 9.18. One sinner destroies much good. I
only add, how much more a rabble of rebels, conspiring to provoke God? Sure I
am, we have great cause to wish for our Country, as Ferus did for the Romish
Synagogue; I would we had some Moses, said he, to take away the evils: Non
enim unum tantum vitulum, sed multos habemus, for we have not only one golden
Calf, but many amongst us.

CHAP. X. Verse. 1. Dead Flies cause the ointment, etc.]
THe Preacher had said, that One sinner destroies much good, chap. 8.18. here
he affirms the same of one sin; be it but a small sin, a peccadillo, no
bigger than a few dead flies fallen into a pot of sweet odours; it is of that
stinking nature, that it stains a good man's esteem, and fly-blows his
reputation. A great many flies may fall into a tarr-box, and no hurt done. A
small spot is soon seen in a Swan; not so in a Swine. Fine Lawn is sooner and
deeper stained, than course Canvase. A City upon an hill cannot be hid, the
least eclipse or aberration in the heavenly bodies is quickly noted and
noticed. If Jacob a plain man deal deceitfully, (...). Sept.
the banks of blasphemy will be broken down in a profane Esau thereby. If his
unruly sons falsify with the Shechemites, he shall have cause to complain,
Ye have made me to stink among the inhabitants of the Land, Genesis 34.30. If
Moses marry an Ethiopian woman, it shall be laid in his dish, by his dearest
friends, Numb. 12.1. If Sampson go down to Timnah, the Philistims will soon
have it by the end, told it will be in Gath, published in the streets of
Askelon. If David do otherwise than well at home, 2 Samuel 12.
the name of God will soon stink abroad. If Josiah go up unadvisedly against
Pharaoh Neeho, and fall by his own folly; this shall be his derision in the
Land of Egypt, Hos. 7.16. The enemies of God will soon compose Comedies out of
the Churches tragedies, and make themselves merry in her misery. She is said
to be fair as the Moon: which, though it be a beautiful creature, Cant. 6.10
and full of light, yet is she not without her black spots and blemishes (
Galileus used perspective-glasses to descry mountains in her.) These the Church
Malignant is ever eying and aggravating, passing by or depraving the better
practices of Gods people. As Vultures, they hunt after carcasses, as Swine,
Vultures ad male olentia feruntur. Basil.
they musk in the muck-hill: As Beetles, they would live and dye in horse-dung.
It must be our care as much as may be, to maintain our reputation, to cut off
all occasion of obloquie, to be blameless and harmless, Phil. 2.15. fair to
the eye, and sweet to the taste, as that tree in Paradise; without blemish from
head to foot, as Absalom was; Tertul. ad Scapul.
Non aliunde noscibiles quam de emendatione vitiorum pristinorum (as Tertullian
says of the Christians of his time) known from all others by their innocence
and patience. That was a good choice (for this purpose) that he himself made,
Tert. de fuga pers.
Malo miserandum quam erubescendum, I had rather be pitied, than justly
reproached. Strive we should to be as Paul was, a good savor, 2 Cor. 2. and
not to go out, as they say the Devil does, in a stench.

Verse. 2. A wise man's heart is at his right hand] He does his business
discreetly and dexterously, he is handy and happy at it. Psalm. 110.
And as he orders his affairs with discretion, so he does his affections
too, reigning them in with his right hand, and not suffering them to run riot,
as the fool does often to his utter ruin. As the wise man's eyes are in his head,
chap. 2.14. so his heart is at his right hand; he has it at command, to think
of what he will, when he will; it is as an hawk brought to the Faulkners
lure; or as an horse that is taught his postures. Hence he keeps his credit
untainted, he retains the reputation of a wise man, he rightly owns that
honor that the Italians arrogate to themselves, in that proverbial speech of
theirs; Italus sapit ante factum, Hispanus in facto, Germanus post factum, i.
e. The Italian is well advised before the deed done, the Spaniard in, the
German after it.

But a fools heart at his left] At his left side (so it may be rendered) where
nature placed it; he never yet sorrowed (as those Corinthians did, 2 Epist.
7.9.) to a transmentation, to a through change both of mind and manners; (...).
his heart is yet still in the old place, he follows the course of depraved
nature, he is a perfect stranger to the life of God.

Or his heart is at his left hand] i. e. He rashly rusheth upon business
without due deliberation; and does it aukwardly, as with the left hand, and
like a bungler, invita Minerva, and collachrymantibus Musis, he brings it to no
good upshot. See an instance of this in Hanun and his Counselors, 2 Samuel 10.
Ahab and his claw-backs, 1 King. 22. Antichrist and his adherers. Bellarmine
bewails it in these words: Ab eo tempore, quo per vos Papa Antichristus esse
coepit, non modo non crevit ejus imperium, sed semper magis ac magis decrevit.
Lib. 3. de Pap. Romans c. 2, 3. Ever since you Protestants have made the Pope to
be Antichrist, his authority has not only not increased, but still more and
more decreased. Or thus, his heart is at his left hand, that is, Ut quae
aversantur homines fere sinistra depelluntur.
he puts away reason and wisdom from himself; as, for the most part, those
things which men dislike, are put away with the left hand. Thus Junius expounds
it.

Verse. 3. Yea also when he that is a fool walks, etc,] In his very gate,
gestures, looks, laughings, etc. he bewraies his witlesness, as Jehu did his
furiousness by the manner of his marches, 2 King. 9.2. He winketh with his
eyes, speaks with his feet, teaches with his fingers, frowardness is in his
heart, etc. Prove. 6.13, 14. (See the Note there) such a froward fool was Julian
the Apostate, as Nazianzen describes him, with his colli crebrae conversiones,
oculi vagi, pedes instabiles, etc. frequent turning of his neck, tossing up his
head, wild eyes, wandering feet, etc. And such were those haughty daughters of
Sion, that walked with stretcht-forth necks, and wanton eyes, mincing and
making a tinkling as they went, Isa. 3.16. their haughtiness and hauntiness
spoke them little better than harlots.

And he says to every one that he is a fool] Upon the matter he says it,
though he say nothing: Prove. 17.28. it is said, that a fool, whiles he holds
his tongue, is held a wise man; that is, if neither by his tongue nor any other
part of his body he discover himself: but that can hardly be, since folly
flows from man (as excrements do from sick folk) and they feel it not, will
hardly be persuaded of it. Symmachus, Hierome, and others refer the last He in
this sentence, Dicit de omnibus, Stultus est.
not to the fool himself, but to every one else whom he looks upon as so many
fools, like himself; ex suo ingenio universos judicans, judging of others
according to his own disposition. For as the Philosopher says, Qualis quisque
est tales existimat alios: Arist. Polit. lib. 3. cap. 6.
Such as any one is, the same he thinks others to be: and as men muse, so
they use, whether it be for the better or the worse. Jacob could not imagine
that his sons were so base, as to make away their brother Joseph, Genesis 37.32.
but said, Surely some evil Beast has devoured him. Joshuah never suspected
the false Gibeonites, nor the rest of the Disciples, Judas, when our Savior
said, What thou do, do quickly; and again, when he said, One of you shall
betray me. On the other side, fools conceit the whole world to be made up of
folly; as the Lacedaemonians once, neminem bonum fieri publicis literis columna
incisis sanxerunt, Plut. in quaest. Graec. Dio.
scored it upon their public posts, that there was none good, no not one: as
Clodius and Caligula (being themselves notorious whoremongers) would not be
persuaded, that there was any chaste person upon earth: as the Devil charged
God with Envy, which is his own proper disease, Genesis 3.5. The old Proverb
says, The Mother seeks the Daughter in the Oven, as having been there sometime
her self. I dare say (quoth Bonner) that Cranmer would recant, Acts and Mon.
if he might have his living; so judging of another by himself.

Verse. 4. If the spirit of thy Ruler rise up, etc. leave not thy place] Thine
office, Ne (...) andiat. Horat.
duty, and obedience: A metaphor from military matters. A soldier must not
start from his station, but keep to the place assigned him by his Captain: So
here, Perdidit arma, locum virtutis deseruit, etc.

Others render it, do not persist in thy place, do not stand to affront anger;
but go aside a little out of sight, as Jonathan, when his Father had thrown a
javeling at him, went forth a shooting. See the Note on Chap. 8.3. and on Prove.
15.1.

For yielding pacifieth great offences] Thus by yielding, David pacified Saul,
Abigail, David. See Prove. 25.15. with the Note. Salve the wound, and save thy
self. The weak Reed, by bending in a rough wind, receives no hurt, when the
sturdy Oak is turned up by the roots.

Verse. 5. As an error which proceeds from the Ruler] Or an ignorance (as
Hierom renders it) (...) (so the Septuagint) as a thing unwillingly done. An
error, an infirmity it must be called, because committed by great ones; but
in true account it is a gross evil, the very pest of virtue, and cause of
confusion, viz. the advancement of most unworthy and incapable persons, and
that for the Princes pleasure sake, because he will seem absolute. An Earl of
Kildare was complained of to our Henry the Eighth: Heyl. Geog. page 506
and when his adversary concluded his invective with, Finally, all Ireland
cannot rule this Earl, the King replied, Then shall this Earl rule all Ireland;
and so, for his jest sake, made him Deputy.

Verse. 6. Folly is set in great dignity] Seeds prima and vita ima, these suit
not, Salvian.
Dignitas in indigno est ornamentum in luto. Royalty it self, without
righteousness, is but eminent dishonor. When a fool is set in dignity, it is
(says one) as when an handful of hay is set up to give light; which with smoke
and smell offends all that are near. When as the worthy sit in low place,
Ca^tw.
it is as when a goodly candle (that on a table would give a comfortable and
comely light) is put under a bushel.

And the rich in low place] i. e. The wise (as appears by the opposition) who,
in true account, are the only rich, James 2.5. rich in faith, 1 Timothy 6.18.
rich in good works, Luke 12.21. rich to Godward, who has highly honored and
advanced them, though vilipended and under-rated by men: digni etiam qui
ditentur, worthy they are also to be set in highest places, as being drained
from the dreggs, and sifted from the branns of the common sort of people.
Dignity should wait upon desert, as it did here in England, Sen. Epist. 91.
in King Edward the Sixths days, that aureum saeculum, in quo honores
melioribus dabantur, as Seneca has it, that golden age, in which honors were
bestowed on those that best deserved them. But in case it prove otherwise, as
it often does, (the golden Bishopric of Carthage fell to the lot of leaden
Aurelius, and little Hippo to great Saint Austin. Damasus the scholar was
advanced to the Sea of Rome, when Hierome his Master ended his days in his
cell at Bethlehem) yet virtue is its own competent encouragement, and will
rather choose to lie in the dust, than to rise by wickedness: Cato said, he had
rather men should question why he had no statue or monument erected in honor
of him, than why he had. The wise Historian observed, Tacit. Annal.
that the statues of Brutus and Cassius, eo praefulgebant quod non visebantur,
were the more glorious and illustrious, because they were not brought out with
other Images in a solemn procession at the funeral of Germanicus. Abstrusum in
despecto corpore margaritam conspicatus.
God pleases himself (says Basil) in beholding a hidden pearl, in a
dis-respected body. A rich stone is of no less worth, when locked up in a
wicker casket, than when it is set in a royal diadem.

Verse. 7. I have seen servants upon horses] i. e. Servile souls, Muscovites are
noted to be slaves by nature, destitute of all gifts to rule or govern. Quint.
lib. 9. c. 2 Subita a diabolo dignitate perflati vias publicas manus terunt.
Hieronym.
base-spirited abjects, slaves to their lusts, homines ad servitutum paratos,
as Tyberius said of his Romans, natural slaves born to be so (as the
Cappadocians) brute beasts made and taken to be destroyed, 2 Pet. 2.12. Hi
perfricant frontem and digniores se dicunt quam Catonem, qui praetores fierent,
as Vatinius did. These set a good face upon it, many times; and leap into the
saddle of authority, ride on strong and shining palfries, ride without reigns
in the prosecution of their ambitious ends, till, unhorst with Haman, they that
were erst a terror, become a scorn. See the Note on Prove. 30.22.

And Princes walking as servants upon the Earth] In Persia at this day, the
difference between the Gentleman and the slave is, that the slave never rides,
the Gentleman never goes on foot; they buy, sell, confer, fight, do all on
horseback. When Doeg Saul's heards-man the Edomite, and Tobiah the servant the
Ammonite were got on cock-horse, there was no hoe with them, but they would
needs ride to the Devil: When Justinian the second was Emperor, Stephen the
Persian, being made Lord High Chamberlain, grew to that height of insolency,
that he presumed to chastise with rods the Emperors own Mother, as if she
had been some base slave. In the year of Grace, 1522. Func. Chron.
the Boars of Germany rose up against their Rulers, and would lay all levil,
that servants might ride check by joul (as they say) with Princes. Sed
miserabilis and lamentabilis tandem hujus stultitiae exitus fuit, says
Lavater. Lavat. in hanc loc.
But these fools paid dear for their proud attempt; and after a miserable
slaughter of many thousands of them, were sent home by the weeping cross, ad
beatos rastros, benedictum aratrum, sanctamque stivam, (as Bucholcerus phraseth
it) to handle again (instead of guns and swords) their blessed rakes,
plow-staves, and horse-whips. Their General Muncer was tortured to death;
Bucholc. Ind. Chron.
being so mated and amazed, that he was not able to repeat his Creed, etc.

Verse. 8. He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it] As heedless hunts-men do.
He that being of base beginning, and unmeet for Government, seeks to set up
himself upon better men's ruins, and where he finds not a way, to make it,
shall fall from his high hopes into remediless misery, as he has made a
match with mischief, so he shall have his belly-full of it. As he has
conceived with guile, so (though he grow never so big) he shall bring forth
nothing but vanity, and worse, Job 15.35.

Prove. 23.32
And whosoever breaks an hedge] The hedge of Gods Commandments (as our first
Parents did, to come to the forbidden fruit) a Serpent bites such, and the
poison cannot be gotten out. Others sense it thus (and I rather incline) He
that seeks to overthrow the Fundamental Laws, and established Government of a
Commonwealth, and to break down the fences and mounds of Sovereignty and
subjection, shall no less (but much more) imperil himself, than he that pulls
up an old hedge, wherein Serpents, Snakes, and Adders, do usually lurk and lie
in wait to do mischief. Speed.
Wat Tiler the rebel dared to say, that all the Laws of England should come
out of his mouth. Strafford uttered somewhat to the like sense in Ireland. Our
good Laws are our hedges, so our Oaths ((...) quasi (...)) Let us look to
both, or we are lost people. Det Deus ut admonitio haec adeo sit nobis omnibus
commoda quam sit accommoda.

Verse. 9. Who so removes stones shall be hurt therewith] So he that attempteth
to loose and remove the joints and pieces of a settled Government, there is
danger, that like Sampson, he will be crushed in the ruin: So one gives the sense
of it. Pemble.
He that goes about to remove a Ruler out of his place, and to divide a
settled Government that is at unity in it self, undertaketh a dangerous piece of
business. Granger.
As he undertaketh a desperate work, such shall his reward be. It is evil
meddling with edged tools, etc. says another Interpreter. Some by stones here
understand Landmarks, which to remove was counted Sacrilege among the Romans,
Dim. Halic.
and worthy of death. What are they guilty and worthy of then, Jerem. 6.
that abrogate the good old Laws of a Land, or the good old ways of God, that
have given rest to so many souls? See the Note on Prove. 26.27.

And he that cleaves wood, shall be in danger thereby] viz. of breaking his
tools, if not his shins: specially if he be a bungler at it. This is to the
same sense with the three former similitudes. Cyprian makes use of this text
against Schismatiques, Test. ad Quirinum. lib.
reading it thus; Scindens ligna periclitabitur in eo si exciderit ferrum, He
that cleaves wood shall be endangered thereby, if that the iron fall off.
Hierom by wood here understands Heretics; as being unfruitful and unfit for
Gods building; and makes this Note upon it, Quamvis sit prudens and doctus vir,
etc. Although he be a wise and a learned man, who with the sword of his
discourse cutteth this knotty wood, Hieron. in loc.
he will be endangered by it, unless he be very careful.

Lib. 34. cap. 14
Verse. 10. If the Iron be blunt] Pliny calls iron the best and worst instrument
of man's life, and shows the many uses of it: as in plowing, planting, pruning,
plaining, etc. but abominates the use of it in war and murdering weapons.
Porsena enjoined the Romans, Ne ferro nisi in agricultura uterentur, says he,
Plin.
that they should not use Iron but only about their Husbandry. The Philistims
took the like order with the disarmed Israelites, 1 Samuel 13.19. among whom
swords and spears were geasen, shares and coulters they allowed them, but so as
that they must go down to the Philistims for sharpening. Gregory compares the
Devil to these Philistims, blinding and blunting men's wits and understandings,
lest the light of saving truth should shine unto them. These Edge-tools
therefore must be whetted by the use of holy Ordinances, and much strength put
to, 2 Cor. 4.4
great pains taken, virtutibus corroborabitur, (so the old Translation has
it.) But when all is done, he must needsly be obtuse acutus, which sees not
that wisdom is profitable to direct: that is, that (whether the iron be blunt
or sharp, whetted or not whetted, more strength added, or not added) it is
wisdom that rectifies all, or the benefit of rectifying is wisdom. There is
none to that, as David said of Galiah's sword.

Verse. 11. Surely the Serpent will bite without enchantment] It is for want of
wisdom that the babbler, or tongue-master (as the Original has it) is nothing
better, than the most poisonous serpent: nay, in some respects, worse. For one
Serpent stings not another, as back-biters do their best friends. And whereas
Serpents may be charmed, or their poison kept from the vitals, contra
Sycophantae morsum non est remedium, as the Proverb has it, there is no help
to be had for the biting of a Sycophant: His tongue is full of deadly poison,
says St. James. Again, Jam. 3.
Serpents usually hiss and give warning (though the Septuagint here read non
in sibilo, the vulgar in silentio, in silence and without hissing, for, without
enchantment) so does not the slanderer, and detractor: he is a silent Serpent,
and like the Dogs of Congo which bite, but bark not. Purth. Pilg.
And therefore, as all men hate a Serpent, and fly from the sight of it: so
will wise men shun the society of a slanderer. And as any one abhorres to be
like to that old Serpent the Devil, so let him eschew this evil.

Verse. 12. The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious] Heb. Are grace, Ne sons
quae grace. Col. 4.
they are nothing but grace (so the French Translatour has it) such as render
him gracious with God and men, (so Lyra glosseth it) as being usually seasoned
with Salt, and ministering grace to the hearers.

But the lips of a fool swallow up himself] Suddenly, utterly, unavoydably, as
the Whale did Jonas, as the devouring sword does those that fall under it, as
the grave does all the living. How many of all sorts in all ages have perished
by their unruly tongues, blabbing or belching our words, Quae reditura per
jugulum, (as Pliny phraseth it) that were driven down their throats again by
the wronged and aggrieved parties? Cave ne feriat lingua tua collum tuum. Scal.
Ar. Prove.
Take heed (says the Arabic Proverb) lest thy tongue cut thy throat: it is
compared to a sharp razour doing deceit, Psalm. 52.3. which instead of cutting
the hair, cuts the throat.

Verse. 13. The beginning of his words are folly] He is an inconsiderate Idiot,
utters incoherences, pours forth a flood of follies, his whole discourse is
frivolous, futilous. To begin foolishly may befall a wise man; but when he
sees it, or has it showed unto him, he will not persist: Once have I spoken,
says holy Job, but I will not answer again: yea twice, but I will proceed no
further, Chap. 40.4, 5. Much otherwise the fool, and because he will be dicti
sui dominus, (as verse. 11.) having lasht out at first, he lancheth further out
into the deep, as it were, of idle and evil prattle. And if you offer to
interrupt or admonish him, the end of his talk is mischievous madness, he
blusters and lets fly on all hands, laying about him like a madman. And so we
have here, (as one says) the Serpent, the Babbler (spoken of in the eleventh
verse) wreathed into a circle: his two ends, head and tail, meeting together.
D. Jerm.
And as at the one end, he is a Serpent, having his sting in his head; so at
the other end he is a Scorpion, having his sting in his tavl.

Verse. 14. A fool also is full of words] A very wordy man he is, Boni oratoris
est sermonem habere rebus parem. Plut.
and a great deal of small talk he has: voces susque deque effutit inanes, as
Thuanus has it, he lays on more words than the matter will well bear. And
this custom of his is graphically expressed by an imitation of his vain
tautologies. A man cannot tell (says he) what shall be after him, and what
shall be after him, who can tell? He has got this sentence, (that may well
become a wise man, chap. 6.12. and 8.7.) by the end, and he wears it
threadbare, he has never done with it, misapplying and abusing it to the
defense of his wilful and witless enterprises. Thus the Ass in the Fable
would needs imitate the Dog, leaping and fawning in like manner, on his
Master: but with ill success. The lip of excellency becomes not a fool, Prove.
17.17. (See the Note there: See also Prove. 10.19. Prove. 17.27. Eccles. 5.3, 7.
with the Notes) But empty casks, we know, sound loudest, and baser metals ring
shrillest: things of little worth are ever most plentiful. History and
experience tells us, that some kind of Mouse breeds one hundred and twenty
young ones in one nest; whereas the Lion and Elephant bears but one at once,
(...); so the least wit yields the most words, and as any one is more wise, he
is more sparing of his speeches. Hesiod says, that words, as a precious
treasure, should be thriftily husbanded, and warily wasted. Christians know,
that for every waste word account must be given at the great day, Mat. 12.36.
See the Note there.

Verse. 15. The labor of the foolish wearieth every one of them] Whilst he
labors in vain, and makes much ado to little purpose. He medleth in many
things, and so creates himself many crosses: he will needs be full of
business, and so must needs be full of trouble, since he wants wit to manage
the one, Isa. 57.10. and 47.13.
and improve the other. Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way. And
again, Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels, says God to such,
as had wearied him also with their iniquities, and made him to serve with their
sins, Isa. 43.24. Yea even then, when they think they have done him very good
service. Thus Paul, before his conversion, persecuted the Saints so eagerly,
Acts 26.
and was so mad upon it (as himself speaks) that, like a tired Wolf, wearied
in worrying the flock, he lay panting as it were for breath: and when he
could do no more, Acts 9.1 Act. and Mon. 1684. 1843
yet breathed out threatenings. Thus Bonner would work himself windlesse almost,
in buffeting the Martyrs, and whipping them with rods, as he did Mr. Bartlet
Green, Mr. Rough, and many others. So the Philosophers wearied themselves and
their followers in their wild disquisitions after, and discourses of the chief
Happiness: which, because it lay not in their walk, therefore ab itinere regio
deviantes ad illam metropolim non potuerunt pervenire, says Cassian, they
wandering from the King of Heavens Highway, they could never be able to get to
that Metropolitan City, called Jehovah-shammah, or the Lord is there, Ezekiel.
48.34. They wandered in the Wilderness, in a solitary way, they found no City
to dwell in, Psalm. 107.4. Fools many times beat their wings much, as if they
would fly far and high, but with the Bustard, they cannot rise above the
earth: or if they do, they are soon pulled down again by the Devil, to feed
upon the worst of excrements, Picrius.
as the Lapwing does, though it has a coronet on the head: and is therefore
fitly made an hieroglyphick of infelicity.

Verse. 16 Woe to thee O Land, when thy King is a Childe] sc. In understanding,
though not in years, such as was Shechem (Genesis 34.19. Neque distulit puer) and
Rehoboam, 1 King. 14.21. with 2 Chronicles. 13.7. Solomon was a Childe-King, so was
Josiah, Vzziah, our Edward the Sixth: and yet it was well with the Land in
their days.

Hic regum decus and juvenum flos, spesque bonorum,
Deliciae saecli, and gloria gentis erat.
Acts and Mon.
As Cardan sings of King Edward in his Epitaph. As he was the highest, so I
verily believe he was the holiest in the whole Kingdom, says Mr. Ridley
Martyr. And whilst things were carried on by himself, in his health time, all
went very well here: and si per leges fas illi fuisset omnia proprio nutu and
voluntate regere, if by the Laws of the Land he might have done all himself,
without Officers, all should have been far better done, says Mr. Cartwright
upon this text. By Child is here therefore meant a weak or wicked King, that
lets loose the golden reigns of Government, is carried by his passions, lies
heavy upon his Subjects: See Esaias 3.6. compared with verse. 13. Such Princes
are threatened as a plague to a people, Levit. 26.17. and they prove no less:
this childhood of theirs is the maturity of their Subjects misery, the Land it
self is woe, and woe it self the Land, as one Expositor observed from the word
(...) here used; which signifies both Woe and Land. See Job 34.30.

And the Princes eat in the morning] As children use to call for meat, as soon
as they have rubbed sleep out of their eyes. If the King be a Child, the
State-Officers will be loose and luxurious: yea, like morning Wolves, will
devour the prey, Jam. 5.4
and nourish themselves as in a day of slaughter. The morning is a time to seek
God, and search for wisdom, Prove. 8.17. to sit in Counsel, and dispatch
business, as was Moses his manner, Exodus 18. and the ancient Romans. Scipio
Africanus was wont before day to go into the Capitol, in cellam sovis, into
Jupiters Chapel, and there to stay a great while, quasiconsultans de republica
cum Jove, says Gellius, Lib. 7. cap. 1
as if he were consulting with Jupiter, concerning the Weal public: whence
his deeds were pleraque admiranda, admirable for the most past, says that
Heathen Author.

Verse. 17. Blessed art thou O Land, etc.] Ita nati estis ut bona malaque vestra
ad Remp. pertineant. You Governors are of such condition, as that your good or
evil deeds are of public concernment, says he in Tacitus. Annal. lib. 4.
It is either weal or woe with the Land, as it is well or ill governed.

When thy King is the Son of Nobles] Well-born, and yet better bred: Princeps
bonis moribus and liberaliter institutus. Hieron. in loc. Speed.
for else they will be noti magis quam nobiles, notable, or notorious, but not
Noble. Our Henry the First (surnamed Beauclark) was often heard to say, that an
unlearned King was no better than a crowned Ass. Sure it is, that royalty
without righteousness is but eminent dishonor, gilded rottenness, golden
damnation. Godly men are the excellent Ones of the Earth, Psalm. 16. the
Beraeans were more Noble, or better Gentlemen, than those of Thessalonica,
(...). Act. 17.11
non per civilem dignitatem, sed per spiritualem dignationem, not by civil, but
by spiritual dignity; without which, riches, revenue, retinue, high birth, etc.
are but shadows and shapes of Nobleness. Since thou have been precious in my
sight, thou have been honorable, says God, ( Isa. 43.4.) who is the top of
good men's kin, as Religion is the root. But for want of this it was that
Jehoiakim, though royally descended, is likened to an Ass, Jer. 22.19. and
Antiochus, though a mighty Monarch, is called a vile person, Dan. 11.

And thy Princes eat in due season, for strength, etc.] Being modest and
moderate, not diffluent and debauched. Great men should not cater for the
flesh, Romans 13. ult. but so serve the body, that the body politic may be
served by it, and the Lord by both. Did ever any one see King Deiotarus dancing
or drunken? says Cicero: and this he holds to be a singular commendation.
Orat. pro Rege Deiotaro.
See Prove. 31.3, 4, etc. with Notes: See my common place of Abstinence.

Verse. 18. By much slothfulness the building decayeth] So does the
Commonwealth, not sheltered with good Government: For as the householder is in
his house, so is the Magistrate in the City, and the King in his Dominions. In
his palace he may see a pattern of his Kingdom, a draught of his City:
Especially if it be, as George Prince of Anhalts was, Ecclesia, Academia,
Curia, a Church, an University, and a Court. Melch. Ad. in vit.
For the better dispatch of civil businesses, there was daily praying, reading,
writing, yea and preaching too, as Melanchthon and Scultetus report. Here was
no place for sloth and sluggishnesse within this most pious Princes
Territories. Cant. 1.17 1 Pet. 2.
His house was built of Cedar-beams, of living-stones: his polity a Theocratie,
as Josephus says of the Jewish Government: and of his people it might be
said, as Polydor Virgil says of the English, Regnum Angliae Regnum Dei: O the
blessednesses of such a Country!

And through idleness of the hands, the house droppeth, etc.] Stillicidia
praecedunt ruinam, sic poenas gravissimas, leviores, says Hierome. If course
be not timely taken, the house will run to ruin for want of people or
reparation: So will that person that takes not warning by lighter punishments.
Surely as one cloud follows another, till the Sun disperseth them: So do
judgments; greater succeed lesser, till men meeting God by repentance disarm
his wrath.

Verse. 19. A feast is made for laughter; Daniel.
and wine makes merry] Slothful Governors, Regni dilapidatores, (so our Henry
the Third was called for his pride and prodigality) are all for feasting and
frollicking. See Prove. 31.4. with Dan. 5.3, 4. This cannot be maintained
without money: for the getting and gathering in whereof, the poor people are
pilled and polled, and rich men's gifts are received, to the perverting of
Justice, by those corrupt Rulers, qui vili precio nihil non humile and vile
parati sunt facere, as Gregory Thaumaturgus speaks in his Note upon this
verse.

But money answers all things] It gives a satisfactory answer to whatsoever
is desired or demanded. Seneca says, circa pecuniam multum vociferationis est,
(...). Lib. 1. excid. Hierosol. cap. 14 (...) of (...) strong and (...) to
prepare.
that about money there is much noise, great crying; but though never so much,
never so great, money answers all, it effects all. What great designs did
Philip bring to pass in Greece by his gold? the very Oracles were said (...) to
say as Philip would have them; Antipater non tenuis fuit pecuniae, and ideo
praevalidae potentiae, says Egesippus, he was a well-monyed man, and
therefore a very mighty man. The Hebrew, or rather Chaldee word used for money,
1 Chronicles. 29.7. Ezra 8.27. signifies to do some great work, because money is the
Monarch of the world, and therein bears most mastery; Among suitors (in love
and in Law especially) money drives the bargain and business to an upshot.

Verse. 20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought] Or, In thy conscience:
but in this or any other kind, Auson.
Turpe quid acturus, te sine test time.

(...). Thucyd.
The present Government is ever grievous] And nothing more usual than to grudge
against it: but take heed of wishing hurt to Rulers (thought is not free) much
more of uttering it, though in hugger-mugger; Kings have long ears, heavy
hands, walls also and hedges have ears. Some may over-hear thee, as Mordecai
did the two Traitors, Esth. 2.22. or thou may unwittingly and unwillingly
betray thy self, as our Powder-plotters.

That which has wing, etc.] It was a quill, a piece of a wing, that discovered
that hellish plot. Wilful murder and treason will out by one means or other.
Turk. Hist. fol. 460 Fr. Hist.
Those two Traitors sent by Mahomet to kill Scanderbeg, falling out betwixt
themselves, let fall something that brought all to light, and themselves to
punishment. The like befell that Gentleman of Normandy that confessed to a
Priest his intent to have killed King Francis.

CHAP. XI. Verse. 1. Cast thy bread]
Acts and Mon. fol. 765.
THine own well-gotten goods. Alms must not be given (said a Martyr) until it
have sweat in a man's hand. Let him labor working with his hands (says the
Apostle) that he may have to give to him that needs, Ephesians. 4.28. And the
bountiful man gives of his bread to the poor, Amos 2.8
says Solomon, Prove. 22.9. God hates to have ex rapina holocanstum, a
sacrifice of things got by rapine and robbery: With such Sacrifices God is not
well-pleased. Wherefore if thou have of thine own, give: If not, better for
thee to gratify none, than to grate upon any, says Augustine. When our Henry
the third (an oppressing Prince) had sent a load of Freeze to the Friar Minors
to cloathe them, Dan. hist. 168
they returned the same with this message, that he ought not to give Alms of
what he had rent from the poor, (...) Buxtorf.
neither would they accept of that abominable gift. The Hebrew word signifying
Alms, signifies properly Justice; to intimate, that the matter of our alms
should be goods justly gotten. Hence also the Jews call their Alms-box
Kuphashel tsedaka, the chest of Justice. Into this box or basket, if thou cast
but bread (so it be thy bread) brown bread, such as thou have, and then wait
for the Lord, when he will return from the wedding with a full hand, thou
shall be fed supernae mensae copiosis deliciis, as one says, with the
abundant dainties of the heavenly table.

(...).
Upon the waters] Heb. Upon the face of the waters, where it may seem clearly
cast away; as seed sown upon the Sea, or a thing thrown down Avon (as we say)
no profit or praise to be had by it. Or upon the waters, i. e. upon strangers
(if necessitous) whom we never saw, and are never like to see again. Or upon
the waters, i. e. upon such as being hunger-bit, or hardly bestead, do water
their plants, being fed with bread of tears, as Psalm. 80.5. To this sense
Munster renders the words thus, Mitte panem tuum super facies aquas, sc.
emittentes, cast thy bread upon faces watered with tears. Or upon the waters,
upon the surface of the waters, that it may be carried into the Ocean, where
the multitude of waters is gathered together: so shall thine alms carried into
Heaven be found in the Ocean of Eternity, where there is a confluence of all
comforts and contentments. Or lastly, upon the waters, i. e. in loca irrigua,
upon grounds well watered, moist and fertile soil, Blounts voy. p. 37 Herod.
lib. 1. c. 193. Plin. lib. 6. c. 26.
such as is that by the River Nilus, where they do but throw in the seed, and
they have four rich Harvests, in less than four months: or as that in the Land
of Shinar (where Babel was founded, Genesis 11.) that returns (if Herodotus and
Pliny may be believed) the seed, beyond credulity.

For thou shall find it after many daies] Thou shall reap in due time, if thou
faint not, slack not, withdraw not thy hand as verse. 6. Mitte panem, etc. and
in verbo Domini promitto tibi, etc. says one, Cast thy bread confidently
without fear, and freely without compulsion, cast it, though thou seem to cast
it away, and I dare promise thee in the name and word of the Lord, Greg. Thaum.
Nequaquam infrugifera apparebit beneficentia, that thy bounty shall be
abundantly recompensed into thy bosom. The liberal soul shall be made fat,
and he that waters shall be watered himself, Prove. 11.25. See the Note
there: See also my Commonplace of Alms. Non pereunt sed parturiunt pauperibus
impensa, That which is given to the poor is not lost, but laid up. Not getting,
but giving is the way to wealth, Prove. 19.17. Abigail for a small present
bestowed on David, became a Queen, whereas churlish Nabal was sent to his place.

Verse. 2. Give a portion to seven, and also to eight] A portion, i. e. a good
deal, a fair proportion to a good many; as B. Hooper did to his board of
beggars, whom he fed every day by course, serving them by four at a mess, Act.
and Mon. f. 13 c 8.
with whole and wholesome meats. Or give a portion, i. e. a part, such as thou
can well part with, not stretching beyond the staple, lest ye mar all,
whiles others are eased, and you burdened, but by an equality, etc. 2 Cor.
8.13, 14. Luke 6
Give to him that asks, says our Savior, scil. according to his necessity,
and thine ability; Give with discretion, Psalm. 112. have a special respect to
the family of faith, Gal. 6. those excellent ones of the earth, Psalm. 16.3
in whom was David's delight. The Jews from this Text grounded a custom of
giving alms to seven poor people every day, or to eight at utmost, if they saw
cause. But here is a finite number put for an infinite, as when Christ bade
Peter forgive his brother seventy times seven times, and as Micah 5.5. seven
Shepherds, and eight principal men, signify so many Shepherds, both Teachers
and Rulers, as shall sufficiently feed the flock of Christ, and defend it from
enemies.

For thou know not what evil shall be upon the earth] Therefore lay in
lustily; or rather, lay out liberally, and so lay up for a rainy day; thou
may be soon shred of thy goods, and as much need other men's mercy as they
now need thine. Sow therefore whilst thou have it, that thou may reap again
in due season. Water, that thou may be watered again, Prove. 11.25. lay up
for thy self a good foundation against the time to come, 1 Timothy 6.18. Lay out
thy talent; work whiles the tool is in thine hand. Make friends with thy
Mammon. Say not as one rich churl did, when requested to do somewhat toward his
Ministers maintenance; The more I give, the less I have: Another answered, that
he knew how to bestow his money better: A third old man said, I see the
fore-end of my life, but I see not my latter, I may come to want that which I
now give. Thou may do so, says Solomon here, and by thy tenacity thou art
very likely to do so; but will thou know O man, how thou may prevent this
misery, and not feel what thou fear? Give a portion to seven, etc. part
therefore freely with that which thou art not sure to keep, that thou may
gain that which thou art sure never to lose. He that gives to the poor shall
not lack, Prove. 28.27.

Verse. 3. If the clouds be full of rain] As the Sun draws up vapors into the
air, not to retain them there, but to return them to the earth, for its relief,
and the creatures comfort: so those that have attracted to themselves much
riches, should plentifully pour them out for the benefit of their poorer
brethren. Clouds, when full of great and strong Rain (as the word here
signifies) pour down amain; and the spouts run, and the eves shed, and the
presses overflow, and the aromatical trees sweat out their precious oils; so
should rich men be ready to distribute, willing to communicate. But it falls
out otherwise, for commonly the richer the harder, and those that should be as
clouds to water the earth, as a common blessing, are either waterlesse clouds
(as St. Jude has it) or at best, they are but as water-pots, that water a few
spots of ground only in a small garden. Domini inarsupium.
The earth is Gods purse, as one says; and rich men's houses are his
storehouses. This the righteous rich man knows, and therefore he disperseth
(as a steward for God) he gives to the poor, his righteousness (and his
riches too) endures for ever, Psalm. 112.9. Whereas the wicked rich man
retains his fullness to rot with him; he feeds upon earth like a Serpent,
and striveth like a Toad, to dye with much mould in his mouth; and is therefore
bidden by St. James, to weep and howl for the miseries that are coming upon
him, for his cursed hoard of evil gotten and worse kept goods. The rottenness
of his riches, the canker of his cash, the moth of his garments shall be a
witness against him, and eat up his flesh as fire, James 5.1, 2, 3. He shall
be sure to be arraigned as an arrant thief, as a cursed cousener; for that,
Mal. 1.14
having a better thing by him, he brings a worse, and being a rich man, he
makes himself poor, lest he should do good to the poor. As Pope Alexander the
fifth said of himself, that when he was a Bishop, he was rich, when a
Cardinal, he was poor, and when he was Pope, he was a beggar. I should
sooner have believed him, if he had said as his successor Pius Quintus did,
Corn. a Lap. in Numb. 11.11
Cum essem religiosus, sperabam been de salute animae meae; Cardinalis factus
exti^^ui; Pontifex creatus pene despero. When I was first in Orders (without
any further Ecclesiastical dignity) I had good hopes of my salvation; when a
Cardinal, I feared my self; but now that I am Pope, I am almost out of hope.

And if the tree fall toward the South] i. e. Which way soever it grows, it
fructifieth: so should rich men be rich in good works, 1 Timothy 6.18. and being
fat Olive Trees, Psalm. 52.^
they should be (as David) green Olive Trees, full of good fruits. Or thus,
trees must down, and men must die; and as trees fall Southward, or Northward,
so shall men be set either at the right hand of the Judge, or at the left,
according as they have carried themselves toward Christ's poor members, Matthew.
25. Up therefore and be doing whiles life lasts; and so lay hold upon
eternal life. Mors atra impendet agenti. Where the boughs of holy desires and
good deeds are most and greatest, on that side no doubt the tree will fall: but
being fallen, it can bear no fruit for ever.

Verse. 4. He that observes the wind shall not sow] In sowing of mercy, he
that sticks in such objections and doubts, as carnal men use to frame out of
their covetous and distrustful hearts, neglects his seeds-time, by looking at
winds and clouds, which is the guize of a lewd and lazy seeds-man. A word in
season (says Solomon) so a charitable deed in season, how good is it? He that
defers to do good in hope of better times, or fitter objects, or fewer
obstacles, or greater abilities, etc. it will be long enough ere he will do
any thing to purpose. When God sets us up an Altar, we must offer a sacrifice;
when he affords us an opportunity, we must lay hold on it, and not stand
scrupling and casting perils, lest we lose the sowing of much seed, and
reaping of much fruit; lest we come with our talent tied up in a napkin, and
hear, Thou idle and therefore evil servant.

Verse. 5. As thou know not what is the way of the Spirit] Or, Of the wind,
as some render it, grounding upon the former verse, q. d. why should any so
observe the wind, the nature whereof he so little understands, John 3.8. and
the inconstancy whereof is grown to, and known by a common proverb? But by
spirit I rather think is meant the soul, as by bones the body. Who can tell
when and how the body is formed, the soul infused? The body is the souls
sheath, Dan. 7.15. an abridgement of the visible world, as the soul is of the
invisible. The members of the body were made all by book, Psalm. 139.16. and
curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth, that is, in the womb: Homo
est (...). Eurip.
as curious workmen, when they have some choice piece in hand, they perfect it
in private, and then bring it forth to light, for men to gaze at. What an
admirable piece of work is man's head-peece, (Gods Masterpiece in this little
world) the chief seat of the soul, that cura divini ingenii, as one calls it?
There is nothing great on earth but man, nothing in man but his mind, said the
Philosopher. Fav^rin.
Many locks and keys argue the price of the Jewel that they keep; and many
papers wrapping the token within them, the worth of the token. The Tables of
the Testament, First, Laid up in the Ark; Secondly, The Ark bound about with
pure gold; Thirdly, Overshadowed with Cherubims wings; Fourthly, Enclosed with
the veil of the Tabernacle; Fifthly, With the compass of the Tabernacle;
Sixthly, With a Court about all; Seventhly, With a treble covering of Goats,
Rams, and Badgers-skins above all, must needs be precious Tables. So when the
Almighty made man's head (the seat of the reasonable soul) and over-laid it with
hair, skin and flesh, like the threefold covering of the Tabernacle, and then
encompassed it with a skull of bones like boards of Cedar, and afterward with
diverse skins like silken curtains; and lastly, Enclosed it with the yellow skin
that covers the brain (like the purple veil) which Solomon calls the golden
Ewre, Eccles. 12.6. he would (doubtless) have us to know it was made for some
great treasure to be put therein. How and when the reasonable soul is put into
this curious Cabinet, Philosophers dispute many things, but can affirm nothing
of a certainty: as neither how the bones do grow in the womb, how of the same
substance, the several parts (as bones, nerves, arteries, veins, gristles,
flesh and blood) are fashioned there, and receive daily increase. This David
looks at as a just wonder, Psalm. 139.14, 15. Mirificatus sum mirabilibus operis
tuis, Montanus.
says he, I am fearfully and wonderfully made: and Galen, a profane
Philosopher, could not but hereupon sing an hymn to man's most wise Creator,
whom yet he knew not.

Even so thou know not the work of God] i. e. The rest of his works of
creation and providence, which are very various, and to us no less unknown,
than uncertain. Do thou that which God commands, and let things fall out as
they will; Prove. 3.5 Isa. 58.7
there is an overruling hand in all for the good of those that love God. Trust
therefore in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to thine own
understanding. Hide not thine eyes from thine own flesh: He that does so shall
have many a curse. The Apostle uses a word for liberality, (...). 2 Cor. 8.2
which properly signifies simplicity: and this he does in opposition to that
crafty and witty wiliness of the covetous, to defend themselves from the danger
(as they take it) of liberality.

Verse. 6. In the morning sow thy seed, etc.] At all times be ready to every
good work, as the Be is abroad, so soon as ever the Sun breaks forth. Tit. 3.1
Sow mercy in the morning, sow it likewise in the evening, as those bountiful
Macedonians did, to the shame of those richer, but harder Corinthians, sending
once and again to Paul's necessities, 2 Cor. 8.3. with Phil. 4.16. Oh sow much
and often of this unfailable seed into Gods blessed bosom; the fruit whereof you
are sure to reap at your greatest need. Men may be thankful, or they may not,
Perraro grati reperiuntur, says Cicero: it is ten to one if any cured Leper
turn again to give thanks. But God is not unrighteous to forget your labor of
love in ministering to his Saints, Heb. 6.10. Happily, you may not sow and reap
the same day, as the widow of Sarepta did: happily the seed may lie under ground
some while, and not be quckned except it dye; but have patience, nothing so
sure as a crop of comfort to those that are duly merciful. Up therefore and
be doing, lose no time, slip no season. It but a morning and an evening, one
short day of life wherein we have to work, and to advance your blessedness.
Sow therefore continually: blessed is he that sows besides all waters: Acts
and M^n.
Blessed Bradford held that hour lost wherein he had not done some good with
his hand, tongue, or pen. Titus remembering one day that he had done no good to
any one, cried out, Amici, diem perdidi: And again, Hodie non regnavimus. We
have lost a day, etc. This was that Titus that never sent any suitor away with
a sad heart; and was therefore counted and called, Humani generis deliciae, the
darling of mankind, the peoples sweetheart. The Senate loaded him with more
praises when he was dead, than ever they did living and present.

Verse. 7. Truly the light is sweet] The light of life, of a lightsome life
especially. Any life is sweet; which made the Gibeonites make such an hard
shift to live, though it were but to be hewers of wood, and drawers of water.
I pray thee let me live, live upon any terms, said Benhadad in his submissive
message to that merciful Non-such, 1 King. 20.32. If I have found favor in thy
sight, O King, and if it please the King, let my life be given me at my
petition, Sic de Aspasia Milesia Cyri concubina Aelian lib. 12. cap. 1. var.
hist.
said that (...), that paragon of her time, Q. Esther. cap. 7.3. Ebedmelech is
promised his life for a prey, Jer. 39.18. And so is Baruc, as a sufficient
reward of that good service he had done in reading the Roll, for the which he
expected some great preferment, Jer. 45.5. compared with chap. 36.1, 2. The
Prophet chides him, and tells him he might be glad of his life in those dear
years of time, when the arrows of death had so often come whisking by him, and
he had so often stradled over the grave, as it were, and yet was not fallen into
it. To maintain our radical humor, that feeds the lamp of life, is as great a
miracle (says One) as the oil in the widows cruise, that failed her not. To
deliver us from so many deaths and dangers, as we are daily and hourly subject
unto, is a mercy that calls for continual praises to the Preserver of mankind:
But more, when men do not only live, but live prosperously, as Nabal did, 1 Samuel 25.6. Thus (said David to his messengers) shall ye say to him that
lives, viz. in prosperity. Which such a man as Nabal reckons the only life.
The Irish use to ask what such a man meant to dye? And some good Interpreters
are of opinion, that the Preacher in this verse brings in the carnal carl
objecting, or replying for himself against the former persuasions to acts of
charity: Ah! says he, but, for all that, to live at the full, to have a
goodly inheritance in a fertile soil, in a wholesome air, near to the River,
not far from the Town; to be free from all troubles and cares that poverty
brings, to live in a constant sunshine of prosperity, abundance, honor and
delight, to have all that heart can wish, or need require, what an heavenly
life is this? what a lovely and desirable condition? etc. Psalm. 34.12
What man is he that desires life, and loves many days that he may see
good? says David. I do, says one, and I, says another, and I, a third, etc.
as St. Austin frames the answer. It is that which all worldlings covet, and
hold it no policy to part with what they have to the poor, for uncertainties in
another world. In answer to whom, and for a cooler to their inordinate love of
life, the Preacher subjoyns,

Verse. 8. But if a man live many years and rejoice, etc.] q.d. Say he live
pancratice and basilice, and sit many years in the worlds warm sunshine, yet
he must not build upon a perpetuity, as good Job did (but was deceived) when
he said, I shall dye in my nest, Job 29.18 Psalm. 30
and holy David, when he concluded, I shall never be moved: For as sure as
the night follows the day, a change will come, a storm will rise, and such a
storm, as to wicked worldlings will never be blown over. Look for it therefore,
and be wise in time. Remember the days of darkness, that is, of adversity,
but especially of death and the grave. The hottest season has lightning and
thunder. The Sea is never so smooth, but it may be troubled; the Mountain not
so firm, but it may be shaken with an earthquake. Light will be one day
turned into darkness, pleasure into pain, delights into wearisomeness, and the
dark days of old age and death, far exceed in number the lightsome days of
life, which are but a warm gleam, a momentary glance. Let this be seriously
pondred, and it will much rebate the edge of our desires after earthly
vanities. Dearly beloved, says St. Peter, I beseech you as Pilgrims and
strangers abstain from fleshly lust, etc. q. d. 1 Pet. 2.12
The sad and sober apprehension of this, that you are here but sojourners for a
season, and must away to your long home, will lay your lusts a bleeding, and a
dying at your feet: It is an observation of a Commentator upon this Text, that
when Samuel had anointed Saul to be King, to confirm unto him the truth of the
joy, and withal to teach him how to be careful in governing his joy, he gave
him this sign, When thou art departed from me to day, 1 Samuel 10.2
thou shall find two men at Rachels sepulcher. For he that finds in his
mind a remembrance of his grave and sepulcher, will not easily be found
exorbitant in his delights and joys. For this it was (belike) that Joseph of
Arimathea had his sepulcher ready hewn out in his garden. The Egyptians
carried about the Table a deaths-head, at their feasts; and the Emperors of
Constantinople, Isidor.
on their Coronation-day, had a Mason appointed to present unto them certain
Marble-stones, using these ensuing words, Elige ab his saxis ex quo,
Invictissime Caesar,
Ipse tibi ^umulum me fabricare velis.
Choose (Mighty Sir) under which of these stones,
Your pleasure is ere long to lay your bones.


Verse. 9. Rejoice O young man in thy youth] i. e. Do if thou dare: like as
God said to Balaam, Rise up and go to Balak, Numb. 22.20. that is, go if thou
think it good: go, since thou will needsly go; but thou go upon thy death.
Let no man imagine that it ever came into the Preachers heart here, oleum
camino addere, to add fuel to the fire of youthful lusts, to excite young
people (unruly enough of themselves) to take their full swinge in sinful
pleasures. Thus to do might better befit a Protagoras, of whom Plato reports,
Plato in Menen.
that he many times boasted, that whereas he had lived threescore years,
forty of those threescore he had spent in corrupting those young men that had
been his pupils: or that old Dotrel in Terence, that said, Non est mihi creed,
flagitium adolescentem helluari, potare, scortari, fores effringere. I hold it
no fault for young men to swagger, drink, drab, revel, etc. Solomon in this
Text, either by a Mimesis brings in the wild yonker thus bespeaking himself,
Rejoice, my soul, in thy youth, etc. and then nips him on the crown again with
that stinging But in the end of the verse. Or else (which I rather think) by an
ironical Concession he bids him rejoice, etc. yields him what he would have,
by way of mockage and bitter-scoff: like as Elias jeered the Baalites, bidding
them cry aloud unto their drowsy or busy God: or as Micaiah bade Ahab (by an
holy scoff) go up against Ramoth Gilead and prosper: Mark. 14.41
Or as our Savior bade his drowsy Disciples, Sleep on now, and take your
rest, viz. if you can at least, or have any mind to it, with so many Bills and
Halberds about your ears.

And let thine heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth] In diebus electionum
tuarum (so Arias Montanus reads it) in the days of thy chusings, that is, Luke
12.
when thou followest the choice (and the chase) of thine own desires, and do
what thou will without control.

Walk in the way of thine heart] Which bids thee Eat, drink, and be merry; and
had as lief be knocked on the head, as do otherwise. Hence fasting is called an
afflicting of the soul; and the best find it no less grievous, to go about
holy duties, than it is to children, to be called from their sports, and set
to their books.

And in the sight of thine eyes.] Those windows of wickedness, and loop-holes
of lust.

But know] Here is that which marrs all the mirth, here is a cooler for the
yonkers courage, sour sauce to his sweet meats, for fear he should surfeit.
Verbahaet Solomonis valde emphatica sunt (says Lavater) there is a great deal
of emphasis in these words of Solomon. Let me tell thee this as a Preacher,
says he: And oh that I could get words to gore the very soul with smarting
pain, that this Doctrine might be written in thy flesh!

That for all these things] These tricae, as the world accounts them, these
trifles and tricks of youth, which Job and David bitterly bewailed as sore
businesses.

God will bring thee to judgement] Either in this life, as he did Absalom and
Adoniah, Hophni and Phinehas, Nadab and Abihu, or infallibly at thy deaths-day,
which indeed is thy doomsday, then God will bring thee perforce, be thou
never so loath to come to it; he will hale thee to his tribunal, be it never
so much against thy heart, and against the hair with thee. And as for the
judgment what it shall be, God himself shows it, Isa. 28.17. Judgment will I
lay to the line, and righteousness to the plummet, and the hail shall sweep
away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the hiding place.
Where, what is the hail (says One) but the multitude of accusations, which
shall sweep away the vain hope that men have, that the infinite mercy of God
will save them, howsoever they live? And what is the hiding place, but the
multitude of excuses which men are ready to make for themselves, and which the
waters of Gods justice shall quite destroy and overthrow? Young men, of all
men, are apt to make a Covenant with death, and to put far away from them the
thought of judgment. But it boots them not so to do: for Senibus mors in
januis, adolescentibus in insidiis, says Bernard. Death does not always knock
at door, but comes often like a lightning or thunderbolt; it blasteth the green
corn, and consumes the new and strong building. Now at death it will fare
nothing better with the wild and wicked youngster, than with that thief, that
having stolen a Gelding, rides away bravely mounted, till such time as being
overtaken by hue and cry, he is soon afterward sentenced and put to death.

James 4.8
Verse. 10. Therefore remove sorrow from thine heart] One would have thought he
should have said rather (considering the premises) Remove joy from thy heart,
Let thy laughter be turned into mourning, and thy joy into heaviness; turn all
the streams into that chanel that may drive that Mill that may grind the heart.
But by sorrow here or indignation (as Tremellius renders it) the Preacher means
sin, the cause of sorrow: and so he interprets himself in the next words, Put
away evil from thy flesh, i. e. Mortify thy lusts.

For childe-hood and youth are vanity] The Septuagint and Vulgar render it,
Youth and pleasure are vain things. They both will soon be at an end.

CHAP. XII. Verse. 1. Remember now thy Creator.]
HEB. Creatours, scil. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, called by Elihu, Eloa
Gnosai, God my Makers, Job 35.10. and by David, the Makers of Israel, Psalm.
149.1. so Isa. 54.5. Thy Makers is thine Husbands. Let us make man, Genesis 1.26.
and verse 1. Dei creavit. Those three in One, and One in Three made all things;
but man he made fearfully and wonderfully, Psalm. 139.14. The Father did it,
Ephesians. 3.9. The Son, Heb. 1.8, 10. Col. 1.16. The Holy Ghost, Psalm. 33.6. and
104.30. Job 36.13. and 33.4. To the making of Man, a Council was called, Genesis
1.29. Sun, Moon, and Stars are but the work of his fingers, Psalm. 8.3. but Man
is the work of his hands, Psalm. 139.14. Thine hands have made me (or took
special pains about me) and fashioned me, says Job, chap. 10.8. thou have
formed me by the book, says David, Psalm. 139.16. Hence the whole Church so
celebrates this great work with Crowns cast down at the Creators feet, Rev.
4.10, 11. And hence young men also, who are mostly most mindless of any thing
serious (for childe-hood and youth are vanity) are here charged to remember
their Creator, that is (as dying David taught his young Son Solomon) to know,
love, and serve him, with a perfect heart, and a willing mind, 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
(for words of knowledge in Scripture imply affection and practice) Tam Dei
meminisse opus est quam respirare, To remember God is every whit as needful as
to draw breath; since it is he that gave us being at first, and that still
gives us (...), life and breath, Act. 17.25. Let every thing therefore that
has breath, praise the Lord, even so long as it has breath; yea let it spend
and exhale it self in continual sallies, as it were, and egressions of
affection unto God, till it has gotten, not only an union, but an unity with
him. Of all things, God cannot endure to be forgotten.

In the days of thy youth] Augustus began his speech to his mutinous
soldiers, with Audite senem, juvenes, quem juvenem senes and ierunt, You that
are young, hear me that am old, whom old men were content to hear, when I was
but young. And Augustine begins one of his Sermons thus, Ad vos mihi sermo,
O juvenes, flos aetatis, periculum mentis, To you is my speech, O young men,
the flower of age, the danger of the mind. To keep them from danger, and direct
them to their duty it is, that the Preacher here exhorts them to remember God
betimes, to gather Manna in the morning of their lives, to present the
first fruits to God, whose soul has desired the first ripe fruits, Micah 7.1.
and who will remember the kindness of their youth, the love of their espousals,
Jer. 2.1. God of old would be honored with the firstlings of men and of
cattle, by the first fruits of trees, and of the earth, in the she^f, in the
threshing-floor, in the dough, in the loaves. He called for ears of corn dried
by the fire, and wheat beaten out of the green ears, Levit. 2.14. to teach men
to serve him with the primrose of their childe-hood. Three sorts there were of
first fruits. First, Of the ears of corn offered about the Passover. Secondly,
Of the loaves offered about Pentecost. Lastly, About the end of the year in
Autumn. Now of the two first God had a part, but not of the last. He made
choice of the Almond-tree, Jer. 1.11. because it blossometh first; so of Jeremy
from his infancy, Timothy from his Mothers breasts, etc. He likes not of those
arbores antumnales, Jude 13. which bud at latter end of harvest. He cares not
for such loiterers, as come halting in at last cast to serve God, when they can
serve their lusts no longer. The Circassians (a kind of mongre-Christians) are
said to divide their life betwixt sin and devotion: dedicating their youth to
rapine, B^cerw. Enqui^. 1^5 Mal. 1.14
and their old age to repentance. But cursed be that cozener, says the
Prophet, that has a male in his flock, and yet offers to the Lord a corrupt
thing. Will thou give God the dreggs, the bottom, the snuffs, the very last
sands, thy dotage, which thy self and friends are weary of? James 4
Shall thine oil (which should have been fuel for thy thankfulness) increase
the fire of thy lusts, and thy lusts consume all? How much better were it to
sacrifice early with Abraham, the young Isaac's of thine age? to bring as he
did young Rams unto the Lord, and even, whiles thou art yet a lad, a stripling,
to take heed to thy ways according to Gods Word? Psalm. 119.9. Ye shall not
see my face, says Christ, (as once Joseph) except you bring your younger
brother with you.

While the evil days come not] viz. Of old age and misery: for these are
seldom separated. Senectus, ut Africa, semper aliquid novi adportat, As Africa
is never without some monster, so neither is old age ever without some
ailement. Multa senem circumveniunt incommoda, Horat.
Many are the inconveniences that do encompass an old man. Solet senectus esse
deformis, infirma, obliviosa, odentula, lucrosa, indocilis and molesta, says
Cato in Plutarch, Plut. in Apoph. Romans
old age uses to be deformed, weak, forgetful, toothless, covetous,
unteachable, unquiet. Now shall any man be to besotted and betwitcht, as to
make that the task of his old age, which should be the trade of his whole
life? and to settle his everlasting, only, surest making or marring upon so
sinking and sandy a foundation? A Ship, the longer it leaks, the harder it is
to be emptied; a Land, the longer it lies, the harder it is to be plowed; a
Nail, the further it is driven in, with the greater difficulty it is pulled
our. And shall any man think, that the trembling joints, the dazzled eyes, the
fainting heart, the failing hands, the feeble legs, of strengthless, drooping,
untractable, wayward, froward old age, can break up the fallow ground, can ever
empty and pluck out the leaks and nails of so many years flowing and fastening?

Verse. 2. While the Sun, or the light, or the Moon, etc.] i. e. Whiles greater
and lesser comforts fail not. Or before the sight of thine eyes grow dim, and
as unfit to let in light, as an old dusty window. The air to aged eyes, seems
dusty and misty, and the Sun wadeth, as the Moon in a foggy evening, and the
stars are out of sight; 1 Cor. 13.
they see through a glass darkly, as the Apostle speaks in another case, they
can know no kin without spectacles; the defluxion of rheum, which trickleth
down the nose and cheeks, being as it were the Rain, the gathering of new
matter, which continually distilleth, being as it were the returning of the
clouds after the rain in a moist season, and waters into an emptied fountain.
Some (with relation to the former verse) interpret the words thus: Let thy
Creator be remembered while the Sun is not darkened, that is, while youth
continues: Or if not so, while the light of the Sun is not gone, that is,
while thy manhood lasts: Or if not so, while the Moon is not darkened, that
is, while thine elder years are not spent: Or if not so, while the stars are
not shut up, while the worst of old age has not seized upon thee: for then the
clouds will return after the Rain; that is, one grief comes upon the neck of
another, Psalm. 42.7.
as deep calls upon deep at the noise of the water-spouts. One affliction
follows and occasioneth another, without intermission of trouble, as one
billow comes wallowing and tumbling upon another; or as in April weather, one
shower is unburthened, another is brewed. Hence some of the ancient Patriarchs
are said to have died old men, and full of years, they had enough of this
world, and desired to depart, as Abraham, Simeon, others. Hence the Poets feign
that Tithonus, when he might have had immortality here, he would not. Cic. de
Senectu^e.
And Cato protested, that if of old he might be made young again, he would
seriously refuse it.

Verse. 3. In the day when the Keepers of the house, etc.] i.e. The hands and
arms wherewith we defend the head and whole body (called an house also by St.
Paul) from harm, and danger, and maintain our lives; which are therefore called
the lives of our hands, because upheld with the labor of our hands, Isa.
57.10. These are fitly called Keepers or Gardians, for their usefulness, and
for their faithfulness too: Plut.
Numa Pompilius consecrated the hands to Faith; His successor Tullus Hostilius
(being a profane perfidious person, Lactant.
and a contemner of all Religion, as that which did but emasculate men's minds,
and make them idle) brought in and worshipped two new Gods, viz. Pavor and
Pallor, Fear and Paleness. Like another Cain, Sighing and trembling he was
upon the Earth: (So the Septuagint render that, Genesis 4.12.) Not his hands only
trembled (which is thought to be Cains mark, Genesis 4.15.) but his heart too,
Isa. 7.2. Not with old age neither, as here, but with the terrors of an evil
conscience. But to return to the Text, Ecquem vero mihi dabis Rhetorem tam
magnifice and exquisite disserentem, and in non obscura sententiae tot lumina,
imo flumina orationis exscrentem?
Old men are full of the Palsy, for most part, and many other infirmities,
which here are most elegantly described, by a continued allegory. Men draw
forth as lively as they can the pictures of their young age, that in old age
they may see their youth before their eyes. This is but a vanity, yet may good
use be made thereof. So contrarily the Preacher here draws out to the life the
picture of old age, that young men may see and consider it together with death
that follows it, and after death judgment.

And the strong men shall bow themselves] Nutabunt, the legs and thighs shall
stagger and faulter, cripple and crinkle under them, as not able to bear the
bodies burden. The thigh in Latin is called femur a ferendo, because it
bears and holds up the creature, and has the longest and strongest bone in
the whole body, The leg has a shin-bone, and a shank-bone, aptly fitted for
the better moving. The foot is the base, the ground and pedestal which
sustaineth the whole building. These are Solomon's strong men: but as strong as
they are, yet in old age they buckle under their burden; and are ready to
overthrow themselves and the whole body. Genua ^abant. Virg.
Hence old men are glad to betake them to their third leg, a staff or crutch:
Membra levant baculis tardique senilibus annis. Hence Hesiod calls them (...).
Let them learn to lean upon the Lord, as the Spouse did upon her Beloved, Cant.
8.5. and he will stir up some good Job to be eyes to them, when blind, and
feet to them, when lame, chap. 29.15. Let them also pray with David, Cast me
not off in the time of old age, forsake me not when my strength fails, Psalm.
71.9.

And the grinders cease, because they are few] The teeth (through age) fall
out, or rot out, or are drawn out, or hang loose in the gumms, and so cannot
grind and masticate the meat that is to be transmitted into the stomach, for
the preservation of the whole. Now the teeth are the hardest of the bones,
Lactant. de opif. Dei.
if that they be bones, whereof Aristotle makes question. They are as hard as
stones, in the edges of them especially: and are here fitly compared to
Millstones from their chewing office. The seat of the teeth are the jaws, where
they have their several sockets, into which they are mortised. But in old men
they stand wet-shod in slimy humor, or are hollow and stumpy, falling out one
after another, as the coggs of a Mill, so that Frangendus misero gingiva panis
inermi. Juvenal.


And those that look out at the windows] The eyes are dim, as they were in old
Isaac and Jacob. An heavy affliction surely, but especially to those that have
had eyes full of adultery, evil eyes, windows of wickedness, for the conscience
of this puts a sting into the affliction, is a thorn to their blind eyes, 2
Pet. 2.
and becomes a greater torment than ever Regulus the Roman was put to, Plut.
Oculus ab occalendo. Turk. hist.
when his eyelids were cut off, and he set full opposite to the Sun shining
in his strength: Or than that Grecian Prince, that had his eyes put out with
hot burning basins, held near unto them.

Verse. 4. And the doors shall be shut in the streets] The ears shall grow
deaf, the hearing weak; which hearing is caused by two bones within the inside
of the ear; whereof one stands still, and the other moves, like the two stones
of a Mill.

And he shall rise up at the voice of the Bird] Being awakened by every small
noise; and this proceeds not from the quickness of the hearing, but from the
badness of sleeping. For as Hierome speaks, Frigescente jam sanguine, etc.
Hieron. in hunc verse.
The blood now growing cold, and the moisture being dried up, by which matters
sleep should be nourished, the old man awakeneth with a little sound, and at
midnight when the Cock croweth, he rises speedily; (...) dicitur, quia nos a
lecto exsuscitat.
being not able often to turn his members in his bed. Thus he. Cocks crowing
(says another) unto old men, is the scholars bell, that calls them to think of
the things that are in Gods Book every morning.

And all the daughters of music shall be brought low] Old men, as they cannot
sing tunably, Nam quae cantante voluptas? Juvenal.
but creak or scream (whence Homer compares them to Grasshoppers, propter raucam
vocem, for their unpleasant voice) so they can take no delight in the melodious
notes of others, as old Barzillai confesses, 2 Samuel 19.35. they discern not
the harmony or distinction of sounds, neither are affected with music. They
must therefore labor to become Temples of the Holy Ghost, (in whose Temple
there never wants music) and sing Psalms with grace in their hearts: for, Non
vox, sed votum; non musica chordula, sed Cor; Non clamans, sed amans, ps^llit
in aure Dei.

Verse. 5. Also when they shall be afraid of that which is high] Hillocks or
little stones standing up, whereat they may stumble; as being unsteddy and
unweildy. High ascents also they shun, as being short-winded; neither can they
look down without danger of falling: their heads being as weak as their hamms.
Let them therefore pray for a guard of Angels, putting that promise into suit,
Psalm. 91. Let them also keep within Gods precincts, as ever they expect his
protection; and then, though old Eli fell, and never rose again, yet when they
fall, they shall arise, for the Lord puts under his hand, Psalm. 37.24.
Contrition may be in their way, but attrition shall not. Let them fear God,
and they need not fear any other person or thing whatsoever.

And the Almond-tree shall flourish] The hair shall grow hoary, those
Churchyard-flowers shall put forth. Plin. lib. 16. cap. 25.
The Almond-tree blossoms in January, while it is yet winter; and the fruit is
ripe in March. Old age shall snow white hairs upon their heads. Let them see
that they be found in the way of Righteousness.

And the Grasshopper shall be a burden] Every light matter shall oppress them,
who are already a burden to themselves, being full of Gowt, and other swellings
of the legs, which the Septuagint and Vulgar point at here, when they render
it impinguabitur locusta, The Locusts shall be made fat. Let them wait upon
the Lord (as that old Disciple Mnason did) and then they shall renew their
strength, Act. 11.
mount up as Eagles, run, and not be weary, walk, and not faint, even then,
when the youth shall faint and be weary, and the young men utterly fall, Isa.
40.30, 31.

And desire shall fail] The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the
pride of life. 1 John 2.15
And this Tully reckons among the commodities and benefits of old age, quod
hominem a libidinis estu, velut a tyranno quodem liberet, that it frees a man
from the fire of lust. (...) a (...).
It should be so, doubtless; an old Letcher being little less than a Monster:
What so monstrous as to behold green Apples on a tree in winter? and what so
indecent, as to see the sins of youth prevailing in times of age among old
decrepit Goats? that they should be capering after capparis, (...).
the fruit of Capers, as the Septuagint and Vulgar render it here.

Because man goes to his long home] Heb. to his old home, scil. to the dust
from whence he was taken. Or to the house of his eternity, that is, the grave
(that house of all living) where he shall lie long, till the Resurrection.
Tremellius renders it, in domum saeculi sui, to the house of his generation,
where he and all his contemporaries meet. Cajetan, in domum mundi sui, into
the house of his world, that which the world provides for him: as nature at
first provided for him the house of the womb. Toward this home of his, the old
man is now on gate, having one foot in the grave already: He sits and sings
with Job, My spirit is spent, my days are extinct, the graves are ready for
me, Job 17.1.

And the mourners go about the streets] The proverb is, Senex ^os non lugetur,
An old man dies unlamented. But not so the good old man. Great moan was made
for old Jacob, Moses, Aaron, Samuel. The Romans took the death of old Augustus
so heavily, that they wished he had either never been born, or never died.
Those indeed that live wickedly, dye wishedly. But godly men are worthily
lamented, and ought to be so, Isa. 57.1. This is one of the dues of the dead,
so it be done aright. But they were hard bestead that were fain to hire
mourners; that as Midwives brought their friends into the world, so those
widows should carry them out of it. See Job 3.8. Jer. 9.17.

Verse. 6. Or ever the silver cord be loosed] Or lengthened, i. e. before the
marrow of the back (which is of a silver color) be consumed. From this Cord
many sinews are derived: which when they are loosened, the back bends, motion
is slow, and feeling fails.

Or the golden bowl be broken] i. e. The heart say some, or the Pericardium:
the Brain-pan, say others, or the Piamater compassing the brain like a
swathing-cloath, or inner rind of a tree.

Or the pitcher be broken at the fountain] That is, the veins at the Liver
(which is the shop of sangnification, or blood-making, as one calls it) but
especially Vena porta and Vena cava. Read the Anatomists.

Or the wheel be broken at the cistern] i. e. The head, which draws the power
of life from the heart, to the which the blood runs back in any great fright,
as to the fountain of life.

Verse. 7. Then shall the dust return to the earth, etc.] What is man, says
Nazianzen, but (...), Soul and Soil, Breath and Body, a puff of wind the one, a
pile of dust the other, no solidity in either. Zoroaster, and some other
ancient Heathens imagined, that the soul had wings; that having broken these
wings, she fell headlong into the body; and that recovering her wings again,
she flies up to Heaven, her original habitation. That of Epicharmus is better
to be liked, and comes nearer to the truth here delivered by the Preacher,
Concretum fuit, and discretum est, rediitque unde venerat; terra deorsum,
spiritus sursum, It was together, but is now by death set asunder, and returned
to the place whence it came; the Earth downward, the Spirit upward. See Genesis
2.7. God made man of the dust of the earth, to note our frailty, vility, and
impurity. Lutum enim conspurcat omnia, sic and caro, says one, Dirt defiles
all things, so does the flesh: It should seem so (truly) by man's soul, which
coming pure out of Gods hands, soon becomes Men's oblita Dei, vitiorumque oblita
coeno.

Bernard complains not without just cause, that our souls by commerce with the
flesh are become fleshly: Sure it is, that by their mutual defilement,
corruption is so far rooted in us now, that it is not cleansed out of us by
mere death (as is to be seen in Lazarus, and others that died) but by
cinerification, or turning of the body to dust and ashes.

The spirit returns to God that gave it] For it is divinae particula aurae, an
immaterial, immortal substance, that after death returns to God the Fountain of
life. D. Pressed.
The soul moves and guides the body (says a worthy Divine) as the Pilot does
the ship. Now the Pilot may be safe, though the ship be split on the rock.
And as in a chicken, it grows still, and so the shell breaks and falls off: So
it is with the soul; the body hangs on it but as a shell, and when the soul is
grown to perfection, it falls away, and the soul returns to the Father of
spirits. Augustine (after Origin) held a long while, that the soul was begotten
by the Parents, as was the body. At length he began to doubt of this point,
and afterward altered his opinion; confessing inter caetera testimonia hoc esse
praecipuum, that among other testimonies this to be the chief, to prove the
contrary to that which he had formerly held.

Verse. 8. Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher] Who chose for his Text this
Argument, of the vanity of humane things, which having fully proved, and
improved, he here resumes and concludes. Vide supra.

Verse. 9. And moreover because the Preacher was wise] He well knew how hard it
was to work men to a belief of what he had affirmed concerning earthly
vanities; and therefore heaps up here many forcible and cogent Arguments, as
First, that himself was no baby, but wise above all men in the world, by Gods
own testimony; therefore his words should be well regarded. (...), Our wise
men expound to day (said the Jews one to another) Come let us go up to the
house of the Lord, etc. Cicero had that high opinion of Plato for his wisdom,
that he professed that he would rather go wrong with him, than go right with
others. Averroes over-admired Aristotle, as if he had been infallible. But
this is a praise proper to the holy Penmen guided by the Spirit of Truth, and
filled with wisdom from on high for the purpose. To them therefore, and to the
word of prophecy by them, must men give heed as unto a light that shines in a
dark place, etc. 2 Pet. 1.19.

He still taught the people knowledge] He hid not his talent in a Napkin, but
used it to the instruction of his people. Have not I written for thee excellent
things (or three several sorts of Books, viz. Proverbial, Penitential, Nuptial)
in counsels and knowledge, Prove. 22.20. Synesius speaks of some, (...). Synes.
that having great worth in them, will as soon part with their hearts, as with
their conceptions. And Gregory observes, that there are not a few, who being
enriched with spiritual gifts and abilities to do good, dum solis
contemplationis studiis inardescunt, Past. Cur. p. 1. c. 5.
parere utilitati proximorum praedicatione refugiu^ while they burn in the
studies of contemplation only, do shun to seek by preaching to profit their
neighbors. Solomon was none of these.

Yea he gave good heed] Or, he made them to take good heed; Aus^ultare fecit.
Page Ar. Mon. tan.
he called upon them ever and anon, as our Savior did upon his hearers, Let
him that has an ear to hear, hear. Or as the Deacons in Chrysostoms and Basils
time used to call upon the people, in these words, Oremus, attendamus, Let us
pray, let us give heed.

And sought out] By diligent scrutiny and hard study: beating his brains, as
the foul bears the shell, to get out the fish, with great vehemence. The staves
were always in the Ark, to show, says Gregory, that Preachers should always
meditate in their hearts upon the sacred Scriptures; that if need require they
may without delay take up the Ark, teach the people.

And set in order many Proverbs] Marshalled them in a fit method, and set
others a work for to do the like. Dan. 68.
For, Regis ad exemplum, etc. Our Henry the first (surnamed Beauclerk) had in
his youth some taste of learning; And this put many of his subjects into the
fashion of the Book, so that diverse learned men flourished in his time: as
Ethan, Heman, Cha^col, Agur, and other Paroemiographers did in Solomon's.

Luther.
Verse. 10. The Preacher sought, etc.] He sought and sought, by pains and
prayer. He knew the rule, Been orasse, est been studuisse, To have prayed
well, is to have studied well. By prayer and tears St. John gat the Book
opened, Rev. 5.4. Luther got much of his insight into Gods matters, by the same
means.

To find out acceptable words] Verba desiderata (so Cajetan renders it) Verba
delectabilia (so Tremellius) Verba expetibilia (so Vatablus) Delectable and
desirable words, dainty expressions, that might both please and profit, tickle
the ear, Into^abat, fulgurabat. Cicero. Plutarch.
and withal take the heart. Such a Master of speech was Paul, Act. 14.12. who
thundered and lightened in his discourses, like another Pericles. Such a one was
Apollos that eloquent Preacher, mighty in the Scriptures ((...), like another
Phocion, a weighty Speaker) such were many of the Greek and Latin Fathers;
Ambrose for one, whom when Augustine heard preach, Veniebant, says he, in
animum meum simul cum verbis quae deligebam, etiam res quas negligebam, there
came into my mind, together with the words which I chiefly looked after, the
matter which till then I made no reckoning of. Et res and verba. Philippus
Melanchthon could dress his doctrine in dainty terms, and so slide insensibly
into the hearts of his hearers. Egit vir eloquens ut intelligenter ut
obedienter audiretur, De doct. Christ. l. 4. c. 14.
(as Augustine has it.) This eloquent man took pains that he might be heard
with understanding, with obedience. The like might be said of Calvin (famous
for the purity of his style, and the holiness of his matter. Zanch. Miscell.
Ep. dedic.
) Viret, in whose Sermons singularem eloquentiam and in commovendis affectibus
efficacitatem admirabar, says Zanchy. I greatly admired at his singular
eloquence and skill to work upon the affections by his elaborate discourses.

And that which was written was upright] A cord ad cor, void of all
insincerity and falsehood, Prove. 8.8. Seducers come for the most part with
pithanology; by good words and fair speeches they deceive the hearts of the
simple. Romans 16.18. But our Preachers words are of another alloy; not more
delicious and toothsome, than sound and wholesome, 2 Timothy 3.16. proceeding from
a right heart, and tending to make men upright, transforming them into the same
image, and transfusing them into the Divine nature.

Verse. 11. The words of the wise are like goads] To rouse up men's drousie and
drossie spirits; to drive them (as the Eagle does her young ones with her
talons) out of the nest of carnal security: to awaken them out of the snare of
the Devil, who has cast many into such a dead lethargy, such a dedolent
disposition, that like Dionysius the Heracleot, they can hardly feel sharpest
goads, or needles thrust into their fat hearts; fat as grease, Psalm. 119.17.
St. Peter so preached, that his hearers were pricked at heart, Act. 2.37. St.
Stephen so galled his adversaries, that they were cut to the heart, Act. 7.54.
And before them both, how ^^rely and boldly dealt John Baptist, and our Savior
Christ with those enemies of all Righteousness the Pharisees, qui toties puncti
ac repuncti, nunquam tamen ad resipiscentiam compuncti, as one says of them:
(who like those Bears in Pliny, or Asses of Tuscany, that have fed on hemlock)
were so stupefied, that no sharp words would work upon them, or take impression
in their hearts; so brawny were their breasts; so horny their heart strings?

And as nails] Such as Shepherds fastened their tents to the ground with; Jael
drove one of these tent-nails through Sisera's Temples; Judge. 4.
and laid his body as it were a listening what was become of the soul. Now as
nails driven into pales do fasten them to their rails, so the godly and grave
sentences of Teachers (those Masters of Assemblies) do pierce into men's hearts,
to unite them unto God by Faith, and one to another in love. Our exhortations
truly should be strong and well pointed; not only to wound as arrows, but to
stick by the people as forked arrows, that they may prove as those of Joash,
the arrows of the Lords deliverance. And surely it were to be wished (in these
unsettled and giddy times especially) that people would suffer such words of
exhortation, as like goads, might prick them on to pious practice, and like
nails, might fix their wild conceits, that they might be steadfast and
unmovable, stablished in the truth, and not whiffled about with every wind of
Doctrine. But we can look for no better, so long as they have so mean an
esteem of the Ministers, those Masters of the Assemblies, (whose Office it is
to congregate the people, and to preside in the Congregations) which are given
from one Shepherd, 1 Pet. 2.25.
the Arch-Shepheard of his Sheep, Jesus Christ; who in the days of his solemn
inauguration into his Kingdom, gave these gifts unto men, viz. some to be
Apostles, some Evangelists, some Pastors, some Teachers, etc. Ephesians. 4.11. What
a mouth of blasphemy then opens that Schismatical Pamphleter, The Compass.
Samarit.
that makes this precious gift of Christ to his Spouse, this sacred and tremend
function of the Ministry, to be as mere an Imposture, as very a mystery of
iniquity, as arrant a juggle as the Papacy it self?

Verse. 12. And further, by these; my son, be admonished] By these divine
directions and documents, contained in this short Book, wherein thou shall
find fullness of matter in fewness of words. Or by these, that is by the holy
Scriptures, which (according to some interpreters) are called in the former
verse, Lords of Collections, because they are as Lords paramount above all
other words and writings of men, that ever were collected into volumes. Odi ego
meos libros, says Luther, Luth. in Genes.
I do even hate the Books set forth by my self, and could wish them utterly
abolished, because I fear that by reading them, some are hindered from spending
their time in reading the sacred Scriptures. Of these it is that the Psalmist
says, Moreover by them is thy servant warned (or clearly admonished, as the
word signifies) and in doing thereof there is great reward, Psalm. 19.11.

Of making many Books there is no end] Ambition and covetousness sets many
Authors a work, in this scribbling age, Scribimus indocti doctique, etc. Presses
are greatly oppressed; and every fool will be meddling, that he may be a fool
in Print. Multi mei similes hoc morbo laborant, ut cum scribere nesciant, tamen
a scribendo temperare non possunt, Many are sick of my very disease, says
Erasmus, that though they can do nothing worthy of the public, yet they must
be publishing: hence the world so abounds with books, even to satiety and
surfeit, many of them being no better than the scurf of scald and scabby heads.

And much study is a weariness to the flesh] Hierome renders it, Labor carnis,
a work of the flesh. They will find it so one day to their sorrow, that are
better read in Sir Philip, than in St. Peter, in Monsieur Balsa^s letters, than
St. Paul's Epistles. The holy Bible is to be chiefly studied, and herein we
are to labor even to lassitude; to read, till being overcome with sleep, we
bow down as it were, to salute the leaves with a kiss, Hierom* ad Eust.
as Hierome exhorted some good women of his time. All other Books, in
comparison of this, we are to account as waste Paper; and not to read them
further than they some way conduce to the better understanding or practicing of
the things herein contained, and commended unto our care.

Verse. 13. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter] scil. Touching the
attainment of true happiness: Let us see (for a perclose of all) where and how
it may be had. Shall I tell you in two words, says the Preacher? I will so,
and see that ye mark it: In the Original the word rendered conclusion here,
has the first letter bigger than the rest, to stir up the greater attention to
that which follows: since in this short sentence is contained the sum of all
Divinity.

Fear God and keep his commandements] Bear an awful respect to the Divine
Majesty, a reverential fear; and from this principle obey God in every part and
point of duty: Do this, and live for ever. Do it in an Evangelical way, I mean:
for we can do it now no otherwise. Wish well to exact obedience, as David
does, Psalm. 119.4, 5. Oh that I could keep thy commandments accurately; and
woe is me that I cannot! And then be doing as thou can: for affection
without endeavor, is like Rachel, beautiful, but barren. Be doing, I say, at
every thing, as well as at any thing: for thou must not be funambulus vertutum
(as Tertullian phraseth it) one that goes in a narrow tract of obedience. No:
thine obedience must be universal, extending to the compass of the whole Law,
(which is but one copulative, as the Schools speak.) And then, Aug.
beati sunt qui praecepta faciunt, etiam si non perficiunt, they are blessed
that do what they can, Bern.
though they cannot but under-do. And, in libro tuo scribuntur omnes qui quod
possunt faciunt, and si quod debent, non possunt, They are surely written all
in Gods Book, that do what they can, though they cannot do as they ought. I
cannot let slip a Note given by one that was once a famous Preacher in this
Kingdom, and still lives in his printed Sermons. The Book of Ecclesiastes
(says he) begins with All is vanity, and ends with fear God and keep his
commandments. Now if that sentence were knit to this, which Solomon keeps to
the end, as the haven of rest after the turmoils of vanity, it is like that
which Christ said to Martha, Thou art troubled about many things, but one thing
is necessary. That which troubles us, Solomon calls vanity: that which is
necessary, he calls the fear of God. From that to this, should be every man's
pilgrimage in this world. We begin at vanity, and never know perfectly that
we are vain, till we come to fear God, and keep his commandments.

For this is the whole duty of man] Heb. This is the whole man, q. d. He is
not a complete man; he loses all his other praises, that fears not God. It is
the very nature and essence of man to be a reasonable creature: Now, what more
reasonable than that God should be feared and served? What more irrational
than irreligion? (See 2 These. 3.2.) and what is man without true grace, but
praestantissimum brutum (as one says) a very fair beast?

Verse. 14. For God shall bring every work into judgement] Full loath is sinful
flesh to come to judgment: but (will they, nill they) come they must, God will
bring them: Angels will hale them out of their hiding holes. Rocks and
mountains will then prove a sorry shelter; since rocks shall rent, and mountains
melt at the presence of the Judge. Let us therefore judge our selves, if he
shall not judge us, and take unto us words against our sins, if we will not
have him to take unto him words against our souls, Hos. 14.2. And then, Ita
vivamus, ut rationem nobis reddendam arbitremur, says the Heathen Orator, Let
us so live, as those that must shortly be called to an account. For who can
tell but that he may suddenly hear as that Pope did, and was soon after found
dead, Veni, miser, in judicium, Come, thou wretch, receive thy judgment. Let
this be firmly believed, and thoroughly digested, and it will notably incite us
to the fear and service of God. This some Heathens knew; Zaleucus Locrensis, in
the Proeme to his Laws has these words, Hoc inculcatum sit, esse Deos, and
venturum esse summum and fatalem illum diem: Remember to press often upon the
people these two things; First, That there are Gods, Next, to these Gods an
account of all must be given. The Areopagites at their Council were wont
diligently to enquire what every of the Athenians did, Rouz his Archaeol. Atti.
125
and how he lived: that men knowing and remembering that once they must give an
account of their lives (though but to earthly Judges) might embrace honesty.

With every secret thing] For at that day of Revelation, as it is called, We
must all appear (or be made transparent, pellucid and clear like a diaphanous
body, as the word there signifies) before the judgment seat of Christ: 2 Cor.
5.20
all shall be laid naked and open, the Books of Gods Omniscience, and man's
Conscience also shall be then opened, and secret sins shall be as legible in
thy forehead, as if written with the brightest Stars, or the most glittering
Sunbeams upon a wall of Crystal. Men's actions are all in print in Heaven, and
God will at that day read them aloud in the ears of all the world.

Whether it be good or evil] Then it shall appear what it is, which before was
not so clear: like as in April, both wholesome roots and poisonable discover
themselves, which in winter were not seen. Then men shall give an account, 1 De
bonis commissis, of good things committed unto them. 2. De bonis dimissis, of
good things neglected by them. 3. De malis commissis, of evils committed by
them. 4. Lastly, De malis permissis, of evils done by others, suffered by them,
when they might have hindered it.

LAUS DEO.
A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION UPON THE CANTICLES: OR, Solomon's Song of Songs.
CHAP. I. Verse. 1. The Song of Songs.
NOt a light Love-song (as some profane persons have fancied; and have
therefore held it no part of the sacred Canon: Theodoret. lib. 5. de Provid.
Sic coena a Dionysio caeremonia caeremoniarum, and ab alio Pascha celebritas
celebritatum dicitur.
) But a most excellent Epithalamium, a very divine Ditty, an heavenly Allegory,
a Mystical-marriage-song, called here, The Song of Songs, as God is called the
God of Gods, Deuteronomy. 10.7. as Christ is called the King of Kings, Rev. 19.16. as
the Most Holy is called the Holy of Holies, to the which the Jew-doctors liken
this Canticle; (as they do Ecclesiastes to the Holy place, and Proverbs to the
Court:) to signify, that it is the treasury of the most sacred and highest
mysteries of holy Scripture. It streams out all along, under the parable of a
Marriage, Hieron. prooem. in Ezech.
that full torrent of spiritual love that is betwixt Christ and the Church.
This is a great mystery, says that great Apostle, Ephesians. 5.32. It passes the
capacity of man to understand it in the perfection of it. Hence the Jews
permitted none to read this sacred Song, before thirty years of age. Let him
that reads, think he sees written over this Solomon's porch, Holiness to the
Lord, T. W. on Canti^.
Procul hinc, procul este profani, nihil hic nisi castum. If any think this
kind of dealing to be over-light for so grave and weighty a matter, let them
take heed (says one) that in the height of their own hearts they do not
proudly censure God and his order, who in many places uses the same similitude
of marriage, to express his love to his Church by, and interchangeably her duty
toward him, as Hos. 2.19. 2 Cor. 11.2. Ephesians. 5.25. with verse. 22, 23, 24.
where the Apostle plainly alludeth and refers to this Song of Songs in
sundry passages, borrowing both matter, and frame of speech from hence.

Which is Solomons] He was the Penman, God the Author. Of many other Songs
he was both Author and instrument, 1 King. 4.32. Not so of this; which
therefore the Chaldee Paraphrast here entituleth, Songs and Hymns (in the
plural, for the surpassing excellency of it) which Solomon the Prophet, the
King of Israel, uttered by the spirit of Prophecy, before the Lord, the Lord of
all the Earth. A Prophet he was, and is therefore now in the Kingdom of
Heaven, notwithstanding his foul fall, whereof he repented. Luke 11.28
For as it is not the falling into the water that drowns, but lying in it: So
neither is it the falling into sin that damns, but dying in it. Solomon was
also King of Israel, and surpassed all the Kings of the Earth in wealth and
wisdom, 2 Chronicles. 9.22. yea he was wiser than all men, 1 King. 4.31. And as
himself was a King, Psalm. 45.2
so he made this singular Song (as David did the 45 Psalm) concerning the King
(Christ and his spiritual marriage to the Church) who is also called Solomon,
Cant. 3.11. and greater than Solomon, Matthew. 12.42. If therefore either the
worth of the writer, or the weightiness of the matter may make to the
commendation of any book, this wants for neither. That is a silly exception of
some against this Song, as if not Canonical, because God is not once named in
it; for as often as the Bridegroom is brought in speaking here, Romans 9.^
so often Christ himself speaks, who is God blessed for ever. Besides, whereas
Solomon made a thousand Songs and five, 1 King. 4.32. this only, as being the
chief of all, and part of the holy Canon, has been hitherto kept safe (when
the rest are lost) in the Cabinet of Gods special providence, and in the chest
of the Jews (Gods faithful Library-keepers, Romans 3.2. Joh. 5.39.) It being not
the will of our heavenly Father, that any one hair of that sacred head should
fall to the ground.

Verse. 2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth] It must be premised
and remembered, that this Book is penitus allegoricus and parabolicus, as one
says, allegorical throughout, and abounds all along with types and figures,
with parables and similitudes. Quot verba, tot sacramenta, So many words, so
many mysteries, says Hierome of the Revelation, Apocalypsin fateor me nescire
exponere, etc. exponat cui Deus concesserit. Cajet. Possev. in Biblioth. select.
which made Cajetan not dare to comment upon it. The like may be truly
affirmed of the Canticles: nay, we may say of it in a special manner, as
Possevinus does of the whole Hebrew Bible, tot esse sacramenta, quot literae,
tot mysteria, quot puncta, tot arcana, quot apices. Hence Psellus in Theodoret
asks pardon for presuming to expound it. But difficilium facilis est venia;
and, In magnis voluisse sat est. In hard things the pardon is easy; and in
high things, let a man show his good will, and it suffiseth. The matter of this
Book has been pointed at already: as for the form of it, it is Dramatical and
Dialogistical. The chief speakers are not Solomon and the Shulamite (as
Castalio makes it) but Christ and his Church. John 3.29
Christ also has his Associates (those friends of the Bridegroom) viz. the
Prophets, Apostles, Pastors, and Teachers, who put in a word sometimes. As
likewise do the fellow-friends of the Bride, viz. whole Churches, or particular
Christians. The Bride begins here abruptly (after the manner of a Tragedy)
through impatience of love, and an holy impotency of desire after, not an union
only, but an unity also with him whom her soul loves. Let him kiss me, etc.
Kissing is a token of love, 1 Pet. 5.14. Luke 7.45. and of reconciliation, 2 Samuel 14.33. And albeit (...) (as Philo observes) Love is not always in a
kiss; Joab and Judas could kiss and kill, (Caveatur osculum Iscarioticum)
consign their treachery with so sweet a symbol of amity, yet those that love
out of a pure heart fervently, do therefore kiss, 1 Pet. 1.22.
as desiring to transfuse, if it might be, the souls of either into other, and
to become one with the party so beloved, and in the best sense suaviated. That
therefore which the Church here desires, Heb. 1.1
is, not so much Christ's coming in the flesh (that God, who at sundry times,
and in diverse manners had spoken in times past unto her by the Prophets, would
now speak unto her by his Son, as some have sensed it) as that she may have
utmost conjunction to him, and nearest communion with him, here as much as may
be, and hereafter in all fullness of fruition. Let him kiss me, and so seal up
his hearty love unto me, even the sure mercies of David; with the kisses of
his mouth; Not with one kiss only, with one pledge of his love, but with many
(there is no satiety, no measure, no bounds or bottom of this holy love, as
there is in carnal desires, ubi etiam vota, post usum fastidio sunt) Neither
covers me to kiss his hand (as they deal by Kings) or his feet (as they do the
Popes) but his mouth; she would have true kisses, the basia, the busses of
those lips, whereinto grace is poured, Psalm. 45.3. and where hence those words
of grace are uttered, Prove. 31.26
Mat. 5.2, 3, etc. He opens his mouth with wisdom, and in his lips is the
Law of kindness. Hence her affectionate desires, her earnest pantings,
inquietations, and unsatisfiablenesses. She must have Christ, or else she
dies; she must have the kisses of Christ's mouth, even those sweet pledges of
love in his word, or she cannot be contented, but will complain, in the
confluence of all other comforts, as Abraham did, Genesis 15.2. Lord God, what
will thou give me, seeing I go childeless? Or as Artab^zus in Xenophon did,
(when Cyrus had given him a cup of gold, and Chrysantas a kiss in token of his
special favor) saying, that the cup that he gave him was nothing so good
gold, as the kiss that he gave Chrysantas. The Poets fable, that the Moon was
wont to come down from her orb to kiss Endymion. It is a certain truth, that
Christ came down from Heaven to reconcile us to his Father, to unite us to
himself, and still to communicate unto our souls the sense of his love, the
feeling of his favor, the sweet breath of his holy Spirit.

For thy Love is better than Wine] Heb. Loves. The Septuagint and Vulgar render
it Ubera; Thy breasts; but that is not so proper, since it is the Church that
here speaks to Christ, and, by the sudden change of person, shows the strength
and liveliness of her affection: As by the Plural Loves, she means all fruits
of his love, righteousness, peace, joy in the Holy Ghost, assurance of Heaven,
which Mr. Latimer calls the sweetmeats of the feast of a good conscience.
There are other dainty dishes at that feast, but this is the banquet, this is
better than Wine, which yet is a very comfortable creature, Psalm. 104.15. and
highly set by, Psalm. 4.7. Plato calls wine a music, miseriarum humanarum
(...), the chief allayments of men's miseries.

Verse. 3. Because of the savor of thy good ointments] Or, To smell to, thy
ointments are best. Odoratissimus es. As the Panther casts abroad a fragrant
savor, as Alexander the Great is said to have had a natural sweetness with
him, by reason of the good temperament of his body: So, and much more than so
the Lord Christ, Eusebius.
that sweetest of sweets. He kisseth his poor persecuted people, as
Constantine once kissed Paphnutius his lost eye: and departing (for here he
comes but as a suter only, till the marriage be made up in Heaven) he leaves
such a sweet scent behind him, such a balmy verdure, as attracts all good
hearts unto him; so that where this all-quickning carcass is, there would the
Eagles be also. Mat. 24.
The Israelites removed their tents from Mithcah, which signifies sweetness, to
Cashmonah, which signifies swiftness, Numb. 33.29. To teach us (says one) that
the Saints have no sooner tasted Christ's sweetness, but they are carried after
him presently with incredible swiftness. Hence they are said to have a nose
like the Tower of Lebanon, Cant. 7.
(for their singular sagacity in smelling after Christ) and to flee to the holy
Assemblies (where Christ's odors are beaten out to the smell) as the clouds,
Isa. 60.8.
or as the Doves to their windaws. For why? they have their senses habitually
exercised to discern good and evil, Heb. 5.14. and their love abounds yet more
and more in knowledge and in all judgment, Phil. 1.9.

Thy name is as ointment poured forth] There is an elegant allusion in the
Original betwixt Shem and Shemen; that is, Name, (...).
and Ointment. And Christ has his name both in Hebrew and Greek from ointment;
for these three words in signification are all one, Messiah, Christ, Anointed.
See the reason, Isa. 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord (that oil of gladness, Heb.
1.9.) is upon me, because he has anointed (and appointed) me to preach good
tidings to the meek, 2 Cor. 2.2, 14, 15, 16
etc. Now when this is done to the life, when Christ crucified is preached,
when the Holy Ghost in the mouth and ministry of his faithful servants shall
take of Christ's excellencies, (as it is his office to do, Joh. 16.14.) and hold
them out to the world: when he shall hold up the tapestry, as it were, 2 Timothy
2.5
and show men the Lord Christ, with an Ecce virum, Behold the man, that one
Mediator betwixt God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus; See him in his Natures, in
his Offices, in his Works, in the blessed Effects of all: This cannot but stir
up wonderful loves in all good souls; with hearty wishes, 1 Cor. 16.22.
that If any one love not the Lord Jesus Christ, he may be Anathema,
Maranatha, accursed upon accursed, and put over to God to punish.

Therefore the Virgins love thee] i. e. All that are adjoined to me in comely
sort, as chaste Damsels to their Mother and Mistress. The elect and faithful
are called Virgins for their spiritual chastity. They are Gods hidden ones (as
the word here used signifies, as they are called, (...) Paellae absconditae;
propter secretiorem educationem. Riv. Speed. 1236.
Psalm. 83.3.) they are not defiled with the corruptions that are in the world
through lust, for they are Virgins, Rev. 14.4. Else, the Bride would not suffer
them about her, Psalm. 45.14. (Of Queen Elizabeth it is said, that she never
suffered any Lady to approach her presence, of whose stain she had but the
least suspicion) These follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes, ib. as the other
creatures follow the Panther for his sweet odors; as birds of prey are carried
after carcasses. Whom having not seen, yet ye love, and can do no less, 1 Pet.
1.8. because he first loved you, and has shed abroad his love in your hearts
by his holy Spirit, 1 John 4.19. Romans 5.5. Amate amorem illius, O love his
love, says Bernard, and cry out with Ignatius, (...), My Love was crucified.
If the Centurion in the Gospel were held worthy of respect because he loved
our Nation (said those Jews) and built us a Synagogue: Luke 7.5
what shall we say of Christ, who loved us, and washed us with his own blood,
etc? Rev. 1.5 Cos amoris amor.
Herein was love, etc. And should not love be the whetstone of love? should
we not reciprocate? shall we be worse than Publicans? shall not the love of
Christ constrain us, etc? 2 Cor. 5.14.

Verse. 4. Draw mee] Those very Virgins, though they love Christ, and are
affected with his incomparable sweetness; to the slighting of earthly vanities,
and all tastless fooleries of this present life, yet are they sensible of
sundry obstacles and backbyasses, which cause them to call for help from
Heaven, Draw me, etc. scil. by the effectual working of thy mighty Spirit, and
by the cords of kindness, Hos. 11.4. that irresistible grace of thine, whereby
thou do fortiter, but yet suaviter, powerfully, but yet sweetly work upon the
wills of them that belong to thee; and by a merciful violence pull them out of
Satan's paws, yea bring them from the jaws of Hell, to the joys of Heaven, Jer.
31.3.

We will run after thee] We will not only follow thee, as the straw follows
the jet, or as Iron the lodestone; as the Sea-mans needle does the North Pole,
Numb. 14.24 John fulfilled his race. Act. 13.25 Psalm. 119.32 2 Timothy 4.7
or as the Hop in its growing follows the course of the Sun from East to West,
winding about the pole, and will rather break than do otherwise; But we will
fulfill after thee, as Caleb did, we will run after thee, as David did, yea we
will so run, that we may obtain, finish our course, and receive our Crown,
whereof we shall not fail, if we run regularly, run forthright, Prove. 4.25.
run after Christ, as the Church here promises to do, and not step before him,
as Peter presumed to do, and therefore heard, Mat. 16.13
Get thee behind me Satan. Christ is ou^ forerunner, gone before us into
Heaven, Heb. 6.10. We must come after him, Luke 9.23. press his footsteps, 1
Pet. 2.21. follow him close, Mat. 16.24. Ephesians. 5.1. and, having him ever in
our eye, run with patience the race that is set before us, Heb. 12.1, 2. Rubs
and Remoraes we shall be sure to meet with, but that must not make us stop or
step back. Pet. 1.
Christ ran with a courage, though he ran with the cross upon his shoulders
all the way. Gird up your loins, and do likewise. Run to get the race, said
blessed Bradford to his fellow sufferers, You are even almost at your journies
end. (...). Heb. 11.26 (...). Heb. 12.3
If there be any way to Heaven on horseback, it is by the cross. Look to the
joy that is set before you, as Christ did, steal a look from glory, as Moses
did, lest ye be wearied and faint, or Loosened, as the Nerves are in a swoon
or palsy. Lift up the hands that hang down to the feeble knees, Heb. 12.12.
Lift up your feet, Genesis 29.1.
as Jacob did, after the vision at Bethel, and take long strides to Christ.
Think thou hear him say, as Tully did once to his friend, Quam-obrem, si me
amas tantum, Cicer. Epist. famil.
quantum profecto amas, si dormis, expergiscere; si stas, ingredere; si
ingrederis, curre; si curris, advola. Credibile non est quantum ego in amore
and fide tua ponam, i. e. Wherefore if thou love me, as I am sure thou do,
if thou be asleep, wake thy self; if thou stand still, set forward; if thou
art upon thy way, run to me, if thou art a running, fly to me. Little do
thou think how much I set by thy love and faithfulness. Therefore haste, haste,
Neh 8.10
haste. The joy of the Lord shall be thy strength, so that thou shall walk and
not be weary, run and not faint, Isa. 40.31.

The King has brought me into his chambers] Into the Bride-chamber of Heaven,
and has made me sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus mine Head and
Husband, Ephesians. 2.6. yea into the inward part of the Bedchamber (as the word
here used signifies, Cant. 3.4.) there to have familiarity with him, that I
may be filled with his graces, John 1.16. and bring forth fruit to God, Romans
7.4.

We will be glad and rejoice in thee] Be glad inwardly, and rejoice
outwardly; not in thy love tokens so much, as in thy self. Vix diligitur Jesus
propter Jesum. They that rejoice in any thing but Christ, rejoice in a thing of
naught, Amos 6.13. with verse. 4, 5, 6. The beginning of Epistles and Letters
anciently was Gaudete in Domino, Rejoice in the Lord.

We will remember thy love] Or rehearse it. Men cannot but think and speak
much of what they love and like. If David's heart be enditing a good matter (a
song of loves) his tongue will soon be the pen of a ready writer, Psalm. 45.1,
2. And as people, when drunk with Wine, wherein is excess, are apt to sing and
hollow: so those that are filled with the Spirit, cannot but utter those
magnalia Dei, the wonderful works of God, Act. 2.11. yea express their
spiritual jollity in Psalms, and hymns, and spiritual Songs, Ephesians. 5.18, 19.

The upright love thee] Heb. Uprightness, the abstract, for the concrete, as
Pride for proud, Jer. 50.31. rebellion for rebellious, Ezekiel. 2.7. This seems
to be added for to exclude hypocrites, those Hang-byes. They seem to love God
(none more) but it is from the teeth outward only: and Christ may well say to
them, Judge. 16.
as she did to Sampson, how can thou say thou love me, when thy heart is
not with me? their hearts are upon their covetousness, then when with their
mouths they make love, Ezekiel. 33.31. as the Eagle has his eye upon the prey,
when he soareth highest toward Heaven. They follow Christ more for the loaves,
Romans 16.18
than for love, Joh. 6.26. they serve not God, but serve themselves upon him;
they serve him for gain, as children will not say their prayers, unless we
promise them their breakfasts. Sincerity is an utter enemy to Sinisterity.

Verse. 5. I am black, but comely] Heb. Black as the morning, or day-dawning,
which has light and darkness (dimness at least) mixed together. It is not
(...), Eustath. in Hom. Odyss. p.
wherein there is more light than darkness, but (...), wherein there is more
darkness than light, as the Grammarians distinguish. This morning light is
lovely, though not pure, so is the Church comely, though not clear. The Coy
Daughters of Jerusalem might make a wonderment, that so black a doudy, as the
Church appeared to them that saw not her inward beauty, (...). Act. 7.
should ever hope to have love from the fairest among men. (We read how Aaron
and Miriam murmured against Moses, (who was fair to God) because of the
Tauny-Moor-woman whom he had married, Numb. 12.1.) For answer to whom, the
Spouse here grants that she is black, or blackish, at least: (1) As having
some hypocrites in her bosom, that as that blasted corn, (...) frumentum
adustum.
Mat. 13.25. smutcheth and sullieth the better sort. (2) As being not fully
freed from sin till after death. Sin is dejected indeed in the Saints, but not
utterly ejected, while they are here. For why? it is in them as the spots of
the Leopard, not by accident, but by nature, which no Art can cure, no water
can wash off, because they are not in the skin, but in the flesh and bones, in
the sinews and the most inward parts. Job 30.30 Lam. 4.8. Jer. 8.21
Howbeit the Church is freed from the damning and domineering power of sin. And
whereas (3) She is looked upon as black, because of her afflictions (those
fruits of sin) and seems to have lain among the pots (as the Psalmist has it)
places where Scullions use to lie, and so are black and collied, yet shall she
be as the wings of a Dove that are covered with silver, etc. Psalm. 68.13.
though she sit in darkness, the Lord shall give her light, Micah 7.8. And as
black soap makes white clothes: so do sharp afflictions make holy hearts: Act.
and Mon. 1486.
Where God is pleased to set in with his battle-door, as that Martyr said.
Puriores coelo afflictione facti sunt, says Chrysostom of those that were
praying for Peter, Act. 12. And some of them of understanding shall fall, to
try them, and to purge, and to make them white, says the Prophet, of those
suffering-Saints, Dan. 11.35. The face of the Church is never so beautiful, as
when it is washed with its own tears: as some faces appear most orientally
fair, when they are most instampt with sorrow. Christ did so, Isa. 52.14.

But comely] Or, goodly, lovely, desirable, delectable, viz. For my double
Righteousness (those righteousnesses of the Saints, Rev. 19.8.) imputed, and
imparted. Hence the Church may better sing than Sappho did, Si mihi difficilis
formam natura negavit, Ovid. Epist.

Justitia formae damna rependo meae.
Ingenio formae damna rependo meae.


As the tents of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon] Kedar signifies black;
Plin^ lib. 6. cap. 28. Solin. cap. 26. Isa. 13.20.
and the Kedarens (a people of Arabia, descended of Ismael) dwelt in black
tents made of hair-cloath, and had no other houses; they also dwelt not far
from the Ethiopians, or Black-moors, 2 Chronicles. 21.16.

As the curtains, etc.] i. e. As his costly tapestry, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 8.5
and other sumptuous household stuff, whereof, read 1 King. 10.1, 2, etc.
Josephus also makes mention of the Babylonish rich furniture, wherewith
Solomon's rooms were hanged. These are to set forth the Churches comeliness, as
the other did her homeliness. Let none be despised for his outward meanness:
for within that leathern purse may be a Pearl. Christ himself was hidden under
the Carpenters son, and a poor outside, Isa. 53.2.

Saepe sub attrita latitat sapientia vest. Verse. 6. Look not upon me, because
I am black] Look not upon me, viz. with a lofty look, with a coy countenance,
fix not your eyes upon mine infirmities and miseries, so as to disdain me, or
to disesteem me for them. Blackish I am, I confess, tanned and discolored.
The old Latin translation renders it brown, (lovely brown we call it, belle
brunette, the French) Others, somewhat black, q. d. My blackness is not so much
as you may think for: Judge not therefore according to the appearance. Stumble
not at my seeming deformities. A faithful man may fall far, but the seed
abides in him, the new nature cannot be lost: the oil of Gods Spirit,
wherewith he is anointed, sets the colors, which are of his own tempering,
so sure on, and makes them cleave so fast together, that it is impossible he
should ever return to his own hiew, to be coal-black, as before. Howbeit he
is subject to much affliction, anguish and distress, as it were to the
scorching of the Sun: and that, with many that have not senses exercised to
discern good and evil, renders him despicable; but that should not be. Of
Queen Elizabeth, it is said, Camb. Elis.
that she hated no less than did Mithridates, such as maliciously persecuted
virtue forsaken of fortune: as when a Deer is shot, the rest of the Herd push
him out of their company.

Because the Sun has looked upon mee] By Sun here some have understood the Sun
of Righteousness, whom when the Church looks intently upon, she is bedazled,
and sees her own nothingness, in comparison of his incomparable brightness.
Others by Sun here will have original sin to be meant; which indeed has
brought the blackness of darkness upon the spirit of our minds, and bored out
the eye of our understandings. The same Original pravity they understand by the
following words, Sons of the same Mother, and by being kindled with wrath, they
understand sin increasing and raging as it were; And by appointing the Church
to keep other Vineyards, they understand the committing of the works of the
flesh, and the deeds of darkness, with which she was as it were holden, so
that she could do nothing else, till the Lord had loosed her out of these
chains. But they do best that by Sun in this place understand the heat of
persecution, and the parching of oppression, according to Mat. 13.6, 21. Lam.
1.6, 13, 14, etc. What Bonefires were here made in Queen Mary's days, burning
the dear Saints of God to a black coal, lighting them up for tapers in a dark
night, as they did in Neroes days? After John Husse was burnt, his adversaries
got his heart, which was left untouched by the fire, and beat it with their
staves. The story of the Maccabees persecutions prophesied of Dan. 11.36. and
recorded, Heb. 11.35. to the end, is exceeding lamentable. Opposition is (as
Calvin wrote to the French King) Evangelii Genius, Luth. in Genesis 29.
and Ecclesia est haeres crucis, says Luther, The Church has its cross for
its inheritance. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus (if they be set upon
it so to do) shall suffer persecution, there is no avoiding of it, 2 Timothy 3.12.
When Ignatius came to the wild Beasts, Now, Act. and Mon.
says he, I begin to be a Christian, and not till now. That Christian, says
Mr. Bradford, has not yet learnt his ABC in Christianity, that has not
learned the lesson of the Cross, Luth.
etc. Omnis Christianus Crucianus. This the worldling cannot away with: and
although he make a fair show in the flesh, or set a good face on it (as the
word signifies) as if he had set his face toward Sion, (...).
yet when it comes to a matter of suffering, he stumbles at the Cross, and
falls backwards: he will not suffer persecution for the Cross of Christ, Gal.
6.12. He looks at the Church with a Vultures eye, as though he would behold
nothing in her but corruption and carrion. He makes an ill construction of her
infirmities, and will not stick to say, if he have a mind to shake her off,
that she is black and despicable, that she provides but poorly for her
followers, that the great ones favor her as little, as the Lords of the
Philistims did David, Cic. pro. L. Flavio.
etc. Cicero veram religionem splendore imperii, gravitate nominis Romani,
majorum institutis, and fortunae successibus metitur. Cicero's marks of the
True Religion were the largeness of the Roman Empire, their spreading fame,
their Ancestors Ordinances, and their singular success. The Papists have the
like Arguments for proof of their Church. Luth. T. 2
But what says Luther? Ego non habeo aliud contra Papae regnum robustius
argumentum, quam quod sine cruce regnat. I have no stronger argument against
the Popes Kingdom than this, that he reigns without the Cross.

My Mothers children were angry with mee] i. e. Worldly men that are of the
same humane race that I am; these fretted at me, as Moab did at Israel
(because they were of a different Religion) Numb. 22.3, 4. or as Tobiah and his
accomplices did at Nehemiah and his Jews: Neh. 6.1
it was quarrel enough to Jerusalem, that it would not be miserable.
Hypocrites and Heretics especially, are here understood (as some conceive)
such as pretend to be children of the Church, and her greatest friends, as the
Donatists would be the only Christians, and after them the Rogation Heretics
called themselves the only Catholics. So did the Arians, and so do the
Papists, whose anger against the true children of the Church is far hotter than
Nebuchadnezzars Oven after it had been seven times heated for those three
constant Worthies. Hypocritis nihil est crudelius, impatientius and vindictae
cupidius (says Luther, who had the experience of it) plane sunt serpents,
etc. there is not a more cruel creature, more impatient and vindictive, than an
hypocrite. He is as angry as an Asp, as revengeful as a Serpent, etc. He is
of the Serpentine seed, and carries the old enmity, Genesis 3.15. Cains club, Genesis
4.8. with 1 John 3.12. Your Brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my
names sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified, Isa. 66.5. Here was a fair glove
drawn upon a foul hand. Act. and Mon.
In nomine Domini incipit omne malum, was grown to a Proverb here in times of
Popery.

They made me the Keeper of the Vineyards] No marvel therefore that I am
Sunburned, since I have born the burden and heat of the day, as Matthew. 20.12. it
has been my task to keep out Boars, Foxes, and other noisome creatures; yea it
has been my lot to be put upon some servile offices (as those poor
Vinedressers were, 2 King. 25.12.) not so suitable to my place and station
assigned me by God: Yea, although I am dead with Christ from the rudiments of
the world, yet as though living in the world, (...)
I have by these Impostours and Impositours been made to dogmatize after the
commandments and doctrines of men, Col. 2.20, 22.

But mine own Vineyard have I not kept] q. d. Being burdened with humane rites
and traditions, and having been the servant of men, 1 Cor. 7.23. I have
departed from the duty that God prescribed unto me. Sane been, Full well truly
have I rejected or slighted the commandment of God, that I might keep men's
tradition, Mark 7.9. Thus she shames and shents her self: she blusheth and
bleedeth before the Lord for her carelessness in duty. Yea she tells the world
the true reason of her present blackness: somewhat she had to say against
others, but most against her self. After I was made known to my self, Postquam
ostensum fuerit mihi. Trem.
laid Ephraim, scil. by looking in the glass of Gods Law, I repented, Jer.
31.19. Get thee this Law, as a glass to look in, said Mr. Bradford, so shall
thou see thy face foul arrayed, and so shamefully saucy, mangy, pocky and
scabbed, Sermon. of Repent. page 26
that thou can not but be sorry at the sight thereof. Thus he. Physicians
in some kind of unseemly Convulsions, wish their Patients to look themselves
in a Glass, which will help them to strive the more, when they shall see their
own deformities. It is fit we should often reflect, and see every man the plague
of his heart, the error of his life, keeping our hearts soft, 1 King. 8. Psalm.
19.
supple and soluble: for softness of heart discovers sin, as blots do run
abroad, and seem biggest in wet paper. When the Cockatrices egg is crushed, it
breaks out into a viper, Isa. 59.5.

Verse. 7. Tell me, O thou whom my soul loveth] The sins of Gods Elect turn to
their good ( Venenum aliquando pro remedio fuit, says Seneca, De Benef. l. 2.
c. 18.
Poison is by Art turned into a Medicine) make them cry more upon Christ, love
him more with all their soul, desire more earnestly to be joined unto him, use
all holy means of attaining thereunto; and that with such affection, that when
others are at their rest, or repast, the Christian can neither eat nor rest,
unless he be with Christ.

Where thou feedest] This Book of Canticles is a kind of Pastoral, a song of a
Beloved concerning a Beloved. The Church therefore gives, and Christ takes often
herein upon himself the term and carriage of a loving and skilful Shepherd,
that feeds his flock daily and daintily, feeds them among the Lillies, and
beds of spices, makes them to lie down in green pastures, Ezekiel. 24.13 John
10.1, 1 Pet. 5.2 Jer. 3.10, 13 Rev. 13.1
and leads them beside the still waters, Psalm. 23.2. (his Word and Sacraments)
makes them also to lie down at noon, i. e. (as the chief Pastor of his sheep)
he wholly orders them in all their spiritual labors, toils, and
afflictions; giving them safe repose in the hottest seasons, Isa. 49.10.

For why should I be as one that turns aside] q, d. This would be no less
to thy dishonor, than my disadvantage. If I miscarry, thou will be no small
loser by it. Exodus 32
To urge God with the respect of his own glory lying now at stake, is a most
effectual way of speeding in prayer. If thou destroy this people, what will the
Egyptians say? how will the very banks of blasphemy be broken down, Josh. 7.9.
and they speak evil of thee with open mouth? If the Canaanites beat us, what
shall become of thy great name? Interpone, quaeso, tuas preces, apud Deum pro
me, Scultet. Annal.
and or a Christum cujus est causa haec, ut mihi adsit: quam si obtinuerit,
mihi obtenta erit: sin vero causa exciderit, nec ego eam obtinere potero: atque
ita ipse solus ignominiam reportabit. Prithee pray for me (says Luther to a
friend of his that feared how it would fare with him when he was to appear at
Ausborough before the Cardinal) pray for me to Jesus Christ, whose the cause
is, that he would stand by me; for if he carry the day, I shall do well
enough. As, if I miscarry, he alone will undergo the blame and shame of it.

By the flock of thy companions] Why should I have fellowship with thy
pretended fellows, 1 These. 5.23.
and so incur the suspicion of dishonesty. Christians must abstain from all
appearance of evil, shun and be shy of the very shows and shadows of sin,
Quicquid fuerit male coloratum, as Bernard has it, whatsoever looks but
ill-favouredly; 2 Cor 8.20, 21 (...).
providing for things honest, not only in the sight of the Lord, but in the
sight of men: and avoiding this, that no man should blame us, avoiding it, as
ship-men shun a rock or shelf, with utmost care and circumspection. Joseph
would not breathe in the same air with his Mistress, nor John the Evangelist
with the Heretic Cerinthus; (...). Eusebius.
but sprang out of the bath, as soon as he came into it. St. Paul would not
give place by subjection to those false brethren, no not for an hour, lest the
truth thereby should suffer detriment, Gal. 2.5. Constantine would not read the
Arians Papers, but tear them before their eyes. And Placilla the Empress
besought her Husband Theodosius senior, Sezom. li. 7. c. 7.
not once to confer with Eunomius; lest being perverted by his speeches, he
might fall into heresy. Memorable is the story of the children of Samosata,
that would not touch their ball, but burnt it, because it had touched the toe
of an heretical Bishop, as they were tossing it, and playing with it.

Verse. 8. If thou know not, O thou fairest among women] So Christ is pleased to
style her, who erst held and called her self black and Sunburned, verse. 5.
Nothing more commends us to Christ, than humility and lowly-mindedness, 1 Pet.
3.5. The daughter of Zion, for this is likened to a comely and delicate woman,
her enemies to Shepherds with their flocks, Jer. 6.2, 3. False Prophets also
have their flocks, seducers drag Disciples after them, Act. 20.30. Faciunt
favos and vespae, faciunt Ecclesias and Marcionitae, says Tertullian, Wasps
also have their hony-combs, Apes imitate men's actions. These Conventiclers the
Church must studiously decline, and not viam per avia quaerere, seek truth by
wandering through the Thicket of Errors, as Junius, says one, in his time did;
who confessed he had spent two and twenty years in trying Religions, pretending
that Scripture, Prove all things. The Spouse is here directed by the
Arch-shepheard to repair to the foddering-places, to frequent the public
Assemblies; to tread in that Sheep-track; the footsteps of the flock, the
Shepherds tents. There Christ has promised to feed his Lambs (that have
golden fleeces, Exodus 33.12, 7. Acts 10.1, 2.
precious souls) to call them by name, as he did Moses, Cornelius, etc. to
teach them great and hidden things, such as they knew not, Jer. 33.3. to give
them spiritual senses, ability to examine what is doctrinally propounded to
them, Joh. 10.
to try before they trust (for all Christ's Sheep are rational, they know his
voice from the voice of a stranger) to be fully persuaded of the truth that
they take up and profess, Col. 2.2. Luke 1.1. to feel the sweetness and
goodness, the life and power of it within themselves, Col. 1.9. Job 32.8. to
hate false doctrines, and those that would persuade them thereunto, Psalm.
119.104. buzzing doubts into their heads, Romans 16.17. John 10.5. So that though
man or Angel should object against the truth they have received, they would not
yield to him, 1 Cor. 11.15
Gal. 1.8, 9. They know that Satan can, and does transform himself into an
Angel of light, and can act his part by a good man also, as he did by Peter
once and again, Matthew. 16.23. Gal. 2.13. and as he did in our remembrance by
Mr. Archer, a holy man, who yet held and broached hellish opinions.
Swenchfeldio non defuit cor bonum, sed caput regulatum, says Bucholcerus:
Swenchfeldius had a good heart, but a wild head, and so became a means of much
mischief to many silly shallow-headed people, whom he shamefully seduced. This
to prevent, Christ has given gifts to men, Pastors and Teachers after his own
heart. Guides, to speak unto them the word of God, Heb. 12.7. to set in order
for them acceptable words, words of truth, that may be as goads and as nails
fastened by those Masters of the Assemblies, which are given from one
Shepherd, Eccles. 12.10, 11. in fine, to take heed to themselves, and to all
the flock over the which the Holy Ghost has made them Overseers, to feed the
Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood, Act. 20.28. that
they might go in and out, and find pastures, such as will breed life, and life
in more abundance, John 10, 9, 10.

Go thy way forth by the footsteps of the flock] Add endeavor to thy desire,
up and be doing: for affection without action is like Rachel (that ancient
Shepherdess) beautiful, but barren. Get thee forth therefore by the
footsteps of the flock, tread in the same track that good old Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, David, Paul, etc. did; who followed the Lamb whithersoever he went.
Keep to that good old way (the way that is called Holy) and ye shall find
rest to your souls. Walk in the footsteps of faithful Abraham, Jer. 6.16
and ye shall one day rest in the bosom of Abraham. Walk in the same spirit,
in the same footsteps with Paul and Titus, 1 Pet. 1.9
2 Cor. 12.18. so shall you shortly and surely receive the end of your faith,
the salvation of your souls.

And feed thy Kids] The Church also is a Shepherdess (as were Laban's and
Jethro's daughters) and has a little little flock of young Goats, that is, of
green Christians, who are to be fed with the sincere milk of the word, that
they may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2.

Beside the Shepherds tents] Turn to the Under-shepheards (the godly
Ministers) and so return to the great Shepherd and Bishop of your souls, 1
Pet. 2.25. Hold you close to these, and hold fast the form of wholesome words,
2 Timothy 1.13. and linger not after unsound and unsavory doctrines, so rife
abroad; those murdering morsels that fat men indeed, but it is to the day of
slaughter. Silly sheep do eat no grass more greedily than that which rots them.
But thou, O man of God, fly these things, and from such stand off, 1 Timothy 6.5,
11.

Verse. 9. I have compared thee, O my love, etc.] My Pastoral-love, or
Shepheardesse-companion, my Fellow-friend, or familiar Associate in the
function of spiritual feeding: My Neighbor, or Next, as the Greek renders it.
For the Saints are not only like unto Christ, 1 John 3.2. but also next unto
him, Luke 22.30. yea one with him, John 17.21. and so, above the most glorious
Angels, Heb. 1.14. as being the Spouse, the Bride; whereas Angels are only
servants of the Bridegroom: and as being the Members of Christ, and so in a
nearer union than any creature. This the Devil and his Angels stomacked, and so
fell from their first principality.

To a company of horses] Or, to my troop of horses in the Chariots of Pharaoh.
The Palfreys, His, the Chariots Pharaohs, says an Interpreter. What is this?
but that the Spirit of strength and speed, it is Christ's: Clapham.
and the untoward flesh (which is to be drawn by the same Divine Spirit) it is
of the world, and the very Chariot of Satan. Soul and Body (as wheels and
axletree) do run which way the Devil drives; till the stronger Man Jesus have
freed our Charret-nature from that power of hell, and joined himself by his own
Spirit unto our nature, that so (with Ezekiels Charret) it may go forth, and
return as his Divine Spirit directs. Thus he.

Verse. 10. Thy cheeks are comely] i. e. Thy whole face (by a Synecdoche) though
the cheeks are instanced, as being the seat of shame facedness, modesty, Omnium
hominum pulcherrimus. Aenil. Prob. Aeliat. 12. cap. 1.
and beauty; such as was found in Esther (whose son Artaxerxes Longimanus was
held the fairest man alive) Aspasia Milesia the wife of Cyrus, who was styled
(...), Fair and wise; and the Lady Jane Gray, whose excellent beauty was
adorned with all variety of virtues, as a clear sky with stars (says the
Historian) as a Princely Diadem with Jewels. Sir John Heywood.
Hence she became most dear to King Edward the sixth, who appointed her his
successor. But nothing so dear to him, nor so happy in her succession, as the
Church is to Christ; who lively describes her inward beauty, which he looks
upon as a rich pearl in a rude shell, or as those tents of Kedar
aforementioned, verse. 4. which though course and homely for the outward hiew,
yet, for the precious gemms, jewels, and sweet odours that were couched in
them, were very desirable.

With rows of Jewels] A metaphor from fair women richly adorned. Holy women may
be costly attired, Gratior est Pulchro, etc. though Seneca thinks that he was
in an error that said so, since virtue needs no garnish, but is magnum sui
decus, and corpus consecrat, its own greatest glory, and consecrates the body
wherein i^ dwells. St. Peter also prescribes Ladies an excellent dress, 1
Pet. 3.3, 4. Tertullian comes after with his Vestite vos serico pietatis, etc.
Cloathe your selves with the silk of Piety, with the satin of Sanctity, with
the purple of Purity. Taliter pigmentatae Christum habebitis amatorem, Being
thus arrayed and adorned, you shall have Christ to be your Suter.

Thy neck with chains] scil. Of pearl or precious stones, that is, of heavenly
graces drawn all upon that one thread of humility, which is the ribband or
string that ties together all those precious pearls. Humility is (...), says
Basil, the treasuresse of the rest of the virtues. It is (...), says
Chrysostom, the bond of all good things, the bond of perfection, as St. Paul
says of Charity. Hence St. Peter's word (...), (1 Pet. 5.5. Be ye clothed
with humlity) comes of (...), for a knot: and it signifies not only alligare,
to knit the graces together, and to preserve them from being made a prey to
pride, but also innodare (say some) to tie knots as delicate and cutious women
use to do of ribbands to adorn their necks, or other parts: as if humility was
the knot of every virtue, and the ornament of every grace. On the contrary,
Pride is said to compass evil men about as a chain, Psalm. 73.6. which, oh how
ugly and unseemly is it on the neck of beauty, back of honor, head of learning.

Verse. 11: We will make thee borders of gold with studs of silver] We, the
whole Trinity will join together (as we do in all our works ad extra) in
framing for thee these glorious ornaments, in putting upon thee our own
comeliness, Ezekiel. 16.11, 12, 13, etc. in increasing, and imbellishing thy
graces, thy pure gold of holiness, with silver speks, studds or imbroiderie.
Thus the Spouse promises to make his Bride (though he find her fair and
fine) much fairer and finer by an addition of more and more graces and gifts,
both ordinary and extraordinary; till she be transformed into the same image
from glory to glory. He will spare for neither gold nor silver to beautify
her, such is his abundant love unto her. (...). Ephesians. 3
He clothes her with the party-colored Garment of multivarious graces, and
this he borders with gold and bespangles with silver. Her clothing is of
wrought gold, far more stately and costly than that of Esther in all her beauty
and bravery; than that of Dionysius, whose mantle was sold to the Carthaginians
for an hundred and twenty talents; Athenaus.
than that royal Robe of Demetrius King of Macedony, that was so massy and
magnificent, that none of his successors would ever wear it, propter
invidiosam impendii magnificentiam, for the unparalleld sumptuousness thereof.

Verse. 12. While the King sits at his table, etc.] Heb. at his round table,
or Ring-sitting. In accubitu circulari: in orbem enim antiquitus ad mensam
sedebant, 1 Samuel 16.11. Send and fetch him, for we will not fit round till he
come hither. Turk-hist.
The manner of the Turks at this day is, to sit round at meat on the bare
ground, with their legs gathered under them. By the King is here meant Messiah
the Prince, Dan. 9.25. Christ the Lord, Act. 2.36. Et omnes sancti in circuitu
ejus, all his Saints sit round about him, Psalm. 76.11. (as the twelve Tribes
were round about the Tabernacle Numb. 2.2. as the four and twenty Elders are
round about the Throne, Rev. 4.4.) they are a people near unto him, Psalm.
148.14. they are those Blessed that eat and drink with him in his Kingdom,
first of grace, and then of glory. Luke 14.15
And whiles they thus sit with their King (a sign of sweetest friendship and
fellowship: it was held a great honor and happiness to stand before Solomon)
in his circled session. 1 King. 10.8


My spikenard sends forth the smell thereof] Says the Church, that is, my
faith is actuated, and all mine other graces exercised and increased at the
Lords Table, that heavenly Love-feast: Ubi cruci haeremus, Cyprian.
sanguinem sugimus, and inter ipsa Redemptoris nostri vulnera figimus linguam,
whereat we climb the cross, as it were, suck Christ's blood, suck honey out of
the Rock, (Deuteronomy. 32.13.) feed heartily and hungerly upon his flesh, as Eagles
do upon the slain, Matthew. 24, 38. This Luther calls crapulam sanctum, a
gracious gourmandise; Luther.
whiles we lean upon his bosom, and feed without fear; sending forth our
sweet odours, our pillars of incense, by lifting up many an humble, joyful and
thankful heart to him, living by his Laws, and being a savor of life to
others. But what shall we think of those that stink above ground, poison the
very air they breathe upon, defile the visible Heavens, which must therefore
be purged by the fire of the last day: and by their rotten communication, and
unclean conversation, spread their infections, and send the Plague to their
neighbors, as those Ashdodites, Gittites and Ekronites did, 1 Samuel 5.

Verse. 13. A bundle of myrrh is my Well-beloved, etc.] The Bride proceeds to
return all the glory to her Bridegroom (of all that good that he had praised
her for before) by a second similitude here, and by a third in the next verse:
for in this argument she thinks she can never say sufficient. It is the
manner of Maids to wear Nosegaies of sweet flowers in their bosoms, and to
make no small account of them. Myrrh is mavelous sweet and savoury, Psalm.
45.8. Prove. 7.17. See Plin. lib. 12. cap. 15, 16. but nothing so sweet as the
Lord Christ is to those that have spiritual senses; Whom therefore the Spouse
here places between her breasts, that there-hence the sweet savor may ascend
into her Nostrils. Again, Myrrh has a bitter root, Mark 15.23. Christ seems
bitter at first, because of afflictions; but if we suffer with him, 2 Timothy
2.12 Matthew. 2
we shall also reign together with him. Thirdly, Myrrh was very precious:
Hence the Wisemen offered it to Christ at his birth. Christ is of that esteem
with his people, elect and precious, 1 Pet. 2.6. That as wise Merchants they
make a thorow-sale of all to purchase him, Matthew. 13. Lastly, Myrrh is of a
preserving nature, and was therefore made use of at funerals, see John 19.39.
In like sort Christ, as he does by his Spirits heat exsiccate or dry up the
superfluity of our degenerate nature, whereby body and soul is preserved to
eternal life; so, after our bodies are turned to dust, he still preserves a
substance, which he will raise again at the last day. Hence the Saints are
said to sleep in Jesus, to be dead in Christ, who shall raise our vile bodies,
and make them like unto his own glorious body, in beauty, brightness, grace,
favor, agility, ability, Phil. 3.21.
and other Angelical excellencies.

He shall lie all night betwixt my breasts] This is Christ's proper place: My
son, give me thine heart, Christ should dwell in the heart by Faith, Ephesians.
3.17. But too too often he is shut out, and adultery found between the
breasts, as Hos. 2.2. there they carried the signs of their Idolatry (as
Papists now do their crucifixes) to testify, that the Idol had their hearts.
But what says Mr. Bradford Martyr in a certain letter? As the wife will keep
her bed only for her husband, although in other things she is content to have
fellowship with others, as to speak, sit, eat, drink, go, etc. So our
Consciences (which are Christ's wives) must needs keep the bed, that is, Gods
sweet promises, a lonely for our selves and our husband to meet together, to
embrace and laugh together, and to be joyful together: If sin, the Law, the
Devil, Act. and Mor. 1503.
or any thing would creep into the bed, and lie there, then complain to thy
husband Christ, and forthwith thou shall see him play Phineahs part, etc. And
again, in another Letter, Think on the sweet mercies and goodness of God in
Christ. Here, here is the resting place, here is the Spouses bed: creep into
it, and in your arms of Faith embrace him. Ib. 1^9
Bewail your weakness, your unworthiness, your diffidence, and you shall see
he will turn to you. What said I, you shall see? Nay, I should have said, you
shall feel he will turn to you, etc.

Verse. 14. My beloved is unto me as a cluster of Camphire] My Beloved, and
unto Me. This particular application is the very quintessence and pith of
Faith. (...).
(...). It is the property of true Faith to individuate Christ, to appropriate
him to her self, as if he were wholly and solely hers: She adjudgeth him in
special to her self, with My Beloved, my Strength, and my Redeemer, my Lord,
and my God. This when Thomas did, Now thou beleevest, said our Savior, John
20.29. Were it not for this word of Possession (Mine) the Devil might say the
Creed to as good purpose as any of us. He believes there is a God, and a
Christ: but that which torments him is, he can say (My) to never an article of
Faith. Wicked men likewise may Credere Deum, and Deo, sed non in Deum, they may
hear with joy, and have a taste, yea and apply the promises, but they do it
presumptuously and sacrilegiously; because they accept not of Christ upon
Christ's terms, take not whole Christ in all his Offices and Efficacies, would
have him as a Savior, but not as a Sovereign, they make not a total
resignation of themselves to Christ as Paul did, Ga^. 2.19, 20.

As a cluster of Camphire] Or, As the Cypress-berry, within his white flower
sweet, Plin. lib. 12. cap. 14.
pleasant, and very fragrant. They tha^ talk here of the Island Cyprus, are as
far from the sense, as that Island is from Engedi, which was a place in the
Land of Canaan, in the tribe of Judah near unto the Dead Sea. Hither fled David
one time, when Saul pursued him. And here Jehosaphat had that notable victory
over his enemies by the power of prayer, 2 Chronicles. 20. This was a fruitful soil
for Gardens and Vineyards, Ezekiel. 47.10. Now the Cypress-tree, as also other
Aromatical-trees, grow best in Vineyards. And the Church forgetting her self,
as it were, and transported with love to Christ, heaps up thus one similitude
upon another. Amor Christi est ecstaticus, neque juris se sinit esse sui. R.
Solomon Jarchi does out of their Agada note, Rev. 22.2.
that this Cophir in the text, is a tree that brings fruit four or five times
yearly. Christ is that tree of life, that yields fruit every month, being more
fruitful than the Lemmon-tree, Sol. cap. 45.
or the Egyptian Fig Tree* that bears seven times a year, as Solinus reports.
Our English Bibles call it Camphire, which being smelled unto, does naturally
keep under or weaken carnal lust, says one. Now if that should be here
intended, how fitly is it here placed among the Vines of Engedi, that is a
medicine for bridling lust, over-soon stirred up by Wine, which one well calls
lac Veneris, the milk of Venus.

Et Venus in vinis, ignis ut igne, furit. Verse. 15. Behold, thou art fair my
love] Or, My fellow-friend, as verse. 9. And as she is his Love, so he is her
Beloved, verse. 16. and as he commends her, so she him no less. This should
be all the strife betwixt married couples, who should outstrip the other in
mutual melting-heartedness, and all loving respects either to other, in all
passages, carriages, and behaviors whatsoever betwixt them: accustoming
themselves, as here, to speak kindly and cheerfully one to the other. This is
that that will infinitely sweeten and beautify the married Estate: it will
make marriage a merry-age, which else will prove a marr-age. And here, let
husbands learn to love their wives, as Christ loved the Church, Ephesians. 5.25.
celebrating her beauty in a song, repeating her just praises, to show his
heartiness therein, and inviting others with an Ecce, to the due contemplation
thereof. Behold thou art all fair, my Love, behold thou art fair: Non est ficta
aut frigida haec laudatio, this is no feigned or frigid commendation, but such
as proceeds from entire affection, and breathes abundance of good will. Full
well might the Prophet tell the Church: Surely as the Bridegroom rejoices over
the Bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee, Isa. 62.5. And again, The Lord
thy God will rejoice over thee with joy, he will rest in his love, and seek no
further, he will joy over thee with singing, Zeph. 3.17. The Church had
acknowledged, verse. 5. that she was black, or at least blackish, and yet, by
way of Apology too, she had pleaded that she was comely, and so, not to be
slighted. But Christ affirms her fair, yea twice fair, yea the fairest among
women (sic suum cuique pulchrum, so does he even err in her love, as the
Wiseman phraseth it, Prove. 5.19.) as himself is said to be the fairest
amongst men, (...). Theog.
Psalm. 45.2. where the Hebrew word likewise is of double-form (Thou art fair,
thou art fair above the Sons of Adam) to note out double, that is excellent
beauty, such as draws love and liking: Now it is a Maxim in the Civil Law,
Vxor fulget radiis mariti, The wife shines with her husbands beams, so does
the Church with Christ's graces, wherewith she is decked, as Rebecca did with
Isaac's Jewels. Read Ezekiel. 16.2, 3, 4, 5, etc. and you will see that all the
Churches beauty is borrowed. The Maids that were brought to Ahashuerosh,
besides their own native beauty, they were first purified and perfumed before
he chose one, Esth. 1. But here it is otherwise altogether. For when the
Church was in her blood, in her blood, in her blood (three several times it is
so said, that we might the better observe it, and be affected with it) Christ
sanctified and cleansed her with the washing of water by the word, that he
might present her to himself a glorious Church, holy and without blemish,
Ephesians. 5.26, 27. But a bloody Spouse she was to him, Rev. 1.5.
who loved her, and washed her with his blood.

Thou have Doves eyes] Sweet, amiable, single, and chaste. In the eyes beauty
sits, and shines more than in any part of the body besides. (...), etc. apud
Homerum. Blunts voyages.
The Turks tell their desperate Devotoes of beautiful women, with full eyes, in
their fools paradise; and thereby hearten them on to bold attempts. The Hebrews
say, that in oculis, loculis, poculis, the heart of a man shows it self. The
Church is here said not to have Eagles, Vultures, Foxes, Apes eyes, but Doves
eyes. Now, Fell columba caret, rostro non caedit, and ungues
Possidet innocuos, puraque grana legit.


The Dove has her name in the Hebrew, from a root that signifies to oppress
and make a prey of any, as poor people, strangers, fatherless, (...)
etc. Jer. 50.16 because (belike) this creature is subject to the prey and
spoil of Hawks, when pursued, they save themselves by flight, not fight. (The
Prophet Jonah was so called, as some think, quod columbae instar aufugeret,
because he fled as a Dove, when God sent him to Nineveh, but not with the
wings of a Dove) Sometimes sitting in their Dove-cotes, they see their nests
destroyed, their young ones taken away, and killed before their eyes, never
offering to rescue or revenge, which all other fowls do seem in some sort to
do. This is very appliable to the persecuted Church; (...).
as may be seen in the Lamentations, and Martyrologies. In Greek, the Dove
has her name from her exceeding love to her Mate and young ones. (...), says
Aristotle, they kiss one another: the Church likewise kisseth Christ, and is
interchangeably kissed of Christ, (...) ab (...) simul and (...), traho.
Psalm. 2.12. Cant. 1.1. being drawn together by a mutual dear affection (as the
Apostles word imports, Heb. 11.13.) As if at any time the Dove and her Mate
fall out and fight; shortly after, Quae modo pugnarunt, jungunt sua rostra
columbae,
Quarum blanditias, verbaque murmur habet.


Differences may arise between Christ and his Spouse (she may thank her self,
for he grieves her not willingly, Lam. 3.35. Ille dolet quoties cogitur esse
ferox) and some houshold-words she may have from him: but soon after, he
takes her into the wilderness, and speaks to her heart, Hos. 2.14. yea he
takes her into his Wine-cellar, Cant. 2.4. then when one would think he should
carry her into a dungeon rather. He kisses her (as Doves do one another) with
the kisses of his mouth, then when one would think he should, upon such high
provocations, kick her, nay kill her, then he shows her matchless mercy, such
as no man would show his wife, Jer. 3.1.22. For he is God, and not man, yea
such a sin-pardoning God as never was heard of, Micah 7.18. If there be but a
Doves eye in the heads of any of his, a columbine simplicity, if simple to do
evil, bunglers at it, and have nothing to say in defense of it, when it is
done, Romans 16.19. the amends is made: and love, with her long mantle, covers a
multitude of sins, Prove. 10.12.

Inter Romanos dicebatur, Tu Caius ego Caia. So here the Spouse, I am Japha,
because thou art Japhe. Joppa a fair haven Town had its name from this root;
like as the fair havens, Act. 27.8. and the beautiful gate. Act. 3.2.
Verse. 16. Behold thou art fair my Beloved, yea pleasant] Behold thou art fair
my Love, etc. said he to her. It were fitter a fair deal for me to say so to
thee, says she here to him: since all my beauty is but borrowed of thee, it is
but a spark of thy flame, a drop of thine Ocean: if I shine at all, it is with
thy beams only: if I be any whit comely, it is with the comeliness that thou
have put upon me. Christ as a man (how much more as God blessed for ever?) was
fairer by far than all the children of men, Psalm. 45.2. because free from sin,
and full of grace and truth, as in Ezekiel. 28.7. there is mentioned beauty of
Wisdom. And the Plato.
Heathen Philosopher could say, that if moral wisdom (how much more
spiritual?) could be seen with mortal eyes, it would draw all men's hearts unto
it self. But besides his inward beauty, which was unconceiveable (inasmuch as
in him, as in a Temple, the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily, that is,
personally) in the body of Christ, there was a most fair form, and a Divine
face. He had a good complexion, and such a comely countenance, as did express
a Divinity in him. If St. Stephens face, when he stood before the Council,
shone like an Angels face, Act. 6.15. and if his eye could pierce the Heavens,
Act. 7.55. how much more (may we think) Christ did? True it is, that by reason
of his sufferings in the flesh, his visage was marred more than any man's, and
his form more than the sons of men, Isa. 52.14. And, he had no form nor
comeliness, viz. in the eyes of his perverse Countrymen, who when they saw
him, they could discern no such beauty wherefore they should so desire him: He
was despised and rejected of men: for why? He was a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief, which had so drunk up his spirits, John 8.57
and furrowed his fair face, that at little past thirty years of age, he was
reckoned to be toward fifty, he seemed to the Jews to be much elder than
he was indeed, as some are of opinion.

(...) Sept. The Spring or flower of beauty.
Yea pleasant] Sweet as a flower, sweet as an honeycomb, Mell in ore, melos in
aure, jubilum in cord, sweet to the soul, and health to the bones, Prove.
16.24. He that has once but lightly tasted how sweet the Lord Christ is, does
soon dis-relish, yea loathe, in comparison, all this worlds homely fare,
tasteless fooleries.

Ovid. Met. lib. 15
Clitorio quicunque sitim de font levarit,
Vina fugit, gaudetque meris abstemius undis.
Yea our bed is green] Our Bridal-bed: which was wont to be decked with
Garlands and green bows. Or, our Bedsted (so it may be rendered) is green, made
of green and growing timber, as Christ's house is built of living and thriving
stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. There is a perpetual greenness (the fruit of the vegetative
Spirit of God within them) upon all Christ's Olive Trees, Psalm. 52.8. And these
green things must not be hurt, Rev. 9.4. Or if they be by a wound at the
root, so as that they suffer a fit of barrenness, or seem to be sapless, yet
they shall revirescere, recover their former greenness, as the Philippians did,
and had a new spring after a sharp winter: they had deflourished for a time,
(...).
but now reflourished, Phil. 4.16.

Verse. 17. The beams of our house are Cedar] Not My, but Our house, as before
Our bed, and after Our galleries. All is common betwixt the Bridegroom and the
Bride, bed, board, house, all. It should be so betwixt married couples, who
should not have several purses, interests, etc. but both bring in what they
have or get, to the common hive. The Church is Christ's house, 1 Timothy 3.15 Heb.
3.6 Isa. 51.16
and every faithful soul is Gods building: he plants the Heavens, and lays
the foundation of the Earth, that he may say to Zion, Thou art my people. The
great Architect of the world does as wonderful a work in converting a soul to
himself, as he did in setting up this goodly Edifice of the Universe. This
stately structure of the new creature he makes of the best materials, Cedar,
Cypress, Bora^ine, etc. A mud wall may be made up of dirt, straw, stones of
the street, etc. Not so a stately Palace, a Marble Monument. Solomon's Temple
was built of Cedar-wood: So was the Temple of Diana of the Ephesians, as
Vitruvius testifies: the Devil will needs be Gods Ape. He knew that Cedar is
a tree strong and durable; and for the dryness of it, the timber chawneth not,
rotteth not: yea it has a property to preserve other things from putrefaction.
A late writer observes of it, Hinc Horat. Cedro dignum, and Cerite cera.
Scribon. in Physic. lib. 2.
that viventes res putrefacit and perdit, putridas autem restituit and
conservat. The Church is also stable, and cannot be ruinated; it is founded
upon a Rock; the Elect cannot be finally deceived: the faithful Ministers, by
preaching Law and Gospel, kill the quick Pharisee, and quicken the dead
Publican, Romans 7.9. 2 Cor. 2.16. they declare unto man his righteousness, Job
33.23. and show him how he may be found in Christ, (viz. when sought for by
the justice of God) not having his own righteousness, those filthy garments,
Phil. 3.9 Rev. 19.14
Zech. 3.4. but the Brides fine white linen and shining: and after a few turns
taken here with Christ in the terrace or galleries of the Church Militant made
of Firr, he shall have places given him in Heaven, to walk among those that
stand by, Zach. 3.7. that is, among the Seraphim, as the Chaldee Paraphrast
expounds it.

CHAP. II. Verse. 1. I am the Rose of Sharon]
THe Greek renders it, the flower of the field, that grows without man's labor,
having Heaven for its Father, Earth for its Mother. So had Christ, made of a
woman, manifested in the flesh, without Father as man, without Mother as God,
Heb. 7.3. And Heb. 9.11. The Tabernacle of Christ's humane Nature (so called,
because therein the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily, Col. 2.9.) was not
made with hands, that is, not by man's help; it was not of this building by the
power of Nature. But as matter in the beginning of time was taken from man to
make a woman, so matter in the fullness of time was taken from Woman to make the
Man Christ Jesus: And as Eve was a true Woman without woman, so Christ was a
true Man without man. He is called, filius hominis, but it is only of the
feminine gender. He is the flower of the field, as here, the Stone cut out
without hands, Dan. 2.45. the Phoenix that has no Parents, the Pearl that is
not made through any earthly copulation, but is begotten of the dew of Heaven.
For as Pearls are bred in shell-fishes of a celestial humor, so was Christ, by
heavenly influence, in the Virgins womb. But let us weigh the words as they are
commonly rendered: Sharon was a most fruitful place situate under the hill
Libanon, 1 Chronicles. 27.29. coupled with Carmel for excellency, Isa. 35.2. not
more a field than a fold for flocks, Isa. 65.10. To a Rose (that Queen of
flowers) here growing does the Lord Christ fitly compare himself. This flower
delights in shadowy places (and thence borrows its name in the Original) it
is orient of hiew, Habasteleth.
cold of complexion, but passing redolent, and of comfortable condition. Such a
Flower is Jesus (says an Expositour here) most delighted in temperate places,
for hiew white and ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousand, Clapham.
a cooler to the conscience, but passing savoury, and comfortable to the
distressed Patient.

And the Lilly of the Vallyes] Or, low places, which are most fat and fertile.
Christ is both Rose and Lilly, which two put together make a gallant show, and
beautify the bosoms of those that bear them; but nothing like as Christ does
those that have him dwelling in their hearts by Faith. These flowers do soon
fade, and lose both beauty and sweetness: but so does not Christ or his
comforts. Tam recens mihi nunc Christus est, ac si hac hora fudisset sanguinem,
says Luther, Christ is as fresh to me now, as if he had shed his blood this
very hour. He purposely compares himself to a Vine, to a door, to bread, and
many other excellent and necessary creatures, every where obvious, that therein
(as in so many optic glasses) we may see him, and be transformed into him.
For this it is also, that he here commends himself, not out of arrogance or
vain affectation of popular applause, but for our sakes doubtless, that we may
take notice of his excellencies, and love him in sincerity. The Spouse also
praises her self sometimes, not out of pride of her parts, but to show her
thankfulness to Christ, from whom she had them.

Verse. 2. As the Lilly among the Thorns] The Lilly is white, pure and pleasant,
Shos^^^nah.
having six leaves (and thence its name in Hebrew) and seven golden-coloured
grains within it. The forty fifth Psalm (of like argument with this Song) is
dedicated to him that excels upon Shoshannim, or upon this sixleaved flower
the Lilly. Moreover the chief City of Persia was called Shushan, from the
multitude of Lillies growing there. Schindler. Cassidor. lib. 7. v^r. Ep. 15.
Here Alexander found fifty thousand Talents of gold; the very stones of it are
said to have been joined together with Gold. The Church is far richer, and
fuller of beauty and bravery; but beset with thorns, such as Abimelech was, a
right bramble indeed, that grew in the base hedge-row of a Concubine, and
scratcht and drew blood to purpose: wicked men are called Briers, Micah 7.4.
thorns twisted and folded, Nahum 1.10. that hurt the earth, and those that
handle them. Indeed they cannot be taken with hands, but the man that shall
touch them must be fenced with Iron, and the staff of a spear. But God shall
thrust them all away, seal. into hell, and they shall be utterly burnt with
fire in the same place, 2 Samuel 23.6, 7. In the mean space, who will set the
briers and thorns against me in battle, says the Lord Christ (being jealous
for his Spouse with a great jealousy, Zach. 1.14.) who dare do it? I would
march against them, I would burn them together, Isa. 27.4. Sin or Sinai, a
thorny place in the desert, where it rained down Quails and Manna from Heaven,
was a type of the Church, flourishing in the midst of her enemies, like a Lilly
among thorns.

So is my Love amongst the Daughters] i. e. false Sisters, quae dicuntur spinae
propter malignitatem morum; Aug. Epist. 48.
dicuntur filiae, propter communionem sacramentorum, says Augustine: these are
called thorns for the malignity of their manners, and Daughters for their
profession and outward privileges. These prick, sting, and nettle the Church;
they cannot but do their nature, till God take an order with them, Matthew. 13.
till he bind them in bundles, and cast them into the furnace. But as the
Lilly is fresh and beautiful, and looks pleasantly (even that wild Lilly that
we call Wood-binde) though among thorns: so should we amidst trouble. God
hedgeth us about with these briars, that he may keep us within compass: August.
he pricks us with these thorns, that he may let out our ill humors, O
felices tribulos tribulationum! O happy thorns of tribulation, that open a vein
for sin to gush out at! Be not weary, my son, of Gods correction, says
Solomon, Prove. 3.11. Ne ejus castigationes ut spinas quasdam existimes tibi
molestas, so Kabvenaki renders and expounds that text. Feel not Gods
corrections troublesome to thee, as thorns in thine eyes, or prickles in thy
sides. Especially since, as Gideon, by threshing those churls of Succoth, with
thorns and briars of the wilderness, Judge. 8.16.
taught them better behavior, so deals God by his people: his House of
correction is his School of instruction, Psalm 94.12. (See my Love Tokens, page
144, 145, etc.) God sets these thorns, as he did those four horns, Zach. 1. to
afflict his people which way soever they fled. Zach. 1.19, 20, 21
Howbeit when they had pushed them to the Lord, there were four Carpenters set
a work to cut them short enough, for ever doing any further hurt.

Verse. 3. As the Apple Tree among the trees, etc.] Among wild trees,
moss-begrown trees, trees that bring not forth meat for men, but mast for
Hoggs. Such is every natural man, Romans 11.24. Ephraim is an empty Vine, he
bears fruit to himself, Hos. 10.1. paltry-hedge-fruit. Oaks bring forth
Apples, such as they are, and Acorns. But what says our Savior, John 15.2.
Every branch in me that bears not fruit, he takes away, and without me
ye can do nothing, verse. 5. That is a true saying (though Spiera the Postiller
censure it for a cruel sentence) Omnis vita infid elium peccatum est, Aug. De.
vera innocen. cap. 56
and nihil bonum sine summo bono, The whole life of an unbeleever is sin:
neither is there any thing good without Christ the chiefest good. Here he is
fitly compared by the Church to an Apple Tree, which yields both shade and food
to the weary and hungry traveller; furnishes him with whatsoever heart can
wish, or need require. Christ is cornucopia, an Universal Good, All-sufficient
and satisfactory, proportionable, and every way fitting to our necessities: It
is not with Christ, as with Isaac, that had but one blessing: for in him are
hid all the treasures of wisdom, and whatsoever worth, Col. 2.3. So that as a
friend of Cyrus in Xenophon being asked where his treasure was, answered,
(...), where Cyrus is my friend: so may a Christian better answer to the like
question, (...), where the Lord Christ is my friend: Bern.
For as sine Deo omnis copia est egestas, without Christ all plenty is
scarcity; so with him there can be no want of any thing that is good. In the
fullness of his sufficiency he is in want, says Job of a wicked man.
Contrariwise the godly, in the fullness of his want, is in an All Sufficiency;
because he is in Christ, Col. 3.
who has filled (...), the neuter gender, not only all the hearts of his
people, but All things; he has filled up that emptiness that was before in
the creature, and made it satisfactory.

I sat down under his shadow with great delight] Heb. I delighted and sat
down. The Church being scortcht with troubles without, and terrors within, ran
to Christ for shelter, and found singular comfort, Psalm. 91.1. Isa. 25.4. Tua
praesentia, Domine, Laurentio ipsam craticulam dulcem fecit, says an Ancient;
Philip Lantgrave of Hesse, being a long time prisoner under Charles the fifth,
was demanded what upheld him all that time? Respondit, divinas Martyrum
consolationes se sensisse, he answered, that Christ came in to him with such
cordials, as kept up his spirits above belief. There be divine comforts that
are felt by the suffering Saints, that others taste not of, nor themselves
neither at other times. When the child is sick, out come the conserves and
sweetmeats: Never sits he so much on his Mothers lap, and in her bosom, as
then.

And his fruit was sweet to my taste] i. e. His word and promises, which I
rolled as Sugar under my tongue, and sucked therehence more sweetness than
Sampson did from his honeycomb, Psalm. 19.10. and 119.103. Jer. 15.16. Luther
said, he would not live in paradise, Tom. 4. Oper. Lat.
if he might without the Word, at cum verbo etiam in inferno facile est
vivere, says he, but with the Word he could live even in Hell it self. True
it is, that those that have not the Spouses palate, find no such sweetness in
Christ or his promises. Most men are so full gorged with the Devils dainties,
so surfeited with sins sweetmeats, that they find no more relish in the good
Word of God, Multi in terris manducant quod apud inferos digerunt. Aug.
than in the white of an Egg, or in a dry chip. These feed upon that now, that
they must (without repentance) digest in Hell, there will be bitterness in the
end. Whereas they that, by sucking those full-strutting breasts of consolation,
the promises, have tasted and seen how good the Lord Christ is, as their souls
are satisfied with fat things, full of marrow, with the very best of the best,
Isa. 25.6. so he shall make them to drink abundantly of the river of his
pleasures, Psalm. 36.9. he shall take them into his Wine-^eller, and fill them
with gladness.

Verse. 4. He brought me to the banquetting-house] Heb. to the house of Wine,
where he gives me that which is better than Apple-drink, as verse. 3. As the
sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also abounds by Christ,
2 Cor. 1.5. The lower that ebb, the higher this tide: as is to be seen in the
Martyrs, who went as merrily to die, as ever they did to dine; sang in the
flames, and felt no more pain, than if they had lain upon beds of Roses. This
their persecutors counted stupidity and vainglory: but they knew not the power
of the Spirit, and the force of Faith: as Mr. Philpot told scoffing Morgan, who
coming to confer with him, asked him, How know you that you have the Spirit of
God? Mr. Philpot answered, By the Faith of Christ which is in me. All by Faith
(quoth Morgan) do ye so? I ween it be the spirit of the buttery which your
fellows have had that have been burned before you, who were drunk the night
before they went to their death, Act. and Mon. fol. 1653.
and I ween went drunk unto it. Whereunto Philpot replied, It appears by your
communication, that you are better acquainted with the spirit of the buttery,
than of God. Meethink you are liker a scoffer in a Play, than a reasonable
Doctor to instruct one. Thou have the spirit of illusion and sophistry, which
is not able to countervail the Spirit of truth. Thou art but an Ass in the
things of God, etc. God shall surely rain fire and brimstone upon such scorners
of his Word, and blasphemers of his people as thou art. The like sensure was
passed upon Nicholas Burton, Martyr in Spain, who because he went cheerfully
to the stake, and embraced death with all gladness and patience, Ibid. 1866.
his tormentours and enemies said, that the Devil had his soul, before he came
to the fire, and therefore his sense of feeling was past. These carnal
creatures meddle not with the true Christians joy, neither know they the privy
armor of proof (the joy of Faith) that he has as an aes triplex about his
heart, making him insuperable, and more than a Conqueror. Romans 8.35.
True grace has a fortifying comforting virtue, which the world knows not of:
like as true gold comforts and strengthens the heart, that Alchymy gold does
not. And as a man that by good fare, and plenty of the best Wines has his
bones filled with marrow, and his veins with good blood, and a fresh spring of
spirits, can endure to go with less clothes than another; because he is well
li^ed within: So it is with a heart, that by often feasting with Christ in his
Ordinances, and by much reading and ruminating upon the Scriptures (called here
the Banqueting House, or Wine-celler, as most are of opinion) has got a great
deal of joy and peace: such an one will go through troubles, and make nothing of
them, yea though outward comforts utterly fail, Hab. 3.17.

Romans 5.15.
And his banner over me was love] As a Standard erected, as a banner
displayed, so was the love of Christ shed abroad in her heart by the Holy
Ghost: who had also (as a fruit of his love) set up a Standard in her against
strong temptations and corruptions, Isa. 59.19. and thereby assured her of his
special presence: like as where the colors are, there is the Captain, where
the Standard, there the King. The wicked also have their banners of lust,
covetousness, ambition, malice, under which they fight (as the Dragon and his
viperous brood, Rev. 12.7.) against Christ and his people: but they may read
their destiny, Isa. 8.9, 10. Associate your selves, O ye people! stand to your
arms, repair to your colors, etc. yet ye shall be broken in pieces, gird
your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces, etc. Take counsel together,
and it shall come to naught, etc. for God is with us, Immanuel is our General:
And how many do you reckon him for? (as Antigonus once said to his soldiers,
that feared their enemies numbers.) Surely if Christ be for us (and he is
never from us, Matthew. 28.20. but as Xerxes was wont to do, he pitcheth his
tent, and sets up his Standard in the midst of his people, as once in the
wilderness) who can be against us? Romans 8.31. And though many be, yet No
weapon that is formed against the Church shall prosper, (how should it, fith
she has such a Champion as Christ, who is in love with her, and will take her
part, fight her quarrel?) and every tongue that shall rise against thee in
judgment, thou shall condemn, Isa. 54.17. As the ecclipsed Moon, by keeping
her motion, wades out of the shadow, and recovers her splendor: So it shall
be with the Spouse. Yea she shall be able to answer those that reproach and
cast dirt upon her, for her keeping close to Christ's colors, and suffering
hardship for him: as the Emperor Adrian did the Poet Florus, who sat on an
Ale-bench and sang, Nolo ego Caesar esse
Ambulare per Britannos
Rigidas pati pruinas, etc.


The witty Emperor replied upon him, as soon as he heard of it, Melanchthon.
in Chron. Carrion.
Nolo ego Florus esse
Ambulare per tabernas;
Latitare per popinas,
Pulices pati rotundos.


Verse. 5. Stay me with flaggons] Not with cups or bowls only, but with
flaggons, larger measures of that Wine that was set before her in Christ's
Wine-house. Comfort me with Apples, such as fall from Christ's Apple Tree,
spoken of in the former verse, the precious mellifluous promises, which are
sweet like the Apples of the Garden of Eden, as the Chaldee here has it.
Boulster me up with these: for I am even sinking and swooning with an excess
of love, with an exuberancy of spiritual joy in God my Savior, such as I can
hardly stand under. Stay me therefore (says she to the Ministers, Poly.
hist. cap. 56. Smells are applied to the nostrils of them that faint.
those pillars to support the weak, Gal. 2.9. and to comfort the feeble minded,
1 These. 5.14.) Stay me, or sustain me with flaggons, comfort me with Apples.
(Solinus tells of some near the River Ganges, that live odore pomorum
sylvestrium, by the smell of Forest Apples, which is somewhat strange.)

For I am sick of love] Surprised with a love-qualm, as an honest Virgin may
be, meeting her Love unawares, enjoying him in the fullness of joy, and fearing
the loss of his company for a long season. Lomb. Sent. lib. 3. distine. 34.
Vide August. Epist. 121. ad Hoxor^.
This is timor amicalis, which Lombard thus describes, ne offendamus quem
diligimus, and ne ab eo separemur, The fear of love is, lest we should offend
him whom our soul loves, and so cause him to withdraw. Hic timor transit in
charitatem, says Gregory, This fear passes into love, and overwhelms the
spirit sometimes. This was it that made Jacob, when he saw nothing but visions
of love and mercy, cry out, How dreadful is this place! This made that mixture
of passions in those good women, that coming to look Christ, Gosr. in Vit. Bern.
departed from the grave with fear and great joy. From this cause it was that
Bernard, for a certain time after his conversion, remained as it were deprived
of his senses by the excessive consolations he had from God. Cyprian writes to
his friend Donatus, that before his conversion, he thought it impossible to
find such raptures and ravishments, as now he did in a Christian course.
Epist. l. 1. Confess. l. 6. c. 22.
He begins his Epistle thus, Accipe quod sentitur antequam discitur, etc.
Augustine says the like of himself: What unconceiveable and unutterable
ecstasies of joy then may we well think there is in Heaven, where the Lord
Christ perpetually, and without intermission, manifests the most glorious and
visible signs of his presence, and seals of his love? He pours forth all
plenteous demonstrations of his goodness, to his Saints, and gives them eyes to
see it, minds to conceive it: and then fills them with exceeding fullness of
love to him again, so that they swim in pleasure, and are even overwhelmed with
joy: a joy too big to enter into them, they must enter into it, Mat. 25.21. Oh
pray! pray with that great Apostle that had been in Heaven, and seen that which
eye never saw. that the eyes of your understanding being enlightened, Verbis
exprimi non potest, experimento opus est. Chrysostom.
you may know the love of Christ which passes knowledge, and what is the
riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints, Ephesians. 1.18. and 3.19. A
glory fitter to be believed, than possible to be discoursed. An exceeding
excessive eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. Such a weight, as if the body
were not upheld by the power of God, it were impossible but it should faint
under it. How ready are our spirits to expire here, when any extraordinary
unexpected comfort befalls us? The Church is sick of love. Jacobs heart fainted
when he heard of Joseph's life and honor in Egypt. The Queen of Sheba was
astonished at Solomon's wisdom and magnificence, so that she had no spirit more
in her. Viscount Lisley in Henry the Eighths time died for joy of an unexpected
pardon. What then may we think of those in Heaven? and should not we hasten
in our affections to that happy place? Oh do but think (says one) though it
far pass the reach of any mortal thought) what an infinite inexplicable
happiness it will be, to look for ever upon the glorious body of Christ,
shining with incomprehensible beauty, far above the brightest Cherub; and to
consider, that even every vein of that blessed body bled to bring thee to
Heaven! Think of it, I say, and then exhale thy self in continual sallies, as
it were, of most earnest desires to be dissolved, and to be with Christ,
which is far the better, Phil. 1.23. As in the mean while, let thy soul sweetly
converse with him in all his holy Ordinances, but especially at his Holy Table,
where he says unto thee, as once to Thomas, Reach hither thy hand, and thrust
it into my side, and be not faithless, but believing. Let thy soul also there
reciprocate and say, My Lord and my God! Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and in
Earth, Psa. 73.25
none in comparison of thee! Rabboni, Come quickly.

Verse. 6. His left hand is under my head, and his right hand does embrace mee]
As if she should have said, I called unto you my friends to relieve and raise
me falling into a spiritual swoon, but behold the consolation that is in
Christ, Phil. 2.1, 2
the comfort of love, the fellowship of the Spirit, the bowels and mercies of
my dear Husband: he has fulfilled my joy, he has prevented your help, or at
least he has wrought together with the means, and made it successeful. You
have stayed me with flaggons, Psalm. 23.2
but he has restored my soul: You have bolstered me up with Apples, but when
that would not do, he has put his left hand under my head, as a pillow to
rest upon, and with his right hand he has embraced me; as a loving Husband
cherishes his sick wife; and does her all the help he can, Ephesians. 5.29. The
whole virtue and power of the Ministry comes from Christ. They do their worthy
endeavor to stay and under-prop our Faith: but that notwithstanding we shall
soon fall to the ground, if Christ put not to both his hands to keep us up. We
stand in need of whole Christ: and having him to support us, we cannot fall
finally, because fall we never so low, we shall arise, for the Lord puts
under his hand, Psalm. 37.24. his goodness is lower than we can fall: he
circleth his Saints with amiable embracements, and none can pull them out of
his hands. Jacob under-bare Rachel till she died upon him, died on his hand,
Genesis 48.7. The good Shunamite held her Son till he died on her lap. But the
lovesick Church, Romans 14.8
whether she lives or dies, she is the Lords: and who so lives and believes
on him, cannot die eternally. But as when Christ himself died, though soul and
body were sundred for a season, yet neither of them were sundred from the
Godhead whereunto they were personally united. So is it here: death may
separate soul and body, but cannot separate either of them from Christ. And as
Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more: Romans 6.9. Col. 3.1
so neither does any one that is risen with him. Christ may as easily die at
the right hand of his heavenly Father, as in the heart of a true Believer.

Verse. 7. I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem] A vehement obtestation,
(or rather an adjuration, I charge you, and that by an Oath) taken from the
manner of Country-speech. For in this whole Chapter the Allegory is so set, as
if the feast or meeting were made and represented in a Country House or
Village. These Daughters of Jerusalem therefore, the particular Congregations,
and all faithful men and women, (as Luke 23.28.) are straightly charged, and as
it were in conscience bound by the Church, the Mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. not
to disease or offend (much or little) her Well-beloved Spouse, that rests in
her love, Zeph. 3.17. and takes pleasure in the prosperity of his Servants,
Psalm. 35.27. until he please, that is, not at all: for he is not a God that
takes pleasure in wickedness, Psalm. 5.4. his holy Spirit is grieved by it,
Ephesians. 4.30. Or, until he please, that is, till he waken of his own accord:
be not overhasty with him for help, but hold out faith and patience, let him
take his own time, For he is a God of Judgment, Isa. 30.18
and waits to be gracious. If through impatience and unbeleef you set him a
day, or send for him by a Post, he will first chide you before he chide the
waves that afflict you, as he dealt by his Disciples that wakened him ere he
was willing, Mark 4.37.40. Those that are suddenly roused out of a deep and
sweet sleep, are apt to be angry with those that have done it. Great heed must
be taken by our selves, and Gods charge laid upon others, that nothing be
spoken or done amiss against the God of Heaven, Dan. 3.39. Their sorrows shall
be multiplied that hasten after another God, Psalm. 16.4. The Lord shall
trouble thee, thou troubler of Israel, 1 Cor. 10.22.
Josh. 7.25. Do ye provoke the Lord to wrath? are ye stronger than he? will
ye needs try a fall with him? Psalm. 18.26. Has ever any yet waxed fierce
against God and prospered? Job 9.4. Surely as Ulysses his companions told him
when he would needs provoke Polydamas, so may we say much more to those that
incense the Lord to displeasure.

(...); It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Heb. 10.
Had men the feet of Roes and Hindes of the field, they could not outrun his
wrath, witness Jonah. Or if they could, yet the Roes and Hindes, those loving
creatures, ( Prove. 5.19.) would be swift witnesses against them for their
baseness and disloyalty, since they do such things as those poor creatures would
not; see Deuteronomy. 30.19. Isa. 1.2. Be thou instructed therefore, Oh Jerusalem,
lest Christ's soul be dis-joynted from thee, lest (as well as he loves thee
now) he make thee desolate, a land not inhabited, Jer. 6.8. Let him be that
Love of thine (as she here emphatically calls him) that takes up thy whole
heart, soul and strength, (...)
with a love, not only of Desire, but of Complacency, with a God-like love.
True it is, that we cannot, neither are we bound to love God, in quantum est
diligibilis, so much as he is loveable (for so God only can love himself) but
we must love nihil supra, aeque, or contra, nothing more, or so well, or
against God. Other persons we may love with his allowance, but it must be in
him, and for him, as our friends in the Lord, our foes for the Lord: Other
things we may also love, but no otherwise than as they convey love to us from
Christ, and may be means of drawing up our affections unto Christ. This true
love will keep us from doing any thing wilfully that may disease or displease
him: it will also constrain the Daughters of Jerusalem to abide with the Roes,
and with the Hindes of the field, (so some read this Text) as Rachel did by her
Fathers Herds, to glorify Christ in some honest and lawful vocation, and not
to vex him by idleness, and unprofitableness: since as punishment has an
impulsive, so love has a compulsive faculty, 2 Cor. 5.14.

Verse. 8. The voice of my Beloved! Behold!] An abrupt passage, proceeding from
a pang of love, whereof she was even sick: and now lay languishing as it were,
at Hopes Hospital, lingering and listening, hankering and kearkening after her
beloved. Of the ear we use to say, that it is first awake in a morning: Call
one that is asleep by his name, and he will soon hear and start up. Christ
calls all his sheep by their name, John 10.3. and they know his voice, verse. 4.
(so well are they versed in his Word, and so habitually are their senses
exercised, Heb. 5.14.) yea they know his pase, for Behold he cometh] viz. to
make his abode with me, according to his promise, John 14.23. to fulfill with
his hand what he had spoken with his mouth, as Solomon phraseth it in his
prayer, 1 King. 8.15. Christ sends his voice as another John Baptist, a
forerunner, and this no sooner sounds in the ear, and sinks into the heart,
than himself is at hand to speak comfort to the conscience, Psalm. 51.8. He
thinks long of the time till it were done, as the Mothers breast aches, when it
is time the child had suck.

He comes leaping upon the Mountains, skipping upon the Hills] Look how the
jealous Eagle, when she flies highest of all from her nest, and seems to seat
her self among the clouds, yet still she casts an eye to her nest where are her
young ones; and if she see any come near to offend, presently she speeds to
their help and rescue: So does the Lord Christ deal by his beloved Spouse.
Neither mountains, nor hills shall hinder his coming: neither the sins of his
people, nor the worlds opposition. As for the former, Christ blots out the
thick cloud, as well as the cloud, Isa. 44.22. that is, enormities as well as
infirmities. He casts all the sins of his Saints into the bottom of the Sea,
which can as easily cover mountains, as mole-hills. And for the second, Thou
art more glorious and excellent than the mountains of prey (meaning, than all
the Churches enemies* called for their ravenousness, mountains of Lions and
Leopards, Cant. 4.8.) The stout-hearted are spoiled, etc. Psalm. 76.4, 5. And
who art thou, O great mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shall become a plain,
Zech. 4.7. And whereas man's soul has naturally many mountains of pride and
profaneness in it ( there is that Leviathan, Psalm. 104.26
and creeping things innumerable, as the Psalmist says of the Sea.) And for
his body there is not a vein in it that would not swell to the bigness of the
highest hill to make resistance to the work of grace; every such mountain and
hill is made low before the Lord Christ, Isa. 40.4. and every high thing cast
down, that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, 2 Cor. 10. He comes
with authority, and reigns over all impediments.

Verse. 9. My Beloved is like a Roe, or a young Hart] Viz. For sweetness and
swiftness, as in the former verse. His help seems long, because we are short.
In the opportunity of time he will not be wanting to those that wait for him.
The Lion seems to leave her young ones till they have almost killed themselves
with roaring and howling; but at last she relieves them: and hereby they
become the more courageous. God seems to forget his people sometimes, but it is
that they may the better remember themselves, and reminde him. He seems, as
here to have taken a long journey, and to be at a great distance from them,
when as indeed he is as near us, as once he was to Mary Magdalen after his
Resurrection, but she was so bleared she could not see him. If he at any
time absent himself for trial of our Faith and love to him, and to let us know
how ill we can be without him, yet he is no further off, than behind some
wall or screen. Or if he get out of doors from us, yet he looks in at the
window to see how we take it, and soon after shows himself through the Lattess,
that we may not altogether despond or despair of his return. (...) Apparuit
instar floris exoricutis.
Yea he flourishes or blossometh through the Lattesses, like some flower or
fruit-tree that growing under or near unto a window, sends in a sweet sent into
the room, or perhaps some pleasant branches: to teach, that Christ comes not
to his without profit, and comfort to their souls.

Verse. 10. My Beloved spoke and said] Heb. Answered and said. She had sighed
out, belike, some such request unto her Beloved, as David did, Psalm. 30.19.
Return O Lord, how long! Lovers hours are full of eternity. He replieth, Even
now my Love, behold here I am for thy help. Now will I rise, now will I be
exalted, Isa. 33.10.
now will I lift up my self. Rise thou therefore out of the ashes wherewith
thou have been covered, Lam. 3.16. and come away to a better condition. Or,
Rise out of sin, wherein by nature thou sit, Luke 1.79. Stand up from the
dead, come away to Christ, and he shall give thee light, Ephesians. 5.14. Come,
for the Master calls, as they said to blind Bartimeus, Mark 10.49. Come, for
it is high time to come: since now is our salvation nearer, than when we
believed. The night is far spent, the day is at hand, etc. Romans 13.11, 12. The
winter is past, the flowers appear, etc. Up therefore, and come with me to my
Country House, as it were, to take the pleasure of the Springtide. In Heaven
there is a perpetual Spring: and here the Saints have hansel of heaven, those
first fruits of the spirit, even as many as are holy Brethren, partakers of
this heavenly calling, Heb. 3.1.

Verse. 11. For lo the winter is past, the Rain is over and gone] In winter,
the clouds commonly return after the Rain, Eccles. 12.2. A shower or two does
not clear the air; but though it rain much, yet the sky is still over-cast with
clouds; and as one shower is unburthened, another is brewed. Lo such is the
doleful and dismal condition of such as are not effectually called by Christ.
Omnis illis dies hybornus est, it is ever winter with them; no spring of grace,
no Sunshine of sound comfort. It is with such, as it was with Paul and his
fellow-sailers, Act. 27.20. when as neither Sun, nor Stars in many days
appeared, and no small tempest lay on them: all hope that they shall be saved
was then taken away. All the hope is, that God who by all his all-quickening
voice, raises the dead, and calls things that are not, as if they were, Romans
4.17. that calls those his people, that were not his people, and her Beloved,
which was not Beloved, Romans 9.25. Together with his voice, there goes forth a
power, as Luke 5.17. as when he bade Lazarus come forth, he made him rise and
come away, so here. Of carnal, Christ makes us a people created again, Psalm.
102.18. Ephesians. 2.10. of a wild Ass Colt he makes a man, Job 11.12. and of an
hollow person (as empty and void of heart, as the hollow of a tree is of
substance) he makes a solid Christian, fit to be set in the heavenly
building. This is as great a work, as the making of a world with a word: God
plants the Heavens, and lays the foundation of the Earth, that he may say to
Zion, Thou art my people, Isa. 51.16. Hence Christ is called the beginning of
the Creation of God, Rev. 3.14. And the Apostle, Romans 5.10. argues from
Vocation to Glorification, as the lesser.

Verse. 12. The flowers appear on the Earth] Here we have a most dainty
description of the Spring or prime time (as the French call it) far surpassing
that of Horace, and the rest of the Poets, Prim-tempe*
who yet have showed themselves very witty that way. For the sense; by flowers
(made rather to smell to, than to feed upon) are understood (says an
Interpreter) the first fruits of the Spirit, whereby the Elect give a pleasant
smell: and therein lies sweetness of speech, and words going before works,
even as flowers before fruits. For the which cause, as the Apostle exhorts
that our speech be gracious always, ministering Edification to the hearer,
Col. 4.6. so the Prophet calls it a pure language, which the Lord will give to
as many as love him, as are called according to his purpose. Zeph. 3.9.

The time of the singing of birds is come] Hic autem garritus avium plurimum
facit ad veris commendationem, this chirping of birds makes much to the Springs
commendation, says ^^nebrard. How melodiously sing the Ministers of the
Gospel, whiles they a^ unto Gods people, as a very lovely song of one that has
a pleasant voice ^ Ezekiel. 33.32. It is mel in ore, melos in aure, to the Elect,
as it was to Austin, who coming to hear Ambrose, had his ears tickled, his
heart touched; so had that unlearned Corinthian, 1 Cor. 14.25. and the whole
City of Samaria, wherein there was great joy at the receiving of the Gospel,
Luke 2.10.
Act. 8.8. Behold we bring you good tidings of great joy to all people, said
those Angels to the Shepherds that sang Christ into the world: and from whom
the preaching of the Gospel was afterward taken and given to the Ministers,
whose proper office it is to publish peace, to bring good tidings of good, Thy
Watchmen shall lift up the voice, with the voice together shall they sing, etc.
Isa. 52.7, 8. If they do otherwise to any, if they sing doleful accents to
guilty persons, if the voice of these Gospel birds, be to such, like that of
Abijah to Jeroboams wife, I am sent to thee with heavy tidings, 1 King. 24.6.
they may thank themselves. To fall out with the Minister is as great folly, as
if some fond people should accuse the Herald or the Trumpet as the cause of
their war; Or as if some ignorant peasant when he sees his fowls bathing in
his pond, should cry out of them as the causes of soul weather. What do
faithful Ministers do more? (what can they do less, if they will be true to
their souls?) than tax men's sins, foretell their judgments? This when they
do, it is diversely taken: Ravenous and unclean birds, like the Ravens of
Arabia, See Ezekiel. 7.16 Isidor.
scriech ^orribly, scratch terribly: Turtles and Doves (whose voice is here
said to be heard in the Land when other birds are sweetly singing) come in with
a mournful tone mixed with a groaning sadness (whence also the Turtle has its
name, scil. a somo quem edit per onomatopoeiam) and may well serve to set forth
the unutterable groans of gracious spirits, grieving for their sins, mourning
bitterly over Christ crucified before their eyes, Zach. 12.10 Gal. 3.1
and evidently set forth by their faithful Ministers (so that they need no
other crucifix to draw tears from them) tabring upon their breasts with the
voice of Doves, Nah. 2.7. Yea smiting upon their breasts with the penitent
Publican, and saying, or rather sighing out each for himself, Lord be merciful
to me a sinner. And here assert solatium lugentibus suspiriorum societas.
Basi^.
It is an heavenly hearing when a Church-full of good people, wrought upon by
their godly Preachers, send up a volly of sighs to God: and as Hindes by
calving, so they by weeping cast out their sorrows, Job 39.3. such as show
their hearts to be as so many Hadadrimmons. Aug. in Psa. 10
Austin persuades a Preacher so long to insist upon some needful point, until
by the groans and looks of his hearers, he perceive that they understand it,
and are affected with it. Such hearers Paul had at Athens, that wept as he
did, Act. 20.37. but this is but few men's happiness. Turtles are rare birds in
our Land.

Verse. 13. The Fig Tree puts forth her green figs, and the vines with the
tender grapes, etc.] These two trees put forth their fruits first; when other
trees for most part, Post flores fructus, etc. Lib. 17. cap. 13
put forth first flowers, and then fruits in their season. Pliny numbers the
Fig Tree among the trees of quick Nature. And our Savior, Luke 21.29, 30.
makes the shooting forth of the Fig Tree to be a sign of Summers approaching.
When himself came hungry to that Fig Tree, Matthew. 21.19. he thought to have
found something on it more than leaves only; for though the time of Figs was
not yet, (that is, of ripe Figs) Mark 11.13. yet grossuli, green Figs at least
he looked for, those untimely Figs that she casts when she is shaken of a
mighty wind, (...) grossus. Hinc ficus, and fig. Hinc puto Bethphage dictam
quasi locum grossorum. Mercer. Unde pomum decerpseris alterum protuberat.
Rev. 6.13. his hunger would have made somewhat of them. It was at Bethphage
(that house of green Figs, as the word signifies) or near unto it, that he
cursed this barren Fig Tree, Mark 11.1, 13. and therefore cursed it, because it
answered not his expectation. It behooves us therefore not only to make a
flourish of goodly words (with Naphtali) but to be fruitful boughs (with
Joseph) being filled with the fruits of Righteousness, which are by Jesus
Christ unto the glory and praise of God, Phil. 1.11. Joseph is a fruitful
bough, Genesis 49.22. that is, of the Vine, says the Chaldee Paraphrast there.
But it may be Jacob meant it of the Egyptian Fig Tree, Uno anno septies
fructus sufficit.
whereof Solinus reports, that it bears fruit seven times a year: pull off
one Fig, and another presently puts forth. Now if the Fig Tree slack not her
duty, but labors quickly to bring forth her first-fruit, that so again and
again she may be more fruitful: how much more should we hasten the fruits of
holiness, break off our sins, and be abrupt in our repentance, Dan. 4.27. cut
the cart-ropes of vanity, and cast away the deeds of darkness, Romans 13.12.
bring forth fruits meet for repentance, parallel to it, and tantamount: such as
were to be seen in the penitent thief, that suffered with our Savior? Aarons
Rod was not sooner changed from a withered stick into a flourishing tree, than
he was from a barren malefactor into a fruitful professor; for see what a deal
of fruit he bears in an instant: he confesses his own sin, rebukes his
companion, gives a good testimony unto Christ, and prays that Christ would
remember him when he came into his Kingdom. This encouragement among many
other we have, that Christ will bless our very budds, Isa. 44.3. (see the
Geneva Translation) he will taste of our green Figs, Un^ minutula. R. David.
of our tender Grapes, which, if not yet of a good taste, yet because they give
a good smell, as this Text has it, they are well resented; Christ when he
comes into his garden, takes all he finds well aworth: He gathers his
myrrh with his spice, he eats not only of his honey, but of his honeycomb,
and drinks not only of his Wine, but of his Milk, Cant. 5.1.

Verse. 14. Oh my Dove! that art in the clefts of the Rock] The Dove is meek,
mournful, simple, sociable, fearful, beautiful, faithful to her mate, fruitful,
neat, so is the Church. And because the Dove is sought after by birds of prey,
therefore she builds in strong and steep places, in clefts of Rocks, in the
sides of the holes mouth, as Jeremy has it, chap. 48.28. The Church also is
forced many times to fly into the wilderness, Rev. 12. into the further parts
of the world, and hide it self in corners, to avoid persecution. So many, so
mighty, and so malicious are the Churches enemies, that she dare scarce peep
out, or appear abroad, with the Dove, but she is in danger to become
Hawks-meat. Hence Hilary says of the Primitive Christians, that they were not
to be sought in tectis and exteriori pompa, in Palaces and outward pomp, but
rather in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth, as the
Apostle also has it, Heb. 11.38. Concerning the Christian Congregation in
Queen Mary's time, says Mr. Fox, there were sometimes forty, sometimes an
hundred, sometimes two hundred came together, as they could, in some private
place in London, Act. and Mon. fol. 1881.
for mutual edification. They are utterly out therefore, that hold that the
true Church must be evermore glorious and conspicuous for her outward
splendor. She is eft-soons like the Moon in her eclipse, which appears
dark toward the earth, but is bright and radiant in that part which looks
toward Heaven. The Papists would have this Moon always in the full. And if
she show but little light to us, or be ecclipsed, they will not yield, she
is the Moon. And yet (except it be in the eclipse) Astronomers demonstrate
that the Moon has at all times as much light, as in the full: But oftentimes a
great part of the bright side is turned to Heaven, and a lesser part to the
earth. And so the Church is ever conspicuous to Gods eye, though it appear not
always to ours.

In the secret places of the stairs] Whither thou art retired, as for security,
so for secrecy, that thou may the more freely, and without suspicion of
hypocrisy, pour out thy heart before me, and seek my protection. Or, where
thou lie close out of modesty, or conscience of infirmity; not daring to show
thy face.

Show me thy face] Or, Let me see thy countenances, leave none of thy
particular Congregations or Members behind thee, but present your selves
before the Lord, come boldly to the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4.16. in full
assurance of Faith, Heb. 10.22. Quid enim per faciem nisi fidem qua a Deo
cognoscimur, says Gregory upon this Text. Heb. 11.6
What can we understand by the face but Faith, since by it we are known of
God, and without it, it is impossible to please God: For he that comes to
God, (that shows his face before the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, etc. 1 Timothy 1.17. must come in his best) must believe that he is (scil. Optimus
Maximus) and more particularly, that he is a rewarder of all that diligently
seek him, that seek him out, as the Greek has it, viz. that fetch him out of
his retiring-room, as the Syrophenisse by the force of her Faith did, Mark
7.24. and as the Spouse here would never give him over, till she had recovered
him out of the Country, and drawn from him this sweetest invitation to go along
with him, and incitation to make bold with him.

Let me hear thy voice] In holy exercises, preaching, prayer, conference, etc.
See here how the Lord Christ wooes attendance, solicits suitors. The Father
seeks such to worship him, John 4.24. Hitherto ye have asked me nothing,
says the Son, nothing to what you might have done, and should do well to do
hereafter, Ask, that your joy may be full. John 16.24
Pray that ye may joy: draw waters with joy out of this wellspring of
Salvation. Ply the Throne of Grace, follow your work close. It was more
troublesome to Severus the Emperor (to Christ you may be sure it is) to be
asked nothing of his Courtiers, than to grant them much. Ask, and you shall
have, says Christ. And is not he worthily miserable, that will not make
himself happy by asking?

Sweet is thy voice] Because uttered by the Spirit of grace and supplication,
whose very breath prayer is, and without whom prayer is no better than a
sounding brass, or tinckling cymbal.

And thy countenance is comely] scil. By reason of the Image of God repaired in
thee, clearly shining in thy heart and life: This renders thee comely indeed,
so that I am the better to see thy face, and to hear thy voice. To Lovers
nothing can be more pleasing than mutual converse and conference.

Verse. 15. Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes] i. e. The Heretics and
Schismatics. For as Fox-cubbs will be Foxes one day, and of little will
become great: so Schismatics, if not timely taken, will turn Heretics. Whence
it is that the Apostle 1 Cor. 11.18, 19. having said, I hear that there be
divisions or Schisms among you, he presently subjoyns, For there must be also
Heresies among you (God having so fore-appointed and foretold it) that they
which are approved may be made manifest among you. Now these Heretics and
Schismatics are fitly called Foxes, both here, and Ezekiel. 13.4. ( Herod is also
called a Fox, Luke 13.32. as being a Sect-Master, Mat. 22.16. and as it is
thought, to still the noise of his conscience, a Sadducee) first for their
craft, secondly, for their cruelty. Foxes are famous for their craftiness even
to a Proverb (As subtle as a Fox, Persius.
Astutam vapido servans sub pectore vulpem.)

They are passing cunning to deceive those that hunt them; feigning themselves
simple, when there is nothing more subtle, and looking pitifully, when taken
in a snare, but it is only that they may get out: there is no trusting to
their looks, for Vulpes pellem mutat, non naturam, says the Proverb, the Fox
may alter his countenance, but not his condition. And for cruelty, besides the
hurt Foxes do among Lambs and Fowls (for, lacking meat, they feign themselves
dead: and so the birds hasting down as to a carkase, volucres rapiunt and
devorant, Isidor. Etym. lib. 12.1.
says Isidore, they seize upon the birds, and devour them) they are noted here
to mar the Vineyards, Vulpes vitibus maxim nocivae, says one. And for Grapes,
the Fox loves them exceedingly, yea though they be but tender, and unripe.
Hence the Latins call him Legulus, a Gatherer, namely, of Grapes; and we
ironically say of a man, The Fox loves no Grapes, he will not eat them, but it
is because he cannot get them: howbeit, by his leering one may know he loves
them. Heretics and Schismatics are therefore to be taken by the
Vine-dressers, that is, detected, refuted, 1 Timothy 1.20.
and if need be, delivered up to Satan by the Ministers, chased out of the
Vineyard, and pursued to death, if incorrigible, by the Magistrate, as Jehu
dealt by the Baalites, and after him Josiah. The sword is put into their hands
for such a purpose, Romans 13.4. and our Savior with a civil whip expelled those
Church-Foxes, the Mony-merchants, giving therein a taste of that civil
authority which he naturally derived from David, as one observes. The
Apostles being convented before civil authority about matters of Religion,
never pleaded, You have no power to meddle with us in these things that belong
to Jesus Christ. No: their plea was only the justness of their cause, their
obedience to God, etc. This, Heretics can never make good. Well they may
pretend that they suffer for righteousness sake, and style themselves, as the
Swenck feldians did, The confessors of the glory of Christ. Well they may cry
out as that Heretic Dioscorus did in the Council of Chalcedon, I am cast out
with the Fathers, I defend the doctrine of the Fathers, I transgress them not
in any point. Well they may seem to be ambitious of wearing a Tiburn-tippe^
(as Campian) and cry out with Gentilis the Antitrinitarian, Se pro gloria
Altissimi Dei pati.
that he suffered death for the glory of the most High God. He that hates,
dissembleth with his lips (says Solomon of such subtle Foxes) and lays up
deceit within him: When he speaks fair, believe him not; for there are seven
abominations in his heart, Prove. 26.24, 25. Heretics are notably cunning, and
no less cruel, as the Arians and Donaetists were of old, the Papists, Matthew. 8.
Socinians, and others of the same bran at this day. These Foxes have holes;
they cunningly creep, or shoot themselves into houses by their pithanology and
counterfeit humility, they lead captive silly women, and, by them, 2 Timothy 3.6
their husbands: they take them prisoners (as the word signifies) and then make
prize of them, 2 Pet. 2.3. they bring them into bondage, and devour them, as
St. Paul says of those deceitful workers, the Foxes of his time, 2 Cor. 11.13,
20. they fraudulently foist in false doctrines, 2 Pet. 2.1. Heresies of
perdition, and so corrupt the Vineyard, as the Master of the Vineyard
complains, Jer. 12.10. shipwreck the Faith, 1 Timothy 1.19. subvert whole houses,
Tit. 1.11. and are therefore to be taken, or clubd down as Pests, and common
mischiefs to mankind; to the younger sort especially, those tender Grapes,
which they chiefly covet, and catch at. And here in hunting of these cruel
crafties, that counsel would be taken that Saul gave the Ziphites concerning
an innocent man, that deserved it not: Go, I pray you, prepare ye, and know, 1 Samuel 23.22, 23
and see his place where his haunt is, and who has seen him there: for it is
told me, that he deals very subtly. See therefore and take knowledge of
all the lurking places where he hides himself, etc.

Verse. 16. My Beloved is mine, and I am his] Hitherto the Church has related
Christ's words to her self, and others. Now she shuts up the whole discourse
with praise of Christ, here, and prayer to him, verse. 17. In praising him, she
preaches her own blessedness in that spiritual Union, that mystical marriage
that is betwixt them, My Beloved is mine, etc. q. d. I am sure he is mine, and
I can boldly speak it. Many lay claim to him, which have no share in him: they
deeply affirm of him, but have no manner of right to him, their faith is but
fancy, their confidence presumption; they are like that madman of Athens, that
claimed every rich ship that came to shore, when as he had no part in any; or
Haman, who hearing that the King would honor a man, concluded (but falsely)
that himself was the man. Like Idolatrous Micah, they conceit that God will
bless them for the Levites sake, Judge. 17.13. which was no such matter. And
like Sisera, they dream of a Kingdom, when as Jaels nail is nearer their
Temples than a Crown. The condition of such self-soothers, and self-seekers is
nothing different from his, that dreaming, upon a steep place, of some great
happiness befallen him, starts suddenly for joy, and falling down with the
start, breaks his neck at the bottom. The true believer is upon a far better
ground, his faith is unfeigned, his hope is unfailable. He knows whom he has
trusted, he knows and believes the love that God has to him, 1 John 4.16. he
has gotten a full gripe of Christ, and is sure that neither death nor life,
etc. shall separate him from Christ. He has comprehended him, or rather is
comprehended of him, Phil. 3.12. Christ has laid hold on him by his Spirit,
and he has laid hold on Christ by Faith, the property whereof is to put on
close to Christ, and Christ to him: yea to unite us to Christ, so that he that
is joined to the Lord, is one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. as truly one, as those
members are one body which have the same soul; or as man and wife are one
flesh: as they two are one matrimonial flesh, so Christ and his people are one
mystical Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. Well therefore may the Church here glorify
Christ, and glory in her own happiness by him, saying, My Beloved is mine, and
I am sure of it, and cannot be deceived; for I am his: all that I am is his, I
have made a total resignation of my whole self unto him, and have put him in
full possession of all. I am crucified with Christ: Nevertheless I live, yet
not I, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2.20. Christ is All-sufficient to me,
and I am altogether his. His is as a Covenant of mercy, mine of obedience.
Wherein I do as it were by Indenture, with highest estimations, most vigorous
affections, and utmost endeavors, bestow my self upon him: and I accept of
whole Christ in all his offices and efficacies.

He feeds among the Lillies] Before she was to seek, and goes to Christ to
be resolved where he fed, Chap. 1.7. Now, after more intimate communion with
him, she is able to resolve herself and others where he feeds his flock, viz.
among the Lillies, that is, in sweet and soft pastures, Psalm. 23.2. in those
Mountains of spices, Cant. 8.14. those bounties of holiness, the glorious
Ordinances, wherein Christ feeds his people, and feasts them daily and
daintily, pleasantly and plentifully with the best of the best, fat things full
of marrow, Wine on the Lees well refined, Isa. 25.6. to the gladding of their
hearts, and greatning of their Faith, so that they grow up as the Lillies, Hos.
14.5. as the Calves of the stall, as the willows by the watercourse, Isa.
44.4. And as Lillies are not more beautiful than fertile, Una radice
quinquagenos saepe emittente bulbos, Plin.
yea the dropping of the Lilly will cause and beget more Lillies: so the
Lilly-white Saints will be working upon others, and bringing them to Christ,
as Andrew did Peter, and Philip Nathaniel, John 1.41, 45. True goodness is
generative, Charity is no churl, etc.

Verse. 17. Until the day break, and the shadows flee away] Until that day dawn,
that last and glorious day, when Christ the Sun of Righteousness shall appear,
and chase away the shadows of sin and misery, wherewith I am here benighted.

Umbra terrae noctem facit. Isidor. Etym. lib. 5. cap. 13.
Turn about my Beloved] And though thou leave me for a time (as thou art a God
that hidest thy self, Isa. 45.15.) yet never forsake me, but let thine heart
be ever upon me, and thine hand ready to help at a dead lift.

Yea be thou like a Roe or a young Hart] Come sweetly and seasonably to my
relief and succor. To set thee a time, were to set the Sun by my Dial. But
when thine own time is come, 2 Samuel 2.29.
their come Lord Jesus, come quickly, be as nimble as a Roe or young Heart upon
the Mountains of Bether, called elsewhere Bithron beyond Jordan: which
mountains were much haunted by Hunters. Mountains of division, some render it,
and one descants thus: The Spouse of Christ in that heavenly Marriage-Song
calls him a young Heart on the Mountains of Division. D. Hall Epist. 5. dec. 3.
Tell me then whither will you go for truth, if you will allow no truth, but
where there is no division?

CHAP. III. Verse. 1. By night on my Bed I sought him whom my soul loves.]
She had not a name good enough for him: she therefore makes use of this
powerful Periphrasis. Before he had been her Beloved, but now the love of her
soul, because now he had withdrawn himself. It was night with her now; she
walked in darkness, and had no light, as Isa. 50.10. and, as before day break,
the darkness is greatest: so was it now with the woeful Spouse. She was indeed
upon her bed of ease, but to her in this case it was a little-ease, a bed of
unrest, her soul was tossed and troubled with solitary seeking, longing and
looking after him whom her soul loved. By night therefore, or night after
night, sundry nights together (as some read it) She sought and sought, being
constant, instant and indefa^igable in the scarch, she sought him early and
earnestly, with utmost attention and affection, with her whole heart and soul,
Jer. 29.13. according to the measure of her love to him, which was modus sine
modo, as Bernard has it. Now whatsoever a man loves, that he desires, and
what he desires, that he seeks after; especially if he apprehend some
singular worth in it. In Christ are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, Col. 2.3. He is better than Rubias, says Solomon, and all the
things that may be desired are not to be compared unto him, Prove. 8.11. Hence
the good soul seeks him, as eagerly as the Mammonist seeks silver, the
Ambitionist honor, the affamished man bread, the condemned prisoner a pardon,
or as one that seeks for a lost Jewel, he over-looks all till he has found
it; Christ I must have, says she, whatever it cost me: this gold cannot be
bought too dear. She longs sore, as David did, saying, Oh that one would
give me of the water of the Well of Bethlehem! 1 Chronicles. 11.17. Oh for a
blessed arm-full of the Babe of Bethlehem! such as Simeon once had; Give me
Christ, or else I die. None but Christ, none but Christ. All is but dung and
dross to Christ. Phil. 3.
God offered Moses an Angel to go along with them in the wilderness: He would
have no Angel, nor stir a step unless God himself would conduct them. Barak
would not march without Deborah; etc.

I found him not] i. e. I had not so full a presence, nor so fast hold of him
as I desired, he had got behind the wall or the window, as in the former
chapter, and ( Joseph-like) concealed his love out of increasement of love; as
also that he may stir up strong affections after him in the hearts of his
people: for he well enough knows how to commend his mercies to us, as Laban
did his daughter Rachel to Jacob, by holding us off, by suspending us for a
season. Even barren Leah, when unloved and unlookt on, becomes fruitful: and
the drowsy Spouse, when she misseth her Beloved, becomes restless till she
have recovered him. In their affliction they will seek me early, Hos. 5.15.
Affliction excites devotion; and makes the Saints seek again with a redoubled
diligence, as here. See Psalm. 78.34, 35. It fares with the best sometimes, as
it did with Saint Paul and his company in the shipwreck, Act. 27.20. when they
saw neither Sun nor Stars for diverse days and nights together. In this dismal
and disconsolate condition, if they can but cast anchor and pray still for day,
Christ will appear (as here, verse 3.) and all shall clear up, the day will
dawn, and the day star appear in their hearts. Mourning lasts but till
morning, Psalm. 30. and the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end
it shall speak and not lie, it will surely come, it will not tarry, Hab. 2.3.
But what shall we do in the mean while, may some say? how shall we sustain
our spirits? since hope deferred makes the heart sick? Though it tarry, wait for
it, says the Prophet, Have patience, and learn to live by Faith, The just
shall live by his Faith, verse. 4. We are usually too hasty, and do antedate
the promises: neither will any reason satisfy us, unless we may have all
Christ's sweetness at once, and at present. Excellent is that discourse that Mr.
Bradford the Martyr makes in a consolatory letter to a good woman, that was
troubled in conscience. You are not content, says he, to kiss Christ's feet,
Act. and Mon. 1490.
with Magdalen, but you would be kissed even with the kisses of his mouth. You
would see his face with Moses, forgetting how he bids to seek his face,
Psalm. 27. yea and that for ever, Psalm. 105. which signifies no such sight as
you desire to see in this present life, which would see God now face to face:
whereas he cannot be seen but covered under something, yea sometime in that
which is clean contrary unto God, as to see his mercy in his anger, etc. How
did Job see God, but as ye would say under Satan's cloak? etc. You know that
Moses when he went to the Mount to talk with God, he entered into a dark
cloud. And Elias had his face covered when God passed by. Both these dear
friends of God heard God, but saw him not. But you would be preferred before
them. See now, my dear heart, how covetous you are. Ah be thankful, be
thankful! But God be thanked your covetousness, is Moses covetousness. Well,
with him you shall be satisfied. But when? forsooth when he shall appear,
etc. God would have his people discontentedly contented with what measures of
grace and feelings they have attained unto, and to know that Tota vita boni
Christiani sanctum desiderium est, Bern.
the whole life of a good Christian is an holy desire after more: and that
those very pantings, inquietations and unsatisfiablenesses cannot but spring
from truth of grace, and some taste of Christ.

Verse. 2. I will rise now and go about the City, etc.] The holy City Jerusalem,
whither the Tribes went up, the Tribes of the Lord unto the Testimony of
Israel, Psalm. 122.4. There was the likeliest place to find Christ; there his
Parents found him once after three days search ( Luke 2.46.) sitting in the
Temple: there he dwelt amongst men, there he gave gifts unto men, and
there-hence he went forth abroad the whole world conquering, and to conquer,
Rev. 6.2. Here therefore the Spouse seeks him amongst the people of God, and in
his Word and Ordinances. She knew well that he fed his flock among those
Lillies, used to go down into that his garden of spices, Cant. 6.1, 2. to take
a turn amidst those golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1.13. to take a view of his
Wedding guests, Mat. 22.11. yea to eat and drink in their presence, and to
teach in their streets, Luke 13.26. Abroad she gets therefore, and that
presently.

I will rise now] Says she, lest I lose mine opportunity: for if so, I may
seek it with tears, and go without it with sorrow. Men may purpose, promise,
and expect a time of healing, and curing, when they shall be deceived, and
find a time of trouble, Jer. 14.17. Many, I say unto you, shall seek to enter,
and shall not be able, Luke 13.24. yea they shall go with their flocks; and
with their herds, to seek the Lord; but they shall not find him, he has
withdrawn himself from them, Hos. 5.6. They came too late belike; they sought
not the Lord while he was to be found (vel sero, vel certe non serio
quaerebant) they called not upon him while he was near, they stayed till he
was out of call, Prove. 1.28. till he was resolved to return either no answer
at all, or such a sad answer as the Jews had from him, because they stood out
their day of grace, Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me: and where I
am, thither ye cannot come, John 7.34. And again, I go my way, and ye shall
seek me, and shall dye in your sins, John 8.21. Oh dreadful sentence! The
Church her self here, though never so dear to Christ, seems to some to be
guilty of sloth and slackness in seeking after Christ, and doing it in her bed
(as loath at first to disease her self) or in holding him while she had him, if
whilst she was sleeping, he slipped away from her side. The wise Virgins also
were napping and nodding, Mat. 25. and holy Austin confesses, that he could
not answer that clear text, whereby he was called out of his sinful course,
Confess. lib. 8. cap. 5.
Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, etc. but only by that
wish of the sluggard, Modo and ecce modo, Sinite paululum, etc. A little more
sleeps, a little more slumbers, etc. little and yet sleeps in the plural. Thus
Modo and Modo non habent modum, and Sinite paululum ibit in longum, as that
Father has it. Somewhat it was surely that makes the Church resolve, as here,
I will rise now, or Let me rise now; I will stir up the gift of God that is in
me, I will stir up my self to take better hold of Christ. Here is a tacit
taxing her self for some former slackness, after her former enjoyments, and
familiar intercourse with Christ. We are too ready, after we have run well,
to lie down and take cold, which may cause a consumption: to please our selves
in unlawful liberties, when we have pleased the Lord in lawful duties.
Hezekiah, after his notable service both of prayer and thanksgiving, fondly
over-shoots himself to the Babylonish Ambassadors. Jonah after his Embassage
faithfully discharged to the Ninivites, breaks forth into anger against the
Lord. Peter being commended by Christ for the profession of his Faith, Mat. 16.
fell presently so far wide, that he heard, Get thee behind me Satan.

I sought him, but I found him not] For trial and exercise of her faith and
constancy. Then shall ye know, if ye follow on to know the Lord, Hos. 6.3. So
then shall we find, if we follow on to seek Christ, fetching him out of his
hiding place, as the woman of Canaan did. For he would have hid himself, says
the Text, but he could not, For a certain woman, etc. Mark. 7.24, 25. And as
she set him out, so she followed him close; refusing to be either said nay,
or sit down with silence or sad answers. The like did Jacob, Genesis 32. he
wrestled with might and slight, he would have a blessing whether God would or
no, as we may say with reverence. Let men go, says God, No, thou shall not,
says Jacob. Let me alone that I may destroy this people, No, (...) Propter
improbitatem.
by no means, says Moses. In seeking of Christ, faith is not only
importunate, but even impudent, Luke 15.8. and threatens Heaven, as Nazianzen
said of his sister Gorgonia. If he have lost his mercy, she will find it for
him, Isa. 63.15. If he look strange and stern, she will both know him, and
claim him amidst all his austerities. Verse. 16. Art not thou our Father? Psalm.
63.8.
If he be gone never so far, she will follow hard after him, so David's
phrase is, even as hard as her old legs will carry (as Father Latimer said)
with Return for thy servants sake. We are thine, etc. verse. 17, 19. O Lord
(faith the Church in Habakkuk) Art not thou from everlasting, my God, and mine
Holy One? It was a bold question; but God assents to it in a gracious answer,
ere he went further. We shall not dye, say they abruptly, Hab. 1.12. Nay
after two days (for so long, it may be, he will hold us off, to try how we
will hold out seeking) he will revive us, in the third day he will raise us
up, and we shall live in his sight, Hos. 6.2. Or if we should dye in this
waiting condition, and in a spiritual desertion, yet we could not miss of
Heaven, because he has said, Blessed are all they that wait for him, Isa.
30.18.

Verse. 3. The watchmen that go about the City found mee] i. e. The Angels, (who
are Gods watchmen over the world, and are so called somewhere in Scripture) as
also, Ministering Spirits, guardians of the Saints, (...). Dan. 4.10 Ezekiel. 33.2
etc. But here I conceive are meant either those Princes of the world,
strangers to the mystery of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.8. and therefore can tell no tale
nor tidings of him. For why, they are of Gallio's Religion, which is no better
than a mere irreligion, Act. 18.15. being de regione magis soliciti quam de
religione, as one says: Or else, the Officers and Ministers of the Church, set
as Watchmen upon Jerusalems walls, with charge never to hold their peace, day
nor night, Isa. 62.6. But they alas prove too too often blind watchmen, dumb
dogs, sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber, Isa. 56.16. And such it seems
were these here, by the small directions they gave the Church, or intelligence
of her best Beloved. Howbeit, because the Priests lips should preserve
knowledge, Heb. 13.1
and they are given for Guides to God, however they prove, she repairs to
them, or rather, lighting upon them, enquires for Christ.

Saw ye him whom my soul loves?] They that love Christ in sincerity, are apt
to imagine that others also do love him no less than they. So much worth they
find in him, that they wonder how any can do otherwise than affect and admire
him. This made Mary Magdalen, who loved much, to ask the Gardener (for so she
took him to be) what he had done with the Lords body, John 20.15. Whereabout
she thought he had been as solicitous as her self. So the Church here, Have
you seen him? When they perhaps were perfect strangers to him. But be they as
they will, they should have known and loved the Lord Jesus Christ, upon pain of
utter cutting off, 1 Cor. 16.22. and whether they do or do not, they shall know
that she loves him; Quis enim celaverit ignem? for who can hide fire in his
bosom, or musk in his pocket? The love of Christ cannot possibly be
concealed. A man may as easily hide the wind with his fist, and the ointment of
his right hand, which bewrays it self, as Solomon speaks in another case,
Prove. 27.16. He that believes with his heart, will confess with his mouth,
Romans 10.10. Christ's true worshippers are marked in their foreheads, Rev. 7.3.
Antichrists limbs receive his mark in their hands, chap. 13.16. which they can
cover or discover, as they see occasion. We have also many politic Professors
amongst us, who for want of true love to Christ, either run away in the plain
field, Heb. 10. ult. and so incur the danger of Marshal Law: or else (under a
color of discretion) fall back into the rereward; the battle is sharp, and it
is not good to be too forward. But is this thy love to thy friend, as be said
to Hushai the Archite? David's Parents and brethren came down to him to the cave
of Adullam, though to their great danger, 1 Samuel 22.1. And Basil being blamed
for his forwardness to appear for his friend in danger, answered, Ego aliter
amare non didici, a friend is made for the day of adversity.

Verse. 4. It was but a little that I passed from them] It is probable, that
lighting upon these watchmen, she promised her self much counsel and comfort
from them; but was disappointed. It pleases God many times to cross our
likeliest projects, that himself alone may be l^aned upon. The poor soul in
distress is apt to knock at the creatures door for comfort, to shark abroad,
and to look this way and that way, as David did, for help. Yea many use the
means as Mediators, and so fall short of Christ. It is a good Note that one
makes upon this Text, that she was a little past the watchmen; Mr. Dud'y
Fenner.
which shows, says he, that the Lord delays comfort, to draw his Church
through all his means, from the lowest to the highest, where she finds in
short space comfort; but many times not till she is past: that they might not
attribute it to the excellency of the means, but unto God.

Ideo minatur, ut non punia^. Chrysostom.
But I found him whom my soul loveth] Christ, as he therefore threatens that
he may not be put to punish, so he therefore hides himself (otherwhiles)
that he may come in again to his people with more comfort: And his usual time
to come in to them, is, when they have well-nigh done looking after him (as he
dealt by those two that were traveling to Emmaus, Luke 24.13.) when they have
hanged up their hopes, and their harps together, and are ready to cast away
their confidence, and to leave looking any longer, Luke 18.8. When the son of
man comes (viz. with an answer to his peoples prayers, which they have now even
given up for lost labor) shall he find Faith upon the earth? i. e. will
anybody ever think, that having stayed so long, he would yet come at last?
Christ loves to comfort those that are forsaken of their hopes, and to give a
blessing to those times and means, whereof we despair. The pains cannot be
cast away which we resolve to lose for Christ.

I held him, and would not let him go] She held him with both hands earnestly:
for Faith has two hands, one receiving Christ from God, the other giving the
believer to God. With both she holds Christ (the King is held in her galleries
by the bonds of love, by the cords of kindness, Cant. 7.5. he is even held
prisoner in her company) but especially with the former. She holds him, as
Jacob did, Genesis 32.26. though with much conflict: the Devil strikes hard at her
hand, and would make her loose her hold. Hence Faith is fain to tugg and
wrestle, even till it sweat again. And therefore Paul calls it, (...), the
difficult work of Faith, 1 These. 1.3. because the believer has such ado to
hold his own. If he cannot hold with his hands, he will make use of his teeth
(as it is storied of Cynegirus that Noble Athenian, and of our Sir Thomas
Challoner, A^lian. Camden.
in the wars of Charles the fifth) any shift he will make rather than part with
Christ, whom his soul loves: having fastened on the tree of life, rather than
drown, he is resolved to pull it up by the very roots. Let God fight against
him with his own hand, and offer, as it were, to kill him, yet he will hang on
still: he will trust in an angry God, in a killing God, as Job: and as Jacob,
he will wrestle, and not let go, though alone, and in the night, and upon one
leg. Lo this is the Generation of them that seek him, of them that seek thy
face: this is Jacob, Psalm. 24.6. these be Israelites indeed, John 1.47.

Until I had brought him into my Mothers house] That is, into my conscience,
say some, (where Faith dwells, and Christ by faith, Romans 10.10. Gal. 4.19.)
into the Synagogues of the Jews say others, or into the Congregations of the
Gentiles. They do best that understand it of the Catholic Church, the supernal
Jerusalem, that mother of us all, figured by Sarah, Gal 4.24, 26. where Christ
has most delightful dwelling, a comfortable commoration, and as it were,
conjugal cohabitation with his Spouse, chamber-fellowship, Judge. 15.1.

Verse. 5. I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem] As a further fruit of her
revived faith, she renews her contestation, and charge of sanctification of
life, such as becomes the Gospel; that Christ whom she resolves now to retain
with her, be not provoked by sin to leave his people, Numb. 32.15. And in this
vehement adjuration, no doubt, says an Interpreter, but the Church had a
special regard to the custom used then, and yet even at this day used amongst
us: namely, that songs are sung before the Bride-chamber, and certain noises of
Instruments brought to wake the Bride and Bridegroom from sleep. See the Note
on chap. 2.7.

Verse. 6. Who is this that comes out of the wilderness] Who is this, say the
Angels, those friends of the Bridegroom (as some will have it) admiring the
Churches high expressions, and continual ascensions in her affection to Christ?
But I rather think it is the voice of the Bridegroom himself, ravished with the
beauty and sweetness of his Spouse, and wondering at his own comeliness put upon
her; as well he may; for quantum mutatur ab illa? Virg.
Such a change he has wrought in her, as never was known in any. See Ezekiel.
16.6, 7, 8, etc. Moses married an Ethiopian woman, and could not change her
hiew. David married a scornful dame, a mocking Michol, and could not mend her
conditions. Jobs wife continued to be (as it is said of Helena after the
Trojan troubles caused by her) (...), the same woman still, no changeling She:
but the Church, and all her genuine children are strangely altered and
metamorphosed (as the Apostles word is, Romans 12.2.) and this change is not
moral, formal, merely mental, temporal, partial, but spiritual, real,
universal, both in respect of subject and object: for it is an entire change of
the whole man, from the whole service of Satan, to the living and true God in
sincere obedience to the whole Law, the whole course of his life throughout. A
change so conspicuous, and so stupendous, that not only strangers take notice
of it, strange at it, 1 Pet. 4.4. and marvel much at the matter, saying, (...).
Who is this? Mat. 21.10. What is come to the man of late, that now it is, Ego
non sum? but Christ himself stands wondering at his own work, as he did once in
Nathanael, Behold an Israelite indeed (an Ishmaelite by nature, but an
Israelite by grace, as Gether, 1 Chronicles. 7.17. 2 Samuel 17.3.) John 1.47. and as
before that in Araunah, that famous Jebusite, 2 Samuel 24.18. compared with Zach.
9.7.

That comes out of the wilderness] scil. Of this world, fitly called a
wilderness, for the paucity of good people in it (the wilderness of Judea,
where John preached was so called, because but thinly inhabited) and plenty of
Bears, and Bores, Lions, and Leopards, and other wild creatures, whereunto
wicked men for their savageness are commonly compared in Scripture. This
ascending of the Church out of the world, as Israel did out of Egypt, and their
orderly marching through the wilderness into the promised inheritance, is
worthily called a wonderful separation, Exodus 33.16. And as that Angel that
appeared to Manoah, by ascending up in the flame of the Altar, is said to do
wondrously, Judge. 13.19, 20. So do the Saints by their daily devotions, as so
many pillars of smoke, elationibus fumi, aspiring to eternity, and coming up,
(as Cornelius his prayers and alms did) for a memorial before God, Act. 10.4.
And albeit their best performances are as smoke, black and sooty in regard of
infirmities and imperfections, yet they have a principle in them to carry them
upward: they have also the High Priest of the New Testament, not to present
them only, but to perfume and becense them, as it is here, with myrrh and
frankincense, and sweetest powders of the spice-merchant, that is, with the
merit and mediation of his own most precious passion, Heb. 9.24. those sweet
odours poured as out of Vials, into the prayers of Saints, Rev. 5.8. and 8.4.
and so making both them and their services acceptable to his Father. And as he
promised, John 12.32. that being lifted up himself by the cross to the
Kingdom, he would draw all his to him; so we see it fulfilled in the Saints,
those heavenly Eagles, soaring out of sight: lowly in their speeches, lofty in
their actions, but especially in their affections carried above all earthly
objects, Col. 3.2. and not content till they are gotten home to Heaven; their
commoration is here, their conversation above. These heavenly Stars, though
seen sometimes in a puddle, though they reflect there, yet they have their
situation in Heaven. These birds of Paradise, though they may touch happily
upon earth, yet they are mostly upon the wing, and those outward comforts and
creatures are to them but scalae and alae, wings and wind in their wings, Zeph.
5.9. to carry them upward. Let shallow men wonder at worldly things, as the
Disciples did at the huge and fair stones of the Temple, Mat. 24. let them be
nailed fast to the earth, as Sisera was by Jael, let them ever bow down-ward,
as that woman in the Gospel that had a spirit of infirmity, let them grovel and
go upon their bellies, and feed upon earth, as the Serpent, Genesis 3. The Saints
are of another alloy: their civil conversation is in Heaven, (...).
Phil. 3.20. their politic bent, aim and fetch is for Heaven: They are
immortalitatis candidati, as the Ancients called Henock and Elias, they do
paradisum mente deambulare, as Hierome bids the young Hermit, take a turn ever
and anon in paradise: and, after some serious thoughts of that blessed place,
they break out, as Monica, Austins Mother did, into a Quid hic facio? What make
I here? why hasten I not home to mine own Country? They send up many pious
ejaculations, many holy sallies, and as it were egressions of soul, many an
humble, joyful and thankful heart to God. Mittunt preces and lachrymas cordis
legatos, as he says, pillars of prayers, vollyes of hearty wishes they send
up continually; laying up treasure in Heaven, and thinking long of the time or
ere they get thither.

Verse. 7. Behold his bed which is Solomon's, etc.] Or behold, the bed of
Solomon, (as the Greek, explaining the Hebrew, has it) Solomon was a famous
figure of Christ: of his bed we read nothing, but may well conceive, it was
(as every thing else about him) stately and costly: And thereby is meant here
Heaven, say some, whither the Church is brought in ascending in the precedent
verse: and by the valiant Warders they understand the Angels, those Mighties,
Psalm. 103.20. But because they are said to be valiant men of Israel, I rather
assent to those that think the godly Ministers are here meant by the Mighties,
and the Church, by Christ's bed, where he reposeth and rests in his love,
Zeph. 3.17. lodging betwixt her breasts, Cant. 1.13. There is nothing more
sure, than that the blessed Angels do watch over the Church. What a guard by
them had Jacob at Mehanaim, Genesis 32.1, 2
where they made a lane for him (as the word imports) to provide for his
safety? the like we may say of Elisha at Dothan, and diverse others. I doubt
not, (says one) but as the Angels waited at Christ's sepulcher, so for his sake
they watch also over our graves, called our beds, Isa. 57.2. Howbeit here,
understand we it of the Ministers of the word, that watch for men's souls, and
are frequently called watchmen. Sixty of them they are said to be, because a
great number, as the Levites were scattered up and down the Tribes of Israel
(as salt is strawed thick upon flesh to keep it from putrefying. Ye are the
salt of the Earth, Mat. 5. etc.) And valiant they are said to be: for valor
and courage invincible is necessary to a Minister, who shall be sure to be
put hard to it; and therefore had need to be (as Athanasius was) an Adamant
for his resolute stout carriage; and to partake with the Diamond in the
Highpriests breast plate for hardness and hardiness in standing to and for the
truth. Israelites also they ought to be; Jews inwardly, not scoffing
Ishmaelites, profane Edomites, false Philistines, but the valiants of Israel,
such as David's band of Worthies was, 1 Chronicles. 11, and 12. faithful and godly
patterns of piety, such as will take heed to themselves, and to the flock,
waiting upon the Lords work, and watching for men's souls, as they that must
give account, etc. Heb. 13.17. It is a great matter to be of Christ's
lifeguard. Remember what David said of Abner, 1 Samuel 26.15.

Verse. 8. They all hold swords, being expert in war] They not only bear arms,
Judge. 8.20 (...). Plutarch.
but can handle them. Young Jether wore a sword, but he durst not draw it, or
strike with it, when he should have killed Zeba, and Zalmunna. Themistocles
said of the Eretrians, a cowardly people, that they were like the Sword-fish,
which has a sword indeed, but wants an heart. Such white-livered soldiers,
such faint-hearted swordmen our Solomon has no need of: Our Gideon will not
employ them so far as to break a pitcher, or to bear a torch. Judge. 7.
The fearful and unbeleeving shall never set foot in his Kingdom, much less
be Esquires of his body; those in that Office must hold fast the faithful word
(that sword of the Spirit, that two-edged sword) far beyond that of Goliath (and
yet David said, there was none to that) that they may be able and apt by sound
doctrines, both to exhort the tractable, and to convince the gainsayer, Tit.
1.9. Those that either cannot, or will not do thus, are no way fit to be of
Christ's guard, because they are more likely to betray him into the hands of his
enemies, than to defend him from them; to act a Judas his part, than a Peter's,
who manfully cut off Malchus his ear, and chose rather to be held temerarious,
than timorous. Jeremy complains of the Pastors of his time, Jer. 9.3.
that they were not valiant for the truth, they had no spiritual metal in them:
but as Hearts and Stags have great horns and strength, but want courage: so it
was with these. St. Austin professes this was it that heartened him, and made
him to triumph in his former Manichism, that he met with feeble Opponents, and
such as his nimble wit was easily able to overturn. If gainsayers be not
powerfully convinced, how will they set up their crests, Haeretici argumentis
lapidandi. Hilar.
and cry, victoria? If they be not stoned with Arguments, how will they start
up, and outstare the truth? There must be therefore skill and will in all her
Champions. They must also every man have his sword upon his thigh, and be
ready for an assault. Seneca reports of Caesar, that he had quickly sheathed
his sword, but never laid it off. And Suetonius tells us, Scilicet ut paratum
and intentum momentis omnibus, etc.
that he would never fore-acquaint his soldiers of any set time of removal or
onset, that he might never find them unready. Christ expects the like care
and courage in his Ministers, lest the Proverb be verified on them, Ungirt,
unblest.

And because of fears in the night] Lest evil should befall Solomon, as it did
Ishbosheth, who was slain upon his bed by the sons of Rimmon: lest deeds of
darkness be done in a Land of light, and whilst the watchmen slack their
duty, the Rulers of the darkness of this world break in and play their pranks.
Whilst men slept, tares were sown by the evil man, Mat. 13.

Verse. 9. King Solomon made himself a Charriot] Hic locus lubricus est and
difficilis. This is an hard Text, says one. It had been easier (perhaps) if
Commentatours had not made it so hard. The word rendered Chariot, is by others
rendered a Bride-chamber, a Bed, a Throne, a Palace. (...).
The Hebew word is found in this place only: it has the name of fairness and
fruitfulness. Rabbi Solomon says it is, Thalamus honorificus, a bedchamber of
honor, whereby we are to understand again the Church, as we did by bed in
the former verse. She is often compared to an house, here to a Bride-chamber,
and Solomon's Bride-chamber, which must needs be supposed very trim, and set
forth to the best. It is further set forth here by the causes; efficient,
Solomon himself; Material, Cedar, Silver, Gold, etc. Formal, paid with love;
Final, for himself first, and then, for the daughters of Jerusalem. First,
Solomon himself made it, though a King. Stupenda sane dignatio, a wonderful
condescension. The Church is Christ's own workmanship, his artificial facture,
(...).
or creature (as the Greek word signifies, Ephesians. 2.10.) that Masterpiece of
his architecture, wherein he has showed singular skill, by erecting that
glorious fabric of the New Man, that New Heaven, and New Earth wherein
dwells Righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.13. For he planteth the Heavens, and lays
the foundations of the Earth, that he may say to Zion, Thou art my people,
that he may rejoice in the habitable part of Gods Earth, Prove. 8.31. that he
may say, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will be their God, and
they shall be my people, 1 Cor. 6.16. Christ wrought the Centurions faith, as
God, he wondered at it, as man. God wrought, and man marvelled, he did both,
to teach us where to bestow our wonder. Paul prays for his Ephesians, that
their eyes might be enlightened to see the power that wrought in them, Chap.
1.18.

Of the Wood of Lebanon] See the Note on chap. 1.17. The Saints are the
Churches materials, Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.2. The precious sons of Zion, are
comparable to fine gold, Lam. 4.2. Her Nazarites are purer than Snow, whiter
than Milk, more ruddy than Rubies, their polishing is of Sapphire, verse. 7. And
yet Bellarmine is not ashamed to say, Lib. 3. cap. 2. de Eccles. militante.
Nos etiamsi credimus in Ecclesia inveniri omnes virtutes, etc. Although we
doubt not but that all virtues are found in the Church: yet that a man may be
absolutely called a Member of that true Church spoken of in Scripture; we hold
not that any inward virtue is required, but only an external profession of the
Faith, and participation of the Sacraments. Cameron de Eccles. page 167.
Belle hoc convenit Ecclesiae Romanae, says a learned man. This description
suits very well with the Church of Rome. For certainly if there be any
virtuous persons in that Church, id eis convenit per accidens, it is by mere
accident, and not as they are in that Church, but as they dissent from it: like
as Cicero says wittily of the Epicureans, that if any were good amongst them,
it was merely from the goodness of their nature, for they taught and thought
otherwise. And as Peter Moulin said of many of the Priests of France, that they
were for their loyalty not beholding to the Maxims of Italy, and yet Bellarmine
has the face to say, De notis Eccles. l. 4. c. 13
Sunt quidem in Ecclesia Catholica plurimi mali, sed ex haeriticis nullus est
bonus. Among Papists there are many bad men, but among Protestants, not one
good man is to be found.

Verse. 10. He made the pillars thereof] i. e. The faithful Ministers, called
Pillars, Gal. 2.9. and that ( Atlas-like) bear up the pillars of it, Psalm
75.3. Those that offer violence to such, Sampson-like, they lay hands upon the
pillars to pluck the house upon their own heads. Yea they attempt to pull Stars
out of Christ's hand, Revelations 1. which they will find a work not feisable.

Of silver] For the purity of matter, and clearness of sound: for their beauty,
stability, and incorruption. Let Ministers hereby learn, how they ought to
behave themselves in the house of God, which is the Church of the living God,
the pillar and ground of truth, 1 Timothy 3.15.

The bottom thereof of gold] Understand it either of Gods Word, which is
compared to the finest gold, or of that precious grace of Faith the root of all
the rest: whence it is laid by St. Peter, as the bottom and basis, the
foundation and fountain of all the following graces, 2 Epist. 1.5. Add to your
Faith, virtue, and to virtue knowledge, etc. they are all in Faith radically:
every grace is but Faith exercised: Hence we read of the joy of Faith, the
obedience of Faith, the righteousness of Faith, etc. She is the Mother-grace,
the womb wherein all the graces are conceived: Hence the bottom of Christ's
fruitful bed, the pavement of his glorious Bride-chamber the Church, is here
said to be of gold, that is, of Faith, which is called gold, Rev. 3.17.
compared with 1 Pet. 1.7. that the trial of your Faith (or your well-tryed
Faith, for it seems to be an Hebraism) being much more precious than that of
gold, etc. And here, Bern.
Melius est pallens aurum quam fulgens aurichalcum, gold though paler, is
better than glittering copper. Splendida peccata.
The Faith of Gods Elect is far more precious than the shining sins of the
beautiful abominations of mere Moralists. Suppose a simple man should get a
stone, and strike fire with it, and thence conclude it a precious stone. Why,
every flint or ordinary stone will do that. So to think one has this golden
grace of Faith, because he can be sober, just, chaste, liberal, etc. Why,
ordinary Heathens can do this. True gold will comfort the fainting heart, which
Alchymy gold will not. Think the same of Faith.

The covering of it of Purple] I am of their mind, that expound it of Christ's
blood, wherewith, as with a Canopy, or a kind of Heaven over head, the Church
is covered and cured, Rev. 5.16. and 7.14. Romans 6.3, 4. Purple was a rich and
dear commodity amongst them; see Prove. 31.22. and 7.5. Mark 15.17. Luke 16.19.
The precious blood of Christ is worthily preferred before gold and silver, 1
Pet. 1.18, 19.

The midst thereof being paved with love] For Christ loved us, and washed us
with his blood, Rev. 1.5. He also fills his faithful people with the sense of
his love, who therefore cannot but find a great deal of pleasure in the ways
of God, because therein they let out their souls into God, and taste of his
unspeakable sweetness, they cannot also but reciprocate and love his love. So
the bottom, the top, and the middle of this reposing place are answerable to
those three Cardinal graces, faith, hope and love, 1 Cor. 13.

For the daughters of Jerusalem] This Charret or Bridal-bed he made for
himself, he made it also for the daughters of Jerusalem: for all his is
theirs; Union being the ground of Communion. As we must do all for Christ
(according to that, Quicquid agas propter Deum agas, and again, Propter te
Domine, propter te; choice and excellent Spirits are more taken up with what
they shall do for God, than what they shall receive from God) so Christ does
all for us, and seeks how to seal up his dearest love to us in all his actions
and achievements. Christ's death and bloodshed (says Mr. Bradford) is the
great Seal of England, yea of all the world, for the confirmation of all
Patents and Perpetuities of the everlasting life, whereunto he has called us.
-- This death of Christ therefore look on as the very pledge of Gods love
toward thee, etc. See, Gods hands are nailed, they cannot strike thee; Sermon. of
Repent. 63
his feet also, he cannot run from thee. His arms are wide open to embrace
thee, his head hangs down to kiss thee; his very heart is open, so that therein
look, nay even spy, and thou shall see nothing therein but love, love, love to
thee. Hide thee therefore, lay thine head there with the Beloved Disciple, join
thee to Christ's Charret, as Philip did to the noble Eunuchs. This is the cleft
of the Rock wherein Elias stood. This is for all aching heads a pillow of Down,
etc.

Verse. 11. Go forth, O ye Daughters of Zion] i.e. All ye faithful souls which
follow the Lord Christ, the Lamb that stands upon Mount Zion, Rev. 14.1, 4. Ye
shall not need to go far (and yet far ye would go, I dare say, to see such a
gallant sight as King Solomon in his Royalty: the Queen of Sheba did) behold
he is at hand, Tell ye the Daughters of Zion, behold thy King comes, etc.
Mat. 21.5. Go forth therefore, forth of your selves, forth from your friends,
means, all, as Abraham did, and the holy Apostles, Confessors, and Martyrs,
and as the Church is bid to do, Psalm. 45.10. forget also thine own people, and
thy Fathers house. Good Nazianzen was glad that he had something of value (to
wit, his Athenian learning) to part with for Christ. Horreo quicquid de meo
est, ut meus sim, says Bernard. He that will come to me, must go utterly out
of himself, says our Savior. All Saint Paul's care was, that he might be
sound in Christ, but lost in himself. Epist. ad Gabr. Vydym.
Ambula in timore and contemptu tui, and ora Christum, ut ipse tua omnia
faciat, and tu nihil facias, sed sis sabbatum Christi, says Luther, walk in
the fear and contempt of thy self, and rest thy spirit in Christ; this is to go
forth to see King Solomon crowned, yea this is to set the Crown upon Christ's
head. Camd. Elisab. Anno 1585.
When Queen Elizabeth undertook the protection of the Netherlands against the
Spaniard, all Princes admired her fortitude: and the King of Sweden, said that
she had now taken the Diadem from her own Head, and set it upon the doubtful
chance of war. He that forsakes all for Christ, and puts himself by Faith
under his protection, submitting to the Scepter of his Kingdom, and sending a
Lamb to this Ruler of the Land, Isa. 16.1. in token of homage and fealty, his
eyes shall see the King in his beauty; and instead of a Vivat Rex, he shall
break forth into this glorious acclamation, The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is
our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, and he will save us, Isa. 33.17.22. It
was St. Augustines wish, that he might see Romam in flore, Paulum in ore, and
Christum in corpore, Rome, as of old, flourishing, Paul, as he did once,
preaching, and Christ, as in the days of his flesh, going up and down doing
good. There are that hold, that by Solomon crowned here is meant Christ
incarnated, taking flesh, as a Crown, of his Mother Mary: and that this was the
day of his Espousals, when the Word was made flesh, and the day of the gladness
of his heart, when he rejoiced in the habitable part of Gods Earth, (that is,
in the humane Nature, wherein the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily) and his
delights were with the sons of men, Proverbs 8.31. Some understand it of the
Crown of Thorns set upon him by his Mother the Synagogue. Others the
Resurrection, Phil. 2.9.
and that Name above all Names that he gat by his Death. I am of Mercers mind,
who expounds it of that glory that Christ has when he is preached up as the
sole and absolute Savior, and so believed on in the world, 1 Timothy 3.16.
that the obedience of Faith is yielded unto him. When Faith and Obedience make
a perfect pair of Compasses, then Christ's head is compassed with a Crown. Faith
as the one foot is pitched upon the Crown of Christ's head, whiles Obedience as
the other walks about in a perfect circle of good duties, whereby he is made
glad, Psalm. 45.8.

CHAP. IV. Verse. 1. Behold thou art fair, my Love, behold thou art fair.]
THou art, thou art, and I am much taken with it, so that I cannot but set an
Ecce admirantis upon it, I am so rapt and ravished: yea I would that others
also should behold it, and be enamoured with it. As the Church called upon her
Daughters of Zion, in the last verse of the former chapter, to go forth and see
her Bridegroom in all his bravery, and to help to crown him: Ezekiel. 16.14
so here interchangeably, Christ calls upon all sorts to contemplate his
beautiful Bride in all the comeliness that he has put upon her, and that
Crown of twelve Stars that he has set upon her head, Rev. 12.1. so that in
every thing she is enriched by him, and comes behind in no gift, 1 Cor. 1.5,
7.

Thou have Doves eyes] Particularly Christ commends her eyes, hair, teeth,
lips, temples, neck and breasts. He that would praise another, is careful to
take in whatsoever of him may be thought praiseworthy. Christ only is able
to give his Church her due commendation; because he only knows all men; And
needs not that any should testify of man, for he knows what is in man,
John 2.24, 25. All others that shall undertake such a business, had need say as
Mr. Bradford the Martyr says of that Peerless King Edward the Sixth. Sermon. of
Repent. 37
So many things are to be spoken in commendation of Gods graces in this child
(who yet was but one of those many that make up the Church, but yet such an
one, that as he was the chifest, so I think the holiest and godliest in the
Realm of England, Pictores pulchram absolutamque faciem raro nisi in pejus
effingunt.
says the same blessed Bradford,) that as Salust writes of Carthage, I had
rather speak nothing, than too little, in that too much is too little. An exact
face (says Pliny) is seldom drawn but with great disadvantage: how much more
when a bungler has it in hand? In which regard Alexander the Great forbade his
pourtraiture to be painted by any other than Apelles, or to be carved by any
other but Lysippus, men famous in those faculties. Behold here one that goes
far beyond them both, (the greatest Artisan in the world) pensilling out to the
life, and setting forth a complete Character of his dearest Spouse, whom he
had in his heart to dye, Exodus 28.29 2 Cor. 7.3 2 Cor. 11.
and to live with, as the High Priest had the twelve Tribes, and St. Paul his
Corinthians, though the more he loved, the less he was beloved. But to come
to her particular praises, Thou have Doves eyes, that is, fair, full, clear,
chaste. See the Note on chap. 1.15. Eyes the true Church has, and those both
opened and enlightened, Act. 26.18. She cries not up ignorance as the Mother
of Devotion, neither does she send forth blind guides, to require blind
obedience, as the Popish Padres do with their novices; to put out the eyes of
those poor mis-lead and muzzled Ignoramusses, and to lead them blindfold into
the midst of their deadly enemies, as Elisha did the Syrians into Samaria. The
Church here described, has (as Solomon's wise man) her eyes in her head: yea,
she has two eyes, when the rest of the world has but one, (as the Chinois
vainly brag of themselves) a praise proper to the Church of Christ, Description
of the world, chap. of China.
She lifts not up her eyes unto Idols, Ezekiel. 18.6. but to the Holy One of
Israel, Isa. 17.7. her eyes are Doves eyes. Every child of Christ's Church has
a spiritual eyesight, an insight into the Mystery of Christ, communication of
Christ's secrets, the mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.15. She has no blind children:
for though born blind, yet Christ has anointed them with his eye salve, Rev.
3.18.
and given both light and sight. But by eyes here we are chiefly to understand
Pastors and Ministers, those Seers (as they were called of old, 1 Samuel 9.9.)
those lights of the world, John 5.
Mat. 5.14, 15, 16. burning and shining lights, as the Baptist was called,
whose Office is to be to Gods people, instead of eyes, Numb. 10.31. and to
open the eyes of the blind, to turn them from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan to God, etc. Act. 26.18. And these are to have Doves eyes,
seeking to present unto Christ every man chaste and pure in the simplicity of
the Gospel, 2 Cor. 11.2, 3.

Within thy locks] Seemly tied up and covered (as the word imports) without
pride or affectation, not laid out, as the manner is, of vain and unshame-faced
women, but thick, fair, and modestly made up: to show the Churches modesty and
humility, which is the knot of every virtue, (...).
and ornament of every grace, as St. Peter's word holds it forth, 1 Pet. 5.5.

Their hair is as a flock of Goats, etc.] They are fat and well-liking; and so
their hair lay smooth, slick, and shining: By the Churches hair here, may be
meant the community of true Christians, that, being as the hair innumerable, do
adhere to Christ, as to their head; and have a promise that not one hair of
that sacred head shall fall to the ground: and that if any son of Belial shall
offer to shear or shave them, 2 Samuel 10.
he shall answer it as dearly as the Ammonites did the like abuse done to
David's Ambassadors.

Verse. 2. Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep, etc.] Handsome teeth set forth a
woman very well: and they are then held handsome, when they are 1. Even and
well matched; 2. Fair and white; 3. Thick and full. All this we have here
daintily set forth in an allegory. And by teeth the Chaldee Paraphrast will
have meant (and I dissent not) the Priests and Levites of the Law, the Pastors
and Preachers, think I, of the Church: who as they must be eyes to see, so
they must be teeth in another regard, viz. 1. To chew, 2. To bite. First, they
must champ and chew the childrens meat for them as good Nurses: such as Paul
was, 1 These. 2.7. and before him, Isaiah, chap. 28.9. Whom shall he teach
knowledge, and whom shall he make to understand? Not the wise and prudent, not
conceited persons, that make Divinity only a matter of discourse, or come to
hear, only to exercise their Critics, and to sit as Judges, on their
Ministers gifts: But such as are weaned from the Milk, and drawn from the
Breasts. And how will he do to deal with such, and to divide the word aright
to them? He will praemansum cibum in os indere, (...). 2 Timothy 2.25
mollify their harder meat for them, that it hurt not the tender toothless
gumms of these weanlings, weaklings. Precept, says he, shall be upon
Precept, Precept upon Precept, line upon line, line upon line, here a little,
and there a little. They shall have it as they can take it, neither will he
put that upon them, that is not fit for them. They shall have Milk, and not
strong meat, or if they have, it shall be ready chewed for them. Our Savior
spoke, as the people could hear, and not as he could have spoken. Mark 4.33
If we have spoken to you (says he) of earthly things, (that is, of
spiritual matters under earthly similitudes borrowed from wind, water, etc.)
and ye believe not, how shall ye believe, John 3.12.
if I tell you of heavenly things? that is, of more sublime matters and
mysteries of eternal life: Ministers must stoop to their hearers capacities,
and not be up in their Altitudes; or deliver their discourses in an high
language, in a Roman English, etc. For what is that but to beat the air, to
lose their labor, and to be as Barbarians to their hearers, etc? Non oratorum
filii sumus, sed piscatorum: nec verborum (...), sed Spiritus (...), said that
great Divine to Libanius the Rhetorician. We are not Orators, but Preachers:
neither come we with excellency of words, but with evidence of the Spirit, and
of power, and by manifestation of the Truth, commending our selves to every
man's conscience in the sight of God, 1 Cor. 2.4. 2 Cor. 4.2. This is preaching:
the Art whereof plus operis habet quam ostentationis (as Quintillian says of
the Art of Grammar) is not a matter of show, but of service: And to the ears of
that which St. Peter calls the hidden-man of the heart, the plain song always
makes the best music.

But (secondly) As Ministers must masticate the childrens meat, (...).
Cuttingly.
and make it fit for their eating, so they are bound to bite, that is, to
rebuke sharply those that are unsound in their Faith, or enormous in their
practice, Tit. 1.13. to gore their very souls with smarting pain, and to sting
their consciences to the quick, with the forked arrows of biting reproofs, and
unquestionable convictions. Thine arrows art sharp in the hearts of the Kings
enemies, whereby the people fall under thee, Psalm. 45.5. Ministers must not
only whet their teeth against the wicked (as Boars do their tusks when
provoked) but set their teeth in the sides of those Boars that root up the
Vineyard, and those Foxes that destroy the Grapes. Thus the ancient Prophets
pricked and peirced the hearts of their hearers: so did the holy Apostles, St.
Peter for instance, Act. 2. he so handled the matter, (...).
that they were punctually pricked at heart, Act. 2.37. they felt the nails
wherewith they had crucified Christ, sticking fast in their own spirits, and
driven home to the head by that Master of the Assembly, Eccles. 12.11.
Penitency and pain are words of one derivation, and are very near of kin.
Hardly will men be made to repent, till touched to the quick, till the Preacher
do mordaci radere vero, Horat.
deal plainly and roundly with them, stab them to the heart with the menaces of
the Law, and lay them for dead at Christ's feet, that he may revive them, as
the Pelican does her young ones with her blood. O^iand. hist. Eccles. Cent. 5.
l. 1. c. 6.
It is said of Chrysostom, that he took the same liberty to cry down sin,
that men did to commit it. Of Mr. Bradford, that as he did earnestly persuade
to a godly life, and sweetly preach Christ crucified, so he did sharply
reprove sin, and zealously impugn errors. Of Mr. Perkins, that ^ee came so
close in his Applications, that he was able almost to make his hearers hearts
fall down, and their hairs to stand upright. This was preaching indeed,
preaching in the life of it. I know well, that most men are sick of a Noli me
tangere, and are apt to hate him that reproves in the gate. As loath they are
to be searched, as Rachel, when she sat upon the Idols; to have their lusts
mortified, as David was to have Absalom executed: Handle him gently, for my
sake, etc. Cannot Preachers meddle only with toothless truths, say they, as
Balak bade Balaam neither curse, nor bless at all. But why has Christ given
his Ministers teeth, but to bite and be bitter against sin and wickedness?
personal invectives indeed proceeding from private grudge he allows not.
Spiritus Christi nec mendax, noc mordax. The Rule here is, Parcere nominibus,
dicere de vitiis.

Of Erasmus it is said, that he was Mente and dente potens, sharp with
discretion. Every Minister should be so: and his Doctrine should distill as
honey, as the property whereof is to purge wounds, but to bite Ulcers, it
causes pain to exulcerate parts, (...). Alex. Aphrod. Probl.
though of it self sweet and medicinable.

That are even shorn] The commendations of a set of teeth, whereof before. 1.
Even they must be and well matched: so should Ministers be like-minded, having
the same love, being of one accord, and of one mind, Phil. 2.2. serving the
Lord with one shoulder, Zeph. 3.9. not shouldering one another, and striving
for precedence, but content with a parity, and in giving honor going one
before another. The six branches in the golden Candlestick joined all in one;
and the Cherubims in the Temple looked one toward another: which some think
signified the agreement and oneness that should be between the Ministers of
the Gospel.

Which came up from the washing] 2. Fair and white: washed in the Kings Bath of
Christ's blood, famous and eximious for their extraordinary and exemplary
holiness. It is their office to be fullones animarum, to make and keep white
the fleeces of their flocks, the peoples souls. And therefore themselves had
need be as Jerusalems Nazarites were, Lam. 4.7. Purer than Snow, whiter than
Milk, etc.

Whereof every one bears Twins] Gemelliparae. It must be Ministers care to
bring many to God, whom they may one day present with, Here am I, and the
children whom thou have given me. Aarons sons by generation, are said to be
Moses his sons by institution and instruction, Numb. 3.1. See Gal. 4.19. 1
Cor. 4.15. Happy is the man that has his quiver full of them.

Verse. 3. Thy lips are like a thread of Scarlet] Which has two comely
properties, Small and Ruddy. A thin lip is a sign of eloquence, Job 12.20.
Pitho sits upon it: as on the other side, a thick lip is an uncircumcised lip
Exodus 6.12. a polluted lip, Isa. 6.5. Scarlet or Coralline lips are counted a
great grace, as white, black, bluish lips are held no small deformity. The
Churches lips are her Christian confessions, whether to God or men. To God,
when she acknowledges his favors, (and so covers his Altar with the calves
of her lips) or confesses her sins with all the aggravations, bringing them
forth as they did the vessels of the Sanctuary, Ezra 8.34. by tale and by
weight; bewailing and begging pardon of all their transgressions in all their
sins, as the words are, Levit. 16.21. To man she confesses, when she makes a
wise and bold profession of the truth; not afraid with any amazement, 1 Pet.
3.6. but ready to resist even unto blood, Heb. 12.4. The Tabernacle was covered
over with Red (and the Scarlet Whore would fain persuade us, that she takes up
that color for the same intent) to note that we must stand to the profession
of the truth, even to effusion of blood: This confession of the mouth, Romans
10.10. is set forth here by lips red as Scarlet, because it must be lively, not
fady or frigid, but full of Faith, and died in Christ's blood. It is also
described by a thread of Scarlet, because (as a thread) it must be drawn out
to the full length, and not cut off, so long as life lasts, for any fear, or
other by-respect whatsoever. Surely as Austin said of the feast of Pentecost,
Gaudet produci haec solennitas, so may we say of Christian confession, It
rejoices to be held out to the last breath. And as the silkworm stretches
forth her self before she spin, and ends her life in her long wrought clew: so
is it with the faithful Confessor.

And thy speech is comely] Because grave and gracious, framed in
Scripture Phrase as much as may be: and therefore comely and delectable.
Loquamur verba Scripturae, utamur sermon Spiritus Sancti, etc. said that
incomparable man Peter Ramus, Let us speak the very words of Scripture, let us
make use of the language of the Holy Ghost, and for ever abominate those
Logodaedali, learned Asses, that profanely disdain at the stately plainness of
Gods blessed Book; and that think to correct the Divine Wisdom and eloquence
with their own infancy and sophistry. It is the Church only that speaks
handsomely, because holily, and as the Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4.11. She is (as
one well says of Basil) suaviter gravis, and graviter suavis, nihil habens
affectatae loquacitatis, sweetly grave, and gravely sweet, neither
troublesomely talkative, nor sinfully silent: verborum parca, Casaub.
sententiarum dives (as another says of Livy) few words, but full of matter.

Thy Temples are like a piece of a Pomegranate] A Pomegranate has many grains
within his case, and a little round circle or Crown without, upon his head. Now
these grains being sweet in taste, and red in color, are orderly set one by
another, and point up, and as it were look up altogether unto the Crown. To
intimate thus much (say Beda and Haimo) that the children of the Church must
grow on still toward the mark, not only when they enjoy the sweet taste of
pleasant prosperity, but also when they bear the red color of bloody
persecution. And consenting in a kind of conformity and perfect peace, they
must point up all together with the finger of Faith, to Christ, and look up
continually with the eye of love to their head Christ, who being first crossed,
is now come to be crowned with honor and glory. Some do explain this piece of
a Pomegranate when it is cut, to signify the reverend and modest countenance
of the Church; as fearing and taking heed lest she should speak or do amiss;
or blushing, if she has failed. Others expound it of the good works of Gods
people (compared verse. 9. to an Orchard of Pomegranates) beautiful, and comely,
but yet imperfect: like as there is no Pomegranate that has not one rotten
grain in it.

Verse. 4. Thy neck is like the Tower of David] i. e. Fair and forcible, erectum
and celsum, upright and lofty. It betokens the invincible courage, and
comfortable carriage of the Church, not giving place to her enemies by
subjection, no not for an hour, Gal. 2.5. Many a time have they afflicted me
from my youth, may Israel now say, yet never have they prevailed against me,
etc. Psalm. 129.1, 2, etc. Neither shall the gates of Hell ever do it: She
shall set her feet in the necks of her enemies, but her neck (as the horses,
Job 39.19.) shall be clothed with thunder, so long as with stretcht-out neck,
she looks up unto the Hills from whence comes her help, Psalm. 121.1. Even
those everlasting Hills, Genesis 49.26. where her David (the Lord Christ) dwells
as in a Tower, (...).
and from thence succors her, as the people said once to David, 2 Samuel 18.3.
Besides the fresh supply of his free Spirit, Phil. 1.19. fortifying their
hearts against the tyranny of sin, and terror of hell, he has furnished for
her a most admirable Armory, viz. the Sacred Scriptures, with armor that is
polished and prepared for most necessary uses. Justin.
So that the Saints are those true Argyraspides (as Alexanders old soldiers
were called) for defense they have (besides that privy armor of peace with
God, Phil. 4.7. and joy in the Holy Ghost, Nehem. 8.13.) the breast plate of
righteousness, the girdle of truth, the shield of faith, and shoes of
patience. And for offense, they have the sword of the Spirit, and darts of
Prayer, Ephesians. 6, 14, 15, 16.

All weapons of mighty men] Meet for such, and not for mean men: and all to be
fetched out of the Armoury of the Scriptures, by our Saviors own example, Mat.
4.4. The Word of God has a Power in it to quail and quell all our spiritual
enemies, far better than that wooden dagger, that leaden sword of the Papists,
their holy waters, crossings, Medals, Relics, etc. This the Devil knows, and
therefore sets his Antichristian instruments on work, to take away this Armoury
from the common people (as the Philistims took away all weapons from the
Israelites) and to give this wicked advice (as Bristow did) to get Heretics
out of their weak and false Tower of holy Scriptures, Motive. 48.
into the plain field of Councils and Fathers, etc. Which if they should do, as
we trust they never shall, Whitak. in Campian.
yet we dare be bold to say with learned Whitaker, Patres in maximis sunt
nostri, in multis varii, in minimis vestri: The Fathers in most material points
are for us, and not them. As for the Papists, we know how disdainfully they
reject the Fathers, De Christo, lib. 1. cap. 9.
when they make against them. Bellarmine says, to Irenaeus, Tertullian,
Eusebius and Luther, I answer, Omnes manifesti haretici sunt, They are all
manifest Heretics. When any thing in Gregory or other Ancients pleases them
not, the Gloss upon that says, Hoc non credo, or sets Palea upon it, or Hoc
antiquum est, and happened in illo tempore. And Cornelius Mus, on Romans 3.
speaks out the sense of the whole rabble of them, Plus uni Pontifici crederem,
quam mill Augustinis, I would sooner believe one Pope, Quaest. An Papa sit
sup. council.
than a thousand Augustines. How much better that learned Picus Mirandula (a
Papist too) Simplici potius rustico and infanti and aniculae magis quam
Pontifici Maximo and mill^ Episcopis credendum est, si isti contra Evangelium,
il^i pro Evangelio faciant, we should sooner and rather believe a plain
Countryman, an infant, or an old wife, than the Pope, and a thousand Bishops,
if the former speak or do according to the Scripture, the latter against it.
And what a strong neck had Luther, scorning to stoop to Antichrists yoke, when
he professes, that if the Pope (as Pope) should command him to receive the
communion in both kinds, he would but receive in one kind (though he were
otherwise very earnest to have it administered in both, according to the Gospel)
lest he should seem to receive the mark of the beast?

Verse. 5. Thy two Breasts are like two young Roes, etc.] From the neck he
descends to the breasts: and by these descriptions of beauty in all parts
(for the rest are to be understood, though not here specified) is signified,
that the Spirit of Regeneration works upon the whole man in all manner of
virtue. Holiness in the heart, as the Candle in the Lanthorn, appears in the
body, 1 These. 5.23.
and every member thereof. Spirit, soul and body are sanctified throughout:
like as the most holy place, the Sanctuary, and the outer Court of Solomon's
Temple were filled with the cloud. The Churches breasts here are said to be
fair, full, and equally matched. Hereby some understand the two Testaments,
those breasts of consolation, Isa. 66.11. fair and full strutting with sincere
milk, that her children may all suck and be satisfied, viz. batten, grow up
and increase with the increase of God, to a full stature in Christ, 1 Pet. 2.2.
These breasts are also suitable and equal, as twins: the two Testaments are so
in sundry respects. For as the Old Testament has four sorts of Books, viz.
Legal, Historical, Sapiential, Prophetical, so has the New in a due
proportion. Answerable to the Legal are the Evangelical, to the Historical are
the Acts of the Apostles, to the Sapiential or Dogmatical are the Epistles
(wherein, as St. Paul principally presses Faith, so St. Peter Hope, and St.
John Charity) and to the Prophetical, Apocalypse, ut sic mira sit conformitas,
(says Bonaventure) non solum in continentia sensuum, sed in quadriformitate
partium, so that there is a wondrous conformity of one Testament to another,
not only in the sameness of sense, but in the quadriformity also of parts. And
this was mystically set forth, says he, by Ezekiel in his Vision of the wheel
with four faces, and this wheel within a wheel, implying the Old Testament in
the New, and the New Testament in the Old.

Verse. 6. Until the day break, and the shadows flee away] i. e. Till that last
and great day of the Lord dawn, that day of refreshing, Bemicha^a, Isa. 35.10.
Act. 3.19. that day of Consolation, as the Syriack has it, John 11.24. When
everlasting joy shall be upon the heads of all believers; they shall obtain
joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away. Till that blessed
time Christ (in answer to his Spouses request, chap. 2.17.) promises to get
him to the mountains of myrrh, that is, not to Heaven (as some sense it) but
to his Church Militant, frequently called Gods Holy Mountain, and here
Mountains of Myrrh, and Hills of Incense] as in allusion to Mount Moriah,
whereon the Temple was builded, so especially in reference to the prayers and
good works of the Saints, those Evangelical Sacrifices wherewith God is well
pleased. Some there are, that comparing this with chap. 2.17. make these to be
the Churches words: that as there she requested speedy help of Christ in the
time of her sorrow; so here in like temptation she flees for refuge to the
mount of myrrh, and hell of frankincense, to the holy Ordinances where she
hops for comfort.

Verse. 7. Thou art all fair my Love] Christ having graciously answered his
Spouses Petition with a Promise of his gracious presence with her, and
providence over her, proceeds in her commendation. A perfection of parts he
here grants her (though not of degrees) a comparative perfection also in regard
of the wicked, whose spot is not the spot of his children, Deuteronomy. 31.5. He
calls her his Spouse in the next verse: Calab of Calol to profit.
the Hebrew word imports that being dressed in all her Bride attire, she is
all fair, and has perfection of beauty, Jer. 2.32. and is all glorious within
and without, not having spot, wrinckle, or any such thing but holy and
spotless, Ephesians. 5.26, 27. Fair he called her before, verse. 1. but now

All fair] And therefore the fairest among women, a meet Mate for him who is
fairer than all the children of men, Psalm. 45.2. Not but that she has whiles
here, her infirmities and deformities, as the Moon has her blots and
blemishes: but these are ut naevi in vultu Veneris, these serve as foils to set
off her superexcellent beauty, or rather the superaboundant grace of Christ,
who sees no sin in Jacob; that is, imputes none: but freely accepts of his
own work in his people, and sweetly passes by whatsoever is amiss in them:
Perfection is that they breathe after, and that which is already begun in them:
they have the first fruits of the Spirit, and all their strife is to attain to
the Resurrection of the dead, that is, to that perfection of holiness that
accompanies the State of the Resurrection, Phil. 3.11.

There is no spot in thee] i. e. None in mine account, none such as the wicked
are full of, Deuteronomy. 32.5. (See the Note there) no Leopard spots that cannot be
washed away with any water. Eubhorm. James 3
Faults will escape the best man betwixt his fingers: Nimis Angusta res est
nusquam errare: In many things we offend all: But as David saw nothing in lame
Mephibosheth, but what was lovely, because he saw in him the features of his
friend Jonathan; so God beholding his offending people in the face of his Son,
takes no notice of any thing amiss in them; they are, as that tree of Paradise,
Genesis 3. fair to his eye, and pleasant to his palate: or as Absalom, in whom
there was no blemish, from head to foot: so are they irreprehensible, and
without blemish before the Throne of God, Rev. 14.5.

Verse. 8. Come with me from Lebanon, etc.] Or, Thou shall come with me, etc.
by way of promise. And it is doubled for more certainty, q. d. Nothing shall
hinder thee, but thou shall indeed come with me, and enjoy my continual
presence. This she had begged hard for, in the former chapters, and this she
is now sweetly assured of, with a new largess of love sealed up in the kindest
compellation, Spouse: which signifies the wife married, and already joined to
her husband. Yea in the next verse he calls her both Sister and Spouse. The
nearest affinity is Spouse, and the nearest consanguinity Sister. Thus Christ
is better to his people than their prayers, better than their hopes. Hezekiah
asked one life, God gave him two; adding fifteen years to his days. Psalm. 21.4
John 16.24
David asked life, and God gave him life for ever and ever. Hitherto ye have
asked me nothing, says Christ: that is, nothing to what I am ready to give
you. He stands disposed to his suitors, as Naaman did toward Gehezi, 2 King.
5. Gehezi asked but one talent: nay take two, says Naaman: one is too little,
take two. And he pressed him, and heaped them upon him. 2 King. 4
God deals with his servants, as the Prophet did with that widow, when he bade
her borrow vessels, and the cruse never ceased running till there was no room.
Or as he dealt with the Shunamite in the same chapter: when he bade her ask
what she needed, and she found not any thing to request at his hands, he
sends for her again, and makes her a free promise of that which she most
wanted and desired, and tells her that God would give her a Son.

From Lebanon, Look from the top of Amana] Or Abanah, as the River running
under it was called, Strabo, lib. 14
2 King. 5.12. And Strabo says, that it was a Mountain forcibly possessed by
many tyrants. Of Shenir and Hermon, see Deuteronomy. 3.9. These all were haunted with
wild beasts, even Lebanon also, 2 King. 14.9. though otherwise a pleasant and
plentiful place, Deuteronomy. 3.25. Hereby is signified, that the Lord Christ from all
parts will call and collect unto himself a people: and although he find them
Lions and Leopards, (as here) untameable and untractable, he will soon subdue
them to the obedience of the Faith; so that the Lion shall dwell with the Lamb,
and the Leopard lie down with the Kid, Isa. 11.6. all bloodiness and rapine
shall be laid aside, as it was with the wild beasts in Noah's Ark. Thus Paul,
that ravening Wolf of the Tribe of Benjamin, (Genesis 49.27.) is made to preach
the Faith, which once he destroyed, Gal. 1.23. Thus the Ancient Britains our
Forefathers, though like that Demoniack in the Gospel, fierce above measure,
and inhospital Salvages, so that the Romans could not come at them, Christo
tamen subditi, says Tertullian, Bond in Horat. Carm. lib. 3. od. 3.

Act. and Mon. 924. and 1555. Ibid. Anno 1755


yet they were easily subdued by Christ: and then sensim evanuit feritas
indies, exulavit immanitas, corruit crudelitas, says one, they were suddenly
and strangely altered; not civilized only, but sanctified. So was Justin
Martyr, Cyprian, Austin, Vergerius, Latimer, Julius Palmer, that Popish Priest
of Canterbury, who said Mass on one day, and the next day after came into the
Pulpit, and made a long Sermon against it, desiring the people to forgive him,
Speed. 761
for he had betrayed Christ, etc. As long before him in Wickliffes days, and
by his means, one that was the Popes Chaplain renounced him, professing that
he came out of his Order, Act. and Mon. 1565.
as out of the Devils nest, etc. And although not a Scholar in Oxford would
look upon the good Bishops Ridley and Cranmer prisoners in Bocardo, Speed. Ibid.
but generally set against them, yet the whole body of that University gave a
glorious testimony under their public seal of Wickliffes religious life,
profound learning, Orthodox opinions, exquisite writings, all furthest from any
stain of Heresy. See what Christ can do where he pleases to come in by his
mighty Spirit.

Verse. 9. Thou have ravished mine heart, etc.] Thou have caught it, and carried
it from me; so that I am least Master of it: for Animus est potius ubi amat,
quam ubi animat, The heart is where it loves, and not where it lives. Austin.
The Hebrew is, Thou have be hearted me, (as we say, one is beheaded, behipt,
etc.) Thou have robbed me of my heart, and laid thy self in the room: thy love
is fixed in the Table of my heart, so the Chaldee expounds it. Greg. in Rev. 3
Excellently spoke he, who called the holy Scripture, Cor and animam Dei, the
heart and soul of God: and another Father is bold to say, Cor Pauli, Chrysostom.
est cor Christi, Christ and Paul had exchanged hearts, as it were. For, we
have the mind of Christ, says he, communication of Christ's secrets. 1 Cor.
2.16
And surely when the Saints hide Christ's words in their hearts, as his Mother
Mary did, Col. 3.16
when they give themselves wholly up to it, as the Macedonians did, so that the
word of Christ indwelleth richly in them in all Wisdom, and he, by his Spirit
puts his Laws into their minds, so that they assent unto them, Heb. 8.10
and into their hearts, so that they consent unto them, and have the comfort,
feeling and fruition of them, then is his heart ravished with his own handy
work: then is he so far in love with such a soul, as that, Esther-like, she
may have any thing of the King. The King is not he that can do any thing
against you: Jer. 38.5
Christ says seriously so. His heart is become a very lamp of love toward his
Sister, as nearest unto him in consanguinity, his Spouse is nearest also in
affinity, Sanctior est copula cordis, quam corporis. Christ is indeared to his
people in all manner of nearest relations. For whosoever shall do the will of
his Father, the same is his Brother, and Sister, and Mother, Mat. 12.50. Act.
10.35
And in every Nation he that fears God, and works righteousness, is
accepted of him.

With one of thine eyes] With that single eye of thine, Mat. 6.22. that looks
on me singly abstracted from all other things, and affects thine heart with
pure love to me for my self, more than for my love tokens; that eye of Faith
that looks up to my Mercy-seat, yea that peirceth Heaven, as St. Stephens
bodily eye did, (he being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly into
Heaven, and saw Jesus standing on the right hand of C^^, Act. 7.55.) Heaven is
so high above the Earth, that it is a just wonder that we can look up to so
admirable an height, and that the very eye is not tired in the way. But Faith
has a visive faculty peculiar to it self, it is the evidence of things not
seen, Heb. 11.1. whiles it looks not at the things which are seen, scil. with
the eye of sense, but at the things that are not seen, viz. but by the eye of
Faith, 2 Cor. 4.18.
whereby Moses saw him who is invisible, Heb. 1^.27. Let as many as would
behold the King in his beauty, study Moses his Optics, get a Patriarchs eye,
see Christ's day afar off, as Abraham did, and set him at their right hand, as
David, Psalm. 16. So shall the King greatly desire their beauty, yea set them at
his right hand with the Queen his Spouse, in gold of Ophir, Psalm. 45.9, 11. But
then Christ must see their chain of obedience, as well as their eye of Faith,
even the whole chain of spiritual graces linked one to another. These are the
daughters of Faith, and good works, the products of them, are the fruits of
Faith. As chains adorn the neck, so do true virtues a true Christian: these as
chains are visible and honorable testimonies of a lively Faith, which works by
love. These make the true Manlii Torquati, See the Notes on chap. 1. verse. 10.

Verse. 10. How fair is thy love] Heb. Loves in the plural, noting, not only
their multitude, but excellency also, such as do far praeponderate all carnal
affections. These are said to be inexpressibly fair and lovely (noted by the
exclamation and repetition here used, as if words were too weak to utter it)
because it is undissembled. A man may paint fire, but he cannot paint heat. A
man may dissemble actions in Religion, but he cannot dissemble affections. 2.
It is rare, and in respect of common Christians it may be said, as Ephesians.
3.18. to pass knowledge: since most have little of the life of it in their
breasts, less of the light and luster of it in their lives.

How much better is thy love than Wine] This same she had said of him, chap.
1.2. Now he returns it upon her as is usual among Lovers. He had confessed
himself ravished with her love, verse. 9. Now here he shows why he was so. He
found her not lovely only, but loving: he had made her so, and now takes
singular delight and complacency in his own work, as once he did in his work
of Creation. He well perceived that he had not lost his love upon his Church,
as David did upon his Absalom, as Paul did upon his Corinthians, (of whom he
complains, that the more he had loved, the less he was beloved) as Job upon
his miserable comforters, whom he compares to the Brooks of Tema, Job 6.
that in a moisture swell, in a drought fail. But Christ finds no such
fickleness or false-heartedness in his Beloved, he had love for love: and as
he had been a sweet friend to her, so was she to him. Her love was better
than the best Wine (which yet is both costly and comfortable) yea than all the
delights that this life can afford; so much is implied by Wine here, and so he
is pleased to esteem it. Unworthy she of so kind acceptance of that little
she can do this way, if she do not her utmost: if she cry not out with her
son David, I will love thee dearly, or entirely, with mine utmost bowels, (with
the same tenderness of affections as is in Mothers toward the fruit of their
bodies, so the Hebrew word signifies) Psalm. 18.1. And again, I love! (so he
abruptly expresses himself by a passionate pang of love) because the Lord has
heard the voice of my supplications, etc. Psalm. 116.1. He saw (and we may all
see) so much cause to love the Lord, as that he must needs be a monster, and
not a man, that loves not the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. It was a miracle
that those Worthies in Daniel should be in the midst of a fiery furnace, and
not burn. It is no less that men should be in the midst of mercies on all
hands, and not love Christ. It would be as great a wonder men should fail
here, as for a River to run backwards. I have drawn them by the bands of love,
by the cords of a man, Hos. 11.4. that is, with reasons and motives of love
befitting the nature of a man, of a rational creature. Oculis in utram partem
fluat judicari non potest. Caesar. de bello. Gal. lib. 1.
But most men, alas! (and those that profess to be the children of the Church
too) move like the River Araris; backward or forward, who can tell? This is to
give Christ Vinegar for Wine: this is as lukewarm water to his nice and
nauseating stomach, Rev. 3.16. There is a Prophecy reported in Telesphorus,
that Antichrist shall never overcome Venice, nor Paris, nor London. But we
have a more certain word, and let us take heed, lest for our lukewarmness
Christ spues us out of his mouth. What has been the opinion and fear of some
not inconsiderable Divines, that Antichrist, before his abolition, shall once
again overflow the whole face of the West, and suppress the whole Protestant
Churches for a punishment of their loss of their first love, I pray Christ to
avert.

And the smell of thine Ointments, than all spice!] That is, of thy sweet
graces actuated and exercised. See Psalm. 89.20. John 2.20, 27. It was an
aggravation of the fall of Saul, that he fell as though he had not been
anointed, 2 Samuel 1.21. So for the Saints to fall from their first love, or from
their own stedfastness. Such a dead fly will cause their once-sweet Ointments
to send forth a stinking savor, Eccles. 10.1. Corruption optim^ est pessima.

Verse. 11. Thy lips, Oh my Spouse, drop as an Hony-comb] Heb. drop the
Honeycomb: So Christ calls the doctrines and prayers of the Church, her
thanksgivings, confessions, conferences, etc. which are things most pleasing to
Christ, and do much comfort and edify the faithful. That golden-mouthed
Preacher did so please the people, that it was grown to a Proverb, Better the
Sun shine not, than Chrysostom preach not. Bilney the Martyr, a little before
he was burned, entreated much on that Text, Isa. 43.2. Fear not, when thou
walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame
kindle upon thee: so that some of his friends present took such sweet fruit
thereby (says Mr. Fox) that they caused the whole sentence to be fair written
in Tables, Act. and Mon. 923.
and some in their books: the comfort whereof in diverse of them was never taken
away from them to their dying day. Ibid. 1559.
The same Author says of Bishop Ridley Martyr, that he usually preached every
Sunday and Holyday: to whose Sermons the people resorted, swarming about him
like Bees, and coveting the sweet juice of his heavenly doctrine. How pleasant
and profitable to Latimer was the private conference he had with Bilney? and
the like benefit had Ridley by Bradford, Luther by Stanpicius, G^leacius by
Peter Martyr, Junius by a Countryman of his not far from Florence. Hom.
(...).

Honey and Milk are under thy tongue] The language of Canaan is thy proper
dialect: for Canaan was a Land that flowed with Milk and Honey, 1. With things
both pleasant and profitable. Yea I doubt not, (says an Interpreter) but that
under these terms the Holy Ghost means fit food as well for strong men, as
for weak ones in the Church. Milk most properly belongs to children, 1 Cor.
3.2. Heb. 5.12.13. and honey to them of more strength, as examples of the word,
and reason it self teaches sufficiently in Jonathan, 1 Samuel 24.27. and John
Baptist, Matthew. 3.4. By these comparisons also may well be understood the good
Housekeeping that is in Christ's Church. Honey and Milk she has ever at hand.
And why has he put these provisions under her tongue, but that she should
look to lip-feeding? Prove. 10.22. Let our words be always with Grace, Col.
4.6. Mel in ore, verba lactis, this becomes the Churches children. Felin cord,
fraus in factis, is for those brats of fathomless perdition, that have Adders
poison under their lips, Psalm. 140.3. that being in the gall of bitterness, and
bond of perdition, show themselves by their words and actions to be the sons of
the sorceress, the seed of the Adulterer, and of the Whore, whose lips also
drop the honeycomb, but her end is bitter as wormwood, Prove. 5.3, 4. Isa. 57.3.

And the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon] Which was passing
pleasant, by reason of the odoriferous, and sweet smelling trees, that grew
there. Now what are these garments, but the Churches inward graces, say some,
outward behavior, say others, which is most gracious, amiable, and sweet, as
far above all worldly grace, as the smell of Lebanon is above the savor of
common woods.

Verse. 12. A Garden enclosed is my Sister, my Spouse] Fair and sweet he had
before affirmed her: Now (because Lis est cum forma magna pudicitiae)

Fair women have many that wish them, and lie in wait for them, Aul. Gell.
(...), said he to his friend, dissuading him from marriage. If she be fair,
she will lightly be common; Christ therefore here commends her for her purity
and chastity, and shows that he was so hedged and defensed by Discipline and
Government, that none could come at her to hazard her Virginity, no more than
they could enter into a well-walled Garden. She opens the gates, that the
righteous Nation, which keeps the truth, may enter in, Isa. 26.2. those which
subscribe with their hands, unto the Lord, Isa. 44.5. that (when he shall say,
Who is on my side? Who?) do heartily avouch him for their God, Deuteronomy. 26.17.
that fly to her as a cloud, Isa. 60.8.
and flock to her as a flight of Doves. As for the unclean, or any thing that
defiles she has her Porters on purpose to keep them out, 2 Chronicles. 23.19.
Rev. 21.27. no dirty dog shall trample on her golden pavement. (...). Plut.
(...).
See Isa. 5.2. and 35.8, 9, 10. and 62.8. 1 Cor. 5.11, 12, 13. It was not
permitted to a dog to enter into the Acropolis, or Tower at Athens, for his
heat in Venery, and for his ill favor, says Plutarch. Goats likewise, says
Varro, come not there, lest they should hurt the Olive. Irish Air will sooner
brook a Toad or Snake to live therein, than the true Church (if she may freely
exercise her power) scandalous and heretical persons. Papists teach, Bell. lib.
3. cap. 2. de Eccles. Militan.
that the Catholic Church consists of good and bad; and that a man may be a
true member thereof, though he have no inward virtues. We confess that in all
particular Congregations there are hypocrites, as appears in the parable of the
Tares, of the Net, etc. But yet we deny, that the holy Catholic Church
mentioned in the Creed has a mixture of good and bad: since she is the chaste
Spouse of Jesus Christ, who owneth no wicked man or hypocrite in her: for how
should he love such, unless it be with a common (not with a conjugal) love,
so as he loved that tame young man, Mark 10.21. whom he pitied as a
self-deceiver, like as we pity moderate and devout Papists. In Christ's
Garden, as there is no ground but what is special good, set apart for the
purpose, fit for him to sit and walk in for his recreation, Isa. ^.1.
(My Well-Beloved has his Orchard in a very fruitful hill, in a cornu-copia
Country) so it is furnished and filled with the choicest fruits and flowers,
plants of renown, and pleasant trees, yielding fruit according to their kind;
and though all cannot bear Cinnamon and Balsam, yet (as in Spain there is said
to be nihil infructuosum, nihil sterile, nothing barren or unfruitful, so) all
that are planted in the house of the Lord, do flourish in the Courts of our
God, they do still bring forth fruit in old age, they are fat and flourishing,
Psalm. 92.13, 14. they are both actuosi, and fructuosi, 2 Pet. 1.8. neither
barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. And indeed how
can it be otherwise with Gods Garden, when as he himself keeps it, and
waters it every moment, lest any hurt it, he keeps it night and day, Isa
27.3. God fenceth it with his Omnipotent arm, keeps it from the wild Boar,
and other devoratory evils (as Tertullian phraseth it) better than the Garden
of Eden was kept with the flaming Sword. And whereas the Church may seem to lie
open to all incursions, this verse shows that it has a Well within it, and a
Wall without it: Yea himself is a Wall of fire round about Jerusalem, Zach.
2.5. in allusion to the custom of those East-countries, where, by reason of
the great number of wilde-beasts, shepherds and travelers guard themselves by
making great fires round about their night-lodgings to keep often their approach.

A spring shut up, a fountain sealed] A preciously-purling current of grace, a
spring of water, whose waters fail not, Isa. 58.11. and whereof whosoever
drinks shall never thirst, John 4.14. For which end it is carefully shut up,
nay sealed, that the stranger meddle not with his joy, and that the envious man
stop not up this wellspring with earth, as the Philistims served Isaac: or
cast baggs of poison into it, as the spightful Jews did once in this Kingdom;
and were therefore banished hence for ever. It was wittily said of Polydor
Virgil, Regnum Angliae, Regnum Dei, the Kingdom of England, is the Kingdom of
God. He meant, because God seemed to take special care of it, as having walled
it about with the Ocean, and watered it with the upper and nether springs; like
that Land which Caleb gave his daughter: Hence it was called Albion quasi
Olbion, the happy Country: whose valleys are like Eden, (says our English
Chronicler) whose hills are as Lebanon, Speed.
whose springs are as Pisgah, whose Rivers are as Jordan, whose walls is the
Ocean, and whose defense is the Lord Jehovah: Foreign writers have termed our
Country the Granary of the Western world, the fortunate Island, the Paradise of
pleasure, and Garden of God. All this may much more fitly be applied to the
Catholic Church. If Judea were called the glorious Land, because of Gods
presence there, Dan. 11. and an Island (though part of the continent) because
surrounded with Gods powerful protection, Isa. 20.6. and the Commonwealth of
Israel, (...), by Josephus, a Godlike polity, what shall we think of that
Jerusalem above, that is the Mother of us all? of those sealed Saints, Rev.
7.3, 4. this sealed fountain, sealed up, as to keep it filth-free, that no
Camels stir up the mud, nor great Hee-goats foul it with their feet, Ezekiel
34.18. so to denote an excellency (as Isa. 28.25. hordeum signatum, is put for
excellent Barley) and a propriety, 2 Cor. 1.22. who has also sealed us, and
given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts. Like as the Merchant sets his
seal upon his goods, and marks them for his own.

Verse. 13. Thy plants are as an Orchard of Pomegranat^s] By plants are to be
understood, Emissiones. propagines.
either particular Churches, or several Saints; these are those shoots or
sorouts that spread abroad Gods Paradise (that the word here used, and no where
else in Scripture, save Eccles. 2.5. Neh. 2.8.) so called for the curious
variety and excellency of all sorts of precious and pleasant trees there
growing: some for profit, as Pomegranates, which are known to be healthful and
preservative: some for pleasure; and these again were either more common and
copious in Jury, as Camphires and Spikenards ( plurals both in the Original,
for the plenty of them in those parts) or more rare and costly, as those
mentioned in the next verse.

Verse 14. Nard] called Mark 14.3. and Joh. 12.3. Spikenard very costly, (...),
melius vero (...) ab oppido prope Babylonem Op^ dicto. Scultet: ex Hartungi
criticis.
or rather (as some learned men will have it) Nard of Opis, a town near Babylon,
where grew the most precious Spikenard: and whence it was transported to other
places. Of this plant see Pliny, Lib. 12. c. 11. as of Cypress or Camphire,
Lib. 12. c. 14. of Saffron, ib. etc. 15. of Calamus, lib. 12. c. 23. of
Cinnamon and Myrrh, lib. 12. c. 23.19. For Pomegranates see the note on ver.
3. of this chapter. For Camphire see the Note on c. 1.14. Saffron is in the
Hebrew Carcom: Shindler says it should be read Carcos with Samech; and so it
will exactly agree with (...), crocus, the one, likely, coming of the other.
Our English comes of the Arabic Zaphran; so called of the yellow color.
Calamus or sweet Cane is a precious aromatical reed bought and brought out of
far countries, Gal. l. 1. Antidot.
as appears by Jer. 6.20. Isa. 43.24. Cinnamon was very rare in Galens time,
and hard to be found, except in Princes Storehouses. Pliny reports, that a
pound of Cinnamon was worth a thousand Denarii, that is, 150 Crowns of our
money: As for those trees of Frankincense, Myrrh, and Aloes, etc. Brightman
thinks they betoken tall and eminent Christians, as Calamus and Cinnamon
(shrubs of two cubits high or thereabouts) do Christians of a middle stature:
and Nard and Saffron, herbs that scarce lift up themselves above the ground,
represent those of a lower rank, and lesser degree of holiness: Which yet have
all of them their place in Gods garden, and their several sweetnesses: the
Spirit of grace being magnus in magnis, nec parvus in minimis, as Augustine
has it, great in Gods greater children, and not little in the least. And
though there be diversity of gifts, yet are they from one Spirit, as the
diverse smells of pleasant fruits, and chief spices are from the same influence:
and the diverse sounds in the Organs, from the same breath. The Spirit of grace
are those two golden pipes, Zach. 4. through the which the two Olive-branches
empty out of themselves the golden oils of all precious graces into the
Candle-stick the Church. Hence grace is called the fruit of the Spirit, Gal.
5.22. Yea, Spirit, Verse 17. And albeit, as the man is, so is his strength, as
they said to Gideon: and God has his children of all sizes, babes, young men,
old men, 1 John 2.13. yet Philadelphia with her little strength may keep
Christ's Word, and not deny his Name; (which those Churches that had more
strength are not so commended) and, in that little strength, I have set open a
door for thee, even the door of Heaven, wide enough; so that none could shut
it, Rev. 3.8. Why then should any despise the day of small things? God who has
begun a good work, his hands shall finish it: and he that has laid the
foundation, shall in due time bring forth the Topstone thereof with shouting,
crying Grace, Grace unto it, Zech. 4.7, 9, 10. An infant of days shall proceed
from degree to degree, till he be like the Ancient of days: and those that
be planted in the house of the Lord, shall once flourish in the Courts of our
God. They shall still bring forth fruit in old age: they shall be fat and
flourishing, Psalm. 92.13, 14. The seeds of the Cypress tree are so very small,
that they can scarce be seen with eyes, Plin. l. 11. c. 2. Heb. 5.14.
and tamen in ^is tanta est arbor, tamque procera, and yet in some one of them
is potentially so large and so tall a tree. Despair not therefore of further
measures, but aspire still to perfection, Phil. 3.12, 13. The blessing on man
in the first creation, was, Increase and Multiply, in the second, Grow in
Grace, Isa. 61.3, 11. And remember that growth is not always to be measured by
joy, and other accessory graces. These sweet blooms may fall off, when fruit
comes on, etc.

Verse 15. A fountain of gardens, a well, etc] Or, Oh fountain of the Gardens,
etc. For they do best in mine opinion that make this to be the Churches speech
to Christ: grounded upon his former commendation of her. And it is as if she
should say, Call thou me, Lord, a Garden enclosed, a Spring shut up, a
Fountain scaled? True it is, I am the garden which thine own right hand has
planted, walled, watered, etc. but for all that I am or have, the entire praise
belongs to thee alone. All my plenty of spiritual graces, all my perennity of
spiritual comforts, all my pleasancy and sweetness is derived from thee, no
otherwise than the streams of Jordan are from mount Lebanon, all my springs are
in thee, as in their Wellhead. Certum est nos facere quod facimus, sed Ille
facit, ut faciamus, says Augustine. True it is that we do what we do; but it
is as true, that Christ makes us to do what we do. For without him we can do
nothing, John 15.5. In him is our fruit found, Hos. 14.8. It is he that works
all our works in us, Isa. 26.12. Hence it is, that the Church is no where in
all this book described by the beauty of her hands or fingers: because he
alone does all for her. The Church of Rome that will needs hammer out her own
happiness, (like the Spider climbing up by a thread of her own weaving, and
boasting with her in the Emblem, Mihi soli debeo) shows thereby of what Spirit
she is. That wretched Monk died blasphemously, who said, Read mihi aeternam
vitam quam debes, Pay me heaven which thou owe me. And what an arrogant
speech was that of Vega, Coelum gratis non accipiam, I will not have heaven of
free-cost? Haec ego feci, haec ego feci, shows men to be no better than mere
Feces, said Luther wittily. This I have done, and that I have done, speaks them
dregs, and dogs that shall stand without doors, Rev. 22.15. Hear a child of
our Church, speaking thus of himself.

Georg. Fab. Chemnicensis de scipso.
Fabricius studuit been de pictate mereri;
Sed quicquid potuit, gloria, Christ, tua est.
This was Matrissare, to be like his mother, whose Motto has ever been, Non
nobis Domine, Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but to thy name give the praise,
Psalm. 115.1. If I be thy garden, Thou art my fountain; from whence unless I be
continually watered, all will be soon withered, and I shall be as one that
inhabiteth the parched places in the wilderness, in a salt land and not
inhabited, Abbot his Georg. 251.
Jer. 17.6. In the Island of St. Thomas (on the backside of Africa) in the
midst of it is an hill, and over that a continual cloud, wherewith the whole
Island is watered. Such is the Lord Christ to his Church, Hos. 14.5, 6, 7.
which therefore as Gideons Fleece must needs be wet and moist, when all the
Earth besides is dry and desolate; as the mountains of Gilboah, or as St.
David's in Wales, which is said to be a place, neither pleasant, fertile, nor
safe.

A well of living] Or, A pit of living and life-giving waters. Christus and
coelum non patiuntur hyperbolen: 2 Samuel 1.20. Godw: Catal. Giral. Camb. Puteus
effossus ubi est aqua viva scaturiens and clara. Merc.
A man cannot say too much in commendation of Christ, and his Kingdom: Hence
the Church here cannot satisfy her self. A Fountain she calls him, a well, a
stream, such as makes glad the City of God, even that pure river of the water
of life proceeding out of Gods Throne, Rev. 22.1. with Ezekiel. 47.6. Gregory
makes this Fountain to be the Scriptures; which be says, are like both to a
Fountain, and to a pit. Some things in them are plain and open, and may be
compared to a spring, which runs in an open and eminent place. Other things
therein are dark and deep, and like unto a pit, that a man must dive into, and
draw out with hard labor.

And streams from Lebanon] Watering the whole Church (as Jordan did the holy
Land) and tasting, no doubt, of that sweetness mentioned before, verse. 11. Even
as we see by experience, (says one) that the waters that come out of the hills
of some of the Islands of Molucca, taste of the Cinnamon, cloves, etc. that
grow there.

Verse 16. Awake, O North wind, come thou South, etc.] These winds she
supposes to be asleep, because they blow not. Rupertus calls the winds Mundi
scopas, the worlds Beesomes: because God makes use of them to sweep out his
large house, and to purge the air. The Spirit of God first purges, and then
waters the faithful, whom the Church here calls her garden, (though indeed
it be Christ's) by reason of the nigh conjunction that is between him and her,
Ephesians. 5.30. so that they both make but one mystical Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. Now
we all know, that to a complete Garden are necessary, 1 that it be well
enclosed, 2 Well planted, 3 Well watered, 4 that it be amaena coeli
aspiratione perflabilis, well situate for wind and air, 5 that it be fruitful
and profitable. The Churches Garden has every of these good properties, as
appears here: And for the fourth, Christ is all the diverse winds both cold
and hot, moist and dry, binding and opening, North and South, fit for every
season. What wind soever blows, it blows good to the Church, for Christ speaks
to them, as David did to his Captains; Do this young man no hurt, handle him
gently for my sake: The Sun may not smite him by day, Psalm. 121.
nor the Moon by night. The nipping North of adversity, the cherishing South
wind of prosperity must both make for him.

That the spices thereof may flow out] That I may be some way serviceable to
God, and profitable to men. She knew that in Gods account, to be idle, is all
one as to be evil, Matthew. 25.26. to be unthankful, Horat.
is to be wicked, Luke 6.35. Paulum sepulta distat inertia, Celata virtus,
could one Poet say, and another, Vile latens virtus: quid enim submersa tenebris
Proderit, obscuro veluti sub remige puppis, Claudian. de Consul. Honor.

Vel lyra quae reticet, vel qui non tenditur arcus?


Christ had made his Church a garden of sweetest sweets. Her desire is
therefore that her fruits being rightly ripened, her graces greatned, and made
mature by the benign breath of the Holy Ghost, (compared here, as elsewhere, to
the several winds,) their sweetness may be dispread, and conveyed to the
nostrils of such as have their senses habitually exercised to discern good and
evil. Heb. 5.14.
As for others, their heads are so stuffed with the stenches of the world (that
great muck-hill) and themselves so choked up with earth, as Core and his
accomplices were, that they cannot resent or savor the things of the Spirit;
but, as vultures, they hunt after cation carcases: and as Tigers, they are
enraged with the sweet smell of the Churches spices.

Let my Beloved come and eat his pleasant fruits] For who plants a Vineyard or
Orchard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? 1 Cor. 9.7. The Garden is Christ's:
the precious graces of his Spirit, and all acts of grace, those pleasant fruits
are all his. He alone is the true proprietary: for of him, Romans 11.36.
and through him, and to him are all things. Of him, as the efficient cause;
Through him, as the administering cause; and to him, as the final cause. Well
therefore may it follow, to whom be glory for ever. Christ counts the fruits
that we bear to be ours, because the judgment and resolution of will whereby
we bear them, is ours. This he does to encourage us. But because the grace
whereby we judge, will, and work aright, comes from Christ, ascribe we all to
him, as the Church does in the former verse: Genesis 43.11. Cedren. ad an. 32.
Justin.
and presenting him with the best fruits (as they did Joseph) say as David, and
after him Justinian, (...), Of thine own have we given thee, 1 Chronicles. 29.14.

CHAP. V. Verse. 1. I am come into my Garden.]
SO ready is the Lord Christ to fulfill the desires of them that fear him,
Sometimes he not only grants their prayer, Psalm. 145.19.
but fulfills their counsel, Confess. l. 5. c. 1.
Psalm. 20.4. fits his mercy ad cardinem desiderii, as Austin has it, lets it
be to his, even as they will. Or if he cross them in the very thing they crave,
they are sure of a better: their prayers they shall have out either in money,
or moneys worth. Christ, though he be a God that hides himself, yet he scorns
to say unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain, Isaiah 45.15, 19. that is
enough for the Heathen Idols, verse. 16, 18. He is not like Baal, who pursuing
his enemies, could not hear his friends: or as Diana, that being present at
Alexanders birth, could not at the same time rescue her Ephesian Temple from
the fire. Non vacat exiguis, etc.
He is not like Jupiter, whom the Cretians painted without ears, as not being
at leisure to attend small matters: and whom Lucian the Atheist feigneth to
look down from heaven through certain crevisses or chincks, at certain times:
at which time, if Petitioners chance to pray unto him, they may have audience,
otherwise not. No, no: the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his
ears are always open to their prayers, Psalm. 34.15. Flectitur iratus voce
rogante Deus. Basil compares prayer to a chayn, the one end whereof is linked
to Gods ear, and the other to man's tongue. Sozomen says of Apollonius, that
he never asked any thing of God in all his life that he obtained not. And
another says of Luther, Iste vir potuit apud Deum quod voluit. That man could
do what he would with God; it was but ask and have, with him.

I have gathered my myrrh with my spice] i.e. I have highly accepted of thy
graces and good works: these are to be gathered only in Christ's Garden.
Hedge-fruits and wilde-hearbs, or rather weeds, are every where almost to be
had. Moral virtues may be found in a Cato, who was homo virtuti similimus, a
man as like virtue as may be, says Velleius: And he adds (but I am not bound
to believe him) Qui nunquam recte fecit, ut facere videretur, sed quia aliter
facere non poterat, vell. lib. 2.
that Cato never did well that he might seem to do so, but because he could
not do otherwise than well: But why then (might a man have asked the Historian)
did your so highly extolled Cato take up the trade of griping usury? Why did he
so shamefully prostitute his wife, so cowardly kill himself? Was it not because
he lived in the wild Worlds waste, and grew not in the Churches garden, hence
his fruits were not genuine? his moral virtues are but shining sins,
beautiful abominations, a smoother way to hell. Civil honest men are but Wolves
chained up, tame Devils, Swine in a fair meadow, etc. Operam praestant, natura
fera est, (as the Civil Law says of those mixed Beasts, Elephants and Camels)
they do the work of tame Beasts, yet have the nature of wild ones. They are
cried up for singularly honest as ever lived, by such as are strangers to the
power of Godliness, and aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel; like as in
Samaria's famine, a cab of Doves dung was sold at a great rate, and an asses
head at four pound. But Christ, and such as have the mind of Christ, are
otherwise minded: they look upon an unregenerate man, though sober, just,
chaste, liberal, etc. as a vile person; Psalm. 15.4.
and upon all their specious works, as dead works: when as (contrarily) they
honor them that fear the Lord, and set an high price (as Christ here does)
upon their good parts and practices. Myrrh and spices, or aromatical fruits,
are but dark shadows and representations of them.

I have eaten mine honeycomb with mine hony] As it were crust and crumb
together: not rejecting my peoples services for the infirmities I find
cleaving unto them, but accepting what is good therein, and bearing with the
rest, I take all well a worth, and am as much delighted therewith, as any man
is in eating of honey; whereof he is so greedy, that withal he devours the
comb too sometimes. Mr. Dudley Fenner.
Christ feeds (says an Expositour here) upon all the fruits of his garden,
he so much delights in it, as he eats not only the honey, as it were the
most excellent duties or works of the Church, (see Heb. 13.15, 16, 21.) but
also the honeycomb as it were the baser services and fruits of his Spirit, of
least account: that he receives of all sorts most sweetly mingled together,
both the common and daily fruits of godliness, understood in milk, and the more
rare of greater price, as solemn fasts and feasts, signified by wine: both
which he drinks together, that is, accepts of them all.

Eat, O friends] That is, O you holy Angels, (says the former Interpreter)
which as my Nobles, accompany me the King of Glory in Heaven, and have some
communion with me in the gifts I bestow on you. Mr. Diodate also thinks the
same: But I rather incline to those that by Christ's friends here understand
those earthly Angels, the Saints, (see John 15.14. Isa. 41.8. Jam. 2.23. whom
he cheareth up and encourages to fall to it lustily, and by a sancta crapula
(as Luther calls an holy gluttony) to lay on, to feed hard, and to fetch hearty
draughts, till they be even drunk with loves, (as the Hebrew here has it)
being ravished in the love of God, where they are sure to find it (as in
hony-pots) the deeper, the sweeter. Such as so eat, are called Christ's friends,
(by a specialty) and such as so drink, his beloved, as Gregory here well
observes: and they only do thus that hear the Word with delight, turn it in
succum and sanguinem, concoct it, incorporate it, as it were, into their souls,
and are so deeply affected with it, that like drunken men, they forget and let
go all things else, that they may retain and practice it. These are not drunk
with wine, wherein is excess, but filled with the Holy Ghost, Ephesians. 5.16.

Verse. 2. I sleep, but my heart waketh] It was no sound sleep that she took:
She did not short aloud in the Cradle of security (as those do whom the Devil
has cast into a deep Lethargy) but napped and nodded a little, and that by
candlelight too, as those wise Virgins did, Matthew. 25.5. She slept with open
eyes as the Lion does: she slept but half-sleep: the Spirit was willing to
wake, but the flesh was weak and overwayed it, as it fared with those sleepy
Disciples, Matthew. 26.41. Fain would this flesh make strange of that which the
Spirit does embrace. O Lord, how loath is this loitering sluggard to pass forth
into Gods path, said Mr. Sanders in a letter to his wife, Act. and Mon. fol.
1359.
a little before his death, with much more, to like purpose? As in the state of
Nature, men cared not for grace, but thought themselves well enough, and wise
enough without: so in the state of Grace, they are not so careful as they
should. Heaven must be brought to them, they will scarce go seek it, 1 Pet.
1.13. And as the seven tribes are justly taxed by Joshua for their negligence
and sloth in not seeking speedily to possess the Land God had offered them,
Josh. 18.2. So may the most of Gods people be justly rebuked for grievous
security about the heavenly Canaan. They content themselves with a bare title,
or hang in suspense, and strive not to full assurance: they follow Christ, but
it is (as the people followed Saul) trembling: they are still troubled with
this doubt, or that fear, and all because they are loath to be at the pains of
working out their salvation, Phil. 2.12. Something is left undone, and their
conscience tells them so. Either they are lazy, and let fall the watch of the
Lord, neglecting duty, or else they lose themselves in a wilderness of duties,
by resting in them, and by making the means their Mediators, or by pleasing
themselves (with the Church here) in unlawful liberties, after that they have
pleased the Lord in lawful duties. The flesh must be gratified, and such a
lust fulfilled. A little more sleep, a little more slumber in Jezabels bed, (as
Mr. Bradford was wont to phrase it) Solomon must have his wine, Act. and Mon.
and yet think to retain his wisdom, Eccles. 2.3. Samson must fetch a nap on
Dalilahs knees, till God, by his Philistims, send our summons for sleepers,
wake them in a fright, cure security by sorrow, as Physicians use to cure a
Lethargy by casting the Patient into a Burning Fever. Cold diseases must have
hot and sharp remedies: The Church here found it so. And did not David, when
he had sinned away his inward peace, and wiped off, as it were, Psalm. 51.
all his comfortables?

It is the voice of my beloved that knocketh] She was not so fast asleep, but
that the hidden man of the heart (as St. Peter calls him, 1 Ep. 3.4.) was
awake, and his ears arrect and attent, so that she soon heard the first call,
or knock of Christ; whose care was to arrouse her, that though she slept a
while through infirmity of the flesh, yet she might not sleep the sleep of
death, Psalm. 13.3. dye in her sins, as those Jews did, John 8.21. In the
sweating sickness (that reigned for many years together in this Kingdom) those
that were suffered to sleep (as all in that case were apt to do) they died
within a few hours. The best office therefore that any one could do them, was,
To keep them waking, though against their wills. Sembably our Savior,
solicitous of his Churches welfare, and knowing her present danger, comes
calling and clapping at the door other heart, and sweetly wooes admission and
entertainment: but misseth of it. He knocks and bounceth by the hammer of
his Word, and by the hand of his Spirit, (see Revel. 3.20. with 2 Pet. 1.13.)
and if the Word work not on his people, they shall hear the rod, and who has
appointed it, Mic. 6.9. that they may by some means be brought to summon the
sobriety of their senses before their own judgments; and seeing their danger,
to go forth and shake themselves, as Sampson did, Judge. 16.

Open to me, my Sister, my Love, etc.] What irresistible Rhetoric is here?
what passionate and most pithy persuasions! Ipsa Suada, credo, si loqui posset,
non potuisset (...), ubi quot verba tot tela, quae sponsae animum percellant,
fodicent, lancinent, she was not so dead asleep, but that she could hear at
first, and tell every tittle that he said. And this she does here very finely,
and to the full; that she may aggravate against her self the foulness of her
fact in refusing so sweet an offer, in turning her back upon so blessed and so
bleeding an embracement: the terms and titles he here gives her, are
expounded before. Undefiled or perfect he calls her, for her Dove-like
simplicity, purity, and integrity.

For mine head is filled with dew] i. e. I have suffered much for thy sake, and
waited thy leisure a long while: and must I now go look my lodging? Do thou
thus requite (repulse) thy Lord, O thou foolish woman and unwise? Is this thy
kindness to thy friend? Jer. 13.27.
Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem: will thou not be made clean? when shall it once
be? It is the ingratitude that makes the Saints sins so heinous; which
otherwise would be far less than other men's; since his temptations are
stronger, and his resistance is greater. Oh when Gods grace shall come suing to
us, nay kneeling to us; when Christ shall come with Hat in hand, and stand
bare-headed, as here, and that in foul weather too, begging acceptance, and
beseeching us to be reconciled, and we will not, what an inexcusible fault is
this!

Verse. 3. I have put off my Coat] Thus the flesh shows itself, not only weak,
but wayward, treacherous, and tyrannical; rebel it does in the best, and reign
it would, if it might be suffered. This bramble would fain be playing Rex,
and does so other-whiles, till he be well buffeted (as St. Paul served it, 1
Cor. 9.27.) and brought it into subjection. But what a silly excuse makes the
Church here for her self? Trouble me not, for I am in bed, as he said to his
friend, Luke 11.7. My clothes are off, my feet are washed, and I am composed
to a settled rest. But are you so? (might Christ have regested.) And is that
the part and posture of a vigilant Christian? Might it not better have beseemed
you to have had your loins girt up, your lamp in your hand, and your self to
have waited for your Lords return, that when he came and knocked, you might
have opened unto him immediately, Luke 12.35, 36? Or, being got to bed, must
you needs mend one fault with another? Is it such a pains to start up again and
let in such a guest, as comes not to take any thing from you, but to enrich you
much more than once the Ark did Obed-Edom? And in this sense some take those
words in the former verse, for mine head is filled with dew, etc. as if Christ
came unto her, full of the dew of blessings to enrich her. Sure it is, that
Christ is no beggarly or niggardly guest. His reward is with him: he brings
better commodities than Abraham's servants did to Laban, or the Queen of Sheba
to Solomon, even purest gold, whitest raiment, sovereign eye salve, any thing,
every thing, that heart can wish, or need require, Revel. 3.17, 19. How
unworthily therefore deal they, and how ill do they provide for themselves,
that either deny or delay to entertain him, when either by the motions of his
Spirit, by the words of his mouth, or by the works of his hands, he knocks at
the doors of their hearts, and would come in to them? How do they make void or
reject the counsel of God against themselves, with those unhappy Lawyers, Luke
7.30. being ingrati gratiae Dei, as Ambrose speaks, and judging themselves
unworthy of ever-lasting life, with those perverse Jews, Acts 13.46? Who can
say it is otherwise than righteous, that Christ should regest one day upon such
ungrateful Gadarens, Depart from me ye wicked? that such as say to him, as
Felix did once to Paul, Go thy way for this time, when I have a convenient
season I will call for thee ( Acts 24.26.) should hear from him, Get you to the
Gods whom ye have chosen, for I will not help you, etc. and that those that
would not obey this sweet precept, Open to me, etc. Come down Zachaeus, Luke
19.5.
for to day I must abide at thy house, etc. should have no other left to obey,
but that dreadful, Go ye cursed, etc. The Church here did but lust a while and
linger, when she should have been up and about, and she soon rued it deerly,
bewailed it bitterly. Now what was it that she did? Did she rate Christ for
coming at such unseasonable hours? did she answer him currishly, or drive him
from her door? No surely, but only pleads excuse, and pretends inconvenience:
She had put off her clothes, washed her feet, etc. A great chare she had
done: and it would have undone her, doubtless, to have dressed her again, and
set her fair feet on the foul ground. There is none so wise as the sluggard,
Prove. 26.16. He has got together a great many excuses, which he thinks will
go for wisdom: because by them he thinks to sleep in a whole skin. Sin and
shifting came into the world together. But what says the Apostle? Surely his
counsel is most excellent, and worthy of all acceptance, Heb. 12.25. See that
ye refuse not him that speaks, sc: by his Blood, Word, Sacraments, motions
of his Spirit, Mercies, etc. Look to it, (as the Greek has it) that ye refuse
not, (...)
Gr: that ye shift him not off by frivolous pretenses, and idle excuses, as
those recusant guests did, Mat. 22.5. as Moses would have done, Exodus 3.11, 14.
and 4.1, 10. and Jeremiah, c. 1.6. So again Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape if
we neglect so great salvation? He says not, if we reject, renounce,
persecute, but if we neglect, let slip, undervalue, etc. If when God sends
forth his mercy, and his truth, Psalm. 57.3. and looks that we should send a
Lamb to that Lamb of God the Ruler of the land, Isa. 16.1. we send messages
after him, saying, We will not have this man to rule over us, Luke 19.14. We
break his cords, those cords of love, Hos. 11.4. and kick against his bowels;
and instead of serving him, make him to serve with our sins, and even weary him
with our iniquities, Isa. 43.24. How shall we escape? What hill shall hide us?
What will ye do in the end thereof?

Verse. 4. My Beloved put in his hand by the hole] Or, Dimissit manu^ a foramine.
He let fall his hand from the hole, where he was lifting at the latch, or
see^ing to put by the bar: he took it so unkindly to be so ill answered, that
he ^^parted in displeasure, and would be no further troublesome. Sleep on no^
(quoth he, as Mark 14.41.) and take your rest. He that will hear, let him
^^ar, (...). De Pomp^io Romano ap. Plutarch.
and he that has a mind to forbear, let him forbear, Ezekiel. 3.27. but at his
own peril, the best that can come of it, is repentance, that fair and happy
daughter of an ugly and odious mother. Delicatares est Spiritus Dei, says one,
The spirit of God is a delicate thing; and he that grieves that holy thing
whereby ^ee is sealed, by giving way to a spirit of sloth and slumber, may lose
his joy of faith, and go mourning to his grave. And although with much a do he
man get assurance of pardon, yet his conscience will be still trembling, as
David's, Psalm. 51. till God at length speak further peace: Even as the water of
the Sea, after a storm, is not presently still, but moves and trembles a good
while after the storm is over. Take heed therefore: Cavebis autem si pavebis,
Romans 11.21. But to take the words as they are here translated, My Beloved put
in his hand by the hole, that is, he touched mine heart by his holy Spirit:
and notwithstanding my discourteous dealing with him, left a sweet remembrance
of himself behind him. As he would not away, but continued still knocking till
he had an answer, so, though the answer pleased him not, yet he called not
for his love tokens back again, he cast her not off, as Ahashuerus did Vashti,
(no, he hates putting away, Mal. 2.16.) but as the Sun with his bright beams
follows the passenger that has turned his back upon it: So deals Christ by his
backsliding people, Psalm. 23.6. Jonah 2.8.
Jer. 3.22. (Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my
life, says David, follow me though I forsake mine own mercies, says Jonah.)
And as the same Sunbeams do convey the heat and influence thereof to the
earth, thereby calling out the herbs and flowers, and healing those deformities
that winter had brought upon it: So does Christ that Sun of Righteousness,
arise (to his servants that are benighted with sin and sorrow) with healing in
his wings, that is, with the gracious influence of his holy Spirit, conveying
the virtues of his blood to their consciences, and causing them, as by a new
spring of holy desires and endeavors, to reflourish, Phil. 4.10.

And my Bowels were moved for him] They rumbled, tumultuated, and made a
humming noise, as the Hebrew has it. She means, that she had no rest in her
Spirit, her heart (that chiefest of the bowels, or inwards) did even quake and
ache within her; her thoughts afflicted her, she was greatly disquieted, and
all for him, for the unkindness she had offered him, or concerning him, or
over him, as those Penitentiaries in Zachary, that looked upon him whom they
had pierced, and (by an instinct of the Spirit of grace powered plentifully upon
them) mourned for him, or over him, till their hearts became a very
Hadadrimmon, (...).
and fell asunder in their bosoms like drops of water; and all for the
indignities and injuries they had done to Christ. This is a sorrow according to
God, or, as God would have it, 1 Cor. 7.9. this is a repentance never to be
repented of, verse. 10. This is that Rainbow, which if God see shining in our
hearts, he will remember his holy Covenant. The Church here for instance. That
she sorrowed after a godly sort appears by those seven signs set down, 2 Cor.
7.11. and here in this Chapter exemplified and evidenced. I sleep, there is
Indignation, but my heart waketh, there is Apology, or clearing herself. I arose
to open, there is study, or carefulness and diligence. My soul failed when he
spoke, there is her Zeal. I called on him, I sought him, there is her vehement
desire. The Watchmen found me, they smote me, they unveiled ^ee, there is her
self-revenge, whiles she shrank not for any danger, but bearing patiently the
Lords indignation, because she had sinned against him, she followed him
through thick and thin, in the night, among the watch, etc. followed him
hot-foot, and would not rest till she had recovered him. Lo this is the guise
of a godly heart: it runs into sin sometimes, but rises again soon after by
repentance: it is at as much unrest till reconciled to God, as he that has
broke a bone, till it be well set again. When as a profane Esau can sell his
birthright, Hac congerie impaenitentia Esaui describitur. Piscat.
(and with it his title to heaven) and when he has so done, he can eat, and
drink, and rise up, and go his way without any the least remorse or regret,
Ge^. 25.34. Wicked men grow worse and worse, says the Apostle: and take long
strides toward hell, as if they feared it would be full ere they ^ome there.
Some seek to out-sin one another, like unhappy boys, that str^ve who shall go
furthest in the dirt: Noluit solita peccare, says Seneca: et pudet non esse
impudentes, says Austin; Sin has woaded an impuden^^ ^n their faces: their
spot is not the spot of Gods children, Deuteronomy. 32.^.

Verse. 5. I rose up to open to my Beloved] This was repentance from sin, as
that in the former verse was repentance for sin. To repent; and yet to lie
still in sin, is to repent with a contradiction, says Tertullian; Optima et
aptissima paenitentia est nova vita, says Luther. A new life is the best
repentance. Up gets the Church, when once soundly sensible of her sin: and
leaving her bed of carnal security, makes after Christ with all her might, with
a redoubled diligence; to make some amends for her former negligence. Nunquam
sero, si serio. Late though it were ere she started and stirred, yet better
late than not at all. We are too much after-witted, for most part,
Postmasters, Epimetheusses: we see not our folly (but cry with him, In
crastinum seria) till we have smarted for it, and then wish, O mihi
praeteritos, etc.

And my hands drop with myrrhe] That is, with the testimonies of his sweetness
left behind him on the lock-handles, the better to allure her to his love.
Philip Beroaldus, and many others, In Apul^^um, lib. 2. M. Les.
tell us of a very precious unguent Cinnamimum, because made of Cinnamon and
other sweet odours; whose chief commendation is, that the very smell thereof,
(if a man carries it about him) draws any woman, though passing by, and minding
other things, to draw nigh to him. What truth is in this relation, I know not:
but sure it is, that the smell of the Gospel, and those spiritual blessings
which the presence of Christ had left behind it, did notably attract and draw
after him the Churches affections. Goodness is of it self attractive: Velut
aliqui volunt (...) quasi (...). Sic (...) quasi (...).
The Greeks call it (...) from (...), and (...) from (...): because it does as
it were, invite and call to it; and every man is willing to run after it.
Christ puts a secret instinct into his people to do so; like as nature has put
an instinct into the Be, the Stork, and other creatures. And as the needle in
a Sundial that has been touched with an adamant, though it may be forced this
way, and that way, yet it rests not till it look toward the North Pole: So the
soul that has aliquid Christi in it, that has been once hand-fasted to Christ
by a lively faith, though for a season it may, Jam. 1.14. 2 Pet. 3.17.
by the malice of Satan working with corruption, suffer some decays of her
first love, be drawn aside by some lust, and enticed so as to fall from former
stedfastness; yet after a while her thoughts will work, and the sweet
remembrance that Christ has left behind him, will make her to say, I will go
and return to my first husband, Hos. 2 7.
for then it was better with me th^n now.

Verse. 6. I opened to my Beloved, but my Beloved had withdrawn himself and was
gone] Or, He was gone, he was gone; a passionate complaint for his departure;
which lay so much the heavier upon her spirit, because by her unworthy usage of
him, she had foolishly occasioned it. Fools, because of their transgression
and because of their iniquity are afflicted: And when affliction comes with a
sting in the tail, it is very grievous. Psalm. 107.17, 19, 20.
But then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble: he saves them out of their
distress; He sends his word and heals them, he sends for them by his
Spirit, and brings them back again into his own bosom, that his banished be
not expelled from him (2 Samuel 14.14.) though to themselves and others, they may
for present seem to be as water spilled on the ground that cannot be gathered
up again. Those fragrant footsteps and heart-attracting stamps of his favor,
that sweet smelling Myrrh, mentioned in the former verse, had so eneagered and
edged her affections, that she could not rest till she had recovered him.
She opened unto her beloved, and, presuming upon his patience, Heu rara hora,
and parva mora. Dern.
was in good hope to have had him at hand: But patientia laesa fit furor,
Christ will not always bear with our evil manners, but hide his face from us,
like as we have behaved our selves evil in our doings, Micah 3.5. And whereas
spiritual desertions are of three sorts, 1 Cautional, for preventing of sin,
as Paul's seems to be. 2 Probational, for trial and exercise of grace, as Jobs.
3 Penal, for chastisement of spiritual sloth and sluggishness, as here in the
Church; this last is far the heaviest.

My soul failed when he spake] Or, because of his speech, that sweet speech of
his when he so passionately wooed her, ver. 2. Then he could have no audience
nor admittance, now if he would but offer himself, he might be sure of both.
The word spoken does not always presently take effect in the hearers, but lies
long as the seed under a clod, till Christ the good husbandman, come with some
temptation, as with his clotting-beetle, and give it room to rise. Then as the
water casts up her dead after a time, so do their memories cast up that which
seemed buried therein, by the help of the Holy Ghost their remembrancer: John
14.26. John 2.22. The new birth of some, (the recovery of others out of their
relapses) is like the birth of the Elephant, fourteen years after the seed is
inserted into the womb. Peter remembered Christ's words, and repented, Mat.
26.75. If we remember not what has been preached unto us, all is lost, 1 Cor.
15.2. If we leak, (...).
and let slip, actum est de nobis, Heb. 2.1. If we keep the Word, the Word will
keep us, Prove. 6.22.

I sought him] So soon as recovered out of my swoon, I set to seek him; The
Church went not to bed again, to sleep as before, neither stays she longer
within, than to cast her veyl or her scarf over her head, without any further
dress, abroad she gets to seek him whom her soul loves. She sought him by
serious and set meditation of the word and promises, but after all that royl
and travel she took therein, she found him not. This is the greatest grief
that can befall a good heart in this present world: it is to such little better
than hell it self. Thou hiddest thy face and I was troubled, says David, Psalm.
30.8. Non frustra praedicant meptes hominum nitere liquido die, coactanube
flaccescere, says Symmachus. Men's minds are either clear or cloudy, as the
weather is: but more truly, good men's minds are as Gods countenance is. It is
with the godly in desertion, as with vapors drawn up by the Sun; which when
the extracting force of the Sun leaves them, fall down again to the earth. And
as in an Eclipse of the Sun, there is a drooping in the whole frame of nature:
so it is with the Saints, when Christ withdraws himself. Hell it self is said
to be a separation from his presence: the pain of loss there is worse than the
pain of sense: the tears of hell are not sufficient to bewail the loss of
heaven. Bern.
Laetemur igitur in Domino, sed caveamus a recidivo.

I called him, but he gave me no answer] And it was but just: for she had
dealt so by him, ver. 2. Christ loves to retaliate. Such a proportion many
times one may see between sins and punishments, that you may say, such a sin
brought forth this affliction, it is so like the father. Howbeit, his ear is
not heavy that he cannot hear: but your iniquities have hid his face from you
that he will not hear, Isa. 59.1, 2. And this the Saints take (as well they
may) for a sore affliction, Lam. 3.8. when to all other their miseries, he
adds this, that he will not come at them, that he casts out their
prayers, that he deals by them as the Lionness does by her young ones, which
she seems sometimes to leave, till they have almost killed themselves with
roaring. This is to make them more careful another time. None look at the
Sun but when it is in the eclipse: Neither prize we (for most part) Gods
loving countenance, till we have lost it. In this case the course is, to set up
a loud cry after him, as Micah did after his Gods, Judge. 18.23. Or rather as
the Church here does after her beloved, in many strong cries and bitter tears,
continuing instant in prayer, (...).
Romans 12.12. The Greek word imports a metaphor from hunting dogs, that give
not over the game, till they have got it. For encouragement; See the happy
success the Church here had: and further, take that saying of Brentius, Etiamsi
fides tuae nec lucem hominibus, nec calorem cordi tuo afferat, tamen non
abjicit Christus, modo incrementum ores, i. e. Although thy faith, as smoking
flax, yield neither light to others, nor heat to thine own heart, yet Christ
will not cast thee off, so thou pray for more, and follow thy work close, till
thou have gotten it.

Verse. 7. The Watchmen that went about the City, etc.] See the Note on Chap.
3.3. The Ministers that walk the round, that watch for men's souls, Heb. 13.17.
Isa. 61.6. that know how to time a word, Isa. 51.4. these smote her with the
tongue, they buffeted her by just and sharp reproofs for her negligence, they
unveiled her for being abroad at that time of night (which she needed not to
have been, but for her own slothfulness) they dealt little better with her,
than as if she had been some light and lewd woman: and all this they might
well do out of zeal to God, and godly jealousy for her souls good; Unless it
were that Hypocrisy of jealousy exercised by the false Apostles over the
Galatians, Chap. 4.17. Not Pastors, but Impostours; not Overseers, Non
Episcopi, sed Aposcopi.
but By-seers; potius grassatores; quam custodes, homonym^s tamen sic dicti,
out-throats rather than Keepers, wicked men taking upon them to be Watchmen,
Church Officers in name, but Church-robbers in deed. Such were those, Isa.
66.5. that hated and cast out the true worshippers, under a pretense of, Let
the Lord be glorified. Such an one was Diotrephes, that prating prelate, (...),
that villanously entreated Gods faithful people, 3 John 9.10. And such is that
Man of sin, that Antichrist of Rome, who, for so many hundred years together,
has smitten with the fist of wickedness, has wounded and drawn blood from
Christ's dearest Spouse, and despoiled her of her veyl: that is, labored to
dispriviledge her, and deprive her of that purity and soundness of Doctrine
that he has committed unto her, as a means to hold her in the duty of all
holy obedience and subjection unto him. 1 Cor. 11.5, 6, 10. Of these false
friends, and deadly enemies, the Church here heavily complains, and might well
have proceeded against them, as those six Martyrs, burnt by Harpsfield,
Archdeacon of Canterbury, when Queen Mary lay a dying. One of those six that
were then burnt (and those were the last) John Cornford (stirred with a
vehement zeal of God when they were excommunicated) pronounced sentence of
excommunication against all Papists in these words: In the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and by the power of his holy Spirit, and authority of his holy
Catholic and Apostolic Church, we do give here into the hands of Satan, to
be destroyed, the bodies of all those blasphemers and heretics that do
maintain any error against his most holy Word, Act. and Mon. fol. 1862.
or do condemn his most holy truth for heresy, to the maintenance of any false
Church, or feigned religion: so that by this thy most just judgment, (O most
mighty God) against thine adversaries, thy true religion may be known, to thy
great glory, and our comfort, and the edifying of all our Nation: Good Lord, so
be it.

Verse. 8. I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem] Being evil entreated by her
enemies, she turns her to her friends; those damsels, or daughters of
Jerusalem: (See chap. 2.7. and 3.5.) so the Lord Christ being tired out with
the untractableness of his untoward hearers, turns him to his Father, Mat.
11.25, 26. Kings, as they have their cares and cumbers above other men, so they
had of old their friends (by a specialty, as Hushai was David's friend, 2 Samuel
15.37.) to whom they might ease themselves, and take sweet counsel, Psalm.
55.14. The servants of God are Princes in all lands: Psalm. 45.
and as they have their crosses not a few, so their comforts, in and by the
communion of Saints. The very opening of their grievances one to another does
many times ease them: as the very opening of a vein cools the blood: Their
mutual prayers one with and for another prevail much, if they be fervent,
(...). Jam. 5.26. Prove. 27.17.
or thorough-well wrought; as in this case they likely will be; for as Iron
whe^s Iron, so does the face of a man his friend. And as ferrum potest quod
anrum non potest, Iron can do that sometimes that Gold cannot (An Iron-key may
open a chest wherein Gold is laid up) so a meaner man's prayer may be more
effectual sometimes than a better man's, for himself. His own key may be rusty,
or out of order, and another man's do it better. Hence the Church is so
importunate with the daughters of Jerusalem (who were far behind her in grace,
and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, as appears by that which
follows) to commend her and her misery to Christ, to tell him (where ever they
meet with him) Behold, she whom thou love is sick, thy Church (in whom thy
love is concentrate, as it were, and gathered to an head) does even languish
with love, and is in ill case. Tell him, says she, What shall ye tell him?
as the Hebrew has it. An earnest and passionate kind of speech (somewhat like
that in Hosea, Give them O Lord, Hos. 9.14.
What will thou give them?) as if she should say, would you know what you
should tell him? even that which follows, that I am sick of love. See chap.
2.5.

Verse. 9. What is thy beloved more than another beloved] This capital question
is here doubled for the more vehemence; as also for the strangeness of the
matter, wherein they desire much to be better informed; and the rather,
because she so straightly charge, or rather swears them. Something they
must needs think was in it more than ordinary: since good people do not use to
be hot in a cold matter. But as in the Revelation, whenever heaven opened,
some singular thing ensued: So when the Saints be so serious in a business,
sure it is of very great concernment: Great matters are carried with great
movings: as, for the divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of heart,
Judge 5.15, 16
great impressions, great searchings. It is a common saying, Admiratio peperit
Philosophiam, Wonderment at the works of God, set men a work to enquire into
the natural causes of them. Semblably these damsells of Jerusalem, friends to
the Church, little knowing the love of the Spouse to Christ (which passed their
knowledge) and yet willing to comprehend with all Saints the several dimensions
thereof; Ephesians. 3.18, 19
first, they acknowledge her, amidst all her miseries, to be the fairest among
women] (See chap. 1.8.) as gold is gold, though found in the dirt, or cast into
the furnace; and stars have their glory, though we see them sometimes in a
puddle, in the bottom of a well, nay, in a stinking ditch. Secondly, they
propound to her two most profitable questions: The one concerning his person,
Whereof we have here a very lively and lofty description, both generally, and
in his parts. The other concerning the place of his abode, and where he may be
had, chap. 6.1. to the which she makes answer, verse. 2. and so her faith begins
to revive, verse. 3. which was the blessed effect of this their gracious
communication. Conference in all arts and sciences is a course of incredible
profiting. Est aliquid quod ex magno viro vel tacente proficias, the very
sight, Prove. 31.26. Prove. 20.5.
nay, thought of a good man often does good: how much more when he opens his
mouth with wisdom, and in his tongue is the Law of kindness? And surely it is
a fine art to be able to pierce a man, that is like a vessel full of wine,
and to set him a running. Elihu would speak that he might be refresht, Job
32. It would be an ease to him, it would be a great benefit to others: as the
mother is in pain, till the child has sucked, and the child not at quiet till
he has done so. Foolish and unlearned questions about those things whereof
we can neither have proof nor profit, we are bound to avoid, 2 Timothy 2.23.
knowing that they do gender strifes, and breed crudities, fill men with wind,
and make them question-sick, 1 Timothy 6.4. But profitable questions are
frequently to be propounded with a desire to learn, and resolution to
practice: as the Virgin Mary demanded of the Angel, Luke 1.34. the Disciples of
our Savior, John 16.17, 19. etc. and he resolved them: which he refused to
do for the Jews, that asked him the same question, John 7.35, 36. because not
with the same mind and desire. So that frollick self-seeker, with his fair
offer of following Christ, was rejected: when those that had more honest aims
and ends, heard, Come and see, Mat. 8.19, 20. John 1.46. These daughters of
Jerusalem do not therefore ask, because they were utterly ignorant of Christ:
but 1 That they might hear the Church what she had to say of him, as they that
love Christ, love to hear talk of him; his very name is mel^in ore, melos in
aure, etc. 2 That by her discourse they might better their knowledge: for the
very Angels know not so much of this mystery, but they would know more, and do
therefore curiously pry into it, 1 Pet. 1.12. Yea, to these very Principalities
and powers in heavenly places is made known by the Church the manifold wisdom
of God, in contriving man's salvation by Christ: they cannot but see an
abundance of curious variety in this divine wisdom: (...).
such as is to be seen in the best pictures or textures, as the Apostles word
imports, Ephesians. 3.10.

Verse. 10. My Beloved is white and ruddy, etc.] Love lacks no Rhetoric to lay
forth the thing beloved in liveliest colors; White and ruddy, What can be
more laudable and lovely? What can come nearer to a perfect symmetry, to a
sound and sure constitution and complexion? Sure it is, that these two being
comelily mixed, do make the most beautiful or orient look or color; (see the
Prophets description of the Nazarites, Lam. 4.7.) And note (says an
Expositour) that the Holy Ghost joyneth both these together: the whiteness
making the ruddiness more fresh and fair, and the ruddiness discerning the
whiteness from paleness of face, or phlegmatic complexion. Sed sunt in his
mysteria investiganda (says another) itaque candor refert divinam Christi
naturam, rubor humanam. White and red may signify Christ's Godhead and
Manhood. God is called the Ancient of days, Dan. 9.7. his head and his hairs
are white like wool, as white as snow, Rev. 1.14. Man had his name Adam of the
red earth, out of which he was taken, Genesis 2.7. Christ also, the second Adam,
became red with his own blood, whereby he purchased the Church, Act. 10.28* (a
bloody Spouse she was unto him) and paved for her a new and lively way into
the most holy place, Heb. 10.20. Upon the battlements whereof he hangs out
still, (as once that warlike Scythian did) a white flag of grace and mercy to
penitent persons, that humble themselves at his feet for favor: but a red flag
of justice and severity to those his enemies, that will not have him to rule
over them: in token whereof his raiment is said to be red, Isa. 63.1, 2, 3. his
vesture dipped in blood, Rev. 19.13.

The chiefest among ten thousand] Heb. vexillatus praedecem millibus, that is,
famous and conspicuous among and above many, as Saul was higher than the people
by the head and shoulders, as the Hachmonite was the chief of David's mighties,
1 Chronicles. 11.11. Or the standard bearer of ten thousand. Now the goodliest, and
withal the ablest men use to carry the banner or standard. Christ stands for
an ensign of the people, Isa. 11.10. and has ten thousand times ten thousand
standing before him, following him wheresoever he goes, Rev. 7.9, 14. and
singing, We will rejoice in thy salvation, and in the name of our God,
vexillabimus, we will set up our banner, Psalm. 20.6. The Churches design here
is to hold out Christ as altogether matchless and incomparable, that there is
none like him in the earth, (as God said of Job, chap. 1.8.) to teach us to
esteem him, as the people did David, more worth than ten thousand others, 2 Samuel 18.3. to set him upon the chief chariot, and to give him the sole command
of all, as Pharaoh dealt by Joseph. And as the Sun, Moon, and eleven stars in
Joseph's vision did obeisance to him: so let our souls, bodies, all our
temporal, natural, moral, and spiritual abilities be subject and serviceable to
Christ; who, if he be the chiefest of ten thousand, ought to have as much love
as ten thousand hearts put into one, could hold.

Verse. 11. His head is as the most fine gold] Here she begins her particular
praise of his several parts: and here she may seem to speak with the tongues
of men and of Angels; performing (as Lovers use to do) that for him, that he
had done for her before, chap. 4.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. though all she could say
falls far short of him; and well she might say after all, as Nazianzen
sometime said of Basil, There wants but his own tongue to commend him with.
Loquimur de Deo non quantum debemus, sed quantum possumus. In speaking of
Christ's excellencies men may speak what they can, they cannot possibly speak so
much as they ought, they cannot hyperbolize. If any shall think the Church does
here, he must needs be of those that either know him not, or are not able to
judge aright of his worth, Tull. de Orator.
as once Cicero said of Crassus and Antonius the Orators. Nusquam Origines non
ardet, sed nusquam est ardentior, etc. says Erasmus. Origin is never but
earnest, Eras. in praef. ad Orig. opera.
howbeit he is never more earnest, than when he discourses of Christ: in
other things he may seem to excel others, but in this he excels himself.
The same we may well say of the Church in this place, in setting forth the
surpassing purity and perfection of her Spouse: Quem manibus propriis finxit
cordata Minerva. And first she makes his head to be of the finest and firmest
gold, Fess-gold, so the Arabic, from the Hebrew, calls it: and the land of
Fess seems to be named of such gold there. David's Michtam or Golden Psalm
comes from one of the words here used. For in the Original thus it is, Or he is
the gold of gold, as Athens was the Greece of Greece.
His head is most glistering gold, yea, most solid gold. That is, his deity
which dwells in him, is most pure and glorious, (for the head of Christ is God,
1 Cor. 11.3.) and that fullness of grace which is communicated to his humane
nature, is wondrously beautiful: and so sets it forth, as black curled locks do
a fresh countenance.

Spectandus nigris oculis, nigroque capillo est. Ver. 12. His eyes are as the
eyes of Doves by the rivers of water, etc.] i. e. they are full of all
innocence, singleness, and chastity: See the Notes on chap. 1.15. and 4.1.
where Christ had attributed the very same to the Church, who is his image and
glory, as the woman is of the man, 1 Cor. 11.7. the very looking-glass of his
dignity, and reflex of his comeliness. His eyes are elsewhere said to be as a
flame of fire, sharp and terrible, such as pierce into the inward parts, Rev.
1.14. Dan. 10.6.
and need no outward light. Here they are as the eyes of Doves, casting an
amiable, gracious, joyful, and comfortable look upon his Church. As, his eyes
behold, his eyelids try the children of men (the one points out his knowledge,
the other his critical descant) Psalm. 11.4. So he casts an eye of singular
providence and tender affection upon his afflicted people, I have seen, I have
seen, says he, the sufferings of my people. I know their sorrows, and am come
down to deliver them; His eye affects his heart, Exodus 3.7, 8.
and his heart sets his hand awork for their succor and safety. Ezekiel. 1.8. we
read of faces, eyes, wings, hands, etc. all to express the sufficiency of Gods
providence for all means of help. See Psalm. 33.18, 19. and 34.16. The Church is
like the land of Canaan, which is said to be a land which the Lord cares for:
the eyes of the Lord are always upon it, etc. Deuteronomy. 11.11. He sees that
loveliness in her, that he overlooks all, as it were, to look upon her: he
beholds that worth in her, that the buzzards of the world cannot ken. Therefore
the world knows us not, respects us not, because it knew not him, 1 John 3.1.
saw no such beauty, that they should desire him, Isa. 53.2. Nicostratus in
Elian, himself being a cunning Artisan, finding a curious piece of work, and
being wondered at by one, and asked by one what pleasure he could take to stand
gazing as he did on the picture? answered, Had thou mine eyes, thou would
not wonder, but rather be ravished as I am at the inimitable art of this
piece. Semblably, had men those dove-like single eyes that Christ and his
people have, washed in milk, that is, in milk-white waters, cleansed from the
dust of sinful prejudice, and fitly set, as a precious stone in the foyl of a
ring, or as the precious filling-stones in the holy Ephod, Exodus 25.7. they
would kiss the Son, and admire his Spouse. Whereas for want of Spiritual
eyes, the Northern proverb is verified, unkent, unkist, unknown, unrespected.

Verse. 13. His cheeks are as a bed of spices] i. e. comely and pleasant to the
sight, sweet also to the smell; areolis similes aromatum plenis: flourishing
with a goodly, comely, fresh, and sweet beard; so declaring his face not only
to be gracious and amiable, but also full of gravity, glory, and majesty. There
are that would have all these things to be taken literally of Christ's natural
body: and that here is set down his Prosopography: But this was written long
before Christ was incarnate; and therefore it must needs be meant in a
metaphorical and allegorical sense, hard to be explained. Ego quid de singulis
statuam fateor me nescire, says a learned Interpreter. Allegorically to handle
all these is not in my purpose or power, says another: since the graces of
Christ, as they cannot well be expressed, so, by reason of our weakness, they
cannot better be declared. The drift of the holy Ghost is to paint out unto us
the spiritual and heavenly love of his Church to Christ, who does not, nor
cannot satisfy her self with any words, or comparisons of this kind. And
secondly, to stir up our heartiest and liveliest affections to him, that has
such a world of worth and wealth in him. As the worth and value of many pieces
of silver is in one piece of gold, so all the petty excellencies scattered
abroad in the creatures are united in Christ; yea all the whole volume of
perfections which is spread through Heaven and Earth, is epitomized in him: why
do we not then make out to him, and despise all for him with Paul? Why do we
not with David chide our selves and others for loving vanity, Psalm. 4.2.
and seeking after leasing? How long will thou go about, O backsliding
daughter, Isa. 7.14.
and fetch a compass? know thou not that the Lord has created a new thing
in the Earth? a woman shall compass a man, Jer. 31.22. that is, a Virgin shall
conceive and bear a Son, even the Man Christ Jesus, in whom it pleased the
Father that there should dwell all fullness, Col. 1.19. Make we therefore
straight paths for our feet, Heb. 12.13. Let us go speedily to Christ, Zech.
8.21. as Bees do to a Meddow full of flowers: as Merchants do to the Indies
that are full of fruits and spices; that we may return from him, full fraught
with treasures of truth and grace.

His lips like Lillies, dropping sweet smelling myrrhe] i. e. His word and
doctrine is white, sweet, pleasant, far-spreading as Lillies; sweet to the
smell, and yet bitter to the taste as myrrh, no way pleasing to the flesh
which it mortifieth, calling upon men to repent, reform, walk by rule, strive
to enter in at the straight gate, resist unto blood, striving against sin.
These things are good and profitable to men (as the Apostle speaks in another
case, ( Tit. 3.8.) but they naturally care not to hear of them. Drop not ye,
say they, (we like not your Lillies dropping myrrh and nitre) Let those drop
or prophecy, Micah 2.6.
that preach pleasing things; We like your Lillies, but care not for your
Myrrh: or if we smell it, we like not to taste of it, because little
toothsome, however it may be wholesome.

Verse. 14. His hands are as gold Rings set with the Beril] Or Chrysolite. Heb.
Tarshish, whence our word Turkeis (as it may seem) a precious stone, of color
blew like the Sky, or (as others say) green like the Sea: Asher was graven
upon this stone, who dwelt near the Sea, Exodus 28.20. Some write, that in
former times this stone was most usually set in such Rings as Lovers did use to
give one to another, or in Marriage-Rings; because of the power that was
thought to be in it to procure and continue love and liking one of them
toward another. Whatsoever stone it is, whether a Beril, Chrysolite,
Carbuncle, Hyacinth, Onyx (for all these ways it is rendered) the Churches
meaning is, that all the works of Christ, whether in the state of Humiliation,
or of Exaltation (for redemption we have by his Abasement, application of it
by his Advancement) are most rare, dear, precious, and glorious, as numbers of
Rings filled with all manner of costly stones: they are acceptable and
honorable before God and man. And like as great men are known by their Rings,
and rich Jewels, so is Christ by his Saints, the work of his hands, Isa. 64.8.

His belly is as bright Ivory, overlaid with Sapphires] Heb. His bowels, in the
dual; meaning his breast and belly, and there, the heart and lights, those
seats of the will and affections; here, the liver, stomach, entrails, which
serve for nutrition and generation. By all this we may well understand Christ's
inward affections outwardly manifested. These are true and sincere, as bright
and white Ivory; they are also hearty and heavenly as Sapphires: various also
and manifold, sicut Sapphiri caeruleae sunt, His bowels yearn toward his
afflicted people, his heart is turned within him, his repentings are kindled
together, Hos. 11.8, so the Poet, Ingemuit miserans graviter, dextramque
tetendit. Virg.


Verse. 15. His legs are as pillars of marble] A sign of Christ's firmness in
his Kingdom, works, word, and government (says a learned Expositour) and of
his strength to trample upon his enemies, as also of his united power to
accomplish the course of his threefold office. Pillars both bear up the
building, and beautify it: neither can any thing be more sure and solid than
these, if set upon a firm foundation. The Pillars here mentioned are said to
be set upon fine gold, that is, upon a foundation both fine, and firm, for
gold hardly rusteth or cankereth: whence it was (likely) that Tithonus and his
Son Memnon, when they built the City of Susa in Persia, they joined the stones
together with gold, as Cassiodorus writes: Christ's power is founded upon his
divine Nature; and this is the Rock upon which the Church is built, and whereby
it is set in safety from all miseries and molestations satanical or secular.
The gates of Hell shall not prevail against her. Christ and the Father are one;
Psalm. 89.19.
therefore none shall take her out of his hands. God has laid help upon one
that is mighty, even upon Emanuel the mighty strong God, as he is called, Isa.
9.6. declared to be the Son of God with power according to the spirit of
holiness, by the resurrection from the dead, Romans 1.4. that your Faith and hope
might be in God, (...). Prorsus, perpotuo, perfect.
1 Pet. 1.21. Trust perfectly therefore to, or hope to the end, for the grace
that is to be brought unto you at the Revelation of Jesus: since he is able to
save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, 1 Pet. 1.13. Heb. 7.25.

His countenance is as Lebanon] His aspect, his look or general view, i. e.
Whatsoever of himself Christ is pleased to manifest and lay open unto us is
pleasant and delightful, goodly and glorious, excellent and eximious, choice as
the Cedars, that are chosen before other trees; and why, see the Note on chap.
1.17.

Verse. 16. His mouth is most sweet] Heb. His palate, (that is, his word and
promises, which are as it were the breath of Christ's mouth) is all sweet. This
she had celebrated before, verse. 13. but, as not satisfied therewith, she
repeats it, and rolls it again as sugar under her tongue. She doubles this
commendation, to show, that that is the chief lovely thing in Christ, his Word;
this fruit she had found sweet unto her palate, chap. 2.3. and she spares not
to set it forth, as here, the second time, Mallemus carere, etc. We had rather
be without Fire, Water, Bread, Sun, Air, etc. (says a Dutch Divine) than that
one sweet sentence of our blessed Savior, Come unto me all ye that are
weary, etc.

Yea he is altogether lovely] Totus totus desiderabilis, wholly amiable: every
whit of him to be desired. Moses thought him so, when he preferred the
reproach of Christ, the worst part of him, the heaviest piece of his cross,
before all the treasures in Egypt, that Magazin of the world, Heb. 11.26. Those
of this world see no such excellency and desireableness in Christ, and his
ways, ( Psalm. 22.7.) nor can do, till soundly shaken, Hag. 2.7. I will shake
all Nations, and then the desire of all Nations, that is Christ, shall come
with stirring affections, saying, as Isa. 26.9. with my soul have I desired
thee in the night: yea with my spirit within me will I seek thee early. Lo
this is the voice of every true child of the Church; and these desires of the
righteous shall be satisfied, Prove. 10.24.

This is my Beloved, etc.] q.d. You may see I have cause to seek after him;
neither can you do better than to do likewise: howsoever, when you see him, do
my errand to him, as verse. 7. And here we have most excellent Rhetoric, which
in the beginning of a speech, requires (...), milder affections: in the end of
it, (...), stronger passions, that may leaved deepest impressions.

CHAP. VI. Verse. 1. Whither is thy Beloved gone, etc?]
ALL Christ's Disciples are (...), inquisitive after the truth that is in Jesus,
Ephesians. 4.21. and are fellow-helpers to it, John 3.8. There is also quid divinum
in auscultatione, as one well notes, that is, a strange and strong energy or
forcibleness in hearing (whether publicly or in private conference) Christ
and his excellencies displayed and discoursed of. Let but his name, as an
ointment, be powered out, and the Virgins can do no less than love him. Cant.
1.3. These daughters of Jerusalem are by hearing the Church describing her
Spouse, and painting him out in lively colors, fired up to an holy contention
in godliness: and might they but know where to have him, they would be at any
pains to partake of the benefit, 1 Timothy 6.2. They wondered at first why she
should make such ado about Christ: But when they conversed a while with her,
and had heard her speak with such affection and admiration, they are turned,
and will now go seek him with her. God is pleased many times to water the holy
meetings and conferences of his people with blessing, beyond expectation or
belief. We should frame our selves to an easy discourse of the glory of
Christ's Kingdom, and talk of his power, Psalm. 145.8, 9. Our tongues in this
argument should be as the pen of a ready writer, Psalm. 45.1. that we may be
able to speak often to one another, with profit and power in the best thing, Mal.
3.10. Little do we know what a deal of good may be done hereby. Mr. Fox
speaking of Gods little flock in the days of Henry the 8. says, in such rarity
of good books and want of teachers, Act. and Mon. fol. 750.
this one thing I cannot but marvel and muse at; to note in the registers, and
consider how the word of God did multiply so exceedingly amongst them. For I
find that one neighbor resorting and conferring with another, eftsoons with a
few words of their first or second talk did win and turn their minds to that
wherein they desired to persuade them, touching the truth of Gods Word and
Sacraments, etc. In all ages such as were ordained to eternal life, believed.
Acts 13.48. after that they had heard the Word of truth, they believed, and
were sealed. Irridentis vex, non interrogantis.
Contrariwise reprobates either refuse to hear the Church preaching Christ,
John 8.47. Of else they hear and jear, (as Pilat with his What Is truth? in mere
mockage, John 18.38.) hear and blaspheme, Acts 13.45. or, at best, hear and
admire, and that is all: they leave the Word where they found it, for any thing
they will practice. They think they do a great chare to sit out a Sermon, and
then commend it. But Wisdoms children will not only justify her, Mat. 11.19.
but also glorify her, Acts 13.48. they will seek the Lord and his strength,
seek his face evermore, Psalm. 105.4. Seek him in his holy Temple, seek him in
and with the Church, as here. They know that extra Ecclesiam nulla salus. The
Church is the pillar and ground of truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. in as much as by her
ministry, the authority, dignity, knowledge, virtue, and use of the truth of
the Gospel is preserved in the world, and held out, Philip. 2.16. as the hand
holds forth the torch, or the watchtower the light, and so the haven, to the
weather-beaten Mariners.

That we may seek him with thee] For he is not like to seek long that seeks
alone; there being a notable tie to constancy in the Communion of Saints.
Surely as sincerity is the life of Religion: so society is the life of
sincerity. The Philippians had no sooner received the Gospel, but they were in
fellowship, to a day, Phil. 1.5.

Verse. 2. My Beloved is gone down into his garden] Now she can tell where
Christ is, and inform others: who before was to seek of him, and sought
information from others. Post tenebras lux, is the Churches Motto. Though I sit
in darkness, the Lord shall give me light: he will with the temptation give
the issue, a way to get out of it, as the Moon wades out of a cloud, as the
Seed gets up from under a clod. And see how forward she is to communicate: her
friends shall know all that she can tell them. There is no envy in Spiritual
things, because they may be divided in solidum: one may have as much as
another, and all alike: Yea, Gods people know, that the manifestation of the
Spirit is given them to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. and that it is not pouring
out, but want of pouring out, that dries up the streams of grace, as that of
oil, 2 Kings 4.6. What is meant by Christ's garden, see chap. 4.17. with the
Note: He is said to go down to it, in allusion to the situation of Jerusalem,
which was on an hill: their gardens being below in the fruitful valleys. (...)
ex omni ad nihilum seipsum redegit. Beza.
Christ came down to his Church: he descended into the lower parts of the
earth, that is, into his mothers womb, Ephesians. 4.9. with Psalm. 139.15. yea, he
emptied himself of all his excellencies, and took upon him the form of a
servant, yea, of an evil servant that was to be beaten. Yea more, he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross, Phil.
2.9. Oh humble Savior, whether will thou descend? Facinus vincire civem
Romanum, Cicero.
It was much for the Son of God to be bound, more to be beaten, most of all
to be slain, Quid dicam in crucem toll^, etc? well might the Apostle say, He
humbled himself.

To the beds of spices] i. e. To the particular Churches, or to the companies
of Believers: these beds, or rows of renewed souls, Christ, as a good
Gardener, treads out, sows, planteth, waters, fenceth, fills with
sundry gifts and graces.

To feed in the Gardens, and to gather Lillies] Like as men go to their
Gardens, either to make merry (as we say) or to gather fruits. So Christ here,
either to eat his pleasant fruits, Cant. 4.16. his peoples holy performances,
better to him than any Ambrosia: and then to gather his Lillies, to transplant
them into heaven. Pascitur Christus, quando suorum virtutes videt (says one)
Lilia decerpit, quando optimum quemque ex hac vita traducit. Christ feeds in
the Gardens, when he beholds the virtues of his people: he gathers
Lillies, when he translateth good souls into his Kingdom above.

Verse 3. I am my Beloveds, etc.] Or, I am for my Beloved, and he is for me,
i. e. for me only: Flamm^ redardescit, quae modo nulla fuit. Ovid.
he rests in his love, and I in mine, we will seek no further. And here her
faith reviveth, who in her late temptation, and desertion, was in a mist, and
could not read her own graces. (See the Note on chap. 2.16.) It reviveth, I
say, and fetches out Christ that had hid himself, as that brave woman did,
Mark 7.24, 25.

Verse. 4. Thou art beautiful, O my Love, as Tirzah] A most neat and elegant
City, where the Kings of Israel kept their Courts. A place of pleasure it was,
(...).
as the very name imports: hence the Greeks translate it here, Good pleasure,
like as the Italians call a City of theirs, Placenza. Of the Churches exquisite
beauty much has been said before: let it ever be remembered, that all her
beauty is but borrowed, Ezekiel. 16.14. Uxor fulget radiis mariti, as they say in
the Civil Law. Isaac, when he was to marry Rebecca, sent her jewels aforehand;
that having them she might be more lovely in his eye: So does Christ the
Spirit of faith, and other graces (besides the imputation of his own perfect
righteousness) that he may delight in his Spouse. And albeit she had so
discourteously dealt with him, as chap. 5.3. and thereupon he had stepped aside
for a while: yet, that she might know that he was still the same, without
shadow of change, and that he hated putting away, Mal. 2.16. meeting her
again, he does marvelously commend her, that is, his own graces in her, and
all is as well as ever betwixt them. Homo agnoscit, Deus ignoscit: it is but
acknowledging the debt, and Christ will soon cross the book, and cancel the
handwriting, Col. 2.14. Quem poenitet peccasse, Jer. 3.22.
pene est innocens. Repent, and the amends is made* Return ye backsliding
children, and I will heal your backslidings.

Comely as Jerusalem] That City of the great King, great among the Nations, and
Princess among the Provinces, Lam. 1.1. the glory of the whole earth, urbium
totius Orientis clarissima, Plin. l. 5. c. 14.
says Pliny, the most famous of all the Cities of the East, Orbis totius
lumen, as another calls it: yea, an earthly paradise, (as Josephus) soli
coelique fertilitate omnes civitates superans, a City compact together, Psalm.
122.3. The Church is all this in Christ's esteem: and though the least, yet not
the least among the Princes of Juda, as it is said of Bethlehem in a different
respect, Mic. 5.2. Mat. 2.6.

Terrible as an army with banners] i. e. Of invincible faith, and Spiritual
courage: terrible also and full of majesty, either to draw hearts, or to daunt
them; as Nazianzen says of Athanasius, that he was Magnes, and Adamas, a
Loadstone in his sweet gentle drawing nature: and yet an Adamant in his
resolute stout carriage against those that were evil, and erroneous. Exodus
15.14, 15, 16. Psalm. 48.5, 6.
How terrible were the Israelites encamped and bannered in the wilderness unto
the Moabites, Canaanites, etc? And the like may be said of the Hussites in
Bohemia (when all Germany were up in arms against them, and worsted by them:)
of the Britains under the conduct of Germanus, D. Usher de Britan. Eccles.
primord. 337.
fighting against a mighty army of Pelagian Picts and Saxons in this Kingdom,
and prevailing only by the three times pronouncing the word Hallelujah. Of the
Protestants in France at the siege of Mountalban, where the people of God using
daily humiliation, immediately before their sallying forth sang a Psalm, which
when the enemy heard, they would so quake and tremble, crying, They come, Spe^.
be^li sac. 282.
they come, as though the wrath of God had been rushing out upon them. God is
both Van and Rere in the Churches Army, Isa. 52.12. The Lord will go before
you, and the God of Israel will be your rereward: Even he that is the great,
the mighty, and the terrible God, Nehem. 9.32. So that although, Loricatus
incedat Satan, and cataphractus, as Luther has it, Satan muster up all his
forces, Tyrants, Heretics, etc. that invade the Church, and assault her on all
sides; yet they shall find her invincible: Oppugnatur, sed non expugnatur.
Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, may Israel say, yet they
have not prevailed against me, Psalm. 129.1, 2. Populus Romans saepe prae^io
victus, nunquam bello, says Florus. The people of Rome lost many battles, but
were never overcome in a set war, at the long run they crushed all their
enemies. So the Church: Nay, it may be truly affirmed of her, that she
conquereth, even then, when she is conquered; as Christ overcame as well by
patience, as by power. So that more truly it may be written upon her gates,
that is at this day upon the gates of Venice, Intacta manet, because it was
never yet subdued by any enemy.

Verse. 5. Turn away thine eyes from mee] Or, Turn thine eyes right upon me, so
verse. 13. he calls Return, return, O Shulamite, etc. And then the sense is,
Look up unto me by Faith. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the
earth, Isa. 45.22. See chap. 31.1. and 42.18. But to keep to our Translation.
Christ had before confessed himself ravished with one of her eyes; and here he
says the same in effect. Stupenda sane dignatio, a wonderful condescension.
Non been convenient nec in una sede morantur, Majestas and Amor.
We use to say, Majesty and love cannot meet, or cohabit: because love is the
abasing of the soul to all services. But it is otherwise in Christ: Majesty and
Love (even unto ravishment) meet in his holy heart. If the Church be sick of
love toward him, he would she should know, that he is overcome with love
toward her; and that there is no love lost betwixt them.

Thy hair is as a flock of Goats, etc.] Grazing upon, and gazing from Gilead,
q. d. I like thee as well as ever I did, thy late relapse notwithstanding: for
I find thee more humble, watchful, thankful for a Savior, merciful to others,
desirous of the state of perfection, etc. And as a limb once broke, and well
set again, knits and grows stronger there, than in any other place: so by thy
late falling in some sort from me, I find thee more firmly fastened unto me;
Thus God changes (says one) out griesly wounds into beauty-spots; and makes
the horrible sting of Satan, to be a pearl-pin to pin upon us the long white
Robe of Christ, and to dress us with the garment of gladness. See chap. 4.1, 2,
etc. And observe here an addition of some other parts described, and a more
full description of some of the former: to show, that his love was no whit
diminished, but rather increased. Something it was surely that made Mr. Fox,
the Martyrologue say, that he got by his infirmities, and lost by his graces.

Verse. 6, 7, Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep, etc.] See verse. 4, and 5. chap.
4.2. with the Notes there.

Verse. 8. There are threescore Queens, and fourscore, etc.] Or, as some read
it, hypothetically, Be there sixty Queens, and eighty Concubines (which were
secondary wives, usurary the Lawyers call them, that had right to the bed, but
no rule in the family) and Virgins, or waiting Gentlewomen without number;
although there be of other sorts never so many, yet My Dove (albeit but one)
is an only one, and beloved accordingly; see Jer. 31.20. For the allegory
here; some go one way to work, some another. Let there be never so great a
number (says one) of Peoples and Nations, of Churches and Assemblies, which
challenge my name, and love, and perhaps by their outward prosperities may seem
to plead much interest in me, and much worth in themselves; yet My Dove, etc.
Others think, that by Queens are meant, true Believers, by Concubines,
Hypocrites, and formal professors, and by Virgins, profane persons, that have
not yet so much as a form of godliness. The first are the fewest, and the last
are the greatest number. Lastly, There are that make Queens, Concubines, and
Virgins, to signify three several sorts or degrees of true Christians in the
Catholic Church, which yet is but one. Some have made but small progress in
piety; these are compared to Virgins, and are the far greater in number. Some
are got further onward, and are of better proof; these are like Concubines, and
do exceed the Queens in number; quo enim perfectiores, eo pauciores. Some again
are eminent and eximious Christians; these are Queens, and have more close
communion with Christ: and to this highest degree we must all aspire and
endeavor, striving to perfection. Nature, Art, Grace, do all proceed from less
perfect to more perfect. We read in Scripture of a Christians conception, Gal.
4.19. birth, 1 Pet. 1.23. and 2.2. childe-hood, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. 1 John 2.13.
youth or well-grown age, Ephesians. 4.13. old age, Act. 21.15. M^ason was a
gray headed experienced Christian, a Father, 1 John 2.13. All must exact of
themselves a daily growth, and be still bringing forth fruit in their old age,
Psalm. 92.13, 14. so shall the King take pleasure still in their beauty: so
shall he one day set them upon his right hand, (as place of dignity and
safety) in gold of Ophir, Psalm. 45.9, 11.

Verse. 19. My Dove, mine undefiled is but one] For though all the forenamed may
be called Spouses; yet they all make but One. He that has the Bride (not
Brides) is the Bridegroom, says the Baptist. And this is a great Mystery
(says Paul) but I speak concerning Christ and the Church, not Churches, Ephesians.
5.32. Una Ecclesia, quia ex una fide, per unum spiritum nascitur, Christi
tunica est unica. Gal. 2.11, 12.
says Epiphanius, Beware therefore of the concision, Phil. 3.2. that is, of
those that make divisions, and cut the Church in minutula frustula (as Austin
says of the Donatists) into little pieces, and sucking Congregations, making
separations. Peter himself was blamed for this, and others branded for
profligate professors, Jude 19. These are they that separate themselves,
sensual, having not the spirit. The Primitive Christians were famous for their
unity, animo animaque inter se miscebantur, says Tertullian. The very Heathens
acknowledged that no people in the world did hold together, and love one
another, so as Christians did. As the curtains of the Tabernacles were joined
by loops, so were they by love. And as the stones of the Temple were so close
cemented together, that they seemed to be all but one stone: so was it among
them. Neither need we wonder, since Christ's Dove is but one; neither is there
any such oneness or intireness any where, as amongst the Saints. Other
Societies are but as the Clay in the toes of Nebuchadnezzars Image: they may
cleave together, but not incorporate one into another.

She is the only one of her Mother] i. e. Of the world, say some, of the
flesh, say others: but they say best that expound it of Jerusalem, that is
above, Gal. 4.26.
the Mother of us all. Epiphanius makes Faith and Religion the Mother of the
Church.

The Daughters saw her, and blessed her] i. e. Called and counted her blessed
above all other people. Happy art thou O Israel Who is like unto thee O people
saved by the Lord, etc? Deuteronomy. 33.29. And yet at that time, they seemed to be
nothing so happy as the Moabites, Edomites, etc. as being in a very unsettled
condition in the wilderness. So David, What one Nation in the earth is like thy
people, like Israel? 2 Samuel 7.23. O blessed is the people whose God is the
Lord! Psalm. 144.15. Est Ecclesiae Scoticanae privilegium rarum prae multis,
inquo ejus nomen apud caeteros fuit celebre, etc. Sic in elogio* praefator^ de
confess. in Pre^cip. Syntag confess. page 6.
It is the singular privilege of the Church of Scotland, and they are
deservedly famous for it, that for this fourscore years and upwards, they have
kept an unity, together with purity of Doctrine, without heresy, or so much as
schism. This the daughters (other Christian reformed Churches) have seen, and
blessed her: yea, the Queens and Concubines, and they praised her.

Verse. 10. Who is she that looks forth as the morning] This is the
commendation that the Queens and Concubines give her: and it is expressed by
way of question: not because they doubted, but for that they admired her
excellency. See the like, Psalm. 77.13. Mic. 7.17. First, the Church is compared
to the morning, which has no full light, but mixed: so that light seems to
strive with darkness. Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, Isa.
58.8. (...)
The Hebrew word here used has its name from blackness or dimness. Next she
is said to be fair as the Moon, which is called here Lebanah, ab albedine, from
her whiteness, or bright shining. In her full the Moon is a very beautiful and
fair creature: And even in her Eclipse, though she appear dark toward the
earth, yet is she bright and radiant in that part which looks toward heaven:
So is the Church. The Papists would have this Moon always in the full: And if
she show but little light to us, or be eclipsed, they will not yield she is
the Moon. And yet (except in the Eclipse) Astronomers demonstrate that the Moon
has at all times as much light, as in the full: but oftentimes a great part of
the bright side is turned to heaven, and a lesser part to the earth: And so the
Church is ever conspicuous to Gods eye, though it appear not always so to us.
The Church waxes and waneth as the Moon, non nunquam etiam in debquio est and
aspici non potest: adeo exiguns numerus fidelium aliquando apparet. Elias
complained of his aloneness. Christ, when he came, scarce found faith upon the
earth. Papists themselves yield, that there was but Mary, and some few others,
that looked for the consolation of Israel. Christ came to his own, and his own
received him not, John 1.11. he wondered at one good Nathaniel, and sets him
forth with an Ecce admirantis. Behold an Israelite indeed. The mad multitude
cried Crucifige with one consent. The whole world went wondering after the
Beast; Revel. 13.^, 4. Of Luther it is said, Iste vir^o^iu^ orbis impetum
sustinuit, that he had all the world against him, as once Athanasius had.
Latimer saw so few good in his time, Mat. 24.12, 13
that he thought the last day had been come. Our Savior foretold that toward
that day, the love of many should wax cold, but he that endures to the end
shall be saved. Lo it is but a He, a single man (a very few) that holds
out, in comparison of the many Apostates, that fall from their own
stedfastness. Here then falls to the ground that Popish and sottish mark of the
true Church, Universality and visibility. We deny not, that the Church is a
multitude of Believers, and a Catholic company, to the which we must join our
selves: but that she is always visible and aspectable, as a City on an hill,
as the Sun in heaven, Luna sipet.
can never be proved. As the Moon, she has her wa^es, and non-appearances:
and when at the very brightest and broadest, she may be m^^^led up, and
overcast with a cloud of persecution. Such was the paucity and obscurity of
Christians in the Arrian times, that Basil cries out, An Ecclesias suas prorsus
dereliquit Dominus? Has the Lord utterly left his Churches, etc? The Ship of
the Church was then almost overwhelmed, says Hierome. The Church was not then
to be sought intectis and ex^eriori pomp* in places and external pomp, but in
dens, mines, and prisons, says Hillary. God has set the Moon lowest in the
heavens, and nearest the earth, that it might daily put us in mind of the
constancy of the one, and inconstancy of the other; herself in some sort
partaking of both.

Clear as the Sun] As having put on Christ that Sun of Righteousness, Gal.
3.27. Mal. 4.2. Rev. 12.1. The Sun is so glorious a creature, that the Heathens
over-admiring it, deified it: and from the Hebrew word Chammah here used,
called it Jupiter Hammon. The Greeks called it (...) from gnelion the most high
God. Eudoxes said, that he was made for no other purpose but to behold it: and
that he could be content to be presently burnt up by the heat of the Sun, so
he might be admitted to come so near it, as to learn the nature of it.
Chrysostom. Hom. 8. ad pop. Anti.
Chrysostom cannot but wonder, that whereas all fire naturally tends upwards,
the Sun should shoot down his rays to the earth, and send his light abroad all
below him. Christ (the Father of lights) does the like for his Spouses, Jam.
1.17. And as the Pearl by the often beating of the Sunbeams upon it, becomes
radiant and orient as the Sun it self: So does the Church, and shall do much
more when she shall appear with him in glory. Then shall the righteous shine
forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their father. Mat. 13.43. The Sun in his
strength, compared to them, shall be but as a clod of clay, or as those things
that shine in the dark, but it is only from their rottenness. Three glimpses
of this surpassing glory expected by the Saints, were seen in Moses his face
when he came from the Mount, Mar. 17.2. Mark 9.3. Luke 9.29.
in Christ's transfiguration, (when his face did shine as the Sun, his raiment
was white and glistering, so as no fuller can white them) and in St. Stevens
countenance when he stood before the Council. It should suffice for the
present that the Church looks for (or is looked for, so some render this
Text) at first, as the morning, somewhat dark and duskish: She shall be fair
as the Moon, at least, in regard of Sanctification: and for Justification, she
is clear as the Sun, so that God sees no sin in her; or if he do, yet (as the
Sun) he blots out the thick cloud as well as the cloud, the thickest mist as
well as the thinnest vapor, Isa. 44.12. And therefore to the Devil and his
Angels she must needs be terrible as an Army with Banners: 2 Cor. 10.4.
because, as she marches under the banner of Christ's mercy and love, chap.
2.4. so the weapons of her warfare are not carnal but mighty through God, etc.
and do strike as great a terror into her enemies, as once Christ did into
those ruffian soldiers that came to apprehend him; Greg. Orat. de laud Basil.
or as Basil did into Valens the Emperor, that came to disturb him when he
was in holy exercises. See the Note on v. 4. of this chapter.

Verse. 11. I went down into the garden of Nuts] Or, Nutmegs, Tremellius and
those that follow him, render it the well-dressed or pruned Gardens: These are
the particular Churches, and several Saints; Christ's mystical and spiritual
garden, that need much pruning and trimming. Of all possessions, Nulla majorem
operam requirit, says Cato, none requires so much pains to be taken with it
as a Garden or Orchard. Corn comes up and grows alone: ripeneth and comes to
perfection, the husbandman sleeping and waking, etc. ( Mark 3.) he knows not
how. But Gardens must be dressed, trimmed, pruned, pared almost every day, or
else all will be out of order. Christ therefore as a careful Gardener, (...),
Putat, purgat, amputat, weeds, lops, prunes his garden, John 15.2. Be careful
therefore (says a Worthy Divine) Christ walks in his Garden, spies how many
raw, unripe, indigested prayers, etc. hang on such a branch: What gum of pride,
what leaves or luxuriant sprigs and rotten boughs there are; and with his
pruning-knife cuts and slashes where he sees things amiss, etc. Thus he.
Neither may we think that Christ does this or any of this in ill will, but out
of singular love and faithfulness to our souls, which else would soon be
woefully overgrown with the weeds of wickedness, as a neglected garden. The
wicked, God never meddleth with (as I may so say) till he come with his ax to
hew them down to the fire: because he finds them incorrigible. Hos. 4.17.
Isa. 1.
Let him alone, faith God concerning Ephraim; And, why should ye be smitten
any more, since ye revolt more and more? They have a great deal of freedom for
present: but the end is utter extirpation. Non surget hic afflictio, Nehem.
1.9. they shall totally and finally be consumed at once.

To see the fruits of the valley] Green valley-plants: that is, the humble
spirits which tremble at Gods Word, and present him with the first ripe fruits,
which his soul desires, Mic. 7.1.

And to see whether the Vine flourished] These Vines and Pomegranates are the
faithful: who are compared to th^se trees, for the plenty and sweetness of
their fruits. Christ came to see whether the former were flowring, and the
latter budding; to see if there were any hopes of ripe fruit in due time: for
he likes not those outlandish plants, that every year bud and blossom, but
never bring any fruit to its perfection. No: when he has done all that can be
done for his Vineyard, he looks for fruit, Isa. 5.2. Matthew. 21.34. 1 Cor. 9.7.
For who, says he, planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof?
Danda igitur est opera ut hujus agricolae votis respondeamus. Answer Christ's
expectation, or else he will lay down his Basket, and take up his Axe, Luke
13.7.

Verse. 12. Or ever I was aware, my soul, etc.] Heb. I knew not. So Christ
speaks after the manner of men: And it is as if he should say, I could not
conceive that my people were in so good a forwardness, as indeed I found them;
for they have over and above answered mine expectation, being full of goodness,
as those believing Romans, chap. 15.14. filled with all knowledge, and always
abounding in the work of the Lord; from whom therefore they shall be sure to
receive a full reward, 2 John 8. Or thus; I know not, that is, I perceived not,
that the Vines flourished, the Pomegranates budded, that all was ripe and
ready; therefore I withdrew my self for a season, O my Spouse: And therein I
dealt with thee no otherwise, than as good Gardiners and Vinedressers do; who
coming (perhaps before the time of fruit) to look for fruit, and finding none,
depart for present, till a more convenient season. But that thou may know my
dear love and tender care of thy comfort, behold my haste to call thee to thy
former feelings again: for dicto citius, my soul set me on the Charrets of
Amminadib, who may seem to be some famous Charret-driver of Solomon's, that
could out-drive all the rest. There is another sense given of these words, and
perhaps a better. For by some, these are thought to be the words of the Church
confessing her ignorance: I knew not, Lord, says she, that thou wast gone
down into the Garden to do those things. I thought rather that thou had
departed in great anger against me for my negligence; and therefore I sought
thee carefully, I made out after thee with all my might; my soul made me like
the Charrets of Amminadib; Amor addidit alas, I drove furiously, till I had
found thee: I was like unto those two women in Zachary, that had wings, and
wind in their wings, chap. 5.9. This was well; that missing her Spouse, she
followed so hard after him, Psalm. 63.8. My soul cleaves after thee, says
David, thereby showing his love, constancy, and humility. But then that was not
so well: that she so far mistook Christ, as to think that he went away from
her, in deep displeasure, and kept away from her, as loathing her company: Such
hard conceits of Christ, and heavy conceits we are apt to have of our selves,
as if he had forsaken us, because we cannot presently find him (when as he
is only gone down in his Garden to prune it, or to see how things thrive
there) as it he had cast off the care of us; because, finding us too light,
he make us heavy (as there is need) with manifold temptations, 1 Cor. 11.
1 Pet. 1.6. We are therefore judged of the Lord, that we may not be
condemned with the world. He leaves us on the other side the style (as Fathers
sometimes do their children) and then helps us over, when we cry. To say God
has cast us off, because he has hid his face, is a fallacy fetched out of the
Devils Topics. Non est argumentum aversi Dei quemadmodum diabolus
interpretatu^, Lavat. in Prove. 3.
sed potius paternae ipsius benevolentiae, says learned Lavater. It is not an
argument of Gods wrath and displeasure, as the Devil would make it, but rather
of his fatherly love and affection, he hides his love, as Joseph did, out of
increasement of love. And yet how apt are we to say in this case, with those
malcontents in Malachi, In quo dilexisti nos? Wherein have thou loved us? and
with those Israelites in the Wilderness, Is God amongst us? as if that could
not be, Exodus 17.7. Judge. 6.12.
and they athirst. O my Lord, said Gideon, If the Lord be with us, why then is
all this evil befallen us? And, Lord God, (said Abraham, when he had received
many gracious promises) What will thou give me, seeing I go childless? Genesis
15.1, 2. We see then how ready the best of us are to cast the helve after the
hatchet, as they say; and, like little children, because we may not have what
we would, sullenly to say, God loves us not, and we will not have what he
thinks good to give unto us. My soul refused comfort, says he, Psalm. 77.2.
And I said, my hope and my strength is perished from the Lord, remembering mine
afflictions, and my misery, the wormwood and the gall: Lam. 3.18, 19
This our folly and fault we must confess to Christ, as the Church here does;
and beseech him, by his Spirit, to teach us better things; that we may not
mistake the cause of our calamities, and make them heavier than God meant them,
by our frowardness and impatience: Pondus ipsa jactatione incommodius fit,
says Seneca.

Verse. 13. Return, return, O Shulamite] The Church is so called of her peace
and perfection with God in Christ. Brightman gathers from this word, that the
Church of the Jews in special is meant, (the Church in general being usually
before signified by the daughters of Jerusalem) and applies it to the recalling
of the Jews, according to Romans 11.25, etc. which is yet to be fulfilled.
Solomon's wife, says another, was after his name called the Shulamite,
according to Isa. 4.1. And as Christ in this Book is named Solomon, so the
Church is called Shulamite, to show the communion that she has with him: and
therefore also the forming of the Hebrew word is rather passive than active.
That which she is again and again called upon to do, is, to return. It seems
she had so posted apace after Christ (as on swift chariots, verse. 12.) that
she had gone quite beyond him. He therefore as it were by houting and
shouting to her, calls her back. How easily we overshoot and run into
extremes, may be seen in Peter, John 13.9. and the Galatians, chap. 4. It is
best to hold the golden mean. Howbeit, as in falling forward, is nothing so
much danger as backward: so he that is earnest in good, though he may over do
and carry some things indiscreetly: yet is he far better than a lusk, or
Apostate; especially if he afterward return, and discern, and hearken to
better counsel. But some are so set upon it, that (like a man that is running
a race) though you give them never so good advice, they will not stay to hear
it. Of these the Proverb is verified, Prove. 19.2.
He that hastes with his feet, sins, Prove. 19.2. See the Note there.

That we may look upon thee] Or, contemplate thee with complacency and
delight. This is the speech of the Bridegroom and his friends. The Church
though in her fright and grief for want of her Beloved, though unveyled and
evil-intreated by the Watchmen, etc. and so not so sightly as at some other
times, yet wanted not that beauty that made her desirable: like as some faces
appear most oriently beautiful when they are most instampt with sorrow: and as
the sky is most clear after a storm.

What will ye see in the Shulamite? as it were the company of two Armies]
Ready to join battle, or maintaining Civil War within her: for in the
Christian conflict, the very same faculties are opposed; because in every
faculty the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh,
and these are contrary the one to the other: Gal. 5.17.
These maintain civil broils within the Shulamite, (as the two Babes did in
Rebecca's womb) so that she cannot do what she would. And this the Apostle
spoke by woeful experience, as appears, Romans 7.21. and 15. Something lay at the
fountain head, and stopped it. There is a continual contest with spiritual
wickednesses about heavenly privileges. (...).
Ephesians. 6.12. Put fire and water together, there is no quiet, till one of them
get the victory. So in sicknesses: Let a man have a strong disease and a strong
body, he shall never have any rest, as long as they both continue in their
strength. When Christ was born, all Jerusalem was troubled. When Paul came to
Ephesus, there arose no small stir about that way, Acts 19.23. So when grace is
wrought once, there is somewhat to do within; though till then all was jolly,
quiet. When cold Saltpeter and hot Brimstone meet, they make a great noise: so
do the flesh and spirit in their skirmishes and encounters. Now these two
duellars meet and fight in every faculty of the soul; as hot and cold do in
lukewarm water; as light and darkness meet in the morning light; or as wine
and water in a cup mixed of both. In the wicked one faculty may, and sometimes
does oppose another: as sensual appetite may resist natural reason, etc. But in
such as are sanctified, the understanding is against the understanding, the
will against the will, etc. as the sick patient both wills and nills, those
physical slibber-sauces. But Satan is not so divided against himself, Luke
11.18. No more is the flesh. It is in the Shulamite only, and in every part of
her, that this conflict is found: which makes her cry out with Rebecca
sometimes, If it be so, Why am I thus? and with Paul, Wretched creature that I
am, etc.

CHAP. VII. Verse. 1. How beautiful are thy ^eet with shoes, etc.]
BEfore he had described her from head to foot, now back again, from foot to
head; taking in ten parts of his Spouse, concerning whom (such was his love)
he thought he could never say sufficient: He begins at the lowest and most
abject part, the feet, not without admiration of them. O quam pulchri sunt
pedes tui! O how beautiful are thy feet with shoes, etc! A temporal calling
honors our profession: so some understand it. Others make the meaning to be,
the Churches being shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace; ready
pressed to run with patience the race that is set before her; To run, is active,
to run with patience, is passive. Ephesians. 6.15. Heb. 12.1.
This Princes daughter, ( Atalanta-like) can only skill of this running with
patience: as being shod with Tachash-skin, Ezekiel. 16.10. (bestowed upon her by
her Spouse, as a love-token) that is, with sound affections, and holy actions.
Whereas wicked men are carried captive by the devil, (as the Egyptians once
were by the Assyrians, Isa. 20.4.) naked and barefoot, and so perish from the
way, Psalm. 2.12.

O Princes daughter] Thou that have him for thy father, in whose hands are all
the corners of the earth, and is supreme King of the Universe. This is such a
privilege and preferment, as St. John stands amazed at, 1 John 3.1. Behold,
says he, qualem and quantum, what manner of love the Father has showed unto
us, that we should be called the sons and daughters of God Almighty, 2 Cor.
6.18. All privileges are summed up in this, and John 1.12. it is called a
power or prerogative royal: (...).
it is to be of the blood Royal of heaven: It is to be an heir of God, and
coheir with Christ. Kings can make their firstborn only heirs, as Jehosaphat,
2. Chron. 21.3. But all Gods children are firstborn, and so, higher than the
Kings of the earth, Psalm. 89.27.

The joints of thy thighs are like jewels, etc.] i. e. Thy loins are compassed
with the girdle of truth: for so some render it, The compassing of thy thighs
or loins. And here, if ever, ungirt, unblest. Gird up therefore the loins of
your minds, 1 Pet. 1.13. gird your selves and serve God, Luke 17.8. Girding
implies readiness, nimbleness, handiness, handsomeness. A loose, discinct, and
diffluent mind, is unfit for holy actions.

Verse. 2. Thy navell is like a round goblet, etc.] There be that expound this
text of the two Sacraments. The navell is Baptism that nourishes newborn
babes in the womb of the Church. See hence the use of it, even to Infants; who
can receive nourishment by the navell, though they can neither take nor chew,
nor suck meat with hand or mouth. Note this against Anabaptists (says Mr.
Cotton upon these words) this navell never wants liquor: there is a continual
matter of instruction and comfort to be fetched from Baptism against all
temptations. A Christian (says Chrysostom) should never step out of doors, or
lie down in his bed, or go into his closet, but he should remember that word,
Abrenuncio, I forsake the devil and all his works, etc. Luther tells of a
certain holy virgin, that used to quench the Devils fiery darts with the water
of Baptism: For as often as she was tempted to do any thing not beseeming her
profession, she would resist the devil, steadfast in the faith, and stop his
mouth with this short, but full answer, Christiana sum, I am a Christian, I
have been Baptized into the death of Christ, I have also put on Christ by
Baptism, I am a votary, the vows of God are upon me, etc. But what an horrible
shame is that to the Papists, and what a sore stumbling block must it needs be
to the poor Jews that live amongst them, that in Rome a Jewish maid may not be
admitted into the stews of whoredom, unless she will be first baptized? This
is related and bewailed by Espencaeus a moderate Papist. De contin. lib. 3.
cap. 4.


Thy belly is like an heap of wheat, set about with Lillies] Some understand
hereby that other Sacrament of the Lords Supper, called an heap of wheat, for
its store of excellent nourishment: and said to be set about with lillies,
that is, with Christians, white and of holy conversation. Basil calls such,
stars of the world, (...).
and flowers of the Churches. Chrysostom calls them earthly Angels: and says,
that they were Puriores coelo, purer than the heaven in their common
conversation: but especially when they came to the Lords table, that
dreadfultable, as he calls it; whereunto all must come with the best
preparation they can make, wash and be clean, wash their hands in innocence
before they compass Gods Altar: wash their hearts, Jer. 4.14. their feet, John
13.10. He that is washed (sc. for the outside) needs not save to wash his
feet, but is clean every whit. An allusion to those, that having bathed their
bodies, foul their feet by going out of the Bath, and so are fain to wash them
again. The inwards and the feet in a sacrifice were to be washed above the
rest, because the intrails contain the excrements, and the legs tread in the
dirt. The soul is apt to gather soil by meddling with earthly things, though
lawful: how much more to be defiled with the soot of sin, as if she had lain
among the pots? All Christ's Nazarites, his Votaries, must come to his feast
purer than snow, whiter than milk, etc. Lam, 4.7. since at this Sacrament they
do renew the Nuptials of Christ; and take a corporal oath to cleave close to
him with full purpose of heart all the days of their lives. As for those that
presume to come unpreparedly, that want their wedding garment, they are no
otherwise bidden to the feast of the King, than Haman was to Queen Esthers. Sin
brought to the Sacrament, petitions against a man, as Esther did against Haman
at the banquer of wine; Esth. 7.2, 6.
pick out that time, and he shall find God no less angry, than Haman did
Ahasuerus. For this is that which the Lord has said, I will be sanctified in
all them that draw near unto me. Of communicants God seems to say, as Solomon
did of Adonijah, If he show himself a worthy man, there, shall not one hair of
him fall to the earth: but if wickedness be found in him, he shall die, 1
King. 1.52.

Verse. 3. Thy two breasts are like two young roes] Fresh and lusty, even and
equal. Understand the two Testaments; hereunto resembled for their perfect
agreement, amiable proportion, and swift running all the world over in a short
time. Eusebius says, that the Doctrine of both Testaments was presently after
our Saviors resurrection carried abroad into all countries as it were, upon
Eagles wings. The like may be said of Luther and his Colleagues in Germany at
the first Reformation there, which, as lightning, was soon seen from one end of
the heaven to the other. So mightily grew the Word of God, and prevailed, Act.
19.20. See the Notes on chap. 4.5.

Verse. 4. Thy neck is as a Tower of Ivory] Most smooth, white, and upright.
Some do hereby understand Magistrates, that support the State, as the neck does
the head. I bear up the pillars of it, says David. Others will have the
Ministers meant, who being aloft in the Church, are to the same instead of
watch-towers, or towers of defense. And especially then when they are in their
pulpits (called towers in the Hebrew, Neh. 8.4.) reading and expounding Gods
law unto his people.

Thine eyes like the fish-pools in Heshbon] Glazed with tears of compunction
and compassion ( Nam faciles motus men's generosa capit) and well cleared to
look into her own heart and life. Tears instead of gems, were the ornaments of
David's bed, says Chrysostom: And surely that sweet singer never sang more
melodiously, than when his heart was broken most penitentially, Psalm. 6. and
51. Thus birds in the spring sing most sweetly when it rains most sadly: and
tears of true contrition are pillulae lucis, pills made on purpose to clear the
eyesight. When John wept, the sealed book was set open to him, Lilium lachryma
sua seritur. Light is sown for the righteous.

Thy nose is as the tower of Lebanon, etc.] Si verborum faciem consideremus,
quid poterit magis dici ridiculum? says Titleman upon the words. If we look
upon the outside only of this text, what may seem to have been spoken more
ridiculous? Is it so great a commendation to have a nose like a tower? That
which we must here-hence learn, is, that seeing Christ is now risen again, and
ascended up into heaven, we ought to bear our noses aloft, as it were:
savouring things of the Spirit of Christ, discerning things that are excellent,
and by a Spiritual sagacity, aspiring to eternity.

That looks toward Damascus] The chief City of Syria, having its name from
the bloody excursions of thieves, as Peter Martyr thinks: or else, Pet. Mart.
in 1 Reg. 16.
as others, from the blood of righteous Abel there spilled, whence the place
was called Damsech, a bag of blood.

Verse. 5. Thine head upon thee is like Carmel] This head is Christ himself: for
he is the sole head of his Church. God has put all things under his feet
(hence he is here compared to Carmel, because he is high over all) and given
him to be head over all things, (that is, over all persons) in the Church,
Ephesians. 1.18, 22. Angels are under Christ as an head of government, of
influence, of confirmation, not of redemption, as the Saints are. The Angels
are great friends to the Church, but not members of it, Heb. 2.16. The Church,
Christ sanctified and washed with his blood, Ephesians. 5.26. Not so the Angels: He
was but a poor patron of the Popes Head-ship, that said, (and as he thought,
very wisely too) that he had read in some Vocabulary that Cephas signified an
head; therefore Peter was head of the Church. But if that should have been
granted him, yet it would not follow, that the Pope is therefore so too: For
Belarmine (a better scholar by far) is forced to say, Forte non est de jure
divino Rom: Pontificem Petro succedere, Perhaps it is not by any divine right,
Lib. 2. de Romans Pontif. c. 12.
that the Pope succeeds Peter. And again, Rom: Pontificem Petro succedere non
habetur express in Scripturis, It is not expressly set down in the Scriptures,
that the Pope succeeds Peter.

And the hairs of thine head like purple] Which was the color of Kings and
Princes. The Saints (called here the hair of the Churches head, for their
number or multitude) are Princes in all lands, Psalm. 45.16. yea, they are Kings
in righteousness, as Melchisedech was a King, but somewhat obscure. Compare
Mat. 13.17. with Luke 10.24. Many righteous (says one) Many Kings (says the
other) have desired to see those things that ye see, etc.

The King is held in the galleries] i. e. There is no King in the world so
great and glorious, but might find in his heart to be tied to these walks,
and to be held prisoner in the sight of thee and thy bravery: Like as King
James (coming first into the public Library at Oxford, and viewing the
little chains wherewith each book there is tied to its place) wished, Rex
Platon. page 123.
that if ever it were his destiny to be a prisoner, that Library might be his
prison, those books his fellow prisoners, those chains his fetters. Psalm.
138.4, 5. and 119. 72. The Psalmist shows by prophesying, that even Kings,
coming to taste the excellency of the comforts of godliness, and to feel the
power of Gods Word, should sing for joy of heart, and greatly acknowledge the
excelling glory of Christ's Spouse the Church. See David's desire, Psalm. 27.4.
and 84. throughout. Constantine and Valentinian (two Emperors) called
themselves Vasallos Christi (as Socrates reports) the Vassals of Christ: and
Theodosius, another Emperor, professed, that it was more honor and comfort to
him to be membrum Ecclesiae, (...). Plutarch
quam caput Imperit, a member of the Church, than head of the Empire. Nay,
Numa, second King of Rome (though but a Heathen) held it an higher honor to
serve God, than to reign over men. Some Interpreters by the King here,
understand Christ, coveting the Churches beauty, Psalm. 45.12. and held fast
bound unto her in the bands of pure affection, of spiritual wedlock.

Verse. 6. How fair and how pleasant art thou, O love, for delight] Emphatica
haec admodum sunt, cum toties exclamatio ponatur, says one. This is a most
Emphatical exclamation, proceeding from admiration; and importing, that all
that he could say of her, was too little; Well might the Prophet say, As the
Bridegroom rejoices over his Bride, so does thy God over thee, Isa. 62.5.
Hence he can make no end here of commending her: but, having finished one
praise, he presently begins another. This yields infinite matter of comfort to
the Saints, that Christ loves them so dearly, prizeth them so highly, praises
them so heartily: Howbeit, let not them hereupon turn again to folly, Psalm.
85.8. or give way to carnal security. Laetemur in domino, sed caveamus a
recidivo. Argue not from mercy to liberty, (that is the Devils Logic) but from
mercy to duty, as those good souls do, Ezra 9.13, 14. Having received such and
such, both privative and positive favors, should we again break thy
commandments? There is so much unthankfulness and dis-ingenuity in such an
entertainment of mercy, that holy Ezra thinks heaven and earth would be
ashamed of it; Shall we continue in sin that grace may abound, says the
Apostle, Romans 6.1? And it is as if he should say, that were most unreasonable,
and to a good heart, impossible. A man may as well say, the sea burns, or fire
cools, as that assurance of Christ's love breeds careless and loose living: They
that hold so, know not the compulsive power of Christ's love, 2 Cor. 5.14. nor
what belongs to the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18.

Verse. 7. This thy feature is like to a palm-tree] This thy whole stature and
feature of body (that has been already pourtraied and described particularly
and piecemeal) is like to a palm tree, strong and straight, fresh and
flourishing; so that thou may say with the palm in the Emblem, Nec premor,
nec perimor. Pliny, Aristotle, Plutarch, and Gellius, have written of the
palm tree, that it is always green, bearing pleasant fruit: and that it will
not bow downward or grow crooked, though heavy weights be hanged upon it. The
Church is all this and more, ever green, even in the winter of affliction, when
the oak loses her leaves. (See the Note on chap. 1.16.) full of the fruits of
righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God,
Phil. 1.11. (See the Notes on chap. 4.14. and 6.11.) Neither can she be long
kept under by any pressure of persecution or heavy affliction: Premi potest,
opprimi non potest. As Paul, when stoned, started up with Sic petitur coelum,
Sic, Sic oportet intrare. Tyrants might curse the Saints (as he did that cried
out to those ancient Confessors, O miseri, number vobis desunt restes and rupes?
O wretches, cannot you hang or drown your selves, but that I must be thus
troubled with you to put you to death?) but crush them they never could. The
valor of the patients, the savageness of the persecutors have striven
together, till both exceeding nature and belief, bred wonder and astonishment
in beholders and readers. Hence Trajan forbade Pliny to seek after Christians:
But if any were brought to him, to punish them. Antoninus Pius set forth an
Edict in Asia, that no Christian should be persecuted. For, said he, it is
their joy to dye, they are conquerours, and do overcome you, etc.

Trucidabantur and multiplicabantur, says Augustine of the ancient Martyrs:
they were Martyred, and yet they were multiplied. Plures efficimur quoties
metimur, says Tertullian, the more we are cropped, the more we are increased; as
the Lilly is increased by its own juice that flows from it. Plin.
Hence, Rev. 7.9. the Saints, that by their victorious faith overcame the
world, are brought in with palm-branches in their hands, in token of victory.
Plutarch tells us, that the Babylonians made three hundred and sixty
commodities of the palm tree: and did therefore very highly honor it. The
world has a great deal of benefit by the Church, could they but see it. (For
Absque stationibus non staret mandus, were it not for the Saints, a short work
would the Lord make upon the earth, and cut it short in righteousness, Romans
9.28.) And great is the gain of godliness; even an hundred fold here, and life
eternal hereafter. Who would not then turn spiritual merchant? who would not
pass from strength to strength, and flourish in Gods house like a palm tree,
Psalm. 29.12.
till he attain to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ? Ephesians.
4.13.

And thy breasts to clusters of grapes] Not well-fashioned only, as Ezekiel.
16.7. but full-strutting with milk, yea, with wine, plenty and dainty, to lay
hunger, and slake thirst, to nourish and cherish her children, even as the Lord
does the Church. Ephesians. 5.29. See the Note on chap. 4.5.

Verse. 8. I said, I will go up to the palm tree, etc.] I said it, and I will do
it: for Christi dicere est facere, together with Christ's word there goes forth
a power, as it did, Luke 5.17. David said he would confess his sins, and take
heed to his ways, Psalm. 32.5. and 39.1. and accordingly he did it. Shall
Christ purpose and promise mercy to his people, and not perform it? Is he yea
and nay? 2 Cor. 1.19. can he say and unsay? does not the constant experience
of all ages fully confute any such fond conceit of him? The Saints will not
lie, Isa. 63.8. Christ cannot, Tit. 1.2. He will not suffer his faithfulness
to fail, nor alter the thing that is gone out of his lips, (...).
Psalm. 89.33. All his sayings are the issue of a most faithful and right will,
void of all insincerity and falsehood. Now when Christ promises to climb his
palm tree, and to take hold of the boughs thereof, he means, that he will
dwell most familiarly with his Church, even in the branches thereof: pruning
and trimming it, and accepting the fruits of his Spirit in his Spouse. Or thus,
He will so join himself unto his Church, as he may cause her to be fruitful,
he will lay hold on her boughs, which are very fit, and apt to climb; so
covertly and elegantly noting the work of spiritual generation. The effect
follows.

Now also thy breasts shall be as clusters of the vine] Whatsoever they have
been heretofore, now at this time, and for ever hereafter they shall be
delightful to me, and nourishable to thy children, who shall suck and be
satisfied, Isa. 66.11. Albeit some Interpreters of good note conceive, that all
this is nothing else but a figurative description of Christ's perfect
conjunction with his Church in the Kingdom of heaven, and of the unspeakable
pleasure which Christ will take in her for ever.

And the smell of thy nose like apples] i. e. The breath that comes out of thy
nostrils is sweet as spice-apples. The breath that the Church draws into her
lungs, and sends out again, is the spirit of grace: without which she can as
little live, as we can without air. This sweet Spirit is the joy of her heart,
and the breath of her nostrils: and thereby she draws many into her company.
If that be true that one here notes, that the fruit of the palm partaketh of
the nature, both of the grape, having a sweet and pleasant juice, and of the
apple, for pleasant meat, it may well signify, that the Word of God is both
meat and drink to the soul.

Verse. 9. And the roof of thy mouth like the best vine] Her word and doctrine
(for the palate is an instrument of speech) often before commended by Christ,
Instrumenta novem, etc.
and here again, like as she comes over it in him the second time, chap.
3.13.16. See the Note there. This he resembles to the best, and most generous
wine: Such the Word of Gods grace is to those that have Spiritual palates, that
do not carry fell in aure, their galls in their ears, (as some creatures are
said to do) that have their ears healed, (as Demosthenes said of his Athenians)
and their inward senses habitually exercised to discern good and evil. The
doctrine of the Church seems to some bitter and grievous: it goes down like
the waters of Marah, Pausanias, Aristot.
or that water that caused the curse in case of jealousy, Numb. 5. It becomes
a savor of death unto him, as the viper is killed with palm-branches, and
vultures with oil of roses. But this is merely their own fault; For does not my
Word do good to them that are good? says the Lord, Micah 2.6. Excellently St.
Austin, Adversarius est nobis, quamdin sumus and ipsi nobis: quamdiu tu tibi
inimicus es, inimicum habebis sermonem Dei. Gods Word is an enemy to none but
to such as are enemies to themselves, and sinners against their own souls. This
holy word in the mouths of Gods Ministers is like Moses his rod; which, while
held in his hand, flourished, and brought forth almonds: but being cast to the
ground, it became a serpent. The application is easy. See the Note on chap.
1.2.

For my Beloved] These are Christ's words: but he speaks as if the Church
spoke; to show her great affection, that had dedicated all her good things to
him. Some read it thus, which goes straight to my well-beloved, q. d. It is
such excellent wine as I would wish it, or send it even to the dearest and best
friend I have, Prove. 23.31.
even to her that I love as my self, if not before my self. Or thus, which
springs and sparkles in the cup.

1 Cor. 1.
Causing the lips of those that are a sleep to speak] Utterance is called a
gift, and dumb Christians are blameworthy as well as dumb Ministers. We
should all strive to an holy ability and dexterity of savoury discourse. And
for this end, the Word of Christ should dwell richly in us in all wisdom: our
hearts should endite a good matter, that our tongues might be as the pen of a
ready writer. Let there be a good treasure within in our hearts, and the law
of kindness will soon be in our lips: for out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks. Graceless men are gagd by the devil, they cannot so much as
lisp out one syllable of good language; if they attempt it, they show
themselves but bunglers, and say Sibbolath for Shibboleth: you may soon see
they speak by rote, and not by experience. But those that have well drunk of
this wine of the Word, made effectual by the Spirit, talk lustily, Act. 2.4,
11, 14
yea, their tongues never lin talking and preaching forth the praises of him
who has drawn them out of darkness into his marvelous light: they speak as the
Spirit gives them utterance. Those that were in a dead sleep of sin, are soon
set a work to awake and sing, Isa. 26.19. This should stir us up to study the
Word of God, and there-hence to learn language. The hundredth and nineteenth
Psalm is by David set before it as a Poem of commendation, mentioning it in
every verse, testimonies, laws, statutes, etc. Like as when a book is set
forth, verses of commendation are often prefixed. Such another, but far shorter
is that, Psalm. 19. verse. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. The Holy Ghost does so much the more
highly there extol it, because men are wont to have it in very light account,
and to hold it a disparagement, to be eloquent and mighty in the Scriptures.

Verse. 10. I am my Beloveds] I see I am so, says the Spouse, by that ample
commendation that he has now again given me, notwithstanding all my former
failings in duty toward him. There fall out some fallings out betwixt married
couples sometimes; but then they fall in again: they cannot fadge together
happily so well at first, but being well pieced again, they love better than
before: So is it here, The sins we commit make no change in Christ, no
substantial alteration. For, first, upon the same grounds he chose us, he
loves us still: he chose us freely because he would; he chose us for his
love, and loves us for his choice. Secondly, there is the same bent of mind
and frame of heart toward him remains in us still. And therefore, as there is
a transient act of sin passes from us, so a transient act of chastisement for
sin may pass from him. Christ looked upon Peter, after his denial, with the
same familiarity as before. Jehoshuah the High Priest, though he were so ill
clothed, and had Satan at his right hand to accuse him, yet he stood before
the Angel, Zech. 3.1. Christ did not abhor his presence, nor reject his
service. Ephraim repenting after his revolt, is re-entertained with all
sweetness, Jer. 31.20. See the Note on chap. 2.16. and 6.3.

And his desire is toward mee] His desirous affection, he loves me as
passionately as any woman does her dearest husband, Genesis 3.16. his love to me
is wonderful, passing the love of women; His desire is so toward me, that as
Livia, by obeying her husband Augustus, commanded him, and might have what she
would of him: so may I of Christ. Compare Genesis 4.7. with Isa. 45.11. The Church
here well understood the latitude of that royal charter: and makes it a prop to
her Faith, and a pledge for her perseverance.

Verse. 11. Come my Beloved, let us go forth into the field] Being now fully
assured of Christ's love, she falls a praying; she makes five requests unto
him in a breath as it were. 1 That he would come. 2 Go forth with her into the
field. 3 Lodge with her in the villages. 4 Get up early to the vineyards. 5 See
if the vine flourish, pomegranates bud, etc. And further promises, that there
she will give him her loves. Assurance of Christ's love is the sweetmeats of
the feast of a good conscience, said Father Latimer. Now it were to be wished,
that every good soul whiles it is banqueting with the Lord Christ by full
assurance (as once Esther did with Ahasuerus) would seasonably bethink it self
what special requests it has to make unto him, what Hamans to hang up, what
sturdy lusts to subdue, what holy boons to beg, etc. How sure might they be to
have what they would, even to the whole of his Kingdom! Suitours at Court
observe their mollissima fandi Tempora, their fittest opportunities of
speaking, and they speed accordingly. A Courtier gets more many times by one
suit, than a tradesman can do with twenty years pains-taking: So a faithful
prayer, made in a fit season, in a time when God may be found, (as David has
it) is very successful. Psalm. 32.6.
Beggary here is the best trade, as one said; Common beggary is indeed the
easiest and poorest trade: but prayer is the hardest and richest. The first
thing that she here begs of him, is, that he would come, and that quickly: and
this we all daily pray, Thy Kingdom come, both that of grace, and the other
of glory. The Jews also, in their expectation of a Messiah, pray almost in
every prayer they make, Thy Kingdom come, and that Bimherah Bejamenu, quickly,
even in our days; that we may behold the King in his beauty. Let our hearts
desire and prayer to God be for those poor seduced souls, that they may be
saved: And the rather, because they have a zeal of God and his Kingdom, but not
according to knowledge, Romans 10.1, 2. As also, because their Progenitors
prayed hard for us: and so some take it to be the sense of the Spouses second
request here. Let us go forth into the field, that is, into the world, (for the
field in the parable is the world, Mat. 13.38.) let us propagate the Gospel all
abroad, and send forth such as may teach all nations, Mat. 28.19. and reveal
the mystery that has been kept secret since the world began, that obedience
may be every where yielded to the faith. Romans 16.25, 26.

Let us lodge in the villages] That is, in the particular Churches: for, Tom.
3. p. 81.
vilissimus pagus, est palatium eburneum, in quo est Pastor and credentes
aliqui, says Luther: the poorest village is to Christ and his Spouse an ivory
palace, if there be but in it a godly Minister, and some few believers.
Melanchthon going once upon some great service for the Church of Christ, and
having many fears of the good success of his business, was much cheared up and
confirmed by a company of poor women and children, Selneccer: paedag. Christ.
whom he found praying together for the laboring Church, and casting it by
faith into Christ's everlasting arms.

Verse. 12. Let us get up early to the Vineyards] Heb. Let us morning it: A.
Gel. l. 3. c. 29
Manicemus (that is Gellius his word) Let Us up betime, and at it. Here she
promises not to be found henceforth, unready, drowsy, sluggish: but night
and day to watch and attend that hour, and to enquire and learn out all the
signs and tokens when she may come to be perfectly knit to Christ. But it is
worthy our observation, that she would neither go any way, or do any thing
without Christ's company: for she had lately felt the grief of being without
him, though but for a small moment, as the Prophet has it. She had felt her
self that while in the suburbs of hell, as it were. She therefore holds him as
fast as the restored cripple did Peter and John, Acts 3.11. she cleaves as
close to him, as Ruth did to Naomi, or Elisha did to his master Elijah, when
now he knew he should be taken from his head, 2 Kin. 2.2. She seems here to
speak to Christ, as once Barach did to Deborah, If thou will go with me, Judge.
4.8.
then I will go: but if thou will not go with me, I will not go. And whereas
she seems (as the forwarder of the two) to excite and exhort Christ to get
up early, to visit the Vines, etc. we may not imagine any unwillingness in him
to the performance of his Office, as Shepherd and Bishop of our souls; 1 Pet.
2.25.
or any need on his part to be quickened and counseled by her, (as Manoah was
by his wife, or Aquila by Priscilla, whence she is set before him, Romans 16.3.)
for who has directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his counselor, has
taught him? Isa. 40.13. But the Church requesteth these things of Christ for
her own encouragement, and further benefit; that having his continual presence
and fellowship, she may the more cheerfully and successefully go on with her
duty. So when we press God with arguments in prayer, it is not so much to
persuade him to help us, (for the Father himself loves you, John 16.27. Homer.
says Christ, and needs no arguments (...) to incite or entice him, to show us
mercy) as to persuade our own hearts to more faith, love, humility, etc. that
we may be in a capacity to receive that mercy, that of his own accord he has
for us; and even waits to confer upon us. Isa. 30.18. Look how a man that would
make a bladder capacious to hold sweet spices, he blows it, and rubs it, and
blows it, and rubs it many times over, to make it hold the more: so it is here.
And as when a man that is in a ship plucks a rock, it seems as if he plucked
the rock nearer the ship, when as in very deed, the ship is plucked nearer the
rock: So when Gods people think they draw God to them with their arguments, in
truth they draw themselves nearer to God; who sometimes ascribes that to us
which is his own work, Aug.
that we may abound more and more. Certum est nos facere quod facimus, sed ille
facit ut faciamus: True it is, that we do what we do, but it is he that
gives us to do what we do in his service. The bowls of the Candle-stick had
no oil, but that which dropped from the Olive-branches.

Whether the tender grape appear] Heb. open, and so prove it self to be a
grape; which in the bud can hardly be discerned. True grace may be doubted of
so long as it is small and feeble. Weak things are often so obscured with their
contraries, that it remains uncertain, whether they be or no. Mark 9.24.
He that cried out, and that with tears, I believe, Lord help mine unbeleef,
(that is, my weak faith,) could not well tell whether he had any faith at all
or not. Add growth to grace, and it will be out of question. Mean while that is
a sweet promise, Isa. 44.3. I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my
blessing upon thy buds. And again, Isa. 65.8. Thus says the Lord; As the new
wine is found in the Cluster, and one says, Destroy it not, for a blessing is
in it: so will I do for my servants sake, that I may not destroy them all.

And the Pomegranates bud forth] See the note on chap. 4.13.

There will I give thee my loves] i. e. The fruition of my graces, and fruits
of thy faith, thanks, good works, etc. And this is that which Christ requires
of us all: viz. that we bestow all our loves upon him, even the liveliest and
warmest of our affections. Love him we must truly, that there be no halting,
and totally, that there be no halving: Hold him we must, better, dearer to us
than ten sons, etc. and communicate all our loves to him as best worthy: What
he gives us back again, we may bestow upon others; we may love other things,
but no otherwise than as they convey love to us from Christ, and may be means
of drawing our affections unto Christ. We must love all things else as they
have a beam of Christ in them, and may lead us to him: accounting that we
rightly love our selves no further, than we love the Lord Jesus Christ with a
love of complacency.

Verse. 13. The Mandrakes give a smell] Loves and Mandrakes grow both upon one
Hebrew root: and Tremellius renders it not Mandrakes, out lovely flowers,
yielding a savor, pleasant to the eye, and sweet to the smell. The Chaldee
Paraphrast calls it Balsam. Legesis August. lib. 22. contra Faust. Manichaeum
cap. 56. Jun: in Genes. 30.14. Drus. in fine comment in Ruth. Aben-ezra says,
that Mandrakes are fragrant, and yield a pleasant favor, that they have head
and hands like unto a man. But how they should be good to cause conception, he
wondreth, since by nature they are cold. Austin says, that he made trial, and
could not find any such operation to be in them, and that Rachel coveted them
merely for their rarity, beauty, and sweetness. There is enough of these in the
Church to draw all hearts unto her; but that many men have brawny breasts, and
horny heart strings.

And at our gates are all manner of pleasants] Or, delicacies, precious and
pleasant commodities, whether fruits, metals, gems, jewels, quicquid in
deliciis habetur, whatsoever is excellent and exquisite in any kind. This is
the import of the Hebrew word. There is nothing of any worth but it is to be
found in the Church. Her wise Merchants, not content with the pearl of price,
seek out other goodly pearls, common gifts, which also have their use and
excellency, Mat. 13.45, 46. they learn to maintain good works, or honest
professions for necessary uses; these things are good and profitable to men,
Tit. 3.8, 14. Some think that the Holy Ghost here alludeth to the order of old
(and still in use) of strawing the wedding-house doors with sweet smelling
flowers. Others to the customs of those that have Orchards, to lay up their
fruits over the gate house.

New and old] As a good storer that has plenty and variety wherewith to please
all palates, new for delights, and old for wholesomeness. (...). Mat. 13.52.
Extrudit copios^ and alacriter.
The good Scribe, well instructed to the Kingdom of heaven, throws out of
his treasury things new and old, new for the nice, and old for the stronger
stomach. Some delight in the sweetness of things, (as in new wine). David tells
them, the Word is sweeter than live-hony dropping from the honeycomb. Others
say, the old is better, are all for profit, as elder people, he tells them
there, it is better than gold, Psalm. 19. In the Churches storehouse, men shall
be sure to meet with all that heart can wish, or need require.

Which I have laid up for thee, Oh my Beloved] Propter te, Domine, propter te,
(...), dixit ille Graculus Augusto.
is the Churches Motto. As all his springs are in her, and all his offices and
efficacies for her, so all that she has and is, is only for him, and a great
deal more she could beteem him. Let Ephraim (that empty vine) bear fruit to
himself. Hos. 10.1. and those hypocrites, Zech. 7.5. fast to themselves;
Christ's hidden ones hide all for him, set up and seek him in all they do or
suffer, are wholly devoted to his sole service.

CHAP. VIII. Verse. 1. O that thou were as my Brother]
HEb. Who will give thee for a Brother to mee] q. d. Men may give me many
other things, but God alone can give me thy brotherhood, love, and communion,
which I wish above all, says the Bride here. Ephesians. 1.3.
Spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ are chiefly to be desired
and endeavored after. Quaerito primum bona animi, says Philosophy, Seek first
the good things of the mind. Quarito primum regnum Dei, says Divinity, Seek
ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness: and then other things
shall seek you, shall be cast into the bargain, as it were. Let the Many say,
Who will sheir any good? David prefers one cast of Gods countenance before all
the worlds wealth, Aug. de pec. mort. l. 1. c. 11.
Psalm. 4.7. Oh that Ishmael might live in thy sight, said Abraham, Oh that he
might be written among the living in Jerusalem, be an heir of life truly so
called, for, Aeterna vita vera vita! The Lord make his face to shine upon you,
said the Priests to the people, Numb. 6. Grace be to you, and peace, says
Paul; what ever else be wanting. Covet earnestly the best things, says he, 1
Cor. 12.13. With all thy getting get understanding, says Solomon, Prove. 4.7.
He desired wisdom above wealth: and dispatched the Temple in seven years
space, when as he was thirteen years ere he finished his own house; as
holding it a work of less haste and care. Elisha begs a double portion: the
Spouse ( chap. 2. of this Book) calls for whole flagons: nothing less would
content her. The Prophet Isaiah chides men for laying out their money on that
which is not bread, Isa. 55.1, 2.
or but panis lapidosus, bread made of gravel: And our Savior bids, labor
not for the meat that perishes, but for the meat that endures to eternal
life, John 6.27. Mors privare potest opibus, non operibus: these dye not with
us, (as Hortensiu his orations did with him) but follow us to heaven when we
dye, and shall be found to praise, honor and glory, at that day, 1 Pet. 1.7.
Hence the Church so earnestly desires here to have more close conjunction and
consociation with Christ as a brother: yea, as a most natural and kinde-hearted
brother, that had sucked the breasts of her mother, that had been her
collactaneus, and so, more inwardly affected toward her, as Joseph was toward
his brother Benjamin, Genesis 43.29, 30, 34. In sum: she wishes that she may
feel Christ dwelling in her heart: that he would remove all impediments of
their happy conjunction, and hasten the accomplishment thereof in heaven.

When I should find thee without (or at the door) I would kiss thee] As the
Bride was wont to do the Bridegroom, receiving and welcoming him with all
comely familiarity and sweetness. Kiss the son, and covet his kisses, Psalm.
2.12. Cant. 1.2. Be not ashamed or afraid to perform all duties of an holy
love, and sound obedience toward him. He was not ashamed of (...) when we had
never a rag to our backs, Ezekiel. 16. He stretched the ski^ (...) love over us,
and said unto us, Live: when he might well enough have loathed to look on us,
ib. verse. 6.

Yet I should not be despised] Heb. they should not despise me. Or if they
did, yet they should not dishearten me from duty. 2 Samuel 6.22.
If this be to be vile, I will be yet more vile, said David to his mocking
M^chal. We may not suffer our selves to be mocked out of our Religion. Barren
Michal has too many sons, that scorn the holy habit and exercises; but they
shall be plagued, as their mother was with continual fruitlesness, they shall
also one day ( viz. when they are in hell) behold those with envy, whom now
they behold with scorn: as the scoffers of the old world, from the tops of the
mountains that could not save them, behold Noah's Ark floating upon the waters.
It is as impossible to avoid, as necessary to contemn the lash of lewd tongues,
whether by bitter scoffs or scurrilous invectives; as full of scorn commonly
as the wit of malice can make them. The Church here resolves so to deport her
self, as that none shall have cause to contemn her: or if they do, bravely to
slight all contumelies and contempts for her conscience; taking them as crowns
and confirmations of her conformity to Christ.

Verse. 2. I would lead thee and bring thee] With solemnity and joy. She speaks
it twice, as fully resolved to do it; and hereby to bind her self more
straightly to a performnce; I would not only kiss thee at the door, but bring
thee into the house. Many are strict abroad, and in company, but too too loose
at home, and in their own houses: follow these stage players to their crying
rooms where they dis-robe themselves, and you shall soon see what they are.
Heed must be taken, say the very Heathen, Aedibus in propriis quae prava aut
recta gerantur. Religion admits not of that distinction between a good man and
a good Governor. If you will be for the public, be good in private: bear
your own fruit, work in your own hives, reform your own hearts, and houses, man
your own Oars, and make good your own standing. Cato could say, Plut. Dio. Genesis
Josh. 24.14. Curam exegeris, non curationem. Bern.
that he could pardon all men's faults but his own: And Augustus going about to
redress some abuses in the State, was upbraided with his own domestical
disorders. Abraham had a well ordered family: so had Joshua, David, Psalm. 101.
And although his house were not so with God, yet that was all his desire, 2 Samuel 23.5. and he well knew that it was the care, not the cure of his charge
that he stood charged with. Noah may bring the Lord Christ into his house, and
labor to set him up in the hearts of his children, speaking perswasively to
that purpose: But when all is done, God must persuade Japheth, and speak to his
heart. Now this the Lord does, Monendo potius quam minando, docendo quam
ducendo. Hence the Church in the next words cries out,

Thou shall instruct mee] For so the Text is to be rendered. Thou who art the
Arch-Prophet, a Teacher sent from God, anointed and appointed for the purpose
to put Divine learning into us, Thou shall instruct or learn us. Now, quando
Christus magister: quam cito descitur quod docetur? says Austin. Christ is a
quick teacher; and all his scholars are very forwardly. (...) John 6.45.
Nescit tarda molimina gratia Spiritus Sancti, says Ambrose. Gods people must
needs be well taught, because they are all taught of God.

I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine] Such as we call Ipocras, which,
besides the nature and strength of the wine it self, has by the mixture of
many spices with it, great power and pleasantness, to the comforting of the
heart, and satisfying of the smell. And this was the (...) Minerval,
recompense, that Christ should have for teaching her: she resolves to
testify her thankfulness by her obedience: rendering unto him such fruits of
faith and holiness, as should be sweetened and spicened with his own Spirit in
her, and should exceedingly delight him. Contrary to these (...), these dainty
and goodly fruits, are those nasty and naughty ones, Rev. 18.14.
Isa. 5.4. that (besides their stench) are so offensive to the taste, that they
cannot be eaten, they are so naught, Jer. 24.2. Wicked men's grapes are of
gall, and their Wine is venom, Deuteronomy. 32.32, 33. both their natures and
practices are abominable.

Verse. 3. His left hand should be under my head] Or prayer-wise, Let his left
hand, etc. Conscious and sensible of her own inability, she begs the benefit
of both Christ's hands, and all little enough: his whole power and providence to
support and relieve her.

Vna est in tenui mihi re medicina, Jehova
Cor patrium, os verax, omnipotensque manus.
See the Note on chap. 2.6.

Verse. 4. I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem] See the Note on chap. 2.7.

Why should you stir up] What shall you get by it? or what reason can ye give
for it? But lust is headlong, and considers not what an evil and bitter thing
sin is. Besides, it so blears the understanding, Jer. 2.19.
that a man shall think he has reason to be mad, and that there is great
sense in sinning.

Verse. 5. Who is this that comes up from the wilderness] See the Note on chap.
3.6. There are continual ascensions in the hearts of Gods people, whiles here.
And whereas the men of this world, which have their portion here, ( Psalm.
17.14.) animas etiam incarnaverunt, as Bernard complains, and are born
downward to hell by their own weight; the Saints of God are ever aspiring, and
do groan being burdened; as knowing that whilst they are at home in the body,
(such an home as it is) they are absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.4, 6.
from their heavenly home. Either Egypt was not Moses his home, or but a
miserable one: and yet in reference to it, he called his son born in Midian,
Gershom, i. e. a stranger there. If he so thought of this Egyptian home, where
was nothing but bondage and tyranny, what marvel though the Saints think of
that home of theirs above, (and hasten to it in their affections) where is
nothing but rest and blessedness?

Leaning upon her Beloved] For otherwise she could not ascend, as unable to
sustain her steps, Jer. 10.23. The Church, as the Vine, is the most fruitful,
but the weakest of all trees, and must have a supporter: hence she leans upon
her Beloved: Brightman. Sunt qui exponunt Delicians.
which phrase, beside recumbency, denotes a more than ordinary familiarity, qua
solent amantes insinus amasiorum sc projicere, like as Lovers throw themselves
sometimes into their sweet-hearts arms or bosoms. Now thus to lean upon
Christ, is an act of faith, of the faith of Gods Elect. Others seem to lean
upon Christ, but it is no otherwise than as the Apricock which leans against
the walls, but is fast rooted in the earth. So these lean upon Christ for
Salvation, but are rooted in the world, in pride, filthiness, etc. and though
they make some assaies, yet like the door upon the hinges, they will not come
off. See the folly and confidence of these wretched men, (the same Hebrew word
signifies both; and may both ways be taken, Psalm. 49.13.) graphically
described by the Prophet, Mich. 3.11. The heads thereof judge for reward, and
the Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for money:
yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? none evil
can come upon us. These men perish by catching at their own catch, hanging on
their own fancy, making a bridge of their own shadow: they will not otherwise
believe but that Christ is their sweet Savior, and so doubt not but they are
safe, when it is no such matter. They grow aged and crooked with such false
conceits, and can seldom or never be set straight again. These must know,
that to rely upon Christ, is to be utterly unbottomed of a man's self, and of
every creature: and so to lean upon Christ alone, that if he fail, thou
sinkest; if he set not in, thou art lost for ever. Papists think, that as he
that stands on two firm branches of a tree is surer than he that stands
upon one: so he that trusts to Christ and his own works too. But it must be
considered, first, that he which looks to be justified by the law, is
fallen from grace: Christ is of no effect unto him, Gal. 5.4. He will not
mingle his purple-blood with our puddle-stuff, his rich robes with our tattered
rags, his Eagles feathers with our Pigeons plumes. There can be but one Sun in
heaven (Sol quasi Solus) and they set up rush candles to the Sun, that join
other Saviors to this Sun of righteousness. Secondly, he that has one foot
on a firm branch, another on a rotten one, stands not so sure, as if wholly on
that which is sound: Away then with all such mock-stays: See the fruit of
creature-confidence, Job 6.17. and 8.15. and know, that no man trusts Christ at
all, that trusts him not alone. He that stands with one foot on a rock, and
another foot on a quick-sand, will sink and perish as certainly, as he that
stands with both feet on a quick-sand. See Psalm. 6.2.2.5, 6.

I raised thee up under the Apple Tree, etc.] Here the Bride answers to the
Bridegrooms question, Who is this, or What woman is this that comes up from
the Wilderness, etc? that goes in a right line to God, leaning on her Beloved?
that will not break the hedge of any commandment to avoid any piece of foul
way? I am she, says the Church, even the very same that raised thee up under
the apple tree, etc. viz. by mine earnest prayers. When thou wast asleep under
the apple tree, and I had straightly charged the Damsels of Jerusalem not to
disquiet thee by their sins, yet I took the boldness to arouse thee, and say,
as Psalm. 44.23. Awake, why sleep thou, O Lord? arise, cast us not off for
ever; and with those drowning Disciples, Master, earest thou not that we
perish? Sometimes (says one) God seems to lose his mercy, and then we must
find it for him, as Isa. 63.10. sometimes to sleep, and then we must waken
him, quicken him, Psalm. 40.17. Isa. 62.7. God will come, but he will have his
peoples prayers lead him, Dan. 10.12. I come for thy Word. Christ himself is
the apple tree here mentioned, as Cant. 2.3. Though there are that interpret it
of the Cross, that tree whereon he bare our sins in his own body, 1 Pet. 2.24.
Others better, of the tree of offense, the forbidden fruit, Genesis 2. And that
when Eve tasted of that fruit (which they here-hence conclude to have been an
apple, though the word be more general, Nux enim pomum dicitur) then, as
Christ's mother, she brought him forth by believing the promise there made unto
her, that Messiah of her seed should break the Serpents head. Look how the
Virgin Mary conceived Christ when she yielded her assent: When the Angel spoke
to her, what said she presently? Be it as thou have said, Let it be even so,
she yielded her assent to the promise, that she should conceive a son, and
she did conceive him: So Eve believed the promise of pardon and salvation,
she saw it afar off, was persuaded of it, and embraced it, Heb. 11.13. and is
therefore said here to bear and bring forth Christ, yea, to travel of him with
sorrow, as the word signifies: for as there is no other birth without pain, so
neither is the new birth. Those that have passed through the narrow womb of
repentance, and been born again, will say as much, See Isa. 26.17. If God brake
David's bones, and the Angels back (says one) he will break thy heart too, if
ever he save thee. No sound heart ever went to heaven as (in another sense)
none but sound could ever come thither. Cor integrum cor scissum. Rent your
hearts, etc.

Verse. 6. Set me as a seal upon thine heart] i. e. Be thou as a merciful and
faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, Heb. 2.17. with Exodus 28.21,
29. Remember me for good, and make mention of me to thy Father. Have me also
in precious esteem, as great men have the signets upon their right hands; and
as whatsoever is sealed with a seal, that is excellent in its own kind, as
Isa. 28.25. hordeum signatum, excellent barley. Christ wears his people as a
signet, or as great men wear their jewels, to make him glorious in the eyes of
men; neither will he be plundered of them by the Churches enemies: to touch
them, Zech. 2.8.
is to touch the apple of his eye, that tenderest piece of the tenderest part.
The Proverb is, Oculus and fama non patiuntur jocos, The eye and the good name
can bear with no jests. As the Saints are in Christ's heart, ad commoriendum and
convivendum, so they are also upon his arm, so that if they do but come and say
in any danger or difficulty, Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord,
awake as in the ancient days, etc. Isa. 51.9. he will redeem his people with
his arm, Psalm. 77.15. yea, with his out-stretcht arm, Exodus 6.6. that is, with
might and open manifestation of his love: he will awake as one out of sleep,
and like a man that shouteth by reason of wine, Psalm. 78.65.

For love is strong as death] And yet death is so strong, that it passes over
all men, Romans 5.12. and devoureth them as sheep, Psalm. 49.14. as a rot it
over-runneth the whole flock, having for its Motto, Nulli cedo, I yield to
none: Only love is strong as death, nay, stronger. Jonathan would have died
for the love of David, David of Absalom. Arsinoe interposed her self between
the Murderers weapons sent by Ptolomy her brother, to kill her children.
Priscilla and Aquila for St. Paul's life laid down their own necks, Romans 16.4.
Paul was in deaths often for Jesus sake. Those primitive Martyrs loved not
their lives unto the death, Rev. 12.11. Certatim gloriosa in certamina
ruebatur, says Sulpitius, they were prodigal of their dearest lives, and even
ambitious of Martyrdom; that thereby they might seal up their entire love to
the Lord Jesus. If every hair of mine head were a man, Act. and Mon. fol. 1438.
I would suffer death in the opinion and faith that I am now in, said John
Ardley Martyr to Bishop Bonner. Ignis, crux, bestiarum conflictationes, ossium
distractiones, etc. Let me suffer fire, cross, breaking of my bones,
quartering of my members, crushing of my body, and all the torments that men or
devils can devise, so I may enjoy my Lord Jesus Christ, said holy Ignatius;
whose Motto was, Amor meus crucifixus, my love was crucified. Love is it self a
passion, and delights to show it self in suffering for the party beloved; yea,
though it were to pass through a thousand deaths for his sake. And this is here
yielded as a reason why the Spouse first awakened Christ, and now desires to
be so nearly knit unto him, to be set as a seal upon his hand, yea, upon his
heart, the love of Christ constrained her, and lay so hard upon her, that she
could do no less than beg such a boon of him, than covet such a courtesy, as a
compensation of her dearest love to him. And surely to account Christ precious
as a tree of life, although we be fastened to him as to a stake to be burned,
this is love; and this our labor of love cannot be in vain in the Lord.

Jealousy is cruel as the grave] Or, zeal is hard as hell. This follows well
upon the former, Contra Adamant. c. 13.
for, Non amat qui non zel^t, says Augustine. Zeal is the extreme heat of love
and other affections for and toward any whom we esteem: burning in our love to
him, desire of him, delight in him, indignation against any that speak or do
ought against him. The object of zeal is, either Man, as 2 Cor. 7.7. Coloss.
4.17. Basil venturing himself very far for his friend, and by some blamed for
it, answered, Ego aliter amare non didici, I cannot love a man, but I must do
mine utmost for him. Or (Secondly) God, as John 3.17. 2 Cor. 7.11. Rev. 3.19.
And here out love will be, and must appear to be fervent, desire eager,
delights ravishing, hopes longing, hatred deadly, anger fierce, fear terrible,
grief deep, deeper than those black deeps, (a place so called) at the
Thames-mouth, whereinto Richard the third caused the dead bodies of his two
smothered Nephews to be cast, Speed 935.
being first closed up in lead, etc.

The coals thereof are coals of fire] Or, fiery darts that set the soul all on
a light fire, and turn it into a coal or lump of love to Christ. The word here
used is elsewhere taken for fiery thunderbolts, Psalm. 78.48. and for
brass-headed arrows, that gather heat by motion, Psalm. 76.4. also for a
carbuncle, or burning fever, Deuteronomy. 32.24. The Church had said before, more
than once, that she was sick of love: here she feels her self in a fever as
it were, or as if her liver were struck through with a love-dart, by that
spirit of judgment, and of burning, (Isa. 4.4.) kindling this flame of God, as
she calls it here, upon the ha^h of her heart. The word signifies the
consuming flame of God: and zeal may be very fitly so called; For as it comes
from above, even from the father of lights, (as the fire of the Altar did) so
it tends to him, and ends in him; it carries a man up, as it were, in a fiery
Chariot, and conformes his corruptions by the way: It quenches also those
fiery darts of the devil, (as the Sunbeams will put out the kitchen fire) and
sets the tongue a work, as the Holy Ghost set on fire the Apostles tongues,
Act. 2. (when as wicked men's tongues, full of deadly poison, are yet further
set on fire from hell, Jam. 3.6.) yea, the whole man a work for God and his
glory, as Elias with his Zelando zelavi. (he sucked in fire with his mothers
breast, as some have legended) St. Paul is mad for God (so some misjudged him,
2 Cor. 5.13.) as ever he had once been against him, Act. 26.11. Peter was a
man made all of fire, walking amongst stubble, says Chrysostom. And of one
that desired to know what manner of man Basil was, it is said, there was
presented in a dream a pillar of fire with this Motto, Talis est Basilius, such
an one is Basil. Such also was Savanarola, Farel, Luther, Latimer, that bold
Tell-troth; who when he was demanded the reason why there was so much
preaching, and so little practiced, answered roundly, deest ignis, the flame of
God is wanting in men's hearts.

Verse. 7. Many waters cannot quench love] Water was proved long since to be
above fire, in that ancient contest between those two Nations, about the
precedence and precellency of their Gods: the one worshipping Fire, and the
other Water. But though there be Gods many, and Lords many, yet to the Church
there is but one Lord; and to him she will go through thick and thin, through
fire and water. Her love to him is such as no good can match it, no evil
over-match it: it cannot be quenched with any calamity; nay, it is much kindled
by it, as fire in the smiths-forge, or as lime that is the hotter, for the
water that is cast upon it. Elias would have water poured on the sacrifice,
(covered therewith) that the power of God might the more appear in the fire
from heaven. Semblably Christ suffers the ship of his Church to be covered
sometimes with waves of persecutions, and afflictions, that the strength of
their love to him may be the more manifested, and the thoughts of many hearts
may be revealed, Luke 2.35. It is easy to swim in a warm bath, and every bird
can sing in a summers day, but to swim to heaven (as Queen Elizabeth did to her
throne) through a sea of sorrows, to sing, (as some birds will do in the
spring) most sweetly, then when it rains most sadly, that is a true trial
indeed. Many will imbark themselves in the Churches cause in a calm, that with
the Mariners in the Acts, will flee out of the ship in a storm. Many will own a
prospering truth, a blessing Ark, but he is an Obed-Edom indeed, that will own
a persecuted, tossed, banished Ark, an Ark that brings the plague with it. God
sets an high price on their love that stick to him in affliction; 2 Samuel 15.18
as David did on those men that were with him at Gath (those Cherethites and
Pelethites that stuck to him when Absalom was up.) And notwithstanding their
late mutiny at Ziklag, he takes them to Hebron with him (where he was to be
crowned) that as they had shared with him in his misery, so they might partake
of his prosperity. Lo thus likewise deals our heavenly David with all his
fellow sufferers: He removes them at length from the ashes of their forlorn
Ziklog, to the Hebron of heaven. And at the general judgment, in that great
Amphitheater of Men and Angels, Christ will stand forth, and say, Ye are they
that continued with me in my temptations: and I appoint unto you a Kingdom,
etc. Luke 22.28, 29.

Neither can the floods drown it] surgit hic afflictio, Neh. 1.9. This is not a
vain repetition: but serves to show, that no persecution, tribulation, anguish,
though never so grievous, (...).
(though the devil should cast out of his mouth water enough to carry us down
the stream, as Rev. 12.15.) shall be able to separate the Saints from the love
of Christ. Romans 8.35.

If a man would give all the substance of his house, etc.] i. e. To buy this
love of me, or to get it from me, I should cry out with Peter, Thy money perish
with thee, or with Luther, Contemptus est a me Romanus and favor and furor, I
care neither for Romes favor nor fury. When they offered to make him a
Cardinal if he would be quiet, he replied, No not if I might be Pope. And when
they consulted about stopping of his mouth with money, one wiser than the rest
cried out, Hem! Germana illa bestia non curat aurum, Alack, that German beast
cares not for money. Galeacius Caracciolus, His Life by Mr. Crashaw.
that noble Italian Convert, left all for the love of Christ, and went to live
a poor obscure life at Geneva. Where, when he was tempted to revolt for money,
he cried out, Let their money perish with them, who esteem all the gold in the
world worth one days society with Jesus Christ and his holy Spirit. And cursed
be that religion for ever, that by such baits of profit, pleasure, and
preferment, seeks to draw men aside from the way of truth and holiness. The
Papists propose rewards to such as shall relinquish the Protestant religion,
and turn to theirs: as in Ausborough, where they say, there is a known price
for it, of ten Florens a year. In France, Spec. Europ.
where the Clergy have made contributions for the maintenance of runagate
Ministers. Stratagema nunc est Pontificum ditare multos ut pii esse desinant,
says one that was no stranger to them: Joh. Bapt. Gell. dial. 5.
It is a cunning trick that the Popes have taken up, to enrich men, that they
may rob them of their religion. And though Luther would not swallow that hook,
yet there are those that will, not a few. Tell men a tale of Utile, promise
them preferment, and you may persuade them to any thing. Fac me Pontificem, and
ero Christianus, said one Pammachius an Heathen once to the Pope; Make me a
Bishop, and I Will turn Christian. But, as one said of Papists, that they must
have two conversions ere they come to heaven; one from Popery, and another from
profaneness (like as corn must be first threshed, and then winnowed) so this
money-merchant, this preferment-proselyte might have been a Christian at large,
had he had his desired Bishopric: but Christ never favored any such
self-seeking followers. See Mat. 8.20. John 6.26. their love he knows to be no
better than meretricious and mercenary. It is a sad thing that any Augustine
should have cause to complain, Vix diligitur Jesus propter Jesum, that scarce
any man loves Christ, but for his rewards; like the mixed multitude, that came
up with Israel out of Egypt, for a better fortune: Or those Persians, that in
Mordecai's days, for self-respects became Jews. All Gods people should be
like those Medes in Isaiah, that regarded not silver, and as for gold they
delighted not in it, chap. 13.17. Christ's love should be better to them than
wine, Cant. 1.2. and when in exchange for it, the devil does offer them this
worlds good, they should answer him as the witch of Endor did Saul, 1 Samuel
28.9. Judge. 9.11.
Wherefore laiest thou a snare for my soul to cause me to dye? or as the vine
and fig tree in Jonathans Parable, answered the rest of the trees, Should I
leave my fatness and sweetness, derived unto me from Christ, and so go out of
Gods blessing into the worlds warm Sun? God forbid that I should part with my
patrimony, as Naboth said; take an apple for paradise, as Adam did, lose the
love of Christ for the worlds blandishments, etc.

Verse. 8. We have a little sister] Thou, Lord, and I have such a sister, sc.
the Church of the Gentiles, known to thee, and fore-appointed to conversion,
(as James speaks in that first Christian counsel, Act. 15.18.) from the
beginning of the world; unknown to me (more than by hearsay from the holy
Prophets, 1 Pet. 1.10.
who prophesied of the grace that should come unto her) but not unloved, or
undesired. Now therefore as a fruit of my true love unto thee (such as no
floods of troubles can quench or drench, no earthly commodity can compass or
buy off) I desire not only to deliberate with thee about the enlargement of
thy Kingdom by the accession of the elect Gentiles thereunto, but also by
making (as I may say) large and liberal offers, set forth my care and study for
their eternal salvation. See the like affection in St. Paul toward his
countrymen the Jews, proceeding from that full assurance that he found in
himself, Romans 8.38, 39. with chap. 9.1. And learn we to pray as earnestly for
their conversion, as they have done for ours; longing after them from the very
heart-root in Jesus Christ, as Philipp. 1.8. and turning to the Lord, that they
may the sooner find compassion. It is Hezekiah's reason, and a very remarkable
one, 2 Chronicles. 30.9.

And she has no breasts] i. e. She is not yet Nubilis apta viro,
marriageable and fit for Christ, to be presented as a chaste Virgin unto him:
she wanted such paranymphs as Paul was, to do it for her, 2 Cor. 11.2. She
had not a stablished Ministry to nurse up her children withal. And at this
same pass was the old Church at first, not only small, but unshapen, Ezekiel.
16.7, 8. A society of men without the preaching of the Word, is like a mother
of children without breasts. All the Churches children must suck and be
satisfied, Isa. 66.11. they must desire the sincere milk of the Word, and grow
thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. not like the changeling Luther speaks of, ever sucking,
never batling. Such shall be made to know, that their mother has verbera as
well as ubera, rods as well as dugges. Their father will also repent him, as
once David did of his kindness to Nabal; and take up his old complaint, Isai.
1.2. I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against
me. The ox knows his owner, etc. the most salvage creatures will be at the
beck and check of those that feed them: disobedience therefore (under means of
grace especially) is against the principles of nature. It is to be like the
horse and mule, yea, like the young mulet, which has no sooner done sucking
her dammes teats, but she turns up her heels, and kicks her.

What shall we do for our sister] Love is not more cogitative than operative:
and delights to be doing for the beloved. I love the Lord, etc. What shall I
render unto him? I will pay my vows, etc. Psalm. 116. Jonathan will disrobe and
strip himself even to his sword and girdle for David, because he loved him as
his own soul, 1 Samuel 18.3, 4. Shechem will do all that can be done for his
beloved Dinah. The Macedonians will over-do for their poor brethren: Paul's love
to the Jews was like the Ivy; which if it cleave to a stone or an old wall,
will rather die than forsake it, Romans 9.3. He tells his Hebrews of their labor
of love, Heb. 6. all love is laborious.

In the day when she shall be spoken for] Or, wherein speech shall he had,
concerning her, viz. for an husband for her: how we may best prefer her in
marriage. The care of disposing young people to fit yoke-fellows, lay upon
their parents, and other kindred. The Church (as an elder-sister) shows her
self solicitous, and propounds the matter to Christ, as the only best husband
for her, the partition wall being broken down.

Verse. 9. If she be a wall, we will build upon her, etc.] Christ answers, If
she be, as she ought to be, strong and well-grounded in the faith, able to bear
a good weight laid upon her, as a wall, pillar, and ground of truth, not
sinking or fainting under the heaviest burden of these light afflictions, which
are but for a moment; but patient and perseverant in the faith unto the death;
then will I do all for her that may be done, to make her happy. This speech is
somewhat like that of Solomon concerning Adonijah, 1 King. 1.
If he show himself a worthy man, etc.

We will build upon her a palace of silver] The whole blessed Trinity will have
an hand in building the Church of the Gentiles upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone, Isa.
51.16. John 6.44.
Esth. 2.20. God plants the heavens, and lays the foundation of the earth,
that he may say to Zion, Thou art my people. None can come to Christ except
God the Father draw him. Christ the second person is both Author and Finisher
of our faith, Heb. 12.2. The Holy Ghost is the same Spirit of faith in David
and Paul, 2 Cor. 4.13. and is received by the hearing of faith, Gal. 3.2. He
is the God of all grace, 2 Pet. 1.19. antecedent, concomitant, subsequent: We
have nothing of which any of us can say, Mihi soli debeo, I am not bound to God
for it.

And if she be a door, etc.] As she is the house of God, and gate of heaven,
Genesis 28.17. If she will open the everlasting doors to the King of glory, Psalm.
24.7. and open a great door and effectual to his faithful Ministers, 1 Cor.
16.9. who come to build her for an habitation of God through the Spirit, Esther
2.22. If she open the gates, that the righteous nation, which keeps the
truth, may enter in, Isa. 26.2. then will the Lord Christ enclose her,] board
her, and beautify her with fair, sweet, and strong cedars, as with curious and
costly weinscot, which shall be monimentum, munimentum, ornamentum, etc. But
all this is promised upon condition, that she be a wall and a door, that is,
that she receive and retain Christ with her; for otherwise she can claim
nothing. He may desert her without breach of Covenant, as he did the old
Church, and many particular Churches of the New Testament now under the Turk
for their perfidy and Apostasy. The Church of Rome, though utterly revolted,
yet lays strong claim to Christ still; and concludes, I sit as a Queen, and
shall see no sorrow. Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, etc. For,
strong is the Lord God who judges her, Rev. 18.7, 8. See the Note there. About
the year of grace 1414. Theodoricus Urias an Augustine-Frier in Germany, said,
Jac. Revius de vit. Pontif. page 229.
that the Church of Rome was (even so long since) become ex aurea argenteam, ex
argentea ferream, ex ferrea terream, superesse ut in stercus abiret, of gold
silver, of silver brass, of brass iron, of iron clay: there remains nothing
now, but that of clay she become dung, to be swept out of doors with the
beesome of destruction.

Verse. 10. I am a wall; and my breasts like towers] If she be a wall, says
Christ; I am a wall, says this Church of the Gentiles: I will carefully keep
the Doctrine of truth committed unto me, I will stand firm in the faith, being
founded upon the rock of ages. And whereas lately I was looked upon as
breastless, verse. 8. Now my breasts are fashioned, Ezekiel. 16.7. yea, they are
grown far greater than those of mine elder sisters; so that they look like
towers. The Church of the Gentiles, though little at first, and scarce
considerable, yet after Christ's ascension, was marvelously increased and
multiplied: so that she her self stood amazed to see her children come from
far, flying to her as a cloud, most swiftly; and in such flocks, as if a whole
flight of Doves, driven by some hawk, or tempest, should scour into the
columbary, and rush into the windows, Isa. 60.8.

Then was I in his eyes as one that found favour] Heb. peace, even as that
Jerusalemy-Shulamite; nothing inferior to the old Church: yea, before her in
this, that she for present is fallen off, and through her fall, Salvation is
come unto the Gentiles, for to provoke them to jealousy, Romans 11.11. But when
God shall have united these two sticks, Ezekiel. 37.19. and made way for those
Kings of the East, Rev. 16.12. then it shall be said of Jacob and Israel, What
has God wrought! Numb. 23.23.

Verse. 11. Solomon had a Vineyard in Baal-hamon] So has Christ in a very
fruitful hill, Isa. 5.1. Solomon's Vineyard must needs be of the best: for he
abounded both with wealth and wit, to make it so. He let it also to farm for a
very great rent: which shows the fruitfulness of it, so many vines set for so
many silverlings, Isa. 7.23. But Solomon's Vineyard falls far short of Christ's
(wherewith it is here compared in many respects.) For as it is nothing so
fruitful, so he was fain to let it out to Vine-dressers. He could not dress
and manure it himself, keep it in his own hands, (as his Father David his, 1 Chronicles. 27.27.) neither could he take all the fruit; for the tenants also must
live, and reason good: If Solomon have a thousand, the poor laborers may well
have two hundred. But I, says Christ here, neither let out the Church my
Vineyard, but look to it my self, though I have a great deal of pains with it:
nor suffer any part of the profits to go from me; So jealous I am of mine
inheritance, being ever in the midst of it.

Verse. 12. My Vineyard which is mine, etc.] And therefore most dear unto me:
Seneca.
for ownness makes love. Patriam quisque amat: non quia pulchram, sed quia
suam. Every man loves his own things best. The Church is Christ's own by a
manifold right; by donation, conquest, purchase: not with silver and gold: but
with the dearest and warmest blood in all his heart, 1 Pet. 1.18. No wonder
therefore though she be always before him; though he look carefully to her
that cost him so dear; that he trust not others with her (as Solomon was
forced to do) but whomsoever he employs about her ( for we are laborers
together with God, says the Apostle, Ye are Gods husbandry, 1 Cor. 3.9.)
himself is ever one: Ipse adest and praeest, he is present and president: Feed
my sheep, said he to Peter, but do it for me, as the Syriack Translatour
(respecting the sense) adds there, John 21.15. Take not unto thee the
instruments of a foolish shepherd, Zech. 11.11. that is, forcipes and
mulctram, (as an Ancient says) like those that are more intent, attonsioni
gregis quam attentioni, fisco quam Christo. Peter must not do any of this: much
less must he Lord it over Gods inheritance, as his pretended successors do;
with whose carcasses therefore Christ shall shortly dung his Vineyard, and
water the roots of his vines with their blood: He must look to lip-feeding,
and, when himself is converted, strengthen his brethren: neither must he
intervert or take to himself any part of the fruits, as Solomon's farmers did.
He may not seek his own things, but the things of Jesus Christ. Paul may
plant, and Apollos water, but, since it is God that gives the increase, let God
reap all the glory: they shall also reap in due season, if they faint not, if
they grow not weary of well-doing, Gal. 6.9. See the Note on verse. 11.

Verse. 13. Thou that dwell in the Gardens] i. e. O thou Church universal,
that dwell in the particular Churches, frequently called Gardens in this
book. The French Protestants at Lions called their meeting house, Paradise.

The companions hearken to thy voyce] The Angels, (so some interpret it) learn
of the Church, and profit in the knowledge of the manifold wisdom of God in
man's redemption, Ephesians. 3.10. 1 Cor. 11.10. 1 Pet. 1.10. Or rather, thy
Fellow Christians, thine obedient children, that will hearken to their mothers
counsel: No sooner can she say, Hear and give ear, be not proud, for the
Lord has spoken it, but they give glory to the Lord their God, as Jer. 13.15,
16. glorify his Word, Acts 13.48. set to their seals, John 3.33. dispute not
Christ's commands, but dispatch them; Illi garriant, nos credamus, said
Augustine of heretics that would not be satisfied. The Philosophers called
the Christians, Credentes, Believers, by way of reproach: because they believed
God upon his bare word. We believe and know, says Peter, John 6.69. And we
believe and speak, says Paul after David, 2 Cor. 4.13. And we believe and
practice, as Noah, and those other Worthies did, Heb. 11.7. laying faith for a
foundation of all their doings and sufferings in and for the Lord, like as Ezra
6.4. the foundation of the Temple was laid with three rows of great stones, and
a row of new timber. This is the guise of the Churches children; they are soon
persuaded to believe and obey their mother, whom they look upon as the pillar
and ground of truth.

Cause me to hear it] See the Note on chap. 2.14. Tremellius renders it, Fac
ut me andiant, Cause them to hear me: deliver nothing to them for truth, but
what is consonant to my Word of truth; let all thy doctrines bear my stamp,
come forth cum privilegeo, carry mine authority. What said Austin to an
adversary (it was Faustus the Manichee, I trow) what matter is it, what either
thou say, or I say to this or that point? Audiamus ambo quid dicit Dominus,
Let us both hear what God says, and sit down by it.

Verse. 14. Make haste my beloved] Heb. Flee or speed thee away, as Amaziah said
to Amos, Go flee thee away into the land of Judah, Amos 7.12. And as a Senator
of Hala in Suevia wrote to Brentius, Fuge, fuge, Brenti, cito citius citissime,
make all possible speed, haste, haste, haste: So the Church is at it here, with
her Come Lord Jesus, come quickly -- O mora! Christ veni. Thus, Augustine.
as this Book began with a wish, so it ends. Tota vita boni Christiani sunctum
desideriumest. The whole life of a good Christian is an holy wish. He loves,
and longs, and looks for Christ's second appearance: and even spends and exhales
himself in continual salleys and egressions of affection unto him in the mean
while. He has taken some turns with Christ upon those mountains of spices (so
heaven is called, for its unconceiveable height and sweetness) he has tasted
of the grapes of this celestial Canaan: hence he is as eager after it, Plut. in
vita. Camilli.
as once the Gauls were after Italy, when they had once tasted of the sweet
wine of those grapes that grew there. The old character of Gods people, was,
they waited for the consolation of Israel, Christ's first coming; (...) Vide
Isa. 16.5. Septu.
Now they long as much for his second, as the espoused maid does after the
marriage, as the Apprentice for his freedom, the captive for his ransom, the
traveller for his Inn, the mariner for the haven, etc. looking for, and hasting
the coming of that day of God, 2 Pet. 3.12.

Soli Deo gloria in aeternum. FINIS.
A Commentary or Exposition Upon the BOOK Of the Prophet ISAIAH.
CHAP. I.
Verse 1. THE Vision of Isaiah] That which was not unfitly affirmed of a Modern
Expositor, Snepfius.
that his Commentaries on this Prophecy of Isaiah are mole parvi, eruditione
magni, small in bulk, but great in worth, may much more fitly be spoken of the
Prophecy it self, which is aureus quantivis precii libellus, worth its weight
in gold. A great roll or volume it is called, chap. 8.6. because it is Magnum
in parvo, much in a little; and is said there to be written with a man's pen,
that is, plainly and perspicuously: so little reason was there that John
Haselbach, Market. Atlas
Professor at Vienna, should read twenty and one years to his Auditors upon
this first chapter only, and yet not finish it. I confess there is no Prophecy
but has its obscurity (the picture of Prophecy is said to hang in the Popes
Library like a Matron with her eyes covered) and Jerome says that this of
Isaiah contains all Rhetoric, Ethics and Theology. But, if Brevity and
Suavity (which Fulgentius makes to be the greatest graces of a sentence) if
Eloquence of style and Evidence of Vision may carry it with the Reader, Casaub.
here they are eminently met in this Seraphical Orator; of whom we may far
better say then the learned Critic does of Livy, Non ita copiosus ut nimius;
neque ita suavis ut lascivus; nec adeo lenis ut remissus: non sic tristis ut
horridus; neque ita simplex ut nudus; aut adeo comptus ut affectata
compositione calamistris videatur inustus. Par verbis materia, par sententia
ribus, etc. A Courtier he was, and a Master of speech: a man of Noble birth,
and as noble a spirit: not the first of the holy Prophets, and yet worthily set
in the first place (as St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans is for like cause set
before the rest) because in abundance of Visions he exceeds his fellows; and
in speaking of the Lord Christ, he delivers himself more like an Evangelist
then a Prophet, Hieronym. Est in fragmentis Demad^, orationes Demostheni^ esse
(...). De Isaiae vision bus idem p^ Conciones ha^ poenitential^ comminator as
and Cons^^ortas. (...).
and is therefore called The Evangelical Prophet. In the New Testament he is
cited by Christ and his Apostles sixty several times at least, and by the
devouter Heathens he was not a little respected, as appears by the history of
that Ethiopian Eunuch, Acts 8.

The vision] That is, the several Visions or Doctrines so certainly and clearly
revealed to him by God, as if he had seen them with his bodily eyes: see chap.
2.1. Nahum. 1.1. for they are not to be hearkened to, who hold that these
Seers, the Prophets understood not their own prophesies, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11.
though it is true, that those holy men of God spoke as they were moved, acted,
and powerfully carried on to see and say as they did, by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet.
1.21.

Of Isaiah] Which signifies Gods health. He would indeed have healed that
perverse people to whom he was sent, but they would not be healed, as he sadly
complains, chap. 44.4. and 53.1. turning them over to God with a Non
convertentur, They will not repent, let them therefore perish: When there is no
hope of curing, there must be cutting.

The Son of Amoz] Who likewise was a Prophet, say the Hebrews, and of royal
extraction.

Luth. in Psalm. 127.
Which he saw] Not which I saw: thus he speaks for modesty sake. Luther
wittily says that Haec ego feci, Haec ego feci, shows men to be nothing else
but Faeces, dregs.

Concerning Judah and Jerusalem] The Inhabitants whereof lived in Gods good
land, but would not live by Gods good laws: to them was objected as afterward
to the Athenians, Eos scire quae recta sunt, sed facere nolle, that they knew
what was right, but had no mind to do it, though this and other Prophets used
their best Oratory in inviting those of them that did rebel, inciting those
that did neglect, hastening those that did linger, and recalling those that did
wander, to sue out their pardons, and make their peace with their Maker.

In the days of Vzziah, Jotham, Ahaz and Hezekiah] And longer too, if that be
true which the Hebrews tell us, that at the age of one hundred twenty and six
years he was sawn asunder by Manasseh (his grandson by the Mothers side) with
a wooden saw. Hier. lib. 15. in Isa. in sine.
Sure it is that Manasseh was a most bloody persecutor, and perhaps not
inferior to Dioclesian, in whose days such cruelty was exercised toward the
Christian Bishops, and others, Vt totum orcum dicas in orbem effusum, Bussieres.
ubi nemo nisi tortus vel tortor sit, as if Hell had been broke loose, and all
men turned either Torturers or Tortured.

Deuteronomy. 4.26. and 30.19. and 31.28.
Verse 2. Hear O Heavens, and give ear O Earth] Exordium patheticum! Moses-like
he calls heaven and earth, brutas illas mutasque creaturas, to record against
Gods rebels, whose stupendous stupidity is hereby taxed. Heaven and earth do
hear and obey Gods voice, for they are all his servants, Psalm. 119.91. keeping
their constant course. Only Man (that great Heteroclite) breaks order; and is
therefore worse then other creatures, because he should be better.

For the Lord has spoken it] So Jer. 13.15. Hear and give ear, be not proud,
for the Lord has spoken it. Jehovah, whose voice shakes not the earth only,
but the heavens also, Heb. 12.26. Psalm. 104.32. at whose dreadful presence
Mountains melt, Rocks rent asunder, and the whole fabric of heaven and earth
is astonished, horribly afraid, and very desolate, Jer. 2.12. This Great
Jehovah (whose Name is great among the Heathen, Mal. 1.11. The Pythagoreans
used to swear by (...) Quaternity, the name Jehovah consisting of four letters
in the Hebrew, Lingua mea est calamus S. S. and guttur meum est tuba divino
inflata and clangens anhelitu. Deuteronomy. 32.15.
which also they called (...) the fountain of Eternity) Aph^hu even he has
spoken, or, is about to speak, sc. by my mouth and Ministry. Hear now this O
foolish people, and without understanding, which have eyes and see not, which
have ears and hear not: Fear ye not me, says Jehovah? Will ye not tremble at
my presence? etc. Jer. 5.21, 22. Hear ye deaf, and look ye blind that ye may
see. Isa. 42.18. Thus must Ministers preach to the conscience, cut to the
quick, rouse up themselves and wrestle with their hearers, goring their very
souls with smarting pain, whilst they speak as the Oracles of God, 1 Pet.
4.11. with all gravity and authority.

I have nourished and brought up children] Or advanced, exalted them. Brevicula
verba, sed causa querulandi maxima; A short but sharp contest. God had adopted,
educated, Plato Aristotelem vocabat mulum.
and advanced the people of Israel: but Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked, as young
Mulets, when they have sucked, lift up the heel, and kick the dams dugs, as
Hawks when full fed forget their Master.

And they have rebelled against me] Or transgressed, blasphemed. Rebellion is a
kind of blasphemy, Numb. 15.30, 31. with Ezekiel. 20.27. and unthankfulness is, as
one says, an accumulative sin, a voluminous wickedness; many sins are bound up
in it, as Cicero says of parricide. Solon would make no law against parricide,
because he thought none would be so vile as to commit it. Lycurgus would make
no law against Ingratitude for like reason.

(...).
Ver. 3. The Ox knows his owner] Yea helps him: whence these creatures are
called juumenta a juvando, and the Ass has his name in Greek from his
usefulness. Yea the most savage creatures will be at the beck and check of
those that feed them. Diobedience therefore is against the Principles of
nature: and Gods Rebels fall below the stirrup of Reason, yea of Sense: so
great cause was there that our Prophet tantas tragoedias ageret, should begin
his Sermon with such a solemn contestation, Hear O Heavens, etc. O coelum, O
terram! But Israel does not know, quo est stupore; he needs to be set to
School to these dullest of creatures to learn the knowledge of God, and of his
will, of himself and his duty. Oh the brutish ignorance of many profligate
professors! they are a people of no understanding, Psalm 53.4. So chap. 44.18.

My people does not consider; Though them only have I known of all the Families
of the Earth, Amos 3.2. culling and calling them, owning and honoring them,
adopting and accepting them for my people, when I had all the world before me
to choose in, Deuteronomy. 10.14, 15. yet they value not my benefits, they stir not up
themselves (as the Hebrew word signifies) to apprehend them, and to be
affected with them: All Is lost that I have laid out upon them. Unthankfulness
is as a grave, which receives dead bodies, but renders them not up again
without a Miracle. But should ye thus requite the Lord, Oh foolish people and
unwise! Deuteronomy. 32.6. See the Note there.

Ver. 4. Ah sinful Nation! Hoi goi chote.] He begins his complaint with a
sigh, as well he might, when he saw that the better God was to them, the worse
they were to him: like Springs of water, which are then coldest, when the Sun
is hottest: like the Thracian flint, which is said to burn with water, and to
be quenched with oil: or like that Country where drought makes dirt, and rain
dust. Siccitas dat lutum, imbres pulverem. Plin.
Ah geus peccatrix! Oh thou that art wholly made up of mischief! as Aaron once
said of their Forefathers in the Wilderness, that they were wholly set upon
wickedness, Exodus 32.22. and as the Prophet says, What is the transgression of
Jacob? Gens quae non nisi peccare didicit. Scult. secura and petulans. Piseat.
Luke 15.30.
Is it not Samaria? And what are the high places of Judah? are they not
Jerusalem? Mic. 1.5.

A people laden with iniquity] Great and grievous offenders, guilty of many and
mighty (or long) sins, Amos 5.12. quorum amplitudine pragravantur, yet not
sensible of their burden, not heavy-laden, as Mat. 11.28. nor laboring to be
delivered of that hedg-hog that wounds and teareth them in their tender
inside.

A seed of evil-doers] A race of Rebels, a seed of Serpents: Mali corvi malum
ovum; such as were as good at resisting the Holy Ghost as ever their Fathers
had been, Acts 7.51. generation after generation they held it out, and were no
changelings then, neither are to this day.

Children that are corrupters] Or, destroyers, ding thrifts, (...) quasi (...),
stroygoods, such as the Roman Prodigal who gloried that of a large Patrimony
left him by his Parents, he had now left himself nothing praeter coelum and
coenum; or that other in the Gospel, who had drawn much of his portion through
his throat, and spent the rest on harlots. Lo, such ill husbands for their
souls were these Jews here spoken of, scipsis assidue facti deteriores, whilst
they woefully wasted their time and strength in the pursuit of their lusts:
cursed children, 2 Pet. 2.14.

They have forsaken the Lord] which is such a foul enormity, as good Jeremy
thinks the very Heaven sweateth at, and the earth groaneth under, Jer. 2.12, 13.

They have provoked unto anger] as if they had a mind to wrestle a fall, and
try masteries with him. The Vulgar renders it, They have blasphemed. See the
Note on ver. 2.

They are gone away backward] Alienaverunt seretrorsum, certatim exardescentes
in Apostasiam: as the Moon when fullest of light gets farther off from the
Sun. They had turned upon God the back and not the face, by a shameful
Apostasy, even then when they frequently trod his Courts, ver. 12. and departed
not thence, happily, any otherwise then the Jews at this day do, out of their
Synagogues, with their faces still toward the Ark, like crabs going backward.

Ver. 5. Why should ye be stricken any more?] This was the heaviest stroke that
ever Judah felt from the hand of God; like as Ephraims sorest Judgment was, He
is joined to Idols, let him alone, Hos. 4.17. q. d he is incorrigible,
irreclaimable, let him go on and perish: I Will not any longer foul my fingers
with him. O fearful Sentence! To prosper in sin is a grievous plague, and a
sign of one given up by God. To be like the Smiths-dog, whom neither the
Hammers above him, nor the sparks of fire falling round about him can awaken,
is to be in a desperate condition. To wax worse by chastisements, as 2 Chronicles.
28.22. is a sure sign of reprobate silver, Jerem. 6.30. of a dead and dedolent
disposition, Ephesians. 4.18. God as a loving Father, verba, verbera, beneficia,
supplicia miscuerat, had done all that could be done to do them good, but all
would not do; such was their obstinacy.

The whole head is sick, and the whole heart is faint] Head, Heart, Feet;
Princes, Priests, and common people, as they had all sinned, so they all had
their payment: Sin is an universal sickness, like those Diseases which
Physicians say are Corruption totius substantiae, a corruption of the whole
substance. And National sins bring National plagues, wherein all sorts suffer,
as they did in the days of Ahaz, de quibus haud dubie loquitur hic propheta,
says Scultetus: though others think the Prophet here speaks rather of those
miseries inflicted upon Judah by Hazael King of Syria, 2 King. 12. and by Joash
King of Israel, 2 King. 14. wherein all sorts had their share, none escaped
scot-free.

Verse. 6. From the sole of the head] totum est pro vulnere corpus, The whole
body Politic was deadly diseased, and it was our Prophets unhappiness to be
the Physian to a dying State; Tunc etenim docta plus valet art malum.

There is no soundness] Nec sanitas in corpore, nec sanctitas in cord. Heu,
heu, Domine Deus.

But wounds, and bruises and putrefying sores] And those also such as would not
be cured, but called for cutting off -- Immedicabile vulnus Ense recidendum est.

They have not been closed] Neither will be, Non est malagma imponere, say the
Septuagint here. You will not endure to have them searched or suppled: what
hope therefore of healing? If the Sun of Righteousness shall shine upon us with
healing under his wings, we must repent and believe the Gospel, Mar. 1.15.

Ver. 7. Your Country is desolate] Here the Prophet speaks plainly, what
before, parabolically: thus many times the Scripture explaineth it self, Joh.
7.39.

Your Cities are burnt] So that there is sometimes but an hours space, inter
civitatem magnam, and nullam, says Seneca, betwixt a fair City and an heap.

Zar alienum significat and hostem.
Your land strangers devour it] that is, Enemies: In which sense also an Harlot
is called a strange woman, seemingly a friend, but really an enemy: she will
destroy his peace who is overcome by her.

In your presence] to your greater grief. Witness the experience hereof in our
late stripping and desolating times, whereof we have here a kind of Theological
^icture.

Ver. 8. And the Daughter of Zion] 1. Jerusalem which is called the Daughter of
Zion say some, because standing at the foot of that Hill as a Daughter, it
comes out from between the feet, being also cherished and tendered by God as
his Daughter. Howbeit, as dear as she was to him, she fell into deep distress,
when she became undutifull. Abused Mercy turns into fury.

Is left as a cottage in a Vineyard] As a shed or booth, whereof after the
Vintage, there is little use or regard.

As a lodge in a garden of Cucumers] Or Melons, which when ripe, lie on the
ground: So says one, do Gods ripest and best servants, being humble, and
meanly conceited of themselves.

As a besieged City] Besieged, though at a distance: as Rome was, when Saguntum
was beleagured.

Ver. 9. Except the Lord] Jehovah the Essentiator and Induperator, the Maker
and Monarch of the Universe.

Had left unto us a very small remnant] which he reserved for Royal use:
pulling them as a brand out of the fire, Zech. 3.2. or as two legs or a piece
of an ear taken by the Shepherd out of the mouth of a Lion, Amos 3.12. The
Apostle, after the Septuagint, renders it a seed, Rom 9.29. in allusion to
store-seed, kept by the Husbandman; and there hence infers, that the Elect
Jews shall by faith in Christ be freed from the Tyranny of Satan, and terror
of Hell. And this is here alleged for an allay to those foregoing dreadful
Declarations of bygone and direful menaces of future desolations; so loath is
the Sun of Righteousness to set in a cloud; surely in the midst of Judgment he
remembers mercy -- quamvis cecidere trecent, Non omnes Fabios abstulit una
dies. Ovid.


We should have been as Sodom] Those five Cities of the Plain are thrown forth
for an Example; Jude 7. Lot was no sooner taken out of Sodom, but Sodom was
taken out of the World, and turned into a sea of salt, Deuteronomy. 24.23. So Meroz,
Judge. 5.23. some City, likely, near the place where that battle was fought,
has the very Name and memorial of it utterly extinct.

Ver. 10. Hear the Word of the Lord, ye Princes of Sodom] Having mentioned
Sodom and Gomorrah, verse 9. he makes further use thereof, probrosa hac
appellatione auditores suos conveniens: sharping up his Hearers in this sort,
whom he knew he should not wrong at all by so calling them; see Ezekiel. 16.46,
48. Non tam ovum ovo simile, Like they were, both Princes and people, to those
of Sodom and Gomorrah, 1. In their ingratitude toward God. 2. in their cruelty
toward men. Our Prophet therefore is very bold (as Saint Paul also testifies
of him, Romans 10.20.) fearing no colors, although for his boldness he lost his
life: if at least that be true which Hierom out of the Rabbis tells us,
Hier. ^^ Is* 1.
viz. that this Prophet Isay was sawn asunder. 1. Because he said he had seen
the Lord, chap. 6.1. Secondly, Because he called the great Ones of Judah
Princes of Sodom, etc. giving them a Title agreeable to their wicked practices.
The like liberty of speech used Athanasius toward Constantius, Agapetus toward
Justinian, Johannes Sarisburiensis toward the Pope. etc.

Ver. 11. To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices] All which,
without faith and devotion, are no better then mere hypocrisy and illusion. It
is, says Oecolampadius, as if one should present his Prince with many Carts
laden with dirt: or as if good meat well-cooked should be brought to Table by a
nasty sloven, who has been tumbling in a jakes. They are your sacrifices, and
not mine: and though many and costly, yet I abhor such sacrificing Sodomites as
you are, neither shall you be a button the better for your pompous he catombe
and holocausts. Your devotions are placed more in the massy materiality then
inward purity, and therefore rejected. Go ye and learn what that is, I will
have mercy (so, Faith, Repentance, new Obedience) and not sacrifice, Mat. 9.14.
You stick in the bark, rest in the work done: your piety is potius in labris
quam in fibris nata, a mere outside, shells, Nut-kernels, shows and Pageants,
not heart-workings, etc. Vna Dei est, purum, gratissima victima, pectus.

I am full of the burnt offerings] I am even cloyed and lothed with the sight
of them.

And of the fat of fed beasts] Though ye bring the very best of the best; yet
you do worse then lose your labor, cast away your cost: for therein ye commit
sin, Prove. 15.8. Displeasing service is double dishonor, Deus homines istis,
ut vocant, meritis praefidentes aversatur.

I delight not in the blood of Bullocks, etc.] He that kills an Ox, unless
withal he kill his corruptions, is as if he slew a man. He that sacrifices a
Lamb, as if he cut off a dogs neck, etc. chap. 66.3. Those miscreants in Micah
who offered largely for a License to live as they list, are rejected with
scorn, Mic. 6 7.

Ver. 12. When ye come to appear before me] Heb. to be seen, else all had been
lost: Hypocrisy is very ostentous; it would be noted and noticed: whereas true
Devotion desires not to be seen of any, save Him who sees in secret.

Who has required this at your hand?] This is Gods Voice to all superstitious
Will-worshippers and carnal-Gospellers. Friend, how came thou in hither? Who
sent for thee to my service? Who has forewarned this generation of Vipers to
fly from the wrath to come? What have thou to do to take up my Name? etc.
Psalm 50.16. to tread my Courts, to pollute my Presence? This is the gate of
the Lord into which the Righteous only should enter, Psalm 118.20. The
sacrifice of the wicked is abomination, how much more when he brings it with
a wicked mind! Prove. 21.27.

To tread my Courts] Or trample on, as chap. 62.3. to foul it, Calca^is atria
and teritis pavimentum. A Lap. Sands his Relat. of West. Relig. Sect. 8.
and wear it out with their feet: as in some places Marble-crosses graven in
Pavements of Popish Churches (with indulgences annexed for every time they are
kissed) are even worn by the kisses of the devouter Sex, especially. Diodaete
notes here that a phrase is picked out on purpose to show that these false
appearances were rather acts of profane contempt then of right Religion. The
Greeks gave such honor to their Temples, that they durst not tread on the
Threshold thereof, but leap over it. The Priests at their solemn services,
cried aloud (...), Gressus removete prophani. The Jews at this day, before they
come to the Synagogue, wash themselves, and scrape their shoos with an Iron
fastened in a wall at the entrance. The Habassines (a mongrel kind of
Christians in Africa) do neither walk nor talk, nor sit nor spit, nor laugh in
the Church, nor admit dogs into the Churchyards. Sed quorsum haec omnia? to
what end is all this, without an honest care to lift up pure hands and holy
hearts in Gods presence? See Jer. 7.3, 4, 9, 10, 11.

Ver. 13. Bring no more vain oblations] Vain, because unacceptable,
ineffectual, unsubstantial: Epitheton argumentosum, says Piscator. Lip-labor
is lost-labour; For God is not mocked with shadows of service: his sharp nose
easily discerns and is offended with the stinking breath of the Hypocrites
rotten Lungs, though his words be never so scented and perfumed with shows of
holiness. Hence it is added

Incense is an abomination unto me] sc. because it stinketh of the hand that
offers it. Incense of it self was a sweet and precious Perfume, compounded of
the best Odours and Spices. In the incense of faithful prayer also, how many
sweet spices are burnt together by the fire of Faith, as Humility, Hope, Love,
etc. all which come up for a memorial before God, through the Merits and
Mediation of Jesus Christ, Heb. 9.24. But it is otherwise with the wicked,
whose carnal heart is like some fen or bog, and every prayer thence proceeding
is as an evil vapor reaking and rising from that dunghill. Never did those
five Cities of the Plain send up such poisonous smells to Heaven; which God
being not able to abide, sent down upon them a counter-poyson of fire and
brimstone.

I cannot away with] Heb. I cannot, by an angry Aposiopesis: I cannot, that is,
I cannot behold, bear with, or forbear to punish: as Oecolampadius makes the
supply to be.

It is iniquity] Or an affliction, a grievance, as Joh. 5.6. Yea it is a
Vexation, as some render the next word, viz. your solemn meeting.

Ver. 14. Your New Moons] These were commanded to be kept to mind them of Gods
gubernation of all things, as from whom come all alterations and changes; and
so to teach them to rely on his providence at all times and turns. This they
thought not on, and are therefore turned off with contempt.

Your appointed Feasts] Or rather your set-meetings, whether for Feasts or
Fasts.

My soul hateth] Not all his senses only were offended, but his very soul also,
which is an Emphatical speech, and an argument of his hearty detestation.
Hypocrisy is hateful to men, much more to the holy God. When Bernardine Ochin
offered the Cardinal of Lorrain his service in writing against the Protestants,
he slighted him with greatest scorn, because he knew he had dissembled and
played the Hypocrite. The other Papists should have dealt in like sort with
Bolsecus, that twice-banished and thrice-runnagate Friar and Physician, whom
they basely hired to write the lives of Calvin and Beza, alleging him in all
their writings as Canonical.

They are a trouble unto me] or a burden, a combrance, God, though he be not
weary of bearing up the whole world, yet under this burden he buckles as it
were, and elsewhere complains, that he is pressed under it as a cart is pressed
that is full of sheaves, Amos 2.13.

Ver. 15. And when ye spread forth your hands] This was the ancient guise and
garb in extraordinary and most earnest prayer, especially to spread forth the
arms, and lay open the hands as it were, to receive a blessing from the
Allmighty. Exodus 9.24. Psalm 44.20. and 143.6. 1 King. 8.22, 38.

I will hide mine eyes from you] tanquam a teterrimo cadavere, quod oculos and
nasum ut occludatis faciat. The eyes of the Lord are upon the Righteous, and
his ears are open to their cry: But the face of the Lord is against them that
do evil, Psalm 34.15, 16. his pure eyes cannot behold them with patience, Hab.
1.13.

Yea, when ye make many prayers] as hoping to be heard for your much babbling.
The Turks pray constantly five times a day. The Jews pronounce daily an hundred
benedictions. The Papists pray more by tale then by weight of Zeal. The wild
Irish pray for a blessing on their theft also.

I will not hear:] Your prayers are as jarring in mine ears, as if diverse
distracted Musicians should play upon diverse had Instruments so many several
tunes at one time: or as if so many dogs should set up a Howl together, Hos.
7.14. See the Note there. Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs, (those
black Santi's) for I will not hear the melody of thy viols, Amos 5.23. The Jews
at this day conclude their Sabbath with singing, or caterwawling rather, which
they continue as long as they can, for the ease of souls departed: and withal
they pray many times over and over, that Elias would hasten his coming, even
the next Sabbath, if he please, to give them notice of the Messiah his coming.
All this is lost labor.

Your hands are full of blood.] Ac proinde horrorem mihi incutiunt. Hands
imbrued in blood are horrible to behold: Should he who has assassined the
Kings son, come to him with a petition presently upon it? And should not pure
hands be everywhere lifted up to God without wrath and without doubting? 1 Timothy
2.8. By Blood here may be meant not only Injustice and Oppression of the poor,
but all other sins also allowed and wallowed in, when blood touches blood,
Hos. 4.2 one foul sin is added to another.

Ver. 16. Wash ye, make ye clean.] Wash your hearts from wickedness, that ye
may be saved, Jer. 4.14. Yea, cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify your
hearts ye double-minded, Jam. 4.8. But how is that done? Be afflicted, and
mourn, and weep, etc. ver. 9. Ye cannot wash your bloody hands in innocence;
wash them therefore in tears, which are a second Baptism of the soul where it
is rinsed anew. And surely, as the sins of the old world, so of this little
world, need a Deluge. Set to work therefore, and God will soon set in with you.
Wash your selves with the tears of true Repentance, and God will wash you with
the blood of his Son; only be sure to do your work thoroughly, wash hard, rub,
rinse: we have inveterate stains, which will hardly be got out till the cloth
be almost rubd to pieces. And as an error in the first Concoction, is not
mended in the second; nor of the second, in the third; so if a man's humiliation
has not been sound, his reformation cannot be right. Wash therefore, and then,

Put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes.] Away with that
abominable thing that is so grievous to all my five senses, yea, to my very
soul, as is above said. Sin is in Scripture called Pollution, Leprosy,
Contagion, Vomit of a dog, wallowing of a swine in the mire, etc: and must
therefore be rid and removed out of the heart and life, or we cannot find
favor.

Cease to do evil.] This is first to be done; Depart from evil, and do good:
break off your sins by Repentance, and be abrupt in the work: sow not among the
Thorns; cast away all your transgressions, etc. The Prophets pressing moral
duties in this sort, do it as Explainers of the Law; they did but unfold and
draw out that Arras which was folded together before.

Learn to do well.] Turn over a new leaf, take out a new lesson. Be thou
instructed O Jerusalem, lest God's soul depart from thee, Jer. 6.8. Deliver thy
self wholly up to his Discipline: Religion is the best learning, Philosophia
sacra: To know Christ and him crucified is as much as Saint Paul cared for:
Deum cognoscere and colere, is the whole duty of man; add this to the former:
Negative goodness profits not.

Seek Judgment, relieve the oppressed, etc.] Look to the Duties of the second
Table; those of your own particular places especially: Exercise your general
Calling in your particular, and think not to set off with God by your
sacrifices for your oppressions; I will have Mercy and not sacrifice. Primo
praecepto reliquorum omnium observantia praecipitur, says Luther. All Gods
Laws were in David's sight, Psalm 119.198. all his ways in Gods sight. What a
good Justicer and Householder both he was, see Psalm 101.

Relieve the oppressed] Heb, righten the sowred, or leavened.

Judge the fatherless, plead for the widdow] These are Gods own Clyents, Exodus
22.21.

Ver. 18. Come now let us reason together] In the Greek Church, at the
beginning of Divine service, the Deacon cried out, Sacra Sacris, Holy souls to
holy service. Chrysostom. Basil. Liturg.
God will not treat with this people till purified, till resolved upon better
practices. As when he is content, by a wonderful condescension, to make them
even as Judges in their own cause. The Vulgar renders it, but not so well, Et
venite and arguite me. See chap. 5.3. Jer. 2.9. Mic. 6.1, 2, 3.

Allu^it ad habitum meretricum. A Lap.
Though your sin be of scarlet] blood-red, as ver. 15. and of a double dye,
sins in grain, enormia and horrenda, such as ye may well think will never wash
out.

They shall be white as snow] i. e. You shall be fully freed of the guilt and
filth of your most heinous offenses by the blood of my Son; sc. Not your
peccadilla's only shall be remitted, but your many and mighty sins, quae
coccini, quae vermiculi instar sunt. Ci^cr. l. 4. Acad. quest. Galen. l. 2. De
virt. ^mp. remediorum.
But what meant that mad Philosopher Anaxagoras to affirm that snow was black?
Purge me with Hysop (wash me by the blood of sprinkling from the sting and
stink of sin) and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow,
Psalm 51.7. Cleaner I shall be then the picked glass, whiter then the driven
snow. The Law, says one, is like a glass wherein we see our spots: but the
Gospel is like the Laver, Ainsw. in loc.
Exodus 38.8. which was made of the women's Looking-glasses, whereby they might
both see their Faces, and also wash out their spots: for it was both a Glass to
look in, and a Laver to wash in; and this typified Christ: see 1 John 1.7.
Revel. 1.1.

Though they be redlike crimson] which is, say the Rabbis, of a deeper color
then the former.

They shall be as wool] which naturally is exceeding white in those Countries,
Psalm 147.16. Scultetus notes that God here promises not only pardoning, but
purging Grace also.

Ver. 19. If ye be willing and obedient] If ye love God and keep his
Commandments, Exodus 20.6. If ye love to be his servants, Isa. 56.6. willing in
all things to live honestly, Basil. Conc. de prodigo. Enchir. id. cap. 32.
Heb 13.18. Tantum velis and Deus tibi praecurret: say thou can not open the
door, yet be lifting at the latch: ever holding that of Austin, Nolentem
praevenit Deus ut velit, volentem subsequitur ne frustra velit. It is God that
works in us both to will and to do of his own good pleasure. Phil. 2.8.
Austin (after Paul) stood so much for free grace, that the Papists say be
yielded too little to free will.

Ye shall eat the good things of the land] Ye shall, and not strangers for you,
as ver. 7. The Easterlings shall not eat thy fruit, nor drink thy milk, as
Ezekiel. 25.4. Thine enemies shall not eat thy corn, nor the sons of the stranger
drink thy wine; But they that have gathered it shall eat it and praise the
Lord: and they that have brought it together shall drink it in the Courts of my
holiness, Isa. 62.8, 9. Godliness has a Cornucopia: Religion is the right
Palladium of a Nation. The Heathen Poet could acknowledge that so long as Rome
stood Religious, so long she continued victorious and prosperous; as on the
contrary, Horat.
Dii multa neglecti dederunt
Hesperiae mala luctuosae.


Italy was undone by irreligion. The Greek Empire had not fallen from the
Paleologi to the Turks, Non caliditate and robore. sed pietate and religione
omnes gentes supera ^is. Orat. de Art. respons. ^ib. 3.
had the Christian verity stood firm in Constantinople. Tully confesses that
the Instruments by which the Romans subdued the world, were not strength and
policy, but Religion and Piety. Wherefore also Mecaenas in Dion Cassius
advises Augustus (...) by all means, and at all times to advance the worship
of God, to cause others to do the same, and not suffer Innovations in Religion.

Ver. 20. But if ye refuse and rebel] The Romans sent the Carthaginians
caduceum and hastam, that they might take their choice of Peace upon
submission, or war upon refusal so to do. Semblably deals the Lord by this
people here; See Deuteronomy. 30.19.

Yet shall be devoured with the sword] War is threatened, which is, says One,
the Slaughterhouse of mankind, and the Hell of this present world; and that we
may not think that these are but big words, brute thunderbolts, it is added
for confirmation.

For the mouth of the Lord has spoken it] Now whatsoever he has spoken with
his mouth, he will surely make good with his hand, as Solomon phraseth it in
his prayer. The Original has it, For the mouth of the Lord has spoken, q. d.
let his Word stand for a Law with you. Justinian tells us in his Institutes,
that it was a Prerogative belonging to the Roman Emperor, Quicquid principi
placuirit, legis habet vigorem, whatsoever he pleased to bid be done was a Law.
And the French Kings Edicts or Proclamations always end with these binding
words, Car bell est nostre plasir, for such is our pleasure, and we look to be
obeyed. May not the King of Kings say so much more?

Ver. 21. How is the faithful City] Here begins, as some think, Nota est
admirantis, and deplorantis.
a new Sermon; and it begins as Jeremiah's Lamentations do with an Ecack:
How, a particle of Admiration mixed with grief, q. d. Proh pudor! proh dolor! O
shameful! O doleful! What a strange business is this? and how unworthily is
this matter carried? Here Is a City so altered that ye can scarce know her to be
the same; ye may seek Jerusalem in Jerusalem and not find her: -- tota est jam
Roma lupanar. Mantuan.
See Ezekiel. 16.15, 23. and 23.3. etc.

Become an Harlot?] In meretricem; not a privy Harlot only, but a prostituted
harlot, a very prostibulum meretrix meretricissima, utpote quae cubile
dilatavit, Isa 57. Tibias devaricavit, Ezekiel. 16. Such a trite harlot is the
great whore of Babylon at this day, whose faithfulness was once famous all the
world over, Romans 1. But now, O quantum haec Niobe! Ex aurea factam argenteam,
ex argentea, ferream, ex ferrea terream, superesse ut in stercus abiret. Theod.
Urias Augustinianus. circa. An. 1414.
One of her own sons once complained that of gold she was become silver, of
silver brass: and that she was ready to degenerate into dirt, and worse.

It was full of judgement] topfull: Sad, that it was so. Fuimus Troes. It Is a
misery to have been happy.

Righteousness lodged there] Not in Melchisedecks days only, who was King of
Righteousness according to his Name, and King also of Salem, afterward called
Jerusalem: but also in the reigns of David, Solomon, Jehosophat, and other
good Princes. But now no such matter; nay the contrary, like as the Prince of
Orange his Country is fertile of all fruits save Orenges; whence the French
Proverb, En Orange it n'y a point de Oranges.

But now Murtherers] Hierapolis was become a very Poneropolis, the City of God
a den of Thieves, or (as the Papists maliciovsly say of Geneva) a professed
Sanctuary of roguery. By Murderers here may be meant Persecutors of the pious,
and oppressors of the poor man, whose livelihood is his life, Mark 12. ult.
Luke 8.43. A poor man in his house is like a snail in his shell: crush that,
and you kill him.

Ver. 22. Thy silver is become dross] Heb: drosses. A proverbial kind of
speech, deciphering Apostasy. It is as if the Prophet had said, There is
nothing pure in thee, nothing sincere or simple; sed omnia fallacia, omnia
fucata, omnia inquinata; but all things are deceitful, degenerate and corrupt.
Dross looks like silver, and is nothing less: Wine mixed (or marred) with
water has the name of wine, when it is nil nisi vappa: Hypocrites are mere
seemers, Jam, 1.26. Juglers, Job 13.16. having a form of Knowledge, Romans 2. a
form of Godliness, 2 Timothy 3.5. fair professors they are, and foul sinners. But
be not deceived, God is not mocked; he is a faithful Metallary, says a Father,
and will easily find out men's mixtures and impostures. It is to be feared that
he has yet a further controversy with this Nation for our hateful Hypocrisy
and Apostasy: for where now alas, is our ancient fervor and forwardness, our
heating and whetting one another? O how dull and dilute are we, etc.

Ver. 23. Thy Princes are rebellious] Or, Revolters, Apostates: there is an
Elegancy in the Original, such as this Prophet is full of: ac si dicas primi
sunt Pravi vel Perversi; so says Calvin here; Episcopi may be called Aposcopi,
Cardinales Carnales vel Carpinales, Carpet-men; Canonisi, Cenonici, Praepositi
praeposteri, etc. This note A Lapide is very angry at, and lapides loquitur.

And companions of Thieves] Whilst they not only suffered such to go
unpunished, but also shared with them, as Psalm 50.18. Cato complained that in
his time some thieves stood at the bar in cold Irons, when others and worse sat
on the Bench with Gold-chains about their necks. The bold Pirat told Alexander
to his teeth, that he was the Arch-Pirat of the World. And what shall we think
of Pope Alexander, who Anno 1505. sent a Bull of Pardons for many, Speed. 992.
dispensing thereby with such as kept away, or by any fraud had gotten the
goods of other men, which they should now retain still without scruple of
conscience, so as they paid a rateable portion thereof to his Holinesses
receivers? And at this day Popish Priests will absolve a thief of his
wickedness, Scultet in loc.
if he may have half with him of the stolen goods.

Every one loves gifts] Not only takes; although in taking also the Greek
proverb says, (...), great care and caution should be used. Olim didici quid
sint munera, said a grave man. See Deuteronomy. 16 19.

And follows after rewards] As an Hunter his game, or a Merchant his gain, or
a Martialist his enemy; Sectantur retributiones, i. e. Collidunt inter se
judices, says the Chaldee Paraphrast: the Judges complot, saying one to
another, Help thou me in Judging against the poor, and I Will do as much for thee
another time.

They judge not the fatherless] Because friendless, pennilesse. Sed pupillos
laedere, est pupillam oculi Dei contingere.

Neither does the cause of the Widow come before them] The Widow cannot speak
for her self (in the Original she has her name from Dumness) and has no money
to make room for her: hence her cause is slighted.

Ver. 24. Therefore thus says the Lord] Dominator, (...), the great
Housekeeper of the World. (...)


The Lord of Hosts] Heb. Jehovah of Armies.

The mighty One of Israel] Able enough to deal with them, and to punish their
facinus majoris abollae.

Ah] Some render it Heu, Alas, to show that God punishes nolens and dolens,
unwillingly and with grief, Heu ^olentis. Luther. Oecol^mp. Ab exultantis.
as Lam. 3.33. Others make it to be an expression of joy, to show what content
he will take in punishing the obstinate: and so it follows.

I will ease me -- I will avenge me] As it is an ease to a full stomach to
disgorge: and as to a vindictive person Revenge is very sweet.

Est vindicta bonum vita jucundius ipsa. So (but in a way of Justice) God
delights in the destruction of his stubborn enemies. animumque explesse
juvabit.
See Deuteronomy. 28.63. Ezekiel 5.13. Prove, 1.26.

Mine Adversaries] Such by a specialty are corrupt Judges, as Calvin here
notes.

Ver. 25. And I will turn my hand upon thee] So Zech. 13.] I will turn my hand
upon the little ones; so soon does it repent the Lord concerning his servants.
Here he mitigateth the former fearful menace, and promises a Reformation.

And purily purge away thy dross] Et expurgabo, ut purificativum, scorias tuas.
The wicked are the dross of the State, Psalm. 119.119. and wickedness is the
dross and dregs of the soul Prove. 17.3. and 27.21. God promises her to purge
out both, to separate the precious from the vile; to reform and refine all: a
Metaphor from Metallaries.

And I will take away all thy tinne] 1. Thine Hypocrisy: for tin has a show
of silver, but it is not so, nay it is a deadly enemy to gold and silver, says
One, making them hard and brittle. Diod.
It is also a Tyrant over them and will hardly be separated from them. Hereby
are figured your most noted, rooted, and inveterate sins.

Ver. 26. And I will restore] By new minting the Commonwealth, Volut
adulterinum nummum, as Jer. 9.7. Mal. 3.3. This I will do for thee after thy
Captivity, but especially after the coming of Christ in the flesh.

Thou shall be called] Thou shall have the name and the note, the comfort and
the credit of such a one.

The City of Righteousness] Wherein dwells Righteousness: or the City of the
Righteous, of Jesus Christ the Righteous One, 1 Ioh. 2.2. and of his people,
which shall be all righteous, Isa 60.21. Thou shall be a very Jehovah shammah,
Ezekiel 48.35.

The faithful City] As once thou wast, ver. 21.

Ver. 27. Zion shall be redeemed in judgement] Or, by judgment executed on her
enemies, who are also Gods enemies, ver. 24.

And her converts] Such as were Manasseh, made of a Lion a Lamb, Matthew of a
Publican an Evangelist, Paul of a Pharisee an Apostle, Justin of a Philosopher
a Martyr, Cyprian of a Rhetorician, and (as some think) a Magician, a most
famous Bishop; Austin of a Manichee, a Champion of the Church: Petrus Paulus
Vergerius, of the Popes Nuntio a zealous Preacher at Zurich: that I speak not
of Peter Martyrs converts in Italy, Earl Martinens. Marquess Caracciolus,
Lacisius, Tremellius, Zanchius, and other great Divines. Hist. of Modern
Divines by Lupton.
Bucer was first wrought upon by Luthers Sermon preached before the Emperor at
Worms, and so of a Dominican became a famous Protestant. Bilney was converted
by reading Erasmus his Translation of the New Testament, for the Eloquence of
it; and particularly by that sweet sentence, 1 Timothy 1.15. Latimer was converted
by blessed Bilney (as he calls him) from a stiff Papist to a stout Professor
of the Truth; Julius Palmer the Martyr, by reading Calvin's Institutions; Dr.
Sibbs by a Sermon preached by Mr. Paul Bains; Mr. Whateley by Mr. Dod.

In Righteousness] or by Gods faithfulness in fulfilling his promises, whereby
they are made partakers of the Divine Nature, having escaped the corruption
that is in the World through lust, 2 Pet. 1.4.

Ver. 28. And the destruction] Heb. the shivering or shattering. Tremelius
rendereth it, the fragments or scraps, sc. of the dross above mentioned; these
shall be broken and burnt together.

Shall be together] As well the sinners in Zion or Hypocrites, as the
Transgressors or notorious offenders, shall be destroyed without distinction.
Such as turn aside unto their crooked ways, stealing their passage to Hell as
it were, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity, with
openly profane persons, Psalm 125.5. The Angels also shall bundle them up
together to be burnt, Mat. 13.30.

Ver. 29. For they shall be ashamed of the Okes] Pudefient and peribunt; (...).
they shall be ashamed of their false ways of worship, but not with a godly
shame, such as was Ephraims, Ier. 31.19. that made him say, What have I do any
more with Idols? Hos. 14.8. See Ezekiel. 16.61. and 36.31. Dan. 9.5. 2 Thessalonians.
3.14. Of this holy shame Chrysostom says, that it is the beginning of
Salvation, as that which drives a man into himself, makes him fall low in his
own eyes, shame and shent himself in the presence of God, seek for covering by
Christ, that the shame of his nakedness may not appear, Rev. 3.18, etc. But the
shame here mentioned is of another nature, unseasonable, unprofitable, not
conducing at all to true Repentance; such as was that of Cain, and of those
Jews in Jeremy, Chap. 2.26. and of Reprobates at the Resurrection, Dan. 12.2.

Which ye have desired] Or have delighted in, as Adulterers do sin their sweet
sin, Alludit verecunde ad scortationem, qua est in idolorum cultu. Oecolamp.
as they call it.

And the Gardens] where you have wickedly worshipped Priapus or Baal-peor.

That ye have chosen] Where ye have had your sacra electitia, which now, ye
see, cannot help you.

Ver. 30. For ye shall be as an oak] Peccato poenam accommodat: By oaks they
sinned, and by a withering oak is their punishment set forth: Infelicissime
marcesceth and exarescetis. Jun.
as also by a garden that wants water, wherein every thing fades and hangs
the head, as suffering a Marasus. Well might God say, Hos. 12.10. I have
multiplied Visions, and used similitudes by the Ministry of the Prophets, such
as are very natural, plain and proper.

Ver. 31. And the strong shall be as tow] The Idol is here called the strong
one, either by an Irony, sicut siquis scelestum bonum virum dicat, as if one
should say to a knave, You are a right honest man: or else according to the
Idolaters false opinion of it, and vain expectation of it: like as 2 Chronicles.
28.23. the gods of Damascus are said to have smitten, or plagued Ahaz: not that
they did so indeed (for an Idol is nothing in the world, and this strong in the
Text is weak as water, Ier. 10.5. 2 Cor. 8.4.) but he thought they did so: like
as the silly Papists also think of their He-saints and She-saints, whereof they
have not a few, but are shamefully foiled and frustrated: besides that they are
here and elsewhere threatened with unquenchable fire. Hierom following Symmachus,
for tow has the refuse of tow which is quickly kindled.

And the maker of it] Or, and his work: that is, all your pains taken to no
purpose in worshipping your mawmets, and bringing your Memories (as they are
called) and presents to them.

And they shall both burn together] As one says of Aretines obscene book that
it is opus dignum quod cremetur cum Authore, Boissard. Biblioth. Rev. 19.20.
fit for nothing but to make a bone-fire to burn the Author of it in. The Beast
and his Accomplices shall be cast alive into the burning lake.

And none shall quench them] Hellfire is unquenchable, chap. 30. ult. Mat.
3.12. This Origin denied, and is therefore justly condemned by all sound
Divines.

CHAP. II.
Ver. 1. THe word that Isaiah the son of Amos saw] An august Title or
inscription, such as is not to be found in the whole book again, unless it be
in the former Chapter. There alas he had labored in vain, and spent his
strength for naught, and in vain, as chap. 49.4. Howbeit he will try again; as
considering that he had lost many a worse labor: and although his Report were
not believed, chap. 53.1. yet he would bestow one more Sermon upon them, the
short Notes and general Heads whereof we have in this and the two following
Chapters: I say, the general Heads. For Calvin in his Preface to this Book
tells us, that it was the manner of the holy Prophets to gather a compendious
sum of what they had preached to the people, and the same to affix to the
gates of the Temple, that the Prophecy might be the better viewed and learned
of all, after which it was taken down by the Priest, and put into the Treasury
of the Temple, for the benefit of after-Ages.

Ver. 2, 3, 4. And it shall come to pass, etc.] See for these three Verses what
I have noted on Micah 4.1, 2, 3. where we shall find that that Prophet has the
self-same words with this (...). So has Obadiah the same with Jeremy, St. Mark
with St. Matthew, St. Jude with St. Peter, the blessed Virgin in her Magnificat
with holy Hannah in her Canticle, etc.

Ver. 5. O house of Jacob] So Mic. 2.7. O thou that art called the house of
Jacob; and the house of Israel, Isa. 5.7. Thou that art called a Jew and make
thy boast of God, Per aemulaticnem provocat. Oecolamp.
Romans 2.17. This, Rupertus makes to be the voice and advice of the converted
and Christian Gentiles to the Jews: others, of our Prophet to his perverse
Countrymen, to join with the Gentiles, or rather to go before them as worthy
Guides in Heaven-wayes; and not to lie behind those whom they have so much
slighted.

Let us walk in the light of the Lord] that is, in the Law of the Lord (for Lex
est Lux, Prove. 6.23.) and not by the sparks of our own Tinder-boxes, Isa.
50.11. not by the Rush-candle of Philosophical prescriptions. Let us walk in
the fear of the Lord, (...) est in Apostrophe.
and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, as Acts 9.31.

Ver. 6. Therefore thou have forsaken thy people] Or, But thou have, etc. By a
sad Apostrophe to God, he sets forth the Jews dereliction and destruction
irrecoverable, together with the causes of it, their impiety, cruelty, etc. but
especially their contempt of Christ and his Kingdom. Let us beware, and be
warned by their example, Romans 11. To be forsaken of God is the greatest
mischief. Lay hold upon him therefore with Mary Magdalen, and say -- nobiscum,
Christ, maneto: Extingui lucem nec patiare tuam.

Because they be replenished from the East] Or, they are fuller then the East;
that is, more superstitious then the Syrians and Mesopotamians, Balaams
Countrymen. Ethnicismum illis improperat. Antiq. lib. 16. cap. 10.
Josephus tells us that a little before Christ came in the flesh, Herod had
brought into Judea many superstitions of the Gentiles: and it appears by the
first of Macchabees, that the Greeks had their Schools at Jerusalem: and by the
Gospel, that the Pharisees held Pythagoras his transanimation, and many other
Paganish Traditions.

Augurium qua^i avigerium.
And are Southsayers like the Philistins] These were West of Judaea, chap.
9.12. The Syrians before, and the Philistines behind. These were great
Southsayers and Sorcerers, and the Jews were tainted with that Contagion, as
sin is more catching than the plague. The vanity of this practice Cicero saw,
when he said, Potest Augur Augurem videre and non ridere?

Adhaeserunt, Vulg. In usu habent, Ch^ld.
And they please themselves in the children of strangers] They applaud and
approve of their customs and commerces. Some think they are there taxed of
Paederastie, or Sodomy, and that they boasted of it, as that odious Johannes a
Casa did in print.

Ver. 7. Their land also is full of silver] They had forsaken the Fountain of
Living Waters, and now they hew them out broken Cisterns: they have made their
gold their God, which is a more subtle kind of Idolatry, Col. 3.5. dum sibi
ipsis numen quoddam lararium conflant. But though their houses were full of
silver and gold, their hearts were not: for they were vexed with the curse of
unsatisfiableness, Eccles. 5.10.

Auri nempe fames parto fit major ab auro. Prudentius.
Neither is there any end of their Treasures] Josephus says that there was a
world of money found at Jerusalem when taken by the Romans: so there was at
Constantinople when taken by the Turks; and therefore taken, because the
Inhabitants could not find in their heatts to part with it, though for their
own defense.

Their land also is full of horses] and their hearts of creature confidence,
trust in the arm of flesh as Josephus testifies, that the Jews were this way
very faulty, about the time of the last devastation.

Ver. 8. Their land also is full of Idols] As Babylon a land of Idols, Jer.
50.38. As Athens wholly given to Idolatry, Act. 17.16. As China is said to have
in it at this day an hundred thousand gods. And what shall we think of Popish
mawmets? the word here rendered Idols, signifies Nihilitates nothingnesses: for
an Idol is nothing in the world, 1 Cor. 8.4.

They worship the work of their own hands] Scelestum and immane facinus, dirum
scelus and execrandum; effraenata and praeceps amentia. See chap. 44.15, 18.

Ver. 9. And the mean man boweth down] There is a general conspiracy, and they
are altogether become abominable. Lords and losels, Kings and caytifes, all
sorts were Idolaters. Some render it, shall be brought down, and shall be
humbled: God loves to retaliate, to abate and abase man's pride, by pulling
down whatsoever height or strength they confide in.

Therefore forgive them not] A pious prayer doubtless, proceeding from true
zeal, which is an extreme heat of all the affections for Gods glory. Vt pius
sit in Deum, durus sit in proximum, says Oecolampadius. Like another Elias he
makes Intercession to God against Israel, Romans 11.2. whom he saw to be
incorrigible, and their sin to be irremissible, their Judgment unavoidable.

Ver. 10. Enter into the Rock and hide thee] q. d. Do if thou can: go where
thou think thou may be most secret and secure: but Gods hand will surely
find thee and ferret thee out, as it did the five Kings of Canaan, hid in the
cave of Makkedah* Josh. 10. and as it did the wretched Jews, who were by the
Romans pulled out of their privies and other lurking-holes to the slaughter, at
the last destruction of Jerusalem. Hoc autem perpetuo invenies apud peccatores,
says Oecolampadius here: This is ever usual with sinful persons, to desire to
fly from God, but he meets them at every turn, as he did Adam, Cain, Jonas,
Dr. Rain.
etc. The safest way is to fly fron Gods anger to Gods grace. Blood-letting is
a cure of bleeding, and a burn a cure against a burn: and running to God is the
way to escape him; as to close and get in with him that would strike you, does
avoid the blow.

For fear of the Lord and for the glory] Heb. from before the fear of the Lord,
and from the glory of his Majesty: so the Chaldaean and Roman forces are
called. See 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. which seems to be taken from this Text.

Ver. 11. The lofty looks of man shall be humbled] Ipsi antea tumidi and
cervicosi Deum ultorem agnoscent. God shall bring down the haughty from their
lofty tops where they have perked themselves, and shall take them a link lower,
as they say, Pride must have a fall; and no wonder: for whereas other sins flee
from God, pride lets fly at him; and hence it is, He is so utter an enemy to
it.

And the Lord alone shall be exalted] This, the Heathens also understood: De
consen. Evang. lib. 1. cap. 18.
and therefore the Romans would never receive the God of Israel, says Austin,
because they understood that, He would be worshipped alone. Let the gods of the
Heathens be good fellows: the true God is a jealous God, and will not share his
glory with another.

In that day] Nempe statis quasi comitiis, ver. 17. at the set-time in it
implies also* says One, that God will keep his time to a day; we have a
saying like our selves, A day breaks no square: but it is not so with God,
Exodus 12.40, 41. the first born were slain at midnight: because just then, the
400. or 4^0. years of their sojourning in Egypt were expired, Dan. 5.30. In
that night was Belshazzar slain: because then exactly the Seventy years of
their Captivity were ended.

Ver. 12. For the day of the Lord of Hosts shall be upon every one that is
proud] These he knows afar off, Psalm 138.6. these he resists as it were in
battel-array, Jam. 4.6. these he casts down to the ground, Psalm 147.6. One
of the seven Wise men of Greece said, that God made it his business, to humble
the proud, and to lift up the lowly.

Ver. 13. And upon all the Cedars of Lebanon] which was to the North: Ab
Aquilone nihil boni.

That are high and lifted up] No man's might or height, whether of State or of
Stature, can secure him in the day of Gods displeasure.

And upon all the Oaks of Basan] which was to the East: by which way the
Chaldees were to come upon them.

Ver. 14. And upon all the high Mountains] Optimates and dynastas designat:
Hereby he means the Grandees and Magnificoes, and all that are puffed up with
an opinion of their own power or policy.

Ver. 15. And upon every high Tower] In these the Jews trusted, as sure
succors in time of distress: but all in vain.

Ver. 16. And upon all the ships of Tarshish] Or of the Mediterranean sea; the
ships whereof were of great bulk and burden; and perhaps were garnished and
inlaid with curious pictures, called here Pictures of desire; Virg.
Pictasque innare carinas.

Ver. 17. And the loftiness of man shall be] This is often inculcated; and all
little enough to abate and abase the pride of people, and to bring down every
high thought that exalts it self against the Knowledge of God, and the
Obedience of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. This holy fisherman, that he might
catch souls, spreads his Net, dilates his discourse: telling the proud person
over and over what to trust to.

Ver. 18. And the Idols he shall utterly abolish] Their names shall be cut off
out of the Land, and they shall no more be remembered, Zech. 13.2. unless it be
with shame and detestation, as Ezekiel. 16.61. Psalm 16.4. Hos. 14.8. Isa. 30.22.

Ver. 19. And they shall go into the holes] See ver. 10.

Ver. 20. In that day a man shall cast his Idols] Though never so much worth
either for weight or workmanship, for value or elegancy: he shall pollute what
before he had perfumed, Isa. 30.22.

To the Moles and to the Bats] Coeci coeca coecis, having their eyes opened in
that extreme danger: as the Mole has they say, when the pangs of death are
upon her. These ashamed of their vain confidences, and hasting to hide
themselves, shall cast their Idols into by-corners, saying as chap. 30.22. Get
you hence. Moles do all their mischief by working under ground; so says
Epiphanius do Heretics: but if once they be above ground, they are weak and
contemptible creatures. Bats have wings as a Bird, and teeth as a Beast: being
both, and yet neither. Such are our Vespertilian Professors, time-serving
Gospellers, who should do well to cast away either their wings or their teeth:
and loathing this bat like Nature, be what they are, either birds or beasts.

Ver. 21. To go into the clefts of the Rocks] See ver. 10. Only here the double
repetition of this dreadful Judgment is very Emphatical: and may serve to
teach Preachers to inculcate upon their Hearers Gods severity against sinners,
and to remind them much of those last things, Death, Judgment, Hell. Vtinam
ubique de his dissereretur, says Chrysostom that excellent Preacher. O that
these things might resound from all Pulpits!

Ver. 22. Cease ye from man] Man or means, humane helps and creature comforts;
think not that these can secure you from an angry God, or moat you up against
his fire; Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there
is no help. His breath goes forth, he returns to his dust: in that very day
his golden thoughts perish, Psalm 146.3, 4. See the Notes there.

Whose breath is in his nostrils] Every moment ready to puff out: as the
Emperor Jovinians did; a good Emperor, but he reigned only seven months,
being stifled (as it is thought) with the smell of his bedchamber newly
white-limed, Eutrop. Oros.
wherein he had commanded a great fire to be made in a cold night. Hence
Hierome, Jovinian who succeeded Julian the Apostate in the Empire, In epitap.
Nepotian.
when as yet he had scarce tasted of the goodness of it, faetore prunarum
suffocatus interiit, died suffocated with the stench of hot-burning coals,
declaring to all men what a poor thing man is in his greatest power. The
Cardinal of Lorrain, was lighted to his Lodging, B^vlus de vit. Pen.
and to his long home both at once by a poisoned Torch: Pope Adrian 4. was
choked by a fly getting into his Windpipe, Anno Dom. 1159.

For wherein is he to be esteemed?] All his power without God is but weakness,
all his wisdom folly, all his plenty poverty. What is man, says a Father,
(...). Greg. Naz.
but Soul and Soil? Breath and Body; a puff of wind the one; a pile of dust the
other; no solidity in either. Abstinete ergo vos ab ipso homine -- nam quanti
est? what reckoning is to be made of him?

CHAP. III.
Ver. 1. FOr behold] This is also part of the former Sermon, though made the
beginning of another Chapter: for of our Prophet that is some way true which
Petrarch says of Livy, viz. that he wrote many Books, quos in Decades non ipse
sed fastidiosa legentium scidit imperitia, which not himself but others without
any great skill divided into Decads; sc. Chapters.

The Lord -- does take away] Heb. is taking away, i. e. He will surely and
suddenly do it, and thereby pave a way to the utter ruin of all. For as it was
a Sign Sampson meant to pull down the House when he pulled away the pillars: so
that God is about to ruin a State, when he plucketh away those that are the
shores and props of it.

The stay and the staff] Validum and validam, so some render it, Sept. Piscat.
the Miriams as well as the Mosesses, Mic. 6.4. Others, baculum and bacillum,
the staff and the little staff; all the supports and stays of the State, both
great and small, one with another: Cease ye therefore from man, as chap. 2.22.

The whole stay of bread] Sustenance as well as Supporters, quicquid alimento
aut munimento esse poterat.

Ver. 2. The mighty man and the man of War] Such as were David's Mighties,
Hannibal, Fabius Maximus (of whom the Poet, Hic patria est, murique urbis stant
pectore in uno) Scipio Africanus, of whose death when Metellus heard, he run
out into the public Forum, and cried out, Concurrite cives, urbis vestrae
maenia corruerunt. Come forth, and consult what is to be done, for your City is
undone.

The Judge and the Prophet] When God gathers such by clusters as it were,
some evil is at hand: as when men pull up their hedges and fences, it is
open-tide.

And the prudent] Heb. the Diviner: such as have their eyes on their head,
Eccl. 2.14. their hearts at their right hands, Eccles. 10.20. that judiciously
pondering things past, can prudently order things present, and providently
foresee to prevent dangers likely to ensue.

And the ancient] With whom is Wisdom and Counsel, Job 32.4.6, 7.

Ver. 3. The Captain of fifty] One of the least and lowest Commanders in War:
such also shall fail, and therefore all must needs fall to wrack and ruin;
this Epaminondas when he was dying foresaw at Thebes, Plut:
and therefore counseled his Countrymen to make peace upon any terms.

And the honourable] Heb. the man eminent in countenance. Sept. (...), a man of
respect and authority; in the eyes of Augustus Caesar sat such a rare Majesty
as a man could hardly endure to behold them, without closing of his own.

And the cunning artificer] Such as was Hiram (whom for honour-sake Solomon
called Father) Archimedes, and such others who are of great use to a State, for
making of Engines and Instruments.

And the eloquent Orator] Heb. skilled in Charms: Quintilian describes an
Orator thus: Intelligentem, meditatam and gravem orationem. Oecolamp.
Vir bonus dicendi peritus, a good man well-spoken. Ille regit dictis animos
and pectora mulcet, he carries the people which way he pleases: The Athenians
called such (...) and set an high price upon them, as they did on Pericles,
Demosthenes, Phocion, etc.

Ver. 4. And I will give children to be their Princes] si non annis, at animis;
such as were Ahaz, Manasseh, the four last Kings of Judah; the calamity of that
Kingdom. Dii avertant principes pueros. Vopis.
Princes that are witless, wilful, weak or wicked, are the peoples woe, Eccles.
10.16. this childhood of theirs is the maturity of their Subjects misery. See
Job 34.30.

And babes shall rule over them] Sept. Mockers. some render it Foxes. Others
Effeminate persons. But babes is best. Such a one was Rehoboam, and Honorius
the Emperor, who when he heard that his City of Rome was taken by Alarichus,
grieved most of all for the loss of a certain bird which was there kept for
him, and by him called Rome. Indignum sane, Regem aves praeferre urbibus, says
the Historian.

Ver. 5. And the people shall be oppressed one by another] the greater
devouring the lesser, as fishes do. How should it be otherwise, when there is
either no Government, or not that which is good, but all things turned as here,
topsy-turvy, without any respect to age, order, or dignity, and Virg.
Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus.

This dissension is the mother of Dissolution, says Nazianzen. This
Dissipation and perversion of Order and Manners is the forerunner of utter
desolation and subversion.

Ver. 6. When a man shall take hold of his brother] This is a further mischief
that Government shall go a begging, and scarce one be found that shall hold it
worth having. The Venetians have Magistrates called Praegadi, because at first
men were prayed to take the office, and not many would accept of it. This was
the case here: Men are naturally ambitious of Ruledom (the Bramble thinks it a
goodly thing to reign over the Trees) but they may soon have enough of it, and
be forced to cry out as he once did of his Diadem, O vilis pannus! O base rag!
not worth taking up at a man's feet!

Thou have clothing] fit for a Prince, some badge of honor, and such Apparel
as may procure thee respect: For Hunc homines decorant, quem vestimenta
decorant.

Let this ruin be under thy hand] that is, by an Hypallage, let thy hand be
under this ruin, that is, under this desolate and ruined State, to raise it up
and repair it.

Ver. 7. In that day shall he swear, saying] It Is come to this pass in some
places at this day, Vt ambigant prudentiores, otium, an officium aliquod Reip.
sint persecuturi, that Wise men doubt whether they had best bear Office or not.
But true goodness is publike-spirited, though to private disadvantage.

In caducum parietem non inclinabo.
I will not be an healer] i. e. a Ruler. I will not be a binder up, or a
Chyrurgion; for this State is no better then a great Spittle; the whole Head is
sick, and the whole Heart heavy, etc. I dare not therefore meddle with it, since
it is incurable, incorrigible. The Septuagint render it, I will not be thy
Prince: A King has his Name in Greek from healing, (...) ab (...) medela.
as Plutarch observes: because he is to be the Physician or Surgeon of the
Common wealth.

In mine house is neither bread, nor cloathing] I have not for mine own, much
less for you. A Prince had need to be well under-laid, that he may not need to
pill and poll his Subjects, or in judging to gape after gain.

Ver. 8. For Jerusalem is faln] Therefore I Will not meddle, since it is a very sad
thing to be Physician to a dying State, quando conclamatum est, when men are
forsaken of their hopes.

Because their tongue and their doings are against the Lord] They set their
mouths against Heaven, and like so many Wolves they howl upwards: they lay the
reins in the neck, and let their unruly tongues run riot. And as they talk, so
they act, doing wickedly with both hands earnestly, against the Author of their
Being and Well-being.

To provoke the eyes of his glory] His eyes run to and fro through the earth:
and all the wickedness in the world is committed before his face. This they
know, and yet, go on in sin, as if they did it on purpose to provoke him, and
to see what he can do. Oecolampadius notes, that Gods eyes are here mentioned,
because men are easily provoked to anger by a hurt in the eye. And Junius here
observes, that Gods eyes are called the Eyes of his Glory, because as he is
glorious in himself, so he is either to be glorified by us, or else he will
surely glorify himself upon us, such especially as are obstinate and impudent,
as here.

Ver. 9. The show of their countenance does witness against them] q. d. You may
see by their very looks what Lewd losels they are. Their cruelty, pride, envy,
hypocrisy, mulierosity sits and shows it self apparently in their faces
and foreheads. Wisdom makes the face to shine, says Solomon; and ipse
aspectus viri boni delectat. Good men look lovely, says Seneca, as did that
Angel of God, John Bradford, quoth Dr. Tailor Martyr: not so Cain, when
discontented at God and displeased at his brother, Genesis 4.6. he scouled and
looked like a dog under a door, as we say. (...), Hom. (...).
The thoughts are often known by the countenance: and the heart is printed upon
the face. Damascen calls the eyes, the exact images of the Imaginations. And
the Italians have a Proverb that a man with his words close and his countenance
loose, may travel undiscovered, what he is or goes about, all the world over.
The word here used for show or trial, does in Hithpael signify to make a man's
self unknown.

And they declare their sin, as Sodom] They tell it out, as Judge. 14.16. And as
the shameless Sodomites said to Lot, Bring them out to us that we may know
them, Genesis 19.5. See the like impudency in Lamech, Genesis 4.23, 24. In Lots two
daughters, Genesis 19.36, 37. This impudent naming of their incestuous brats as
begotten by their own Father shows, that they declared their sin, as Sodom,
where they had lived and learned it.

They hide it not] So Ezekiel. 24.7. Her blood is in the midst of her: she set it
upon the top of a Rock, as it were a sunning, she poured it not upon the
ground, to cover it with dust. See Jer. 2.25.

Woe to their soul] to their very soul. All wickedness has a woe hanging at the
heels of it: but especially that which is grown impudent, a noon-day-Devil. The
Septuagint here have it thus: Woe to their soul, for that they have taken evil
counsel: saying, let us bind the just One, for that he is not for our purpose
or profit. Wherein they do insinuate the Mystery of Christ's Passion, says
Oecolampadius, and do manifestly tax their own Nation. Epiphanius testifies of
the Jews at Tiberias after the last destruction of Jerusalem, that it was usual
with them when any of their dear friends or kindred were at the point of death,
Epiphan. apud Lonicer. in Theat. Histor. p. 96.
to whisper these words secretly into their ears, Creed in Jesum Nazarenum
crucifixum, Believe in Jesus of Nazareth, whom our Chieftains crucified: for he
it is who shall come to judge thee at the last day; Now if this be true, how
great is the obstinacy and impudence of that perverse people, who still sin
against such strong convictions?

Ver. 10. Say ye to the Righteous] Tell them so from me, says God, for their
comfort and encouragement. Zuinglius when he had preached terror to the
wicked, was wont to add, Probe vir, hoc nihil ad te. All this concerns not
thee, O thou godly man. When the dogs in a house are beaten, the Children will
be apt to fright and cry: So when the wicked are threatened, good men are apt
to be troubled. Say therefore to such, and let them know assuredly,

That it shall be well with him] Heb. that good, sc. shall betide him, whatever
befalls others. God shall be with the good, 2 Chronicles. 19. ult. Yet God is good
to Israel, to the pure in heart, Psalm 73.1. Eccl. 8.12.

For they shall eat the fruit of their doings] They shall reap in due time if
they faint not; they shall eat of the fat, and drink of the sweet, Isa. 25.6.
See chap. 65.13. and Prove 14.14. with the Notes.

Ver. 11. Woe to the wicked] This Sentence should ever sound in the wicked man's
ears, for a powerful retentive from wickedness, considering the evil
Consequent thereof, that doleful (...) woe and alas for evermore! And when thou
art making (says One) a covenant with sin; say to thy soul, as Boaz said to
his kinsman, Ruth. 4.4. At what time thou buyest it, thou must have Ruth with
it: If thou will have the pleasure of sin, the ways of wickedness, thou must
also have the vengeance and wrath of God with it; and let thy soul answer as he
here does; No, I may not do it, I shall mar and spoil a better Inheritance, I
shall inherit a curse, etc. Look says Mr. Bradford Martyr to the tag tied to
Gods Law (the malediction) which is such as cannot but make us to cast our
currish tails betwixt our legs, Sermon. of Repentance.
if we believe it.

Jun.
It shall go ill with him] Vtcunque sibi de rebus praesentibus gratuletur.
Though he stroke himself on the head, saying, I shall have peace though I walk
in the imaginations of my heart, to add drunkenness to thirst, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
Tell him from me, says God, Evil sc. shall betide him, Yea An evil, an only
evil awaiteth him, Ezekiel. 7.5. let him look for it.

The reward of his hands shall be given him] He shall reap as he sowed, drink
as he brewed, Gal, 6.7, 8.

Mox aut poena manet miseros, aut palma beatos:
Quisque suae vitae semina jacta metet.
Verse. 12. A for my people] Now the people of my wrath, and of my curse,
Loammi, discovenanted, discarded.

Children are their oppressours] Rulers he calls them not, as being too good
a Name for them: but Oppressors, and these were boys and women, i. e. such as
were no wiser then children, nor had any more command of their passions then
weak women, Heyl. Cosm^g.
and were therefore unfit for Government. Brunhild the wife of Sigebert King of
Metz, Fri^egund the wife of Chilperick, and Katherine Medices wife of Henry the
2. are said to be the Furies of France. What work they made in that Kingdom in
their generations, by abusing their Husbands love and authority, Histories are
full. The like did Jezabel in Israel, Athaliah in Judah, and Dame Alice Pierce
here in England in King Edward the thirds days. This Woman being the Kings
Concubine, and presuming on his favor, whom in his old age she had subdued,
grew so insolent, that she imprisoned Sir Peter la Mare, Speaker for the
Parliament: Dan. Hist. 257.
intermeddled with Courts of Justice, and other Offices, where she her self
would sit to effect her desire; which though in all who are so exalted are ever
excessive, yet in a woman most immoderate, as having less of discretion, and
more of gre^diness. Heliogabalus in a merriment set up a Senate of Women, but
then their Ordinances were correspondent, as what Attire each Woman should use,
how they should take place, when salute, etc. But these in the Text working
upon their Husbands Impotencies (who were children in the sense that Shechem
the son of Hamor is so called, Genesis 34.19. Neque distulit puer, a lad or a boy,
because swayed not by right reason, but by blind affection) exacted of the poor
people unreasonable Tributes and Pensions, for the maintenance of their pride
and luxury. Est haec ingens plaga, says One, this is a great mischief to a
State, such as Greece and Rome sometimes groaned under. Diophantus the son of
Themistocles once boasted that he Ruled all Greece, because he Ruled his
mother: she Ruled his Father, and he Ruled Greece. Cato also complained,
Mulieres regunt nos, nos Senatum, Senatis Romam, Roma orbem; Our Women, said
he, Rule us, we Rule the Senate, the Senate the City and the City the whole
world.

Qui bea^^ficant te.
O my people, they which lead thee] Or, those that bless thee, and pronounce
thee happy, saying, as do thy false-Prophets, those flatterers, because thou
have with thee the Oracles and Ordinances of God, the Ceremonies and
Sacrifices, praising thee therefore and promising thee all happiness, soothing
thee up in thy sins, etc. Qui ducunt te, seducunt; False Guides they are, and

Destroy the way of thy Paths] Heb. They swallow up, that is, they hide from
thee thy duty, and so harden thee in thy sin.

Ver. 13. The Lord stands up to plead] Or, to debate, Job 9.3. Prove. 25.8, 9.
to argue the case, and to hear pleas. He is content, for the clearing of his
Justice, and conviction of sinners, to submit his courses unto scanning. See
chap. 5.3. Judicate quaeso, Judge I pray you: so Jer. 2.9. Wherefore I will yet
plead with you, and with your childrens children will I plead. But when that is
done,

He stands to judge the people] And the Lord will enter into Judgment, ver.
14. three several words are here made use of for Judgment, to show, says
Oecolampadius, that God has been is, and shall be Judge; and that in his
Judgment, nihil relinquetur inexpensum, nothing shall be left unconsidered.

Ver. 14. The Lord will enter into judgment with the ancients] 1. with the
Prince and Rulers, each of which shall have cause to cry out Judex ante fui,
nunc judicis ante tribunal
Sistor. --


For ye have eaten up the Vineyard] Vos, non caret Emphasi, Ye, even ye, that
should have preserved it, and wrought in it, have depastured and destroyed my
Vineyard, that is my Church, as chap. 5.17. or poor men's possessions, through
your extortions and oppressions.

And the spoil of the poor is in your houses] You are taken (...) in the very
act of your theft, as Cacus was, and Verres, Deprehensi estis in surto.
Oecolamp.
etc.

Ver. 15. What mean you that you beat my people to pieces?] Heb. What to you?
all in a word, short and sharp, q. d. What reason had you? What authority to do
thus? That was a witty answer that was given once here to the Popes Exactor,
Tuitione.
who pleaded that all Churches were his, and therefore he might call for what
sums he pleased; a nimble Disputant replied, that all Churches were the Popes
in a sense, viz. Tuitione, sed non fruitione; defensione, non dissipatione, i.
e. to defend them, but not to destroy them. If God give any man power, it is
for edification, and not for destruction, 2 Cor. 13.10.

And grind the faces] holding their Noses to the grind stone, as we say by hard
usage. See on Mic. 3.3.

Says the Lord God] Dixit Dominator dominus; he who is higher then the
highest, and being Lord of Hosts, has those at hand that are higher then they,
Eccles. 5.8.

Ver. 16. Moreover the Lord saith] He has this other saying to the other sex,
for the maintaining of whose pride and luxury their Husbands and Paramours
exercised such cruelty, as before in the Reign of Henry 2. King of France, Anno
1554. many were burned there for Religion, as they said; but indeed to satiate
the covetousness, and support the pomp of Diana Valentina the Kings Mistress,
Hist of Counc. of Trent. 387.
to whom he had given all the confiscation of goods made in the Kingdom for
cause of Heresy.

Because the Daughters of Zion] the Court Ladies.

Are haughty] Elatae, h. e. superbia inflatae, puffed up with pride, first in
heart, and then in habit: for pride will bud, Ezekiel. 7.10.

And walk] Women should keep the house, says Paul. Sarah was in the Tent, Tit.
2.5.
Genesis 17.9. and these professed to be her Daughters, but were nothing like her;
Modestia enim a superbia triumphata est.

With stretched forth necks] like Cranes or Swans, that they might show their
fair foreheads, whereas nature has given the submiss and modest visages.

And wanton eyes] Heb. Lying or deceiving, viz. by their lewd lascivious looks,
twinkling and making signs. Some render it facie sercussata with their painted
faces, and counterfeit visages, whereby to the reproach of their Maker they
would seem fairer then they are.

Walking and mincing as they go] Or tripping or tabering, with an affected
gate, after the manner of Dancers. Or ruffling in their Silks and Taffaties,
with which last word, the original seems to have affinity. Others derive it
from Taph a little child, Minutim and numerose passus conserunt. Jac. Revius.
and render it instar parvulorum ambulant, they take short steps, as little
ones do; so nice they are in their gate and garb; elaborata quadam
concinnitate gressum modulantes.

Making a tinkling with their feet] going as if they were shackled, or as young
Colts that are to be broken and brought to a pace. Some think they wore bells
about their legs, or spangles on their pantofles. Pope Sixtus quartus was wont
to give his Harlot Tyresia pantofles covered with Pearls.

Turpe pecus mutilum, turpis sine gramine campus. Et fine p^onde frutex, and
sine crine caput. Ovid.
Ver. 17. Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the head] He
will not only pull off their rich pantofles off their feet, but also their
lovely looks from off their heads, with scabs and scales, perhaps caused by
some soul Disease, as the lues Venerea, or plica Polonica.

And will discover their secret parts] not having a rag left to cover them
with, whilst stripped of all by the enemy, they are driven away as those
Egyptians were, chap. 20.4. naked and barefoot, even with their buttocks
uncovered to the shame of Egypt: or as the Albigenses in France at Carcassona
had quarter for their lives given them, by the Popish Bishops and other
Cruciats that persecuted them: but on this condition, Rivet Jesuit. vapul.
that both men and women should depart the Town stark naked in the view of the
whole Army.

Ver. 18. The Lord will take away the bravery] All the following bravery: for
the Prophet as punctually and particularly threatens all down, as if he had
lately seen the Ladies Wardrobes in Jerusalem. And if this vanity of gallantry
be so blameworthy in a woman, who is naturally (...) addicted to fine attire,
how much more in a man, who shall turn Lands into laces, and embroyder his
cloak with Woods and Parks, and Lordships, lining it, happily, with Obligations,
and Bonds, and Statutes?

Of their tinkling ornament, etc.] Here and in the following Verses we have an
Inventory of the Ladies gallantry, such as made the mighty men fall in the War,
ver. 25.26. This was the fruit of their twinkling eyes and tinkling Ornaments,
Vatablus says that the Spanish women did wear bells about their heels when
they danced.

And the round tires like the Meon] Lunata monilia. Statius.

Ver. 19.20, 21, 22, 23. And the chains and the bracelets, etc.] The
particulars of all their bravery we can say little unto upon certainty; since we
are at this day ignorant what Ornaments and Abiliments were then in use: and
besides, the Names here given unto them are such as the Jews themselves can
hardly tell what to make of. It is a sad thing that the gawds and gayeties of
this Age and Country are such and so many, as that not six or seven Verses, but
so many whole Chapters might be easily taken up in Inventarying them. Lysander
a Heathen will rise up in Judgment against many amongst us: for he would not
suffer his Daughters to wear gorgeous attire, saying, it would not make them so
comely as common. That is very remarkable that is storied of Mr. Fox the
Martyrologue, Hist of mod. Div. by Lupton.
that when a son of his returning from his travels into foreign parts, came to
him in Oxford, attired in a loose outlandish fashion, Who are you? said his old
Father, not knowing him. He replied, I am your son: O what enemy of thine, said
he, has taught thee so much vanity? The Hebrew word beghed for a garment,
comes from Baghad, which signifies to deal perfidiously or treacherously, as
Isa. 21.3. perhaps, because it is tegumentum and testimonium, not more a
covering of man's shame, then a testimony of his first sin in falling from God.
So that a man or woman has no more cause to brag of his fine clothes or to be
proud of them, then a Thief of a silk-rope, or then one bath of a Plaster laid
to his filthy sore.

Ver. 24. And there shall be in stead of sweet smell, stink] Ex illuvie and
sordibus captivitatis and carceris. Martial and Marcellinus tell us of a
natural stench the Jews have, such as made the Emperor Aurelius coming amongst
some of them, and annoyed with their ill savor, Ammian. li. 2.
to cry out, O Marcomanni, O Quadi, O Sarmatae, etc. O Marcomans, Quades and
Sarmatians, at length I have met with those that are more nasty and loathsome
then you are. These dainty Dames are threatened with dirty doings in captivity
and prison, such as should render them odious.

And in stead of a girdle, a rent] Or rags, or a beating, the Vulgar rendereth
it a cord.

And instead of well set hair] Heb. work of even or smooth setting, or
trimming, (...) or hair-trimmers were anciently noted for effeminate. Pompey is
taxed in History for that he did, Vnico digitulo caput scalpere, scratch his
well-set hair with his little finger only.

Baldness] Pro crispanti crine calvitium, and pro fascia pectorali cilicium.
Pride is so hateful to God, that such as are guilty of it seldom escape his
visible vengeance.

And burning instead of beauty] Burning, that is Sun-burning.

Ver. 25. Thy men shall fall by the sword] for suffering and favoring the
women's excesses; such as are now adays naked breasts and shoulders: Abhorred
filth! Our King Henry the 6. at such a sight cried, Fit fie Ladies, in sooth
you are too blame, etc.

Ver. 26. And her gates shall lament] because unfrequented, as Lam. 1.4. (...).
Nazian.


And the King desolate] swept and wiped of all; not, as once, with her
turrified head and stretched forth neck.

Sits upon the ground] as a sad mourner. Money was coined by Vespatian with a
woman sitting at the root of a Palm Tree, and this inscription, Judae capta.

CHAP. IV.
Ver. 1. ANd in that day] sc. that day of desolation, chap. 3.26.

Seven women] i. e. many women: See the like Zach. 8.23. The women had been
grievously threatened, chap. 3. the men also for their sakes, ver. 25.26. and
yet the Prophet has not done with them; so heinous is sin in either sex.

Shall take hold of one man] who themselves were wont to be sued unto by many
men: and perhaps were not content with their own Husbands when they had them
alive, but were sick of a Plurisie.

We will eat our own bread, etc.] whereas the husband gives to his wife food,
raiment and due benevolence: these would crave the last only, which yet they
could not do neither in this sort, but by laying aside womanlike modesty.

Only let us be called by thy name] As wives used to be by their husbands
names, both among the Jews and other Nations, as Mary Cleophas, Mary Zebedee,
etc. Solomon's wife was after his name called Shulamite, Cant. 6.13. and the
Roman Ladies were wont to say to their husbands, Vbi tu Cajus, ibi ego Caja.

To take away our reproach] of want of husbands and children. See Psalm 78.63.
Judge. 11.36, 37. Jer. 30.17.

Ver. 2. In that day the branch of the Lord] Here the Prophet draws to a
close of this excellent Sermon, and he concludes it as he began, with a
gracious promise of the coming and Kingdom of Christ, and of the felicity of
his Subjects, which consists, first, in their sanctity, ver. 3.4. Secondly,
in their security, ver. 5.6. This is more amply set forth, chap. 11.

The branch of the Lord] The Lord Christ the Consolation and Expectation of
Israel, called elsewhere the Bud or Branch, Chap. 11.1. Zech. 3.8. and 6.12.
(See the Notes there, Luke 1.78. The Dayspring from on high is by Beza rendered
the Branch from on high) and the Branch of Righteousness, Jer. 23.5. and 33.15.
The Jew Doctors also understand it of the Messiah, Istud germen quod de virga
Jesse virore virgineo pullulavit, says Bernard. The Branch of the Lord he is
called, says Oecolampadius, because being true God, he has God to his Father
in Heaven: and the Fruit of the earth, because being also true man, he had the
Virgin to his mother in earth. Ecce habet incarnationis mysterium. Lo here we
have, says he, the great Mystery of God manifested in the flesh. Others by
the Fruit of the earth here do understand the body of the Church, which is as
the Plant that grows out of that Branch.

Shall be beautiful and glorious -- excellent and comly] Heb. Beauty and glory,
excellency and comeliness, or gayness and goodliness, all in the abstract, and
yet all too little. All this Christ is and more to his Elect, Evasores ^rd.
elis.
who are here set forth by many Titles, as the escaped of Israel, the residue
in Zion, the remnant in Jerusalem, the written among the living there, etc.
Saepe autem ad paupertatem aut pancitatem redigitur Ecclesia. Howbeit known to
the Lord are all his, as well as if He had their Names set down in a book,

Ver. 3. He that is left in Zion] See on ver. 2.

Shall be called holy] Heb. holy shall be said to him or of him: he shall have
the Name and Note of a Saint, the comfort and the credit of it. Christ's
holiness shall be both imputed and imparted unto them: He shall both expiate
their sins, and heal their Natures, pay their Debts, and give them a stock of
grace and holiness; so that men shall call them an holy people, chap. 62.12.

Even every one that is written among the Living] written in Gods book of Life,
which is matter of greater joy then to have the Devils subdued unto us, Luke
10.26. for a man may cast out Devils, and yet be himself cast to the Devil,
Mat. 7.22, 23. but in Gods book of Life, there is no blots, no crossings out:
but as many as are ordain-to eternal Life believe, 1 Pet. 1.4. See Ezekiel. 13.
and the same are kept (as in a Garrison) by the power of God through faith unto
salvation. The Prophet seems her to allude to that custom in Jerusalem, of
enrolling the names of all the Citizens, Psalm 48.3. Christ Jesus is the Master
of the Rolls in Heaven, Rev. 13. wherein none are recorded but such as are
designed to glory and virtue, 1 Pet. 1.2. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. All others are said to
be dead in trespasses and sins, Ezra 2.63.
Ephesians. 2.1. and to be written in the earth, Jer. 17.13. Those Priests that could
not produce their genealogy, were cashiered by the Tirshata: so shall those one
day be by Christ, whose names are not found written among the Living in
Jerusalem.

Sordes quae excunt and excer nuntur e corpore hominis per vari^s meatus.
Ver. 4, When the Lord shall have washed away the filth] the ordure or
excrement; sin is the excrement of the soul, the superfluity or garbage of
naughtiness, the Devils vomit. From this abominable filth Christ has loved and
washed his with his own blood, that he may make them Kings and Priests unto God
and his Father, Rev. 1.5. He not only washes his people from their sins, but
takes away their swinish Natures, whereby they would else return to their
former wallowing in the mire, as so many Borboritae.

Of the Daughters of Zion] Whose pride in apparel, wantonness, luxury, etc.
those Peccadillo's as they are commonly counted, are here rightly called filth
and blood by these Penitentiaries, whose property is to aggravate and lay load
upon their former evil practices, which now swell like Toads in their eyes;
neither can they find words had enough to call them by.

By the spirit of judgement] By pouring upon them the clean water of the Holy
Spirit, whereby also they are enabled to make a right judgment of things that
are excellent (or that differ) and to judge themselves worthy to be destroyed
for their many and mighty sins.

And by the spirit of burning] so called because it burns up our corruptions;
carnis vitia and carcinomata: and secondly, because it enflameth our hearts
with a zeal of Gods glory, making us all on a light fire, as Chrysostom says
that Peter was like a man made all of fire walking amongst stubble. And of one
that desired to know what kind of man Basil was, it is said, there was
presented in a dream a Pillar of fire with this Motto, Talis est Basilius, such
an one is Basil.

Ver. 5. And the Lord will create] for the safeguard and security of his
peculiar people, thus purified unto himself, Tit. 2.14. and that they may serve
him without fear in holiness and righteousness before him all and every day of
their lives, Luke 1. 74, 75. God (rather then fail) will create (as he did of
old in Egypt and the Wilderness) a cloud by day, a flaming fire by night;
against heat, a Tabernacle; against storm and rain, a Covert; any thing, every
thing that heart can wish, or need require; dux erit and defensor, lux erit and
consolator, He will be to all his a Sun and a shield; He will give grace and
glory, etc. Psalm 84.11. See Cant. 2.3.

Upon every dwelling-place] upon every private house, and place of his peoples
abode: their walls are continually before him, chap. 49.16. He loves to look
upon their Habitations, and will hedge them about, Job 1.10.

And upon her assemblies] or meeting-places for Gods service. Howbeit this is
to be taken cum exceptione crucis; the poor Protestants in France have not only
been disturbed but destroyed, at their Church Assemblies, by the Duke of Guise
and other Popish Persecutors. But the godly in such a case glorify God in the
very fire, and bear fruit in such a tempest, by Gods defense and benediction.

A cloud and smoake] Or a smoaky cloud, alluding to that cloudy Pillar, Exodus
13.21. and 14.19. which was a cloud by day, and a fire by night to Israel: so
is Christ a cooling Refreshment to his own in the scorching day of Temptation
or trouble; and a comfortable Lamp of Light to direct and protect them through
the Wilderness of this world. The Cloud was spread over them for a covering,
Psalm 105.39. and sometimes came betwixt them and their enemies behind them,
Exodus 14.19. And this was done in Egypt, where was no rain: how then was there
a cloud? God created it.

For upon all the glory] Israel is called Gods glory, chap. 46.13. the house of
his glory, chap. 6.7. a crown of glory, chap. 62.3. A Throne of glory, Jer.
4.21. Gods Ornament. Ezekiel 7.20. the beauty of his Ornament, and that set in
Majesty, ib. His Royal Diadem, Isa. 62.3. His Jewels, Mal. 3.17. which he wears
(as great men do their Jewels) to make him glorious in the eyes of men: they
are the Signet on his right hand, Isa. 49.

Shall be a covering] As the Cloud covered the Tabernacle, and as the
Rams-skins covered the Ark from the violence of wind and weather: so will
Christ the Church.

Ver. 6. And there shall be a Tabernacle for a shadow] Or, He shall be. Christ
is a shelter and a shadow to his, when as all worldly comforts are but as so
many Burning-glasses, to scorch the soul more.

CHAP. V.
Ver. 1. NOw will I sing] Now, or Now I pray, as stirring up his Hearers to
attention; for here begins his third Sermon. He had endeavored (but with
little good effect) to convince them of their detestable unthankfulness,
Apostasy, and other enormities, in prose: Now he resolves to try another
course, and to be unto them as a Poet rather then a Prophet, if happily they
might be taken by the sweetness of his verse, and loveliness of his Voice, as
Ezekiel. 33.32.

Metra parant animos, comprendunt plurima paucis:
Aures delectant, pristina commemorant.
True it is that Poets for most part, are dulcissime vani, most sweetly vain,
as Austin said of Homer. And some have noted well concerning St. Paul, that
citing his country man Aratus (for he was a Cilician) he names him not, (but
only says, Certain of your own Poets, Act. 17.28.) notwithstanding the Piety
of his beginning, (...), or the Divineness of his Subject, the Heavens; more
sublime and pure matter then uses to be in the wanton Pages of other Poets.
But our Divine Poet is of another alloy, and his holy Song is of the same
strain with that of Moses, of Deborah and Barak, of Hannah, of David (qui
noster Orpheus est, says Euthymius, the sweet singer of Israel, 2 Samuel 23.1.)
of Solomon with his Song of Songs; saving that this is lugubre carmen says
Oecolampadius, Et tragaediae quam comaediae similius, a lamentable ditty, and
more like a Tragedy then a Comedy: for though the Prophet begineth merrily, yet
he ends heavily: it is of Mercy and Judgment that he sings.

To my well-beloved] i. e. to Christ the Churches Bridegroom, cujus amicus and
administer sum, whose Paranymph I am and well-wisher. See John. 3.29. 2 Cor.
11.2, 3. some render it for my Beloved, or in his defense.

A song] Or Poem, whereto this first verse is the Proem or Preface. A spiritual
song it is, most Artificially composed, and set out with the most exquisite
skill that might be.

Of my Beloved] Of him whom my soul loves, as Cant. 1.7. Jonathan loved David,
1. with a love of Union, 1 Samuel 18.1, 2. with a love of complacency, ver. 19.3.
with a love of benevolence, chap. 20.4. so does a gracious heart love Jesus
Christ. My Love was crucified, said Ignatius, Epist. 12. quae est ad Roman
whose heart was even a Lump of Love.

Touching his Vineyard] That degenerate Plant of a strange Vine unto him, Jer.
2.21. the plantation and supplantation whereof is here 1. parabolically
propounded. Secondly, more plainly expounded. Some read it To his Vineyard:
Others for his Vineyard. See Matthew, 21.33.34. Mar. 1.1, 12. Luke. 20.9, 16.

My Beloved] See how often he harps upon this sweet string, and cannot come off.
What a man loves he will be talking off, as the Huntsman of his hounds, the
Drunkard of his cups, the worldling of his wealth, etc. Ten times in nine
verses together does St. Paul mention the name of Jesus, 1 Cor. 1. etc. showing
thereby that it was to him mel in ore, melos in aure, jubilum in cord, the
sweetest Music.

Has a Vineyard] So the Church is here, ver. 7. and elsewhere frequently and
fitly styled: Confert autem vineae, says Oecolampadius. To a Vineyard is the
Church compared for sundry reasons: Nulla p^ssessio majorem operam requierit.
Cato. Itali dicunt Vinea est tinea. Soli antemeridiano, meridiano atque
postmeridiano expostus. Pisc.
as the great care men take about it, the great delight they take in it, the
sweet fruits they expect from it, the great worth of its fruit, the little
worth of its stemm, Ezekiel. 15.3. if it prove fruitless, the lowly and feeble
condition thereof, the continual need it has to be dressed, supported,
sheltered, pruned, Joh. 15.2. (...), amputat, putat.

In a very fruitful hill] Heb. in an horn the son of oil, that is an
horny-hill, bowing like a Half Moon, and so exposed to the Sun beams all the
day long. Some say that Judea lies in the form of a horn, like as the
Low Countries do in the form of a Lion, unde Leo Belgicus. The son of oil or
fatness, that is exceeding sat: Judas is called Sumen totius orbis, a Land
flowing with Milk and Honey, Ezekiel. 20.6. a very Cornucopia of all comforts;
Basil tells us that it was a Tradition of great Antiquity, that Adam when he
was thrust out of Paradise, ut dolorem leniret, for a mitigation of his grief,
chose Judea (that most fruitful Country) for a place to dwell in: whence it is
that Sodom and her sisters (which were a part of that Country) are said to be
pleasant as the garden of God, Gen 13.10.

Pro Sepivit alii vertunt Fod^t, pastinavit, plantavit.
Ver. 2. And he fenced it] Maceria munivit, He hedged it in, or walled it about,
protecting his people from the rage of enemies wherewith that Country was
begirt. God was a wall of fire to them. Zech. 2.5. and a wall of water to them,
as Exodus 14.22. whence their land, though part of the Continent, is called an
Island, Isa. 26.6. not only because separated from other Countries, but because
secured and made -- media insuperabilis unda.

And gathered out the stones thereof] He not only cast out the Cananites, but
flatly forbad Idolatry, and all other wickednesses, (...) every scandal or rock
of offense, that might hinder their growth, or turn them out of the way, Heb.
12.13.

And planted it with the choicest Vine] Heb. Sorek; the Vines of which place
(Judge. 16.4.) may seem to be the best and choicest: like as now in Germany are
the Vines of Herbipolis. See Jer. 2.21. The Saints of God are noble Plants and
of choice spirits: they are the chiefest Personages, and of highest account in
Heaven.

And built a Tower in the midst of it] for both Beauty, Defense, and
Convenience. This may be meant of Jerusalem, or the Temple therein, that Tower
of the flock, and the strong Hold of the Daughter of Gods people, Mic. 4.8.
Religion set up in the power and purity of it, is the beauty and bulwark of any
place.

And also made a Wine Press therein] for the pressing of the Grapes, and saving
of the Vine: but alas that labor might have been saved, for any grapes he
gat, or wine he made.

Fallitur augurio spes bona saepe suo. Little good is done many times, by the
most pressing and piercing Exhortations and Arguments used by Gods faithful
Prophets.

And he looked that it should bring forth grapes] i. e. good grapes, as little
thinking ut opera perdatur and spes eludatur, to have lost all his care and
cost, as he did. For who planteth a Vineyard and eats not of the fruit
thereof? or who feeds a Flock, and eats not of the milk of the Flock? 1
Cor. 9.7.

And it brought forth wild-grapes] stinking stuff, as, the word signifies,
that which was naught and noysom: grapes of Sodom and clusters of Gomorrah,
Deuteronomy. 32.32, 33. He looked for the fruit of the spirit, but behold the works of
the flesh, Gal. 5. No whit answerable to his continual care, culture and
custody: they made him, as One says, a contumacious and contumelious
retribution. Thus the wicked answer Heavens kindness with an ungrateful
wickedness.

Ver. 3. And now, O ye Inhabitants of Jerusalem] Here we have Gods Plea (before
his Sentence) and therein his Appeal to them, and his Indictment against them.
First he appealeth to the Jews themselves, and makes them Judges in their own
cause. So Nathan dealt by David, and Jesus by the wicked Jews of his time, Mat.
21.40. Judicate quaso, only judge a righteous Judgment, John 7.24. and then I
dare report me to the conscience of any one amongst you, and will therehence
fetch witness.

Between me and my Vineyard] With which I am now at variance: Sin is that
hell-bag, makebate, trouble-town, that sets odds betwixt God and his greatest
favorites.

Ver. 4. What could have been done to my Vineyard?] See the like angry
expostulations, Jer. 2.5. Mic. 6.3. when God has done all that can be done to
do wretched men good, they often do their utmost to defeit him, and undo
themselves. Quid debu, facere Domino meo quod fecerim? said Austin of himself
by way of penitent confession: quis ego, qualis ego? quid non mali ego? The
Cypress-tree, the more it is watered, the less fruitful: so it is with many
people. But God can no way be charged with their barrenness.

At Paris ut vivat regnetque beatus, Horat.

Cogi posse negat. --
Ver. 5. And now go to, I will tell you, etc.] God loves to fore-signifie, to
warn ere he wounds, and to foretell a judgment ere he inflicteth it. This he
does that he may be prevented, Amos 4.12. Prolata est sententia ut non fiat.
Well might the Lord say, Fury is not in me, Isa. 27.3.

I will take away the hedge thereof] Hedge and Wall shall be taken away at once
from an ungrateful people: and all laid open to the wrath of God and rage of
enemies; it shall be opentide indeed: See Psalm 80.12, 13. And what may be
reasonably pleaded against God at such a time, when he may say to men as Reuben
did to his brethren, Did not I warn you, saying, Sin not?

It shall be eaten up -- it shall be trodden down] All shall run to ruin, as
it did at Jerusalem by the Babylonians, but especially by the Romans: and as it
did in Christendom about six hundred years after Christ's Incarnation, when
Religion was become a matter of form, yea of scorn; then the Sarazens in the
East, and the barbarous Nations in the West brake in, and bore down all before
them.

Ver. 6. And I will lay it waste] Heb. Wasteness, I will utterly root it up and
ruin it. Lege and Luge; wrath is come upon Jury to the utmost. Lukewarm
Laodicea was swallowed up by an Earthquake, as Eutropius testifies. The rest
of those seven famous Churches are overrun by the Turk. And our utter ruin,
unless we repent, may be as plainly foreseen as if Letters had been sent us
from Heaven to such a purpose.

It shall not be pruned nor digged] sc. by such painful Vine-dressers, as were
wont both to dig and beg for it, as he, Luke 13.8. Such labor shall now be no
longer lost, such cost cast away no more. Cutting shall be used where there is
no longer hope of curing.

But there shall come up Briars and Thorns] Being bereft of the means of Grace,
they shall run into foul and flagitious practices, which shall ripen them for
ruin: See Heb. 6.8.

I will also command the clouds] The Prophets and Ministers.

That they rain no rain upon it] No not a small shower or mist. Non pluvia
dignabitur nedum imbre, says Oecolampadius.

Ver. 7. For the Vineyard, etc.] Exponit breviter mentem hujus Cantici. Here we
have the Parable expounded and applied: the Scripture is its own best
Interpreter, sometimes (as here, and John 7.39.) the sense is annexed. The
Rabbis have a saying, Nulla est objectio in Lege quae non habet solutionem in
latere.

His pleasant plant] Delectabilis in patriarchis, infructifera in palmitibus.
Heb. his plant of Delights, but now turned into the degenerate plant of a
strange Vine unto him, Jer. 2.21. Good Progenitors may have a bad offspring:
the reason whereof is given by Austin, Homo liberos gignit ex carne vetusta and
peccatrice, Con. Palag. Lib. 2. cap. 9.
non ex spiritu, etc. Man begets children of the old and sinful flesh, and
not of the Spirit.

And he looked for judgment, but behold oppression] Or conspiracy, or, as some
render it a scab, a cleaving scab, such as a man cannot easily be rid or
recovered of. And here in the Original is excellent Rhetoric past Englishing:
it is as if we should say, a Preacher, a Prevaricator rather; a Dispensation, a
Dissipation; the sound is almost the same, the sense much different. There is a
lawful use of Rhetoric in divine discourses. Austin confesses that whilst he
heard Ambrose for his Eloquence only, together with his words which he loved,
the matter which he at first cared not for, came into his mind: and whilst,
says he, I opened my heart to listen how trimly he spoke, I came to consider
also how truly he spoke; gradatim quidem.

For righteousness, but behold a cry] The clamor of the oppressed entered into
the ears of the Lord of Sabbath, who hears their groans, and beholds their
grievances, Job 34.28. Psalm 12.5. Jam. 5.4.

Clamitat in caelum vox sanguinis and Sodomorum,
Vox oppressorum, mercesque retenta laborum.
The twofold Ecce. Behold oppression, Behold a cry, shows it to be an evil
action with an accent, a wickedness with a witness; Aliam Hebraeorum labrusiam
notat.

Ver. 8. Woe unto them that join house to house] The Prophet goes on in the
Exposition of his Parable, showing us some more of those wild or stinking
grapes, with the sad effects thereof, to the end of the Chapter. He begins
with Covetousness (that Root of all evil, as Paul calls it, 1 Timothy 6.10. that
Metropolis of all wickedness, as Bion) and throws a Woe at it, as do also
sundry other Prophets. Covetous persons are of the Dragons temper, who (they
say) is so thirsty, that no water can quench his thirst. Covetousness is a dry
drunkenness, says One, an insatiable Dropsy, and like Hell it self, ver. 14.
-- insatiabiliter cava guttura pandit: its Never-enough will be once quit with
fire enough in the bottom of Hell. Here they are brought in joining house to
house, as Shallum did at Jerusalem, Jer. 22.13, 14. as Nero did at Rome for the
enlarging of his Palace to a vast extent: whence that of the Poet, Martial.
Roma domus fiet, Veios migrate Quirites,
Si non and Veios occupet ista domus.


That lay field to field] encroaching upon others, and engrossing all to your
selves: as Will. the Conqueror did at New-forrest, wherein 46. Parish Churches
were demolished, with the removing of all the Inhabitants, to make room for
beasts or dog^-game. But in true account, Parva seges satis est: laudato
ingentia rura,
Exiguum colito.


The holy Patriarchs were content to dwell in Tents. Abraham's only purchase was
a burying place. David in that Letany of his (as One calls it) blesses
himself from those men of Gods hand who have their portion here, Psalm 17.14.
Christ bids us lay up Treasures, and build Tabernacles for our selves in
Heaven: and having food and raiment, says the Apostle, let us therewith be
content, 1 Timothy 6.

Lucan. l. har. Lib. 4.
Discite quam parvo liceat producere vitam:
Et quantum Natura petat.
If a man will study rather to satisfy his hunger then his humor, a little
will serve. But it is as easy to quench the fire of Aetna, as the thoughts set
on fire by covetousness. Juvenal.
Vnus Pelaeo juveni non sufficit orbis.

Till there be no place] sc. left unseized upon by you: usque ad desitionem
loci, no place or room for any other.

That they may be placed alone] Man is a sociable creature, and not born for
himself. Aristotle calls him Natures good fellow: but the covetous caytiff
has put off all Humanity, and would have all to himself, be placed alone. And
herein, as Ambrose rightly observes, he is worse then the unreasonable
creatures. Avis avibus se associat, says he, pecus pecori adjungitur, piscis
piscibus, Birds, Beasts and fishes sort and shoale together, and account it no
loss, but a comfort to be in company of their own kind. Solus tu homo,
consortem excludis, includis feras: Lib. de Naboth and Ahab. cap. 3.
struis habitacula bestiarum, destruis hominum; Only thou, O sorry man,
shuttest out men like thy self, inclosest for cattle, pullest down houses,
set up pinfolds and sheep-cotes, etc. And yet thou can not live without
poor Laborers: Only thou hate to have them live by thee.

Ver. 9. In mine ears said the Lord of hosts] Or, in the ears of the Lord of
hosts: q. d. God well hears and knows all your cunning contrivances, your
colored and cloaked covetousness as it is called, 1 Thessalonians. 2.5. 2 Pet. 2.3.
The cries also of those poor whom you have by fraud or force unroosted, and
undone, is come into Gods ears, Deuteronomy. 15.9. and 24.15. and he will reckon with
you: though by your greatness you can bear out your wrong dealing, because it
is -- facinus majoris abollae. Yet God will arraign you one day for an Abaddon:
and in the mean while

Of a truth many houses shall be desolate] You shall be driven out of your
great and fair houses, aut a milite, aut a morte, either by the enemy, or by
Death, who shall come upon you with a firmae ejectione, and then the place of
your habitation shall know you no more: a poor fool God will make of you, Jer.
17.11. Luke 12.20. If many houses be not desolate, never trust him more: if
they be not left for Cadowes and Jack-dawes to dwell in.

Ver. 10. Yea, ten acres of Vineyard shall yield one Bath] viz of wine; a poor
proportion; not a gallon of wine, for an acre of ground planted with vines.

And the seed of an homer shall yield an Ephah] and no more: the earth shall
yield but the tenth part of what was fown; so little joy shall you have either
of your enlarged houses, or fields laid to fields, by evil arts. Et signanter
december ponit jugera, says Oecolampadius here: neither is it for nothing that
the Prophet says ten acres of Vineyard, etc. and that they shall have but the
tyth of their seed again: to teach them how angry God is with such, as thorough
covetousness refuse to pay their tithes duly, and truly, etc.

Ver. 11. Woe unto them that rise up early] Heb. the early risers, Osor. in loc.
but for an ill purpose. O intolerandum flagitium, says one, -- homines
inertia, somnique plenissimos, etc. O intolerable wickedness, that men so lazy,
and more sleepy then dormise, should be up, and at it so very betimes (they
rise early to corrupt their actions, says another Prophet; Zeph. 3.7.) and
should have their brains crowing before day. Neither are they so soon up alone,
but they call up others (as the Hebrew word here signifies) to serve them, and
sit with them on their Alebench; for they are good fellows they say, and must
have company.

That they may follow strong drink] pursue it eagerly, as the worlding does his
gain, Studium ebrietatis illis objicit. Lib. 14. cap. ult.
the hunter his game; Their Motto is, Take away our liquour, ye take away our
life. By strong drink here understand any inebriating liquour, whereof besides
wine, the Italians have twenty distinct Species, to please the Gusto. Pliny
cries out Hei mira vitiorum solertia inventum est quemadmodum aqua quoque
inebriaret! Portentosum sane potionis genus, etc.

That continue unto night] All the live-long-day; these Ale-stakes stick to it,
quaffing and carousing. Diem noctemque continuare potando nulli probrum, says
Tacitus of the old Germans; to drink whole days together is amongst them no
disgrace: neither is it among many of their posterity, to this day. About the
midst of Q. Elizabeth's reign, that cursed sin was first brought over into
England, say some, Fullers Church hist. 61.
out of the Low Countries: before which time there was neither general
practice, nor legal punishment of that vice in this Kingdom.

Till wine inflame them] By which expression, omnem ebriorum insaniam
intelligit, says Oecolampadius, he means all the drunkards mad pranks, when
heated with wine, and yet more with lusts and passions. See Prove. 23.29 -- 34.
Tyrone the Rebel 1567. was such a drunkard, Camd. Eliz. page 89.
that to cool his body when it was immoderately inflamed with wine and
Vskabagh, he would many times be buried in the earth up to the chin.

Ver. 12. And the harp and the viol] To make themselves the more mad upon
pleasure, they had their music of all sorts, that thereby they might banish
all seriousness, and be lulled faster asleep in carnal security. Fescenninis
cantibus omnia personabant: a practice still in use among drunkards, to drown
the noise of their consciences; like as the old Italians to drown the noise of
the heavens when it thundered, were wont to ring their greatest bells, beat up
their drums and tabers, etc. So Amos 6.4, 6.

Are in their feasts] Or, are their feasts, or drinkings.

But they regard not the work of the Lord] that is the first making, whether of
themselves to glorify God in some honest employment, and not to make drunkeness
their occupation: or, of other creatures, wherein they might find much of God,
as Pliny did in the music of the Gnat, Saculum est speculum rerum
invisibili^m. Trismeg.
and the curious paint of the Butter-fly: as Galen did in the double motion of
the Lungs, called Systole and Diastole: but especially as David did in the
contemplation of the Universe, Psalm. 8. and as Mr. John Dad did in the flower
he had in his hand at Holdenby; where being invited by an honorable person to
see that stately house, he answered, In this flower I can see more of God, then
in all the beautiful buildings in the World. Thus if these drunkards had done,
they would not have so abused Gods good creatures. But whoredom and wine, and
new wine had taken away their hearts, Hos. 4.11. Neither regarded they any
thing, but the sparkling of the wine in the cup, Prove. 23.31. and the beauty of
the strange woman, ver. 33. in the flagrancy of their beastly lust.

Neither consider the operation of his hands] the present disposing of his
creatures, either by way of mercy or judgment. They pass by his providence
unobserved, his late judgments upon the ten Tribes, Am. 6.6. his heavy plagues
hanging over their own heads, called his work and the counsel of the holy One
of Israel, ver. 19. Nihil omnino sapiunt nisi luxum suum, they mind nothing
but their luxury and looseness.

Ver. 13. Therefore my people are gone into captivity] i. e. they are sure to
go: So Am. 6.7.

Because they have no knowledge] Heb. Propter non-scientiam, i. e. ut ita
dicam, non-curantiam, for their brutish oscitancy and inconsiderateness, as
having buried their wits in their guts, and being miserably besotted by their
daily sensualities. Jer. 5.4. Surely they are poor, they are foolish: for they
know not the way of the Lord, nor the judgment of their God.

And their honorable men are famished] Heb. are men of hunger or famine.
Congrua huic malo lues. They had abused their meat and drink to surfeiting and
drunkenness: now they shall know the worth of those good creatures by the want
of them.

And their multitude dried up with thirst] The common sort also shall taste of
the common calamity: Joseph. Egesip.
as they did very deeply when besieged by Vespasian, for the space of five
months. Ox dung was then a precious dish unto them, and the shreddings of
pot-hearbs cast out and trodden under foot and withered, were taken up again
for nourishment: yea some, to prolong their lives, would not stick to eat up
that that others had vomited and cast up. See Isa. 9.19, 20.

Ver. 14. Therefore hell has enlarged herself, etc.] To swallow up those
insatiable Helluones and Lurcones. Drunkards and Epicures: These Swilbowles and
Sensualists, Cerberi instar, tria guttura pundebant; Diotimus of Athens was
surnamed Tunbowl, and young Cicero Tricongius, because he could take off three
pottles of wine at a draught: Therefore Death and Hell

Have opened their mouth without measure] hiante rictu amplissimo helluones
istos absorbere, to devour such pests and botches of mankind. Oh that the
carousers were persuaded, as Mahomet told his followers, that in every grape
there dwelt a devil! and Oh that they would foresee and prevent a worse
punishment in hell then befell that poor Turk, who being found drunk, had a
ladleful of boiling lead poured down his throat, by the command of a certain
Bashaw!

And their glory] their great ones, those men of honor, ver. 13.

And their multitude] The meaner sort: Nos numeri sumus.

And their pomp] Or their noise, or tumult: their revel-rout, as they call it,
when they have drunk all the Out's, and are now a singing and hallowing.

Ver. 15. And the mean man shall be brought down, etc.] Here the Prophet,
before he comes to the third denunciation (for this part of the chapter, like
Ezekiels roll, is full of lamentation and mourning, and woe, chap. 2.10.)
inserteth three good effects of the fore-threatened punishments; 1. that the
wicked shall be thereby tamed, Piscat.
in this verse. 2. that Gods glory shall be asserted ver. 16. and 3. that Gods
poor people shall be graciously provided for, ver. 17. See for this ver. chap.
29.

And the eyes of the haughty] See on chap. 2.11.

Ver. 16. But the Lord of Hosts shall be exalted] See chap. 2.11.

And God, that is holy shall be sanctified] He shall be religiously
acknowledged, Dio i.
approved of and worshipped as an enemy to sin, and an upright judge, because
of his most righteous judgments. It shall be said, Certainly there is a God
that rules in the earth, Psalm. 58.12.

Ver. 17. Then shall the Lambs feed after their manner] i. e. freely and
quietly: by Lambs here understand the godly poor (those Lambs with golden
fleeces) who shall be graciously provided for.

And the waste places of the fat ones] Medullatorum, of those fat Bulls of
Bashan, who had oppressed the poor, and laid waste their dwellings: but are now
served in like sort by the enemy.

Shall the strangers eat] Such as had been strangers at home, because held
captive in a far country, but are now returned, and repossessed of all.

Ver. 18. Woe unto them that draw iniquity] that draw sin to them, as a beast
draws a cart after it. Here the Prophet reproves and threateneth such, Nihil
agitantes nisi malum omni studio suo. Jun. Qui data opera peccant. Scultet.
says an Interpreter, as sin without any strong temptation or occasion drawing
them thereunto: yea they draw sin to themselves as with ropes, and quodammodo
velut invitum and repugnans cogunt: not remembering that sin haleth hell at the
heels of it. Let such get from under sins cart as soon as they can: Otherwise
they shall be holden with the cords (punishments) of their iniquity: they shall
dye without instruction, etc. Pro. 5.22. The Devils as they sinned without a
tempter, so they perish without a Savior. Cavete.

Ver. 19. That say Let him make speed] That jear when they should fear; jest at
Gods judgments, and mock at his menaces, as if they were only bugbear terms,
devised on purpose to affright silly people: but that themselves had more wit
then to regard them. This also was the guise of those Atheists in after-ages,
Jer. 17.15. Ezekiel. 12.23. Am. 5.18. 2 Pet. 3.3. (...), they made childrens play
of Gods direful threats, as the Greek word signifies: and that they may not
plead ignorance, the Apostle adds, ver. 5. that they were willingly ignorant,
they choked their natural light, and contradicted the testimony of their own
consciences. Magna little hodieque seges est: such dust-heapes are found in
every corner.

And let the counsel of the Holy one of Israel] Verba ludificantium Deum and
Prophetas. (...).
These scoffers are here brought in deriding the very name whereby the holy
Prophets for more reverence sake commonly called the Lord, viz. The Holy one of
Israel. Oecolamp.
Or thus: God is the Holy one of Israel, which Israel we are: and think thou
that he will do us hurt? Hereupon the Prophet adds

Ver. 20. Woe unto them that call evil good, etc.] that can make Candida de
nigris, and de candentibus atra, and go about to invert the nature of things,
and to change the very names of them: whilst they call (not out of ignorance
or infirmity, but out of base calumny, or gross flattery) evil good, and good
evil; cleping drunkenness good fellowship, covetousness good husbandry,
prodigality liberality, swearing with a grace a gentleman like quality,
fornication a trick of youth, adultery an enjoyment of the fellow creature, as
Ranters call it, etc. Thus the Athenians flattered their own vices calling
(...), In Catll.
etc. Cicero said it was an ill omen of the overthrow of the Commonwealth, that
the true names of things were lost. And in Divinity it is a rule. Qui fingit
nova verba, nova gignit dogmata, David. Par. vlta.
He that affects new terms would bring in new opinions. That saying of Luther
was often in Pareus his mouth, Theologus gloriae dicit malum bonum, and bonum,
malum. Theologus Crucis dicit id quod res est. Not long before our late unhappy
troubles, the Martyrs of the Protestant religion were disgraced, the
Conspiratours in the Powder Treason excused in a Sermon at St. Mary's in
Cambridge by one Kemp of Queens College. The schools, press, and pulpit began
to speak Italian apace, Mist. of iniq. p. 15.
and to persuade to a Moderation, to a Reconciliation with Rome, which now was
said to be a true Church, the Pope not Antichrist, etc. The great Elixar called
State Policy, has, with some at least, so transmutative a faculty, as to make
copper seem gold, right wrong, and wrong right. But let us pray with good
David, Psalm. 119.66. Teach me good judgment, and knowledge: give me senses
habitually exercised to discern betwixt good and evil, Heb. 5. Vlt. and then
take heed that we neither make Censures whip, nor Charities cloak too long: we
may offend in both.

Ver. 21. Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes] wiser then Daniel (as
the proud Prince of Tire thought himself, Ezekiel. 28.3.) or than any Prophet of
them all. This self conceitedness is (...), said that Heathen, the hinderance
of all true Proficiency, and a mischievous marre-good: here is a Woe hanged at
the heels of it. And left any should hold that to be a small matter, let them
consider what befell Meroz after that bitter curse pronounced against it, Judge.
5.23. the very name and memorial of it is utterly extinct and blotted out: as
also what befell the barren Fig Tree, when once cursed by Christ, it withered
away suddenly, Mat. 21.19, 20. both root and branch; though naturally the
Fig Tree is the most juyceful of any tree, and bears the brunt of
winter-blasts.

Scuke.
Ver. 22. Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine] Iterato taxat hoc vitium,
eo quod invaluerat. The Prophet inveigheth against this vice a second time,
because it was grown so common. Drunkards also are a sottish kind of creatures,
and had therefore more then need to be double dealt with; like as Physicians
use to give double quantities, to such as have Palsies or Epilepsies; so to
awaken their dull drowsy senses. Many of these sots take it for a great glory,
(...). Athen. Vopisc. in Bonoso.
that they are mighty to drink wine; as did Darius King of Persia who caused it
to be written upon his tomb, I was a great hunter, I could also drink much
wine, and bear it bravely. This was (as one well says) to glory in his shame:
it being rather the commendation of a tun then of a man (for a beast will
scarce abide it) to be able to take in and contain much liquour. When Bonosus
the drunken Roman had hanged himself, it went for a byword Amphoram pendere non
hominem, that a tun or tankard hung there, and not a man. And when one was
commended to King Alphonsus for a great drinker and able to bear it, he
answered that that was a good praise in a sponge, Gentiles ipsi risere tales
athletas.
but not in a Prince. This, if Alexander the Great, and Tiberius the Emperor
(those great drinkers and incouragers of others to that vice) had well
remembered, they would not have been so infamous as they are and will be to all
posterity.

Aristoph. in Ranis. Civilis est irrisio non carens sale. Oecolamp.
And men of strength] or valor: but to do what? (...) as the Comedian has it,
to drink and do worse only: a goodly prize surely, a fair commendation; fortes
esse and strenuos non contra hosts, sed ad exhauriendos calices; gigantes esse
non ad bellandum, sed ad potandum, to be carpet-knights, not of Mars but of
Bacchus, and fitter for a canopy then a camp.

To mingle] Or, to pour in, whether into their own wide gullets, or into the
cup to make others drunk: for preventing whereof Minos King of Creet, made a
Law that men should not drink one to another (...) to drunkenness; So did
Lycurgus at Lacedemon. And our King Edgar made an Ordinance for putting pins in
cups that none should quaffe whole ones, or cause others to do so.

Ver. 23. Which justify the wicked for reward] q. d. Woe to such also, for even
they both are abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17.15. See the Note there. See
also chap. 1.23.

Ver. 24. Therefore as the fire devoureth the stubble] For all the crimes before
mentioned, and for that, to all the former they add this, that they have cast
away the Law of the Lord and despised his word.

As the fire] Heb the tongue of fire, that is, the top of the flame, which
resembles a tongue, that is also thin, broad, long, and of a fiery color;
setting on fire the course of nature, and is it self set on fire of hell, Jam.
3.6.

Devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumes the chaff] Sin does as
naturally draw and suck judgments to it, as the loadstone does iron, as dry
stubble and light chaff does fire: suddenly and with no ado shall sinners be
consumed, when God once takes them to do: exorientur and exurentur.

So their root shall be rottenness] in allusion to the vine, ver. 1. which
brought forth rotten grapes, ver. 4.

And their blossom shall go up as dust] shall vanish and come to nothing, as it
needs must where the root is putrified. Of wild vines Pliny says, Ostentant
fructum potius quam porrigunt, Lib. 16. cap. 27.
they rather make a show of fruit then yield any. And there are some vines
says Varro, whose fruit ever rotteth before it has time to ripen. Var. ap.
Cas. D on.
He means they shall vanish in their greatest flourish of seeming felicity.

Ver. 25 Therefore is the anger of the Lord kindled] For contempt of the Law, 1
These. 2.16.
but especially of the Gospel, wrath came upon that wretched people of the Jews
to the utmost, or until the end, as some read it. They are to this day a
people of Gods wrath and curse, and become a woeful example of that Rule,
Atrocia delicta puniuntur atrocibus poenis, Heinous sins bring heavy
punishments. This desolation of theirs (as Daniel prophesies chap. 9.) shall
continue to the end.

And he has stretched forth his hand against them] His mighty hand as St. James
has it, wherewith he often leaves bloody wailes on the backs of the best, when
they provoke: but crusheth the wicked in pieces, and crumbleth them to crattle.

And has smitten them] Revenge is the next effect of anger.

And the hills did tremble] i. e. The highest among them: or literally, Ar.
Montan. Hype bole.
the senseless hills seemed sensible of so great displeasure.

And their carcasses were torn in the midst of the streets] What havoc there
was made of men at the last destruction of Jerusalem, Josephus, Egesippus,
Orosius and Eusebius fully tell us. What with the extremity of famine, what
with the fury of the sword, and what with sickness during the siege, there
perished about 600000 able men: or as others say 1100000, besides 97000 carried
captive. Titus the Roman General, seeing the infinite carcasses of the Jews
cast out unburied without the walls of the City was much grieved, Joseph.
and took God to witness that he was not the author of that calamity, but that
the fault was altogether in those stubborn Jews, that held out the City against
him.

For all this his anger is not turned away] With those froward ones God will
show himself froward, Psalm. 18.26. and not give place to their pertinacy, till
they had enough of it. It must be an humble submission that pacifieth Gods
wrath.

Ver. 26. And he will lift up an ensign] That is, by his secret providence he
shall bring on the enemies army. The Roman forces are called Gods armies, Mat.
22.7. and Titus confessed that he only lent God his hand to execute his wrath
on that rebellious people the Jews.

And will hiss unto them] Bring them together with little ado; as Pilots hiss
for their ship-boyes, or shepherds whistle for their sheep to come about them.

From the end of the earth] Rome was far remote from Jerusalem: and in the
Roman army were likely, many French, Spaniards, Italians, and perhaps Britons.

And behold they shall come with speed] Sooner then those mockers imagined, who
said ver. 19. Let him make speed. Hence the enemy is compared to a swift Eagle,
Deuteronomy. 28.

Ver. 27. None shall be weary nor stumble] Though they come speedily, yet they
shall none of them tire or turn out of the way; but come on with expedition;
robusti, alacres, felices, probe armati, saevi, ver. 27, 28, 29. being lively,
lusty, happy, well appointed, fierce.

None shall slumber or sleep] More then the necessity of nature requires: they
shall be no less vigilant then diligent.

Neither shall the girdle of their loins be loosed] They may put up their
swords sometimes, but not put them off at all, as it is said of Julius Caesar.

Nor the latchet] i. e. So as to hinder their march.

Ver. 28. Whose arrows are sharp] Or sharpened, sc. to wound the deeper.

Their horses hoofs] Judea was a stony Country: but hard to hard will not
easily break.

Ver. 29. Their roaring shall be like a Lion] At whose terrible roar, the
beasts of the field are said to stand as amazed.

They shall lay hold on the prey] Not of wealth only but of persons, and shall
hold their own when they have gotten them.

Ver. 30. Like the roaring of the sea] The noise whereof is so hideous, that
the shreiking of the Devil is set forth by it, Jam. 2.19. See the Note there.

And if one look into the land] Or, to the earth below, behold darkness, etc.
as if to the Heavens, the light also there is darkened. Man cannot help them,
God will not. To such straits of an evil, an only evil, are such often brought,
as think themselves out of the reach of Gods Rod. Vae victis.

CHAP. VI.
Ver. 1. IN the year that Uzziah dyed] This was the year 1540. from Noah's
Flood, say Chronologers. Where One well observes how diverse things were done
this year within the Church, Bucholc.
and without. The Gentiles in Greece at the Town of Eleum behold their Olympic
games: the Prophet Isaiah in Judea beholds the glory of God, and hears the
Trisagion of the blessed Angels. So in the year of Grace 1617. Rev. Hist.
Pontif. To. page 306.
The Pope proclaimed a Jubilee for the peace of Italy and Austria, etc. The
Reformed Churches in Germany kept a Jubilee likewise at the same time, in way
of thankfulness to God for the Gospel restored a just hundred years before by
Luther, Zuinglius, and other Reformers.

I saw also] sc. in spiritu and in ecstasi, in Spirit and in a Rapture. Some
compare it with that Vision which Ezekiel saw afterward, chap. 1. This whole
Book is called The Vision of Isaiah; chap. 1.1. and why? see the Note there:
Est autem celeberrima haec prophetia, but this is a most famous Prophecy of
the utter excaecation and excision of the Jews: and is alleged against them by
all the four Evangelists, and by Saint Paul, Romans 11.

The Lord] The Three in One, and One in Three: ver. 8. Who shall go for us?
Conser Genesis 1.26. and 3.22. See John 12.41. Where it is applied to God the Son,
and Act. 22.25. where to God the Holy Ghost. This Lord of all was seen by the
Prophet, not in his Essence, or in the Infinite excellency of his Majesty,
Exodus 33.20. 1 Timothy 6.16. but in some visible module of his Glory: like as we
cannot see the Sun in rota but in radiis, in the body of it, but in the beams
only.

Sitting upon a Throne] Instar judicis and vindicis, as a just Judge and sharp
Revenger of this peoples rebellions: and this Throne is in the Temple too, the
place wherein they most of all trusted, crying, The Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord, Jer. 7. Lo here they were to be sentenced, because they had
cast away the Law of the Lord of Hosts, and despised the word of the Holy One
of Israel, chap. 5.24.

High and lifted up] Stately for sight, and lofty for site, as was Solomon's, 1
King. 10.18, 20.

Sirmata.
And his train filled the Temple] His train, or his skirts, viz. of his Robes.
The Sept. and Chaldee have it, The house was full of his glory. The sense is,
says Oecolampadius, that the least part of the divine Majesty is greater then
the greatest glory of men, Rev. 19 16.
as 1 Cor. 1.25. He has upon his Vesture and on his Thigh this Name written,
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Here we can see but his back-parts, his train
and line. We need see no more that we may live. Zerxis the famous Painter drew
in a Table a fair Temple with the doors open, and Venus going in, so as the
beholders could behold but her back and her train: as not able to depaint her
fair face, and fore-parts.

Ver. 2. Above it stood the Seraphims] Those Heavenly Salamanders, that are all
on a light fire with Love to God, and Zeal of his Glory, Number. 21.6. Isa. 30.6.
Fiery Serpents full of deadly poison are also called Seraphims (...) the Greeks
call them. That old Serpent the Devil can transform himself into an Angel of
Light, At bonum erat tibi si ignifer magis esses quam Lucifer, says Bernard in
his third Sermon upon this Vision of Isaiah.

Each one had six wings] So had those four beasts or living wights, Rev. 4.8.
See the Note there: and observe that in the Revelation the Holy Ghost borrows
most of the Elegancies and Flowers found in the Old Testament, to set out the
story of the New in succeeding Ages.

With twain he covered his face] As with a double scarf, before Gods surpassing
brightness, that would put out their eyes else. When the Lightning flasheth in
men's eyes, they clap their hands on their faces: so here do the Angels. The
Moon never casts less light then when she is nearest the Sun. Sol reliqua
Sidera occultat, quibus and lumen suum faenerat: Plin. Lib. 2. cap. 6.
sic and Deus gloriae, Act. 7.2. neither are any so humble as they who are
nearest to God: Angels make their addresses with greatest self-abasements; what
then should vile men do? worms and not men!

And with twain he covered his feet] As conscious to themselves of a kind of
comparative impurity, Job 4.18. and 15.15. and unworthiness so to stand before
God, i, e. to minister unto Him.

And with twain he did flie] that is, he was ready to fly, velabant, and
volabant: as Gabriel came to Daniel with weariness of flight, Dan. 9.21. that
is, with incredible swiftness. Their six wings, say some, might set forth a
sixfold motion, upward, downward, forward, backward, to the right hand, or to
the left: A Lapide. Perer.
any way were they ready to fly where God would, ita ut celeritate superent
ventos, fulmina, Solemn, caelosque omnes, swifter then the wind, thunderbolt,
Sun, or any of the celestial orbs.

Ver. 3. And one cried to another] Hymnum cantant (...), and that, as it may
seem, by way of Antiphony as those did, Exodus 15.1, 21.

And said Holy, holy, holy] Hereby showing their earnestness and
unsatisfiableness in praising God, as Jer. 22.20. Mat. 23.37. the ingemination
imports strong affection. Infinitis vicibus iterant, says Procopius: the
holy Angels have no rest (and yet they have no unrest neither) day and night,
saying, Holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty which was, and is, and is to come,
Rev. 4.8. The ancient Rabbines (as R. Simeon Ben Joai) proved the Trinity of
persons from this text, says Galatin; appointing their posterity to repeat
these words twice a day at least, Lib. 2. cap. 1.
viz. at the rising and setting of the Sun, which also they do to this day: and
when they do it, they leap three times.

The whole earth is full of his glory] Not the Land of Judea only, but the wide
world, as Psalm 97.6, 8. and Isa. 40.5. shall be full of Gods glory, when the
Gospel shall be preached to all Nations. This was for comfort to our Prophet,
that although his Countrymen were cast off for their contumacy, yet he should
not lose the fruit of his labors, when once that great Mystery of godliness
was revealed, God (whom he had now seen upon the Throne, and that purposely for
his confirmation) manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of
Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, 1 Timothy 3.16.
believed on in the world, received up into glory.

Ver. 4. And the posts of the door were moved] Presently upon the Angels hymn,
this fell out, with such a force it was uttered, like as at our Saviors
Resurrection, when the Angel rolled back the stone and sat upon it, there was a
great Earthquake, Mat. 28.2. By the moving of the posts or thresholds was
signified the destruction of the Temple: like as by-the smoke wherewith the
house was filled, the burning of it down by the Chaldees, as also the just
excaecation of the Jews. Their Temple that had been filled with the train of
glory, is now filled with smoke going out of Gods Nostrils when he was angry,
Psalm 18.8. See Deuteronomy. 29.20.

Ver. 5. Then said I, Woe is me] The ordinary fear of the faithful, when they
had seen the Lord in his Majesty, Genesis 16.13. Deuteronomy. 5.24. Heb. 12.21. Judge.
13.22. How shall the wicked then be able to stand before him at the last day?

For I am undone] I am a dead man: since no man shall see God and live, Exodus
33.20.

Because I am a man of unclean lips] i. e. of a foul nature, and sinful
practice: his original uncleanness, that filthy Fountain and wellspring of
wickedness, made him cry out in this manner, Pollutior sum quam ut landem Deum.
Angels praise God, as I have heard them: but I wicked wretch am altogether
unfit for such an employment. Infinite is the distance and disproportion
betwixt the High and Holy God, and me a loathsome Leper, a sordid caytiffe, etc.
The nearer a man draws to God, the more does rottenness enter into his bones,
Hab. 3.16. Now mine eyes have seen thee, says Job, therefore I abhor my self
and repent in dust and ashes, Job 42.6. Depart from me, Lord, says Peter, for
I am a sinful man, Gr. a man a sinner, Luke 5.
that is a compound or hodgpodge of dirt and sin. Quis tu Domine? quis ego?
said One; Tu abyssus essentiae, veritatis, and gloriae: ego abyssus nihili,
vanitatis and miseriae, Who art Thou Lord? and what am I? Thou art an Abyss of
Essence, Truth and Glory: and I an abyss of nothing, of sin and of misery.

And I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips] whose Language I have
learned, with whose sinful practices I have too much symbolized, and in whose
punishments therefore I am like to be involved: for there is a double danger to
a man by conversing with the ungodly. 1. Infection of sin: 2. Infliction of
punishment. Lot was the Worlds Miracle, who kept himself fresh in Sodoms
salt water.

Ver. 6. Then flew one of the Seraphims unto me] Relin quit chorum illum
sanctissimum ut serviat polluto; he leaves that holy company, that he may do
service to a poor polluted creature! The brightest Angel in Heaven thinks not
himself too good to serve the Saints, Heb. 1.14. If there come to us at any
time a Messenger, one of a thousand to declare unto us our righteousness, to be
unto us a Minister of Reconciliation, we are to receive him as an Angel of God.

Having a live coal in his hand] a coal from the Altar, shadowing the merit and
Spirit of Christ purging his people from all sin. The Tongs whereby this
quick-coal of Christ's Righteousness is applied to the soul, is the Grace of
Faith, Act. 15.9.

Ver. 7. And he laid it upon my mouth] Not to burn him (for all this was
visional) but to expiate and purify his lips by the Spirit of judgment and of
burning, Chap. 4.4. to fire him up to an holy contention in godliness, and to
fit him yet further for his Office, as the Apostles were for theirs by cloven
tongues of fire, Act. 2.

And said, Lo this has touched thy lips] To the sign words are used to make a
perfect Sacrament. And here the cautelousness of the Angel is to be noted: He
says not I have touched, 1 Cor. 15.10.
but lo this coal has touched thy lips. So Paul, yet not I, but the Grace of
God in me. So the good and faithful servant, Not I, but thy Talent has gained
five Talents, Luke 19.16. The Seraph was himself a burning creature as his very
name imports: howbeit it was not the Seraph but the Retheph or burning-coal
that did the deed, that God might have all the glory.

Thine iniquity is taken away] Sacraments take not away sin: but only testify
that iniquity is purged by Christ alone, who has merited Justification and
Sanctification.

Ver. 8. Whom shall I send] Lay hands upon no man rashly, but with
deliberation. The mystery of the Trinity is well observed by some in the
following words: as by others this, that Ministers serve not men, but the only
true God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 4.1. 2 Cor. 5.21.

Nobis, id est tribus Elohim sive personis sanct. Trin. Piscat.
Who shall go for us?] God knew whom he would send, but he will have the
Prophet offer himself: for he loves a cheerful server; and Ministers must take
the oversight of Gods Flock, not of constraint but willingly, 1 Pet. 5.2.

Here am I, send me] This was right: and this was wrought in him not by base
fear of punishment (as we read of one Balthus a dumb man, that wandering in a
Desert, Pausanlas.
and met with a Lion, he was struck with such exceeding fear and trepidation,
that thereupon the string of his tongue was loosed, and he spoke ever after)
sed igne Dei tactus and actus est. The Seraph had comforted him, and this was
the effect of it. The Prophet after the touch of the live-coal, felt his gifts
increased, his zeal kindled, and hence his forwardness thus to offer God his
service. So ought such to do as find themselves fitted for the work: If thou
have not Manchet, said Bucer to Bradford, give the people Barly-bread, such as
thou can: it will be accepted. It is no small commendation to a man to addict
himself to the Ministry of the Saints, as the House of Stephanus did, 1 Cor.
16.15. and to be to every good work ready, Tit. 3.1. that is, forward and
forth-putting, cheerful and vigorous.

Verba indignantis. Piscat.
Ver. 9. And he said, Go and tell this people] Once my people, but now no more
so; (Loammi) but a people laden with iniquity, and so a people of my wrath and
of my curse, no longer owned by me, but disavowed and abandoned, as their
Fathers one were, Exodus 32.7.

Hear ye indeed, but understand not] This is that heavy and dreadful doom,
whereunto for authority sake, is premised that glorious Vision of the Lord
sitting on his Throne, and passing Sentence, together with the renewed mission
of this Prophet on so unpleasing an Errand. Hear ye shall for a mischief to
you, but understand no more then the seats you sit on, or the Pillars you lean
against, because stupefied, delivered up to a Reprobate sense.

And see indeed] sc. both my Words, Jer. 2.31. and my Works, when my hand is
lifted up especially, Isa. 26.11. See chap. 42.18, 19, 20.

But perceive not] sc. that the cause of your calamity is your sin, the end
Repentance, the Author God: with whom therefore it is a righteous thing to
punish you with spiritual blindness and hardness of heart, that ye may proceed
and perish. Now then if any be ignorant, let him be ignorant for me, as 1 Cor.
14.38. And, let him that is filthy be filthy still, or Let him be yet more
filthy, Rev. 22.11. Abeat in malam crucem, as a Father says to his
incorrigible child. See the like angry expressions, Ezekiel. 20.39, Isa. 50.11.
Psalm 81.12, 13. Matthew. 23.32, 34.

Ver. 10. Make the heart of this people fat] sc. by preaching to them the Word
of God; which because they regard not, it shall become unto them a savor of
death, as sweet Ointments kill beetles, as a shril voice hurts weak ears, as
Lime is kindled by cold water cast upon it, etc. Of such a fat heart beware:
fat things are less sensible, and fat hearted people are noted by Aristotle for
dull and stupid. There is not a greater mischief can befall a man on this side
Hell, then to be given up to a dead and dedolent disposition, such as was that
of those, Ephesians, 4.18. of the Jews in Christ's time and ever since, and of many
Papists, who continue blind in the midst of so much light, and will not
renounce thost Errors whereof they are clearly convinced.

And make their ears heavy] Preach them to Hell: this is an accidental effect
of the Word preached, and proceeds from men's corruptions, Zech. 7.11. But as
an hard heart, so a heavy ear is a singular judgment, Act. 7.51. Antagoras
reciting his Thebais (a book that he had made) among the Boeotians, and they
little regarding him, he folded up his book, and said, Ye may well be called
Boeotians, Eras. Apophth.
quis boum habetis aures, for ye have Oxes-ears; playing upon the Notation of
their Name.

Lest they should see with their eyes, etc.] Or, that they may not see with
their eyes, or hear, etc. but be as so many sots and stocks or statues, that
have eyes and see not, etc. to their utter ruin and destruction. Neither is
there any the least injustice in such a proceeding. An Apprentice has given
him by his Master a Candle to light him to bed, which he abuses to light him
to game or drink. Hereupon his Master takes it from him, blows it out, and
sends him darkling to bed, in the way whereto, he breaks his arms or his
face by some fall: will any man blame the Master, since the candle was his, and
allowed for use? I t^ow not: think the like here.

And convert] which whilome they would not, now they shall not: but having made
a match with mischief, they shall henceforth have enough of it: they love to
have it so, Jer. 5.31. they forsake their own mercies, Jon. 2.8. they are
miserable by their own election.

And be healed] i. e. pardoned and purged. Atque hic pulchre exprimitur (says
One) ordo obtinendae salutis; and here is excellently set forth the order of
obtaining Salvation. For first it is requisite that we have ears to hear, and
eyes to see, (not ears stopped, and eyes dawbed up as these had) 2. That what
we hear and see, we understand with the heart, that is, that there be yielded
thereunto both Assent of the mind, and Consent of the will; this is Faith. 3.
That we turn to the Lord by true Repentance; and then we are sure of healing,
which is by pardon of sin, and power against it.

Ver. 11. Then said I, Lord how long?] sc. shall this sad stroke up on the
souls of this poor people last? Is there no hope of an end? have thou utterly
cast off Israel? See here the good affection of godly Ministers toward even
obdurate and obstinate sinners: how deeply and dearly they often pity them, and
pray from them, as did also Moses, Samuel, Paul.

Until the Cities be wasted, etc.] Till these uncounselable and incorrigible
Refractaries be utterly rooted out by the Babylonians first, and then by the
Romans.

Ver. 12. And the Lord have removed men far away] Judaea lay utterly waste for
70. years: insomuch that after the slaughter of Gedaliah, when all, man, woman,
and child fled into Egypt, there was not a Jew left in the Country. And in
that last desolation by the Romans, such affliction befell them as never had
been from the beginning, nor shall be to the worlds end, Mar. 13 19. Joseph.
After Titus had slain a thousand thousand of them, and carried away Captive
900000. more, Adrian the Emperor, for their sedition under Barchochach, drove
all the Jews utterly out of Jury, set a sow of white Marble over the chief gate
of Jerusalem in reproach of their Religion, and by Proclamation forbad them so
much as to look toward that land from any high Tower or Mountain. Howbeit they
afterward obtained leave to go in once a year, and bewail the destruction of
their Temple, giving a piece of money to the Soldiers: and at this day when or
wherever they build an house, they use to leave about a yard-square of it
unplaistered, Leo Modena.
on which they write Zecher lechorban, The memory of the Desolation.

It may be rendered Gods Tenth. But what meant Lyra to argue from hence that
Tithes are due to the Church?
Ver. 13. But yet in it shall be a tenth] i. e. some Elect left in the land for
a reserve. And these are called a Tenth, 1. Because, as the Tenths, they are
consecrated to God, Levit. 27. 2. Because but a few: So that God may say as
once of the cured Lepers, Where are the other nine? Such were those that looked
for the Consolation of Israel when Christ came in the flesh, Zachary, Simeon,
Anna, the Mary's, Joseph of Arimathea, the Apostles, Peter's Converts, etc.

And it shall return and shall be eaten] Or, it shall, after its return again,
be burnt up or removed: so they were to some purpose by the Romans. See on ver.
12.

As a Toyle-tree, or as an Oak] Trees that are durae ac durabiles, hard and
long-lasting: and although they lose their fruit and leaves, or be cut down, yet

Their substance is in them] the substance of the matter, the sap remains in
the Trunk and Root. In radice and caudice. Junius. Piscator.
Some think there is an allusion in this Text to a Bank or Causey that went
from the Kings House to the Temple, and was born up with Trees planted on
either side of it: which Trees as they kept up the Causey, so do the godly the
State, 1 Chronicles. 26.16, 18. 1 King. 10.5. 2 Chronicles. 9.11. Semen sanctuus statumen
terrae.

CHAP. VII.
In Pentat.
Ver. 1. ANd it came to pass] This is not a superfluous Transition, as Austin
makes it: but imports, that the following discourse is no less to be
regarded then the foregoing.

In the days of Ahaz] that sturdy-stigmatick, under whom Isaiah was, as Eliah
under Ahab: and for the comfort of the godly, prophesied then most sweetly
concerning Christ and his Kingdom.

The son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah] for whose sake, say the Rabbis, this
wretch was thus relieved.

King of Judah] Titularis, sed non Tutelaris (as it was once said of Culperick
King of France) utpote qui Reip. defuit, non praefuit.

That Rezin the King of Syria] He is first named, as being Generalissimo. See
of him, 2 King. 15.37. He was King of Damascene, and Caelosyria.

And Pekah King of Israel] These two Kings had severally invaded Judah before
with great success, 2 Chronicles. 28.5, 8. And heartened thereby, now they join
their forces, thinking to make a full conquest: but were as much deceived and
disappointed, as were the Pope and Spaniard here in Eighty-eight: and more then
once in Ireland, where D. Aquila with his Spaniards being beaten out, said in
open Treaty, that when the Devil upon the Mount showed Christ all the Kingdoms
of the Earth and the glory of them, he did not doubt but he left out Ireland,
and kept it for himself.

Went up] but not in Gods Name, non Dei missu and nutu ut ante, sed proprio
motu and ambitione.

But could not prevail against it] Heb. could not war, sc. with any good
success: They came into the Country like Thunder and Lightning, as duo fulmina
belli, but went out like a snuff.

Ver. 2. And it was told the house of David] i. e. the King and chief Officers
of the Crown and Court. Ill news flies swift, and fills all places.

Syria is confederate with Ephraim though these two were often at deadly feud
betwixt themselves, yet they could combine for a mischief to Gods people. So
could Herodians and Pharisees, Herod and Pilate, etc. The Devil doubtless had a
design by these two Champions of his to have utterly rooted out the House of
David (as he sought also afterward to do by Herod, Caligulae and others) and
so to have prevented Christ his being made of the Seed of Abraham according to
the flesh, Romans 1.3. but that could not be.

And his heart was moved] Concussum and conquassatum. Impiety triumphs in
prosperity: trembles in adversity. Tullus Hostilius, that godless King of
Rome, set up Pavor and Pallor for Gods to himself. Saul and Achitophel in
distress despaired, and dispatched themselves: So did Demosthenes, Cato, and
other Heathen Sages, who were without God in the world, and therefore without
comfort. Sin makes men timorous, Lev. 26.36. but Righteousness bold, Prove.
28.1. Psalm 27.1. The Spirit of power and of a sound mind are fitly set
together, 2 Timothy 1.7.

Ver. 3. Then said the Lord unto Isaiah] Wicked Ahaz shall have a Prophet sent
him with a Promise, if it be but to leave him without excuse: There was also a
godly party in the Land, whose comfort was aimed at, and for whose sake Shear
jashub was also taken along, as carrying comfort in this very name: Portendit
enim omnes pios qui divini verbi satu generandi sunt salvos and incolumes fore,
divinisque muneribus exornatos.

At the end of the Conduit of the upper pool] Where he is walking, and talking
about sending to Assyria for help. The place is pointed out for confirmation of
the truth of the Prophecy. So in the Gospel the Apostles are foretold where to
fetch the Ass, where to prepare the Passover. This place was without the City,
over against the Palace-Royal: the very same where afterward Rabshakah (the
fugitive son of our Prophet Isaiah, say the Rabbis; but without reason) railed
upon the living God. This Prophecy here and now delivered, 2 King. 18.
might happily be some support to good Hezekiah under that trial.

Of the Fullers field] Fullers must have store of water, and room enough for
the dressing and drying of their clothes, Ministers are by an Ancient called
Fullones animarum, Fullers of men's souls.

Ver. 4. Take heed and be quiet] Cave and quiesce: Or as others render it, Vide
ut sileas, See that thou say nothing: fret not, faint not, send no message to
the Assyrian, rest by Faith upon the Lord of Hosts, get a blessed Sabbath of
Spirit, a well composed frame of Soul: for in quietness and confidence
consists thy safety, as Chap. 30.15.

Fear not, neither be faint-hearted] See on ver. 2.

For the two tails of these smoking fire-brands] By a most elegant Metaphor;
he names not one of these two Potentates as not worth naming: but calls them
in contemp a couple of firebrands, such as would do mischief but cannot,
because but smoking, and not burning; and but the tails of smoking firebrands
neither, such as are smoking their last, and shall shortly be utterly extinct.
In a word, they have more pride then power, being a mere flash.

Ver. 5. Because Syria, Ephraim, etc.] This was the fruit of their fury fuming
out at their Noses, ver. 4. and proving like smoke, which the higher it rises,
the sooner it vanishes: or like the bubbles blown up into the air by children,
into whose eyes they soon fall back again. There is no wisdom, nor
understanding, nor counsel against the Lord, Prove. 21.30. See the Note there.

Ver. 6. Let us go up against Judah and vex it] So they had done severally, and
so they think much more to do jointly. Sed aliter Deo visum est. There is a
Council in Heaven that dasheth the mould of all contrary Counsels upon earth,
as Psalm 2.4.

And let us make a breach therein for us] Or, let us divide it, and share it
betwixt us, or set a King over it that may be a vassal to us both. Thus the
Pope gave away England Primo occupaturo, to him that should first take it in
Henry the eighths days: but he reckoned without his Host, as they say.

Even the son of Tabeel] A Syrian, likely, as Tabrimmon, 1 King. 15.18. a good
Rimmonite, 2 King 5.18. So Tabeel a good God. Rimmon was the Syrians God. The
Chaldee expounds it Good or Right for us.

Ver. 7. It shall not stand] The Counsel of the Lord, that shall stand, Psalm.
33.11. when the worlds Wizzards shall be taken in their own craftiness, 1 Cor.
3.19.

It shall not be] All their projects are dashed by a word. Video, Rideo, says
He that sits in Heaven, Psalm 2. I look and laugh: and wherein they dealt
proudly, I am above them, Exodus 18.11.

Ver. 8. For the head of Syria is Damascus] Not Jerusalem, as they happily had
contrived it: looking upon Jerusalem as a City fatally founded to bear Rule, as
One says of Constantinople.

And the head of Damascus is Rezin] Let him set his heart at rest, and not
reach after the Dominion of Judah: lest falling from his high hopes, he lose
that he has already, and cry out with that Ambitionist, Sic mea fata sequor.

And within threescore and five years] sc. from the time that Amos foretold it,
Chap. 5.27. and 7.8. that is, from the twenty fourth year of Vzziah to the
sixth of Hezekiah, when as the ten Tribes were carried away by Salmaneser, 2
King. 17. Thus Hierom out of Seder-Olam. But I like better Piscators
computation, which is thus within 65. years, that is, from the fourth year of
Ahaz now current to the 23. of Manasseh, when Ephraim ceased indeed to be a
people by the command of Esarhaddon Son of Senacherib: whereof see Ezra 4.2.

Ver. 9. And the head of Samariah, Remaliah's son] In contempt he has neither
his Name nor Title of a King given him, but is fairly warned to keep within his
bounds: he is not like to hold long that he has. It is dangerous meddling with
Jerusalem, Zech. 12.2, 3, 6.

Valde brevis sententia est, sed gravis admodum. Oecolamp.
If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established] Jehosaphat said as
much, 2 Chronicles. 20.20. and our Savior somewhat like, John 8.20. Isaiah saw the
King and people still fluctuating and trembling, notwithstanding the divine
Promise: and tells them what to trust to; unless they will trust in God, they
will never be soundly settled: Faith quelleth and kills distrustful fear, and
makes a man walk about the world like a Conqueror. There is an Elegancy here
in the Original that cannot be Englished.

Ver. 10. Moreover the Lord spoke again unto Ahaz] Wicked though he were, and
under the power of unbelief, yet he shall see that he has to do with a very
gracious and long-suffering God, who, by a wonderful condescension, will needs
give him a sign; Inauditum vero, dari signum incredulo. Christ would not so far
gratify the unbelieving Pharisees, but calls them an evil and bastardly
brood for seeking a sign from Heaven, Mat. 12.39.

Ver. 11. Ask the sign of the Lord] not of any other God, to whom thou art
addicted.

Thy God] From whom thou have deeply revolted: but of whom thou might upon
thy return be graciously re-accepted.

Ask it either in the depth] This was a fair offer to so foul a sinner: but all
would not do; no though he should have had a sight of Heaven or of Hell for a
sign; And yet Bellarmine thinks, that one glimpse of Hell were enough to work
upon the most hard-hearted sinner in the world, and to make him yield to any
thing.

Ver. 12. I will not ask] Ah lewd losel! I will not ask; what a base answer was
this of a Bedlam Belialist? what a wretched entertainment of such an
over-bounding Mercy? He does upon the matter say, I Will ask no Asks, I Will try no
signs, I know a trick worth two of that: God shall for me, keep his signs to
himself: I crave no such courtesy at his hands: I can otherwise help my self,
viz. by sending to the Assyrian. If the Lord could and would have helped, how
happeth it that so lately no less then an hundred and twenty thousand of my
Subjects were cut off in one day by this Remaliah's son, as you contemptuously
call him?

Neither will I tempt the Lord] Or, neither w^ll I make trial of the Lord, as
in the former Note. Ambrose was mistaken who thought that Ahaz refused to ask
or try the Lord, out of modesty and humility: rather it was out of pervicacy,
or (at best) Hypocrisy. Hic descendamus in nostras conscientias, says good
Oecolampadius. Here let us each descend and dive into his own conscience, to
see whether we also have not matched Ahaz in his madness, or at least wise,
coasted too near upon his unkind usage of the Lord, by rejecting his sweet
offers of Grace and motions of Mercy: by slighting his holy Sacraments, those
Signs and Seals of the Righteousness that is by Faith. Adsit fides, and aberit
periculum.

Ver. 13. Hear ye now ye House of David] But shamefully degenerate from your
thrice-worthy Progenitors; and strangely forgetful of Gods Promises for a
perpetual Succession: which if ye remembered and believed, ye would not be so
causlesly terrified.

Is it a small thing for you] How heartily angry is the Prophet, how blessedly
blown up in this case of so great dishonor done to God? we should be so too.

To weary men] to vex and molest: the Septuagint have it, to strive, Agoneus
redditis.
or wrestle a fall with men; By men he means himself and his fellow-Prophets,
whom Ahaz and his Courtiers slighted and misused. Let this comfort Gods
faithful Ministers under the worlds indignities and injuries. See Matthew. 5.11,
12.

But will ye weary my God] whom I serve in my spirit; and now no more thy God,
as ver. 11. since thou have refused to be Ruled by him, Non autem tuum, o rex
Ahase. Piscat.
and that after manifest conviction, and greatest importunity to bring thee to
a better temper.

Ver. 14. Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign] Give it you,
ingratiis vestris, without your leave, of his own proffer. If we believe not,
yet God remains faithful, 2 Timothy 2.13. Romans 3.3. The House of David was as it
were great with child with Christ, and with Gods promises in him; therefore (to
be sure) it could not be rooted out (as these two Kings designed) before Christ
were come into the world. Hence his wonderful Conception and Birth is made
here a Sign of his peoples Safety here, and Salvation hereafter. And had Ahaz
and his people believed this latter, they would not have much doubted of the
former; but rather argued with St. Paul, Having given us his Son, Romans 8.32.
how shall he not with him give us all things also?

A sign] A singular sign, a sign both from above and from beneath: for he
joined lumen suae aeternitatis limo tuae mortalitatis, Bern.
the light of his Eternity to the mud of thy mortality, as a Father has it,
Joh. 1.14. Phil. 2.6.7.

Behold] A Note of attention and admiration. One compares it to the sounding
of a Trumpet before some notable Proclamation: Another to a hand in the
Margent, pointing to some remarkable matter: so does this Ecce to Christ's
incarnation as a thing in Gods Decree, and to his peoples Faith already present.

A Virgin] Hagnalmah that famous Virgin, so long since spoken of, Haec simul
est genitrix, filia, sponsa Dei. Tot tibi sunt dotes Virgo, quot sidera caelo.
Genesis 3.15. that female glory, the Virgin Mary, with whom the Angel spoke
concerning man's salvation, Matthew. 1.18, 23. Luke 1.27, 35. as the Devil before
had done with the first woman, concerning the means of his destruction. Of this
Virgin Mother the Sibulls are said thus to have prophesied also, Virginis in
corpus voluit dimittere caelo
Ipse Deus prolem, cum nuntiat Angelus almae
Matri, quae miseros contracta sorde levabit.


See more in Virgils 4th. Eclog. and Aug. de civ. Dei, lib. 10. cap. 27. Some
tell us that when this blessed Virgin brought forth, there was seen at Rome
about the Sun, the likeness of a woman carrying a child in her arms, and a
voice heard, saying, Pan the great God is born into the world.

Shall conceive and bear a sen] Shiloh, the son of her secundine, Genesis 49.10.
the true Melchisedeck; as man without father, and as God without mother, Heb.
7.5. See Luke 1.35. But how blank were the Jews when they saw the issue of
their late Jewish Virgin turned to a Daughter? and how silly is that saying of
theirs in their Talmud, For our sins which are many, the coming of the Messiah
is deferred? Sanhed. cap. 11.
Jachiades upon those words, Dan. 12.4. would have us believe that God sealed
up the time of Christ's coming, revealing it to Daniel only. But why take they
not notice that the very time of Messiah the Prince his coming is set down by
Daniel, chap. 9. and since that time is long since past, let them either condemn
the Prophet of vanity, or else confess with us that Christ is come already.

And shall call] Or, Thou (Virgin) shall call; as having the right of
nomination.

His Name Immanuel] That is, God with us, as Matthew. 1.23. See the Note there.
Cujus nomen illius numen facile declarabit. Christ indeed was not called by
this name Immanuel, that we anywhere read of (as neither was Solomon by the
name of Jedediah, 2 Samuel 12.25, 26.) unless it be chap. 8.8. but the import of
this name is most truly affirmed and acknowledged to be fully made good in him.

Ver. 15. Butter and Honey shall he eat] i. e. He shall be fed with Childrens
meat, after the manner of other Infants; for as he shall take upon him our
nature, Noematica periphrasis.
so shall he also partake with us in our natural infirmities: feeding as other
Children there did, on butter and honey, not able to discern good from evil
through want of judgment, till he came to be of discretion, Luke 2.52. with
Deuteronomy. 1.39. that he might be in all things like unto us, and that we might once
come unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. that
we might become strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, able to do
all things through Christ that strengthens us, Phil. 4. Stumble not at his
weakness, but gather assurance of his Love, who so sweetly joined his Majesty
to our meanness, his might to our weakness: abasing himself to the shape and
state of a feeble weak and helpless child.

Ver. 16. For before the child] Hannagnar, this child Shear Jashub here
present, ver. 3. the proper sign of this present deliverance, as Isa. 8.4. made
so by occasion of the mention of Immanuel that was to be born many years after,
of a Virgin.

The land that thou abhorrest] Or, by which thou art vexed, as ver 6. Confer
Exodus 1.12. Number. 22.3. So the Danes were abhorred by the English, the French by
the Sicilians, as appeared by those bloody Vespers.

Shall be left of both her Kings] Who shall be cut off by a seasonable
vengeance: See this fulfilled, 2 King. 15.30. and 16.9. within a year or two of
this prophecy.

Ver. 17. The Lord shall bring upon thee, etc.] sc. in case thou believe not.
Thou and thine shall perish, notwithstanding this present deliverance; the Lord
will destroy thee after that he has done thee good, as Josh. 24.20. Et cujus
verbis credere noluisti, ejus verberibus fidem habebis. Thou shall soon have
enough of the Assyrian, in whom thou will needs trust, and not in Me. Him thou
shall call in for help against others: but he, having taken a taste of so
fertile a soil and wealthy a state, shall at length overrun all: Like as
afterward also the old Gawls did Italy, and the Saracens the Greek Empire.

Ver. 18. The Lord will hiss for the fly, etc.] Out of Egypt and the confines.
The people of which parts are fitly called flies, say Expositors, for their
numerosity, swiftness, stench, impudency, harsh language, ob vocis absonae
stridorem. The country being hot, and lying low abounds with flies and
gnats, such as proud Pharaoh was vexed with.

And for the be that is in Assyria] That country is full of woods, and so of
bees: to which also the Assyrians are fitly compared, as for their
numerousness, their military skill and comely marshalling of their forces,
their golden armor, their industry and constancy in battle; so for their force
and fury especially. Virgil speaking of bees says, Illis ira modum superat,
laefaeque venenum
Inspirant stimulis, and vitam in vulnere linquunt.
See the Babylonical fierceness and cruelty graphically described, Jer. 51.34.
It was so much the greater, because sent for and set on they were by Gods hiss
or whistle.

Ver. 19. And they shall come and shall rest all of them] As flies do upon
flesh, and as bees upon trees: they shall seize all.

In the desolate valleys, etc.] Hereby is set forth, says Calvin, that in no
lurking place any of the Jews should be secreted or secured from their enemies,
but that they shall range about and rage everywhere thoroughout the whole land.
And because all this is done at an hiss, the backwardness of Christians is
condemned, says Musculus, who cannot by most earnest preaching of long
continuance be brought to do as God requires them.

Ver. 20. In the same day shall the Lord shave] Not shear but shave, with a
razor, to set forth the calamity of war which wastes and takes away all, and
makes clean work, as we use to say: nihil in toto regno intactum reliquit, sed
omnia a summo ad imum expilavit Assyrius. The Assyrian is here called Gods
razor, because his instrument to shave as he pleases: though happily by
exceeding his commission, as Zach. 1.15. he might prove a deceitful razor, as
Psalm. 52.2. that instead of shaving the hair, lanceth the flesh.

That is hired] Whether by Ahaz himself, but for a better purpose, 2 King.
16.7, 8. not to hurt but to help, though it fell out otherwise: or by God, who
paid the Assyrian for his hire the Lands of Israel and of Syria: see the like
Ezekiel. 29.18, 19. Barbers use not their razors but for reward.

Beyond the river] Euphrates that ran between Syria and Assyria, but could not
keep off the Assyrian Destroyer.

The head, and the hair of the feet] Elsewhere called head and tail, that is,
high and low, Prince and Pesant.

And it shall also consume the beard] 1. the Priests, Psalm. 133.2. as some
sense it: or, as others, all the comeliness and virility of the Jewish nation.

Ver. 21. A man shall nourish two sheep] He that was wont to say, Virg. eclog.
Mill meae Siculis errant in montibus agnae, shall now be reduced to so great
penury as to be glad of two sheep, and have scarce a young Heifer left for his
necessary subsistence, who was wont to have many ploughs going. They shall not
now, as heretofore, join house to house, and land to land: they shall not keep
race-horses, or hunting dogs, etc.

Ver. 22. For the abundance of milk] yielded him by his two Cows, through the
paucity of people and plenty of grass.

He shall eat butter] eat his fill, since there are none to buy it of him; none
to pull it out of his mouth.

For butter and honey shall every one eat] not cates and dainties, as chap.
5.12. but mean fare, such as he can get: as wild-honey, such as the Baptist fed
on.

Ver. 23. Where there were a thousand vines] Which once were to the sensual
Jews an occasion of drunkenness and forgetfulness of God, chap. 5.11, 12. A
Lapide on chap. 5.2. tells us that at Herbipolis in Germany there are
abundance of vineyards, so that they have more wine there then water: and such
huge wine-vessels that the vintners have doors in the sides of them whereby
they enter (as Diogenes did into his tub) to make them clean and fit for their
use.

Shall be briars and thorns] Agri quondam vitibus consiti, erunt obsiti
vepribus, and dumetis densissimis hirsuti.

Ver. 24. With arrows and with bows shall they come] for their necessary
defense against the wild beasts that haunt those desert places, propter densa
ferarum lustra hominibus infesta: This was threatened, Lev. 26.22.

Ver. 25. And on all the hills that shall be dug, Assemb. Annot.
etc.] A good Translation of a text is instead of a good Commentary: Some very
learned render the words thus, And on the hills that had wont to be dug with
mattock or spade, that no fear of bryar or thorn might come thither, shall a
place also be for sending in of oxen, and the treading of lesser cattle: Which
shall range and graze freely (say they by way of gloss) after their wonted
manner in those places, from whence they and their owners had formerly been
ejected and excluded by the violent oppressions and undue enclosures of the
richer and greater sort, chap. 5.17.

CHAP. VIII.
Ver. 1. TAke thee a great roll] Or volume, so called either because it was
rolled up together like the web upon the pin: or (as others) because it
reveals that unto us, which otherwise we knew not. Blasphemous was that jear
of the Jews who called the Evangel or Gospel Aven gillaion a volume of vanity.
And no better was that of B. Bonners Chaplain who called the Bible (that
blessed Book) in scorn his little pretty Gods book. Chald. vertit
Scripturamclaram. See Isa. 30.8.
This one small piece of it is here styled grande volumen, a great roll, for
the fullness of the matter in fewness of words.

And write in it with a man's pen] that is, plainly and clearly: that when it
shall be fastened to the gate of the Temple, or some way else be exposed to
public view, he that runs may read it, Habac. 2.2. and he that reads may
understand it: and not be so written as that was, Dan. 5.5, 7. which none could
read and unriddle, (...).
but the Prophet himself: nor be as Aristotle's Acroamaticks, published and yet
unpublished.

Concerning Maher-shalal-hash-baz] 1. Make speed to the spoil, hasten the prey:
words whereby God calls the King of Assyria out of his country to take the
spoil speedily of Syria and Samaria; both which groaned for his coming, and
hanged for his mowing. This was afterward given for a name to Isaiah's newborn
babe, viz. at his circumcision: and that before two sufficient witnesses who
might attest both the child's name, and the reason of it, which the Prophet
likely told them. Such another compound name was Shear-jashub, chap. 7.
Zorobabel, Hagio-Christophorites, etc. and amongst us Keep-sabbath, Hope-still,
etc.

Ver. 2. And I took unto me faithful witnesses] So they might be, and yet not
godly men: as Galba and our Rich. 3. were said to be bad men, but yet good
Princes. Some think that this Vriah was the same with him that brought in the
Altar of Damascus. He had been better perhaps, but at last revolted: as did
Demas (of whom Dorotheus says that he became a Priest in an idol temple at
Thessalonica) and Damascen who turned Mohammedan, as some write. Zechariah the
other witness was a man of great eminency, as being grandfather (by the
mothers side) to good Hezekiah.

Ver. 3. And I went unto the Prophetess] Prophets wives were anciently called
Prophetesses; like as Bishops wives (says a Lapide the Jesuit) were also
called Bishoppesses, Presbyters wives Presbyteresses, Deacons wives
Deaconesses: Jesuits have still their Jesuitesses, as Majors their Majoresses,
etc.

Maber-shalal-hash-baz] q. d. Make haste, come away to so rich a booty, to the
rifling and ruinating of these two potent and opulent Kingdoms. God hereby
seems to bespeak the Assyrian as Cicero once did his friend, Si dormis,
expergiscere: si stas, ingredere: si ingrederis, curre: si curris, advola, etc.
and at the calling of this child by his name, the prediction was remembered, and
the thing ascertained.

Ver. 4. For before the child, etc.] That is within a year or two: for it was
an extraordinary thing that is reported of Maximilian the Emperor that he was
eight year old at least ere he spoke any thing: but afterward he became a
fluent and elegant Speaker.

The riches of Damascus] Riches do many times change their masters; and
Kingdoms are often turned upside down, when they fall to persecuting the people
of God especially, as did these Syrians and Israelites.

Before the King of Assyria] Spoils taken from the enemy were and are usually
carried in triumph before the Conqueror.

Ver. 5. The Lord spoke also unto me again saying] Heb. And the Lord further
added to speak unto me. Here the Israelites, a part from the Syrians, are
specially threatened with destruction, because they abandoned their brethren the
two other tribes, and trusted to confederacies and aids of foreign Princes.

Ver. 6. Forasmuch as this people] The ten revolted tribes not worth the
naming: see ver. 5.

Refuse the waters of Shiloah] Slight and contemn the small means and strength
of the Church, humilem and obscurum statum regni Zionis.

That run softly] at the foot of mount Zion, creeping and crooking slowly and
slily: called therefore, De Bell. Gall. lib. 1.
as some think, the Dragons well, Neh. 2.13. Caesar says the like of the river
Araris (probably Sone) and the Poet Claudian of Nilus, Le^e fluit Nilus, sed
cunctis amnibus extat
Vtilior, nullas confessus murmr vires.


And rejoice in Rezin and Remaliah's son] rejoice in a thing of naught, as Amos
his expression is chap. 6.13. The Hebrew here has it thus, And joy is to
Rezin, etc. that is, the Syrians and Israelites both are much cheared up to see
that Judah is at so great an under; and so easy to be overcome, as they think.

Ver. 7. Now therefore behold the Lord bringeth] They that slighted
still-running Shiloah, shall have the waters of Euphrates strong and many to
overwhelm and swallow them up. God loves to retaliate.

Even the King of Assyria and all his glory] i. e. his armies and forces
wherein he gloryeth. See chap. 10.8. and 36.9.

(...).
And he shall] Or, it shall, viz. the River Euphrates, whose exundation is here
graphically described, and thereby depainted to the life the practice of
tyrants in overrunning whole countries as by a deluge, as did the Assyrian of
old, and as does the great Turk at this day.

Ver. 8. And he shall pass thorough Judah] After Israel subdued: but yet with a
difference, as chap. 27.7, 8. for the Israelites and Syrians were utterly
drowned with this proud flood, but the Jews were only drenched; it reached but
to the neck, their head was ever above water: and that because Emanuel (better
that any Christopher) bore them up.

And the stretching out of his wings] that is, of his immense forces: the
Assyrian, by another Allegory, being here compared to an Eagle, which covers
her whole prey with her wings.

Shall fill the breadth of thy Land, O Immanuel] Shall surely, unless thou O
Lord Christ, (who art King of this country by a specialty) shall please to
prevent it. Learn we likewise in all our straits or ailments to run to our
Immanuel, and implore his help, remembering that he is God with us, he is a man
amidst us; cum Patre dator, inter nos petitor, as Austin has it; he gives with
the Father, he prays with the suitor; he will deliver and defend his subjects
and suppliants.

Ver. 9. Associate your selves O ye people] In confidence of her King Immanuels
succor and support, the Church thus holily insulteth over her most active
enemies, foretelling their utter subversion. The Virgin daughter of Zion does
the like, chap. 37.22. as binding upon her invincible Champion Immanuel, ver.
2.3. whose very name here puts spirits into her, and makes her take heart
of grace, as they say. Basil bids the Christians in time of persecution
boldly bespeak their adversaries in these words, though somewhat otherwise
rendered by the Septuagint, by mistake of a letter: If again ye prevail, ye
shall yet again be vanquished. And truly of the Church it may be foretold
better then of Troy, Victa tamen vinces, eversaque Troja resurges: Ovid. Fast.

Obruet hostiles illa ruina domos.


Gird your selves and ye shall be broken in pieces] Ye shall, ye shall without
fail, though ye little believe it. It shall be done (as is therefore here so
often threatened) as sure as the coat is on your back, or the heart in your
belly.

Ver. 10. Take counsel together] Do so if you will: but when all is done, the
counsel of the Lord shall stand: and you shall consult nothing better then
shame to your selves.

Speak a word] All these expressions serve to set forth the bitter hatred born
by these wicked ones against Gods poor people, whom they sought by all means to
mischieve, but could not.

For God is with us] Heb. Immanuel: that sweet name was to the godly party mel
in ore, melos in aure, jubilum in cord: and hence so often recited: these
heavenly birds, having got such a note, record it over and over.

Ver. 11. For the Lord spoke thus to me with a strong hand] that is, with his
spirit accompanying his word, and setting it home to my heart, that so I might
speak from the heart to the heart. Some render it, Taking me by the hand,
fidelis paedagogi instar, Sicut apprehensione manus.
like a loving and faithful schoolmaster: and thereby pulling me back that I
should not walk in the common road.

That I should not walk in the way of this people] not howl with those wolves,
not tune my fiddle to the base of the times, not follow a multitude to do evil:
but rather to keep a constant countermotion to the Many; and rather to go right
alone then not at all. Cassianus gives very good Counsel, Vive ut pauci, In
Epist.
ut cum paucis inveniri merearis in regno Dei, Live thou as but few else do,
that with those few thou may be found in Gods Kingdom. Now none can do thus,
but only they to whom the Lord both speaks, and lays hold also upon their
hand that they be not led away with the error of the wicked, 2 Pet. 3.17.

Ver. 12. Say ye not a Confederacy] A Confederacy, a Confederacy, sc. between
Syria and Samaria, is made against us; this was vox populi, all the talk in
those days, and every bodies mouth was full of it, and heart afraid of it: But
say ye not so, comply not, concent not, chime not in with the spirits and
speeches of other men. Away with all such despairing language. For help against
which

Ver. 13. Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself] Even your sweetest Immanuel: non
sanctificatur autem nisi in eum credatur; sanctify him, I say, by believing in
your hearts and confessing with your mouths, Romans 10.9. and walking as
becomes the Gospel, -- in nothing terrified by your adversaries, Phil. 1.27,
28.

And let him be your fear] That is, the Object of your fear, as Genesis 31.53.
Psalm. 76.11. where God is called Fear by an Appellative Proper. So the Chaldee
Paraphrase frequently calls God Dechilah, 1. Fear. The Greeks call him (...)
of (...) Fear. Bernard says well, God is to be feared as a Lord, honored as a
Father, loved as a Spouse. This fear of God is a sovereign remedy against the
fear of the creature; and is therefore here and elsewhere opposed to it. Surely
as one fire drives out another: and as Moses his Serpent swallowed up the
Sorcerers Serpents: so here.

Ver. 14. And he shall be for a sanctuary] In quo serventur, and in lapidem, in
quo firmiter stent pii: impii vero impingant, ruant and conterantur, a
Sanctuary of safety, a stone of stability, though to the wicked he prove
otherwise: even a stone of offense to stumble them, and a snare to take them in
for their hurt. Christ as he is Piorum rupes, a Rock of Refuge to the godly; so
he is reorum scopulus, a Rock of Revenge to dash in pieces the impenitent, as
Val. Max. once said, the Tribunal of L. Cossius was. This was chiefly fulfilled
in the time of the Gospel. See Romans 9.23. 1 Pet. 2.6. Matthew. 21.42. Act. 4.11.

But for a stone of stumbling] Petra perditionis, to all that refuse to be
Ruled by him, and to rely upon him: with these froward ones he will show
himself froward, Psalm 18.27.

Ver. 15. And many among them shall stumble and fall] So may Gods Elect, but
not so as to be broken: because they cannot fall below a supporting hand of
God, Psalm 37.24. Utter prolapsion cannot befall them possibly.

And be broken, and snared, and taken] The Septuagint here add of their own;
and men shall be taken, that are in a supposed safety: living as if they were
out of the reach of Gods Rod.

Ver. 16. Bind up the Testimony, seal the Law, etc.] Et lateat, and luceat: Let
thy Doctrine (says God here to the Prophet) contained in that great Roll, ver.
1. or otherwise published (concerning Immanuel especially) be concealed from
these profane scoffers: but imparted to my Disciples that sit down at my feet
to receive my words, Deuteronomy. 33.3. Those Jews in Christ's time had the Testimony,
that is the Gospel preached to them: but they were woefully blinded; so that
when the Messiah, to whom all their owd signs so well agreed, was among them,
they could by no means own him and receive him, Matthew. 2.5. with John 1.11.
That Italian Translation of the New Testament which the Jews lately had, is,
for their abuse of it, called in and taken from them. Pope Gregory the ninth
caused their Talmud, wherein Christian Religion is so much blasted, to be
burned: and the like did Julius the third, about the Year 1553.

Seal the Law among my Disciples] Such as have been (...), taught of God,
taught as the Truth is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4.20, 21. Seal the Law, that perfect Law
of liberty, the Gospel for such: for their behoof and support in these
calamitous times.

Ver. 17. And I will wait upon the Lord] I will patiently and peaceably submit
to his Holy Will in the exercise of mine office, hoping that I shall be
acknowledged and approved of him, though men reject me, and are for their
obstinacy deservedly rejected of God.

And I will look for him] as it were with stretcht-out neck. Difficile opus and
arduum! Good men find it more easy to bear evil, then to wait till the
promised good be enjoyed, Heb. 10.36.

Ver. 18. Behold I and the children whom the Lord] that is, my Disciples and
Converts, who have the same conflict with me, Phil. 1.30.

Are for signs and for wonders] Hissed and hooted at as so many Monsters by the
mad world, ever beside it self in point of Salvation: and accounting the Saints
(as the Spaniards were wont to say of the Portingals) Pocos and focos, few and
foolish: and as the Turks count all fools to be Saints: so the most count all
Saints to be fools. These shall one day cry, Nos insensati.

Ver. 19 And when they shall say unto you] The Prophets wholesome advice to his
Disciples. God had hid his face, and withdrawn his favor from this people;
therefore they would help themselves as they could, by doing as Saul did when
forsaken of God, by running to witches and wizzards, resolving with her in the
Poet, Flectere si nequo superos, Acheronta movebo.

That peep and that mutter] Utter their predictions in broken and low Language,
grunting or grumbling them out in dark and doubtful expressions, as distrusting
their own art.

Should not a people seek unto their God?] See Jer. 2.11. Mic. 4.5. Our God is
a rewarder of all that diligently seek him, or that seek him out, Heb. 11.6.
viz. when he has withdrawn himself, and hid his face, as ver. 17.

For the living to the dead] q. d. Is that handsome? is it agreeable to right
reason? O stultam commutationem! vocat nos Deus vivus, and nos recurrimus ad
mortuos. Oecolamp.


Ver. 20. To the Law and to the Testimonies] Lo this is the way, walk in it,
for. the Commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is Light, Prove. 6.23. They have
Moses and the Prophets, Luke 16.29. these must be the men of our Counsel, Psalm.
119.24. even these lively and Life-giving Oracles, Act. 7.38. not dead Idols,
or damned Necromancers.

There is no light in them] either of truth or of comfort. Good expressions
such kind of creatures may use, it may be: but Si magicae, Deus non vult tales:
si piae, non per tales: their false lights serve but to light them into utter
darkness. Happy was Oecolampadius (an excellent Commentatour upon this Prophet)
who made good the splendor of his own Name, when (beside the light he lent to
the Law and Testimonies) he could lay his hand on his breast when he lay a
dying of the plague, and say, Here Is plenty of light got from the Scripture.

Ver. 21. And they shall pass through it] to and again as uncertain of their
way: and even at their wits end.

When they shall be hungry] cum esurierit and efferbuerit, as a Pot boiling
casts up scum.

And curse their King] Ahaz, say some; Zedekiah, say others.

And their God] As those Antichristians, Rev. 16.10. The Chinois whip their
Gods, when they please them not.

And look upward] as the hungerbit-Wolf howls against Heaven.

Ver. 22. Trouble and darkness, etc.] A huge heap of words all to one sense: to
set forth their deepest distress without all hope of help.

CHAP. IX.
Ver. 1. NEvertheless the dimness shall not be such] Dimness of anguish had
been fore-threatened, chap. 8.22. Now this is added for an allay, as being a
promise of a mitigation of their misery, and yet further of Christ's
Incarnation, which is the sum of all the good news in the world. Evangelistam
hic agit Isaias, Scult.
non prophetam, says One, i. e. Isaiah here acts the part of an Evangelist
rather then of a Prophet: He foretells, says another Interpreter, that as
the Assyrians preyed upon Samaria and Galilee, so shall the Lord Christ also
prey upon them spiritually, A Lap.
and for their greatest good, ver. 2. And as Tiglath-pileser first carried away
a few out of Galilee, lightly afflicting the Land of Zebulon, and the Land of
Nephthaly: and then Salmaneser more grievously afflicting her carried captive
those and all the rest of the ten Tribes: Semblably Christ, first preaching in
Galilee, Oecolamp.
converted and called therehence sundry of his Disciples: and afterward when
he was lifted up from the earth he drew all men unto him, John 12.32. He rode
upon his white-horse (the Apostles) conquering the world, and to conquer, Rev.
6.2. And hence that sincere Joy in the hearts of his servants, far exceeding
that of Harvest which is not without great toil; or that of Soldiers dividing
the spoil, which is not achieved without confused noise, and garments rolled
in blood, ver. 2.3, 5.

By the way of the sea] The sea of Tiberias, John 21.1. or lake of Genesareth,
Luke 5.1.

Beyond Jordan] Or, beside Jordan.

In Galilee of the Gentiles] See the Note on Matthew. 4.15.

Ver. 2. The people that walked in darkness] Liberationis lucem promittit. See
the Note on Matthew. 4.16.

Ver. 3. Thou have multiplied the Nation] Or, Never since thou multiplyedst
this people, did thou give them such joy: i, e. such matter of joy as now
Thou intendest to do: Or thus, Thou will multiply this Nation: thou will
increase their joy; especially by sending thy Son, who is called the Gift, John
4.10. the Benefit, 1 Timothy 6.2. such as wherein all discontents are soon
swallowed up. Everlasting Joy shall be upon the Heads of the Lords Ransomed
ones, they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall fly
away, Isa. 35.10.

They joy before thee] Pleasure there must be in the ways of God, because
therein men let out their souls into God the Fountain of all good. Christ's
Chariot is paved with Love, Cant. 3.9, 10.

According to the joy in Harvest] and a great deal more, Psalm 4.7. They do
over-abound exceedingly with joy, 2 Cor. 7.4. Joys they have unspeakable, and
full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8.

And as men rejoice when they divide the spoil] Wherein the pleasure is usually
more then the profit, Psalm. 119.162. and yet the profit often very great too, as
2 Chronicles. 20.25. and as at the sack of Constantinople, at the wealth whereof the
Turks themselves wondered, and derided their folly, that possessing so much
they would bestow so little in the defense of themselves and their Country.
Turk Hist. fol. 345.


Ver. 4. For thou have broken the yoke of his burthen] i. e. Thou have
disenthralled and delivered thy people from the burthenous yokes of their
enemies, both corporal and spiritual: that taking thine easy yoke, thy light
burden upon them, they might serve thee without fear in holiness and
righteousness before thee all the days of their lives, Luke 1.74. The
Jew-Doctors expound all this of Senacheribs Tyranny, and their deliverance
therefrom. But the Prophet intends a further matter, ver. 6.7.

And the staff of his shoulder] Wherewith he was beaten and bastinado'd. See
chap. 14.5.

The Rod of his oppressour] Metaphora ab agasonibus, a Metaphor from
Horse-drivers, who lay on without mercy. Whipping among the Turks has been
usually inflicted even upon the greatest Bashaws of the Court upon the least
displeasure of the Tyrant: Ib. 361.
especially if they be not natural Turks born. The poor Captives met with hard
measure this way at Babylon: but Satan's slaves with much harder. Christ fitly
notes here, that the Rod wherewith the Devil whippeth sinners is their own
lusts and passions: yea herewith they punish themselves, by his instigation, as
the Lion beats himself with his own tail.

As in the day of Midian] beaten by Gideon, Judge. 7.22. So the day of Gibea,
Hos. 9.9. The day of Jerusalem, Psalm 137.7. The battle of Agin court; The
Sicilian vespers, etc. Gideon by the sound of Trumpet and shining of Lamps out
of earthen broken vessels, overcame those Midianites: so by the Trumpet of his
Word and light of the Gospel carried through the world by weak Instruments,
has Christ confounded his Adversaries, 1 John 2.14. as One fitly makes the
comparison. See it largely prosecuted in sixteen particulars in Cornelius a
Lapide upon the Text.

Ver. 5. For every battle of the Warrior, etc.] Great is the woe of war; when
Death heweth its way through a wood of men, in a minute of time, from the mouth
of a murdering piece, when fire and sword waste at pleasure. The birth of
Christ comfort against all the miseries of War: whereunto therefore it is
opposed both here, and Mic. 5.1, 2. See the Note there. Now then as the
Israelites frighted and flighted the Midianites with saying, Hic Gideon, Here Is
Gideon: so may we our spiritual enemies, by crying Hic Jesus: Hoc in signo
vincemus. Here Is Jesus: we are more then Conquerers through him that loved us.

But this shall be with burning] i. e. with the fire of the holy Ghost, says
Oecolampadius, burning up our corruptions, as chap. 4.4. and moulding us into a
new man. Diodate senseth it thus: The world shall be filled with blood and
wars, and at last shall be consumed with fire at the day of Judgment.

Ver. 6. For unto us a child is born] That Child foretold of, chap. 7.14.
Christ shall be born in the fullness of time, as sure as if he were born
already. This was good tidings of great joy to all people, Luke 2.10. The
Hebrew Besher for good tidings, comes of Bashar for Flesh: because (say some
Critics) there shauld be a taking of Flesh, God manifested in the flesh, which
should be the best tidings. Angels first brought it, and were glad of such an
Errand. Still they pry into this Mystery, prono capite and propenso collo, 1
Pet. 1.12. and can never sufficiently wonder to see that (...) should be (...),
the great God, a little child; regens sidera, sugens ubera; that He who Rules
the stars, should be sucking at the breast: that the Eternal Word should not be
able to speak a word: that He that should come in the Clouds, should appear in
clouts, Luke 2.12. in vilibus and veteribus indumentis, (...). Induit sordes
nostras; He condescended to our rags.
says Ladolphus, in old tattered rags, in such clouts as we cover wounds, and
beggars sores with all, say others. Well might Synesius call Christ viscerum
ingentium partum, the birth of huge Bowels. For the time of his birth, Christ
living just thirty two years and an half, (says One) and dying at Easter, it
must needs follow that he was born about the middle of the month Tisri which
answers to part of our September, at the Feast of Tabernacles, etc. to which
Feast the word (...), John 1.14. probably alludeth.

Unto us a son is given] That only begotten Son of God, John 3.16. begotten of
the substance of his Father before all beginnings, after an unspeakable manner.
The Scripture speaks of it usually by way of circumlocution, Col. 1.15. Rev.
19.12. or gives us only some glimpse by way of similitude, as Heb. 1.3. This
Eternal Son of God, the second Person in Trinity, assumed our Nature, Heb.
2.17. He overtook it (as the Greek word signifies) as the Shepherd does his
sheep that is run astray. A Shepherd with a sheep upon his shoulder engraved
upon the Communion-Cup in the Primitive times of the Gospel, imported the same
Notion.

And the Government shall be upon his shoulders] The Power and Majesty of the
Kingdom is committed to him by his Father, chap. 22.22. with Matthew. 28.18. and
he has strength enough to manage it. Princeps est hajulus Reip. The Hebrews
call a Prince Nassi, because Atlas-like, he is to bear up the Commonwealth,
and not to overload his Subjects. Christ, both as Prince of his Church, and as
High Priest also, bears up and bears out his people, helping their
infirmities, Romans 8.26. See the Note.

And his Name shall be called] Heb. He shall call his Name. 1. God his Father
shall: or every true Believer shall call him and count him all this. And sure
it is, had we but skill to spell all the Letters in this Name of Christ, Prove.
18.10.
it would be a strong Tower unto us, better then that of David builded for an
Armoury, and completely furnished, Cant. 4.4. Compare this Text with 1 Cor.
1.30. and see all our doubts answered. Are we perplexed? He is our wonderful
Counselor, and made unto us of God Wisdom. Are we in depths of distress? He
is the mighty God, our Redemption. Want we Grace and his Image? He is the
Everlasting Father, our Sanctification. Does the guilt of sin sting us? He is
the Prince of peace, our Righteousness.

Wonderful] Heb. A Miracle or Wonder, viz. in all his Counsels and Courses,
(...). Symmach. Ipsa admirabilitas. A Lap.
especially for his: Glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders,
Exodus 15.11.

Counsellour] The Septuagint here calls Him the Angel of the great Counsel,
Rev. 1.13. He is set forth as clothed with a garment down to the foot, which
is the Habit of Counselors at Law, who are therehence called Gentlemen of the
long Robe. See Rev. 3.17. Prove. 8.14. Jer. 32.19. But because Counselors are
but Subjects, it is added in Christ's style

The mighty God] Able to effect his own Counsels for the behoof of his
Subjects. Saint Paul calls him the great God, Tit. 2.13. and God above all to
be blessed for ever, Romans 9.5. God the Potentate; so the Sept. render this
Text: God the Giant; so Oecolampadius.

The Everlasting Father] The Father of Eternity: the King Eternal, Immortal, 1 Timothy 1.17. Ferdinand the Emperor on his death bed would not acknowledge the
Title Invictissimus, but commanded his Counselor to call him Ferdinand
without more addition. Christ is also the Author of Eternity to all his people
whom he has begotten again to an Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and
that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for them, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4.

The Prince of peace] Pacis omnimodae, of all kinds of peace, outward, inward,
of country and of conscience, temporal and eternal. Of all these he is the
Prince, as having full power to bestow them: for he is son to the God of peace,
Romans 16.20. He was brought from Heaven with that song of peace, Luc. 2.14. He
himself purged our sins, and made our peace, Heb. 1.3. Ephesians. 2.14. Returned up
to Heaven with that farewell of peace, Joh. 14.27. Left to the world the Gospel
of peace, Ephesians. 2.17. Whose Ministers are messengers of peace, Romans 10.15. Whose
followers are the children of peace, Luke 10.6, etc. Wherefore Christ does far
better deserve then our Hen. 7. did, to be styled the Prince of peace.
Especially since

Ver. 7. Of the increase of his government there shall be no end] Here the Mem
final in the middle of the word Lemarbeh has occasioned some to give many
guesses at the reason of it: yea to conceit many mysteries, where wiser men can
find no such matter. It is a good note which One gives here, viz. that the
more Christ's government increases in the soul, the more peace there is: See
chap. 32.17. Psalm. 119.136.

To establish it] Or, support it, uphold it. (...) quasi (...). A King has his
name in Greek from being the foundation of the people. This King of Kings is
only worthy of that name: he is not maintained and supported by us and our
Subsidies; but we by him, and by the supplies of his Spirit, Philip. 1.19. All
our springs are in him, Psalm. 87.7.

Non amat qui non zelat.
The Zeal of the Lord of hosts] i. e. the philanthropy, Tit. 3.4. and free
grace of God. Dilexisti me Domine magis quam te, says a Father. Let us
reciprocate by being zealous of good works, fervent in spirit, serving the
Lord. And when Satan tells us of our no merits, tell we him that the Zeal of
the Lord of hosts shall do it notwithstanding.

Ver. 8. The Lord f^r^ a word into Jacob] He sent it as a shaft out of a bow,
that will be sure to hit. God loves to premonish: but woe be to those that
will not be warned. The Septuagint render it The Lord sent a plague, or Death
into Jacob; and indeed after the white horse follows the red and the black,
Revel. 6.2, 4, 5. Like as Tamerlan, that warlike Scythian, displayed first a
white flag in token of mercy, and then a red, menacing and threatening blood:
and then, lastly, a black flag, the messenger and ensign of death was hung
abroad.

And it has lighted upon Israel.] 1. They were not ignorant of such a word,
ver. 9.2. They could neither avert, nor avoid his wrath.

Ver. 9. And all the people shall know] Know it they do already: but they shall
know it by woeful experience. He that trembles not in hearing, shall be
crushed to pieces in feeling, said Mr. Bradford Martyr.

That say in pride and sloutness of heart] The Poet could say of his Ajax --
(...). His pride undid him; so does it many a man: especially when come to that
height, that it fights against God, as here: When earthen pots will needs be
dashing against the Rock of ages, and doing this or that al despito di Dio, as
that profane Pope once said, whether God will or no: divine vengeance dogs at
heels such Desperado's.

Ver. 10. The bricks are fallen down] Not thrown down by Providence, but fallen
down by Fate or blind fortune. God is not so far honored as once to be owned
by these Atheists, who think they can make their party good against him, and
mend what he had marred, whether he would or not. Thus this giantlike
generation: and the like impiety is in the corrupt nature of us all; For as in
water face answers to face, so does the heart of a man to a man, says
Solomon.

Prove. 27.19.
The Sycomores are cut down, etc.] Another proverbial speech to the same
purpose: Sycomores were then very common in that country, and little set by, 1
King. 10.27. Now they are not to be found there, says Hierom, as neither are
Cedars in Lebanon.

Ver. 11. Therefore the Lord shall set up the adversaries of Rezin] in whom ye
trust. He shall shortly be destroyed by the Assyrian, 2 King. 16.9. and then
your hopes shall hop headless, and make you ashamed.

And join his enemies together] Heb. mingle them, viz. in confederacy and
agreement against him, though otherwise at ods amongst themselves.

Ver. 12. The Syrians before] Under the conduct of the Assyrian, who has slain
their King Rezin, and made them his vassals.

And the Philistines behind] Or from the West, westward.

And they shall devour Israel with open mouth] The enemies of Gods people are
more savage and ravenous then wild beasts. Hence they are called in Scripture
Boars, Bears, Lions, Leopards, Unicorns, Tigers, Wolves, etc. Let us therefore
bless us out of their bloody jaws: which having escaped, let us sing Blessed
be God who has not given us as a prey to their teeth, Psalm, 124.6. The poor
Jndians cried out that it had been better their country had been given to the
Devils of Hell, then to those cruel Spaniards.

For all this his wrath is not turned away] He still frowneth, and has his
hand up to smite, as angry people use to do.

Ver. 13. For the people turns not unto him that smites them] This were the
only way to escape God, viz. to run in to him: there is no standing before a
Lion: no bearing up sail in a storm, no stouting it out with God Almighty; See
the Notes on Am. 4.6. -- 11.

Ver. 14. Head and tail] i. e. high and low, as ver. 15. (...) Sept. Parvi
properemus and ampli.
Here he compares Israel, non sine morsu, to a beast with a long tail, for the
perverseness of their practices. Or else to the Serpent Amphisbaena, which
stingeth both with head and tail.

Branch and rush] strong and feeble. A branch or bough has some tack in it: a
rush is a spungy, unsubstantial substance.

Ver. 15. The ancient and honorable is the head] Thus the Scripture frequently
expounds it self. In a general calamity all fare alike, Lords and Losels.

And the Prophet that teaches lies, he is the tail] Such, like Dogs do cauda
adblandiri, sooth and smooth men up in their sins, and are the vilest of men.
Quid enim contemptius and abjectius animo fingi potest quam assentari
divitibus, linguamque venalem habere? Such also, as Serpents, glide smoothly
over the body; but sting with their tails.

Ver. 16. For the leaders of this people cause them to erre] by their ill
counsel and example. Exempla enim non ibi consistunt, ubi caeperunt. The
Ancients placed the Statues of their Princes and Patriots near the fountains:
to show that they were the springheads of good or evil to the public. Some
read the words thus, Those that bless this people ( viz. the false Prophets)
have been misleaders; ductores fuerunt seductores. Pope Pius 2. has this
memorable saying, Nihil excellenter malum in Ecclesia, In Hist. Auster.
Catholica patratur cujus prima origo a sacerdotibus non dependeat, ni forte
occulto quodam Dei consilio fiat.

And they that are led of them] Or, blessed by them. Obiecti. Tremel.


Are destroyed] Or swallowed up, or blindfolded.

Ver. 17. Therefore the Lord shall have no joy in their young men] Nay he shall
laugh at their destruction, Prove. 1.

Neither shall have mercy on their fatherless and widdows] They are deceived
therefore that being unregenerate, hope to find favor with God, merely for
their adversity: and because they have their Hell, as they call it, here, think
to have Heaven hereafter.

Because every one is an hypocrite and an evil-doer] That facies hypocritica of
our nation is facies Hippocratica, says One; a mortal complexion, a sad
Prognostic.

And every mouth speaks folly] Or villainy; sapless, worthless, rotten and
stinking stuff, Ephesians. 4.29.

Ver. 18. For wickedness burns as a fire] God will burn up these wicked
Israelits, as once he did those sinful Sodomits: for unregenerate Israel is to
him as Ethiopia, Am. 9.7. when once scelera abierunt in mores, and there is a
general defection of all sorts and States, God will make an utter riddance of
them; he will fire the whole forest.

Ver. 19. Through the wrath of the Lord of hosts is the Land darkened] viz. by
that pride of smoke or vast pillar of smoke mentioned ver. 18. Tristem and
miseram rerum faciem designat.

No man shall spare his brother] Wickedness is cruel: and a man had as good
deal with a Cannibal, as with a truly covetous caytiffe.

Ver. 20. And he shall snatch on the right hand, and be hungry] Inexplebilem
illorum avaritiam and rapacitatem notat. They shall rape and scrape by right or
wrong, and yet as sick of a bulimy, or under the curse of unsatisfiableness,
they shall never have enough, Eccles. 5.10. See the Note there.

They shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm] that is, they shall make a
prey of they nearest allies. Some understand the text of civil wars which
indeed are most unnatural: Imbelles damae quid nisi praeda sumus?
and concerning which One says well, Dissidia nostra sunt amicorum dispendia,
hostium compendia, and publica irae divinae incendia.

Ver. 21. Manasseh Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasseh] Snarling at and intertearing
one another as dogs, about the kingly dignity, or some other reasonless reason.
Thus the Prophet exemplifieth what he had spoken.

And they together shall be against Judah] So Herod and Pilate could unite
against Christ, Luke 23.7, 8, 9 and those that were at greatest enmity amongst
themselves, against the Church, Psalm. 83.5, 8. So in Julian the Apostates time,
Jews and Gentiles combined against Christians: and in our days Papists and
Lutherans against Calvinists. In Syngram.
How unworthily and impotently do the Lutherans of Suevia rail upon that holy
man Oecolampadius, whose note it is upon this text, that these last dangerous
times were foretold by St. Paul, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2. Annon eosdem describunt Paulus
and Jesaias? says He; Do not Paul and Isaiah describe the same men? Bullinger
observes concerning the Anabaptists of Germany, that as they are at great odds
among themselves, so they all agree against godly Ministers of the truth, to
despise and disparage them to the utmost.

CHAP. X.
Ver. 1. VVOe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees] Having denounced Woe
to wicked of all sorts, the Prophet here threatens wicked Princes in
particular; as the chief causes of Gods judgments by their misgovernment.
Periculosissimum Prophetae factum, Sculter.
and cui seditionis dica scribi poterat! This was boldly done of the Prophet:
and there wanted not those doubtless, that would say it was sedition. Luther,
for like cause, was called the Trumpet of rebellion, sc. for declaring against
the Popes decrees and decretals, though never so unrighteous and vexatious; not
much short of that made by Nero, Whosoever confesses himself a Christian (so,
a Protestant) let him, without further defense of himself, be put to death as a
convicted enemy of mankind?

And that write grievousness] Or, and to the writers that write grievous
things, viz. the public Notaries, registers, and other Underofficers; such as
were those Persian Scribes and Posts, Esth. 3.12, 13. who should, in such a
case, have obeyed God rather then men.

Ver. 2. To turn away the needy from judgment] To put them beside their right
because indigent, and overweighed by the wealthy ones, quorum aureae literae
apud tales judices possunt omnia.

Judex injustus latro cum privilegio est. Columel. l. 1.
And to take away the right] Heb. to tear it away by force.

And that they may rob the fatherless] rob the Spittle, as we use to say.
Unrighteous ruledom is but robbery with authority.

Ver. 3. And what will ye do in the day of visitation] that is, of vastation by
the Assyrians.

To whom will ye flee for help] Who have denied help to the poor that fled unto
you; but sped no better then the Sheep that flies to the Bush for defense in
weather, where he is sure to lose part of his fleece.

And where will ye leave your glory] Where will ye betrust or bestow your
wealth, power, and worldly pomp, purchased by you at too dear a rate, who paid
your honesty to get it (O magno emptas, and parum proficuas divitias!) and must
now lose not it only, but your liberties and lives also in the next verse*

Ver. 4. Without me they shall bow down under the prisoners] i. e. Without any
fault of mine, as Hos. 13.9. Or as some render it, Ne corruat inter vinctos,
and inter occisos cadant: that it (your glory) should not bow down under the
prisoners, and they fall under the slain. i. e. that ye be not some of you
captivated, and others slain by the enemy. And yet behold a worse matter.

For all this his anger is not turned away] Endless torments will follow, Hoc
oratione vir sanctus impios cruentat, and vulnerat. Osor.
unless ye prevent them by repentance: and all your present sufferings are
nothing else but a typical hell. Ecce quot mala a contemptu Dei proveniunt.

Ver. 5. O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger] Or, Woe to the Assyrian: Or, Heu
Assure, Alas, the Assyrian, q. d. Alas that I am forced by this sharp and iron
rod to correct my people whom I have bred so choicely. Dolentis vocem assumit
Deus, says Oecolamp.

The rod of mine anger] Or, my rod of anger. A rod of anger to beat the little
ones, and a staff of indignation to bastinado the bigger and more stubborn.
Oecolamp. Ira Dei ego sum, and orbit vastitas. Act. and Mon. fol. 1544.
So Nebuchadnezzar is called the hammer of the whole earth, Jer. 50.23.
Tamerlan called himself The wrath of God, and the Desolation of the world.
Attilas styled himself King of Huns, Medes, Goths, Dacians, the Terror of the
world, and Gods scourge. The wicked are Gods rod, said that Martyr: whom when
he has worn to the stump, he will cast into the fire.

Ver. 6. I will send him -- I will give him a charge] Non patefacta quidem
voluntate, sed arcana providentia, I will stir him up by a secret providence,
which (being nothing else but the carrying on of the divine decree) is that
Helm that turns about the whole Ship of the Universe.

Against an hypocritial nation] Pretenders only to religion (see chap. 9.17.)
qui toti ex hypocrisi sunt conflati, such as are wholly made up of hypocrisy:
God was near in their mouth, and far from their reins, Jer. 12.2. Nemo tam
prope proculque Deo. Mat. 15.8. hot Meteors they are, says One, shooting, yet
showing like stars: shaming goodness by seeming good; virtutis stragulam
pudefaciunt, as Diogenes said to Antipater, who, being vicious, wore a white
cloak the ensign of innocence. These are little better then Devils wrapped up in
Samuels mantle: odious therefore to God, whom they would cozen of Heaven, if
they could tell how.

And against the people of my wrath] Who are therefore the worse (and shall
fare the worse) because they ought to have been better. Indignation and wrath
shall be upon the Jew first (because of his privileges) and then upon the
Gentile, Romans 2.9.

To take the spoil, and to take the prey] As had been foretold in
Maher-shalal-hash-baz his name, chap. 8.1.

And to tread them down like mire in the streets] To make mortar of them, as we
use to say; Gens simulatrix tota terrena, is trodden under foot as unsavory
salt, which is not good enough for the dunghill.

Ver. 7. Howbeit he means not so] He is otherwise minded and affected then I
am; and does my will merely beside and against his own will. As in applying of
leeches the Physician seeks the health of his Patient, the leech only the
filling of his gorge: so is it when God turns loose a bloody enemy upon his
people. He has excellent ends which they think not on.

But it is in his heart to destroy and cut off] This was to exceed his
Commission, which was only to take the spoil, and to take the prey, ver. 6. not
to cut off Nations, and to make havoc of all. How much better our King Edward
the Confessor, Camd. Rem. p. 214.
who when his Captains promised for his sake, they would not leave one Dane
alive, thought it better to lead a private and unbloody life, then to be a King
by such bloody butcheries? Of Charles 5. Emperor we read, Parei Hist. prof.
Med. p. 895.
that when Antonius Leva and other of his chief Commanders commended Alexander
the Great, and Julius Caesar for their great exploits in overrunning and
destroying nations not a few, to their great renown; and on the other side
complained that Charles made not the like use of his power and victories as he
might and ought to do for such a purpose: he gravely replied, that Alexander
and Julius had in waging wars nothing else to aim at besides Honor and glory:
but that Christian Princes were in all their enterprises to mind the glory of
God, and the salvation of their own souls.

Ver. 8. For he saith] Sennacherib says, See Chap. 36.9, 15, 18, 20. and
37.10, 13, 24, 25. A great part of this whole book of Isaiah concerns
Sennacherib.

Are not my Princes altogether Kings] Behold a right, Pyrgopolynices Perhaps he
had made some of his chief commanders Kings: our Hen. 6. crowned Hen.
Beauchamp, E. of Warw. King of the Isle of Wight.
, when as he was set a work by God, exalting himself both against God and man.
And says not the Pope the same when he claims to be Dominus feudi, Lord
paramount in spirituals and temporals? And when in creating his Cardinals he
uses these words, Estote confratres nostri, and Principes mundi; Be ye
fellow-brethren to us, and Princes of the world? The Assyrian styled himself
King of Kings, and accounted his Commanders Compters to Hezekiah, chap. 36.9.
So Cardinal Bellarmine held himself King James his Mate.

Ver. 9. Is not Calno as Carchemish?] Here in a vaunt he reckons up six royal
Cities vanquished by himself and his ancestors: and boasts how with a wet
finger, as we say, he had taken in all the country betwixt Niniveh, and
Jerusalem. Of the destruction of Calno and Hamath, see Am. 6.2.

Is not Hamath] Afterward called Antiochia.

As Arpad] Hear how this proud Braggad^chio

Projicit ampullas and sesquipedalia verba! Is not Samaria as Damascus?] Have
not I subdued them both pari fortitudine and felicitate?

Ver. 10. As my hand has found] Nota fastum tyranni, Note the arrogance of
this tyrant says A Lapide. It was his hand did all, and not Gods (like as
afterward Timothaus, the victorious Athenian, into whose toils cities were
said to fall even as he was sleeping, telling his Countrymen of his great
successes, inserted ever and anon these words Herein Fortune did nothing) and
then, His hand only found those Kingdoms, as an obvious prey, which he did no
more but meet, and it was taken.

V^g.
Dextra mihi Deus, and telum quod missile libro. The Kingdoms of the idols] In
despite of their Tutelary deities, which indeed were but deunculi petty-gods,
as the word here used (Elil) signifies.

And whose graven images did excel them of Jerusalem] Os ferreum! vah scelus!
Prodigious blasphemy! this absurd collation and prelation of dumb and dunghill
idols before the true and living God, is omnium mortalium execratione
dignissima.

Ver. 11. Shall I not as I have done] God is not in all this man's thoughts:
himself does all that is done.

So do to Jerusalem] Why, no: for their Rock is not as our Rock (might Gods
people have replied) our enemies themselves being judges. Vere magnus est Deus
Christianorum, said a certain Pagan truly. The God of the Christians is a great
God above all gods. But the Devil does all he can to drive us to despair.

Ver. 12. Wherefore] Heb. And. A close connection; where pride is in the
saddle, there destruction is on the crupper. When the scum is at highest, it
falls in the fire.

When the Lord has performed] When he has sufficiently chastised his children
by this rod of his wrath, he will cast it into the fire. So Jer. 25. when other
Nations have drunk deep of the cup of the divine displeasure, Babylon shall
suck up the dreggs. What became of the Primitive Persecutors and of such as
were most active here in those dog-dayes of Q. Mary? See the Acts and Monuments
of the Church.

Upon mount Sion] For there he usually begins, Jer. 25.18. 1 Pet. 4.17. his
own he least of all spares, Am. 3.2.

I will punish the fruit of the stout heart] His arrogant words and lofty
looks, proceeding from the pride of his heart. But let himself tell what those
fruits are.

Ver. 13. For he says, By the strength of my hand, etc.] Viva haec est istius
Vejovis Latialis, hoc est Pontificis pictura, says Scultetus. i. e. Here we
have a lively picture of Antichrist, who speaks great things and blasphemies,
Rev. 13.5. arrogateth to himself all power and wisdom, disposes of Kingdoms
at his pleasure, robs their treasures, etc.

Ver. 14. And my hand had found] See ver. 10.

As a nest] Or, as in a nest, where a man need but only put in his hand and
take out the birds or eggs, and has none to withstand him. Thrasonica
Allegoria.

The riches of the people] Whereon they sat abrood as it were; but I have
unnested and despoiled them: They meanwhile, as silly doves, saved themselves
by flight not fight: or else sitting in their dove-coats saw their nests
destroyed, young ones taken away and killed before their eyes, never offering to
rescue or revenge.

Ver. 15. Shall the ax boast it self] Is not God the Architect and chief Agent?
the Assyrian only the Instrument in his hand? What a madness then is it for him
thus to vaunt and vapor? Is the man in his right mind, trow ye? How much
better that victorious Emperor Charles 5. who instead of Caesar's Veni, Vidi,
Vici, wrote Veni, Vidi, sed Christus vicit? Christ is the only Corquerour,

As if the staff should lift up it self] Or, When the rod is lift up, is it
not wood, lignum inanime, sorry wood?

Ver. 16. Therefore shall the Lord -- send among his fat ones] i e. Pingues
torosos and validos milites, his lusty and mastive soldiers, in whom he
confided.

Leanness] i. e. Luem, a plague to tame them, and take them down: See this
fullfilled, chap. 37.36.

And under his glory] i.e. His huge army wherein he glories. Turk. hist. fol.
206.
What need we to fear the Turks, said Sigismund the young King of Hungary, who
need not at all to fear the falling of the Heavens; which if they should fall,
yet were we able with our spears and halberds to hold them up for falling upon
us?

He will kindle a burning] A plague parching up their vitals. The Hebrews say
that the bodies of Sennacheribs soldiers were by the stroke of an Angel so
consumed and burnt up, as that their garments and weapons were not burnt at all.

Ver. 17. And the light of Israel shall be for a fire] To Israel he shall be a
comfortable Light, to their enemies a consuming fire, as Exodus 14.24. Assyrios,
quibus ut sentibus vepribusque cohorrebat terra. Jun.
Ecce idem justis and fidelibus suavis, impiis autem gravis.

His thorns and his briars] His army, which is so troublesome and vexatious to
Israel: God will go thorough them, he will burn them together, Isai. 27.4.

In one day] i. e. In one night, being part of the natural day. So the Spanish
Armada was quickly dispersed, which had been so many years in rigging and
setting forward.

Ver. 18. And he shall consume the glory of his forrest] i. e. Of his army,
cutting his way thorough a wood of men, and felling the very glory of his
glory, even his best soldiers. All this God shall do to his stout Warriers,
and stately Princes.

Both soul and body] i. e. full and whole, both here and in hell. Ecce hic
habes animam ardere. Oecolamp.


And they shall be as when a standard bearer fainteth] Heb. Melts, i.e.
through fear casting away his colors: soon after which the whole regiment is
routed, and cannot he rallied.

Ver. 19. And the rest of the trees -- shall be few] Heb. a number: methe
mispar, a poor few, and inconsiderable company, that may soon be told.

That a child may write them] The Hebrews say that Sennacherib escaped home
with ten only in his company. Sculter.


Ver. 20. And it shall come to pass in that day] Meras consolationes hic
loquitur Deus, says Scultetus: Here God begins to speak pure comforts to
his poor people. Here he sets forth how he will be a lively light to Israel;
like as he had been a devouring fire to the Assyrians.

Shall no more again stay upon him that smote them] Piscator ictus sapiet: they
had paid for their learning, smarted for their creature confidence: and now
they would be better advised, viz. under Hezekiah, then they had been under
Ahaz, 2 King. 16.10. Hos. 14.3.

Ver. 21. A remnant shall return] sc. to the Lord by true repentance, from whom
they had deeply revolted. But of these there is but as a remnant (a poor few)
in comparison of the whole piece of cloth.

Ver. 22. Yet a remnant of them shall return] i. e. Shall be saved from
Senn^cherib, but especially from Satan that old manslayer, Romans 9.27, 29. and
11.5. The greater part of the Jews were then cut off by the Assyrians; and so
they are spiritually still by the evil spirits, which hold them in their
hardness of heart, and hinder them from embracing the Christian faith. But this
befalls them by Gods holy decree, Romans 9.27, 28. and just judgment.

The consumption decreed shall overflow with righteousness] i. e. The utter
destruction of this perverse people (both temporal and spiritual, Romans 9.27.
for the generality of them) is not to be accounted cruelty, but overflowing
righteousness. For God could not in justice but thus rigorously deal with them;
and then, for his promise sake to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, reserving a
remnant, show favor to them again.

Ver. 23. For the Lord God of hosts shall make, etc.] Here the same thing is
repeated by way of asseveration; because not easily believed or digested, but
would lie heavy as hard meat. Behold the severity of God, Romans 11.22. and stoop
to it.

Ver. 24. O my people that dwell in Zion, be not afraid] Quam pattern omnia!
As a father bespeaketh his little son passing with him through a dark entry, etc.

Non occidet te, quamvis vapules. Oecol.
He shall smite thee with a rod] Chasten thee, but not slay thee. Sinite virgam
corripientem, ne sentiatis malleum conterentem.

And shall lift up his staff against thee] Or, but he shall lift up his staff
for thee (so some render it) i.e. God shall: and that, after the manner of
Egypt, as of old he did for thy Fathers against Pharaoh.

Ver. 25. For yet a very little while] Heb. a little little, or a little of a
little. Yet a little modicum, and wrath shall be at an end. Oecolampadius
renders it, adhuc paululum, minus quam paululum: Hold out therefore faith and
patience.

Ver. 26. And the Lord of hosts shall stir up a scourge for him] Far worse then
that rod, ver. 24. this scourge was that Angel that slew to many Assyrians in a
night, according to that slaughter of Midian, Judge. 7.22. Psalm. 83.9, 11.

At the rock of Oreb] Where Oreb was slain; like as was Sennacherib after this,
in his Temple at Niniveh.

And as his rod was upon the sea] As Moses by his rod or staff held over the
red Sea made way for Israel, but brought destruction on the Egyptians, Exodus
14.26.

Ver. 27. And the yoke shall be destroyed, because of the anointing] That is,
because or for the sake of Messiah the Prince, Dan. 9.25. the Lord Christ our
(...) and Sospitator, the foundation of all the Churches deliverances. The
whole 11th Chapter following is a comment on this sweet promise.

Ver. 28. He is come to Aiath] Elegans hypotyposis, a dainty description of
Sennacheribs ingress into the Land, and progress with his army toward
Jerusalem, thorough the tribe of Benjamin.

He is passed to Migron] 14. Cities are here set down in order, as distressed
by this Poliorcetes, of whom it might be truly said as it is now of the Grand
Signior, that no grass grows on that ground where he has set his foot once.

At Michmash he has laid up his carriages] i.e. He shall: but the Prophet
speaks of it, as if presently done: or as if himself had been marching along
with them.

Ver. 29. They are gone over the passages] i. e. The streights, between two
rocks, 1 Samuel 13.23.

Ver. 30. Lift up thy voice] Heb. Hinni, i. e. claram vocem ede, ^amque
lugubrem, make a grievous outcry, ejula, quiritare: Nam certa tibi imminet
vastitas, for thou art undone.

O poor Anathoth] Jeremies country, poor because plundered.

Ver. 31. Madmena is removed] i.e. Fled for fear, as Gibeah, ver. 29.

Ver. 32. He shall shake his hand] Viz. at Jerusalem, as threatening her
destruction; but she shall shake her head at him in contempt, chap. 37.21. God
often lets his enemies go to the utmost of their tedder, and then pulls them back
to their tasks with shame enough, as he did Pharaoh.

Ver. 33. Behold, the Lord shall top the bough] i.e. Those of greatest state
and stature in the Assyrian army.

And the haughty shall be humbled] See chap. 2.11, 17.

Per Magnificum.
Ver. 34. By a mighty one] That is, by an Angel, as chap. 37.36. See Psalm.
78.25. and 89.5, 6.

CHAP. XI.
Ver. 1. ANd there shall come forth a rod] i. e. Christ shall be born: whom our
Prophet having called the anointing or Messiah, chap. 10.27. makes him and
his Kingdom hence forward the chief matter of his discourse, to the end of his
book. Here he begins with his Nativity, calling him a Rod or Twig springing
not out of the stock of David, but out of the stump of Jesse a mean man, and
that then, when the Royal Family was sunk so low as from David the King, to
Joseph the Carpenter. Well might Chrysostom say, that the foundation of our
Philosophy was humility: And another, that at Bethlehem brake forth that well
of Salvation, Scultet.
which in the type once David so thirsted after, 2 Samuel 23.15.

And a branch] Or the Nazaren born at Nazareth (says Junius) which signifies
a branch; for so it was generally deemed: and our Savior styles himself Jesus
of Nazareth, Act. 22.8. and on his Cross they wrote Jesus of Nazareth King of
the Jews: wherein that Prodigy (faith A Lapide) seems to have fallen out,
concerning which the Poet enquireth, Dic quibus in terris inscripti nomine Regis
Nascantur fl^res. --


For Nazareth, he interprets a Flower, or something flowery; and for (shall
grow) others render shall bud, or bear fruit.

Ver. 2. And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him] After such a
description of Christ's person, as ver. 1. follows here a Declaration of his
Kingdom, which is set forth to be First, Spiritual, ver. 2. Secondly, Just,
ver. 3 4.5. Thirdly, Peaceable, ver. 6.7, 8, 9. Fourthly, Ample, as made up of
Gentiles and Jews, ver. 11, etc.

Shall rest upon him] His Humanity shall be filled topful with the Gifts and
Graces of the Holy Ghost, Diodat. Annot.
to be as it were an Everlasting Treasure and Cistern full of them for the use
of the Church, John 1.16. and 3.34. Acts 2.33. And this was typified by the
Holy Ghosts descending in the likeness of a Dove at the time of his Baptism,
and resting upon him. Matthew. 3.16. John 1.32, 33.

The spirit of wisdom and understanding] These six Princely Virtues (for the
Schoolmen, misled by the vulgar Translation, falsely found their septiformem
gratiam spiritus sancti) were eminently and transcendently in Christ, they
should be also found in some measure in all Rulers, Deuteronomy. 1.16. Exodus 18.25.
Lev. 19. 1 King. 3.12.

Ver. 3. And shall make him of quick undestanding] Heb. It shall make him scent
or smell, sc. by a singular sagacity and sharpness of judgment in smelling out
an Hypocrite, as Simon Peter did Simon Magus, who had deceived Philip, even
unto Baptism; but Peter soon found him out: how much more will Christ? His
sharp Nose easily discerns and is offended with the stinking breath of the
Hypocrites rotten Lungs; though his words be never so scented and perfumed with
shows of holiness. So for the innocence of the godly, when being defamed they
pray as Paul, apologize and cannot be heard as the Primitive Christians; Psalm.
37.6.
Christ will bring forth their Righteousness as the Light, and their judgment
as the noon day.

And he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes] He cannot be cozened, as
knowing all hearts, and as having all things naked and dissected before his
eyes, Heb. 4.1^. Matthew. 9.12. John 2.24. Others judge by relation of others,
and secundum allegata and probata, not so Jesus Christ: but he shall always
proceed upon his own knowledge, and so pass a most righteous Sentence.
Oecolampadius thinks the Prophet here alludeth to Solomon's sentence passed on
the two Harlots, 1 King. 3.

Ver. 4. But with righteousness judge the poor] i.e. The poor in spirit, those
meek ones of the earth. So the Anabaptists of Germany called themselves, and
said, that now the Promise must be fulfilled, The meek shall inherit the earth;
when as they by blood, rapine, cruel wars, seized on the possessions of others.
And have we not now amongst us many loaves of the same Leven, brats of the same
breed, This was written, May 1. 1657.
bloody in their positions and dispositions (the fifth Monarchy-men they call
themselves) Christ Jesus (as he has lately to his great praise, so still)
preserve, and bless us out of their bloody fingers, and from their prodigious
principles, and practices. He has promised it here, and much more; Thou shall
give thy Judgment to the King (Christ) and he shall deliver the poor, Psalm.
72.2. viz. from all foes and persecutors.

And he shall smite the earth] i. e. Earthly-minded men, who are of the earth,
speak of the earth, and the earth hears them, John 3.31. As the earth is cold
and dry: so are they. As the earth is heavy and bears downward: so do they.
As the earth keeps down hot exhalations that naturally would ascend: so is it
with such. And lastly, as the earth stands still in the midst of Heaven, and
takes no notice of the whole circumference that is carried round about it: so
are earthly men stupid and insensible, etc. Howbeit, by the Rod of his mouth,
that is, by the preaching of the Gospel, Christ does eftsoons secretly smite
the earth, that is, the consciences of carnal people, glued to the earth,
making them sound heavily as a shawlm.

And with the breath of his lips shall he stay the wicked] The Devil and his
Deputies, Antichrist especially, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. and that with little ado, even
with a blast of his lips only: as with his bare Word he laid on their backs,
those Soldiers that came to apprehend him.

Ver. 5. And righteousness shall be the girdle of his Loyns] Symbelum Regis hoc
est, The girdle is put for a Kingly Ensign, Job 12.18. Calvin.
says Scultetus. Kings and Princes have their scita in scutis, their Motto's
on their Escucheons; so has our King here, viz. Righteousness and
Faithfulness: and this is so manifest as if written on his girdle, or belt: See
Rev. 19.16. where for like cause, Christ's high Titles are written on his
vesture, and on his thigh. Others, by this Expression understand Christ's
alacrity and promptitude to vindicate his Elect, and to punish the wicked,
according to his promise, Vaticinatur de Christi solertia in obeundis regni Dei
negotiis, ac tribuit illi cincturam, seu industriam spiritualem pro qualitate
obeundae dispensationis. Zeged.
Let us also, Christ-like, gird up the loins of our minds, he sober, and hope
perfectly, 1 Pet. 1.13. Gird our selves and serve him, Luke 17.8. readily,
nimbly, handsomely and hardily: A loose discinct and diffluent mind is unfit
for Gods service.

Ver. 6. The Wolf also shall dwell with the Lamb] Not worrying as he was wont,
but made tame and tractable. Lo, such a blessed change is wrought in all true
Converts, as is to be seen in Paul, that Wolf of the Tribe of Benjamin
prophesied of by Jacob, Sleidan. l. 21. page 650. Bucholc. Anno. 1548. Act. and
Mon. 919. Fullers Church-Hist. Fol. 405.
Genesis 49.27. as some hold. And the like may be said of Petrus Paulus Vergerius,
once the Popes Nuntio, but afterward a great Preacher of the Gospel. Hugh
Latimer once as obstinate a Papist as any was in England (they are his own
words) but converted by blessed Bilney (as he called him usually) he became a
zealous promoter of the truth according to godliness, Confessor general to all
Protestants troubled in mind, and the Treasury into which restored ill-gotten
goods were cast, to be bestowed on the poor acording to his discretior.

And the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid] As they did at the Creation, and
afterward in Noah's Ark, all bloodiness and rapine laid aside. Those that love
not one another out of a pure heart fervently, but are filled with envy,
malice, debate, deceit, malignity, are none of Christ's subjects, nor fellow
Citizens with the Saints.

And a little child shall lead them] That is, the child Jesus (say some
Interpreters) by the conduct of his Holy Spirit: or the Apostles and other
godly Ministers, who were counted but as little children to the Pharisees and
Philosophers, called the Grandees and Princes of this world, 1 Cor. 2.8. But
they do best that understand it of such a tractableness and teachableness in
Christians, Vt vel ex puero, h. e. ex inopi and simplici quovis. Sculter.
that they can be content to learn of any one, though never so mean, that can
better inform them. See this in Apollos, Act. 18.26. Augustine, as himself
witnesses thus in one of his Epistles, En adsum senex a juvene coepiscopo,
Episcopus tot annorum a collega nondum anniculo paratus sum discere, I am here
an old man ready to learn from a young man my Coadjutor in the Ministry; and so
old a Bishop, from one who has scarce been a year in the service. (...).
Hippocrates advises men not to slack or disdain to learn even of those who
are counted Idiots.

Ver. 7. And the Cow and the Bear shall feed] An Allegorical description of
greatest confidence and innocence, says Junius; Bears are angry and vindictive
creatures; so are the best by nature, Tit. 3.3. till cicurated and mansuefied
by Gods distinguishing Grace. As for those semiperfectae vertutis homines (as
an Ancient calls them) Temporaries and Hypocrites, who do only the outward
works of duty, without the inward principle, it may be said of them as the
civil Law does of those mixed beasts, Elephants, Camels, etc. operam praestant,
natura fera est, they do the work of tame beasts, yet have the nature of wild
ones.

Their young ones shall lie down together] Heb. their children, i e. say some,
children after Parents shall do thus, and their children after them from age to
age: Arcularius.
not revolting any more to barbarism.

And the Lion shall eat straw] Not men, and other sensitive creatures, as now.
C^nversi non vivent ex rapto: sed legitime partis reculis contenti erunt.
This (say the Chiliasts after some Rabbis) shall be literally fulfilled in
that golden Age of Christ's personal Reign upon earth: A mere fancy, first
vented by Papias, a man of some holiness, but ingenii pertenuis, of very little
judgment, says Eusebius.

Ver. 8. And the sucking child shall play upon the hole of the asp, etc.] There
shall be no danger from calumniators and cruel-crafties, Asps and Basiliskes,
quorum in labris venenum sessitat, Psalm 140.4. These homines damnosissimi
shall have a new nature transfused into them; their malign^ties and mischievous
qualities shall cease when once truly converted.

Ver. 9. None shall hurt] Here the foregoing Allegory is fully explained. In
Gods Holy Mountain, that is, in the Church, there shall be an holy harmlesness,
and a sweet Harmony of hearts: The word amongst them shall be this, Beloved, if
God so loved us, we ought also to love one another, 1 John 4 11. Some
differences and jarrs there may fall out among the best, as did betwixt Paul
and Barnabas, Hierom and Austin, Luther and Zuinglius: but these last not long;
at utmost but till they come to Heaven: and the ground of such a distemper, is,
that we know but in part, and therefore love but in part, 1 Cor. 13. O pray for
that blessed sight, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. and for a fuller comprehension of those
several dimensions, Ephesians. 3.18. that the earth may be full of the Knowledge of
the Lord.

As the waters cover the sea] i e. The bosom and bottom of it, that Gods Word
may dwell richly in us in all wisdom, and that the knowledge we have of it may
be a transforming knowledge, 2 Cor. 3.18. Two or three words of Gods mouth hid
in the heart, and there mingled with faith, work such an evident and entire
change in a man (says Lactantius) that you can hardly know him to be the same.
Lactant. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 86.
Da mihi virum qui sit iracundus, maledicus, effraenatus, paucissimis Dei
verbis tam placidum quam ovem reddam. Da cupidum, avarum, tenacem, etc. Give me
a man that is angry, ill-spoken, unruly; with a few words of Almighty God, I Will
make him as meek as a Lamb. Give me one that is covetous, an oppressive
hold-fast, a very Nabal, I Will make him a Nadib, of a covetous carle a liberal
person, of a Viper a child, of a leacher a chaste man, etc. Lo this is the fruit
of the sound and saving Knowledge of God, and of his Word, of our selves and of
our duties.

Ver. 10. And in that day] In the day of Christ's power (or Kingdom) the people
shall be willing, Psalm 110.3. The Isles shall wait for Gods Law, Isa. 42.8.
Multitudes of Nations shall come crowding in to his greatest glory, Prove. 14.2.
and for the fulfilling of old Jacobs Prophecy, Genesis 49.10.

There shall be a root of Jesse] See on ver. 1.

Which shall stand for an Ensign] or Standard, whereto all the Elect must
Assemble: and hereby is meant the preaching of the Gospel.

Shall the Gentiles seek] Ferventi studio, magno desiderio, non coacti: they
shall fly thereto as the Clouds, and as Doves scour to their windows, chap.
60.8.

And his rest] that is, His Church, with whom he rests and resideth, Psalm.
132.8. He rests also in his Love to his people, and rejoices over them with
singing, Zeph. 3.17. See the Notes there.

Shall be glorious] Heb. glory, sc. per sanctitutem, chap. 4.5.

Ver. 11. The Lord shall set his hand again the second time] Not to bring them
back to the promised Land, to Palestina, as once he did out of Egypt: that's
but a Rabbinical dream, not unlike that other, viz. that all Jews, in what
Country soever they are buried, do travel through certain under-ground-passages
till they come to their own Country of Jury. But with a stretcht-out hand he
shall recover the remnant of his people that shall be left: So the Poet, --
relliquias Danaum atque immitis Achillei.

He shall recover] Or get, buy, purchase, that poor dissected Nation, Elevatio
signi est praedicatio Crucifix Oecolamp.
out of all places of their dispersion; uniting their minds, and subduing their
enemies.

Ver. 12. And he shall set up an Ensign] See on ver. 10.

Dispersas oves Judae. Piscat.
The dispersed of Judah] See John 7.35. Jam. 1.1. The word dispersed in the
Hebrew is Feminine, to show that no sort or sex shall be excluded, Col. 3.11.

Discimus sub Christo finem sore simultatum and odiorum. Oecol. Dan. hist. 249.
Ver. 13. The envy also of Ephraim shall depart] The fierce wrath or deadly feud
that was betwixt the ten revolted Tribes of Judah, the like whereunto was
between England and Scotland, and in England between the Houses of York and
Lancaster: in which last-mentioned dissension were slain fourscore Princes of
the blood Royal, and twice as many Natives of England as were lost in the two
Conquests of France. This emulation and hatred of Ephraim against Judah was to
be abolished by Christ, Ezekiel. 37.17. The Disciples, being of several Tribes,
were all of one heart, and of one soul, Peza ex Beda.
Act. 4.32. Neither was there any controversy at all amongst them, as one
ancient Greek Copy adds to that forecited Text.

Ver. 14. But they shall flee upon the shoulders] A Metaphor from Conquerers
who pursue their enemies, and fall upon the bones of them, as we say. The
meaning is, The Gentiles shall be converted to the Christian faith by the Jews,
See Genesis 49.8.
viz. by the Apostles and other Preachers of the Gospel. Thus Philip was found
at Azotus, or Ashdod, Act. 8. Peter at Joppe, Act. 10. At Gaza and Askelon were
many flourishing Churches in the times of Athanasius and Chrysostom, Tertul.
says Adrichomius. Brittannorum inaccessa Romany loca, Christo patuerunt.

Ver. 15. And the Lord shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea]
that is, by drying up, or driving away the waters, He shall open a way through
the red Sea, which represents the form and fashion of a Tongue. He alludeth
to Exodus 14. for Christ being our Conduct we do enter by Baptism (as by the red
Sea) into the Church: and after this life present, into the Kingdom of Heaven.

He shall shake his hand over the River] The River Nilus. The sense is, he
shall remove all obstacles and impediments. This was fulfilled, Acts 2.

With his mighty wind] The Chaldee paraphraseth in eloquio prophetarum suorum,
by the word of his Prophets: quod Apostolis non parum congruit, (says
Oecolampadius) which very well agrees to the Apostles, converting the Elect,
whom neither height, nor depth could keep from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.39. The Jews expect (but in vain) that all these
things should be fulfilled unto them in the letter by their Messiah, as once
they were by Moses at the red Sea.

And make men go over dry-shod] without boat, or boot.

Ver. 16. And there shall be an high-way] Agger, via strata, a Causey, chap.
7.3.

In the day that he came up out of the Land of Aegypt] This signal deliverance
was a clear Type of our Redemption by Christ. And this Prophecy was fulfilled
when thousands of the Egyptians were converted by Mark the Evangelist and
other Preachers: as also when other Nations forsook Spiritual Egypt, Rev.
11.8. and embraced the Truth.

CHAP. XII.
Ver. 1. ANd in that day] sc. when there shall come forth a Rod out of the stem
of Jesse, as chap. 11.1. Blessed be God for a Christ. See Psalm 96.1. -- 13.
Rev. 6.11.

Thou shall say] It is not a dumb kind of thankfulness that is required of the
Lords Redeemed, but such as from an heart full of Spiritual Joy breaks forth
into fit words, such as are here set down in this ditty, or Directory.

I will praise thee] The whole life of a true Christian is an holy desire,
says an Ancient: It is or should be surely continua laetitia and laus Dei, a
continual Hallelujah. Deo gratias was ever in Austins mouth. Laudetur Deus,
laudetur Deus, in Another. i.e. Praised be God* praised be God. The Saints
here with one mind and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Romans 15.6. The Saints and Angels do so in Heaven uncessantly,
Rev. 4. hoc est juge eorum negotiosum otium and otiosum negotium.

Thine anger is turned away] My sins are forgiven me: and hence I am of so good
cheer, though otherwise distressed. Feri Domine, feri: a peccatis absolutus
sum, said Luther Strike while thou will Lord, so long as my sins are pardoned.
See Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3.

And thou comfortedst me] viz. with Gospel-comforts, which are strong and
satisfying. I do over-abound exceedingly with joy in all our tribulation, says
Paul, 2 Cor. 7.4.

Ver. 2. Behold, God is my salvation] Let such take notice of it as said when
time was, There is no help for him in God; Salvation it self cannot save him.
Behold, Oecolamp.
and My: there is much matter in this Adverb, and that Pronoun, says an
Interpreter. Behold God is my Jesus, so Hierom reads it: according to that of
old Simeon, Mine eyes have seen thy Salvation; And in this and the next Verse
Salvation is thrice mentioned, so sweet it was to those that thus sang of it.
See the Note on 1 Cor. 1.8.

I will trust and not be afraid] There is an Elegancy in the Hebrew that cannot
be Englished. This Spiritual security flows from Faith: Experience should
both breed and feed it. See Psalm 46.3. 2 Cor. 1.10.

For the Lord is my strength] Salvation properly denotes the privative part of
man's happiness, viz. freedom from evil: but it includes also position in a
good estate, and preservation therein, whilst we are kept by the power (or
strength) of God through faith unto Salvation.

Ver. 3. Therefore with joy shall ye draw water] Joy is the just man's portion:
and Christ is the never-failing fountain, whence by a lively faith he may
infallibly fetch it, John 4.10, 14. and 7.37. Christ was much delighted with
this Metaphor: see Joh. 1.16. Out of this Fountain only may men quench their
Spiritual thirst after Righteousness. Haec sola est aqua quae animas arentes,
maerentes and squalidas reficit, and recreat. These Wells of Salvation are
those Words of Eternal Life, John 6 68. Sanchez.
the rich and precious promises, 2 Pet. 1.4. whereby we are made partakers of
the Divine Nature, and of the Holy Spirit, which is frequently and fitly
compared to water in regard of First Ablution, Ezekiel. 36.25. Secondly, of
Fructification, Job 8.11. Isa. 35.6, 7. and 44.3, 4. And thirdly, of
Refrigeration, Psalm 42.1. Romans 5.5. Some think the Prophet here alludeth to
those softly-running Waters of Siloam, chap. 8. or to the Rock-water that
followed them in the Wilderness, or to that famous Fountain, Numb. 21.16, --
18. whence they drew waters with so much mirth and melody.

Ver. 4. And in that day shall ye say, Praise the Lord] Viz. with us, and for
us. Every true Confiteb^r tibi, has its Confitemini Domino annexed unto it.
The Saints are unsatisfiable in praising God for the great work of their
Redemption: and do therefore call in help, all that may be.

Call upon his Name] Which is a special way of praising Him, whilst we make
Him the sole Object of our prayers: professing our distance from him, our whole
dependence upon him, etc. See 1 Chronicles. 16.8. and Psalm 105.1.

Declare his doings] Sept. his glorious things; those many Miracles of Mercy
wrought in our Redemption, which is a work much more excellent then that of
making all things at first of nothing, keeping Heaven still upon its hinges,
and upholding the whole Universe without a Foundation. Magna sunt opera Dei
Creatoris, Recreatoris autem long maxima, says Gregory.

Make mention that his Name is exalted] Or, celebrate his Name which is High,
far above all praise.

Ver. 5. Sing unto the Lord] Or, sing of the Lord. Sing a concise and short
Song, amputatis omnibus supervacantis.

He has done excellent things] Heb. Excellency or Majesty. All other Spiritual
Blessings meet in our Redemption by Christ, as the lines do in the Center,
streams in the Fountain.

This is known in all the earth] Or, let this be known, let all the world ring
of it. As when the Argives were delivered by the Romans from the Tyranny of
the Macedonians and Spartans, the air was so dissipated with their acclamations
and outcries, Plutarch.
that the Birds that flew over the place fell down amated to the ground.

Ver. 6. Cry out] Heb. hinni, neigh as Horses do, that are full fed, or fitted
for fight. Jubila quantum potes, valide and totis viribus clama, claram and
laetam vocem ede.

For great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee] Or, for the Holy One
of Israel who is great, is in the midst of thee. How should thou then do
otherwise then well?

CHAP. XIII.
Ver. 1. THe burden] That is, the burdenous Prophecy, it should not have
seemed a burden, See the Notes on Nah. 1.1. and on Mal. 1.1.
Jer. 23.36. but it is a grievous burden to graceless persons to be told of
their sins, and foretold of their punishments.

Of Babylon] Not that Babylon in Egypt (of which St. Peter, 1 Epist. 5.13. as
some hold) now called Gr^ndcair the Soldans Seat-royal: but the Metropolis of
Chaldaea* built by Semiramis about an hundred years after the Flood, whethe^
the Jews were to be carried captive: and concerning which calamity they are
here aforehand comforted. See Mic. 7.8, 16.

Ver. 2. Life up a Banner] Deus hic quasi classicum canit, God, as
Generalissimo gives forth his Orders to the Medes and Persians. He is a man of
War, Exodus 15.3. yea the Lord victour of War, as the Chaldee there paraphraseth.
See the like, Jer. 50.2.

Upon the High Mountain] Where it may best be seen, Media is a Mountanous
Country. Or, contra montem cal^ginosum, against the dark Mountain. i. e.
Babylon, which though situated in a Plain, yet was tu^ou^'d up with her wealth
and power, Strabo. lib. 16. Curtius. lib. 5. Josephus l. 10.
and seemed unmovable. Famous this City was for an hortus pensilis, an
Artificial Garden (made by Nebuchadnezzar for the pleasure of his Wife
Nicotris) which hanging over the City darkeneth it: like as that continual
Cloud does the Island of St. Thomas, on the backside of Africa:

Exalt the voice unto them, shake the hand] Propinquos voce, longinquos
significatione adarma convocate: give the alarm to those that are near-hand,
and further off.

Junius.
That they may go into the gates of the Nobles] Or, of the munificent or
Bounteous Lords: for such all Nobles are or ought to be: Our English word Lord,
contracted of the Saxon word Laford, comes of Luef to sustain or succor
others.

Ver. 3. I have commanded my sanctified ones] i. e. I have by my secret
instinct stirred up and set on my Medes and Persians, ver. 17. whom in my
Decree I have set apart for this holy work of executing vengeance on the
Babylonians.

I have also called my Mighties] My Heroes, armed with my Might.

Even them that rejoice in my Highness] Heb. Exultantes superbiae meos, My
brave Soldiers, whom I render victorious and triumphant.

Ver. 4. The noise of the multitude] The Medes that come against Babylon are
both numerous and streperous: as is here graphically described by an Elegant
Hypotyposis.

The Lord of Hosts mustereth the host of the battel] No marvel then that the
Forces are so many and mighty. For if he but stamp with his foot, all creatures
are up in Arms immediately.

Ver. 5. They come from a far Countrey] Heb. from a Land of Longinquity.

Even the Lord, and the weapons of his Indignation] (...) Vessels of wrath, the
Septuagint render them: but in another sense then the Apostle uses that
expression, concerning Reprobates designed to destruction.

To destroy the whole Land] Or, the whole world: for so the Chaldees in the
pride of their Empire, styled it. The Romans did the like, Luke 2.1. The Turks
do the same at this day; such is their ambition.

Ver. 6. Howl ye] For the evils that are coming upon you, as Jam. 5.1. we may
well say the same to mystical Babylon.

For the day of the Lord is at hand] And yet it came not till above two hundred
years after. Think the same of the day of Judgment: and reckon that a thousand
years with God is but as one day.

It shall come as a destruction from the Almighty] Heb. Cleshod Mishaddai, an
elegancy that cannot be Englished. Sh^ddai (Gods name) signifies a Conqueror,
say some; a Destroyer, say others, which a Conqueror must needs be: Eundem
victorem and vastatorem esse oportet. Here is threatened a devastation from the
Devastatour.

Ver. 7. Therefore shall all hands be faint] Base fear, that cowardly passion
shall betray them to the enemy, by expectorating their courage, and causing
their hearts to fall into their heels, as we say. But this also comes from the
Lord of ^^osts, who is wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in working; for He
orders the Armor, Jer. 50.25. and he strengthens or weakeneth the Armies of
either party, Ezekiel. 30.24. whencesoever the Sword comes, it is bathed in
Heaven, Isa. 34.5.

And every heart shall melt] How much more shall wicked men's hearts do so at
the day of Judgment, when the Powers of Heaven shall be shaken, Luke 21.26.
Allegorice; haec veriora erunt in di^ judicii cujus hic est typus.

Ver. 8. And they shall be afraid] Conturbabuntur --
Innumerabilibus sollicitudinibus.


They shall be amazed one at another] Amused, amazed, amated, as being at their
wits ends.

Their faces shall be as flames] So Jer. 30.5, 6. a voice of fear and
trembling, every man with his hands on his loins (the posture of a traveling
Woman) and all faces turned into paleness. The Prophet here alludeth, says
Musculus, to the face of a Smith at dark night, when he stands blowing his
fite: for his face appears as if it had no blood in it, most wan and pa^e. Or,
as others think, to a man afrighted, who first looks pale (the blood running
to the heart to relieve it) afterward, upon the return of the blood to the
outward parts, he looks red, and of a flame-colour.

Ver. 9. Behold the day of the Lord comes cruel] So it shall seem to the
enemies: because an evil, an only evil behold is come, Ezekiel. 7.5. without
mixture of Mercy.

Ver. 10. For the Stars of Heaven -- shall not give their light] They shall
have punishment without pity, misery without mercy, sorrow without succor,
Est Hyperbole and Hypallage.
mischief without measure, crying without comfort, etc. and all this shall be
but a typical hell to them, a foretast of eternal torments.

The Constellations thereof] Which yet some Interpreters take for some single
and signal Star, magnam luceus magnae sequuntur tenebrae.

The Sun shall be darkened] They shall neither have good day, nor good night.

Ver. 11. And I will punish the world] That is, the Chaldean State: Dan. 4.17.
for they reckoned themselves (...) or Lords of the world. See on ver. 5. Or to
show that if the whole world should conspire against the Lord, he can as easily
punish them, as he did that rabble of Rebels the old world.

And lay low the haughtiness of the terrible] Or, of the roysters, or Tyrants.

Ver. 12. I will make a man more precious] Quod rarum carum: Men shall be
reduced to a small number, not Nobles only, sed triobolares homunciones, but
Pesants; nor shall any money be taken in exchange for lives.

Ver. 13. Therefore I will shake the Heavens] i.e. for the pride, arrogance,
cruelty, and other impieties of these Babylonians, I will bring upon them
Tragical calamities and horrid confusions, so that they shall think that Heaven
and earth are blended together, and each be ready to say, In me omnis terraeque
polique marisque ruina est.

Ver. 14. And it shall be as the chased Roe] Or, she, that is Babylon, shall
be, when drunk with security (that Usher of De^truction) she shall be suddenly
surprised. So strong were her Walls and Bulwarks, that she feared no irruption
of the enemy: and so bold she bore her self upon her twenty years provision
laid in aforehand that she feared no famine, by the straitness of a long siege.
Herodotus tells us, Herod. lib. 1. Arist. Polit. lib. 3.
that when Babylon was taken by Cyrus, some part of the City knew not of their
condition, till the third day after; the suddenness of their surprisal must
needs be very dreadful.

They shall every man] i.e. All her Confederates and Presidiaries.

Ver. 15. Every one that is found, shall be thrust thorow] This makes them
fly for it: Quis enim vult mori? prorsus nemo. Life is sweet: and men will
rather fly then dye.

Every one that is joined unto them] Or, that is decrepid, worn out with old
age: See 2 Chronicles. 36.17.

Ver. 16. Their children shall be dashed in pieces, etc.] As had been prayed and
prophesied long before, Psalm. 137.9. and this was but lex talionis: See 2 Chronicles. 36.17. Lam. 5.11.

Their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished] As those three
Commandments. Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall
not steal, are ranked together in the Law: so they are commonly violated
together in the lawless violence of war.

Ver. 17. Behold I will stir up the Medes] together with the Persians, under
the conduct of Darius and Cyrus.

Which shall not regard silver] sc. For a ransom, but shall kill all they meet,
though never so rich, and able to redeem their lives, as Pro. 13.8. Jer. 41.8.

Incredibilis sanguinis aviditas in milite bacchabi^^r.
Ver. 18. Their bows also shall dash the young men] They shall double destroy
them. O Barbaram crudelitatem!

And they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb] Quamvis adhuc teneri
essent and fructus novelli, ripping up their mothers, as Am. 1.13. as at the
Sicilian Vespers, and as in the late Parisian and Irish Massacres, which were
the most prodigious horrid villan^es that ever the Sun saw.

Their eye shall not spare children] In the Massacre of Paris, a bloody Papist
having snatched up a little child of one of the Protestants in his arms, the
poor Babe began to play with his beard, Act. and Mon.
and to smile upon him. But he, more mercyless then a Tiger, stabbed it with a
dagger, and so cast it all gore-blood into the River.

Ver. 19. And Babylon the glory of Kingdoms] Those four great Monarchies of the
world had their times and their turns, their rise and their ruin. The Roman
Empire can scarce stand on its feet of clay; and by the death of the late
Emperor, no King of Romans being nominated, is like to suffer great
concussions.

Shall be as when Gid overthrew Sodom] The destruction whereof was the greatest
and most stupendous, that ever we read of.

Hi^ Babylonia contermini.
Ver. 20. Neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there] The Scenites or vagrant
Shepherds of Arabia deserta, that often flitted for better pasture, shall shun
Babylon, as haunted with wild beasts, or rather with Dragons, and Devils in the
Revelation; all this is applied to, and shall be verified of Rome, cap. 18.

Ver. 21. But wild beasts of the Desart] Heb. Ij^m, Ochim, etc. These are names
of wild creatures unknown to us in these parts.

And Satyrs] Or Devils in borrowed shapes, and hideous apparitions.

Ver. 22. And the wild beasts of the Islands] Heb Ijim, i. e. desolate places
and far remote.

And her time is near to come] Though two hundred year hence and more, ere it
commence. So Babylon is fallen, is fallen, Rev. 19.2. that is, certo, cito,
penitus, surely, shortly, utterly, -- O mora! Christ veni.

CHAP. XIV.
Ver. 1. FOr the Lord will have mercy upon Jacob] And therefore destroy
Babylon, as chap. 13. Such is his Love to his Church, that for her sake, and in
Revenge of her wrongs, Bern.
he will fall foul upon her enemies. Si in Hierosolymis fiat scrutinium, quanto
magis in Babylone.

And the strangers shall be joined with them] Proselyted: especially when made
partakers of the grace of the Gospel.

Ver. 2. For servants and for hand-maids] Their Converts shall be willing to
lay their hands under their feet, as we say, and glad to do them any service:
like as Cyprian was for Caecilius (whom be called novae vitae parentem) and
Latimer for Bilney, whom he called Blessed Bilney. See Isa. 49.23.

Ver. 3. That the Lord shall give thee rest, etc.] The Church has her Halcyons
here; neither is she smitten as those are that smote her, but in measure, in
the branches, etc. God stays his rough-wind, Isa. 27.8. that is, such
afflictions as would shake his plants too much, or quite blow them down. Yea
whether South or North Wind blows, all shall blow good to them, Cant. 4. ult.
Blow off their unkindly blossoms: and refresh them both under and after all
their sorrow, fear, and hardship.

Ver. 4. That thou shall take up this Proverb] Or taunting speech: Carmen (...).
this exultatory and insultatory song, which upon the fall of Babylon shall be
in every man's mouth.

How has the Oppressor ceased!] q. d. This is wonderful and beyond all
expectation.

The golden City] Or, Gold-thirsty City. Aurata vel auri avida.


Ver. 5. The Lord has broken the staffe] Wherewith these Exactors cudgelled
men (as so many beasts) into subjection and obedience.

And the Scepter] Or Rod of the Rulers who ruled with rigor.

Ver. 6. He that smote the people in wrath, etc.] This is the Tyrants Epitaph:
Aurel. Victor.
there is at their death a general joy, as was when the world was well rid of
Tiberius, Caligula, Nero, Heliogabalus, etc. When Domitian dyed, the Senate
decreed that his name should be razed, that all his Acts should be rescinded,
and his memorial abolished quite for ever. When Caligula was cut off, his
moneys were all melted by the decree of the Senate* like as King Richard the
thirds cognizance, Speed
the white Bore was torn from every sign, that his memory might perish.

Ver. 7. The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet] Quievit, conticuit. All Is
hushed, (...). Sept.
that was used to be set in an uproar by these restless Ambitionists.

They break forth into singing] By a wide opening of the lips and lungs, as the
word signifies.

Ver. 8. Yea the Fir-trees rejoice at thee] A notable Metaphor, whereby sense
and speech is attributed to senseless creatures: the trees once afraid to be
felled, are now freed from that fear. This Tyrant was the terror of things on
earth, and things under earth. Hence men and trees are said to rejoice, Hell to
be in an hurry, etc.

No feller is come up against us] As was wont to do, for thy Shipping,
Buildings, Warlike Engines, etc.

Ver. 9. Hell from beneath is moved for thee] Infernus ab inferendo: Shaeal
from its unsatiableness, and continual craving. Here is an Ironical and
Poetical representation of the King of Babylons coming into Hell, and his
entertainment there; the dead Kings rising from their places for reverence, to
receive him.

Even all the chief ones of the earth] Heb. The He-goats, such as lead and go
before the flock; such Rhetoric as this we meet with in Lucians Dialogues. Of
Laurentius Valla, that great Critic, who found fault with almost all Latin
Authors, One made this Tetrastich; Nunc postquam manes defunctus Valla petivit,
Trithem.

Non audet Pluto verba Latina loqui.
Jupiter hunc caeli dignatus honor fuisset,
Censorem linguae sed timet ipse suae.


From their Thrones] i. e. From their Sepulchers, says Piscator.

Ver. 10. Art thou also become weak as we?] Interrogatio sarcastica and
insultabunda. Have thou also an Hic fitus est, or Mortuus est, set upon thy
Tombstone? This if thou had forethought, thou would have better behaved
thy self, whilst alive: the meditation of Death would have been a death to thy
passions, and an allay to thine insolences. Virgil says, if swarms of Bees
meet in the air, they will sometimes fight, as it were in a set battle with
great violence; But if you cast but a little dust upon them, they will be all
presently quiet.

Hi motus animorum atque ^aec certamina tanta, Georg. lib. ^.

Pulveris exigui jactu compressa quiescunt.
Had Nebuchadnezzar or his Successors bethought themselves of their Mortality
and of Deaths impartiality, they would have been more moderate.

Ver. 11. Thy pomp is brought down to the grave] Ipsaque justa sepulta jacent,
Funeral rites (those Dues of the Dead) are wanting to thee. This was fulfilled
in Belshazzar slain at his impious Feast, These Feast-dayes were called (...)
like the Roman Saturnalia.
whilst he profaned the vessels of Gods house to quaff in, to the honor of
Shac his drunken god, and had no doubt variety of Music. See Jer. 51.39, 41,
47. Dan. 5.1, 30.

The worm is spread under thee, and worms cover thee] Pro li^eamine tinea
sternitur: pro lodice vermes superimponuntur: for sheets thou have Maggots, and
for a coverled, worms: and this the rather, because whereas the Assyrian Kings,
as Strabo testifies, Lib. 16. Lib. 1.
and the Babylonian Kings, as Herodotus, were wont to be Embalmed after their
death, that they might keep sweet, Belshazzar was not so, ver. 19.20.

Ver. 12. How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer!] That is, not O Belzeebub
(as some Ancients) but O Belshazzar rather, called Lucifer here, or the
Morning Star, for his beauty and brightness: and as much wonder it was to see
the Chaldaean Monarch at such an under, as to have seen Lucifer (the Suns
constant companion) fallen from Heaven: He was the terror of the world, and as
he thought, superior to Fortune: yet a sudden and dismal change befell him. In
the Chariot of the Roman Triumpher, there hung up a little bell and a whip; to
put him in mind he might one day be whipped as a slave; or as an offender, lose
his head. Nemo confidat minium secundis.

Ver. 13. For thou have said in thine heart] The natural heart is a Palace of
Satanical pride: it is like unto the Table of Adonibezek, at which he sat in a
Chair of State, and made others, even Kings, to eat meat like dogs, under his
feet, with their thumbs cut off.

Oecolamp.
I will ascend into Heaven] Vide quomodo non satientur honor superbi. Ambition
as the Crocodile, grows is long as it lives, and is never satisfied.

Above the stars of God] i. e. Above all the Kings of the earth, or above the
Saints, Rev. 12.1. those earthly Angels.

I will sit also upon the Mount of the Congregation] I will sit upon the skirts
of Gods Church: yea I will set my Throne upon Gods Throne, and take up his
room. See the like madness in Pharaoh, Ezekiel. 29.3. that proud Prince of Tire,
Ezekiel. 22.28. Antiochus surnamed (...). Herod, Act. 12. Caligula, Chosroes,
Diocletian, Antichrist, of whom and his practices One cries out, O Lucifer
out-devil'd, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. One of the Popes Parasites Valladerius says of
Paul the fifth, that he was a God, lived familiarly with the Godhead, heard
Predestination it self whispering to him, had a place to sit in Council with
the most blessed Trinity, etc.

In the sides of the North] In Mount Moriah, where the Temple stood.

Ver. 14. I will ascend above the height of the clouds] Vt verbo dicam, ero
summa and sacra majestas.

Hor. lib. 1. Ode. 3.
Attingit solium Jovis, and coelestia tentat. Ver. 15. Yet thou shall be brought
down to Hell] To the counterpoint of thy haughtiest conceits, ad infimam Erebi
sedem. So a merry fellow said that Xerxes, that great Warrior who took upon him
to control the Sea, was now mending old shoos under a shop-board in Hell.

Adagium Homer. cum.
To the sides of the pit] i. e. Of the infernal Lake: a Tartesso in Tartarum
detrusus; from the sides of the North, ver. 13. whether thou had pierked thy
self, ad latera luci, to the sides of the pit, and to an odd corner of the
burying place. This was a foul fall, Rev. Hist. Pontif. 195.
and worse then that of Hermannus Ferrariensis, who having been canonized for a
Saint, was thirty years after unburied, and burnt for an Heretic by Pope
Boniface the eight: or that of Thomas Becket, of whom, forty eight years after
he had been Sainted, Dan. Hist. Fol. 99.
it was disputed among the Doctors of Paris, whether he were damned or saved?

Ver. 16. They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee] Shall look wishly
upon thee, as scarce believing their own eyes, for the strangeness of the thing.

Is this the man that made the earth to tremble?] The earth to quake, and men's
hearts to ache? yea sure; this is very He. At one end of the Library at Dublin
was a Globe, at the other a Sceleton, to show (says mine Author) that though a
man be Lord of all the world, yet he must dye, nullusque fiet, qui omnia esse
affectabat.

Ver. 17. That made the world as a Wilderness] Nero the Tyrant came into the
world an Agrippa, or born with his feet forward; and turned the world upside
down ere he went out of it: so that the Senate at last proclaimed him a public
enemy to mankind, and condemned him to be drawn through the City, and whipped
to death.

That opened not the house of his prisoners] Or, that did not lose his
prisoners homewards, but kept them in durance with prisoners pittance, Lam.
3.34.

Ver. 18. All the Kings of the Nations] i. e. Very many of them have their
stately Pyramides, Tombs, Mausolaean Monuments erected, as amongst us at
Westminster Henry the sevenths Chapel is a curious and costly piece.

Ver. 19. But thou art cast out of thy grave] i. e. Cast out, Insepulta
sepultura turpiss^me abiectus es. ^cult.
and kept from thy grave. This befell Baltasar upon the surprizal of the City,
Dan. 5 30. And the like also befell Alexander the Great dying at the same City:
and our Will. Conqueror, who having utterly sacked the City of Mants in France,
and in the destruction thereof got his own, dyed shortly after at Rouen, Dan.
Hist. 42. 50.
where his corpse lay three days unburied, his interment being hindered by one
that claimed the ground to be his.

Like an abominable branch] The matter is here set forth by three notable
similitudes, such as this Prophet is full of.

Ver. 20. Thou shall not be joined to them in burial] i. e. To thy Compeers,
thy fellow Kings in Funeral-state and pomp. Christians have an honest care
(...), with whom they be buried, and where they are laid when dead, that as
they lived together and loved together, so in their death they may not be
divided, 2 Samuel 1.23.

Because thou have destroyed thy land] Tyrannized over thine own Subjects also.
The Septuagint read it my land, and my people.
So did Saul, Manass^h, Herod (who butchered about Bethlehem 14000. Infants, as
some affirm, and his own son among the rest) Tyberius that Tiger, Nero that
Lion, Commodus, who was (says Orosius) cunctis incommodus, Charles 9 of France,
etc.

The seed of evildoers shall never be renowned] The house of the wicked shall
be ouerthrown: but the Tabernacle of the upright shall flourish, Prove. 14.11.
See the Note there: and notanto hoc parents, and a sceleribus se abstinento:
ni sibi velint parcere, ut posteritati parcant.

Ver. 21. Prepare another slaughter for his children] For Baltsars posterity.
This is Gods charge to the Medes and Persians. See on ver. 20.

Ver. 22. For I will rise up against him] And therefore it is to no purpose for
them to rise up to possess the Land, and to fill the face of the world with
Cities, as ver. 21. I will overturn, overturn, overturn, etc. Ezekiel. 21.27. and
who shall gain-stand it?

Ver. 23. I will also make it a possession for the Bittern] Which is a kind of
waterfowl that makes a hideous noise.

And I will sweep it with the besom of destruction] Scopa vastatrice verram
came, Scopis ^ en purgatoriis sed perditoriis* R. David in Rad^c. (...). Mercer.
in Pagnin Thesaur.
Vatab. I will not brush them for Ornament, but sweep them, or rather scrub
them to their ruin by my Persian Praedones whom I will set upon them. And here
the Jewish Rabbis acknowledge that they came to understand this Text by
hearing an Arabian woman mention a broom or a besom in her Language, to her
maid. Apollos a learned Teacher may yet learn of a Tent-maker.

Ver. 24. The Lord of Hosts has sworn] If he had but said it only, it had been
sure enough (for he cannot lie, he cannot deny himself) but when he swears
any thing we may build upon it, especially since he is Lord of Hosts. He can do
more then he will, but whatsoever He wills shall undoubtedly be done: for
what should hinder? Juravit Jehovah, is the best assurance.

Ver. 25. That I will break the Assyrian in my Land] Or, as in breaking the
Assyrian in my Land: for here, says Junius, the overthrow of the Assyrian
Monarchy, which should shortly be, is given for a sign of the overthrow of the
Babylonian.

Ver. 26. This is the purpose that is purposed] Heb. The Council that is
consulted. Now there are many devices in the heart of man, but (when all is
done) the Counsel of the Lord, that shall stand, Prove. 19.21.

Ver. 27. For the Lord of Hosts has purposed, and who shall disannul it?]
Emphasin habet interrogatio. An excellent and unanswerable way of arguing from
the irresistible Will, and Almighty power of God: the like whereof is used by a
certain Persian in Herodotus, In Calliope.
in most Elegant expressions, as Junius here notes.

Ver. 28. In the year that King Ahaz dyed] A very good worlds riddance: When
Tiberius the Tyrant died, some of the people offered sacrifice for joy: others
in detestation of him cried out Tiberium in Tiberim, Let Tiberius be thrown
into Tiber: Think the like of Ahaz, that stigmatical Belialist. Howbeit, as bad
as he was, the Philistines hearing of his death, hoped to find some advantage
thereby against the Jews, who are therefore here encouraged.

Ver. 29. Rejoice not thou whole Palestine] That is, the Philistines, quos
Judaei animis armisque sibi infestissimos habuere. These were as bad Neighbors
to the Jews as the Dunk^rkers now are to us. Vzziah had subdued them, 2 Chronicles.
26.6. but Ahaz had been much damnified and despoiled by them, 2 Chronicles. 28.18*
and in the beginning of Hezekiahs Reign, they thought to have overrun all the
Country. Here therefore Gods decree concerning them is published, for the
comfort of his poor people, and it is this: Philistaeis non jubilandum sed
ejulandum. Philistines must not be over joyed but rather weep and howl for the
miseries that are coming upon them.

Because the Rod of him that smote thee is broken] Because Vzziah is dead, and
Ahaz has had ill success against you through his own sinfulness, and
sluggishness: do not you thereupon take boldness to set up your crest, and
think all is your own.

For out of the Serpents root] Out of Vzziah's issue.

Shall come forth a Cockatrice] or Basilisk, which is said to kill with his
looks only: and hereby is meant Hezekiah, as also by the fiery flying Serpent:
for thus he is called both for his fierceness and for his swiftness, two very
commendable properties of a Commander. J. Caesar was in omnia praeceps, very
fierce, and withal notable nimble, witness his Veni, Vidi, Vici, I no sooner
came, but overcame. The Hebrews from this text have a Proverb, Deradice colubri
egredietur regulus. i e. Afflictissimi, inter pauperes praecipui ac primi,
atque adeo tolerandis Calamitatibus nati. Quis globu^ o cives, caligine
volvitur ^tra? Hostis adest. Virg.
Out of the Serpents root shall come forth a Cockatrice, i. e. One woe is past,
but behold a worse at hand.

Ver. 30. And the firstborn of the poor shall feed] i. e. Gods poor people
shall: who though never so poor (as they were at a very low ebb under Ahaz)
were Gods firstborn, and, in that respect, higher then the Kings of the earth,
Psalm. 89.27.

And I will kill thy root] See Zeph. 2.4. with the Note.

Ver. 31. Howl O gate] Philistines are elsewhere taxed for flashy and foolish
mirth, Judge. 16. 2 Samuel 1. Here they are told they have more cause to fear then
stear, to sigh then sing, to bowl then hollow.

From the North a smoke] i. e. Hezekiah's army raising a dust, and setting all
in a combustion.

Ver. 32. That the Lord has founded Zion] Not Hezekiah but Jehovah has done
it.

CHAP. XV.
Ver. 1. THe burden of Moab] A burden, says Hierom, ever betokens sad
things to follow; A vision does joyful; at last howsoever. The Chaldee
paraphraseth thus. The burden of a cup of cursing for Moab to drink off. Moab
was the brat of an incestuous birth, as his name also (De Patre) declares.
There is now no such nation, their very name is rooted out, ever since they
were destroyed, first by Salmaneser, as is here fore-threatened; and then by
Nebucadnezzar, as Jer. 48. (where we meet with many like passages as here) so
that they live but by fame only, as they are mentioned in holy Scripture, but
never for any good. Their destruction is foretold for a comfort to the poor
afflicted Jews, to whom they were near-allyed, but very ill-affected.

^iscat.
Because in the night] nocte intempesta: the night is dark and dreadful: or in
the night* i. e. subito, derepente, praeter opinionem, suddenly, unexpectedly.
These Moabites dwelt in a fruitful country (near to those five Cities of the
Plain) and giving themselves up to loose and luxurious living, says Hierom,
they worshipped Chemosh or Bacchus: as they had been incestuously begotten by
Lot in his drink, so they proved accordingly. Ebrius te Pater genuit, said One
to a desperate drunkard. Some think they are threatened with wasting in the
night, in allusion to that dismal night-work, and that deed of darkness, the
begetting of their father and founder Moab, Genesis 19. Whence other nations were
wont to reproach the Moabites, as children of the night, says Hierom.

Ver. 2. He is gone up to Baiith and to Dibon] two chief places of their
Idolatrous service, whereunto they ran in their distress, but all in vain. The
like at this day do the Papists to their Ladies of Loretto, Sichem, etc. and
the Turks to their Mahomet at Mecha (situate in the same country, as once
Moab, and perhaps in the same place with one of these Idol-temples) by troops
and Caravans: but they do worse then lose their devotion.

To weep] and to pray too, chap. 16.12. but to no good purpose, for want of a
right object, principle, motive, end. So afterward the Romans, in a like
exigent, cum conjugibus ac liberis jussi sunt a Senatu supplicatum ire,
pacemque exposcere Deum, Li^. lib. 3.
omnia delubra implent, etc. they were by the Senate commanded to go with they
wives and children into the temples of their gods, and there to pray, make
their peace, and to seek for aid.

Moab shall houle over Nebo and over Medeba] Cities surprised and sacked by the
enemy. But this chapter is so much the more obscure to us, because the Cities
here mentioned are long since destroyed: and the Scripture sets not forth
the manner of their site or downfall.

On all their heads shall be baldness, and every beard cut off] This was
commonly done in those Eastern parts, in times and in token of lamentation, Job
1.20. Ezra. 9.3. Ezekiel. 7.18. Alexander mourning for the death of his friend
Ephestion, not only tore off his own hair, but clipped his horses and mules
hair: yea he plucked down also the battlements of the walls of the City, as
Plutarch writes. In vita Pelopidae.
Pudeat nos lathrymis delicta non abstergere, and spiritualia damna non
deplorare, says Oecolampadius: What a shame is it then for us Christians not
to weep over our sins, and to bewail our spiritual wounds and wants?

Ver. 3. In their streets they shall gird themselves with sackcloth] Saccum and
cilicium non curat Deus: God cares not for these externals, where there is not
an heart sprinkled with the blood of his son. The sacrifice of the wicked is
abomination: how much more when he brings it with a wicked mind? Prove. 21.27.

On the tops of their houses] thence, as it were, to require help from heaven.

Weeping abundantly] Heb. descending with weeping, Miseros ergo Papicolas, qui
and ip^i cum fletu ad divos divasque suas ascendunt, cum ululatu descendunt.
Scultet.
like as with weeping they ascended: they get nothing of their Gods, though
they cried to them. But He that goes to the true God with an honest heart and
lawful petitions, is sure to speed: See Isa. 45.19.

Ver. 4. And Heshbon shall cry, and Elealeh] See on ver. 2.

The armed soldiers of Moab shall cry out] as being faint-hearted and
unwilling to fight, because to no purpose.

His life shall be grievous to him] Heb. his soul shall be ill-affected to him,
or, for himself: that is, say some, all his care shall be for himself: let
others shift as they can.

Ver. 5. My heart shall cry out for Moab] Let others do as they will, Heu quam
d^leo cord toto. Oecol.
says the Prophet here, I can do no less then bewail the woeful condition of
Moab, bad though they be.

Tu quibus ista legis incertum est, Lector, ocellis:
Ipse quidem siccis scribere non potui.
His fugitives shall flee unto Zoar] Whither once their father Lot fled for
refuge; but it was too hot to hold him. Or, His fugitives shall cry to Zoar.

An heifer of three years old] Which being in her prime loweth aloud, coelum
mugitibus implens: so shall these fugitives set up their Note clamore fragos^
boantes, as they pass thorough the countries, they shall even break or rend
themselves with crying.

Ver. 6. For the waters of Nimrim shall be desolate] What these waters of
Nimrim were, it does not appear. Hierom says that Nimrim is a Town near the
dead Sea, where the waters are salt, and the country about it barren: so
should the Land of Moab now be forlorn and fruitless.

Ver. 7. Therefore the abundance they have gotten] Here the Prophet seems to
tax the covetousness of the Moabites, qui coacervandis thesauris operam
dederint, who made it their work, to hoard and heap up riches.

And that which they have laid up] Heb. their visitation, that is their
treasures which they often looked upon.

Shall they carry away to the brook of the willows] The Moabites shall cast it
into the water; as hoping there to find it again, when the enemy was gone: Or,
shall they (the Assyrians) carry away to the valley of the Arabians, who were
their confederates, and for such good offices spared (as Herodotus says Lib.
3.) that, that they might keep and convey home for them, the spoils they had
taken from other nations.

Piscat.
Ver. 8. For the cry is gone round about, etc.] When the Prophet thus describes
the mourning of the Moabites as excessive, and as a fruit of their unbelief, we
must learn to moderate our mourning for outward losses and crosses; and that
out of hope of Gods mercy promised to his penitent suppliants.

The howling thereof unto Eglaim] See on ver. 2.

Ver. 9. For the waters of Dimon shall be full of blood] Non tingentur solum,
sed etiam inundabunt: and the bloody enemy shall happily be heard to cry out, as
once Hannibal did when he saw a pit full of man's blood, O formosum spectaculum!
O brave sight! The very name Dimon signifies bloody: so called, as some think,
on this occasion, instead of Dibon the old name, ver. 2.

Additamenta plegarum. Haymo.
I will bring more upon Dimon, Lions upon him that escapes of Moab] Heb. I
will put additions upon Dimon, i. e. additions of evils. viz. Lions, and other
like fierce and cruel creatures, which shall prey upon the Moabites there,
Chap. 35.9. 2 King. 17.25. Some say by Lion is here meant Nebuchadnezzar, Jer.
4.7. fitly compared to a Lion for his strength and swiftness. Certain it is
that God has in store plenty of plagues for evildoers: and if they escape one
mischief, they shall fall into another: their preservation is but a reservation
except they repent.

CHAP. XVI.
Ver. 1. SEnd ye the Lamb] For prevention of those Lions, Chap. 15.9. submit to
Hezekiah your right Liege-Lord: 2 Samuel 8.2. with 2 King. 3.4.
a Lamb, i.e. your appointed number of tribute-Lambs, in token of homage: But
especially make your peace with God the Ruler of the whole World, 1 Chronicles.
29.12. by paying him homage and fealty; that there may be a lengthening of your
tranquillity.

Strabo lib. 16.
From Selo in the wilderness] otherwise called Petra (because beset with rocks)
whence the country it stood in was called Arabia Petraea. Some make it the
head-City of Moab, others of Edom; a place it seems it was full of cattle,
and by King Amaziah who took it, called Jok^eel, 2 King. 14.7.

Alioqui fiet. Jun.
Ver. 2. For it shall be that as a wandering bird, etc.] Or, Otherwise it shall
be that as, etc. i. e. except ye do as I have advised you, ver. 1. a double
mischief shall befall you: 1 dissipation, as a wandering bird, etc. 2
deportation, at the foords of Arnon, where ye shall be carried captive.

As a wandering bird] See Prove. 27.8. with the Note.

Ver. 3. Take counsel, execute judgment] Or, make a decree, or deal equally and
uprightly: show the like kindness to Abraham's posterity as he once did to your
proginitour Lot whom he rescued; or as Lot did to the Angels whom, as
strangers, he entertained; fac, inquam, quod suggero, dum subdo.

Make thy shadow as the night in the midst of noonday] i. e. Shelter and shade
my persecuted people, este illis securum perfugium, and jucundum refrigerium,
protect them, refresh them, do all k^nd offices for them, which your fathers
did not, but the contrary, Deuteronomy. 23.3, 4.

Ver. 4. Let mine out-casts] who are dear to me, Jer. 30.17. though I may seem
to have cast off the care of them. Out easts they may be: but not castawayes.
See chap. 52.5, 6. persecuted, but not forsaken, 2 Cor. 4.9. Bowels of mercy
must be put on toward godly Exiles especially, who are Dei (...), and should
therefore be dear to us.

For the extortioner is at an end] Heb. Emunctor, the Milker, or Squeezer, or
W^inger out, Prove. 30.33. so the Assyrian Tyrant is called: as also Vastator
and Proculcator, the spoiler or plunderer, and Conculcator, the Oppressor or
Treader down, is consumed out of the Land: and it shall not be long ere I fetch
home my banished: be content therefore to harbor them awhile: herein thou
shall do thy self no disservice at all.

Ver. 5. For in mercy (or piety) shall the throne be established] Hezekiah's
throne shall, (but especially Christ's) from whom ye may once have occasion to
borrow that mercy which now you are called upon to lend to those outcasts of
Israel.

And he shall set upon it] i. e. He shall make it his business to relieve and
right his people.

And seeking judgment] Making inquisition after wrongs of such as dare not
complain. The Grand Signior, they say, show himself on purpose weekly abroad,
for the receiving the poors petitions, and punishing the Grandees of his Court
by whom they are oppressed: whence also he styles himself Awlem Penawh, i. e.
the worlds Refuge.

And hastening justice] Dispatching and dispeeding causes.

Ver. 6. We have heard of the pride of Moab] His harsh and haughty carriage
toward Gods poor people, though he were advised the contrary, ver. 1.3, 4. Good
counsel is but cast away upon a proud person. Now, the Moabites were as much
noted then for their pride as now the Spaniards are. And their pride appeared
by their braggs and threats. But

His lies shall not be so] Or, his indignation is more then his strength, as
Hierom renders it. His boastings and blusters shall come to nothing: his pride
shall be his bane and break-neck.

Ver. 7. Therefore shall Moab houle for Moab] One Moabite to another, or each
within himself, ut solent desperantes.

For the foundations of Kirharesheth] Which shall be utterly rased and harased.
Kirhareseth is interpreted the city of brick walls (as was Babylon) or rather
the city of the Sun (as Bethshemesh and Heliopolis) because there the Sun was
in a special manner worshipped.

Shall ye mourn] Or roar, or mutter, or muse.

Ver. 8. For the fields of Heshbon langu^sh] as being decayed and destroyed:
hence so great mourning in Moab. Their father and founder was begotten in wine:
and themselves were likely great wine-bibbers. Historians say that some of
their Cities were built by Ba^chus. Fitly therefore are these drunken Moabites
bereft of their vines: as those gluttonous Sodomites were of their victuals,
Genesis 14.11. The Drunkards motto is Take away my liquour, and take away my life.

The Lords of the heathen have broken down the principal plants therereof] The
great Turk causes all the vines to be cut down wherever he comes, as hearing
out of the Alchoran, that in every grape there dwells a devil.

Ver. 9. Therefore I will bewail with the weeping] Defleo fletum (Paronomasia)
that is, the misery of Jazer. Or, I will with weeping bewail Jazer, and the
vine of Sibmah.

For the shouting for thy summer-fruits] i.e. Thy joy and jollity over thy
summer-fruits, and over thine harvest, expressed by songs and shouts, do now
fail and cease.

Ver. 10. And gladness is taken away] Laetitia, i. e. quicquid laetificum erat,
all matter of mirth is removed. Heb. gathered up, or gathered in; as your
harvest also is to your hand by the enemy.

Ver. 11. Wherefore my bowels shall sound like an harp for Moab] The elect of
God holy and beloved, have bowels of mercy, Ego ex intimi^ visceribu^ meis
conturba^m. Jun.
tenderness and kindness toward their very enemies also, Colos. 3.12. whom they
do often pity more, then they pity themselves, as Habakkuk did the Chaldeans
calamity, Chap. 3.16. and as Daniel did Nebuchadnezzars downfall, Dan. 4.19.
Sicut cithara plectro tacta dat sonitum in funere funereum; As they have
mournful music at funerals, Jer. 9.17, 20. Mat. 9 23. or as the strings of a
Shaulm sound heavily, so do my heart strings, for miserable Moab. In an harp,
if one string be touched, all the rest sound: so it should be with us, in
regard of fellow-feeling: We should feel others hard cords thorough our soft
beds.

Ver. 12. That Moah is weary on the high place] tired out in his superstitious
services, by all which he is not a button the better: but a great deal the
worse.

But he shall not prevail] This is every wicked man's case and curse: for we
know that God hears not sinners. Joh. 9 31. He will never accept of a good
motion from a bad mouth, Isa. 1. The very heathen could say (...).

Ver. 13. This is the word that the Lord has spoken] And is therefore sure and
certain: for the word of the Lord cannot be broken, Joh. 10.35.

Since that time] i. e. Since Balaam hired by Balac (say the Hebrews) cursed
not the Israelites as he would have done, but the Moabites, as he was made to
do. Ex tunc.

Ver. 14. Within three years] In which time the sins of the Moabites shall be
full, and themselves ripe and ready for vengeance. Three years hence therefore,
sc. in the fourth year of King Hezekiah: for then came up Salm inezer against
Samaria, and it is probable, that in his march thither he invaded and subdued
these Moabites, that he might leave all safe behind him. An hundred years after
which, or more, Nebuchadnezzar utterly ruined them, according to Jer. 48.

As the years of an hireling] i. e. praecise, nec citius nec tardius, three
years precisely. This time Moab had to make his peace in: but he minded nothing
less, and therefore deservedly perished. So, alas, shall all such infallibly as
repent not within their three years space, which perhaps may not be three
months, or three days, says Oecolampadius, I may add, three minutes: and yet
ex hoc momento pendet aeternitas, upon this short inch of time depends
eternity. Up therefore and be doing: Stat sua cuique dies, etc.

CHAP. XVII.
Ver. 1. THe burden of Damascus] See chap. 13.1.

Of Damascus] That is, of the Kingdom of Syria, the head City whereof was
Damascus: and it was destroyed by Salmaneser, five or six years after this
burdenous Prophecy: the like whereunto see chap. 49.23. Am. 1.2. Zech. 9.1. It
had been taken before by Tiglath-pileser, 2 King. 1. and has been rebuilded
since, Act. 9.2. 2 Cor. 11.32. being at this day a noble City of the East,
civitas laetitiae and landabilis, as Jeremy calls it, Chap. 49.

And it shall be a ruinous heap] It was so till re-edified, and inhabited by a
new people.

Ver. 2. The cities of Aroer are forsaken] i. e. The country beyond Jordan,
Deuteronomy. 2.36. is desolated, and depopulated; the Gadites and the Reubenites being
also together with the Syrians, carried captive by Tiglath-pileser, 1 Chronicles.
5.26.

Ver. 3. The fortress also shall cease from Ephraim] Heb. shall sabbatiz^, or
rest. Ephraim or the ten tribes had joined with Syria in a confederacy against
Judah: they justly therefore partake with them in their punishment.

Shall be as the glory of the children of Israel] Poor glory now: but so their
low condition is called Ironically, and by way of contempt, says Oecolamp.

Ver. 4. The glory of Jacob shall be made thin] Their multitudes wherein they
gloried shall be greatly impaired.

And the fatness] He shall be cast into a deadly consumption. Now the
consumption of a Kingdom is poverty, and the death of it is loss of authority,
(says Scultetus) wickedness being the root of its wretchedness, like as the
causes of diseases are in the body it self.

Ver. 5. And it shall be as when the harvest man] Their utter captivity is set
forth by three lively Similitudes, for better assurance, a very small remnant
only left in the Land. This by some Ancients is alleged to show how few shall
be saved: surely not one of ten thousand, said Simeon. And before him
Chrysostom, How many think you, shall be saved in this City of Antioch? Hom. 4.
ad Pop. Antioch.
Though there be so many thousands of you, yet there cannot be found an hundred
that shall enter into Gods Kingdom: and I doubt much of those too, etc.

In the valley of Rephaim] which was nigh to Jerusalem, Jun.
Josh. 15.8. nam simili tudine populari propheta ulitur.

Ver. 6. Ye^ glea^ing grapes, etc.] See on ver. 5.

Ver. 7. At that day shall a man look to his Maker] The Elect among the
Isralites shall do so, having been whipped home as before. There is an Elegancy
in the original (as there are many in this Prophet) that cannot be Englished.
Here also, and in the next Verse, we have a description of true Repentance, the
right fruit of Afflicton sanctified. Penitency and Punishment are words of one
derivation.

Ver. 8. And he shall not look to the Altars] As, having looked before to his
Maker with a single eye, with an eye of Adamant that will turn only to one
point. See on Hos. 14.8

Ver 9. Which they left for the children of Israel] Which the enemy left, by a
sweet providence of God; the like whereto see on Zech. 7.14.

Ver. 10. Because thou have forgotten the God of thy salvation] Thou have
disloyally departed from him, as a Wife does from her Husband: though he were
both able and ready to have saved thee.

Therefore shall thou plant pleasant plants] But all to no purpose. Hoc patres
familias pro regula habeant oeconomica: There is a curse upon the wicked,
though never so industrious: all will not do, God cannot abide to be forgotten.

And shall set it with strange slips] i. e. Rare and excellent ones: Exotica
fere non nisi preciosa afferuntur. Jun.
but for the enemies use, as ver. 11. Deuteronomy. 28.29.

Ver. 11. In the day thou shall make thy plant to grow] So Prove. 22.8. he that
sows inquity shall reap vanity: and the more serious and sedulous he is at
it, the worse shall it be with him, Gal. 6.8.

But thy harvest shall be an heap] This is a Proverb among the Jews, to
signify labor in vain.

In the day of grief and desperate sorrow] Heb. aegrae, sc. plagae: for grapes
ye shall gather thorns, for figs thistles.

Ver. 12. Woe to the multitude of many people] Met to make up Sennacheribs Army.
Mihi hoc loco admirantis vi etur. Oecolamp.
Or, O the multitude, etc. The Prophet wondereth, as it were, at the huge
multitude of the enemies, and their horrible noise.

Like the rushing of many waters] Ob impetum and fremitum.

Ver. 13. The Nations shall rush] Or, rustle. The Assyrians did so, when they
brake in, chap. 36.1. -- 20.

But God shall rebuke them] i. e. Chide them, smite them, and so set it on, as
none shall be able to take it off

And they shall flee far off] Heb. he shall flee, viz. Sennacherib, who
frighted with the slaughter of his Soldiers by the Angel, shall flee his
utmost.

Ver. 14. And behold at even-tide trouble] Or, terror, sc. within Jerusalem
besieged by Sennacheribs forces. But this mourning lasted but till morning. The
time of affl^ction is ordinarily short; a day, or a night; a piece of a night,
as here: a moment, Isa. 54.8. a small moment, ver. 7. Or if longer, yet 1.
there are some breathing-whiles betwixt. 2. There Is much good got by it. 3. It Is
nothing to Eternity.

Before morning he is not] He and his forces are all gone. The wicked (says
Oecolampadius here) at the even-tide of their death have an hard tug of it: and
in the morning of the Resurrection they are not, or could wish they were not.

This is the portion of them that spoil us] Epiphonema ad populum Dei. He
closes up his discourse with a word of comfort to all Gods people: for whose
sake also it is that all this is said against Assyria, Syria and other foreign
States, enemies to the Church.

CHAP. XVIII.
Ver. 1. WOE to the Land] To Ethiopia described here. 1. By the shady Mountains
wherewith it is surrounded. Strabo.
2. By the Rivers wherewith it is watered.

Which is beyond the Rivers of Ethiopia] Or, which is along by the Rivers, even
Ethiopia, which also may be said to be beyond the Rivers, i. e. beyond the
seven streams of Nilus, in respect of Jerusalem.

Ver. 2. That sends Ambassadors by the sea] Heralds to defy the Assyrian,
and to bid him battle, to their own ruin.

Junceae fiscella picatae. Vide Plin. lib. 6. cap. 22.
Even in the vessels of bul-rushes] Or, in paper barks-well pitched. These were
much in use among the Ethiopians and Egyptians, both for expedition, and also
for safety against Rocks, shallows and falls of Rivers.

Go ye swift messengers] Tirhaka's words to his Heralds. See 2 King. 19.9.

To a Nation scattered and peeled] i. e. To the Assyrians, whose great Forces
are at this time scattered up and down in several Countries; and therefore with
more ease and safety to be set upon. Thus the Ethiopian pleases himself in the
conceit of an easy Conquest, but was quickly confuted; the Jews who trusted
unto him were disappointed, and Sennacherib more enraged against Jerusalem.

To a people terrible] The mauls of mankind; but I shall chastise them. Thus he
triumphs before the victory, having already devoured Assyria in his hopes.

A Nation meted out, and trodden down] Or rather, meting out, and treading
down, or shortly to be meted out to corculcation or destruction.

Whose Land the Rivers have spoiled] Or, the floods (inundations of enemies)
shall spoil; Or, whose Land the Rivers (1. the Ethiopians who live by the
Rivers, ver. 1.) do despise: For this Chapter is not more short then dark: and
diversely rendered and sensed.

Ver. 3. All the Inhabitants of the world -- see ye] Or, ye shall see when he
lifts up a banner on the Mountains, and when he blows a Trumpet, ye shall
hear, i. e. ye shall shortly see the Assyrians returning from the Conquest of
the Ethiopian, with glory and great joy. But what will the Lord do the while?

Ver. 4. I will take my rest, I will consider] He will sit and bethink himself
as it were, how he may best bestow his poor people: The Assyrian shall go on
with his great design for a while, and none shall interrupt him: but the Church
meanwhile shall not be unprovided for.

Like a clear heat upon herbs] Or, after-rain, which makes herbs and plants
suddenly to sprout and shoot up a main. God will not only look upon his people,
but refresh them in troubles.

Ver. 5. For before the Harvest] Or, Vintage.

When the bud is perfect, etc.] When the Assyrian, fleshed with his former
Victory, makes full account that all is his own, God shall make his hopes to
hop headless, He shall slaughter his Forces, as ver. 6. branches and sprigs,
great and small.

Ver. 6. They shall be left together] They, that is, the Assyrians slain by the
Angel, as Psalm 79.2. Chap. 37.37.

The fowls shall summer upon them] Both birds and beasts of prey shall have
enough to feed upon the whole year about.

Ver. 7 In that time] When the Assyrians are thus slain.

Shall the present be brought] sc. By the Jews, who shall consecrate a
considerable part of the spoils of the Assyrians, according to Numb. 31.28, 47,
50, 54. Thankfulness for public deliverances is still due to the most High:
Bring presents unto him that ought to be feared, Psalm. 76.11.

CHAP. XIX.
Ver. 1. THe burden of Egypt] See chap. 13.1.

Behold the Lord rideth] Heb. riding: sc. as a Judge, or General of an Army.

Upon a swift cloud] i. e. Speedily, suddenly, and irresistibly: Clouds are
rarely seen in Egypt where it raineth not, but Ezekiel. 30.18. we read of a Cloud
that should cover Egypt. By swift cloud here some understand the Virgin Mary,
others our Saviors body, or humane nature. And they further tell us that
as soon as the child Jesus was brought into Egypt, down fell all the Idols
there, Hist. Scholast.
as Dagon did before the Ark. This they ground upon the following words.

And the Idols of Egypt shall be moved at his presence] Whereby I conceive is
only meant that rheir gods should not be able to help them, and should
therefore lose their Authority, be discredited and decryed.

And the heart of Egypt shall melt] As it did first when Sennacherib, and then
when Nebuchadnezzar came against it.

Ver. 2. And I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians] Commiscebo
Egyptios inter sc. I will embroil them in a civil War. This fell out, says
Junius, Herod. lib. 2. Diod. Sic. l. 1.
under King Psammeticus after the death of Sethon, about the end of Hezekiahs
Reign, or the beginning of Manasseh's, whilst Isaiah was yet alive.

And Kingdom against Kingdom] Or, Rectory against Rectory; for as here in the
Heptarchy, so there the Land was divided into many Provinces or Jurisdictions,
even 66. says Ortelius.

Ver. 3. And the spirit of Egypt shall fail] Fail and falter; their wits shall
not serve them, but be drained and emptied, as the Hebrew word here signifies.
By spirit here understand their Wisdom, Learning and Sharpness, for the which
they were famous among, and frequented by other Nations. Moses was skilled in
their Learning, Acts 7.23. Pythagoras, Plato, Solon, Anaxagoras, and other
Philosophers gat much by them. Mercurius Trismegist says of Egypt, that it was
the Image of Heaven, Aug. de C. D. lib. 8. cap. 14.
and the Temple of the whole world. By spirit here, some understand their
familiar spirits. See Levit. 19.31.

And they shall seek to the Idols] Whereof they had great store (so that they
were derided by other Idolaters) but their chief Deity was Latona, says
Herodotus.

And to the charmers] Who have their name in Hebrew from their low or slow
speaking.

Ver. 4. And the Egyptians will I give over] Heb. shut up, sc. as fishes in a
pond.

Into the hand of a cruel Lord] Heb. Lords, Herodot.
viz. those twelve Tyrants that reigned after Sethon, and were put down by
Psammetichus one of their own number, who afterward reigned alone, and with
rigor.

And a fierce King] viz. Psammetichus, the Father of that Pharaoh Necho, who
slew Josiah, 2 King. 23.29. This fierce King reigned fifty four years: and by
his harshness caused 200000. of his men of War to leave him, and to go into
Ethiopia.

Ver. 5. And the waters shall fail from the sea] i. e. Their Sea-traffick shall
be taken from them, to their very great loss. Historians testify, that by
frequent Navigation out of the Bay of Arabia into India and Trogloditice, the
revenue of Egypt was so increased, that Auletes the father of Cleopatra
received thence yearly twelve thousand and five hundred Talents.

And the River shall be wasted and dried up] i. e. The River Nilus, which
waters Egypt and makes it fruitful: See Deuteronomy. 11.9, 10. Ezekiel. 29.3, 9.

Creditur Aegyptus caruisse juvantibus arva Ovid. Arf; lib. 1.

Imbribus, atque annis sicca fuisse novem.
Ver. 6. And they shall turn the Rivers far away] The Assyrians shall: or some
of their own fond and vain glorious Princes shall drain the River Nilus at
several passages and in several places, to the impairing of the River, Herodot.
l. 2.
and the impeaching of the State.

The reeds and flags shall wither] These were of great use there: for of flags
they made their barks and boats, Plin. lib. 13. cap. 11.
matts also, wheels, baskets, etc. of reeds they made their Sails, ropes,
paper, and a kind of juice serving them for food, etc. As therefore the
Palm Tree is to the Indians a Cornu-copia, yielding sundry commodities, so are
Reeds and Flags to the Egyptians.

Ver. 7. The paper-reeds by the brooks] i. e. By the streams of Nilus: for
where this River arriveth not, is nothing but a whitish sand bearing no grass,
but two little weeds called Suhit and Gazul, which burnt to ashes makes the
finest Chrystal-glasses.

And every thing sown by the brooks] As far as Nilus ouer-floweth, is a black
mould, so fruitful as they do but throw in the seed, and have four rich
Harvests in less then four months.

Ver. 8. The Fishers also shall mourn] Because their Trade decays, or they
take pains to no purpose, ver. 10.

Ver. 9. They that work in fine flax -- shall be confounded] sc. For want of
materials; such as were wont to be sown by the brooks, ver. 7. See 1 King.
10.28. Prove. 7.16. Ezekiel. 27.7. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 1.

They that weave net-works] Or, rather white-works, that is, white garments
made of the fine-flax of Egypt. These were much worn by Nobles, Esth. 8.16.
Dan. 7.9. Whence also in Hebrew they have their name. 1 King. 21.8. Neh. 2.16.
Eccl. 10.17, etc.

(...) Albi seu candidati.
Ver. 10. And they shall be broken in the purposes thereof] Heb. In the
foundations, as Psalm. 21.3. Purposes are the foundation of Practices: but are
often disappointed.

Berecha.
And ponds for fish] Heb. ponds of fowl, stagna voluptaria (Tremellius)
standing pools of desire. In Hebrew, the word used elsewhere for a pond or
fish-pool, signifies a blessing also.

Ver. 11. Surely the Princes of Zoan are fools] Otherwise they would never have
so ill-advised their King, so to drain the River for his pleasure, to the
public detriment. Zoan was an ancient City in Egypt, Numb. 13.22. The
Septuagint and Vulgar versions call it Tanis. Here it was that Moses did all
his Wonders, Psalm, 78.12. Exodus 7.8, 9. Here Pharaohs Princes took counsel,
but not of God, and covered with a covering, but not of his Spirit, that they
might add sin to sin, Chap. 30.1.

The counsel of the wise Counselors is become brutish] Such as was that of
Machiavel the Florentine Secretary, De principe page 185.
who proposes Caesar Borgia (notwithstanding all his villainies) as the only
Example for a Prince to imitate.

How say ye unto Pharaoh?] How can ye for shame say so of your selves. Or
quomodo dictatis Pharaoni? How can ye dictate or put such words as these into
your Kings mouth? What gross flattery is this?

Herod. lib 2. (...) Luclan. Plato in Timaeo.
I am the son of the wise] Or, a son of wise ones: as if Wisdom were proper to
you, and hereditary. The Egyptians cracked much of their wisdom, yet more of
their Antiquity, as if they were long before other people, yea before the Moon
(as the Arcadians also boasted) and that their Philosophy was very ancient.

Ver. 12. Where are they? where are thy wise men?] q. d. Vile latens virtus: if
they have that wisdom they pretend to, let them predict thy calamities, and
help to prevent them. Mihi hominum prudentia similis videtur talparum labori
non sine dexteritate sub terra fodientium, Gasp. Ens.
sed ad lumen solis coecutienttium. The worlds Wizzards are like children
always standing on their heads, and shaking their heels against Heaven.

Ver. 13. The Princes of Zoan are become fools] Wilful fools: this they are
told twice over, because hardly persuaded to it. See ver. 11.

The Princes of Noph] Called also Moph, Hos. 9.6. and therehence Memphis, now
Grand-Cairo, famous once for the Pyramides and Monuments of the Egyptian Kings.

Even they that are the stay of the Tribes thereof] Heb. The corners of the
Tribes or Rectories: The free States of Switserland are called Cantons, l. e.
corners.
that is, either the King and Chieftaines, as some sense it; Or, as others, all
the Inhabitants of the Country from one corner thereof unto another. How these
wise men of Egypt deceived others, is not expressed: but probably they did it
by approving and cherishing the superstition, impiety and carnal security of
the Princes and people.

Ver. 14. The Lord has mingled a perverse spirit] Or, given them to drink a
spirit of giddiness. Heb. a spirit of extreme perversities: He has stupefied
and as it were intoxicated them with the efficacy of error.

And they have caused Egypt to err in every work] Psammetichus their King was
twenty eight years in besieging Azotus, ere he could take it: Herod. Euterp.
and other things went on with them accordingly.

Ver. 15. Neither shall there be any work] See on ver. 14.

Ver. 16. In that day shall Egypt be like unto women] Feeble and faint-hearted,
nihil mascule aut fortiter facturi, sed mulieribus meticulosiores. See Prove.
28.1. with the Note.

Because of the shaking of the hand of the Lord] When as yet he threateneth
only: how much more when he strikes in good earnest? See Chap. 30.32.

Ver. 17. And the Land of Judah stall be a terror unto Egypt] For how should
Egypt hope to speed better then Judea had done? How Sethon King of Egypt was
put to her trumps, as we say, when Sennacherib invaded Egypt, imploring the aid
of his God Vulcan, whose Priest he was, see Herodot. lib. 2.

Ver. 18. In that day] When the Gospel shall be there preached, whether by Mark
the Evangelist or others, as Clement, Origin, Didymus.

Five Cities] A considerable number of Egyptians.

Speak the Language of Canaan] Called the Jews language, chap. 35.11, 13. the
Hebrew tongue wherein were written the lively Oracles of God. This Language
therefore the Elect Egyptians shall learn, and labor for that pure lip, Zeph.
3.9. to speak as the Oracles of God, 1 Pet 4.11. Wholesome words, 2 Timothy 1.13.
Right words. Job 6.25. Words of wisdom, Prove. 1.6. Of truth and soberness, Act.
26.25. to be Examples to others, not only in faith and conversation, but also
in words and communication, 1 Timothy 4.12.

And swear to the Lord of hosts] Devote themselves to his fear and service,
Nempe susceptione baptismi. Piscat.
taking a corporal oath for that purpose as in baptism, and other holy
covenants: whereupon happily they might be enabled to speak with tongues, the
holy tongue especially, as most necessary for Christians. Here then we have a
description of a true Christian, not such as the Jesuits in their Catechism
give us, viz. A Christian is he who believes whatsoever the Church of Rome
commands to be believed, swearing fealty to Her.

One shall be called the City of destruction] i. e. Nevertheless there shall be
a few cities that shall despise Christian Religion; and shall therefore be
destroyed for neglecting so great salvation: It shall be easier for Sodom one
day then for such. Others render the text, Heliopolis or the city of the Sun
shall be accounted one, sc. of those 5 converted cities; and become consecrated
to the Sun of righteousness. Joseph. Ant. l^b. 13. cap. 6.


Ver. 19. In that day shall there be an altar to the Lord] A spiritual altar
for spiritual sacrifices, as ver. 20. Heb. 13.10. Onias the Jewish Priest who
hereupon went and built an altar at Heliopolis in Egypt, and sacrificed to God
there, was as much mistaken as the Anabaptists of Germany were in their Munster
which they termed new Jerusalem and acted accordingly, sending forth Apostles,
casting out orthodox Ministers, etc.

And a pillar in the border thereof] that is, says One, the Gospels and
writings of the Apostles, that pillar and ground of truth: Or a public
confession of the Christian faith, Romans 10 9. An allusion to Josh. 22.10, 25.
See Zech. 14.9 20, 21.

Ver. 20. And it shall be for a sign and for a witness] The doctrine of Christ's
death is a clear testimony of Gods great love and kindness to mankind, Romans 5.
and 8.

For they shall cry unto the Lord for their oppressours] As the Israelites
sometimes had done, under the Egyptian servitude, Exodus 3.9.

And he shall send them a Saviour] not Moses, but Messiah, that great Savior:
Servatorem and magnatem, vel magistrum.
for God has laid his peoples help on One that is mighty, Psalm. 89.19. See
Tit. 2, 13.

Ver. 21. And the Lord shall be known to Egypt] They shall both know the Lord
Christ, and be known of him, as Gal. 4.9. See Romans 10.20.

And shall do sacrifice and oblation] Perform reasonable service, Rom 12.1.
such as whereof they can render a reason. Not a Samaritan service, Joh. 4.22.
or Athenian, Act. 17.23. Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, etc. God will
have no such blind sacrifices, Mal. 1.8.

Yea they shall vow a vow, etc.] That in baptism especially.

Facit opus a^tenum ut faciat proprium. Isa: 28.
Ver. 22. And the Lord shall smite Egypt] That he may bring it into the bond of
the covenant, Ezekiel. 20.37. Heb. 12.9. Hos. 6.1.

He shall smite and heal it] Heb. smiting and healing. Vna eademque manus, etc.
Vna gerit bellum monstrat manus altera pacew, as it was said of Charles 5.

And shall heal them] Pardon their sins, heal their natures, and make up all
breaches in their outward estates.

Ver. 23. In that day there shall be an highway etc.] All hostility shall
cease, and a blessed unanimity be settled amongst Christ's subjects of several
nations: Hereunto way was made by the Roman Empire, reducing both these great
countries into Provinces.

And the Egyptiant shall serve] Serve the Lord with one shoulder, as Zeph. 3.9.

Ver. 24. In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt] The posterity of
Sem, Ham, and Japh^t, shall concur in the communion of Saints; the pale and
partition wall being taken away.

Even a blessing in the midst of the earth] The Saints are so. Absque
stationibus non staret mundus. If it were not for them, the world would soon
shatter and fall in pieces.

Jun.
Ver. 25. Whom the Lord of hosts shall bless] Or, For the Lord of hosts shall
bless, and then he shall be blessed; as Isaac said of Jacob, Genesis 27.33.

Blessed be Egypt my people] A new title to Egypt, and no less honorable. Vide
quantum profecerit Aegyptus flagellis, says Oecolampad. here, i e. See how
Egypt has got by her sufferings: See ver. 22. She who was not a people, but a
rabble of rebels conspiring against heaven, is now owned and taken into
covenant.

And Assyria the work of my hands] For we are his workmanship created in Christ
Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. 2.10.

And Israel mine Inheritance] This is upon the matter, one and the same with
the former: every regenerate person, whether Jew or Gentile, is all these three
in conjunction. O the (...), the heaped up happiness of all such! Let Israel
rejoice in him that made him; let the children of Zion be joyful in their King,
Psalm 149.2. For the Lord her God in the midst of her is mighty: he will save,
he will rejoice over her with joy, he will rest in his love, he will joy over
her with singing, Zeph. 3.17.

CHAP. XX.
Ver. 1. IN the year that Tartan] A certain Commander under Sennacherib, 2
King. 18.17. who came against Ashdod (among other Cities of Judah) about the
twelfth year of King Hezekiah.

Came to Ashdod] Called also Azotus, Act. 8.40. and much praised by Herodotus
in Euterpe.

When Sargon] That is, Sennacherib most likely, who had seven Names, says
Hierom: eighth, say some Rabbis. Commodus the Roman Emperor took unto himself
as many names as there are months in the year; 1 ^on.
which also he changed ever and anon, but constantly kept that of Exuperans,
because he would have been thought to excel all men. The like might be true of
Sargon.

Herod. l. 2.
And fought against Ashdod and took it] Psammetichus King of Egypt had before
taken it, after a very long siege; now it is taken again from the Egyptian by
the Assyrian; to teach them and others, not to trust to Forts and fenced Cities.

Ver. 2. At the same time spoke the Lord] Against Egypt and Ethiopia, whom he
had comforted, (...) i. e. Per Isaiam tanquam organum and dis^ensatorem suo^um
myster. Oecolamp. Vestimentum ^i losum.
ver. 18. and 19 and yet now again threateneth; showing by an ocular
demonstration what miseries should befall them. This was done in Jury; but the
report thereof might easily come to these confederate Countries: and the Jews
howsoever were given hereby to see how vain a thing it was to trust to such
Confederates.

By Isaiah the son of Amos] Heb. by the hand of Isaiah, whom God used as a
dispenser of this precious Treasure.

Go, loose the sackcloth from off thy loins] i. e. Thy thick rough garment,
such as Prophets usually wore, 2 Kings 1.8. Zech. 13.4. Matthew. 3.4. Or else thy
sackcloth put on as a mourning-weed, either for ten Tribes lately carried
captive: or else for the miseries ready to fall shortly upon thine own people.

And put off thy shoo from thy foot] The Nudipedales in Moravia might as well a
vouch Isaiah for their founder, as the Carmelites do Elias.

And he did so] God is to be obeyed without sciscitation; his Commands, how
unreasonable soever they may seem, are not to be disputed but dispatched.

Walking naked] Not stark-naked, but stripped as a prisoner, his Mantle or upper
garment cast off, See 1 Samuel 19.24. Act. 19.16. Mic. 1.8.

Ver. 3. Like as my servant Isaiah] Servants are either Menial, or Magisterial:
Prophets and Preachers are of this latter sort.

Has walked naked and barefoot three years] i. e. Three days: a day for a
year, as Ezekiel. 4.4, 5, 6. Tremelius renders the Text thus: has walked naked
and barefoot for a sign and wonder of the third year against the Egyptians,
and against the Aethiopians, that is, for a sign that the third year after this
Prophecy, the Forces of the Egyptians and Ethiopians under the conduct of
Tirhaka shall be worsted, slaughtered, and carried captive by the Assyrian
Monarch. And this was preached not more to their ears then to their eyes, ad
fidem faciendam, for more assurance.

Ver. 4. So shall the King of Assyria led away] As men use to lead or drive
cattle, for so the Hebrew word Nahag imports; so are poor captives led: and
so shall the Lord also one day lead forth with or in company of the workers of
iniquity (notorious offenders) all such as turn aside unto their crooked ways,
Hypocrites and dissemblers: when as peace shall be upon Israel, upon the pure
in heart, Psalm 125.5.

Young and old] Young men are for action, old men for counsel. Consilia senum,
hastae juvenum sunt. Pindar.
(...), They were all carried away together in a sad and sorry condition,
little better (and sometimes more bitter) then death it self.

Even with their buttocks uncovered] Vel ad Iudibrium, vel ad libidinem
hostium, for the enemies either to scorn at, or to feed their filthy eyes upon.
Thus and for such a purpose dealt the mitred fathers with the poor Albigenses
(those ancient Protestants) in France; when they had forced them to take
quarter for their lives, voluerunt Episcopi viros and mulieres nudos egredi,
etc. And so Tilly dealt with the miserable Citizens at the sack of Magdeburg.
And much worse then so deals the Devil with all his wretched captives, whom
be drives away Hell-ward naked and barefoot with their buttocks uncovered;
Disceopertis natibus.
the shame of their nakedness exposed to public view, for want of the white
Raiment of Christ's Righteousness that they might be clothed, Rev. 3.18.

Ver. 5. And they shall be afraid and ashamed] They, that is, as many as
confided in them, seeing themselves thus confuted, shall be abashed and
terrified, perterrefient at the fall of their Confederates, and their own
approaching calamity.

Ver. 6. And the Inhabitant of this Isle shall say, etc.] Judaea, though part
of the Continent, is here called an Isle or Island, (whereas it was indeed an
inland) 1. Because it was bounded on the West with the Midland-sea, and on the
East with the Lake of Gennesaret. 2. Because it was beset with many enemies,
and beaten upon by the waves of Wars from all parts, but especially from Egypt
and Babylon, which is called a sea, chap. 21.1. See chap. 8.8. 3. Because
begirt with Gods favor, Venice is environed with her embracing Neptune, to
whom she marries her self with yearly nuptials, casting a ring into the Sea.
power and protection, which was greater security to it then the Sea is to
Venice (which yet is media insuperabilis unda) or then wooden walls can be to
any Island.

Behold, such is our expectation, etc.] Here Is their shame, and well it might
be: for if Hezekah relied not upon the Egyptian for help against the Assyrian,
yet the people did, as Rabshakeb also could tell, 2 Kings 18.24.

And how shall we escape?] Here Is their fear, ver. 5. How much more shall
wicked men say thus at the last day?

CHAP. XXI.
Ver. 1. THe burden of the Desert of the Sea] i. e. Of Babylon, ver. 9. which
is here called a sea, because situate by many waters, Jer. 51.13, 36. and the
desert or plain of the sea, because it stood in a Plain, Genesis 11.2. Or was to
be turned into a Desert: see chap. 13. and 14. Jer. 51. It is so often
prophesied against. 1. For the comfort of Gods people, who were to suffer hard
and heavy things from this City. 2. For a caution to them, not to trust in such
a tottering State; A Lapide says, that about the time of this Prophecy,
Hezekiah was making a League and amity with Merodach King of Babylon, to whose
Ambassadors he had showed all his Treasures, and was well shent for it, 2
King. 20.12. To take him off which Design, the ruin of Babylon is here
fore-prophesied.

Pliny says, the greatest tempests at Sea come from the South.
As whirlwinds in the South pass thorow] Patentibus campis, ac locis arenosis,
vehementissimo impetu cuncta prosternentes, without stop or stay, bearing down
all before them: covering whole armies with sand sometimes, and destroying them.

So it cometh] Or, so He comes, that is Cyrus with his Armies, Vastator
Babyloniae, he comes fiercely and furiously.

From the Wilderness] From Persia, which is desert in many places, especially
toward Babylon.

From a terrible Land] From Media, the people whereof were barbarous, and
brutish, Herodot.
skilful to destroy. Nitocris Queen of Babylon feared an hostile irruption from
this Land, did her utmost to prevent it: but that would not be.

Ver. 2. A grievous Vision] Heb. Hard, harsh; tyrannorum speculum: here is hard
for hard; God loves to retaliate. Babylon had been the maul of the earth, Jer:
51.20. now a hard Messenger is sent, a harsh Vision is declared against her.
They who do what they should not, shall hear what they would not; a burdenous
Prophecy, a grievous Vision! This treacherous dealer deals treacherously,
and this spoyler spoyleth: for so some read the next words.

The treacherous dealer deals treacherously] Or, O thou treacherous dealer
and notable spoyler: thou Elam I mean, go up thou Media, besiege. God often
makes use of one Tyrant to punish another: as here he stirs up the Persians
to plunder and waste the Babylonians. So the Persians were afterward in like
sort punished by the Macedonians, the Macedonians by the Romans those Romans by
the Hunnes, Vandals, Lombards, Sarazens, Turks: all whom Christ shall destroy
at his last coming.

Go up, O Elam] i.e. Thou Persian: Elymais is properly that part of Persia that
lies toward Media. Here they are appointed their work, 170. years before it
was done: and Cyrus afterward named as the chief doer.

All the sighing thereof have I made to cease] Thereof, or of her, that is, of
Babylon, (not of Judaea, which the Prophet ever had in his heart, as some sense
it) the sighing, Vatab.
quo ipsa, sua tyrannide and appressione, cogebat alios flere and gemere, that
she forced from others, specially from Gods oppressed people. Or, they shall
not have long to sigh, for I will soon put an end to their lives.

Ver. 3. Therefore are my loins filled with pains] I Babylon, or I Belshazzar
am in a woe case: Ze^ed.
this is here set forth by a notable Hypotyposis, ac si res ipsa jam tum
gereretur, persona Regis in se per Mimesin assumpta, acting Belshazzars part,
as Dan. 5.5, 6. where we may read this Prophecy punctually fulfilled.

I was bowed down at the hearing of it] Belshazzars senses were sorely
afflicted: how much more shall it be so in Hell? Oecolamp.
The Prophet here elegantly imitateth his groans and out-cr^es, O dolorem
lumborum! O torsiones! O cordis amissionem! O tremorem and terrorem! O the
doleful woe and alas of the damned spirits!

Ver. 4. My heart panted] Or, fluttereth too and fro, as not able to keep in
its place. Viro impio calamitatibus presso nihil desperatius est, Nothing is
more hopeless and crestfaln then a wicked man in distress: for why? his life
and hopes end together.

The night of my pleasure has he turned into fear] That dreadful and dismal
nigh Dan. 5. intended for a revelling night, and dedicated to the honor of
Shac: but the Handwriting on the Wall, and the irruption of the Persians,
marred the mirth.

Ver. 5. Prepare the Table] Insultat regi Balthasari, Zeged.
ac irridendo voces illius memorat. Prepare the Table, said Balthazar: but more
need he had to have said, Prepare the battle, set the Army in array, etc. But
this secure sot thought of no such matter: his destruction, though at hand, was
hid from his eyes by the Lord, who Auferre mentem talibus primum solet,
Caliginemque, affundit, ut ruant suas
Furenter in clades, sibi quas noxii
Accersierunt ultro, consiliis malis.


Watch in the watch-Tower] That we may revel the more securely.

Eat, drink,] Etiam si Hannibal sit ad portas; feed without fear,
notwithstanding the siege.

Arise ye Princes, anoint the shield] q. d. It would better become you, Non
convivandi sed pugnandi tempu^ est. A Lapide.
O Babylonian Princes so to do, viz. to stand to your Arms, to furbish your
shields, for your better defense against the Medes and Persians. Some make
these words to be the Watchmans warning given upon the Persians entering the
City.

Ver. 6. For thus has the Lord said unto me] Confirming by a Prophetical
Vision, what I had foretold concerning the calamity of the Chaldees.

Ver. 7. And he saw] sc. In a Vision.

A Chariot with a couple of horsmen] Darius and Cyrus.

A Chariot of Assesand a Chariot of Camels] Beasts of both sorts, both for
burden and service: great store of them.

And he hearkened diligently with much heed] Attendit attente, attentissime,
the Watchman did who was set to watch in the Vision.

Ver. 8. And he cried a Lyon] i. e. A stout and cruel enemy is upon us. Or, he
cried as a Lion (so some render it) that is, the Watchman cried aloud,
professing his utmost vigilance in performance of his duty.

Ver. 9. And behold here comes a Chariot of men] Or, behold even now are gone
in, that is, Cyrus and Darius (as ver. 7.) have broken into the Town, and
surprised it.

And he answered and said,] He, that is, the Watchman, numinis quodam afflatu
commotus, by a divine instinct; or rather God himself.

Babylon is fallen, is fallen] That is, shall fall, certo, cito, penitus,
certainly, speedily, utterly, -- ruit alto a culmine Troja: so shall shortly
mystical Babylon, Rev. 18. as the Jesuits themselves Ribera and a Lapide
confess; only they say This shall be toward the end of the world, when Rome
shall become Idolatrous; as though it were not so now. But what said Petrarch
long since? There yet stands near at hand a second Babylon, cito itidem
casura, si vos essetis viri, which would soon be down, would you but stand up
as men.

Ver. 10. O my threshing, and the corn of my floor] That is, O my Church and
people, whom by so many tribulations I have hitherto been threshing, that I
might sunder thee from the chaff, and make thee the corn of the floor, or, Non
ut perdam, sed ut probem and purgem. Frumentum Dei sum, etc. Ignat.
as the Hebrew here has it, my son of the floor, and may lay thee up as pure
grain in my Garner. See chap. 28.27.

That which I have heard from the Lord of Hosts] viz. That you my poor
Countrymen shall be threshed for a while, and winnowed by Babylon (see chap.
25.10 and 41.15. Jer. 51.33. Mic. 4.13.) Vt cum triturando e gluma, and
follibus suis utriculisque triticum educitur, and that you shall at length be
delivered from this grievous affliction: all this you may write upon as certain
and infallible. I have herein told you not the dreams of mine own heart, but
the very undoubted words of God himself.

Ver. 11. The burden of Dumah] i. e. Of Idumea, or of the Edomites: Onus
Idumea. Sept.
for burden, see on chap. 31.1. This Prophecy is the shorter, the harder. The
Jews apply this Prophecy to Rome: they read for Dumah Roma: the Romans they
call the new Idumaeans, and the Popes Kingdom the wicked Kingdom of Edom. Some
of them say that Julius Caesaer was an Idumean: Others that Aeneas came out of
Idumea into Egypt, from thence into Lybia, thence to Carthage, thence to Italy:
and that there he built Alba out of which sprang Rome. The rise of this Fiction
seems to have been the destruction of the Jewish State by Titus and his
Romans, who were thereupon for their cruelty by those Jews called Edomites.

He calls to me out of Seir] Or, One is calling to me out of Seir, which was
a Mountain possessed by the Edomites.

Custos, quid de nocte.
Watchman, what of the night?] Interrogatio Ironica est atque sarcastica; a
scoffing question whereby the Prophet is derided and upbraided with false
foretelling a night of misery to the Edomites, when as they felt no change, but
enjoyed rather a lightsome morning; a fine time, as we say, of liberty and
prosperity.

Non omnium dicrum sol occidit Nescis quid serus vesper vehat.
Ver. 12. The Watchman said, The morning comes, and also the night] This is a
short and sharp answer, q. d. say it be yet morning with you and clear day;
yet, as sure as the night follows the day, a change will come, such as
whereof you shall have small comfort.

If ye will enquire] sc. of the Lord by me, whom you call Watchman in disdain:
but I profess my self to be so, that is, to be a Prophet; and do take it for an
honor.

Enquire ye] Do it seriously and not sarcastically: be not ye mockers, lest
your bonds be increased, chap. 28.22.

Return] To God by true Repentance.

Come] Come over to us who are his people. And all this is delivered by an
Elegant Asyndeton in short and quick terms; importing that haste must be made,
if the forementioned danger shall be prevented. Habent aulae suum cito, cito;
they must be nimble that shall find favor in the Court of Heaven. It is an
unsafe thing always to begin to live. How many are taken away in their offers
and essays, before they have prepared their hearts to cleave to God? Castigemus
ergo mores and moras: Up therefore and be doing that the Lord may be with you.

Ver. 13. The burden upon Arabia] As a burden upon a beast. These Arabians o^
Hagarens had assisted (likely) Tihakah the Ethiopian against Sennacherib; and
are therefore set upon by him: sure it is they were enemies to the Church,
Psalm 83.

In the Forest -- shall ye lodge] In the wide and wild woods, glad to lurk any
where for safety, glad to quit your huts.

O ye traveling companies] Ye troops of Travelers.

Ver. 14. Brought water to the thirsty] Or, bring forth water wherewith to meet
the thirsty; with your bread prevent those that flee: Be speedy, and
spontaneous in your beneficence. Blessed is the man that considers the poor
and needy, Psalm 41.1. qui praeoccupat vocem petituri, which preventeth the
request of the poor beggar; so Austin rendereth it.

Ver. 15. For they fled from the swords, etc.] Swords, bows, battle to all the
rest. Crosses seldom come single. See on James 1.2.

Ver. 16. Within a year, after the years of an hireling] See on chap. 16.14.
before the year be come about.

All the glory of Kedar] Whose tents, Psalm 120.5. were rude, but rich, Cant.
1.5. See there the Note.

Ver. 17. And the residue of the number of Archers] Heb. of the bow, whereby
these Kedarens lived much, as had also their Ancestour Ishmael, Genesis 21.20.

For the Lord God of Israel has spoken it] Who will surely see it done, and
yet he loves mercifulness: but can less then Mithridates could, endure those
who hate virtue forsaken of Fortune, as they call it.

CHAP. XXII.
Ver. 1. THe burden] See chap. 13.1.

Of the Valley of Vision] i. e. Of Zion or Jerusalem (as the Septuagint express
it) which is called first a Valley (though set upon a knole) because environed
with Mountains, Psalm 125.2. secondly, because shortly to be laid low and
levelled with the ground; ita ut vallis aut vorago dici posset.

Of Vision] So Jerusalem is called, First, Because there (...) Gods visible or
aspectable presence. Secondly, Because it was a Seminary of Seers (as Hierom
elegantly terms it) not without some allusion, as it is thought, to Mount
Moriah (whereon stood the Temple) which signifies Vision, q. d. O Zion, thou
wast Moriah, but now thou art Marah: thou wast the Mountain of Vision; but now
thou art a Valley of tears and of darkness: thou wast the Temple of God, but
now thou art a den of thieves.

What ayleth thee now that thou art wholly gone up to the house-tops?] Luctus
and salutis causa, says Scultetus, there to lament thy distress, or else for
safeguard in this destraction: Should thou not rather go out to fight, then
go up thus wholly and fully to the tops of thy Terrisies?

Ver. 2. Thou that art full of stirres] Clamoribus fragosis: Screptra.
how soon have thou changed thy cheer and thy Note? thy joyful acclamations
into doleful exclamations?

Thy slain men are not slain with the sword] sed mortui ex anxietate, but are
fore-slain with fear, or as others, by the visible vengeance of God, as Titus
acknowledged at the last sack of that City, and as the Poet sang of Troy,
Joseph. lib. 7. cap. 16.
Non tibi Tindaridis facies invisa Lacaenae, Virgil.

Culpatusve Paris; verum inclementia divum
Has evertit opes. --


Ver. 3. All thy Rulers are fled together] As not knowing what to do, Vagantur.
or whether to turn themselves.

All that are found in thee, are bound together] Either in fetters, Jer. 52.11.
or with fear, Psalm 76.5.

Which have fled from far] Or, they fly far away, even as fast and as far as
they can out of danger.

Ver. 4. Therefore said I, look away from me] Vt luctui and lamentis me totum
dedam, that unseen I may soak my self in the salt-tears of sorrow for Sion.

Ver. 5. For it is a day of trouble, and of treading down] Great is the woe of
War: no words how wide soever, can set forth to the full, the distress and
destruction thereof.

And of perplexity] Mebusah samebucah, so the original elegantly, as in the
last words of the verse, rythmically.

Breaking down the walls] According to chap. 5.5.

Ver. 6. And Elam] i. e. The Persians (great archers, as Corabo testifies,
Dominus exparietavit. Vatab.
lib. 16.) as Kir stands here for the Medians, 2 King. 16.9. good at Sword
and Buckler: called also Syromedians.

Uncovered the shield] Kept covered till then for fear of rusting. These were
desperate fellows, bloodily bent, skilful to destroy.

Ver. 7. Thy choycest Valleys shall be full of Chariots] Iron Chariots armed
with Sythes: these were, says Vegetius, first a terror, and then a scorn.

In array at the gate] sc. To force entrance into the City, as Judge. 9.44, 52.

Ver. 8. And he discovered the covering of Judah] That is, Zeged. Diodat.
Oecolamp.
he that is the enemy took the City: hoc enim significat nudari operimentum, i.
e. protectionem Judae; Or, as others sense it, God took away his Protection,
the Rampire and Defense of their Country. See Exodus 32.25. Numb. 14.9. Mic.
1.11. Or the enemy destroyed the Temple wherein the Jews so foolishly confided,
Jer. 7.

To the armor of the house] To any thing but whom they should have looked
unto. Our hearts are top-full of harlotry, ready to shift and shark in every
by-corner for comfort: to hang their hopes on every hedge rather then to roll
themselves upon God the hope of Israel.

Ver. 9. Ye have seen also -- and ye gathered together, etc.] This they did,
when in distress, to prevent the enemy, and provide for their own safety: and
this they might well have done, had not God been neglected: This of all things
he can least endure. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the Nations
that forget God, Psalm 9.17. See chap. 30.1.

Ver. 10. And ye have numbred] This they did not till now, that they might make
the City more defensible, and the better keep out the enemy. General Vere told
the King of Denmark, that Kings cared not for Soldiers and Warlike
preparations, until such times as their crowns hang on the one side of their
head.

Ver. 11. Ye made a ditch also] A new ditch (lest the old one should not
suffice) to hold water for the besieged. All this was well and wisely done: had
not the main matter been left undone. See 2 Chronicles. 32.3, 5. with 2 King. 18.14,
16. The community of the Jews were carnal, and trusted in the arm of flesh.
Hezekiah also himself faltred, etc.

But ye have not looked unto the maker thereof] i. e. To the Author of that
trouble, Oecolamp.
treading down and perplexity, ver. 5. Or, to the Founder of Jerusalem, which,
say the Rabbis, was one of those seven things which God had in his thoughts
before he made the world.

Ver. 12. And in that day did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping] Ponit arma
quibus civitates ab hostibus defenduntur, nempe arma poenitentiae. These are
the best defensive Weapons, which therefore God of his goodness calls people
to, or ere he punishes them. He calls them, I say, by his Word, and by his
Works, both ordinary and extraordinary, that his Justice may be magnified, and
every foul mouth stopped.

To weeping and mourning] The walls of Sion cannot but stand firm, if well
tempered with the tears of true penitents.

And to baldness] Forbidden in other cases, Lev. 19.27, 28. and 21.5. Deuteronomy.
14.1. but here, and Mic. 1.16. called for in the practice of holy Repentance,
which has nothing to do with despair: See Ezra. 9 3.

Per omne (...) genus grassabantur. Scult.
Ver. 13. And behold joy and gladness] Or, But behold; see the madness of these
cross-grained creatures, who to thwart the Almighty, in laetitiam and luxum
prosiliunt, take a clean contrary course to what he had prescribed, as if they
had don't on purpose.

Eating and drinking] This was all they minded, or were good so, as we say,
Gulonum non alia est cura quam cibum ingerere, digerere, egerere, says
Bernard. The belly-god is set all on his panch; as the Ass-fish has his heart
in his belly: as the Spider is little else but belly: as the Gulon (a beast so
called) eats that which he preyeth upon; if it be a horse, till all be
devoured; ever filling his belly, and then emptying it, and then falling to it
again till all be consumed: such a delight has he in his appetite.

For to morrow we shall dye] So the Prophets tell us, but we are wiser then to
believe them: so the enemy threateneth us, but we are too well fortified to
fear him: so it may fall out, for we are all mortal; let us therefore make much
of our selves whiles we may.

Pers. Sat. 5.
Indulge genio, carpamus dulcia: nostrum est
Quod vivis: cinis and manes and fabula fies.
Saint Paul says, that the Epicures of his time used the like Atheistical
expressions, 1 Cor. 15.32. See there. It is the guise of graceless wretches to
jest out Gods Judgments, and to jeer when they should fear.

Ver. 14. And it was revealed in mine ears] It was told me for certain: God is
absolute in threatening because resolute in punishing: such is his hatred
against scoffing Epicures.

Surely this iniquity shall not be purged] Heb. If it be ever purged, let me be
never trusted again.

Till ye dye] That is, Never: for ye shall dye in your sin, dye Eternally: O
fearful! Pavete, cavete.

Ver. 15. Go get thee unto this Treasurer] This is Actio Jesaiae in Shebnam,
sicut Ciceronis in Verrem. Shebna was a great Courtier and an ill member;
advanced likely by King Ahaz, and tolerated for a time by good Hezekiah, as
Joab was by David, because he could neither will nor choose: or as Stephanus the
Persian was by Justinian the second Emperor of Constantinople: who being
praefectus aulae likewise, set over the house, grew so insolent, that he spared
not the Emperors mother though she were Augusta, Funcelus.
but whipped her, as if she had been his bondslave: This Shebna is thought to
have been an Egyptian, a Sochite, and of mean Parentage; Asperius nihil est
humili cum surgit in altum.

Shebna likely, was one of those jeering Epicures above-taxed and now
particularly threatened: Some for Treasurer render Fautor, adjutor, a favourer
and helper, sc. of those profane scoffers, ver. 13. or of the enemies, with
whom he underhand dealt and packt: he is therefore threatened to be ex
officed, and sent packing into a strange Country.

Ver. 16. What have thou here?] What inheritance, possession?

And whom have thou here?] sc. of thy stock and kindred? Terrae filius.
Art not thou a forraigner, a new man, an upstart mushroom? why then do thou
cut thee out such a costly and stately Sepulcher in Jerusalem, as if thou were
of the stock-Royal? or as if thou were sure to dye here in thy nest? Will it
not prove a true (...), as the Greeks call it? Some conceive that for the
safeguard of his Tomb, and other trinkets, Shebna was one of those Princes, 2
King. 19. that gave the King counsel to fortify so strongly. The Hebrews say,
that he likewise secretly kept correspondency with the enemy, that he might
have a stake in store, which way soever the dice chanced to turn: yea that he
treacherously agreed with the enemy to deliver the City into his hands: and
therefore it was but time to take him a link lower, as Hezekiah did upon this
Prophecy of Isaiah. Some add, that for betraying the City he hoped to be made
King there till his death; and therefore hewed him out a Mausolaeum or Royal
Sepulcher there, and that among those of the House of David, say the Rabbis.

Ver. 17. Behold the Lord will carry thee away, etc.] Or, is casting thee out
with casting, O thou mighty man: Not, God will carry thee away as a cock is
carried, so the vulgar Translator has it: which caused a learned Interpreter
to say, he wondered whence this cock flew into the Text.

And will surely cover thee] As they used to do to condemned persons unworthy
any longer to see the light; they covered their faces, as Job 9.24. Est. 7.8.
See the Note there.

Ver. 18. He will surely turn and toss thee] Turn thee like a bowl, and toss
thee like a ball. How and when this was fulfilled, the Scripture relates not:
But the Talmudists tell us, that Shebna revolting to Sennacherib was by him
(after the execution done by Gods Angel upon his Forces) carried to Niniveh,
there tied to an Horse-tail, and drawn through briars and brambles till he dyed.

There shall thou dye] -- Ingloria vita recedet. Spotswood Archbishop of St.
Andrews, who had discouraged and by degrees extirpated many faithful Ministers
of Scotland, thought it seasonable, Anno 1639. to repair into England, Mist. of
Iniq. page 15.
where he dyed: and so was fulfilled upon him the prediction of Mr. Walsh a
famous Scottish Minister, who in a Letter to the Bishop written long before,
told him, he should dye an outcast.

And there the Chariots of thy glory] Thy stately Chariots wherein thou
delightest to be hurried up and down, these shall also dye or cease; O domus
regiae dedecus! O dedecus domus domini!
O optimi regis opprobrium! (for so some read the words by an Apostrophe to
Shebna) O thou that art such a blur to thy good Master, and such a disgrace to
his House. Shebna affected to bear as great a port almost as the King himself
did: sed passus est manes suos, but he came to an ill end. So did the Duke of
Guise in France: and so did here Cardinal Woolsey, Sir Thomas Moor, Sir Francis
Bacon, etc.

Ver. 19. And I must drive thee from thy station] This was done in part, when
as of a great master of the Court, Chancellor, Lord Marshall, or Lord high
Treasurer, (for so many ways the word Sochem, ver. 15. is rendered) he was made
Scribe or Secretary, chap. 36.3. (which was a far inferior place) but much
more when all that befell him that is threatened ver. 17.18. as it did no doubt.

Ver. 20. I will call my servant Eliakim] Such as honor God, shall surely be
honored: He will call them to it, who else would choose to live and dye in
their self-contented secrecy: like as the sweet Violet grows low to the ground,
hangs the head downward, and besides, hides it self with its own leaves.

Ver. 21. And I will cloth him with thy Robe] i. e. Vest him in thine Honors
and Offices, thy self being laid by, and looked upon as an Officiperda.

And he shall be a Father] A fit Title for a Ruler: as this Text is a fit
Looking-glass for a good Counselor.

Ver. 22. And the Key of the House of David will I lay upon his shoulder]
Rulers have their back-burdens.

Fructus honos oneris: fructus honoris onus. The meaning is, he shall have
chief authority under the King, together with dexterity and discretion to
manage it aright. And herein Eliakim was a Type of Christ, Rev. 3.7. Let us
pray for such Eliakims as a common blessing.

Sit princeps miseris paxillum, cui appendeant urceolos suos. Scult.
Ver. 23. And I will fasten him as a nail] Paxilli simile and concinnum and
amabile est. On a nail are hung Utensils of the house: any such thing as cannot
stand by its own strength. Eliakim was to be a common support to the people;
but especially to his fathers house.

And he shall be for a glorious Throne] He shall enoble his whole stock and
kindred.

Ver. 24. And they shall hang upon him] As upon a nail.

The offspring and the issue] All his Allies both great and small shall be the
better for him: he shall employ and prefer them. And this Shebna is told the
more to spite him.

Ver. 25. Shall the nail that is fastened] So Shebna once seemed to be, but now
it shall appear to be otherwise: for he shall fall, and with him all his
dependants shall be ruined.

CHAP. XXIII.
Ver. 1. THe burden of Tyre] Heb. Tsor, whence came Tire. It was the chief City
of Phaenicia, the chief mart of the East, a very Microcosm or Epitome of the
whole world, for its wealth and wickedness. It was not far distant from Judea
(our Savior, Matthew. 15. went from Galilee into the coasts of Tire and Sidon)
in whose misery she made her self merry, Ezekiel. 26. and is therefore here
threatened with utter destruction.

Howl ye ships of Tarshish] i. e. Of Tartessus in Spain, or of Tarsus in
Cilicia (St. Paul's Country) or of the main Ocean.

P^ln. lib. 5. cap. 19.
For it is laid waste] viz. By Nebuchadnezzar, and afterward by Alexander the
great, who of an Island made it part of the Continent, and then razed it to the
ground.

So that there is no house] Or thus: so that there is no house, nor coming in
for those from Chittim, is made known to them.

Ver. 2. Be still ye Inhabitants of the Isle] A nundinatorio strepitu
quiescite, and plorate, Be quiet and mourn.

Ver. 3. And by great waters the seed of Sihor] i. e. Of Nilus, by the
overflowing whereof Egypt is made exceeding fertile, being styled the Granary
of the world. Tire was much enriched by its store thereto transported through
the Mid-land Sea, called here great waters.

Ver. 4. Be ashamed, O Zidon] sc. of Tire thy Daughter and Confederate.

For the sea has spoken, even the strength of the sea] Or, the seaport: By the
sea, and seaport we are to understand Tire, who sat in the Sea (as now Venice
does) and Soveraigned it.

Plin. ubi supra.
I travel not, nor bring forth children] I send forth no Colonies, as sometimes
I have done. Pliny says of Tire, Olim partu clara urbibus genitis, Lepti,
Vtica, Carthagine, etiam Gadibus extra orbem conditis. But now it was past that
time of day with her.

Ver. 5. As at the report concerning Egypt] i. e. Concerning their overthrow
once at the Red Sea, Exodus 15.14. They are also shortly to be overrun by
Nebuchadnezzar, to whom God has promised Egypt as his pay for his pains taken
in taking Tire.

Ver. 6. Pass ye over to Tarshish] -- Tyrii migrate coloni, be packing any
whether, and make any shift to save your lives, Vltra Sauromatas fugite hinc,
etc. To Carthage many of them went, say some: and the Septuagint for ships of
Tarshish, ver. 1. have ships of Carthage.

Ver. 7. Is this your joyous City] q. d. So ye were wont to hold her, and to
b^ast of her: but now it is somewhat otherwise. Cities dye as well as men, says
One: (...)
they also have their times and their turns, their rise and their ruin. Hic
immoremur parum and pedem figamus oportet. Let this be duly considered, and an
abiding City sought, Heb. 12.14. The wicked may revel in this world, the Godly
only rejoice.

Whose antiquity is of ancient dayes] Palaetyrus, or the old Town especially:
and this was a piece of her silly glory; Vrbs fuit illa Tyros priscis quae
condita saeclis,
Innumeroque suo repetens ab Agenore soles,
Aeternos demens spe praesumebat honores.


Ver. 8. The crowning City] Heb. The crowning or crowned: a City of Kings, Vidi
civitatem regum.
as Cyneas once said of Rome: This is a style better befitting Heaven, and the
crowned Saints there.

Whose Merchants are Princes] Little Kings, as we say. So they are at Venice;
so the Hogens Moghens of the Netherlands.

Ver. 9. The Lord of Hosts has purposed it] Here the Prophet sets forth both,
who had decreed the downfall of this famous and flourishing City; and why, see
Ezekiel. 27.5, 6, 7.

To stain the pride of all glory] Vt faede^ fastum omnis gloriae, to bring down
the height of all haughtiness. This has God Almighty decreed, and it shall
stand. Let us therefore have Grace, whereby we may serve Him with reverence and
godly fear, Heb. 12.28.

Ver. 10. Pass through the land as a River] i. e. Hastily: Abi praeceps,
Indesinenter and cito. Jun.
pack up and be gone with all speed, be there never so many of you here at Tire.

There is no more strength] Heb. girdle, that is Soldiery, or shipping, or Sea
to encompass it: Occolampadius sets this sense upon the words, Non est ei
cingulum reliquum, There is not so much as a girdle or such like mean commodity
left in Tire: she had been so plundered.

Ver. 11. He stretched out his hand] That mighty hand of his, 1 Pet. 5.6.
wherewith he spanneth the Heavens, chap. 48.13. brought the red Sea upon the
Egyptians, Exodus 14.26. and still shakes the wicked out of the earth, as by a
canvase, Job 38.13.

He shook the Kingdoms] Shook and shattered them, viz. by Nebuchadnezzar; the
Kingdom of Tire especially, to the terror of others, Ezekiel. 26.15.

The Lord] That man of War, Exodus 15.3. Mighty in battle, Psalm 24.8.

Has given a Commandement] Bidding his Forces Fall on.

Against the Merchant City] Heb. against, (or concerning) Canaan; so he calls
Tire the posterity of the old Cananites, and a place of great Merchandise. See
Hos. 12.7.

Ver. 12. Thou shall no more rejoyce] Heb. exult, revel.

O thou oppressed] Or ravished damsel, daughter of Zidon, hactenus intacta vi
hostili, never till now subdued.

Arise, pass] Asyndeton, q. d. Haste, haste.

Over to Chittim] To Cyprus, Greece, Italy.

There also shall thou have no rest] Succor or shelter. Cains curse was upon
them, the visible vengeance of God followed them close at heels: see Deuteronomy.
28.65, 66.

Ver. 13. Behold the land of the Chaldeans] q. d. The Chaldees were once no
such considerable people, but lay hid under the grandeur of the Assyrian
Monarchy which did set them up. Howbeit in time the Assyrians at length were
devoured by the Chaldees, Niniveh by Babylon; filia devoravit matrem, as the
Proverb is: And why may not the like be done to Tire? Others make this to be
the Prophets speech to the Chaldees, Behold O land of the Chaldees! This people
(of Tire) was not (however they boast of their Antiquity) till the Assyrians
(those Monarchs of the World) founded it, Vt esset statio Carinis, to be a fit
place for shipping, or for Barbarians. Calvin.
See 2 King. 17.24. Down with it therefore; bring it to vastity.

Ver. 14. Howl ye ships of Tarshish] He concludes this Prophecy of Tyres
downfall, as he began, ver. 1. The Inhabitants of Tarshish (or Tarsus in
Cilicia) were great Ship-masters: they sent a Navy of an hundred ships to
Xerxes when he went against Greece.

Ver. 15. Tire shall be forgotten] i. e. Laid aside by God, as if not at all
minded in her misery: slighted also and unfrequented by men, as a withered
Harlot.

Seventy years] So long as the Jews (whom they jeered) were held captives in
Babylon.

According to the days of one King] i. e. The duration of the Babylonish
Monarchy, under Nebuchadnezzar, his son, and his sons for, Jer. 17.7.

Shall Tire sing as an harlot] Vt meretrix, i. e. Mercatrix. Harlots fallen into
some foul disease are abandoned: but recovering thereof, they seek by singing
and other allurements, to regain their Paramours: so should Tire deal by her
old customers, being (as was once said of Helena after her return from Troy)
(...), no changeling, but as good as ever.

Ver. 16. Take an harp] In bidding her do so, he foretells that she shall do
so sc. ad ingenium suum redire, fall to her former practices.

Make sweet melody etc.] The Tyrians were much addicted to music, Ezekiel. 26.13.
and 28.13.

Ver. 17. The Lord will visit Tyre] Bad though she be, he will graciously visit
her: both by suffering her to grow rich again, as here, and by converting some
of them to the faith of Christ, ver. 18. See it fulfilled, Act. 21.3, 4, 5.
Euscbius also tells of many made Martyrs there.

Ver. 11. It shall not be treasured] Being once converted, they shall leave
heaping and hoarding wealth, and find other use for it, viz. to feed and cloth
Gods Ministers and poor people freely and largely.

And for durable cloathing] The Vulgar has it Vestientur ad vetustatem.

CHAP. XXIV.
Ver. 1. BEhold the Lord emptieth] It must needs be a matter of some rare and
mavelous consequence, that Behold (the O-yes of the Holy Ghost) is thus set
before.

The Lord emptieth] i. e. Will empty, an Idiom proper to Gods Prophets, who saw
in the Spirit things to come as if they were even then done.

The earth] Or, the land, sc. of Jury, by a woeful desolation, Lege and Luge:
Some hold it to be a Metaphor from ships over-laden: which therefore must be
disburdened: so was the Land to be eased of her Inhabitants, which she could
hardly stand under.

And waste] Making havoc of persons, and things of worth.

Turns it upside-down] Ferens, agens sursum deorsum omnia, turning all things
topsy turvy, as they say.

Ver. 2. And it shall be as with the people, so with the Priest] Or, Prince.
Digninity and Wealth hinders him not ( Does he esteem nobility or riches, or
any thing that fortifieth strength?) Poverty or meanness finds no favor with
him. In a common calamity, all, commonly, share and fare alike.

Ver. 3. The Land shall be utterly emptyed] See on ver. 1.

For the Lord has spoken this word] And his words are not in vain: Does he
say, and shall he not do it? Numb. 23.23.

Ver. 4. The earth mourns and fades away] Luxit and diffluxit, waileth and
saileth: gallant Rhetoric in the original, as this is a stately Chapter all
along: all the rowlings of Demosthenes are but dull stuff to it.

The world languisheth] As a sick man, so enfeebled that he cannot stand
high-lone.

Nempe contactu scelerat^rum hominum. Pisc.
Ver. 5. The earth also is defiled] Viz. With sin, and therefore so decayed: yea
the very visible Heavens are defiled with man's sin, and shall therefore be
purged by the fire of the last day: like as the vessels that held the
sin-offering was to pass the fire.

Because they have transgressed the Laws] Natural and moral; those bounds and
banks set to keep men within the compass of obedience: but the unjust knows
no shame, Zeph. 3.5. is Lawless, Awless, Yokeless, untameable, untractable, as
the wild Ass-colt, as the Horse and Mule, etc.

Changed the Ordinances] Or passed by the Ordinances, sc. By sins of omission,
as before by commission: so Heb. 2.2. every transgression and disobedience, i.
e. every commission and omission.

Broken the everlasting Covenant] Disannulled, vacated the Covenant founded in
Christ, when coming unto his own, his own received him not; when the Pharisees
and others by slighting holy offers and Ordinances of Grace, rejected the
counsel of God against themselves, Luke 7.30. This last especially brought the
curse, ver. 6. Some by Laws here understand the judicial Laws: by Ordinances
the ceremonial; and by everlasting Covenant the Decalogue: Others by Laws, the
municipal Laws of the Commonwealth: by Ordinances the Laws of Nations, as
not to violate an Ambassador, etc. by everlasting Covenant the Law of Nature,
which is that Light that lighteneth every man that comes into the world, John
1.9.

Ver. 6. Therefore has the curse devoured the earth] The Chaldee and Vatablus
render it the perjury, viz. in transgressing the Laws, etc. which they had
covenanted and sworn to observe; See Psalm 119.106. That dreadful curse of the
Jews, Matthew. 27.25. is come upon them to the utmost, devouring their Land, and
desolating the Inhabitants thereof: Though the curse causeless come not, yet
God sometimes says Amen to other men's curses, as he did to Jothams upon the
Shechemites, Judge. 9.57. How much more to men's banning themselves?

Ver. 7. The new wine mourneth] As being spilled and spoiled by the enemy.

All the merry-hearted do sigh] Who were wont to sing away care, and to call
for their cups.

Ver. 8. The mirth of Tabrets ceaseth] Quicquid laetitiarum fuit, in luctum
vertitur.

Ver. 9. They shall not drink wine with a song] Revel it as they had wont to
do* non convivabuntur pergroecando. We use to call such merry-griggs: that is,
Greeks.

Ver. 10. The City of confusion] Vrbs desolanda, destined to desolation:
whether it be Babylon, Tire, Jerusalem, or any other, Mundum intellige in quo
nihil nisi vanum, says Oecolampadius: that is, by this City of vanity (so the
Vulgar translateth it) understand the world, according to that of the Preacher,
Vanity of vanities, all is vanity. Austin in the beginning of that excellent
work of his De Civitate Dei makes two opposite Cities: the one the City of
God, the other the City of the Devil; the one a City of Verity, the other a
City of vanity.

Ver. 11. There is a crying for Wine] The Drunkards weep, the Ale-stakes yell,
because the new Wine is cut off from their mouths, Joel 1.5.

All joy is darkened] Heb. It is eventide with joy. As the air in the evening
waxes dark, so shall their mirth be turned into heaviness.

The mirth of the land is gone] Together with their liquor. (...).
Wine is by Simonides called the expeller of sadness.

Ver. 12. In the City is left desolation] There is nothing of any worth left,
but havoc made of all; it is plundered to the life, as now we phrase it; since
the Swedish Wars Custom is the sole Mint-Master of current words.

Ver. 13. When thus it shall be in the midst of the Land] Or, for so it shall
be in the land among the people, as in the beating of an Olive Tree, etc. En
misericordiae specimen, still there is a remnant reserved for royal use; quando
omnia passim pessum ^unt: God never so punishes but he leaves some matter for
his mercy to work upon: A Church on earth he will ever have.

Ver. 14. They shall lift up their voice, etc.] Laudabunt Deum and laetabuntur:
this Elect remnant in all Countries shall be filled with spiritual joy and
peace through the belief of the Truth, which shall vent it self by singing
praises to God. And here we have the very mark of the true Church, which is to
celebrate and profess the great and glorious Name of the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

For the Majesty of the Lord] Or, for the magnificence: that great work of his
especially of divulging his Gospel all the world over; and thereby gathering
his Church out of all Nations.

They shall cry aloud from the sea] i. e. From the Islands and transmarine
parts, as we do now from great Britain (thanks be unto God for his unspeakable
gift) calling to our Neighbour-nations, and saying,

Ver. 15. Glorify ye God in the fires] In ipsis ignibus, in the hottest fires
of afflictions, rejoice in hope, be patient in tribulation, praise God for
crosses also: this is Christianorum propria virtus, says Hierom.

Jun.
In the Isles of the sea] Quicunque quocunque loco, and inter quoscunq sitis.

Ver. 16. From the uttermost part of the land have we heard songs] Or Psalms,
aliquid Davidicum: The Martyrs sang in the fire; Luther in deep distress called
for the 46. Psalm to be sung in contemptum Diaboli, in despite of the Devil.

Maerore ac macie conficior.
Even glory to the Righteous] To Jesus the just One, 1 John 2.2.

But I said, my leanness, my leanness] The Prophets flesh was wasted and
consumed with care and grief for his graceless Countrymen. See the like in
David, Psalm 119.158. and Paul, Romans 9.1, 2.

Woe unto me] Or, Alas for me.

The treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously] They have crucified the Lord
of Glory, upon a desperate and deep malice, out of most notorious contumacy and
ingratitude. This was with most treacherous treachery to deal treacherously:
this was to do evil as they could.

Ver. 17. Fear and the pit and the snare are upon thee] Metaphora a
venatoribus, a Metaphor from Hunters, elegantly expressed in the original by
words of a like sound. God has variety of plagues at command: his quiver is
full of shafts: neither can he possibly want a Weapon to beat his Rebels with.
If the Amorites escape the Sword, yet they are brained with Hailstones, Josh.
10. If the Syrians get into a walled Town, yet there they are baned by the fall
of a Wall upon them, 1 King. 20.

Ver. 18. He who flees from the noise of the fear] See Am. 5, 19. with the
Note, and learn to fear God, the stroke of whose arm none may think to escape.

For the windows from on high are opened] The cataracts or sluices of the
clouds, as once in the general Deluge.

The foundations of the earth do shake] Heaven and earth shall fight against
them, and conspire to mischieve them.

Ver. 19. The earth is utterly broken down] This he had said before. Oil, if
not well rubbed in, pierces not the skin: Menaces must be inculcated, or else
they will be but little regarded. Let Preachers press matters to the utmost,
drive the nayl home to the head: not forbearing through faint-heartedness, nor
languishing through luke-warmness.

Ver. 20. The earth shall reel too and fro like a drunkard] As the Inhabitants
thereof had drunk in iniquity like water, Job 15.17. so they should now drink
and be drunk with the Cup of Gods wrath.

And shall be removed like a cottage] Or lodge, but or tent, so shall they be
tossed and tumbled from one place to another.

And the transgression] i. e. The punishment of your transgression. Observe
here the wages and the weight of sin.

Ver. 21. The Lord shall punish the host of the high-ones that are on high]
Altitudinis in excelso: Hereby he may mean the Jews Gods firstborn, and
therefore higher then the Kings of the earth, Psalm 89.27. though now for most
part degenerated, and therefore in the next words also heavily threatened: for
versum vicesimum primum secundus explicat, says Scultetus.

Ver. 22. And they shall be gathered together, etc.] Id quod de poenis
Judaeorum intelligimus, says an Interpreter: that is, This we understand of
the punishment of the obstinate Jews, whose bodies after death were clapped up
close prisoners in the grave, their souls held fast in hell till the last day:
when after many days they shall be visited, i. e. in the whole man punished,
with eternal torments. Caveamus, si sapimus, a destinata peccandi malitia.
Origin was certainly out when he argued from this Text, that the damned in Hell
should after a time be visited, that is, delivered. There are that begin the
promise at these words,

And after many days shall they be visited] i. e. In mercy and favor (as
chap. 23.17.) through Christ. This gracious visitation began in Israel, Luke
1.68. and then came abroad to the Gentiles also, Act. 15.14, 15.16, 17.

Ver. 23. Then the Moon shall be confounded] The glory of Christ's Kingdom shall
be so great, that in comparison of it the Sun and Moon shall cast no light. See
Isa. 54.11, etc. and 60.12.

When the Lord of hosts] The Lord Christ, summus coelitum Imperator.

And before his Ancients] The whole Church, and especially her Officers, which
are the glory of Christ, 2 Cor. 8.23.

CHAP. XXV.
Ver. 1. O Lord, thou art my God] Sunt verba fidelium in regno Christi, says
Piscator: These are the words of the Subjects of Christ's Kingdom, who in the
end of the former Chapter are called his Ancients or Elders: See Rev. 4.4. But
that of Oecolompadius I like better; More suo in jubilum and hymnum ^rumpit
Propheta. The Prophet as his manner is, breaks forth into a joyful
jubilation: and being ravished, and as it were rapt beyond himself with the
consideration of so marvelous things, he first makes a stop or breathing, and
then sweetly celebrateth Gods Power, Truth, Justice, and Mercy; the naked
bowels whereof were seen (as it were in an anatomy) in the sending of his Son,
and the benefits thereby: concerning which, the Apostles afterward discoursing
more plainly and plentifully, do yet make use of some passages in this Chapter,
as is to be seen, 1 Cor. 15. Rev. 7. and 21.

Thou art my God] So to say ex animo is the very pith of true Faith: the
property whereof is to individuate God, and appropriate him to it self.

I will exalt thee] This we do, when we bless and praise him for his blessings.
But what a mercy is it of so great a Majesty, that he should count himself thus
exalted and magnified by such worthless worms as we are? and how should this
excite and edge us to so holy a service?

For thou have done wonderful things] In the Worlds creation, but especially in
the Churches preservation.

Thy counsels of old] Thy promises and threatenings are all fulfilled and
verified: they are faithful and firm.

Ver. 2. For thou have made of a City an heap] Babylonem intelligit, say some.
Narratur eversio urbis Romae, say others: the ruin of Rome is here foretold:
(...). Sept.
which is therefore also, say they, called a palace of Strangers, because
Antichrist with his adherents reigns there. Hierom says, the Jews understand
it of Rome, which shall be in the end destroyed, and then their poor Nation
shall be relieved, as v. 4. It may be so.

Ver. 3. Therefore shall the strong people glorify thee] Will they, nill they,
they shall confess, as Julian did, that thou art too hard for them: and that
thy Church is invincible. Thus God wringeth out of the mouth of the wicked a
confession of his praises, and a counterfeit subjection, Isa. 60.14.

Ver. 4. For thou have been a strength to the poor, etc.] That is, Thou have
protected thy poor people from the persecution of the Antichristian rout, says
Piscator. Great is Gods mercy in succouring his oppressed ones: This is here
set forth by a double comparison: First

A refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, Christ is a shadow, etc. when
as all worldly comforts are but as so many burning-glasses to scorch the soul
more.
etc.] Where the Churches enemies are compared to raging waters that bear down
all before them: God to a place of refuge to fly unto. Secondly

Ver. 5. As the heat in a dry place] Where the insolency of these Strangers (
from the l^fe of God, the Antichristian rabble) the stir and ado they make, is
resembled to a heat and drought that does parch and scorch the godly: Gods
protection of his, to a thick shadow.

The branch of the terrible ones shall be brought low] Some read the Text thus:
As the heat (is ubated) with a thick shadow: So the song or chanting of the
terrible ones was abased: Others, the whole verse thus, As the heat in a
drought thou have brought down the stir of the strangers: heat, I say with the
shadow of a cloud, which (heat) did answer (a life) to the branch of the
terrible ones. That is (say they) served well their turn, and was most
commodious for the wicked, who think their branches spread and flourish, when
the Godly are scorched with calamities.

Ver. 6. And in this mountain] i. e. in the Church, Chap. 2.2. Gods Court,
chap. 24.23. as the Tablestood in the Sanctuary.

Shall the Lord of hosts make] Instead of that tree of life, in Paradise, See
Rev. 2.7.

Unto all people] i. e. To the Elect among all people: for reprobates are not
worthy, Mat. 22.8. with Rev. 3.4.

Convivium opimum, and munificentis. convivium medullatorum.
A feast of fat things] The very best of the best; fat things, and marrow of
fatness; wines, and the most refined; so that the meek shall eat and be
satisfied, Psalm. 22.16. Their soul shall delight it self in fatness, chap.
55.2. In the life to come, especially where there shall be solidum hujus
convivii complementum ac plena perfruitio. Meanwhile the Saints have here (at
the Lords Table especially) their dainties and junketting dishes, their
celestial viands, and most precious provisions, fat things marrowed, (as the
Hebrew word is) not only full of marrow, but picked, as it were, and culled out
of the heart of marrow: Wine, first in the lees that keeps the smell, taste
and vigor, Vina probantur odore, color, sapore, nitore. Convivium faecium,
Heb. Shemarim: faeces, enim vina ipsa conservant.
( Vinum Cos, as they call it) as Jer. 48.11. Next, of the finest and the best;
such as at Lovain they call Vinum Theologicum, because the Divines there (as
also the Sorbonists at Paris) drink much of it. Jesus Christ in his Ordinances
and Graces, is all this, and much more, Prove. 9.2. Mat. 22.2. and yet men had
rather, as Swine feed on swill and husks, then on these incomparable delicacies.

Ver. 7. And he will destroy in this mountain, etc.] Absorbebit velum faciei,
id est, faciem veli. Christ came a light into the world, that whosoever
believes on him, should not abide in darkness, Joh. 12.46. Faith freeth from
blindness; we no sooner taste of the bread of life by Faith, but the vail of
ignorance, which naturally covers all flesh, is torn: and men are suddenly
brought out of darkness into a marvelous light. 1 Pet. 2.9.
This is the first Elogy and noble commendation of the doctrine of the Gospel,
Light: there follow two more, viz. Life, and Joy spiritual ( chap. 35.6.) which
is the life of that life, ver. 8.

Ver. 8. He will swallow up death in victory] As the fire swalloweth up the
fuel: or as Moses's Serpent swallowed up the Sorcerers Serpents. The kisses of
Christ's mouth have sucked out the sting of death from a justified believer: so
that his heart does live for ever, as Psalm. 22.6. and if so, then in death it
self: which made Cyprian receive the sentence of death with a Deo gratias; as
did also Bradford, and many more Martyrs, accounting the days of their death
their Birth-days, and welcoming them accordingly. Hierom insults over death as
disarmed and devoured, Illius morte tu mortua es: Animasque in vulnere ponunt.
V^^g.
devorasti, and devorata es, etc. Ever since Death ran through the veins of
Jesus Christ, who is Life Essential, it is destroyed or swallowed up: like as
the Be dies, when she has left her sting in the wound. Hence Saint Paul does
so crow over death, and as it were, call it craven, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57.

And the Lord God w^ll wipe away] A Metaphor from a Mother.

And the rebuke of his people] Or, the reproach; their afflictions and
persecutions, for which the world reproacheth them.

Ver. 9. Lo this is our God] sc. Jesus Christ our sole Savior, who is God
blessed for ever; and our God by a specialty. Wait for him, for he waits to
be gracious, chap. 30.18.

Ver. 10. For in this mountain] In the Church, as ver. 6, 7.

Shall the hand of the Lord rest] i. e. settle for their safeguard.

Junius.
And Moab shall be trodden down] i. e. Contumax quisque and perversus hostis
Dei and Ecclesiae Piscator thinks Papists are here meant by these Moabites,
who were nearly allied to Gods Israel, but Ardeliones, bitter and brutish
enemies, skilful only to destroy, as Ezekiel. 21.31.

As straw for the dung-hil] Or, as straw in Madmenab, Jer. 48.2. God will make
an hand of all his peoples adversaries, as is here and in the following verses
set forth by three several Metaphors.

Ver. 11. And he shall spread forth his hands* etc. i. e. He shall destroy them
with greatest facility. The motion in swimming is easy, not strong: for strong
strokes in the water would rather sink then support. Vatablus referrs this to
Christ stretching out his hands upon the Cross, whereby he overcame Satan and
his Imps.

Together with the spoyls] Or, wiles of his hands, i. e. his wealth gotten by
wrench and wile, as we say.

Ver. 12. Shall he bring down, etc.] To show that there is no strength against
the Lord, the true (...).

CHAP. XXVI.
Ver. 1. IN that day] Before the morrow, and while the mercy was yet fresh. We
are not to take day for return of thanks, but to do it forthwith.

In that same day shall this song be sung] As an evidence and effect of their
spiritual joy and security, mentioned, chap. 25.9. Is any man merry? let him
sing Psalms, James 5.13. and so set an edge upon his praises and thanksgivings.
Thus Israel sang Exodus 15.1. and Numb. 21.7. Spring up O well: sing ye unto it.
Thus in the Apostles times, Romans 15.9. and afterward, Justin, Tertullian,
Athanasius, others, Socrates lib. 7. c. 22.
voce praeiverunt, gave the Note. Constantine and Theodosius ever sang Psalms
with their Soldiers, before they gave battle: They knew, that it is a good
thing to sing praises to our God: it is pleasant, and praise is comely, Psalm.
147.1.

We have a strong City] The Church is invincible: hell-gates cannot demolish
it, whatever became of Moabs munitions, chap. 25.12.

Salvation will God appoint] All manner of health, help, and safety. Satan
cannot have so many means to foyl and spoil the Saints, as Jesus (to whose
sweet name our Prophet here and elsewhere often alludeth, as much delighted
therewith) has means to keep and hold them up.

For walls and bulwarks] pro muris and antemurali, for walls, and rampart or
counterscarf. So Scipio was said to be fossa and vallum, the wall and trench to
the Romans against Hannibal. If Salvation it self cannot save Jerusalem, let
her enemies triumph, and take all. If her name be Jehovah-shammah, as Ezekiel.
48.35. The Lord is there, let her enemies do their worst.

Ver. 2. Open ye the gates] Room for the Righteous: for such only are freemen
of this City, Rev. 22.14. such only are written among the living in Jerusalem,
chap. 4.3, 4. Psalm. 118.19. And this seems spoken to those door-keepers the
Ministers, to whom God has committed the keys of his kingdom: setting them as
upon a watchtower to keep out enemies, and to let in the true Citizens.

That the righteous nation which keeps the truth] Heb. the truths, or faiths,
(as Peter has Godlinesses, 2 Pet. 3.11.) that both observes Christ's Law, and
preserves it; striving together for the Faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1.27. and
accounting every particle of Truth precious, Jude 3. And here we have a true
definition of a right Churchmember. Civil righteousness is but a beautiful
abomination. If men men lay not Faith for a foundation to their virtue, 2 Pet.
1.5. it is no better then a glistering sin.

Ver. 3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace] Heb. peace, peace, that is, a
multiplied peace with God, with himself, and with others; or a renewed,
continued peace, or a perfect, sheer pure peace, as One senseth it. What the
old Translatour here means by his Vetus error abiit, is hard to say. An
excellent description of true saving Faith may be taken from this Text: and Mr.
Bolton makes mention of a poor distressed soul relieved by fastening
steadfastly in his last sickness on these sweet words: saying that God had
graciously made them fully good to him.

Because he trusts in thee] So far as a soul can stay on and trust in God, so
far it enjoys a sweet peace, and calm of spirit: perfect trust is blessed
with perfect peace. We have a famous instance for this in our blessed Savior,
Joh. 12.27, 28. Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope
perfectly for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of
Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.13.

Ver. 4. Trust in the Lord for ever] To trust in God, is to be unbottom'd of
thy self and of every creature; and so to lean upon God, that if he fail thee,
thou sinkest.

For in the Lord Jehovah] Heb. for in Jah Jehovah: in him who is the
all-powerful Essentiator, and faithful promise-keeper, etc. Here then, look not
downward (says One) upon the rushing and roaring streams of miseries and
troubles which run so swiftly under us; for then we shall be taken with a
giddiness, etc. but steadfastly fasten on the power and promise of Jah Jehovah,
and ye shall be established.

Is everlasting strength] Heb. The rock of ages, or the old rock: so called of
old, Deuteronomy. 32, 4, 18, 31. and so found to be from the beginning: Et quia in
aeternum non mutat aut nutat erga pios, licet montes and colles nutent, Isa.
54.10. The name of the Lord is a strong Tower, Prove. 18.10. A munition of
rocks, Isa. 23 16. rocks so deep, no Pioner can undermine them; so thick, no
Cannon can pierce them; so high, no ladder can scale it.

Ver. 5. For he brings down those that dwell on high] Even all adverse power,
and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God* 2 Cor.
10.5.

The lofty City he lays it low] This, Musculus understands of Babylon, that
towering City; as also of Rome, that spiritual Babylon, to which it was long
since said, Versa eris in cineres quasi nunquam Roma fuisses.

Ver. 6. The foot shall tread it down] He says not the hand shall beat it
down, but the foot shall spurn down this lofty City, even the feet of the poor
and abject ones, as once Sampson dealt by the Philistines, Judge. 15.8. and as
men use to spurn base and pesantly fellows that stand in their way. God can and
sometimes does (to show his power and wisdom) make desolation it self to scale
a fort, Amos 5.10. Men thrust through, to rise up and set whole Cities a fire,
Jer. 37.10. bring to pass mighty things by base and abject means.

Ver. 7. The way of the just is uprightness] Heb. Vprightnesses, that is, just
and strait courses: They turn not aside to crooked and wry ways, as do the
workers of iniquity, Psalm. 125.5. but hold on in an even way without windings
or writhings, Prove. 4.26, 27. the Kings highway to heaven is their rode, and
this leads them to that City of God, ver. 1, 2.

Thou most upright do weigh the path of the just] Or, Thou do by levelling
make the just man's path even. By thy preventing grace thou make him just and
upright, and by thy subsequent grace thou strengthenest and directest him, that
he may run and not be weary, walk and not faint, Isa. 40.21.

Ver. 8. Yea in the way of thy judgments] Rough though it be, and rugged: even
when thou have wrought against us in the rigor of thy punishments, as One
paraphraseth it: in the discipline of thy chastisements, as Another: There are
that by this phrase understand the doctrine of the Gospel, which teaches
another way of judging of a righteous man then the Law does; and such as the
Church trusts to alone, and to none other, sc. Justification by Faith in
Christ Jesus.

Diod.
And to the remembrance of thee] i. e. to all the signs, gages, and
testimonials which thou have given us of thy Grace by thy Word, Sacraments and
Work.

Ver. 9. With my soul* etc. with my spirit] Spirit, Soul and Body must all be
for God, The wicked with all their soul rejoice to do evil. Ezekiel. 25.6. Attend
quam non sit otiosa fides. Oecol.
1 These. 5.23. all that is within us especially, Psalm. 103.1. the fat and
inwards were consecrated to him: the heart is his Bride-chamber, his bed of
spices, Cant. 6.2. In the lives of the Fathers mention is made of a certain
Monk to whom boasting of perfection, it was answered from heaven, Illa est
perfectio, quae Lunam, Solemn and Canis iram Deo tribuit, id est COR, that is,
Perfection consists in giving the whole heart to God.

For when thy judgments are in the earth, etc.] Gods judgments are the best
Schoolmasters. Q. Elizabeth learned much from Mr. Ascham, but more from her
affliction. Our Savior himself learned something by the things which he
suffered, (...), Heb. 5.8. so do all his Members, Ezekiel. 20.37. the worst are
forced to say with Phlegyas, Virg. Aeneid. lib. 6.
Discite justitiam moniti, and non temnere numen.

It was a true saying in the general of the Proconsul to Cyprian at his
Martyrdom, though ill applied to him in particular; In sanguine tuo caeteri
descent Disciplinam, by thy punishment others shall learn wisdom. As when one
Scholar is whipped, the rest are warned: And as a thunderbolt falls with the
danger of few, but with the fear of all: so is it here.

Ver. 10. Let favor be showed to the wicked, etc.] No fair means will work
upon him, whatever foul may do. But as an evil stomach turns good meat into
bad humors; so here, all is lost that is laid out upon them.

Vngentem pungit, pungentem rusticus ungit. In the land of uprightness will he
deal unjustly] In the Church where Righteousness reigns. Or, in a land of
evenness he will wry and stray. Ye all know, (says holy Bradford in a certain
letter of his) there was never more knowledge of God ( viz. in good King Edward
6. his days) and less godly living and true serving of God. Act. and Mon.
It was counted a folly to serve God sincerely: and earnest prayer was not past
upon. Preaching was but pastime: Communion was counted too common, etc.

And will not behold the Majesty of the Lord] Or, and he shall not see the
Majesty of the Lord, sc. in his heavenly kingdom, Heb. 12.14.

Ver. 11. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see] i. e. Observe,
consider, and take warning: let Gods hand be never so high and glorious, so
lifted up and exalted, yet these Buzzards will not behold his Majesty, as ver.
10. as being more blind then Moles, more deaf then Sea Monsters, they refuse to
regard ought.

But they shall see and be confounded] But yet, maugre their head, (as One well
paraphraseth the words) they shall be driven both to see, and to acknowledge to
their shame, the great and mighty hand of God, his zeal for his people, and the
fire of his wrath to consume his foes: See Zach. 1.15, 14. experientur suo
magno malo, they shall to their cost, feel the weight of Gods hand, which the
higher it is lifeed, the heavier it will light at length. Mrs. Hutchinson,
Story of Sect. in New Engl. by Mr. Weid. page 44.
that Jezabel of New England, as she had vented about thirty misshapen opinions
there, so she brought forth about thirty deformed monsters. She and her family
were after this (because they would not be reclaimed, but turned off
admonition, saying, This is for you, ye Legalists that your eyes might be
further blinded by Gods hand upon us, in your Legal ways, etc.) slain (some
say burnt) by the Indians who never used to exercise such an outrage upon any.

Ver. 12. Lord, thou will ordain peace for us] Or. Lord, dispose peace for us.

For thou also have wrought all our works in us] Or, for us, Certum est nos
facere quod facimus, sed Deus facit ut faciamus: without Christ we can do
nothing, Ioh. 15.5. In him alone is our fruit found, Hos. 14.8. It is well
observed by a grave Interpreter, that the Church in the Canticles is nowhere
described by the beauty of her hands or fingers, because God alone works all
her works for her: and had rather that she should abound in good works in
silence, then to boast of them at all.

Ver. 13. O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have had dominion over us]
Or, have mastered us: Oh that men were so sensible of their spiritual
servitude, as thus to complain thereof to Jesus Christ! But alas they do
nothing less for most part, delighting on the Devils drudgery, which they count
the only liberty, and dancing, as it were, to hell in their bolts.

Will we make mention of thy name] For which end we would not be the servants
of men (much less the slaves of Satan, 1 Cor. 7.27.
that basest of slaves) but the freemen of Christ: where the spirit is, there
is liberty; and if the Son set us free, Joh. 8.
we shall be free indeed.

Ver. 14. They are dead] Those other Lords of ours are, ( ver. 13.) But seldom
lies the devil dead in a dyke, says our proverb: yet he and his agents have
their deadly wound, and shall be trodden under our feet shortly, Romans 16.20. Oh
groan in spirit after that sweet day of full redemption, etc.

Therefore thou have visited] Or, because thou have visited. Woe be to a person
or people, when God takes them to do.

Ver. 15. Thou have increased the Nation] That righteous Nation which keeps
the truth, ver. 2. Some render and sense the words thus, Thou have indeed
increased the Nation, sc. of the Jews, thou had done it (O sweet mercy, I am
the better to speak of it, and therefore I speak it twice) but thou wast
heavy-laden, sc. with their sins: therefore thou have removed it far unto all
the ends of the Earth. Who knows not what a dispersed and despised people the
Jews are in all places, banished as it were out of the world by a common
consent of Nations: Be not therefore high-minded, but fear.

Ver. 16. Lord, in trouble have they visited thee] Pulcherrimus afflictationum
fructus, precandi ardor and assiduitas. Affliction exciteth devotion, as
blowing does the fire. Christ in his agony prayed most earnestly, Luke 22.44.
Martha and Mary when their Brother Lazarus was sick, sent Messengers to Jesus,
Joh. 11.3. quos putas nisi suspiria continuata, nisi prece^ irremissas, says
Scultetus: i. e. what were those Messengers but their continued groans, and
earnest prayers? See Hos. 5.15. with the Note. Prayer is the Daughter of
affliction, and the Mother of comfort.

Not dropped but poured: not prayers but a prayer; one continual act: and as in
the speaking of three or four words there is much efficacy in a charm, so their
prayers were very prevalent.
They poured out] Freely and largely, and well-watered, as 1 Samuel 1.10. and
7.6. ver. 9.1.

A prayer] Heb. A charm, a mussitation, a submiss and lowly speech. Spells and
Enchantments were conceived to be full of efficacy, containing much in few;
think the same of prayer. But how much was he mistaken in this kind of charm or
spell, who would haunt the Taverns, Play Houses and Whore houses at London all
day, but he durst not go forth without private prayer in the morning: and then
would say at his departure, Now Devil, do thy worst.

Ver. 17. So have we been in thy sight] Heb. From thy face, i. e. By reason of
thy wrath. So 2 These. 1.9. who shall be punished from the presence of God, that
is, of God himself present to their terror.

Ver. 18. We have been with child] With diverse devices and hopes, which yet
have miscarryed and run aslope. See Job 15.35. with the Note there.

We have as it were brought forth wind] As did Queen Mary, to her own great
grief, and the disappointment of her Expectants; Dale the promoter for
instance: Well (quoth he at the apprehending of Julian Living) You hope and
hope, but your hope shall be aslope. For although the Queens conceptions should
still fail (as they did) yet she that you hope for shall never come at it; for
there is my Lord Cardinals grace and many more between her, Act. and Mon. fol.
1871.
and it. But my Lord Cardinals grace departed the very next day after Queen
Mary, Ib. 1905.
having taken, as it is thought, some Italian Physic, and Queen Elizabeth
succeeded in the Throne to the great joy of all good men.

Ver. 19. Thy dead men shall rise] So shall not thine enemies, ver. 14. This
may seem to be Christ's gracious answer to his poor desponding people: and it
is, say some, argumentum a beata Resurrections sumptum, an argument taken from
the happy resurrection of the righteous; the wicked also shall be raised at the
last day, but not by the like means, nor for the like blessed purpose, Dan.
12.2. Some read the words thus, Thy dead, my dead body shall live; for the
faithful, say they, are Christ's body, Ephesians. 4.12. and therefore to show this, My
dead body is here added by Apposition; to show how the faithful being dead and
buried, are to be accounted of, even Christ's dead body, etc. and shall be
raised at the last day, by virtue of that mystical union which still they hold
with Christ. Hence they are said to sleep in Jesus, to be dead in Christ, Phil.
3.21.
who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all
things unto himself. The Hebrews call a dead corpse Nephesh, i. e. a soul,
Numb. 5.2. and 9, 10. and 19.11. Hag. 2.14. to note that it shall live again,
and that the soul shall return to it. At this day also they call the
Churchyard Bethcaiim the house of the living: Leo Modena Hist. of Rites of the
Jews, page 238.
and as they return from the burial-place, every one plucks off grass from off
the ground twice or thrice, and casts it over his head saying, florebunt de
civitate tanquam foenum terrae, etc. Psalm. 92.12, 13. so to set forth their
hopes of a resurrection. Neither need it seem incredible with any that God
should raise the dead. Acts 26.8. considering what follows: 1. Together with
my dead body shall they arise, i. e. with Christ's body raised as the first
fruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15. One of the Rabbis reads it, As my dead
body, they shall arise. 2. The force of Christ's all-powerful voice, saying,
Awake and sing ye that dwell in dust: Arise and come away, lift up your heads
for your Redemption is at hand. The Resurrection is in the Syriack called the
Consolation, Joh. 11.24. 3. Thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall
cast out the dead, i. e. Qua facilitate herbulas reficit Deus, eadem mortuos
animare potest. God can as easily raise the dead, as refresh the herbs of the
earth with a reviving dew, when they were even scorched to death with the heat
of the Sun. See we not a yearly resurrection of grass, grain, flowers, fruits
every Springtide: And surely if Nature can produce out of a small seed a great
Tree, or a Butter-fly out of a worm, or the beautiful featherd Peacock out of a
misshapen egg, cannot the Almighty raise our bodies out of dust, who first out
of dust made them? or can the condition of any people or person be so
desperate, that he is not able to help them out? The assurance of Gods power
which shall show it self in the raising of the dead, is a most excellent
argument to confirm us in the certainty of Gods Promises, seem they never so
incredible to flesh and blood. Atque haec de Cantico.

Ver. 20. Come my people] Thus God lovingly bespeaketh his, as leading them by
the hand to an hiding place of his providing. So he shut up Noah in the Ark,
secured Lot in Zoar, hid Jeremy and Baruch when sought for to the slaughter:
bade Daniel to go away and rest before those great troubles foretold, chap.
12.13. Austin and Paraeus died a little before Hippo and Heidelberg were taken.
So did Luther before the bloody wars of Germany. For Mr. Brightman, a
Pursuivant was sent, Life of K. James by Wilson.
a day or two after he was buried. The burying place is not unfitly called
(...), a resting room to the Saints, the grave a bed, Isa. 57.2. the bier that
carries men to it, Matteh, i. e. a pallet, 2 Samuel 3.31. Lyra and others by
Chambers here understand the graves, (Confer Rev. 6.11. Joh. 16.33.) those
chambers of rest, and beds of down to the bodies of the Saints, until the last
day. There are that by chambers, will have meant the closets of Gods Providence
and Protection, such as Pella was to the Primitive Christians. Hitherto the
Saints are exhorted to retire till the storm be over, the enemy gone, the
destroying Angel passed over, as Exodus 12.12. possessing their souls in
patience.

As it were for a little moment] Heb. A little af a moment. Nubecula est, Sozom
lib. 15. cap. 5.
cito transibit, as Athanasius said when persecuted by Julian, This storm will
soon blow over: this indignation does not transire, but pertransire, pass, but
pass a pace.

Ver. 21. For behold] This is as a crier to prepare attention.

The Lord comes out of his place] Here God compares himself to a Prince upon
his Throne, who goes from his place of State into Countries, to quiet mutinies
and rebellions among his people.

The earth also shall disclose her blood] Murder shall out: oppression,
whether by force or fraud, shall be certainly and severely punished: See Job
16.8. See an instance hereof in Leviathan, chap. 27.1. whether you understand
it of the Devil that old manslayer, as Many Ancients do: or else the Kings of
the Nations, and especially of the Turks, as some Rabbis.

CHAP. XXVII.
Ver. 1. IN that day] The day of Gods great Assize, and of execution to be done
on the enemy and the Avenger, chap. 26.21. Now we know how well people are
pleased, when Princes do Justice upon great Offenders.

The Lord with his sore, and great, and strong Sword] Heb. With his Sword, that
hard or heavy one, and that great one, and that strong one: that is, with his
Word, says Oecolampadius, who by Leviathan here understands the Devil, who
is elsewhere also called the Serpent and the great dragon, Rev. 12.9. and 20.2.
But they do better in my Judgment, who by Leviathan here understand some great
Tyrant, acted by the Devil against the Church: such as was Pharaoh, see Ezekiel.
29.3. Sennacherib, see chap. 8.7. or Nebuchadnezzar, see Jer. 51.13. and at
this day, the Grand Signior, who has swallowed up countries, as the Leviathan
or the Whale does fishes: For in the greatness of his Empire is swallowed up
both the Name and Empire of the Sarasines, the most glorious Empire of the
Greeks, the Empire of Trapezonum, the renowned Kingdoms of Macedonia,
Peloponnesus, Epirus, Bulgaria, Servia, Bosna, Armenia, Cyprus, Syria, Egypt,
Judea, Tunis, Argeirs, Media, Mesopotomia, with a great part of Hungary, as
also of the Persian Kingdom. His Territories do somewhat resemble a long and
winding Serpent, as some learned men have observed: and for the slights and
might which he uses against Christians still, who knows them not out of the
Turkish story? God therefore will shortly take him to do: sharpening happily the
Swords of men (as he has lately and marvellously done of the Venetians) as
instrumental to ruin this vast Empire, which labors with nothing more then
the weightiness of it self.

Jun.
And he shall slay the Dragon that is in the sea] i. In fluctuante hujus
saeculi aestuario. Of the strange length of Dragons, see Aelian. l. 2. c. 21.
and Plin. l. 8. c. 11. In the last year of the reign of Theodosius senior there
was a Dragon seen in Epirus of that vast bigness, that when he was dead, eight
yokes of Oxen could hardly draw him. By Dragon, some understand the same with
Leviathan, v^z. the Whale or Whirlpool. The Dragon is never satisfied with
blood, though never so full gorged: no more are Persecutors.

Ver. 2. In that day sing ye to her] Or, of her: a new song for a new
deliverance. Happily this shall be done by the Christian Churches upon the
conversion of the Jews, after the Turks downfall: like as at the building of
the second Temple, the people sang and shouted Grace Grace unto it, Zech. 4, 7.

A Vineyard of red Wine] i. e. Of rich and generous Wine, Vini meri, non
labruscarum, ut cap. 5. See Prove. 23.31. Genesis 49.22. By this red wine
Oecolampadius understands Christ's blood, wherewith the Church is purged and
beautified. Sanguis Christi venustavit genas meas, said a certain good woman, a
Martyr.

Ver. 3. I the Lord do keep it] And then it cannot but be well kept. The matter
is well amended with Gods Vineyard since chap. 5.5. The Lord is with you whiles
ye are with him, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The hand of our God is upon all them for good
that seek him: but his power and his wrath is against all them that forsake
him. Ezra 8.12. Do good O Lord, unto those that be good, etc. As for such as
turn aside unto their crooked ways, etc. Psalm. 125.4, 5.

I will water it every moment] God will be to his Vineyard both a Wall and a
Well; a Sun and a Shield; as Psalm. 84.11. all that heart can wish, or need
require. Of all possessions, says Cato, none requires more care and pains,
then that of Vineyards. Corn comes up, and grows alone, Mar. 3. but vines must
be daily dressed, fenced, supported, In Philip.
watered. Plantas tenellas frequentius adaquare proderit, says Primasius. Young
Vines must be often watered: Gods Vines shall not want for watering, though
once he forbad the clouds to rain upon them, chap. 5.6. He has not been
wanting to England either for watching or for watering it. We may now much
better say of it, then once Polydor Virgil did, Regnum Angliae Regnum Dei: he
meant because none seemed to take care of England, but God. He grant we may at
length walk worthy of such a mercy: Amen. The Vulgar here renders it, but not
so well Repent propinabo ei, I will shortly drink to her.

Lest any hurt it] Heb. Lest he visit on it: left any profane person should
rudely and unmannerly rush upon it, he gardeth it constantly.

Ver. 4. Fury is not in me] Whatever you may think of me, because of my many
dreadful menaces, and your heavy calamities; Non est in me sed in vobis culpa
istarum calami, atum: the fault is not in me but in your selves: do you but
mend, and all shall be soon well betwixt us. It is but displeased love that
makes me chide or strike my dear children; Lop my Vines, Vt bonus Vinitor
Vites luxuriantes falce putat and purgat, (...), Job. 15.2. leases and
luxuriances must be taken off, or it will be worse. Better the Vine should
bleed, then die: better be preserved in brine, then perish in honey. But assure
your selves I am not implacable: as your sins have put thunderbolts into my
hands, so by sound repentance you may soon disarm me.

Who would set the briars and thorns] Gods Vineyard is not without briars and
thorns, his Field without tares, his Church without Hypocrites, which prick God
and his people, galling them to the heart. These he will make an hand of, take
an order with, by treading them down and burning them up; especially if once
they shall be so mad and mankind, as they say, as to bid him battle; See Job.
9.4. with the Note.

I would burn them together] Or, I will burn them out of it; See 2 Samuel 23.7.
with the Note.

Ver 5. Or let him take hold of my strength] i. Of mine arm wherewith I am
about to smite him, or to throw the fire of my wrath at him; let him by true
repentance, appease me, as submitting Abigail once did angry David: let him but
meet me with entreaties of peace, and he shall have peace, yea he shall be sure
of it. See Job 22.21. with the Notes. To run in to God, is the way to escape
sin: as to close and get in with him that would strike you, does avoid the blow.

Ver. 6. He shall cause them that come to Jacob] i. e. His Proselytes; Or, that
come from Jacob. i. e. his Posterity. Vitium hoec conditio est, the condition
of Vines is such as that they must undergo cold blasts and hard winters:
howbeit at the return of the Spring they recover their verdure, and flourish
again; so shall the seed of Jacob: their dead shall live, chap. 26. and the
mountain of the Lord shall be exalted above all mountains, chap. 2.

Ver. 7. Has he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him] No: for the one
he smote to correction, the other to destruction: the one with the Palm of his
Hand, as a man smites his Son, the other with his clutch-fist, as one smites
his slave whom he cares not where he hits, or how he hurts. Temporal evils are
in the nature sometimes of a curse, sometimes of a cure. Hinc distinctio illa
poenae in conferentem and nocentem, sive in suffocantem and promoventem: item
in poenam vindicta, and poenam cautelae, sive in condemnantem and corrigentem.

Ver. 8. In measure] Heb. Modio, i. e. exigua mensura, in a small measure, By
peck-peck.
and as his people are able to bear, 1 Cor. 10.13. ad emendationem, non ad
internecionem.

When it shoots forth] Or, in the bunches; not at the root, as God smites at
a wicked man resolving to have him down. See here his different dealing with
his own and others. Upon his children he does but sprinkle a parcel of his
wrath, some few sparks of his displeasure: but the wicked he utterly consumes
and burns up with the fire of his indignation, Isa. 42.25. and 66.15.

Thou will debate with it] Dijudicabis thou will put a difference, or discern
betwixt the righteous and the wicked, Mal. 3.18. D Goodw. flagella tantum
quaedam decutiuntur. Scultet.


He stays his rough wind, etc.] i. e. Such afflictions as would shake his
plants too much, or quite blow them down. But he lets out of his treasury,
even He who holds the winds in his fist) such a wind as shall make them
fruitful, and blow away their unkindly blossoms and leaves.

In the day of the East-wind] That boisterous and blasting and blustering wind.
Hinc Euroclydon, Acts 27.14.

Ver. 9. By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged] Hac re, i. e.
deportatione in Babyloniam, says Piscator: By this, that is, by their being
carried captive into Babylon, as it was made a means to bring the Elect to
repentance. As one poison is antidotary to another: so is Affliction to sin.
Crosses are Leeches to suck out the noxious blood: Flails to thresh off our
husks: Files to brighten out graces, etc. Sanctfied afflictions (said Mr. Dod)
are good promotions. Corrections of Instructions are the way of life, Prove.
16.23. For though not joyous but grievous at present, yet afterward they yield
the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them that are thereby exercised, Heb.
12.11. It fares with Gods afflicted, as it did once with those that had the
swearing sickness in this land; If they slept they died: To keep them waking
therefore, they were smitten with Rosemary-branches: whereat though they cried
out, you kill me, you kill me, yet it proved a happy means to keep them alive.
It was good for David that he was afflicted, Psalm. 119.71. it rid him of those
two evil humors, High mindedness and Earthly-mindedness, Psalm. 131.1.

And this is all the fruit] Gods rod, like Aarons, blossometh: and like that of
Jonathan, it has honey at the end of it. A good use and a good issue of
afflictions is ever to be prayed for. I read of a gracious man, who lying under
great torments of the Stone, would often cry out, The use, Lord, the use! And
Mr. Perkins in like case desired his friends to pray to God not so much for
ease of his pain, as for increase of his faith and patience. Perdidisti fructum
afflictionum, said Austin to some in his time, and it was a great loss
doubtless.

To take away his sin] The sin, not the man: D. Goodw.
See Psalm. 99.8. A leprous or ulcerous member, a man loves as it is his own
flesh, Ephesians. 5.29. though he loatheth the corruption and putrefaction that is
in it; therefore he cuts it not off, but plaistereth it: whereas a Wart or Wen
he cutteth off, as not his flesh: so here.

When he makes all the stones of the Altar as Chalk-stones] When he, that is
Jacob, in token of his true repentance, abandoneth all his mawmets and
monuments of idolatry, and them abolisheth and demolisheth, so as never to be
re-edified. The Jews after the captivity were so far from idolatry, that, they
would not admit a Painter or Carver into their City. And how zealous they were
to keep their Temple from such defilement both in the time of Antiochus
Epiphanes, and of the Romans, Histories show us.

Ver. 10. Yet the defenced City shall be desolate] Or, But, or Therefore shall
they suffer, ut ad saniorem mentem and ad frugem calamitesi redeant, that they
may be thereby bettered: See on ver. 9.

Ver. 11. For it is a people of no understanding] Heb. Not a people of
understandings, i. e. non sapiunt nisi plagis emendentur, they will not be wise
without whipping: I must therefore handle them the more sharply and severely.
Castigat Deus quem amat, etiamsi non amat castigare.

Therefore he that made them] Deus factor ejus and fictor. A fearful sentence:
such as should affright those many Ignaro's that say, God that made us will
surely save us.

Ver. 12. In that day] sc. When God shall have purged his people by his Word,
and by his Rod.

The Lord shall beat off] Or, shall thresh: The Ministry of the Word is Gods
Flail to sever the Chaff from Corn: to single his out of the midst of wicked
and profane worldlings. See the like of Afflictions sanctified, ver. 9.

And ye shall be gathered] As Ears of Corn are for threshing.

One by one] There is no thresher in the world (says one here) that thresheth
half so clean: for he loses not one grain. See Joh. 17, 12. and 10.3. Christ
has a care of every one particularly and by the poll; some gather from hence
that the calling of the Jews shall be general and universal.

Ver. 13. The great Trumpet shall be blown] Or, a blast shall be blown with a
great trumpet. Tuba haec magna Apostolica praedicatio est, says Oecolampadius.
This great trumpet is the Gospel the preaching whereof is of power to save
those that perish, to put life into the dead, Joh. 5.25.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Ver. 1. VVO to the crown of pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim] Drunkenness is
a sin, at the heel whereof hangs many a Woe. Some think it is a dry
drunkenness that is here threatened (that there is a dry drunkenness as well as
a wet; see chap. 51.21. 2 Timothy 2.26. (...) that they may awake out of their
drunken sleep) a drunkenness with prosperity, which made them proud and
dissolute, even the King of Israel and his Counselors also; not considering
that in maxima liberate minima est licentia; It is not for Kings to drink
wine, Prove. 31.4.

Whose glorious beauty is a fading flower] Or, and to the fading flower of his
goodly gallantry. Some conceive that the Prophet here alludeth to the
Etymology of the word Ephraim, whereof see Genesis 41.42. but Ephraim was now
declining and decaying.

(...) Crapula, (...).
That are overcome with wine] Heb. smitten, beaten, overmastered, as Sisera was
by Jaels hammer, which has its name from the word here used, Judges 4.23.
Tremellius renders it, Obtusis vino, to those that are blunted with wine, or
beaten about ears with it.

Ver. 2. Behold the Lord has a mighty and a strong One] viz. Salmaneser King
of Assyria. For whereas Ephraim might say, Who is there that can or dare pull
off the flower of our goodly gallantry? God answers that he has at hand One
that can do it; The Romans pictured Pride with a triple crown: on the first
crown was written, Transcendo, on the next, Non obedio, on the third, Perturbo.
and do it with a turn of a hand, with little ado.

Ver. 3. The Crown of pride -- shall be trodden under foot] This notes utmost
ignominy. Finge ideam animo, says one here: imagine you saw Salmantser pulling
the Crown from the King of Isreal's head, throwing it to the ground, and then
trampling on it. What brave Rhetoric is here?

Ver. 4. As the hasty fruit] quasi primae and praematurae ficus, rath-ripe
fruits much coveted and caught at.

Ver. 5. For a Crown of glory and for a diadem of beauty] so he was to Judah
alled here the residue of his people) during Hezekiahs days; a crown unfading
or a garland made of Amaranth (as 1 Pet. 1.4.) which is, says Clemens, a
certain flower that being hung up in the house, yet is still fresh and green.
And as God is thus to his people, so (enterchangeably) are they to him a crown
of glory, Isa. 62.3. and a royal diadem, ib. his throne of glory, Jer. 4.21.
The beauty of his Ornament, Ezekiel. 7.20.

Ver. 6. And for a spirit of judgement] A sagacity more then ordinary^: in
regard whereof Solomon calls the Kings doom a divination, Prove. 16.10. as is
well observed.

And for strength to them, etc.] In this verse we have the description of an
happy State, governed justly at home, Diod.
and able abroad to resist any endeavor of the enemy.

Ver. 7. But they also have erred through wine] Judah had caught this disease
of Ephraim, as the English are said to have done of the drunken Dutchmen. Sin
is more contagious and catching then the plague. The Hebrew word imports an
alienation of mind, Prove. 20.1. Hos. 11. Jer. 23.9. Vino sapientia obscuratur,
said Alphonsus King of Arragon.

They are swallowed up of wine, they are out of the way through strong drink]
Errarunt propter Shecar: they are buckt in beer, they are drowned in drink;
like as George Duke of Clarence was drowned in a out of Malmsey by his own
election: Nam sicut athletico potore dignum erat, ut potando moreretur, elegit,
says mine Author; for being condemned to die by his brother King Edward the
fourth, he chose that kind of death, as became a stout drunkard.

They err in vision] the Prophets do.

They stumble in judgement] the Priests do; for they were to interpret the law,
and to decide differences. Drunkenness in Rulers is a capital sin, and makes
the land reel.

Ver. 8. For all places are full of vomit and filthiness, Vah, vah, vah: Cum tu
Narbone mensas hospitum convomeres, said Tully to Antony; who was not ashamed
likewise to write, or rather to spue out a book concerning his own great
strength to bear strong drink, and to lay up others who strove with him for the
mastery. Tully taxes Julius Caesar for this soul custom: so does Philo
Caligula, Veniunt ut edant, edunt ut vomant. Senec.
and Suetonius Vitellius.

Ver. 9. Whom shall he teach knowledge?] Quem docebit scientiam? Doceo
governs two Accusative cases. Ministers must have 1. Quem, whom to teach: and
2. Quid, what to teach, sc. Knowledge. Isaiah had no want of knowledge, as
being apt and able to teach, but he wanted a fit Audience, as having to do with
a sort of drunken sots that were unteachable, incapable. So Ezekiel. 47.11. when
the waters of the Sanctuary flowed, the miry places could not be healed. Think
the same also of those that are drunk with pride (as ver. 1.) and
self-conceitedness, who make Divinity only a matter of discourse, or that come
to sit as Judges or Critics on their Ministers gifts, etc. It will be long
enough ere such will be taught any thing. One may as good undertake to teach a
young weanling void of understanding; and in some respects better; for these to
their natural corruption and impotency have added habitual hardness and
obstinacy, to their sinews of iron, brows of brass, Isaiah 48.4. and what hope
can there be of working upon such?

Ver. 10. For precept must be upon precept] Children are of weak understanding,
and of short memories; and Hebraei dicunt hisce verbis infantilitatem
significari, they must also have short words and sentences prescribed unto them
(such as are kau and flau) and inculcated upon them, that something at least
may stick: so must most of our Hearers, or little good will be done, Deuteronomy. 6.7.
thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children, Heb. thou shall whet or
repeat them by often going over the same thing, as the knife goes over the
whetstone till it be sharp. But very many of our common hearers are not only
unteachable, but untameable, deriding sound doctrine, and making a mocking
stock of their godliest Ministers. And so some very good Expositors, haec (...)
and (...) a Prophetadici tradunt, make these words here recited to be the
scoffs and taunts of those profane mockers, ver. 14. and 22. which they put
upon the Prophet; q. d. We have nothing but rule upon rule, precept upon
precept, etc. Zaulazau, kau lakau, the very sound of the words carries a jear;
like as scornful people by the tone of their voice and riming words, scorn at
such as they despise: Thus this good Prophet became the drunkards song. Any man
may be witty in a biting way: and those that have the dullest brains, have
commonly the sharpest teeth to that purpose. Rightly said the Comedian, Homine
imperito nunquam quicquam injustius;
Terent.
Qui, nisi quod ipse fecit, nihil rectum putat.


Ver. 11. For with stammering lips, etc.] with a lisping lip, Heb. with scoffs
of lip, or with language of mocks. Surely God scorneth the scorners, Prove.
3.34. for he loves to retaliate and proportion choice to choice, Isa. 66.3, 4
device to device, Micah 2.1.3. frowardness to forwardness, Psalm. 18.26.
scoffing to scoffing, Prove. 1.25.26.

And with another tongue] lingua exotica, such as they shall be no whit the
better for; see 1 Cor. 14.21. We read of John Elmar Bishop of London in Queen
Elizabeth's reign, that on a time when he saw his Auditory grow dull in their
attention to his Sermon, he presently read unto them many verses out of the
Hebrew Text: whereat they all started, admiring what use he meant to make
thereof: then showed he them their folly, that whereas they neglected English,
whereby they might be edifyed, they listened to Hebrew whereof they understood
not a word: and how justly God might bring in Popery again (with Latin
service, blind obedience, and dumb offices) for their contempt of the Gospel.

Ver. 12. To whom he said, This is the rest] i. e. the ready way to find rest
to your souls, as Mat. 11.28, 29. sc. by obeying my precepts, and embracing my
promises.

Wherewith ye may cause the weary to rest] i. e. Me who am pressed by your
sins, Amos 2.13. and wearied out with your iniquities, Isa 43.24. or your poor
brethren tired with miseries, or your own souls laden with sin guiltiness.

Ver. 13. But the word of God was unto them precept upon precept, etc.] i. e. a
derision, as ver. 10. therefore henceforth hearing they shall hear and not
understand: Sic Sanniones Deus punit.

That they may go and fall backward] ut vadant and cadant retrorsum, tanquam
turpiter ab host superati and resuperati, laid flat on their backs, brought to
remediless ruin. This came of their obstinacy; though not intentionally, yet
eventually.

Ver. 14. Wherefore hear the word of the Lord] Stand forth and hear your doom,
ye that jear when you should fear, as if ye were out of the reach of Gods rod.

Ye scornful men] Heb. ye men of mockage, ye who mock at the word of God by
your words, deeds and gestures; quales sycophantas quotidie videmus, of which
sort we find not a few now a days; such dust-heaps as these we have in every
corner, men that have turned religion not only into a form but also into a
scorn, accounting the wisdom of God foolishness. (...)
These Saint Peter calls scoffers, or such as make sport with the word, 2
Pet. 3.3. And the Prophet here uno verbo multa peccata exprimit, dum Illusores
nominat, in calling them mockers, calls them all that naught is.

That rule the people] such as Shebna now was, and afterward Tobiah, Neh.
2.19. Herod, Domitian, Julian, Sr. Thomas Moor, etc.

Ver. 15. Because ye have said] i. e. ye have thought and reckoned so, but
without your host, as they say, Jer. 6.19. Hear O earth, behold I will bring
evil upon this people, even the fruit of their thoughts.

We have made a covenant with death] Nos ab omni malo sumus securissimi:
Thrasonicae hyperbolae, we are shot-free and shall escape scotfree: Beckets
friends advised him (for his security) to have a Mass in honor of St. Stephen,
to keep him from the hands of his enemies: Spencer.
He had so, but it saved him not: As not to have been dipped in Lethe-lake, could
save the Son of Thetis from to dye, etc.

And with hell are we at agreement] Heb. we have made provision, or taken
order, egimus cantum. The Prophets tell us a tale of death and hell, but we
shall yet dance upon their graves; and for hell we fear it not. The Lion is not
so fierce as he is painted, nor the Devil so black as he is represented.
Diabolo optime convenit cum lurconib us. Good-fellows shall have good quarter
with the Devil, say our modern Atheists. But what a mad fellow was that
Advocate in the Court of Rome mentioned by Bellarmine, who lying at his last
gasp almost, and being called upon to repent and cry to God for mercy, prayed
thus; O Lord, I have much desired to speak one word unto thee before I dye, not
for my self, but for my wife and children: ego enim propero ad inferos, neque
est ut aliquid pro me agas; for I am hasting to hell, neither is there any
thing now to be done by thee for me? De art mor. lib. 2. cap. 10.
And this he spoke (says Bellarmine who was by and heard it) with as much
confidence, as if he were but traveling to the next town.

When the overflowing scourge shall pass thorough] to sweep away such as are
drowned in drunkenness and dread no danger.

It shall not come to us] whatever the Prophets prate: let them say as they
please, we will believe as we list.

For we have made lies our refuge] a poor refuge: for tenue mendacium pellucot,
lies are so thin they may be seen thorough; but it may be that they called
their false refuges lies, not because they held them so, but because the
Prophets called them so: whereas to themselves they seemed prudent counsels.

Ver. 16. Therefore thus says the Lord God] This is purposely prefaced for the
support of the faithful, when they should hear the ensuing dreadful
denunciations, and see them executed. We cannot beat the dogs but the children
will be ready to cry.

For a foundation a stone] firm and fast, opposed here to the fickle stays and
vain fastnesses of wicked worldlings: this foundation-stone is Christ, Romans
9.33. and 10.11. not Hezekiah as the Jews would have it; or Peter, as the
Papists: see Peter to the contrary, 1 Pet. 2.6. and Paul, 1 Corinthians. 3.11.

He that believes shall not make haste] viz. to help himself as he can, since
God defers his help; as did faithless Saul, Ahaz, these Jews, ver. 15. those
Bethulians that set him a time, and sent for him by a post as it were, David
staid Gods leisure for the Kingdom; those in Esther for deliverance, and those
other in the Hebrews for the accomplishment of the promises, Heb. 10.36. Hold
out faith and patience. We know not what we lose by making haste, and not
holding up our hand as Moses did to the going down of the Sun.

Ver. 17. Judgment also will I lay to the line] Or, I will set out judgment
by line, and justice by plummet; that is, I will proportion your punishments to
your offenses, as it were by line and by level, that the wicked may have their
due, and the godly sustain no damage. See 2 Kings 21.12, 13. Amos 7.8. Calvin
says, that by this expression borrowed from builders, the Lord here shows
that when the cornerstone before spoken off shall be laid, the Church of the
faithful built thereupon, shall rise up to a fair and uniform built temple in
the Lord, according to Ephesians. 2.20.

And the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lyes] Or shovel away, or quasi
furcillis extrudet, shall fork away, or burn up your vain confidences; as he
destroyed the Egyptians by hail mingled with fire.

And the waters] see ver. 15. and Mat. 7.27.

Ver. 18. And your covenant with death shall be disannulled] See ver. 15. They
made a covenant with death and hell; but death and hell make no covenant with
them.
God shall shoot at such with an arrow suddenly, Psalm. 64.7. and when they
shall say peace and safety, then shall sudden destruction come upon them, as
travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape, 1 These 5.3. Thus it
befell the rich fool. Luk 12. Alexander the great, whom his parasites flattered
into a fond conceit of an immortality: and Pope Sylvester the second, who dealt
with the Devil for the Popedom, and was persuaded by him, that he should never
dye till he sang Mass in Jerusalem: but when he saw how he was cheated, and
that he must dye, he cried out, Ah miser aetern^s vado damnatus ad ignes.

Ver. 19. From the time that it goes forth it shall take you] this was opposed
to their fond conceit of impunity, or at least immunity for a long season, ver.
15. the most secure are soonest surprised.

And it shall be a vexation, etc.] Vexatio dabit intellectum, Luther after the
Vulgar renders it, sententiam Prophetae non male exprimens; See chap. 26.9.
The Cross is the best Tutor.

Ver. 20. For the bed is short] Here the Prophet seems to some to threaten
them for their lectulorum luxus, Amos 6.4. their beds of ivory, whereon, when
well whittled, they once stretched themselves at full length, and slept out
their drunkenness: but when brought to Babylon, the case should be otherwise
with them. Diodate faith that these are figurative and proverbial terms,
importing that all means and devices they can use will no way defend them. Gods
wrath is such as none can avert or avoid.

Ver. 21. As in Mount Perazim] See 2 Samuel 5.20. God usually sits amidst his
people in his mercy-seat, or throne of grace: neither arises he to punish them
till much provoked; and then he may possibly deal as severely with them, as he
did with the Philistines at mount Perazim, or with the Amorites in the valley
of Gibeon, Josh. 10.10. But then he does his work his strange work, and brings
to pass his act his strange act, i. e. that which is neither his wont nor his
delight, Lam. 3.33. Mic. 7.18. Ezekiel. 33.11. To fall foul upon his people by his
plagues and judgments, goes as much against the heart with him, as against
the hair with them. And besides by doing this his strange work he makes way
for the doing of his own proper work, 1 Cor. 11.32.

Ver. 22. Now therefore be ye not m^ckers] for those are the worst of men, ver.
14. Pests the Septuagint commonly render them: Abjects and castawayes David
calls them; and yet they proudly disdain others (and far their betters) as
thimbles full of dust, and the goodly braveries of their scorn. But shall they
escape by this iniquity? shall they carry it away so? In no wise: for,

Ne vincula vestra invalescant.
Their bands shall be made strong] their sorrows shall be multiplied, and they
shall have more load of miseries and mischiefs laid upon them: though now they
mock at Gods menaces as uttered in terrorem only for fray-bugs, and at his
Ministers as false Prophets. Among many other memorable examples of Gods
judgments upon such out of Gods blessed book, the Acts and Monuments of the
Church and other Histories, Nicholas Hemingius relates a story of a lewd
fellow in Denmark, Anno Christi 1550. which usually made a mock at Religion and
the professors of it; and on a time coming into a Church where a godly Minister
was preaching, by his countenance and gestures showed a great contempt against
the Word: but as he passed out of the Church, a tyle fell upon his head and
slew him in the place. How much more mercifully dealt Almighty God with that
Miller in Lecestershire, who sitting in an Alehouse on a Sabbath day with one
of his companions, said to him, I hear that bawling Hooker is come to Town, let
us go and hear him, we shall have excellent sport; and accordingly they went on
purpose to jeer him: But it pleased God, the Sermon so wrought upon him, that
being pricked at the heart, Mr. Clark from Mr. White. Jun.
he went to Mr. Hooker, entreating him to tell him what he might do to be
saved; and afterward went with him to New England. By sins men's bands are made
strong, as by repentance they are loosened: videte ergo ut resipiscatis mature.

Ver. 23. Give ear, and hear my voice, hearken, etc] Being to assure the
faithful of Gods fatherly care of their safety and indemnity amidst all those
distractions and disturbances of the times, he calls for their utmost
attention, as knowing how flow of heart and dull of hearing the best are, how
backward to believe, Luke 24.25. and apt to forget the consolation, Heb. 12.5.
See the Note on Mat. 13.3.

Ver. 24. Does the plowman plow all day to sow?] Or, every day. Does he not
find him somewhat else to do besides? Preponit parabolam rusticam, sed magna
sapientia refertam.
Sua sunt rebus omnibus agendis tempora, novandi, arandi, occandi, aequandi,
serendi, metendi, colligandi and excernendi grani, and suae rations singulis.
And shall not the only wise God afflict his people with moderation and
discretion? yea verily; for he is a God of judgment, and waits to be
gracious: chap. 30.18. We are no longer plowed then needs: and whereas we may
think our hearts soft enough; it may be so for some grace, but God has seeds
of all sorts to cast in, the wheat and the rye, etc. and that ground which is
soft enough for one, is not for another. God (says Chrysostom) does like a
Lutanist, who will not let the strings be too slack, lest they mar the music:
nor suffer them to be too hard-stretcht or scrued up, lest they break.

Ver. 25. When he has made plain] laid it level and equal.

Does he not cast in the fitches] See on ver. 24.

The appointed barley] Hordeum signatum. Whatsoever is sealed with a seal, is
excellent in its own kind: so are all Gods sealed ones, Ephesians. 4.30.

Ver. 26. For his God does instruct him to discretion] Being a better Tutor to
him then any Varro de Agricultura, Cato dear Rustica, Hesiod in his works and
days, Virgils Georgicks, or, Geonomica Constantino inscripta. Some read the
verse thus, And he beats it out according to that course that his God
teaches him, that is, according to the judgment of right reason. God is to be
praised for the art of Agriculture. How thankful were the poor Heathens to
their Saturn, Triptolemus, Ceres, etc.

Ver. 27. For the fitches are not threshed out, etc.] So are Gods visitations
diversely dispensed: he proportioneth the burden to the back, and the stroke to
the strength of him that bears it, sparing his afflicted as a man spares his
Son that serves him. Thus Epaphroditus was sick nigh unto death, but not unto
death, and why, see Phil. 2.27. Some of the sweet smelling- Smyrnians were in
prison ten days and no more, Rev. 2.10.

Ver. 28. Bread-corn is bruised] yet not mauled or marred. That of Ignatius is
well known, Commolor dentibus ferarum ut purius Domino panis fiam.

Because he will not ever be threshing it] As he is not ever sowing mercies, so
he will not always be inflicting miseries.

Nor bruise it with his horsemen] Or, with his horses-hoofs.

Ver. 29. This also comes forth from the Lord] (...)
As does likewise (...), Jam. 1.17.

Which is wonderful] qui mirificus est consilio, and magnificus opere.

Chap. XXIX.
Ver. 1. WOE to Ariel, to Ariel] i. e. to the brazen altar, Metonymia adjuncti
Synecdochica.
Ezekiel. 43.15, 16. called here Ariel or Gods lion, because it seemed as a lion
to devour the sacrifices daily burnt upon it. Here it is put for the whole
Temple, which together with the City wherein it stood, is threatened with
destruction.

The City where David dwelt] Both Mount Moriah whereon stood the Temple, and
Mount Zion whereon stood the Palace: both Church and State are menaced with
Judgments Temporal in the eight first verses, and Spiritual in the eight next.
The rest of the Chapter is no less Consolatory then this is Comminatory.

Add ye year to year] i. e. feed your selves on with these vain hopes, that
years shall run on always in the same manner: See 2 Pet. 2.4. Ezekiel. 12.22.

Let them kill sacrifices] and thereby think (but falsely and foolishly) to
demerit God to themselves; as that Emperor did, who marching against his enemy,
sacrificed and then said, Non sic deos coluimus ut ille nos vinceret, Antonin.
Philosop.
we have not so served God that he should serve us no better then to give our
enemies the better of us: see Isa. 58.3. Jer. 7.21. Hos. 9.1.

Ver. 2. Yet I will distress Ariel] though a sacred place. Profligate
Professors are the worse for their privileges. The Jew first, Romans 2.9.

And it shall be unto me as Ariel] i. e. it shall be full of slain bodies, as
the Altar is usually full of slaughtered beasts, and swimmeth as it were in
blood. So Jer. 12.3. Isa. 34.6. Arias Montanus gives this sense; Jerusalem
which once was Ariel, that is, a strong lion, shall now be Ariel, that is, a
strong curse or a rain of malediction.

Ver. 3. And I will camp against thee round about] I will bring the woe of war
upon thee; a woe that no words how wide soever can possibly express: see this
accomplished, 2 King. 25.4.

And will lay seige] As the Captain General of the Chaldees.

Ver. 4. And thou shall be brought down] from those lofty pinacles of self
exaltation, whereunto thy pride has peirhed thee.

And speak out of the ground] humillime and submissime, thou shall speak
supplicatione, with a low voice, as broken men, who wast wont to face the
heavens, and speak in spite of God and men, speak big words, bubbles of words:
See Jer. 46.22.

And thy voice shall be as one that has a familiar spirit] cujus vox est
gracilis, flebilis, hiulca, confusa, gemebunda.

Out of the ground] as the Devil at Delphos did.

Ver. 5. Moreover the multitude of thy strangers] thy foreign Auxiliaries
these shall do thee no good, but be blown away as with a whirlwind.

It shall be at an instant suddenly] The last siege and sack of Jerusalem, was
so by a specialty, as is to be read in Josephus. And some Interpreters
understand this whole Chapter of the times of the new Testament: because our
Savior and St. Paul do cite some places herehence, and apply the same to those
their times; not by way of Accommodation only, but as the proper and true sense
of the text, as Mat. 15.8, 9. Romans 11.8. 1 Cor. 1.19.

Ver. 6. Thou shall be visited -- with thunder and earthquake, i. e. fragosis,
repentinis, vehementibus, and immedicabilibus plagis, with rattling, sudden,
violent and unmedicinable miseries and mischiefs: as if heaven and earth had
conspired thine utter undoing. Some apply this to the prodigies that went
before the last devastation of Jerusalem; whereof see Joseph. lib. 7. cap. 12.

Ver. 7. Shall be as the dream of a night-vision] Both in regard of thee to
whom this siege and ruin shall happen beyond all thought, Diod.
judgment and expectation; as also in respect of the Chaldees themselves, who
will never be satisfied with tormenting thee, as ver. 8. and yet shall fail of
what they hope for too. Spes mortalium sunt somnia vigilantium, says Plato.

Ver. 8. It shall be as when] See on ver. 7.

Ver. 9. Stay your selves and wonder] Sistite gradum, stand still, and stand
amazed at this peoples stupendous stupidity and desperate security. Piscator
renders the Text thus; Cunctantur, itaque admiramini: deliciantur, itaque
vociferamini. They delay (to return) therefore wonder ye at it: they sport at
it, but cry ye out, as lamenting their folly, Ezekiel. 9.4. where the Original is
very elegant. Some translate the words thus, Obstupefacite vos ipsi, and sitis
stupidi, and excoecate vos ipsi and sitis coeci; stupifie your selves and be
stupid; blind your selves and be blind: do so I say; for ye will do so
undoubtedly. And here begin their spiritual miseries; see ver. 1. confer chap.
6.9, 10.

They are drunk, but not with wine] but yet with that which is much worse, viz,
with a spirit of stupidity, ver. 10. they are not only drunk with a dry
drunkenness, but deadly sick of a lethargy; being dulled in their
understandings, lulled asleep in their sinful practices, ready to fly in the
face of one that shall offer to awake them. Other drunkenness a man may sleep
out, Homil. de plaga grandinis.
sleep himself sober, as Noah did: not so here, as Nazianzen well observes
upon this Text.

Ver. 10. For the Lord has poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep.] By a
judiciary hardness ne has rolled a stone upon your hearts, and given you up to
a reprobate sense: He has cast you into a dead lethargy, a dedolent
disposition; so that because of the blindness of their hearts, this people are
past feeling, Ephesians. 4.18, 19. and because they have wilfully winked, he has
even dashed out their eyes; bereaving them of the light against which they
rebelled, Job 24.13. so that they have neither sight nor light, lemosorum
instar oculos mentis concretos habent: they are miserably benighted.

The Prophets etc.] A blind Seer is a monster: how could these thus blindly led
avoid the ditch of destruction?

Ver. 11. And the vision of all is become unto you etc.] The Scriptures were so
to the Scribes and Elders of the people; who although when Herod asked them of
the Messiah, they could give such descriptions of him as agreed to none but the
Babe of Bethlehem, Mat. 2.5, 6. yet would they by no means be drawn to believe
in his name. And the like woeful obstinacy is found in the Rabbis and other
Jews to this day. The like spiritual judgment has befaln the Papists also,
both the learned and unlearned; and yet one of them sticks not to tell us to
our heads, that our damnation is so plainly and plentifully set down in our own
English Bibles, that no man needs to doubt of it who has but a book, and can
read English. Thus, who so bold as blind Bayard? who so blind as those that
will not see?

Ver. 12. And the book is delivered to one that is not learned] Heb. knows
not to read. By the learned is meant, say some, the Rulers in Church and State:
by the unlearned, the common people: all were in a pickle. Nicodemus had often
read in this our Prophet, in Ezekiel, and elsewhere, of Regeneration, though
not under that term; but how little he understood of it, see Joh. 3. And what a
buzzard is Bellarmine himself in some such fundamentals as whereof it is a
shame for a very child to be ignorant? I must needs confess, said a learned
Papist to the Bishop of Cavaillon, that I have often been at the schools of
Sorbon in Paris, where I have heard the Disputations of the Divines, Act. and
Mon. 865.
but yet I never learned so much as I have done by hearing these young children
at Merindol posing one another before the Bishop about points of religion. The
poor men of Lions in France were enlightened, when the great Doctors were
blinded and besotted in their superstitious Tenets and practices.

Ver. 13. Because this people draws near to me etc.] For their putid
hypocrisy, and outsideness in Gods service, they were given up by him to be
further hardened by the Devil, and to have their necks possessed by an iron
sinew; Hypocritis nihil stupidius.
see the Note on Mat. 15.8.

Their fear toward me] see on Mat. 15.9.

Ver. 14. Therefore behold I do a mavelous work] sc. by infatuating these
Masters in Israel, and bereaving their wise men of their wisdom: this was a
greater Marvel then to take sight from the eye, whiteness from the swan,
sweetness from sugar, etc.

For the wisdom of their wise men shall perish] And worthily, since they either
hid their candle under a bushel, or else their learning hung in their light,
whilst it better served them to devise a thousand shifts to elude the truth,
then their pride would suffer them once to yield and acknowledge it. This the
Prophet speaks of the Pharisaical and Rabbinical wisdom: and the Apostle
fitly extends it to the wisdom of the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 1.19. calling both the
Pharisees and Philosophers Princes of this world for their learning; but yet
denying that they knew any thing to any purpose at all, 1 Cor. 2.8.

Si Christum nescis, nihil est si caetera noscis. Ver. 15. Woe unto them that
seek deep to hide] that carry two faces under a hood, as all Formalists and
double-minded persons do, desirous to deceive the world, and if it were
possible, God himself also, with their pretenses and professions, and to cozen
him of heaven.

To hide their counsel] their cunning contrivances, ut ita libere in omnes
veneres and scelera ruant.

From the Lord] which cannot be, because he is All-eye, and the searcher of
hearts; he is intimo nostro intimior nobis, and will bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, 1 Cor. 4, 5.

Their works are in the dark] Out of sight, but not out of the light of his
countenance, Psalm. 90.8. Deo obscura liquent, muta respondent, silentium
confitetur, all things are naked and open before the eyes of him with whom we
have to do, Heb. 4.13. Sin not therefore in hope of secrecy; Si non cast tamen
caute, will prove too short a covering.

And say, who sees us? and who knows us?] God does, (to be sure) whoever
does not, hold this fast against that natural Atheism which is in us all; See
Ezekiel. 9.9. Romans 3.18. with the Note.

Ver. 16. Surely your turning of things upside down] your denying the Divine
Providence and Omniscience, Heb. Invertere vestrum
whereby ye go about to pervert the whole course of nature, and to put all into
a confusion.

Shall be esteemed as the Potters clay] Shall be confuted by a very familiar
comparison. Calvin reads it thus, Shall be esteemed as the Potters clay: i.
e. is as easily effected as he makes a vessel at his pleasure.

For shall the work say of him that made it, He made me not?] It should say so
upon the matter, by denying his knowledge of it. The Watch-maker knows every
pin and wheel in it; so the Heart-maker knows every turning and winding in
it, were they more then they are.

Ver. 17. Is it yet not a very little while?] Nonne adhuc paululum paululum] or
an hundred years hence the Gentiles shall be called by the preaching of the
Apostles (for here begins the Consolatory part of this Chapter; see on ver.
1.) and that is but a very small time with God. He speeds away the generation,
that he may finish the calling of his elect, and so put an end to All.

And Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field] Heb. Lebanon shall be
turned into Carmel, Sylvestria corda electorum inter gentes. Piscator.
the wide world, the wild waste of the Gentiles (confer Isai. 22.15.) the
Elect amongst them shall be made Gods husbandry or vineyard, Ephesians. 2.12. Romans
11.17 and e contra, Carmelus fiet Libanus.

The fruitful field shall be esteemed as a forrest] The obstinate Jews with
their seeming fruitfulness shall be rejected. Lo here is a turning of things
upside down, that you dream not of; this is that mavelous work, ver. 14.

Ver. 18. In that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book] i. e. the deaf
and blind Gentiles being by the preaching of the Gospel drawn out of darkness
into Gods mavelous light, shall see and hear that which eye never saw, nor
ear heard, neither has entered into the heart of any natural man to conceive, 1
Cor. 2.9. They shall first be illightened, secondly, accheared, ver. 19. so
Act. 13.48. Romans 14.17.

The words of the book] the holy Scriptures, that book which the proud would
not read, the ignorant could not, ver. 11. and 12.

Shall see out of obscurity] see their Savior, as Simeon, see that blisful
vision, Ephesians. 1.18, 19. See Joh. 9.39.

Ver. 19. The meek also shall increase their Joy in the Lord] All sincere
Converts, such especially as have mastered and mortified their unruly passions,
and are cured of the Fret; these shall add Joy, these shall have Joy upon Joy,
they shall over-abound exceedingly with Joy, 2 Cor. 7.4.

The poor amongst men] the poor in spirit. These shall greatly rejoice, both
for the mercy of God to themselves, and for the Justice of God exercised upon
others, ver. 20, 21.

Ver. 20. For the terrible one is brought to nought] This is part-matter of the
Just man's joy: where observe the contrary Characters given to the godly and the
wicked: those are said to be lowly, meek, poor in spirit: these to be tyrants,
scorners, sedulous in sin, catch-poles, incorrigible, such as turn aside the
Just, etc. ver. 20.21.

And all that watch for iniquity] Surgunt de nocte latrones: they also break
their sleep to devise mischief, Psalm. 36.4. Mic. 2.1. but they should watch for
a better purpose, Mar. 13.37. as Seneca also could say, and Pliny, qui vitam
mortalium vigiliam esse pronunciat; Proaem. not. Hist.
who calls man's life a watch.

Ver. 21. That make a man an offender for a word] when he meant no hurt: or by
perverting and misconstruing his speeches. Thus they sought to trap Christ in
his speeches: and thus they dealt by many of the Martyrs and Confessors. To
say, The Lord, Act. and Mon. fol. 1116.
and not Our Lord is called by Stephen Gardner, symbolum haereticorum, a note
of an Heretic. Dr. Stories rule to know an heretic was, they will say, The
Lord, and We praise God, and The living God.] Robert Cook was abjured for
saying that the blessing with a shoo-sole was as good as the Bishops blessing:
Ibid. 1803.
Another for saying, that Alms should not be given until it did sweat in a
man's hand. Mrs. Catismore for saying that when men go to offer to images, Ib
952. Ib. 765.
they did it to show their new gear; and that images were but Carpenters
Chips; and that folks go on pilgrimage more for the green way then for
devotion. Ib. 763.
Philip Brasier for saying that when any miracle is done, the Priests do anoint
the images, and make men believe these images sweat in laboring for them, Ib.
952.
etc. Every day they wrest my words, says David of his enemies, Psalm. 56.5. As
the spleen is subservient to the liver, to take from it only the most putrid
and feculent blood: so do Detractors pick out the worst of every thing, to lay
it in a man's dish, or allege it against him.

And lay a snare for him that reproveth] See the Note on Amos 5.10. Freedom of
speech used by the Waldenses in blaming and reproving the vices and errors of
great ones, Girard.
offecit ut plures nefariae affingerentur eis opiniones, a quibus omnino
fuerant alieni, made them hardly thought and spoken of.

Ver. 22. Who redeemed Abraham] sc. out of his Idolatry; that pulled him as a
brand out of Up of the Chaldees, Josh. 24.2, 3. The Rabbis say that his Father
Terah was a maker and seller of Images.

Concerning the house of Jacob] i. e. The calling of the Jews, confer Romans
11.25.

Ver. 23. The work of mine hands] Created in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians.
2.10. and now sanctifying Gods name in their hearts and lives, and walking in
the fear of the Lord, and in the comforts of the Holy Ghost. Thus, as it were,
ex prof^sso, does the Prophet Isaiah here handle the doctrine of Regeneration;
which and other like places, whiles Nicodemus had not noted, he was worthily
reproved, Joh. 3.

Ver. 24. They also that erred in spirit] Erroneous opinions, and muttering
against Ministers are here instanced as two special Opposites to effectual
Conversion. Those that relinquish not these two evils, are far enough from Gods
Kingdom; and yet now adays nothing more ordinary: hence so few Converts, so
many Apostates.

CHAP. XXX.
Ver. 1. WOe to the rebellious children] Vae filiis desertoribus, vel
Apostatis: so he boldly calls the Politicians of his time, the Counselors of
State, Est species quadam (...) aliunde quam a Deo auxilium petere.
Shebna and others who gave good Hezekiah ill counsel to send to Egypt for help
when Sennacherib invaded him. Well might St. Paul say, Esaias is very bold,
Romans 10.20. Consurgens enim, Proceres inquit, quid hoc rei est quod occeptatis?
male omnino factum! vae vohis, vae reip. toti! such another bold Court-preacher
was Elias, Amos, John Baptist, Chrysostom, Latimer, Deering, etc. See Latimers
letter to King Henry the eighth after the proclamation for abolishing English
Books, Act. and Mon. fol 1591. where we may see and marvel at his great
boldness and stoutness (says Mr. Fox) who (as yet being no Bishop, so freely
and plainly, without all fear of death, adventuring his own life to discharge
his Conscience so boldly, to so mighty a Prince, in such a dangerous case,
against the Kings Law and proclamation, set out in such a terrible time) durst
take upon him to write and to admonish, that which no Counselor durst once
speak unto him in defense of Christ's Gospel? etc.

That take Counsel, but not of me] Though I am the Wonderful Counselor, chap.
9.6. and though they profess to be my children; but unruly rebellious ones; I
must needs say, they are such as like petty-gods within themselves, run on of
their own heads, and lean to their own understanding, Prove. 3.5. as if I were
nothing to them, or as if Consilii satis est in me mihi were their Motto. See
the like folly, Josh. 9.14.

That cover with a covering] But it will not reach, Et ordiremini telam.
chap. 28.20. God will make the strongest sinew in the arm of flesh to crack,
and the fairest blossoms of humane Policies to wither.

That they may add sin to sin] i. e. Thereby adding sin to sin, as Devt. 29.19.
Job 34.37. See the Notes there.

Ver. 2. That walk to go down into Egypt] This they were flatly forbidden to
do. But State Policy does sometimes carry it against express Scripture, to the
formalizing and enervating of the power of truth, till at length they have left
us an heartless and sapless Religion, as One well observes. This is no
thriving course certainly: here we have a dreadful Woe hanged at the heels of
it. The Grecian Churches first called in the Turks to their help, who
distressed them, and then, through fear of the Turks, Anno 1438. sent, and
subjected themselves to the Bishop of Rome, that they might have the help of
the Latin Churches: but shortly after they were destroyed, their Empire
subdued, etc. teaching all others by their example, not to trust to carnal
Combinations, not to seek the association of others in a sinful way.

Ver. 3. Therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh be your shame] They that
consult not with God, consult shame to their own houses, Hab. 2.10. and because
they despise him, they shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2.30. When any came to
Bacon and Burleigh, Q. Elizabeth's gravest Counselors, with a project or design
of raising her revenue, or promoting her interest, they would ask him how much
reputation would redound unto her by it? Moses, who was faithful in all Gods
house, had the like care of Gods glory, Exodus 32.10, 12. and is therefore
renowned to all posterity. But these Apostates in the Text, for carnal policy
and contempt of God, are justly branded and threatened with disgrace and
disappointment.

Ver. 4. For his Princes were at Zoan] where Pharaoh kept his Court, and Moses
had done his Miracles.

And his Ambassadors came to Hanes] This was, says Hierom, a famous City in
the utmost part of Egypt, toward Aethiopia: Oecolampadius says it lay beyond
Egypt: so far did these men travel and trouble themselves in seeking foreign
help, when they might have staid at home to better purpose.

Ver. 5. They were all ashamed of a people that could not profit them] Either
could not or would not, for fear of provoking the Assyrian so potent and
formidable a Prince. When Queen Elizabeth undertook to protect the
Netherlanders against the Spaniard, the King of Sweden, hearing of it, said,
That she had taken the Crown off her own head, and set it on the head of
fortune.

Ver. 6. The burden] i. e. the gifts and presents wherewith the Hebrews beasts
were laden to carry southward, to hire help from Egypt. A man's gift makes room
for him, Prove. 18.10. Philip was wont to say, that he doubted not of taking any
town or tower, if he could but thrust into it an ass laden with Gold. But these
Jewish Ambassadors lost both their labor and their treasures, carried upon the
shoulders of many young Asses, and upon the bunches of Camels to a very great
quantity. See what a present was sent to a poor Prophet, even of every good
thing of Damascus forty Camels burden, 2 King. 8.9. and guess by that what a
deal of wealth went now to Egypt to procure help.

Into the land of trouble and anguish] that great and terrible wilderness of
Arabia, wherein were fiery serpents and scorpions, Deuteronomy. 8.15. and other
fell-creatures not a few: Thorough that waste howling desert, Deuteronomy. 32.10. that
lay between Judea and Egypt, traveled these beasts with their burdens; but
all was labor in vain, and cost cast away, because God was not of the counsel.

Ver. 7. For the Egyptians shall help in vain and to no purpose] Heb. in vanity
and inanity; such are creature comforts if relied on: a very magnum nihil.

Therefore have I cryed] but could not get audience.

Their strength is to sit still] to bide at home, and behold the salvation of
the Lord; for the Prophet here seems to relate to that, Exodus 14.14.
Contented godliness is great gain says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.6. and quiet
godliness is great strength, says the Prophet here; Their strength is to fit
still: as good sit still (says our English proverb) as rise and fall. The word
here rendered strength, is Rahab, which signifies pride and power, and is
sometimes put for Egypt her self, Psalm. 86. Hence the Vulgar translation here
is, Superbia tantum est, quiesce; Egypt is but a flask or a piece of proud
flesh: she is all in ostentation, but will not answer thine expectation:
therefore keep home, and be quiet. Others rendering the Text as we do, set this
sense upon it; your Rahab or Egypt is to sit still, and to hold you content: by
so doing you shall have an Egypt: whatsoever succor you might think to have
that way, you shall have it (and better) this way, si tranquillo and sedato
sitis animo, if you can compose your selves and get a Sabbath of spirit.

Ver. 8. Now go write it before them in a table, and note it in a book] He had
proclaimed it before, ver. 7. but with ill success: now he is commanded to
commit it to writing, for a testimony against them to all posterity; viz. that
they had been told in two words what were their best course to take for their
own security and safeguard; but they thought it better to trot to Egypt, then to
trust in God. Now therefore if they suffer and smart (as they must) for their
contempt and contumacy, the blame must be laid upon themselves alone: who else
can be faulted when as they were so fairly forewarned?

Ver. 9. That this is a rebellious people] Isaiae concepta verba praeit Deus;
God dictateth to the Prophet Isaiah what very words he shall set down. So he
did to Moses, to Jeremy, chap. 36. to Habakuk, chap. 2. to John the Divine,
Rev. 14.13. the whole Scripture was inspired by God; not for matter only, but
for words also, 2 Timothy 3.16. and is therefore more then a bare commonitory, as
Bellarmine calls it, a kind of storehouse for advice in matters of Religion.
We account them the surest Rule of life, the divine beam and most exact
balance. But the Papists see well enough, that whiles the authority of the
Scriptures stands, Divina slatera. Aug. Exactissima trutina. Chrysostom.
the traditions of their Popes cannot be established; which they account the
touchstone of doctrine, and foundation of faith. And in favor of their
unwritten verities, as they call them, they tell us (but falsely) that Christ
commanded his Apostles to preach, but not to write.

Lying children] and therefore not Gods children, chap. 63.8.

Ver. 10. Which say to the Seers, See net, etc.] strange impudency! but in thus
reciting their words, the Prophet rather expresses their spirit then their
speeches: And yet it may be, that the Politicians of those times blamed the
Prophets, Isaiah and the rest, ^^^^ragmatical, for interposing and meddling in
State-matters, and pressing the Law so strictly: since in cases of necessity as
now it was, they must make bold to borrow a little Law of the holy one of
Israel.

Speak unto us smooth things] Heb. smoothnesses, toothless truths, and such as
may speak you No-medlers.

Ver. 11. Get ye out of the way] If that be the way which you so much insist
upon, warp a little, remit of your rigor, Religiosum opertet esse, sed non
religentem.

Cause the holy one of Israel to depart from us] Desinat ille nos per Prophet
as obtundere, let us hear no more of him: molest us not with so many messages
from him; see Mic. 2.6.

Ver. 12. Wherefore thus says the holy one of Israel] The Prophet does on
purpose repeat this title, so much disrelished by them, to cross them.
Ministers must not be men-pleasers.

Ver. 13. Therefore this iniquity shall be unto you] q. d. your Commonwealth is
tumbling down apace, and ye are hastening the utter ruin of it; as if ye were
ambitious of your own destruction, which will be as sudden, so total, ver. 14.

Ver. 14. And he shall break it as the breaking of a Potters vessel] Collige ex
hoc loco, says Oecolampadius: Gather we may from this text, that remediless
ruin will befall such as resist the Holy Ghost, and sin against light.

Ver. 15. The Holy one of Israel] A style much in the mouths of Gods Prophets
in those times. But how great arrogance is it in the Pope to take unto him the
title of His Holiness?

In returning and rest shall ye be saved] This is the same in effect with that
before; ver. 7. Preachers must be instant, stand to their work, and not be
baffled out of their unpleasing messages. The Septuagint here have it, Si
conversus ingemueris, tunc salvaberis.

Ver. 16. But ye said, No] we will not return or rest. This is a golden rule of
life, In silentio and spe fortitudo vestra: but these refractaries would none
of it: they knew a better way to work then all that came to. Politicians are
like tumblers, that have their heads on the earth, and their heels against
heaven. Cross-gtain'd they are for most part to all good.

For we will flee upon horses] whereof Egypt was full, and for which it was
famous of old, and so is yet, for the Mamalukes horses especially.

Therefore shall ye flie] but in another sense, sc. fusi, fugatique ab host,
with the enemy at your heels.

Ver. 17. One thousand shall flee] See Deuteronomy. 32.30. with the Note.

Until ye be left at a beacon] Heb, a mast; i. e. a very poor few, or all
alone, shred of all you had. This was fulfilled when Sennacherib wasted the
Country, even to the very walls of Jerusalem. Paucitatem salvandorum nobis
insinuat, says Oecolamp.

Ver. 18. And therefore will the Lord wait that he may be gracious unto you]
This it a wonderful condescension; i. e. God tarrieth looking for thee to show
thee mercy, Sermon. of Repent.
as Mr. Bradford renders it; if thou were ripe, he is ready. But never think
that he will lay cordials upon full and foul stomachs, faith another grave
Divine; D. Harris.
that he will scarf thy bones before they be set, and lap up thy sores before
they be searched. God chooses the fittest times to hear and help his
suppliants, Isa. 49.8. with Psalm. 69.13. opportunitatem opitulandi expectat. Be
patient therefore brethren, until the coming of the Lord, Jam. 5.7. Let your
equanimity, your longanimity be known to all men: the Lord is at hand, Phil. 4,
5.

And therefore will he be exalted] He will get up to his tribunal or throne of
grace, that if ye repent ye may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of
need, Heb. 4.16.

For the Lord is a God of jugdement] i. e. He is a wise God that knows best
when to deal forth his favors, and where to place his benefits.

Blessed are all they that wait for him] Wait his leisure, and non cerebri sui
sectantur consilia, and seek not to get off by indirect courses. Those though
they should die in a waiting condition, yet cannot but be happy, because God
has said here, Blessed are all they that wait for him.

Ver 19. For the people shall dwell in Zion, etc.] Or, For thou, the people of
Zion that dwell in Jerusalem, shall weep no more; Flebile principium melior
fortuna sequetur.

At the voice of thy cry] Thou shall pray; thou shall also hear the word of
God, ver. 20.21. and reform thy life, ver. 22. so shall good be done unto thee.

When he shall hear it, he will answer thee] yea before, chap. 65.24. before
thy prayer can get from thy heart to thy mouth, it is got as high as heaven.

Ver. 20. And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity] Though he hold
you to hard-meat, and give you but prisoners pitrance, so much as will keep you
alive only, and that you eat your meat with the peril of your lives; emendicato
pane hic vivamus, says Luther; in our Fathers house is bread, Gods plenty.

Yet shall not thy Teachers be removed into a corner] Non alis se induent, they
shall not take wing and fly from thee. The Ministry is a sweet mercy, under
what misery soever men do otherwise groan and labor. Corporeal wants are not
much to be passed on, so the spiritual food be not wanting: a famine of the
word is the greatest Judgment. Amos 8. when the Gospel was first preached,
there was great scarcity of bodily food, Rev. 6.6. Act. 11.28. but that was
scarce felt by those holy souls who did eat their meat, such as it was, with
gladness and singleness of heart, Greenham.
accounting that bread and cheese with the Gospel was good cheer.

Thine eyes shall see thy Teachers] A description of holy hearers; their eyes
are intent on the preachers, Scultet.
their ears arrect, their whole course conformed to the rule, quando lapsus tam
in proclivi est, ver. 21. their dearest sins abandoned, ver. 22. Oh for such
hearers in these days!

Apparent rari nantes in gurgite vasto. Subest comparatio a pastore sumpta, qui
oves sequitur, and aberrantes in viam revocat.
Ver. 21. And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee] Quum a tergo tuo dicent,
when they shall say behind thee, viz. thy teachers: a Metaphor say some, from
Shepherds driving their sheep, and whistling them in, when ready to stray.

When ye turn to the right hand or to the left] Heb. when ye right hand it. and
when ye left hand it. It is hard to hold the Kings highway chalked out in the
word, without swerving; to walk accurately, and as it were in a frame: yet this
must be done, and all exorbitancies carefully shunned: Hereunto the word
preached is a singular help: God by his spirit also sends for us in our
out-strays, and sets us right again: there will be upon any miscarriage,
Singultus cordis, an upbraiding or rising of heart, as it is termed by Abigail, 1 Samuel 25 31. the spirit will come in with his secret and sweet voice, both
correcting and directing pro re nata.

Ver 22. Thou shall defile also the covering] Thou shall pollute the idols
which thou had perfumed. Such a change is wrought in people by the Word
preached, as is to be seen in all the Reformed Churches: Comparat idola scorto
perpetuo monstro abominabili. Zeged.
Cavete ab idolis.

Thou shall cast them away as a menstruous cloth] Vt mulierem laborantem ex
mensibus: Piscat.

Thou shall say unto them, Get thee hence] A page, Abi in malam crucem. Men
should heartily hate sin by them committed: dealing by it, as Amnon did by
Tamar: and as heartily desiring to forgo it as to have it forgiven: to part
with it, as to have it pardoned: See Hos. 14.8. with the Notes.

Ver. 23. Then shall he give the rain of thy seed] Or, for thy seed, or to thy
seed. A figurative Description of Gods superabundant blessings, viz. the
spiritual blessing, says Diodate. This was fulfilled in the Letter, under
Hezekiah and Ezra: in the figure, under Christ.

In that day shall thy Cattle feed] This branch properly belongs to the next
verse. The Bible was not distinguished into verses till of late years: and it
is not done very skilfully in some places, as this for one. Versuum in
Scripturis sectiones pio quidem, at tumultuario Roberti Stephani stud o
excogitatae, Scultet.
imperitissime plerunque textum dissecant.

Verse 24. Shall eat clean provender] Such plenty there shall be of corn, that
the Cattle shall have of the best threshed out and winnowed. The Vulgar Latin
has it commistum migma, whereby is understood diversity of grains mingled
together, as in Horse-bread.

Verse 25. R^vers and streams of waters] To moysten them and make them fertile.

When the Towers fall] i. e. Sennacheribs great Princes, who were as Towers and
Bulwarks.

Ver. 26. Moreover the light of the Moon, etc.] i. e. Very great shall be your
joy upon that slaughter of Sennacheribs army: the Sun and Moon also seeming to
rejoice with you by their extraordinary out-shinings.

In the day that the Lord binds up the breach] Sunt Allegoriae sive
similitudines quae instituto mire convenient. Hyperius.


Verse 27. Behold the name of the Lord comes from far] That is, an Angel
comes from heaven to destroy the Assyrians: Or the Name of the Lord, that is,
Majestas Dei Nominatissimi, the glorious and renowned God himself.

Burning with his anger] Or, at the Nose, which burns with a grievous flame.

His lips are full of indignation, and his tongue, etc.] Est pulchra
hypotyposis irae Dei, a gallant description of Gods anger; which yet is nothing
else but his most just will to punish sin. These things and the like are spoken
concerning God (...): and must be understood (...). Rash anger as it
dispossesseth a man of his soul, wit and reason: so it dis-figureth his body
with fieriness of the eyes, inflammation of the face, stammering of the tongue,
gnashing of the teeth, a very harsh and hateful intention of the voice, etc.
Hence angry men were counseled, in the heat of their fit to look themselves in
a glass, etc. God is here brought in as thus angry, more humano: Let us take
heed how we provoke him to wrath: (...);

Verse 28. And his breath as an overflowing stream] God can blow men to
destruction, Job 4.9. for they are but dust-heaps: yea his breath as an
irresistible torrent bears all before it. The Prophet had compared Gods
fierce wrath to a raging fire; Now he further compares it here 1. To a flood.
2. To a Fan. 3. To a Bridle.

To sift the Nations with a sive of vanity] i. e. Ad perdendas gentes in
nihilum, as the Vulgar here has it, to destroy the Nations, and to bring them
to nothing.

Verse 29. Ye shall have a song] As, after the Passover eaten, they sang an
hymn; so after the Assyrian destroyed, there shall be a different sound heard
in their several camps. Apud utrosque audietur sonus, and strepitus, sed
diversa admodum ratione: so was fulfilled that of our Prophet, chap. 65.13, 14.

As in the night when an holy solemnity is kept] Pintus says, that the night
before some solemn sacrifice, the Jews usually spent in jollity and singing.
They still conclude their Sabbath with singing or caterwawling rather, which
they continue as long as they can, for ease of the defunct fouls.

Ver. 30. And the Lord shall cause his glorious voice] Hence some gather that
Sennacheribs soldiers were destroyed by the Angel, not without a mighty storm
and tempest accompanied with dreadful thunder and lightening: See the like
threatened to all wicked ones, Job 27.20, 21, 22.

Ver. 31. Which smote with a rod] Isa. 10.14. Now he is broken in pieces with
Gods iron rod, Psalm. 2.9. Justissimae talionis exemplum.

Ver. 32. And in every place where the grounded staff shall pass] virga
fundata, seu infixa, Gods rod or staff, wherewith he beats the Assyrians,
shall pierce their flesh, and stick in it, make deep wails, yea stick in their
very bowels, as Ehuds dagger did in Eglons gutts. And this shall be done with
little ado too.

It shall be with tabrets and harps] quisi per ludum, non tormentis bellicis.

And in battles of shaking will he fight with it] levi quadam velitatione
bellica, by skirmishings only.

Ver. 33. For Tophet is ordained] Heb. Tophteh, which some derive of Pathah to
entice or seduce, because hell draws customers; and is called also Infernus
ab inferendo, from the great resort that is to it. But others fetch the name
from Toph a drum; because those idolaters who sacrificed their children to
Moloch or Saturn, in the valley of Hinnom, struck up drums to drown the cries
of those poor tortured children. Hence it is here used for hell; together with
that eternity of extremity which the damned there endure: and this the
Assyrians are here threatened with, yea their very King whose preservation from
the stroke of the Angel was but a reservation to a worse mischief here and
hereafter: For potentes potenter torquebuntur, great men, if not good, shall be
greatly tormented; and the more they have of the fat of the earth, the more
they are sure to fry in hell. Such therefore had need to add true grace to
their high places; else they shall prove but as an high gibbet to bring them to
more disgrace in this world, and torment in the next.

Of old] Heb. from yesterday. Hence some infer that hell torments are always
fresh and new; as if they had begun but yesterday: and every sacrifice there is
salted with fire, Mar. 9.49. that is, it burns but consumes not; fire being
of a burning, but salt of a preserving nature.

He has made it deep and large] capacious enough to receive a world full of
wicked ones, Psalm. 9.17.

The pile thereof is fire and much wood] Hellfire is no Metaphorical thing,
but a material, true, proper, real, and corporeal fire, Mat. 18.9. and 25.41.
Luke 16.23. for vehemence of heat, says Austin, it exceeds ours, as far as
our fire does exceed fire painted on the wall. That Friar said too little of
it, who said that one might feel it burn seven miles of. Aetna, Vesuvius,
Pietra mala, (which is a mountain in the highest part of the Apennines that
perpetually burns) come not near it. Some gross Papists have imagined Aetna
to be the place of Purgatory: Odilo Abbot of Cluniacum persuaded Pope John the
nineteenth, that he had there seen the tormented souls wailing: whereupon that
Pope appointed the Feast of All Souls.

The breath of the Lord as a stream of brimstone] This formidable fire then is
fed with most tormenting temper, rivers of brimstone: and kindled with the
breath of the Almighty, throughout all eternity. Simile quiddam videmus in
thermis, ubi sulphureae scaturigines magno fremitu effervescunt: some
resemblance hereof we have in the hot baths, etc.

CHAP. XXXI.
Ver. 1. WOE to them that go down to Egypt for help] The Prophet saw them set
upon it to send down to Egypt; he therefore adds another Woe to such
refractaries, and lays before them more reasons to dissuade them from doing
so: a good president for Preachers. Oecolampadius renders it, O descendentes,
O ye that go down to Egypt, etc. Oh ye are a wise company of you, and full well
ye have done it!

But they look not to the holy one of Israel] They trust not God at all, that
not alone. He that stands with one foot on a rock, and another foot upon a
quick-sand, will sink and perish as certainly as he that stands with both feet
on a quick-sand. See Psalm. 62.2, 5, 6.

Ver. 2. Yet he also is wise] yea he is the only wise God, whatever the worlds
wizzards think of Him, or of themselves. They counted, the voyage down to Egypt
the wisest way; and to rest altogether upon God, Tacita Antithesis in qua latet
Antanaclasis.
to be altogether impolitique, as the case now stood. Egypt also they knew was
famous for wisdom, chap. 19.11, 12. but considered not how God had fooled them,
Exodus 1. and taken those foxes in their own craft, 1 Cor. 3 19.

And will bring evil] To those evil-Counsellors especially, (...).

Ver. 3. Now the Egyptians are men and not God] Poets fain that in the Trojan
war one god fought against another, Mulciber in Trojam, pro Troja stabat Apollo.

But these Jews could not imagine that the Egyptians in whom they confided,
were fit matches for God, and able to deal with him. Who would set those briars
and thorns against me in battle? I would go through them, I would burn them
together, chap. 27.4.

And their horses flesh and not spirit] God is Lord of hosts: and as the
Rabbis well observe, he has his Cavallery and his Infantry, or his horse and
his foot: his upper forces and his lower, ready pressed. The charets of God are
twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels, Psalm. 68.17. and what can the
Egyptian horse do against such worthy warriors?

Ver. 4. Like as the Lion, and the young Lion] That they may trust in God, and
not in the arm of flesh, the Prophet sets before them under two fit
similitudes the power of God, ver. 4. and the mercy of God, ver. 5. These are
the Jachin and the Boaz, the two main pillars and supports of Trust in God.
Procopius here notes that the Lion when he preyeth, first roareth so terribly,
that he thereby amazeth both the cattle and their keepers, and then he falls
upon them and teareth them in pieces: so does God first roar, that is, threaten
by his Prophets, and then he destroys such as obstinate themselves in a
sinful course.

Ver. 5. As birds flying, so will the Lord of Hosts] This is the second
similitude: the Eagle, when she flies highest of all from the nest, and
seems to set her self among the clouds, still keeps her eye on her nest, so
that if any come near her young ones to offend them, she makes all possible
speed for their defense. Such an Eagle is Almighty God, Deuteronomy. 32.11. such a hen
is Jesus Christ, Mat. 23.37. see Psalm. 91.1, 2. The Church is Gods nest; who
dare meddle with it? Sennacherib had threatened to destroy nest and young ones
together, because he had done so elsewhere, and none durst wag the wing at him,
chap. 10.14. but he found it otherwise here, chap. 37.33.

Ver. 6. Turn ye unto him] Vos Apostatae Judaei. He runs far that never turns
again, we say: ye have revolted and run away from God with all your hearts,
doing evil as ye could: O Turn again to Him, ex profundo imoque cord ad illum
redite, let there be a proportion betwixt your sin and your repentance. Turn ye
unto me, usque ad me, all out as far as to me, give not the half turn only;
with all your heart, Joel 2.12. Take heed left there be in any of you an evil
heart of unbelief in departing from the living God. Heb. 3.12. (...) parit
(...).


Ver. 7. For in that day] Sc. of your effectual conversion, chap. 30, 22. or,
when the Assyrian shall assault you, then you shall see the vanity of your
Idols, and of all humane helps: so chap. 2.20.22.

Ver. 8. Then shall the Assyrian fall] fall in his forces, flee in his person:
but evil shall hunt that violent man to destroy him, Psalm. 140.11.

Not of a mighty man] or of a mean man, but of an Angel.

And his young men shall be discomfited] Heb. shall be unto melting, they shall
melt away, as 1 Samuel 14.16. Vide hic says a Lapide, see here how this world is
nothing else but a perpetual ruin of all kinds and conditions of men.

Ver. 9. And he shall pass over to his stronghold] To Nineveh, never thinking
himself safe till he come thither.

And his Princes shall be afraid of the Ensign] lifted up by Gods Angels in the
slaughter of their fellows.

Whose fire is in Zion] Who keep; house there: sumpta Metaphora a re
Oeconomica: there he had his fire and his chimney, sc. in the Temple from
whence also came this destruction to the enemy: Psalm. 76.2, 3. with the Notes
there.

CHAP. XXXII.
Ver. 1. BEhold a King] Hezekiah in the type, Christ in the Antytipe.

Shall reign in righteousness] Regiment without righteousness, is but robbery
with authority.

(...). And Princes shall rule in Judgement] Not as Shebna, and those other
(placed in by wicked Ahaz) do now, whiles the King is young, and not so well
able to weed them out. Evil under-rulers are a great mischief to a State. Nerva
was a good Emperor, and so was Aurelian; but so bought and sold by bad
Counselors and inferior Magistrates, that the people were in a worse case then
when they were under Nero. Hezekiah would see to his Princes that they were
right: Christ has none about him but such: All his people are righteous, Isa.
60.21. his Ministers and Officers especially. These are Princes in all lands,
Psalm. 45 16. yea they are Kings, because righteous ones. Mat. 13.17. compared
with Luke 10 24. Ministers especially are Plenipotentiaries under Christ, Mat.
18. John 20.

Ver. 2. And a man shall be] i. e. Each man of those forementioned Princes: Or,
that man, viz. Hezekiah: how much more the man Christ Jesus shall be a comfort
to distressed Consciences, an absolute and All sufficient Savior? such as his
people may trust unto for safety here, and salvation hereafter.

Ver. 3. And the eyes of them that see shall not be dim] Or, shall not be
closed: they shall not wink or be wilfully ignorant, Festucam quaerunt unde
oculos sibi eruant.
shutting the windows lest the light should come in, or seeking straws to put
out their eyes withal, as Bernard expresses it.

And the ears of them that hear shall hearken] they shall listen to Christ's
word as for life; they shall draw up the ears of their souls to the ears of
their bodies, that one found may pierce both: they shall hear what the Spirit
speaks to the Churches.

Ver. 4. The heart also of the rash] Heb. of the hasty ones, such as are
headlong and inconsiderate; that weigh not things, that say not, What shall we
do in the end thereof?

And the tongue of the stammerers] that once did but bungle at holy discourse,
pronouncing as it were Sibboleth for Shibboleth, and marring a good tale in the
telling; as not understanding either what they say, or whereof they affirm, 1 Timothy 1.7.

Shall be ready to speak plainly] shall be forward to speak fruitfully, having
an holy dexterity therein. The Corinthians are commended for their utterance, 1
Cor. 1.5. they could express themselves firly, and they would do it freely.

Limpida, nitida.
To speak plainly] Heb. neat or clear words: A Metaphor from clear or fair
weather.

Ver. 5. The vile person shall be no more called liberal] Benefici and
magnifici Domini. That sapless fellow Nabal shall no more be called Nadib, that
is, Bountiful benefactor, or Gracious Lord. Of Archbishop Bancroft was made
this Distich, Here lies his Grace in cold clay clad,
Who dyed for want of what he had.


In Ahaz his time the worst of men gat honors and offices. Hezekiah would look
to that. Dignity shall henceforth wait upon desert, and flattery shall be
utterly out of fashion and request at Court. Our old English Bibles have it
thus, A niggard shall not be called a gentle, or gentleman.

Nor the Churl said to be bountiful] The Hold-fast, whose Logic is all little
enough to conclude for himself, shall not be cleped a Magnifico. The Vulgar
Latin has it, Neque frandulentus appellabitur major.

Ver. 6. For the vile person will speak villany] Why then should he be advanced
to great places? why should he be smoothed and soothed up with high titles? The
adversary and the enemy is this wicked Haman, said Esther, chap. 7.6. Before,
some had styled him Noble, others Great, and some perhaps Virtuous; only Esther
gives him his own: Pessimus iste, That most wicked Haman: so, Go tell that
fox, says our Savior; and God shall smite thee thou whited wall, says St.
Paul to Ananias, etc. Nomina rebus consentanta imponentur] a spade shall be
called a spade, Bernard.
a fool a fool; there shall not be nomen inant, crimen immane, seeds prima and
vita ima, ingens authoritas and nutans stabilitas, etc.

And his heart will work iniquity] Exegefis flagitiosi, the true portraiture of
an evil Magistrate: Judex locusta civitatis est malus. Scalig.


Ver. 7. The instruments also of the chur are evil] There is an elegancy in the
Original, cujus lepos in vertendo perit. By his instruments or vessels are
meant, say some, his evil arts and deceits of all sorts. Or, as others hold,
his Underofficers and Teasors.

Even when the needy speaks right] right or wrong, he is sure to be undone:
the doing of any thing or of nothing he finds alike dangerous.

Ver. 8. But the liberal devises liberal things] Beneficus beneficia cogitat:
munificentias consultat, and consulit, in opposition to the churl, ver. 7. He
is of a public spirit, and studyeth how and where to do most good. Augustus
Caesar was for this called Pater patriae; Charles the great, Pater orbis.
Claudian thus bespake Honorius, Tu civem patremque geras, tu consule cunctis,
Non tibi: nec tua te moveant, sed publica damna.


And by liberal things shall be stand] One would think he should fall rather:
but he knows what he does; and that not getting but giving, not hoarding, but
distributing is the way to thrive.

Ver. 9. Rise up ye women that are at ease] Secure sedentes, ye Court-ladies
whose pride has brought on the wars, chap. 3.25. Or, ye hen hearted Jews,
(...). Or, ye lesser Cities and villages of Judah, rise up and rouse up your
selves, ad exhibendum honorem verbo Dei, in honor of Gods holy word, as Judge.
3.20.

Ver. 10. Many days and years shall ye be troubled] A just punishment of your
former security, which usually ushereth in destruction. Days above a year your
calamity shall last, by the invasion of the Assyrians, but not two full years;
take that for your comfort.

For the Vintage shall fail] War makes woeful work and waste.

Ver. 11. Tremble ye women] Adhortatio ad poenitentiam, says Hyperius an
exhortation to repentance: not unlike that of St. James, chap. 4.9, 10. Afflict
your selves, Trepidate O tranquillae. Tremel.
and weep and mourn, let your laughter be turned into mourning, your Joy into
heaviness.

Ver. 12. They shall mourn for the teats] That it, for their Corn and wine. The
Heathens called Ceres their goddess of plenty, (...) Mammosam, fullteated: some
sense it thus, Let them (infants) mourn for the teats, denied them in this day
of humiliation, as Jon. 3.5, 6. or so dried up that there is no milk for them:
Others render it, Beating upon their breasts, plangentes pectora palmis.

Ver. 13. Upon the Land of my people shall come up thorns] Here the Prophet
proceeds to denounce the destruction of the Land, that should one day come by
the Babylonians: and yet he foretells, that afterward God shall receive them
into favor, and restore unto them such a Kingdom as wherein righteousness and
peace shall meet and mutually salute.

In the Joyous City] Or, revelling City: see chap. 22.2, 13. Zeph. 2.15.

Ver. 14. The multitude of the City shall be left] for, the City shall be left
of its multitude.

The Forts and Towers] Heb. Ophel and Bachan. The Hebrews tell us that these
were two high Towers in Jerusalem: now they were to be dismantled, and lie wast.

Ver. 15. Until the Spirit be poured upon us from on high] Donec Dominus
dignabitur suum favorem and gratiam denuo nobis impertiri, Till God shall
please once more to impart unto us his grace and favor. So he sets them no
certain time of restoration: as desirous thereby to stir them up to pray
continually, and to bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life. This effusion
of the Spirit upon all flesh, Joel 2.28. (that is, of the best thing upon the
basest) is a very great mercy.

And the wilderness be a fruitful field] Heb. a Carmel: Such a change works
the Spirit of grace; it makes barren hearts fruitful, and manifests
hypocrites (whatever they seem) to be no better than wild trees that bear no
good fruit.

Ver. 16. Then judgment shall dwell in the wildernesse] In this and the next
Verse, he sets forth the sweet effects of Gods Spirit in the Saints, in
hypocrites also when once they come to be converted; these are Righteousness,
Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost, as Romans 14.17. By Righteousness and Judgment
there is to be understood the Righteousness of Faith, together with all those
good works the fruits thereof, Obedience I mean, which Luther was wont to call
fidem incarnatam. Faith incarnate.

Ver. 17. And the work of Righteousness shall be Peace. Peace both of Country
and of Conscience: none other but this last, can last for ever.

Quietness and assurance for ever] Such as the world gives not, such as the
wicked meddleth not with; the Cock on the dunghill knows not the worth of this
jewel; it is the new name that none knows but he who has it. Oh this blessed
quietness and assurance for ever, this boldness and access with confidence
by the Faith of him, Ephesians. 3.12. having a full certainty, Luke 1.4. yea a
confident glorying and boasting, Romans 5.3. so as to stand upon Interrogatories,
1 Pet. 3.21. such as are those, Romans 8.35, 36, 37. and to have God to make
answer, as Isa. 43.25.

Ver. 18. And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation] Great peace have
all those that love Gods Law, and nothing shall offend them, Psalm. 119.165.
Peace shall be within their walls, and prosperity within their Palaces. From
this and the next Verse one well gathers, that when the heart lies lowest,
it lies quietest: in loco humili humilis erit civitas, sc Dei.

Ver. 19. When it shall hail, coming down on the Forrest] When reprobates (here
compared to a Forest, or tall wood) shall be hail-beaten that is, grievously
plagued, as those Egyptians once were, Exodus 9.22, 26. it shall be hail or well
with the Elect: the Church, as a City that stands in a low bottom, is secure
and safe: her afflictions also working together for her good. In humbling her,
God remembers her; for his mercy endures for ever, Psalm. 136.23.

Ver. 20. Blessed are ye that sow besides all waters] Conclusionem texit ipse
Propheta. The Prophet concludes with an exclamation, as admiring the
happiness of such as should live till the Commonwealth should be thus
restored: but especially when Christ should come in the power and purity of his
Ordinances, filling his people with the fruits of Righteousness, and fattening
them for the purpose with those waters of the Sanctuary, as Nilus does the land
of Egypt, etc. Oh the heaped up happiness of such! O terque quaterque beati!
Say, they sow in tears, yet they shall reap in joy, Psalm. 126.5. say, they send
thither the feet of the Ox and the Ass, those laborious and useful creatures
to ear the ground and fit it for receipt of seed, Psalm. 144.14. they shall
surely eat the fruit of their labors, Psalm. 128.2. They shall reap in due time
if they faint not, Gal. 6.9. His faecunda sine dubio messis indulgantiae
orietur, says Arnobius: their labor cannot be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor.
15. ult.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Ver. 1. VVOe to thee that spoilest] Minatur vastationem vastatori Sennacherib,
vel Antichristo, quem praesignat; Oecol.
Sennacherib and Antichrist are here threatened.

And thou wast not spoiled] Thou abusest thy present peace, and the riches of
Gods goodness and patience toward thee, to fall foul upon others unprovoked.

And dealest treacherously] This, some understand of Sennacherib, Oecol.
See 2 King. 18.14, 17. others of Shebna and other Traitors in Jerusalem, who
dealt underhand with the enemy against Hezekiah, and might happily meet with the
like meed, as he did who betrayed the Rhodes to the Turks, who fleaed him and
salted him: Or at least as Charles the fourths Agents did from Philip Duke of
Austria, who paid them the sum he promised them, but in counterfeit money,
saying that false coin is good enough for such false knaves as they had showed
themselves.

Thou shall be spoiled] Of Kingdom, and life, and all, by thy treacherous
sons, Chap. 37, 38.

Siquis quod fecit patitur, justissima lex est. See Judge. 7.11. with the Note,
and fear thou God, who loves to retaliate, to pay wicked men home in their own
coin, to fill them with their own ways, to overshoot them in their own bow,
etc. Vae ergo vastatoribus: one time or other God will be even with such.

Ver. 2. O Lord, be gracious unto us] Brevicula sed pulchra precatio, a short
but sweet prayer of the Prophet; teaching thereby the people to put the promise
in suit, and to do it effectually: using a throng of strong arguments, as here
is Much in few.

Be thou their arm] Here the Church seems to pray for her children, as they
before had prayed for her. Plena est affectibus haec precatio.

Every morning] Heb. In the mornings] That is, speedily, seasonably,
continually, and for Christ's sake, Voce enim matutinis allusum ad juge
sacrificium, Scultet. Piscat. A Voce Angeli. Vulg.
Exodus 29.

Ver. 3. At the noise of the tumult the people fled] i. e. The Assyrian
Soldiers shall flee at the coming of the Angel with a hurry noise in the air
for greater terror: but he shall give them their pasport. This their
confidence was the fruit of prayer.

At the lifting up of thy self] If God do but arise only, his enemies shall be
scattered; and all that hate him shall flee before him, Psalm. 68.1. See the
Note there.

Ver. 4. And your spoils shall be gathered] The spoil of the Assyrians Camp
now become yours, as 1 Samuel 30.20.

Like the gathering of Catterpillars] Quae ad hominum concursum omnes repent
disperguntur, which are soon rid, when men set themselves to destroy them.

Ver. 5. The Lord is exalted] He has made him a name, gained abundance of
honor.

For he dwells on high] Whence he can pour down plagues at his pleasure on
his proud enemies, and fill Zion with Judgment and Righteousness.

Ver. 6. And wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times] Thy
times O Hezekiah: but especially, O Christ: Or, the stability of thy times and
strong safeguard shall thy wisdom and knowledge be: By his knowledge, that is,
by faith in him, shall my righteous servant (Jesus Christ) justify many, Chap.
53.11. but these are also sanctified by him: the fear of the Lord is their
treasure, they hold faith and a good conscience, which some having put away,
concerning faith, have made shipwreck, 1 Timothy 1.19. See the Note there.

The fear of the Lord is his Treasure] The spirit of this holy fear rested upon
Christ, Paradin. in symbol.
chap. 11.2. and good Hezekiah was eminent for it, not for civil prudence only:
this was flos regis the fairest flower in all his garland: this is solidissima
regiae politiae basis, as one says, the best policy, and the way to wealth.

Ver. 7. Behold their valiant ones] or their Heralds, Messengers, Heb. Hen
Erelam Behold their Erel, or their Ariel chap. 29.1, 2. that is, their Altar,
shall they (i. e. the Assyrians) cry without, sc. in mockery, twitting the Jews
with their Sacrifices as no way profitable to them. Mr. Clerks Eng. Martyrol.
So the profane Papists, when they murdered the poor Protestants at Orleans,
sang in scorn, Judge and revenge my cause O Lord: Others, Have mercy on us
Lord. And when in the late persecution in Bohemia diverse godly Nobles and
Citizens were carried to prison in Prague, the Papists insultingly cried after
them, Why do ye not now sing The Lord reigns?

The Ambassadors of peace] thar went for peace (having for their Symbol Pacem
te poscimus omnes) but could not effect it.

Weep bitterly] so that they might be heard before they entered the City. Vide
quam vivide, see here how lively things are set forth, and what a lamentable
report these Ambassadors make of the state of the country, and the present
danger of losing all.

Ver. 8. The highways lie waste] and by-waies are more frequented, through
fear of the enemy.

He has broken the Covenant] Irritum factum est pactum. He took the money sent
him, but comes on nevertheless, though he had sworn the contrary, 2 King.
18.14, 17. It is said of the Turks at this day, that they keep their leagues
(which serve indeed but as snares to entangle other Princes in) no longer then
stands with their own profit. Turk. Hist. 755.
Their Maxim is, There is no faith to be kept with dogs; whereby they mean
Christians: as the Papists also say, There is no faith to be kept with
Heretics, whereby they mean Protestants: But why kept not Vladislaus King of
Hungary his Faith better with Amurath the great Turk? or our Henry the third
with his Barons, by Papal dispensation? Vah scelus! vae perjuris.

He has despised the Cities] and will not take them for his Subjects: he
scorneth the motion.

He regards no man] He vilipendeth and slighteth all Jewels generally.

Metaphora Pros^popoetica.
Ver. 9. The earth mourns and langisheth] Or the land luget and languet: thus
they go on in their doleful relation: Miserrima sunt omnia, atque miseranda.
What sad work has Antichrist made of late years in the Christian world? what
desolations in all parts?

Lebanon is ashamed and hewn down, Sharon is like a wilderness] East, West,
North, P. al. 80 13.
and South of the Land are laid wast by the enemy and the avenger: that boar
out of the wood, that bear out of the Forest.

Ver. 10. Now will I rise, says the Lord, now] Now, now, now, Emphasin habet
ingeminatio vocis Nunc: This now, thrice repeated, imports both the
opportunity of time, and Gods readiness to relieve. Cum duplicantur lateres,
venit Moses, When things are at worst, they will mend, we say.

Now will I lift up my self] who have hitherto been held an underling; and
inferior to the enemy.

Ver. 11. Ye shall conceive chaff, ye shall bring forth stubble] Gravidi estis
stramine, parietis stipulam; So did Pharaoh, Antiochus, Julian, etc. so does
Antichrist and his Champions, notwithstanding his bloody alarmes to them; such
as was that sounded out in the year 1582.

Vtere jure tuo, Caesar, sectamque Lutheri
Ense, rota, ponto, funibus, igne neca.
And that other to the King of France not many years since; exhorting him to
kill up all the Protestants per Galliam stabulantes (the very words of the
Popes Bull) that had any stable-room in France.

Your breath as fire shall devour you] shall blow up the fire that shall
consume your chaff and stubble: Your iniquity shall be your ruin Ezekiel. 18.38.
Turdus sibi malum cacat. Hic est gladius quem ipse fecisti, this is a sword of
thine own making, said the Soldier to Marius, when he ran him thorough with
it.

Ver. 12. And the people shall be as the burning of lime] As hard chalk-stones
which when burnt to make lime, crumble to crattle.

As thorns cut up] Sear-thornes, that crackle under a pot, and are soon
extinct. The Hebrews tell us, that the Assyrian Soldiers were burnt by the
Angel with a secret fire: that is, with the pestilence as Berosus cited by
Josephus witnesses: and our Prophet hinteth as much in many passages. Lib. 10.
cap. 1.


Ver. 13. Hear ye that are afar of] Longinqui, propinqui. Gods great works are
to be noted and noticed by all. The Egyptians heard of what God had done to the
Assyrian Army; and memorized it by a monument, as Herodotus relates.

Ver. 14. The sinners in Zion are afraid] At the invasion of the Assyrian:
Herod. l. 2. Justin.
those that formerly fleared and jeared Gods Prophets and their menaces, now
fear, and are crest fallen, ready to run into an anger-hole, as we say. It is as
natural for guilt to breed fear and disquiet, as for putrid matter to breed
vermin. Sinners (especially those in Zion where they might be better, and are
therefore the worse a great deal) have galled consciences, and want faith to
fortify the^r hearts against the fear of death or danger; and hence those
pitiful perplexities and convulsions of soul in the evil day: what wonder if
when they see all on fire, they ring their Bells backwards? if instead of
mourning for their sins and making peace with God (as they ought to do) they
mutter and growl against him (as these hypocrites do) for his overgreat
severity?

Fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites] The Jews were an hypocritical
Nation, chap. 9. Epiphanius when he left Constantinople, said that he left
three great things behind him, viz. a great City, a great Palace, and ingentem
hypocrisin, and a great deal of hypocrisy. That facies hypocritic] of our
Nation is that facies Hippocratica which Physicians speak of, of a spent dying
man, that looks ghastly: it is a mortal complexion, a sad prognistick. Oh that
these frozen hearts of ours, since they must have a thew or it will be worse,
might melt here, and be unfoldered from hypocrisy, that we might be saved,
though so as by fire, rather then to be reserved to be thawed with everlasting
burnings, the portion of hypocrites, Matthew. 24. So might we dwell with
everlasting burnings, that is, within the knowledge of Gods terrible presence
and sight of his great Judgments, whereof the hypocrites of the world are
afraid, because this fire melts off their paint, and threatens to wash off
their varnish with rivers of brimstone.

Who among us shall dwell] Or, who of us can but fear a devouring fire?

Ver. 15. He that walks righteously] q. d. Though you cannot, yet there are
those that can: viz. those that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the
flesh, but after the Spirit. Surely to such there is no one condemnation, Romans
8.1. Christ stands as a skreen betwixt the wrath of God and his Elect, for
whose sake also this Paschal Lamb was once for all roasted in the fire of his
fathers indignation, whereby they are not only delivered from the wrath to
come, 1 These. 1.10. but also have boldness and access with confidence by the
Faith of him, Ephesians. 3.12. and 2.18.

He that walks righteously] Through whose whole life righteousness runs as
the woof does through the web, as the blood does through the veins, etc.

And speaks uprightly] Heb. Evennesses, non blasphema, impudica, fescennina,
not the language of Hell but of Canaan, see Jam. 3.2.

That despises the gain of oppressions] The Mammon of iniquity, wealth gotten
by force or fraud. A public person (especially) as he should have nothing to
lose, so he should have nothing to get: he should be above all price or sale,
Nec prece nec precio should be his Motto.

That shakes his hands from holding of bribes] He does not only not do wrong,
but not receive a gift, whereby he may be engaged or inclined to do it.

That stops his ears from hearing of blood] He not only not sheddeth it, but
refuses to hear any communing about such a business. Quintil. declam.


That shuts his eyes from seeing of evil] Lest his heart should thereby be
betrayed: for vitiis nobis in animum per oculos est via, could an Heathen say:
By the eyes evil gets into the heart: by looking comes lusting: and
millions dye of the wound in the eye.

Ver. 16. He shall dwell on high] Extra jactum, out of the gunshot, the reach
of evils and enemies. Or in heaven shall he dwell with God in safety: who is to
the wicked a consuming fire, ver. 14.

His place of defense shall be the munitions of Rocks] Rocks within Rocks;
Rocks beneath, above Rocks: Rocks so deep no Pioner can undermine them, so
thick no Canon can pierce them, so high no Ladder can scale them, etc.

Bread shall be given him, his waters shall not fail] He shall have all that
heart can wish, or need require.

Ver. 17. Thine eyes shall see the King in his beauty] Hezekiah in his pristine
state and luster: yea more glorious and renowned then ever before. Hierom
understands it of Christ reigning gloriously in Heaven, and the Saints
looking from thence should see the earth a far off as little and
contemptible, and say, O quam angusti sunt mortalium termini!
O quam angusti sunt mortalium animi!


Austine wished that he might have seen these three things, Romam in flore,
Paulum in ore, Christum in corpore, Rome in the flourish, Paul in the pulpit,
Christ in the body of flesh. Venerable Bede came after him, and wished rather
that he might see his King Christ in his beauty, as he is now at the right hand
of his Father far outshining the brightest Cherub in Heaven.

Oiim haec meminisse juvabit.
Ver. 18. Thine hearts shall meditate terror] But thou shall now think of it as
waters that are past, calling to mind what speeches amongst those late
distractions had fallen from thee.

Where is the Scribe? Or the Muster-master of the Assyrian Army? Verba sunt
insultantium and exsultantium, says Piscator, they are the words of Gods
people insulting over the enemy now overthrown and dispersed. See the like done
by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.10.

Ver. 19. Thou shall not see a fierce people] Or, Look not upon a fierce
people, or, as some render it, a barbarous people, of a stammering tongue that
thou can not understand (such as are most of the Schoolmen; seven years said
one, are but sufficient to understand the barbarisms of Scotus upon Lombard.)
but rather look upon Zion.

Ver. 20. Look upon Zion the City of our Solemnities] where God is daily and
duly served, and is therefore her shield and exceeding great reward, Genesis
17.1. If that Heathen King, hearing of his enemies approach whilst he was
sacrificing, could answer (...) I am serving my Gods, and therefore fear not
their force: how much more cause had Zion to be confident, and to sing as Psalm.
46.1, 2, 3, etc. See Psalm. 48.12, 13.

Ver. 21. But there the glorious Lord will be] The Church must needs be
invincible, because the glorious Lord is her Champion, or will do gallantly for
us, as the words may be rendered. Her name is Jehovah-Shammah, Ezekiel. 48.35. The
Lord is there, and how many reckon we him at? He alone is a potent Army, Isa.
52.12.

A place of broad rivers and Streams] Such as Mesopotamia was, or the Garden of
God. Or, he shall be instead of broad rivers, etc. even a river that shall not
be drawn dry or sucked out (as Euphrates was by Cyrus when he took Babylon) a
river that shall not fail the dwellers by (as Nilus, once at least, did Egypt,
for nine years together; Ovid Art. l. 1.
Creditur Aegyptus caruisse juvantibus arva
Imbribus; atque annis sicca fuisse novem)
But shall fill its banks and shores perpetually, and keep a full stock of
streams and waters.

Wherein shall go no gally -- nor gallant ship] i. e. None of the enemies
navies shall annoy it. England had the experience of this in that famous 88.
when the Seas were turreted with such a Navy of Ships, as her swelling waves
could hardly be seen: and the Flags, Streamers and Ensigns so spread in the
wind, that they seemed to darken even the Sun: but the glorious God defeated
them.

Ver. 22. For the Lord is our Judge] Ours in all relations, therefore we shall
not dye or do amiss. See Habak. 1.12. with the Note: Our Judge will do us
right. Our Lawgiver will give us the best direction, (See Nehem. 9.13. with
the Note) Our King will see to our safety. Let the children of Zion be joyful
in their King, Psalm. 149.2.

Ver. 23. Thy Tacklings are loosed] Thy shipping O Assyrian, is wracked and
dissipated. Vbi per funes tentoria; per vela, vexilla intelliguntur. The
Prophet elegantly expresses the matter in Sea-mens terms.

Ver. 24. And the inhabitant shall not say I am sick] Sc. by reason of the long
and straight seige. None shall be so lame, ver. 23. or sick and in pain (as
here) but that he shall be in case to pursue and prey upon the enemies.

The people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity] Jehovah Rophe,
or the Physician shall heal them on both sides, make them whole every whit.
This is a most sweet Promise, and highly to be prized by all that are heirs of
the Promises.

Optandum est ut sit men's sana in corpore sano. CHAP. XXXIV.
Ver. 1. COme near ye Nations] In this Chapter and the next, the Prophet, for
the terror of the wicked, and comfort of the godly, summeth up what he had
said before concerning the destruction of the enemies, and the restoration of
the Church. Lib. 11. de praep. Evang.
Eusebius (with many other Ancients) will have this Chapter to be understood of
the end of the world and the last judgment: and further says that Plato has
taken this place of the Prophet Isaiah into his writings, and made it his own,
Litera vero hujus vaticinii de extremo judicio non loquitur: but this cannot be
the literal sense of the text, says Scultetus. The Jew-Doctours will needs
understand these two Chapters as a Prophecy of their return into the holy land,
when once Idumea shall be destroyed: and for this they allege, Lam. 4.22.
which yet proves it not.

Ver. 2. For the indignation of the Lord is upon all Nations] Is or shall be
upon all the Churches enemies, whether of former or latter time; even his
boiling wrath, as the Word signifies.

He has utterly destroyed them] Or, he will make an Anathema of them, as ver.
5. the people of my curse, devoted to destruction.

Ver, 3. Their slain also shall be cast out) Buried with the burial of an Ass,
Jer. 22.19. which Cicero somewhere calls sepulturam insepultam: This may also
befall such as for Gods sake are slain all the day long: but to them it is no
such judgment; Caelo tegitur qui caret urna.

And their stink shall come up out of their carcasses] They stink alive as
Goats, as whited Tombs, as walking dunghils: and now their dead carcasses
also shall stink above-ground.

And the mountains shall be melted with their blood] Just omnino, because
they moistened the earth with the blood of Gods people, and dunged the land
with their dead carcasses.

Ver. 4. And all the host of Heaven shall be dissolved] Inusitati supplicii
atrocitas sic designatur. So great shall be the slaughter of the Nations, that
the heavenly bodies shall seem to be sensible of it, and amazed at it, and the
whole heaven to be rolled together as a scroll, lest it should be forced to
behold it. In a bloody fight between Amurath the third, King of Turks, and
Lazarus Despot of Servia, many thousands fell on both sides: the Turkish
Histories, to express the terror of the day, vainly say, that the Angels in
Heaven amazed with that hideous noise, for that time forgot the heavenly hymns
wherewith they always glorify God.

Ver. 5. For my sword shall be bathed in heaven] Heb. drunk or drenched, i. e.
In caelo decretum est ut inebrietur; whence-soever the sword comes, it is
bathed in Heaven, has its commission from God, Jer. 47.6, 7. See Jer. 46.9.
and as a drunken man reeleth to and fro: so the sword, when once in commission,
roveth up and down, and rides circuit usually, Ezekiel. 14.17.

Behold it shall come down upon Idumea] i e. Upon the Edomites who were assidui
and acerrimi hosts Judaeorum, bitter enemies to the Jews, though both Nations
came of Isaac, both were circumcised: so are now the Romish Edomites to the
Churches of Christ, with whose blood they are red all over, Rev. 17. The
Hebrews understand here by Idumea, Rome.

Ver. 6. The sword of the Lord is filled with blood, etc.] That is, it makes
clean work: as the blood and fat were in sacrifices consumed, Levit. 1.16, 17.
and this execution was no less pleasing to God than some solemn sacrifice.

For the Lord has a sacrifice in Bozrah] The Metropolis of Idumea: Ptolomy
calls it Botsra. And it prefigured Rome, says Piscator; the chief City and
seat of Antichrists Kingdom.

Ver. 7. And the Unicorns shall come down] Monocerotes, qui interimi possunt,
capi non possunt, creatures of untameable fierceness: or Rhinocerotes, as the
Margent has it: he means the Great ones.

Ver. 8. For the controversy of Zion] i. e. Of the Church both Jewish and
Christian, says Piscator: Confer, Rev. 18.2.

Alludit ad vicinam and s^tu and scelere and clade Sodomam. lib. 5. de bell.
Jud. Geog. l. 16.
Ver. 9. And the streams thereof shall be turned into pitch] Like the Lake of
Sodom which is near to Idumea; and whereof Josephus writes, that an Ox, having
all his legs bound, will not sink into it, the water is so thick and pitchy.
Strabo, though a stranger to this Prophecy, attesteth the accomplishment of it.
Lyra says, that in some part of Idumea there is still ascending a smoke of
fire and brimstone, as out of Mount Aetna in Sicily. And Hyperius thinks that
the Edomites are here further threatened with hell torments. It should seem so
by the next words.

Ver. 10. It shall not be quenched night nor day; the smoke of it shall go up
for ever] See Revel. 14.11. and 18.18. and 19.3. And observe how John the
Divine picks out the choicest passages of the Old Testament, and polisheth
therewith his Revelation.

None shall pass thorough it for ever] i. e. Incolendi animo, to dwell there:
passengers did pass through it, and wondered at Gods dreadful judgments
thereon, Jer. 49.17.

Ver. 11. The cormorant and the bittern shall possess it] God cannot satisfy
himself in saying what he will do to the Edomites, because they had dealt by
revenge, and had taken vengeance with a despightful heart to destroy the
Church, for the old Satanical hatred, as Ezekiel 25.15. He will turn in those
animalia faeda, fera and terribelia, to dwell in their land; whereby is noted
extreme devastation, which is here in many exquisite words (more propemodum
Poetico) described.

And he shall stretch out upon it] So that men shall in vain think of
rebuilding and repeopling it.

Ver. 12. They shall call the Nobles thereof to the Kingdom] The Venetians have
Magistrates called Pregadi; because at first men were prayed to take the
office, and to help to govern the State: but here were none left for such a
purpose.

Ver. 13. A Court for Owles] Or, Ostritches: see on ver. 11.

Ver. 14. The wild beasts of the desart] Heb. Ziim and Jiim: See Chap. 12.21,
22. where these monstrous creatures are said to dance: whence Basil notes,
that men learned of devils to dance: Conr. Clingius.
And another says, that a dance is a circle; the center whereof is the devil,
the circumference, all his Angels.

And the Satyr shall cry to his fellow] Heb. the rough or hairy one. Chald.
Daemones inter se colludent, the devils shall play among themselves, Satan is a
rough harsh spirit, so are his, See Levit. 17.7.

Ver. 15. There shall the great Owl make her nest] Heb. Kippoz. The Hebrews
themselves agree not what creatures these are here mentioned: so far are they
fallen from the knowledge of the Scripture: Their tale about Lilits (once Adams
first wife, but now a scriech-Owle or an evil spirit) is not worthy the
mentioning.

Ver. 16. Seek ye out of the book of the Lord] Sciscitamini ex libro Domini,
the Holy Bible: which Bishop Bonneri Chaplain called in scorn of the Martyrs,
Your little pretty Gods-book: Another Bohemian blasphemer for Biblia called it
Vitlia: which in the Bohemian language signifies Vomit. But let us search the
Scriptures, (and particularly this Prophecy commanded to be written in a book,
chap. 30.8.) and compare the truth of these predictions with the events.

None shall want her mate] Some write of the Asp, he never wandreth alone
without his companion; and none of these birds of desolation want their mate:
so craft and cruelty do ever go together in the Churches enemies.

Ver. 17. And he has cast the lot for them] i. e. For those creatures of prey
aforementioned.

From generation] i. e. For many generations.

CHAP. XXXV.
Ver. 1. THe wilderness, and the solitary place shall be glad for them] The
Edomites, and other enemies have had their part: It has been sufficiently
said, Woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him: for the reward of his
hands shall be given him. And now the Prophet is bidden to say to the Righteous
(to tell him so from the Lord) that it shall be well with him; for the reward
of his hands shall be given him, Isa. 3.10, 11. The wilderness and the desert,
that is, the poor people of God that have been oppressed and slighted in this
world, shall be restored into a happy and flourishing estate: the Church shall
have her Halcyons under Hezekiah, but especially under Christ, She shall have
it both in temporals and spirituals, ver. 2.

Ver. 2. The glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency of Carmel,
etc.] Outward blessings shall be heaped upon Gods people: even all that heart
can wish, or need require.

They shall see the glory of the Lord] Spiritual blessings in heavenly things
in Christ Jesus shall be conferred upon them also: even every good gift and
perfect giving from the Father of lights, Qui icturatos intexit floribus hortos,
Quique jubet rutilis albescere lilia campis.


Ver. 3. Strengthen ye the weak hands] q. d. Cheer up, my hearts, be of good
courage, and God shall strengthen your hearts, all ye that hope in the Lord.
Comfort ye also one another with these words, and build up each other on your
most holy Faith; and I will show you how, and in what terms you shall do it.

Ver. 4. Say to them that are of a fearful heart] Inconsideratis; to them that
consider not the Promises, but forget the consolations, Heb. 12.5. so poring
upon their sins, that they see not their Savior.

Behold your God will come with vengeance] He will tread Satan under your feet
shortly, Romans 16.20.

Even your God with a recompence] Diabolo par pari retribuet Christus, says
Hierom: Christ will be even with the devil: He had got one of Christ's Disciples
(Judas:) and (to cry quittance) Christ gat one of his, Paul. Cyprian was wont
thus to comfort his hearers, Veniet Antichristus, sed superveniet Christus,
Antichrist will come, but Christ will not be long behind him.

Ver. 5. Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened] This was fulfilled
corporally in cures wrought by Christ, Mat. 4.27. and 11.5. etc. and
spiritually in the preaching of the Gospel by the efficacy of his spirit, Act.
26.18. and 16.14. Apollonius Tyanaeus could never do such miracles, nor any
other. This shows that Jesus of Nazareth was the true Messiah.

Ver. 6. Then shall the lame man leap as an hart] As that impotent man did,
Act. 3.8. and those Loripedes, Heb. 12.13.

And the tongue of the dumb sing] As good old Zacharies did, Luke 1. Not so
much for his speech restored, or his son received, as for his Savior now at
hand: and as did those that sang, He has done all things well; he makes both
the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak, Mac. 7.37. yea to utter the great
things of God, and to speak good of his name. Lo here, says Luther, miracles
to confirm the Gospel to be of God, against those that deride his Ministers,
saying, They cannot make so much as a lame horse sound: For all they in whose
hearts it takes effect, of blind are made to see, of deaf to hear, of lame to
go, and of dumb to speak.

For in the wilderness shall waters break out] This and that which follows
in the next verse, Junius makes to be the matter of their song, viz. the grace
of God abundantly communicated to his Church. See Joh. 7.38, 39. The Jews dream
that when their Messiah comes, the red sea shall again be divided and the rock
cloven, much water gushing out, etc. Thus they work themselves into the fools
Paradise of a sublime dotage, by misunderstanding this text.

Ver. 7. And the parched ground, etc.] See on ver. 6.

Ver. 8. And an highway shall be there] i. e. In the Church of Christ: and a
way] (...), the Kings highway to Heaven, arcta and ampla: latet and lucet.

The way of holinesse] Or, the way of the Sanctuary.

But it shall be for those] Those Beneficiaries of Christ mentioned ver. 5, 6.
the ransomed of the Lord, ver. 10.

The wayfaring men though fooles] Simple Christians.

Shall not erre] Miss their way, or miscarry in it.

Ver. 9. No Lion shall be there] The Devil (that roaring Lion) nor his
actuaries, tyrants and heretics, shall haunt these holy highways: God will
preserve his people from all deveratory evils (as Tertullian calls them) 2
These. 3.3. that wicked one (the devil) shall not once touch them, 1 John 5.18.
so as to thrust his deadly sting into them.

Ver. 10. And the ransomed of the Lord] Those happy ones, Deuteronomy. 33.29.

Shall return] To the Lord from whom they had deeply revolted.

Tantum gaudebimus quantum amabimus. Tantum amabimus quantum cognoscemus. Aug.
With songs] As they were wont to do in their sacred solemnities.

And everlasting joy upon their heads] As an unfadable crown, 1 Pet. 1.5. and
5. 4. they shall pass from the jaws of death to the joys of heaven.

Joy and gladnesse] i. e. Outward and inward, say some.

And sorrow, and sighing] Their joys shall be sincere, and constant,

CHAP. XXXVI. and CHAP. XXXVII.
FOr these two Chapters, see 2 King. 18, and 19. with the Notes. See also 2 Chronicles. 32.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Ver. 1. IN those days was Hezekiah sick] See 2 King. 20.1, 2. 2 Chronicles. 32.24.
with the Notes.

Ver. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. See as before.

Ver. 9. The writing of Hezekiah] Scriptum confessionis, A song of thanksgiving
set forth by Hezekiah, and here inserted by the Prophet Isaiah, as a public
instrument, and lasting monument of Gods great goodness to him in his late
recovery: such a thankful man is worth his weight in the gold of Ophir.
Heathens in such a case were wont to hang up tables in the Temples of their
gods. Papists build Chapels, erect Altars, hang up Memories (as they call
them) and vow presents to their hee-Saints and she Saints. But amongst us
(alas) it is according to the Italian Proverb, When the disease is once
removed, God is utterly defrauded, Sciapato il morbo, fraudato il sancto.
Aegrotus surgit, sed pia vota jacent.

We may be wondered at, not without cause, as the Emperor Constantine marvelled
at his people that were newly become Christians: I marvel, said he, how it
comes to pass, that many of my people are worse now than before they were
Christians.

Ver. 10. I said in the cutting off of my dayes] When I looked upon my self as
a dead man. Here he tells us what passed betwixt God and him whilst he lay
desperately sick. The utmost of a danger escaped is to be recognized and
recorded: This will both instruct the judgment, enlarge the heart, and open
the mouth.

I shall go to the gates of the grave] He makes the grave to have gates:
either by a poetical fiction, or else by a proverbial expression. So the gates
of death, Psalm. 9. 13. and 107.18. See 1 Samuel 2.6.

I am deprived of the residue of my years] sc. that I might have lived in a
natural course. Vox baec queritantis quidem est: Quis enim vult mori? prorsus
nemo. Nature shunneth death as its slaughter-man.

Ver. 11. I said I shall not see the Lord] In the glass of his Ordinances; his
love whereunto made Hezekiah so loath to depart: as also his delight in the
Communion of Saints, and his desire to do more good amongst them on all
occasions. This made good Paul in a strait also. Philip. 1.23, 24. I loved the
man (said Theodesius concerning Ambrose) for that when he died, he was more
sollicitous of the Churches welfare then of his own.

Even the Lord] Non videbo Jah Jah. I shall not see the Lord of the Lord, Leo
Castrius.
Deum Dei, vel Deum de Deo. That is, Christ in the flesh, as I had well hoped
to have done: so some sense it. Others say He redoubleth the word Jah to
express his ardent affection to Gods service, and to intimate his desire of
life to that purpose, Ver. 22.

Ver. 12. Mine age is departed] Or, my generation, or, my habitation: here I
have no settled abode, no continuing City, but am flitting, as a shepherds shed.

I have cut off like a weaver my life] By my sins I have shortened my days, as
Genesis 38.7.10. Or rather, God as a weaver that has finished his web, cutteth me
out of the Loom of life. We know what the Poets fain of the Fates, Clotho colum
bajulat, Lachesis trabit, Atropos occat.

He will cut me off with pining sicknesse] Or, from the thrum; for the same
Hebrew word signifies both; because of the thinnes, and weakness of it.

From day even to night] So that by night I shall be dead, as they story of the
Ephemerobii; and as Aristotle writes that the River Hypanis in Thracia every
day brings forth little bladders, out of which come certain flies, which are
thus bred in the morning, fledgd at noone, and dead at night.

Ver. 13. I reckoned until morning] And then, at utmost, I thought there would
be an end of my life and pain together: for what through troubles without, and
terrors within, he was in a woe case, even as if a Lion had broke all his
bones. Hoc sentiunt qui magnis febribus aestuant, says an Interpreter. Now
whereas some say All dye of a fever, let us take care we dye not of a cold
shaking fit of fear.

Ver. 14. Like a Crane or a Swallow, so did I chatter] Ita pipiebam; perapta
sunt similitudines. Broken petitions coming from a broken heart are of singular
avayl with God, Psalm. 51.17. Ah Pater, brevissima quidem vox est, sed omnia
complectitur, says Luther, i. e. Ah Father, it a short prayer, but very
complexive and effectual. So is the prayer here recorded.

O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me] Miserere mihi misero. Tu tuam fidem
interpone.
Hezekiah though a most holy man, begged pardon at his death, and flies to
Christ his surety. So did Augustine (he prayed over the seven penitential
Psalms) and Fulgentius, and Archbishop Usher. Some render it Pertexe me, weave
me out, lengthen my life to its due period.

Ver. 15. What shall I say?] This he seems to speak in a way of wondering at
Gods goodness in delivering him from so great a death. The like does the
Apostle, Romans 8.31. What shall we then say to these things?

He has both spoken unto me, Dixit and fecit.
and himself has done it] He no sooner bade me be well, but he made me so.
Thus he attributes his recovery to the most faithful promise of God, and not
to the lump of figs, etc.

I shall shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of my soul] Or, I shall
go quietly and cheerfully all my years, after my souls bitterness. sc. when it
is past and gone. Scultet.


Ver. 16. O Lord, by these things men live] By thy promises so performed, the
just do live by Faith, and live long in a little while: For life consists in
action; and some live more in a day, then others do in a year. An Elephant
lives two hundred years, says Aristotle: three hundred and fifty says
Philostratus: and yet man, though of much shorter a continuance, is not
inferior to an Elephant. For this is not the best thing in nature, says
Scaliger, to live longest, but to live to best purpose. Now man's life is a way
to life eternal. Other creatures have that they live for: Not so Man, whilst
here.

And in all these things is the life of my Spirit] The godly esteem of life by
that stirring they find in their souls: Else they lament as over a dead soul.

So will thou recover me] Or, have thou recovered me?

Ver. 17. Behold for peace I had great bitternesse] Mar Mar; the approach of
death was to this good man bitter bitterness: and yet Christ had taken away
from him the sting (or gall) of death; so that he might better say then Agag
did, Surely the bitterness of death is past, or then Lucan does of the Gauls
and Britones, -- animaeque capaces
Mortis:


But thou have in love to my soul] Or, thou have embraced my soul out of the
corrupting pit. Complectendi verbum, affectum plane paternum, and studium
juvandi singular exprimit.

For thou have cast all my sins behind thy back] As an old oreworn evidence,
that is out of date, and of no use. Here it is well noted, that we must set our
sins before our face, if we would have God to cast them behind his back, Psalm.
50.2^. and 51.3.

Ver. 18. For the grave cannot praise thee] i. e. Palam and cum aliis, openly
and exemplarily. See Psalm. 6.5. with the Notes: David desires to live for no
other end (and so Hezekiah) then to be glorifying of God.

They that go down into the pit] Of the grave: so, of despair. It is a sin for
any man to say I am a reprobate: for it keeps him in sin, and cuts the sinews
of endeavor.

Ver. 19. The living, the living, he shall praise thee] Those that live the
life of nature if withal they live the life of Grace, and so are living
living, and not dead whilst they live: for the wicked cannot praise God: they
can say God a thank, and that is all. But as it is with the hand-diall, the
finger of the dial stands at twelve, when the dial has not moved one
minute: so though their tongues are forward in praises, yet their hearts stand
still. What they do this way is but dead work.

The Father to the Son shall make known] and for this end Parents may desire to
live longer. Hezekiah did his part, no doubt, by wicked Manasseh, who also at
length repented and was saved.

Ver. 20. The Lord was ready to save] Heb. The Lord to save. Servati sumus ut
serviamus. Hezekiah was the better for his sickness: God had brought health out
of it, as he does out of all his, by bringing the body of death into a
consumption.

Therefore we will sing my songs] Quales quae so illi? says Scultetus, what
kind of songs would he sing in the house of the Lord and in the hearing of all
the people, as long as he bad a day to live? Surely this here recorded among
and above the rest, though it set forth his queritations and infirmities:
Deprimunt se sancti ut Deus exaltetur. The Saints gladly abase themselves, if
thereby God may be exalted.

Ver. 21. Let them take a lump of figs] Commendatur hic usus Medicinae. The
Patient must pray, but withal make use of means; trust God, but not tempt him.
See the Note on 2 King. 20.

Ver. 22. See on 2 King. 20.8.

CHAP. XXXIX.
VErse 1, 2, 3, etc.] See 2. King. 20.12, 13, 14, etc. with the Notes thereon.

CHAP. XL.
Ver. 1. COmfortye, comfort ye my people] Hitherto has been the Comminatory
part of this Prophecy: follows now the Consolatory: Here begins the Gospel
of the Prophet Isaiah, and holds on to the end of the book. The good people
of his time had been forewarned by the foregoing Chapter of the Babylonian
Captivity. Those in aftertimes, not only during the Captivity, but under
Antiochus and other Tyrants, were ready to think themselves utterly cast off,
because heavily afflicted. See ver. 27. of this Chapter, with Lam. 5.22. Here
therefore command is given for their comfort, and that Gospel be preached to
the penitent: the word here used signifies, first to repent, then to comfort,
1 Samuel 5. 35. 1 Samuel 12.24. This our Prophet had been a Boanerges, a thundering
Preacher all the forepart of his life (see one instance for all chap. 24.
where Pericles-like, fulgurat, intonat, totam terram permiscet, etc.) Now
toward his latter end, and when he had one foot in the grave, the other in
Heaven, he grew more mellow and melleous, (as did likewise Mr. Lever, Mr.
Perkins, Mr. Whately, and some other eminent and earnest Preachers that might
be named) setting himself wholly in a manner, to comfort the abject and feeble
minded; Sunt eutem omnia plena magnis adfectibus. Hyp.
which also he does with singular dexterity and efficacy. This redoubled
Comfort ye, is not without its Emphasis: but that which follows, ver. 2. is a
very hive of heavenly honey.

Ver. 2. Speak ye comfortably] Speak to the heart, as Genesis 34.3. Hos. 2.14.
Cheer her up* speak to her with utmost earnestness, that your words may work
upon her and stick by her: do it solidly, not frigidly.

That her warfare is accomplished] Militiam, not Malitiam, as the Vulgar has
it: The word signifies also a set term of time, See Dan. 9.2. and Gal. 4.4.
God has limited the Saints sufferings, Rev. 2.10. Some by warfare here
understand that hard and troublesome Pedagogy of Moses Law; that yoke
importable, Act. 15.10. taken away by Christ.

That her iniquity is pardoned] Heb. her iniquity is accepted: Perfectam esse
paenam ejus, so Piscator renders it. She might be under Gods hand, though her
sins were pardoned. The Palsy-man heard, Son, thy sins are forgiven thee, some
while before he heard, Take up thy bed and walk.

That she has received of the Lords hand double] i. e. Abundantly and in a
large measure, satis superque, so much as to her merciful Father seems over
and above, more than enough. She has received double for all her sins: and yet
death is the just hire of the least sin, Romans 6.23. But this is the language of
Gods compassions rolled together and kindled into repentings; Jerusalem her
self was of another judgment, Ezra. 9.13. Our God has punished us less than
our sins: and yet he reckons that we fill up that which is behind of the
afflictions of Christ, Col. 1.24.

Ver. 3. The voice of him that cryeth] See Mat. 3.3. John 1.25. with the notes
there: but Luke cites this text more fully than the other Evangelists,
applying it to the Baptist crying in the wilderness, sc. of Judea, where he
first preached, or (as some sense it) in the ears of a waste and wild people.
Hereby is meant the world, says one, word of Gods grace, barren in all virtue,
having no pleasing abode, Diod.
nor sure direction of any good way in it, being full of horror, and accursed.

Ver. 4. Every valley shall be exalted] Terms taken from the custom of
Princes coming into a place; viz. to have their way cleared, and passages
facilitated. See on Mat. 3.4.

Ver. 5. And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed] i. e. Jesus Christ (the
Lord of glory, Jam. 2.1.) shall appear in the flesh. Some interpreters
understand this whole Sermon ad literam concerning Christ and Redemption
wrought by him: yet with an allusion to the Jews deliverance out of Babylon;
for this was a type of that, like as Cyrus also was of Christ.

Ver. 6. The voyce] Or a voice, sc. in vision.

What shall I cry? All flesh is grasse] This is taught by every Philosopher,
says Sasbors^: but never is it taught effectually, till cried to the heart by
Gods Word and Spirit: for which reason also it is not uttered here without a
Preparative, by way of Dialogue, to stir up to attention.

All flesh is grasse] Not only as grass, but is grass: we are all but dying
men; death has already taken hold of us, and does every day feed upon us
insensibly. To live is but to lie a dying. The Jews at this day, when they
return from burying a corpse, cast grass over their heads; either to signify
that all flesh is grass; or else, their hope of a Resurrection.

And all the goodlinesse thereof] Any thing eximious or excellent in man must
needs vanish, when the glory of the Lord is revealed, ver. 5. The sight of God
makes all else little.

As the flower of the field] Which is more apt to be blasted, cropped, or trodden
down, then the flower of the garden.

Esse, fuisse, fore, tria florida sunt sine flore:
Nam simul omne perit, quod fuit, est, and erit.
Ver. 7. Because the spirit of the Lord blows upon it] Or, when the breath of
the Lord blows upon it. God can easily blow men to destruction, dissipate
them as so many vile dustheaps, Job 4.9. and 34.14, 15. Psalm. 104.29. Dan.
2.34, 35. Zach. 4.6.

Surely the people is grasse] Have we not heard? have we not seen from the
beginning? does not every days experience seal to it, that all flesh is
grass? yea has not God often heard our attestations? We shake our heads, we
confess it is true, etc. and yet we lay it not rightly to heart, though so
deeply assevered and assured us.

Ver, 8. But the Word of our God shall stand for ever] q. d. Though the Elect
also as well as others are grass, frail and fading creatures, yet the grace of
God wrought in their hearts by the Gospel, is stable and lasting, See 1 Pet.
1.23. with the Note. And so necessary is this whole doctrine here delivered,
that the Ministers of the Gospel are commanded here not to write it only, but
to speak it: nor that only, but to cry it also, with all possible both
affection and power of inforcement.

Ver. 9. O Zion that bring good tydings] That Evangelist: The Gospel is the
sum of all the good news in the world. Christ's Incarnation ( Bisher the word
here used, comes of Bashar, which signifies Flesh) was glad tidings of great
joy to all people, Luke 2.10.

Get thee up into the high mountain] Zion was it self an high mountain: yet is
bidden to ascend into an higher, for the better promulgation of the Gospel.

Lift it up, be not afraid] Viz. for persecution which is Evangelii genius, the
evil Angel that doggeth the Gospel at the heels, as Calvin wrote to the French
King.

Behold your God] Behold the Messiah, who has been so long expected, is now
exhibited.

Ver. 10. Behold the Lord God will come with strong hand] Or, The Lord God will
come against the mighty: i. e. Christ against the Devil and his Agents; whom he
shall vanquish, Piscat. Diod.
and give them their due. See 1 John 3.6. Mat. 12.29. Joh. 12.31. Colos. 2.15.
Heb. 2.14.

And his arm shall rule for him] Or, his arm shall rule over him: i. e. over
Satan.

Ver. 11. He shall feed his flock like a Shepherd] That good Shepherd shall,
the Lord Jesus, Joh. 10.11. See Psalm. 23.1. with the Notes.

He shall gather the Lambs with his arms] The Lord has a great care of his
little ones: like as he had of the weaker tribes: In their march thorough the
wilderness (in their several companies or brigades) he put a strong Tribe to
two weak Tribes; as Judah to Issachar and Zebulon: lest they should faint, or
fail.

Ver. 12. Who has measured the waters] Who but God alone? Totus est in hoc
libro, ut confirmet nos in fide. God made Heaven, Earth and Sea, in number,
weight and measure, as an Architect; therefore he wants neither power nor
wisdom to work in, and for his people.

And comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure] In a teirce or in three
fingers: for he spoke before of the hollow and span of Gods hand.

Ver. 13. Who has directed the Spirit of the Lord] Who was then of his
Counsel, when he made the Universe? None but his own Essential wisdom, Prove.
8.30. See Romans 11.34.35. with the Notes.

Ver. 14. With whom took he Counsel?] See ver. 13.

Ver. 15. Behold the Nations are as the drop of a bucket] Quota igitur es tu
istius guttae particula? what a small parcel art thou then of that small drop?
says an Ancient.

As the small dust of the balance] That weighs nothing: Mira igitur superbiae
^n straestultitia. Oecolamp.
yea all men together laid in the balance with vanity it self, will ascend or
tilt up, Psalm. 62.9.

He takes up the Isles as a very little thing] Or, he takes up and throws
away the Isles as powder.

Ver. 16. And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn] So infinitely great is God: so
absolutely insufficient is man to give God satisfaction. Let those think on
this, who talk of setting off with God, and of making amends, by their good
deeds, for their bad.

Ver. 17. All Nations before him are as nothing] Agnosce ergo virium tuarum
(...). See therefore thine own nothingness; and learn to vilify, yea to
nullify thy self before God, as Agur, Prove. 30.2. and as David, who was a worm
and no man, Tertul.
Psalm. 22.6. Rejectamentum hominis and nullificamen populi.

Ver. 18. To whom then will ye liken God?] A sin which the Jews were exceeding
prone unto, and would be tempted to, when in Captivity at Babylon; here
therefore they have an Antidote provided aforehand. The voice of the Gospel is,
Little Children, keep your selves from Idols, 1 John 5.21. See the Notes.

Ver. 19. The workman melts a graven Image] That may be afterward graved and
gilded over.

And casts silver chaines] To fasten it to the place; Or, he raileth it in.
Et nisi homini Deus placuerit, Deus non erit, says Tertullian. Numa, second
King of Romans, saw this great vanity, and therefore forbad Images of the gods
in Temples: Plut. in Numa.
So do the Turks at this day, to the shame of Papists Idolomania.

Ver. 20. He that is so impoverished -- chooses a tree] Which therehence may
well say, Olim truneus eram ficulnus, inutile lignum,
Cum faber incertus scamnum, faceretne Priapum,
Maluit esse Deum; Deus inde ego: --


He chooses a tree that will not rot] Which yet is hard to do; the Cypress
tree is most likely. But what goodly Gods were those that could not keep
themselves from rotting.

A cunning workman] Somewhat better than he who made the ugly Rood of Cockram,
whereof when they complained to the Mayor of Doncaster, he advised them to clap
a pair of horns on the head of it, and then instead of a god, it would make an
excellent devil.

Ver. 21. Have ye not known? have ye not heard?] Both Jews and Gentiles went
against the light; the former of the Word, the latter of their own consciences;
in thus changing the glory of the incorruptible God into the similitude of a
corruptible creature, Romans 1.23. Their ignorance was wilful and affected: some
render this text, Will ye not know? will ye not hear? Idolaters are brutish and
blockish; they that make them, are like unto them.

Ver. 22. It is he that sits upon the circle of the earth] As Sovereign, and
is he fit to be pourtrayed? In Thebe a town of Egypt, Plutarch de Isid and Osir.
they painted God in the likeness of a man blowing an egg out of his mouth: to
signify, that he made the round world by his Word. Others set him forth as an
Emperor with a Globe in one hand, and a Light-Bolt in the other. Pencer and
others tell us, that if there were a path made round the circle of the earth,
an able footman might easily go it in nine hundred days.

Ver. 23. That brings Princes to nothing] After their part acted here a
while, they go off the stage of life, and are seen no more. Augustus Caesar
said, that his life was nothing else but a kind of a Comedy: and that he had
acted his part, as became him; and therefore, at his death, he called for a
Plaudite.

Ver. 24. Yea they shall not be planted] They are like grass, that is neither
planted nor well rooted: but as weeds that grow on the top of the water, vel
tanquam podii folium, Hieron.
quod mane candidum, meridie purpureum, vespere caeruleum aspicitur.

And he shall blow upon them] Two fits of an ague shook to death great
Tamerlan, in the midst of his preparations for the conquest of Turkey.

Ver. 25. To whom then will ye liken me?] See ver. 18, 19.

Cicero.
Ver. 26. Lift up your eyes on high] Who is there says an Heathen, that looks
up toward Heaven, and presently perceives not that there is a God? we may well
add, and an Almighty God? Why then should the vanities of the Heathen come in
competition with Him? or why should Jacob say, My way is hid from the Lord,
etc. as ver. 27. as if God neglected them, or were weary of helping them, ver.
28.

And behold who has created these things] Without tool or toil, ver. 28. And
shall the creature be worshipped rather than the Creator God blessed for ever?

That brings out their host by number] As if he had them set down in his
muster-roles. Astronomers take upon them to number and name the chiefest of the
stars: reliquas nomenclationi Dei permittere coguntur. Abraham could not
number them, Genesis 15.5. and yet Aratus and Eudoxus vainly vaunted, that they
had done it.

Ver. 27. How say thou, O Jacob, and speak, etc.] q. d. Fie for shame; what
unbecoming language is this for such! Does God know and order the stars, and
has he cast away the care of his people? never think it: let it be enough and
too much for an Heathen to say, Saepe mihi dubiam traxit sententia mentem,
Claudian.
Curarent superi terras, an nullus inesset
Rector, and incerto fluerent mortalia casu.


And my judgment is passed over] q. d. I thought I should have had a day of
hearing ere this: sed comperendinor.

Ver. 28. He faints not, nor is weary] Or, he is neither tired nor toiled:
viz. as earthly Judges may be. And his own people, for thinking otherwise of
Him, are here taken up as tartly, as those Idolaters before, ver. 21. with,
Have thou not known? have thou not heard?

There is no searching of his understanding] Submit to Him therefore, as to the
only wise God. De sera Number. vindic.
This, the very Heathens taught men to do; as Plutarch.

Ver. 29. He gives power to the faint] How then should he himself faint? or
why should any good man's heart fail him? The Jews among their Benedictions
(whereof they are bound to say an hundred every day) have this for one, Blessed
be God who gives power to the faint:

Ver. 30. Even the youths shall faint] All that trust to their own strength,
shall tire out: like as the Hare that trusts to the swiftness of her legs, is
at length overtaken, and torn in pieces: when the coney that flies to the
holes in the rocks, does easily avoid the dogs that pursue her.

Ver. 31. Shall renew their strength] Heb. shall change, quotidie seipsis
fortiores prodeuntes, by the new supplies of the spirit, Phil. 1.19. they shall
pass from strength to strength, Psalm. 84. They shall mount as Eagles. See
Psalm. 103.5. R. Saadias says, that every tenth year the Eagle mounteth up to
the Orb of the Sun, cingeth her wings there, and so renews her age, till she
be an hundred.

CHAP. XLI.
Ver. 1. Keep silence before me O Islands] i. e. O Islanders (so the Hebrews
called all that were beyond sea to them) with whom God, being about to contest,
calls for silence that he may be heard. The people of Rome could hardly
digest a (...) or Keep silence from their Emperor Adrian, Dio in Adrian.
as too severe: but when God thundreth it, men wriggle into their holes as so
many worms.

And let the people renew their strength] Come as strong as they can into the
Court, with their best Advocates and arguments; since they are to debate the
cause concerning their Religion.

Let them come near together in Judgement] This is a wonderful condescension:
En in quantum se demittat Deus!

Ver. 2. Who raised up the righteous man from the East?] Who but my self? which
of your Idols can boast of such a man as Abraham was, like as I can?

Called him to his foot] Making him follow his call with a blind obedience: for
he winked and put himself into Gods holy hand to be led at his pleasure. He
knew not whither he went, Heb. 11.8. nor much cared, so long as he had God by
the hand, or might follow Him as a guide, step after step.

He gave the Nations before him] Genesis 14.14. his posterity also prevailed
exceedingly. And thus God stops the mouths of those Idolaters who insulted
over the Israelites, because afflicted and subdued by other Nations: (as Cicero
does in his Oration for Q. Flaccus) extolling therefore their Idols above the
true God.

Ver. 3. He pursued them, and passed in safety] He gat an unbloody victory over
the four Kings; not losing a man of all those unexpert Soldiers: this was a
great mercy, if not a miracle. War is usually utrique triste: victory is often
like a golden fish-hook; which, lost or broken, cannot be paid for with that it
takes.

Ver. 4. Who has wrought and done it?] Here the Gentiles should have answered
for God: which because they did not, but were senselesly silent, therefore He
answers by a description of himself.

Calling the generations from the beginning] Giving them their Being; and
having them at a Beck.

I the Lord, the First, and with the Last] (...): De leg. lib. 4. Virg.
This was anciently believed concerning God, as Plato testifies. A te
Principium tibi desinet.

Ver. 5. The Isles saw it] The Heathens were convinced by the former arguments,
yet not converted: they were afraid, and yet they came together to confirm
themselves mutually in their abominable Idolatries.

Yea they drew near] As it were to justify their Idolatries before the Lord.
Such is the desperate obstinacy of obdurate sinners; Pharaoh menaced Moses,
even during that palpable darkness. The Philistines were afraid when they saw
the Ark of the Covenant brought into the field: and yet they encourage one
another to fight against Israel, 1 Samuel 4.8, 9. The Thief on the cross was
under the arrest of death, and yet railed. Felix trembled, and yet expected a
bribe from St. Paul. There is a cold sweat sits on all the limbs of
Antichrist at this day, and yet they repent not of their Idolatries, nor
murders, nor sorceries, nor fornication, nor thefts, Rev. 9.20, 21. but defend
them, all they can.

Ver. 6. They helped every one his neighbour] Thus those desperate Idolaters
did from the first; Eusebius tells us, that in the seventh year of Abraham,
Ninus the founder of Niniveh set up an Image of his father Belus, In Chron.
which was worshipped after his death: so did other Princes, by his example;
not moved with Gods mercies showed to Abraham who worshipped the true God
alone, setting up altars to him wherever he came.

Ver. 7. So the Carpenter encouraged the Gold-smith] Because no small gain was
brought hereby unto these crafts-men, Acts 19.24, 25. The Jew-doctours tell us,
that Terah the father of Abraham was an Image-maker at Vr of the Chaldees, till
God called him thence. Hyperius says, that all these words are to be taken as
pronounced with irrision and contempt, that so the vanity of Idols may the more
plainly be perceived: since they have no more worth then is given them by their
worshippers.

Ver. 8. But thou Israel art my Servant] And it was for thy sake, and for thy
settlement, that I have dealt so long with these odious Idolaters: whom else I
would not once look toward nor commune with, as he said 2 King. 3.14.

The seed of Abraham my Friend] This style was an higher honor to Abraham,
then if God had engraven his name in the orbs of Heaven. See the Note on Jam.
2.23. Hushai was David's Friend: and Augustus vouchsafed to give Virgil the name
of Amicus. This was a special favor: but not like that in the Text.

Ver. 9. Thou whom I have taken from the ends of the earth] sc. in the loins of
Abraham thy Progenitour.

And called thee from the chief men thereof] Called thee and culled thee out of
the Grandees of the Chaldees, the rich, the potent and the honorable, separate
from the common sort; setting thee above the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 89.27.

Ver. 10. Fear thou not, for I am with thee] Cordialibus, ut ita dicam, verbis,
Deus hoc eloquitur. As long as a child has his Father by the hand, he fears
none. Quid timet hominem homo in sinu Dei positus? what should he who lies in
Gods own bosom, fear any man alive? Is not Gods presence security sufficient?

I will strengthen thee, I will help thee, etc.] I will, I will, I will: Oh the
Rhetoric of God! Oh the certainty of the Promises!

With the right hand of my righteousnesse] i. e. My righteous right hand, that
shall right all thy wrongs.

Ver. 11. Behold all that were incensed against thee] These and the following
precious Promises the Jews misapply to the coming and Kingdom of their Messiah;
the Papists to their Hierarchy. Let every true servant of God take them home as
spoken to himself: Every promise droppeth Myrrh and mercy.

Ver. 12. Even them that contended with thee] Heb. the men of thy contention,
thy Contendents; such as this Eristical age has more then a good many. By the
Quakers wild fancies and rude practices, we may see how cross-grained these
people are, in contradicting every thing. Many men's spirits (says One)
now-adayes, lie like that Haven, Acts 27.12. toward the South-West, and
North-West, two opposite points.

Ver. 13. For I the Lord thy God will hold thy right hand] As a tender father
takes his dear child by the hand, in dirty or dangerous ways especially,
lifting him over; So the Saints are said to sit down at Gods feet, Deuteronomy. 33.3.
or to stand betwixt his legs, as little ones do.

Ver. 14. Fear not] This is often inculcated, for better confirmation and
comfort. Our Savior may seem to have hence his Fear not little flock. It is no
easy matter to cheer up afflicted consciences: Luther says it is as hard a
matter as to raise the dead. Hence this frequent Fear not.

Ver. 15. I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument having teeth]
Traham, aut tribulam in omnem partem probe dentatam. Such as those Eastern
Countries did use, to mash in pieces their rougher and harder fodder for their
cattle; or rather to thresh out their harder grain with, Chap. 28.25, 28. or to
torture men with, 2 Samuel 12, 31.

Thou shall thresh the mountains] Thy lofty and mighty enemies. This was
fulfilled in the Macchabees: But especially in the Apostles, subduing the
Nations to the obedience of the Faith: See 2 Cor. 10.4.

Ver. 16. Thou shall fan them] But find nothing in them of any solidity: the
heart of the wicked is little worth.

And thou shall rejoice in the Lord] As the sole doer of all: for it is he that
subdueth the people under us, and does all our works for us, Chap. 26.12.

Ver. 17. When the poor] When such as are poor in spirit, sensible of their
utter indigency, shall blessedly hunger and thirst after righteousness,
showing themselves restless and unsatisfiable without it.

And there is none] None to be found in the doctrine of the Pharisees,
Philosophers, or Friars.

Ver. 18. I will open rivers in high places] Rather work miracles, as once in
the Wilderness, Exodus 17.6, 7. then my poor people shall want necessary
support and succor.

Ver. 19. I will plant in the wilderness the cedar, etc.] That is, says Lyra,
I will give variety of graces to my people. Per varia ligna varietatem
gratiarum insinuat. Oecol.


And the Box-tree] That grows of it self in wild places, says Diodate: to
signify that the Church will always have worldly wild plants, mixed and
growing in it. Box is always green indeed and full of leaves: but its of an
ill smell, and semen habet omnibus invisum animantibus, and of a worse seed.

Sphinx Philos.
Ver. 20. That they may see and know and consider] Heb. lay. 1. Lay it upon
their heart: which natural men are very hardly drawn to do. The best are so
backward, that an Ezekiel may hear, Son of man, behold with thine eye, and hear
with thine ears, and set thine heart upon all that I shall show thee, etc.
chap. 40.4. and Hagget calls upon the good people of his time to consider,
and better consider, chap. 1.5, 7.

Ver. 21. Produce your cause, says the Lord] He had dealt with the Heathens,
and convinced them: now have at their Gods: and their best proofs are called
for.

Bring forth your strong reasons] Heb. your bony arguments, argumenta trabalia:
but alas they had none such.

Says the King of Jacob] Not the God of Jacob: for that was now the matter in
question, whether he were God, or the Heathen deities. (...).
And because they were silent, and to seek of such arguments, he helps them
to a couple.

Ver. 22. Let them bring forth, and show what shall happen] By such arguments
as these, Cleanthes in Tully testifies (though himself were an Heathen) that
the deity might be known. And whereas it may be objected, Lib, 2. de not.
deorum.
that the Delphick devil had foretold things to come: it is answered, that the
devil cannot foretell all future things, nor any thing infallibly, and of
himself: but either as it is revealed unto him by God, as was Ahabs fall at
Rameth-Gilead: or as he forseeth it in the causes, signs, or Prophecies of
holy Scripture, wherein he is not a little skilled.

Ver. 23. Show the things that are to come] This first argument is much
insisted on: God alone can properly predict; Tertul. Apol. cap. 20.
and Testimonium divinitatis est veritas divinationis. Cato Major was wont to
say, that he wondered how one Diviner could look upon another and not laugh, as
knowing themselves to be no better then deceivers of the people.

Yea do good or evil] good to your friends, evil to your foes: this is the
second argument, and it is unanswerable. If it be objected, that this the Devil
can do, and has done: The answer is, 1. that Idols can do neither good nor
evil. 2. No nor yet Devils: but the good they do their clients, is a mere
juggle: and the evil they do to any, is by divine permission. Vide etiam Aug.
de Civ. Dei. l. 2. c. 22. 25. and Baruc. 6.
See Cyprians fourth treatise de vanitate idolorum.

Ver. 24. Behold ye are of nothing] Hence Paul took that assertion of his, 1
Cor. 8.4. we know that an Idol is nothing in the world. For the matter of it,
it is true, wood is wood, and stone is stone: but the relation and signification
which is fastened thereunto, is nothing at all: all the being of an Idol is
nothing but the Idolaters imagination.

And your work of nought] Or, of the Basilisk, or Viper: it will do you to
death.

An abomination is he that curses you] Papists therefore must needs be
abominable Idolaters. Dr. Rainolds his work De Idololatria Romana is yet
unanswered; Weston writes that his head aked in reading it.

Ver. 25. I have raised up one from the North] Here God begins to prove that
He can do both those things, whereof the Heathen vanities could do neither.
This One in the Text, is Cyrus, say some: Christ say others, by whom God here
foretells, that he will punish his enemies, but do good to his Church and
chosen.

He shall call upon my name] Or, proclaim my name.

Ver. 26. Who has declared] Who, besides my self, ever did or could predict
such a thing? If any other has done it, we will do him right, clepe him a God.

Ver. 27. The first shall say to Zion] Or, I first said to Zion. I first
brought her that good tidings by my Prophets.

Ver. 28. For I beheld, and there was no man] None to say any thing for these
dumb Idols, why I should not pass a definitive sentence against them. It is
therefore this:

Ver. 29. Behold they are all vanity] Jer. 10.3, 15.

Their works are nothing] See ver. 24.

Are wind and confusion] Or emptynesse, Heb. Tohu, Nothing in themselves, and
yet of sufficient efficacy to inflict vengeance on their worshippers.

CHAP. XLII.
Ver. 1. BEhold my servant] Cyrus partly, but Christ principally, Matthew. 12.18.
See the Notes there, with Philip. 2.7. A Servant he was, yet not Menial, but
Magisterial: that he was one or other, is admirable, and well deserves an Ecce.

Whom I uphold] That he faint not under the weight of his Mediatorship, and the
importable burden of my wrath, which he must suffer for a season. Some render
it whom I lean upon, see 2 King. 5.18. and 7.2, 13.

Mine elect] Or choice one.] Cyrus was so, chap. 44.28. and 45.3, 4. but Christ
much more, chap. 43.10. Joh. 6.27, 29. and 10.36. See the Notes on Matthew.
12.18. Cyrus was so singular a man, says Herodotus, that no Persian ever held
himself worthy to be compared unto him. Herod. lib. 3. Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. 8.
And of his Court Xenophon has this merable saying, that though a man should
seek or choose blindfold, he could not miss of a good man: How much more truly
may this be spoken of the Lord Christ, and his people?

In whom my Soul delighteth] (...). God affected Cyrus, chap. 45.3, 4. and
44.28. but nothing so well as Christ, Matthew. 3.17. and 17.5. Once God repented
him that he had made man: but now it is otherwise.

He shall bring forth Judgment to the Gentiles] Who shall all cry Grace, Grace
unto it, to see mercy rejoicing against judgment. See on Matthew. 12.18.

Lib. 3.
Ver. 2. He shall not cry, nor lift up] See on Matthew. 12.19. Cyrus was a very
mild and gentle Prince, so that his Persians called him their Father, but his
Son Cambyses their Lord, as Herodotus records. Christ's government is much
more gentle; he will not, by a loud and terrible voice affright broken spirits,
or rule them with rigor, Cyrus umbra, Christus Sol ipse.
etc. Christians must likewise put away all bitterness, and wrath, and anger,
and clamor, And be kind one to another, tenderhearted, Ephesians. 4.31, 32. This is
to be like unto Christ; all whose actions, whether Moral or Mediatory, were
either for our Imitation or Instruction.

Ver. 3. A bruised reed shall he not break] i. e. A contrite heart Psalm. 51.17.
in whom there shall appear to be any thing of Christ, Mar. 9.
though never so little: that are faithful in weakness, Cruclger.
though but weak in Faith, as He was who cried out Lord I believe, help mine
unbelief: and Another, Invoco te fide quamvis languida, fide tamen. See on
Matthew. 12.20.

He shall bring forth judgment unto truth] Unto victory says the Evangelist,
after the Septuagint. Truth will prevail, sincerity proceed to perfection. The
righteous also shall hold on his way: and he that has clean hands shall be
stronger and stronger, Job 17.9. Where there is truth of grace, there will be
victory. Bernard never went from God without God. And holy Bradford would never
give over any good duty, till he found something coming in: as in confession,
till his heart melted: in begging pardon, till it was quieted: in seeking
grace, till it was quickened, etc.

Ver. 4. He shall not fail, nor be discouraged] Non erit tristis nec
turbulentus, so the Vulgar has it: he shall be master of his passions, and
keep an even state of his looks and motions, whatever befall, as they report of
Socrates. He shall not knit his brows, or chide (which was Eli's fault, 1 Samuel
3.13. but is Christ's commendation) so Lud. de Dieu rendereth it. He shall not
make to smoke (so Junius from ver. 3.) nor shall he bruise any one.

Until he have set Judgement] See on ver. 3.

And the Isles shall wait for his Law] Heb. shall with desire expect his
doctrine.

Ver. 5. Thus says God the Lord, he that created the Heavens, and streched
them out] Heb. and they that streched them out; noting the Trinity in Unity, as
Deuteronomy. 6.4. See there. Some Pagans concluded the world must needs have had a
beginning: otherwise we could not know whether the egg or the bird, the seed
or the plant, the day or the night, the light or the darkness were first.

Ver. 6. I the Lord have called thee] To the Mediatorship.

And will hold thine hand] working wonders by thee, and with thee.

And will keep thee] That thou be not crucified till thine hour be come, and
that thou despair not when thou suffer.

And give thee for a Covenant of the people] i. e. For that Angel of the
Covenant, Mal. 3.1. and that thou may reconcile all the Elect in one body to
me by thy cross, etc. Ephesians. 2.16.

For a light to the Gentiles] See chap. 9.2.

Ver. 7. To open the blind eyes] By the preaching of the Gospel, Acts 26.18. 2
Cor. 4.4, 5, 6. Rev. 3.18.

To bring out the prisoners from the prison] To free poor souls from the
Tyranny of sin and terror of hell. This should make us say to Christ, as one
did once to Augustus for a deliverance nothing so great, Effecisti Caesar, ut
viverem and morerer ingratus, let me do mine utmost I must live and dye in thy
debt.

Ver. 8. I am the Lord] I and no Heathen petty god, as I have plainly and
plentifully proved, nemine contradicente.

That is my Name] God, though he be above all name (when Manoah enquired after
his name, the answer was It Is wounderful, i. e. far above thy conception) yet
here we have his proper name Jehovah; which is also called his glory, because
incommunicable to any creature.

And my glory will I not give to another] To his Son Christ he has given it,
Joh. 17.2. who although he is Alius, yet he is not Aliud from the Father, but
of the same nature and essence. God has given being to all things, life to
many, sense to others, reason to men and Angels, his glory he will not give to
any. Excellently hereupon Bernard, My glory I will not, etc. what then will thou give us Lord? Ser. 13. in Cant
what will thou give us? My peace, says he, I give you, my peace I leave unto
you. It Is enough for me Lord; I thankfully take what thou leavest, and leave
what thou keep to thy self, etc.

Ver. 9. Behold the former things are come to passe] The Prophecies are
fulfilled.

Before they spring forth, I tell you of them] Therefore I am the true God
undoubtedly, and the doctrine of my Prophets is true assuredly, veriora quam
qua ex tripode. Siquidem Satan etsi semel videatur verax, millies est mendax,
and semper fallax.

Ver. 10. Sing unto the Lord a new song] The disputation being ended, and God
having clearly got the better, the Prophet sings this Gratulatory song, and
calls upon others to bear a part with him therein, and especially for Christ
and his benefits aforementioned.

Ye that go down to the sea] i. e. That dwell toward the West of Judea.

Ver. 11. Let the wilderness] Ye that dwell Eastward: It was called the
wilderness, because but thinly inhabited.

The Villages that Kedar does inhabit] The most fierce and savage people
cicurated and civilized by the Gospel preached among them, as it is with us at
this day, De not. deor.
whose Ancestors were most barbarous and brutish, as Tully testifies.

Let the inhabitants of the rock] Or of Petra, the chief City of Arabia Petraea.

Ver. 12. Let them give glory] See ver. 10.

Ver. 13. The Lord shall go forth as a mighty man] Or, as a Giant. And here by
an elegant Hypotyposis, the fierce wrath of God against his foes is set forth
to the life: and appointed also to be sung for a second part of the ditty; viz.
Christ's conquest over sin, death and hell; whereby we are made more than
Conquerours.

He shall cry, yea roar] Jubilabit atque etiam barriet, he shall make an
hideous and horrible noise: such as the Roman soldiers did of old when they
began the battle; Vegerius.
and as the Turks do at this day, on purpose to affright their enemies.

Ver. 14. I have long time holden my peace] As a traveling woman biteth in her
pain as long as she is able: So had God, for causes best known to himself,
forborne a long while to appear for his people, and to avenge them of their
enemies: But now Patientia laesa fit furor: Deique patientia quo diuturnior, eo
minacior: now down goes Dagon and the devils whole Kingdom, before this
jealous Giant.

Now will I cry like a traevelling woman] Which when she can bear no longer,
sets up her note and is heard all the house over. This is very comfortable: God
is pained as it were for his people; in all their afflictions he is afflicted:
he longs for their deliverance, which therefore shall not be long ere it come.

Ver. 15. I will make waste mountains and hills] I will rather invert the order
of nature, and mingle heaven and earth together, than my Church shall want
seasonable help. I will also remove all obstacles by sending fire upon the
earth, Luke 12.49. and bring every high thought into an holy obedience, 2 Cor.
10.5.

Ver. 16. And I will bring the blind by a way] This was fulfilled in the letter
to the Jews brought back from Babylon, where they had been close prisoners: and
in the mystery, to all Christ's converts; more especially to that blind boy
presented to Bishop Hooper Martyr (the day before his death) at Gloucester, Act.
and Mon.
where the boy also had not long before suffered imprisonment for confessing
the truth.

I will make darkness light before] By bringing them out of darkness into my
mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9.

Ver. 17. They shall be greatly ashamed] Heb. be ashamed with shame, because
disappointed and defeated: as the Papists often have been when they have fought
against Prorestants; in that Bellum Hussiticum in Germany especially: And yet
Bellarmine has the face to say, that the Catholics were never yet worsted by
the Heretics (as they call us) in a set battle.

Ver. 18. Hear ye deaf, and look ye blind] Ye, who as so many sea monsters or
deaf Adders, will not hear; and as so many blind moles will not see, by a
perulant blindness, and of obstinate malice: such were the Scribes and
Pharisees who winked hard with their eyes, and wilfully shut the windows, lest
the light should come in unto them. See more of this in the Notes on chap. 6.
and 29.

That ye may see] In nature, Caecorum men's oculatissima est. We read of Didymus
Alexandrinus, that though blind, yet he wrote Commentaries: and of two of
Archb. Vshers Aunts, that being blind from their cradles, they taught him first
to read; such was their readiness in the Scriptures: But this was rare; and in
spirituals it is otherwise, till God enlighten both Organ and Object.

Ver. 19. Who is blind but my servant?] Who so blind as he that will not see?
Israel was Gods peculiar, and had the light of his Law; yet were blind as
beetles.

Or deaf as my messenger?] The Priests and Levites, Mal. 3.7. Such were the
Papists dolts, till awakened by the Reformation.

Buxtorf. Tiber. p. 5.
Who is blind as he that is perfect?] The Elders of the people, who arrogated
to themselves perfection, chap. 65.5. Romans 2.17, 18, 19, 20. as likewise the
Popish Perfectists, the Jewish Doctors with their pretended Mashlamnutha's,
and the Turkish Mussalmans, i. e. Perfectionaries.

Ver. 20. But observest not] Viz. for holy practice.

But he hears not] Viz. for any good purpose, he hears not what the Spirit
says to the Churches.

Ver. 21. The Lord is well pleased -- he will magnify his Law, etc.] Or, to
magnify his Law and make it honorable, sc. by recompensing so highly those
that observed it; this he did for his righteousness sake, i. e. of his free
grace and fidelity: but these are none such; they are practical Antinomians;
and to me, direct Antipodes.

Ver. 22. But this is a people robbed and spoiled] And all too little, unless
they were better. Hierom expounds this of the destruction of the Jews by the
Romans, after their voluntary blindness and malice showed against Christ: at
what time they were pulled out of holes and privies, spoiled, slaved, sold
thirty a penny.

Ver. 23. Who among you will give ear to this] Magna nimirum haec sunt, sed
paucis persuasa. We shall have much ado to make you believe these things;
though your liberties, lives and souls lie upon it.

Hyper.
Ver. 24. Who gave Jacob for a spoil?] Omnia magno adfectu sunt pronuncianda,
debentque singula membra hujus orationis expendi; This is a very remarkable
passage. Let us cry out O the severity, and beware. Cavebimus autem si
pavebimus.

Ver. 25. And it has set him on fire] When the Country was wasted, the City
and Temple burnt and ruined. Read Josephus; Lege inquam, and luge.

And he laid is not to heart] This was worse than all the rest: Like a sleepy
man (fire burning in his bed-straw) he cries not out, when others happily lament
his case, that see a far off, but cannot help him.

CHAP. XLIII.
Ver. 1. But now thus says the Lord] Here the Prophet comfort those with
the Gospel, whom he had frighted with the Law, says Oecolampadius.

That created thee O Jacob] By a new creation, Aug.
especially Isa. 9.23. Ephesians. 2.10. 2 Cor. 5.17. Magna sunt opera Dei Creatoris,
Dei Recreatoris long maxima: The work of Redemption is far beyond that of
Creation.

And he that formed thee O Israel] As the Potter forms to himself a vessel of
honor, and distinguishes it from other vile and sordid vessels: so have I
dealt by thee.

I have redeemed thee] A mercy much celebrated in this book; and for very great
reason.

I have called thee by thy Name] Which was no small favor; See Exodus 33.17.
Psalm. 147.4. Some think he alludeth to his giving Jacob the name of Israel,
when he had wrestled with God and prevailed.

Thou art mine] I have adopted thee, which is no small honor, 1 John 3.1. Meus
es tu, may very well be the new name spoken of, Rev. 2.17. with Hos. 2.23.
better than that of sons and of daughers, Isa. 56.5. See it displayed, 1 Pet.
2.9.

Ver. 2. When thou passest through the waters] Fire and water, we say, have no
mercy, when once they get above us: extreme calamities are hereby denoted,
Psalm. 66.12. But Gods gracious presence kept the bush from burning (burn it
did, but was not consumed, through the good will of him that dwelt in it, says
Moses, Deuteronomy. 33.16.) the Israelites in the red sea from drowning, Exodus 14. His
presence made the fiery furnace a gallery of pleasure, the Lions den an house
of defense, the Leonine prison a delectable Orchard, as that Italian Martyr
phrased it; the fiery trial a bed of roses, as another, Tua praesentia, Domine,
Laurentio ipsam craticulam dulcem fecit. Hierom of Prague and other Martyrs
sang in the very flames. Blessed Bilney being condemned to be burnt for the
Testimony of Jesus, when he was comforted by some against the extremity of the
fire: he put his hand toward the flame of the candle burning before them: and
feeling the heat thereof, Oh said he, I feel by experience, and have learned by
Philosophy, that fire by Gods Ordinance, is naturally hot; But yet I am
persuaded by Gods holy Word, and by the experience of some spoken of in the
same, that in the flame they felt no heat, and in the fire no consumption. I
constantly believe, that howsoever the stubble of this my body shall be wasted
by it, yet my soul and spirit shall be purged thereby: a pain for the time,
wherein notwithstanding follows joy unspeakable; and here he much treated on
this text, Fear not when thou passest through the waters, etc. So that some of
his friends there present took such sweet benefit therein, Act. and Mon. fol.
923.
that they caused the whole said sentence to be fair written in Tables, and
some in their books: the comfort whereof in diverse of them was never taken from
them to their dying day.

Ver. 3. I gave Egypt for thy ransom] quasi victimam piacularem a Sennacheribo
mactandam loco Judaeae, in exchange for thee; so the Septuagint render it: This
was done when Tirhakah King of Egypt and Ethiopia was beaten by Sennacherib,
who was then making toward Jerusalem, which he had already devoured in his
hopes, chap. 37.9. Thus the righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the
wicked comes in his stead, Prove. 11.8. Saul and his people were afflicted by
the Philistines that David might escape, 1 Samuel 23. The Canaanites were rooted
out, to make room for the Israelites. Charles the fifth, and Francis the French
King, after a mutual agreement to root out Lutheranisme, fall together by the
ears, and the Church the while has her Halcyons. So the Turks and Persians
are at deadly feud, to the great safeguard of Christendom: and the Popish party
are as a bulwark betwixt those Mahometans, and the Protestants.

Ver. 4. Since thou have been precious in my sight] Nothing so ennobleth as
Gods grace, and being in the Covenant, Genesis 17.20, 21. I have blessed Ismael;
twelve Princes shall he beget: but my Covenant will I establish with Isaac.
Some read the text thus, Because thou wast precious in my sight thou wast
honorable, and I loved thee, therefore will I give men for thee, and people
for thy life.

Ver. 5. I will bring thy seed from the East] From all coasts and quarters.
This was a Type of the Church in the New Testament, see Mat. 8.11. Joh. 11.52.
Joh. 10.16. Gal. 3.28. this was also a type of the last Resurrection. See
Revel. 20.13.

Ver. 6. I will say to the North, Give up] I will do it with a word of my
mouth: Ipse dixit, Oecola. p.
and facta sunt.

Bring my sons from far, and my daughters] That is, say some, my stronger and
also weaker children, of what size or sex soever. Souls have no sexes.

Ver. 7. Even every one that is called by my Name] i. e. My sons and my
daughters, ver. 6. with 2 Cor. 6. ult. such as have Christian for their name,
and Catholic for their Surname.

I have created him for my glory] See on ver. 1.

Feci i. e. magnum effeci Pisc.
Yea I have made him] i. e. Advanced him, as 1 Samuel 12.6.

Ver. 8. Bring forth the blind people] Such as were blind and ignorant, but now
are illightened.

And the deaf] Such as were cross and rebellious, but now are tractable and
obsequious, chap. 42.7, 16.

Ver. 9. Let all the Nations] See chap. 41.1.

And show us former things] Much less can they show us things future. Varro
calls all the time before the flood (...) Obscure, because the Heathens had
no certain relation of any thing then done. And Diod. Siculus acknowledges,
that all that was written amongst them before the Theban and Trojan wars, was
little better than fabulous. The gods of the Gentiles had not so much as any
solid knowledge of things past; neither could they orderly and perfectly set
them forth by their Secretaries.

It is truth] sc. That there is but one true God; Phocyllides did say so,
(...), etc. Socrates suffered for holding this truth at Athens: Plato held the
same: but durst not speak out; these are his words, It is neither easy to find
out the Maker of all things, nor safe to communicate to the Vulgar what we have
found out of him. Here, for fear of the people, he detained the truth in
unrighteousness. And the like did Seneca, De civi. Dei lib. b. cap. 10.
whom Austin accuses, quod colebat quod reprehendebat; agebat quod arguebat;
quod culpabat, adorabat: that he worshipped those gods, whom he disliked and
decryed.

Ver. 10. Ye are my witnesses] He takes to witness of this great Truth in
question, not heaven, earth, sea, etc. but his people, among whom he had given
in all ages so many clear arguments and experiments of his Divinity; his
Oracles and Miracles for instance.

And my servant whom I have chosen] i. e. Christ, says the Chaldee Paraphrast:
the Prophet Isaiah, say others; or (which is more likely) Cyrus, who is called
Gods Elect servant, chap. 42.1. and his Testimony concerning God, is to be
read, Ezra 1.3. The Lord God of Israel he is God. Every true believer does as
much, if not more: for, He that believes, has set to his seal that God is
true, Joh. 3.33. has given him a Testimonial, such as is that, Deuteronomy. 32.4. A
God of truth, and without iniquity, just and right is He. Such a sealer was
Abraham, Romans 4.20. and such honor have all his Saints.

That ye may know and believe and understand] That ye may have a full assurance
of knowledge, as Luke 1.4. and a full assurance of Faith, Heb. 10.22.

Ver. 11. I even I am the Lord] This redoubled I is Emphatical, and Exclusive.

And beside me there is no Saviour] They are gross idolaters therefore, that
set up for Saviors the Saints departed.

Ver. 12. I have showed, when there was no strange God amongst you] See Deuteronomy.
32.12. See also the Note on Exodus 34.14.

Therefore ye are my witnesses] See on ver. 10.

Ver. 13. Yea before the day was I am He] The Ancient of days, yea the
Eternal. The God of Israel was long before Israel was in being.

And there is none that can deliver out of my hand] So Nebuchadnezzar vainly
vaunted, but was soon confuted, Dan. 3.15, 17, 29.

I will work and who shall let it?] Angels may be hindered: God can come
between their Essence and their executive power, and so keep them from doing
what they would. In fire there is the substance, and the quality of heat:
between these God can separate: as he did in the Babylonish fire, Dan. 2. But
who shall hinder the most High?

Ver. 14. Thus says the Lord your Redeemer] For their greater comfort and
confirmation, the Prophet purposely premiseth, to the promise of deliverance
from Babylon, these sweet Attributes of God: Each of them dropping Myrrh, and
Mercy.

For your sakes I have sent to Babylon and have brought down] Or, I will send
-- and I will bring down.

All their Nobles] Heb. bars, Psalm. 147.13. Bars Noble men should be, to keep
out evils, and to secure Saints: Eut these were crosse-bars, etc.

Whose cry is in the ships] Or, whose outcry is to the ships: whereby they
thought to save themselves but could not, because Cyrus had drained and dried
up their river Euphrates. Tremellius rendereth it The Chaldees with their most
famous ships.

Ver. 15. I am their Lord] More of Gods holy Attributes are her heaped up for
like reason as ver. 14.

Ver. 16. Which makes a way in the Sea] Or, that made a way in the Sea, etc.
sc. when your Fathers came out of Egypt. Why then should you doubt of
deliverance?

Ver. 17. Which brings forth the Chariot and horse] Or, who brough forth the
Chariot and horse, the army and the power, viz. Pharao's forces, Exodus
14.4.9.23. Vt ellychnium extinguentur.


They are quenched as tow] Heb. as a candle-weik made of flax quickly quenched
with water poured on it: See how easily God can confound his foes.

Ver. 18. Remember ye not the former things] sc. in comparison of those things
I shall now do for you by Cyrus, but especially by Christ: who is that way in
the Wilderness, and that running Rock (1 Cor. 10.4.) ver. 14.

Ver. 19. Shall ye not know it?] Or, Do ye not perceive it? He speaks of it
as present and under view.

And rivers in a desart] As once when I set the flint abroach, Exodus 17.6. Number.
20.8, 11. Psalm. 105.41. By this way in the Wilderness, and rivers in the
desert, understand the doctrine of the Gospel, and the comforts of the Spirit,
Joh. 7.38, 39.

Vet. 20. The beasts of the field shall honor me] i. e. In their kind they
shall: so shall brutish and savage persons, Lib. 3. de Rep. Lib. 31. Mor. c. 5.
when tamed and turned by the word of Gods Grace. The malignities of all
creatures are in man (as Plato also observed) in doloso enim est vul^es, in
crudeli leo, in libidinoso amica luto sus, etc. Gregory by Dragons here
understands profane and carnal people: by Owls or Ostriches, hypocrites. These
being converted shall sing Halleluja's to God: but let them take heed that they
turn not, with the dog, to their own vomit again, etc. 2 Pet. 2.22. For

Ver. 21. This people I have formed for my self] Even the Gentiles now, as well
as the Jews.

They shall show forth my praise] They shall preach forth the virtues (or
praises) of him who has called them out of darkness into his mavelous
light. 1 Pet. 2.9.

Ver. 22. But thou have not called upon me, O Jacob] During the captivity, they
prayed not to any purpose: as Daniel also acknowledges, chap. 9.13. All this
evil is come upon us; yet made we not our prayer before the Lord our God that
we might turn from our iniquities and understand thy truth. Nevertheless, of
his free Grace, God brought them back again.

But thou have been weary of me, O Israel] Accounting my service a burden, Non
Mihi sed Deo fictitio.
and not a benefit. See on Mal. 1.13.

Ver. 23. Thou have not brough me, etc,] Not Me, but a God of thine own
framing: such a one as would take up with external heartless services, formal
courtings, and complements.

Ver. 24. Thou have bought me no sweet cane] or calamus, whereof see Plin. lib.
12. cap. 22.

Neither have thou filled me with the fat] The Heathens had a gross conceit,
that their Gods fed on the steam that ascended from their fat sacrifices. And
some Jews might happily hold the same thing. See Deuteronomy. 32.38. Psalm. 50.13.

But thou have made me to serve with thy sins] With thine hypocrisy, and
oppressions especially, Isai 1. The Seventy render it, Thou have stood before
me in thy sins, as outbraving me. Thou have tried my long patience, in seeing
and suffering thy sins, to my great annoyance: so Diodate paraphraseth.

And have wearied me] Exprimit rei-indignitatem cum iniquitate conjunctam. God
had not wearied them, but they had wearied him sufficiently. Some make these to
to be the words of Christ to his ungrateful Countrymen.

Ver. 25. I even I am he] Gratuitam misericordiam diligentissime exprimit. God
diligently sets forth his own free grace, and greatly glories in it:
showing how it is that He freeth himself from trouble, and them from
destruction; viz. for his own sake alone.

That blotteth out thy transgressions] Heb. am blotting out, constantly and
continually I am doing it. As thou multiplyest sins, so do I multiply pardons,
chap. 55.7. So Joh. 1.27. he takes away the sins of the world; Dulcis Metaph.
One may with a pen cross a great sum as well as a little.
its a perpetual act, like as the Sun shines, the Spring runs, Zech. 13.1.
Men gladly blot out that which they cannot look upon without grief. Malunt enim
semel delere quam perpetuo dolere: so here we are run deep in Gods debt book:
but his discharge is free and full.

For mine own sake] Gratis and propter me.] Let us thankfully reciprocate, and
say as he once did, Propter te Domine, Propter te, For thy sake, Lord, do I all.

Peccata non redeunt.
And will not remember thy sins] Discharges in Justification are not repealed,
or called in again. Pardon proceeds from special love and mercy, which alter
not their consigned acts.

Ver. 26. Put me in remembrance] sc. of thy merits, if thou have any to plead.
Justitiaries are here called into Judgment, because they slighted the Throne
of Grace.

Ver. 27. Thy first Father] Adam, or Abraham, say some.

And thy Teachers] Heb. thine Interpreters, Orators, Ambassadors, that is,
thy Priests and Prophets.

Ver. 28. Therefore I have profaned the Princes of the Sanctuary] Or, of
holiness: that is, those that under a pretense of Religion, affected a kind of
Hierarchy, as did the Scribes and Pharisees, who with the whole Jewish Polity
were taken away by the Romans, both their place and their Nation, as they had
feared, Joh. 11.48.

CHAP. XLIV.
Ver. 1. YEt now hear] Hear a word of comfort after so terrible a
Thunder-crack, chap. 43.28. But there it is bare Jacob and Israel, who are
threatened: here it is Jacob my servant, and Israel whom I have chosen: it is
Jeshurun or the righteous Nation, who are comforted. And because we forget
nothing so soon as the consolations of God, as is to be seen in Christ's
Disciples, and those believing Hebrews, chap. 12.5. therefore does the Prophet
so often repeat and inculcate them; like as men use to rub and chafe in Ointments
into the flesh, that they may enter and give ease.

Ver. 2. Thus says the Lord that made thee] See on chap. 43.1, 7, 21. and
observe how this Chapter runs parallel with the former: yea how the Prophet
from chap. 41. to chap. 47. does one and the same thing almost; laboring to
comfort his people against the Babylonian captivity, and to arm them against
the sin of Idolatry, whereunto, as of themselves they were over-prone, so they
should be sure to be strongly tempted amongst those Idolaters.

And thou Jeshurun] Thou who art upright or righteous, whith a twofold
righteousness, viz. Imputed and Imparted. The Septuagint render it Dilecte, or
Dilictule, my dearly beloved.

Ver. 3. For I will pour water upon him that is thirsty] Or, upon the thirsty
place, hearts that hunger and thirst after righteousness, Matthew. 5.6. See the
Notes there.

I will pour my Spirit -- and my blessing] When God gives a man his holy
Spirit, he gives him blessing in abundance: even all good things at once, as
appears by Matthew. 7.11. with Luke 11.13. Here are three special operations of
the Spirit instanced. 1. Comfort. 2. Fruitfulness. 3. Courage for Christ, ver.
5.

Ver. 4. As willows by the water-courses] Not only as the grass, (but by a
further growth) as the willows, which are often lopped, sed ad ipso vulnere
vires sumunt, Vberius resurgunt, altiusque excrescunt.
but soon thrust forth new branches; and though cut down to the bottom, yet
will grow up again: so will the Church, and her Children.

Ver. 5. One shall say, I am the Lords] When God seems to cry out, Who is on
my side, who? then the true Christian, by a bold and wise profession of the
truth, answers as here. After the way that they call heresy, so worship I the
God of my Fathers, said that great Apostle. We are Christians, said those
Primitive Professors: and some of them wrote Apologies for their Religion to
the persecuting Emperors, as did Justin Martyr, Athenagoras, Arnobius,
Tertullian, Minutius Felix, and others. The late famous Reformers Zuinglius,
Luther, Musculus, etc. had been Franciscans, Augustinians, Dominicans: but
relinquished those superstitious titles and gave up their names to Christ and
his truth. I knew a Nobleman (says Mr. Buroughs) who when he came into
jearing company of great ones, On Hosea.
would begin and own himself one of those they called Puritans, a nickname
then put upon the godly party; and so odious to the profaner sort, that the
same Author elsewhere tells us of a Scholar in Queens college, who professed
he had rather suffer the torments of hell, then endure the contempt and scorn
of the Puritans.

Subscribe with his hand] Or, write on his hand, I am the Lords.

And surname himself] So Christian is my name, said an Ancient, and Catholic
my surname.

Ver. 6. Thus says the Lord] Here and in the subsequent verses we have an
evident and excellent testimony of the Unity of the true God, and vanity of
Idols.

Ver. 7. And who as I shall call, and shall declare it?] These are alleged by
God as Arguments or Demonstrations of his Deity, praedicare, and indicare and
ordinare, to call his Elect (styled here his ancient people, populum aternum)
to foretell them things to come, and to order all occurrences for their eternal
good.

Ver. 8. Have I not told thee from that time] Ever since I made thee mine
ancient people, well-affected to old truths, and diffasting novel-opinions.

Is there a God besides me?] Vehementi spiritu hoc quaerit, and gravitate magna
respondet, There is no God (no other God) I know not any. This was spoken by
the Prophet, say some, in the days of Ahaz, that notorious Idolater.

Ver. 9. And their delectable things] their Mawmets and puppets, which they so
dearly affect and take so great delight in. He speaks thus, says Diodate,
because that Idolatry is a kind of spiritual concupiscence, and unchaste or
disordered love: like as fornication or adultery.

And they are their own witnesses, etc.] Or, even themselves are their own
witnesses to their shame, that they neither see nor know ought.

Ver. 10. Who has formed a god -- that is profitable for nothing?] q. d. Who
but a mad man? (...), such as was Julian the Apostate, called therefore Idolian
by some.

Quis furor est, quae tanta animas dementia ludit? Sedulius.
What can be more ridiculous, says Basil, Quis hacludibria non derideat? Lact.
then for man to go about to make God? and yet Popish Priests take upon them so
to do: which made Averroes abhor Christianity, and wish that his soul might
rather be among the Philosophers.

Ver. 11. Behold all his fellows] his fellow fools.

Shall be ashamed] they may be well enough, of their madness: they shall be
(sure enough) of their disappointments.

And the workmen, they are of men] Not of Angels, or the heavenly virtues,
says Oecolampadius; but vile varlets.

Let them all be gathered together] As were, at Ephesus, Demetrius and his
Associates, Acts 19.29.

Yet they shall fear] As Tullus Hostilius did with his new Gods Pavor and
Pallor: as Papists do with their Valentine, Antony, Sebastian, etc. whom they
worship as the senders of such and such diseases.

Ver. 12. The Smith with the tongs, etc.] He lively sets forth the weakness
of the workmen, that thereby may be understood the weakness of the Idols: since
they cannot help in the least those that take such pains about them. All these
things must be taken as spoken with utmost scorn, and stomach.

And fashioneth it with hammers] He knocks and works his Idol, in manner as he
does his coulter, or Plow-share.

Hoc agunt ut nihil agant.
With the strength of his arms] Tanto conatu tantas nugas agit, cum sit calidus
in re frigida: he much troubles himself about such trifles.

Ver. 13. The Carpenter stretches out his rule] As did the Carpenter of
Cockram, who yet made but an ill-shaped Rood, Act. and Mon. fol. 1340.
and was forced to sue for his money. Mrs. Catismore suffered in King Henry the
eighth his days, for saying that Images were but Carpenters chips: and yet
they are no better. That Is a remarkable saying of Seneca, Ridiculum est genu
posito etc. It is a ridiculous thing to worship Images, and yet to slight the
man that made them.

Quasi ad hostimentum.
And makes it after the figure of a man] God made man after his own Image: and
man to be even with God, will needs make him after his image.

Ver. 14. He heweth him down Cedars] Choice wood, yet but wood: Qualis igitur
inde Deus confurgat?

And the rain does nourish it] Not the Idol: for it can do nothing toward the
production of that matter whereof it is made. Some have observed, that the four
sorts of Trees here mentioned, are all of them fruitless, and growing in woods.

Ver. 15. Then shall it be for a man to burn] The chips at least shall, and the
offal.

Yea, he makes a god and worshippeth it] Quod Dei est, trunco tribuit.

Ver. 16. He burns part thereof in the fire] which is to far better purpose,
then the other part made into an Idol.

I have seen the fire] i. e. I have felt it: one sense put forth another.

Ver. 17. He falls down unto it and worshippeth it] Do not Papists even the
same, whatever they pretend in defense of their Idolatry? (See Rev. 9.20. with
the Note.) so loath they are to have their Asses-ears to be seen.

Ver. 18. They have not known nor understood] How should they (say) when
infatuated and given up to an injudicious mind, or reprobate sense? as those,
Romans 1.28.

For he has shut their eyes] Heb. danbed up their eyes from seeing, their
hearts from understanding.

Men's oblita Dei, vitiorumque oblita coeno. Ver. 19. Shall I fall down to the
stock of a tree?] This the besotted Papists do to this day, by the command of
the Council of Trent. But before that Council so decreed it, Ludovicus Vives (a
learned Papist) confessed, that there could no other difference be found of
Paganish and Popish worship before Images, but only this, that names and titles
were altered; viz. we cry Jehovah, and they Jupiter: we Mary, they Diana; they
Minerva, we Katharine, etc. And here I bethink me of what Luther on the ninth
Commandment writes of a base and beastly woman, Quae ut falleret ejusmodi
superstitionis quendam fatuum cultorem, pubim suam totondit, and illi porrexit,
suadens quod essent capilli S. Catharinae trans mare advecti. Credidit ille
cuculus, and pro reliquiis osculandos praebuit and venerandos: and ecce quid
fit? caepit etiam miracula operari pubes illa turpitudinis.

Ver. 20. He feeds on ashes] i. e. he seeks comfort of his Idol, but
finds as little as he does nourishment who feeds upon ashes.

A seduced heart has turned him aside] And hence it is that he is brought to
deify a thing so contemptible. From this expression note that man is the cause
of evil to himself; and is so blinded by his own default, that he cannot so
much as once think seriously of his souls health: His deluded heart, that has
so often deceived him, may well say to him, as the heart of Apollodorus the
Tyrant seemed to say to him, who dreamed one night that he was fleaed by the
Scythians, and boiled in a Caldron, and that his heart spoke to him out of the
kettle, (...), It is I that have drawn thee to all this.

Is there not a lie in my right hand?] i. e. An idol that is nothing in the
world, and nothing it can do for me. How then are Images fit to be Lay men
books? being unprofitable, lies and teachers of lies? Jer. 10.8. and 16.19.
Hab. 2.18.

Ver. 21. Remember these O Jacob and Israel] i. e. Remember these abominable
Idolaters, and enjoy their madness: learn wisdom by their folly.

Thou shall not be forgotten of me] Or, forget me not, as some render it.
Scultetus adds that whereas many sacred sentences are written upon our walls,
this ought to be written upon our hearts, O Israel forget me not.

Ver. 22. I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a
cloud thy sinnes] God blotteth out or wipeth away the thick cloud as well as
the cloud, enormities, as infirmities: like as the Sun dispelleth foggs and
mists with his bright beams. Think of this sweet similitude, together with that
other, Mic. 7.19. Thou will cast all our sins into the bottom of the sea, and
then despair if thou can. The sea by its vastness can drown mountains as
well as mole-hills: and the Sun by his force can scatter the greatest mist, as
well as the least vapor. So here.

Ver. 23. Sing O ye heavens, for the Lord has done it] It is usual both with
the Prophets and the Apostles, when they mention the great work of man's
Redemption (typified by that famous deliverance from Babylon) to break forth
into praise and thanksgiving to God, the sole Author thereof. See Psalm. 68,
89, 93, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100. Isa. 12.25, 26. Romans 7.24, 25. 1 Cor. 15.56,
57. 1 Timothy 1.17. Rev. 5.11, 12. Here is hinted, that so very great is the
benefit of our Redemption, that it might well affect Heaven and Earth, and all
things, high and low.

Ver, 24. Thus says the Lord thy Redeemer] All this God had said often before;
see chap. 42.5. but, for the further confirmation of some who were unsettled by
the contrary predictions of some vain diviners and wizzards, he says it over
again.

Ver. 25. That frustrateh the tokens of the lyars] Their false Prognostiks of
the long lastingness of the Babylonian Empire; and therefore no likelihood of
the Jews enlargement.

And makes diviners mad] Diviners the Latins call Southsayers and such
fellows, by a term that is altogether too good for them; quum sint potius
diabolici, says Piscator, since they are rather Devils incarnate than Divines.
By a like form of speech Alsted said of his Germans, In Encyclop.
that if the Sabbath day should be named according to their observing of it,
Daemoniacus potius quam Dominicus diceretur.

That turns wise men backward] The worlds Wizzards, who approved of that
which the Diviners affirmed, judging according to outward appearance, etc.

Ver. 26. That confirms the word of his servant] i. e. Of my self and other
Prophets, saying the same with me.

That says to Jerusalem] Who then shall gainsay it? is not Gods Word his Will?
and his Will his Work?

Ver. 27. That says to the deep, Be dry] i. e. That will put it into the heart
of Cyrus to dry up Euphrates, and so to take Babylon: which, (according to
some) is here called the Deep or Abyss, because situated in a plain well
watered with sundry rivers, had wealth at will, and many Princes who ran into
her, as rivers do into the sea.

And I will dry up thy rivers] This Basil expounds of the end of the world.
Hexaem. l. 3.


Ver. 28. That says of Cyrus] One hundred and seventy years at least before he
was born.

Thou art my Shepherd] i. e. Princeps meus beneficus. Coresh in the Persian
tongue signifies food, says Scaliger: and then there might be some allusion
here to his name in calling him a Shepherd, or Feeder.

CHAP. XLV.
Ver. 1. TO his anointed] i. e. To his appointed and enabled one, to subdue
many Nations. Xenophon in his first book de Cyropaed. gives us a lift of them,
Cyrus subdued, says he, the Syrians, Assyrians, Arabians, Cappadocians,
Phrygians, the Lydians, Carians, Phenicians, Babylonians: the Bactrians,
Indians, Cilicians, Lib. 1.
Sacians, Paphlagonians, Maryandines, and many other Nations. He also had
dominion over the Asiatikes, Greeks, Cyprians, Egyptians, etc. He vanquished,
says Herodotus what Country soever he invaded. And what wonder when God
himself, as here, held or strengthened his right hand, and loosed the loins of
Kings that were his adversaries; that is, disarmed and disabled them: for it is
he alone who strengthens and weakeneth the arm of either party, De not. deor.
lib. 2.
Ezekiel. 30.24. Et nemo vir magnus sine afflatu divino unquam fuit, says Cicero.
God transferreth Kingdoms, and sets up Kings, Dan. 2.21.

To open unto him the two-leaved gates] Or doors: whether doors of houses or
gates of Cities, all shall fly open before him, as Act. 12.10.

Ver. 2. And make the crooked places even] Or the hilly places level.

I will break in pieces the gates of brasse] This God would do, that his Temple
might be built; confer chap. 44.28. but in the New Testament, Christ throws
the gates of hell off their hinges (like another Sampson) that he may build his
Church, Mat. 10.18. And it is this Aedificabo Ecclesiam meam that has made all
the stir in the world.

Ver. 3. And I will give thee the treasures of darknesse] All that Craesus
(that rich King) had amassed, and other Princes, but especially Babylon, Jer.
50.37. and 51.1^. See Strabo lib. 15. Plin. 33. c. 3. Dan 5.3. Pliny says that
Cyrus brought out of Asi^, Justin. lib. 1.
which he had subdued, as much treasure as amounts in our money to three
hundred millions. And yet this same Cyrus was within few years after, made as
poor as Irus: for being in Scythia, and there making show of his great riches
at a feast, he was on the sudden slain and spoiled of all by Tomyris Queen of
that Coun^rey.

Ver. 4. For Jacob my servants sake] That the enemies of my people being
subdued, they may have some breath^ng-while, and liberty to live quietly in
their own Country. For which purpose also, it was the will of God, that this
Prophecy of Isaiah should be made known to Cyrus for the good of the Jews, that
he might favor them: and so it was, as appears by Ezra 1.2. and by Josephus,
Antiq. lib. 11. cap. 1.

H. Stephan.
I have even called thee by thy Name] Thy name of honor: for Cyrus signifies
the Sun, says Plutarch: Lord, say others, in the Persian: as in Hebrew it
seems to signify an heir, or possessour. Some derive our word Sir from it.
Cyrus was at first called Achzadat and Space, being the son of Cambyses a noble
Persian, and Mandane the daughter of Astyages King of Medes. De Cyro fluvio
scricit trabo l. 15.
The name of Cyrus he took when he entered upon the Kingdom; and that from Cyrus
a river of Persia, as some hold.

I have surnamed thee] Or, I have entitled thee, sc. My Shepherd, mine
anointed, etc.

Though thou have not known me] sc. Savingly. For albeit he knew the true God
in part, and acknowledged him to be great above other gods; yet he forsook not
his Idols, says Hierom: Scultet.
and therefore perished miserably by the hands of the Scythian^. Nevertheless
others are of opinion, that he was instructed by Daniel, and brought to a true
belief: as was also Darius.

Ver. 5. I am the Lord and none else] None of thy Persian gods to whom thou
did offer solemn sacrifice, Xenoph. Cyr. lib. 1. and 8.
both at the beginning of thy reign, and likewise at thy death (if Xenophon
may be believed) saying, Jupiter patriae and Sol, etc. magnas ago vobis
gratias, quod vestram de me curam intellexi, etc.

Though thou have not known me] Or, when as yet thou wast altogether ignorant
of me. That he afterward believed the immortality of the soul, Tully
testifies in his Cato Major; and that he believed in Christ for the salvation
of his soul, Scultetus thinks, because he was a type of Christ; as was also
Solomon, says he; which to me is one good argument, that he was saved.

Ver. 6. That they may know from the rising of the Sun] i. e. All the world
over, by thy Proclamation, Ezra 1.1, 2.

That there is none besides me] Quia nihilum praeter me: ego Dominus and nihil
^iltra; so Oecolampaedius renders it; and says further, that it is oppido
profunda sententia, a very profound sentence, teaching us that where God is
not, there is nothing: for in him we are, move and live: and it is he who
works all in all things.

Ver. 7. I form the light and create darknesse] sc. By withdrawing the light,
whence darkness succeeds; so does misery when God withholdeth mercy. But what
an odd or rather mad conceit was that of the Manichees, that there were two
beginnings of things, a good one, and an evil! that the latter was the God of
the Old Testament, and the former of the New! that the God of the Old Testament
did good by accident and occasionally, but created evil of himself, even evil
of sin! for so they mistook this text, which is to be understood of evil of
punishment only, (see Am. 3.6. Lam. 3.38) which he inflicteth on evildoers for
the manifestation of his justice and power, ac propterea recte, Vide Aug.
contra Julian. l. 3. c. 8.
and non male eo pacto quo per nos mala male fiunt.

I make peace and create evil] Evil, that is, war, by a specialty, and (...). O
mega nostrorum Mors est, Mars Alpha malorum. Sin, Satan and War have all one
name: evil is the best of them. The best of sin is deformity, of Satan enmity,
of War misery.

Ver. 8. Drop down ye heavens from above] A prayer of the poor captives in
Babylon, say some, for a speedy performance of their promised deliverance: and
this the rather, because else Christ could not come of them, teach in their
Country, work miracles, and fulfill the office of a Mediator, as the Prophets
had foretold. Whereunto God immediately answers: I the Lord have created him,
or will create him; that is, send him in due time, doubt ye not. Others make it
a description of Cyrus his just and happy reign; see the like of Solomon, Psalm.
72.6, 7. And indeed Cyrus is famous in Heathen Histories for his wisdom,
justice, temperance, magnanimity and liberality; It is not the custom of Cyrus
to hoard up money, Cyrop. l. 8.
says Xenophon; for he takes more delight in giving than in getting or
possessing. But it seems rather to be a command from God of plenty and
prosperity, opposite to that countermand, chap. 5.6. The Papists apply it to
Christ, and his Mother: and hence their roaring out of Rorate, in their solemn
service, a month before the feast of the Nativity, and then they call for
their carousing cups.

Ver. 9. Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker] That chats against him,
Romans 9.20. or presumes to prescribe to him, as some impatient spirits among the
Captives may seem to have done. We may not measure Gods dealings by our Models,
nor murmur against his counsels; since his holy will is the most perfect rule of
right.

Let the potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth] And not dash against
the Rock of ages: Let him meddle with his match, and not contend with a
mightier than he, Eccles. 6.10. What though God create him darkness and evil,
as ver. 7. let him wait upon God for better times; and not think to mend
himself by murmuring against his Maker as too severe.

Shall the clay say, etc.] q. d. This were an intolerable petulancy.

Or thy work, it has no hands?] Or, he has no hands, sc. to fashion me
aright. Thus the work seems to make answer to the clay: for as the clay said
to the Potter Quid fecisti, what have thou made? So the work says, by way of
jear, He had no hands, sc. to make me as he should have done.

Ver. 10. Woe unto him that says to his Father] Are these fit words to a
Father? Is it not an impious morosity to talk unto him in this sort, Why have
thou begotten me at all? or if at all, why not rich, fair, wise, etc.

And to the woman] i. e. To his Mother, as chap. 49.15. but such as he can
hardly find in his heart to call Mother.

Ver. 11. Thus says the Lord, etc.] q. d. Leave off such insolent and
unbecoming language; and learn of me about what ye should rather busy your
selves.

Ask me of things to come] Me, and not your Wizzards. Have recourse to my
Prophets, believe them and ye shall prosper. Let your patient mind be known to
all men, the Lord is at hand for your deliverance.

Command ye me] This is a wonderful expression, and does notably set forth the
power of prayer. Mr. Burr.
Luther, it seems, well understood the latitude of this royal Charter, says
One, when praying for the recovery of a godly useful Preacher who was far gone
in a consumption, amongst other passages he let fall this transcendent rapture
of a daring faith, Let my will be done: but then he falls off sweetly, My will,
Lord, because thy will.

Ver. 12. I have made the earth] q. d. I am the mighty Maker and Monarch of the
world; therefore pray on, and patiently wait for a gracious answer: he that
believes, makes not haste.

Ver. 13. I have raised him up] i. e. Cyrus, Ezra 1.1.

And I will direct all his wayes] sc. When he comes against the Babylonians,
Lydians, etc. on mine errand. But when moved by his ambition, he invaded
Scythia, and cruelly wasted the Country, God took no further charge of him, as
I may say: He that is out of Gods precincts, is out of his protection.

Ver. 14. Thus says the Lord, the labor of Egypt] Here he turns his speech
to Cyrus, promising him that he should be no loser by his generous carriage
toward the poor people of God, his captives, whom he freely dismissed without
ransom, ver. 13. Gods retributions are more than bountiful.

Agatharch. lib. 5. cap. 20. vel proceri, i. e. potentissimi agro and mercib.
Trem. In Psalm. 37.
Men of stature] The Arabians are reported to have been goodly personable men
by Agatharchides an ancient writer, from whom Plutarch and Pliny borrowed much.

They shall come over unto thee] Commodissime dicemus promissionem hanc
referendam ad tempus revelati Evangelii. This was fulfilled chiefly when the
Gospel was preached, and Nations thereby converted. See Psalm. 45.5. and 149.6.
-- 8. The bonds of the holy Spirit are stronger than Adamant, says Ambrose.

Surely God is in thee] Or, with thee: and hence thou (O Cyrus) so prevailest,
and prosperest. Thus these conquered Kings shall supplicate and say to Cyrus.

And there is none else, there is no God] Hence Mahometans seem to have taken
that, which out of their Alchoran, they daily proclaim in their Moschies or
meeting houses, There is no god but God, and Mahomet his Counselor. Thus
those Kings: but what says the Prophet?

Hac approbatio est Prophetae. Scultet.
Ver. 15. Verily thou art a God that hidest thy self] As thou art invisible and
dwell in light inaccessible: so in thy dispensations thou go a way by thy
self, and thy judgments are unsearchable. Thou hidest thy self, and stand
off a while sometimes from the help of thy poor people, but wilt appear to them
and for them in due time. The Septuagint here translate Tues Deus and
nescitbamus. Thou art God, and we knew thee not: And this the Fathers interpret
concerning Christ: and hence the Jews seem to have drawn that speech of theirs,
Christ when he comes, no man knows whence he is.

Ver. 16, That are makers of Idols] The Word rendered Idols, signifies properly
Tormina, cruciatus, pains and throws, and straits: Idolaters heap up sorrows
to themselves and terrors of conscience. See Psalm. 16.4. with the Note.

Ver. 17. But Israel -- with an evelasting salvation] By Cyrus they were not
so: for not long after, Antiochus afflicted them, Herod gat the Scepter from
them, the Romans came and took away both them and their Nation: But the Israel
of God were, and are still, saved by Jesus, with an everlasting salvation.

Ver. 18. He created it not in vain] Therefore never think that he will forsake
it, or not take care of his Church therein, for whose sake he made it at first
and still upholdeth it by the word of his power, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. Now if God
created not the earth in vain, much less the heavens (wherein he has showed
his greater skill, Heb. 11.10. See the Note there) but that his people might
there inhabit for ever. And here it is that they shall be saved in the Lord
with an everlasting salvation: Yea they shall not be ashamed or confounded
world without end. ver. 17.

Ver. 19. I have not spoken in secret] As the Sibylls did out of their dens; as
the Idol-priests did out of their holes, and underground vaults; as heretics
and seducers, who creep into corners and there vent their false wares, as
Vincentius Lirinensis long since observed: ( Epiphanius fitly compares them to
Mouls, who do all their mischief by working under ground:) But God as he
delivered his Law openly on Mount Sina: so his Gospel he commanded to be
preached on the housetop, and in Mount Zion. Christ spoke openly to the world,
Joh. 18.20. Truth seeks no corners: I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ,
Romans 1.16. But what was this word that was delivered so plainly and
pespicuously?

Seek ye me] And for your encouragement, ye shall not do it in vain: for I am a
rewarder of all those that diligently seek me, Heb. 11.6. Let Heathen deities
disappoint and delude those that seek to them; Jacobs God scorneth the motion:
he is better to his people then their prayers, better then their hopes: and
when with Gehezi they ask but one talent, he, like Naaman, forces them to take
two.

I the Lord speak righteousness, I declare the things that are right] Or,
even: so does not the Devil, but things sinful and obscene; as humane
sacrifices, promiscuous uncleanness, ut in nefariis Priapi and Veneris
sacris. Contrariwise, all the words of Gods mouth are in righteousness; there
is nothing froward or perverse in them, Prove. 8.8.

Ver. 20. Ye that are escaped of the Nations] That have escaped the sword of
Cyrus: and well proved how little your gods can do for you.

That set up the wood of their graven Image] Qui levant lignum, carrying them
in pomp and procession upon their shoulders, as Papists now do their pictures,
their breaden god especially, and crying to it Holy, holy holy Lord God of
Sabbath.

Ver. 21. Who has declared this] sc. that the people of God should be set at
lilerty by Cyrus.

Ver. 22. Look unto me and be ye saved] Whiles the Moon looks directly upon
the Sun, she is bright and beautiful: but if she once turn aside and be left to
her self, she loses all her glory, and enjoyes but only a shadow of light,
which is her own: so while men look to Christ the Sun of righteousness, and
toward the stars in his right hand, etc.

For I am God and none else] This, Judas Maccabeus acknowledged in his Ensign
wherein this Motto was written Mi Camoca Belohim Jehovah, Godw. Heb. Antiqu.
i. e. Who is like unto thee among the Gods O Lord? from the capital letters of
which Motto he took his name Maccabi.

Ver. 23. That unto me every knee] I will be known and obeyed all the world
over, sc. by Christians. Of the Jews Hierom notes, quod mentis superbiam
demonstrantes genu non flectunt, that they bow not the knee in Gods service,
but only stand up at times.

Ver. 24. Surely shall one say] This shall be the Christian Confession, In the
Lord have I righteousness, etc. righteousness. i. e. Mercy to those that come
over to him, and strength to enable them to come; as the Sea sends out waters
to fetch us to it, etc.

Ver. 25. Shall be justified] by faith in Christ, Romans 5.1.

And shall glory] Having peace of Conscience they shall glory in tribulation,
Romans 5.1, 3. Note this against Meritmongers.

CHAP. XLVI.
Ver. 1. Bell is bowed down] Jupiter Belus (as Pliny calls him) Babels chief
God, is now become a prey to the Persians: Lib. 6. c. 26.
and might be to them of as great worth as was Nebuchadnezzars massy Image of
gold dedicated in Dura, Dan. 3.1, 2. This great golden image, some think to be
the same that is here called Nebo or Nebuchadnezzar. Others think it to be
Apollo Deus vaticinus. Tremellius renders it, the prophesying or oracular God.
Jeremy seems to call him Merodach, chap. 51.1. Dagon the Septuagint render
him; but not well.

Your carriages were heavy laden] tam estis dii graves.

Ver. 2. They stoop] The Babylonians together with their Mawmets: Ridiculous
Gods, that could be thus plundered, carried captives, born on the backs of
Asses.

But themselves are gone into captivity] Heb. and their soul went into
captivity, that is, their Idols, that were dear unto them as their very souls.

Ver. 3. Which are born by me from the belly] You do not bear me, as they do
their Idols in procession and otherwise, but I bear you: and so have done from
the first and shall do the last: like as the tender mother does her beloved
babe, or as the Eagle does her young upon her wings, Exodus 19.4. Deuteronomy. 32.11.

Ver. 4. And even to your old age I am he] The mother beats not her child in
her bosom, Idem faciunt ^qui calcibus and canes morlu.
when grown to some bigness. The Eagle beats her young out of the nest when
able to prey upon their own wing: but God deals better a great deal with his
whom he never casts off: as neither does he his laboring and languishing
Church, upon whom the ends of the world are come.

I have made, and I will bear, even I will carry] God himself will do it; I is
emphatical, and exclusive.

-- Et si gratissima semper
Munera sint Author quae preciosa facit;
How sweet should this precious promise be unto us, and how sovereign against
the fear of want in old age? Plutarch gives this for a reason why old men are
so covetous, viz. because they fear they shall not have (...), such as will
keep them whiles they live, and such as will bury them decently, when dead. The
Lord here assures all his, that he will see to their support and sustentation
as long as life lasts; yea for spirituals as well as temporals. This was no
small comfort to old David, Psalm. 71. to Dr. Rivet and others, And well it
might. See Psalm. 48. ult. with the Notes. Pathos habent verba Me and Cui. Alap.


Ver. 5. To whom then will ye liken me, etc.] q. d. To which of your paramours?
for here the Lord rerurneth to his discourse against idolaters, and their
Idols, earumque inanitatem and inopiam demonstrat, inveighing against them with
no less stomach and indignation then a jealous husband against his adulteresses
stallions. Let every godless person, who idolizeth his lusts, think he hears
God thus bespeaking him as in this Text.

Ver. 6. They lavish gold out of the bag] They spare for no cost:
Nebuchadnezzar did not in that vast Colossus, Dan. 3.1. Canutus bestowed upon a
Cross his whole annual Entrado, or revenue. He also gave an hundred talents of
silver and one of gold, for St. Austine arm, which he bestowed on Coventry as
a memorial of his blind zeal. The Lady of Loretto has her Churches so stuffed
with vowed Presents and memories as they are fain to hang their Cloisters and
Churchyards with them.

Sands Relat.
Ver. 7. They bear him upon their shoulders] As the Papists breaden god
furfuraceum illud numen is, at this day, born about to be adored: whereas the
true God bears up all things by the word of his power, Heb. 1.3.

Yea one shall cry unto him] As they did to Baal in Eliah's days: and the
Cretians to their Jupiter, whom they therefore pictured without ears.

Ver. 8. Remember this] Suffer me not to press these things so often upon you to
no purpose.

And show your selves men] Roboramini, fortify your hearts by the Word of God
and true reason, renewing your good resolutions often against this senseless sin
of Idolatry.

Bring it again to mind] Heb. bring back to heart, turn short again upon your
selves, recognize your iniquities, and be humbled.

Ver. 9. Remember the former things of old] Again he calls upon them to
remember who had so foully forgot themselves in the days of Ahas and Manasseh;
and would do so again in Babylon, where they kept not themselves from Idols:
Papists unman themselves, or otherwise they could not be such gross Idolates.

Ver. 10. Declaring the end from the beginning] This forttelling of things
future, is a precellency in God above Idols, that he much stands upon.

I will do all my pleasure] What God pleases to do, there is no question but
he is able to do. But they are out, who argue from Gods power to his will.

Ver. 11. Calling a ravenous bird] i. e. Cyrus, who was hawk-nosed, and came
swiftly to seiz upon Babylon, like a Falcon, or some such ravenous bird;
Cyripaed. l. 7.
So Nebuchadnezzar is called an Eagle, Jer. 48.49. Xenophon testifyeth that
Cyrus had in his standard a golden Spred-Eagle, as had after him the Persian
Kings, and likewise the Romans: See Matthew, 24.28. with the Note.

Ver. 12. Hearken unto me ye stout-hearted] Ye cruel Caldeans; And here some
begin the next Chapter.

That are far from righteousness] And therefore not far from ruin, Psalm. 119.
ver. 155.

Ver. 13. I will bring near my righteousness] I will suddenly right my wronged
people, by Cyrus my servant, but especially by Christ my Son: therefore it
follows.

I will place salvation in Zion for Israel, my glory] Or, in Israel my
magnificence. i. e. Now which of your Idols can do thus for their worshippers?

CHAP. XLVII.
Ver. 1. COme down] from thy lofty top, and towering state, as the head. Sic
transit gloria mundi. Cyrillus legit (...)
City of the world.

Sit in the dust] as a mourner, Job 2.8. and 42.6. So Judea being subdued by
Vespatian was pictured upon money coined by him, as a handmaid sitting on the
ground. Sic ruet alto a culmine Roma.

O Virgin daughter of Babylon] Thou that have never yet been subdued: So Venice
has for her Motto Intacta manto: So Cullen upon Rhine is called The
Virgin-City.

Thou shall no more be called tender and delicate] so as Queens use to be:
Cleopatra for instance.

Ver. 2. Take the mil stone] As the most abject slaves used to do, qui in
pistrinum trudebantur. Neither is this an end of thy sorrows: for out of the
mil-house thou must be carried captive into a far Country, and therefore, in
order thereunto,

Uncover thy locks] Cast away thy diadem:

Make bare thy leg] Denuda turpituainem, the Vulgar rendereth it: that thou
may pass through the waters naked, and squallid into captivity.

Ver. 3. The nakedness shall be uncovered] Thou shall be stripped, and worse
dealt with: the ordinary lot of women-prisoners. At the sack of Magdeburg by
Monsieur Tilly, Ladies, Gentlewomen, and others, like beasts and dogs, being
naked and coupled together, were led into the woods, and there ravished. Such
as resisted, the Soldiers stripped naked, whipped them, cropped their ears, and so
sent them home again.

I will not meet the as a man] But as a Lion rather: Absque omni humanitatis
contemperatione. Scult. Tractabo te pro divina potentia mea. Piscat.
thou shall have vengeance without mixture of mercy (See 2 Samuel 7.24.) Isa.
13.6. and 27.7, 8, Hos. 5.14.) Men use sometimes to deal favorably with women:
but they shall not do so with thee.

Ver. 4. As for our Redeemer, etc.] This comes in by way of Parenthesis, for
the comfort of Gods poor people.

Ver. 5. Sit thou silent] Here he threatens Babylon with loss of her former
fame: she shall be buried in obscurity and oblivion, as out of sight, and out
of mind: no longer called the Lady of Kingdoms, but a wretched drudge, ut de
Hecuba tradunt Tragici.

For thou shall no more be called] Heb. thou shall not add to be called.
Ocolampadius senseth it thus, Thou wast wont to be called the Lady of Kingdoms;
now they shall call thee, Non adjicies, as desperate and irrecoverable. And why?

Ver. 6. I was wrath] See on Zach. 1. ver. 15.

I have polluted mine inheritance] God is his peoples inheritance, and they are
his: but now, for their sins, He had dealt with them as with a profane and
unclean thing.

Thou did show them no mercy] Heb. thou did set them no bowels. Cruelty
cries for vengeance. See Jer. 50.17. with 51.24.

Upon the ancient] Who should have been born with for their age and weakness.

Ver. 7. I shall be a Lady for ever] Presumption precedeth destruction, Psalm.
10.6. Rev. 18.7.

So that thou did not lay these things to thy heart] The daughter of Pride is
security, and pleasure is her niece, ver. 8.

Nor did remember the latter end of it] Heb. her latter end. Memorare
novissima tua, and in aeternum non peccabis: See Lam. 1.4.

Ver. 8. Thou that art given to pleasure] Delicatula; It is not good to take
pleasure in pleasure, no not to go as far here as we may: verecunda sunt omnia
initia peccati, sin seems modestat first, etc.

Thou faist in thine heart, I am] sc. the Lady of the world. Heathen Rome was
called by the Heathens Terarum dea gentiumque. Rome Papal says as much, Rev.
17.4.

And none else besides me] i. e. None worth speaking off. The Jesuits brag in
like sort of their transcendent learning, and profess skill beyond the
periphery of possible knowledge.

I shall not sit as a widdow] i. e. Be bereft of my Monarchy, which is as it
were my husband.

Neither shall I know the loss of children] I shall not cease to subdue
Countries and Kingdoms, which are added unto me as so many children.

Ver. 9. But these two things shall come upon thee in a moment] Accidit in
puncto, etc. Babylon was suddenly taken in one night, as the Prophet had
foretold, chap. 21. and as the history testifies, Dan. 5. Periit inter pocula.

For the multitude of thy sorceries] Thy taking upon thee to divine of each
man's life and fortune by the Stars and Horoscope: for which profession the
Chaldeans were famous. But what a madness was it in Cardanus, who by the like
skill went about to demonstrate that it was fatal to our Savior Christ,
Alsted. Encycl. lib 30. cap. 10.
to dye the death of the Cross?

Ver. 10. Thou have trusted in thy wickednesse] God calls that wickedness
which they counted wisdom.

None sees me] Ne Deus quidem novit rations meas. Graceless men having hid
God from themselves, think also to hide themselves from God.

Thy wisdom and thy knowledge] Thy Magical arts and practices. Quantus artifex
pereo? quadrabit in te peritum and periturum.

Ver. 11. Therefore shall evil come upon thee] An evil, an only evil, as Ezekiel.
7.5. both unexpected and inexpiable; such as thou can neither avoid, nor
abide.

Ver. 12. Stand now with thine enchantments] Try thine utmost skill, and let us
see what thou can do forthy self: Sen. H^nc divina^o^es per Anto^nomasiam
Ch^l^ae^ appellati.
this is spoken in way of derision.

Wherein thou have labored from thy youth] But found them to be no better than
toilesome toys, quae nec ignoranti nocent, nec scientem juvant. Against
judiciary Astrology, see Aug. de civ. Dei lib. 5. cap. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Ver. 13. Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels] As all such are
sure to be (with a woe to boot) as take counsel but not of God; and that cover
with a covering, but not by his spirit that they may add sin to sin, Isa. 30.1.
Thus do those vain Astrologers, that pretend to read men's fates and fortunes in
the Heavens, velut in Minervae peplo; and thence to foretell good and evil. But
experience frequently confuteth them, as it did Abraham the Jew, who foretold
by the stars the coming of their Messiah, Anno Domini 1464. And Albumazar a
Mohammedan Wizzard, who predicted an end of the Christian Religion, Anno 1460.
at utmost. A great flood was foretold by these Diviners to fall out in the year
1524. cum planetae comitis in piscibus celebrarent. Hollinsh. in 1524.
This caused the Prior of St. Bartholomews in London (wise-man-like) to go and
build him an house at Harrow on the hill, for his better security.

Stand up and save thee] Save thee if they can; but Baltasar found they could
not, though he called for them all, Dan. 5.7, 8. and they likely had promised
him an everlasting Monarchy: (as some did the Romans imperium sine fine) but
falsely: for now the Roman Empire is at a very low ebb, and who shall be
Emperor, This was w^itten, Sept. 19. 1637.
is much questioned.

Ver. 14. Behold they shall be as stubble] As dried stubble, Nah. 1.10. See the
Note there.

They shall not deliver themselves] Much less others.

There shall not be a coal to warm at] Like a fire of flax, which is soon
extinct, and leaves no embers or cinders behind it. In a spiritual sense, it
may be said of most of our hearts and houses as here, There Is not a coal to
warm at: Deest ignis, as Father Latimer was wont to say, the fire of zeal is
wanting; that flame of God, Cant. 8.6.

Ver. 15. Thus shall they be unto thee with whom thou have laboured] But all in
vain, viz. with thy Wizzards and Diviners, those deceivers of the people, Cic
de divinat. lib. 2.
concerning whom Cato once said, Potest Augur Augurem videre and non ridere?
Can those fellows look one on another, and not laugh when they consider how
they cozen people, and cheat them of their moneys? Cic. orat. 4. in Ver.
hence they are called merchants also in the next words, as some think, qui non
tam coeli rationem quam coelati argenti ducunt. Such money-Merchants has
mystical Babylon also not a few, Rev. 18.11. Non desunt Antichristo sui Augures
and malefici, says Oecolampadius; Antichrist has those abroad that trade with
him, and for him: these shall be cast alive with him into the burning lake,
Rev. 19.20. and though they wander, yet not so wide as to miss of hell.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Ver. 1. HEar ye this O house of Jacob] Ye stiffenecked of Israel, and
uncircumcised in heart and ears, who do always resist the Holy Ghost, Act.
7.51. to you be it spoken: for to the Israelites indeed enough has been said
of this subject already.

Which are called by the name of Israel] Sed nomen inane crimen immane: Ye are
called Jews, and make your boast of God, Romans 2.17. having a form of knowledge,
Picti estis Israelitae, est^ hypocritae.
Romans 2.20. and of godliness, 2 Timothy 3.5. and that is all: the voice of Jacob,
but the hands of Esau. Let such fear Jacobs fear, My Father perhaps will feel
me, and I shall seem to him as a deceiver: and I shall bring a curse upon me
and not a blessing, Genesis 27.12. It Is sure enough.

And are come forth out of the waters of Judah] i. e. Out of the bowels, Pro
(...) videtur hic legendum (...)
as Genesis 15.4. as waters out of a spring, Deuteronomy. 33.28. Psalm. 68.26. Judah was
the tribe royal (hence they so gloried) and remained ruling with God, and
faithful with the Saints, when other tribes revolted.

Which swear by the Name of the Lord] And not of Baal.

And make mention of the God of Israel] Who was near in their mouths, but far
from their reins, Jer. 22.2. Psalm. 50.16. Religionem simulabant, cum in cute
essent nequissimi, arrant hypocrites.

But not in truth, nor in righteousnesse] i. e. Without faith and sound
conversion.

Ver. 2. For they call themselves of the holy City] Inhabitants of Jerusalem
and men of Judah: yea they swore by their City and Temple, as appears in the
Gospel, and cried out ad ravim usque, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the
Lord, Jer. 7. like as the Romists now do, The Church, the Church; glorying in
the false and empty title of Roman Catholics, Sed grande est Christianum esse,
non dici, says Hierom: and it is a great vanity, says the Poet, Respicere ad
fumos and nomina vana Catonum.

And stay themselves] As far as a few good words will go. See on Mic. 3.11.

The Lord of hosts is his Name] So said these hypocrites, bearing themselves
bold upon so great a God, who had all creatures at his command.

Ver. 3. I have declared the former things] This God had said often before: but
being now to conclude this comfortable Sermon, he repeats here the heads of
what had been spoken in the seven foregoing Chapters.

Ver. 4. Because I knew that thou art obstinate] Heb. hard, obduraete:
therefore do I so inculcate these things, if by any means I may mollify thee.
Hypocrites are harder to be wrought upon then other sinners.

And thy neck is an iron sinew] Thou art utterly averse from, yea adverse to
any good, no more bended thereunto than if the body had for every sinew a plate
of iron.

And thy brow brasse] Sinews of iron argue a natural impotency and somewhat
more: but brows of brass impudency in evil; quando pudet non esse impudentes,
when men are shameless in sin, setting it upon the cliffe of the Rock, Ezekiel.
24.7. and declaring it as Sodom, Isa. 3.9.

Ver. 5. I have even from the beginning, etc.] See ver. 3. It is probable that
there were many among the Jews, who when they saw themselves to be so punished,
and the heathen prospered, would be ready to think that the God of Israel
either could not or would not do for his people, as those Devil-gods did for
theirs. For their help therefore under such a temptation, God was pleased to
foretell his people what good or evil should betide them; and accordingly to
accomplish it.

Ver. 6. Thou have heard; see all this] Here God extorteth from them a
confession of the aforesaid truth; and urges them to attest and publish it.

Ver. 7. They are created now] i. e. They are now brought to light by my
Revelations and predictions.

Behold I knew them] By my gods or Diviners, or by my natural sagacity.

Ver. 8. Yea thou heardest not, yea thou knew not] Yea so often used here, is
very emphatical; and shows how hardly sinners are born down, and made to
believe plain truths, where they are prepossessed with conceits to the contrary.

And wast called a transgressour from the womb] Ever since thou made and
worshippedst a golden Calf in the wilderness (See here the Note on Psalm.
58.3.) and art still as good at resisting the Holy Ghost, as ever thy Fathers
were, Act. 7.51.

Ver. 9. For my name sake will I defer mine anger] Heb. prolong it. Here he
sets forth the cause of his patience toward so perverse a people, viz. the
sole respect to his own glory whereof he is so tender, and so loath to be a
loser in: Propter me faciam.

And for my praise] The praise of my might and mercy.

That I cut thee not off] Which I would do, were it not that I feared the wrath
of the enemy, lest thine adversaries should behave themselves strangely, and
lest they should say Our hand is high, and the Lord has not done all this,
Deuteronomy. 32.27.

Ver. 10. Behold I have refined thee, but not with silver] Much less as gold,
which is wont to be fined most exactly, Non agam summo jure tecum. Jun.
and to the uttermost; because these precious mettles will not perish by fire.
But thou have more dross in thee than good oar: therefore I have refined thee
with favor, Psalm. 118.18. Ne totus disperires, lest I should undo thee: for
if thy punishment should be commensurate to thine offense, thou must needsly
perish.

I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction] i. e. In affliction, which is
as a furnace or crucible. See Ezekiel. 20.37.

Ver. 11. For mine own sake, even for mine own sake] This is often repeated, that
it may once be well observed. Been cavet spiritus sanctus ubique in Scripturis
ne nostris operibus salutem tribuamus; it is Oecolampadius his Note upon the
first verse of this Chapter, i. e. The holy Ghost does everywhere in Scripture
take course that we ascribe not our safety to our own works. See on chap. 43.13.

For how should my Name be polluted?] As it will be by the blasphemous
Heathens, who else will say that their gods are fortiores and faventiores, more
powerful and more merciful than the God of the Hebrews. Thus the Turks at this
day, when they have beaten the Christians, cry up their Mahomet as mightier
than Christ.

And I will not give my glory to another] Press this in prayer: it is an
excellent argument, Exodus 32.12. Josh. 7.9. Psalm. 79.9, 10. Psalm. 115.1, 2. The
Saints after all other arguments used, hunc quasi arietem admovent, mind God
of his glory engaged; and then doubt not to prevail with him.

Ver. 12. I am he] Heb. Hu; this the Rabbines make to be one of the names of
God. Sanchez here observes, that by this threefold I is meant the holy
Trinity: the Deity of Jesus Christ is rightly proved from this text, compared
with Rev. 1.11. and 22.13.

Ver. 13. My hand has also laid the foundation of the earth] My left hand,
Oecolamp. in loc.
say the Rabbis, as my right hand spanned the heavens; that is, meted them out
as a workman does his work. God did but call unto them both, and they stood up
together; Vain therefore and needless was the disputation of the Samerites and
the Hillelites among the Jews, Whether was first created the heaven or the
earth?

Ver. 14. The Lord has loved him] i. e. Cyrus. He so loves his people that
for their sakes he loves all their Benefactours and well-wishers. See Genesis
12.3.

He will do his pleasure] See chap. 43.14.

Ver. 15. I have brought him] Heb. made him to go, or caused him to come, who
of himself had no such mind to come on such a design. Herodotus tells us,
that Cyrus had once resolved to let alone the siege of Babylon as unfeisable:
but God altered his mind, as we here read, and prospered his work.

Ver. 16. Come ye near unto me and hear this] God calls often for audience,
as knowing our dullness and crosseness, our oscitancy and inadvertency: a good
mirror for Ministers.

I have not spoken in secret] See chap. 41.26.

From the time that I was, there am I] Viz. At the Creation, as Prove. 8.22, 23.
Diod.
Or, I have from everlasting been the Author of that counsel by which all
these things have had as is were their first beginning; and afterward, in
their appointed time, I have brought them forth by my power.

And now the Lord God and his Spirit has sent me] i. e. Me Isaiah the Prophet;
whose writings should therefore be prized and believed by us as most authentike
and authoritative, because he was commissionated by the blessed Trinity.

Ver. 17. I am the Lord thy God which teaches thee to profit] And do therefore
so often call upon thee to hear me, not for any benefit to my self but to thee
alone. And the truth is, In all the Commandments of God, if they were open to
us, if we did see the ground of them, we should see there were so much reason
for them, and so much good to be got by them, that if God did not command them,
yet it would be best for us to practice them.

Which leads thee by the way that thou should go] Heb. making thee to
tread in the way thou shall walk, carefully choosing thy steps for thee, and
setting thy foot right: thus he led Joseph like a sheep, Psalm. 80.2. and Israel
through the deep as an horse in the wilderness that they should not stumble,
Isa. 63.13. Thrice happy are the Saints in such a guide. The steps of a good
man are ordered by the Lord, and he delights in his way, Psalm. 37.23.

Ver. 18. Oh that thou had hearkened to my Commandements] See the like
wishes, Deuteronomy. 32.29. and 5.29. Psalm. 81.13. implying, that so they might have
redeemed many sorrows, escaped many miseries.

Then had thy peace been as a river] Great peace have all they that love Gods
Law, and nothing shall offend them, Psalm. 119 105. they shall have a confluence
of all comforts and contentments: yet ever with an exception of the cross, as
need requires.

And thy righteousness as the waves of the sea] Which are perpetual, fluctus
fluctum trudit.

Ver. 19. Thy seed also had been as the sand] As was promised to Abraham, and
performed to his posterity: Such a (...) there is in godliness, and in doing of
Gods Commandments so great reward.

His name should not have been cut off] As it was of old among the heathens
(see Horace, Juvenal, Martial, etc.) and is at this day among the Turks, who
usually swear, Judaeus sim si fallam, etc. See Zach. 8.13. with the Note.

Ver. 20 Go ye forth of Babylon] The word among the Jews, that despaired of
ever returning from Babylon: but the Prophet by an unexpected alarm commands
them to return, showing how and why they should do so; and carries himself no
otherwise than as if he had been a Captain in the midst of those captives, etc.

Ver. 21. And they thirsted not when he led, etc.] Your Fathers did not of old:
nor shall you now in your return homeward. The Jews tell us of many miracles
then wrought also: but we read of no such matter in Ezra; and we know that Gods
pilgrims shall want no necessary accommodation: that, he will be sure to see to.

Ver. 22. There is no peace, says the Lord, unto the wicked] Babylons best
days are past: therefore go ye forth of her, ver. 20. The wicked of what
Nation soever that hearken not to Gods Commandments (as ver. 18.) well they
may have a truce, Live. Hist. lib. 9.
but no true peace certainly. That which they have is pax infida, pax incertae
(as that of the Romans with the Samnites) a peace no peace: and how can it be
better, so long as their wickednesses and witchcrafts are so many? 2 King.
9.22. Tranquillitas illa tempestas erit: as after a South Wind arose
Euroclydon, Act. 27.13, 14. so after a false peace storm and tempest
everlasting: this shall be the portion of their cup, Psalm. 11.6. See chap.
57.20, 21.

CHAP. XLIX.
Ver. 1. LIsten O Isles unto me] i. e. Ye forreiners; for wicked Israel will
not, and therefore have no true peace, chap. 48.22. with Psalm. 119.165.

Unto me] Understand it of Isaiah. but especially of Christ: for from hence to
the end of this book (as the Jew-Doctours also acknowledge) are visions and
Sermons set down concerning Christ's twofold Kingdom, viz. of Patience and of
Power. See Act. 13.47. 2 Cor. 6.2. Rev. 7.10.

The Lord has called me from the womb] Called me and qualified me, appointed
and anointed me to the office of a Mediator. This, those that attend not,
though never so remote, are deeply guilty before God, Deuteronomy. 18.18, 19. Act.
3.22, 23.

Ver. 2. And he has made my mouth like a sharp sword] He has added efficacy
to my doctrine; and will protect my person till I have finished the work that
he gave me to do.

And made me a polished shaft] That, being well pointed, will pierce at a
distance, and either prick Converts at the heart, as Act. 2.37. or cut
refractories to the heart, as Act. 7.54. Christ will pursue his enemies both
with the terrors of his words, his mouth being made like a sharp sword; and
with the plagues of his hands, being made like a polished shaft.

Ver. 3. Thou art my servant O Israel] i. e. O Christ, who best deservest to be
called by that name, who art also the head of the Elect that Israel of God,
Gal. 6.16.

Ver. 4. Then said I, I have labored in vaine] I have done little more than
preached my hearers to hell. The Pharisees and the Lawyers rejected the counsel
of God against themselves, Luke 7.30. they would not be forewarned to flee from
the wrath to come, Mat. 3.7. to escape the damnation of hell, Mat. 23.33. Our
Savior lost his sweet words upon them: so did the Prophet Isaiah upon his
untoward Countrymen, who refused to be reformed, hated to be healed. Nothing
was unconquerable to his pains, who had (as one says of Jul. Scaliger) a
golden wit in an iron body; but this matter was not malleable: hence he spoke
to them to as little purpose as Bede did when he preached to an heap of stones.
Hence his complaint, chap. 53.1. Who has believed our report? he might happily
hope at first, as holy Melanchthon did, that it was impossible for his hearers
to withstand the evidence of the Gospel: but after he had been a Preacher a
while, it is said be complained that old Adam was too hard for young
Melanchthon. Reverend Mr. Greenham, besides his public pains in season and
out of season, was wont to walk out into the fields, and to confer with his
neighbors as they were at plough. But Dry-Draiton (the place where he was
Minister many years) though so often watered with his tears, prayers and
pains, was little the better for all: Mr. Fullers Church-hist.
the generality of his parish remained ignorant and obstinate, to their
Pastors great grief, and their own greater damage and disgrace. Hence the
verses, Greenham had pastures green,
But sheep full lean, etc.


He might well cry out, as many also do at this day, Eheu, quam pingui macer
est mihi taurus in arvo! Our people, alas, are like Labans-lambs or Pharaohs
kine: they are even Ministrorum opprobria. But if Ministers toil all night and
take nothing, it is to be feared (says one well) that Satan caught the fish ere
they came at their net.

Yet surely my judgment is with the Lord] He will do me right and reward me
howsoever: The Physician has his praise and pay, though his Patient dies. The
Lawyer has his see though his Clients cause miscarry. Curam exigeris, non
curationem, says Bernard to a frienk of his, Jer. 20.
it is the care not the cure of your charge that is charged upon you. Jeremy
was impatient, and would preach no more, but that might not be. Mr. Greenham
left Dry-Draiton, upon friends importunity, and removed to London, but he
afterward repented it. Latimer speaking of a certain Minister, who gave this
answer why he left off preaching, because he saw he did no good: This, says
Latimer, is a naughty, a very naughty answer.

Ver. 5. To bring Jacob again to him] To convert and reduce him to the fold:
this is the proper work of the Archshepherd, 1 Pet. 2.25. and 3.18. and 5.4.
Men may speak perswasively, but Christ alone can persuade the heart. Meum est
docere, says Cyril, vestrum auscultare, Dei vero perficere.

Though Israel be not gathered] Viz. By Gods Word which is his Arm, chap.
53.1. or will not be gathered, as Mat. 23.37.

Yet I shall be glorious in the eyes of the Lord] Who will reward me (...),
according to my pains, and not according to my success: yea it is more than
probable, that such as patiently persist in the work of the ministry, Secundum
laborem, non secundum proventum. Bern.
though few or none be converted thereby, shall have a greater measure of
glory, than those that see much fruit of their labors, and so have their
honeycomb here to feed on.

Ver. 6. I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles] De vocatione
gentium illustre testimonium; and to this purpose it is cited by Paul and
Barnabas, Act. 13.47. See Joh. 12.46. Luke 1.78, 79.

That thou may be my Salvation] Vide quam Deo cordi and curae sit salus
nostra, A Lap,
cum eam vocat suam. See how God minds and fancieth our salvation, when he
calls it here his salvation.

Ver. 7. To him whom man despiseth] Christ was extremely despised in the state
of his humiliation, Isa. 53.2, 3. his Soul was filled with scorn and contempt,
as Psalm. 123.3, 4. he was heartily hated.

To him whom the Nation abhorreth] Hierom says that, to this day, that
execrable nation curses Christ three times a day in their Synagogues: and
professes that if their Messiah should come, rather than the Gentiles should
share with them in his benefits, they would crucify him over and over.

To a servant of Rulers] Christ was basely used by the Rulers of the Jews, who
never left till they had nailed him to the Tree; which was a slaves death among
the Romans.

Kings shall see and arise, Princes also shall worship] As did Constantine,
Theodosius, Valentinian, Charles the Great, etc. who called themselves vasallos
Christi, the vasals of Christ.

And he shall choose thee] i. e. He shall declare that he has chosen thee to
be the Savior of his people.

Ver. 8. In an acceptable time] Heb. In a time of my good pleasure, or
goodwill, i. e. when of free grace I am pleased to send thee into the world,
and to cause the Gospel to be preached all abroad: thereby declaring my self
fully appeased which the men of my good will, as the Elect are called, Luke
2.14. Confer 2 Cor. 6.2.

Have I heard thee] Or, will I hear thee, sc. interceding, and will I help
thee, sc. conflicting.

And give thee for a Covenant] i. e. For a Mediator of the New Covenant, which
is ratified by thy blood: as was signified by the book sprinkled with the blood
of the slain sacrifice.

To establish the earth] Had not Christ undertook the shattered condition of
the world to uphold it, it had fallen about Adams cares.

To cause to inherit the desolate heritages.] i. e. Heaven forfeited by us in
our first Parents: or, as others, the Countries of the Nations now converted.

Ver. 9. That thou may say to the prisoners] i. e. To such as lie hampered
and enthralled in the invisible chains of the Kingdom of darkness: To these
Christ says, be refreshed with the light of saving knowledge, and with the
liberty of the sons of God.

They shall feed in the wayes] As cattle do, that are removed from place to
place: they shall have a subsistence till they get home to their Fathers house,
where is bread enough.

Ver. 10. They shall not hunger nor thirst] A sufficiency the Saints have, even
of outward comfotts, if not a superfluity: and for inward, sunt nobis pascua,
pocula, and panis coelestis, they shall not want, Psalm. 23.1. yea they shall
over-exceedingly abound, 2 Cor. 7.4. So little cause is there for the Jew to
jear us as poor and forlorn; spiritual alimony we are sure of: and bread and
water with the Gospel are good cheer. See Rev. 7.16.

Neither shall the heat nor Sun smite them] As Psalm. 121.6. See the Note there.

For he that has mercy on them] He says not Pastor but Miserator, a sweeter
title.

Even by the springs] See Psalm. 23.3. with the Note.

Ver. 11. And I will make all my mountaines] I will remove all rubs, and lay
all level: pacifica erunt omnin, foecunda and suavia: who would not then take
up Christ's so easy a yoke, etc?

Ver. 12. Behold, these shall come from far] The Jews from all parts, whither
they have been dispersed: the Elect from all quarters of the earth, Mat. 8.11.
with the Notes.

And these from the land of Sini] Or, of the Sinites, that is of the Chinois
(says Junius and others) whom the Greek Geographers call Sinois, Arias Mont.
Osorim. A Lapide. Mr. Cotton.
a very populous Nation. Botterus says, that there are reckoned seventy
millions of men, which are more than are to be found in all Europe: and who
knows but many of those of the ten tribes of Israel are there?

Enthusiastico jubilo, etc. Oecolamp.
Ver. 13. Sing O heaven] The Prophet having thus foretold the Saints happiness
in and by Christ, cannot hold but breaks forth into Gods praises, calling
into consort all creatures, which since the Fall have lain bed-ridden, as it
were looking with stretcht-out neck for their full deliverance, Romans 8.23.

For the Lord has comforted his people] This is just matter of general joy.

Ver. 14. But Zion said] The Church has her vicissitudes of joy and sorrow:
mercies and crosses are interwoven: God checkereth his Providence white and
black; he speckleth his work, as Zach. 1.8.

The Lord has forsaken me] No, never: Non deserit Deus, etiamsi deserere
videatur: Aug.
non deserit etiamsi deserat: God may withdraw, but not utterly desert his; he
may change his dispensation, not his disposition toward them.

My Lord has forgotten me] My Lord still, though little enjoyed at present. So
Psalm. 22.1. Plato could say that a man might believe, and yet not believe: I
believe says he in the Gospel, help mine unbelief, that is, my weak and
wavering faith.

Ver, 15. Can a woman forget her sucking child] Twere a wonder she should grow
out of kind, as to be so unkind. The mother fasteth, that her child may eat;
waketh that he may sleep; is poor to make him rich; slighted to make him
glorious. Occidar modo imperet, said she in story. Gods love to his is more
than maternal. All the mercies of all the mothers in the world being put
together, would not make the tithe of his mercy: David says much, Psalm.
103.13. As a Father pittieth his children, etc. great was Jacobs love to
Benjamin, David's to Absalom, so that Job upbraideth him with it, 2 Samuel 19 6.
But God here says more, Can a woman forget, etc. The harlot could not yield to
have her child divided. Arsinoe interposed her own body betwixt the sword of
the murderer and her dear children. Chronic. l. 5.
Melancthon tells of a Countess of Thuringia, who being compelled by her
husbands cruelty to go into banishment from her children, when she took leave
of her eldest son she bit a piece of his cheek out, amoris notam cruento morsu
imprimens, and so marked him for her own. This is somewhat: but what is all this
to the infinite? Was there ever love like Gods love in sending his son to dye
for sinners? Christ himself wondreth at it, Joh. 3.16. this was a sic without a
sicut, there being nothing in nature wherewith to parallel it. See Romans 8.32.

Yea they may forget] They may put off natural affection, as some did in times
of Popish persecution; Julius Palmers mother for instance. King Edward the
Martyr was basely murdered by his own Mother: Egelred succeeded him, and much
mourned for his brother, (being but ten years old) which so enraged his mother,
that taking wax-candles which were readiest at hand, she therewith scourged him
so sore, that he could never after endure wax candles to be burnt before him.

Ver. 16. Behold I have graven thee] So that as often as I look upon mine own
hands I cannot but think on thee: Non descripsit sed sculpsit and quidem in
manibus, utraque scilicet. Sculter.
We read of one who had written the whole history of Christ's passion upon the
nails of his hands, in small letters. The signet on his finger a man cannot
lightly look beside. See Cant. 8.6. Jer. 22.24. Some think here is alluded to
that precept given by God, of binding the Commandments to their right hand,
Deuteronomy. 6.

Thy walls are continually before me] The Lord does so delight in his servants,
that their walls are ever in his sight, and he loves to look upon the houses
where they dwell. See on Psalm. 87.6.

Ver. 17. Thy children shall make haste] People shall come in a main to the
Church. Nescit tarda molimina Spiritus sancti gratia. God can make a Nation to
conceive and bring forth in a day, chap. 66.8. How quickly was the Gospel
divulged and darted all the world over, as the beams of the Sun? so in the late
blessed Reformation begun by Luther.

And they that made thee waste] Tyrants and heretics shall be cashiered, as
Zach. 13.2. Fiat, Fiat.

Ver. 18. Lift up thine eyes round about and behold] As those use to do, which
look upon ought with wonder and delight.

Thou shall surely cloth thee with them, as with an ornament] The good sons of
Zion are a great honor to their mother, as the two Scipio's were to Cornelia;
and as that Elect Ladies children were to her, Joh. 2. A godly man is a gallant
man: but the wicked are botches and blots to a Church.

Ver. 19. For thy waste, and thy desolate places] Heb. thy wastnesses and thy
desolations.] The true Church then may lie waste and desolate, and not be so
gloriously visible, as the Papists falsely say it always is.

Shall even now be too narrow] A Metaphor from Cities, that being over-full,
send out colonies into other Countries,

And they that swallowed thee up] See ver. 17.

Ver. 20. The children] Heb. the children of thine orbity: such as are not yet
received into the Church.

Give place to me that I may] People shall offer violence to heaven, and the
violent stall take it by force: valde avide and quasi ambitiose accessuri sunt.
Ezekiel describes the Church of the New Testament to be very large and
spacious: and yet she shall be so crowded as is a bee-hive, out of the mouth
whereof the bees often hang on heaps, for want of room within.

Ver. 21. Then shall thou say in thine heart] Est artificiosa fictio, and color
rhetoricus.

A Captive and removing too and fro] The condition of Gods Church on earth to
be afflicted and tossed from post to pillar, having no settled abode: as
neither had the Ark, but was transportative, till settled at length in Solomon's
Temple.

Ver. 22. Behold I will lift up my hand, etc.] i. e. I will call them by the
Gospel, which is the power of God to salvation to all believers, Romans 1.16.

And they shall bring thy sons in their armes] sc. when they bring them to be
baptized. Respicit ad puerilem conditionem: yet some expound it Metaphorically,
as Deuteronomy. 32.10. Hos. 11.3.

Ver. 23. And Kings shall be thy nursing-fathers] Such were David, Solomon,
Hezekiah, Josiah, Constantine, Theodosius, Placilla, Queen Elizabeth, etc.

They shall bow down to thee] They shall give thee civil worship, and low
obeisance: and that for Christ's sake who is thine head and husband, and
dwells in thee.

They shall bow down to thee, etc.] Such honor has every Saint through
Christ. The Popes Parasites would hence ground his holding out his feet to be
kissed; yea his treading upon Kings and Emperors. But Peter would none of
this, Act. 10.25, 26. so little cause had that Pope once to cry out Et mihi and
Petro. Interpreters do rightly note that in these and the like texts, Xenoph.
lib. 8. Plutarch. in Alcib.
the Prophet alludes to the manner of the Persians, amongst whom those that
would speak unto the King, did first kiss the pavement that the King had
trodden upon: Hence Martial, Pictorum sola basiare Regum.

The ancient Christians also, to honor and hearten their Confessors, and such
as suffered imprisonment for the truths sake, did use to kiss their hands, yea
to cast themselves down at their feet. Tertullian writing to some of the
Martyrs, says, Non tantus sum ut vos alloquar, I am not good enough to speak
unto you. He tells also of some in his time that they did reptare ad vincula
Martyrum, creep to the bands of the Martyrs in way of honor to them.

Ver. 24. Shall the prey be taken from the mighty] Not unless he be
overmatched and over-mastered. The heathens were wont to ask, Who can wring a
club out of Hercules his hand, or a light-bolt out of Joves? The Captive Jews
here seem to ask, Who can deliver us from the Babylonians, who have both might
and right for them? for we are their lawful Captives, and we see not how we can
be set at liberty. Thus they thought at least, if they spoke not as much; not
looking at all to the power and faithfulness of God, sed ad praesentium rerum
spectra, ac hostium potentiam. Those that look downward on the rushing and
roaring streams of miseries and troubles which run so swiftly under them, shall
be sure to be taken with a giddiness, etc but such as steadfastly fasten on the
power and Promise of God all-sufficient, shall be established.

Ver. 25. But thus says the Lord] Here Is a full answer to the former
objection, as God does usually in the Scripture frame answers to men's thoughts:
the Law is spiritual and heart-reaching.

And I will contend with him that contendeth with thee] I will over power the
devil, and thy most headstrong lusts; bringing thee out of his slavery, so
that thou shall be able to do all things through Christ who strengthens thee,
Phil. 4. Thy temporal enemies also, thy persecutors shall feel my power, as did
Pharao, Nero, Diocletian, Julian, etc. See on Genesis 12.2.

Ver. 26. And I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh] Which
yet no man ever hated, A^^m ut ^l^^^us macta^em s^^g^^e ^^mas.
but nourishes and cherishes it, Ephesians. 5.29. But Zions enemies should one
destroy another, and be put to such straits, as the Jews were in the siege of
their City by Titus, that they fed upon their own flesh, and the flesh of their
children. So hard a thing it is to kick against the pricks: quae in coelum
expuunt, in faciem ipsurum recidunt.

And they shall be drunk with their own blood] Yea drowned in it, as was
Attilas King of Hunnes, Flac. ^lly
Felix Count of Wartenburg (a great Warrior and bloody persecuter of the
Lutherans) who was choked in his own blood; and Charles the ninth of France,
to whom a certain Poet thus rightly speaks, Naribus, ore, oculis, atque
auribus undique, and ano,
Et pene, erumpit qui tibi, Carle, cruor,
Non tuus iste cruor, sanctorum at caede cruorem,
Quem ferus hausisti, concoquere haud poteras.


CHAP. L.
Ver. 1. WHere is the bill of your mothers divorcement, Heb. abscission: this
bill was called by the Greeces, (...): but none such could here be produced or
proved, as given by God to the Jewish State: but that the disloyalty was
theirs, and their dereliction on their part: God had neither rejected them
though innocent (as some husbands did their wives out of a peevish and selfish
humor) nor sold them though obedient, as some fathers did their children for
payment of their debts: for he is neither debtor to any, nor non-solvent, Romans
11.35, 36.

Behold for your iniquities ye have sold your selves] O duram servitutem! O
miseram necessitatem! You have sold your selves, as Ahab did, to work
wickedness, 1 King. 25.29. and therefore I have justly sold and abandoned you
into the hands of your enemies, Judge. 2.13, 14. and 3.7, 8. Psalm. 44.11, 12.

Is your mother] i. e. The Synagogue, whereunto the Jews do yet still adhere as
to their mother: and the Lord did then acknowledge himself to be her husband,
but now he has worthily cast her off.

Ver. 2. Wherefore when I came was there no man?] Christ came unto his own, but
his own received him not, Joh. 1. This was condemnation, Joh. 3. their
rebelling against the light of the Gospel; this was the great offense, the
damning sin, the very cause of their utter rejection.

Is my hand shortened at all?] Or rather have not you by your obstinacy and
incredulity transfused as it were a dead Palsy into the hand of Omnipotency?
Mar. 6.5. He could do there no mighty work because of their unbelief; of so
venomous a nature is that cursed sin.

Behold at my rebuke I dry up the Sea] I have done it (you know) Psam. 106.9.
and can do it again. Be not therefore faithless but believing, as Joh. 20, 27.

Ver. 3. I clothe the heavens with blacknesse] I did so in that three-daie
darkness in Egypt, Exodus 10.21, 22. and shall do so again at the time of my
Passion: I can therefore, doubtless deliver you not only from Babylon, but from
sin, death, and hell, by giving you an entrance into Heaven by the waters of
Baptism, and by bringing you out of darkness into my marvelous light, 1 Pet.
2.9.

And make sackcloth their covering] Ita ut coelum pullata vest obtensum
fuisse dixeris. So Rev 6.12.

Ver. 4. The Lord God] Heb. the Sovereign self-being.

Has given me] Me Isaiah, but much more Jesus Christ the Arch-Prophet of his
Church, who spoke as never man spoke, Joh. 7.46. See Matthew. 7, 28, 29. Luke
4.22. Grace was poured into his lips, Psalm. 45.2. and it was no less poured out
of his lips, whilst together with his words there went forth a power, and he
could persuade as he pleased; for why? God had blessed him: ib.

The tongue of the learned] A learned and elaborate speech it had need to be
that shall affect the heart. Matthew. 13.52. Not every dolt can do it; but he who
is an Interpreter, one amongst a thousand, 1 These. 5.14.
Job 33.23. who can speak as the Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4.11. sell oil to the
wiser Virgins, Matthew. 25.9. comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak, be
patient or for bearant toward all men, O quam hoc non est omnium! Such a choice
man, thus taught of God, is worth his weight in gold. Such an one was Luther,
such was Latimer, (who was Confessor general to all Protestants troubled in
mind) Bradford, Greenham, Dod, Sibbs, etc.

That I might know how to speak a word in season] Tempestivare, to time or
season a word, to set it on the Wheels, as Solomon phraseth it, Prove. 25.11.
that it may be as apples of gold in pictures of silver, not only precious for
matter, but delectable for order, Eccles. 12.10. Surely such a speaker has joy
by the answer of his mouth: and a word spoken in his season how good is it?
Prove. 15.23. This is the right Physic for the soul (as Heathens also hammered
at) far beyond all Philosophical discourses, or any other consolatiunculae
creaturulae, as Luther fitly expresses it.

Indesinenter me informat spiritu, non autem per momenta, ut omnes Prophetas
alios. Jun.
He awakeneth morning by morning] He constaintly calls me up betime, as a
Master does his scholar to his book and business, for the which the morn is
fittest. Christ's indefatigable assiduity in teaching his perverse Countrymen,
left them without all excuse, Joh. 15.22.

To hear as the learned] i. e. Attentively, as those that would be learned, and
are therefore (...) desirous to hear. Aristotle calls hearing the learned
sense.

Ver. 5. The Lord God has opened mine ear] Removing all lets, and making the
bore bigger, as it were thereby speaking home to my heart, and making me
morigerous and obedient, against all affronts and misusages. For here our
Savior sets forth his active obedience, as in the next verse his Passive.

De Temp. ser. 114.
Ver. 6. I gave my back to the smiters] Ecce pro impio Pietas flagellatur, etc.
says Ambrose Behold the man (as Pilat once said) the just man scourged for the
unjust, (1 Pet. 3.18.) wisdom derided for the fools sake; truth denied for the
liars sake; mercy afflicted for the cruel man's sake, life dying for the dead
man's sake. What are all our sufferings to his? how often have we been whipped,
depiled, despitefully spit upon, etc. for his sake? Oh that I might have the
maidenhead of that kind of suffering, said One of the Martyrs in the Marian
times! for I have not heard that you have yet whipped any: Bishop Bonner,
afterward, with his own hands whipped some, and pulled a great part of their
beards off.

I hid not my face from shame and spitting] That is, from shameful spitting:
See Matthew. 26, 47. and 27.3^. with the Notes. Discamus etiam hoc loco, says
Oecolampadius, Learn here also what is the character of a true Christian
Minister, namely to express Christ to the world as much as may be, viz, by apt
utterance, seasonable comforts, divine learning, ready obedience, constant
patience, exemplary innocence, discreet zeal, etc.

Ver. 7. For the Lord God will help me] And again, ver. 9. Behold the Lord God
will help me. This lively hope held head above water. Hope we also perfectly
(or, to the end) for the grace that is to be brought unto us at the revelation
of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.13.

Therefore shall I not be confounded] Heb. ashamed, notwithstanding the shame
they seek to cast upon me, ver. 6. I am as marble to which no dirt will stick.

Therefore I have set my face as a flint] Or, as steel (which is medulla sive
nucleus ferri, says Pliny:) I have steeled my countenance, as Luke 9.51. See
Ezekiel. 3.8, 9. So did Luther when he resolved to appear at Worms before the
Emperor, though he were sure to encounter as many devils there as were tiles
upon the houses. Act. and Mon. 776.
See Acts 21.13.

Ver. 8. He is near that justifies me] i. e. God the Father will shortly clear
up mine innocence, and declare me to be the Son of God (my only crime now) with
power by the resurrection from the dead. Romans 1.4.

Who will contend with me] So Joh. 8.46. and Romans 8.33.34. where the Apostle
Paul, as a stout soldier and imitatour of Christ, the Captain of his
salvation, uses the same argument, and teacketh us to do likewise.

(...).
Ver. 9. Behold the Lord God will help me] See ver. 7.

Who is he that shall condemn me] If Libanius could say of his friend Basil
(though of a different Religion) Let but him praise me, and I care not who
dispraiseth me: how much better might Christ and may every good Christian say
the same of God!

Lo, they shall all wax old as a garment] The Scribes and Pharisees (those old
cankered carles) shall: for of them Hierom, Cyril and others understand it: The
Romans (according as they feared, and therefore crucified Christ, Joh. 11.48.)
came upon them and took away both them and their Nation.

The moth shall eat them up] i. e. They shall be irrecoverably ruined, being
once laid aside by God as an old ore-worn garment, which is made thereby meat
for mothes. Thus it befell Pilat (says Lyra here) banished by Tiberius; and
thus it besel the Priests, who were burnt by Titus in the Temple: who also
added, that it was fit that those which served in the Temple should perish
together with it.

Ver. 10. Who is among you that fears the Lord] This Question implies that
there were not many such among them: See the like, Hos. 14. ult.

That obeyeth] The fear of God frames the heart to the obedience of faith,
Eccles. 12.13.

That walks in darkness and has no light] That being for the time deserted,
are in a mist: so as that ye cannot read your own graces, see your own
comforts, but walk in darkness though children of light, and are in such a
state as Paul and his company was, Acts 27.20. when they saw neither Sun nor
Stars for many days together, but were almost past hope.

Let him trust in the name of the Lord] Let him do as those abovementioned
did, cast anchor, even in the darkest night of temptation, and pray still for
day, and it will dawn at length: before daybreak the darkness is greatest; so
is it often in this case. Here then as a child in the dark clasps about his
father: so let the poor deserted soul about God. Distrust is worse then
distress: and although the liquour of faith is never pure in these vessels of
clay, without the sees of distrust, yet true faith will trust in God where it
cannot trace him, and by an assurance, of adherence at least, get to Heaven
through mourning: as Christ was taken up in a cloud, or as the kine that
carried the Ark went right, but they lowed as they went.

And stay upon this God] As the vine does upon some support. Faith has a
catching quality at whatoever is near to lay hold on: like the branches of the
Vine, it windeth about that which is next and stays it self upon it, spreading
further and further still. Fides est quae te pullastrum, Christum gallinam
facit, says Luther.

Ver. 11. Behold all ye that kindle a fire] That instead of relying upon God,
would relieve your selves by carnal shifts and fetches, a fire of your own
kindling, or rather sparks of your own tinder-boxes, strange fire, and not
that of Gods Sanctuary: Or say they be your own good works you trust to; like
as the Phoenix gathers sweet odoriferous sticks in Arabia together, and then
blows them with her wings, and burns her self with them.

That compass your selves about with sparks] Away with those tinder-boxes of
yours; what are your sparkles but such as are smitten out of a flint, which 1.
Yields no warmth or good light. 2. Are soon extinct. 3. Nevertheless, you are
sure to lie down in sorrow, to be cast into utter darkness, where you shall
never see the light again till you see the whole world all on a light fire at
the last day.

Walk in the light of your fire] Do so, if ye thing it good: but your light
shall be put out into darkness and worse: like as lightning is followed by
rending and roaring Thunder.

This shall ye have of my hand] This I will assure of: and having spoken it
with my mouth, I will fulfill it with my hand.

Ye shall lie down in sorrow] As sick folk, who being in grievous pain and
teen, would fain dye, but cannot: Cubatum ibitis, adignes, ad dolores and
cruciatus. You shall make your beds in the bottom of Hell, as it is said of the
King of Babylon, chap. 14.11. and as of Pope Clement the fifth it was reported,
that upon the death of a Nephew of his whom he had sensually abused, Jacob.
Revius hist. Pont. p. 199.
he sent to a certain Magician to know how it went with his soul in the other
world? The Magician showed him to the messenger as lying in Hell in a bed of
fire: Whereupon the Pope was so struck with horror, that he never held up his
head more, but soon after dyed also.

CHAP. LI.
Ver. 1. HEarken unto me ye that fellow after righteousnesse] Heb. ye that
pursue or follow hard after it, as Paul did, Philip. 3. The speech is directed
to those Jews that embraced the Gospel: persuading them to persist in the
faith, in nothing terrified by their adversaries, since Almighty God would keep
and help them, as he had done faithful Abraham and Sarah, their Ancestors:
Banim meabanim.
to whom also he would of stones raise up sons in the conversion of the
Gentiles, and could do it as easily as he had hewed the Hebrews, that great
Nation, out of aged Abraham, and superannuated Sarah; who are here compared to
a dry-rock, and a deep pit.

And to the hole of the pit whence ye were digged] Est honesta periphrasis
actus conjugalis. The word here used is of the same root with Nekebah the
female kind of all creatures.

Ver. 2. Look unto Abraham your Father] Look and again Look: hearken and again
hearken: These poor Jews, before the coming of Christ in the flesh, were vino
somnoque sepulti, drunk with the cup of Gods fury, ver. 17. and so fast asleep,
that they needed to be thus roused and raised up to the hope of better times,
which now were at hand.

And unto Sarah that bare you] By the force of her Faith also, Heb. 11.11. her
son Isaac was emeritae fidei filius. Now these domestical examples are
alleged, to assure them that God could do the like again in respect of
spiritual children, Abraham's right seed, Gal. 4.

For I called him alone] Be not ye therefore troubled at your alonenesse.

And blessed him, and increased him] Gods benediction is his benefaction; the
Popes is not so: fumos vendit, fumo pereas.

Ver. 3. For the Lord shall comfort Zion] (As once he did Abraham) by
multiplying her children, giving her in good store of Converts: these were the
Apostles and the Primitive Christians, those earthly Angels, who made the world
(which before was as a waste wilderness) to become a most pleasant and
plentiful Paradise. Chrysostom somewhere calls them Angels, and says that
they were puriores coel^ afflictione facti, more clear then the azured sky.

Joy and gladness shall be found in them] See chap. 35.10.

Thanksgiving and the voice of melody] Paul as the Pracentor sweetly sings and
gives the Note to us all, Ephesians. 1, 3, 4, 5. etc. Blessed be the God and Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ who has blessed us, etc.

Ver. 4. Harken unto me] See on ver. 2.

For a Law shall proceed from me] i. e. The Gospel of grace, that perfect Law
of liberty, the Law of the Spirit of life, Romans 8.2.

Diod.
And I will make my Judgment to rest] I will firmly and irrevocably establish
the government of my Word and Spirit in the Church for a secure guide to bring
it to eternal life. Some render it thus, My Judgment. (i. e. My Gospel) shall
be for a light of the people, whereby I will give rest: So that here is a
double effect of the Gospel, viz Saving light, and Peace of Conscience.

Jam amodo iter ingressa est. Hyper.
Ver. 5. My righteousnesse] i. e. my faithfulness, or my Son, that Sun of
righteousness, is already on the way, and will be with you forthwith.

And mine arm shall judge the people] i. e. All that set themselves against the
Lord and against his Christ, Psalm. 2.2. these shall feel his power to their
perdition, even the force of both his arms.

The Isles shall wait upon me] They shall stretch out their souls as a line, (so
the word imports) and direct them toward Christ.

And on mine arm shall they trust] i. e. On my power, or on my Gospel-promises.

Ver. 6. Lift up your eyes to the Heavens] Man has a muscle more then ordinary
to draw up his eyes heavenward.

And look upon the earth beneath] How fast and firm it stands, Eccles. 1.4.
Yet the whole engine shall be changed, 2 Pet. 3.10.

Shall dye in like manner] Or, like a louse, as some render it.

But my salvation shall be for ever] The Gospel, together with the spiritual
benefits thereby, shall out last Heaven and Earth.

Ver. 7. Hearken unto me] See on ver. 2.

Ye that know righteousnesse] with a knowledge Apprehensive, and Affective also.

The people in whose heart is my Law] and not in your heads only.

Fear ye not the reproach of men] Tertullian thinks that our Savior alludeth
to this of Isaiah in that, Luke 6.22. We should not be scoffed out of our
Religion, but patiently suffer cruel mockings.

Ver. 8. For the moth shall eat them up] They shall be crushed before the moth,
Job 4 19. that is, easily be destroyed, and their own consciences shall grub
upon them too, throughout all eternity.

But my righteousness shall be for ever] Bear therefore bravely all
contumelies and contempts of men.

Ver. 9. Awake, awake O Arm of the Lord] God had promised what his holy arm
should do for his people, ver. 5. Now they beg of him to use it, and bestir
himself for their relief and rescue: and this they do magno affictu atque animi
impetu, heartily wishing the coming of Christ and the declaration of the
Gospel, to their Salvation.

Awake as in the ancient daies] God seems sometimes to be asleep, and we must
wake him; to delay, and we must quicken him: to have lost his compassions
(which yet never fail:) and we must find them for him.

Art not thou it that has cut Rahab] Or hew^d Egypt with thy ten plagues
successively, though she were a proud and potent State?

And wounded the Dragon] Or Crocodile? That is, Pharaoh, Psalm. 74.14. whom thou
did put to pain, even the pains of a traveling woman (as the word
signifies) when he sank as a mil-stone in the mighty waters.

Ver. 10. Art not thou it which has dried the sea?] And can not thou do as
much again for thy poor people? This is an excellent way of arguing with God in
prayer: viz. from his ancient acts.

Ver. 11. Therefore the redeemed of the Lord, etc. This is Gods answer, as
some: or the good peoples confidence as others: that God would deliver them
now, as he had done their forefathers from Pharaoh.

And everlasting joy] As a fair and precious crown, 2 Timothy 4.8. Some make it a
Metaphor from those that carry heavy burdens on their heads. St. Paul calls
it a weight of glory.

They shall obtain joy] See chap. 35.10.

Ver. 12. I even I am he that comfort you] This is certainly an Answer to
that supplication ver. 10. and it comprehends a reprehension and an
expostulation about their pusillanimity, which was more then womanly: therefore
it follows, At, not Acta.


Who art thou] Heb. thou woman, thou hen-hearted creature.

That thou should be afraid of a man] Heb. sorry-man, ab homine misero,
aerumnoso, damnato ad mortem, ab host faeneo, an enemy of clouts, as we say.
We trouble our selves often through ignorance. In the dark every thing scares us.

Ver. 13. And forgettest the Lord thy Maker] Thou considerest not wisely, 1.
How fearfully and wonderfully thou art made. 2. What a mighty power God put
forth in the Creation of the whole world: all which he will rather unmake again
then thou shall want seasonable help.

And have feared continually every day] P^jor est morte timor ipse mortis.

And where is the fury of the oppossour?] q d. It is but fury and not power;
and that not illimited neither; for in the thing wherein they deal proudly I am
above them, Exodus 18.11.

Ver. 14. The captive exile hasteneth that he may be loosed] i. e. Deliverance
is even at the next door by: Or it is a description, says Diodate, of the
believers readiness in answering with the motion of their hearts to Gods
calling and deliverance.

Ver. 15. For I am the Lord thy God that divided the Sea] Or, I the Lord thy
God am he that stilleth the Sea when the waves of it roar: How much more then
can I curb and control the rage of man? Surely, says David, (...)
the wrath of man shall praise thee: the remainder of wrath shall thou
restrain: where the Septuagint have it, It shall keep holy day to thee.

Ver. 16. And I have put my words in thy mouth] O Isaiah, my servant: but
especially O Christ my Son.

Than I may plant the Heavens, etc.] God does as great a wonder in saying to
Zion, Thou art my people in the work of renovation, as if he had made a new
world. Whosoever is in Christ, is a new creature, or a new Creation, 2 Cor.
5.17. Christ is called The beginning of the Creation of God, Rev. 3.14. Some by
planting the Heavens and laying the foundation of the Earth here, understand
the state of the Gospel, called by St. Peter a New heaven and a new earth: and
the same they say is called by our Savior Regeneration, Matthew, 19.28. Ye which
have followed me in the Regeneration, etc. and by the Author to the Hebrews The
world to come, Heb. 2.5.

Ver. 17. Awake, awake] Suscita te, suscita te: As the Church had stirred up
the Arm of the Lord to awake, ver. 9. so here he does the Church: chearing her
up, and as it were drinking to her in a cup of Nepenthe, after her bitter cup
of gall and Aloes, which she had drunk to drunkenness, and had none to guide
her, v. 18. as a drunken man had need to have.

That have drunk at the hand of the Lord] Herein happy yet, that God had a hand
in the mingling of thy cup: who, being a wise and gracious Physician and
Father, would be sure not to overdo; for he knows our frame, he remembers
that we are dust, Psalm. 103.

The cup of his fury] Or his cup of poison, as Deuteronomy. 32.24, 33. so thou
mistakest it, and therefore sputterest as if poisoned indeed, Lam. 3.19.

Thou have drunk the dregges] Crassamentum, that thick stuff that settleth in
the bottom, and usually is reserved for the worst of wicked ones, Psalm. 75.8.
whiles the Saints sip only of the top of the cup. Illud tantum bibunt qu^d est
suavim et limpidius; est propemodum proverbialis locutis bibere calicem, pro eo
quod est perferre adversa. Hyper.
See Ezekiel. 23.34.

Of the cup of trembling] Poculum horrificentissimum bibisti, exsuxisti, the
cup of concuffion or horror, as a just punishment of thy cup of slumbering and
security, wherein thou had before caroused, chap. 29.9, 10.

Ver. 18. There is none to guide her] This was a point next the worst, as we
say: She was without prudent and pious Magistrates and Ministers, or other
friends to advise her: and so she was (...) twice miserable. Christ has
promised all his, I will not leave you destitute or orphans.

Among all her sons] Who should see to their aged Parents and sublevate them;
as pious Aeneas did, and as Scipio, who therehence had his name: but Zions sons
were themselves in a dreadful plight, ver. 26. and in an ill case to relieve
their Mother.

Ver. 19. These two things are come unto thee] As they seldom are separated:
as some write of the Asp that he never wanders alone, without his companion.

Who shall be sorry for thee] Condole and comfort thee.

Desolation and destruction, and the famine and the sword] i. e. Desolation by
famine and destruction by the sword: or, as some will have it, desolation by
famine and sword, and want of consolation, as ver. 18.

By whom shall I comfort thee?] By whom but by my self, when thou art at thy
greatest under, and even forsaken of thy hopes. See ver. 12.

Ver. 20. Thy sons have fainted] Fame, macie, tabe, vulnere, utterly disabled
to relieve thee, ver. 18.

As a wild Bull in a net] Taken in a toil, where he struggles and strives,
foames and fumes, but cannot get out.

Ver. 21. Thou afflicted and drunken] With a dry drunkenness, which thou can
not so easily sleep out. See ver. 17.

Ver. 22. Behold I have taken] Though man could not. Where humane help fails,
Divine help begins.

Thou shall no more drink it] i. e, Not of a long time, till thy last
devastation by the Romans.

Ver. 23. But I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee] Who shall
drink it not to drunkenness only as thou have done, but unto madness, Jer.
25.10. Baltasar and his Babylonians did so: the revenging hand of God was
afterward upon Antiochus, Vespatian and his children: Antichristians drink of
the wine of Gods wrath, Rev. 14.10.

Bow down] This passage sets forth their extreme cruelty and Thrasonical
insolency. But the case shall be altered. Rev. 3.9.

CHAP. LII.
Ver. 1. AWake, awake] Pluck up thy best heart, as we say, and rouse up thy
self to receive the sweet promises. For as man's laws, so Gods promises favor
not them that are asleep, but awake, and watchful.

O Jerusalem the holy City) Thou that have been brought through the fire; being
refined as silver is refined, and tried as gold is tried, Zach. 13.9.

There shall no more come into thee] Or, against thee, i. e. I will not suffer
tyrants to vex thee, or profane ones to harbor with thee. See chap. 35.8.

Ver. 2. Shake thy self from the dust] Wherein thou layest along when trampled
on, chap. 51.23.

Arise and sit down O Jerusalem] Rather, arise sit up O Jerusalem. It has been
noted before, that when Vespasian had subdued Judaea, money was stamped with a
woman sitting in the dust with this inscription, Judaea subacta.

Loose thy self from the bonds of thy neck] From thy spiritual servitude
especially, as Luke 1.74. Romans 6.19. shake the devils-yoke from off thy neck,
gestaque monilia sponsae and libertatis, and get on the Spouses ornaments.

Ver. 3. For thus says the Lord] Thus he pleads the cause of his people,
chap. 51.22.

Ye have sold your selves for nought] Heb. ye were sold for naught; Babylonii
non egerunt mihi gratias. Piscat. Mat. Paris. Hist A. D. 1072
I had not so much as thanks for you from the enemy; no more has he from the
devil: and yet a letter was framed in Hildebrands days, as sent from the
devil, wherein he kindly thanked the Popish Clergy for the many souls they
daily sent him to hell, by their negligence and wickedness.

And ye shall be redeemed without money] Heb. without silver, so were we, 1
Pet. 1.18.

Ver. 4. And the Assyrian oppressed them without cause] Nulla injuria
lacesssitus. So did the Primitive Persecutors, the Christians of those times:
though they were non aliunde noscibiles quam ex vitae integritate, says Justin
Martyr, eminent for their innocence; as Pliny also in his Epistle to Trajan the
Emperor testifies. What hurt had the Israelites ever done to malicious Moah,
that he was irked at them? Number. 22.3. or the Hebrews to the Assyrians, that
they should oppress them?

Ver. 5. Now therefore what have I here?] Cui bono? to what purpose or profit?
for what wealth or worth suffer I my poor people to lie captives here at
Babylon? Or, as others sense it, Piscator.
what make I here any longer at Jerusalem when my poor people are in durance at
Babylon? why hasten I not to help them out?

They that rule over them, make them to houle] i. e. The Chaldaans, and after
them the Romans, and then the Scribes and Pharisees, by binding heavy burdens
grievous to be born, and laying them on men's consciences, Mat. 23.4.

And my name continually every day (or, all the day long) is blasphemed] That Is
all I get by the bargain.

Ver. 6. Therefore my people shall know my name] sc. That I am Jehovah, as
Exodus 6.3. the God of Amen, Isa. 65.16. who will not suffer my faithfulness to
fail, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my mouth, Psalm. 89.33, 34. And
it shall therefore be so because my name (that nomen majestativum) has been
blasphemed and vilified: Gods people fare the better for their enemies
insolences.

That I am he that does speak: behold it is I] Or, that it is I that do speak,
saying, Lo here I am. This some understand of the second person in Trinity,
the eternal Son of the eternal Father, called the Word. Joh. 1.1. and there are
that give us this Rule, Where the Old Testament brings in God appearing and
speaking, we are to understand it always of the second person. See Joh. 12.37,
to 42.

Ver. 7. How beautiful!] Quam amaeni, i. e. amabiles! How amiable or
desirable. Interrogatio admirantis and exultantis.

Upon the mountains] Whence they may best be heard, as Judge. 9.7. saying as
there, Harken unto me, that God may harken unto you. Our Savior (that
Arch-Evangelist who, as some, is here first and chiefly meant by Mebassher, him
that brings good tidings) seeing the multitudes, went up into a mountain,
Mat. 5.1. which is said to be in the tribe of Nephthali, and called Christ's
mount to this day. blis Apostles afterward traveled and trudged on foot over
hills and dales (What a compass fetched Paul, Romans 15.19? Inter valium illud
est milliarium Germanicorum 350. so that he might better be called than
afterward George Eagles the Martyr was Trudge-over-the world) to preach the
Gospel and to plant Churches, to whom their feet though fouled and worn (how
much more their faces?) were deemed delectable and debonnaire, Gal. 4.14. Act.
10.21. The Pope ( Peter's pretended successor) holds forth his feet to be
kissed, but preaches not; or not peace, but war, which he stirs up by his
roaring Bulls.

Of him that brings good tydings] Whosoever he be that preaches the Gospel
(that chief work of a Minister) Romans 10.15. Of Mr. John Dod it is written (and
I know it to be true) that he was very Evangelical: striving first to make men
see their lost condition clearly (for, said he, sense of misery must go before
sense of mercy) and then largely and excellently opening the promises, and the
grace of God in Christ according to the Gospel, looking at that as the most
effectual preaching. Some, said he, labor still to keep men under terrors,
loading them with threatenings, etc. lest they should not be humbled enough: but
the Gospel works true humiliation, not the law; it arises from sense of sin
and misery joined with hope of mercy. The damned have terror and sense of
misery enough; but that does not humble them.

That publishes peace] The Gospel is a doctrine of peace, Ephesians. 2.17. whose
Author is the God of peace, 1 Cor. 14.33. whose Ministers are Messengers of
peace, Romans 10.15. whose followers are the children of peace, Luke 10.6. etc.
If any know not how they came by their peace, but are like the Israelitish
women, quick of delivery before ever the Midwife (the Minister) can come at
them, they have cause to suspect their peace.

That brings good tydings] As before, (but never enough) mentioned and
memorized. Some Critics tell us, that the Hebrew word here used signifying
also Flesh, B. Andrews.
showed that the incarnation or taking flesh should be generally good news to
the whole world; even the best tidings. The Old Church had (...) the Promise:
we have (...) the joyful tidings.

Leo Castrius ex Procop. and Eusebius.
That publishes Salvation] Publicantis Jesum, so some have rendered it: the
concrete for the abstract.

That says to Zion Thy God raigneth] Maugre the malice of earth and of hell;
this is the sum of all the good news in the world. It is happy that Christ
lives and reigns, said a godly man, for else I had utterly despaired.

Ver. 8. Thy watchmen shall lift up the voyce] Heb. the voice of thy watchmen.
sc. Thy God reigns: or, as in the following verse, Break forth into joy, etc.

They lift up the voice, they sing together] As having no greater joy than that
their children walk in the truth, 2 John 4. 1 These. 3.8. and the contrary.

Id est cominus evidentissime, ui Number. 14.14. Jun.
For they shall see eye to eye] And be able to say, as 1 John 1.1. That which
we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, (and what so sure as
sight?) declare we unto you.

Ver. 9. Break forth into you] This is the subject matter of Gospel Ministers
discourses: they shall call upon Gods people to rejoice, ver. 9.10. and to
repent, ver 11, 12. and shall show them that it is as well a sin not to rejoice
as not to repent.

Ver. 10. The Lord has made bare his holy arm] Nudavit, id est, exeruit, in
answer to your prayer, Confess. l. 5. c. 8. Turk. hist. fol. 287.
chap. 51.9. God often answers his praying people ad cardinem desiderii, (as
Austin says) lets it be to them even as they will. Scanderbeg ever fought
against the Turks with his arm bare, and that with such fierceness, that the
blood did oftentimes burst out of his lips. It is written that he with that
bare arm of his slew three thousand Turks, in the time of his wars against
them.

Shall see the Salvation of the Lord] Shall see it and sing of it, ver. 9.

Ver. 11. Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out, etc.] Here we have a double
repetition redoubled, and all little enough to bring them out of Babylon (not
half, as may be probably thought, returned, which was no small prejudice to
those that did) and us out of this wicked world; whereunto we are so affixed
and addicted, that nothing can sunder us but an extraordinary touch from the
hand of heaven. Save your selves from this perverse generation, Act. 2.40.
Exter not into the path of those wicked, and go not in the way of evil men:
avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it and pass away, Prove. 4.14, 15. a
parallel place.

Be ye clean, ye that bear the vessels of the Lord] Id est qui gestatis arma,
instramenta, adeoque insignia Christi, all ye true believers who are made
spiritual Priests, Rev. 1.6. and especially all ye holy Ministers who (as
Mystagogues) handle the Law, Jer. 2.8. and administer the Sacraments, being
your selves choice vessels of honor to bear Christ's name unto his people, Act.
9.15. See 2 Timothy 2.21.

Ver. 12. For ye shall not go out with haste] Neither with fright nor flight
shall ye depart, as once ye did out of Egypt. Diod.
And this spiritually denotes the mature deliberation and calm mind with which
believers do forsake the world to follow Christ.

For the Lord will go before you] He will be unto you both Van and Rere. The
Lord is a man of war, Exodus 15.3. yea he alone is a whole army of men, as here.

Ver. 13. Behold my servant shall deal prudently] Or, shall prosper, as chap.
53.10. Aug. de Civ. Dei lib. 18 cap. 29. Justin. contra Tryphon. O^ig. lib. 1
cont. cos.
Here some (and not unfitly) begin the next Chapter, which has Christ also for
its subject, as the Chaldee Paraphrast, and some old Jew-Doctors acknowldge:
Johannes Isaac a Jew was converted by reading of it: This I confess
ingenuously, says he, that that Chapter brought me to the Faith of Jesus
Christ; and well it might; for taken together with these three last verses, it
is an entire Prophecy, or rather an history of Christ's person and acts, both in
the state of his Humiliation, and Exaltation.

He shall be exalted and extolled and be very high] This great advancement was
the consequent of his great abasement, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. His humane
nature, wherein he suffered so for our sakes, has by virtue of the Union with
the Deity, these high prerogatives; 1. An exuberancy and excess of glory, Ephesians.
1.21. 2. The grace of divine Adoration together with the Deity, Heb. 1.6. Phil.
2.9. 3. Power over all things for his peoples use, Mat. 28.18. 4. Judiciary
power, to be Judge of all, Act. 17.30.

Ver. 14. As many were astonished at thee,] Viz. at thine abasement first, and
then at thine advancement thereupon. All things in Christ are admirable: well
therefore might he be called wonderful, Isa. 9.6.

His visage was so marred, more than any man] Partly through the anguish of his
mind at his passion and on the cross, and partly also by the misusage of his
body, whilst they made totum pro vulnere corpus, by their scourging,
scratching, racking on the tree, piercing, buffeting, etc.

And his form more than the sons of men] Plusquam filii Adae, more than those
of the vulgar sort: whereas naturally his body, being of the finest
temperament, and no way diseased, could not but be very beautiful. See Psalm.
45.2. with the Note.

Ver. 15. So shall he sprinkle many Nations] With his Doctrine, Ezekiel. 20.46.
Am. 7.16. or with his blood, that blood of sprinkling. See Heb. 10.22. or with
water in baptism, wherein sprinkling insufficient.

Kings shall shut their mouths at him] As being astonished at his prudence and
prosperity, ver. 13. They shall also silently and reverently submit to his
Scepter, and to the Laws of his Kingdom with all humble observance.

For that which had not been told them] The mystery of the Gospel so long time
concealed, Romans 15.21. and 16.25.

Shall they see] Viz. with the eyes of their faith, God enlightening both Organ
and Object.

And that which they had not heard] Gospel-truthes. See 1 Cor. 2.9. with the
Note.

CHAP. LIII.
Ver. 1. WHo has believed our report] q. d. The Gentiles, some of them, even
of their Potentates, have believed our report concerning the Messiah, chap.
52.13, 14, 15. But Lord, how few Jews will give credit to what we have said?
Lib. 1. de Consens. Evang. cap. 31.
Albeit this Chapter may not unfitly be called The Gospel of Jesus Christ
according to Isaiah: and things are here set down so plain that Austin thinks
they need no exposition: yet those Buzzards the later Rabbines, cannot, or
rather will not see that the Prophet speaks here all along concerning Christ:
but do strangely writh, wring, and wrest his words to a wrong sense; applying
them, some to Moses, some to Ezra, some to Joshuah the son of Josadak, etc.
John Isaac indeed the Jew confesses of himself, as has been said before, that
by pondering upon this Chapter he was converted to the Christian Religion: the
like we read of some few others in Andreas Bayna and Cornelius a Lapid. But the
Jews themselves will tell you (falsely and maliciously) that such pretended
Proselytes are not of them, but poor Christians hired by us to personate their
part: such a thick veil is still before their eyes, such a hard hoof upon their
hearts, till God pleases by his own holy arm made bare, to remove it. They
could not (that is, they would not) believe Joh. 12.39. They have not all (nay
scarce any in comparison) obeyed the Gospel, Romans 10.16. but blasphemously call
it Avengelaion a volume of vantiy: scorning to be saved by a crucified God,
although by mighty miracles wrought amongst them, he showed himself to be the
Son of God, and an arm to save all that believe in his name, Joh. 12.37.

And to whom is the Arm of the Lord] i. e. His Gospel which is his power to
salvation, Romans 1.16. and is hid only to them that perish, 2 Cor. 4.3.

Ver. 2. For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant] His beginning shall
be mean and despicable. See chap. 11.1. with the Notes. God hid his Son under
the Carpenters son: Humilis Christi prosapia nocatur.
this the Jews much stumbled at, Matthew. 13.55, 57. Luke 24.1. Joh. 7.27, 41,
53. 1 Cor. 1.23. that Christ should come without sightly show or state. But
they should have known that his Kingdom is not of this world. Some of their
Rabbines can say In regno Messiae nihil mundanum.

He has no form or comliness] How could he (say) when his fair face was
covered sanguine, sputo spinis lacrymis, with blood black and blew, swelths,
spettle, tears, scratches, so that Pilat wondering at it, said Behold the man?
q. d. he is not dealt with as a man: but being in greatest misery he deserves
to be pitied.

And when we shall see him] Here the Prophet takes upon him the person of a
carnal Jew, who judged of Christ according to his outward appearance, Joh.
7.24. But what says the Chaldee Proverb? Ne spectes cantharum vel urceum, sed
id quod in eo est: Look not on the pitcher, but on the liquor, that is
contained in it.

And when we shall see him there is no beauty] Heb. And we shall see him and no
sight or sightliness.

That we should desire him] And yet he was a Man of desires, yea the desire of
all Nations, Hag. 2.7. all over desirable, Cant. 5.16. but so he is only to
such as have their senses exercised to discern good and evil, Heb. 5. ult.

Ver. 3. He is despised and rejected of men] Heb. desitus virorum one at whom
the nature and name of man ends: as we would say the very list and fag-end of
mankind, Jun. Tertul.
nullificamen hominis, a worm and no man, not held so good as wicked Barabbas,
but crucified betwixt two thieves as worse then either of them, and made
nothing of, Mar. 9.12. This is so plainly here set forth, that some of the
Jew-doctours ( Aben-Ezra for one) when as they cannot rightly distinguish
betwixt the two comings of Christ, the one in humility and the other in glory,
duos construunt Christos, Genebrard.
they make us up two Christ's: the one the Son of Joseph, to whom agree those
things which the Scriptures speak of concerning Christ's meanness and
sufferings; the other the Son of David, to whom they apply those things that
are written concerning the glory, majesty, and triumphs of Christ.

Ex doloribus conslatus.
A man of sorrows] q. d. made up of sorrows. Atque hic mirus artifex est
Propheta, and here the Prophet shows singular skill in discribing Christ's
state of humiliation through all the degrees of it: And Faith is much happier
in finding out his cross, blood, nails, tomb, and all, then ever Helen was or
any Popish relique-monger: and in making use of them too, to better purpose
then that Popish Covent of Friars do, who have hired those places of the Turk,
built Temples, altars and silver floores in honor of the Passion.

And acquainted with grief] Heb. knowing of infirmity, or inured to it: see
Heb. 4.15. The Greek Letany has By thine unknown sorrows and sufferings, Good
Lord deliver us.

And we hid as it were our faces from him] Or, And he hid as it were the face
from us, viz. as one for his loath somenesse, his low condition, ashamed to be
seen. The Jews in their Talmud question What is the name of Messiah? Sanhedrin.
Some answer Hhenara leprous: and he sits among the poor in the gates of
Rome, carrying their sicknesses.

He was despised] double-despised; and for the unworthiness of the things this
is repeated.

And we esteemed him not] i. e. We contemned and derided him.

Ver. 4. Surely he has born our griefs] He took our infirmities natural,
though not sinful: or He suffered for our offenses: and his satispassion is our
satisfaction, as Luther phraseth it: he suffered, says Peter, the just for the
unjust: he bore our sins in his own body on the tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. he (the true
scap^-goat) takes away the sins of the world, Joh. 1.29. bearing them into the
land of forgetfulness: this is his continual act, and this should be as a
perpetual picture in our hearts. Surely he did all this for us: Juramentum est
Vere: This Surely or Truly is an oath, for better assurance and satisfaction
to any doubting conscience. For which cause also the same thing is said over
again, ver. 5. and herewith agrees that of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a
sure saying and worthy of all men to be received, that Jesus Christ came into
the world to save sinners:

Yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God] sc. for his own deserts (and
not for ours:) we looked upon him as a deceiver, a wine-bibber, a blasphemer,
and one that wrought by Beelzebub, etc. and therefore we crucified him.

Smitten of God] Percussus Dei, says the Syriack: The Apostle says, God
spared not his Son, Flagellatum a Deo. Theodotion.
Romans 8.32. and because the creature could not strike a stroke hard enough,
himself was pleased to bruise him. But that this was done for his own proper
sins, and in a way of vengeance, was a gross mistake.

And afflicted] Or, humbled: He was stricken, smitten, afflicted: But then
afterward he was exalted, extolled, and made very high, chapter 52.13. We also who
suffer with him shall be glorified together, and in a proportion, 2. Tim. 2.12.

Ver. 5. But he was wounded for our transgressions] Not for his own: for he
knew no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth: nevertheless he took upon
him whatsoever was penal that belonged to sin, that we might go free: he was
content to be in the wine press, that we might be in the wine-cellar.

He was bruised for our iniquities] (...), as Anacreon did upon a worse
occasion.

Cernis ut in toto corpore sculptus amor! Oh love, that love of his! as Bernard
speaks: let it bruise our hard hearts into pieces, grind them to powder, and
make them fall asunder in our bosoms like drops of water. Let us propagate our
thankfulness into our lives; meditating returns answerable in some proportion
to our Saviors sufferings. Oh that as Christ was crucifixus, so he were
cordifixus.


The chastisement of our peace was upon him] They which offered
burnt-offerings, of old, were to lay their hand upon the head of the beast:
thereby signifying the imputation of our sins unto Christ, and that we must lay
hand on him by Faith, if we look for any comfort by his death and passion.

And with his stripes we are healed] By the black and blew of his body after he
was buffetted with dry-blows: and by the bloody wailes left on his back, after
he had been scourged, which was a punishment fit for dogs and slaves. Nero they
threatened to scourge to death, as judging him rather a beast then a man: But
what had this innocent Lamb of God done? And why should the Physicians blood
thus become the sick man's salve? We can hardly believe the power of
Sword-salve, etc.

Ver. 6. All we like sheep have gone astray] Gone of our own accords, as
longing to wander, Jer. 14.10. to wander as sheep (lost sheep) then the which
no creature is more apt to stray, and less able to return. The Ox knows his
owner, and the Ass his masters crib: the very Swine accustomed to the trough,
if he go abroad, yet at night will find the way home again: Not so the silly
sheep. Lo ye were all as sheep going astray, says Peter, but are now returned
unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls, 1 Epist. 2.25.

We have turned every one to his own way] Quo variae errorum formae inuunntur,
dum suas quisque opiniones sectatur. Each one, as he is out of Gods way, so
has his own by-way of wickedness to wander in: Wherein yet (without a Christ)
he cannot wander so far as to miss of hell.

And the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all] i. e. Of all his Elect:
the iniquity of us all he has made to meet on him (so the Hebrew has it) or,
to light on him, even the full weight of his wrath and dint of his dipleasure,
for our many and mighty sins imputed unto him. Let the Jew jear at this and
say, that Every fox must pay his own skin to the fleare: Let the Romist reject
imputed righteousness, calling it putative, by a scoff: there is not any thing
that more supporteth a sinking soul, then this righteousness which is through
the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith, Philip. 3.9.
This Manus Christi (as nailed to the cross) is the only Physic for a sin-sick
soul; believe it.

Ver. 7. He was oppressed and he was afflicted] Heb. It (the punishment of our
sin) was exacted, and he (being our surety) was afflicted. Or, It was exacted,
and he answered, i. e. satisfied.

Yet he opened not his mouth] Though he suffered, the just for the unjust, with
the unjust, upon unjust causes, under unjust Judges, and by unjust punishments:
Silence and sufferance was the language of this Holy Lamb, dumb before the
shearer; insomuch as that Pilat wondered exceedingly. The Eunuch also wondered
when he read this Text, In vita ejus apud Surlum.
Acts 8.32. and was converted. And the like is related of a certain Earl
called Eleazar, a choleric man, but much altered for the better by study of
Christ and of his patience. I beseech you by the meekness of Christ, says
Paul: and Peter, who was an eyewitness of his patience, propounds him for a
worthy partern, 1 Epist. 2.23. Vide mihi languidum, exhaustum, cruentatum,
trementem, and gementem Jesum tuum, and evanescet omnis impatientiae effectus.
Christ upon the Cross is as a Doctor in his chair, where he reads unto us
all a lecture of Patience.

He is brought as a Lamb to the slaughter] Or, as a sheep that is led to the
slaughter: which when we see done, we should bethink us of Christ, and see Him
as it were in an Optic glass. The Saints of old did so in their Sacrifices:
and this was that hidden wisdom David speaks of Psalm. 51.8. the Ceremonial Law
was their Gospel.

And as a sheep before her shearer is dumb] The word Rachel signifies an Ew,
Genesis 31.38. and 32.14. This Ew has brought forth many Lambs; Act. and Mon.
fol. 811.
such as was Lambert and the rest of the Martyrs, who to words of scorn and
petulancy returned Isaac's Apology to his brother Ishmael, Patience and
Silence: insomuch as that the Persecutours said that they were possessed with a
dumb devil. This was a kind of blasphemy.

Ver. 8. He was taken from prison and from judgement] Absque dilatione and
titra judicium raptus est, sc. ad crucem; so Vatablus rendereth it: He was
hurried away (to the Cross) without delay and against right or reason. Or, as
others, he was taken from distress and torment into glory, when he had cried
consummatum est, It is finished; Inaudita causa
and, Father, into thy hands I commit my Spirit. The Seventy render it somewhat
otherwise, as may be seen. Act. 8.33. the Apostle Peter explaineth it, Act.
2.24.

And who shall declare his generation?] Or, who can reckon his age, or his
race? Or, who can utter or describe his generation? i. e. The wickedness of
the men of those times he lived in: or the history of his life and death? Some
understand it of his eternal generation, Prove. 8.24, 25. Others of his
Incarnation, that great Mystery of godliness: Quantus enim Deus quantillus
factus est homo! Others of his holy seed, his Cross being fruitful, Aug.
and his death giving life to an innumerable generation, Revl. 7.9.

For he was cut off out of the land of the living] Quasi arbor saevis icta
bipennibus, as a tree that is hewn down, 2 King. 6.4.

For the transgression of my people] Our iniquities were the weapons, and our
selves the traitors, that put to death the Lord of Life; Judas and the Jews
were but our workmen. This should draw dreary tears from us, Zach. 12.10.

Ver. 9. And he made his grave with the wicked] i. e. He should have been
buried among malefactors, had not rich Joseph begged his body: Or, his dead
body was at the disposal of wicked ones, and of rich men or Rulers (the Jews,
and Pilat) at his death.

And with the rich] The same, say some, with wicked. And indeed Magna cognatio
ut rei si^ nominis, divitiis and vitiis. Rich men are put for wicked rich, Jam.
5.1. And how hardly do rich men enter Heaven? Hyperius thinks that the two
thieves crucified together with Christ were rich men, put to death for
Sedition: and Christ was placed in the midst, as their chieftain: whence also
that memorable title set over his head King of the Jews.

Because he had done no violence] Or, albeit he had done, etc. notwithstainding
his innocence, and integrity.

-- Nec te tua plurima Pentheu
Labentem texit pietas.
Ver. 10. Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him] Singula verba hic expendenda
sunt cum Emphasi, says One: Here every word has its weight: Hyper.
and it is very sure that the Apostles and Evangelists in describing the
mysteries of our salvation, have great respect as to this whole Chapter of
Isaiah, so especially to these three last verses. And it must needs be that the
Prophet when he wrote these things was endued with a very great Spirit; because
herein he so clearly sets forth the Lord Christ in his twofold estate of
Humiliation and of Exaltation, that whereas other oracles of the Old Testament
borrow light from the New, this Chapter lends light to the New in several
places.

He has put him to grief] Or, he suffered him to be put to pain, See Acts
2.23. and 4.28. God the Father had a main hand in his Sons sufferings: and that
out of his free mercy, Joh. 3.16. for the good of many.

When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin] Confer 2 Cor. 5.20. He made
him sin for us that knew no sin. Our sins were laid upon him, as the sins of
him that sacrificed were laid upon the beast; which was thereby made the
sinner, as it were, and the man righteous. Christ's Soul suffered also, Matthew.
26.38. it was undequaque tristis, surrounded which sorrows, and heavy as heart
could hold. This Sacrifice of his was truly expiatory and satisfactory: Confer
Heb. 10.1, 2.

He shall see his seed] Bring many sons to God, Heb. 2.10, 13. (See on ver. 8.)
an holy seed, the Church of the New Testament to the end of the world, Parit
dum perit, and perit dum parit; Phae^ nic. aenigma,
Psalm. 72.17. filiabitur nomine ejus. The name of Christ shall endure for ever,
it shall be begotten, as one generation is begotten of another: there shall be
a succession of Christ's name, till time shall be no more.

And the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand] He came to send fire
on the earth, which whiles he lived upon earth was already kindled, Luke 12.49.
This some interpret of the Gospel: which how wonderfully it spread and
prospered, the Evangelical and Ecclesiastical histories testify.

Ver. 11. He shall see of the travel of his soul] Or, because his soul
labors, he shall see (his seed) and be satisfied. A Metaphor from a
traveling woman; confer Acts 2, 24. Joh. 16.21.

And shall be satisfied] As a Parent is in his dear children, or a rich man in
the fight of his large farms and incomes. Saturabitur salute fidelium quam
esurivit.
If therefore we would gratify and satisfy Christ, come by troops to the
Ordinances.

By his knowledge] i. e. By the lively light and impression of Faith, as Joh.
17.3. Acts 25.23. and 26.18. Joh. 6.69. Faith comprehends in it self these
three acts, Knowledge in the understanding, Assent of the will, and Trust of
the hear^: so that justifiyng Faith is nothing else but a fiducial assent,
presupposing knowledge. The Popish-Doctours settle the seat of Faith in the
Will, as in its adaequate subject, that they mean while may do what they will
with the Heart, and with the Understanding. To which purpose they exclude all
knowledge: and as for confidence in the promises of Christ, they cry it down to
the utmost, and everywhere expunge it by their Iudices expurgatorii: for a bare
assent (though without wit or sense) is sufficient, say they: and Bellarmine
defends it, that Faith may better be defined by ignorance then by knowledge.

Shall my righteous servant] Jesus Christ the just one, 1 John 2.2. Jehovah our
righteousness, Jer, 23.6.

Justify many] i. e. Discharge them from the guilt of all iniquity by his
righteousness imputed unto them. This makes against Justification by works:
Cardinal Pighius was against it: so before him was Contarenus, another
Cardinal. And of Stephen Gardener it is recorded, that he died a Protestant in
the point of man's Justification by the free mercies of God, Fullers Church hist.
and merits of Christ.

For he shall bear their iniquities] Bajulabit: that, by nailing them to his
Cross, he may expiate them.

Ver. 12. Therefore I will divide him a portion with the great] Or, I will give
many to him, Psalm. 2.8. Some sense it thus, I will give him to conquer,
plunder, and spoil the evil spirits, as Colos. 2.15. and this he shall have for
a reward of his ignominious death, and his intercession for some of his
enemies, whom he conquered by a new and noble kind of victory, viz. by loving
them, and by praying for them.

And he was numbered with transgressours] So he became a sinner (though
sinlesse) 1. By Imputation. 2. By Reputation.

And he bare the sins of many] Not of all, as a Lapide here would have it,
because all are many, etc.

And made intercession] For those that with wicked hands crucified him, Luke
23.34. so for others still, Heb. 7.25.

CHAP. LIVE.
Ver. 1. SIng O barren, thou that did not bear] O Church Christian, O
Jerusalem that art above, the mother of us all, the purchase of Christ's
passion, chap. 53. to whom thou have been a bloody spouse, Acts 20.28. an
Acheldama or field of blood, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. he has paid dear for thy
fruitfulness. As the blood of beasts applied to the roots of trees makes them
sprout and bear more fruit: so does the blood of Christ, sprinkled on the
roots of men's hearts, make them more fruitful Christians: as it did the
Gentiles whose hearts were purified by Faith, Acts 15.9. See Gal. 4.27. The
corn of wheat that fell into the ground and died there, abode not alone, but
brought forth much fruit, Joh. 12.44.

For more are the children of the desolate] The Christian Church, made up of
Jews and Gentiles, shall have a more numerous and glorious offspring then ever
the Synagogue had: Sarah shall have more issue then Hagar, Hannah then Peninnah.

Ver. 2. Enlarge the place of thy tent] Thus he speaks after the custom of
those Countries, wherein was frequent use of tents: neither is it without a
mystery, fith we are all strangers in this world, Epist. ad Diog.
neither have we here any continuing City. Justin Martyr says of the
Christians of his time, that every strange Land was to them a Country, and
every Country a strange Land: they looked upon themselves as Citizens of the
new Jerusalem.

M. Fuller hist. of Cambridge. p. 28.
Ver. 3. For thou shall break forth] i. e. Bring forth abundantly, and beyond
belief. Margaret Countess of Henneberg, brough forth at a birth in Holland 365
children, one skul whereof I have seen, says mine Author, no bigger then a
bead or bean. The Church brought forth three thousand at one birth, Acts 2.41.
and some whole Nations at another, Isa. 66.8. Romans 10.18.

And thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles] Shall spiritually become Lords of the
world, peopling it with a new and holy generation of such as seek Gods Face:
this is Jacob, Psalm. 24.6. This text the Jews and Millenaries carnally construe.

Ver. 4. Fear not, for thou shall not be ashamed] As widows and barren women
wont to be. Thou have been without God and without Christ in the world: but
henceforth thou shall be married to him who is raised from the dead, that thou
may bring forth fruit unto God, Romans 7.4. Ipse enim quod vult jubet, Act. and
M^n. 1490.
and dat quod jubet. When you would and should be certain and quiet in
Conscience (says Mr. Bradford Martyr, in a sweet letter of his to a woman
troubled in mind) then should your faith burst through all things, until it
come to Christ crucified, and the eternal sweet mercies and goodness of God in
Christ. Here, here is the bridal-bed, here is you Spouses resting place: creep
into it, and in your arms of faith embrace him. Bewail your weakness, your
unworthiness, your diffidence, etc. and you shall see he will turn to you:
what said I you shall see? nay I should have said you shall feel he will turn
to you.

Ver. 5. For thy Maker is thine husband] Heb. thy Makers, as Job 35.10. See the
Note there. De sancta Trinitate dictum, says Junius. Mariti tui factores tui.
Isaac has the name of the most loving husband we read of in holy Writ: but
his love to Rebecca was not comparable to this of Christ to his Church, Ephesians.
5.25, 26. where I doubt not but the Apostle Paul had respect to this passage in
Isaiah.

The Lord of Hosts is his name] Therefore thou his wife art sure of Protection
and provision, of all things necessary to life and godliness: for he hates
putting away, Mal. 2.16. and will bear with more then any husband else would,
Jer. 3.1. Joh. 13.1. Surely as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is
his mercy toward them that fear him, Psalm. 103.11.

The God of the whole earth] Of the Church universal.

Ver. 6. For the Lord has called thee] Or, recalled thee.

As a woman fosaken, grieved in spirit] Because forsaken. This, the Lord, out
of his conjugal affection, cannot endure.

And a wife of youth] Which can least of all bear such a rejection, as being in
her prime, and likely to be longtime desolate and disconsolate. If the Church
in this condition can but say (as that Duchess Douager of Millain once did)
Sola facta solum Deum sequor, he will say as Jer. 2.2. I remember thee, the
kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals.

Ver. 7. For a small moment have I forsaken thee] I have made thee believe so
at least, by suffering thee to fall into manifold temptations, Jam. 1.2. but
for thy greatest good, Heb. 12.11. as 1. For Probation. 2. For Prevention. 3.
For Purgation. 4. For Preparation to mercy. And although it should last as long
as life, yet that were but for a moment: for what is life but a spot of time
betwixt two eternities? And God therefore takes liberty to do it, because he
has such an eternity of time to reveal his kindness in; time enough for
kisses and embraces. But usually God takes off the smarting plaster, as soon
as it has eaten away the proud flesh.

But with great mercies] Heb. with great tender mercies, such as the mother
bears toward the babe of her own body, 1 King. 3.16. Gods Mercies are more
then maternal.

Will I gather thee] Or, take thee up, as Psalm. 27.10. See the Note there.

Ver. 8. In a little wrath] God can let forth his wrath in minnums, in little
bubbles, as the word here rendered wrath properly signifies. This wrath to the
Saints, is but love displeased, and soon pacified again.

I hid my face from thee] God sometimes concealeth his love out of increasement
of love: he departs from us, but then turns again and looks through the
chinkers (as that Martyr phrased it) to see how we take it. Fathers leave their
children (says One) the other side the style, and help them over when they
cry: they seem to leave them sometimes in a throng, and then reach them the
hand again upon their complaint: So is it here. To say God has cast me off
because he has hid his Face, is a fallacy fetched out of the devils Topics.
When the Sun is eclipsed, foolish people may think it will never recover light:
but wise men know it will. As, during the Eclipse, Dr. Goodwin.
though the earth wants the light of the Sun for a time, yet not the
influence thereof: for the metals that are engendered in the bowels of the
earth are concocted by the Sun at the same time: so does Gods favor visit men's
hearts in the power, heat, and vigorous influence of his grace, when the light
and comfort of it is intercluded.

But with everlasting kindnesse] See a like elegant Antithesis with a double
Hyperbole to boot, 2 Cor. 4.17.

Ver. 9. For this is as the waters of Noah] Genesis 9.9, 11,

For as I have sworn] i. e. I have said it: Gods Word is as good as his oath.
See the like Exodus 32.13. with Genesis 12.7.

So have I sworn] And given thee the Sacraments for thy confirmation, like as I
gave him the Rainbow.

Ver. 10. For the mountains shall depart] See Mat. 24.35. Psalm. 46.2. with the
Notes.

But my kindness shall not depart from thee] This sweet Promise comforted
Olevian at the point of death; Although sight, hearing, speech depart from me,
said he, yet Gods loving-kindnesse shall never depart. This was somewhat like
that of David, Psalm. 73.26. my flesh and my heart fails: but God is the
strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.

Neither shall the Covenant of my peace] God is in a league with his people,
offensive and defensive, such as was that of Jehosophat with Ahab: and this
Covenant is an hive of heavenly honey.

Ver. 11. O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted] This is the
Churches style and state in this present life: Ecclesia est haeres crucis.
Luth. None out of hell have suffered more than Saints.

Behold I will lay thy stones with fair colours] So that thou shall be a City
of pearl, having for thy foundation the Lord Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. for thy
windows, the holy Prophets, Dan. 12.3.
Apostles and other faithful Preachers, by whose ministry thou shall receive
the light of true knowledge; and for thy walls and gates the divine protection.
See Rev. 21.11. -- 21. All this is to be understood of the spiritual excellency
of the Church, which is begun in this life, and to be perfected in the life to
come.

And lay thy foundations with Saphirs] Confer Exodus 24.10. where Moses and the
Elders are said to have seen the God of Israel; and there was under his feet as
it were a paved work of a Saphir-stone, and as it were the body of heaven in
its clearness: To show that God had now changed their condition, their brickes
made in their bondage to Saphir, their lying and sooting among the pots into
the wings of a Dove covered with silver, and her feathers of pure gold, as
Psalm. 68.13.

Ver. 12. And I will make thy windows of Agates] Or of Crystal, which is purus
and durus.

And thy gates of Carbuncles] Which are of a flame-colour.

And all thy borders] That is, all thy bordering Cities, say the Rabbines: As
Plutarch says of the neighbor-villages of Rome, in Numa's time, that sucking
in the air of that City they breathed righteousness, may be much better
affirmed of the Church.

Ver. 13. And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord] Outwardly by his
Word, inwardly by his Spirit: and here he explaineth that which he had spoken
before concerning gemmes and jewels. The glory of the Church consists not in
outward splendor, but in inward virtues and gifts of the Holy Ghost, which are
found only in Gods Disciples.

Ver. 14. In righteousness shall thou be established] Righteousness is here
opposed to oppression. Regiment without righteousness, is but robbery with
authority.

For thou shall not fear] Or, that thou may not fear.

And from terrour] Tyranny is terrible.

For it shall not come near thee] See Psalm. 32.6. with the Note.

Ver. 15. Behold they shall surely (or sedulously) gather together] Heb. He
shall gathering gather together, ^^mmo^abun^^^.
i. e. the enemies as one man. Some understand it of heretics and hypocrites,
who shall dwell together with the Church (so they render it) but shall be
evil-affected toward it, but to their own ruin.

Whosoever shall gather together against thee] Qui accolit tecum contra te.
Such are those Renegado Jesuits, that run over to the Lutherans, pretending to
be Converts, when it is only to keep up the bitter contention that is between
them and us.

Ver. 16. Behold I have created the Smith that blows the Coales] i. e. The
devil say some; rather his impes, and instruments, those kindle-coales, and
tools of his.

And I have created the waster to destroy] Those brats of Abaddon: I have
determined their evil-doings, over ruling the same, and directing them to a
good end.

Ver. 17. No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper] But shall be as
the Poets fain of Ajax his sword, which so long as he used against men, his
enemies, served for help and defense: but after he began to abuse it to the
hurt of hurtless beasts, it turned into his own bowels.

And every tongue -- thou shall condemn] As the eclipsed Moon by keeping her
motion, wades out of the shadow, and recovers her splendor, so shall thou when
slandered. See Psalm. 37.6. with the Note.

This is the heritage] Given them freely, and for perpetuity.

And their righteousnesse] The clearing up of their wronged innocence.

CHAP. LV.
Ver. 1. HO every one that thirsteth] Sitit sitiri Dominus says Nazianzen,
O^at. 40. in S. Baptis.
the Lord even thirsts to be thirsted after; he seeks such to worship him
as will worship him in spirit and in truth, Joh. 4.23. Hence this present
Proclamation, Ho every one, of what Nation soever, that is duly affected with
the preceding discourse of Christ's alsufficiency to save, chap. 53. and the
Churches glory and safety, chap. 54.

That thirsteth] That, being scorched and parched with the sense of sin and
fear of wrath, brayeth and breaths after true grace and sound comfort, as the
hunted Hind does after the waterbrooks, Psalm. 42.1, 3. (See the Note there) as
David did after the water of the well of Bethlehem, 2 Samuel 23.15, 16. as the
Lamb of God did when roasted in the fire of his Fathers wrath he cried aloud
Sitio I thirst; Joh. 19.28, Psalm. 22.11, 16.

Come] Non passibus sed affectibus itur ad Christum. Repent and believe the
Gospel, Mar. 1.15. Repentance is here set out by a word of activity. Come, buy,
etc. The frame of a true repenting heart is in an active coming posture, fitted
for any service; when the wicked pine away in their sin, Ezekiel. 33.10. and so
perish eternally, Psalm. 9.17.

To the waters] To Christ the fountain of living water, upon which you had
turned your backs, Jer. 2.13. Ortelius tells us that in Ireland there is a
certain fountain whose water kills all those beasts that drink thereof; but
hurts not the people that usually drink of it. Christ also is set for the
fall and rising again of many in Israel, Luke 2.34. his ordinances are a savor
of life to some, and of death to others, 2 Cor. 3.16.

And he that has no money] Or moneys-worth. Many would come to Christ, but
they would come with their cost: wherefore they run up and down to borrow money
of the creatures or of the Ordinances, using the means as Mediators, and
sharking in every by-corner for comfort: but men may be starved before they
buy, if they go this way to work: for these in themselves are broken cisterns,
empty granaries, and Horrea formicae tendunt ad inania nunquam.

In the Lord Christ is all fullness, Joh. 1.16. not of plenty only, but of
bounty also. To this fountain if we bring but our empty vessels well washed,
Jer. 4.14. we shall return well refreshed, and replenished with good things,
when the proud Self-Justitiary shall be sent empty away, and shall not once
taste of Wisdoms dainties, Prove. 9.

Buy] Emite, i. e. comparate and comed^te, get Christ with all your gettings:
get him whatever else you go without: part with all you have to compass this
pearl of price, Mat. 13.44, 46: and 16.24, 25. this gold cannot be too dear
bought, Rev. 3.18. Heus saeculares, comparate vobis Biblia, animae pharmaca,
says Chrysostom, by a like expression.

And eat] That is, believe: hic enim edere, est credere, and this water, this
wine may be eaten also: nec enim rigat tantum sed and cibat. Christ is to his
water to cool them, wine to comfort them, milk to nourish them, bread to
strengthen them: he is all that heart can wish or need require. They who have
once tasted how good the Lord is, cannot but thirst after him, and be
unsatisfiable, Optima demonstratio est a sensibus: Eat therefore: it is a
virtue here to be a holy glutton.

Yea come] Heb. And come: Come and come, yea come, come, come: linger not,
loyter not, frame not excuse, strain not courtesy, hang not off by a sinful
bashfulness; it is good manners to fall to your meat.

(...) Colos. 3. Argonaut. lib. 3.
Buy wine and milk] Any thing, every thing, that is good and comfortable: for
Christ is all and in all. As the worth and value of many pieces of silver is in
one piece of gold, so all the petty excellencies scattered abroad in the
creatures, are united in Christ. Apollonius writes, that in the Court of Aeta
King of Colchis, were three fountains which flowed, one with milk, another
with wine, and a third with honey: Christ is all this and more in one. And of
believers it may better be said than Justin does of the Scythians, Lib. 2.
Lacte and melle vescuntur: nihil alienum concupiscunt, etc. they feed upon
milk and honey, they desire nothing more than what they have: vines they have
none, but gods they have; as they use to glory. Nazianzen and Hierom tells us,
that anciently in some Churches they used to give to those Proselites whom they
baptized, wine and milk: grounding upon this text, by a mistake.

Without money and without price] All things for nothing, gratis: this is
doubled and trebled for the comfort of poor trembling consciences: Christ is
rich to all that call upon his Name, Romans 10.12. none gives to him, Romans
11.35. but he to all his freely, Isa. 43.25. for the praise of his gloriour
grace, Ephesians. 1.6. It Is his good pleasure to do so, Luke 12.32. And if so, what
can man, devil or any distrustful heart say against it?

Ver. 2. Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread?] Heb. for not
bread, for that which can no more feed you than those husks could the hungry
Prodigal, Luke 15.16.

Martial.
Turpe est difficiles habere nugas:
Et stultus labor est ineptiarum.
The saying of the Roman General to the Soldier that kept the Tents, when he
should have been fighting in the field, Non amo nimium diligentes, I love not
those that are over-diligent, will be used of God, if when he calls us to the
care of higher things, we busy our selves only about matters of an inferior
alloy. Surely as Domitian the Emperor spent his time in catching flies: and
Artaxerxes in making haftes for knives: so do most men in trifles and lying
vanities, neglecting the One thing necessary (with Martha) and preferring as
those Gergesites in the Gospel, haram domesticam arae Dominicae, a swine-sty
before a Sanctuary. Betwixt such and true believers there is as much difference
as is betwixt substantial merchants who deal in rich commodities, and those
nugivenduli Agyrtae, who sell gawdes, rattles and trangums: as is betwixt
Spiders that catch flies, and Eagles that hunt after Hares and Hirons; as is
betwixt Fowlers that follow after Quails, and children that run after
butter-flyes. Had men but tasted of Gods bread, they would never set such a
price upon Doves-dung. Had they drunk of Christ's wine (which is beyond the best
Nectar or Ambrosia) they would never thirst again after the worlds delights,
Joh. 4.14. which are such as whereof a man may break his neck before his fast,
Eccles. 1.8.

Clitorio quicunque sitim de font levarit, Ovit. Metam. lib 15.

Vina fugit, gaudetque meris abstemius undis.
And your labor for that which satisfies not] The world is full of pomp and
pleasure, 1 John 2.15. and yet it satisfies not, because it is full of nothing
but of emptiness: the creature is now ever since the fall as the husk without
the grain, the shell without the kirnel: yea the world passes away and the
lust thereof, ver. 17. for a man cannot make his heart long to delight in the
same things, but ipsa etiam vota, post usum, fastidio sunt, we loath after a
while what we greatly lusted after, as Amnon did Tamar. Therefore love not the
world, ver. 15. labor not for the meat that perishes, Joh. 6.27. but hasten
heavenward, saying as that Pilgrim did who traveling to Jerusalem, and by the
way visiting many brave Cities with their rare-Monuments, and meeting with many
friendly entertainments, would say eftsoons, I must not stay here, this is not
Jerusalem.

Harken diligently unto me] Heb. hearing hear, i. e. hear as for life, with
utmost attention of body, intention of mind, and retention of memory.

And eat ye that which is good] Not only hear the Word of God, but eat it:
turn it in succum and sanguinem, digest it, incorporate it into your souls,
Jam. 1.20. for it is the heavenly Manna; that has all manner of good tastes in
it, and properties with it, 2 Timothy 3.16.

And let your soul delight it self in fatnesse] Talis est doctrins and gratia
Evangelica qua mentem saginat and impinguat. A good soul feeds on the fat and
drinks of the sweet that is found in the precious promises, Psalm. 36.8. and
63.5.

Ver. 3. Incline your ear] Hear with all your might. Alphonsus King of Arragon
is renowned for his attentive hearing: so is our King Edward 6. who usually
stood, and took notes all the Sermon while. Origin chideth his hearers for
nothing so much as for their seldom coming to hear Gods Word, and for their
careless and needless hearing it when they did come. whence their slow growth
in godliness.

Hear and your soul shall live] God has ordained (as it were to cross the
devil) that as death entered into the world through the ear, by our first
Parents listening to that old man slayer, so should life enter into the soul by
the same door, as it were. The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and
they that hear shall live, Joh. 5.25. The Romanists hold not hearing so
absolutely needful: Spec. Europ.
the Mass only they make a work of duty, but the going to Sermons but a matter
of convenience, and such as is left free to men's leasures and opportunities
without imputation of sin.

And I will make an everlasting Covenant with you] Heb. I will cut out unto
them a Covenant of perpetuity. A Covenant is a cluster of Promises solemnly
made over.

Even the sure mercies of David] Or firm, faithful. The Greek, Act. 13.34. has
it, The holy things, or the venerable things of David, that is of Christ: for
the ratifying and assuring whereof it was necessary that Christ should rise
from death and enter into glory: for which purpose Paul alleges this text,
Act. 13.34.

Ver. 4. Behold I have given him] i. e. Christ called David, ver. 3. because
typed out by David, promised to him, and sprang of him.

For a witnesse] To teach and testify his Fathers will and counsel, at which,
Vt de veritate hac and voluntate Patris testaretur.
being his eternal wisdom, he had been present. See Rev. 3.14.

A Leader and Commander to the people] Of Christ's Priestly office had been
spoken, chap. 53. here of his Prophetical and Princely. These were frequently
set forth even in the Old Testament: by the Crown or golden plate on the
Highpriests head was signified Christ's Kingly office: by the breast plate his
Priestly, and by the bells his Prophetical.

Ver. 5. Behold thou shall call a Nation] Yea all Nations that yet dwell in
darkness and in the shadow of death: being utterly ignorant of God and his
will, of themselves and their duties. But now when they shall know God or
rather be known of him, they shall run to Christ, and yea fly as a cloud, and
flock into the Church, as doves scour into their columbaries, rushing into the
windows, chap. 66.8.

Because of the Lord thy God] Through the mighty operation of his Spirit by the
preaching of his Word. The Philosophers though never so able, could hardly
persuade some few to embrace their Tenants. Plato went thrice into Sicily to
convert Dionysius, but could not do it. Socrates could not work upon
Alcibiades, nor Cicero upon his own son, because God was not with them, nor was
willing to glorify his Son Christ by them, as he did afterward by his holy
Apostles.

Ver. 6. Seek ye the Lord while he may be found] Seek not his Omnipresence (for
that ye need not do, since he is not far from any one of us, Acts 17.27.) but
his gracious presence, his face and favor: seek to be in the fear of the Lord,
and in the comforts of the Holy Ghost, in communion with him and conformity
unto him; and give not over till you find it. Seek him seriously, seek him
seasonably. There is a time when men shall seek the Lord with their flocks and
herds, and yet not find him, when once he has withdrawn himself from them,
Hos. 5.6.

Call ye upon him while he is near] In a time of acceptance, Psalm. 32.6. before
he has sworn that he will not be spoken with, Psalm. ^5.11. God is but a while
with men in the opportunities of grace, Prove. 1.24, 28.

Ver. 7. Let the wicked forsake his wayes] Or else never think of finding
favor with God, or of calling upon him to any purpose: The Leapers lips should
be covered according to the Law: A good motion from an ill mouth will never
take with God.

Pura Deus men's est, pura vult mente vocari:
Et puras jussit pondus habere preces.
And the unrighteous man his thoughts] See Jam. 4.8. with the Note. A Pilat may
wash his hands, a Pharisee cleanse the outside of the platter. Castae manus
sunt, sed men's habet piacula, said an Heathen, who saw by the light of nature
that clean hands and foul hearts did not suit well.

And let him return unto the Lord] See the Notes on Zach. 1.2. Joel 2.12, 13.

For he will abundantly pardon] Heb. he will multiply to pardon: as we multiply
sins, Epist. 7. ad Venant.
he will multiply pardons. God in Christ mollis est and misericors, not an
austere man, implacable, inexorable, but multus ad ignoscendum, as the Vulgar
here rendereth it: and Fulgentius thus descanteth upon it, In hoc multo nihil
deest, in quo est omnipotens misericordia and omnipotentia misericors, etc. In
this much nothing is wanting (how can there, say) since there is in it
omnipotent mercy, and merciful omnipotence? A pardon of course He gives us for
involuntary and unavoidable infirmities; this we have included in that general
pardon which we have upon our general repentance. And for other sins (be they
blasphemies, Matthew. 12.13.) God has all plasters and pardons at hand and
ready made and sealed: for else we might dye in our sins, while the pardon is
in providing. He has also hanged out his tables, as I may say in the holy
Scriptures, showing what great sinners he has pardoned, Act. and Mon. 109.
as Adam that Arch-rebel, Manasseh who was all manner of naughts, David, Peter,
Paul, Magdalen, etc. The Lord Hungerford of Hatesby was beheaded for buggery in
Henry the eights time: The Lord Thomas Cromwell a better man, but executed
together with him, cheared him up and bad him be of good comfort: for, said he,
If your repent and be heartily sorry for that you have done, there is for you
also mercy with the Lord, who for Christ's sake will forgive you: therefore be
not dismayed. God seems to say to sinners as once the French King Francis the
first did to one that begged pardon for some ill words spoken against his
Majesty; Do thou learn to speak little (so to sin no more) and I will not fail
to pardon much: I can remit whatsoever you can commit, never doubt it.

Ver. 8. For my thoughts are not your thoughts] q. d. You may think it
impossible likely, that such great and grievous sinners as you have been,
should ever be received to mercy: but what talk you of your thoughts? mine are
infinitely above them: neither may you measure my mercies by your own models.
Bring broken and bleeding hearts to my Mercy-seat, and I shall soon think all
the meritorious sufferings of my Son, all the promises in my Book, all the
comforts of my Spirit, all the pleasures of my kingdom but enough for you.

Ver. 9. For as the heavens are higher then the earth] And that is no small
deal: see the Note on Psalm. 103.11, 12. Lo, such is the proportion that my
mercy bears to your mercy (even the very best of you) that the heaven does to
the earth, i. e. That a most vast circumference does to one little point or
center.

Ver. 10. For as the rain comes down] Simile omnium elegantissimum pariter and
notissimum. Of the use and efficacy of fit similitudes, See the Note on Hos.
12.10.

Ver. 11. So shall the word be that goes out of my mouth] The word in general,
but specially the word of Promise: it shall surely give seed to the sower, and
bread to the eater, comforts of all sorts both for the present, and for the
future. Only we must see that we be good ground, and then pray that the heaven
may hear the earth, as Hos. 2.21.

But it shall accomplish that which I please] It shall produce the sweet fruits
of righteousness, Romans 8.13, 14. There is (says a good Author) a certan
shellfish that lies always open toward Heaven as it were looking upward,
and begging one fruitful drop of dew: which being fallen, it shuts
presently, and keeps the door close against all outward things, till it has
made a pearl of it. In reading or hearing the Promises, if we open our shells,
our souls, the Heaven will drop the fruitful dew of grace to be employed
worthily in making pearls of good works and solid virtues. Who is she that
comes out of the wilderness to join her self to her well-beloved! Cant. 6.9.

Ver. 12. For ye shall go out with joy] sc. Out of your spiritual bondage,
worse then that of Babylon.

The mountains and the hills] The mute and brute creatures, as they seem to
groan together with the fathfull, Romans 8. so here by a Prosopop^ia they are
brought in as congratulating and applauding their deliverance.

Ver. 13. Instead of the thorn shall come up the fir-tree] There shall be a
blessed change of men and of manners: those who before were stark naught or
good for naught, yea vexatious and mischievous, shall become fruitful and
beneficial: Spinis paliurus acutis. Virg. Eclog.
The Fir Tree is good for many uses, the Myrtle brings berriers of excellent
taste, as Pliny tells us. The Chaldee thus paraphraseth here, Just men shall
rise up instead of sinners, and such at fear the Lord in the room of the
unrighteous. Sed cave ne hic somnies, says Oecolampadius, but be warned you
dream not as some do, that in this world and before the day of Judgment the
wicked shall all be rooted out. For there will always be Cains to persecute
Abels, etc.

And it shall be to the Lord for a name] i. e. For an honor: it shall be much
for his glory, which is the end that he propounds to himself in all that he
does: and well he may; since 1. He is not in danger of doing any thing through
vainglory. 2. He has none higher then himself, to whom to have respect.

For an everlasting sign] In monumentum non momentaneum, Heb. for a sign of
pepetuity or eternity.

That shall not be cut off] Or, that it (the Church) shall not be cut off.

CHAP. LVI.
Ver. 1. Thus says the Lord, Keep ye judgment and do justice] i. e. Repent
ye, as ye were exhorted, chap. 55.6, 7. and bring forth fruits meet for
repentance, as Matthew. 3.8 for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Matthew. 3.1.
Tit. 2.12. Christ came to call sinners to repentance, Mar. 2.17. and to good
works of all sorts, which are here called Judgment and Justice: as he himself
is here called not only Gods salvation but his righteousness.

Ver. 2. Blessed is the man that does this] And withal lays hold on that, i.
e. That performs the duties of both Tables, of Piety and of Charity: that
makes conscience of keeping the Sabbath especially: the fourth Commandment
stands fitly in the heart of the Decalogue, and betwixt the two tables of the
Law, as having an influence into both.

From polluting it] Either by corporal labor or spiritual idleness: spending
the holy time holily.

And keeps his hand from doing any evil] That is, righteous as well as
religious: not yielding his members as instruments of unrighteousness unto
sin, Romans 6.13.

Ver. 3. Neither let the son of the stranger] If a Proselite, let not him
interline the Covenant of Grace in Christ, and say It belongs not to me: Let
not him turn the back of his hand to the promise, as if he were not concerned
in it, because no Jew born; for now the partition wall is by Christ to be
broken down, and the rigor of that old prohibition taken away, Acts 10.34, 35.
Gal. 3.28. Colos. 3.11. Ezekiel. 47.22.

Neither let the Eunuch] See the Note on Mat. 19.12.

Ver. 4. For thus says the Lord] Who comfort those that are cast down, 2
Cor. 7.6. those that are forsaken of their hopes, Jer. 30.17.

That keep my Sabbaths] Which who so do not, are worthily deemed to have no
true goodness in them at all.

And choose the things that please me] Choose them upon mature deliberation and
good advice, as Moses did, Heb. 11.25. By a free election, as Psalm. 119.30. so
showing themselves wise Eunuchs, Ennius.
such as have their name (...), as Scaliger deriveth it, i. e. well-minded men,
egregie cordati homines.

And take hold of my Covenant] By a lively faith which is said to have two
hands: one wherewith she lays hold on Christ; and another whereby she gives
up her self unto him: and although the Devil rap her on the fingers for so
doing, yet she is resolute and holds her own.

Ver. 5. Even unto them will I give in mine house] In the Church of the New
Testament, Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21.

A place] Heb. a hand. A door-keepers place in Gods House is worth having.
Psalm. 84. this was that one thing that he so dearly begged, Psalm. 27.4.

And a name] That new name, Rev. 2.17. that power or prerogative royal (that
heavenly honor, Nonnus there calls it) Joh. 1.12. viz. to be the Sons of
God, and so to be called 1 John 3.1. to have both the comfort and the credit of
it: this is nomen in mundo prastantissimum; none to this, 2 Cor. 6. ult. for if
sons, then heirs, etc. Romans 8.16, 17.

Ver. 6. Also the sons of the stranger that joyneth] Relinquishing his
heathenish superstition, and devoting himself to my fear. The Levites had their
name from the word here used; and Leviathan, whose scales and parts are so fast
joined and joynted together.

To love the name of the Lord, to be his servants] Plato could say, Parere
legibus est Deo servire: and haec summa est libertas. To obey the laws, is to
serve God; and this is the chiefest liberty, this is perfect freedom; But Plato
never knew what it was to love to be Gods servant. In Psalm. 1.
Lex voluntarios quaerit, says Ambrose. All Gods Soldiers are volunteires,
all his people free-hearted, Psalm. 110.3. they wait for his Law, Isa. 42.8. See
Deuteronomy 10.12.

Every one that keeps the Sabbath] See on ver. 2.

Ver. 7. Even them will I bring unto my holy mountain] i. e. Into my Church and
Church Assemblies. Quaere whether Eunuchs and strangers were made partakers of
all holy services in the second Temple, according to the letter? Sure we are,
that that holy Eunuch. Acts 8. and the rest of the Gentiles had and still have
free admission under the Gospel.

And will make them joyful in mine house of prayer] by their free access unto
me, and all good success in their suits. Pray that your joy may be full, Joh.
16.24. Draw water with joy out of this well of salvation, Isa. 12. Rejoice
evermore, and that you may so do, Pray without ceasing, 1 These. 5.16, 17.

Their burnt offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine Altar]
Their Evangelical Sacrifices of prayer, praise, alms, obedience, etc. shall be
accepted through Christ, Heb. 13.10, 15. who is the true altar that sanctifies
all that is offered on it, Rev. 8.3, 4.

For mine house shall be called, etc.] See on Mat. 21.13.

Ver. 8. Which gathers the outcasts of Israel] According to that ancient
promise of his, Deuteronomy. 30.4. None of his shall be lost for looking after: he
will fetch back his banished, as that witty woman said, 2 Samuel 14.14.

Yet will I gather others to him] Strangers, Eunuchs, all mine other sheep
that are not yet of this fold, Joh. 10 16. together with all my straglers,
those that are relapsed will I recover.

Ver. 9. All ye beasts of the field come to devour] Statim quasi vehementer ira
accensus, etc. All upon the sudden, as one much enraged against the wicked
Priests especially (as greatest Traitors to the state) the Lord thundereth and
threateneth terribly. By the beasts here called for, we may understand the
Babylonians, Grecians, Syrians, Egyptians, but especially the Romans, who made
clean work of them, when as they were grown extremely wicked, and even ripe for
ruin, as Josephus witnesses. See Jer. 50.17.

Ver. 10. His watchmen are blind, they are all ignorant] Invehit in
Pseudepiscopos, such as were (and are still in part) the Popish Clergy, those
of the ninth age especially, and not much better a little before Luther
stickled: blind leaders of the blind, lamentably ignorant, as the Bishop of
Dunkelden in Scotland for instance; Act. and Mon. Luther.
who professed that he knew neither the New Testament nor the Old: so Bishop
Albert reading the Bible, and being asked by a Nobleman What book it was he
read? I know not, said he, what book it is; but all that I read in it, is
contrary to our Religion. As for the other ill qualities of the watchmen here
enveighed against, Hugo the Cardinal said, that the Devil had two daughters,
Covetousness and Luxury: the former he had heretofore married out to the Jews,
the latter to the Gentiles: but now the Monks and Priests had gotten them both
from their old husbands, and taken them for their own use. The Hebrew Critics
have observed, that the word here rendered watchmen, has a Tsade bigger than
ordinary; to show what odious creatures such are as are here described.

They are all dumb dogs that cannot bark] i. e. Will not deal plainly and
faithfully with men's souls: but either preach not at all, or placentia only,
toothlesse truths. Lib. 29. chap. 4.
Pliny tells of the dogs in Rome that were set to keep the Capitol; because,
when the Gauls scaled it, the dogs being fed too full, lay sleeping and did
not give warning, they not only hanged them up, but every year on that day of
the year, hanged up certain dogs in the City for exemplary justice; yea
crucified them alive upon an Elder-tree. Let dumb dogs and parasitical
Preachers (treacherous to men's souls) take heed they be not one day hanged in
hell.

Sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber] Non dormiunt solum, sed dedita opera
dormiunt; Somno^entia pastorum luporum est gaudium.
so full they have farced themselves, and so deeply drunk they are, that they
sleep soundly (though Lions roar, and wolves worry the poor flock) and that
many times far enough from the fold; wherein they show themselves to be worse
then Ulysses his swineherd, of whom Homer says, -- (...)
(...).
that he would not be drawn to sleep from his swinesty.

Ver. 11. Yea they are greedy dogs that can never have enough] Heb. strong of
soul, or of appetite, they know not to be satisfied. Lac and lana is that they
look for; the instruments of a foolish shepherd, forcipes and mulctra, the
sheares and milk paile are in their hand, Zach. 11.15. they eat the fruit and
drink the milk, as Ezekiel 25.4. yea they eat the fat, and tear the claws in
pieces, Zach. 11.16. Albertus Magnus complained heavily of the covetousness of
Pastors in his time: In Mat. 10.16.
Temporalia colligunt perse, spiritualia seminant per alios, says he; they
take little pains, but care not how much profit they make: he that made
Fasciculus temporum, does the like. Another modern writer fitly applies that
to them, which Oedipus in Sophocles says of Tiresias the Heathen-Prophet, --
(...)
(...).
i. e. that he looked only to his gain, but was little seen in his profession.
Such a one was Balaam, Jude 11. such were those false Prophets, Ezekiel. 13. the
covetous Pharisees, Luke 16.14. the false Apostles, Romans 16.18. called dogs,
Phil. 3.2. such as had a greedy worm under their tongues, and could never be
satisfied.

And they are shepherds that cannot understand] The dust of covetousness has
even put out their eyes: Midas secundum Etymologi^m Graecam coecus est.
as it fared with the blind and greedy Pharisees, Avidi a non videndo: the
world is a pearl in their eyes, they cannot see God, nor skill of their
office. Tremellius renders it nesciunt docere, they know not to teach, as
being choked happily with a fat benefice; a common practice of the Pope.

They all look to their own way] Mind their own commodity, whereby they are led
up and down, as an Ox may be all a ground over, by a bottle of hay.

Ver. 12. Come ye] The wicked have their Come ye; as well as the godly, chap.
2. 3. See there.

I will fetch wine] A Pastor should be no winebibber or Alestake, 1 Timothy 3.8.
Ebrietas in se culpas complectitur omnes. Drunkenness is a foul fault in any
man (says Petrus Ravennas) but in a Minister, it is sacrilege; especially if
he draw on others to it as here: and as the Popish Priests do at Paris and
Lovain, where the best wine is called Vinum Theologicum, and they use to
lengthen out their drunken compotations.

And to morrow shall be as this day] Words of profane secureness and
dissoluteness. See Chap. 22.13. Prove. 23.35.

CHAP. LVII.
Ver. 1. THe righteous perisheth] So the world deemeth, but not rightly: for
the righteous has hope in his death, when the wicked dying is driven away in
his wickedness, Prove. 14.32. (by him that has the power of death, even the
devil, Heb. 2.14.) having been through fear of death all their lifetime
subject to bondage. The Lacedaemonians all the time of their life adored death.
The righteous can defy death with Paul, and sing, Death, where is they sting?
Hell, where is thy victory? he is not killed with death, as Jezabels children
were, Rev. 2.23. but dies in peace, though he dye in battle, as Josiah did: of
whom some interpret this Text.

And no man lays it to heart] Heb. upon his heart, that it may sink and soak
into it; so as to be soundly sensible of Gods holy hand and end in such a
providence. See chap. 5.12. There is a woe to oscitancy and stupidity of this
kind.

And merciful men] Heb. men of piety or pity, such as all righteous persons
are: they have received mercy, and they can show it, Colos. 3.12. they have
steept their thoughts in the mercyes of God, which have dyed theirs, as the
dye-fat does the cloth.

A^ men gather flowers, and candy them, and preserve them by them, so does God
his pious ones.
Are taken away] Heb. gathered, as corn is into the garner, or fruit into the
storehouse; so they into Abraham's bosom.

No man considering] None of those debauched ones, chap 56.12. to be sure of;
These are glad to be rid of the righteous, as the Sodomites were of righteous
Lot; as the Heathen persecutors were of the Martyrs, whom they counted (...), 1
Cor. 4.13. the sweepings of the world and the off-scourings of all things.

That the righteous is taken away from the evil to come] As was Methuselah a
year before the flood; Jeroboams best son, before the downfall of his Fathers
family, 1 King. 14.12, 13. Josiah before the captivity, and first destruction
of Jerusalem, 2 King. 22.23. James before the second, Act. 12. Austin a little
before the sack of his City Hippo by the Vandals. Felix Nepotianus qui haec non
vidit, says Hierom. Stilico said, Calvin in hunc locum.
that when Ambrose was dead, Great changes would follow: and it fell out
accordingly. Luther was taken away in peace, a little before the calamity of
Germany, which he foretold for contempt of the Gospel. Pareus dyed a little
before Heydelberg was taken, futuro malo substractus. Mr. Brightman was buried
a day or two before the pursevant was sent for him. God had housed him, as he
had Lot before the storm: hid him as he had done Moses in the hole of the Rock,
till the tempest was blown over: dealt by him, as once by Daniel (chap. 12,
13.) who was hid to go away and rest before those great clashings and
confusions should come, which had been foreshewn to him. Howbeit this is not
generally so: for Jeremy lived to see the first destruction of Jerusalem: John
the Evangelist, the last Mr. Dod, and many other holy men outlived our late
unhappy wars, and deeply shared in them: But usually God takes away his most
eminent servants from the evil to come: as when there is a fire in a house or
Town, men carry out their jewels; Dion Prus. orat 28.
(...), says an Ancient; the best dye first, commonly: The comfort is, that
though as grapes they be gathered before they be ripe, and as lambs slain before
they be grown, yet this benefit they have, that they are freed from the
violence of the wine press that others fall into, and they escape many storms
that others live to taste of.

Ver. 2. He shall enter into peace] i. e. Into heaven, where the righteous
(however looked upon as lost, ver. 1.) shall have life and peace, Romans 8.6. joy
and bliss, Mat. 25.21, 23. rest and peace, Rev. 14.13. and this (...) amodo,
strait upon it so soon as ever they are dead; from henceforth, forthwith their
souls have happiness unconceivable. As for their bodies,

They shall rest in their beds] So their graves are called, by an elegant
Metaphor: like as the bier that carries to it, is called Matteh, a couch,
(...).
2 Samuel 3.31. the burying-place a dormitory, or place to sleep in, and the
Resurrection an awaking, Psalm. 17. ult. To this bed Moses went up, when his
Father bad: he dyed ad ^s Jehova, Malmould.
Deuteronomy. 34.5. which the Jew-Doctors expound, as though God did take away his
soul with a kiss: like as the loving mother kisseth the child, and then lays
it down to sleep. Rhodingus, a Dutch Divine, when he perceived he should dye,
Melch. Adam.
desired to be laid in another head which he called his bed of rest, and upon
which he had long before written this verse, Vt somnus mortis, sic lectus imago
sepulchri.

In this short bed of the grave shall be laid up the infinite miseries of many
years; the bodies of the Saints shall by rotting, be refined, their precious
dust preserved, till at last it arise incorruptible. O dieculam illam!

Each one walking in his uprightnesse] Or, walking before him, or right over
against him: that is, keeping equipage with him; as when one friend walks
with another.

Ver. 3. But draw near hither ye sons of the sorceresse] Here Esaias is very
bold, (as the Apostle says of him in another case, Romans 10.20.) and makes it
appear, that he was none of those dumb dogs he had rated as, in the former
Chapter. The Jews gloried much in their pedigree and descent from Abraham, and
that they were born of the freewoman: he tells them flat and plain, that
they were witches children, whores-sons, (...).
a bastardly brood (as our Savior afterward called them) a race of rebels, a
seed of serpents, shamefully degenerate from their praiseworthy Progenitors.

Ver. 4. Against whom do ye sport your selves?] You that are the wits, the
merry Greeks of the times, that instead of trembling at Gods Word, and humbling
before him, hold it a goodly thing to gibe and jear at it, to mock and scoff
at those that preach it, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. See chap. 5.19. and 22.13. and 28.14,
22. These were their game-stocks, and the matter of their mad mirth; neither is
it any otherwise to this day: for the world ever was, and will be still, beside
it self in point of salvation. Mundus anti^ quum obtinet ridendo verbum Dei.
Not the sinful Sodomites only, but Lots sons-in-law, who should have learned
better, laughed him to scorn for his good counsel, Genesis 19.14. Ridetur cum suo
Jehova: Lot is counted but a Job, and bid to keep his breath to cool his broth.
Erasmus is blamed for his dry scoffs at Capi^e and other Reformers: but
Parsons the Jesuit is able to put Rabshaketh, Thersites and Lucian himself to
school, for railing, deriding and scurrilous language.

Against whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue?] By such base
gestures did they show their contempt of the Prophets, as they thought: but
indeed (and as it was construed) of God himself. See Exodus 16.8. Number. 16.11.
Luke 10.16. 1 These. 4.8. Look how unskilful hunters, shooting at wild beasts,
do sometimes kill a man: so profane persons, shooting at Gods Ministers, hit
him. If we be served in like sort as those of old were, if we be for signs and
for wonders in Israel, as Isaiah and his fellows were, chap. 8.18. If in
mockage they imitate our language, as they did good Jeremies, crying at him,
The burden of the Lord, the burden of the Lord, chap. 23. If they blow their
noses at us, as they did at our Savior, (...).
Luke 16.14. taunt and reproach us, as they did Paul, Act. 17.32. set us upon a
stage to be laughed and hooted at, as they did those worthies of whom the world
was not worthy, (...), In theatrum producti pro spectaculo.
Heb. 10.33. 1 Cor. 4.9. let us not strange or startle at the matter, as if
some new thing had befaln us; but rejoice and be exceeding glad: for so
persecuted they the Prophets that were before us, Mat. 5.12. See 1 Pet. 4.14.
with the Note.

Ver. 5. Enflaming your selves with idols] That it might appear that there was
good cause of so much sharpness, and that he did them no wrong, he painteth
them out in their colors, to the life: Incalescitis, id est concumbitis,
whilst ye commit folly and filthiness with your idols, ye are all adulterers,
as an oven heated by the baker: your baker sleeps all the night, in the
morning it burns as a flaming fire, Hos. 7.4, 6. And as the love of Harlots
is often hotter than that of husband and wife, so superstition many times
out-doeth true religion.

Slaying the children] A barbarous practice, taught them by that old
manslayer. Careless parents do little less: whom therefore Bernard calls
peremptores potius quam parents, rather Parricides than Parents.

Ver. 6. Among the smooth stones of the stream is thy portion] Pars and sors
tua: a poor portion it is, but such as thou art well apaid of ( viz. thine
altars and thine idol-service) and set up in my place: how exceeding devout
in their way are some misled and muzzled Papists (those of the weaker sex
especially) in the service of their god Mauzzim, in the honor of their
over-admired relics, which they esteem no less than the people of the Isle
Zeiilon in the East Indies did their consecrated Apes-tooth; which being got
from them, they offered an incredible mass of treasure to recover it.

Should I receive comfort in these] Or, should I not ease my self of these? as
Jer. 5.9.

Ver. 7. Upon a lofty and high mountain] In all places have thou poured out thy
whoredoms, setting thy sin upon the cliffe of the rock, as it were a sunning:
so shameless art thou grown.

Thy bed] i. e. thy Temples and Altars; as likewise do the Masse-mongers at
this day.

Ver. 8. Behind the doors also and the posts] Where my Law should have been
written, Deuteronomy. 6.9. and 11.20.

Have thou set up thy remembrance] Thy mawmets and monuments of Idolatry: such
as Papists now call Memories, and Laymens books.

Thou have discovered thy self] Thy nakedness like a meretrix meretricissima,
divaricasti tibias, as Ezekiel. 23. Omnibus modis t^ comparans ut impudentissimum
scortum, prostituting thy self as a most impudent Harlot, prodigiously
lascivious.

Ver. 9. And thou wentest to the King] The King of Assyria, who styled himself
the great King, to whom Ahaz both sent and went, 2 King. 16.8, 10.

With ointment] Heb. with oil, that is, with balsam, such as Judea only
afforded, and was therefore highly esteemed in other countries.

And did debase thy self even unto hell] By crouching and cringing to those
foreign states, in a most submisse and servile way, as Ahaz had done with his,
I am thy servant and thy son, 2 King. 16.7. to the dishonor of God, and to the
reproach of Israel, who was Gods firstborn, higher than the Kings of the
earth, Psalm. 89.27.

Ver. 10. Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way] Great pains thou have
taken to small purpose, and yet thou think and hopest (but groundlesly) that.

Thou have found the life of thy hand] A sure way of subsistence; thy desired
help and safety.

Ver. 11. And of whom have thou been afraid or feared?] q. d. Not me surely as
thou ought: but thy fellow creatures, whom thou should have looked upon
as so many mice.

That thou have lyed] i. e. So basely flattered the Assyrian.

Have I not held my peace] i. e. Born with thee, more than any else would ever
have done? and yet my lenity is even worse than lost upon thee.

Ver. 12. I will declare thy righteousnesse] i. e. Thine unrighteousness, by
an Irony: Antiphrasis Ironica.
or thy righteousness secundum dici, non secundum esse, thine hypocrisy.

For they shall not profit thee] Nay they shall undo thee.

Ver. 13. When thou cryest, let thy companies (Heb. thy gathered ones or
troops) deliver thee] See Deuteronomy. 32 37, 38. Judge. 10.13, 14. with the Note.

But the wind shall carry them all away] The wind of Gods power shall scatter
them, quisquiliarum in morem.

Ver. 14. And he shall say] Or, and it shall be said: This is further added,
for the comfort of those that trusted in God, that they shall have a smooth and
clear passage home. This is literally meant of their return from Babylon: but
mystically of the recollection of the Church out of the captivity of the devil,
and power of sin.

Ver. 15. For thus says the high and lofty one] Higher than the highest: so
high, that he is said to abase himself to behold things done in heaven, Psalm.
113.6. to look out of himself upon the Saints and Angels there. He is a God,
says one, whose nature is Majesty, whose place is immensity, whose time is
eternity, whose life is sanctity, whose power is omnipotency, whose work is
mercy, whose wrath is justice, whose throne is sublimitie, whose seat is
humility.

That inhabiteth Eternity] Gigas saeculorum, says the Syriak. The Apostle Paul
has a like stately description of Almighty God, 1 Timothy 6.16. who yet is above
all Name or Notion, and must be thought of as one not to be thought of. Herein
he is most unlike to men, who the higher they are, the less they look after the
poor afflicted.

I dwell in the high and holy place] In the light which no man can approach
unto, 1. Tim. 6.16. In the holy place (of the material Temple) which was
without windows, there burned lights perpetually; to represent the celestial
lights: but in the most holy place, there was no light at all; to show, that
all outward light is but darkness being compared with that light which God
inhabiteth, and which is inaccessible.

With him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit] In the lowest hearts he
dwells, as well as in the highest heavens. A broken heart is Gods lesser
heaven: here he dwells with delight. Not that the affliction of a man's spirit
is pleasing to God, but the separation of sin from the soul: when the soder
that joyneth a sinful action and the heart together, is dissolved, this
pleases the Lord.

To revive the spirit of the humble] As this very text has done many a one.

Ver. 16. For I will not contend for ever] It soon repents the Lord
concerning his servants: Et pro magno peccato parum supplicii satis est patri.
Terent.
See Psalm. 103.9.

For the spirit would fail before me] Heb. would be overcovered, sc. tenebris
a^ terroribus, it would even sink and faint away. When the child swoones in the
whipping, God lets fall the rod, and falls a kissing it, to fetch life into it
again, Jer. 31.20. As the rule in Physic is still to maintain nature, so does
he their spirits, by Cordials.

Ver. 17. For the iniquity of his Covetousnesse] Or of his Concupiscence, the
sin of his nature. But covetousness is a wickedness with a witness; the root
of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.10. Timon could say, that there were two sources of all
sin, viz. (...) covetousness and vainglory.

And he went on frowardly in the way of his own heart] i. e. Exco^atus sequitur
animalem suum spiritum, he blindling blundered on, without fear or wit,
cross-grained and irreclaimable.

Ver. 18. I have seen his waies] His ways of covetousness, crossness, etc. I
could be as cross as he for the heart of him, Psalm. 18.26. But,

I will heal him] q. d. I see these froward children will say nothing to heart:
frowns will not humble them, blows will not benefit them: if I do not save
them, till they seek me, they will never be saved. Therefore I will work for mine
own name sake. See Ezekiel. 20.8, 14, 22, 44.

And restore comforts unto him, and to his mourners] To those that mourn in
secret for his sins and miseries, Ezekiel. 9.4. Matthew. 5.4. and to others for
their sakes, ratione consortii.

Ver. 19. I create the fruit of the lips] i. e. I speak peace to my people by
the mouths of my faithful Ministers, applying and setting home the promises:
And this I do most magnificently and mightily.

Peace, peace] See on chap. 26.3.

Ver. 20 But the wicked are like the troubled sea] Whose surges are not more
lofty, then muddy. The sea is of it self unquiet and troublesme: much more when
tossed with winds and tempests: So wicked men, when it is at best with them, are
restless; but under terrors and temptations, they cast up the mire and dirt of
desperation and blasphemy; as did Cain, Judas, Julian, Latomus, etc. God in
afflictions marks men out: and then, conscience will prey upon them, as Simeon
and Levi did upon the Shechemites, when sore: then, as Prove. 5.12, men shall
cry out, How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof! Then, as
Genesis 42.21. Afflictions are to the soul, as storms are to the sea, or as
earthquakes to the ground, which discover a great deal of filth. Vatablus
renders the text thus, Imp^i autem Euripi instar fremunt. Now Euripus ebbeth
and flows seven times a day, His life in. Mr. Clark.
and must needs therefore be in continual motion and agitation. Mr. Dod was
wont to compare wicked men to the waves of the sea; those which were of a great
estate were great waves, said He; those that were of small estate, were small
waves: but all were restless as waves, Job. 20.20.

Ver. 21. There is no peace] a truce there may be for a time, and a seeming
peace: but it is pax infida, Live.
pax incerta, a peace no peace. The sea may seem sometimes still, but it is
never so: no more are the wicked. And this is twice here affirmed for more
assurance: like as he had twice said I will heal them, ver. 18.19. and as he
had promised peace peace to the mourners ^ ib. who, having soaked themselves in
godly sorrow, are washed from their wickedness by the blood of Jesus Christ,
and being justified by faith have peace with God: This is a peerlelesse pearl,
which no cock on the dunghill ever knew the worth of.

CHAP. LVIII.
Ne frigide arguas, and in aenigmatibus ac obscure. Oecol. Ne parcas gutturi
and voci. A Lap.
Ver. 1. CRy aloud] Heb. Cry with the throat, or with full throat, as Jer. 12.6.
plenis faucibus, voce sonora, and quasi tubali; set up thy Note; not only say
to the wicked it shall be ill with him, chap. 3.11. there is no peace to him,
chap. 57.21. but cry it aloud.

Spare not] Singulae particulae habent emphasin; use utmost intention of
spirit, and contention of speech: thou have to do with an hypocritical Nation,
then which kind of people nothing is more stupid, more uncounselable or
impenitent; for how should such repent as have converted conversion it self
into a form, yea into sin? Bestir thee therefore against these deaf
Sea Monsters; Sic clames ut Stentora vincere possis. If a man's house be on
fire, we must not speak softly (as loath to awaken him) Sir your house is on
fire.

Lift up thy voice like a trumpet] Non ut tibia, sed ut tuba; Not as a pipe for
delight, but as a trumpet alarm against sin and Satan: as all the Country was
filled with the sound of that trumpet at the giving of the Law, Exodus 19.16.
and as all the world shall hear the sound of that trumpet of God, 1 These.
4.16. when the Law shall be required: so let the Preachers voice be a summons
to speedy repentance, or else to unavidable judgment. There is one that
descanteth thus upon the words: Diverse things there are says he, D. Play s. on
Matthew. 5.19
that sound louder then a trumpet; the Sea, the Thunder, or such like: Yet he
says not Lift up thy voice as the Sea, or as the Thunder, but as a trumpet:
because a Trumpeter, when he sounds his trumpet, he winds it with his mouth,
and holds it with his hands; and so a Preacher, which is a spiritual Trumpeter,
must not only, by preaching well, sound forth the word of Truth with his mouth,
but also by doing well, he must support and hold it up with his hands: and then
does he lift up his voice as a Trumpet.

And show my people their transgressions] Let Gods watchmen cast away the
inverse trumpets of Furius Fulvius which sounded a retreat when they should
have sounded an alarm; but deal freely and faithfully with men souls, taking
the same liberty to cry down sin, that men take to commit sin.

Ver. 2. Yet they seek me daily] In pretense at least: and this their
dissembled sanctity, double iniquity, is one of those great transgressions of
theirs, against which thou must declaim, yea proclaim hellfire, in case they
amend it not.

And delight to know my wayes] They seem to do so, by frequenting mine
Ordinances, and attending to my Priests, whose lips preserve and present
knowledge.

As a Nation that did righteousness] But it is but as a Nation that did it:
they had but a form of knowledge, Romans 2.20. and a form of godliness, 2 Timothy
3.5. Ejusdem farinae nobiscum sunt religiosu i quidam in speciem, says
Oecolampadius: the Church is still full of such hypocrites, that only act
religion, play devotion, wherein they may out do better men, for the external
part of religion, and pretense of zeal, as the Pharrisees in the Gospel, fasted
more then the Disciples, wanzing their visages, and weakening their
constitutions with much abstinence. The Sorcerers of Egypt seemed to do as much
as Moses: so do these as much or more, then sound Christians. The Apostles were
as deceivers and yet true, 2 Cor. 6.8. but these are as true and yet deceivers.

They ask of me the Ordinances of Justice] As not willing to deviate: but they
are ever learning, yet never come to the knowledge of the Truth.

And take delight in approaching to God] Which yet no hypocrite can do from the
heart, Job 27.10. for God is light, and holiness, and therefore hated by the
blind and soul hypocrite, Joh. 3.20. all whose devotions are effects rather of
Art and parts then of the heart and grace: hence God abhors them; for he
loves truth in the inward parts, Psalm. 51.6.

Ver. 3. Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou see not? Ecce non diu
occultant se hypocrisis and superbia. Oecol. Antonin. Philos. reference Vulgar.
Gallic.
] Here they begin to bluster, and their hypocrisy to blister out at their lips.
God, they held, was not a little beholden to them: and now also behind hand
with them. For as that Heathen Emperor said once of his Gods, Non sic deos
coluimus, ut iste nos vinceret, We have not served our gods, that they should
serve us no better then to suffer our enemies to get the better of us: so were
these proud pretenders ready to say of God Almighty, We have better deserved
then to be so served; rated by these Prophets, and evil entreated by our
enemies; beaten on both sides. A rich Chapman, that has had a good stock and
trading, is loath to be a journey-man again; he will be trading though it be but
for pins: so we, bankrupt in Adam, yet will be doing, and think to be saved for
a company of poor beggarly duties, dead prayers, formal fastings, etc. and to
set off with God by our good deeds for our bad, as the Papists do, and not a
few Ignorants amongst us.

Behold in the day of your fast] which is called a day of Restraint, because
therein you should amerce your selves and abridge your selves of all sorts of
delights.

Ye find pleasure] Ye find your own desire, pleasure or will: ye gratify your
flesh, pursue your sinful lusts and purposes. Grande malum propria voluntas
(says Bernard) qua fit ut bona tua tibi bona non sint. Chephers significas id
quod libet.
A man's own will or pleasure proves a great evil to him many times, making his
good duties (fastings, prayers, and the like) no way good to him. In vain is
the body macera^ed, if men's lusts be not mortified.

And exact all your labours] i. e. Your debts and dues with rigor and
extremity; not considering that utmost righ is utmost wrong: and that
howsoever, you should take another time for such work. Feriu jurgia amovento,
brawl not on an holy day, was one of the laws of the twelve Tables in Rome.

Ver. 4. Behold] Take notice whence it is, that ye so miscarry in your
services: and leave muttering against me.

Ye fast for strife and debate] Or, unto strife and debate, i. e. On your
Fast-dayes ye contend and quarrel; being hungry you are angry; as emptiness
whetteth choler. Sed quid prodest pallor in ore, si sit livor in cord? to what
purpose is a pale face, and a spiteful spirit? and what is an humbling day
without an humbled heart? not only an irreligious incongruity, but an high
provocation: like Zimries act, when all the Congregation were weeping before
the door of the Tabernacle. Get thee behind, said Jehu to the messenger, what
have thou to do with peace? Confessions and prayers are our messengers; but if
the heart be not broken, there is no peace to such wicked.

And to smite with the fist with wickednesse] sc. Your servants, or your
debtours; as Matthew. 18.28. They should have had, on such a day especially,
Pacem cum hominibus, cum vitiis bellum, (which was Otho 2. His Motto) peace
with men, and war with their wickednesses.

Ye shall not fast as ye do this day] For ye fast not to God, Zech. 7.5, 11,
12. but bear fruit to your selves, like that empty Vine Ephraim, Hos. 10.1. and
so are not a button the better for all you do, Jer. 14.1, 2. When they fast I
will not hear their cry.

To make your voices to be heard on high] Out of ostentation of Devotion: but
secrecy here were a better argument of sincerity. Or, do ye think to be heard
on high. i. e. in Heaven for such outside services?

Ver. 5. Is it such a fast that I have chosen] No: for God hates that mar-good
formality: and displeasing service is double dishonor.

A day for a man to afflict his soul] i. e. His body a whole day at least, from
evening till evening, Rous his Archaeol. Attica.
Levit. 23.32. or from morning till evening, Judge. 20.26. 2 Samuel 3.35. Yet so
as that nature be chastised, not disabled for service; and that we take not the
more liberty afterward to pamper the flesh which we have pined, as those dames
of Athens did in their Thesmophoria, a feast of Ceres; to the which they
prepared themselves with fasting: but after that, took their liquor more freely
then was fit. And as the Turks do at this day in their solemn Fasts: they will
not so much as taste a cup of water, Turk. hist. 777. Voyage into the Levant.
or wash their mouths with water all the day long, before the stars appear in
the sky: but then they lay the reins in the neck, and run riot.

Is it to bow down the head as a bulrush] Whiles the heart is unbowed, and
stands bolt upright. Hypocrites, like bulrushes, hang down their heads for a
day, while some storm of trouble is upon them. But when a fair sunshine day is
come, to dry it up again, they lift up their heads as before. Fitly, says a
grave Divine, is formality compared to a bulrush; the color is fresh, the skin
smooth; he is very exact that can find a knot in a bulrush: but if you pill it,
what is under, but a kind of spungious unsubstantial substance, of no use in
the world worth the speaking of. Such are hypocrites; a fair outside, specious
pretenses of piety etc. all the rest not worth a rush. Pictures says another,
are pretty things to look on: and that's all they are good for. Christ looked
on, and loved the young Pharisee, etc.

And to spread sackcloth and ashes under him] The Jews did so usually in their
solemn mournings, Esth. 4, 3. Jer. 6.26. The Heathens also did the like, Jonah
3.5. Matthew. 11.21.

Will thou call this a fast?] Is it not a mere mock-fast as was that of the
Pharisees? and is that of the Papists, who pride themselves that day with
opinion of merit, for their mere outward abstinence. Some Protestants also
fast, but they had need to send, as God speaks, for mourning-women, that by
their cunning they may be taught to mourn, Jer. 19.17. and for reformation (the
main business of a fast) they mind it not.

And an acceptable day to the Lord] Heb. a day of good will, or well-liking:
therefore called elsewhere a day of Atonement, or Expiation; and has most
excellent promises made to it, Joel 2.12, 18. Only there must be withal a
turning from wicked work^; without which, God sees no work or worth in a Fast,
Jon. 3.10. nor can it be an acceptable day to the Lord.

Ver. 6. Is not this the Fast that I have chosen] There is a threefold Fast;
from meat, mirth, sin: this last crowns both the former: and yet we say not (as
the Papists falsely say we hold) that fasting is no more but a moral
temperance, a fasting from sin, a matter of policy.

To lose the bands of wickednesse] i. e. Juramentum, literariam cautionem,
vincula, carceres, servitutem: the unjust bonds and obligations of Usurers and
oppessors, whereby poor non-solvents were imprisoned, or imbondaged. These are
also here further called heavy burdens, and yokes: as elsewhere nets, Psalm.
10.9. that is, says Chrisostom, bonds, debts, morgages.

And to let the oppressed go free] Heb. the bruised or broken, sc. in their
estates.

And that ye break every yoke] Cancel every unjust writing, say the Septuagint.
They took twelve in the hundred in Nehemia's time: this was a yoke intolerable:
Specul. Europi
I pray you let us leave off this usury says he, chap. 5.10. At this day the
Jews are in all places permitted to strain up their usury to eighteen in the
hundred upon the Christians: but then they are used, as the Friars, to suck
from the meanest, and to be sucked by the greatest.

Ver. 7. Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry] Thine own bread it must be,
and that especially whereof thou have on the fast day abbridged thy self: for
what the rich spare on such a day, the poor should spend. Hereby 1. Men's
prayers shall speed the better, Acts 10.4. 2. They shall make God their debtor,
Prove. 19.17.3. That is best and most pleasing alms to God, that is given in
Church assemblies: for 1. It is an Ordinance of God, and a Sabbath-duty, 1 Cor.
16.1, 2. 2. Christ there sits, and sees the gift and mind of every
alms-giver, Luke 21.1, 2. setting it down in his book of remembrance, Mal. 3.16.

And that thou bring the poor that are cast out] Scilicet tanquam rebels, as
those poor Albigenses were in France, and their posterity lately in Piedmont:
Scultet. Annal.
the Protestant Lorainers proscribed for religion by their Duke, and
entertained by the State of Strasborough, at the earnest suit of the Ministers
there, till they could be conveniently provided for elsewhere: there being some
thousands of them, which, till then, were forced to feed upon hips, haws,
leaves of trees, and grass of the field.

That thou cover him] Duties of the second Table only are here enjoined,
because they are excellent evidences of true piety, and pure religion, Jam. 1.
ult.

And that thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh] Thy poor brother, who is
of the same nature with thee, and is as capable of grace and glory as thy self.
Learn to see Christ in thy poor P^titioner; and thou will the sooner yield,
Matthew. 25. Consider also what is said of him that shuts up his bowels of
compassion from his necessitous brother, 1 John 3.17.

Ver. 8. Then shall thy light break forth as the morning] He says not shall
appear, but shall break forth, ut velocitatem and copiam dantis exprimeret,
says Chrysostom: that he might express the swiftness and bountifulness of
God the giver of it.

And thy health shall spring forth speedily] The Sun of righteousness shall
arise unto thee with healing under his wings, Mal. 4.2. See the Note.

And thy righteousness shall go before thee] Thou shall have the comfort and
credit of thy bounty and charity, which is often called righteousness, as Psalm.
112.9. Dan. 4.24. Acts 10.35.

And the glory of the Lord shall be thy rereward] i. e. The glorious Jehovah
shall see to thy safety. See Psalm. 27.10. with the Note. See also Isa. 52.12.

Ver. 9. Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer] Thou shall have the
royalty of his ear, easy access to, and all best success at the throne of
grace: no such cause to complain, as thou did, ver. 3. that thy prayers were
lost.

If thou take away from the midst of thee] E meditullio tui, from thy very
heart, Jun.
by an inward reformation: si animo, opere, and sermon aversaberis
inhumanitatem, if thou heartily hate cruelty, and act accordingly.

The yoke] As ver. 6.

The putting forth of the finger] The finger of that wicked fist, ver. 4. or
that finger wherewith thou threatenest thy servants, or pointest at others in
scorn or disdain; as the proud Pharisee seems to have done at the poor
Publican, when he said I am not as that fellow, Luke. 18.11.

And speaking vanity] Or, violence (as the Chaldee here) talk concerning the
wringing and wronging of others. All this must be done, or else no hope that
God will hear prayers: look to it. See Psalm. 66.18. with Notes.

Ver. 10. And if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry] Not thy sheaf only:
relieving the necessitous out of deep commiseration: Ex animo liberaliter,
bilariterque.
and could part with thy very life also for them, if duly called thereunto.
Compassion excels alms and outward works of mercy: for when one gives an
alms, he gives something without himself: but by compassion, we relieve
another by somewhat within, and from our selves.

And satisfy] Not save him alive only, by a scant allowance, prisoners pittance.

Then shall thy light arise in obscurity] Thou shall abound with blessings of
all sorts: See my common place of Alms.

And thy darkness be as the noon-day] In agone and horrore mortis erit tibi
consolatio and spes salut^ ac lucis. God will make thy bed in all thy sickness:
and comfort thee at the hour of death.

Ver. 11. And the Lord shall guide thee] Or, lead thee: as thou leadest the
harbourless outcast into thine house, ver. 7,

And satisfy thy soul in drough] As thou did satisfy the poor hungry man's
soul, ver. 10. See Psalm. 33.19. and Prove. 28.27. with the Notes.

And make fat thy bones] i. e. Cheer up thy heart: for a sorrowful spirit
dries up the bones, Prove. 17.22. The Vulgar Translation has it, he will
deliver or set free thy bones, sc. from bands and fetters; as thou had loosed
or set free thy poor brethren from their bands and yokes, ver. 6.

And thou shall be like a watered garden] Filled with the fruits of
righteousness, and with spiritual consolations, unspeakable and glorious joys.

And like a spring of water, whose waters fail not] Similitudines and
Allegoriae, magnam habent gratiam. Who would not now turn spiritual purchaser?

Ver. 12. And they that shall be of thee] Thy posterity that have taken their
being and beginning from thee.

Shall build the old waste places] Heb. the wastes of antiquity, i. e. The
ruinous places of Jerusalem. The Apostles also, as master builders, and others
as builders together with them, have an happy hand in rearing the fair fabric
of the new man, that hidden man of the heart, See Ephesians. 2.20, 21, 22.

And thou shall be called the Repairer of the breach] The Father of thy
Country, the repairer of peace, the restorer of lost liberty, etc. Such honor
had Nehemiah of old; Hunniades alate, who having overthrown Mesites the Turks
General, at his return into the Camp, a wonderful number of the poor Captives
came, and falling at his feet and kissing them, gave God thanks for their
deliverance by him: some called him the Father, some the Defender of his
Country: the Soldiers their invincible General: the Captives their Deliverer:
the women their Protector: the young men and children their most loving
Father. He again, with tears standing in his eyes, courteously embraced them;
rejoicing at the public good: and himself, giving most hearty thanks to God,
commanded the like to be done in all the Churches of that Province, Turk. ^^st.
269.
etc. On the contrary, our Henry the third, for his ill managing of matters,
was called Regni dilapidator; and Richard the third, The Calamity of his
Country.

Ver. 13. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabboth] If thou abstain from
Journies and all secular businesses, as much as may be, Ezekiel. 22.26. Otherwise
God will sue thee upon an action of waste: and the superstitious Jew will rise
up and condemn thee; who if in his journey he be overtaken by the Sabbath, he
must stay, though in the midst of a field or wood; though in danger of thieves,
storms, or hunger, he may not budge.

From doing thy pleasure on mine holy day] Plutarch thought Sabbath was from
Sabbos, a name of Bacchus, that signifies to live jocundly and jovially. The
Sabbath that many pleasure mongers keep, may well have such a derivation, and
their Dies Dominicus be called dies Daemoniacus: for they make it as Bacchus
his Orgies rather then Gods holy solemnity; as doing thereon things no day
lawful, but then most abominable.

And call the Sabbath a delight] Counting it so, and making it so. The Jews
call it Desiderium dierum, the desirable day: they meet it with these words,
Veni sponsa mea, come my Spouse. Of old, they blessed God for it, Neh. 9.14.
and gave the whole week the denomination from it, Luke 18.12. they strictly and
spiritually kept it: but now they think the Sabbath is not sufficiently
observed, Buxt. Synag.
except they eat and drink largely, and give themselves to other sensual
delights. After dinner, the most of their discourse is about their use-money,
and other worldly businesses, etc. They pray indeed, but it is that Elias would
hasten his coming, even the next Sabbath if he please: that he might give them
notice of the Messiah's his coming, etc. Let us take heed of being weary of the
Sabbath and wishing it over, as they did, Am. 8.5. Mal. 1.12, 13. walk into
Gods garden, taste how good the Lord is in his Ordinances, feel a continual
increase of sweetness, in the pleasure and dainties of holy duties, whereof we
have such variety that we cannot easily be sated: so little need is there that
we should, with the R^bbines, expound this delight in the text, of dainty and
delightful meats to be eaten on this day.

The holy of the Lord, honourable] And therefore honorable because holy: as it
is said also of the Lord of the Sabbath Holy and reverend is his name, Psalm,
111.9. A holy convocation the Sabbath is called, Levit. 23.3. See Levit. 19.30.
and 26.2. Let us sanctify this holy Rest; else it will degenerate into
idleness, which is a sin any day (one of Sodoms sins) but on the Lords day a
double sin. Better not do our own work any day, than not Gods work on his day.
Deb^t totus dies festivus a Christiano expendi operibus sanctis, says Rob.
Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln. In decalog. praec. 3.
The whole Sabbath should be spent in holy duties. Debemus die Dominico
solummodo spiritualibus gandiis repleri, we should be in the spirit on the
Lords day, and be filled with spiritual delights only, says the Council of
Paris held Anno Dom. 829. Christ has for this purpose made us an holy Nation,
and a Kingdom of Priests, Exodus 19.9. that is, holy and honorable: and God
has sanctified it for a day of blessing to those that sanctify it, Exodus
20.11. Ezekiel. 20.12. He has called it an everlasting Covenant by way of
eminency, Exodus 31.16. as if nothing of Gods Covenant were kept, if this were
not kept holy.

Not doing thine own wayes] Ea tantum facias quae ad anima salutem pertinent,
says Hierom. Those things only are then to be done, that pertain to thy souls
health, works of piety, of charity, and of necessity, none else. Tantum divinis
cultibus serviamus, says Austin. What meant then that good King Edward 6. (and
where were those that should have better instructed him, Cranmer, Ridley etc.)
to deliver to his Council these Articles following; Life of Ed. 6. by Sr. J.
Heyn.
that upon Sundays they intend public affairs of the Realm, dispatch
answers to letters for good order of the State, and make full dispatches of all
things concluded in the week before; Provided that they be present at
Common Prayer* etc?

Nor speaking thine own words] Those words of vanity or vexation, ver. 9. but
words of wisdom and sobriety suitable to the holiness of the day.

Ver. 14. Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord] Find such inexplicable
sweetness in communion with God use of his heart-ravishing ordinances,
meditation on his word and works, especially that of our Redemption, as far far
exceeds all the dirty delights of profane Sensualists and Sabbath Breakers,
Job 27.10. Prove. 14.10.

And I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth] (...).
Yea upon the heights of heaven; where thou shall keep an everlasting
Sabbath;in which all Sabbaths meet, and whereof there is no evening.

And feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy Father] i. e. With heavenly
Manna, such food as eye has not seen, ear heard, or mouth of natural man ever
tasted.

For the mouth of the Lord has spoken it] The Lord, cujus ego sum os and
organon, will certainly do all this: you may build upon it.

CHAP. LIX.
Ver. 1. BEhold the Lords hand is not shortened] That their Fasts were not
regarded, their Sabbath-keeping rewarded, as chap. 58.3, 14. their prayers
answered, chap. 59.1, 2. according to expectation; the fault is not at all in
God, says the Prophet, as if he were now grown old, impotent, deafish, or
bison (as they were apt to conceit it) but merely in themselves, as appears
by the following catalogue of sins; which he therefore also, in his own and
their names confesses to God, and assigns for the cause of their so
long-lasting calamity.

Ver. 2. But your iniquities have severed] i. e. Have set you at a very great
distance (hinted also by the redundancy of speech that is here in the Original)
or rather defiance, Psalm. 5.5. Prove. 15.29. chap. 29.13. Nothing intricates our
actions more than our sins, which do likewise ensnare our souls whiles they are
as a wall of separation between God and us, Ezekiel. 43.8. and as an interstitium,
such as is the firmament that divides the upper and the lower waters, Genesis 1.6.

Mimus.
And your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear] Crudelem
medicum intemperant aeger facit. Sin is as a devil in the air, says one, to
hinder our prayers: turning from sin will charm the devil, and make him fall
from heaven.

Ver. 3. For your hands are defiled with blood] The Prophet well knew, that
these perverse Jews would stand upon their justification, and put God to his
proofs (as their posterity also did, Jer. 2.35.) catalogum ergo been longum
texit, therefore he here brings in a long bedrol of their sins; wherein their
hands, lips, heart, feet, etc. were found guilty of high offense. See chap.
1.15.

Your lips have spoken lyes] Those very lips of yours that have uttered
prayers, have muttered lies. See James 3.10.

And your tongue has muttered perversenesse] How this was done, none has
better set forth than the Prophet Jeremy, chap. 9.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

Ver. 4. None calls for justice] Minds the Judges of their duty, but rather
connive, collogue, partake, etc. The Chaldee has it, There is none that
delivers the poor and needy.

They trust in vanity] As those did, Jer. 7.4. making a bridge of their own
shadows, they fall into the brook.

They conceive mischief, etc.] This is taken out of Psalm. 7.14. See the Note
there: as also on Job. 15.35. Heb. Going great with grievance, and bringing
forth vexation.

Ver. 5. They hatch cockatrice egges] i. e. Poisonous and pernicious designs;
there are that interpret it of false doctrines, as destructive to men's souls:
as Cockatrice egges-eaten, or but broken, would be to their bodies. As the bird
that sits on the serpents eggs, by breaking and hatching them, brings
forth a perilous brood, to her own destruction: so here.

And weave the spiders web] Good for nothing but to catch flies. The natural
man is ever either weaving spiders webs (which are futiles and fragiles) or
hatching Cockatrice-egges. Vanity or villainy is his whole study and practice.

Ver. 6. Their webs shall not become garments] Garments quasi gardments; one
use of them being to guard our bodies from the injury of wind and weather.
Wicked devices and false doctrines profit not those that are therein occupied,
as Heb. 13.9. In the day of Gods wrath, they will prove but as a coat of cobweb.

Their works are works of iniquity] Here Ministers may learn roundly to reprove
the sins of the people.

Ver. 7. Their feet run unto evil, etc.] They trot apace toward hell; they take
long strides, as if they feared least hell should be full before they come
thither.

And they make haste to shed innocent blood] This is taken from Prove. 1.16. and
fitly applied by St. Paul to the whole race of mankind, Romans 3.15. since by
nature there is never a better of us: we are all in a pickle; Ecce hic te las
aranearum and ova aspidum explicat. A ^apide.


Wasting and destruction are in their paths] A Metaphor from torrents or
tempests: or from a pestilence that sweepeth all, as now it does at Genna, and
as it did not long since at Naples.

Ver. 8. The way of peace they know not] Like Salamanders, they love to live in
the fire of contention, to swim against the stream with the Trout, to sow
sedition, as the devil, etc.

Shall not know peace] Shall not know what it means.

Ver. 9. Therefore is Judgment far from us] Here follows, the complaint of
the godly party, together with their confession: this they knew well to be the
readiest way to get off with comfort. God, say they here, has neither avenged
us on our enemies, nor showed us favor: he lets our foes deal with us, as
we have dealt one with another.

We wait for light, but behold obscurity] We promised our selves a better
estate: but the matter mendeth with us, quoth that Martyr, as sour ale does in
summer.

Ver. 10. We grope for the wall like the blind] We are altogether to seek,
utterly destitute of good counsel or advice: neither can we enjoy those
comforts that we have.

We are in desolate places as dead men] As free among the dead, free of that
company, Psalm. 88.5. Leo Judae renders it, we are in our graves as dead
carcasses. Piscator thus, In fatnesses (that is, in the abundance of all
things) we are as dead men.

Ver. 11. We roar all like bears] Fremimus, ac gemimus. The bear, when hurt or
robbed, runs into his den and roareth. Doves, when bereft of their mates, sit
solitary and groan. So do we indisinenter and intime gemimus, make pitiful
moan: and that is all we can do.

Ver. 12. For our transgressions are multiplied before thee] When complaints
end in confessions, it is right: the Physic works kindly. Some furious fools
have brutish and fell affections, full of rage, when in pain or grief they fly
upon God and man, and all that comes next hand; hoping to ease themselves, not
by confession or reformation, but by revenge.

And our sins testifying against us] Sin put a sting into their crosses: and
hence it was they lay so heavy. This brought such roarings and groanings upon
them, Heb. Peccatu^ respondit. l. c. peccatorum unumquodque.
and that also when salvation was looked for.

For our transgressions are with us] They lie like a lo^d of lead upon our
consciences, where they are yet unpardoned.

And as for our iniquities, we know them] Our consciences are burdened with
them, and we feel the terrors of God in our souls. Conscientia nihil aliud est
quam cordis scientia: Conscience is the reflection of the soul upon it self.
See 1 Cor. 4.4. So here, As for our iniquities we know them, namely by a second
act of the understanding, whereby, after we think or know a thing, we think
what we think, and know what we know, and this is properly the action of
Conscience.

Ver. 13. In transgressing and lying against the Lord] Or dealing disloyally
with him. This is to lay on load; to be full in the mouth, to enter into
particulars, and to confess them all with utmost aggravation.

Ver. 14. And judgment is turned away backward] Nihil amplius ex aequo and
bono agitur: All Is out of order: causes are carried the contrary way.

Truth is fallen in the streets] When the disputation at Oxford with Cranmer,
Ridley and Latimer Martyrs was finished, Weston the Prolocutor triumphed with
Vicit Veritas: whereas he should rather have said, Vicit Potestas, Act. and
Mon. 1300.
not Truth but Force has carried it. In the Convocation at Paul's about the
same time, when Philpot and other good men argued for the truth against the
Popish Prelates, it was said, that those distressed Ministers had the Word for
them, but the Prelates had the sword on their side, and would therefore get the
better.

Ver. 14. Yea truth faileth] See ver. 13.

And he that departs from evil, makes himself a prey] Praedae patet, is like
to suffer for his singularity and preciseness. The luxurious Ephesians once
made this decree, (...), Let there be never a sober man suffered to live
amongst us. The Athenians were wont to cast good men out of their Commonwealth
by an Ostracisme. Thrascaes was commanded by Nero to dye, because he was a
better man then was fit to live in so loose an age. Josephus says, that before
the last destruction of Jerusalem, Religion was not only a matter of form, but
of scorn. Bid reports of the ancient Brittons immediately before their
destruction by the Saxons, that they were come to that height of wickedness,
as to cast odium in religionis professores tanquam in adversarios, hatred upon
professors of religion, looking upon them as their adversaries.

Ver. 15. And wondred] The vulgar has it Aporiatus est.

That there was no Intercessour] No Interposer (as Job 36.32.) that would
stickle for truth and right, as did Nehemiah, Athanasius, Luther, etc.

Therefore his arm brought salvation -- and his righteousnesse] i. e. Christ,
the power of God, Jun.
and the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24, 30.

Ver. 17. For he put on righteousness as a brest-plate] i. e. Christ did; and
so must every Christian, Ephesians. 6.14. where the Apostle Paul sounds the Alarm,
and describes his weapons as here, defensive and offensive; alluding likely to
this text.

Ver. 18. Fury to his adversaries] Viz. The Devil and his Agents, his peoples
adversaries.

Ver. 19. So they shall fear the Name of the Lord] Christ shall get him a great
Name, as a renowned Conqueror.

When the enemy shall come in like a flood] When they shall pour out a deluge
of evils upon the Church, Rev. 12.15.

The Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him] i. e. Against
strong temptations, corruptions, persecutions: the Motto shall be (as once)
Christus nobiscum: state.

Ver. 20. And the Redeemer] Shall come to the Israel of God.

That turn from transgression] See Romans 11.26. with the Note.

Ver. 21. My spirit which is upon thee, and my words] The efficacy of the Word
is by the Spirit; the expression of the Spirit by the Word: both are here
promised to the Church, as her true goods, Isa. 30.20, 21. Joh. 14.16, 26. It
is with the Word and Spirit, as with the veins and arteries in the body: as
the veins carry the blood, so the arteries carry the spirits to quicken the
blood.

CHAP. LX.
Ver. 1. A Rise] Thou O my Church that now lie in pulvere vastitatis as a
forlorn captive, rouse up thy self, change both thy countenance and condition,
tanquam libera ac laeta ad novum nuncium: up, and look up; I have joyful
tidings for thee.

For thy light is come] Christ, who is (...) light essential, Joh. 12.48.

And the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee] The glorious Gospel of grace, 2
Cor. 3.7. and 4.4.

Ver. 2. For behold the darkness shall cover the earth] As once it did Egypt,
Exodus 10.21. when there was light in the land of Goshen: so is there in the
Church, when all the world besides lies buried in a fog of ignorance, Semper
in sole sita est Rhodos.
and a bog of wickedness. The separation of the Saints in light, is a
wonderful separation, Exodus 33.16.

But the Lord shall arise upon thee] The Lord Christ who is the true light,
Joh. 1.9. the light of the world, Joh. 8.12. the Sun of righteousness, Mal.
4.2. See the Note there.

Ver. 3. And the Gentiles shall come to thy light] The Apostles, those shining
Luminaries, were Christ's (...), holding forth the light of life to all people,
as Simeon said, Luke 2. And we may well say, as our Savior did, Luke 4.21.
This day is this Scripture fulfilled in our ears, and made good to our hearts;
praised be his holy Name throughout all eternity.

And Kings to the brightness of thy rising] As did our King Lucius, who is
reckoned to be the first Christian King. Our Constantine, the first Christian
Emperor; our Edward 6. the first reforming Prince, Scultet.
and many others. Facit hoc contra Anabaptistas, qui exclusos putant Reges ab
Ecclesia.

Ver. 4. Lift up thine eyes] As from a watchtower: for so Zion signifies. --

All they gather themselves together, etc.] See chap. 49.18.

Thy daughters shall be nursed at thy side] Like sucking children: they shall
suck and be satisfied, chap. 66.11. The vulgar version here has surgent for
sugent: as it has unus de similibus for unus e millibus, Job 33.23. and
evertit for everrit, Luke 15.8. with other such gross mistakes, not a few.

Ver. 5. Then thou shall see and flow together] Or, (...) tam de lumine quam de
stum^e dicitur.
thou shall break forth as a river, or thou shall shine.

And thy heart shall fear] At first, at least; to see such a confluence of
people unto thee.

And be enlarged] With joy, upon better consideration.

Because the abundance of the sea] i. e. The multitude of the Islanders and
such as dwell by the seaside, which are noted for the worst of men, whence the
Proverb, Maritimi mores. Such are we Britones.

Ver. 6. The multitude of camels shall cover thee] i. e. Of such peoples as
usually ride upon Camels, viz. the Arabians and the adjacent Countries: these
shall come flocking and flowing to the Church with their precious and pleasant
riches.

The Dromedaries] A lesser and lower kind of camels, commended for their
swiftness, Jer. 2.23. (we call slow people Drom^daries by Antiphrasis) and for
this, that they can travel four days together without water. Bajazet beaten by
Tamberlan fled for his life, and might have escaped, had he not stayed to water
his mare by the way, which thereupon went the more heavily, and was overtaken
by the Tartars.

They shall bring gold and incense] This, the ancients interpret of those wise
men from the East, Mat. 2.11. which was indeed a small essay of this Prophecy.
But why should the Papists call them the three Kings of Cullen?

And they shall show forth the praises of the Lord] Gratanti animo.
This is more than all their rich gifts. A thankful man is worth his weight in
the gold of Ophir.

Ver. 7. All the flocks of Kedar] i. e. The Kedarens and Nebateans with their
flocks, whereof they had abundance: Refrixit (proh dolor!) ardor isle.
and they now had hearts to honor the Lord with their substance, and with the
best of their increase. See chap. 23.17, 18.

Ver. 8. What are these that fly as a cloud] Which flies more swiftly than any
bird, and covers the sky far and near. Deus bone, Confertis agm^nib^.
quam multi catervatim accurrunt! (says the Church here) wonderful! what
trooping and treading upon the heels one of another is here?

And as the doves to their windows] To their columbaries, -- Columba Radit iter
liquidum, cele^es neque comm vet auras.
whereinto they scour and rush gregatim, and mira pernicitate, especially if
they have young ones there, or else are driven by some hawk or tempest. Gods
people are free-hearted, Psalm. 110.3. they serve the Lord with cheerfulness,
Psalm. 100.2. Amor enim alas addit: and well might Plato descant upon the word,
(...), whom men call Love, the Immortal call winged.

Ver. 9. Surely the Isles shall wait for me] They shall come off freely, Huic
admirationi Messiah ipse respondet.
and non quasi angariati ad auditum verbi and Sacramentorum usum. And this is
taken to be Gods answer, declaring the cause of that wonderful concourse, ver.
8.

And the ships of Tarshish first] i. e. With the first, or in the beginnings,
as the vulgar has it. The Islands were converted as soon as any; as this of
Britain is said to have been by Joseph of Arimathea; Omnium provinciarum prima
Britannia publicitus Christi nomen recepit, says Sabellicus; Of all Provinces,
Enne^d. 7. lib. 5.
Britain first embraced the faith of Christ. From the which also, as we first
of all the ten Kingdoms, ( Rev. 17.) revolted to the Pope, so we were the
first that shook off that yoke: our Henry 8. being the first that broke the
neck of the Popes usurped authority.

Because he has glorified thee] By his gracious presence, and the
sanctification of his Spirit by the Word.

Ver. 10. And the sons of strangers shall build up thy walls] By preaching and
writing for the truth; as did many famous Greek and Latin Doctors; and since
them not a few of all Nations.

And their Kings shall Minister unto thee] As did Cyrus and Darius: but
especially Constantine the Great (who cared not what he bestowed upon the
Church, and was therefore in a jear, by the Heathens called Pupillus, His life
by Sr. Jo. Heyw. p. 115.
as if he needed a Guardian to order his expenses) Valentinian, Theodosius,
Honorius, Justinian: Our Edward the sixth (beside the much good he did at
home,) sent at one time five thousand pounds, to relieve Protestants beyond
seas. Queen Elizabeth sent both men and means in abundance to the relief of the
French and Hollanders.

Ver. 11. Therefore shall thy gates be open continually] Such shall be thy
spiritual security; and so great the resort unto thee.

And that their Kings may be brought] Led captive, says the Chaldee, sc. to
the obedience of Faith, as Psalm. 149.8. or led in state: so others.

Ver. 12. For the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish]
They are utterly out then, who hold that men may be saved in what Religion
soever, so be it they lead an honest life. And Pope Julius the third is justly
accused of sacrilege, for stamping money with his own image and this
inscription, The Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish.

Ver. 13. The glory of Lebanon] The best Cedars there, in allusion to the
building of the material Temple by Solomon, and afterward by Ezra. q. d.
Whatsoever is good in the world either in understanding, virtue or doctrine,
shall be sanctified and employed for the building up of the Church.

The Fir Tree, the Pine Tree, and the Box tree] Which from those that would but
cannot bring better, shall be well accepted.

And I will make the place of my feet glorious] i. e. My Church, when at
lowest, and the members thereof even the meanest of them. Hence also Christ's
name King of Kings and Lord of Lords, is written on his thigh, i. e. On his
lower parts, Rev. 19.16.

Ver. 14. The sons also of them that afflicted thee] When once they shall
return and discern betwixt the righteous and the wicked, as Mal. 3.18. there
shall be a strange alteration wrought in them as was in Paul, Cyprian,
Vergerius, Latimer, others.

Shall bow themselves at the soales of thy feet] Such was the custom of the
Easterlings: And this, the Popish writers say, is fulfilled in their Vice-god;
as we may in the worst sense best call him. The first that held forth his feet
to be kissed was Dioclesian the Tyrant.

Eutrop.
Ver. 15. Whereas thou have been forsaken and hated] The Primitive Christians
suffered Odio humani generis, Lib. 15.
says Tacitus, through the general hatred conceived against them: and non tam
crimen quam nomen puniebatur, says Another, their very name was odious.

I will make thee an eternal excellency] Here in part: but hereafter, in all
perfection. God so favored the first orthodox Christian Emperors, ut cum
illorum pietate, Dei liberalitas certare videretur, That Gods liberality might
seem to strive with their piety.

Ver. 16. Thou shall also suck the milk of the Gentiles] Satiaberis divitiis
populorum, says the Chaldee. Thou shall be satisfied with the riches of the
peoples.

And shall suck the breast of Kings] i. e. With Kingly dainties and delicacies,
says Zanchez after the Rabbines.

Ver. 17. For brass I will bring gold] i. e. I will beautify my Church with
far greater gifts of my Spirit then now. The New Jerusalem (which signifies,
say some, the state of the Church in this world) when it shall be refined to
the utmost, is all of gold: and these golden times are yet to come.

Thine exactours] Or, Overseers: thy Bishops, say the Sept.

Ver. 18. Violence shall no more be heard in thy land] The full accomplishment
of this is not to be expected here.

But thou shall call thy walls salvation] sc. When thou have got the great
gulf, Luke 16.26. betwixt thee and thine enemies.

And thy gates praise] God will continually come to thee with new benefits, and
thou shall go forth to meet him with thanksgiving, Psalm. 89.16.

Ver. 19. The Sun shall be no more] God shall be thy Sun and shield, thy solace
and safety, Psalm. 84.11. the light of his loving countenance shall be lifted up
upon thee: and this shall be better to thee then all outward comforts.

Ver. 20. Thy Sun shall no more go down] Thy joy shall no man take from thee:
thou shall have an habitual cheefulness.

Ver. 21. Thy people also shall be all righteous] Professional Saints at least
they shall all be: Saints by calling: some of them also shall be really
righteous and religious, justified by the merit, and sanctified by the Spirit
of Christ. And these together make up a true visible Church, such as was that
of Corinth and of Sardis. A mature there will be to the worlds end.

They shall inherit the land for ever] Those that are righteous indeed, are
heirs of the world together with faithful Abraham. The meek shall inherit the
earth: and as for the poor in spirit, theirs is the kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5
3, 5.

The branch of my planting] So may some be that yet bear no fruit, Joh. 15.2.

The work of my hands] By regeneration, Ephesians. 2.10. And so are such as are
sanctified by habitual infusion, and not by baptismal profession any. In both
sorts God is glorified.

Ver. 22. A little one shall become a thousand] Three thousand were added to
the Church in one day, Acts 2. five thousand in another, Acts 4. Homo ille
tricubitalis (as Chrysostom calls Paul) that little man and least of all the
Apostles, what great pains took he? how many Churches planted he? how many
thousand souls gained he to Christ? See what a circuit he set, and what a deal
of work he dispatched at one bout, Romans 15.18, 19, 20. Here was minimus in
mill, as it is Here. Think the like of the rest of the Apostles; as also of
Luther, Melancthon, Ferellus, etc. Mr. Fox tells us that many were made to
see the falsities of Popery by reading Chaucer, more by reading Erasmus his
Colloquies.

I the Lord will hasten it in his time] Heb. In its time; that is, in the time
of the New Testament: but most completely and gloriously, at the Resurrection,
shall all these things that are foretold be accomplished.

CHAP. LXI.
Ver. 1. THe Spirit of the Lord God is upon me] Christ had graciously promised
to accomplish his peoples happiness in its due time, chap. 60.22. Here he
shows how and when he will do it, viz. by himself, anointed and appointed by
his heavenly Father to be Messiah the Prince, Dan. 9.25. Christ the Lord, Acts
4.26. Priest, Prophet, and King of his Church, a Savior ex Professo,
consecrated as the Priests of old were, first with oil, and then with blood:
So was he, 1. By the holy Spirit, invisibly at the first instant of his
conception, and visibly, at his Baptism. 2. By his own blood sprinkled upon him
at his Circumcision, but especially at his Passion, which was another Baptism,
Matthew. 20.23. Luke 12.50.

Because the Lord has anointed me] Prae consortibus and proconsortibus, Psalm.
45.7. Above thy fellows and also for thy fellows, as some render that text; See
Joh. 1.33. and 3.34. Luke 4.18. Acts 10.38. Heb. 1.8. with Psalm. 105.15. 2 Cor.
1.21, 22. 1 John 2.20, 27. Only unto every one of us is given grace according
to the measure, of the gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4.7. but God gave not the Spirit
unto him by measure, Job. 3.34. he had it in an abundant and transcendent
manner, good measure, pressed down shaken together and running over, even as
much as his humane nature was capable of. Let the Saints love him for this,
Cant. 1.2. and labor to be more and more made partakers of his holiness: for
of his fullness we all receive grace for grace Joh. 1.16. a persection in some
sort answerable to Christ's own perfection. There are that observe in this text
(and not amiss) the Mystery of the holy Trinity: viz. God the Father anointing
his Son Christ, with the Holy Ghost. See the like at Christ's baptism, Mat.
3.16. with the Note there.

To preach good tidings to the meck] To preach: this refers to Christ's
Prophetical Office; as does binding up the brokenhearted to his Priestly, and
proclaiming liberty to the captives, to his Kingly Office. To these three
offices as God, he was consecrated, (set apart for a Mediator, as Exodus 30.30)
and as Man, he was qualified, as before. That which Christ came to preach was
good tidings, goodspe^ or Gospel, as we call it, the best news that ever came
into the world, Luke 2.10. This he came and preached not in his own person
only, but by his Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2.17. in whom he spoke, 2 Cor.
13.3. and before all whom himself preached the first Gospel to our first
parents, Genesis 3.15. even the Gospel of grace.

Unto the meek] Or lowly: for humility and meekness are s^rores collactancae,
twin-sisters. These are those poor that are Gospellized, viz. the poor in
spirit, sensible of their utter indigency and nothingnesse, Matthew. 5.3. whereby
also our Savior proves himself to John's disciples, sent unto him for the
purpose, to be the true Messiah, foreshewed by Isaiah, and foreshadowed in him,
Matthew. 11.5. Luke 7.22.

He has sent me to bind up the broken hearted] This Christ does as a fit
Highpriest, sensible of our miseries, Heb. 4.15. He has manum medicam, he is
the true Samaritan: Pungit and ungit ut sanct.
not the Physician only but the Surgeon of his people, cataplasmans and
obligans, plaistering and binding up their wounds given them by the Devil,
(that wicked chief,) then when the Priest and the Levite (the Law) had passed
them by, and yielded them no help at all.

The broken-hearted] Broken with the sense of sin and fear of wrath; so broken,
as if all their bones were rattling within their skin. This was David's case,
Psalm. 51.8. and this he pleads, as one in case and capacity for mercy, ver. 17.
he knew well enough, that God pours not the oil of his mercy, save only into
broken vessels: for whole vessels are full vessels, and so this precious liquor
would run over, and be spilt upon the ground.

To proclaim liberty to the captives] Liberty from the tyranny of sin, and
terror of Hell. This Christ does as a King, with great power, Joh. 8.32, 34.
Romans 6.17, 18. Col. 1.13. 2 Timothy 2.26.

And the opening of the prison] i. e. Of Hell, called here koach of lakach to
receive: because it is capacious, and still taking in more company; sic
infernus dicicitur ab inferendo, ut aliqui volunt.

Ver. 2. To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord] The new and true Jubilee
or year of releasment, called here in the Hebrew the year of good will, like as
the Elect are called the men of Gods good will, Luke 2.14. This year is now, 2
Cor. 6.2. and the present now must be embraced and improved; since God is but a
while with men in the opportunities of grace; which opportunities are headlong,
and once past, irrecoverable.

And the day of vengeance of our God] Tribulation to them that trouble his
people, 2 These. 1.6, 7. Gog and Magog shall down in that day; all Hamans be
hanged up at that feast royal, at the last day especially, Luke 19.27.

To comfort all that mourn] This, Christ did both by word and deed: and this
must all his Ministers do: comfort the feeble-minded, 1 These. 5.14. not
burdening men's consciences with humane traditions and merit of works. Popery is
a doctrine of desperation. Apud Hebraeos ornatus est in verbis. (...) and (...)


Ver. 3. To appoint unto them that mourn in Zion] Here is showed how it is that
Christ comfort his people, sc. by clearing up their consciences from the
stain and sting of sin, and by healing their natures, causing them to grow in
grace as trees of righteousness, well rooted and well fruited.

(...)
To appoint unto them] sc. Comfort, as ver, 2.

To give unto them beauty for ashes] Cidarim pro cinere, lusum pro luctus,
risum pro rictu, etc. to turn all their sighing into singing, all their musing
into music, all their sadness into gladness, all their tears into triumphs.
But then those that would rejoice with joy unspeakable, must stir up sighs
that are unutterable: for even Christ himself favos post fella gustavit, tasted
first of the sower, and then of the sweet.

That they may be called] Have the comfort and the credit of growing
Christians, full of goodness, and filled with all knowledge, able also to
admonish one another, as were those Romans, chap. 15.14. to their eternal
commendation. See Joh. 15.5, 8. Philip. 1.11.

That he might be glorified] As indeed he is by one gracious action performed
by a fruitful Christian, more then by all his works of Creation and Providence.

Ver. 4. And they shall build the old wasts] Desolationes saeculi, the Gentiles
that have long lain forlorn and desolate, as ruinated houses, or the wild
waste, shall, by the Apostles and other Doctors of the Church, be brought to
Christ, and built up in holiness.

And they shall repair] The same thing is four several times said over for
better assurance: and to set forth the miracle.

Ver. 5. And strangers shall stand and feed your flocks] i. e. Shall be very
well please to serve you, so they may serve the true God with you: yea, being
proselyted, they shall become eminent Pastors and Teachers of the Gospel; such
as were Justin Martyr, Cyprian, Austin, etc.

Shall be your plow-men] See 1 Cor. 3.9.

Ver. 6. But ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord] Or, Princes of the
Lord, as the word is used, 2 Samuel 8.18. See Exodus 19.6. Rev. 1.6. 1 Pet. 2.9.
Romans 12.1. Heb. 13.15.

Ye shall eat the riches of the Gentiles] Ye shall have the double honor of
countenance and maintenance.

Ver. 7. For your shame ye shall have double] i. e. Plentiful reparation,
double damages, as Job had, chap. 42.10, 12.

And for confusion they shall rejoyce] Your grief shall be turned into joy as
our Savior somewhere says: See Mat. 5.12.

Everlasting joy shall be unto them] They shall be everlastingly merry: not so
much for the double honor done to themselves, as for the enlargement of Gods
Kingdom, and the increase of his people: with whom they shall spiritually
rejoice and reign for ever.

Ver. 8. For I the Lord love Judgment, etc.] One renders it roundly thus, For
I the Lord love right; I hate rapine by iniquity: q. d. Therefore I will right
and repay the wrongs and damages done to my people. Neither is it for any one
to think to expiate his bad deeds by his good, to set off with God, and to make
him amends. In the times of Popery indeed men were taught so to do; they were
persuaded that God would accept rapinam in holocaustum, and they practiced
accordingly: as did the French Fury Brunhildis, who founded many Colleges: and
our King Stephen who built many Monasteries: eo scilicet beneficio maleficia
sua expiaverunt, says mine Author. How much better Selymus the great Turk,
Turk. hist. fol. 567.
who being on his deathbed moved by Pyrrhus his favorite, to bestow the great
wealth taken from the Persian Merchants in diverse places of his Empire, upon
some notable Hospital for relief of the poor, refused so to do, and forthwith
commanded restitution thereof to be made to the right owners.

And I will direct their work in truth] i. e. In sincerity: there shall be good
actions and good aims; which two make a good Christian. Some render the words
thus, And I will give them according to their work in truth; making in truth to
be Gods oath: q. d. Truly and without all doubt, I will perform my promises:
you have mine Oath and my Covenant both, for your better assurance.

Ver. 9. And their seed shall be known among the Gentiles] i. e. Shall be noted
and noticed for eximious and exemplary: non aliunde noscibiles quam ex vitae
emendatione, as it was said of the Primitive Christians, famous among the very
Heathens, Tertul. ad Scapul.
for their holy conversation. Pliny gives a very honorable testimony of their
innocence, in his second Epistle to Trajan. Those that stood with the Lamb had
his Fathers name in their foreheads, Rev. 14. they led convincing lives, so
that their friends could never sufficiently praise them, not their foes justly
find any fault with them. Such a one was Luther, Bucer, Bradford, etc.
Christians should shine as lamps, show forth the power of godliness in their
whole practice, do more then others possibly can do, Matthew. 5.47. that all may
see and say, These are the seed that the Lord has blessed, these are his
darlings, his earthly Angels. What a shame was it to those flagitious Jews that
it should be asked Are these the people of Jehovah? Ezekiel. 35.20. And the like
to profligate Professors, that Papists should say, Are these your new
Gospelers? For certain, (said One when be had read Christ's Sermon in the Mount)
Either this is not Gospel, or we are not right Gospelers. Linaker.


Ver. 10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord] Me beatam! quare dolerem? O happy
am I, said the Church; why should I be troubled at ought: why should not I
over-abound exceedingly with joy, who have such rich and precious promises!
gaudium in re, gaudium in spe; gaudium de possessione, gaudium de promissione,
etc. i. e. Joy in hope, and joy in hand: joy in possession, and joy in
reversion, etc. as Bernard sweetly. When once a soul enjoys God, it is quiet
(as a Be that is got into her hive, or a Bird got into her nest, or the Dove
into the Ark) nay it is triumphant, as more then a conqueror.

For he has clothed me with the garments of salvation] By salvation and
righteousness, Hierom here understands Christ our Savior and Justifier,
whom we are bidden also to put on, Romans 13.14. Gal. 3.27, Rev. 12.1.

(...). Aquila.
As a Bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments] Tanquam sponsum qui sacerdotem
resert ornatu (so Piscator renders it) as a Bridegroom bravely arrayed, like a
Priest, Os humerosque Deo similis.

And as a Bride adorneth her self with jewels] Mundo suo, with her ornaments,
habiliments, Heb. implements. The Church is here compared to a Bridegroom for
her strength and constancy, says Cyril: and again to a Bride for her
fruitfulness, beauty and glory, There is in this verse a double elegancy in the
Hebrew that cannot be englished.
here begun, and hereafter to be perfected.

Ver. 11. For as the earth brings forth her bud] Hic rursum loquitur
Christus, says Piscator, here Christ speaks again, giving us to understand
that piety is planted by God in the hearts of his people. We are Gods
husbandry, says the Apostle, See Mark. 3.26, 27, 28. The Church is Christ's
garden, Cant. 5.1. Howbeit it is with holy affections, as with exotique noble
plants: this Country is not so kindly for them, being but a stepmother to
them; therefore must they be much watered and cherished, etc. We have a
gracious Promise that our hearts shall be like watered gardens, chap. 58.11.
and that if we quench not the Spirit, but quicken and cherish it, there shall
flow out of our belly, that is, out of the bosom and bottom of our souls shall
flow rivers of living water, Joh. 7.38. better than those that watered the
garden of Eden; so that we shall be filled with the fruits of righteousness
which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God, Philip. 1.11.

CHAP. LXII.
Ver. 1. FOr Zions sake I will not hold my peace] Habes hic orationem prophetae
sanctissimam, Pro Panegyrico Ecclesia dicto omnia quae hoc capite dicuntur
recte meo judicio accipientur. Hyper.
says Oecolampadius; Here we have the Prophets Oration; yea here we have the
Prophets Panegyric to the Church, says Hyperius, by way of congratulation for
her felicity and dignity in Christ her head and husband: as also his resolution
to be earnest and importunate with God and men for her deliverance and
restitution. Terentius that noble General under Valens the Emperor, a^ked
nothing but that the Church might be freed from Arrians: and when the Emperor
tore his Petition, he said that he would never ask any thing for himself, if he
might not prevail for the Church.

Until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightnesse] Till Christ come in
the flesh, if I should live so long; as long as I have any being howsoever (See
the like 1 Timothy 6.14.) and after that, by my writings, which shall continue to
the worlds end.

Ver. 2. And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousnesse] The Prophet here very
artificially turns his speech to the Church her self, as if he would
pronounce his Panegyric in her presence: and presently celebrateth her dignity
and happiness herein, that the Gentiles should worship her, and be joined unto
her. Some read it, And the Gentiles shall see thy righteous one, i. e. Christ,
who came of the Jews, was preached to the Gentiles, believed on in the world,
received up to glory, 1 Timothy 3.16.

And thou shall be called by a new name] Viz. Hephzibah, i. e. My darling: and
Beulah, i. e. a married woman, ver. 4. There are that by this new name will
have to be understood the name of sons and daughters of the Almighty, Rev.
2.17. 2 Cor. 6. ult. Others the name of the Church Catholic. And others again
the honorable name of Christians, which yet is at this day in Italy and at
Rome a name of reproach, Fulk ^h^m. Test. on Act. 11.
and usually abused to signify a Fool or a Dolt, as Dr. Fulk proves out of
their own Authors.

Ver. 3. And thou shall be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord] Or, a
glorious crown by the hand (the good hand) of the Lord upon thee. The Saints
are Gods glory, chap. 46.13. the house of his glory, chapter 60.7. a crown of glory
and a royal diadem here: the throne of glory, Jer. 4.21. the ornament of God,
Ezekiel. 7.20. the beauty of his ornament, and that also set in Majesty, ib. Oh
learn and labor to live up to such high preferment.

Ver. 4. But thou shall be called Hephzibah] i. e. My delight is in her: as if
Christ should say to his Church, as Judge. 14.3. -- Tu mihi sola places, Ovid.
de Art Am. Redameu^us ergo sponsum.
thou art mine only joy. The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, Psalm.
147.11. Let us reciprocate, love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, not only
with a love of Desire, as Psalm. 42.1, 3. but also of Delight and complacency,
solacing our selves in the fruition of him, as Psalm. 16.5, 6. and of his people
those excellent ones of the earth who were David's Hephzibam, ver. 3. in whom
was all his delight.

Ver. 5. For as a young man marries a Virgin, so shall thy Sons marry thee]
This translation (says one who prefers the Vulgar, The young man shall
dwell with the Virgins) marreth the sense: since it is improper to say of sons,
that they shall marry their mother. But I say that the Church never flourishes
more, than when the son marries the mother, and does his utmost to beautify
and amplify her. See 2 Cor. 11.2.

And as the Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, so shall thy God rejoice over
thee] Communicating with our souls his sweetest favors in his Ordinances, as
in the Bridal-bed, and making us to be conceived with the fruits of
righteousness to everlasting life. It is therefore a most unworthy thing, that
men should go a whoring from under him, Hos. 4.12. and seek to themselves among
the creatures, alias delieias and amasias other sweet-hearts.

Ver. 6. I have set watchmen upon thy walls] i. e. Angels, say some (who are
called watchers, Dan. 4.13, 33. See the Note there) Prophets and Pastors, say
others, who are as watchmen upon the walls to admonish thee by their preaching,
and to preserve thee by their prayers to God, Chap. 21.11. Ezekiel. 13.17. and
31.7.

Which shall never hold their peace] Never but be either praying or preaching,
as Act. 6.4. Deuteronomy. 33.10. Austin desired that death might find him aut
precantem aut praedicantem. Of Paul's uncessancy, see Act. 20.31. 1 These. 3.10.

Ye that make mention of the Lord] Or, ye that are the Lords rememberancers,
that jogge him as it were, and mind him of his peoples necessities and
miseries. The Kings of Israel, Persia, and of other Nations, had their
Mazkirim, or Remembrancers, to mind them of those matters that concerned the
weal public, and to these he here alludeth: All the Saints are suchlike
Officers and must be active.

Keep not silence] Be still suing and soliciting.

Ver. 7. And give him no rest] Heb. no silence, the same word as before, to
quicken their diligence and to set forth the necessity of the work. Continue
instant in prayer, Romans 12.12. give not in, but persevere, without remission or
intermission.

Till he establish, till he make Jerusalem a praise] Till he send the Messiah,
who may restore Zion, set up and illustrate his Church, etc. Such lawful
petitions from honest hearts have unmiscarrying returns.

Ver. 8. The Lord has sworn by his right hand] i. e. By his Almighty power, or
as Oecolampadius holds, by his Son by whom he made the worlds, and upholdeth
all things, Heb. 1.2, 3.

Surely I will no more give thy corn to be meat for thine enemies] Or if I do,
yet I will give you to suffer with joy the spoiling of your goods, as knowing
in your selves that ye have in heaven a better and an enduring substance, Heb.
10 34. Spiritual security and safety from the devil and all the enemies of our
souls, is also signified by this similitude of protection against corporal
enemies and plunderers, says Piscator.

Ver. 9. But they that have gathered it shall eat it] A sufficiency of outward
comforts they shall be sure of, together with righteousness and peace and joy
in the holy Ghost; so much at least as shall support their spirits. Mr. Paul
Bain says thus of himself, I thank God in Christ, Sustentation I have, Baines
letters.
but suavities spiritual I taste not any.

Shall drink it in the courts of my holinesse] He alludeth to their manner of
feasting before the Lord, when they brought thank offerings: and the like is
still done by us at the Eucharist, or Lords supper especially.

Ver. 10. Go through, go through the gates] Thus the Prophet bespeaketh the
Teachers and Keepers of the Church, with great alacrity of Spirit, and most
ardent affection; being as it were in a spiritual rapture. That which he
exhorts them to do, is, rightly and faithfully to teach the people: and next,
to take out of the way stumbling blocks, as chap. 57.14. such as are heresies,
foul offenses, etc. to the scandal of the weak, and scorn of the wicked.

Lift up a standard for the people] q. d. Certa and solida omnia constituite,
settle all things fast and firm, that all men may be sure of their way, and
what they ought to follow. It was a sad complaint of holy Melanchton, Quos
fugiamus habemus: quos sequamur, non intelligimus: but this lasted not long
with those first famous Reformers whom the Lord soon set in a course.

Ver. 11. Behold thy salvation cometh] i. e. Christ thy Savior, as Luke 2.30.

Behold his reward is with him] See on chap. 40.10. The three Beholds in this
verse, should be well weighed.

And his work before him] i. e. That which he works for us and in us,
rewarding the work of his own free grace.

Ver. 12. And they shall call them the holy people] Profane persons therefore,
and persecutors of holiness are not to be reckoned among the people of the
Lord: Are not all the Lords people holy? said those rebels: but that helped
them not.

And thou shall be called sought out] Or much set by, contrary to that, Jer.
30.17. This is Zion that none seeks after.

CHAP. LXIII.
Ver. 1. WHo is this that comes from Edom] It had been said, chap. 62.11.
Behold thy salvation (thy Savior) comes. Here therefore by an elegant
Hypotyposis, the Sionidae or Saints are brought in wondering at his coming in
such a garb, and asking Who Is this? what gallant Conqueror have we here? Edom
or Idumaea signifies Red, Bozrah (the chief City of Idumaea) a vintage; confer
ver. 2. It may very well be also, that this Prophecy was uttered in
vintage-time, and therehence happily might grow the comparison here used. John
the Divine, representing to us Christ's coming to Judgment, uses the same
Simile, Rev. 19.13. Some also of good note do understand this Prophecy of
Christ's triumphing over all his and our enemies (the Romish Edomites
especially) at the last day.

Metaph. a massa conspersa.
With dyed garments] Heb. leavened, i. e. drenched, besmeared.

This that is glorious in his apparel] Which is the more glorious, because
laced or embroidered with the blood of his enemies.

Walking in the greatness of his strength] Fortiter grassans, walking and
stalking, going in state, Plutarch. in Epam.
gressu grallatorio, Emperor like, so as Epaminondas marched before his army;
which when Agesilaus King of Spartans beheld, he cried out, O virum magnificum!
O that is a gallant man! Ye shall see the Son of man coming with great power,
says Christ.

I that speak in righteousnesse] Christ's answer, q. d. Fear not little flock:
this strange garb and gate of mine portendeth no hurt but good to you, to whom
whatsoever I have faithfully promised, I will powerfully perform. As King of
Zion I will Parcere subjectis and debellare superbos. At the last day also I
will come to be glorified in my Saints, and to be admired in all them that
believe, 2 These. 1.10. See Rev. 19.11.

Mighty to save] Sufficiens ad salvandum, sive Magister ad salvandum, a Master
to save. This those Lepers had learned, and therefore cried, Jesus Master, have
mercy on us, Luke 17.13.

Ver. 2. Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel?] The wondering Church had
proposed two questions, ver. 1. viz. who that was? and why so bloodyed? To the
first she had an answer in few, Aug.
but very full, ver. 1. To the second she here again presses for an answer:
and the rather because candor magis quam cruor, clemency would better he seem a
Savior, than cruelty.

Ver. 3. I have trodden the wine press alone] I the Sole and All sufficient
Savior of my Church have executed Gods just vengeance upon all her enemies,
spiritual and corporal: (confer Lam. 1.15. Rev. 14.19, 20. and 19.15.) and this
with as much ease as men tread grapes in a wine press.

And of the people there was none with me] Christ makes use of men for the
beating down of Satan's strongholds: but the power whereby it is done, is from
Christ alone, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. and 4.7. Papists who will needs share with Christ
and make him but an half-Saviour, have no share in his salvation.

For I will tread them in mine anger] I have already done it: and I will much
more at that great day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of
God, Romans 2.5. See Rev. 19.20, 21.

And their blood shall be sprinkled] Or, was sprinkled. Their blood, not his
own. The Fathers therefore and others who interpret this text of Christ's
passion, were mistaken. There is one among the rest who thus descants upon this
verse, but not so well. The wild bull says he, of all things cannot abide any
red color. Therefore the Hunter for the nonce standing before a tree, puts on
a red garment: whom when the Bull sees, he runs hard at him as hard as he can
drive: But the hunter slipping aside, the bulls horns stick fast in the tree:
as when David slipped aside, Saul's spear stuck fast into the wall: such an hunter
is Christ. Christ standing before the tree of his Cross, puts on a red
garment dipped and dyed in his own blood, as one that comes with red garments
from Bozrah: therefore the devil and his Angels, like wild bulls of Basan run
at him: but he saving himself, their horns stick fast in the Cross; as
Abraham's ram by his horns stuck fast in the briars. Thus he.

Stain my raiment] Heb. pollute it: for other blood polluteth, Chap. 59.3. Lam.
4.14. but the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7.

Ver. 4. For the day of vengeance is in mine heart] Or, was in mine heart:
hence I made such havoc. Christ is the Lord God of Recompenses, Jer. 51.56.
and the Lord God of revenges, Psalm. 94.1. he is jealous and furious, Nah. 1.2.
(See the Note there) his feet wherewith he treads down his enemies, are like
unto fine brass as if they burned in a furnace, Rev. 1.15. Oh it is a fearful
thing to fall into the punishing hands of this living God, Heb. 10.31.

And the year of my Redeemed is come] Their joyful Jubilee. It is hail with the
Saints when ill with the wicked. The deliverance of those is often the
destruction of these.

Ver. 5. And I looked and there was none to help] See on chap. 59.16.

Ver. 6. Make them drunk in my fury] I will give them large draughts of my
displeasure, as Psalm. 75.9. I will infatuate and utterly disable them to rebel
and resist: yea I will make them drunk with their own blood, as with new wine,
chap. 49.26. See Rev. 16.6. with the Note. The perverse Jews, as the last
destruction of their City, became a famous instance, being buried as it were
in a bog of blood.

And I will bring down their strength] Or, their blood, as it is rendered,
Oecolam.
ver. 3. eo quod vita and virtus hominis in sanguine, because life and strength
is in the blood.

Ver. 7. I will mention the loving kindnesses of the Lord] sc. As an
aggravation of Isreal's great unkindness and unthankfulness to so liberal a
Lord, Summam Cantici sui paucis complectitur.
so bountiful a Benefactour. Good turns exaggerate unkindnesses: and men's
offenses are increased by their obligations. See Deuteronomy. 32.7, 14.

According to his mercies, etc.] Which are such, as words are too weak to
utter: hence this Copia verborum, and all too little: See the like, Ephesians. 2.5,
7.

Ver. 8. For he said, Surely they are my people, children that will not lye] q.
d. I presume they will not, it were a foul shame for them if they should
deceive my expectation, deal disloyally, show themselves deceitful in the
Covenant. The Officers of Merindol in France answered the Popish Bishop that
moved them to abjure, that they marvelled much that he would offer to persuade
them to lie to God and the world. And albeit that all men by nature are liars,
yet they had learned by the Word of God, that they ought diligently to take
heed of lying in any matter, be it never so small; Also that they ought
diligently to take heed that their children did not accustom or use themselves
to lie, and therefore punish them very sharply when they took them with any
lie, Act. and Mon. 866.
even as if they had committed a robbery; for the devil is a liar, etc. Here
the Bishop rose up in a great anger, and so departed.

Ver. 9. In all their afflictions he was afflicted] See Exodus 3.7, 9. Judge.
10.16. Zach. 2.8. Act. 9.4. Jer. 31.20. Of God we may better say, than the Poet
did of Augustus, 2. de Ponto. Eleg. 2.
Est placidus, facilisque parens, veniaeque paratus:
Et qui fulmineo saepe sine igne tonat.
Qui cum triste aliquid statuit, sit tristis and ipse:
Cuique fere poenam sumere poena sua est.


And the Angel of his presence saved them] i. e. Jesus Christ, who is called
the face of God, Exodus 33.14, 15. the image of the invisible God, Colos. 1.15.
whom who so has seen, has seen the Father also, Joh. 14.9. He who is in the
bosom of the Father, Joh. 1.18. and as an everlasting Priest mediateth and
ministers in the presence of his Father, making request for us, Heb. 9.24.
Rev. 8.3. that Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1.

And he bare them] As Parents do their young children.

And carried them] As Eagles do their young. See Exodus 19.4. Deuteronomy. 32.11. with
the Note.

Ver. 10. But they rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit] By sinning against
light, checks of conscience, motions of the Spirit, mercyes without measure,
etc. Junius thinks this a clear place for proof of the Trinity in Unity.

So he was turned to be their enemy] This was an ill turn for them: abused
mercy turns into fury: with the froward God will wrestle, Psalm. 18.

Ver. 11. Thou he remembred] i. e. Israel remembered the days of old, Heb. of
antiquity, the days of yore, as some old Translations have it. See Psalm.
89.50, etc.

Saying, Where is he that brought them up out of the sea?] q. d. How is it that
he is not now to be found, as then he was for the succor of his poor people?
They had vexed his holy Spirit, and therefore he withdrew himself. See Hos. 5.6.

With the shepherd of his flock] Or shepherds (as some ancient copies had it)
viz. Moses and Aaron, Psalm. 77.20.

Where is he that put his holy spirit within him?] But this holy Spirit they
had vexed, ver. 10. and now they sorrowfully enquire after. Delicata res est
spiritus sanctus: ita nos tractat, sicut tractatur, says a Father, i. e. The
Spirit of God is a delicate thing: he deals with us, as we deal by him.

Ver. 12. That led them by the right hand of Moses with his glorious arm] Or,
that ma^e his gallant arm to go at Moses his right hand.

Fun^cius.
Dividing the water before them] So that Pseudo-Moses (the devil likely) made
many over credulous Jews of Creet believe, that he would do for them whom he
cozened into the midst of the sea, to their destruction, Anno Christi 434. Some
are of opinion, that this affectionate prayer was purposely penned by the
Prophet, for the use of those poor Jews, who after the coming of Christ, and
manifestation of the Gospel, should see themselves to be rejected by God and
his Church, and should now beg to be owned again: cui sanc instituto omnia,
magis quam dici queat, convenient, says Hyperius; the ensuing petitions suit
very much.

Ver. 13. That led them through the deep] Which threatened to swallow them, but
indeed preserved them: so does every main affliction.

As a horse in the wildernesse] Or, as an horse goes in the plain, (when led
by his rider) in qua non est lutum vel lapis, where there is neither mire to
stick in, nor stone to stumble at. See Psalm. 106.

Leniter and commode.
Ver. 14. As a beast goes down into the valley] i. e. Gently and leisurely,
according to that known Distich, Ascendente tuo, vel descendente caballo,
Vox ait ista, Fave; vox ait illa, Cave.


The Spirit of the Lord caused him to rest] Or, led them until he brought them
to rest, sc. in the promised land.

To make thy self a glorious name] q. d. So thou may do again, if thou please
to show mercy unto us: Name is here put for fame or renown.

Ver. 15. Look down from heaven] Affectus dolentium atque ardenter petentium
site exprimuntur: a pathetical and pithy prayer.

And behold from the habitation of thy holiness, etc.] They pray otherwise now,
then when the Temple stood, Psalm. 121.1. now they look higher: and Oh that they
would do so! The modern Jews pray thus daily; but because not from a right
principle, they are not heard.

Where is thy zeal?] Thine ancient fervor, and forwardness in vindicating thy
people, and being avenged of their enemies.

The sounding (rumbling or yerning) of thy bowels, etc.] Sometimes God seems
to loose his mercy, and then we must find it for him, as here: sometimes to
sleep or delay, and then we must waken quicken him, Psalm. 40.17. Isa. 62.7.

Are they restrained?] Chrysostom exhorts people, whether God grant or not,
to pray still; for when God denies, it is as good as if he grants: And if we
pray for any temporal mercy, the very ability to pray, Hom. 30. in Gen s.
is better then the thing we pray for; for Whosoever calls upon the name of
the Lord, shall be saved.

Ver. 16. Doubtlest thou art our Father] Though thou frownest and withdrawest:
The people of God saw that He was angry, that their hearts also were hard: yet
they thought they should know him amidst all his austerities, and they make to
him for help. And, doubtless, help the Jews might yet have, could they
seriously say as here, Certainly thou art our Father, and would no longer rest
upon carnal things, boasting of Abraham their Father, Circumcision, and other
external privileges.

Though Abram be ignorant of us] Ipsi nunc sua quiet fruuntur, they are at
rest, and know nothing of our affairs. The Monks tell us that the Saints
departed see things done here in the face of God, as in a glass. But this is a
mere fiction of theirs: See Psalm. 27.10. 2 King. 22.20. Augustine says of his
mother Monica deceased, Lib de curae pro mortuis agenda, cap. 13. Eccius in
locis.
that she did now no longer yield him comfort, because she knew not what befell
him. The greatest Popish Clerks themselves confess, that the invocation of
Saints departed has neither precept, promise, nor precedent in the Book of
God. Moreover they cannot determine how the Saints know our hearts and prayers;
whether by hearing, or seeing, or presence everywhere, or by Gods relating, or
revealing men's prayers and needs unto them. All which ways some of them hold
as possible, or probable: and others deny and confute them as untrue. Mortons
Appeal lib. 2. cap. 12. sect. 5.
The Syriack and Arabic render the text thus, Thou art our Father, we are
ignorant of Abraham, and we acknowledge not Israel. Thou O Lord art our Father,
etc. Agreeable whereunto is that of the Heathen, Contemno minutos istos Deos,
moao Jovem mihi propitium habeam, I care not for those petty-gods, so that
Jupiter will stand my friend. And that better saying of a devout Christian, Vna
est in trepida mihi re medicina, Jehova
Cor patrium, os ver ax, omnipotensque manus. Nathan. Chytraeus.



It has been well observed, that the defeat given to the Spanish Fleet Anno
1588. fell out to be on St. James his day, whom the Spaniards pray to as their
Patron, or St. Tutelar.

Thy name is from eternity] i. e. This name of thine our Redeemer. Some read
the text thus, Our Redeemer is from of old thy Name. Our Redemption was not of
yesterday, but verily fore ordained before the foundation of the world, 1 Pet.
1.20.

Ver. 17. O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways? etc.] i. e.
Given us up to error and obstinacy? Why do thou thus punish sin with sin,
for the illustration of thy Justice and jealousy against us, who have rebelled
and vexed thine holy Spirit? ver. 10. Oh be pleased to deal with us rather
according to thy mercy, Return for thy servants sake, the good people that are
yet left amongst us: give us hearts of flesh, and lead us in the way
everlasting. Here observe that Gods best children may find in themselves
hardness of heart, Hos. 4.16. yet not total, but mixed with softness and
tenderness in every part, so that though they resist, neglect, profit not as
they might do (through pride, worldliness, voluptuousness, Mat, 13.22. Luke
21.34. hypocritical hiding of any sin, Psalm. 32.3, 4. Prove. 28.14. letting fall
the watch of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 32.25.) yet it is not done with full consent,
but with reluctance now, and repentance afterward.

The tribes of thine inheritance] q. d. Will thou abhor thy people in covenant
with thee, and abandon thine own inheritance? How few are there that thus urge
the seal, and enter a suit with the Lord?

Ver. 18. The people of thine holiness have possessed it but a little while]
viz. In respect of that perpetuity promised them by Thee, Genesis 17.8. and 26.3.
and 28.13. Exodus 32.13. Besides the many calamities that have befaln us whereby
we have had small enjoyment of this thine inheritance. All the days of the
afflicted are evil, Prove. 15.15. their life lifeless, and not to be reckoned on.

Our adversaries have trodden down thy Sanctuary] This they did in the days of
Antiochus, but especially about the time of our Saviors incarnation: when the
scepter departed from Judah, Pompey with his Army entered into the Sanctuary,
Herod got the government, the Romans sat up their Ensigns and Statues in the
holy of holies, etc. This desolation of the second Temple the Jews do here
bewail: but we have cause to rejoice, for that by Christ the whole world is now
become a Temple, and every place a goodly Oratory, 1 Timothy 2.8.

Ver. 19. We are thine] And should thou then deal with us as some profane
idolatrous Nation? See here the holy boldness of Faith, standing upon
interrogatories, 1 Pet. 3.21. and filling her mouth with arguments of all sorts.

Thou never barest rule over them] No such reason or relation is there of
children, servants, subjects, wherefore they should thus be favored, and we
disowned, Amos 3.2. See on ver. 17.

CHAP. LXIV.
Ver. 1. O That thou would rent the Heaven] That Thou would lie no longer
hid there, as to some it may seem; but making thy way through all impediments
and obstacles, Lyra. Alex. Ales.
thou would powerfully appear for our help, as out of an engine. Vtinam
lacerares coelos and descenderes. Some take the words for a hearty wish that
Christ would come in the flesh: others that he would make haste, and come to
Judgment, late fisso coelo ad percellendum impios. The Metaphor seems to be
taken from such as being desirous suddenly and effectually to help others in
distress, do break open doors, and cast aside all lets, to make their way to
them.

That the mountains may flow down] As Judge. 5.5. By mountains some understand
the enemies kingdoms.

Ver. 2. As when the melting fire burneth] So let the mountains burn and boil
at thy presence. Aristotle reports that from the hill Aetna there once ran
down a torrent of fire, De mundo cap. 6. So Hecla and Hogla in Iseland.
that consumed all the houses thereabout. The like is recorded of Vesuvius, and
of Peitra Mala a mountain in the highest part of the Apenines, which
perpetually burns.

Ver. 3. When thou did terrible things] Or, As when thou did, etc. as
thou did of old for our Forefathers.

Which we looked not for] See Deuteronomy. 4.32, 33. where God himself extolleth them.

Ver. 4. For from the beginning of the world men have not heard] sc. The
mysteries of the Gospel, revealed by the Spirit: whereunto the Angels also
desire to look, as the Apostles witness, 1 Cor. 2.9. and 1 Pet. 1.12.

Neither has the eye seen O God besides thee] or a God beside thee, i. e. That
can do as thou do.

For him that waits for him] For them that love him, says the Apostle. It is
by faith and hope that we wait upon God: now Faith, Hope, and Charity are near
of kin, and never severed. All that truly love God are well content to wait for
him, yea to want, if he see it fit: being desirous rather that God may be
glorified than themselves gratified.

Ver. 5. Thou meetest him that rejoices and works righteousness] That does
thy work diligently and with delight; that being acted by thee, acts
vigorously for thee. Tantum velis, and Deus tibi praeoccurret, says an
Ancient: as the Prodigals Father met him upon the way. If ye be willing and
obedient, ye shall eat the good things of the land, chap. 1.21. which that we
may be, Nolentem praevenit Deus ut velit, Aug.
volentem subsequitur ne frustra velit. God works in us both to will and to
do, of his own good pleasure. Howbeit he expects that we should go as far as
we can naturally, if ever we look that He should meet us graciously. Though the
Miller cannot command a wind, yet he will spread his fails, be in the way to
have it, if it come.

In those is continuance] i. e. In those sins of ours: and shall we be saved?
Or, in those ways of thine, thy ways of mercy and fidelity is permanency:
therefore we shall be saved, our sins notwithstanding.

Ver. 6. But we are all as an unclean thing] Both our persons and our actions
are so: for who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? What a mercy is it
then, that God should look upon such walking dunghils as we are, and accept the
work of our hands?

And all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags] Or, as a coat of patches,
Panno ancumulenta. Scultet.
a beggars coat, vestis centonum, vestis e vilibus paniculis consuta, Heb. a
cloth of separations, a matury rag, a menstrous clout, nauseons and odious,
such as a man would loath to touch, much more to take up. Such are our best
works, as they proceed from us: when there springs up any sweet fountain of
grace within us, our hearts closely cast in their filthy dirt, as the
Philistines dealt by Isaac: they drop down from their impure hands some filth
upon that pure web the Spirit weaveth, and make it a menstruous cloth. Where
then are Justitiaries our Merit-mongers? etc. Those that seek to be saved by
their works, Luther fitly calls the Devils Martyrs; they suffer much, and
take great pains to go to Hell. We are all apt to weave a web of righteousness
of our own, to spin a thread of our own, to climb up to Heaven by: but that
cannot be. We must do all righteousnesses, rest in none but Christ's;
disclaiming our own best, as spotted and imperfect.

And we all fade as a leaf] That falls to the ground in Autumn. The Poet
could say, (...). Hom


And our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away] Out of thy presence;
and will hurry us to Hell, if thou foresend not.

Ver. 7. And there is none that calls upon thy Name] i. e. Very few: for that
God had then a praying people, this very prayer declares: Apparent rari nant^s
in gurgite vasto.
but they were drowned in the multiude, being scarce discernable.

That stirs up himself to take hold of thee] That rouseth up himself, and
wrastleth with God, laying hold on him by faith and prayer, resolved to retain
him. Let us go forth as Sampson did, and shake up our selves against that
indevotion and spiritual sloth, that will creep upon us in doing good: See for
this Mr. Whitfield's Help to stirring up, an excellent Treatise, written upon
this text.

For thou have hid thy face from us] Or, though thou have hid thy face: Ne tuis
quidem ferulis caesi resipuimus.

Ver. 8. But now, O Lord, thou art our Father] Or, Yet now, O Lord, thou art
our Father: therefore we shall not dye, say they, Hab. 1.12. boldly, but
warrantably. See on chap. 63.16.

We are the clay and thou art our potter] This was grown to a Proverb among the
Heathens also, (...), Man is a clod of clay, (...), a piece of clay, neatly
made up, says Arrian upon Epictetus. Fictus ex argilla and luto homulus, Orat.
ad Pison.
says Cicero. And Nigidius was surnamed Figulus or the Potter, says
Augustine, because he used to say that man was nothing else but an earthen
vessel. See 2 Cor. 4.7. and 5.1.

We are all the work of thy hands] Both as made, and re-made by Thee: therefore
despise us not, Job 10.8, 9 Psalm. 138.8. Look upon the wounds of thy hands, and
forsake not the work of thine hands, prayed Queen Elisabeth.

Ver. 9. Be not wroth very sore, O Lord] Neither overmuch, nor overlong; but
spare us as a man spares his own son that serves him. This is commended for
the best line in all Terence, Pro peccato magno paululum supplicii satis est
Patri.

Ver. 10. Thy holy Cities are a Wilderness] And is that for thine honor?
Behold, see we beseech thee.

Ver. 11. Our holy and our beautiful house] The Church rises higher and higher
in her complaints to God: we must do likewise.

Where our Fathers praised thee] Their own praises there they mention not, as
not holding them worth mentioning.

Ver. 12. Will thou refrain thy self for these things?] Or, Can thou contain
thy self at these things? No, he cannot: witness his answer hereunto, chap.
65.1. The obstinate Jews do in vain still recite these words in their
Synagogues, as Hierom here notes.

Will thou hold thy peace?] And, by thy silence, seem to consent to the enemies
outrages, and our calamities? Habet acrimonian^, says Hyperius; there is some
sharpness in these short questions: and yet because they were full of faith and
fervency, they were highly accepted in Heaven.

And afflict us very sore?] Heb. Vsque valde? unto very much or unto extremity?

CHAP. LXV.
Piscat.
Ver. 1. I Am sought of them that asked not for me] I am sought, that is, I am
found, as Eccles. 3.6. Or, I am sought to by those that asked not of me, viz.
by the Gentiles who knew me not, enquired not of me. See Romans 10.20, 21. where
the Apostle (then whom we cannot have a better Interpreter) expounds this
verse of the calling of the Gentiles; and the next verse, of the rejection of
the Jews: and herein Esaias was very bold, says St. Paul: so bold, say Origin
and others, that for this cause, among others, he was sawn asunder by his
unworthy Contrymen. See on chap. 1.10.

I am found of them that sought me not] The first act of our Coversion then
(the infusion of the sap) is of God: our will prevents it not, but follows it.
See 2 Cor. 3.5. Romans 8.7. Joh. 6.44. 1 Cor. 12.3. Deuteronomy. 29.3, 4. Psalm. 36.10.
Note this against the Patrons of Nature, Free Will men, Papists especially, who
not only ascribe the beginning of salvation to themselves in coworking with God
in their first conversion, but also the end and the accomplishment of it, by
works of condignity, meritorious of eternal life.

I said, Behold me, behold me] We are not easily arroused out of that dead
Lethargy into which sin and Satan has cast us: hence this Lo I, Lo I. And here
we have both Gods answer to the Churches prayer, chap. 64. and the scope of the
whole book (as Oecolampadius observes) set down in the perclose: viz. the
coming in of the Gentiles, and the casting off of the Jews, for their many and
mighty sins, Amos 5.12.

Prove. 1.24. Act. 26.1.
Ver. 2. I have spread out my hands] A Preachers use to do, or as those that
invite and becken others to themselves with the hand: See Mat. 11.28.

Unto a rebellious people] Whose destruction therefore is of themselves, since
they will not be ruled, reclaimed.

After their own thoughts] Which were evil, only evil, continually so. A Toad
may as easily spet a cordial, as a natural man think a good thought.

Ver. 3. A people that provokes me -- to my face] As it were for the nouce, in
despite and defiance of me. Siquis me in faciem depalmaret, vix indignius essem
laturus: I could almost as well bear a blow on the face.

And burns incense upon altars of brick] Erected on the house-tops, Lateres
per Meiosin cum contemptu.
2 King. 33.12. Zeph. 1.5. they should have offered on the golden altar only,
Exodus 30.

Ver. 4. Which remain among the graves] Which use Necromancy and consult with
devils, (as Saul did and dyed for it) contrary to Deuteronomy. 18.11. See chap. 8.19.
Mark. 5.5. with the Notes. This they had learned of the Heathens, with whom it
was common, as Tertullian teaches.

And lodge in the monuments] As believing that there they should dream dreams
divinatory, or have revelations in the night. By such ill arts as these,
Timotheus Herulus made himself Bishop of Alexandria, Anno 467. and Boniface 8.
gulled Celestine 5. of the Popedom, Anno 1295. Some render it, Jun. Piscat.
that lodge with the kept ones, i. e. with their Idols, which they were fain to
keep, for fear they should be stolen.

That eat swines-flesh] Which was flatly forbidden, Lev. 11.7. and which those
Martyrs in the Maccabees would rather dye than do. But these belly-gods, who
like swine, had their souls only to keep their bodies from putrefying? securely
violated this plain law: gratifying their lusts, and making their gut their God.

And broth of abominable things is in their vessels] They had animos in
patinis, Porcus quasi spureus. Rupert.
catinis, calicibus, etc. Therein they kept the broth of their swines-flesh
which they offered, and in offering eat of. But what says one from this text?
men must not only abhor the Devils beef, but his broth too; all occasions,
appearances.

Ver. 5. Which say, Stand by thy self, come not near to me] These Jews were all
manner of naughts (and therefore worthily rejected by God) Necromancers,
Idolaters, Epicures, gross hypocrites, as here their words (full of pride and
contempt of others) show them to be. Such were the Pharisees with their
Sanctior sum quam tu: Luke 7.39.
the Monks and Mass Priests among the Papists, and the Brownists with their
broad leaves of formal profession amongst us. Abbots his trial of Church
forsakers, page 148.
From Mat. 18.19. because Christ promises not doing for them that ask, except
they agree on earth, Brownists peremptorily conclude, that they ought not to
pray with them that do not consent with them in their opinions: nor will they
pray with their own wives and children, though never so pious, if they do not
meet in the same center of conceits.

These are a smoke in my nose, a fire that burns all the day] i. e. A
continual offense to me, as smoke is to the nose and eyes, Prove. 10.20. and
shall be perpetually tormented by me in the hottest fire of hell; whereof
hypocrites are the freeholders, and other sinners are but tenants as it were
to them; whiles they are said to have their portion with the Devil and
hypocrites. Some think he hinteth at their smoking and sacrificing in their
gardens and groves, ver. 3.

Ver. 6. Behold it is written before me] Heb. before my face, as your sins were
committed to my face, ver. 3. which therefore I shall surely remember and
punish.

But will recompense, even recompense] Certo, cito, penitus, surely, severely,
suddenly: you may write upon it.

Ver. 7. Your iniquities and the iniquities of your Fathers together] Your vain
conversation received by tradition from your Fathers, 1 Pet. 1.18. whom you
have striven to out-sin. See Genesis 15.16. Mat. 23.32, 35, 36. and 27.25. 1 These.
2.15, 16.

And blasphemed me upon the hills] Or, reproached or dishonored me:
displeasing service is double dishonor; because men dishonor God in that
wherein they pretend (or presume at least) to please him. Such are all Popish
will worshippers: neither will it help them to plead the example of their
Forefathers: for here that of the Prophet Ezekiel, chap. 20. should take
place, Walk ye not in the ways of your Fathers.

Therefore will I measure -- into their bosom] Or Lap, very largely. See Psalm.
79.12. Luke 6.38. I will pay them home, for the new and the old together.

Ver. 8. Thus says the Lord] This he says in effect, I will not destroy the
righteous with the wicked, but still reserve a seed, a remnant: and this he
sets forth by a fine and fit comparison; even as the husbandman, if he find
any wine in the cluster, that is, any life or sap in the vine, cutteth it not
down utterly.

So will I do for my servants sake] Few though they be, even as one cluster of
grapes upon a vine, yet because they are botri mustei, clusters full of new and
sweet wine, full of the juice of piety, they shall be preserved.

Ver. 9. And I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob] The good husband keeps
some of his corn for seed: which though it be not much, yet it will come to
much.

And mine elect shall inherit it] i. e. Reinhabit the land; a type of the last
conversion of the Jews to Christ, Romans 11.25, 26.

Ver. 10. And Sharon shall be a fold of flocks] The fieldlings shall be folds;
and I will feed them daily and daintily, Psalm. 23.1. with my graces and
blessings. Sharon is a very sweet and fruitful quarter reaching from Caesarea
of Palestine to Joppa: Achor is also a very rich vale near Jericho Northward,
Josh. 3.16. their first footing in the promised land. By both these they are
assured, that they shall want for nothing, and least of all for the Word of
God, the food of their souls.

Ver. 11. But ye are they that forsake the Lord] Or, As for you, that have
forsaken the Lord, to observe lying vanities, and so are miserable by your own
election, Jo^. 2.8. you shall be yet more miserable at the great day of
Judgment especially, of which some take this following part of the Chapter to
be meant and intended. Then these improbi and reprobi shall be sure to smoke
for it: then they shall return and discern betwixt the righteous and the
wicked: yea the Judge himself shall show them a manifest difference, as ver.
13, 14, 15, etc.

That forget my holy mountain] i. e. My Temple and pure worship, which ye
slight and neglect, q. d. there is no new wine in your cluster, but rather gall
and deadly poison: therefore it shall be otherwise with you.

That prepare a table for that troop] As the Israelites feasted before the
Lord, Deuteronomy. 16.14, 15. so in an apish imitation did the heathens before their
Idols, Judge. 9.27. Ezekiel. 18.6, 7. 1 Cor. 8.10. and of them these superstitious
Jews had learned to do the like, in the days of Ahaz and Manasseh, who
degenerated into his Grandfather Ahaz, as if there had been no intervention of
an Hezekiah.

For that troop] So the Prophet speaks, as pointing to their Idols, whereof
they had great store. Gad (here used) and Menni (rendered Number here likewise)
some interpret Fortune and Fate; others, Jupiter and Mercury. The Septuagint
for to that Number, has to the Devil. Oecolampadius thinks the Prophet
alludeth to the Pythagorean numbers: (...).
and especially to the number of four, which they superstitiously observed.
Others say, the Jews symbolized with the Heathens in drinking to their Idols by
number: to such an Idol they would drink so many cups, and that was called a
Drink Offering to that Number. Hence Antiphanes in Athenaeus says, Lib. 10.
Adusque tria pocula venerandos esse deos.

Ver. 12. Therefore I will number you to the sword] Est elegans Paronomasia: I
will give you up to the sword by number and tale; to the end that none of you
may escape. God usually retaliateth, and proportioneth number to number: so,
choice to choice, chap. 66.3, 4. jealousy to jealousy, provocation to
provocation, Deuteronomy. 32.21. device to device, Mic. 2.1, 3. frowardness to
frowadrness, Psalm. 18.26.

And ye shall all bow down to the slaughter] As you used to bow down to your
Idols.

Because when I called ye did not answer] See on Prove. 1.24.

But did evil before mine eyes] Did evil things as you could, Jer. 3.5. with
both hands earnestly, Mic. 7.3.

Ver. 13. Behold my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry] Lepidas
antitheses ponit. You have spent your meat and drink upon Idols; therefore ye
shall fast another while, yea you shall feed upon the fierce wrath of God in
hell, and drink deep of that cup of his, that has eternity to the bottom.

But ye shall be ashamed] Your hopes and hearts failing you together, ye shall
pine away in your iniquities, Ezekiel. 24.23.

Ver. 14. Behold my servants shall sing] In the transgression of an evil man
there is a snare, or a cord to strangle his joys with: but the righteous does
sing and rejoice, Prove. 29.6. See the Note there.

And shall howl] When ye come to Hell especially, where is wailing, and
yelling, and gnashing of teeth.

Ver. 15. And ye shall leave your name for a curse] So that when mine Elect
shall denounce my curse against any one, they shall say, God make thee such
another as was such a cursed caytiff. See Jer. 24.9. and 29.22. and 34.9. See
Zach. 8.13. with the Note. Judaeus sim si fallo, say the Turks at this day: As
hard-hearted and unhappy as a Jew, say we.

And call his servants by another name] Jews inwardly, Israelites indeed,
Christians, a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a
peculiar People, 1 Pet. 2.9. The wicked, when they dye, go out in a snuff,
leave a stench behind them, as they say the Devil does, when he goes out of a
room: but when the Saints depart, they leave a sweet smell behind them, as
those lamps do that are fed with aromatical oil. Yea it is more then probable,
that in the next world, we shall look upon Bradford, and such, with thoughts of
extraordinary love and sweetness, through all eternity; as Bonner and such,
with execration and everlasting detestation.

Ver. 16. That he who blesses himself in the earth, etc.] Or, that blesses,
either himself or any other.

Shall bless himself in the God of truth] Heb. shall bless in the God of Amen,
that is, say some, in Christ who is Amen the faithful and true witness, Rev.
3.14. in whom all the Promises are Yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. and who was wont
often to say Amen, Amen. Others render it thus, Benedicat sibi per Deum firmi,
shall bless himself by the God of the firm or faithful people, founded and
rooted in God, so as that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against them.

Shall swear by the God of truth] Or, by the God of the firm and faithful
people, as before.

Because the former troubles are forgotten] Rememberd no otherwise then as
waters that are past. See Zach. 10.6. with the Note.

Ver. 17. For behold I create new Heavens and a new Earth] I am making of a new
world, that is, Gospel Times, called a new Creation, 2 Cor. 5.17. and the world
to come, Heb. 2.5. Heaven aforehand, Matthew. 3.2. The consummation hereof we are
to expect at the last day, 2 Pet. 3.13. Rev. 21.1, 5. when the former shall not
be remembered, nor come into mind, because the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth,
shall bless his people out of Zion, Psalm. 134.3.

Ver. 18. But be glad and rejoice for ever] what can ye be less then
everlastingly merry when you consider your Gospel-priviledges? which are such
as may well swallow up all discontents, and make you more then Conquerours, and
that is, Triumphers.

For behold I create Jerusalem a rejoycing] Creo talem Jerusalem ut sit ei
nomen Tripudium, and populus ejus vocetur Gaudium. Oecol.
Hence it appears that these things are not to be taken according to the
letter: but of Jerusalem which is above, that mother of us all.

Ver. 19. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem] Well may Jerusalem then rejoice in
in God: who as in all her afflictions he is afflicted, so he takes pleasure in
the prosperity of his people.

And the voice of weeping] See chap. 35.11. and 51.12. Rev. 21.4.

Ver. 20. There shall be no more thence an infant of dayes] This verse (as some
others) had been easy, had not Commentatours made it so knotty. There shall be
no more thence, that is, from Jerusalem, ver. 19. an infant of days or a
child for days, viz. that shall so dye by an untimely death: for longevity is
the blessing here promised.

Nor an old man that has not filled his daies] That has not lived his utmost,
satur dierum, as Abraham.

For the child shall dye an hundred years old] i. e. He that is now a child,
shall live till he be so many year old. Note this against those that otherwise
understand the words, and have therehence fished out many frivolous crotchets,
too long here to be related. Hinc proverb. Puer centum annorum.


But the sinner being an hundred year old shall be accursed] And the more
accursed, because so long-lived, and yet dies in his sin; going down to the
grave with his bones full of the sins of his youth. See Eccles. 8.12, 13. with
the Notes.

Ver. 21. And they shall build houses and inhabit them] The contrary whereunto
is threatened against the wicked, Deuteronomy. 28.30, etc. Gods people are freed from
the curse of the Law; from the hurt, if not from the smart of afflictions.

Ver. 22. They shall not build, and another inhabit] They shall not provide for
posterity alone, but live a long while to take benefit of their own labors.

For as the days of a tree, are the days of my people] i. e. Robusti atque
diuturni, they shall be hearty, healthy, and long-lasting, as Psalm. 52.10. and
92.13. even as if they had eaten of that tree of life in Paradise.

Ver. 23. They shall not labor in vain] As wicked men shall, Levit. 26. Deuteronomy.
28. Hag. 1.6. See the Note there.

Nor bring forth for trouble] Bring forth children to the murderer, Hos. 9.13.
to the great grief and trouble of their poor parents.

Ver. 24. And it shall come to pass, that before they call I will answer]
Mirabilis certe promissio, a wonderful promise verily, says Scultetus. The
prayers of the Saints do sooner pierce from their hearts to heaven, then they
can find way from their hearts to their mouths. So David found it, Psalm. 32.5.
and Daniel, chap. 10.12. and that Prodigal, Luke. 15.18, 20. Our Savior, who
came out of the bosom of the Father, gives two reasons: 1. The Father himsef
loves you, Joh. 16.27. and love is liberal. 2. The Father knows before ye
ask, that ye have need of all these things, Mat. 6.32.

And while they are yet speaking, I will hear] Thus he heard those praying
Israelites at the meet at Mizpeh, 1 Samuel 7. David, Psalm. 6.8, 9. Daniel, chap
9.21. Cornelius, Acts 10.3. and his company, ver. 44. Luther when he came
leaping out out of his study (where he had been praying) with Vicimus, Vicimus,
in his mouth; the day is ours, we shall carry the cause.

Antipathiam in ympathiam convertent. Lap.
Ver. 25. The wolf and the Lamb shall feed together] Heb. as one: See chap.
11.6. There shall be an holy harmony of hearts, and all good agreement among
Christ's Subjects; when they come to heaven especially.

And dust shall be the serpents meat] He shall be held in to his first
condemnation, Genesis 3.14. The Devil also that old serpent, shall be limited to
the heel of the Saints; the head he shall not touch: he shall be tied up to his
own meat, viz. that unquenchable fire prepared for him and his angels from the
beginning.

They shall not hurt, etc.] See on chap. 11.9.

CHAP. LXVI.
Ver. 1. THus says the Lord] The same he says in effect here in this last
Chapter, that he had done in the first; rejecting the Jews vain confidence in
their Temple, and Sacrifices: and showing that he was neither confined to their
Temple, nor contented with their Sacrifices, so long as the hidden man of the
heart and the spiritual worship was wanting: so long as they neglected his
Laws, and served their own lusts, ver. 3.

Heaven is my throne] Caelum est solium meum: there do I manifest the most
glorious and visible signs of my presence: there I am in a special manner
worshipped according to mine exccellent gre^tnesse: and there my Courtiers have
a more ardent zeal for me, then those flatterers had for Darius, Dan. 6.7.

The earth is my foot-stool] So it should be ours: since God has in Christ put
all things under our feet, Psalm. 8.6. The earth has its name in Hebrew from
treading upon, and Terra a terendo: these earthly things should be trampled on,
as base and bootless.

Where is the house that ye build unto me?] q. d. An house indeed I commanded
to be built for me, but not to hold me, or there to keep me coopt up as in a
cell; that you should there hence conclude, The Temple, Gods house, shall never
perish: therefore neither shall we. You must know that I am intra, and extra,
and supra, and circa, and infra omnia within and without, and above, and about,
and beneath all things.

Enter praesenter Deus hic and ubique potenter. This the Heathens knew;
Empedocles said, that God was a circle the center whereof is everywhere, the
circumference nowhere. This the Turks acknowledge, by building their Mosches or
Temples open at the top: to show that God is nowhere circumscriptively and
definitively: but repletively everywhere. He is higher then Heaven, says
Bernard, deeper then Hell, larger then Earth, broader then the Sea: he is
nowhere, and yet evrywhere, ye he is everywhere alpresent. The Heavens have a
large place, but they have one part here, and another there: but the Lord is
totally present wheresoever present: not commensurable by any place whatsoever.

Ver. 2. For all those things has my hand made] And could not I then have made
my self an house without your help, if I had lifted or needed? Required I a
Temple for any other use or purpose but for the furtherance of your faith in
Christ, and love one to another? These things have I made, yet these all I
regard not, in comparison: but

To this man will I look] viz. With special intimation of my care and kindness,
q, d. To thee be it spoken, I have an eye to thee. (...).


Even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit] Sept. Humble and quiet,
Vera Sabbata agens, that being poor in spirit has a Sabbath of spirit,
comforting himself in the Lord his God: to such God looks. He cannot look
upwards, says One, because he has none above him: nor on either side,
Humilitas est thronus sapphirinus in quo Deus cum majestate residet.
because he has none equal unto him: therefore he is said to look down, and
that also upon the humble and brokenhearted, with singular delight and
complacency.

And trembles as my Word] viz. With a filial fear flowing from faith in
Christ, trembling at the threatenings before they come into execution. This is a
point of singular prudence: for God therefore threateneth that he may not
inflict punishment: but they that tremble not in hearing, shall be crushed to
pieces in feeling, said that Martyr. What then will be the end of such as hear
the menaces of Gods mouth no otherwise, then they do the stories of foreign
wars, or the predictions of a Prognostication, which they think may come to
pass, and it may be not?

Ver. 3. He that kills an Ox, is as if he slew a Man] Unless, together with
his Ox, he kill his corruptions, and lay fast hold upon Christ (who himself wa
sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5.7.) by a lively faith. Heathens sacrificed men to
Saturn: dogs also and swine and other unclean creatures to their other
dunghil-dieties. Mass-priests do the like by their cruelty, hypocrisy,
idolatry, impudency, luxury: their prayers therefore, fastings, pennances,
pilgrimages, etc. are disaccepted.

He that sacrifices a Lamb] Unless withal he sacrifice his lusts, and look to
the Lamb of God, slain from the beginning of the world, etc.

As if he cut off a dogs neck] Heb. as if he necked a dog, that is, decolled
him, beheaded him for sacrifice: this was absolutely forbidden, Deuteronomy. 23.18.
Excerebraret. Vulg. Plut. (...),
The Athenians also suffered not a dog to enter into their Tower dedicated to
Minerva, for his heat in Venery and ill savor, says Plutarch.

He that offers an oblation] Unless withal he present his body for a
sacrifice holy and acceptable unto God, as Romans 12.1.

Is as if he offered swines blood] Blood was not to be offered at all in an
oblation or meat offering, but meal, oil, wine, Levit. 2. much less swines
blood. See Levit. 11.7.

He that burns incense] In honor of me, unless his heart ascend up withal in
those pillars of sweet smoke, as Manoahs Angel did in the smoke of the
sacrifice.

Is as if he blessed an Idol] i. e. Gave thanks to an Idol (called here by a
name that signifies vanity or vexation) as if he were a God: in doing whereof,
God holds himself less dishonored, then by their hypocritical services
performed to himself, Ezekiel. 20.39.

Be^n.
Yea they have chosen their own wayes] Which must needs be naught: Nemo sibi de
suo palpet: Are ye not carnal and walk as men, says Paul; that is, as naughty
men? Horreo quicquid de meo est, ut meus sim.

Ver. 4. I also will choose their delusions] As they have had their will, so
will I have mine another while. I will make them to perish by their mockeries,
idque ex lege talionis, See chap. 65.11.12. They thought to cozen me by an
out-side-service: but it shall appear that they have cozened themselves, when I
bring upon them mercedem multiplicis petulantiae little (as Piscator rendereth
it) the reward of their manyfold petulancies, and illusions.

And will bring their fear upon them] Inducam nivem super eos qui timuerunt a
pruina. They have feared the coming of the Chaldees, and come they shall. So
their posterity feared the Romans, Joh. 11. and they felt their fury. See Prove.
10.24. with the Note.

Because when I called, etc.] See chap. 65.12.

Ver. 5. Hear the Word of the Lord, ye that tremble, etc.] Here Is a word of
comfort for you, who being lowly and meek-spirited, are the apter to be
trampled on, and abused by the fat bulls of Basan: where the hedge is lowest,
those beasts will leap over: and every crow will be pulling off wool from a
sheeps sides.

Your brethren] By race, and place, but not by Grace.

That hated you] For like cause as Cain hated Abel, 1 John 3.12. for trembling
at Gods judgments whilst they do yet hang in the threatenings.

And cast you out] Either out of their company as not fit to be conversed with,
chap. 65.5. or out of their Synagogue by excommunications, as fit to be cut
off: See 1 These. 2.14. Papists at this day do the like: whence that Proverb In
nomine Domini incip^t omne malum: Ye begin in a wrong name said that Martyr,
when they began the sentence of death against him with In the name of God, Amen.

Let the Lord be glorified] With such like goodly words and specious pretenses
did those odious hypocrites palliate and varnish over their abominations: they
would persecute godly men, and molest them with Church Censures, and say Let
the Lord be glorified: So do Papists and other Sectaries deal by the Orthodox.
Becket offered (but subdolously) to submit to his Sovereign, salvo honere Dei,
so far as might stand with Gods glory. Speed. 508. Anno 1386.
The Conspiratours in King Richard the seconds time endorsed all their letters
with Glory be to God on high, on earth peace, good will toward men. The Swenck
feldians styled themselves The Confessors of the glory of Christ: and Gentiles
the Antitrinitarian, when he was called to answer, said that he was drawn to
maintain his cause through touch of conscience; and when he was to dye for his
blasphemy, he said that he did suffer for the glory of the most high God: so
easy a matter it is to draw a fair glove upon a foul hand, etc. Some for Let
the Lord be glorified, render it Gravis est Dominus, The Lord is burdensome or
heavy: and they parallel it with those sayings in the Gospel, This is an hard
saying, Thou art an austere man, We will not have this man to reign over us,
etc.

But he shall appear to your joy] Parallel to that, your sorrow shall be turned
into joy. How did some of the Martyrs rejoice when excommunicated, degraded,
etc.

Diod.
Ver. 6. A voice of noise from the City] This is a Prophetical description of
the last destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple by the Romans.

A voice from the Temple] Wherein they so much gloryed, where they had often heard
Christ and his Apostles preaching repentance unto life: but now have their ears
filled with hideous and horrid outcries of such as were slain even in the very
Temple, which they defended as long as they were able, and till it was fited:
That which Josephus reports of Jesus the son of Ananis a plain
Country-fellow, is very remarkable; viz. that for four years together before
the last devastation, he went about the City day and night, crying as he went,
in the words of this text almost, A voice from the East, Lib. 7. B^lli. cap. 12.
a voice from the West, a voice from the four Winds, a voice against Jerusalem
and the Temple, a voice against all the people, Woe, woe, woe to Jerusalem: and
thus he continued to do till at length roaring out louder then ordinary, Woe to
Jerusalem and to me also, he was slain upon the wall with a stone shot out of
an Engine, as Josephus reports.

That rendereth recompense to his enemies] So they are here called who
pretended so much to the glorifying of God, ver. 5. False friends are true
enemies.

Ver. 7. Before she traveled, she brought forth] Quum nondum parturiret
paperit, understand it of Zion, or of the Church Christian, which receives her
children, that is, Converts, suddenly on a cluster before she thought to have
done, Subito ac simul. Margaret Countess of Henneburg.
and in far greater numbers then she could ever have believed. That Lady that
brought forth as many as a birth as are days in the year was nothing to her:
nor those Hebrew women; Exodus 1.10.

She was delivered of a man-child] For the which there is so great joy, Joh.
16.21* and which is usually more able and active than a woman-child: so, good
and bold Christians, strong in faith; unless he means Christ himself (says
Dioda^) who is formed by faith in every believers heart; Gal. 4.19.

Ver. 8. Who has heard such a thing? who has seen such things?] The birth of
a man would seem a miracle, were it not so ordinary; miracula assiduitate
vilescunt: but the birth of a whole Nation at once, how much more?

Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day?] Yes, if the day be long
enough, as among the Hyperboreans, of whom it is written that they sow shortly
after the Sunrising, and reap before the Sunset: because the whole half year
is one continual day with them. But the words here should be rather read, Can a
land; Heresbach. de re rust.
or a country be brought forth in one day? a Nation be born at once? Cardinal
Pool abused this Scripture in a letter to Pope Julius 3. applying it to the
bringing in of Popery again here so universally and suddenly in Queen Maryes
days. So he did also another, when at his first return hither from beyond sea,
he blasphemously saluted the same Queen Mary with those words of the Angel,
Hail Mary full of grace, the Lord is with thee.

Ver. 9. Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth?] i. e. Shall
I set upon a work and not go through with it? God began and finished his work
of Creation: Christ is both Author and finisher of his peoples faith, Heb.
12.2. The holy Ghost will sanctify the Elect wholly, and keep them blameless
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 These. 5.23. Nescit tarda molimina
Spiritus sancti gratia, says Ambrose: Otherwise his power and mercy would not
equally appear to his people in regeneration, as the power and mercy of the
Father and the Son in Creation and Redemption.

Ver. 10. Rejoice ye with Jerusalem] As friends use to do with her that is
newly made a mother, Luke 1.58.

Rejoice for joy with her] Out of the Church there is no solid joy: See Hos.
9.1. with the Note. Others may revel, the godly only rejoice, their joy is not
that of the mouth but of the heart: nec in labris nascitur sed fibris, it does
not only smooth the brow, but fills the breast: wet the mouth, but warm the
heart, etc.

Ver. 11. That ye may suck and be satisfied with the breasts of her
consolations] Zion is not only a fruitful mother, but a joyful nurse: God
gives her the blessings both of the belly and of the breasts; and these breasts
of hers are full-strutting with the sincere milk of the Word, that rational
milk, 1 Pet. 2.2. the sweet and precious promises of the Gospel. These breasts
of consolation we must suck, as the babe does the mothers dug, as long as he
can get a drop out of it, and then sucks still till more comes. Let us suck
the blood of the Promises, says one, as a dog that has got the blood of the
bear, he hangs on, and will hardly be beaten off. Let us extort and oppress the
Promises (says another descanting upon this text) as a rich man oppresses a
poor man, and gets out of him all that he has: so deal thou with the
Promises, for they are rich, there is a price in them; consider it to the
utmost, wring it out. The world lays forth her two breasts (or botches
rather) of Profit and Pleasure, and has enough to suck them though they can
never thereby be satisfied: And shall almamater Ecclesia, want those that shall
milk out and be delighted with the abundance of her glory?

Ver. 12. Behold I will extend peace to her] This and the following Promises
are the delicious milk spoken of before, sc. pax copiosa and p^rennis, peace as
a river, as the waters cover the sea: joy unspeakable and full of glory, Gods
fatherly care, motherly affection, etc. all that heart can wish, or need
require.

Like a river] As Euphrates, says the Chaldee.

Like a flowing stream] Or overflowing as Nilus, Claudian.
-- Qui cunctis amnibus extat
Vtilior.


Ye shall be born upon her side] Humanissime and suavissime tra^ctabimini, ye
shall be born in the Churches arms, laid to her breasts, set in her lap,
dandled on her knees, etc. Hac Similitudine nihil fiera potest suavius. See
Number. 11.12.

Ver. 13. And as one whom his mother comforteth] Her darling and dandling,
especially, when she perceives it to make a lip and to be displeased: mothers
also are very kind to and careful of their children when they are grown to be
men: A Lapide in Isai. 56.20.
as Monica was to Austin, and as Matres Hollandicae the mothers in Holland, of
whom it is reported, quod prae aliis matribus mire filios suos etiam grandaevos
ament, ideoque eos vocant and tractant ut pueros. See Isa. 46.4. with the Note.

Ver. 14. And when ye see this, your heart shall rejoyce] Videbitis,
gaudebitis: you shall see that I do not give you good words only, but that I am
in good earnest, ye shall know it within your selves, in the workings of your
own hearts, as Heb. 10.34.

And your bones shall flourish like an herb] i. e. They shall be filled again
with moisture and marrow. See Ezekiel. 37.10, 11. you shall be fair-liking and
reflourish.

And the hand of the Lord] i. e. His infinite power, tantorum beneficiorum in
piis operatrix, the efficient cause of all these comforts.

Ver. 15. For behold the Lord will come with fire] With hellfire, say the
Rabbines here, with the fire of the last day, say we, whereof his particular
judgments are as pledges and preludes.

And with his charrets like a whirlwind] As he did, when he sent forth his
armies (the Romans) and destroyed those murderers (the Jews) and burnt up
their City, Mat. 22.7. And when they would have reedified their City and Temple
under Julian the Apostate who in hatred to Christians, animated them thereunto,
balls of fire broke forth of the earth, which marred their work, and destroyed
many thousands of them.

Ver. 16. For with fire] Then which nothing is more formidable.

And with his sword] Which is no ordinary one, chap. 27.1.

Ver. 17. In the gardens] Where these Idolaters had set up Altars, offered
sacrifices, Donec me flumine vivo. Abluero. Virg. Qui noctem in flumine purgas:
Pers. i. e. nocturnam Venerem.
and had their ponds, wherein when they were about to sacrifice, heathen-like,
they washed and purified themselves one after another, and not together, which
they held to be the best way of purifying. This they did also not apart and in
private, but in the midst, ut hoc modo oculos in nudis lavantium, praesertim
muliercularum, corporibus pascerent, that they might feed their eyes with the
sight of those parts which nature would have hid: for your Pagan superstitions
were oft-times contrary to natural honesty.

Behind one tree in the midst] Or as others render it after, or behind Ahad,
which was the name of a Syrian Idol, Saturnal. lib. 1. cap. 23.
representing the Sun, as Macrobius tells us, calling him Adad.

Ver. 18. For I know (or, I will punish) their works and their thoughts] Or,
yea their thoughts which they may think to be free. See Jer. 6.19.

It shall come to pass that I will gather] It is easy to observe, that this
Chapter consists of various passages interwoven the one within the other: of
judgments to the wicked, of mercyes and comforts to the godly, etc.

All Nations and tongues] A plain Prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles to
the Kingdom of Christ: for which purpose the miraculous gift of tongues was
bestowed upon the Apostles.

And they shall come and see my glory] i. e. In Christ, who is the brightness
of his Fathers glory: and in sending of whom the glory of his truth, wisdom,
power, justice and goodness shone forth, as the Sun at noon.

Ver. 19. And I will set a sign among them] This sign may very well be that
visible pouring out of the gifts of the Holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost,
under the symbol of wind and fire, Scultet.
Act. 2. together with the signs and wonders whereby the Apostles doctrine was
confirmed. Others make this sign to be the Profession of the Christian faith.
Some also, the Doctrine of the Gospel, and especially the Sacraments.

And I will send those that escape of them] i. e. The Apostles and their
fellow-helpers; such as were Barnabas, Silas, Lucas, etc.

To Tarshish, Pul] To all parts of the Word, East, West, North and South.

That draw the bow] The Mosches or Moscovites, say the Septuagint: the Turks,
says one of the Rabbines. See the Notes on Rev. 9.15, 16, 17.

Ver. 20. And they shall bring all your brethren] Now become all your brethren
in Christ: Sanctior est copula cordis quam corporis, Religion is the strongest
eye.

Upon horses, and in charets, and in litters] i. e. With much swiftness and
sweetness: though sick, weakly and unfit for travel, yet rather in litters
than not at all. The Apostles became all things to all men that they might gain
them to Christ.

Ver. 21. And I will also take of them for Priests and for Levites] For
Evangelical Pastors and Teachers: who have a distinct function and employment
in the Church of the New Testament, as the Priests and Levites had in that of
the Old, to teach instruct, and edify Gods people.

Ver. 22. For as the new heaven] So shall there be a true Church and a Ministry
for the good of my people to the worlds end. It shall not be taken away as is
the Jewish Polity and Hierarchy.

Ver. 23. And it shall come to pass that from one New Mood to another] God
shall be served with all diligence and delight. In the Kingdom of Christ here,
but especially in heaven, it shall be holy day all the week, as we say; a
constant solemnity, a perpetual Sabbath. Act. and Mon.
King Edgar ordained that the Lords day should be kept here in England from
Saturday nine of the clock, till Monday morning. The Ebionites kept the
Saturday with the Jews, and the Sunday with the Christians. But here it is
foretold (and we see it fulfilled) that all flesh, i. e. all the faithful,
whether Jews or Gentiles, shall not only keep every day holy day (1 Cor. 5.8.)
by resting from sin, and rejoicing in God; but shall also both in season and
out of season have their Church-meetings for holy services, worshipping God (
from day to day, and from month to month, as the phrase is, Esth. 3.7.) in
spirit and in truth, and having the continual feast of a good conscience.

Ver. 24. And they shall go forth and look upon the carkasses] Rhetoricians
tell us that in the introduction to a discourse (...) milder affections suit
best to insinuate: but in the conclusion (...) passionate passages, such as may
leave a sting behind them and stick by the hearers. This Art the Prophet here
uses: for being now to period his Prophecy, he gives all sorts to know what
they shall trust to. The godly shall go forth, i. e. salvi evadent, liberi
abibunt, they shall have safety here and salvation hereafter. They shall also
look upon the carcasses, etc. they shall be eyewitnesses of Gods exemplary
judgments executed on the wicked, that would not have Christ to reign over
them, ( Rev. 19.21.) who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from
the glory of the Lord and from the presence of his power, 2 These. 1.9. This the
righteous shall see, and fear, and laugh at them, Psalm. 52.6. giving God the
glory of his justice and goodness. Some think they shall have at last day, a
real sight of hell, and the damned there, Rev. 14.10. and this may very well
be. Oh that wicked men would in their daily meditations take a turn or two in
hell, and so be forewarned to fly from the wrath to come. Is it nothing to have
the worm of conscience ever grubbing upon their entrails, and the fire of Gods
vengeance feeding upon their souls and flesh throughout all eternity? Oh that
eternity of extremity! Think of it seasonably and seriously, that ye never
suffer it. The Jewish Masters have, in some copies, wholly left out this last
verse: as in other copies they repeat (both here and in the end of
Ecclesiastes, Lamentations and Malachy) the last verse save one, which is more
sweet and fuller of comfort; and that for this reason, that the Reader may not
be sent away sad, Amama in Antibarb.
and so fall into desperation. But of that there is no such danger, since most
people are over slight in their thoughts of hell torments, regarding them no
more than they do a fire painted on the wall, or a serpent wrought in Arras.
And besides, Non sinit in Gehennam incidere, Gehennae meminisse, says
Chysostom: to remember hell, is a good means to preserve us from it. This verse
has sufficient authority from our Saviors citing of it, Mar. 9.44. See the
Note there, Plato also (if that be any thing) in his description of hell (which
he calls (...) a fiery lake) says the same as here, In Phaed. page 400. Inde
dictus est Moses Atticus.
that their worm dies not, neither is their fire quenched. He might possibly
have read Isaiah as he had done Moses. It Is thought, Laertius tells us, that
he traveled into Egypt, where he conversed with some Hebrews, and learned much
of them.

And they shall be an abhorring to all flesh] i. e. All good men abominate them
now as so many living Ghosts, walking carkases, Ephesians. 2.2. Prove. 29. ult. and
shall much more at the last day, when they shall arise again to everlasting
shame and contempt, Dan. 12.

Scribendo haec studui been de pietate mereri;
Sed quicquid potui, Gratia, Christ's, tua est.
A Commentary or Exposition upon The BOOK of the Prophet JEREMIAH.
CHAP. I.
Ver. 1. THe words of Jeremiah] Piscator rendereth it Acta Jeremiae, The Acts
of Jeremy, Verba sive Res.
as we say The Acts of the Apostles: which Book also, says One, might have
been called in some sense, The Passions of the Apostles, who were for the
testimony of Jesus, in deaths often. And the same we may safely say of Jeremy,
Sermon. 4. contra A ^^nos.
who although he were not omnis criminis per totam vitam expers (which yet
great Athanaesius affirms of him) that is, free from all fault (for he had
his out-bursts, and himself relates them) yet he was Judaeorum integerrimus
(as of Phocion it is said, that he was Atheniensum integerrimus) a man of
singular sanctimony and integrity; good of a little child, a young Saint, and
an old Angel; an admirable Preacher, as Keckerman rightly calls him, Keck. de
Rhet. Eccl. cap. ult.
and propounds him for a pattern to all Preachers of the Gospel.
Nevertheless, this incomparable Prophet proved to be a man of many sorrows,
(...), Lib. 1. Epist. 198.
(as Isidor Pelusiot) a most calamitous person, as appears by this Book, and
one that had his share in sufferings from, and fellow-sufferings with his
ungrateful Countrymen, as much as might be. Nazianzen says most truly of him,
Prophetarum omnium ad commiserationem propensissimus. Orat. 17. ad cives, Nazi
n.
that he was the most compassionate of all the Prophets: witness that
Pathetical wish of his, chap. 9.1, 2, 3. Oh that my head were waters, etc. and
that holy Resolve, chap. 13.17. But if ye will not hear it, my soul shall weep
in secret places for your pride, and mine eye shall weep sore and run down with
tears, because the Lords flock is carried away captive. It was this good man's
unhappiness to be a Physician to a dying State: Tunc etenim docta plus valet
art malum.

Long time he had labored amongst this perverse people but to very small
purpose, Vide Oecol.
as himself complains, chap. 27.13, 14. after Isaiah, chap. 49. whom he
succeeded in his office of a Prophet (some scores of years between) but with
little good success. For, as in a dying man, his eyes wax dim, and all his
senses decay, till at length they are utterly lost: so fares it with
Commonwealths, quando suis fatis urgentur, when once they are ripe for ruin:
the nearer they draw to destruction, the more they are overgrown with
blindness, madness, security, obstinacy, such as despises all remedies, and
leaves no place at all for wholesome advice and admonition. Lo this was the
case of those improbi and reprobi (reprobate silver shall men call them, chap.
6.30.) with whom our Prophet had to do. Moses had not more to do with the
Israelites in the wilderness, then Jeremy had with these stifnecked and
uncircumcised in in heart and ears, Acts 7.51.
as good at resisting the Holy Ghost as ever their Fathers were. The times were
not unlike those described by Tacitus, concerning which Casaeubon says, quibus
nulla unquam aut virtutum steriliora, aut virtutbus inimiciora, that no times
were ever more barren of virtues, or greater enemies to virtues. And to say
sooth, how could they be much better, when the Book of the Law was wanting for
above sixty years, and the whole land overspred with the deeds of darkness?
Josiah indeed that good young King (by the advice of this Prophet Jermy, Josias
a zelo ignis divini nomen babet: Significat autem Jeremias Altitudinem Dei, vel
Exaltatum a Deo.
who was younger then himself, but both full of zeal) did what he could to
reform both Church and State; but he alas could not do withal: the
Reformation in his days was forced by him: and there was foul work in secret
(as appears by Zephany who was our Prophets Contemporary) it met with much
opposition both from Princes, Priest, and People, who all had been woefully
habituated and hardened in their idolatry under Manasseh and Amon, etc. Unto
which also and other abominations not a few they soon relapsed, when once
Josiah was taken away, and his successors proved to be such as countenanced
and complied with the people, in all their impieties and excesses. This Prophet
therefore was stirred up by God to oppose the current of the times and the
torrent of vices; to call them to repentance, and to threaten the Seventy years
captivity: which because they believed not, neither returned unto the Lord,
came upon them accordingly, as is set forth in the end of this Prophecy. Whence
Procopius, Isidor, and others, have gathered that, besides this Prophecy and
the Lamentations, Jeremiah wrote the first and second Book of Kings. But that is
as uncertain, as that he was stoned to death by the Jews in Egypt, Isidor.
Doroth. Epiphan.
or that the Egyptians afterward built him an honorable Sepulcher, and
resorted much unto it, for devotion sake: when as R. Solomon thinks from
chap. 44.28. that Jeremy together with Baruc returned out of Egypt into Judaea,
and there dyed.

The son of Hilkiah] The High Priest who found the Book of the Law, say the
Chaldee Paraphrast and others, but many think otherwise: and the Prophet
himself adds.

Isal. 10.
Of the Priests that were at Anathoth] Poor Anathoth renowned as much by
Jeremy, Ex praepositis Templi. Iunuitur in ipsum rectius potuisse competere
Propheticum munus, quam in multos alios vel ex aula, vel ex caula vocatos.
as little Hippo was afterward by great Austin Bishop there. The Targum tells
us that Jeremy was one of the twenty four Cheiftains of the Temple. A Priest he
was, and so an ordinary Teacher, before he acted as a Prophet: but his
Countrymen of Anathoth evil-intreated him.

In the land of Benjamin] Some three miles from Jerusalem.

Ver. 2. Unto whom the Word of the Lord came in the days of Josiah] Woe be to
the world because of the Word. The Lord keeps count what Preachers he
sends, what pains they take, and how long, to how little purpose they preach
unto a people. He says that it was the Word of the Lord, for authority sake,
and that none might despise his youth, since he was sent by the Ancient of days.

In the thirteenth year of his reigne] Eighteen years then he prophesied under
good Josiah, who was too blame, doubtless, in not sending to advise with this
or some other Prophet, before he went forth against Pharaoh-Necho: sometimes
both grace and wit are asleep in the holiest and wariest breasts.

Ver. 3. It came also in the days of Jehoiachim] Called at first Eliachim by
his good Father Josiah, from whom he degenerated, cutting Jeremies roll with a
penknife and burning it, chap. 36. at which his Fathers heart would have
melted, as 2 Chronicles. 34.27.

Unto the end of the eleventh year of Zedekiah] Jehoahaz and Jehoiachim, are
not mentioned because their reign was so short, hardly half a year. By this
computation it appears, that Jeremy prophesied forty years at least. And the
Holy Ghost sets a special mark (as a Reverend Writer has well observed)
upon those forty years of his prophesying, Lightfoots Harmony Chron. of old
Test.
Ezekiel. 4.6. where when the Lord summeth up the years that were betwixt the
falling away of the ten Tribes and the burning of the Temple, three hundred and
ninety in all, and counts them by the Prophets lying so many days upon his
left-side; he bids him to lie forty days upon his right-side, and bear the
iniquity of the house of Judah forty days, a day for a year. Not to signify
that it was forty years above three hundred and ninety betwixt the revolt of
the ten Tribes and the captivity of Judah (for it was but three hundred and
ninety exactly in all) but because he would set, and mark out Judah's singular
iniquity, by a singular mark; for that they had forty years so pregnant
instructions and admonitions, by so eminent a Prophet: and yet were impenitent
to their own destruction.

Unto the carrying away of Jerusalem] He thought (belike) when he prefixed this
title, that he should have prophesied no more, when once Jerusalem was carried
captive; but it proved otherwise; for he peophecyed after that in Egypt, chap.
44. yet not forty years also after the captivity, as the Jews have fabled: Nor
is it so certain, that for that prophecy he was slain by Pharaoh Ophrae (whom
Herodotus calls Apryes, and says he was a very proud Prince) as some have
storied. Lib. 2. in fine.


Ver. 4. Then the word of the Lord came unto me] The Lord is said to come to
Balaam, Abimelech, Laban, etc. but he never concredited his word to any but to
his holy Prophets, of whom it is said as here, The Word of the Lord came to
them.

Ver. 5. Before I formed thee in the belly, I knew thee] viz. With a knowledge
not Intuitive only but also Approbative. Verba notitiae apud Hebraeos secum
trahunt affectum.

I sanctified thee] Infusing grace into thy heart (as afterward also into the
Baptists, Luke 1.15.) and setting thee apart in my secret purpose to this
sacred office of a Prophet, as afterward also God did Paul to the Apostleship,
Gal. 1.15.

And I ordained thee a Prophet] Magna semper fecerunt qui Deo vocante
docuerunt, says Luther. They have always done great things, whom God has
called to teach his people: quod est contra eos qui Ecclesiam ruituram putant
nisi and ipsi doceant, says Oecolampadius^: This text makes against such as
think that the Church must needsly suffer, unless they (though uncalled) turn
Teachers.

Unto the Nations] i. e. First to the Jews, qui fere in Gentiles evaserant, who
were little better then Gentiles: so Papagant are called Pagans, Rev. 11.2.
Secondly, to forreiners, of and to whom he prophesied, chap. 44, etc. Thirdly,
to people of all times, who may and must be instructed by this Book: which is
such as was highly see by, and cited in the Old Testament by Daniel, Ezechiel,
Nehemiah, Ezra, Obadiah, (who takes most of his Prophecy out of him) as in the
New by our Savior, Matthew. 21. Mar. 11. Matthew the Evangelist, chap. 2. Paul 2
Cor. 6.1. and 10. Heb. 8. and 10. John the Divine, Rev. 2. and 15.

Ver. 6. Then said I, Ah Lord God] Verbum angustiae: The old Latin has it A,
A, A, whereby is noted (say some) a threefold defect sc. of age, of knowledge,
and of eloquence: but that is more subtle then solid. True worth is ever modest:
and the more fit any man is for whatsoever vocation, the less he thinks
himself: forwardness argues insufficiency.

Behold I cannot speak] Heb. I know not to speak, i. e. a right, and as I
ought. Tanto negotio tam instructum oratorem me non agnosco. Jeremy was an
excellent Speaker, as well appears by these ensuing Homilies of his, which
show that he was suaviter gravis, and graviter suavis (as One says of Basil) a
grave and sweet Preacher; one that could deliver his mind fitly, and durst do
it freely. Hence some of the Jews judged our Savior to have been Jeremiah
propter dicendi agendique gravitatem and Parrhesian, for his gravity and
freedom of speech. Nevertheless Jeremy, in his own opinion, cannot speak: that
is, was no way fit to speak. So Moses is at it with his Who am I? Exodus 3. when
as none in all Egypt was comparably fit for such an Embassage. It was an usual
saying of Luther, Etsi jam senex, and in concionando exercitus sum, etc.
Although I am now an old man, and an experienced Preacher, yet I tremble as often
as I go up into the pulpit.

For I am a child] Epiphanius says, that Jeremy was not now above fourteen or
fifteen when he began to Prophecy. Samuel also and Daniel began very young. So
did Timothy, Origin, Cornelius Mus a famous Preacher, say his fellow Jesuits,
at eleven years of age. Arch Bishop Usher was converted at ten years old, His
life and death by D. Bern.
preached betime, and so continued to do for sixty years or near upon. Mr. Beza
was likewise converted at sixteen years old (for the which, as for a special
mercy, he gives God thanks in his last Will and Testament) and lived a
Preacher in Geneva to a very great age.

God loves not Quaerists, but Currists, did Luther.
Ver. 7. Say not I am a child] Plead no excuses, cast no perils; never dispute
but dispatch; never reason but run, depending for direction and success upon
God alone, in whom are all our fresh springs, and from whom is all our
sufficiency, etc. Paul was a most unlikely piece of wood to make what he was
afterward called, a Mercury, Act. 14.11. yet God made use of him, Act. 9.13,
14.

For thou shall go to all that I shall send thee] Whether Kings or Captives,
Lords or Losels. He preached before Jehoiachim, concerning the office of a
King: and threatened him with the burial of an ass, chap. 22. and 36. he dealt
plainly with the Princes who beat him, and with the Priests who stockt him,
with all sorts to his great cost: he was of an heroical and unexpugnable
spirit: so are not many in these times, Verbi Dei truncatores and
emasculatores, men-pleasing Preachers.

Act. and Mon.
Ver. 8. Be not afraid of their faces] Look they never so big, as did Henery 8.
upon Latimer, and upon Lambert, who yet told him his own: as did Stephen
Gardener upon Dr. Taylour Martyr, but had as good as he brought. The majesty of
a man, as also his wrath shows itself in his countenance: and young men
especially are apt to be baffled and dashed with fierce looks.

For I am with thee, to deliver thee] On one sort or another: thy crown (be
sure) no man shall take from thee; thy perpetual triumph thou shall not lose.

Ver. 9. Then the Lord put forth his hand and touched my mouth] This was a very
great favor and a sweet settlement to the hesitating Prophet. The like visible
sign for confirmation was given to Isaiah, chap. 6, to Ezekiel, chap. 2. and 3.
and to John the Divine, Rev. 10. how much are we bound to God for his Word and
Sacraments?

Behold I have put my words in thy mouth] And in thy mind also; together with
good courage for the better uttering of them. Fear not therefore though thou
be, as thou objectest, infantissimus and infirmissimus; but go in this my
might, and Preach lustily.

Ver. 10. See, I have set thee this day over Nations] sc. With authority to use
the same liberty in reproving their sins, that they take in committing them.
Fear not the highest (for I have set thee over them) but look upon them as so
many mice: for what are they more in comparison of me and of thee, who have
from me thy mission and commission? zeal in well-doing shows a man to be
right: like as such are living fish as swim against the stream.

To root out and to pull down] i. e. To denounce destruction to evildoers, and
then I will effect it. Elisha has his sword, as well as Hazael or Jehu, 1
King. 19.17. and vengeance for the disobedient is every whit as ready in Gods
hand as in his Ministers mouth, 2 Cor. 10.6. See Hos. 6.5. (with the Note) Joh.
20.23. But what a mercy of God to the Church was it, that the same day that
Pelagius that Arch-heretick was born in Britain, Austin the great confuter of
that heretic should be born in Afrike? Providence so disposing that the poison
and the Antidote should come into the world together? Dempster. Hist. Scot.


To build and to plant] As a co-worker with God for the good of souls, by
preaching Christ unto them, as this Prophet does notably in a most divine and
stately strain: setting him forth in his coming, Covenant, Offices, Benefits,
etc. as the only foundation, and lively root of hope.

Ver. 11. Jeremiah, what see thou?] It was great kindness and familiarity
thus to parle with him, and to call him by his name.

And I said, I see a rod of an Almond tree] Which has its name in Hebrew from
watching, because it watches as it were to bud and bear before other trees,
even in the deep of winter, and when it is at coldest. Hereby, the Prophet is
animated though but young; and assured that he shall have the fruit of his so
early labors. God cares not for those arbores autumnales, Jude 13. trees
which bud not till the latter end of harvest. The truth of all his predictions
is designed, though little believed by the most: the speediness also of their
performance, as ver. 12. and Ezekiel. 7.10, 11. a good Comment upon this text. The
sins of Gods people, says one, are sooner ripe then of the heathens, because
they have the constant light and heat of his Word to hasten their maturity.
This was typified by the basket of Summer fruits, and by the Almond-tree in
this text. As the Almond-tree, Hieron. Theod. Just. Mart.
says another, has a bitter rind but a sweet kernel, so has affliction
sanctified: and again, as the Almond-tree is made more fruitful by driving
nails into it, letting out a noxious gum that hinders the fruitfulness
thereof: so is a good man made better by afflictions.

Ver. 12. Thou have well seen] Heb. Thou have done well to see, i. e. so to see.

For I will hasten my Word] Heb. amigdalaturus sum, I am watching upon the
evil, to bring in the Chaldeans, as I have threatened. See the like elegant
allusion, Ans. 8.1, 2. Nemesis a tergo: punishment is at the heels of sin.

Ver. 13. What see thou?] By these questions his attention is stirred up,
that he may the better observe the matter of his preaching, which is here
represented by a second vision.

I see a seething pot] Heb. a pot blown up. Ollam Ebullitam.
This boiling pot is Jerusalem besieged by the Chaldeans, and we are the flesh,
say those deriders of this Prophecy of Jeremy, Ezekiel. 11.3. but they found it to
be just so, shortly after: and then their profane hearts might well have
bespoke them, as the heart of Apollodorus the tyrant seemed to say to him, who
dreamed one night that he was flead by the Scythians and boiled in a Chaldron;
and that his heart spoke to him out of the kettle, (...).
It is I that have drawn thee to all this.

And the face thereof] i. e. That part of the pot that is next the fire, and
heated therewith.

Ver. 14. Out of the North an evil shall break forth] i. e. From Chaldea which
is North from Judaea; Gregory moralizeth the text thus: man's mind is this pot:
Aquilo est seeds diaboli. Aug.
that which from the North sets it on fire is the devil, by inflaming it with
evil lusts, and then he sets up his throne therein; As

Ver. 15. And set every one his throne] Judging such as in those very gates had
unjustly judged others. See this performed, 2 King. 24.4. and 25.4. Chap. 52.

Ver. 16. And I will utter my judgment against them] sc. By those Northern
Princes: bu first by thee and Zephany, and Huldah, etc. if happily they will
repent, that I may repent of the evil. God therefore threateneth that he may
not punish.

Who have forsaken me and burnt incense] These sins differ in degrees; and are
all found among the Papists.

Ver. 17. Thou therefore gird up thy loynes] q. d. Thou have, I must needs say,
Perquam difficile est, sed ita lex jubet.
a hard task of it. But hard or not hard, it must be done, or thou art undone.
About it therefore, and play the man, plucking up thy best heart, as we say,
and acting vigorously. Stir up the gifts of God that are in thee, and exercise
thy talents committed unto thee. Verbs minister es: hoc age.

Be not dismayed at their faces, least] Ne conteritor, nete conteram. Be not
afraid of them least I fright thee worse, to thy ruth and utter ruin.
Excellently Bernard, Anranaclasis.
If I deal not faithfully with you, you will be damnified, but I shall be
damned: Let me suffer any thing rather than be guilty of a sinful silence, said
that heroical Luther. But Melancthon (his Colleague) was so timorous, that
Luther was fain to chide him many times: And Calvin (in an Epistle of his to
John Sleidan) prays God to furnish him with a more noble spirit, ne gravem ex
ejus timiditate jacturam sentiat posteritas, lest posterity should rue for his
timidity. Calvin himself in his last speech to his fellow-Ministers on his
deathbed, speaks thus: When I first came to this City (Geneva) the Gospel
indeed was here preached, but things were very far out of order, as if
Christianity consisted wholly in the casting down of images, etc. There were
also not a few wicked fellows who put me hard to it, Melch. Ad. in vic. Calvin.
p. 106.
setting themselves against me to their utmost. But the Lord our good God did
so steel me and strengthen me, who am naturally fearful and dastardly, that I
stoutly withstood them, and went on with the work of Reformation; to his glory
alone be it spoken. Melacthon also admired that courage in Luther, that he
could not find in himself: for besides many passages of his in his Epistles
that way tending, one time when he saw Luthers picture, he uttered this verse
immediately, Fulmnia erant linguae singula verba tuae.

(...).
Ver. 18. For behold I have made thee this day a defenced City] i. e.
Inpregnable, inexpugnable, the bulwark of truth (as one said of Basil) such as
could not be battered. And of Ambrose Stilico the Earl said, that he was the
walls of Italy. Peter and John are called Pillars, Gal. 2.9. Athanasius, the
Churches Champion, Virg.
Ille velut pelagi rupes immota resistit.

Against the Kings of Judah, against the Princes, etc.] There was a general
defection of all sorts; and Jeremy was to declaim against them all, and
proclaim their utter destruction, in case they repented not. Well might Luther
say, for he had the sad experience of it, Praedicare nihil aliud est quam
totius mundi furorem in se derivare. To preach is nothing else, but to derive
upon a man's self the rage of all the world. Vt jam quatuor clementa far
nequeant.
He met with some even at Wittenberg where he lived, who were so wicked and
uncounselable, that the four Elements could not endure them: So did good
Jeremy, etc.

Ver. 19. They shall not prevail against me] They shall not take thy Crown from
thee, no nor thy precious life; for thou shall survive them. So Luther dyed in
his bed, maugre the malice of Rome, and of hell.

For I am with thee] And what can all the wicked do against one Minister armed
with Gods presence and power?

CHAP. II.
Ver. 1. MOreover the word of the Lord came to me, saying] The Prophet being
thus called and confirmed, as chap. 1. sets forthwith upon the work, Est autem
hoc caput plenum querelae, and quasi continuum pathos. In this chapter the Lord
heavily complains of Jerusalems unworthy usage of him, convincing them
thereof by sixteen several arguments (as Alapide has observed) and all little
enough: for they put him to his proofs, as is to be seen, ver. 35.

Ver. 2. Go thou and cry] For if I my self should do it immediately from
heaven, my stillest Rhetorike would be too loud for them, Deuteronomy. 5.27, 28.

I remember thee] Who have forgot thy first love and loyalty to me. Or, I
remember, that is, I put thee in mind of the kindness that has been betwixt
us. Augustus might have some such meaning in those last words of his to his
wife when he lay a dying, O Livia, remember our marriage, and adeiu. It Is
thought she had a finger in setting him going: and that she was over-familiar
with Eudemus the Physician, qui specie artis frequent secretis, says Tacitus.
Peccatum est Deicidium.

The kindness of thy youth] When thou came out of Egypt after me, and wast
espoused unto me at the giving of the Law. We use highly to prize nettle-buds,
when they first put forth: so does God our young services. Others render it
thus, I record the mercy showed to thee in thy youth, and the love of thine
espousals, sc. when as I loved thee because I loved thee, and for no other
reason, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8.

When thou wentest after me in the wildernesse] God takes it kindly when men
will choose him, and his ways in affliction: as did Moses, Heb. 11.25. Cant.
8.5. Who is this that comes from the wilderness (from troubles and
afflictions) leaning on her beloved.

Ver. 3. Israel was holiness unto the Lord] A people consecrated and set apart
for his peculiar, Exodus 19.5. Psalm. 114.2. holy with a federal holiness at
least.

And the first fruits of his increase] Yea his firstborn, and therefore higher
than the Kings of the earth, Psalm 89.27. All Gods people are so, Heb. 12.23.
James 1.18.

All that devour them shall offend] Rather thus, all that devoured them
trespassed, evil befell them: witness the four latter books of Moses.

Ver. 4. Hear ye the word of the Lord] This is often inculcated in both
Testaments, to procure attention, 1 Cor. 11.23. I received of the Lord that
which also I delivered unto you, 1 These. 4.15. This we say unto you by the Word
of the Lord. Thus to preach, is to preach cum privilegio.

Ver. 5. What iniquity have your Fathers found in me?] How unreasonable was
their Apostasy? and how senseless is your pleading of their example? nothing is
more irrational then irreligion.

That they are gone far from me] Are ye weary of receiving so many benefits by
one man? said Themistocles to his ungrateful Countrymen.

And have walked after vanity] An Idol is nothing at all, but only in the vain
opinion of the Idolater.

And are become vain] sc. In their imaginations, Romans 1.21. as vain as their
very Idols, Psalm. 115.8.

Ver. 6. Neither said they] In their minds, or with their mouths. Cicero.
That signal deliverance was obliterated, and even lost upon them. Plerique
omnes sumus ingrati.

Through a land of deserts and of pits] Per terram campestrem and sepulchralem,
where we talked of making our graves; neither was it any otherwise likely, but
that God gave us pluviam escatilem and petram aquatilem, all manner of
necessaries. Tertul.


Ver. 7. And I brought you into a plentiful Countrey] You lived in my good
land, but not by my good Laws: you had aequissimajura, sed iniqu^ssima ingenia,
as was said of the Athenians: as if I had hired you to be wicked, so have you
abused my mercies to my greatest dishonor.

Ver. 8. The Priests said not, Where is the Lord] Ignorant they were and idle:
Dixerunt, Vbi victimae, ubi nummi? triobotarium Deum faciunt subque hastam
mittunt. Oecol.
they would not be at the pains of a serious inquisition after God and his
will: though he be a rewarder of all that diligently seek him, Heb. 11.6.

And they that handled the Law] That expounded and applied it. A Metaphor from
such as are trained in the war, who are said tractare bellum, to handle their
arms.

The Pastors also transgressed against me.] What marvel therefore that the
people did so too? For, as in a fish, the corruption of it begins at the
head: so here.

And the Prophets prophesied by Baal] And taught others to worship Idols. We
see then it is nothing new that stars fall from heaven, that Church-chieftaines
should fall from God, and draw others after them. It went for a Proverb a
little before Luther stirred, Qui Theologum scholasticum videt, videt septem
peccata mortalia, he that sees a Divine, sees the seven deadly sins.

Ver. 9. I will yet plead with you] i. e. Debate the case with you, and set you
down by sound reason. So he did to our first Parents when they had sinned; but
doomed the serpent without any more ado.

Ver. 10. For pass over the isles of Chittim] The Western parts of the World,
Greece, Italy, Cyprus, etc.

And send unto Kedar] The Eastern parts, where dwell Kedarens, Arabians,
Saracens, etc.

Ver. 11. Has a Nation changed their Gods?] No: they are too pertinacious in
their superstitions. Xenophon says it was an oracle of Apollo, that those Gods
are rightly worshipped which were delivered them by their ancestors: and this
he greatly applaudeth. Cicero also says, that no reason shall ever prevail
with him to relinquish the religion of his forefathers. Heyl. Cosm.
That Monarch of Morocco told an English Ambassador, that he had lately read
St. Paul, and that he disliked nothing in him but this, that he had changed his
religion.

Which yet are no gods] Sed hominum figmenta and ludibria daemonum: when
Hercules came into a Temple, and found the Image or statue of Adonis in it, he
pulled it down with this expression, Certe nil sacri es, Sure thou art no god:
the like may be said of all Idols.

But my people have changed their glory] i. e. Their God of whom they might
glory, saying, as Deuteronomy. 32.31. their Rock is not as our Rock, our enemies
themselves being Judges.

Ver. 12. Be astonished O heavens] A poetical and pathetical expression! Confer
Deuteronomy. 32.1. Isa. 1.2.

Be horribly afraid] Horripilamini portento malitiae, quod jam dicturus sum, be
aghast at such a prodigious wickedness.

Be very desolate] As the Sun seemed to be, when at the death of Christ, he hid
his head in a mantle of black, which made (they say) the Heathen Astrologer
break out into these words Either the God of nature suffers, Dionys.
or else the world is at an end.

Ver. 13. For my people have committed two evils] Contrary to those two good
things that I have commanded them, viz. Depart from evil, and do good, Psalm.
34.14. Lust does first (...) draw a man from God, and then it does (...)
deceive him with a bait of the creature, Jam. 1.14.

They have forsaken me the fountain of living water] The all-sufficient,
ever-flowing, Dialog. 7.
overflowing wellspring of all welfare, Jam. 1.17. Trismegist a Heathen could
say Respicite O mortales, and resipiscite, and ad fontem vitae ricurrite. Look
back O mortals and repent, and run back again to the fountain of life. Seneca
also says, that Sin is so foul a thing, that he would not commit it, though he
could hide it from men, and get pardon of it of God: for that were to turn his
back upon God the chife good, Comment. in Romans 1.19. So little reason was there
that Alex. Hales should be called first Fons vitae, and then Doctor
irrefragabilis.
etc. How well might Bullinger say, that Seneca alone had left to posterity
more sincere Divinity, then all the books of almost all the School men!

And hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns] Such and no better are all
Idols, humane helps, creature comforts, friends, means, merits, etc. what are
they all but cisterns, that hold but muddy rainwater at best: but then, being
broken cisterns, riven vessels, what hold they else but limum and lapides, mud
and gravel? Such cisternes therefore to hew out, what is it better then
industrious folly, laborious loss of time? to say no worse of it. Now Turpe
est difficiles habere nugas:
Et stultus labor est ineptiarum.


Servus emptitius.
Ver. 14. Is Israel a servant] sc. Bought with money?

Is he a home-born slave] Verna, a slave by birth q. d. If he be either of the
two, he may thank himself. He was my son, nay my Spouse, if he could have kept
him so: but he has sold himself to commit wickedness, and I have therefore
sold him into the hands of the Caldeans. Lo this is the product of his
forsaking me the fountain of living waters, etc.

Ver. 15. The young Lions roared upon him and yelled] i. e. The King of Babylon
and his forces, more fierce and fell then young Lions. Would any take the
Churches picture? Loc. com. tit. de persecut. ver. Eccles.
says Luther; then let him paint a silly poor maid sitting in a wood or
wilderness, compassed about with hungry Lions, Wolves, Boars, and Bears: for
this is her condition in the world.

And they made his land waste] i. e. They shall shortly so make it.

Ver. 16. Also the children of Noph and Tahapanes] Two chief Cities of Egypt,
the Inhabitants whereof were said to be most effeminate and servile fellows:
even these shall overtop thee, Hero dot. l. 2.
knock thee down as an Ox by a blow on the brain-pan, and make havoc of those
things, that thou hold the chiefest and most desirable.

Genesis 42.22.
Ver. 17. Have thou not procured this to thy self?] The same may the Lord say to
every sufferer: and further add, Did not I warn you saying, Sin not against the
child? Oh do not this abominable thing! your iniquities will undoubtedly be
your ruin, etc.

When he led thee by the way] The way that is called holy, the highway to
heaven: fitly here opposed to those by-waies of carnal wisdom, mentioned in the
following verses.

Ver. 18. And now what have thou to do in the way of Egypt?] Why trustest thou
to carnal combinations, which thou have formerly found to be so successlesse?
will thou never be warned of these broken cisterns? or have thou a mind to be
ground to powder betwixt those two mil-stones, of Egypt and Assyria, after whom
thou hankerest? Psalm. 146.3. David having entered a Caveat against creature
confidence, persuades people to trust in God alone: See also Psalm. 62.8. 9, 10.

To drink the waters of Sihor] i. e. Of Nilus called Sihor, of its blackness,
Limosus est Nilus and oblimat Egypt.
or muddinesse; and in Greek (...) Black: to drink the waters of it here, is to
draw the Egyptian forces to thine assistance, and (as some think) to partake
with them in their superstitions.

To drink of the water of the river] i. e. Of Euphrates, that river by an
eminency.

Ver. 19. Thine own wickedness shall correct thee] E^udiat te malitia tua, Let
thine own wickedness with the sad consequents thereof, teach thee better
things: as chap. 6.8. Let it for shame, let it, (...), let smart make wit, Isa.
28.19. Prove. 29.15.

Know therefore and see] Learn at least by sad experience; for thou have paid
for thy learning. Piscator ictus sapiet.

That it is an evil thing and bitter] So all sin will prove in the issue, and
when the bottom of the bag is turned upward. There will be bitterness in the
end, as Abner said to Joab, 2 Samuel 3.15. Laban will show himself at parting
howsoever. Tamar will be more hated then ever she was loved: Amor, amaror;
pius aloes quam mellis habet.

Laeta venire Venus, tristis abire solet. Drunkenness is sweet, but wormwood
is bitter. These Inhabitants of Jerusalem were made drunk, but with wormwood,
Lam. 3.15. they found that sin was a Dulcacidum, a bitter-sweet: sweet in the
mouth, but bitter in the maw, (...) Philo.
as that book in the Revelation: like Adam's apple, or Esau's pottage, or
Jonathan's honey, or Judas his thirty pieces, whereof he would fain have been
rid but could not: they burnt like a spark of hellfire in his hand, but
especially in his conscience. The Devil with the Panther, hides his deformed
head, till the sweet sent have drawn other beasts into his danger, and then he
devoureth them. Did we but consider what sin will cost us at last, we durst not
but be innocent.

Ver. 20. For of old time I have broken thy yoke] Or, For when of old I broke
thy yoke etc. sc. in Egypt, Psalm. 81.5, 6, 10. whilst the deliverance was
fresh, thou had very good resolutions.

And thou said I will not transgress] Or, I will not serve, sc. other Gods.
Good words, had thou been as good as thy word. But what follows?

When upon every high hill and every green tree, etc.] No sooner did her old
heart and her old temptations meet, but they presently fell into mutual
embraces. When men have made good vows, let them be as careful to make good
their vows unto the Lord, Psalm. 76.11.

Thou wanderest playing the harlot] Thou runnest a madding and a gadding after
Idols, (...).

Ver. 21. Yet I had planted thee a noble vine] Heb. a Sorek, or with slips of
Sorek. Judge. 16.4. See Esa. 5.3. (a parallel text) Exodus 15.17. Psalm. 44.3. and
80.9.

Wholly a right seed] That should have yielded a right crop: but it proves
otherwise; nec votis respondet avari Agricolae.

How then art thou turned into the degenerate plant] How is that slips of Sorek
prove slips of Sodom? Deuteronomy. 32.32. See on Isa. 5.4, 7.

Ver. 22. For though thou wash thee with nitre] Much used of old by Fullers and
neat Landresses, say Isidore and Athanasius; now not known in these parts: Lib.
16. Etym. Lib. de Virg. Nitrum sordes erodit and expurgat. Plin.
Apothecaries use Saltpeter instead of it. Sin leaves behind it a deep stain,
so ingrained that it will hardly ever be gotten out: not at all by blanching,
extenuating, excusing, etc. or by any legal purifications, hypocritical
lotions. All which notwithstanding,

Thine iniquity is marked before me] Nitet iniquitas tua, splendet instar
auri, Piscat.
it glisters like gold before me, whose eyes thou can not blind or bleer with
any of thy colorable pretexts and pretenses.

Ver. 23. How can thou say I am not polluted?] q. d. With what face? but that
sin has oaded an impudence in thy face.

I have not gone after Baalius] The whole crew of Heathen-dieties ( Lords or
Masters the word signifies) which Cicero says were but men, De not. deor.
their Temples were their sepulchers, and their religion superstition. He
further wishes, that he could as easily discern the true religion, as discover
the false.

See thy way in the vally] Of Ben-Hinnom, Where thou have sacrificed thy
children to Moloch thy chief Baal: Sol and homo generant hominem.
that is, say some, to the Sun, as to the universal cause strongly concurring
to the generation of their children so sacrificed.

Thou art a swift Dromedary] That runs a madding after her mate: so do
thou after Idols: Confer 1 Cor. 12.2.

Ver. 24. A wild Ass used to the wildernesse] Untamable, and untractable, Job
39.8. especially when proud, and in the heat of lust, as these were after their
Idols.

That snuffeth up the wind] When she windeth the male: so this people when
acted by a spirit of fornications.

In her month they shall find her] i. e. In her last month, when she is so
big with young, that she cannot weild her self. So sinners be they never so
stubborn, so stiff and high in the instep, that there is no dealing with them,
yet when they are in straits and distresses, it will be otherwise. God, said
Mr. Marbury, is fain to deal with wicked men, as men do with frisking jades in
a pasture, that cannot be taken up till gotten to a gate: so till he seize upon
them by some judgment or summons to dye, etc.

Ver. 25. Withold thy foot from being unshod, etc.] Cease thy vain vagaries to
the wearing out of thy shoes, and exposing thy self to extreme thirst: Or
rather take a timely course to prevent captivity and the miseries that attend
it, Isa. 20.2, 4. and 47.2.

But thou said There is no hope] viz. Of reclayming us, we are resolved on
our course, and will take our swing in sin whatsoever come of it, Isa. 28.14,
15. and 57.10. Some grow desperately sinful (says a Reverend modern Writer)
like those Italian Senators, Mr. Sheph. Sincere Convert. 222.
that desparing of their lives (when upon submission they had been promised
their lives, yet) being conscious of their villainy, made a curious banquet, and
at the end thereof every man drank up his glass of poison and killed himself:
so men feeling such horrible hard hearts, and privy to such notorious sins,
they cast away souls and all for lust, and so perish woefully, because they
lived desperately, and so securely.

Ver. 26. As the thief is ashamed when he is found] As usually he is at length,
notwithstanding all his slights and wiles. That was a cunning thief indeed of
whom Dio writes in the life of Severus: Bulas he calls him, an Italian, who
having gotten together six hundred such as himself, robbed many in Italy under
the Emperors nose for two years together: and although he was diligently
sought for by the Emperor and his Armies, yet he could not be caught: Visus
enim non videbatur, non inveniebatur inventus, deprehensus non capiebatur,
says the Historian: he was too hard for them all.

So is the house of Israel ashamed] They are, or ought to be so: but -- Nihil
est audacius illis
Deprensis: vires animosque a crimine sumunt.


Ver. 27. Saying to a stock, Thou art my Father] i. e. My God. Isa. 44.17. We
are not the children of fornication, said those boasting Jews, Joh. 8.41. that
is, we are not Idolaters who say, as here, to a stock, Thou art my Father. The
Samaritans, they called bastards.

But in the time of their trouble they will say. Arise and save us] Thus in
their month they will be found, ver. 24. When they had run themselves barefoot
in following their lovers, ( ver. 25.) who answered their expectation with
nothing but fear, and sent them away with shame instead of glory, then God was
thought upon and sought unto. Let us make God our choice, and not our
necessity: and labor to maintain such constant couse with him, that he may
know our souls in adversity, and not turn us off, as he does these with

Ver. 28. But where are thy Gods that thou have made thee?] Thou have sure no
need of my help: Quisi tu hujus indigeas patris. See the like, Judge. 10.14.
with the Note there.

For according to the number of thy Cities are thy gods] Enough of them thou
have, and near enough. The Papists also have their Tutelar-Saints, to whom they
seek more then to God himself. And when the Ave-Mary-bell rings, (which is at
Sunrising, Noon, and Sun setting) all men in what place soever, house, field,
Spec. Europ.
street or market, do presently kneel down and send up their united devotions
to heaven, by an Ave-Maria.

Ver. 29. Wherefore will ye plead with me?] Putting me to my proofs? Is not the
case clear enough? will ye not yield to reason? See on ver. 19.

Ye all have transgressed against me] And yet ye have the face to ask, as chap.
16.10. What is our iniquity, or what is our sin that we have committed against
the Lord? and to say as Hos. 12.8. In all my labors they shall find none
iniquity in me: that were sin. See there.

Ver. 30. In vain have I smitten your children] My hammers have but beaten cold
Iron: ye are incorrigible, irreformable. See Isa. 1.5. with the Note.

Your own sword has devoured your Prophets] As it did in the days of Ahaz,
Joash, Manasseh, of whom Josephus says, Lib. 10 cap. 4.
that he slew some Prophet of God every day.

Like a destroying Lion] Cum saevitia summa, exuta omni humanitate: ye have
puulled them limmeale, and caused them to dye piecemeale.

Ver. 31. O generation, see ye the word of the Lord] q. d. O generation rather
leonine then humane! as ver. 30. See ye the word; I say not to you Hear, no
more then I would to a savage beast; for ye have no ears to hear reason: but
see with your eyes; for so even beasts can do. See now, and say sooth.

Have I been a wilderness unto Israel?] Such as is described before, ver. 6.
Or have I not rather been a Paradise unto you, and a storehouse of all
accommodations and comforts? It well appears that they have wanted nothing
but thankful hearts, by this, that fullness has bred forgetfulness: for so
stout they are grown by reason of their great wealth, that they will not come
at me, nor acknowledge my sovereignty over them: but will needs be petty Gods
within themselves: We are Lords, say they, and will not now take it as we have
done. The ancient Greek renders it, We will not be ruled.

Ver. 32. Can a maid forget her ornaments?] Not lightly or easily, as minding
them many times more then is meet, and then their ornaments are but the nest of
pride: and whilst they think to gain more credit by their garments then by
their graces, they are much mistaken.

Yet my people have forgotten me days without number] i. e. Time out of mind:
when as God should be remembered at every breath we draw, since from him we have
(...), life and breath, as the Apostle says elegaintly, Acts 17.25. But into
such a dead Lethargy has sin cast most people, that God is forgotten by them,
add his Service neglected.

Ver. 33. Why trimmest thou thy way to seek love?] Cur bonificas? So Calvin
rendereth it, why do thou make good thy way? that is, set a good gloss upon
it, even the best side outward. The same word is used of Jesabels dressing her
head, 2 King. 9.30. What need this whorish tricking and trimming, if all were
right with thee?

Jactas vaenales, quas vis oberudere, merces. Therefore also have thou taught
the wicked ones thy way] Heb. the wicked women (for the word is feminine) those
she-sinners may learn immodesty of thee, who are meretricissimae. And for this
it is that thou art pointed at with the finger as it were, verse. 34, 35.

Ver. 34. Also in thy skirts] In the skirts of thy garments. Heb. in thy wings:
an allusion say some, to birds of prey, which stain their wings with the blood
of lesser fouls.

Is the blood of the souls] The lifeblood of innocent poor ones, of Prophets
especially, ver. 30.

I have not found it by secret search] Non in suffessione, as Calvin renders
it, as an allusion to Exodus 22.2.

But upon all these] that is, in propatulo, in public view. Or, super haec
omnia, because they told thee of all thy faults.

Ver. 35. Yet thou say, Because I am innocent] Antiquum obtines, thou
stand still upon thy justification: this doubleth thy fault. Homo agnoscit,
Deus ignoscit. The best way, Cur cu^ftas?
is, to plead guilty: confess and go free.

Ver. 36. why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way] Or, changing thy
way, as hoping some way to mend thy self. Keep home, and trust God: go further
and fare worse. Creatures were never true to those that trusted them.

Ver. 37. Yea thou shall go from him] Or, from hence, into captivity.

With thine hands] Lamenting as did Tamar, 2 Samuel 13.19.

For the Lord has rejected thy confidence] Where the beginning is carnal
confidence, the end is shame of any business, even of this life.

CHAP. III.
Ver. 1. THey say] Vulgo dicitur, says the Vulgar; Dicendo dicitur, say
others. They say, and they say well, for they have good law for it, Deuteronomy. 24.4.
But I am above law, says God, and will deal with thee, not according to mine
ordinary Rule, but according to my Prerogative. Thou shall be a Paradox to the
Bible: for I will do that in favor of thee, which I have inhibited others in
like case to do, and that scarce any man would do, though there were no law to
inhibit it, as one here Paraphraseth.

Shall not the land be greatly polluted] Great sins do greatly pollute; that of
adultery especially: for this is an heinous crime, yea it is an iniquity to be
punished by the Judges, Job. 31.11.

But thou have played the harlot -- yet return unto me] Haec est Dei clementia
insuperabilis; Gods mercy is matchless. No man, no God would show mercy as he
does, Mic. 7.18. Mal. 3.7. Zach. 1.3. He follows after those that run from
him, as the Sunbeams do the passenger that goes from them; and as is sweetly
set forth by our Savior in those three Parables, of the lost groat, the lost
sheep, and the lost son, Luke 15. Paul allows of Mark, 2 Timothy 4.11.
(though before he had refused him, Act. 15.38.) and wills others to entertain
him, Colos. 4.10, 11. Let none despair that has but a mind to return to God,
from whom he has deeply revolted. There is a natural Novatianisme in the
timorous conscience of convinced sinners, to doubt and question pardon for sins
of Apostasy, and falling after repentance. But this need not be, we see here.
Pernicious was Ahitophels counsel to Absalom, Go in to thy Fathers Concubines:
this he judged such an injury as David would never put up: yet return again to
me says the Lord, and all shall be well betwixt us.

Ver. 2. And see where thou have not been lien with] Pouring out thy spiritual
whoredoms, as Papists now do with their Crosses, Chapels, Pictures set up in
all places.

In the ways have thou sat for them] For thy customers and copesmates, like a
common strumpet. See Genesis 38.19. Ezekiel. 16.24, 25, 31.

As the Arabian in the wildernesse] As high-way-robbers wait for and way-lay
passengers, making it thy trade.

Ver. 3. Therefore the showrs have been withholden] Drought and dearth have
insued upon thy sin. By showrs here understand the former rain, called also the
seeds rain, Esaias 20.23.

And there has been no latter rain] That commonly came a little before
harvest, and was much desired.

And thou had a whores forehead] Quam pudet non esse impudentem, Aug.
that can blush no more then a sackbut. We have heard (says a Reverend writer)
of Virgins, which at first seemed modest, blushing at the motions of an honest
love; who being once corrupt and debauched, have grown flexible to easy
entreaties to unchastity, and from thence boldly lascivious, so as to solicit
others, Dr. Halls Remedy of Prophan. p. 179.
so as to prostitute themselves to all comers, yea (as the Casuists complain of
some Spanish stews) to an unnatural filthiness. The modest beginnings of sin
will make way for immodest proceeding. Let men take heed of that (...) i. e.
inverecundia, shamelesness, that Caligula liked so well in himself: and that
the heriticks called Effrontes professed. It Is an hard thing to have a brazen
face and a broken heart.

Ver. 4. Will thou not from this time cry unto me] And is not this extreme
impudence? have thou a face thus to collogue? Hypocritis nihil impudentius:
hypocrites are impudent flatterers: they would, if they could, cozen God of his
heaven.

Thou art the guide of my youth] i. e. My dear husband, Prove. 2.17. Fair words
are light-cheap, and may make fools fain. But God is not to be so courted and
complemented.

Ver. 5. Will he reserve his anger for ever?] Will he not? Nah. 1.2. and is
there not good reason he should do so, so long as you speak and do evil things
as you can, obstinately persisting in thy sinful practices? He that repents
with a contradiction (says Tertullian) God will pardon him with a
contradiction. Thou repentest, and yet continuest in thy sins. God will pardon
thee, and yet send thee to bell: There Is a pardon with a contradiction.

As thou couldest] i. e. To thine utmost. Nolunt solita peccare, says Seneca
of some: they strive to out-sin themselves, and others.

Ver. 6. The Lord also said unto me in the days of Josiah] This is the
beginning of a new Sermon, as most hold. Josiah was a religious Prince, and a
zealous reformer: and hypocrisy reigned exceedingly in his days, as we see
here: and as holy Bradford in his letters complains, that it did likewise in
King Edward the sixths days (who was our English Josiah) among the great ones
especially, who were very corrupt.

She is gone up upon every high mountain] sc. Ever since Solomon's mind began to
be corrupted, 1 King. 11.4. and now she smarteth for it: yet is not Judah
warned by her example.

Ver. 7. And I said after she had done] Or, yet I said: but I lost my sweet
words upon her.

Ver. 8. And I saw] That which others could not so easily discern; viz. their
hypocrisy and hollow-heartednesse, their incorrigiblenesse also and refusing
to he warned by what had befallen their brethren. God looked that Isreal's
corrections should have been Jerusalems instructions, and that by their lashes
she should have been lessoned: which because she was not, he is highly
displeased, and speaks of it here in a very angry dialect.

Yet her treacherous sister Judah feared not] But slighted the kindness of such
a caution, and despised the counsel that was written to her in her sisters
blood.

But went and played the harlot also] Being therefore the worse, because she
should have been the better of the two.

Ver. 9. And it came to pass through the lightness of her whoredome] Or
(better) through the vocalnesse of it, the loudness of her lewdness. Heb. The
voice or noise of her whoredom, the fame and bruit of it: for it is talked of
far and near.

And committed adultery with stones and with stocks] Haec ferae omnia in
coecum, erroneum, meretrioiumque Papatum apt hodie torqueri possunt: Do not
Idolatrous Papists even the same?

Ver. 10. Has not turned unto me with her whole heart] Josiah did, but the
people did not: as soon appeared, when in the next Kings reign they fell off as
fast as leaves do in Autumn. And so they did here, when Queen Mary set up
Popery.

Ver. 11. The back sliding Israel has justified her self] That is, she is less
guilty and faulty of the two: because Judah sinned against more means and
mercies; and because she received not instruction by her sisters destruction;
Therefore shall she feel, what she feared not at a distance: therefore shall
she taste of Isreal's rod, because she would not hear it: she that would not
tremble at her sisters divorce, must her self be divorced, and be judged as
women that break wedlock, Ezekiel. 16.38. bearing her own shame for her sins that
she had committed, more abominable then theirs, ver. 52.

Ver. 12. Go and proclaim these words toward the North] i. e, Toward Assyria
and Media, into which Countries the ten tribes had been carried captive. And
although they cannot hear thee, yet in time this prophecy may be brought to
their hearing: and the men of Judah, mean while, may be wrought upon thereby.

And I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you] Heb. I will not make my face
to fall: I will not further frown upon you, or deal hardly with you.

I will not keep anger for ever] Heb. I will not keep for ever. There is
nothing that a man is more ready to keep than his wrath. Therefore the Hebrews
put keep, for keep wrath; so Psalm. 103.9. Levit. 19.18. See Ver. 5.

Ver. 13. Only acknowledge thine iniquity] Thus favor is promised to the ten
captivated tribes, sed per modulum unius poenitentiae, but upon condition of
their true repentance: Facit peccator confitendo propitium, quem non facit
negando nescium. Aug.
one part whereof is confession of sin, Prove. 28.13. Psalm. 32.4. When thy sins
and Gods wrath meeting in thy conscience (says one) make thee deadly sick,
then pour forth thy soul in confession; and as it will ease thee (as vomiting
uses to do) so also it will move God to pity, and to give thee cordials and
comforts to restore thee again.

Ver. 14. Turn, O backsliding children] See on Zach. 1.3.

For I am married unto you] And, as I hate putting away, Mal. 2.16. so I can
receive to favor a wise that has been disloyal, ver. 1. and after a divorce.

And I will take you one of a City] i. e. Though but a few, as Isa. 10.11, 12.
and 17.6. and 24.3. all the rest hardening their hearts by unbelief. This has
been principally fulfilled in the days of the Gospel.

Ver. 15. And I will give you Pastors according to my heart] God gives
faithful Pastors often for the sake of but a few that are there to be converted;
and vilissimus pagus est palatium eburneum, Luth. tom. 3. page 81. a.
in quo est Pastor and credentes aliqui, says Luther: the poorest village is
an Ivory Palace, if there be but in it a Pastor and some few believers. Such
Pastors as God here promises (and more largely describes, chap. 23. and
Ezekiel. 34.) are special gifts of God: I will give you Pastors. David, after he
had discomfited the Amalekites, sent gifts to his friends in Judah, 1 Samuel
30.26. Great Alexander, when he had prevailed at the river Granicum, and was
now ascended into the upper parts of Asia, sent back many gifts, to assure them
of his love in Macedonia. The like does God to his Church by sending them
Pastors, with such two adjuncts as are here. 1. Adherent, his own approbation.
2. Inherent, skill to teach the people. See Ephesians. 4.8. with the Notes.

Ver. 16. They shall say no more the Ark, etc.] When the Gospel shall be
preached, Paulus ea vocat stercora and rudera.
the ancient ceremonies shall be abolished. This was not so easily believed,
and is therefore here again and again assured.

Ver. 17. They shall call Jerusalem] i. e. The Church Christian.

The throne of the Lord] The throne of glory, chap. 4.21. So Exodus 17.16.
because the hand upon the throne of the Lord, that is, say some, Amalecks hand
upon the Church: which is elsewhere also called the Temple of God.

Neither shall they walk any more, etc.] i. e. Not at random, but by rule, Ephesians.
5.15. Heb. not any more after the sight of their heart, i. e. as themselves
thought good, but as God directs them.

Ver. 18. In that day shall the house of Judah walk with the house of Israel]
All the Elect shall be reunited in Christ: unless we shall understand it of the
last reduction of the Nation into one, Isa. 11.13. Ezekiel. 37.16, 22. Hos. 1.11.

And they shall come together out of the land of the North] i. e. Out of the
place of their captivity, whereby was figured our spiritual captivity, etc.

Ver. 19. But I said, How shall I put thee among the children?] How, but by my
free grace alone, since thou have so little deserved it? the causes of our
Adoption, see Ephesians. 1.5, 6.

And give thee a pleasant land] The heavenly Canaan, which is here fitly called
a land of desire or delight, an heritage or possession of goodliness, a land of
the H^sts (or desires) of the Nations.

And I said, thou shall call me My Father] And, My Father affectionately
uttered, is an effectual prayer. As Pater I brevissima quidem vex est, sed
omnia complectitur, says Luther, i. e. Ah Father is but a little word, but
very comprehensive; it is such a piece of eloquence, as far exceeds the
rowlings of Demosthenes, Cicero or whatsoever most excellent Orator.

Ver. 20. Surely as a treacherous wife, etc.) This ye have done, but that is
your present grief, and now you look upon your former disloyalties with a
lively hatred of them: holding that the time past of your life may suffice to
have wrought the will of the Gentiles, etc. 1 Pet. 4.3.

Ver. 21. A voice was heard upon the high places] Where they were wont to
worship Idols, now they weep for their sins, and pray for pardon.

For they have perverted their wayes] This is it that now draws from them
prayers and tears. See Chap. 31.18. Lam 5.14 Oi nalanu, chi chattanu. Woe worth
us, that ever we thus sinned. Some understand those words, A voice is heard, as
showing Gods readiness to hear penitent sinners so soon as they begin to turn
to him, even before they speak, as the Father of the Prodigal met him. etc.

Ver. 22. Return ye backsliding children] Give the whole turn, and not the
half-turn only. So Act. 2.38. Peter said to them that were already pricked at
heart, Repent ye, even to a transmentation; and chap. 3.19. Repent ye, and be
converted, that your sins may be blotted out. Repent not only for sin but from
sin too: be through in your repentance, set it be such as shall never be
repented of, 2 Cor. 7.10. It is not a slight sorrow that will serve Apostates
turn; it must be deep and downright.

And I will heal your back slidings] Pardon your sins, and heal your natures. I
will love you freely, and cause your broken bones to rejoice, Hos. 14.4. Isa.
19.22. Oh sweetest promise I what wonder then that their hard hearts were
forthwith melted by it into such a gracious compliance, as follows.

Behold we come to thee] See Zach. 13.9. with the Note.

Ver. 23. Truly in vain is salvation hoped for from the hills] Heb. Truly in
vain from the hills; the multitude; the mountains; it is like to that, Hos.
14.3. Ashur shall not save us -- neither will we say any more to the works of
our hands, Ye are our gods. See the Notes there.

Truly in the Lord our God] They trust not God at all, that not alone.

Ver. 24. For shame has devoured the labor of our Fathers] That shameful
thing Baal has done it, Chap. 11.13. Hos. 9.10. he has even eaten up our
cattle and our Children: of whom if any be left, yet there is nothing left for
them: And this we now see (long and last) poenitentia ducti, and nostro malo
edocti, having bought our wit, and paid dear for our learning. And may not many
ill husbands amongst us say as much of their drunkenness and wantonness? See
Prove. 5.9, 10, 11, 12. with the Notes.

Ver. 25 We lie down in our shame] We that once had a whores forehead, ver. 3.
and seemed past grace, are now sore ashamed of former miscarriages, yea our
confusion covers us (as Psalm. 44.15.) because we have sinned against the Lord
our God, we and our Fathers from our youth unto this day, and have not obeyed
the voice of our God. Lo here a dainty form and pattern of penitent confession,
such as is sure to find mercy. Haec sane omni tempore Christiana est
satisfactio, non meritoria aliqua Papistica atque nugivendula. Only we must not
acknowledge sin with dry eyes, Zegedia.
but point every sin with a tear, etc.

CHAP. IIII.
Ver. 1. IF thou will return O Israel] As thou seem willing to do, and for
very good reason, Chap. 2.22, 23, 24. Thou art but a beaten rebel, and to stand
it out with me is to no purpose: thou must either turn or burn. Neither will it
help thee to return fainedly; for I love truth in the inward parts, and hate
hypocrisy, halting, and tepidity. If therefore thou will return.

Return unto me] Return as far as to me; not from one evil course to another,
chap. 2.36. (for that is but to be tossed, as a ball, from one of the devils
hands to the other) but to me with thy whole heart, seriously, sincerely and
zealously: for Non amat, qui non zelat. To a tyrant thou shall not turn, but to
one that will both assist thee, Prove. 1.23. and accept thee, Zach. 1.2.

And if thou will put away thine abominations out of my sight] i. e. Thine
Idols out of thine house and out of thine heart, Ezekiel. 14.3, 4.

Then shall thou not remove] But still dwell in the land and do good; feeding
on faith, as Tremellius renders that, Psalm. 37.3.

Ver. 2. And thou shall swear The Lord liveth] Not by Baal shall thou swear, or
other Idols, but by the living God, or by the life of God. The Egyptians once
swear by the life of Pharaoh, as the proud Spaniards now do by the life of
their King. But, to speak properly, none lives but the Lord: and none should
be sworn by but he alone; an oath being a proof of the Divine Power, which one
worshippeth. The Pythagoreans used to swear by (...), Quaternity, which they
called (...) the fountain of eternal being: and this doubtless was the same
with (...) Jehovah.

Tremel.
In truth, in judgment and in righteousnesse] Vere, rite and just. 1. In
truth, Romans 9.1. that is, 1. To that which is true, least we fall into perjury,
Lev. 19.12. And, 2. Truly, agreeable both to the intentions of our mind (not
deceitfully, Psalm. 24.2.) and agreeable also to the intentions of him that
ministers the oath, and not with mental reservations, as Romish Priests often
swear.

The Romans used that most considerate wo^d Arbitror, when the Jurors said
those things which they knew most certainly. Suidas.
In judgement] Or, considerately, duly weighing the conditions and
circumstances: not rashly and unadvisedly, Levit. 5.4. 1 Samuel 14.39. as those
that swear in heat and choler, swear when they should fear, Deuteronomy. 10.20. and
28.58. The Graecians when they would swear by their Jupiter, out of the mere
dread and reverence of his name forbore to mention him. And the Egyptians bore
such respect to Mercurius Trismegistus, that they held it not lawful to
pronounce his name lightly and rashly. This is check to many swearing
Pseudo-Christians. Such also as swear in jest, will (without repentance) go to
hell in earnest. The ancient form of taking and imposing an oath was, Give
glory to God, Josh. 7.19. Joh. 9.24.

And in righteousnesse] 1. Promising by oath, lawful and possible things only;
not making an oath a bond of iniquity, 1 Samuel 25.21, 32. and 28.10. 2. Careful
to perform what we have sworn, though to our own hindrance, Psalm. 15.4.

And the Nations shall bless themselves in him] Or shall be blessed in him,
that is, in that God to whom thou returnest, and by whom thou thus swearest.
They shall turn to God by thine example, and hold themselves happy in such a
good turn.

Ver. 3. Break up your fallow-ground] Novellate vobis novale: Tertullian
renders it, Renovate vobis novamen novum, put off the old man, and put on the
new. See Hos. 10.11. with the Notes. By the practice of Repentance, runcate,
exstirpate, root up and rid your hearts and lives of all vile lusts and vicious
practices. The breaking up of sinful hearts, may prevent the breaking down of a
sinful Nation.

Sow not among thornes] i. e. Cares and lusts of life, fitly called thorns, --
because 1. They prick and gore the soul. 2. Harbor the old Serpent. 3. Choke
the Word: there is no looking for a harvest in a hedge. Stock them, and stub
them up therefore, 1 Pet. 2.1. Jam. 1.21. do not plow here, and make a bawk
there, etc.

Ver. 4. Circumcise your selves to the Lord] There is a twofold circumcision,
Corporis and Cordis, Outward and Inward: that without this avails nothing,
Gal. 6.15. See the inward described, Colos. 2.11. It is the putting off the old
Adam with his actions. It is purgatio animae and abjectio vitiorum, says
Origin, the clensing of the soul, and the casting away of sin, that filthy
foreskin, that superfluity of naughtiness. It is a wonderful work of the holy
Spirit wrought by the Word upon the Saints at their first conversion, whereby
corruption of nature is wounded, beloved sins cast away with sorrow, and the
sinner received into an everlasting communion with God and his Saints: Those
that are not thus circumcised, are not Israelites but Ishmaelites: whereas
Jether, though by nature an Ishmaelite, 1 Chronicles. 2.17. yet being thus inwardly
circumcised, he was for his Faith and Religion called and counted an Israelite,
2 Samuel 17.25. See Philip. 3.3, 4, 5.

And take away the foreskin of your heart] Not of the flesh only (see 1 Pet.
3.21.) as the carnal Israelite, who rests in the work done, glorious in outward
privileges, neglects the practice of religion and power of godliness,
pursues him that is born after the spirit, the Israelite indeed, etc. and is
therefore dispriviledged, hated and defied by God, as Goliath that uncircumcised
Philistin was by David, dead in sins and the uncircumcision of the flesh,
Colos. 2.13. subject to utter excision, Genesis 17.14. as having no portion in
Christ nor in Canaan. Take away therefore the foreskin of the heart: stick not
in the bark, pare not off the foreskin of the flesh only: off with the whole
body of sin, Col. 2.11. begin at Adams sin, bewail that: then set upon the
beloved sin, out with that eye, off with that hand: cast away all your
transgressions with as great indignation as angry Zipporah did her child's
foreskin. Take unto you for this end the sword of the Spirit, the word sharper
then those stones that she made use of, Exodus 4.24. consider the threats (these
will work faith, and that will work fear) apply the Promises, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Ezekiel.
36.26, 28. doubt not of Gods Power, but pray him to thrust his holy hand into
your bosoms, and to fetch off the filthy foreskin that is there. Lo this is
the way, walk in it.

And burn that none can quench it] When once it has caught your thorns, ver. 3.

Ver. 5. Declare ye in Judah] As if the Prophet should say, I do but lose my
labor in calling upon you to mortify your corruptions and to cast away all
your transgressions. Uncircumcised ye are in heart and ears, and so will be.
Now therefore stand upon your guard against the approaching enemy, and defend
your selves, if at least you are able, from the evil that is coming upon you.
Mott up your selves against Gods fire, ver. 4.

Ver. 6. Set up the standard toward Zion] All this seems to be Ironically
spoken, as ver. 5.

For I will bring evil from the North] i. e. From Babylon. Ab aquilone nihil
boni. There is also another Babylon spoken of in the Revelation, which to the
true Church has of long time been lerna malorum: Roma radiu omnium malolorum.
and so the poor persecuted Protestants in Poland feel at this day.

Ver. 7. The Lion is come up from his thicket] i. e. Nebuchadnezzar from
Babylon, where he lies safe, ficut leo in vepreto, and will shorly show
himself for a mischief to many people, who shall feel his force and fierceness.

Ver. 8. For this, gird you with sack-cloth] Repent, if at least it be not too
late, as the next words hint, that now it was.

For the fierce wrath of the Lord is not turned back from us] Or because the
fierce wrath of the Lord will not turn from us: it will have its full forth.
See Zeph. 2.2. with the Notes.

Ver. 9. The heart of the King shall perish] His courage shall be quailed, and
he shall be strangely crest-faln. This was fulfilled in Zedekiah, who sought to
save himself by flight, but could not.

Ver. 10. Surely thou have greatly deceived this people] sc. by those false
Prophets, ver. 9. Confer 1 King. 19.22, etc. Ezekiel. 14.9. This God does as a
just Judge, punishing sin with sin. The words may be rendered question-wise,
Have thou indeed thus deceived this people? Is it possible that Thou should
have an active or so much as a permishve hand in such a business?

When as the sword reaches unto the soul] i. e. To the heart, it goes as far
as it can. -- Capulo tenus abdidit ensem. See Psalm. 69.11.

Ver. 11. A dry wind of the high places] Ventus urens and exiccans as the
Northwind is; understand hereby the King of Babylon, as ver. 6. blasting and
wasting all before him.

Not to fan nor to cleanse] But to dissipate and destroy.

Ver. 12. Even a full wind from those places] An impetuous and stiff wind, such
as shall carry away chaff, and corn, and all.

Now also will I give sentence against them] Heb. utter judgments with them,
i. e. I will speak no more by my Prophets, but by my Judgments.

Ver. 13. Behold he shall come up as clouds] Swiftly, and numerously.

His Horses are swifter then Eagles] Which, though the biggest of all fouls,
yet fly with greatest speed.

Woe unto us, for we are spoiled] This he premiseth fitly to his exhortation to
Repentance, ver. 14. q. d. We are utterly undone, if Repentance prevent not.

Currat ergo paenitentia, ne praecurrat sententia. Ver. 14. O Jerusalem, wash
thine heart from wickednesse] Which defiles it worse then any leprosy, Frustra
sunt lavamenta, ubi nulla est innocentia. Oecol.
or jakes, does the body, Mar. 7.19, 20, 23. Thy hands thou often washest (and
other outward parts; placeing therein no small religion) thou can not wash
them in innocence; wash them therefore in tears: and when thou have so done,
cry to God with Austin, Lava lachrymas meas Domine: ipsae enim lachrymae sunt
lacrymabiles; Wash my very tears, Lord; for they are lamentable ones. Beg of
him to bathe thy soul in the blood of his Son, to wash thee thoroughly from
thine iniquity, and to cleanse thee from thy sin, Psalm. 51.2.

That thou may be saved] i. e. Have safety here, and salvation hereafter.

Hic mora cogitationis redarguitur and ejus adlubescentia. Oecol.
How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee?] Heb. in the midst of
thee, in the very heart of thee? Creep in they will: but why should they lodge
there? why should the Devil be at Inn with us? be any man's bedfellow, as he
is the angry man's, Ephesians. 4.26? David often communed with his own heart, and his
spirit made diligent search for such vagrants, Psalm. 77.6. Scopabam spiritum
mem (so some render it) I swept out my spirit. Vulg.
Carnal hearts are stews of unclean thoughts, slaughter-houses of cruel and
bloody thoughts, exchanges and shops of vain and vile thoughts, a very forge
and mint of false Politic undermining thoughts, yea often a little hell of
confused and black imaginations. They had need therefore to be carefully
cleansed, and kept with all custody. Grace beginnerh at the center, and from
thence goes to the circumference. God and Nature begin at the heart: Art
begins with the face and outward lineaments; so does Hypocrisy at outward
paintings and expressions; it cleanses the outside of the cup and platter, when
the inside is full of ravening and wickedness, Luke 11.39.

Ver. 15. For a voice declares from Dan] which was first called Laish, then
Dan, and after that (in honor of Tiberius Caesar) Caesarea Philippi. It was
the utmost bound of Israel Northward: Joseph. Antiq. lib. 18.
and therehence came a rumor of the enemy entering, and making his first
impression into the Land; and so, by Mount Ephraim, to the Jews of Jerusalem.
This, Jeremy by a spirit of Prophecy foretells long before, against their
vain confidence of better.

And publishes affliction] The same Hebrew word signifies vanity or iniquity
in the verse afore-going. Sin is the mother of misery and molestation.

Ver. 16. Make ye mention to the Nations] i. e. To the Jews who happily are
called the Nations, because once better accounted of then all Nations: thus the
Saints are called All things, Colos. 1.18. and the Rabbines have a saying that
those seventy souls which came down to Egypt with Jacob, were more worth then
all the Seventy Nations of the world besides.

Sicut a Caesare Caesariani, a Preacore Praetoriani.
That watchers are come] Nebuchadnezzars lifeguard say some. Heb. Notserim, i.
e. Nebuchadnezzarens. Others give a better reason of the word from the next
Verse.

And give out their voice against the Cities of Judah] Whilst they invade them
cum barritu militari, with a horrid and horrible noise, such as the Turks use
nowadays also, when they set upon any City to storm it.

Ver. 17. As keepers of a field are they against her] They have straightly
besieged her; so that there is no escaping their hands.

Ver. 18. Thy ways and thy doings have procured these things unto thee] This
is like as we use to say to our children when they have taken cold or got any
harm, This is your gadding and dabbling in the dirt, your going in the snow,
your eating of fruit, etc.

This is thy wickednesse] i. e. Merces malitiae, the wages of thy wickedness,
the fruit of thy folly.

Because it is bitter] Thou have given God a bitter pill, as it were, that went
to his heart: and now he has given thee as bitter a potion, that reaches unto
thine heart.

Ver. 19. My bowels, my bowels] So my head, my head, 2 King. 4.19. My
leanness, my leanness, Isa. 24.16. Thus the Prophet here, to express his
inexpressible grief for the calamities of his people. Dolco instar parturientis.


I am pained] as a woman in travel.

At the very heart] Heb. at the walls of my heart, sc. to see, in spirit, the
City-walls surprised.

My hear makes a noise in him] Saltitat and palpitat ut in pavidis and
perculsis fi^ri solet, leaps and throbs.

I cannot hold my peace] Heb. I will not.

Because thou have heard] i. e. I have heard in the Spirit, and am affected
with it, as if already come.

Ver. 20. Destruction upon destruction] Fluctus fluctum trudit, one mischief
upon another, the sword after famine, captivity after a seige.

For the whole land is spoiled] Or, plundered: which word we first heard of in
the Swedish wars.

Ver. 21. How long shall I see the standard?] Sad sights and doleful ditties
are common in times of war.

And hear the sound of the trumpet] Tubam turbamque hostium.

Ver. 22. For my people is foolish, they have not known me] To know and to
worship God aright, is the only true wisdom, says Lactantius. Lib. 3. cap. 30.


They are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge] In terrenis
Lyncei, in coelestibus talpae. Wise the wicked are in their generation, subtle
and slye: but so is the Serpent, or the Fox: the Swine that wandereth can make
better shift to get home then the Sheep can to the fold. They have received the
spirit of this world, 1. Cor. 2.12. the Devil also works effectually in them,
as a Smith in his forge, Ephesians. 2.2. Hence they are wise to do evil. Elymas was
a vere subtle fellow, but the Devils child; and so the more dangerous, Acts
13.10. Magnum ingenium and magna tentatio, says Vincentius Lirinenses
concerning Origin, who had a great wit, but proved a great scandal to the
Church. The Devil covets to be adorned by thee, said Austin to one that was
wittily wicked. Surely as Jet gathers dross and refuse things to it self,
but lets go gold and precious things: so do the Worlds wisards.

Ver. 23. I beheld the earth, and lo it was without form and void] Tohu
vabohu, as Genesis 1.2. sightlesse and shapelesse. Sermo est hyperbolicus; all was
in a confusion: what shall it then be at the last day?

Ver. 24. I beheld the mountains, and lo they trembled] War is a woe, that no
words, how wide soever, can sufficiently utter.

And all the hills moved lightly] As being lightened of their burden, (says a
Rabbin) trees and houses.

Ver. 25. I beheld, and lo there was no man] But all killed, captived, or
fled. Judaea lay utterly waste for Seventy years. Insomuch that after the
slaughter of Gedaliah, when all, men, women and children, fled into Egypt,
there was not a Jew left in the Country.

And all the Birds of the heavens were fled] Birds were given men for food,
Physic, and delight, as companions of his life; therefore it is reckoned both
here and chap. 9.10. as a judgment to lose them.

Ver. 26. At the presence of the Lord, etc.] Who was the chief Agent: as Titus
the Roman Emperor also acknowledged after he had destroyed Jerusalem: Suidas.
Non se id fecisse dixit, sed Deo iram suam declaranti manus suas accommodasse,
he said it was not He that had done it, but that He had only lent his hands to
God, justly displeased at that Nation.

Ver. 27. Yet I will not make a full end] God kept the room empty all those
Seventy years, till the return of the natives.

Ver. 28. Because I have spoken it, etc.] Quod scripsi scripsi, said Pilat, I
will not alter it: See the like, Ezekiel. 24.13, 14.

Ver. 29. Every City shall be forsaken] See ver. 25.

Ver. 30. Though thou rentest thy face with paint] Jesabel like, 2 King. 9.30.
See Ezekiel. 23.40.

In vain shall thou make thy self fair] i. e. Seek to ingratiate with the
Chaldees, by submitting to them, and worshipping their Idols.

Thy lovers will despise thee] As an old withered strumpet, and now out of date
See Ezekiel. 16.36. and 23.22.

Ver. 31. As of her that brings forth her first childe] Primiparae: such have
greatest pains and least patience, often.

For my soul is wearied because of Murtherers] Once her Paramours, her
Sweethearts. There is nothing got by comporting with Idolaters. The Duke of
Medina's sword knew no difference between Papists and Protestants in Eighty
eight, and that they should have found, had the Spaniard then prevailed.

CHAP. V.
Ver. 1. RVn to and fro] Spaciamini, scrutamini. Go as many of you as ye
please: the verbs are plural.

In the streets of Jerusalem] Where it was strange there should be such a
rarity of righteous ones. But the faithful City was now become an harlot, Esa.
1.21. Like as Rome is at this day.

-- Tota est jam Roma lupanar. She had a Mancinel, a Savanorola, and some few
other Jeremies, to tell her her own: but she soon took an order with them. The
Primitive Christians called Heathens, Pagans; because country people living in
pagis, that is, in Hamlets and Villages, were heathenish for most part, after
that Cities were converted, and had many good people in them: but Jerusalem
here afforded not any one, hardly.

In Polyh.
If ye can find a man] i. e. A godly, a zealous man. For homines permulti, vire
perpauci, says Herodotus: there is a great paucity of good people. Diogenes is
said to have sought for a good man in Athens with a lantern and candle at
Noonday. And once, when he had made an O yes in the marketplace, crying out
(...), Hear O ye men, and thereupon company came about him to hear what the
matter was, he rated them away again with this speech, (...), I called for men
and not for varlets. Job was a man every inch of him; See the Notes on Job 1.1.
So was Moses that man of God, Daniel that man of desires, John Baptist, then
whom there arose not a greater among all that were born of woman; Paul that
little man, Calvinus erat vir admirabilis. Ipsa a quo rosset virtutem dicere
virtus. Guevara.
but who did great exploits: Athanasius and Luther, who stood out against all
the world, and prevailed. But not many such: blessed be God that any such.
Cicero observes that scarce in an Age was born a good Poet. And Seneca says
Such as Clodius was, we have enough: but such as Cato are hard to be found. The
Host of Nola being bid to summon the good men of the Town to appear before the
Roman Censor, gat him to the Churchyard, and there called at the graves of the
dead: for he knew not where to call for a good man alive. God himself sought
for a man that might stand up in the gap, but met not with any such one, Ezekiel.
22.30.

And I will pardon it] Sodoms sins cried loud to God for vengeance; so did now
Jerusalems. But had there been but a voice or two more of righteous and
religious persons there, their prayers had outcryed them. A few birds of Song
are shriller, then many crocitating birds of prey.

Ver. 2. And though they say The Lord liveth] i. e. Albeit they talk
religiously (as those pretenders also did, Isa. 66.5.) and make a great flaunt,
as if some great matter (with Simon Magus, Acts 8.9.) yet they are arrant
Hypocrites, and therefore odious to me who desire truth in the inward parts,
Psalm. 51.6. These neither say the truth, nor do it, 1 John 3.10.

Ver. 3. O Lord are not thine eyes upon the truth?] And can these painted
Hypocrites hope ever to please thee? how much are they mistaken?

Thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved] As being past feeling, of
a dead and dedolent disposition: like naughty boys, which are the worse for a
whipping: or Solomon's drunkard who is beaten but never the better, Prove. 23.35.
There is no surer sign of a carnal Israelite, of a profligate professor, then
to be senseless or incorrigible under public judgments.

Ver. 4 Therefore I said] i. e. I thought with my self.

Surely these] sc. That swear falsely, and refuse to be reformed; etc,

Are poor] Of the rascality; under law; base and beggarly; who neither know
Gods will, nor hold themselves much bound to do it. Of the poorer sort in
Swethland it is storied, that they do always break the Sabbath, saying that
It Is for Gentlemen only to keep that day.

Ver. 5. I will get me unto the great men] Who have been better bred, and
abound with liesure, and other helps to holy living.

But these have altogether broken the yoke] Of God, of the Law, and of
Discipline. These are lawless and awless, and think they may lay the raines in
the neck, and run riot.

Ver. 6. Therefore a Lion of the forest shall slay them] So Nebuchadnezzar is
called for his cruelty, a Wolf for his voracity, and a Leopard for his sliness
and swiftness. All the malignities of other Creatures meet in the Churches
enemies.

Ver. 7. How shall I pardon thee for this?] How with the safety of mine honor
and justice? Swearing then by creatures (as by our Lady, by St. Anne, by this
light, etc.) or by Idols, (as by the Mass, by the Rood. etc.) or by qualities
(as by Faith, Troth, etc.) is not so small a sin as many deem it: since God
makes here a great question how he can pardon it. For why? it is a forsaking
of him, a giving away his honor to another, a disgrace done to a man's self
(since we always swear by the greater, Heb. 6.16.) and a means to procure his
utter mine, without Gods greater mercy, Amos 6.14. Zeph. 1.3, 4, 5. Men sport
themselves with oaths, as the Philistines did with Sampson: which will at last
pull the house about their ears, Zach. 5.4.

When I fed them to the full, they then committed adultery] Fullness in good
men often breeds forgetfulness, and in bad men, filthines^. Gula vestibulum
luxuriae, gluttony is the gallery that incontinency walks through. The
Israelites ate and drank and rose up to play, sc. with their Midianitish
Mistrisses, to the provoking of Gods fierce wrath. Fullness of bread made way to
Sodoms sin. Lunatikes, when the Moon is declining and in the wain, are sober
enough: but when full, more wild and exorbitant. Ceres and Bacchus are great
friends to Venus, etc. Watch therefore, and feed with fear.

And assembled themselves by troops] Heb. they trooped themselves: Libido
effrons and plu^ quam pecuina.
such was their impudency.

Ver. 8. They were as fed horses] As stallions and stone-horses, that are
(...), mare-mad, as the Septuagint have it.

Ver. 9. Shall I not visit for these things] i. e. Shall I not take cognizance
of them, and punish them surely and severely?

Ver. 10. Get yt up upon her battlements and destroy] Ascendete and exscindite,
up and lay about you lustily. A commission granted out to the enemy, to execute
Divine vengeance: God can never want a weapon to beat his rebels with.

But make not a full end] See chap. 4.27.

For they are not the Lords] He disowneth them, and gives them primo
occupaturo, to him that shall first seize them; as the Pope took upon him to
do, this Kingdom of England, in the days of Henry 8. whom he had
excommunicated and deprived.

Ver. 11. For the house of Israel and the house of Judah] Both Aholah and
Aholibah are stark naught: I renounce them therefore, and shall take no further
charge of them. And why?

Ver. 12. They have belyed the Lord] Or, They give the Lord the lie, (as
Montfort Earl of Lecester gave his Sovereign Henry 3. the lie) Every
unbeleever does as much, Daniels hist. 172. Oecolamp.
upon the matter, 1 John 5.10. See the Note there, Nam etiamsi non semper ore
obloquitur, factis tamen obluctatur.

And said It is not he] sc. That speaks, but the Prophets speak their own
dreams and fancies. Or, as some render the text, He is not: there is no God to
reward us if we do well, or to punish us, if we do worse. See my Commonplace
of Atheism.

Ver. 13. And the Prophets shall become wind] All their threats and
bugbear-tearms (devised on purpose to affright silly people, who are no wiser
then to believe them) shall come to nothing: (...). Hom.
they are but bullatae nugae, bruta fulmina, bubbles of words, brute
light-bolts: both they and their menaces shall vanish together, they shall blow
over.

Thus shall it be done unto them] The evils that they foretell shall befall
themselves, not us: and nos male mulctabimus ipsos, and we will see them
soundly punished for false Prophets. Poor Jeremy was ill-handled amongst them
many times, as we shall see in sundry Chapters following. Hoc fuit (...), etc.

Ver. 14. Because ye speak this word] Ungodly men shall one day answer (with
all the world on fire about their ears) for all their hard and haughty
speeches, Jude 15. They shall find that neither their own words are wind, but
such as they shall give a sad account of: nor the Prophets words wind, unless
it be to blow them into the bottomless lake, and to torment their consciences,
happily, in the mean while, more then wind does men's bodies, when gotten once
into the veins, or bowels.

Behold I will make my words in thy mouth fire] That Is somewhat worse then
wind. Oh fear this fire, vengeance is in readiness for the disobedient, 2 Cor:
10.5. every whit as ready in Gods hand as in the Ministers mouth. See Zach.
1.6. with the Notes.

Genesis 10.8.
Ver. 15. It is a mighty Nation, it is an ancient Nation] As ancient as Nimrod
the first founder of that first of the four Monarchies. Hence Babylon is called
the land of Nimrod, Mic. 5. whom the Poets call Saturn, and his son and
successor Jupiter Belus.

A Nation whose language thou know not] For the Babylonians spoke Syriack,
Dan. 2.4. as did also the Jews afterward, viz. after the captivity in Babylon,
where they learnt it, and lost their own language.

Ver. 16. Their quiver is an open Sepulchre] As holding arrows that wound
deadly, and that shall dispatch many being drenched in their gall.

Ver. 17. And they shall eat up thy harvest] Partim gladio, partim gula.
Consider the calamity of war, and take course to prevent it.

Ver. 18. I will not make a full end with thee] In the midst of judgment, God
remembers mercy. See chap. 4 27. and here ver. 10. Howbeit, from this text
some gather, (...).
that now in this last captivity of theirs God has made a full end with the
Jews, and that wrath is come upon them to the utmost, or to the end, as the
Greek has it, 1 These. 2.16.

Ver. 19. Wherefore does the Lord our God all these things unto us] Why? could
not they yet tell? And had they not been often enough (if any thing were enough)
told wherefore? But they were never willing to hear on that ear. Some of our
hearers turn the deaf ear, and say, What tell you us of these terrible things,
etc. Many sit before us as senseless as the seats they sit on, the pillars they
lean to, the dead bodies they tread upon.

So shall ye serve strangers] God loves to retaliate.

Ver. 20. Declare this in the house of Jacob, etc.] Cease not to ring it in
their ears whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear: for it is a
rebellious people; (...).
and of the number of those, who wink willingly, that they may not see when
some unsavory potion is ministered to them, as Justin Martyr expresses it.

Ver. 21. Hear now this O foolish people] They were strangely stupefied, and
were therefore thus rippled up. Those that are in a Lethargy must have a double
quantity of Physic to what others have.

And without understanding] Heb. Without an heart: Cor sapit and pulmo
loquitur, etc. The heart is the symbol and seat of wisdom. See Hos. 7.11. with
the Note.

Which have eyes and see not, etc.] See Esaias 6.9. and 42.20. which have not
senses habitually exercised to discern good and evil, Heb. 5. ult.

Ver. 22. Fear ye not me? says the Lord] What? not me, whom the sea it self,
that tumultuous and unruly creature, fears and obeys? See Psalm. 65.7. and
93.4.

Who have placed the sand for a bound to the sea] A weak bound for so furious
an element. Vis maris infirmissimo sabuli pulvere cohibetur. But so I will have
it: and then who or what can gainstand it? Now who can but be moved at such
miracles? Know you not that I can soon make your arable, sailable? and that I
can shake the earth as often as there is a tempest in the Ocean, since the earth
is founded not upon solid rocks but fluid waters? See 2. Pet. 3.5.

By a perpetual decree] Heb. by an ordinance of antiquity or of perpetuity;
clapping it up close prisoner.

Ver. 23. But this people have a revolting and rebellious heart] Cor recedens
and amaricans, gone they are, and return they will not. (...). Sept.
Apostates are dangerous creatures, and mischievous above others; witness
Julian, once a forward professor; Lucian once a Preacher at Antioch: Staphylus
and Latomus once great Lutherans, afterward eager Popelings: Harding was the
Target of Popery in England, (says Peter Moulin) against which he had once
been a thundering Preacher in this land, wishing he could cry out against it,
as loud as the bells of Oseney. Act. and Mon. fol. 1291.
The Lady Jane Gray, whose chaplain he had sometimes been, gave him excellent
counsel in a letter: but he was revolted and gone past call.

Ver. 24. Neither say they in their hearts] God understands heart language, and
expects a tribute there.

Let us now fear the Lord] Fear him for his goodness, as well as for his
greatness, ver. 22. See Hos. 3.5. and Notes.

That gives rain] Which God decrees, Job 28.26. prepares, Psalm. 147.8.
withholdeth, Am. 4.7. bestows, Deuteronomy. 28.12. Mat. 5.41. for a witness, Acts
17.14. of his general goodness, Mat. 5.45. and special providence, as a good
householder, Act. 14.17.

He reserveth unto us the appointed weeks of harvest] Which if he should deny
us but one year only, how easily might he starve us all? See his love, and fear
his Name.

Ver. 25. Your iniquities have turned] See on Isa. 59.1, 2.

Ver. 26. For among my people are found wicked men] This was as bad as to find
a nettle in a garden, unchastity in a Virgin, or the devil in Paradise. All the
Lords people are or ought to be holy.

They lie in wait] Or watch, or prey: See on Mic. 7.2.

They set a trap, they catch men] To spoil them, or slay them. Such a one was
Otto the Popes Muscipulator (as the story styles him) i. e. Mice-catcher, sent
hither by Gregory 9. to take and take away our money: Tecelius sent by Leo 10.
into Germany was another.

Ver. 27. As a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit] i. e.
Of illgotten goods, which will prove no such catch in the close, as they count
upon.

Ver. 28. They are waxen fat, they shine] Pingues, nitidi sunt: cutem curant ut
Epicuri de grege porci, fat they are and fair liking slick and smooth.

Yea they overpasse the deeds of the wicked] They out-sin others. Or as some
sense it, they escape better then others, Psalm. 73.5.

Ver. 29. Shall I not visit] See ver. 9.

Ver. 30. A wonderful and horrible thing] Res stupenda and horrenda, an
abhorred filth, such as may well draw from us an hen, hen Domine Deus.

Is committed in the Land] Heb. in this land, where men are therefore the
worse, because they should be better.

Ver. 31. The Prophets phophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule] The chief
Priests bearing rule in the causes and consciences of the people, had suborned
their abbettours ambitious Prophets, who applauded their greatness for
preferment, teaching the people to dote on the titles of Moses chair,
Highpriests, the Temple of the Lord, Mat. 15. Aposiopesis de extremo tam
deploratae policiae exterminio.
etc. as if there were not many a goodly box in the Apothecaries shop without
one dram of any drug therein. Such false Prophets were those Pharisees,
factours for the Priests with their Corban: and such also for the Pope are the
Jesuits and Seculars, which differ only as hot and cold poison, both
destructive to the State.

What will ye do?] Alas, what will become of you at last?

CHAP. VI.
Ver. 1. O Ye children of Benjamin] These were the Prophets Countrymen; for
Anathoth was in that tribe: so was also part of Jerusalem it self. He
forewarneth them of the enemies approach, and bids them be gone. The Benjamites
were noted for valiant, but vicious, Judge. 19. Hos. 9.9. and 10 9.

And blow the trumpet in Tekoah] A place that had its name from trumpetting; so
there is an elegan^ in the Original: See the like Mic. 1.10, 14. It was twelve
miles from Jerusalem, and six from Beth-haccerem. Here dwelt that wise woman
suborned by Joah, 2 Samuel 14.2.

Life of Ed. 6. by S J. Heyw.
Set up a sign of fire] A Beacon, or such as the fire-crosse is in Scotland;
where (for a signal to the people when the enemy is at hand) two firebrarnds
set across, and pitched upon a spear, are carried about the Country.

Ver. 2. I have likened the daughter of Zion to a comely and delicate woman]
Certatim amatae Bucolicae puellae, some fair Shepherdess, to whom the Kings
with their armies make love (but for no love) that they may destroy and spoil
her.

Ver. 3. The Shepherds] See on ver. 2.

Ver. 4. Prepare ye war against her] Say those Chaldean sweet-hearts: this is
their wooing language: like that of the English at Muscleborough.

Let us go up at noon] Let us lose no time: why burn we daylight by needless
delays?

Ver. 5. Let us destroy her Palaces] Where we shall find all precious
substance, we shall fill our hands with spoil, as Prove. 1.13.

Ver. 6. For thus has the Lord of hosts said] q. d. It is he who sets these
Chaldaean warriors awork: and gives them these words of command. So Totilas,
Gensericus and others were the scourge in Gods hand; as now also the Turks are.

She is wholly oppression] She was full of judgment, righteousness lodged in
her: but now nothing less.

Nomen Alexandri ne te fortasse moretur,
De Alex. 6 Papa. Pasquil.
Hospes abi: jacet hic and scelus and vitium.
Ver. 7. As a Fountain casts out her waters] Incessantly, and abundantly. In
Jeremia est continua quasi declamatio contra peccatum, etc.

Before me continually] This shows their impudency.

Ver. 8. Be thou instructed] Affliction is a Schoolmaster, or rather an Usher
to the Law, Maturant aspera mentem.
which the Apostle calls a Schoolmaster to Christ. Affl^ction brings men
to the Law, and the Law to Christ. Affliction is a Preacher, says one: blow
the Trumpet in Tekoah: what says the Trumpet? Ee instructed O Jerusalem.

Least my soul depart from thee] Heb. be loosed or disjoynted: least I loath
thee more then ever I loved thee, and so thy ruin come rushing in, as by a
sluice.

Ver. 9. They shall thoroughly glean the remnant] They shall make clean work of
them, as Judge. 20.45.

Ver. 10. To whom shall I speak and give warning] Heb. protest, q. d. I know
not where to meet with one teachable hearer in all Jerusalem.

Behold their ear is uncircumcised] Obstructed and stopped with the superfluity
of naughtiness, worse then any ear-wax, or thick film overgrowing the organ of
hearing. Tanquam monstra marina surda aure Dei verba praetereunt.

The Word of the Lord is unto them a reproach] They take reproves for
reproaches, as Luke 11.45.

Ver. 11. Therefore I am full of the fury of the Lord] i. e. of curses and
menaces against this obstinate people, as chap. 4.19.

I am weary with holding in] As hitherto I have done, and could still in
compassion, but that of necessity I must obey Gods will, and be the messenger
of his wrath. It is a folly to think, that Gods Ministers delight to fling
daggers at men's breasts, or handfuls of hellfire in their faces. Non nisi
coactus, said he.

I will pour it forth] I will denounce it, and then God will soon effect it.
See on chap. 1.10.

Ver. 12. With their fields and wives together] These are mentioned as most
dear to them; who could happily say as he did, Haec alii capiant; liceat mihi
paupere cultu
Secure chara conjuge posse frui. Heb.


Ver. 13. Every one is given to covetousnesse] Avet avaritia, is coveting
covetise, Lib 11. cap. 34.
cries still give, give with the horseleech: of which creature Pliny
observes, and experience shows, that it has no thorough passage, but takes
much in, and letting nothing out, breaks and kills it self with sucking. So
does the covetous man.

Every one deals falsely] Heb. each one is doing falsehood; as if that were
their common trade.

Ver. 14. They have healed also the hurt of -- slightly] Heb. Upon a slight or
slighted thing; secundum curationem mali leviculi, Secundum leviculum. Jun.
as men use to cure the slight hurts of their children by blowing on them only,
or stroking them over. Thus these deceitful workers dealt by Gods people:
dallying with their deep and dangerous wounds, which they search not neither
cauterize, according to necessary severity.

Saying, peace, peace] Making all fair weather before them, when as the storm
of Gods wrath was even breaking out upon them; such a storm as should never
blow over.

Ver. 15. Were they at all ashamed] Their shamelesness was no small aggravation
of their sin: Ita licet mult as abominationes commiserunt Papistae sine
verecundia, verecundari tamen non possunt, says Dr. John Raynols. De idololat.
Romans p. 85.
Papists are frontless and shameless. Dr. Story for instance: I see nothing
(said he before the Parliament in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth) to be
ashamed of, so less I see to be sorry for: but rather because I have done no
more, etc. wherein he said there was no default in him but in the higher
powers, who much against his mind, had labored only about the young and little
sprigs, and twigs, whiles they should have struck at the root and rooted it
out: meaning thereby the Lady Elizabeth, whom also he afterward daily cursed
in his grace before meat. And concerning his persecuting and burning the
Protestants, Act. and Mon. f. 1925.
he denied not but that he was once at the burning of an herewig (for so he
termed it) at Vxbridge (Mr. Denley Martyr) where he tossed a faggot at his
face, as he was singing Psalms, and set a wine-bush of thorns under his feet,
a little to prick him, etc.

Ver. 16. Stand ye in the ways and see] Duly deliberate and take time to
consider, whether you are in the right or not.

Ask for the old pathes] Chalked out in the word, and walked in by the
Patriarchs. Think not, as some do now-adayes, by running through all religions
to find out the right: for this is viam per avia quaerere, as Junius phraseth
it; to seek a way where none is to be found. How many religions are there now
amongst us? So many men, so many minds. Non est sciens hodie qui novitates non
invenit, as one complained of old, He Is Nobody that cannot invent a new way;
but as old wine is better, so is the old way: hold to it therefore. Quod primum
verum, Alnar. Pelagius.
That which was first is true: but beware of new truths, that cannot be proved
to be old, as 1 John 2.7.

Qui veteres linquit, calls sequiturque novatos,
Saepius in frauds incidet ille suaes.
But they said We will not walk therein] So ver. 17. but they said We will not
hearken: See the like resolute answers, chap. 22.21. and 44.16. savouring of a
self-willed obstinacy. It is easier to deal with twenty men's reasons, then with
one man's will. A wilful man stands as a stake in the midst of a stream, lets
all pass by him but he stands where he was. Luther says of some of his
Wittembergians, that so great was their obstinacy, so headstrong and headlong
they were, that the four elements could not bear it. Jeremy seems here to say
as much of his Hierosolymitanes. See ver. 18, 19.

Ver. 17. Also I set Watchmen over you] i. e. Priests and Prophets, to watch
for your welfare.

Hearken to the sound of the trumpet] See on ver. 8.

We will not hearken] See on ver. 16.

Ver. 18. Therefore hear O ye Nations] For this people will not hear me, though
I speak never so good reason. Scaliger tells us that the nature of some kind
of Amber is such, Exercit. 140. Number. 12.
that it will draw to it self all kind of stalks of any herb, except Basilisk
an herb called Capitalis, because it makes men heady, filling their brains
with black exhalations: Thus those who by the fumes of their own corrupt wills
are grown headstrong, will not be drawn by that which draws others, who are
not so prejudicated.

Malitiam eorum. Piscat.
What is among them] What their sins are: Or, Quid in eos, sc. constituerim,
what I have resolved to bring upon them: Or, Quae in eis, know O congregation
(of the Saints) which art among them.

Ver. 19. Hear O earth] In case none else will hear.

Even the fruit of their thoughts] Why then should any man think that thought
is free? free they are from men's courts and consistories: but not from Gods
eye, law, or hand.

Ver. 20. To what purpose comes there to me incense] Cui bono, so long as it
smells of the foul hand that offers it? so long as you think to bribe me
with it? See Isa. 1.14.

From Sheba] Whence the Greeks seem to have their word (...) to worship: and
the Arabians call God (the adequate object of divine worship) Sabim, and a
Mystery Saba.

And the sweet cane] Heb. cane the good. The Septuagint render it cinnamon; and
the Vulgar Calamus: of which see Pliny, lib. 12. cap. 22.

From a far Country] From India says Hierom, Haec omnia been in nostros
Papistas quadrabunt.

Strages sc. and ^lades in quas incident and corruent.
Ver. 21. Behold I will lay stumbling blocks] Heb. Stumblements, i. e.
occasions, preparations and means to work their ruth and ruin: what these are,
see ver. 22.

Ver. 22. Thus says the Lord] It is not in vain that this is so often prefaced
to the ensuing Prophecies. Dictum Jehovae is very emphatical, and authoritative.

Behold a people comes from the North] This the Prophet had often foretold, for
forty years together; sed surdis fabulam, but he could not be believed.

Ver. 23. They shall lay hold on bow and spear] To destroy and eminus and
cominus. both afar off, and at hand.

(...).
Their voice roareth like the sea] Which is so dreadful, that the horrible
shriekings of the devils are set out by it, Jam. 2.19. They who would not hear
the Prophets sweet words, shall hear the enemies roaring in the midst of their
congregations, Psalm. 74.4.

Ver. 24. Our hands wax feeble] He modestly reckons himself among the rest,
though the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty God
of Jacob, Genesis 49.24. and his heart was fixed trusting in the Lord, Psalm. 112.7.

Ver. 25. Go not out into the field] Since there is no peace to him that goes
out, nor to him that comes in, 2 Chronicles. 15.5. but Luctus ubique, pavor, and
plurima mortis imago.

Ver. 26. Gird thee with sack cloth, Live. lib. 3.
and wallow thy self in ashes] The very heathens did so when in danger of a
merciless enemy: veniam irarum caelestium poscentes, says Livy, seeking the
pardon of their sins, and the favor of their Gods.

Ver. 27. I have set thee for a Tower and a fortresse] Or, a fortified
watchtower have I made thee among my people, i. e. To discry and discover
their dispositions and affections.

Ver. 28. They are all grievous revolters] Heb. Revolters of revolters. Chald.
Princes of revolters, arch-rebels. Jeremy (Gods champion, such as was wont to
be set forth completely armed at the Coronation of a King in this Nation)
finds and reporth them such here, and proves it.

Walking with slanders] Trotting up and down as pedlers, dropping a tale here,
and another there, contrary to Levit. 19.16.

They are brass and iron] Base and drossy, false and feculent metals; silver
and gold they would seem to be, a sincere and holy people: but they are malae
monetae, a degenerate and hypocritical generation: adulterini sunt nihil
habentes probi, as Theodoret has it here; naught, and good for naught: not
unlike those stones brought home in great quantity by Captain Forbisher in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth. Camd. Elis. 189.
He thought them to be minerals and of good worth: but when there could be
drawn from them neither gold nor silver, nor any other metal, they were cast
forth to mend the highways.

Thy are all corrupters] Of themselves, and of others.

Ver. 29. The bellows are burnt] The Prophets lungs are spent, Let us to the
wearing of our tongues to the stumps preach never so much, men will on in sin.
Bradford. Mr. Case his Treatise of afflictions.
all their pains spilt upon a perverse people: See Ezekiel. 24.6, 12, 13. Jeremy
had blowed hard as a Smith or Metallary does with his bellows; he had suffered,
as it were, by the heat of a most ardent fire, in trying and melting his oar:
he had used his best Art also by casting in lead (as now-adayes they do
quicksilver) to melt it the more easily, and with less loss and waste: but all
to no purpose at all.

The lead is consumed] All the melting judgments which (as lead is cast into
the furnace to make it the hotter) God added to the Ministry of the Prophets to
make the Word more operative, they will do no good.

The founder melts in vain] Whether God the Master-founder, or the Prophets
Gods co-founders or fellow-workmen, as the Apostle calls them, 1 Cor. 6.1.

The wicked are not plucked away] Or, their wickednesses; they will not part
with their dross, or be divorced from their dilecta delicta beloved sins. The
vile person will speak villainy, and his heart will work iniquity to practice
hypocrisy, and to utter error against the Lord, Isa. 32.6.

Ver. 30. Reprobate silver shall men call them] Dross and refuse, (...)
unapproved.
rather then pure metal: silver they would seem to be; but their hypocrisy
shall be made known to all men, who shall count them and call them reprobate,
because impurgabiles and inexpiabiles, uncounsellable, and incorrigible: a sore
sign of reprobation, Hieron. Lyra.
as Aquinas notes from Heb. 6.7, 8.

For the Lord has rejected them] As refuse and counterfeit, Deus est sapiens
nummularius.
such as will not pass in payment. Hence they are to be cast into Babylons
Iron-furnace (quasi antro Aetnao and Cyclopico adhuc decoquendi) a type of that
eternal fire of hell, prepared of old for the devil and reprobates.

CHAP. VII.
Ver. 1. THe word that came to Jeremiah) A new Sermon, but to the same purpose
as the former. See on chap. 1, 2. Oecol.
Toto libro idem argumentum sursum deorsum versat.

Ver. 2. Stand in the gate of the Lords house] The Eastgate, which was the
most famous and most frequented of the people, and therefore fittest for the
purpose.

And proclaim there this word] Stand there with this Word (as once the Angel
with a terrible sword did at the porch of Paradise) to excommunicate as it were
this hypocritical people: and do it verbis non tantum disertis sed and exertis,
plainly and boldly.

Ver. 3. Amend your ways and your doings] Heb. make good your ways, sc. by
repentance for and from your sins: and by believing the Gospel. Defaecantur
enim mores, ubi medullitus excipitur Evangelium. Amendment of life, is an
upright, earnest and constant endeavor to do all that God commands, and to
forbear what he forbids.

Ver. 4. Trust ye not in lying words] Or, matters, sc. that will deceive you.
The ships Triumph, Cic. in Vatinuim.
or Good-speed, may be ventorum ludibrium, and miscarry upon the hard rocks, or
soft sands: so, fair shows and bare titles help not. Vatinius that wicked Roman
professed himself a Pythagorean, and vicious Antipater wore a white cloak, the
ensign of innocence. This was virtutis stragulam pudefacere, said Diogenes
wittily, to put honesty to an open shame.

The Temple of the Lord, the Temple -- are these] i. e. These buildings, or
these three parts of the Temple, viz. the most holy place, the Sanctuary, and
the outer Court. To these are made the Promises of Gods perpetual residence,
Psalm. 132.14. therefore we are safe from all danger, whilst here we take
sanctuary. See Mic. 3.11. The Romish crew in like manner have nothing in their
mouths so much as the Church, Ecclesiam ad ravim usque crepant catholicam.
the Church, the Catholic Church: and therein, like Oyster-wives, they outcry
us. Many also amongst our selves cry the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the
Lord, who do yet nothing care for the Lord of the Temple. They glory in
external privileges, and secure themselves therein, as the Jews fable that Og
King of Bashan escaped in the flood by riding astride upon the Ark without. But
what profits it Respicere ad phaleras, and nomina vana Catonum? Esse
Christianum grande est, non videri, says Hierom. It Is a great privilege to be
a Christian, but not to seem only to be so. An empty title yields but an
empty comfort at last.

Ver. 5. For if ye thoroughly amend your wayes] If ye thoroughly execute
judgement] If ye be serious in the one, and sedulous in the other. See ver. 2.

Ver. 6. If ye oppress not the stranger, etc.] Turtures amat Deus, non
vultures. See on Isa. 1.23.

Ver. 7. Then will I cause you to dwell in this place] Not else. Gods Promises
are with a condition; which is as an oar in a boat, or stern of a ship, and
turns the Promise another way.

Ver. 8. Behold ye trust, etc.] See on ver. 4.

Ver. 9. Will ye steal, murder, etc.] Heb. will ye stealing steal, murdering
murder, etc. i. e. drive a trade with the devil by these soul practices
allowed and wallowed in, quasi examen malorum facinorum nihil obsit, modo domum
Dei ingrederemini; as if you could set off with me, and make amends by your
good deeds for your bad?

Ver. 10. And come and stand before me in this house] This was worse then to do
as the Circassians (a kind of mongrel-Christians of the Greek-Church at this
day, who as they baptize not their children till the eighth year, so they enter
not into the Church (the Gentlemen especially) till the sixtieth year; but
hear divine service standing without the Temple: Br^erw. Enquir.
that is to say, till through age, they grow unable to continue their rapines
and robberies; to which sin that Nation is exceedingly addicted.

And say We are delivered] i. e. Licensed. Hoc idem dicunt qui cogitationes
inter peccato non numerant, says Oecolampadius.

Ver. 11. Is this house which is called by my name] Is it become impiae gentis
arcanum, A^x omnium turpitudinum.
as Florus afterward spitefully called it? or a professed Sanctuary of
roguery, as the Papists maliciously say of Geneva: Or a receptacle of all
abominations, as Pompey's Theater in Rome was once said to be.

Become a den of robbers] To such it should have been said by the Porters --
Gressus removete profani. In the mystical sacrifices of Ceres no profane person
was to be admitted: for the Priest going before uttered these words -- (...),
that is, be packing every wicked person. So the Roman Priests had their procul
o procul este profani.

Ver. 12. But go ye now] Non passibus sed sensibus. Summon the sobriety of your
senses before your own judgments, and consider what I did of old to Shiloh, a
place no less privileged then yours; and wherefore I did it: and be warned by
their woes. Alterius perditio, tua sit cautio. See thou another shipwrackt?
look well to thy tackling. Reason should persuade, and therefore lodges in the
brain: but when reason cannot persuade, example should, and mostly will.

Ver. 13. And now because ye have done] Worthily are they made examples to
others, that will not take example by others; that will not aliena frui
insania, make benefit of other men's miseries.

Rising early] As good husbands use to do; and as Plutarch reports of the
Persian Kings, that they had an officer to call them up betimes, and to mind
them of their business.

Ver. 14. Therefore will I do unto this house] Which ye fondly think that I am
bound to hold, and uphold. The Disciples also seem to have had a conceit that
the Temple and the world must needs end together: hence that mixed discourse of
our Savior, now of one, and now of another, Mat. 24. See ver. 3. of that
Chapter, with the Note.

V. 15. And I will cast you out of my sight] Heb. from against, or over against
my face.

As I have cast out your brethren] For your instance and admonition, I hanged
them up in gibbets, as it were at your very doors, but nothing would warn you.

Ver. 16. Therefore pray not thou for this people] For I am unchangeably
resolved upon their ruin: and I would not have thy prayers (those hony-drops)
spilt upon them. Their day of grace is past: their sins are full, the decree is
now gone forth, and it is irreversible; therefore pray not for this deplored
people: there is a sin unto death: and who knows but their sin was such? sure
it is the Prophet was silenced here, and that was a sad symptom.

Neither lift up cry] Verbum aptum precibus est: lift up is a very fit
expression, and the word rendered cry comes from a root that signifies clamare
voce contenta and efficaci, to set up the note to some tune, as we say. Ranan,
unde ranae, ut aliqui volunt.


Neither make intercession to me] Interdicit ti ne intercedat. Here and
elsewhere God flatly forbids the Prophet to pray; See chap. 14.7, 11. and yet
he is at it again, ver. 19, 20, 21, 22. So Exodus 32.11, 12, 13. Let me alone,
says God. The Chaldee there has it, leave off thy prayer, but Moses would
not. These were men of prayer, and could truly say of themselves as David once
did, Psalm. 109.4. but I gave my self to prayer. Where the Hebrew has it, But
I, prayer: as if he had been made up of it, and had minded little else. The
Lord also, they knew, was a prayer-hearing God, Psalm. 65.2. O thou that art
hearing prayers, (so the Hebrew has it) always hearing some, and ready to
hear the rest. Our God is not like Jupiter of Creet that had no cares: nor as
those other heathen-deities of whom Cicero sadly complains to his brother
Quintus in these words, I would pray to the gods for those things, but that
they have given over to hear my prayers. Jeremy could upon better ground pray,
then ever he in Plato did, (...), and. In English thus,
Great God, the good thou have to give, Plat. in Alcibiad.

Whether we ask't or no,
Let Us still receive: no mischief thrive
To work our overthrow.


Ver. 17. See thou not what they do] And have thou yet an heart to pray for
them? and should I yet have an heart to pity them? there is only this hope
left sometimes, that something God will yield to the prayers of his people,
Ratio additur quasi digito ad Jeremiam extenso.
even when he is most bitterly bent against them.

Flectitur iratus, voce rogante Deus. Distribuunt inter se munera.
Ver. 18. The children gather wood] All sorts, sizes, and sexes, are as busy as
bees: Sed turpis labor est ineptiarum. Oh that we were so intent, with united
forces, to the worship of the true God of heaven! Vae torpori nostro. Oh take
heed of industrious folly, dispir^t not your selves in the pursuit of trifles,
etc.

Scilicet and tenui popano corruptus Osiris. Juven. Sal. 6.
To make cakes] Popana, cakes stamped with stars.

To the Queen of heaven] i. e. To the heavenly bodies, and (as some will have
it) to the Moon in special. The Hebrews have a saying, that, God is to be
praised in the least gnat, to be magnified in the Elephant, but to be admired
in the Sun, Moon and Stars. And if the Jews in the text had stayed here, who
could have blamed them? but to deifie these creatures, was gross Idolatry, and
an inexpiable sin. Epiphanius tells us of certain heretics called
Collyridians, that they baked cakes and offered them to the Virgin Mary whom
they called the Queen of heaven: and do not the Papists at this day the very
same, Haeres. 79.
saying that hyperdulia is due unto her; not to speak of Bonaventure his
blasphemous Lady-Psalter, Bernard Bauhusius the Jesuit has set forth a book
in praise of the Virgin Mary, by changing this one verse, Tot tibi sunt dotes,
Virgo, quot sidera caelo. A thousand twenty and two ways, according to the
number of the known stars: The Jesuits commonly write at the end of their
books, Laus Deo and beatae Virgini; Praise be given to God, and to the blessed
Virgin: but this is the badge of the beast. Let us say Soli Deo Gloria: and yet
not in the sense of that Persian Ambassador, who, whenever his business lay
with Christians, was wont to have Soli Deo gloria very much in his mouth: but
by Soli he meant the Sun, whom he honored for his God. Why the women here, and
chap. 44. should be so busy in kneading cakes to the Moon, these reasons are
given: 1. Because the Moon was a Queen. 2. Because the women at their labor
were most beholden to the Moon, who by her great moisture mollifies the
secundines, and makes the passage easy for their delivery. This custom of
offering cakes to the Moon (says one) our Ancestors may seem not to have been
ignorant of: Greg. Posth. 202.
to this day our women make cakes at such times; yea the child is no sooner
born, but called cake-bread. Add, that the Saxons did adore the Moon, Ibid. 132.
to whom they set a day apart, which to this day we call Moonday. The same
Author tells us, that he who not long since conquered the Indies, persuaded
the Natives that he had complained of them to their Moon, and that such a day
the goddess should frown upon them; which was nothing else but an Eclipse which
he had found out in the Almanac.

Ver. 19. Do they provoke me to anger] i. e. Hurt they me by their
provocations? or hope they to get the better of me, and to cause me to lay down
the bucklers first? Surely as Ulysses his companions said to him when he would
needs provoke Polydamas, may we better say to such, as provoke the Almighty,
(...); Or as the wiseman, contend not with him that is mightier then thou:
meddle with thy match man.

Ver. 20. Mine anger and mine fury] A very dreadful doom, denounced against
these daring monsters. Those that provoke God to anger, shall soon have enough
of it. It is a fearful thing to fall into the punishing hands of the living
God, Heb. 10. Oh keep out of them.

Ver. 21. Put your burnt-offerings to your sacrifices and eat flesh] Congerite,
ingerite, digerite, egerite: take away all your sacrifices, wherewith ye fondly
think to expiate your sins, and feast your carcasses with them: for I wot well
that you offer them to me, ventris potius gratia quam internae pietatis, rather
of gourmandise then good devotion. You have therefore my good leave to make
your best of them: for I account them no other then ordinary and profane food,
such flesh as is bought and sold in the shambles: So Hos. 9.4. their
meat offering ( Lev. 2.5.) is in scorn called their bread for their soul or
life, that is, for their natural sustenance. And no better are the elements in
the Lords Supper to the unworthy Receiver, whatever he may promise himself by
them. Videlicet solum aut simpliciter.


Ver. 22. For I spoke not unto your Fathers] I gave them not those holy rites
as the substance of my service, or that ye should thus hold them up against my
threats for your rebellions, as a buckler of defense. Sacrifices without
obedience nec placent nec placant Deum.

Ver. 23. But this thing I commanded them] i. e. I principally commanded them:
giving them therefore first the Decalogue, and then afterward the ceremonial
Law, which was, or should have been their Gospel.

Ver. 24. But they hearkened not nor inclined] So crosse-grained they were, and
thwart from the very first.

In the imagination of their evil heart] In sententia animi sui pessimi, Trem.
Heb. aspectu cordis, ut Deuteronomy. 19.9.

They went backward, and not forward] As Crabfish do, as vise Apostates, in
pejus proficiunt grow every day worse then other, being not only averse but
adverse to any good, they daily grow worse and worse, deceiving and being
deceived, seipsit indies facti deteriores. Islebius first became an Antinomian
(and the Father of that Sect) and then a Papist, and lastly Atheist and
Epicure, as Osiander testifies. Whilst he was an Antinomian only, Cent. 16.
page 802.
he many times promised amendment (being convinced of his error) but performed
it not. After that, he condemned his error and recanted it in a public
auditory, and printed his Recantation: yet when Luther was dead, he not only
licked up his former vomit, but fell to worse, as aforesaid.

Ver. 25. Since the day] The Church has never wanted Preachers of the Truth.
See my True Treasure, page 7, 8. Woe to the world because of this.

Daily rising up early] See on ver. 13.

Ver. 26. Yet they harkened not unto me] This God speaks to the Prophet, as
weary of talking to them any longer, since it was to no better purpose.

Ver. 27. But they will not hearken unto thee] Howbeit speak (whether they will
hear, or whether they will forbear) for a testimony against them.

Ver. 28. This is a Nation] A heathenish Nation, such as they use to reproach
with this Name Goi, and Mamzer Gojim, that is, bastardly Heathens.

Nor receives correction] Or, instruction.

Ver. 29. Cut off thine hair, O Jerusalem] In token of greatest sorrow and
servitude, Job 1.20. Esa. 15.2. Ezekiel. 27.31. Tu dum servus es comam nutris,
said he in Aristophanes. The world here rendered hair is Nezir, which signifies
a crown, and there hence the Nazarites had their name, Number. 6. intimating
hereby, happily, that their Votaries should be as little accepted as were their
sacrifices, ver. 21.

And forsaken the generation of his wrath] Who are elsewhere called the people
of his curse, and vessels of wrath, fitted for destruction.

Ver. 30. They have set their abominations in the house] So do those now that
broach heresies in ^ste Church.

Ver. 31. To burn their sons and their daughters] Happily in a sinful imitation
of Abraham or Jephta: Or else, after the example of the Canaanites, Deuteronomy.
12.31. and other heathens, who thus sacrificed to the Devil, commanding them so
to do by his Oracles: Macrob. Saturn. lib. 7.
though Hercules taught the Italians to offer unto him rather men made of wax.

Ver. 32. It shall no more be called Tophet] Unless it be quasi Mophet, i. e.
Portentum.

Nor the valley of the son of Hinnom] As it had been called from Joshua's days,
chap. 15.8.

But the valley of slaughter] Or Ge-haharegah: for the great slaughter that the
Chaldees shall make there. Ecce congrua poena peccato, says Oecolampadius.

For they shall bury in Tophet] It shall become a Polyandrion or common
burial-place, till there be no place or room left.

Et erit morticinum populi.
Ver. 33. And the carcasses of this people] Their murrain-carcasses, as the
Vulgar renders it.

Shall be meat for the fowls of the heaven] Whereby we may also understand the
devils of hell, says Oecolampadius.

Ver. 34. Then will I cause to cease] Laetitia in luctum convertetur, plausus
in planctum, etc. Their singing shall be turned into sighing, their hollowing
into howling, etc.

The voice of the bridegroom] No catches, or canzonets shall be sung at
weddings; no Epithalamia.

CHAP. VIII.
Ver. 1. AT that time they shall bring out the bones] They shall not suffer the
dead to rest in their graves, Maxim propter ornamenta in sepulchris condita,
chiefly for the treasure, the Chaldees shall there look for: See 2 Chronicles.
36.19. Neh. 2.3. Joseph Antiq. lib. 13. chap. 15. Baruch 2.24. For extremity of
despite also, A. D. 897.
dead men's bones have been dug up. Pope Formosus was so dealt with by his
successor Stephanus the sixth: and many of the holy Martyrs, by their
barbarous persecutors. Act. and Mon. 1905. Ibid. 1784.
Cardinal Paol had a purpose to have taken up King Henry the eighths body at
Windsor, and to have burned it, but was prevented by death. Charles 5. would
not violate Luthers grave, though he were solicited so to do, when he had
conquered Saxony. But if he had, it had been never the worse with Luther: who
being asked where he would rest? answered sub caelo: Caelo tegitur qui caret
urna. Of all foul, we most hate and detest the crows: and of all beasts, the
Jackalls (a kind of foxes in Barbary) because the one digs up the graves and
devours the flesh, the other picketh out the eyes of the dead.

Ver. 2. And they shall spread them before the Sun] Whom these Idolaters had
worshipped whiles they were alive, and thought they could never do enough for,
as is hinted by those many expressions in the text.

Whom they have loved, and whom they have served, etc.] Innuitur poena
talionis, says Piscator: their dead bodies shall lie unburied in the sight of
these their deities, who could do them no good either alive or dead.

Ver. 3. And death shall be chosen rather then life] They being captives and
sorely oppressed, shall sing that doleful ditty, -- O terque quaterque b^ati,
Queis ante ora patrum Solymae sub moenibus altis
Contigit oppetere. --
Oh how happy were they that perished, Vae victis.
during the siege, or in the surprisal of the City! Life indeed is sweet, as we
say: and man is a life-loving creature, said that heathen: but it may fall out
that life shall be a burden, and a bitterness: how often does Job unwish it? and
how fain would Eliah have been rid of it? so little cause is there that any
good man should be either fond of life, or afraid of death.

Ver. 4. Shall they fall and not arise?] Or, when men fall, will they not
arise]? Or, will not one that has turned aside, return? To fall, may befall
any man: but shall he lie there, and not assay to get up again? to lose his way
may be incident to the wisest: but who but a fool would not make haste to get
into the right way again? Errare humanum est: perseverare, diabolicum. And yet
these stubborn Jews refuse to rise or return.

Ver. 5. Why then is this people of Jerusalem, etc.] Why else but because they
are void of all true reason, and quite beside themselves in point of salvation?
their pertinacy or rather pervicacy in sinning is altogether insuperable.
Monoceres interimi potest, capi non potest.

They hold fast deceit] They hold close to their false Prophets, or rather a
false heart of their own has deceived them, as ver. 11. a deceived heart has
turned them aside, as Esa. 44.20. See there.

Ver. 6. I hearkened and heard] Or, I have listened to hear; but could not yet
hear them lisp out one syllable of savoury language.

No man repented of his wickednesse] No nor so much as reflected, or turned
short again upon himself to take a reveiw of his former evil practices: which
yet is the very first thing in repentance, 2 Chronicles. 6.37. Luke 15.17.

Saying, What have I done] The Pythagoreans once a day put this question to
themselves. And the Orator thus bespoke his adversary Nevius, Si haec duo
tecum verba reputasses Quid ago? respirasset cupiditas and avaritia paululum:
Cicero orat. pro Quintio.
that is, had thou but said those two words to thy self, What do I? thy lust
and covetousness would thereby have been cooled and qualified.

Every one turned to his course as a horse rusheth] Heb. rusheth with as much
violence as an overflowing flood. Hinc apparet fructus liberi arbitrii, says
Oecolampadius: See here the fruit of free will, and what man will do being left
to himself. Carnal affections are forcible and furious: Plato himself saw, and
could say as much, In Phad^o.
when he compared concupiscence to an headstrong horse, that runs away with
his rider, and cannot be ruled.

Ver. 7. Yea, the stork in the heaven knows her appointed time] These fouls,
though wanting reason, know well when to change quarters: whether against
summer as the stork, turtle and swallow; or against winter as the crane.

But my people know not the judgment of the Lord] Whether his summer of grace
offered, or his winter of punishment threatened; to embrace the one, or to
prevent the other. See a like dissimilitude and opposition, Isa. 1.3.

Ver. 8. How do ye say We are wise?] If ye were so, ye would never say so.
Surely I am more brutish then any man, said holy Agur, Prove. 30.2. This only I
know that I know nothing, said Socrates. Neither know I so much as this that I
know just nothing, said a third. How could these in the text say, We are wise,
when the fouls of the air outwitted them? confer, Job 35.11.

The Law of the Lord is with us] Vox est Pharisaeorum. So the Jesuits at this
day (as of old the Gnostics) will needs be held the only knowing men. The
Empire of learning belongs to the Jesuits, say they: a Jesuit cannot be an
heretic; Casaub. ex Apologista.
Jungantur in unum, dies cum nocte, lux cum tenebris, etc. i. e. Let day and
night be jumbled together, light and darkness, heat and cold, health and
sickness, life and death; so may there be some likelihood that a Jesuit may be
an heretic, says one of them. The Church is the soul of the world, the Clergy
of the Church; and we, of the Clergy, says another.

Lo certainly in vain made he it] i. e. The Law, for any good use, that this
people or their leaders put it to. See Hos. 8.12. Romans 2.17, -- 25.

Ver. 9. The wise men are ashamed] They have cause to be ashamed of their
gross ignorance and folly, ver. 7, 8. and greater cause then ever humble
Austin had to say Scientia mea me damnat, my knowledge undoeth me.

Lo they have rejected the word of the Lord] As to any holy practice: their
knowledge is only Apprehensive and notional, not Affective and practical.

And what wisdom is in them] q d. None worth speaking of: they lose their civil
praises, because not wise to salvation.

Ver. 10. Therefore will I give their wives] For a punishment of their
rejecting my Word, which ought to be received with all reverence and good
affection. Dilher. Elect. lib. 1. cap. 2.
The Turks do so highly respect the Alchoran (which is their Bible) that if a
Christian do but sit upon it though unwittingly, they presently put him to
death.

For every one, etc.] See chap. 6.13.

Ver. 11. For they have healed] See chap. 6.14.

Ver. 12. Were they ashamed] See chap. 6.15.

Ver. 13. I will surely consume them, says the Lord] Texitur hic quasi
tragoediae scena; here follows a kind of Tragedy, says an Expositour; God is
brought in threatening, the Prophet bewailing, the people despairing, and yet
bethinking themselves of some shelter and safeguard, if they knew where to find
it, etc.

There shall be no grapes on the vine, nor figs] But instead thereof I will
give them waters of gall to drink, ver. 14. Tremellius and Piscator read it
thus, There are no grapes on the vine, nor figs on the figtree, yea the leaves
are fallen: that is, say they, there is no power of godliness found among
them, no not so much as any profession, neither fruit nor leaf.

And the things that I have given them shall pass away] I will curse their
blessings, Mal. 2.2. and destroy them after that I have done them good, Josh.
24.

Ver. 14. Why do we sit still] Here the people speak (see on ver. 13.) being
grievously frighted upon the coming of the Chaldees; and thereupon consulting
what course to take: but all would not do, ver. 16.

Let us be silent] Sic silent pavidimures coram feel.

For the Lord our God has put us to silence] Has expectorated our courage,
and stopped our mouths.

And has given us waters of gall to drink] Succum cicutae, our bane, our
deaths-draught: so that now we know, by woeful experience, what an evil and
bitter thing sin is: for a drop of honey we have now a sea of gall.

Ver. 15. We looked for peace, but no good came] Our false Prophets have merely
deluded us. So poor souls, when stung by the Friars Sermons, were set to
pennances and good deeds, which stilled them for a while, but could not yield
them any lasting comfort. The soul is still ready to shift, and shark in every
by-corner for ease: but that will not be, till it comes to Christ.

Ver. 16. The snorting of his horses was heard from Dan] See chap. 4.15. this
caused in the Jews hearts a motion of trepidation: confer Job 39.20, It is the
privilege of believers in nothing to be terrified by their adversaries, Phil.
1.28. but with the horse spoken of Job 39.22. to mock at fear, and not to turn
back from the dint of the sword.

Ver. 17. Behold I will send Serpents, Cockatrices] i. e. Chaldees, no less
virulent then serpents, as violent as horses. Serpentum tot sunt venena quot
genera, tot pernicies quot species, tot dolores quot colores, says an Ancient:
Serpents are of several sorts, Isidor. lib. 12. cap. 2.
but all poisonful and pernicious. The Basilisk or Cockatrice here instanced
(the worst sort of serpents, say the Septuagint here) goes not upon the belly
as other serpents: but erect from the middle part, and does so infect the air,
that by the pestilent breath coming therefrom, fruits are killed, and men being
but looked upon by it, and birds flying over it: stones also are broken thereby,
and all other serpents put to flight.

Dlod. Pisc.
And they shall bite you] There is an elegancy in the original.

Ver. 18. When I would comfort my self, etc.] Or, as some render it, O my
comfort against sorrow, i. e. O my God; others, my recreation is joined with
sorrow.

Ver. 19. Behold the voice of the cry] This was it that broke the good Prophets
heart, the shrieks of his people.

Haec est querela hypocritarum. Oecol.
Is not the Lord in Zion?] Thus in their distress they leaned upon the Lord,
as Mic. 3.11. and enquired after him, whom in their prosperity they made little
reckoning of.

Why have they provoked me to anger?] q. d. The fault is merely in themselves,
who have driven me out from amongst them by their Idolatries.

Ver. 20. The harvest is past, the summer is ended] They had set God a time,
and looked for help that summer at farthest: but the Lord, as he never fails
in his own time, so he seldom comes at ours. Let us think we hear our poor
brethren in Piedmont, Poland, Pomeraenia, complaining to us in this sort, and
be excited to help them, by our prayers and reliefs, etc.

Ver. 21. For the hurt of the daughter of my people am I hurt, I am black] Or,
I go in black, mourner like: or I am denigrated and contemned for bewailing my
peoples misery, who neither feel nor fear hurt.

Ver. 22. Is there no balm in Gilead?] Yes surely, there or nowhere: in Gilead
grew a balsom good to make salves for all sores, they say. This balsam grew
there only in two large gardens, which belonged to the King. The nature of the
tree could not abide iron but presently dyed, if cut never so small a depth:
they used therefore glass, bone-knives, sharp stones, to get the gum out of
the tree.

Is there no Physician there?] Or, no Surgeon there, where this medicinal
simple so abounds? but this peoples sorrow is immedicable, their disease
desperate -- docta plus valet art malum. The balm of the soul is Prayer, says
the Chaldee Paraphrast; is Repentance, says Hierom^ is Christ applied by
faith, say we: Sanguis medici est curatio phrenetici. To this Almighty
Physician, no disease can be incurable.

CHAP. IX.
Ver. 1. OH that mine head were waters] Mira sermonis transfiguratione utitur
Propheta, A wonderful wish of this weeping Prophet, and to be taken up by Gods
faithful Ministers, considering the woeful condition of their perishing people,
posting to perdition. Pia est illa tristitia, and si dici potest, beata
miseria, Epist. 545.
says Augustine; this is a sweet sorrow, a blessed misery. Such waters will be
turned into wine, at the wedding day of the Lamb; for which purpose also they
are kept safe in Gods bottle. Psalm. 56.8.

And mine eyes a fountain of teares] That there might be a perennity of them.
The same word in Hebrew signifies both an eye and a fountain: both because the
eye is of a watery constitution, and for that our eye should trickle down and
not cease for our own and other men's sins and miseries. Athanasius by his
tears, Lam. 3.49.
as by the bleeding of a chaste vine, is said to have cured the leprosy of that
tainted age. Proborum virorum lachrymae sunt peccatorum diluvium, and mundi
piamentum. N^zlanzen. Orat. 3. Mandrae signifies caves or holes.


Ver. 2. Oh that I had in the wilderness a lodging place] Some sorry shed,
such as those Worthies had who dwelt in dens and caves of the earth; Heb.
11.38. such as Athanasius had, who lived (say some) six years in a Well without
the light of the Sun, forsaken of friends, and everywhere hunted by enemies:
such as the ancient Hermites and Monks had: who because they lived in caves
and subterranean holes, they were named Mandrites and Troglodites. A godly man
desires to converse as much as may be with God, and as little as may be with
men, unless they were better. Lot had little joy of Sodom, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8.
Aaron of the Israelites. Thou know, says he to Moses, that this people is
wholly set upon wickedness, Exodus 32.22. And indeed so is the whole world, 1 John 5.19. with 2.16. Hence good men are often put upon David's wish, Oh that I
had the wings of a dove, etc! Psalm. 55.6. Psalm. 122.
Or if that Oh will not set them at liberty, they take up that Woe of his to
express their misery, Woe is me that I sojourn in Meshec, etc. Who will give me
a travelers lodge in the wilderness that I might leave my people, whose
wicked courses are a continual eyesore and heart-break unto me?

For they are all adulterers] Both corporal and spiritual.

An assembly of treacherous] A pack of perfidious wretches; a rabble of rebels
conspiring against heaven, Isa. 1.4.

Ver. 3. And they bend their tongues like their bow for lyes] To the impeaching
of others in their name, state and life. I read that in Italy at this day they
have a pocket-stone-bow, which held under a cloak shoots needles with violence
to pierce a man's body, yet leaves a wound scarce discernable. Lo such is an
evil tongue, Il. Mercurio Italico.
and such mischief it may do a man.

But they are not valiant for the truth] Truth is no part of their profession:
and courage in a good cause they have none. Of the most we may say as of Hearts
and Stags, they have great horns, but to little purpose; Plutarch.
or as Themistocles said of the Eretrians, that they were like the sword-fish
which has a sword indeed, but not a heart to make use of it.

And they know not me says the Lord] The low apprehensions men have of God,
make their hearts work so poorly after him, Psalm. 9.10.

Ver. 4. Take ye heed every one of his neighbour] Since there is scarce any to
be trusted. The Poets tell us that when Pallas had taught people to build an
house, N^n hospes ab hospite tutus. Ovid.
Momus found this fault with it, that it was fixed to a place and not set upon
wheels: to the end that if men liked not their neighborhood, they might
remove at pleasure. A good neighbor is a rare bird.

And trust ye not in any brother] See Mich. 7.5, 6. with the Notes.

For every brother will utterly supplant] Singula verba hic habent pondus and
pathos ingens: Here each word has its weight: each syllable its substance.
Fratrum quoque gratia rara est. Ovid.


Ver. 5. They have taught their tongues to speak lyes] They are Artists at it,
and can tack one lie to another very handsomely, Psalm. 119.69. See the Note.

Aliud in labris, aliud in fibri^.
Ver. 6. Thine habitation is in the miost of deceit] i. e. Of deceitful persons:
who have honey in their tongues, but gall in their hearts.

They refuse to know me] Vt liberius peccent, libenter ignorant, they are
wilfully ignorant, 2 Pet. 3.3, 5. so wedded and wedged they are to their
fraudulent practices.

Ver. 7. Behold I will melt them and try them] I will cast them into the fiery
crucible of sharp affl^ction. A Metaphor from Metallaries. See chap. 6.29.

For how should I do for the daughter of my people?] i. e. How should I do
otherwise? what can I do less to them though they are my people, since they are
so shamelesly, so lawlesly wicked? an unruly Patient makes a cruel Physician:
a desperate disease must have a desperate remedy.

Ver. 8. Their tongue is as an arrow shot out] It is both a bow, ver. 3. and a
shaft, and that a slaughtering shaft, Jun. Pisc.
as some coppies have it here; culter jugulans, a murthering-knife, some render
it. So Psalm. 42.10. As with a murdering weapon in my bones, mine enemies
reproach me. Reckon thou, says one, Sennacherib and Rabshakeh among the first,
and chiefest Kill-Christs, because ever an honest mind is more afflicted with
words then with blows.

It speaks deceit] See Psalm. 52.2. with the Notes.

One speaks peaceably -- but in his heart he lays his wait] Such a one was
the tyrant Tiberius and our Richard 3. who would use most complements and show
greatest signs of love and courtesy to him in the morning, Dan hist. 249.
whose throat he had taken order to be cut that evening.

Ver. 9. Shall I not visit them] See on chap. 5.9.

Ver. 10. For the mountains will I take up a weeping] Accingit se Propheta ad
luctum. Jeremy was better at weeping then Heraclitus, and from a better
principle. Lachrymas angustiae exprimit Crux: lachrymas poenitentiae peccatum:
lachrymas sympathiae, affectus humanitatis, vel Christianitatis: lachrymas
nequitiae, vel hypocrisis vel vindictae cupiditas. Jeremies tears were of the
best sort.

Because they are burnt up] The Rabbines tell us, that after the people were
carried captive to Babylon, the land of Jury was burnt up with sulphur and
salt. But this may well pass for a Jewish fable.

Both the fowl of the heaven] See chap. 4.25.

Ver. 11. And I will make Jerusalem heaps] So small a distance is there, says
Seneca, betwixt a great City and none. The world is as full of mutation as of
motion.

And a den of Dragons] Because she made mine house a den of thieves, chap. 7.11.

Ver. 12. Who is the wise man that he may understand this?] This who, and who,
denotes a great paucity of such wise ones as consider common calamities in the
true causes of them, propter quid pereat haec terra, for what the land
perishes, and that great sins produce grievous judgments: The most are apt to
say with those Philistines It is a chance, to attribute their sufferings to
Fate or Fortune, to accuse God of injustice, rather then to accept of the
punishment of their iniquity.

And who is he to whom the mouth of the Lord has spoken] q. d. Is there never
a one of your Prophets that will set you right herein? but the dust of
covetousness has put out their eyes: and they can better sing Placentia then
Lachrymae, etc.

Ver. 13. And the Lord saith] Or, therefore the Lord says, q. d. Because
neither your selves know, nor have any else to tell you the true cause of your
calamities, hear it from Gods own mouth.

Ver. 14. But have walked after the imagination of their own heart] Then the
which they could not have chosen a worse guide, since it is evil, only evil, and
continually so, Genesis 6.5. See the note there.

Which their fathers taught them] See chap. 7.18.

Ver. 15. Behold I will feed them with wormwood] i. e. With bitter afflictions.
Et haec poena inobedientiae fidei respondet. The backslider in heart shall be
filled with his own ways, Prove. 14.14. he shall have his belly full of them,
as we use to say. See chap. 8.14.

Ver. 16. And I will scatter them also among the heathen] As had been
forethreatned, Deuteronomy. 28. Lev. 26. But men will not believe till they feel. They
read the threats of Gods law as they do the old stories of foreign wars, and
as if they lived out of the reach of Gods rod.

Ver. 17. Consider ye] Intelligentes estote: Is not your hard-heartednesse
such, as that ye need such an help? to do that wherein you should be forward
and free-hearted. The Hollanders and French fast, says one, but (without
exprobration be it spoken) they had need to send for mourning-women, Spec. bell.
sac. 209. Vt flerent oculos erudiere suas. Ovid.
that by their cunning they may be taught to mourn.

And call for the mourning women] In planctum and omne pathos faciles, such as
could make exquisite lamentation, and cunningly act the part of mourners at
funerals, so as to wring tears from the beholders. These the Latins called
Praeficas quia luctui praeficiebantur, because they had the chief hand in
funeral mournings: for the better carrying on whereof they both sang doleful
ditties, See 2 Chronicles. 35.25. and played on certain heavily-sounding
instruments, Mat. 9.23. whence the Poet, Cantabit maestis tibia funeribus. Ovid.


Ver. 18. And let them make haste and take up a wailing for us] Of this vanity
or affectation God approves not as neither he did of the Olympic games, of
usury, of that custom at Corinth, 1 Ep. 15.29. which yet he makes his use of.

Ver. 19. For a voice of wailing is heard out of Zion, How are we spoiled?
Ponit formulam threnodiae.
] Quis tragoediam aptius and magis graphice depingeret? what tragedy was ever
better set forth, and in more lively expressions?

Ver. 20. Yet hear the Word of the Lord, O ye women] For souls have no sexes,
and ye are likely to have your share as deep as any in the common calamity: you
also are mostly more apt to weep then men, and may sooner work your men to
godly sorrow then those lamentatrices.

Ver. 21. For death is come up into our windows] i. e. The killing Chaldees
break in upon us at any place of entrance, doors or windows, Joel 2.9. Joh.
10.1. The Ancients give us warning here to see to our senses (those windows of
wickedness) that sin get not into the soul thereby, and death by sin.

Ver. 22. Speak, Thus says the Lord] Heb. Speak, it is the Lords saying: and
therefore thou may be bold to speak it. So 1 These. 4.15. For I say unto you
in (or, by) the Word of the Lord.

And as the handful after the harvest man] Death shall cut them up by handfuls,
and lay them heaps upon heaps.

Ver. 23. Let not the wiseman glory in his wisdom] q. d. You bear your selves
bold upon your wisdom, wealth, strength, and other such seeming supports and
deceitful foundations, as if these could save you from the evils threatened. But
all these will prove like a shadow that declineth, delightful but deceitful; as
will well appear at the hour of death. Charles the fifth (whom, of all men, the
world ^udged most happy) cursed his honors, (a little before his death) his
victories, trophies, and riches, saying Abite hinc, abite long, get you far
enough, for any good ye can now do me. Abi perdita bestia quae me totum
perdidisti, be gone thou wretched creature, that have utterly undone me, said
Corn, Agrippa the Magician to his familiar spirit, when he lay a dying. So may
many say of their worldly wisdom, wealth, etc.

Let not the wise man glory] Let not those of great parts be headstrong or
top-heavy: let them not think to wind out by their wiles and shifts.

Let not the mighty man glory] Fortitudo nostra est infirmitatis in veritate
cognitio, Aug.
and in humilitate confessio.

Nor the rich man glory in his riches] Since they avail not in the day of
wrath, Zeph. 1.18. See the Note there.

Ver. 24. But let him that glories, glory in this] And yet not in this
neither, unless he can do it with self-denial, and lowlymindednesse. Let him
glory only in the Lord, says Paul. The pride of Virginity is as foul a sin as
Impurity, says Austin: so here.

Ver. 25. That I will punish all them, etc] Promiscuously and impartially.

That are circumcised] Some read it, The circumcised in uncircumcision.
Unregenerate Israel, notwithstanding their circumcision, are to God as
Ethiopians, Am. 9.7.

Ver. 26. That are in the utmost corners] Heb. Praecisos in lateribus, polled
by the corner: Tempora circumradunt.
which was the Arabian fashion, says Herodotus. See chap. 49.32.

For all these Nations are uncircumcised] sc. In heart, though circumcised in
the flesh, as now also the Turks are.

CHAP. X.
Ver. 1. HEar ye the Word which the Lord speaketh] Exordium simplicissimum,
says Junius. A very plain preface, calling for attention. 1. From the
authority of the Speaker. 2. From the duty of the hearers.

O house of Israel] The ten Tribes long since captivated, and now directed what
to do, say some. The Jews, say others; and in this former part of the chapter,
those of them that had been carried away to Babylon with Jeconiah.

Vide Seldom. de diis Syris.
Ver. 2. Learn not the way of the heathens] Their sinful customs and irregular
religions, (mere irreligions.)

And be not dismayed at the signs of heaven] Which the blind heathens feared,
and deified: and none did more then the Syrians, the Jews next neighbors. Of
the vanity of judicial Astrology, see on Esa. 47.13. He who fears God needs
not fear the stars: for All things are yours, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.21.
Muleasses King of Tunis a great star-gazer, foreseeing by them, as he said,
the loss of his Kingdom and life together, left Africa, that he might shun
that mischief: but thereby he hastened it, Anno 1544. God suffers sometimes
such fond predictions to fall out right upon men for a just punishment of their
curiosity.

For the heathen are dismayed at them] Therefore Gods people should not; if it
were for no other reason but that only: See Mat. 6.32. Let Papists observe this.

Caeremoniae populotum.
Ver. 3. For the customs of the people are vain] Their rites confirmed by
custom; their imagery, for instance, a very magnum nihil; whether ye look to
the Efficient, Matter, Form, or End of those mawmets.

For one cutteth a tree out of the Forrest] See Isa. 40.2. and 44.12. -- 17.
which last place Jeremy here seems to have imitated.

Ver. 4. They deck it with silver and with gold] Gild it over, to make it
sightly: goodly gods therewhile. See Esa. 4.4.

That it move not] Vt non amittat, says Tremellius: that it lose not the cost
bestowed upon it.

Ver. 5. They are upright as the Palm-tree] Which it straight, tall, smooth,
and in summo prosert fructus, and bears fruits at the very top of it.

Ver. 6. Forasmuch as there is none like unto thee] None of all these dii
minutuli, these dunghill deities, are worthy to be named in the same day with
thee.

Thou art great] God is great, Psalm. 77.13. Greater, Job 33.12. Greatest, Psalm.
95.3. Greatness it self, Psalm. 145.3. He is a degree above the superlative.
Think the same of other his names and attributes; many of which we have here
mentioned in this and the following verses: which are therefore highly to be
prized, and often to be perused. Leonard Lessius a little before his death,
finished his book concerning the fifty Names of Almighty God: Ex vita Lessii.
often affirming that in that little book he had found more light and spiritual
support under those grievous fits of the stone which he suffered, then in all
his voluminous Commentaries upon Aquinas his sums, which he had well-nigh
fitted for the Press.

Ver. 7. Who would not fear thee, O King of Nations?] Tremble at thy
transcendent greatness, thy matchless Majesty, power, and prowess? See Mal.
1.14. Rev. 15.4. Psalm. 103.19. with the Notes.

Forasmuch as among all the wise men of the Nations] Who used to deifie their
wise men, and their Kings.

Ver. 8. But they are altogether brutish and foolish] The wise men are, for
that when they knew there was but one only true God (as did Pythagoras,
Socrates, Plato, Seneca, etc.) they detained the truth in unrighteousness, and
taught the people to worship stocks and stones, Romans 1.21, 22, 23. The Nations
are, because they yield to be taught devotion by images, under what pretext
soever. Considerentur hic subterfugia Papistarum. Pope Gregory first taught
that images in Churches were Laey-mens books. A doctrine of devils.

Ver. 9. Silver spread into plates] See Isa. 40.19.

Is brought from Tarshish] From Tarsus or Tartessus, Ezekiel. 27.12. from Africa,
says the Chaldee. Idolaters spare for no cost.

And gold from Vphaz] The same with Phaz, Job. 28.17. Or with Ophir, as some:
Aurum Obzyrum.

They are all the work of cunning men] Quaerunt suos Phidias and Praxiteles:
but how could those give that deity which themselves had not?

Ver. 10. But the Lord is the true God] Heb. Jehovah is God in truth, not in
conceit only, or counterfeit.

He is the living God, and an everlasting King] See on ver. 6.

At his wrath the earth shall tremble] The earth, that greatest of all lifeless
creatures.

And the Nations shall not be able] Less able to stand before him, then a
glasse-bottle before a Cannon-shot.

Ver. 11. Thus shall ye say unto them] Confession with the mouth is necessary
to Salvation. This verse (written therefore in the Syriack tongue, which was
spoken at Babylon) is a formulary given to Gods people, to be made use of by
them in detestation of the Idolatries of that City.

The Gods that made not the heaven and the earth] The vanity of Idols and
heathenish-gods is set forth, 1. By their impotency. 2. Frailty. Quid ad haec
respondebunt Papistae? aut qualem contradictoriae reconciliationem afferent?

Ver. 12. He has made the earth by his power] Here we have the true Philosophy
and right original of things: Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas.
Almighty God made the earth, the main bulk and body of it. Genesis 1.1. He alone
is the powerful Creator, the provident disposer, the prudent preserver of all
things both in heaven and in earth: therefore the only true God.

Ver. 13. When he utters his voyce] Again, when he thundereth ( Ps. 29.3.) it
raineth a main, lighteneth in the midst of the rain (which is a great miracle)
and blows for life, as we say, no man knowing whence or whither, Joh. 3.8.
All which wondrous works of God may well serve for a Theological Alphabet, and
cannot be attributed to any god but our God.

And he causes the vapors to ascend] See Psalm, 135.7. with the Notes.

Ver. 14. Every man is brutish in his knowledge] Or, Every man is become more
brutish then to know: That was therefore an hyperbolical praise given by
Philostratus to Apollonius, Non doctus sed natus sapiens, that he was not
taught but born a wise man: See Job 11.12. Romans 1.22. with the Notes. Every man
is become brutish, for want of knowledge (so the words may be rendered) the
heathen idol-makers especially; Brutescit homo prae scientia, so Vatablus 1.
Every man is brutish, in comparison of knowledge, viz. of Gods knowledge,
whilst he goes about to search into the causes of rain, lightening, wind,
etc. which God only understands.

Ver. 15. They are vanity] Vanity in its largest extent, is properly predicated
of them.

And the work of errours] Mere mockeries; making men to embrace vanity for
verity.

In the time of their visitation] See on Isa. 46.1.

Ver. 16. The portion of Jacob is not like them] God is his peoples portion;
they are his possession: Oh their dignity and security! this, the cock on the
dunghill understands not.

Ver. 17. Gather up thy wares out of the land] Make up thy pack, and prevent a
plundering. Reculas tuas and sarcinas compone.

Ver. 18. Behold I will fling out the inhabitants of this land] I will easily
and speedily sling them and fling them into Babylon: so God will one day hurl
into hell all the wicked of the earth, Psalm. 9.17.

And will distress them, that they may find it so] Just so as they were
foretold it would be, but they could never be drawn to believe it.

Ver. 19. Woe is me for my hurt, my wound is grievous] This is the moan that
people make when in distress, and they find it so. But what after a while of
pausing?

Truly this is my grief, and I must bear it] i. e. Bear it off, as well as I
may, by head and shoulders; or bear up under it and rub through it; wearing it
out as well as I can: when things are at worst they will mend again. Crosses, as
they had a time to come in, so they must have a time to go out, etc. This is
not patience but pertinaecy; the strength of stones, and flesh of brass, Job
6.12. it draws on more weight of plagues, and punishments; God likes not
this indolency, this stupidity, this despising of his corrections, as he
calls it, Heb. 12.5. such shall be made to cry when God binds them (Job
36.11.) as here.

Ver. 20. My Tabernacle is spoiled] I am irreparably ruined: like as when a
camp is quite broken up, not any part of a tent or hut is left standing.

Ver. 21. For the Pastors are become brutish] The corrupt Prophets and
Priests, who seduced the people from the truth, were persons that made no
conscience of prayer: hence all went to wrack and ruin.

Ver. 22. Behold the noise of the bruit is come] This doleful peal he often rung
in their ears; but they little regarded it. See chap. 9.11.

Ver. 23. O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself] He is not
master of his own way; but is directed and overruled by the powerful
providence: even this cruel Chaldaan also, that marches against us.

It is not in man that walks, to direct his steps] We know not what to do or
which way to turn our selves: only our eyes are toward thee. Behold we submit
to thy justice, and implore thy mercy. This text does mainly make against
free will, says Oecolampadius: and yet the Pelagiam would hence gather, that
man can by his own strength walk in the way to heaven: but he must be helped
say they, by Gods grace that he may be perfect.

Cum ratione seu modo. Leniter and discrete. Lap.
Ver. 24. O Lord, correct me, but with judgement] i. e. In mercy and in measure.
Correction is not simply to be deprecated: the Prophet here cries Corret me:
David says, It was good for me: Job calls Gods afflicting of us, his
magnifying of us, chap. 7.17. Feri Domine feri clementer: ipse paratus sam,
says Luther; Smite Lord, smite me, but gently: and I am ready to bear it
patiently. King Alfred prayed God to send him always some sickness whereby
his body might be tamed, and he the better disposed and affectioned to
Godward. Ecclesiastical history tells of one Servulus, who sick of a palsy,
so that his life was a lingering death, said ordinarily, God be thanked.

Ver. 25. Pour out, etc.] This is not more votum then vaticinium; a prayer,
then a prophecy.

And upon the families] Neglect of family prayer uncovers the roof as it were
for Gods curse to be rained down upon men's tables, meat, enterprises, etc.

CHAP. XI.
Ver. 1. THe Word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord] To him it came, but to
be imparted to other Prophets, say some, Priests of Anathoth, say others, ver.
2. which might be the reason why they were so enraged against him and fought
his life, ver. 18, 19. as the Popish Priests did Mancinels, Savanarolas and
other faithful Preachers, for exciting them to do their duties.

Ver. 2. Hear ye the words -- and speak ye] Ye Priests whose ordinary office it
is to teach Jacob Gods judgments, and Israel his Law, Deuteronomy. 33.10.

Ver. 3. And say thou unto them] Thou Jeremy: whether the rest will join with
thee, or not.

Cursed be the man that obeys not the words of this Covenant] It is probable
that Jeremy when he said thus, held the book in his hand, viz. the book of
Deuteronomy, which the Rabbines call Sepher Tochechoth, because of the many
increpations and curses therein contained.

Ver. 4. From the iron furnace] Where iron is melted and a fierce fire required.

Obey my voyce] See chap 7.23.

Ver. 5. A land flowing with milk and honey] With plenty of dainties. The City
of Aleppo is so called by the Turks, of Alep milk: for if the via lactea were
on earth, it would be found there, says one.

So be it, O Lord] Amen, Fiat, Fiat. Oh that there were an heart in this people
to obey thy voice; And oh that thou would still continue them in this good
land, etc. Our hearts should be stretched out after out Amen: and we should be
swallowed upon God, say the Rabbines.

Ver. 6. Hear ye the words of this Covevant, and do them] Else ye hear to no
purpose; as the Salamander lives in the fire and is not made hot by the fire;
as the Ethiopian goes black into the Bath, and as black he comes forth.

Ver. 7. Rising early] i. e. endeavoring earnestly: See chap. 5.8.

Ver. 8. Yet they obeyed not] See chap. 7.24.

Therefore I will bring] Heb. and I brought upon them.

Ver. 9. A conspiracy is found among the men of Judah] A combination in sinful
courses, this is not Unity but Conspiracy. See Ezekiel. 22.25. Hos. 6.9. such is
the unity of the Antichristian crew, Rev. 17.13. The Turks have as little
dissension in their religion as any: yet are a rabble of rebels conspiring
against heaven.

Ver. 10. They are turned away to the iniquities of their fore-fathers] Showing
themselves herein to be a race of rebels, as good at resisting the holy Ghost
as ever their Fathers were, and are therefore justly chargeable with their
iniquities: which needs not.

Ver. 11. Which they shall not be able to escape] To avert, avoid or abide.

I will not hearken unto them] See Prove. 1.28. Zech. 7.13. with the Notes.

Ver. 12. Then shall the Cities of Judah -- go and cry unto the Gods] Or, Let
them go, and cry unto them, q. d. Let them for me: This is one of those bitter
answers that God gives to wicked suitors, Ezekiel. 14. See Judge. 10.14. Or if he
give them better at any time, it is in wrath, and for a mischief to them.

Ver. 13. For according to the number of thy Cities] See chap. 2.28.

And according to the number of thy streets] See Ezekiel. 16.31.

Ver. 14. Therefore pray not thou for this people] See on chap. 7.16.

When they cry unto me for their trouble] It is not the cry of the spirit for
grace, but of the flesh only for ease; it is but the fruit of sinful self-love:
In thee indeed it proceeds from a better principle: but I am at a point.

Ver. 15. What has my beloved to do in mine house?] i. e. Mine once-beloved
people, which had the liberty of mine house, and was welcome thither; Vatab.
but is now discarded, and discovenanted; as if an husband should say to his
adulterous wife, What makes this strumpet in my bed, since she has so many
paramouts?

And the holy flesh] The sacrifices sanctified by the Altar.

Is passed from thee] Shall be wholly taken away from you, together with the
Temple.

When thou do evil, then thou rejoycest] Thou revellest in thine impurities
and sensualities, as dreading no danger, but slighting all admonition.

Ver. 16. The Lord called thy name a green Olive-tree] Green all the year long;
fair, and fruitful; this was thy prosperous and flourishing condition: but now
thy best days are over; For,

With the noise of a great tumult] Barritu militari, such as soldiers make
when they storm a City.

Ver. 17. For the evil of the house of Israel] That evil by a specialty, that
land-desolating sin of Idolatry.

Ver. 18. And the Lord has given me knowledge of it] i. e. Of the treacherous
plot of my countrymen of Anathoth against me; who should never have dreamt of
any such danger; Dius pro suis excubat.

Ver. 19. But I was like a lamb or an Ox] Harmless and blameless, busied in
my function, and not in the least suspecting any such evil design against me.
M^t. 10.
I send you forth as lambs amongst wolves, says Christ; who himself being the
Lamb of God was slain from the beginning of the world; his servants also are
slain all the day long, and counted as sheep to the slaughter; Romans 8.

Let us destroy the tree with the fruit thereof] Let us poison his food, so the
Chaldee senseth it, Ponamus lignum taxi in sorbitiunculam. Others, let us
destroy the Prophet and his prophecyes together. Others, let us make an end of
him either by sword or by famine, as the punishment threatened ver. 22. points
us to.

That his name may be no more remembred] Sic veritas odium peperit. So the
Papists have given order that wheresoever Calvin's name is found, it shall be
blotted out: and by a most malicious Anagram they have turned Calvin into
Lucian. One of them lately took a long journey to Rome, only to have his name
changed from Calvin to some other: and that out of devilish hatred of that most
learned and holy man, Ipsa a quo virtus virtutem discere posset.

Ver. 20. But O Lord of hosts] Thou who art potentissimus and liberrimus, a
most powerful and free Agent.

That tryest the reins and the heart] And so know with what mind I make
this complaint and request.

Let me see thy vengeance upon them] A prophetical imprecation guided by Gods
Spirit, and not lightly to be imitated. So the Church prayed against Julian the
Apostate, whom they knew to be a desperate enemy, and to have committed that
sin unto death. So perhaps had these men of Anathoth.

Ver. 21. Of the men of Anathoth that seek thy life] Where shall a man find
worse friends then at home? A Prophet is nowhere so little set by as in his own
country, Epist. famil. lib. 7. ep. 6.
Mat. 13.57. Probatissimus and optimus quisque peregre vivit, says Ennius in
Tully.

Saying, Prophecy not in the Name of the Lord] A desperate speech, proceeding
from an height of hatred, and coasting upon the unpardonable sin.

Ver. 22. Behold I will punish them] Sic tandem bona causa triumphat. The
visible vengeance of God follows close at the heels the persecutors of his
faithful messengers.

Ver. 23. And there shall be no remnant] Behold the severity of God: their
bloody design was to destroy Jeremies stock and fruit, stalk and grain
together, ver. 19. God meteth unto them the self-same measure, leaves them not
a remnant. This is not ordinary justice; chap. 4.27. Isa. 1. and 10. A remnant
shall be left, says he: here not so. Let Rome that shambles of the Saints and
Prophets especially, look to it; God is now coming to make inquisition for
blood, etc.

CHAP. XII.
Ver. 1. RIghteous art thou O Lord when I plead with thee] Or, though I should
contend with thee. Est elegans (...).
This the Prophet fitly premiseth to the ensuing disceptation, that he might
not be mistaken. Thy judgments says he, are sometimes secret, always just:
this I am well assured of, though I thus argue.

Yet let me talk with thee of thy judgements] Let me take the humble boldness
so to do, that I may be further cleared and instructed by thee.

Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper?] Viz. Whilst better men suffer;
as now the wicked Anathothites do, whilst I go in danger of my life by them.
This is that noble question which has exercised the wits and molested the
minds of many wise men, both within and without the Church. See Job 21.7. --
13. Psalm. 37.1. and 73.1, 2, -- 12. Hab. 1.4, 5. Plato, Cicero, Seneca,
Epictetus, Claudian against Ruffin, etc.

Wherefore are they all happy] Heb. at ease. Not all neither; for some wicked
have their payment here, their hell aforehand. To this question the Lord (who
knows our frame, Psalm. 103.) being content to condescend where he might have
judged, calmly makes answer, ver. 5. like as Christ in like case did to Peter,
Joh. 21.21, 22.

Ver. 2. Thou have planted them and they have taken root] All goes hail with
them; they have more then heart can wish, Psalm. 73.7. And in lieu of Gods
goodness to them, they profess largely, and pretend to great devotion: but
that is all.

Thou art near in their mouth, and far from their reines] That is, from their
affections, Tit. 1.16. Hypocrites are like that heap of heads, 2 King. 10.8.
that had never a heart among them: they have vocem in chor^, mentem in foro;
virtutem non colunt sed colorant. That Persian Ambassador (of whom before)
when conversing with Christians, he had so often in his moth, Soli Deo Gloria,
made believe that he gave glory to the only true God, when as he meant the Sun,
whom he worshipped as his God. The King of Bohemia when beaten out of Prague,
was encouraged by some great Commanders about him, that he had many Princes his
friends and allies, that would readily assist him: to which he made no answer,
but wrote the word Deus in great letters. But some thought he meant Denmark in
D, England in E, Hungary in U, and the Swedes in S. God knows what his meaning
was: but he will make all the Churches to know, that he searches the hearts
and reins, and that he will kill with death all such as had rather seem to be
good then seek to be so. If Jeremy had been one of those, he durst never have
said

Ver. 3. But thou, Lord, know me, etc.] q. d. I can safely appeal unto thee,
and take thee for a witness of mine innocence and integrity; that I have thee
not in my mouth only, as they, but in my heart also, which is wholly devoted to
thy fear, ut sit tecum, hanging toward thee, and ^ankering after thee
continually. Trem.


Pull them out as sheep] Punish some of them presently for an example of thy
Providence; and reserve others of them till hereafter for an instance of thy
Patience. See chap. 11.20.

Prepare them] Heb. Sanctify them, as Isa. 13.3. chap. 6.4. Fatted ware is but
fitted for the shambles.

Ver. 4. How long shall the land mourn] For the sake of those wicked wretches
aforementioned?

The beasts are consumed and the birds] See chap. 4.25, 26.

Because they said He shall not see our last end] God shall not; and so they
deny his providence and prescience. Or, the Prophet shall not, though now he
thunder out our punishment with so great vehemence: Confer chap. 11 23.

Ver. 5. If thou have run with the footmen] Here God returns an answer to the
Prophets foregoing complaint, says the Chaldee: partly checking him for his
discontentednesse, and partly exciting him to an humble submission, and a well
knit resolution.

Then how will thou contend with horses?] If thy countrymen of Anathoth
overmatch and overmaster thee, how will thou deal with those of Jerusalem who
are a fair deal worse?

And if in a land of peace] These are proverbial speeches, both to one purpose:
Far minor a velis, ut graviora feras. How would thou endure wounds for
Christ, that can not endure words? says one; and how will thou fry a faggot
that startlest at a reproach for the truth? Whilst William Cobberly Martyr was
in durance, his wife also, called Alice, being apprehended was in the Keepers
house the same time detained: where the keepers wife had secretly heated a key
fire-hot, and laid it in the grass on the backside; so speaking to Alice
Cobberly to fetch her the key in all haste, Act. and Mon. fol. 1719.
she went with speed to bring the key; and taking it up in haste, did piteously
burn her hand; whereupon she cried out. Ah thou drabbe, quoth the other, thou
that can not abide the burning of thy hand, how will thou be able to abide
the burning of thy whole body? And so she afterward revoked.

Ver. 6. For even thy brethren] Let this comfort us in like case. Abel and John
Diazius were butchered by their own unnatural brethren. Paul suffered most of
all from his own countrymen.

Yea they have called a multitude after thee] Or, with full mouth: Clamant post
te pleno gutture.
as those did against Christ who cried crucify him crucify him: and those
against Paul, Away with such a fellow from the earth: and those against the
Primitive Christians, Christianos ad leones, to the Lions with them. In
Rhodanum, in Rhodanum, cried many at Geneva against Farellus their faithful
Preacher; into the River with him: but God preserved him from their fury, for
the good of many other Cities after that converted by him.

Believe them not, though they speak fair words to thee] Fair words make fools
fain, we say: but be not light of belief: the worlds naught.

Mel in ore, verba lactis:
Fell in cord, fraus in factis.
Ver. 7. I have forsaken my house] A man's house is dear to him; dearer his
heritage; dearest his well-beloved wife: Jerusalem had been all this to God:
but now for sin, abandoned by him.

I have given the dearly beloved of my soul] Or, my dearly beloved; my soul: i.
e. My self, my second-self. Heb. the love of my soul. Gr. and Vulg. My beloved
soul. God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth, Nah. 1.2.

Ver. 8. Mine heritage is unto me as a Lion in the forrest] Roaring against me,
and revelling in the ruin of my messengers. Vbi affectus augetur in Antithesi
verborum; Haereditas mea, and contra me. Sheep they were wont to be: now they
are become Lions.

Ver. 9. Mine heritage is unto me as a speckled bird] As an owl say some, that
soveth not the light; as a Peacock say others, proud and inconstant, all in
changeable colors, as often changed as moved. God that could not endure
Miscellane seed, nor linsy-woolsy in Israel, can less endure that his people
should be as a speckled bird, here of one color, and there of another; or as a
cake not turned, Hos. 6.4, etc.

Ver. 10. Many Pastors have destroyed my vine-yard] Those who before were
called Beast, ver. 9. are here called Pastors: viz. Nebuchadnezzars Captains.
See chap. 6.3.

Ver. 11. Because no man lays it to heart] Heb. there is not a man putting it
upon heart, that is duly and deeply affected with my menaces, so as to take a
timely course for prevention, and their own preservation.

Ver. 12. For the sword of the Lord] i. e. Of the enemy set on by the Lord: for
whencesoever the sword comes, it is bathed in heaven, Isa. 34.5. See Ezekiel.
14.17.

Ver. 13. They have sown wheat] The Prophets have, say some, but to no profit.

Vatab.
They shall put themselves to pain] Or, they are sick, sc. for the affliction
of Joseph, as Am. 6 6. See the Note there. Others interpret it of the Jews who
sought to help themselves by this means and that, but lost their labors and
their hopes together.

Because of the fierce anger of the Lord] Quo laeso nihil est illaesum, tutum,
and fidum hominibus.

Ver. 14. Thus says the Lord against all mine evil neighbours] These were the
Syrians, Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, etc. God also has his evil neighbors;
and this may be a comfort to us in like case.

Behold I will pluck them out, etc. And pluck out the house of Judah] This was
a different plucking.

Ver. 15. After that I have plucked them out] sc. In both senses, ver. 14.

I will return] In the midst of judgment I will remember mercy.

And bring again every man to his heritage] To the Church: for in every Nation
he that fears God and works righteousness, shall be accepted with him, and
have a child's part, even the reward of inheritance.

Ver. 16. If they will diligently learn] Heb. learning learn the ways of my
people chalked out unto them in my word, and their conformity thereunto: for
the lives of Gods people are but the Word exemplified; they walk as patters of
the rule, and are of exemplary holiness, as Luke 1.6.

To swear by my Name] In righteousness, in truth and in judgment, as chap. 4.2.

Then shall they be built] i. e. Blessed.

Ver. 17. But if they will not obey] The tartness of the threatening makes us
best taste the sweetness of the Promise; and a mixture of them serves to keep
the heart in the best temper.

I will utterly pluck up and destroy that Nation] This is fulfilled to the
utmost upon the Jews, especially since the last destruction of Jerusalem.

CHAP. XIII.
Ver. 1. GO, get thee a linen girdle] Or belt, or swath.

And put it not in water] Or lie, to wash it or whiten it; but take it as it is
first made, us sord^ciem magis contrahat, to show, say some, that the Jewish
Nation, when first chosen, was black by sin and nothing amiable; better skilled
and exercised in making mortar and bricks in Egypt, then in the worship of God;
and in good manners.

Or put it not in water] i. e. Keep it from being rotted, as a type of Gods
care of, and kindnesses to that people.

Ver. 2. So I got a girdle] God is to be obeyed readily, and without
sciscitation.

Ver. 3. And the Word of the Lord came to me] Heb. Was to me. At sundry times,
or piecemeal, God spoke to his servants the Prophets, Heb. 1.1. (...) per
gradus and momenta, non s^mul and semel.


Ver. 4. Arise, go to Euphrates] A river which ran by Babylon, six hundred and
fourscore miles from Jerusalem. The Prophets journey therefore thither seems
to have been but visional, as was Isay's going barefoot, Hosea's marriage with
a whore, Ezekiels lying on one side three hundred and ninety days together;
his journey from Chaldea to Jerusalem, chap. 8.3, etc.

Ver. 5. So I went and hid it by Euphrates] In the cliffe of a rock, where it
might lie dry: never once asking the reason. This was simple and acceptable
obedience; far beyond that of the Popish Novices, who yet if their Padres or
Superiors send them to China or Peru, without dispute or delay they do
presently set forward.

Ver. 6. And it came to pass after many dayes] See on ver. 3.

Ver. 7. Then I went to Euphrates] See on ver. 4. Those that are for an actual
journey, allege, that Jeremy might do this without danger in the days of
Jehoiakim, who was the King of Babylons Vassal, and paid him tribute.

And behold the girdle was rotted, it was profitable for nothing] This showed
that the Jews should in that Country lie rotting, as it were in baseness and
servility and sin together, many years: so that God might justly have left them
there still in misery, as a man leaves his rotten girdle to become dung.

Ver. 8. Then the word, etc.] Adaptat simile. See ver. 3.

Ver. 9. After this manner will I mar the pride] Their pomp and power,
wherein they pride themselves.

Ver. 10. This evil people] Populus ille pessimus, these P^neropolitans, who
are naught all over, nequitia cooperti.

Walk in the imagination of their heart] See chap. 9.13. and 11.8.

Ver. 11. So have I caused to cleave unto me] For nearness and dearness: the
loins are the seat of strongest desires and affections.

And for a name and for a praise] That I might be magnified and glorified in
them: and for them also, among other nations.

Ver. 12 Therefore] Or, Moreover.

Thou shall speak unto them this word] This other paradigm^ or parable: an
excellent way of teaching, and much used in both Testaments.

Every bottle shall be filled with wine] Wine they loved well, and a great
vintage they now expected. They shall have it, says God; but of another nature
then they look for; Their heads (not altogether unlike bottles for roundness,
and emptiness of all good) shall be filled with a dry drunkenness: even with
errors and terrors, a spirit of giddiness, etc.

Do not we certainly know, etc.] This they seem to speak insolently and
jearingly, q. d. you should tell us some news.

Ver. 13. Behold I will fill] Heb. Lo, I am filling: but the l^quour is such as
whereof you shall have small joy. See ver. 12.

Ver. 14. And I will dash them one against another] As so many earthen bottles,
brittle and soon broken: Si collidimur frangimur, said those in the fable.

Ver. 15. Hear and give ear] Or, Hear and hearken, be not haughty. Here the
Prophet calls upon them again to repent, and to that end, to listen
diligently, and to lay aside the highness of their hearts, and the stoutness of
their stomachs, since it is the Lord that speaks. The Lion roareth: who can
but fear? Am. 3.8. Repentance is the Removens prohibens, as being founded in
humility, and wrought by the Word preached, Jonah 3. Act. 2.

Ver. 16. Give glory to the Lord your God] Confess your sins, Josh. 7.19. one
part of repentance put for the whole. Jeremy was as constant a Preacher of
Repentance, as Paul, and after him Austin, were of the free grace of God. The
impenitent person robs God of his right: the penitent man sarcit injuriam
Deo irrogatam, seems to make some kind of amends to God whom he had wronged,
by restoring him his glory, which he had run away with, whilst he puts
himself into the hands of justice, in hope of mercy.

Before he cause darknesse] sc. Of calamity and captivity. Currat poenitentia,
ne praecurrat sententia.

Modestissima explicatio infaelicitatis.
Before your feet stumble] So, before ye fall upon the dark and dangerous
cragges and precipices of eternal perdition. Which to prevent, work whiles the
light lasts: walk whiles it is yet day.

Ver. 17. My soul shall weep in secret places] Good men are apt to weep; Et
faciles motus men's generosa capit. Good Ministers should be full of
compassionate tears, weeping in secret for their peoples unprofitableness, and
their danger thereby. The breast and right shoulder of the sacrifice belonged
to the Priest; to show that he should be a breast to love, and a shoulder to
support the people, in their troubles and burdens.

Ver. 18. Say to the King and to the Queen] Or Madam, the Lady or Mistress:
that is, to the Queen Regent, even to Necustah the mother of Jeconiab, say the
Jews. When Beza, in the behalf of the reformed Churches in France, made a
speech at Possiacum before the young King and the Queen Mother, he spoke so
effectually, says Rivet, that a great Cardinal who heard it, wished, that
either he had been dumb that day, or that they had all been deaf. This King and
Queen in the text might be as much convinced, though not thoroughly converted.

Humble your selves, sit down] Heb. Humble, sit below.

For your Principalities] Or, your head-attires.

The crown of your glory] Or, your crown of glory, that is, your glorious
crown: of which you shall have cause enough to say as Antigonus did of his
Diadem, O vilis pannus, etc. Or, as another Monarch, Nobilis es, fateor,
rutilisque onerata lapillis,
Innumeris curis sed comitata venis:
Quod been si nossent, omnes expendere; nemo,
Nemo foret qui te tollere vellet humo.


Ver. 19. The Cities of the South shall be shut up] i. e. The Cities of Egypt,
whither ye think to fly, shall be shut up against you, through fear of the
Chaldees.

Ver. 20. Lift up your eyes, etc.] Still he bespeaketh the King and the Queen.

Where is the flock that was given thee] Thee. O Queen Regent (for the Pronoun
is Feminine) or Thee, O State; Read, Vare, legiones, said Augustus, bewailing
the loss of so many gallant soldiers in Germany under the command of Varus,
who was there also slain.

Thy beautiful flock] Heb. Thy flock of goodlinesse. See Prove. 14.28. with the
Note.

Ver. 21. For thou have taught them to be Captains, and as chief over thee]
sc. By thy crouching unto them, and craving their help, thou have made the
Chaldeans masters of all thou have: So did the British Princes Vortiger and
Vortimer bring in the Saxons here: and the Greeks the Turks.

Ver. 22. Are thy skirts discovered] Thou art brought to most miserable shame
and servitude; having scarce a rag to thy back, or a shoe for thy foot.

Ver. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin?] Proverbial speeches arguing a
very great difficulty, if not an utter impossibility. Aethiopem abluo ut
candidum reddam, said Diogenes, when he reproved an ill man to no purpose: I do
but wash a blackmore. And the like said Nazianzen concerning Julian the
Apostate. It is said that the Negro's paint the devil white, as being a color
contrary to their own, and which they less well affect. Will the Ethiopian
change his skin? so the Hebrew has it.

Or the leopard his spots] Sin is in us as the spots of a Leopard, not by
accident, but by nature, which no art can cure, no water wash off: because they
are not in the skin but in the flesh and bones, in the sinews and in the most
inner parts. Where then is man's free will to good, etc?

Then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil] Custom in sin takes
away the sense of it, and becomes a second nature: which though expeld with a
fork as it were, will yet return again. It looks for continual entertainment
where it has once gotten a haunt, as humors fall toward their old issue.
Can^s qui semel didicerit edere corium, nunquam desistet, says Lucian: an evil
custom is not easy left. Nothing so weak as water: yet let much water (so
sin, Satan, and custom) be joined together, and nothing stronger. It was not
for nothing therefore that the Cretians, when they would curse their enemies,
with most bitter execrations, they wished that they might take delight in some
or other evil custom; modestoque voti genere efficacissimum ultionis genus
reperiunt, says the Historian: by a modest kind of with, V^l. M^x.
they sufficiently avenged themselves.

Ver. 24. Therefore I will scatter them] This was no small aggravation of their
misery, that they should be thus severed one from another. So the Persecutors
of the Primitive times relegated and confined the poor Christians to Isles and
mines, Cyprian epist.
where they could not have access one to another, for mutual comfort and
support, as Cyprian complains.

Ver. 25. This is thy lot] Look for no better, since thou, by going after
lying-vanities, forsakest thine own mercies, being miserable by thine own
election.

Because thou have forgotten me]

Esque oblita mei, vitiorumque oblita coeno. Ver. 26. Therefore I will discover
thy skirts] Since thou have discovered and prostituted thy self to other lovers,
I will shame thee before all men.

Ver. 27. Woe unto thee O Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean?] He closes
with this emphatical and most affectionate contestation, pressing them to
hearty and speedy repentance, as he had done often before, but with little good
success. The cock crowed, though Peter still denied his Master. Peter knocked
still, though Rhode opened not to him. He launched out into the deep, though he
had labored all night for nothing. So did good Jeremy here, in obedience to
God, and good will to his unworthy countrymen.

CHAP. XIV.
Ver. 1. THe Word of the Lord that came to Jeremiah concerning the dearth] De
rebus retentionum, that is, concerning the drought or dearth by restraint of
necessary rain and moisture, unde frugum raritas, annon^ caritas, fames,
whereupon followed a famine: as there does also a famine of the Word, where the
divine influences are restrained. Junius renders it Super verbis cohibitionum,
concerning the words of cohibitions; that is, says he, concerning the prayers
made by the Prophet and other good people, for the diverting of Gods
judgments, publicly denounced.

Ver. 2. Judah mourneth] The Prophets pitiful complaint, bitterly bewailing the
common calamity, and laboring thereby to bring them to a sense of the true
cause of it, their sins. See 2 Samuel 21.1. with the Note.

And the cry of Jerusalem is gone up] sc. To heaven for removal of this
judgment: Confer chap. 36.9. with ver. 12. of this Chapter.

Ver. 3. And their Nobles] Who would be sure to have it, if it were to be had.

Sent their little ones] Their boys as they use to call their menial servants
of the younger sort. See Mat. 14.2. with the Note.

To the waters] Such as were the waters of Siloe, which only fountain (says
Hierom) Jerusalem makes use of, so long as it lasts.

To the pits] Or cisterns, chap. 2.13.

They covered their heads] As close mourners do still.

Ver. 4. Because the ground is chapt] As our hearts also are and will be, when
the heaven does not hear the earth; as Hos. 2.21. It has been before observed,
that in the use of the Ordinances if we open our shells (our souls) the heaven
will drop the fruitful dew of grace to the making of pearls of good works, and
solid virtue.

Plin. l. 8. cap. 32.
Ver. 5. Yea the hind also calved in the field and forlook it] The loving Hind,
Prove. 5.19. Alioqui studiosa sui partus, that is otherwise so exceeding chary
and careful of her young.

Ver. 6. And the wild-asses] Sectores alias vagae libidinis in sylvis, that
usually course up and down the woods, and can bear hunger and thirst a long
while together.

Plin. l. 10. cap. 72. Lib. de mirah. auscult.
Snuffed up the wind like Dragons] Quorum est vebementissima spiratio ac
forbitio, who, in defect of water, can continue long by drawing in the air, as
Aristotle likewise testifies of the goats in Cephalonia, that they drink not
for diverse days together: but instead thereof, gape and suck in the fresh air.

Ver. 7. O Lord, though our iniquities testify against us] Though our guilty
consciences bring in large rolls of indictment written against us within and
without, and spread before Thee.

Do it for thy Names sake] Heb. Do. A short but pithy petition: so ver. 9.
leave us not.

Ver. 8. O the hope of Israel, the Savior thereof] In prayer, to pitch upon
such of Gods Attributes, as wherein we may see an answer, is an high point of
heavenly wisdom.

Why should thou be as a stranger in the land] As a stranger at home, and as
one that is loath to be too busy in aliena republica, where he has least to do.

That turns aside] Into some (diversorium) Inn.

Ver. 9. Why should thou be as a man astonished] That knows not which way to
take: first he goes one way, and by and by he returns again. Tremellius
renders it, ut vir fatiscens, as one that faints, has done his utmost, and
can do no more.

Yet thou, O Lord, art in the midst of us -- leave us not] Extingui lucem nec
patiare tuam. This was to stir up himself to take hold of God.

Ver. 10. They have loved to wander] Therefore now they shall have enough of
it: yet not wander so wide as to miss of hell, Psalm. 95.10, 11. what wonder
that God seemed a stranger to them, who had so far estranged themselves from
him?

Ver. 11. Pray not for this people] See on chap. 7.16.

Ver. 12. When they fast I will not hear their cry] At their fasts they were
wont to pray earnestly, and to make their voices to be heard on high. Sed
defuit aliquid intus: their hearts cried not.

Ver. 13. Ah Lord God] The Vulgar Latin has it, A, a, a, Vide diligentissimam
intercessionem. He seeks somewhat to excuse the people, by laying the blame
upon their false Prophets. Like whereunto were those Popish Priests in Gersons
time, who preached publicly to the people that whosoever would come to hear a
Mass, he should not be struck blind on that day, neither should he dye a
sudden death, nor want sufficient sustenance, etc.

But I will give you assured peace] Heb. Peace of truth. Thus, these deluders
had learned to speak the language of Gods true Prophets: of the high-soaring
pretended spiritual language of Familists and some other Sectaries one says
well, That it is a great deal too high for this world, and a great deal too low
for the world to come.

Ver. 14. The Prophets prophecy falsely in my name, etc.] These are certain
signs of Impostors in the Church, in all ages: against whom, now if ever, the
Temple-doors had need be well guarded; and the Pulpit-doors have written on
them (...) Let no unworthy wight presume to come here.

Ver. 15. Yet they say] Heb. they are saying; this is all their song; though
the present famine does in part confute them: but the people were willing
enough to be deceived; and were therefore worthily punished. Being infatuated
they were seduced: and being so seduced, they were justly judged, as Austin
somewhere. The blind led the blind, and both fell into the ditch: though it
befell the blind guides to lie nethermost.

Ver. 16. And the people to whom they prophecy shall be cast out] They shall be
no more excused by their having been deluded, then he that in his drink
commits adultery or murder, is excused by his drunkenesse. A drunkard,
says Aristotle, (...). Ethic. l. 3. c. 5.
deserves double punishment; first for his drunkenness, and then for the sin
committed in, and by his drunkenness: so here. See on ver. 15.

Ver. 17. Let mine eyes run down] This the Prophet did doubtless in good
earnest: like as Samuel mourned for the rejection of Saul, and our Savior wept
over Jerusalem.

And let them not cease] Heb. be silent; for tears also have a voice, Psalm.
39.12. and do often prove very effectual Orators.

Ver. 18. If I go forth into the field,] The Prophet here sets forth the seige
as present, though it was many years after: the more to affect the people.

Yea both the Prophet and the Priest go about into a Land that they know not]
Or, go about the land ( sc. begging their bread, or flying these miseries) and
men know them not, though men of such rank and quality.

Ver. 19. Have thou utterly rejected Judah?] So as that I may not put up one
prayer more for them? I cannot hold whatever come of it; Let not my Lord be
angry if I shoot this arrow also after the former.

Ver. 20. We acknowledge O Lord, our wickednesse] We, the better sort of us do
so: and so the Saints have ever done in their interdealings with God: falling
low at his footstool for pardoning and prevailing mercy.

Ver. 21. Do not abhor us for thy Names sake] This was to continue instant in
prayer, Romans 12.12. This was to pray on, and not faint, Luke 18.1. If thy suit
be not honest, never begin it: and if it be, never leave it.

Do not disgrace the throne of thy glory] The Temple and the Ark in it. (...).
Dion. Hailcar. l. 2.
The Romans held the extinction of the Vestal fire a sign of the destruction
of their City, be the cause thereof what it will. We may well think the same of
the loss of Gods Ordinances, which therefore we must deprecate, as here, with
all our might: For as Bodin said well of obtaining, so likewise for retaining
Religion, Non disputationibus sed regationibus, etc. the business will be the
better effected by requests, then disputes. Pray therefore for the peace of
Jerusalem, yea take no nay: Deus ipse qui nullis contra se viribus superari
potest, pre^ibus vincitur, Hieron.
The invincible God is overcome by the power of prayer: there is a kind of
Omnipotency in it, says Luther.

Remember, break not thy Covenant with us] Lo this is to be Gods faithful
Remembrancer, Isa. 62.6, 7. suggesting unto him seasonable Items.

Ver. 22. Are there among the vanities of the Gentiles] i. e. The Heathen Idols
wickedly worshipped by the Jews.

That can cause to rain?] Pluit, ningit: supple Deus. These Impersonals imply
that the Ancient Romans looked upon Rain, Snow, etc. as Gods work. Sure it is
that they come by a Divine decree, Job 28.26. Not Jupiter (...) (whatever the
Poets fable) nor the Heavens themselves, without the Divine concurrence, can
give rain: but it is God Almighty who both prepares it, Psalm. 147.8. and
withholdeth it at his pleasure, Amos 4.7. the second causes do but serve the
Divine Providence, in these common occurrents.

Therefore we will wait upon thee] For seasonabl^ showers in this our great
necessity: We will wait, or, if thou see fit, want of our will, so that thy
will may be done: for that is best.

For thou have made all these things] Both the constellations, and rain or
drought caused thereby.

CHAP. XV.
Ver. 1. THen said the Lord unto me] In answer to my prayer, he replied, Thou
have well prayed; sed stat sententia I am set, I am inexorable.

Though Moses] That Chancellor of Heaven, as One calls him; who not only
ruled with God, but overruled, Exodus 32.11.^14. Numb. 14.19, 20.

And Samuel] A mighty man likewise in prayer, See 1 Samuel 7.9. called therefore
Pethuel (as some think) Joel 1.1. that is, a God-perswader. These two were
famous in their generations for hearty love to, and prayers for that rebellious
people, and did much for them. But (so the case now stood) if these favorites
were alive, and should intercede their utmost for them, it should avail
nothing. See Ezekiel. 14.14.

Yet my mind could not be to this people] This is spoken after the manner of
men, q. d. I am implacably enraged, I am unchangably resolved against them.

Cast them out of my sight] Tell them that I have utterly rejected them, and I
will ratify and realize thy speeches: See on chap. 1.10.

And let them go forth] Or, let them be gone: q. d. I am the worse to look upon
them.

Ver. 2. If they say unto thee] As they will be apt enough to do in a jeare.

Such as are for death] i. e. For the pestilence commonly called mortality,
because it is so deadly a disease: Those at Genoa have lately found it so. And
yet it is here reckoned first, as the least and lightest of all the four
threatened Judgments; which must needs be had enough when the Pest is the best
of them all. The Turks shun not the company of those that have the Plague; but
pointing upon their foreheads, say, it was written there at their birth* when
they should dye, and of what disease. These in the text could as little avoid
the deaths they were assigned to, as Aeschylus the Tragedian could his being
knocked on the head. For when as he was foretold that he should dye with a
stroke coming from above, Alian. Val. Max.
he shunned houses, and was wont to remain in the open air, but he was killed
by a Torroise falling from the mouth of an Eagle upon his bald head, mistaken
for a stone.

Ver. 3. And I will appoint over them four kinds] Heb. families or kindreds, i.
e. quatuor cognata carnivera, dogs, birds, and beasts being added to the former
four evils, ver. 2. quasi per Auxesin.

Ver. 4. Because of Manasseh] Because of his sins; Idolatry and bloodshed
especially, wherein the people partaked and persisted, and were therefore
justly punished.

The son of Hezekiah] but altogether degenerate: He was therefore the worse
because he should have been better: and yet the worse again, because he was
author publicae corruptelae, a ringleader of rebellion to others, as was
Jeroboam.

Ver. 5. Who shall be moan thee?] Heb. who shall come out of his place to
comfort thee? or who shall shake his head, in commiseration to thee?

Ver. 6. I am weary with repenting] Patiendo, ac parcendo, I have so often
revoked my threats, that unless I should wrong my justice, I can do so no more.

Deo gratias quod lingua Petiliani non sit ventibabrum Christ. Hieron.
Ver. 7. And I will fan them with a fan] Not of Purgation, as chap. 6.29, 30.
but of Perdition. Such as that, chap. 51.2.

In the gates of the land] As men use to winnow corn at a windy door; where the
chaff is blown quite away.

Ver. 8. The widows are increased to me] Or, before me, or in my sight.

Above the sands of the seas] Hyperbole.

A spoiler a^ noon-day] Nebuchadnezzar, that choice young man; for so some
render the text; and so he was, when he came against Jerusalem, and burnt it;
viz. in the eighteenth year of his reign.

And terrors upon the City] Or, terrors, even the City: that is, say the
Sept. and Chaldee, the Army of the Chaldees, which for their numbers and order
of pitching their Tents, seemed to be a City.

Ver. 9. She that has born seven, languisheth] Jerusalem that ma^r multipara,
a fruitful mother.

She has given up the ghost] Heb. she puts out her soul, as Job 11.20. We
read of some mothers, who hearing of their sons to be slain in battle, have
fain down dead in the place.

Her Sun is gone down] See on Amos 8.9. A Christian, when at worst, can sing,
Non omnium dierum Sol occidit, I look for better days yet.

Ver. 10. Woe is me, my mother, that thou have born me] sc. In such an age
wherein I may not pray for my people, not can preach unto them to any good
purpose. Buchanan bewailed it, that he was born nec coelo, nec solo, nec
saeculo erudito: Camd. Elis.
Jeremy lamenteth here for a worse matter. Surely be might well say for his
manifold sufferings;

Littora quot conchas quot amaena rosaria flores, Ovid. Trist.

Quotque soporiferum grana papaver habet:
Tot premor adversis, etc.
A man of strife and a man of contention] Generally opposed and quarrelled, for
my free and faithful discharge of my duty. Virum arguentem. Arab.
This is the worlds wages to godly Ministers, whom they usually make their
but-mark. But God be thanked (says he with Hierom) quod dignus sim quem mundus
oderit, That I am worthy whom the world should hate. Lutherus pascitur
convitiis, says he of himself, Luther is fed with reproaches.

I have neither lent on usury] i. e. I have neither bought nor sold (as we say)
meddled nor made with them. I have had as little to do with them any way as was
possible. Vsura praecipuum fomentum litium. I have kept my self close to my
calling, and yet I cannot avoid their variance and virulencies. To preach, is
to derive upon a man's self the hatred of the world, says Luther.

Ver. 11. Verily it shall be well with thy remnant] Heb. if it be not well; q.
d. then trust me no more: thy latter end shall be comfortable, Psalm. 37.37. the
end of that man is peace, be his beginning and middle never so troublesome.

Verily I will cause the enemy to entreat thee well] Or, I will intercede for
thee with the enemy. See this fulfilled, chap. 40.4. God can speak for his in
the hearts of their enemies, and make their foes to favor them: as many of the
Papists here did Wickliffe, and after him Bradford.

Ver. 12. Shall iron break the Northern iron and the steel?] That is, say some,
shall these hard-hearted Jews be to hard for me? or, for thee Jeremy, whom I
have made an iron-pillar and brazen walls against the whole land? chap. 1.18.
Never think it. Brighten thee they may but not break thee. The Northern iron is
noted for the best and toughest.

Ver. 13. Thy substance and thy treasure] This is spoken by an Apostrophe to
the people, who are here told again what to trust to, for their national sins.

Ver. 14. And I will make thee to pass with thine enemies] Or, to serve thine
enemies: for there is a double reading of the text.

Ver. 15. O Lord, thou knowest] Jeremy had begun a complaint, ver. 10. not
without some tang and tincture of humane infirmity. Invalidum omne natura
querulum. God graciously interrupted him and came leaping over all those
mountains of Bether, all lets and impediments, to his comfort and best
satisfaction, ver. 11, 12. Nevertheless Jeremy has not done, but goes on as
before: and humanum aliquid patitur.

Remember me, and visit me] He was full and speaks thick.

Take me not away in thy long-suffering] Whilst thou bear with them, take
care of me, that I perish not by their persidy and cruelty.

Know that for thy cause I have suffered rebuke] Se^ debitorem compellat Deum,
suaque adducit merita. He delivers himself as if he held God to be his debtor:
This was not so well.

Ver. 16. Thy words were found, and I did eat them] I was well apaid of thy
messages that came at first to me: and of that commission thou gave me to be
a Prophet: yea I took no small delight and complacency therein; and having
found this honey, I ate it, as Prove. 25.16. but since I have met with much
bitterness in this wicked world, for my plain-dealing. See Ezekiel. 3.3. Rev.
10.10. Herodotus writes of the River Hypanis, that for five days journey the
water of it runs clear and sweet: and then, for four days journey further,
bitter and brackish. The Ministry is an honorable and comfortable function,
but has its troubles and encombrances.

Ver. 17. I sat not in the assembly of the mockers] That scoffed and mocked at
Gods messages and menaces. Or, I have not sat in the assembly of those that
make merry; sed serius fui, spiransque compunctionem, I came not at feasts and
merry-meetings, since I became a Prophet.

I sat alone] As Moses in like case did, Exodus 33.7.

Ver. 18. Why is my pain perpetual, etc.] Here the Prophet over-freely
expostulateth with God, as less faithful, or less mindful at least, of the
promised preservation: This was in a fit of diffidence and discontent, as the
best have their outbursts, and the greatest lamps have needed snuffers. The
Milesians, says the Philosopher, are not fools: yet they do the things that
fools use to do: So the Saints do often as wicked ones, but not in the same
manner and degree.

Ver. 19. Therefore thus says the Lord] Or, Notwithstanding, man's perverseness
breaks not off the course of God goodness.

If thou return] If thou cast out this devil of discontent: and (accounting
distrust worse then distress) apply thy self cheerfully and constantly to the
work of the Ministry, Hic vides non praescribi gratiae Dei mentes and annos.
I will continue and confirm thee in thine office, notwithstanding thy present
frailties and failings. So our Savior, presently upon their repentance for
their shameful forsaking him at his apprehension, restored his Disciples to
their Apostolical function, Joh. 20.21, 22, 23.

Probe vir, hoc nihil ad te, dixi Zwinglius cum in vitia acriter inveheretur.
And if thou take forth the precious from the vile] i. e. The gracious from the
vicious, preaching comfort to those, and terror to these; not giving, as he in
the Fable did, straw to the Dog, and a bone to the Ass, but to every one his
proper portion, without fear or flattery.

Thou shall be as my mouth] Speaking as a Prophet of mine, and as I my self
would do, if in thy place.

Let them return to thee] i. e. Conform to thee, but do not thou chime in with
them as the false-prophets do.

Ver. 20. And I will make thee] See on chap. 1.18, 19.

Ver. 21. And I will deliver thee] I will, I will: never fear it man: but go on
courageously. Deal courageously, and God shall be with the good, 2 Chronicles. 19.
ult.

CHAP. XVI.
Ver. 1. THe Word of the Lord came also unto me] It is the Property of this
Prophet to handle the same thing several ways, and by sundry effectual
arguments. Gods Ministers must turn themselves as it were into all shapes and
fashions both of speech and spirit, to win People to God.

Ver. 2. Thou shall not take thee a wife, etc.] It is very likely that this
befell the Prophet in a vision. Or if otherwise, it was but for a sign, and in
regard of the great calamity impendent, that he is here forbidden marriage,
otherwise lawful enough, and, in some cases, necessary. The contrary doctrine
(such as was that of the Tacian-hereticks, and Popish Canonists) is a doctrine
of devils, 1 Timothy 4.1.

Vtinam aut caelebs vixissem aut orbus periissem.
Ver. 3. For thus says the Lord concerning the sons -- born in this place] i.
e. At Anathoth, say some: but others better, at Jerusalem. So great and
grievous shall be the calamity, that married people shall be ready to wish as
Augustus did for another cause, Oh that either I had lived single, or else dyed
childlesse.

Ver. 4. They shall dye of grievous deaths] Heb. death of diseases or
grievances, as did Jehoram, 2 Chronicles. 21.18. and Philip the second of Spain,
etc. they shall dye piecemeal, morte valetudinariorum, which is a misery;
especially if the disease be slow, and yet sharp, as some are.

They shall not be lamented nor buried] Which are two of the usual Dues of the
dead.

Ver. 5. Enter not into the house of mourning] Or banquets, whether at burials
or bridals, as Am. 6.7. Of funeral-banquets, see Deuteronomy. 26.14. These the Greeks
called (...), the Latins Parentalia: See ver. 7.

Ver. 6. Both the great and the small shall dye] Princes and pesants, Lords and
losels together.

Nor cut themselves, nor make themselves bald] Neque caedetur neque calvabitur.
This they had learned of the heathen, and would needs use it, though flatly
forbidden them, Lev. 19.27, 28. Deuteronomy. 14.1. Now they were told that they should
have little either lust or leisure to do any such matter.

Ver. 7. Neither shall men tear themselves for them] Or neither shall they deal
them bread in mourning to comfort any for the dead: Confer Ezekiel. 24.17. Of
feasting at funerals mention is made by Herodotus, Cicero, Lucian, Pliny,
Clemens and Chrysostom. See ver. 5.

Neither shall men give them the cup of consolation] i. e. The consolatory cup
usually given at funerals to the disconsolate friends of the deceased. See on
Prove. 31.6, 7.

Ver. 8 Thou shall not also go into the house of feasting] Ministers may
lawfully go to feasts, Joh. 2. but not in times of common calamity: See Isa.
22.12, 13, 14. Pliny tells us, that when as in the time of the second Punick
war, one Fulvius Argentarius was seen at Rome, looking out at a window with a
rose-garland on his head, Lib. 2. cap. 7.
the Senate sent for him, laid him in prison, and would not suffer him to come
forth, till the war was at an end.

Ver. 9. Behold I will cause to cease] See chap. 7.34. with the Note.

Ver. 10. And they shall say unto thee, Wherefore?] This is still the guise of
hypocrites, to justify themselves, and quarrel the Preacher that reproves
them. See chap. 5.19.

What is our iniquity?] Nature shows no sin; it is no causeless complaint of
a grave Divine, that some deal with their souls as others do with their
bodies: when their beauty is decayed, they desire to hide it from themselves by
false glasses, and from others by painting: so their sins from themselves by
false glosses, and from others by excuses.

Ver. 11. Because your fathers] See chap. 2.5. and 7.24, 25.

Ver. 12. And you have done worse] See chap. 7.26.

For behold ye walk] See chap. 9.13. and 11.8. and 13.10.

Ver. 13. Therefore I will cast you] Chap. 10.18. Because ye have sinned
wilfully and willingly, ye shall be cast out of this land, though full sore
against your wills.

And there shall ye serve other gods] Will ye, nill ye; (for a just punishment
of your voluntary idolatries) being compeld by your imperious enemies so to do,
Notatur poena talionis.
except ye will taste of the whip, as now the Turks gally-slaves.

Where I will not show you favour] This was a cutting speech, and far worse
then their captivity: like as that was a sweet promise, Zech. 10.6. They shall
be as if I had not cast them off, and I will hear them.

Ver. 14 Therefore, behold] Or, notwithstanding, sc. these grievous
threatenings, and extreme desolations. Thus the Lord still remembers his
Remnant, and the Covenant made with them. Ministers also must comfort the
precious, as well as threaten the vile and vicious. Evangelizatum, non
maledictum missus es: laudo zelum, modo non desideretur mansuetudo, said
Oecolampadius to Farellus in a certain Epistle, Thou were sent to preach Gospel
and not Law only, to pour oil as well as wine into wounded consciences. I
commend thy zeal, so it be tempered with meekness of wisdom.

That it shall no more be said] i. e. Not so much be said: the luster of this
deliverance shall in some sort dim the luster of that; but both must be
perpetually celebrated.

Ver. 15. But the Lord lives, etc.] Or, let the Lord live, and let the God of
our salvation be exalted, Psalm. 18.46. See the Notes there. How much more then
should our Redemption from Sin, Death and Hell by Jesus Christ obscure all
temporal deliverance? See for this chap. 23.7, 8. Confer also chap. 3.16.

Ver. 16. Behold I will send for many fishers etc.] sc. To enclose in their
(...), large and capacious nets, whole shoales of them together. These were the
Chaldees whom God sent for, arcano instinctu cordium, by putting it into their
hearts to come up against Jerusalem: Howbeit, some by fishers understand the
Egyptians, who lived much by fishing: and by hunters the Chaldeans, as Genesis
10.8, 9.

And they shall hunt them] Out of all their starting holes and lurking places:
as the Romans afterward pulled them out of their privies, etc.

Ver. 17. For mine eyes are upon all their wayes] And though they hide me from
themselves, yet can they not hide themselves from me possibly, nor from my
hunters, who shall ferret them out.

Paenarum abund^ Jun.
Ver. 18. And first] i. e. Before I restore them.

I will recompense their iniquity, and their sin double] i. e. Abundantly, I
will have my full pennyworths of them: not double to their deserts, as Isa.
40.2. and 60.1.

With the carcasses] i. e. With their Idolatries, more odious and loathsome
then any stinking carcasses can be.

Ver. 19. My refuge] Better then those of the fugitive Jews, out of which they
were hunted and murdered.

The Gentiles shall come to thee] By faith and repentance.

Ver. 20. Should a man make gods to himself?] Nonne res haec stupore digna? Is
not this a strange sottishness? The Gentiles here see it: and yet the Papists
will not.

Ver. 21. I will for this once] And this once shall stand for all. Affliction
shall not rise up the second time, Nah. 1.9.

And I will make them to know] Effectu magis quam affectu.

My hand and my might] i. e. My mighty hand, mine irresistible power in their
just punishment.

CHAP. XVII.
Ver. 1. THe sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron] The four first verses
of this Chapter are left out by the Septuagint. Hierom says they omitted them
in gratiam and honorem populi sui, in favor and for the honor of their
countrymen the Jews, but that was no just reason. For ever, O Lord, thy Word
is settled in heaven, Psalm. 119.89. though there were not a Bible left on earth;
These sinners against their own souls had their Idolatry so deeply engraven on
their hearts, that they could not get out the stamp: and the guilt thereof
stuck so fast to their consciences, that they could hardly get off either the
sting or the stain thereof.

It is graven upon the Tables of their hearts] Their sin lay there, where the
law should have lain, Ezekiel. 31.33. Like as Queen Mary when she dyed told those
about her, that the loss of Callice lay at her heart, a place far fitter for
Jesus Christ.

And upon the horns of your Altars] Whereon the blood of your sacrifices are
sprinkled; and so your sin proclaimed.

Ver. 2. While their children remember their Altars] Or, as they remember their
children, so they remember their Altars and their Groves, sc. with greatest
love and delight. The Greeks call children (...), the Comedian Charissima: so
were their Idols to these Jews.

Ver. 3. O my mountain in the field] Or, O my mountain and field, i. e. O ye
mountaneirs and fieldlings. Montani fere asperi sunt and inculti: molliores
corpore atque moribus pratenses: they should all be spoiled one with another,
for the sin of their high places.

Ver. 4. And thou, even thy self, shall discontinue] Or intermit, sc. the
tillage of thy land. See Exodus 23.11. with Levit. 26.33, 34. it shall keep her
Sabbaths.

Ver. 5. Cursed be the man that trusts in man] Disserit hic de summo bono,
and de summo malo, says one: here the Prophet discourses of the chief good
and of the chief evil. This later he pronounces to be to depart from God, and
to depend upon the creature for help: for such a man, seem he never so manly a
man (haggheber) is accursed of God, whom he robs of his chief jewel, that
which gives him the sovereignty, and sets, as it were, the crown upon his
head. See Judge. 9.15. Psalm. 78.22. and 52.7.

And makes flesh his arm] i. e. His strength: for in brachio est robur. Now
three ways, says a Reverend man, we make flesh our arm, Mr. Case.
1. By sitting down in a faithless sullen discontent and despair when we can
see no second causes. 2. By rising up in a corky frothy confidence, when we see
sufficient humane help. 3. When we ascribe the glory of our good to it,
sacrificing to our own net, Habak. 1. This is to pull the curse upon our heads
with twisted wrath and indignation.

Whose heart departs from God] He trusts not God at all, who trusts him
not over all.

Ver. 6. For he shall be like the heath] Wild-myrice, that neither bears
fruit nor seed, and is good for little but to burn, or make beesomes: See Heb.
6.8. Bastard tamarisk some call it; others, Juniper.

But shall inhabit the parched places of the wildernesse] Such shall have no
content or satisfaction. Confer Mat. 12.43. the unclean spirit cast out, walks
in dry places, etc. not but that dry and wet is all one with him: but it
imports his extreme restlesnesse.

Ver. 7. Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord] See on ver. 5. See also
Psalm. 25.12. and 32.10. and 34.8. and 84.12. and 125.1. and 146.5. where David
having entered a Caveat against creature confidence, persuades people, by
trusting in God alone, to provide for their own safety and happiness. See Nah.
1.7. Such shall have mavelous loving kindness from God, Psalm. 17.7. above all
that can be uttered, Psalm. 31.19. See Prove. 28.25.

Ver. 8. For he shall be as a tree planted] It is plain that he here alludeth
to Psalm. 1.3. See the Notes there. The laurel, says Pliny, is never
thunderstruck. Sure it is, that he who trusts in God takes no hurt: his
heart is fixed and unmovable, Psalm. 112.7, 8. to endure things almost
incredible, Psalm. 27.3. Isa. 14.32. confer Isa. 26.4, 5. True Trust will
certainly triumph at length, as that which leans on the Lord, and the power
of his might, the surest support.

By the river] The Hebrew here is Jubal: and the Jubilee says one, had its
name from this word, which signifies a stream or watercourse: as carrying us
to Christ who is the truth of this type, Luke 18.19.

But his leaf shall be green] Neither falling nor fading.

And shall not be careful in the year of drought] A Metaphor setting forth the
full assurance of faith that is in some good men, such as was that holy Martyr,
who said I will henceforth be Careless according to my name. John Careless
Act. and Mon. fol. 1743.


Si fractus illabatur orbis,
Impavidum ferient ruinae.
Neither shall cease from yiedling fruit] As they say the Lemmon tree does not:
Theoph. Plin.
but ever and anon sends forth new Lemmons, as soon as the former are fallen
down with ripeness.

Ver. 9. The heart of man is deceitful above all things] The pravity and
perversity of man's heart, full of harlotry and creature-confidence, deceiving
and being deceived, is here plainly and plentifully described; and oh that it
were duly and deeply considered. Deceitful it is here said to be above all
things: no creature like it. Varium est, versutum, and versipelle; tortuosum
est, anfractuosum and fallax, ideoque inscrutabile. It is full of turnings and
windings, nooks and corners, wiles and slights. It deceived David (as wise as
he was) and tripped up his heels (as the word here used imports) Psalm. 39.1,
2, 3. so it did Peter, Joh. 13.37, 38. Fitly does the Prophet here call our
hearts deceitful, in that word in the Original, from whence Jacob had his name*
because our fleshly hearts do the same things to the spirit in doing of good,
which Jacob did to his brother; supplant it, and catch it by the heel, while
it is running the Christian race. As Jehu offered sacrifice to Baal, killing
his Priests at the same time (and this he did in subtilty to circumvent them,
See Dike of the deceitfulness of the Heart.
2 King. 10.19.) and as Hushai went to Absoloms company to overthrow him: so
deal our deceitful hearts with us, (...).
etc. Neither is it deceitful only, but deep (so the Septuagint here render it)
those that are still digging in this dunghill, do find it to be a very
bottomless pit. Yea it is,

Desperately wicked] Desperately bent upon deadly mischief. So that he gave no
evil counsel who said to his friend, Ita cave tibi, ut caveas teipsum: so see
to thy self, that thou beware of thine own heart. Another prayed not amiss,
Lord keep me from that naughty man, my self. Take heed of the devil and the
world (said a certain Martyr in a letter to his wife) but especially of thine
own heart: -- Non long scilicet hosts
Quaerendi nobis, circumstant undique muros.
We have a Trojan horse full of armed enemies in the citadel of our hearts. We
have Jebusites enough within us to undo us, (...). Enchirid. cap. 72.
quos nec fugere possumus nec fugare. It was no ill character therefore of a
good man that is given by Epictetus a Heathen, that he carefully watches
himself as his own deadly enemy.

Who can know it?] None but a man's self, 1 Cor. 2.11. nor yet a man's self
neither; for nothing is more common then self-deceit, Gal. 6.3. Jam. 1.21. How
much was Bellarmine (that great Scholar) mistaken? and how ill read in his own
heart, when as the Priest coming to absolve him on his deathbed, he could not
remember any particular sin to confess, till he went back in his thoughts as
far as his youth? had he but thrust his hand into his own bosom with Moses, he
had brought it out leprous, white as snow. Had he looked well into his own
heart, he would have found it to be a raging sea of sin, Isa. 57.20. where is
that Leviathan (the devil) besides creeping things (crawling lusts)
innumerable. This made blessed Bradford never look on any man's lewd life, but
he would strait cry out, Lord have mercy upon me: for in this my vile heart
remains that sin, which without Gods special grace, I should have committed
as well as he.

Ver. 10. I the Lord search the heart] Be it never so full of shifts and
fetches, I cannot be deceived in it. The watch-maker must needs know every
turning and winding in the watch. God is the heart maker, and the heart-mender,
neither is there any creature (no not any creature of the heart) that is not
manifest in his sight: but all things are naked and opened before his eyes,
Heb. 4.13. Naked for the outside, and opened for the inside: (...).
dissected, quartered, and as it were cleft thorough the backbone, as the
Apostles word there signifies: so opened, as the entrails of a man that is
anatomized, or of a beast that is cut up and quartered. The heart and reins
are taken to be the seat of the thoughts and affections, yea of the strongest
affection, namely that which is for generation. These are a man's inwardest and
most remote parts: so that it is hard for food or Physic to come at them.
Covered they are also with fat and flesh, etc. and yet they are not hid from
Gods eye, which is indeed a fiery eye, Rev. 1.14. and therefore needs no
outward light. Man's eye is like a candle, which is first lighted, and then
extinct: The Angels eyes are like the stars which shine indeed, and in the dark
too; but with a borrowed light: neither know they the thoughts of men's hearts,
further then they are discovered. But Gods eye is like the Sun, yea far
brighter, and more peircing then that eye of the world: neither needs he a
window in man's breast (as Momus wished) to look in at: for every man, before
God, is all window, totus totus transparens and pellucidus, This, Thales and
other Philosophers saw and confessed.

Ver. 11. As the Partridge sits on eggs and hatcheth them not] Because
either she is taken in an evil net, or the eggs are marred by the male, or
otherwise, before they can be hatched.

So he that gets riches and not by right] That cries -- Rem, rem, quocunque
modo rem,
Vnde habeat nemo quaerit, sed oportet habere.
Right or wrong, many are resolved to be rich, but are usually crossed, or else
cursed with a blessing: for treasures of wickedness profit not; but
righteousness delivers from death, Prove. 10.2. God sometimes gives wealth to
the wicked, as men put money into an earthen bottle: which that they may get
out again, they break the bottle in pieces.

Shall leave them in the midst of his dayes] Either they shall leave him, or he
them, to his unmedicinable grief and heart-break. A poor fool, God will be sure
to make of him. He that trusts in his riches (as every Mammonist does) shall
fall, Prove. 11.28. for although he bless himself (as well underlaid; and what
should ayle such an one? says the world) yet the Lord abhors him, Psalm.
10.3. so that he many times comes in the midst of his days to an untimely
end, as did Judas, Ahab, Achan, Balaam, Ananias and Sapphira, etc. And thus
many a rich wretch spinneth a fair thread to strangle himself, both temporally
and eternally: he by his covetousness not only kills others, Prove. 1.19. but
himself too.

Ver. 12. A glorious high throne from the beginning] Therefore its best to
trust in God at all times, ye people, and to pour out your hearts before him;
since God is a refuge for us, Psalm. 62.8. All that do otherwise shall be
ashamed, ver. 12. and worthily; because having so glorious a God resiant
amongst them, they so basely forsake him, to serve and seek to Idols.

Ver. 13. Shall be written in the earth] i. e. Aeterna morte damnabuntur, they
shall be hurled into hell, as not having their names written in Heaven, Luke
10.20. where all that are written among the living in Jerusalem, Isa. 4.3. are
enrolled, Heb. 12.23. non pro gloriosis sed pro probrosis habiti: See Psalm.
17.14. Prudentius rightly says, that their names that are written in red
letters of blood in the Churches Calendar, are written in golden letters in
Christ's register in the book of life. As on the contrary, these Idolaters,
whose sin was with an Iron-pen engraven on the tables of their hearts, as ver.
1. are justly written in the earth, i. e. cast to hell.

Ver. 14. Heal me O Lord and I shall be healed] viz. of that cordolium that my
malicious countrymen cause me. The Prophet was even sick at heart of their
unworthy usages; and prays help and healing, ne totus and ipse labascat inter
auditores deploratissimos, lest he should perish by them, and with them.

Ver. 15. Behold they say unto me] Heb. they are saying unto me: it is their
daily dicterium or jear.

Where is the Word of the Lord?] Whereby thou so often threatenest us with
desolation. Thus profane persons flear when they should fear. Vbi est? i. e.
nusquam est. Piscat.
See 2 Pet. 3, 4. Isa. 5.19. Amos 5.18.

Ver. 16. I have not hastened from being a Pastor before thee] I have neither
rashly taken up the work of the Ministry, quo secundus abe te essem Pastor,
wherein I have been thine under-shepheard, but was rightly called by thee
thereunto, and have obeyed thy call: neither have I been overhasty to rid my
hands of this so troublesome and thanklesse an employment. Latimer, in one of
his Sermons, speaking of a Minister who gave this answer why he left off
preaching, because he saw he did no good, but got the hatred of many: This,
says He, was a naughty, a very naughty answer.

Neither have I desired the woeful day] The doleful or deadly day, sc. of their
desolation, or my denunciation of it. Gods Ministers take no delight to fling
daggers at the faces of graceless persons (whatever they may think) or to
terrify them causelessly: but as knowing the terror of the Lord they seek to
affright them by the menaces of Gods mouth from such sinful practices as will
be their ruin: and hence they are hated -- an expectes ut Quintilianus ametur?
Juven.


Thou know it] See chap. 12, 1. and 15.15. 2 Cor. 1.12.

Ver. 17. Be not a terror unto me] Let me have fair weather over head, how
foul soever it be under foot. If we have peace with God, though trouble in the
world, we can take no hurt. If vapors be not got into the bowels of the earth,
and stir not there, storms and tempests abroad cannot cause an earthquake: so
if there be peace within, etc. But like as all the letters in the Alphabet,
without a Vowel, will not make one word: nor all the Stars in the firmament,
without a Sun, will make a day: so neither can all this worlds good make one
happy without God and his favor.

Ver. 18. Let them be confounded] A heavy imprecation: Let persecutours take
heed how they move Ministers to make intercession to God against them, as Elias
did against Israel, Romans 11.2. as Jeremy here and elsewhere does against the
Jews; as the Christian Churches did against Julian the Apostate. God will set
to his Fiat.

Let them be dismayed, but let not me be dismaied] Paveant illi and non paveam
ego, So the Vulgar Latin has it. But what a Lack-latin dolt was that Popish
Priest, who alleged to his Parishioners this text to prove, that not he but
they were to pave the Church Way? So Another of them, finding it written in the
end of Paul's Epistles, Missa est, etc. bragged he had found the Mass in his
bible. So another reading Joh. 1.44, Invenimus Messiam, made the same
conclusion.

Ver. 19. Go and stand in the gate of the children] The sheep-gate say some:
whereof see Neh. 3.1, 32. and 12.39. or, as others, the watergate whereof Neh.
3.26. a place it was of great resort and concourse, and therefore fittest for
this new Sermon to be made in; first, though afterward also he was to preach
it in all the gates of Jerusalem, forasmuch as it was about a matter of
greatest importance, even the serious sanctification of the Sabbath Day: Diem
septimum Opifex mundi natalem sibi sacravit, and observari praecepit. That
fourth Commandment says Philo, is a famous precept, and profitable to excite
to all kind of virtue and piety.

Ver. 20. Ye Kings of Judah] Magistrates being Lord-keepers of both the Tables
of the Law, should carefully see to it, that both be duly observed. Our King
Edgar made laws for the sanctification of the Lords-day-Sabbath, as have also
our present Governors, Jer. Dike of Consc. Estine in lib. Sentent. distinc.
11. cap. 2.
to their lasting renown. The first blow given to the German Churches was on
the Lord's Day, which they carelessly observed: for on that day was Prague lost:
as was likewise Constantinople, on Whit-sunday, as they called it.

Ver. 21. Take heed to your selves] Break not the Sabbath, that ye fall not
under the fierce wrath of God: who paid him home with stones, who but only
gathered sticks on that day. Cavete, it concerns you much.

And bear no burthen] See Neh. 13.15, 16, 19. with the Notes.

Ver. 22. Neither carry forth a burden] Let not the Sabbath of the Lord, that
sanctified day of his Rest, be so shamefully troubled and disquieted. Make not
Holy Day a Voider as some do, to the week aforegoing.

Ver. 23. But they obeyed not] See chap. 7.24, 26.

Ver. 24. But hallow the Sabbath-day] sc. By spending the holy time holily:
else, God may sue us on an action of waste. Idlensse is a sin any day; but
specially on the Sabbath Day; spiritual idleness then, is as had as corporal
labor.

Ver. 25. Then shall there enter] Then shall all go well with you publicly and
privately; ye shall have a confluence of all manner of comforts and
contentments.

Ver. 26. And they shall come] All the solemnity of the Temple shall continue,
with the exaltation of all the neighborhood. When the Highpriests would so
workyday-like beg the body, seal the sepulcher, and set the watch on the
Sabbath (called by an Irony the day that followed the day of the preparation,
Matthew. 27.62.) they forfeited all.

Ver. 27. Then will I kindle a fire] That furious Element, whereby God has so
often punished this sin, as is to be seen in the Practice of Piety, Denison's
Wolf in Sheeps clothing, Mr. Clark's Examples, etc.

CHAP. XVIII.
Ver. 1. THe word which came to Jeremiah] To show the just punishment of the
people for disobeying the precept concerning the Sabbath, chap. 17. and other
of Gods Commandments: See on chap. 7.1.

Ver. 2. Arise and go down to the Potters house] Whether the Prophet was to go
actually to the Potters house, or in vision only, it skilleth not. This we
know, that our Savior did actually wash his Disciples feet: and at another
time set a child in the midst of them, when they were striving about the
primacy: expounding to them afterward what he meant; and so it might well be
here. It may not be amiss for us to go down often with Jeremy to the Potters
house in our meditations, to consider, I mean, our original. (...), as the
first man Adam was of the earth earthy, so are we ex luto lutei.

Ver. 3. Then I went down to the Potters house] Gods Commands must be obeyed
without sciscitation. Officiose paret.
Jeremy saw that verbal teaching without signs would not work upon his hearers:
he is therefore ready to do any thing or to go any whither, for their eternal
good.

And behold he wrought a work on the wheles] So the Poet, -- amphora coepit
Institui, currente rota, cur urceus exit? Hor. de art. Poet.



Ver. 4. And the vessel which he made of clay was marred] Or, the vessel which
he was making miscarried, as clay in the Potters hand.

Non semper feriet quodcunque minabitur arcus. Ver. 5. Then came the Word of
the Lord unto me] See ver. 1. To the visible word, God always adds the
audible: as in the two Sacraments.

Ver. 6. O house of Israel, cannot I do with you] Make you or mar you at my
pleasure: have I not an absolute sovereignty over you, that ye lift up the heel
against me, and awake my power by your provocations?

As the clay is in the Potters hand] What then has vain man to vaunt of? or
why should any proud Arminian say, Quod potui, miserentis est Dei: quod volui,
Grevinchovius.
id meae est potestatis? That I can do good, is of Gods mercy: that I will do
it, is merely in mine own power? This man was sure his own Potter: and not
willing to owe overmuch of himself to God.

Ver. 7. At what instant I shall speak] As God loves to premonish: and he
therefore threateneth, that he may not punish; for he would be prevented.

Ver. 8. Turn from their evil] If I may see such work amongst them, as at
Niniveh God did, Joh. 3.10. He saw not their sackcloth and their ashes, but
their repentance and works, those fruits of their Faith.

I will repent of the evil] Not by any change of my will, but by the willing of
a change: mutatione Rei non Dei.

Ver. 9. And at what instant I shall speak] All is done as God the great
Induperator commands, whether it be for or against a Nation, or a particular
man only, Job 34.29.

To build or to plant it] As he did this kingdom of England; which was
therefore anciently called Regnum Dei, and reckoned among the fortunate Islands.

Ver. 10. Then will I repent of the good] I will take away mine own, and be
gone, Hos. 2.9. curse their blessings, Mal. 2.2. and destroy them after that I
have done them good, as Josh. 24.20. and all this (whether for the better, or
for the worse to a Nation) God usually does on the sudden; At what instant,
etc. Mercies the more unexpected, the more welcome: Judgments, the more
sudden, the more direful they are.

Ver. 11. Behold I frame evil against you] As the Potter frames his vessel on
the wheel.

Return ye now] Currat poenitentia, ne praecurrat sententia. Mitte preces and
lacrymas, cordis legatos. Address your selves to God, and be at peace: so
shall good be done unto you. See chap. 3.12. and 7.3.

Ver. 12. And they said There is no hope] See the like desperate return, Refert
stomachose cantilenam illorum obstinatam.
chap. 2.25. and 13.9. Actum est: vel desperatum est: vel expectoratum est:
that is, we are at a point, and have made our conclusion: Thou may save a
labor of further exhorting us: for we are as good as we mean to be, and shall
nor stir from our resolution: Keep thy breath to cool thy broth, etc.

We will do every one the imagination of his evil heart] As you forsooth please
to count it and call it: though we reckon that we have as good hearts as the
purest or proudest of you all.

Ver. 13. Therefore thus says the Lord] God himself seems here to wonder at
the desperate obstinacy of this people, as not to be matched again. Like as our
Savior marvelled at the unbelief of the Nazarites, and could do for them no
mighty work, Mar. 6.5, 6. See the Notes there.

The Virgin of Israel has done a very horrible thing] A Virgin she is called,
either by an Irony, or else because she should have been a pure Virgin, sincere
in Gods Service, but was nothing less. What this horrible thing was, see ver.
15. Confer chap. 2.13, 32.

Ver. 14. Will a man leave the snow of Lebanon] See chap. 2.13. which may stand
for a Commentary on this Verse. The rocks of Lebanon were still covered with
Snow: whence also it was called Lebanon, i. e. white. Now the Lord was to the
Jews as this snow was to the thirsty traveller, cooling and comforting: and
therefore in no wise to be left.

Or shall the cold flowing waters that come from another place be forsaken?]
Heb. shall strange, cool, flowing water be forsaken? or fail?

Ver. 15. Because my people has forgotten me] Not forsaken me only. Of all
things God cannot abide to be forgotten: this is that very horrible thing, ver.
13. this is filthiness in Virgin Israel, which is most abominable.

From the ancient paths] Chalked out by the Law, and walked in by the
Patriarchs and Prophets, Vepreta avia.
Heb. paths of antiquity or of Eternity. Set a jealous eye upon novelties: and
shun untrodden paths, as dangerous.

Ver. 16. To make their land desolate] Not intentionally so: but yet
eventually. Idolatry is a land-desolating sin.

Ver. 17. I will scatter them] Wherry and whirle them up and down, as chaff
before the force of the enemy.

I will show them the back and not the face] This was woeful, but just upon them
for their unworthy dealing in like sort with the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 29.6. chap.
2.27. and 32.33. Ezekiel. 8.16. Every transgression and disobedience has a just
recompense of reward, Heb. 2.2.

Ver. 18. Then said they, Come let us devise devices] Words savouring of a most
exulcerate spirit against God and his faithful Prophet, quem toto coelo hic
explodunt, whom they shamefully slight, and desperately oppose, both with their
virulent tongues and violent hands. Hence his ensuing complaint, and not
without cause.

For the Law shall not perish from the Priest, etc.] As he would persuade us it
shall. We shall have Priests, Sages, and Prophets still: berter then he is any:
let us therefore stop his mouth, or make him away, there will be no great loss
of him.

Come let us smite him with the tongue] By loading him with slanders, and
laying false accusations against him. Some men have very sharp tongues. He that
was famous for Abuses stripped and whipped, had nothing but his tongue to whip them
with. Some render it, Let us smite that tongue of his; that is, tie it up and
tamper it, that he reprove us no more. Or if he do; yet

Let us not give heed to any of his words] If we cannot rule his tongue, yet
let us rule our own ears, and say, Tu linguae, nos aurium domini. And is not
this the very language of the Romists? Non tam ovum ovo simile, etc.

Ver. 19. Give heed to me O Lord] Though they will not, yet do thou, I beseech
thee. This is ordinary with good men, when wearied out with the worlds
misusages, to turn them to God, and to seek help of him.

Ver. 20. Shall evil be recompensed for good?] q. d. That Is greatest
disingenuity and unthankfulness. To render good for evil is Divine; good for
good is humane: evil for evil is bruitish^s: but evil for good devilish. Lo
with such breathing devils had Jeremy here to do: and indeed what good man has
not? See 1 Samuel 24.17. Psalm 35.12. and 109.5.

Ver. 21. Wherefore deliver up their children to the famine] He who had prayed
so hard for them, could and did pray here as earnestly against them: yet not
out of private revenge, but by a prophetic spirit, whereby he foretells
their calamities auxesi verborum per hypotyposin. This is usual with the
Psalmist, and other Prophets.

And let their men be put to death] Heb. be killed with death: See Rev. 2.23.
with the Note.

Ver. 22. When thou shall bring a troop] The Vulgar rendereth it Latronem, a
thief or robber: viz. Nebuchadnezzar that arch-thief, whose Monarchy was grande
latrocinium, and whose regiment without righteousness, was robbery by
authority.

Ver. 23. Yet Lord, thou know all their counsel] Though I know it not, yet
thou art privy to it, and can prevent it; for wisdom and might are thine,
Dan. 2.20.

To slay me] All malice is bloody.

Forgive not their iniquity] He knew their sin to be unpardonable: and
therefore prays for vengeance upon them unavoydable. This was fulfilled upon
the Jews by the Babylonians in respect of Jeremy, and by the Romans in respect
of Christ.

Neither blot out their sin from thy sight] A heavy curse. Woe to such as whose
debts stand uncrossed in Gods book. Their sins may sleep a long time, like a
sleeping debt, not called for of many years: as Saul's sin in slaying the
Gibeonites was not punished till forty years after: as Joabs killing of Abner
slept all David's days. Men's consciences also may sleep (in such a case) for a
season: but their damnation sleeps not: nor can their condition be safe till
God have wiped out their sins for his own sake: till he have crossed out the
black lines of our iniquities with the red lines of his Sons blood, and taken
out of his coffers so much as may fully satisfy, etc.

CHAP. XIX.
Ver. 1. THus says the Lord] By the former Type of a Potter and his Vessel,
God had showed the Jews what he could do to them, viz. break them at his
pleasure, and remake them upon their repentance. Here, by a like prophetical
paradigme, is set forth what the Lord now will do to them: viz. break them so
for their obstinacy, as that they should never be repaired, and restored to
their ancient luster, and flourish. And this the Prophet Jeremy (fortissimus
ille Dei athleta, as One calls him) that valiant Champion of the Lord,
tells them freely, though he kissed the flocks and was well beaten for his
boldness, chap. 20.2. Where it is worthy our observation, that as the Prophets
task was more and more increased, so was his strength and courage. Deus gratiam
multiplicat onere ingravescente. So it was with Athanasius, Luther, Latimer,
Calvin, etc.

Go and get a Potters earthen bottle] Called in Hebrew Bakbuk: Onomatopaejae.
either from the emptiness and hollownesse of it; or else from the gugling
sound that it made when it was either filled or emptyed. By a like figure it is
said of the vulturine Eagle, Jegnalegnudam.
Job 39.30. that they do glutglut blood.

And take of the ancients] Of both sorts for witnesses.

Ver. 2. And go forth unto the valley of the son of Hinnom] See chap. 7.3. that
where the Jews had sinned, there they might be sentenced.

Which is by the entry of the East-gate] Or (as others render it) Portam
fictilem seu testaceam, the Potters gate (because the Potters dwelt near to it,
and thereby carried forth their potsheards) called also the dung-gate, says
the Chaldee Paraphrase: an allusion being hereby made both to the pot he
carried, and to the pieces of it when broken, which should be cast to the
dunghill. Inde ad gehennam via erat. This was the way to Tophet: and thither
Jeremy led them, A Lapide.
said an Expositour, that considering their graves in that Valley, according to
chap. 7.32. and that their bodies, those earthen vessels, should soon after be
broken and carried out as dung into Tophet by the Chaldeans, and their souls
into Hell by the devils, they might repent, and so prevent such a mischief.

And proclaim there the words that I shall tell thee] God took his own times to
tell his Prophets what they should tell the people. The privilege of
infallibility (says a Divine) was perpetual to the Apostles: Prophetis vero
saepius intervallatum, and fere non extra ipsos prophetandi paroxysmos durans,
not so to the Prophets, but whilst they were prophesying only for the most
part: neither knew they many times what they should Prophecy, till the very
instant.

Ver. 3. Hear the Word of the Lord ye Kings of Judah] i. e. O King and thy
counselors, who are so many little Kings, as King James was wont to say of
the Parliament men.

Behold I bring evil upon this place] This he spoke to all and with all
authority; catholicam and miserabilem perniciem proclamans. It is credible that
he spoke it with as good a courage (or better) as Bishop Ridley Martyr did
those comminatory words of his to Queen Mary and her servants, when they
refused to hear him preach: He uttered them with such a vehemence, Act. and
Mon. 1^70.
says mine Author, that some of the hearers afterward confessed the hairs
to stand upright on their heads.

His cares shall tingle] For grief and fear; as if he had been stonied with a
thunderclap, or were ready to swoon.

Ver. 4. Because they have forsaken me] Chap. 16.11.

And estranged this place] Or, strangely abused it so as I scarce know it, or
can find in my heart to own it.

Whom neither they, nor their fathers] sc. Quamdiu probifuerunt and pii, so
long as they had any goodness in them, says Hierom. Those afterward that
worshipped they knew not what (as those Samaritans did, Joh. 4.) are not worthy
to be reckoned on, much less to be imitated. Walk ye not in the statutes of
your fathers, neither observe their judgments, nor defile your selves with
their Idols, Ezekiel. 20.18.

And have filled this place with the blood of innocents] Especially of Infants
sacrificed to Moloch in Tophet, so filling up the measure of your sins.

Ver. 5. Which I commanded not] Reprobatur voluntarius cultus, and factitiae
religiones. See chap. 7.31. and 32.35. 2 King. 23.10.

Ver. 6. This place shall no more] See chap. 7.32. Things are repeated, that
they may be the better observed.

Ver. 7. And I will make void the counsel of Judah] As vain and empty as this
earthen bottle now is. See on ver. 1. and take notice of an elegant
Agnomination in the Original.

And their carcasses will I give] See chap. 7.33. and 16.4.

Ver. 6. And I will make this City desolate] See chap. 18.10.

Ver. 9. And I will cause them to eat the flesh] This as it was threatened, Lev.
26.29. Deuteronomy. 28 23. so accordingly accomplished, Lam. 2.20. and 4.10.
Ptolomaeus Lathurus King of Egypt barbarously slew thirty thousand Jews, and
forced the rest to feed upon the flesh of those that were slain.

Ver. 10. Then shall thou break the bottle] That the eyes of the bystanders
and beholders may affect their hearts. Non alia ratio Sacramentorum est.

Ver. 11. That cannot be made whole again] Heb. cured. No more was the Jewish
Polity ever restored to its ancient dignity and luster, after the captivity:
neither was Tophet ever repaired at all, but served for a charnel-house, a
place to lay dead men's bones in.

Ver. 12. And even make their City as Tophet] Every whit as abominable and
horrid: a very hell above ground.

Ver. 13. And the houses of Jerusalem] Wherein they had their chambers of
imagery, and their private chapels for Idolatrous uses, (as Papists also have)
Ezekiel. 8.12. Zeph. 1.

Because all the houses upon whose roofes] See on Zeph. 1.4.

Ver. 14. And he stood in the court of the Lords house] A place of greatest
concourse of people: and where he might meet with many hearers. Here he spread
his net, that he might catch some souls; dilated his discourse at Tophet,
whereof we have here but the short notes; minding them of their sin and
punishment. And surely this Prophet should be so much the more regarded by us,
for that he so freely and fully delivered the divine messages, omitting no part
thereof, either for fear or favor. Ambrose bad Austin read the Prophet Isaiah
diligently, for the confirmation of his faith. We may all very profitably read
the Prophet Jeremy who is full of incitation to repentance and new obedience.

Ver. 15. Because they have hardened their necks] Which may seem possessed with
an iron sinew, so stiff they are and sturdy, having manum in aure, aurem in
cervice, cervicem in cord, cor in obstinatione, their hand on their ear,
their ear in their neck, their neck in their heart, and their heart in
obstinacy, etc.

CHAP. XX.
Ver. 1. NOw Pashur the son of Immer] i. e. One of the posterity of Immer,
after many generations: See 1 Chronicles. 24.14.

Who was also chief Governour] Not high Priest as some have said, but a
principal Priest, happily the head of the sixteenth course: or as Junius and
others think, the High Priests Vicar, or second: such as was Eleazer to Aaron
his father, Number 4.

Heard that Jeremiah prophesied these things] Or, heard Jeremiah prophesying;
and having gall in his ears, as they say some creatures have, he was galled at
the hearing of so smart a truth.

Ver. 2. Then Pashur smote Jeremiah the Prophet] Either with his fist, as
Zedekiah did Micaiah, 1 King. 22.24. and as Bonner did Hawks, and other
Martyrs, pulling off part of their beards: or else with a staff, as they dealt
by our Savior, Mat. 26.67. and as that Popish Bishop, degrading a
Martyr-Minister, struck him so hard with his Crosier staff as he was kneeling
on the stairs at Paul's, that he fell down backwards and broke his head. Act and
Mon. Contra Arrian. orat. 2.
Atqui lapidand^sunt haeretici sacrarum literarum argumentis, says Athanasius:
but heretics are to be stoned with Scripture arguments: and men may a great
deal sooner be cudgeled into a treaty then into a Tenet.

And put him in the stockes] As they did afterward Paul and Silas, Act. 16.
Clerinus the Martyr mentioned in Cyprians Epistles, Epist. l. 4.
Mr. Ph^lpot in the Bishop of Londons coal-house; and that good woman, who
suffering afterward for the same cause, rejoiced much that her leg was put in
the same hole of the stocks, where Philpots leg had lain before.

That were in the high-gate of Benjamin] Which might be a Prison like Lollards
Tower in London, whereunto were sent the Martyrs many of them for their zeal
and forwardness. Action and passion go together: Omne agent agendo repatitur;
especially if men go a little faster then others do. They who will live godly
in Christ Jesus (and be set upon it) shall suffer persecution: this gate house
might well be the Priests prison, whither they used to send such as they took
for false Prophets.

Ver. 3. Pashur brought forth Jeremiah] To be judged, say some: but why then
did he first smite him? an Officer should retain the Majesty of the Law, and
not do any thing passionately. To set him at liberty, say others; as perceiving
that the Word of God could not be bound, nor a Prophets mouth stopped by a
prison, as Pashur also shall well perceive ere Jeremy has done with him. Act.
and Mon.
Bonner said to Hawks the Martyr, A faggot will make you believe the Sacrament
of the Altar. He answered, No, no, a point for your faggot: God will be meet
with you one day: So true is that of the Poet, Pressa sub ingen^i ceu pondere
palma virescit,
Sub cruce sic florent debita corda Deo.


The Lord has not called thy name Pashur] That is black-mouth, as some derive
it; Junius. q d. non Augustus sed angustus; non nobilis, sed mob^l^s futurus
es. Non tumor sed tiimor. Daniel. Thuan.
or diffusing palenesse, as others: but on the contrary.

Magor-missabib] i. e. Terror round about, or fear on every side: a Proverbial
form of speech denoting extreme consternation of spirit, and greatest
distress: such as befell Tullus Hostilius King of Rome, who had for his gods
Pavor and Pallor: dign^ssimus sane qui deos suos semper haberet praesentes,
says Lactantius wittily, i. e. great pity, but this man should ever have had
his gods at hand, since he was so fond of them: Our Richard 3. and Charles the
ninth of France, a pair of bloody Princes, were Magor-missabibs in their
generations: as terrible at length to themselves, as they had been formerly to
others: and therefore could never endure to be awakened in the night without
music, or some like diversion.

Ver. 4. I will make thee a terrour] Heb. I will give thee unto a terror, i.
e. I will affright thy conscience, and then turn it loose upon thee, so that
thou shall be a cord tuo fugitivus, and thy friends shall have small joy of
thee, or thou help by them. See on ver. 3.

Ver. 5. Moreover I will deliver all the strength of this City] Thus Pashur
prevailed nothing at all with good Jeremy, by imprisoning him, to make him give
over menacing. But as Baruch wrote the roll anew that had been cut in pieces,
and added besides unto it many like words, chap. 36.32. so does Jeremy here: he
will not budge to dye for it. This was to show the magnanimity of a Prophetical
Spirit.

Ver 6. There shall thou be buried] In a dunghill perhaps, as Bishop Bonner was,
and have cause enough to cry out as that great Parisian Doctor did from his
heir, when brought to be buried, Parcite funeribus: mihi nil prodesse valebit.
Heu infelicem cur me genuere parents?
Ah miser aeternos vado damnatus ad ignes.
Spare funeral-costs: why was I born,
By hells black feinds now to be torn?


Ver. 7. O Lord, thou have deceived me, and I was deceived] From hence to the
end of the Chapter the Prophet, Iterum more solit^ causam suam (...) coram Deo
agit. Oecolamp.
not without some tang and taint of humane frailty, grievously quiritateth and
expostulateth with God, about the hard usage and ill success he met with in the
execution of his prophetical function. But as ex incredulitate Thomae nostra
confirmata est fides, Thomas his unbelief serves to the settling of our faith:
and as Peter's fall warns us to look well to our standing: so when such a man
as Jeremy shall miscarry in this sort, and have such out-bursts, oh be not
high-minded but fear. Some render the text, Lord if I be deceived, thou have
deceived me: and so every faithful man, who keeps to the rule, may safely
say. Piscator has it persuasisti mihi Jehova, and persuasus sum. O Lord thou
perswadedst me, and I was persuaded, sc. to undertake this Prophetical office;
but I have small joy of it: some think he thus complained, when he was put in
prison by Pashur.

I am in derision daily, every one mocketh me] This is the worlds wages. The
Cynik said of the Megarians long ago, Better be their horse, dog, or Pander,
then their teacher: and better he should be regarded.

Ver. 8. For since I spoke, I cried out] i. e. Ever since I took upon me the
office of a Prophet, I executed it vigorously, I cried with full mouth, as
chap. 4.5. Isa. 58.1.

I cried violence and spoile] Sc. will surely befall you by the Chaldees, or I
cried out of my misusages.

Because the Word of the Lord was made a reproach unto me and a derision dayly]
This was all the recompense I reaped of my good will to this perverse people,
and of my pains taken amongst them. Few sins are more dangerous then those of
casting reproaches upon Gods Word, as here: of snuffing at it, Mal. 1.13. of
enviously swelling at it, Act. 13.45. of chatting at it, Romans 9.19, 20. of
stumbling at it, 1 Pet. 2.8. of gathering odious consequences from it, Romans 3.8.

Ex humano motu and metu hoc in mentem incidit A Lap. Pisc. Quoque magis
tegitur, tanto magis aestuat ignis. Ovid. Chrysostom. de Lazaro, Hanc legem ex
hoc loco dat concionatori ne defatigetur nec ullo tempore sileat, sive sit qui
auscultet, sive non.
Ver. 9. Then I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his
Name] i. e. I will give over preaching: This, said Latimer in a like case, was
a naughty a very naughty resolution.

But his Word was in my heart as a burning fire] Ex sensu malae conscientiae
propter illud propositum. And here was the work of the Spirit against that
carnal resolution of his. Gods people cannot do the things that they would,
says the Apostle, Gal. 5.17. As they cannot do the good they would, because of
the flesh; so neither the evil that they would, because of the Spirit: there is
a continual conflict, and as it were the company of two opposite armies, Cant.
6.13. True grace will as little be hid as fire: -- quis enim celaverit ignem?

And I was weary with forbearing, and could not stay] Jeremies service among
the Jews was something like that of Manlius Torquatus among the Romans, who
gave it over saying, Neither can I bear their manners, nor they my government.
He began to think, with that painful Patriarch, that rest was good, Genesis 49.15.
and with the Olive, Vine, and Fig Tree in Jothams parable, that it was best to
enjoy a beloved privacy. He was ready to say, Been qui latuit been vixit: And
Been qui tacuit been dixit, etc. But this could not hold with him, he saw well:
for as the motion of the heart and lungs is ever beating, and it is a pain to
restrain it, to hold the breath; so here, Strangulat inclusus dolor atque
exaestuat intus: Ovid. Trist.

Cogitur and vires multiplicare suas.


Ver. 10. For I heard the defaming of many, fear on every side] This passage is
borrowed from Psalm. 31.13. See the Note there. Some render the text, I heard
the defamation of many Magor-missabibs, many of his accomplices and Coryphaei,
spies set a work by him to defame and bespattle me.

Report say they, and we will report] Calumniare audacter, broach a slander,
and we will blazon it: set it afoot, and we will set it afloat: give us but
some small hint or inkling of ought spoken by Jeremy, whereof to accuse him to
the King and State, and we desire no more. Athanasius was about thirty times
accused, and of no small crimes neither, but falsely. The Papists make it their
trade to belie the Protestants, their chieftaines especially. They reported of
Luther that he dyed despairing: of Calvin that he was branded on the shoulder
for a rogue: of Beza, that he ran away with another man's wife, etc. And for
their Authors they allege Baldwin and Bolsecus, a couple of Apostates
requested by themselves (and as some say, hired) to write the lives of these
Worthies, their professed enemies. But any thing of this kind serves their turn:
and they cite the writings of these runnagates, as Canonical.

All my familiars] Heb. every man of my peace: from such there is the greatest
danger. Hence one prayed God to deliver him from his friends: for, as for his
enemies, he could better beware of them. Many friends are like deep ponds:
clear at the top, but all muddy at the bottom.

Ver. 11. But the Lord is with me as a mighty terrible one] Instar Gigantis
robusti, Vt formidabilis heroes. Pisc.
as a strong Giant and mine only champion, on whom I lean. Here the Spirit
begins to get the better of the Flesh, could Jeremy but hold his own. But as
the ferry man plyes the oar, and eyes the shore homeward, where he would be:
yet there comes a gust of wind that carries him back again; so it fared with
our Prophet: See ver. 14.15, etc.

Ver. 12. But O Lord of hosts] See chap. 11.20. and 17.10.

Let me see thy vengeance on them] Some pert and pride themselves over the
Ministry, as if it were a dead Alexanders nose, which they might wring off,
and not fear to be called to account therefore: but the visible vengeance of
God, will seize such one day, as it did Pharaoh, Ahab, Herod, Julian.

For unto thee have I opened my cause] Prayer is an opening of the souls causes
and cases to the Lord. The same word for opened here, is in another conjugation
used for uncovering, making bare, and naked, Gen 9.21. Gods people in prayer do
or should nakedly present their souls causes without all cover-shames, or so
much as a ragge of self or flesh cleaving to them.

Ver. 13. Sing unto the Lord, praise ye the Lord] Nota hic alternantis animi
motus estusque. Here the Spirit triumphs over the flesh: as in the next
verses, the flesh again gets the wind and hill of the Spirit. Every good man is
a divided man.

For he has delivered the soul of the poor] i. e. Of poor me, as Psalm. 34.4.

Ver. 14. Cursed be the day wherein I was born] What a sudden change of his
note is here? out of the same mouth proceeds blessing and cursing: My
brethren, says James, these things ought not so to be, Jam. 3.10. But here
humane weakness prevailed: and this part of the Chapter has much of man in it.
The best have their outbursts: and as there be white teeth in the blackest
Blackmore, and again a black bill in the whitest swan: so the worst have
something in them to be commended; and the best, to be condemned. See on ver.
7. Some of the Fathers seek to excuse Jeremy altogether: but that can hardly
be, neither needs it. Origin says that the day of his birth was past, and
therefore nothing now: so that cursing it, he cursed nothing. (This is l^ke
those amongst us who say they may now without sin swear by the Mass, because
it is gone out of the Country, etc.) Isidor. that Jeremie's cursing is but
conditional, if any let that day be cursed, etc.

Ver. 15. Cursed be the man] Let him have a curse for a reward of his so good
news. Thus the Prophet, in a fit of impatiency, carries himself as one who
being cut by a Surgeon and extremely pained, strikes at and biteth those that
hold him: or like him in the Poet, Aeneid. l. 2.
Quem non incusavi amens hominumque Deumque?

Surely as the bird in a cage, because pent up, beats her self: so does the
discontented person. Look to it therefore. Satan thrusts in upon us sometimes
praying, with a cloud of strange passions: such as are ready to gallow us out
of that little wit and faith we have. Resist him betimes. The wildfire of
Passion will be burning whilst the incense of Prayer is in offering: this scum
will be rising up in the boiling pot, together with the meat: See Jon. 4.1.
with the Note.

(...), exinde (...). Jon. 4.4.
Ver. 16. And let that man be] A most bitter curse, but causeless. The devil of
discontent where it prevails, makes the heart to be, for the time, a little
hell: as we see in Moses, Job, David, Jeremy: men otherwise made up of
excellencies. These sinned, but not with full consent. A godly man has a flea
in his ear, somewhat within which says Do thou well to be angry, Jonah?

Ver. 17. Because he slew me not, etc.] Why, but is not life a mercy? a living
Dog better then a dead Lion? See on Job 3.10. and 10.18, 19.

Vincet aliquando pertinax bonitas. Rev. 2, 10.
Ver. 18. Wherefore came I forth, etc.] Passions are a most dangerous and heady
water, when once they are out.

That my days should be consumed with shame?] Why but a Christian soldier may
have a very great arrear, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.

CHAP. XXI.
Ver. 1. THe word that came unto Jeremiah from the Lord] This History is here
set down out of course. For Jerusalem was not besieged till chap. 32. and
Jehoiakim reigned Chapter. 25. It was in the ninth year of Zedekiah that this
present Prophecy was uttered, Est hic hysterologia sive praeposterus ordo.
2 King. 25.1, 2. This Zedekiah was one of those semiperfectae virtutis homines
(as Philo calls some Professors) cakes halfbaked, Hos. 7.8. no flat Atheist,
nor yet a pious Prince. Of Galba the Emperor, as also of our Richard the third
it is recorded, that they were bad men but good Princes: We cannot say so much
of Zedekiah: Two things he is chiefly charged with: 1. That he brake his oath
and faith plighted to the King of Babylon, Ezekiel. 17.16. 2. That he humbled not
himself before Jeremiah the Prophet, speaking from the mouth of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 36.12, 13. Hitherto he had not: but now in his distress he seeks to
this Prophet: yea sends an Embassage. Kings care not for soldiers (said a
great Commander) till their crowns hang on the one side of their heads. Sure it
is, that some of them slight Gods Ministers, till they cannot tell what to do
without them, as here. Kingdoms have their cares: and Thrones their thorns.
Antigonus cried out of his diadem O vilis pannus, O base rag, not worth taking
up at a man's feet. Julian complained of his own unhappiness in being made
Emperor. Dioclesian laid down the Empire as weary of it. Thirty of the ancient
Kings of this our Land, says Capgrave, resigned their crowns: such were their
cares, crosses and emulations. Zedekiah now could gladly have done as much. But
since that might not be, He sends to Jeremiah, whom in his prosperity he had
slighted; and (to gratify his wicked Counselors) wrongfully imprisoned.

He sent unto him Pashur] Not that Magor-missabib, chap. 20.1. but another of
his name: though not much better, as it afterward appeared: when, seeing
Jeremies stoutnesse for the Truth, he counseled the King to put him to death,
Chap. 38.

And Zephaniah the son of Maasciah] Of whom see further, chap. 29.25, 29. and
37.3.

Ver. 2. Enquire I pray thee of the Lord for us] He seeks now to the Lord,
whom in his prosperity he regarded not: so does a drowning man catch at the
tree or twig, which before he made no reckoning of. Rarae fumant felicibus
arae, In their affliction they will seek me early, Hos. 5. ult. When he slew
them, then they sought him, and enquired early after God, Psalm. 78.34. Pharaoh
when plagued, calls earnestly for Moses to pray for him: and Joab when in
danger of his life, runs to the horns of the Altar.

If so be the Lord will deal with us according to his wondrous works] Or, it
may be the Lord will deal with us, etc. sc. As he did not long since with
Hezekiah, when invaded by Sennacherib. Thus wicked wretches are willing to
presume, and promise themselves impunity: See Deuteronomy. 29.19. with the Note.

Ver. 3. Then said Jeremiah unto them] He answers them modestly, and without
insultation: but freely and boldly, as a man of an heroik spirit, and the
Messenger of the King of Kings.

Ver. 4. Behold I will turn back the weapons of War] i. e. I will render them
vain and useless: as it is God who in battle orders the ammunition, chap.
50.25. and makes the weapons vain or prosperous, Isa. 54. ult. Jer. 50.9. This
was plainly seen at Edge-hill-fight.

Ver. 5. And I my self will fight against you] This was heavy tidings to
Zedekiah and his Courtiers. Optassent sibi Prophetas qui dixissent laeta, says
Oecolampadius: they could have wished for more pleasing Prophecies; but those
that do what they should not, must look to hear what they would not. Such
bitter answers as this they must look for, who seek to God only in a time of
necessity: silence, or else sad answers they shall be sure of.

Ver. 6. They shall dye of a great Pestilence] See chap. 16.4. and 18.21.
Hippocrates calls the Pestilence (...), the divine disease; Sr. Jo. Heyw.
Life of Edw. the sixth.
because there is much of Gods hand in it: like as there was here in the
sweating sickness, wherewith the English only were chased, not only in
England, but in all Countries.

Ver. 7. And afterward says the Lord] This is noted by the Hebrew Critics for
a very long verse (as having in it two and forty words, which consist of one
hundred and threescore letters:) and it sounds very heavily all along, to the
Courtiers especially: Potentes potenter torquebuntur.

Ver. 8. Behold I will set before you the way of life, and the way of death]
They should have their option, but a very sad one: Saved they could not be from
their enemies, but by their enemies: nor escape death but by captivity, which
is a kind of living death, and not much to be preferred before death. Only life
is sweet, as the Gibeonites held it: and therefore chose rather to be hewers of
wood, and drawers of water, then to be cut off with the rest of the Canaanites.

Ver. 9. His life shall be unto him for a prey] And lawful prey or booty is
counted good purchase, Isa. 49.24 He shall save his life, though he lose his
goods. And it should not be grievous to any man to sacrifice his estate to the
service of his life: why else did Solomon make so many hundreds of targets and
sheilds of gold?

Ver. 10. For I have set my face against this City] I have looked this City to
destruction: I have decreed it, and will do it. When our Savior set his face
to go toward this City, Luke 9.51. he was fully resolved on it, and nothing
should hinder him. See Levit. 17.10. and 20.5.

Ver. 11. And touching the house of the King of Judah, say] i. e. His Courtiers
and his Counselors, which probably were now as bad or worse then they had
been in his Father Josias days, Zeph. 3.3. Her Princes within her were roaring
Lions, her Judges evening wolves. See the Notes.

Ver. 12. O house of David] But much degenerated from the piety of David. So
Mic. 2.7. O thou that art named the house of Jacob -- are these his doings,
etc. See the Notes there. To be a degenerate plant of so noble a vine, is no
small discommendation.

Thus says the Lord] After that the Court had sent to him, he is sent to the
Court with these Instructions.

Execute justice in the morning] As David your Progenitour and pattern did,
Psalm. 101.8. Be up and at it betime, and make quick dispatch of causes, that
poor men may go home about their businesses, who have other things to do
besides going to Law. It is a lamentable thing that a suit should depend ten or
twenty years in some Courts, Oecolamp.
quo saturentur avarissimi rabulae, omnia bona pauperum exugentes, through the
avarice of some Pleaders, to the utter undoing of their poor Clients. This made
one such (when he was persuaded to patience by the example of Job) to reply,
Mane i. e. Mature.
What do ye tell me of Job? Job never had any suits in Chancery. Jethro
advises Moses, Exodus 18. to dismsse those timely, whom he cannot dispatch
presently.

Ver. 13. Behold I am against thee] I, who alone am a whole army of men, Van
and Rear both, Isa. 52.12. and may better say then any other, How many reckon
you me at?

O inhabitant of the valley] i. e. Of Jerusalem: called elsewhere the valley of
vision. It stood high, but yet was compassed about with mountains that were
higher, Psalm. 125.2. See there.

And rock of the plain] The bulwark and beauty of the whole adjacent Country.
Pliny says, that it was the most famous of all the Cities of the East: he
might have said of the whole world, if he had known all.

Which say Who shall come down against us? or who, etc.] This they said out of
carnal confidence in the natural strength of the place, increased by their
fortifications. The Jebusites had done so, 2 Samuel 5.6. and were unrooted.
Security ushereth in destruction.

Who shall enter into our habitations?] Which we hold impregnable: Such like
vaunts precede and presage ruin, See chap. 49. Obad. 3.

Puniam vos pro meritis.
Ver. 14. But I will punish you] And if I take you once to do, you are sure of
your full payment. Heb. I will visit upon thee according to the fruit of your
actions, i. e. I will lay upon you a punishment answerable to your sins; the
sin being as the seed, and the punishment as the fruit that comes of it: q. d.
Ye have sown the wind, and ye shall reap the whirlwind.

And I will kindle a fire in the Forest thereof] i. e. In the streets which
stand as thick with houses, as the forest of Lebanon does with trees: and are
built with timber fetched from that forest.

CHAP. XXII.
Ver. 1. Go down to the house of the King of Judah] To the Palace royal of
Jehojakim son of Josiah, who reigned after that his brother Jehoabaz was
carried captive to Egypt, 2 King. 23.34.

Ver. 2. Thou and thy servants] Thine attendants and Officers: who, too often,
are evil instruments. This made the Primitive Christians pray for the Emperor,
that God would send him Senatum fidelem, faithful Counselors.

Tertul. Apol.
Ver. 3. Execute ye judgment and righteousnesse] Make good Laws, and see that
they be well executed. This, the Prophet presses quasi ad fastidium, ever and
anon over and over, as the likeliest means to prevent future judgments: so
Phineas found it. See chap. 21.12.

Ver. 4. For if ye do this thing indeed] Heb. if doing you do this word, i. e.
If seriously and sedulously ye do it.

Then shall there enter in -- Kings sitting] See chap. 17.25.

Ver. 5. That this house shall become a desolation] This stately edifice, the
place of thy royal resiance. Note here the Prophets boldness: and learn, That
truth must be spoken, however it be taken.

Ver. 6. For thus says the Lord concerning the Kings house] i. e. Concerning
the whole Kingdom of Judah, says Junius.

Thou art Gilead unto me, and the head of Lebanon] i. e. High and happy, as
these fruitful mountains, famous for spicery and other things desirable, Genesis
37.25.

Yet surely I will make thee a wildernesse] Like as I have made them when the
ten Tribes were carried away captive.

Ver. 7. And I will prepare destroyers] Heb. sanctify them, that is, send them
on mine errand, and set them forward. Gods holy hand is in all such desolations.

Every one with his weapons] Or, tools rather, to fell with.

And they shall cut down] -- Sonat icta socuribus ilex.

Ver. 8. And many Nations shall pass, etc.] By a Prosepopaeja of passengers
admiring the utter ruin of so famous a City, the Prophet sets forth the
cause of their desolation.

Ver. 9. Because they have forsaken the Covenant, Magdeburg.
etc.] In promptu causa est. Heinous sins bring hideous plagues. Ingentia
beneficia, flagitia, supplicia.

Ver. 10. Weep not for the dead, neither bemoan him] Lament no more for good
Josiah, lately slain in war, and yet dead in peace: Ne fletote, neque
condoletote: there is no such cause, every thing counted; neither shall ye have
leisure so to do, because of later miseries befalling you thick and threefold.
Weep ye rather for his son Challum carried captive into Egypt: and there
miserably handled, without hope of return.

Ver. 11. Which reigned instead of Josiah his father] But was too hasty,
stepping into the Throne before his elder brother Jehojachim: and therefore
soon after dethroned, carried down to Egypt, and as some say, there put to
death. See 2 Kings 23.33. 2 Chronicles. 36.2. with the Notes.

Ver. 12. But he shall dye in the place] See on ver. 11.

Ver. 13. Woe unto him that builds his house by unrighteousnesse] This was
Jehojakim, cujus injusta and insana aedificia hic accusantur: who would needs
be building, but whether by right or by wrong-dealing, regarded not. This was
to incur that curse, Isa. 5.8. Habak. 2.9, 12. See the Notes there. Such
injurious and therefore accursed builders were the Pyramid-makers in Egypt,
Tarquinius Priscus, Suetom. Niceph.
Caligula, Nero, Phocas, who is said to have heard this voice from heaven,
Though thou should erect thine edifice as high as heaven, (Aedificans auro,
sedesque in sidera mittens)

Yet sin that lies at the foundation, will soon overturn all. Bernard
inveigeth against some in his time, who did with great care and cost erigere
muros, negligere meres, build high manours, but not amend their manners, which
should have been their chief care.

That uses his neighbors service] His neighbor he was, though his vassal and
poor labourer.

And gives him not for his work] This is a crying sin, Deuteronomy. 24.14, 15. Jam.
5.4. See the Note there.

Ver. 14. I will build me a wide house] Heb. a house of measures, or
dimensions, such as is the Turks Seraglio (two or three mile in compass) or
rather such as is Westminster Hall, built by W^ll^am Rufus, who found much
fault with it, for being too little, saying it was fitter for a chamber then
for a hall for a King of England: Daniels Hist.
and taking a plot for one more spacious to be added unto it, he came to an
untimely end; Sarcophago contentus, shut up in a little grave, which yet was
more honor then this ambitious Prince attained to: for he was cast out and
buried with the burial of an Ass, as it follows, ver. 19.

And large chambers] Head. widened or winded: through-aired. Caenacula
perflabilia.
Thus (with those Megarensians spoken of by Plato) he built as if his life had
been riveted upon Eternity.

And cutteth him out windows] Some render it (and the Original will bear it)
that teareth my windows, sc. to enlarge and beautify therewith his new
building: Et lacerat sibi senestras meas. Trem.
he took in (belike) a piece of Gods House. This was such a piece of Sacrilege
as the very Heathens abhorred. A certain King of Sicily, to enlarge his Palace,
pulled down an old Temple: but the Emperor Marcus Antonius calls it a
beastly and lewd action, not to be spoken of without shame; protesting that is
was a matter of wonder and scandal, not only to him but to the whole City and
Senate of Rome: and therefore he blamed the King exceedingly for it. Our
William the Conqueror is much cried out upon for throwing down thirty six
Mother-Churches in Hampshire, for the making of his New-forrest, to hunt in.
Camd. Brit.


Ver. 15. Shall thou reign because thou closest thy self in Cedar?] Have thou
no better mediums to establish thy throne? no better defense against a potent
enemy that comes to dethrone thee, then a ceiling of Cedar? What if thy Cedar
putrify not? can it secure thee that thou perish not? Ah never think it.

Did not thy father eat and drink] Live cheerfully and comfortably, enjoying
peace and prosperity, through his righteousness, and piety?

And then it was well with him] Heb. then was good to him; though he did not
flaunt it out in sumptuous buildings. But you have great thoughts, and will not
take it as your father did.

Ver. 16. He judged the cause of the poor and needy] And so took a right
course, a thriving way, Prove. 29.4.

Was not this to know me? says the Lord] i. e. To show that he knew me soundly
and savingly: whilst he exercised his general calling in his particular, and
observed the first Table of the Decalogue in the second?

Ver. 17. But thine eyes and thy heart are not but for thy covetousnesse]
That Is all thou mindest and look after, oculis atque animo intentus ad rem.
Hearts they have (says Peter of such) exercised with covetous practices:
cursed children, 2 Pet. 2.14. William Rufus is in story noted for such another.

Ver. 18. They shall not lament for him] By his exactions he had so far lost
his peoples affections, that none were found either of his Allies or others
that bewailed his death: but Jehor^m-like as he had lived undesired, so he dyed
unlamented: Edwin-like, Daniel. Hist. Turk. Hist.
as he lived wickedly, so he dyed wishedly. Mahomet-like, he lived feared of
all men, and dyed bewailed of none. See the contrary promised to his brother
Zedekiah, for his courtesy to Jeremy, chap. 34.5.

Ver. 19. He shall be buried with the burial of an asse] His corpse shall be
cast out, like carryon into some by-corner. A just hand of God upon this wicked
one, that he who had made so many to weep, should have none to weep over him:
he who had such a stately house in Jerusalem, should not have a grave to house
his carcass in: sed insepulta sepultura elatus, Philippic. 1.
as Tully phraseth it; but without the ordinary honor of burial, should be
cast out or thrown into a ditch or a dunghill to be devoured by the beasts of
the earth, and fouls of heaven. Our Richard the second, for his exactions to
maintain a great Court and Favorites, lost his Kingdom, was starved to death
at Pomfret-Castle, and scarce afforded common burial. King Stephen was enterred
in Feversham-Monastery: but since, his body, for the gain of the lead wherein
it was coffined, was cast into the River. Let great ones so live, as that they
meet not in the end with the death of a dog, the burial of an ass, and the
Epitaph of an Ox; such as Aristotle calls that of Sardanapalus, (...), etc.
Or that of Pope Alexander the sixth and his Lucrece, Hospes abi: jacet hic and
scelus and vitium.

Ver. 20. Go up to Lebanon and cry] Johoiakim has had his doom and his destiny
read him: Sub icit fata tristissima Jechonia
follows now Jehoiakims part, and what, for his obstinacy, he shall trust to.
The Prophet begins this part of his discourse with a sarcasmae, or scoff at
their carnal security and creature confidence: Get up, says he, into those
high mountains here mentioned, Lebanon, Bashan, Abarim, that look all toward
Egypt: and see if thence by crying and calling for help, thou may be saved
from the Chaldees, who are coming upon thee: but all shall be to small purpose.

But thy lovers are all destroyed] The Egyptians, to whom thou bear a blind
affection, contrary to Gods Covenant.

Ver. 21. I spoke unto thee in thy prosperity] Heb. in thy prosperities, or
tranquillities. Prosperity renders men refractory. Demetrius called a
peaceable and prosperous life a dead sea; because, being not tossed with any
considerable troubles, it slays the simple, as Solomon has it, Prove. 1.32.
Men are usually best when worst, and worst when best: like the snake, which
when frozen, lies quiet and still; but waxing warm, stirs and stingeth. The
parable of the sun and the wind is known. Anglica gens est optimae fleus and
pessima ridens. Some of those who in Queen Mary's days, kept their garments
close about them, wore them afterward more loosly. It is as hard to bear
prosperity, as to drink much wine and not be giddy. It is, at least, as strong
waters to a weak stomach; which however they do not intoxicate, yet they weaken
the brain: plus deceptionis semper habet quam delectationis; able it is to
entice, and ready to kill the entangled; In rest we contract rust: neither are
men's ears opened to hear instruction but by correction, Job 33.16. God holds
us to hard meat, that he may be true to our souls, Psalm. 119.75.

This has been thy manner from thy youth] Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked, is an
old complaint, Deuteronomy. 32.15. To have been an old sinner, habituated and hardened
in iniquity, is no small aggravation of it, Ezekiel. 20 13. But the house of
Israel rebelled against me in the wilderness, etc. there they murmured against
God and Moses ten times: forty years was he there grieved with that perverse
generation. They began as soon as ever they were molded into a state; like as
Esau began to persecute Jacob in the very womb, that no time might be lost.

Ver. 22. The wind shall eat all thy Pastors] i. e. Vento vanitatis ut
chamaleontes aere pascuntur.
The vain hope that thy Governors have in foreign helps, shall deceive them;
for God will make the strongest sinew in the arm of flesh to crack and break.

Surely then shall thou be ashamed] When thou shall see thy self so shamefully
disappointed of humane helps, which were never true to those that trusted them.

Ver. 23. O inhabitant of Lebanon] Heb. O inhahitresse, that is, O Jerusalem,
who have peirked thy self aloft, and pridest thy self in thy strength and
stateliness.

How gracious shall thou be?] i. e. How ridiculous, when thy lofty and stately
rooms wherein thou art roosted, shall be to thee but as groaning rooms to
women in travel?

Ver. 24. At I live, says the Lord] An oath which none may lawfully take but
God himself, who is Life it self. It is therefore sinful for any one to say, A^
I live, such a thing is so, or so. That it is Gods oath, see Number. 14.21. with
Psalm. 95. ult.

Though Coniah] So Jechoniah (or Jehoiakin) by an Apheresis is called in scorn
and contempt. Prepared he was of the Lord (as his name signifies) for misery;
and yet he was now but eighten years old, 2 King. 24.8. Youth excuses not
those that are wicked. This young King was scarce warm in his throne, when
carried captive to Babylon.

Were the signet on my right hand] Which is very carefully kept and carried
about: See Cant. 8.6. Hag. 2.23. where good Zorobabel, the nephew of this
Jechoniah, is called Gods signet.

Yet would I pluck thee thence] This Nazianzen fitly applies to Preachers:
such as prove vile and vicious.

Ver. 25. And I will give thee into the hand] No sooner was he plucked off Gods
hand, but he fell into his enemies hands. So Saul's doleful complaint was, God
has forsaken me, and the Philistines are upon me, 1 Samuel 28.15.

Ver. 26. And I will cast thee out] Heb. I will hurl thee out. To be held
captive by Idolaters in a strange country, is no small misery. Poor Zegedine
found it so among the Turks.

Ver. 27. But to the land that they desire to return] Heb. which they lift up
their soul to, quam avent totaque anima expetunt, and ad quam sum anhelant:
they shall dye in banishment. So they that are once shut out of heaven, must
for ever abide in hell (would they never so fain get out) with dragons and
devils.

Ver. 28. Is this Coniah a despised broken Idol?] Is he not? Interrogatio
pathetica.
who would ever have thought to have seen a King of Judah so little set by,
like some old picture or inglorious trunk?

A vessel in which is no pleasure] that is (by a modest Periphrasis) a
close-stool, or pispot, so Hos. 8.8.

He and his seed] If any he had, or shall have in his captivity.

Ver. 29. O earth, earth, earth, hear the Word of the Lord] Hear this
irrevocable decree of mine, and this ensuing dreadful denunciation, which I
cannot get this stupid and incredulous people to believe. His trebbling of the
word is as Ezekiel. 21. 27. for more assurance. Some sense it thus, O Coniah, thou
who art earth by creation, earth by generation, and earth by resolution, hear
and give ear, be not proud; for the Lord has spoken it, as chap. 13.15.

Ver. 30. Write ye this man childlesse] As to succession in the royal dignity,
as well as to success in his reign. The Septuagint render it, a man abdic^ted
or prescribed. This God would have to be written: that is to be put upon
public record, for the use of Posterity. Ariri i. e. orbus vol solus, sicut in
deserto myrica. Fuller.
Our Chronicles tell us of John Dudley that great Duke of Northumberland, in
King Edward the sixths days, (who endeavored by all means to engrand his
posterity, reaching at the Crown also, which cost him his head) that though he
had six sons, all men, all married, yet none of them left any issue behind
them. Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, etc. Serve the Lord with fear, etc.

CHAP. XXIII.
Ver. 1. VVOe to the Pastors] i. e. To the Rulers and chieftaines, whether in
the State or Church: woe to the wicked of both sorts; and why?

They destroy and scatter the sheep of my Pasture] So he calls the people how
bad soever, because of the covenant with their fathers.

Ver. 2. Against the Pastors] Impostors, rather.

That feed my people] Or, that feed upon my people, rather: attonsioni gregis
potius quam attentioni consulentes, more minding gain then godliness.

Ye have scattered my flock] And worried them, as so many evening wolves, Zeph.
3.3. grievous, or fat wolves, Act. 20.29. See the Notes there.

Behold I will visit upon you] Ludit in voce visitare: I will visit you in
another sense, for your not visiting my people according to your duty, Ezekiel.
34.4, 6, 8.

Ver. 3. And I will gather the remnant of my flock] I will bring them back from
Babylon, but especially from out of this present evil world, into the bosom of
my Church, by Christ the Archshepherd: and by such undershepherds, as he shall
make use of to that purpose, Ephesians. 4.11.

And they shall be fruitful and encrease] Gignendo gentes, by begetting the
Gentiles unto Christ, through the preaching of the Gospel.

Ver. 4. And I will set up Shepherds over them] Pastors after mine own heart:
such as were Zorobabel, Ezra, Nehemiah, Jehoshua the High Priest, Hagge^,
Zachary, Malachy, etc. Christian Princes and Pastors under the Gospel, but
especially Christ the chief Shepherd and Bishop of our souls: who is therefore
here promised, ver. 5, 6. for the comfort of Gods Elect, who might well be
troubled at that former dreadful denunciation, chap. 22.29, 30.

And they shall fear no more] But enjoy spiritual security, and be of an
invincible courage.

Bern.
Neither shall they be lacking] Christ the good shepherd will see to that, Joh.
10.28, 29. his undershepherds also, (whose Motto is Praesis ut prosis) will
have a care.

Ver. 5. I will raise to David a righteous branch] Who shall raise up the
Tabernacle of David that is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof, Am.
9.11. who shall also sit upon the throne of his Father David, and of his
Kingdom there shall be no end. Luke 1.32, 33. Annon hoc probe sarcitur, etc.
Is not this a good amends for that which is to befall Coniah and his posterity
put beside the Kingdom? Of Christ the righteous branch, see Isa. 11.1. and
chap. 4.2. Zach. 3.8. See the Notes. Vocat Scriptura nomen Messiae Jehova
Tsidkenu, quia erit Med^ator Deus, per cujus manu^ c^nsecuturi sumus justitiam
a Deo ipso, inquit Rabb^nus quidam in lib. Ikharim.


Ver. 6. This is the name whereby he shall be called The Lord Our
righteousnesse] Jehovah Tsidkenu. This is a most mellifluous and sweet name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, importing his Godhead: as the righteous Branch of David,
ver. 5. did his manhood: and besides assuring us, that as he has for us
fulfilled all righteousness, Mat. 3.15. so he is by God made unto us
righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. and that we are become the righteousness of God
in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. This one Name of Christ, is a strong tower, Prove. 18.10.
it is such as will answer all our doubts and objections, were they never so
many, had we but skill to spell all the letters in it. Cyprian was wont to
comfort his friends thus, Veniet Antichristus, sed superveniet Christus;
Antichrist will come, but then Christ will be at the heels of him. We may well
comfort our selves against all evils and enemies with this consideration,
Christ is Jehovah our righteousness. God has laid help on one that is mighty:
and he came to bring in everlasting righteousness, Dan. 9.24. Why then should
we fear in the days of evil, when the iniquities of our heels shall compass
us about? Psalm. 49.5. Domine Satan, says Luther somewhere, nihil me movent
minae and terrores tui; Luth. Tom. 4. fol. 55. A.
est enim unus qui vocatur Jehovah justitia nostra, in quem credo: Is legem
abrogavit, peccatum damnavit, mortem abolevit, infernum destruxit, estque O
Satan, Satan tuus: that is, You, Sir Satan, your menaces and terrors trouble
me not. For why? there is one, whose name is called The Lord our Righteousness,
on whom I believe. He it is who has abrogated the Law, condemned sin,
abolished death, destroyed hell, and is a Satan to thee, O Satan. Surely this
brave saying of Luther may well be reckoned among such of his sentences, as a
man would fetch, rather then be without them, upon his knees from Rome, or
Jerusalem.

Ver. 7. Therefore behold the days come] See chap. 16.14.

Ver. 8. But the Lord liveth] See chap. 16.15.

Ver. 9. My heart within me is broken] Vtitur exordiolo pathetico and Tragico
prorsus: Being to inveigh against the Priests and false Prophets, those great
corrupters of the people, he uses this pathetical preface, Cordicitus and
medullitus doleo, I am grieved to the very heart, etc.

All my bones shake] Heb. hover or flutter, as birds do: Totus contremisco.
they shake and shudder with extreme fear and horror.

I am like a drunken man] Totus perturbatus sum, I am not my self: not able to
stand high-lone.

Because of the Lord] Through zeal of his glory.

And because of the words of his holinesse] His holy words so shamefully
slighted: his dreadful threats especially.

Ver. 10. For the land is full of adulterers] It is even become a great
brothelhouse, as sometimes Cyprus was: and as Rome is now said to be; -- tota
est jam Roma lupanar.

For because of swearing (or, cursing) the land mourneth] Swearers and cursers
then are public enemies, traitors to the State. The Jews observe that
Beershaba signifies the well of oath, and Beersaba the well of plenty. Sure we
are, that for oaths the land mourns: of which there is such store, as if men,
by an easy mistake of the point, used to draw and drop them, as it were, out
of the well of plenty.

And the pleasant places] Or, pastures or habitations: which being dried up,
seem to mourn: and yet the inhabitants are without all sense of sorrow.

And their course is evil] Naught all over, as we say.

And their force is not right] Not rightly employed: they are not valiant for
the truth, but violent for wrong doing.

Ver. 11. For both Prophet and Priest are profane] What wonder therefore that
the people were so? I have read of a woman who living in professed doubt of the
Godhead, after better illumination and repentance, did often protest, Mrs.
Wards happiness of Paradise.
that the vicious life of a great scholar in that town did conjure up those
damnable doubts in her soul. And of another, that he desired a profane Preacher
to point him out a nearer way to heaven then that he had taught in his Sermons:
for he went not that way himself. Our Savior foretells, Mat. 24. that
iniquity shall abound, love wax cold, etc. And why? Many false Prophets shall
arise.

Yea in my house have I found their wickednesse] Sin is not a little
aggravated, as by the time ( sc. if committed on the Lords day) so by the
place, sc. if done in Gods house, and in his special presence. Unclean glances
or worldly thoughts in hearing, etc. argue a profane heart. Like as it were a
sign the Orthodox party were but weak, if whilst they were at Sermons,
Papists durst come in and put them out.

Ver. 12. As slippery ways in the darknesse] They shall fall without fail:
for they shall neither see their way, nor stand their ground. See Psalm. 35.6.

Ver. 13. And I have seen folly] Heb. insulsity, Folly is as unpleasant to the
intelligent, as unsavory meat is to him that tastes it.

They prophesied in Baal, and caused my people Israel to erre] They fold poison
to the people, (...) Septuag. Lib. 10. in Epic.
as Laertius says Aristotle did ( Epicurus is his witness) having first
wasted his estate.

Ver. 14. I have seen also in the Prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing] Heb.
fedity or fetidity: filthiness, or stench: such as the devil himself, they
say, leaves behind him, going out of a room. It must needs be an horrible
thing when Doctors turn Devils: teaching such impieties, acsi ipse teterrimus
Satan eas ore suo docuiss^^, as if the devil himself with his own mouth had
taught the same. I would shun an heretic, says One, as I would do a devil:
for he is sent on his errand. Seducers certainly act the part of that horrid
Feind: and together with him shall be cast alive into the burning lake, Rev.
19.20.

They commit adultery] As did Eli's sons: and those two stinking goats, Jer.
29.23.

Hom. 3. in Act.
And walk in lyes] Make a trade of it. It was not for nothing that Chrysostom
said of those of his time, Non arbitror inter Sacerdotes, multos esse qui salvi
fient.

They strengthen also the hands of evil doers] Roborunt ma^us malignatium:
whilst knowing the Judgment of God (that they which commit such things are
worthy of death) they not only do the same, but (both by their false doctrine,
and loose living) they countenance those that do them, Romans 1.32.

They are all become to me as Sodom] i. e. Paucissimis exceptis, omnes
conscel^rati and inemendabiles: they are all stark naught.

Potabo eos calice malediction pessimae quasi capitibus draconum. Chald. Paraph.
Ver. 15. I will feed them with wormwood] i. e. I will slay them with most
bitter and grievous kinds of deaths: See chap. 8.14. and 9.15.

For from the Prophets of Jerusalem is profaneness gone forth into all the
land] Their place adding two wings to their sin, viz. Example, and Scandal,
whereby it soureth higher and flies much further: See ver. 11.

Ver. 16. Hearken not unto the words of the Prophets] Stop your ears to the^^
enchantments, and seriously decline them as ye would do a serpent in your way,
or poison in your meats.

They make you vain] Or, beguile you: Fair words make fools fain: See Romans
18.18.

Ver. 17. They say still to them that despise me] They promise security to the
impenitent: and flatter people in their sinful and sensual practices. Socinians
set up man's reason: Arminians his free will: Libertines his unruly lusts: and
Papists gratify his senses with their forms and pomp. In their humble
supplication to King James for a toleration, they pleaded for their religion,
as that which was most agreeable to man's nature. Sr. Walther Rawleigh knew what
he said, that were he to choose a religion for sensual delights and licentious
liberty, he would be a Papist: No sin past, but the Pope can pardon it: none to
come, but he could dispense with it. No matter how long they have lived in any
sin (thought the sin against the Holy Ghost) yet Extreme Unction at last will
salve all.

Ver. 18. For who has stood in the Counsel of the Lord?] Quis praeter nos? so
Piscator. Who has if we have not? say those false-prophets; as if they were so
many Angels newly dropped from heaven.

Ver. 19. Behold a whirlwind of the Lord] q. d. Though these flatterers make
all fair weather before you: yet assure your selves, the tempest of Gods wrath,
such as shall never be blown over, is even breaking forth upon them and you
together. Look to it therefore.

Ver. 20. In the latter days ye shall consider it perfectly] All too late ye
shall subscribe to the truth of these threats: which now you take as uttered in
terrorem only, and will not believe till you feel. Sere saviunt Phryges.
Sero inquit Nero. Epimetheus, that after-wit, had too many fellows.

Ver. 21. I have not sent these Prophets] Who have cozened you into the mouth
of destruction, as that old Bethelite did the young Prophet into the mouth of
the Lion.

Yet they ran] They have from me neither mission nor commission: but do all on
their own heads. Observabilis est hic locus contra multos qui body plebem
docendi ^^unus sibi arrogant, cum tamen non sint missi, says Oecolampadius.
This is a notable place against Laypreachers. And, as if he had lived in these
loose times of ours, he thus goes on: In the fourteenth and sixteenth of 1
Cor. order is commanded to be kept: But there are now such, as abide not in
their own Churches, but run into others, where they teach without a calling.
These promte not but hinder the cause of Christ. He is the God of peace: but
they go forth and say Mentiris; Deus amat talem constantiam and fortem
confessionem: sic enim vocant suam praefractam pertinaciam. Thou lie: God
loves such constancy and bold confession of the truth as we hold forth: for so
they call, says he, their stiffness and obstinacy. Besides that, they come not
into the Congregations of unbelievers to convert them to the faith, sed nostras
perplexas reddunt (so that good man proceeds in his complaint on this text)
but they trouble our Churches: like as of old they came to Antioch, and made
disturbance there, Acts 15, etc. Luther also, who lived in the same time with
Oecolampadius, cries out to like purpose, December annis laboratur antequam
Ecclesiolarecte and pie instituta paretur, etc. We are ten or more years, Tom.
oper. 4. fol. 18. A.
says he ere we can settle a small Church, as it should be. And yet when
that is done, there, creeps in some silly Sectary, whose only skill is to rail
against godly Ministers: Is uno momento evertit omnia, And he presently marreth
all. See chap. 14 14.

Ver. 22. But if they had stood in my counsel, etc.] As they vainly vaunt they
do, ver. 18. and that they know more of my mind then any others.

And had caused my people to hear my words] And not their own fancies, or
cunning devised fables, 2 Pet. 1.16.

Then they should have turned them from the evil of their way] Not but that a
godly Preacher may want success, Isa. 49.4. (See the Notes there) and on the
contrary, a bad Minister may be a means of good to others, as the dull
whetstone edgeth iron, and the lifelesse heaven enliveneth other creatures. The
head of a Toad may yield the precious stone Bufonites, and wholesome Sugar be
found in a poisoned cane. Noah's builders were a means to save him and his
family, Virgil. Aeneid. 3.
yet themselves were drowned: so was Palinurus, Aeneas his Pilot in the Poet,
etc. But God usually honors his faithful laborers with some success: and
they can say as Chrysostom does, Si decimus quisque, si unus persuasus fuerit,
ad consolationem abunde sufficit. If but one in ten be converted by our
Ministry, yea if but one in all, it is comfort enough. See James 5. ult.

Ver. 23. Am I a God at hand, and not a far of?] See I not what is done on
earth, which seems further from me? or think ye that you live out of the
reach of my rod, because remote from heaven the habitation of my holiness and
of my glory? Lucan.


Jupiter est quodcunque vides, quocunque move^is. Ver. 24. Can any man hide
himself in secret places] Hide he may God from him self, but not himself from
God: though Atheists are apt to think (as they say the Struthiocamelus does
when he has thrust his head in an hole) that because they see none, therefore
none sees them. Plin.


Do I not fill heaven and earth] See Psalm. 139.3, 5, 7, 11. Isa. 66.1. with the
Notes?

Ver. 25. I have dreamed, I have dreamed] i. e. I have a prophetic revelation
in a dream. Such lying Prophets were the ancient and modern Enthusiasts and
High attainers: Messalanian heretics they were called of old, Anno 371.

Ver. 26. How long shall this be in the hearts, etc.] q. d. Will they never
give over lying to the Holy Ghost (Acts 5 3.) and flying against the light (of
their own consciences) as B^^s do. Nam quod argute commenti sunt, Oecolamp.
haec aiunt ex spiritu se dicere; studio enim suis mendaciis plebi imponunt,
falsumque data opera docent: for they father their falsities upon the spirit of
truth: cozening the credulous multitude. And this they do wittingly, and
uncessantly.

Ver. 27. Which think to cause my people to forget my Name] To drive them to
Atheism, which sometimes creeps in at the back door of a Reformation, by the
slight of Seducers and their cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to
deceive. Our Church is at this day pestered, with Atheists (who first have bin
Seekers, Ranters, Antinomians, Antiscripturists, etc.) and is even dark with
them, as Egypt once was with the Grasshoppers. They seemed to speak with
judgment that said formerly, As Antichristianism decreaseth, so Atheism
prevails: And they seem still not to judge amiss that say, that the Jesuits
are acting vigorously by our Sectaries, to bring in Popery again (quasi
postilimino) upon us. It has been long the opinion and fear of some grave
Divines, that Antichrist before his abolition, shall once again overflow the
whole face of the West, and suppress the whole Protestant Churches: quod Deus
avertat. Take we heed that these Sect-makers make us not forget Gods Name by
their fopperies, as our fathers forgot his Name for Baal.

Ver. 28. The Prophet that has a dream, let him tell a dream] Or, let him tell
it as a dream, and not as a divine revelation; making more of it then the
matter comes to, and Laudans vaenales quas vul obtrudere merces.

What are dreams, ordinarily, but very vanities ( Eccles. 5.7. with Zech.
10.2.) pleasant follies and delusions, the empty bubbles of the mind, children
and tales of fancy, idle and fruitless notions, mere bables? why then should
men make so much of them? why should they tell their Midianitish dreams to
others with so much confidence, as if they were Oracles?

And he that has my Word] So he be sure he has it: and can on good ground say
I believed, therefore have I spoken.

What is the chaff to the wheat? says the Lord;] i. e. What is false doctrine
to true? surely nothing in comparison: you may better set Palea, that is,
Chaff, upon it, then the Pope does upon any thing in the Decrees of his
predecessors that pleases him not. Sall not the whole body of Popery founded,
most part of it, upon Revelations and fained Miracles (think the same of
Rant^rs, Quakers, and some Anabaptists) prove Palea, that is, chaff, hay and
stubble that shall be surely burnt? 1 Cor. 3.11. Some render the text Quid
paleae cum tritico? what has chaff to do with the wheat? as Hos. 14.9. Joh.
2.4. Away with any such mixtures. In the writings of some Sectaries, Sunt bona
mista malis, sunt mala mista bonis.

The speech in the text seems to have been Proverbial; and is not unlike that
of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. and those in humane Authors, Quid scepter
and plectro? Suid.
Qui specillo and gladio? quid lecytho and strophio? quid hyaenae and cani?
quid bovi and delphino? quid cani and balneo? etc. So what communion has faith
and unbelief? zeal and passion. etc. And yet unbelief may be with faith ( Lord,
I believe, help thou mine unbelief, Mar. 9.24.) zeal with passion: yea in young
Christians heat and passion goes sometimes for zeal: and yet it is but chaff;
which when blown away, the heap is little else but wheat, that is, says, zeal,
humility; though we have less pride, passion, presumption. But this by the way
only.

Ver. 29. Is not my Word like a fire?] As it is like solid wheat, wholesome
food, 1 Timothy 6.3. so it is no less li^e fire, that most active Element, called
(...) because it is pure (says One) and fire, because it is fair: It
inlighteneth, enliveneth, warmeth, purges, assimilateth, aspireth, consumes
combustible matter, congregat h^mogenea, segregat heterogenia: so does the Word
when accompanied by the Spirit who is of a fiery nature and of a fiery
operation, Isa. 4.4. Mal. 3.2, Matthew. 3.11. The words that I speak unto you
they are Spirit and thee are life, Job. 6.65. Did not our hearts burn within us
whiles he talked with us by the way, and opened unto us the holy Scriptures?
Luke 24.32. when the word comes home to the heart in the power of it, the
preacher was sent of God: See Gal. 2.8.

And like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces?] i. e. The rockiest hearts
and sturdiest stomachs are tamed and terrified by the Word, when God once takes
them to do. I^ is as his plough to break up their fallow ground: and as his
sword to run them through, Jer. 4 Heb. 4. and to lay them for dead, Romans 7. And
like as the hardest ice is broken with hot waters, as well as with hammers: so
is the hardest heart with the Gospel, as well as with the Law.

Ver 30. Behold I am against those Prophets] Heb. Behold I against, by an angry
Aposiopesis.

That steal my Word every one from his neighbour] That filth it, either by
hiding it from others, as the Popish Doctors do from the common people: or by
wresting it to the defense of their false doctrines, as Marcion the heretic,
whom therefore Tertullian fitly calls Murem Ponticum the rat of Pontus, for
his gnawing and tawing of the Scriptures to bring them to his purpose. Or by a
fraudulent imitating of Gods true Prophets, taking up their parables, and
making use of their expressions, such as are Thus says the Lord; Grace be to
you and peace, etc. Wasps also have their combs as well as Bees: and Apes will
be doing as they see men to do. Or, lastly by causing the people to forget and
lose the good that they had once learned of the true Prophets. This we see
daily done by the cunning fetches and flatteries of the Seducers of our times;
causing many to lose the things that they had wrought 2 John 8.

Ver. 31. That use their tongues] Or abuse them rather, to smoothing and
soothing up people in their sins: lenificant linguas, id est, blando sermon
alliciunt plebem, they flatter and collogue: or tollunt linguam, they sift up
their tongues, viz. by extolling themselves, and speaking magnifically of their
own doing. As one has observed of some Sectaries amongst us, that they often
call upon their hearers to mark; Dulcorantium, mollificantium. False Prophets
sooth and sweeten men.
for it may be they shall hear that which they never heard before: When the
thing is either false, or if true, no more then is ordinarily taught by others,
and which they have stolen out of the writings of others.

And say, He saith] See on ver. 30.

Ver. 32. That cause my people to err by their lies and by their lightnesse]
By their lying discorses and light or lose courses. So Zeph. 3.4. Judge. 9.4. If
these false Prophets had been of a sober grave behavior, the people might have
been with better excuse deluded by them: as Aristotle notes of Eudoxus (and
the same is true of Epic^rus himself as Tully tells us) that he prevailed
much in disputing for pleasure, because he was no voluptuous man himself. But
these in the text were no less lewd then loud liars.

Ver. 33. What is the burden of the Lord?] Ironicum interrogandi genus; thus
they profanely asked by way of scoff or despite, such as he will drive down
their throats again, plaguing them for their profane malignity.

Then shall thou say What burden?] q d. I Will burden you to some purpose, since
ye profanely count and call my Word a burden; you shall suddenly have your
back-burthen of plagues and miseries, for the contempt of it.

I will even forsake you] And then Woe be unto you, Hos. 9.12. you shall be
eased of these burdens and of me together: and that you will find misery enough.
See chap. 12.7. Learn therefore to speak holily and honorably of Gods Word:
left thou hear this Word of his Thou shall never enter into my rest.

Ver. 34. That shall say The burden of the Lord] Nempe per l^dibrium, in
contempt and derision. See 2 Chronicles. 36.16.

Ver. 35. Thus shall ye say] God sets them a form, who otherwise knew not how
to lisp out a syllable of sober language. Loquamur verba Scripturae, says
Peter Ramus, utamur sermon Spiritus Sancti, Let us inure our selves to
Scripture-Expressions.

Ver. 36. For every man's word shall be his burthen] That jear of his
aforementioned, shall lie heavy upon him, and cost him dear; for under the
weight he shall sink, and be crushed in pieces.

Ver. 37. Thus shall thou say to the Prophet] See on ver. 35.

Ver. 38. But since ye say, The burden of the Lord] Since ye accuse me as
unmerciful, my Word as a ponderous burden, and my Messengers as telling you
nothing but terrible things and bloody businesses, which therefore you are
resolved to slight and neglect:

Ver. 39. Therefore behold I even I will utterly forget you] I nunc ergo, lude
pasquillis and putidis dicteriis, says One. Go thy ways now, thou that
think it a goodly thing to gibe and jear at Gods Ministers and their
messages. Consider of this dreadful denunciation, and thereby conceive aright
of the heinousness of thy sin: for God does not use to kill flies upon men's
foreheads with beetles, to threaten heavy punishments for light offenses.

Ver. 40. And I will bring an everlasting reproach upon you] Contempt of the
Word is such an enraging sin, that God cannot easily satisfy himself in saying
what he will do to such as are guilty of it.

CHAP. XXIV.
Ver. 1. THe Lord showed me] By showing as well as by saying, has God ever
signified his mind to his people: by the visible as well as by the audible
Word, as in Sacrifices and Sacraments, for their better confirmation in the
Faith.

And behold two baskets] Dodaim, so called from Dodim Breasts: because these
two baskets resembled two breasts.

Were set before the Temple] Either visionally or else actually there set:
whether presented for first fruits, as Deuteronomy. 26.2. or set to be sold in such a
public place.

Before the Temple] To show that the Jews of both sorts gloried in the same
God: but were differently regarded by him, and accordingly sentenced.

After that Nebuchadnezzar] This then was showed to Jeremy about the beginning
of Zedekiah's reign.

Had carried away captive Jeconiah] Who was therefore and thenceforth called
Jeconiah Asir, 1 Chronicles. 3.16. that is, Jeconiah the Prisoner, He was a wicked
Prince, and therefore written childlesse, and threatened with deportation,
chap. 22. Howbeit, because by the advice of the Prophet Jeremy he submitted to
Nebuchadnezzar, (who carried him away to Babylon, where (say the Rabbines) he
repented, and was therefore at length advanced by Evil-merod^h, as chap. 5^.)
he and his company are here comforted, and pronounced more happy (however it
might seem otherwise) then those that continued still in the land. And this,
say the Hebrews, was not obscurely set forth also by those two baskets of figs:
whereof that which was worst showed best, and the other showed worst till they
came to be tasted. Raban. Hugo. Lyra.


With the Carpenters] Or Craftsmen, 2 King. 24.14, 16.

And Smiths] Heb. Inclosers, that is, say some, Goldsmiths, whose work it is
to set stones in gold. And these, thus carried away, are as a type of such,
says Oecolampadius, as are penitent and patient till the Lord shall turn again
their captivity as the streams in the south.

Ver. 2. One basket had very good figs] Maturas and prae^oquas, ripe and ready
betimes, bursas melle plenas, as one once called such good Figs, purses full of
Honey.

Passerat.
Ficus habet lactis nivei, rutilique saporem
Mellis, and ambrosiae similes cum nectare succos.
The other basket had very naughty figs] Sour and ill-tasted, because blasted,
happily, or worm-eaten, In vit. Dion.
etc. Of the Athenians Plutarch says, that they were all very good, or stark
naught; no middle-men: like as that Country also produces both the most
excellent honey, and the most deadly poison. Sure it is, that non sunt media
coram Deo, neque placet tepiditas, before God every man is either a good tree
yielding good fruit, or an evil tree bearing evil fruit. He that is not with
Christ is against him. He acknowledges not a mediocrity, he detesteth an
indifferency in Religion: hot or cold he wishes men, and threateneth to spue
the lukewarm out out of his mouth, Rev 3.15, 16. The best that can be said of
such Neuter-Passives, is, that which Tacitus says of Galba, Magis extra vitia
quam cum virtutibus, that they are rather not vicious then virtuous; their
goodness is merely negative. The world cries them up for right honest men,
but God decryeth them for naught, stark naught, they may not be endured they
are so naught. See Luke 16.15.

Ver. 3. What see thou Jeremy?] See on chap. 1.11.

The good figs very good] See on ver. 2.

Ver. 4. Again the Word of the Lord] Transitio ad Anagogen: the interpretation
follows, whereby will appear the different judgment made of persons and
things, by God and men.

Ver. 5. Like these good figs] Quas sic dat and arbor and aura, when once God
has made the tree good, the fruit will be good.

So will I acknowledge] Heb. know, that is own, or take special notice of: and
this made the difference.

Whom I have sent out of this place for their good] It is for their good
temporal and eternal that God chastises his children. Jehoiachin was preferred
at length: and as the Jew-Doctours say, converted, as Manasseh had been before
him. Daniel and his associates were set over the Kingdom. The Jews got good
estates and respect in the land of their captivity, Jer. 29.4 Esth. 9. and were
at length sent back with many favors and privileges, etc.

Ver. 6. For I will set mine eyes upon them for good] I will see to their
safety, and provide for their necessities: See Psalm. 34.15. with the Note.

Ver. 7. And I will give them an heart to know me] This was better then all the
rest, sc. a sanctified use of their afflictions. This we should highly prize,
Promissio Evangelica, ut infra. 31. 33.
and pray for.

And they shall be my people] This falling out of lovers shall but be a
renewing of love betwixt us.

For they shall return unto me] God must sometimes whip his people to duty, and
galter them from evil, as well as entice them, ut uvae dulces sint and non
labruscae.

Ver. 8. And as the evil figs] Zedekiah and his subjects, who were looked upon
as the happier, because at home; and derided, likely, Jechoniah and his
concaptives as cowards. Sure it is, that they were not bettered by their
brethrens miseries.

Ver. 9. And I will deliver them] As men throw out naughty figs, rotten apples,
or the like. All the figs were carried out, but in diverse baskets, and for
diverse purposes.

To be a taunt and a curse] As when they were called in scorn by the heathen
Verpi, Apellae, Recutiti, etc. and were noted, as they are still, for a nasty
people.

Ver. 10. And I will send the sword] So chap. 14.15. and 34.17.

CHAP. XXV.
Ver. 1. IN the fourth year of Jehoiakim] See on chap. 1.2. Above twenty years
had Jeremy spent his worthy pains upon them: illi vero ne teruntio quidem
meliores facti sunt, but they were nothing the better: here therefore is their
doom most deservedly denounced.

That was the first year] This first year of Nebuchadnezzar, reigning alone
after his fathers death, fell out part of Jehoiakims third and part of the
fourth, Dan. 1.1.

Ver. 2. Unto all the people of Judah] The circumstances both of time when, and
of persons to whom, is thus set down, for the reason given on ver. 1.

Ver. 3. Rising early and speaking] A diluculo indesinenter: as good husbands
use to do, taking the best times.

Ver. 4. But ye have not hearkened] See chap. 7.24, 26.

Ver. 5. They said Turn ye again] This was the sum of all the Prophets Sermons:
as of the Apostles, Repent and believe the Gospel, Mark. 1.

Ver. 6. And I will do you no hurt] Heb. I will not do evil to you: as else I
must. The Romans honored their Vejoves, that they might not hurt them.

Ver. 7. That ye might provoke me] See chap 7.17, 18.

Ver. 8. Because ye have not heard] i. e. Not heeded them, as chap. 7 19.

Ver. 9. Behold I will send and take] By a secret instinct, as chap. 1.15.

And Nebuchadnezzar my servant] i. e. Mine executioner, the rod of my wrath,
Isa. 10. and the scourge of the world, as Attil^s styled himself.

And against all these Nations round about] Who were so infatuated, that they
did not combine against Nebuchadnezzar, whom the Septuagint called a dove, ver.
38. of this chapter, but he was a vulture rather, and these Nations were as so
many silly doves which save themselves by flight, not fight; and sitting in
their dovecotes, see their nests destroyed, and their young ones killed before
their eyes, never offering to rescue or revenge, as other souls do. So dealt
the old Britons when invaded by the Romans: they joined not their forces
against the common enemy, sed dum singuli pugnabant, Tacitus.
universi vincebantur.

Ver. 10 Moreover I will take from them] See chap. 7.34. and Rev. 18.22.

Ver. 11. And this land shall be a desolation -- seventy yeares] Which
commenced at the deportation of Jeconiah, 2 King. 24.8. See Jer. 29.1, 2, 3.
with Ezekiel. 4.1. and 33.21. Avignon in France was the residence of the Pope for
seventy years: Heyl Cosm. fol. 188.
which time the Romans yet remember till this day by the name of the Babylonian
captivity. Luther, when he first began to stir against the Pope, wrote a book
bearing title De captivitate Babylonica: which when Bugenhagius a Pomeranian
Divine first read, he pronounced it to be the most heretical piece that ever
was written; Scult. Annal.
but afterward having better considered the contents of it, he retracted his
former censure; he told his colleagues that all the world besides was in deep
darkness, and that Luther alone was in the light and in the right, and him he
would follow. So he did, and drew many more with him.

Ver. 12. I will punish the King of Babylon] As had been forethreatned, Isa.
13, and 14, and 21, and 47. and was accomplished, Dan. 5.

Ver. 13. And I will bring upon that L^nd] sc. By Cyrus and his Successors:
who out of the ruins of Babylon built two Cities, C^esiphon and Seleucia.

Ver. 14. For many Nations] The Medes and Persians: together with the rest that
served under them.

And great Kings] Cyrus and Darius especially.

Vtitur demonstratione seu ostent^ divino.
Ver. 15. Take the wine cup of this fury] Or take this smoking wine-cup. A cup
is often put for affliction: and wine for extreme confusion and wrath. Poison in
wine works more furiously then in water. See on Psalm. 75.8.

And cause all the Nations] According to that power which I have put into thine
hands, chap. 1.10. Vengeance is still in readiness for the disobedient, 2 Cor.
10.6. as ready every whit in Gods hand, as in the Ministers mouth, who
threatens it.

Ver. 16. And be moved and be mad] As men that are overcome by some hot and
heady liquour, are mad-drunk.

Because of the sword that I shall send] For it is God who puts the sword in
commission, Jer. 47.6, 7. and there it many times rides circuit, as a Judge in
Scarlet. There are certain seasons, wherein, as the Angel troubled the poole,
so does God the Nations: and commonly when he does it to one, he does it to
more, as here; and 2 Chronicles. 15.5, 6. and as at this day in Europe.

Ver. 17. And made all drink] viz. In vision, and by denunciation.

Ver. 18. To wit in Jerusalem] Judgment begins at Gods house, 1 Pet. 4.17.
See the Note there, and on Mat. 25.41. Sed si in Hierosolymis maneat
scrutinium, quid fiet in Babylone? says an Ancient.

Ver. 19. Pharaoh King of Egypt] Pharaoh Hophra, chap. 44.30. of whom Herodotus
writes that he persuaded himself and boasted, that his Kingdom was so strong
that no god or man could take it from him. Lib. 2.
He was afterward hanged by his own subjects.

The mixed people] That lay scattered in the deserts, and had no certain abode:
Scenitae and Hamaxobii.

And all the Kings of the land of Vz] Jobs country, called by the Greeks
Ausitis.

Ver. 21. Edom and Moab, etc.] By the destruction of all these Nations we may
make a conjecture at the destruction of all the wicked, when Christ shall come
to judgment. All that befalls them in this world, is but as drops of wrath
foreruning the great storm: or as a crack foretokening the fall of the whole
house. Here the leaves only fall upon them as it were, but then the body of the
tree in its full weight to crush them for ever.

Ver. 22. And all the Kings of the Isles] As Cyprus, Rhodes, and the Cyclades,
subdued also by the Babylonian, says Hierom, Rabanus and Vatablus.

Ver: 23. Dedan and Temae and Buz] The Hagarens or Saracens, chap. 49.

And all that are in the utmost corners] Qui attonsi sunt in comam, Roundheads.
See chap. 9.26.

Ver. 24. And all the Kings of Arabia] Petraea.

That dwell in the desert] In Arabia deserta.

Ver. 25. And all the Kings of Zimri] i. e. Of Arabia falix. Lib. 6. cap. 28.
Zamarens Pliny calls them.

Ver. 26. And all the Kingdomes] See on ver. 16.

And the King of Sheshac] i. e. Baltasar, that bezelling kink of Babylon,
whilst he is quaffing in the vessels of Gods house, to the honor of Shac the
Babylonian goddess: whence those feast days were called, (...): Shesac, id est
poculum laetitiae aut vanitat^, vel sericum tuum.
being like the Roman Saturnalia Antichrist also, who has troubled all the
Kingdoms of the earth, shall himself perish together with his Babylon the
great, which has made the Nations drunk with the wine of her fornications.

Ver. 27. Drink ye and be drunk and spew, and fall] Eckius or Eccius (otherwise
by some called Jeccius from his casting or spewing) being nonplus't by
Melancthon, Manlii loc. com. 89.
and well nigh madded, fell to drinking (for his own solace) and drunk himself
to death: so should these do of the cup of Gods wrath, not only till they were
mad-drunk, as ver. 16. dut dead drunk.

Ver. 28. Ye shall certainly drink] See on ver. 15.

Ver. 29. The City that is called by my Name] Periphrasis Hierosolymae
argumentosa.

And should ye be utterly unpunished?] See on ver. 18.

Ye shall not be unpunished] But suffer as surely and as sorely.

Ver. 30. The Lord shall roar from on high] As a lusty Lion having discovered
his prey runs upon it, roaring so horribly that he astonisheth the creatures
and sets them at a stand.

He will mightily roar upon his habitation] Pliny reports of the Lioness,
that she brings forth her whelps dead, and so they remain for the space of
three days, until the Lion coming near to the den where they lie, lifts up
his voice and roareth so fiercely, that presently they revive and rise. The
Lion of the Tribe of Judah will roar to like purpose, at the last day: and does
before, when he pleases, roar terribly upon his enemies, to their utter
amazement, Joel 3.16. Am. 1.2. and 3.8.

He shall give a shout as those that tread the grapes] When they have their
feet in the winepress, and the new liquour in their heads, as one phraseth it.

Ver. 31. For the Lord has a controversy with the Nations] A disceptation,
Disceptatio catholica.
which shows that his revenge to be taken upon them shall be just and lawful.
It shall well appear to be so, at that day of wrath and revelation of the
righteous judgment of God, Romans 2.5.

Ver. 32. Behold evil shall go forth from Nation to Nation] See on ver. 16.

Ver. 33. And the slain of the Lord shall be, etc.] Such an utter destruction
of the wicked is expected by the Jews at the coming of their Messiah: as of all
people under heaven they are the most apt to work themselves into the fools
Paradise of a sublime dotage, being light, aereal, fanatical.

Ver. 34. Howl ye Shepherds] Vlulate, volutate: This is spoken to the
Governors and Grandees: for in public calamities such usually suffer more
then meaner men: the corks swim says one, when the plummets sink. If a tree
have thick and large boughs, it lies more open to lopping.

And ye shall fall like a pleasant vessel] i. e. Irremediably: like as a
Crystal glass or China dish once broken, cannot be pieced again.

Ver. 35. And the shepherds shall have no way to flee] Who had formerly diverse
strongholds. See Am. 2.14.

Ver. 36. For the Lord has spoiled their pastures] i. e. Their Kingdoms and
States; or their Flocks.

Ver. 37. And the peaceable habitations] Heb. The habitations or folds of
peace. The fierce anger of the Lord has unroosted them: their dwellings are
demolished.

Ver. 38. He has forsaken his covert as a Lyon] God has, or as some will, Vt
in praedam involet.
Nebuchadnezzar has: he is come out of Babylon his den, to range about for
prey.

Because of the fierceness of the oppressour] Of, the Dove, say some, who also
tell us that the Chaldees had in their standard this picture of a Dove. But of
that there is no such certainty.

CHAP. XXVI.
Ver. 1. IN the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim] What a sudden change was
here, soon after the death of good Josiah! and was there not the like in
England, after the death of that English Josiah, Edward 6? Within a very few
days of Queen Mary's reign were diverse learned and godly men in sundry parts
committed to prison for Religion, and Mr. Rogers the Protomartyr put to death,
as was that holy Prophet of God Vriah the son of Shemajah of Kiriathjearim not
many weeks before Jeremiah was apprehended and questioned for his life, as is
here related, his adversaries being pricked on by pride and malice.

Ver. 2. Diminish not a word] Or detract not ought, viz. for fear or favor,
left I confound thee before them, chap. 1.17. See there, haec instar speculi
omnium temporum Pastoribus inspicienda sunt: here is a Mirror for Ministers.

Ver. 3. That I may repent me of the evil -- because of the evil] Flagitium and
flagellum sicut acus and filum, evil of sin produces evil of pain. See chap.
4.4, 6.

Ver. 4. If ye will not hearken unto me] A conditional menace: the contrary
promise whereunto see ver. 13. And this was the sum of all Jeremyes sermons.

Ver. 5. Both rising early and sending them] See chap. 7.13. and 11.7. and 25.3.

Ver. 6. Then will I make this house like Shiloh] This same threat, Jeremiah
had uttered in good Josiah's days, chap. 7. and no harm ensued. Now, tempora
mutantur, truth breeds hatred: and the Prophet is in danger for discharging
his conscience, to be murdered: as were Rogers, Bradford, Taylour, and other
famous Preachers in those dog-dayes of Queen Mary.

Verbum Domini parit crucem. Oecol.
Ver. 7. So the Priests and the Prophets] Like unto these Prophets were the
Scribes and the Lawyers in Christ's time.

Ver. 8. That the Priests and the Prophets, etc.] So they dealt by Steven, Act.
7. by Arnulph, an excellent Preacher of the truth according to godliness at
Rome, Anno Domini 1125. in the time of Pope Honoriur the second. Hic clericorum
infidiis necatur. Func. Chronol. ex Platina.
This good man was put to death by the instigation of the Clergy, against whose
avarice, pride and luxury he bitterly inveighed, and was therefore much
favored by the Roman Nobility: as was likewise Wickclife by the English, and
Hus by the Bohemian: but the envious Priests wrought their ruin.

Ver. 9. Why have thou Prophesied in the Name of the Lord] Who doubtless has
not sent thee on this errand, but thou speak it of thine own head, and shall
dearly answer it.

And all the people were gathered] That many headed multitude, that -- neutrum
modo, was modo vulgus. See ver. 16.

Ver. 10. When the Princes of Judah heard those things] Pii viri sunt quibus
doluit populi impietas: good men they were, says Oecolampadius: They might be
so, some of them at least: and it was well done of them here, to pass an
impartial sentence for the innocent Prophet, against the Priests and people.
But Pilate did so for a while, for our Savior: and these Princes soon after
turned Jeremyes cruel enemies, chap. 37.15. for his plain-dealing, chap. 34.

And sat down in the entry of the new gate] The East gate, says the Chaldee
Paraphrast; called the new gate, because repaired by Jotham, 2 King. 15.35.
says Lyra.

Ver. 11. Then spoke the Priests and the Prophets] Against a Priest and a
Prophet; but he had earnestly inveighed against them, chap. 23. and hence the
hatred; as Erasmus told the Duke of Saxony, that Luther had been too busy with
the Popes tripple-crown and with the Priests fat paunches, and was therefore so
generally set against.

Saying This man is worthy to dye] Sic Papicola nostri saeculi: these are the
very words of Popish persecutors.

For he has prophesied against this City] This holy, and therefore (it must be
believed) inviolable City. Novum crimen, C. Caesar, etc. These sinners against
their own souls, traitors also to the State, will neither see their evil
condition nor hear of it from others, as having gall in their cares, as they
say of some kinds of creatures.

Ver. 12. The Lord sent me to prophecy against this house] In this Apology of
the Prophet thus answering for himself with an heroical spirit, five noble
virtues, fit for a Martyr, are by an Expositor well observed. 1. His Prudence
in alleging his divine mission. 2. His Charity in exhorting his enemies to
repent. 3. His Humility in saying, Behold I am in your hand, etc. 4. His
Magnanimity and freedom of speech, in telling them that God would revenge his
death. Lastly, His spiritual security and fearlesnesse of death in so good a
cause, and with so good a conscience.

Ver. 13. Amend your wayes] Fall out with your faults, and not with your
friends. See chap. 7.3.

And the Lord will repent him of the evil] This he often inculcateth. Ideo
minatur Deus ut non puniat: See chap. 18.8.

Ver. 14. As for me, behold I am in your hand] See here how God gave his holy
Prophet a mouth and wisdom, such as his adversaries were not able to resist.
The like he did to other of his Martyrs and Confessors, as were easy to
instance. If the Queen will give me life, I will thank her: if she will banish
me, I will thank her: Act. and Mon. 1462.
if she will burn me, I will thank her, etc. said Bradford to Creswel offering
to intercede for him.

To do with me as seems good and meet unto you] But this I can safely say,
Non omnis moriar: all that ye can do, is, to kill the body: kill me you may,
but hurt me you cannot. Life in Gods displeasure is worse then death: Eutipid.
in Aul de.
I am not of their mind who say -- (...):

Better live basely, then dye bravely. Fax^t Deus ut quilibet nostrum epilogum
habeat galeatum: God grant that whether our death be a burnt offering of
Martyrdom, or a peace offering of a natural death, it may be a
free-will-offering, a sweet sacrifice to the Lord.

Ver. 15. Ye shall surely bring innocent blood, etc.] So Mr. Rogers our
Protomartyr in Queen Maryes days; If God, said he, look not mercifully upon
England, the seeds of utter destruction are sown in it already by these
hypocritical tyrants, Act. and Mon.
and Antichristian prelates, double traitors to their native country.

Ver. 16. Then said the Princes and all the people] The Mobile vulgus. See on
ver. 9. The good Prophet is acquitted, as Athanasius afterward was often: for
if to be accused were enough to make a man guilty, none should be innocent.

Ver. 17. Then rose up certain of the Elders] V^ri illi admodum venerabiles
erant, says Oecolampadius, these were very worthy men, whether Princes or
pleaders, well read in the Annals of the times, as great men ought to be.

Ver. 18. Micah the Morashite] See on Mic. 1.1.

Zion shall be plowed like a field] See Mic. 3.12.

Ver. 19. Did Hezekiah King of Judah] Laudable examples are to be remembered:
and as occasion requires, imitated. That was a very good one of Constantine
the Great, when the Arrians brought accusations against the Orthodox Bishops,
as here the false Prophets did against Jeremy, he burnt them and said, These
accusations will have proper hearing at the last day of judgment. Sozomen.


Ver. 20. And there was also a man] This seems to be the plea of the adverse
party producing an example opposite to the former; and showing what the way was
now, whatever it had been heretofore: New Lords, new Laws.

According to all the words of Jeremiah] Whose Contemporary he was, and his
memory was yet fresh bleeding.

Ver. 21. And when Jehoiakim] This Tiger laid hold with his teeth on all the
excellent spirits of the times: See chap. 36.26.

He was afraid and fled] Not out of timorousness, but prudence. Tertullian was
too rigid in condemning all kind of flight in times of persecution. God has
not made his people as standing but marks to be shot at, etc. See Mat. 10.23.

Ver. 22. And Jehoiakim sent men into Egypt] Where he might have any thing: for
he was Pharaohs feudatary and vassal.

Ver. 23. And they fet forth Vriab out of Egypt] As they did here Sir John
Cheek out of the Low Countries, and frightened him into a Recantation. Not so
this Vriah.

And they fet forth Vriah out of Egypt] En collusio Principum mundi in
parricidio.

Who slew him with the sword] Without all law, right, or reason. So John
Baptist was murdered, as if God had been nothing aware of him, said that
Martyr. But Jehojakim got as little by this, as he did afterward by burning
Jeremy's Book or as Vespasian afterward did by banishing all the Philosophers
of his time, because they spoke boldly against his vices and tyranny.

Ver. 24. Nevertheless the hand of Ahikam] Who had been one of Josiah's
Councillors, 2 King. 22.12. By this man's authority and help Jeremiah was
delivered: and God rewarded him in his son Gedaliah made Governor of the Land,
2 Kings 25.22.

CHAP. XXVII.
Ver. 1. IN the beginning of the reign of Jehojakim] By the date of this
Prophecy compared with ver. 12. of this Chapter, and chap. 28.1. it should seem
that it lay dormant for fourteen or fifteen years, ere it was recited.

Ver. 2. Make thee bonds and yokes] i. e. Yokes with bonds, such as they are
wont to be fastened with.

A Lapide.
And put them upon thy neck] This was to the Prophet, says the Jesuit,
molesta and probrosa poenitentia, a troublesome and disgraceful penance: but
this was no will worship, say we; and much handsomer then the pennances they
put the people to in Italy: Bee-hive of Rome.
where you may see them go along the streets, says mine Author, with a great
rope about their necks, as if they were dropped down from the Gallows: and
sometimes they wear a Sawsedge or a Swines-pudding in place of a silver or gold
chain, for a sign of their mortification, and that they may merit.

Ver. 3. By the hand of the messengers] i. e. Ambassadors of those
neighboring States, who might come to Zedekiak, to confederate with him
against Nebuchadnezzar's growing greatness: but all in vain, and to their own
ruin. Deus quem destruit dementat. The wicked often run to meet their bane, as
if they were even ambitious of destruction.

Ver. 4. Go tell your Masters] But they would not be warned, and were therefore
ruined. So true is that of an Ancient, Divinum consilium, dum devitatur,
impletur: humana sapientia, dum reluctatur, comprehenditur.

Ver. 5. I have made the earth] And am therefore the great Proprietary and Lord
Paramount of all; to transfer Kingdoms at my pleasure. This, Nebuchadnezzar,
after seven years prentiship served among the beasts of the field, had learned
to acknowledge, Oecolamp.
Dan. 4.

Ver. 6. And now have I given all these lands] Nebuchadnezzar shall be Monarch,
contra Gentes. Dicunt nugatores equitasse Nabuchodonosor super Leonem, and
infraenasse Draconem.

Ver. 7. And all Nations shall serve him] All the neighboring Nations, and
some others more remote: but never was any man (...) Universal Monarch: though
some have styled themselves so, as did Sesostris King of Egypt,

Qui Pharios currus regum cervicibus egit. Until the very time of his land
come] The greatest Monarchies had their times and their turns: their rise and
their ruin.

And then many Nations and great Kings shall serve themselves of him] As the
Chaldaeans had served themselves of the Assyrians: so did the Persians of the
Chaldaeans, the Greeks of the Persians, the Romans of the Greeks; the Goths
and Vandals, and now the Turks of the Romans; such an aestuaria vicissitudo
there is in earthly Kingdoms, such a strange uncertainty in all things here
below. Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have
grace whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear, Heb.
12.28. Let us serve Him, and not serve our selves upon him, as self-seekers do.

Ver. 8. And it shall come to pass that the Nation, etc.] It is better then,
to serve a foreign Prince, then to perish by the sword, famine or pestilence.
It should not be grievous to any man to sacrifice all his outward comforts to
the service of his life.

And that will not put their neck under the yoke] The Lord disposes of the
Kingdoms of the Heathens also, though in such a way as may seem to us to be
mere hap-hazard.

That Nation will I punish] By seeking to shun a less mischief, they shall
fall into a greater: if they escape frost, the shall meet with snow.

Ver. 9. Therefore hearken not ye to your Prophets] Whom the devil sets a
work to persuade you otherwise, to your ruin; as he is an old manslayer, and
has his breathing devils abroad, as his agents, such as are here mentioned.

Ver. 10. To remove you far from your Land] So it would prove: and such would
be the event of their false prophecies.

Ver. 11. But the Nations that bring their neck] When God bids us Yoke, it is
best to submit. In all his commands there is so much reason for them, that if
God did not enjoin them, yet it were best, in self-respects, for us to practice
them: since in serving him we shall have the creatures to serve us, etc.

Ver. 12. I spoke also to Zedekiah] See on ver. 1.

Bring your necks under the yoke] Better do so then worse: if ye will not be
active in it, ye shall be passive; and that because ye would not take upon you
the lighter yoke of mine obedience.

-- Deus crudelius urit
Quos videt invitos succubuisse sibi. Tibul. Eleg. 1.

Ver. 13. Why will ye dye, thou and thy people?] Ecquae haec pertinacia? If
thou have no mercy on thy self, yet pity the State which is like to perish by
thy pertinacy. Josephus highly commends Jeconiah for his yielding to go into
captivity, for the safety of the City. Tertullian gives this counsel to
Scapula the Persecutor, If thou will not spare us, yet spare thy self: or if
not thy self, yet thy Country Carthage, which is like to smoke for thy cruelty*
for God is the avenger of all such.

Ver. 14. Therefore hearken not unto the words of the Prophets] Quanta opus
opera, says Oecolampadius: what a business it is to beat men off from fale
Prophets and Seducers? but let the end and the evils they lead to be remembered.
Cavete a Melampygo.

Ver. 15. For they prophesy a lye] When they speak a lie, they speak of their
own, as it is said of their father the devil, Joh 8.44. See chap. 23.21, 22.

Ver. 16. Behold the vessels of the Lords house, etc.] Notorious impudency! but
it has ever been the lot of the Church to be pestered with such frontlesse
rakeshames, who dare affirm things flat opposite to the truth, and flatter men
in their sin to their utter ruin. Those who are of God, can do nothing against
the truth, but for the truth, 2 Cor. 13.8.

Ver. 17. Harken not unto them] Life and death is let in by the ear, Isa.
55.3. Take heed therefore what ye hear.

Serve the King of Babylon] And so long as ye may have liberty of Conscience
upon any reasonable terms, be content: and not, as the bird in the cage, which
because pent up, beats her self.

Ver. 18. Let them make intercession to the Lord of hosts] Let them pray in the
Holy Ghost, by whom they pretend to be inspired: Let us see, what answer. So
Elias called upon the Baalites, to call aloud unto their god: and forasmuch as
he heard them not, the people were satisfied that they were false Prophets: God
will fulfill what he has foretold; but then he looks that his servants should
make intercession. Elias had foretold Ahab that there should be store of rain
after a long drought: but then he went up into Mount Carmel to pray for that
rain. I came for thy prayer, said the Angel to Daniel. Gods Prophets are his
favorites, and may have any thing of him.

Ver. 19. Concerning the sea, and concerning the pillars, etc.] Of these see 1
King. 7.15, 23, 27.

And concerning the residue of the vessels] All the goodly plate, whether
sacred or profane, that the moderation of the Conqueror had lest in the City.

Ver. 20. Which Nebuchadnezzar -- took not] See on ver. 19.

Diod.
Ver. 21. Until the day that I visit them] Till by my providence I appoint a
great part of them to be brought back again, and to be new consecrated to my
service, Ezr. 1.7. and 7.19.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Ver. 1. ANd it came to pass the same year] sc. Wherein Jermiah spoke to
Zedekiah and the Priests, cap. 27 12.

In the beginning] In his first year; dividing his reign into three parts.

That Hananiah the son of Azur the Prophet] i. e. The pretended Prophet. Dictum
(...). A Priest he seems to have been by his Country Gibeon, Josh. 21.13, 17.
and a Prophet he takes upon him to be, preaches pleasing things through
flattery, and for filthy lucre, likely. He saw how ill Vriah and Jeremy had
sped by telling the truth: He resolves therefore upon another course. These
false Prophets would ever with the Squiril, build and have their holes open to
the Sunny-side: ever keep in with the Princes, and please the people.

Ver. 2. Thus speaks the Lord of H^sts, the God of Israel] Thus this wretch
makes over-bold with that Nomen Majesta^ivum, holy and reverend Name of God:
whom he entileth also to his falsities with singular impudence, that he may
pass for a Prophet of the Lord, when as the root of the matter was not in him.

Ver. 3. Within two full years] Jeremy had said seventy: Hananiah (a man of
prime authority, some say High Priest) within two years. This was some trial to
good Jeremy to be thus confronted. Jeremy's discourse was so much the more
distasted, because he not only contradicted Hananiah and his accomplices, but
also persuaded Zedekiah to submit to the King of Babylon, and afterward to
yield up the City: when as the Prophet Isay, not long before, had dissuaded
Hezekiah from so doing.

Ver. 5. Then the Prophet Jeremiah said] Without gall or guilt. Like the waters
of Siloah at the foot of Sion. Isa. 8 6. which run softly; he made but small
noise, though he heard great words, and full of falsehood.

In the presence of the Priests, and in the presence of the people] Publicly
he took him up (though mildly:) because he had publicly offended. See Gal.
2.14. 1 Timothy 5.20.

Ver. 6. Amen, the Lord so do] q. d. I wish it may be so as thou say, with
all my heart, if God be so pleased. But I know that this is magis optabile quam
opinabile, rather to be wished then hoped for. I could wish for my poor
Countrymens sake, to be found a false Prophet: but I see little likelihood of
it.

Ver. 7. Nevertheless hear thou now] Audi quaeso. Hear I pray thee: soft
words, but hard arguments. See on Isa. 5.3.

And in the ears of all the People] Whom I desire to undeceive, and to advise
for the best, whatever they think of me. Let them think what they will, modo
impii silentii non arguar, as Luther once said, so that I be not found guilty
of a sinful silence.

Ver. 8. The Prophets that have been before me, etc.] q.d. Committamus, Anania,
nos tempori, etc. Let Us be judged by our Peers, or rather by our Ancients: It
has been ever usual with true Prophets, to declaim against the sins of the
times, and to proclaim divine vengeance if men amend not: But thou do
nothing less then this: Ergo.

Vide Viscat. (...) S^^ol.
And of evil] Or of famine, that greatest evil of all the three, where it is
extreme.

Ver. 9. The Prophet which prophesies of peace] As thou now do, but time
will confute thee, and event will show thee to be a liar. Two years time will
be soon come up. etc. How many that have taken upon them to predict the very
year and day of the last Judgment, have been thus confuted and confounded? See
Deuteronomy. 18.22.

Ver. 10. Then Hananiah the Prophet took the yoke from off the Prophet
Jeremiah's neck and brake it] This was a most insolent and desperate fact in
Hananiah (but nihil est audacius illis Deprensis) and a most dangerous
temptation to the people to believe his prophesying. Such another bold beacham
was Nestorius the heretic; Aud^x erat, says Zanchy, and magnae loquentiae,
qua unica fretus nihil non audebat, and quidom saepenumero foeliciter quod
volebat, obtinebat: That is, bold he was and big-spoken; trusting whereunto, he
durst attempt any thing; and too too often he effected also that which he
attempted; so that he seduced for a while the good Emperor Theodosius, and
caused him to eject Cyril an Orthodox Bishop; Zanch. Miscell. epist. dedic.
whom afterward, upon better consideration, he restored again to his place
with greater honor; and condemned that hypocrite and heretic Nestorius: of
whom what became afterward I wot not: but Hananiah died, as he well deserved,
for his thus daring to fight against God.

Ver. 11. And Hananiah spoke in the presence of all the people] This was
Prophet-like indeed; first to teach by a sign, and then to show the sense of
it: But what makes a parable in a fools mouth? Prove. 26.7. Excellent speech
becomes not a fool, Prove. 17.7. The people of Rome swear to Carbo that they
would not believe him though he swear: so should this people have dealt by
Hananiah.

And the Prophet went his way] As weary and sorry to hear and see such gross
illusions: haud dubium factus ridiculo omni populo praesenti, being well
laughed at, Oecolamp.
no doubt, by the seduced people: but he had been well inured to bear their
buffoneries; besides that, the bird in his bosom sang sweetly. He went his way,
Conscia men's recti famae mendacia r^det.
says One, as shunning contention, and providing for edification, which is not
attained to by brawling and bitterness.

Ver, 12. After that Hananiah had broken the yoke] Which he looked upon as an
eyesore while it was whole: and a real contradiction to his false predictions.

Ver. 13. Thou have broken the yokes of wood] That were weaker and lighter;

-- nunc graviora feres. But thou shall make for them yokes of Iron] Thou,
Jeremy shall, for a type of a cruel, hard and strong bondage. Bonfinius writes
of the Hungarians, Hungar. rer. decad. 4. l. 9.
that they are not to be handled gently, or kindly dealt with: sed virga ferrea
in obsequo continenendes esse, but kept in order with a rod of Iron. Such were
these refractory Jews; but they had enough of it ere God had done with them.

Ver. 14. For thus says the Lord of hosts] Here were right words (not as ver.
2. in labris nata, non in fibris) and therefore very forcible, Job 6.25.

I have put a yoke of Iron] See on ver. 13.

And have given him the beasts] All shall be his: and he shall sovereign it
over all, as the Lion does over the beasts of the field.

Ver. 15. Thou make this people to trust in a lye] Who loved to have it so,
chap. 6. ult. and were therefore justly left to obduration and horrible
destruction.

Ver. 16. Behold I will cast thee] I will shortly lay thee low enough together
with thy lordly looks, as D. Tailor Martyr once told Gardener Bishop of
Winchester, who reviled him, and threatened him.

This year shall thou dye] Than which thou had better do any thing.

Ver. 17. So Hananiah dyed] Two months after this prediction, ver. 1. yet the
people relented not, but persisted in their obstinacy to the end. Such a sward
or rather hoof is grown over some men's hearts, as neither Ministry, nor misery,
nor miracle, nor mercy can possibly mollify.

CHAP. XXIX.
Ver. 1. NOw these are the words of the Letter] Heb. of the book. It is taken
for any manner of writing, whether longer, as a book; or shorter, as a letter,
an Epistle, cujus ornamentum est ornamentis carere, says Politian: the two
chief commendations whereof, say others, are shortness, and plainness: Here
we have both, and should therefore highly prize it: not as Apocryphal Baruch's
letter: but as parcel of holy Writ, worthy of all acceptance.

Which were carried away captive] And longed for deliverance: but are advised
to have patience, and not to antedate the promises, which, in their due time
should be accomplished. As till then obediendum est etiam dyscolis; obedience
must be yielded to the Babylonians (now their Masters) and not only to the good
and gentle, but also to the froward: For this is thank-worthy, etc. 1 Pet. 2.18.

Ver. 2. After that Jeconiah the King, and the Queen and the Eunuches] Angusta
and Eunuchi. These Eunuchs were Chamberlains to Queens; but not always so
bold with them as Stephen the Persian presumed to be with the Queen Mother of
the Emperor Justinian the second, Func.
quam flagellis sicuti servam castigavit. See chap. 24.1.

Ver. 3. By the hand of Elasah the son of Shaphan, etc.] Zedekiak having heard
by Hananiah the Prophet, that within two full years Jeconiah and the captives
should come back to Jerusalem; and knowing that if that should be so, he must
give place, and part with his royal dignity: sends an Embassage to
Nebuchadnezzar to show his obsequiousness; Calvin.
and is content that his messengers should carry Jeremiah's letters (of whom
happily he had a better conceit after the death of Hananiah) to those of the
captivity, to persuade them to live quietly in Babylon, and not yet to think of
returning to his disturbance.

Ver. 4. Thus says the Lord of hosts] It was God then that dictated this
letter to the Prophet: neither is it of private, that is, of humane
interpretation, but the holy man wrote it, as he was moved thereunto by the Holy
Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.20.21.

Ver. 5. Build ye houses and dwell in them] Mitigate the extremity of your
captivity (which is likely to be long) by all honest means. Levius fit
patientia Quicquid corrigere est nefas. Patience, as a paring-knile, cutteth
the cross less and less, till it comes to nothing. It teaches a man, in
case he cannot bring his estate to his mind, to bring his mind to his estate,
and that is as well: but Impotienes quisque his affligitur. The bullock under
the yoke gets nothing by wriggling, but galling.

Ver. 6. Take ye wives and beget sons] First get ye houses and gardens, and
then take wives. So in the last Commandment, house, is set before wife: and
nature teaches the birds to build their nests, before they come together for
copulation.

Ver. 7. And seek the peace of the City] Do not tumultuate or seek to break
prison; as those seedsmen of sedition your false Prophets would persuade you:
but frame to a peaceable and patient behavior. In returning and rest shall ye
be saved, in quietness and in confidence shall be your strength, Isa. 30.15.

And pray unto God for it] sc. That in it you may lead a peaceable and quiet
life in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2. Christians should improve their
writing-moneths upon the King of Saints, to pray for Kings and all that are in
authority, though to them they had been Tyrants: since it seems good to God
that they should live under them. The Dutch have a Proverb,

Arbor honoretur, cujus nos umbra tuetur. Ver. 8. Let not your Prophets and
your diviners] Your deceivers indeed, which were also in Babylon as well as at
Jerusalem: for all places are full of them, and so is hell too. But beware of
these dogs, beware of evil workers, Philip. 3.2. three of them, the most
active, no doubt, are here noted and noticed, ver. 21.23. with a charge in this
text, Ne committitote ut decipiant vos, See that they deceive you not. The body
should be kept, say Physicians, in habitu athletico, in a vigorous and healthy
temper, able to oppose infections. Think the same of the soul.

Neither harken to your dreams] Yours, because you itch after them, listen to
them, pray dearly for them.

Ver. 9. For they prophecy falsely] As chap. 27.15. and 28.15.

Ver. 10. For thus says the Lord] Or, But thus has the Lord said, whatever
these Impostors say to the contrary. Set truth against falsehood, and it will
silence it: like as if a lamp be hanged over a ditch where Frogs are croaking,
they are forthwith hushed and made quiet.

Ver. 11. For I know the thoughts that I think] Gods thoughts run upon his
children (the children of affliction especially) as a fathers do upon his dear
children: Omnis in Ascanio, etc.

To give you an expected end] Heb. an end and expectation, i. e. An end of
evils past, and expectation of better for the future.

Ver. 12. Then shall ye call upon me,] With mind and mouth, with spirit and
speech, as Daniel did, chap. 9.3. and as but few others did, during the
captivity, as is confessed, Dan. 9.13.

And go and pray unto me] Go into your Closets or other Oratories, where you
shall pour out your hearts unto me.

And I will harken unto you] Which shall be a surer seal of my love, then your
return from Babylon.

Ver. 13. When ye shall search for me with all your heart] Not with a piece of
your heart only as do partialists and double-minded men, qui in parabola ovis
capras quaerunt. Sleidan.
Johannes Gropperus of Colen refused a Cardinalship but forsook the Gospel. So
did not Luther, who when he was offered to be Cardinal if he would be quiet,
replied No, not if I might be Pope.

Ver. 14. And I will be found of you] The best (...). See Psalm. 32.6. Isa.
55.6. and 65.1.

And I will gather you] As my scattered Jewels: See chap. 13.7. and 24.6.

Ver. 15. Because ye have said] From the heirs of the Promises, he turns his
speech to others qui praesumendo sperant, and sperando pereunt.

Ver. 16. Know that thus says the Lord] Or, therefore thus says the Lord:
whatever ye say, or your counterfeit Prophets say to the contrary.

Ver. 17. Behold I will send upon them] Chap. 24.10. and 27.8.

And will make them like vile figs] See chap. 24.8.

Ver. 18. And will deliver them to be removed] See chap. 15.4. and 24.9.

Ver. 19. Because they have not harkened.] See chap. 7.23, 26. and 11.7, 8. and
13.11. and 17.23. and 25.4.

Ver. 20. Hear ye therefore] Or, Hear ye also: ye who have lost the fruit of
your afflictions: and are little the better for your being so long in the iron
furnace.

Ver. 21. Thus says the Lord -- of Ahab the son of Koliah] These two (though
not the two Elders that assaulted Susanna, as some have fabled) are singled
out, as Arch-impostors and filthy adulterers, to be exemplarily punished: to
whom also is added Shemaiah the Nehelamite, ver. 24.

And he shall sl^y them before your eyes] Vide autem justam poenam martyrum
diaboli, says Oecolampadius, See here the just punishment of the devils
Martyrs: this evil couple had prophesied, belike, the destruction of Babylon,
bade the Jews put themselves in a posture to return home, promised to conduct
them to Jerusalem, played many lewd prankes besides: and were therefore
worth^ly put to a cruel death by Nebuchadnezzar, in the presence of their
friends and followers.

Ver. 22. And of them shall be taken up a curse] They had blessed themselves,
though the Lord abhorred them: and sought to set up themselves in the hearts of
the people, being Gloriae animalia, popularis aurae vilissima mancipia, (as
Hierom says of Crates the Philosopher) they shall therefore leave their names
for a curse, as Isa. 65.15.

Whom the King of Babylon roasted in the fire] Burnt them with a soft slow fire,
as the Papists did John Hus, Bishop Ridley, and many other innocent Martyrs;
but should do rather those filthy Gergesites, their Monks and Friars of whom
it went for a proverb in Germany, as Luther witnesset^h, Whosoever sees any
one of them, sees the seven deadly sins.

Ver. 23. Because they have committed adultery with their neighbors wives] As
did Elies sons, Scultet- Annal.
1 Samuel 2. those false Prophets also at Jerusalem, chap. 23.14. Hetser the
great Anabaptist in Germany (who yet dyed penitently) and as do still the
Imailers, Turk. hist. 477.
an order of religious men among the Turks (who call them the religious
brothers of love) and the Bramines (successors to the Brachmanni) among the
Indians, who are extremely impure and libidinous; claiming the first nights
lodging of every bride, Heyl. Cosmog.
etc. having nothing of a man but the voice and shape: and yet these are their
Priests.

Even I know and am a witness, says the Lord] Let them carry their villainy
never so cleanly and closely with their Si non cast, saltem caute; yet I know
all; am now an eyewitness, and will be one day a swift witness against them.
Vtinam animadverterent haec Principes, and ille qui non in sede Petri sed in
prostibulo Priapi Lampsaeceni sedens fornicationes tegit, sancta conjugiae
vetat, mera somnia vendit, and Dei oculos claudit, says one.

Ver. 24. Thus shall thou also speak to Chemajah the Nehelamite] Or Dreamer;
dream-wright, Enthusiast: such as were the Messalanian heretics of old, and
some of the same stamp, loaves of the same leven, now-adayes.

Ver. 25. Because thou have sent letters in thy name] Such as Sadoletus a
Popish Bishop sent to Geneva in Calvin's absence, to bring them back again to
the obedience of the Sea of Rome; and as we have many from the Romish factors
sent hither to the seducing of not a few: a subtle and shrewd way of deceiving
the simple.

Act. and Mon.
And to Z^phaniah] The second under the High Priest Seraiah, and successor
likely to that Pashur, chap. 20. who was deposed for some misdemeanour, like as
Dr. Weston was here in Queen Mary's days put by all his Church-dignities, for
being taken in bed with an harlot. Of this Zepha^iah, see 2 Kings 25.18. his
office was to judge of prophecies, and to punish such as he found to be false
Prophets.

And to all the Priests] Who were too too forward of themselves to bandy
against Gods true Prophets, chap. 26.8. and did as little need by letter to be
excited thereunto, Clerks Martyr l. 136.
as Bishop Bonner did to be stirred up to persecute Protestants: and yet to him
were letters sent from King Philip and Queen Mary, complaining that heretics
were not so reformed as they should be, and exhorting him to more diligence,
etc.

Ver. 26. The Lord has made thee Priest instead of Jehoiada the Priest] That
heroical Reformer in the days of Joash, 2 King. 11. Therefore as he did by
Mattan the Baalite, so do thou by Jeremiah the Anathothite. But neither was
Zephaniah Jehoiada, nor Jeremiah Mattan. Shemaiah himself was more like a
Baalite, and better deserved that punishment, which shortly after also befell
him, as was foretold, ver. 32. A hot-spirited man he was, and a boutefeau:
being therefore the more dangerous. He also seemed to himself to be so much the
more holy, by how much the Prophet whom he set against, was more famous for his
holiness.

For every one that is mad] Maniacus, arreptitius, fanaticus: so Gods zealous
servants have always been esteemed by the mad world, ever besides it self in
point of salvation. See 2 King. 9.11. Act. 26.24. Jer. 43.2.

That thou should put him in prison] As chap. 20.2.

Ver. 27. Now therefore why have thou not reproved] Or restrained Jeremiah?
Alas, what had the righteous Prophet done? he taxed their sin, he foretold
their captivity: he deserved it not, he inflicted it not: yet he must smart,
and they are guilty: Zephaniah also is here blamed for his lenity, as bloody
Bonner once was by the rest of the Popish Bishops, who made him their
slaughter-slave.

Ver. 28. For therefore he sent to us in Babylon] And is this all the thank he
has for his friendly counsel? haec est merces mundi.

Ver. 29. And Zephaniah the Priest read this letter] For ill will likely, and
with exprobration: Vbi insignis elucet Dei tutela, says an Interpreter, where
we may see a sweet providence of God, in preserving his Prophet from the rage
and violence of the people so incensed.

Ver. 30. Then came the Word of the Lord] Or, Therefore came, etc. In the five
former verses, we had narrationem causae, Shemajah's crime: In these three last
we have dictionem sententiae, Shemajah's doom.

Ver. 31. Send to all them of the captivity] Send the second time; let not so
good a cause be deser^ed: Vinc^s aliquando pertinax bonitas, Truth will take
place at length.

Because Shemajah has prophesied unto you] He has rewarded evil thereby to
himself, and to his seed after him; his posterity shall rue for it, says
Jeremy, who was irrefracti plane animi orator, a man of an invincible courage,
and might better have been called Doctor resolutus, then was afterward Bacon
the Carmelite.

Ver. 32. Behold I will punish Shemajah -- and his seed] As being part of his
goods, and walking likely in his evil ways.

He shall not have a man to dwell among his people] Viz. At the return from
Babylon: but both he and his shall perish in this banishment; which he
prophesied should be shortly at an end, but shall prove it otherwise. See the
like, Amos 7.17.

Neither shall he see the good] He nor any of his. See the like threatened to
that unbeleeving Prince, 2 King. 7.2.

Because he has taught rebellion against the Lord] So chap. 28.16. See chap.
23.27. Mat. 5.19. To be tuba rebellionis, is no small fault. Luther was so
secundum dici, sed non secundum esse: so may the best be: but let not the sins
of Teachers be teachers of sins, etc.

CHAP. XXX.
Ver. 1. THe Word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord] This Chapter and the
next are Jeremyes the teenth Sermon, as some reckon them, and it is wholly
Consolatory. The Author of it he shows to be the God of all Consolation: and
this the Prophet inculcateth six several times, in the five first verses, pro
majori efficaciae, that it may take the better.

Ver. 2. Write thee all the Words that I have spoken to thee in a book] For the
use of posterity, as Hab. 2.2. and that the consolations may not be forgotten,
as Heb. 12.5.

Vox audita perit: littera scripta manet. Ver. 3. I will bring again the
captivity of Israel and Judah] This promise Oecolampadins thinks was written
in the book in greater letters then the rest: it was fulfilled according to the
letter in carnal Israel sent back by Cyrus (upon Daniels prayer, who understood
by that book here mentioned, that the time of deliverance, Convertam
conversionem. Vulg.
yea the set time was come, Dan. 9 2) but more fully in those Jews inwardly,
Romans 2.29. those Israelites indeed, who are set at liberty by Christ, Joh. 8.
and shall be much more at the last day.

Ver. 4. And these are the words] These are the contents of this precious book:
every leaf, nay line, nay letter whereof, droppeth mirth and mercy.

That the Lord spake] See on ver. 1.

Ver. 5. We have heard a voice of trembling] We were at first in a pitiful
plight, sc. when the City was taken and the Temple burnt (and this is elegantly
here set forth, and in the two next verses) but better times are at hand:
Flebile principium melior fortuna sequetur.

Ver. 6. Ask ye now and see, etc.] Was it ever heard of in this world, that a
male did bear? The Poets indeed fable, that Minerva was born of Jupiters brain:
-- Pictoribus atque poetis Quidlibet audendi fas est.

Wherefore do I see every man] Heb. Every strong or mighty man.

With their hands on their loynes] And not on their weapons.

And all faces turned into palenesse] Through extreme fear, the blood running
to the heart, and the heart fallen into the heels. The Septuagins for palenesse
have the yellew jaundise: the Vulgar gold-yellownesse: Piscator Morbus regius:
the Hebrew properly implies the color of blasted corn, Deuteronomy. 28.22. It
imports that the most stout-hearted warriors should be enervati and
exangues, more parturientium, bloodlesse and spiritlesse, as traveling women.

Ver. 7. Alas, for that day is great] i. e. Troublesome and terrible,
somewhat like the last day, the day of judgment, which is therefore also
called the Great day, because therein the great God will do great things, etc.

It is even the time of Jacobs trouble] Such as never befell him before. Those
very days shall be Affliction: so Mark expresses the last desolation, chap.
13.19. not Afflicted only, but Affliction it self. But though it be the time of
Jacobs troubles, let it be also the time of his trust, for there will be
shortly a day of his Triumph.

But he shall be saved out of it] Not from it, but yet out of it: the Lord
knows how to deliver his, 2 Pet. 2.9. and though Sense say it will not be;
Reason, it cannot be; yet Faith gets above, and says it shall be: I descry
land.

Ver. 8. I will break his yoke from off thy neck] The forementioned misery did
but make way for this mercy, that it might be the more magnified. Let the
Saints but see from what, to what, and by what Jesus Christ has delivered
them; and they cannot but be thankful.

Ver. 9. But they shall serve their Lord their God] Without fear in holiness
and righteousness before him all the days of their lives, Luke 1.74, 75. See
Joh. 8. Romans 8.

And David their King] i. e. Zorobabel of David's line, Hag. 2.23. but
especially Christ the King of Saints, as the Jew-Doctours also expound it.

Whom I will raise up to them] To be Messiah the Prince, Dan. 9.25. Christ the
Lord, Act. 5 31.

Ver. 10. Therefore fear thou not O my servant Jacob] This is Isay-like: and
indeed the Prophet here sets himself verbis consolantissimis, as one says,
with most cordial comforts, to cheer the hearts of Gods poor afflicted.

Ver. 11. For I am with thee] To preserve thee, and to provide for thee, to
support thee, and to supply thee.

Though I make a full end of all Nations] See Isa. 27.7, 8. with the Notes. See
also on chap. 5.10, 18.

But I will correct thee in measure] Heb. According to judgment, not summo
jure and rigida justitia: not as I might; but in mercy, and with moderation.

Aliqui reddunt Mundando non mundabo te, id est non excoquam te exact ad purum
putum.
And will not leave thee altogether unpunished] Heb. Et innocentando non
innocentabo te; in very faithfulness I will afflict thee, that I may be true
to thy soul, and not cruel to thy body.

Ver. 12. Thy bruise is incurable] i. e. Inevitable, by Gods irrevocable
decree. Or, it is incureable in it self; but not to me, who am an Almighty
Physician or Surgeon. See Ezekiel. 37.11. they seemed free among the dead, free
of that company.

Ver. 13. There is none to plead thy cause] Thou art friendlesse.

That thou may be bound up] Thou art helpless.

Ver. 14. All thy lovers have forgotten thee] Thy sweet-hearts, thine Idols,
thy carnal friends, thy Priests, Prophets, riches, pleasures, all these have
given thee the bag as we say; they stand aloof from thy help.

They seek thee not] Sink thou may, or swim, for them: thou art no part of
their care.

For I have wounded thee with the wound of an enemy] As if I cared not where I
hit thee, or how much I hurt thee.

Crudelem medicum intemperans aeger facit.
With the chastisement of a cruel one] So it may seem, and so Job thought,
chap. 30.21. but that was his error. See here what a pass a Saint may be at;
and how deeply he may suffer, when his sins are increased. God, out of love
displeased, may lay upon him and not spare, leave bloody wailes on his back,
etc.

For the multitude of thine iniquities] Because thy sins are many and mighty,
or honey: See Am. 5.12. with the Note.

Ver. 15. Why cryest thou for thine affliction?] And not rather for thy sins?
cry not perii but peccavi: not I am undone, but I have done very foolishly. See
Lam. 3.39, 40.

Ver. 16. Therefore all they that devoured thee, shall be devoured] Or,
nevertheless, or yet all they that devoured thee, etc. q. d. That thou may
experience, that in love I corrected thee, and for thy good, though to thy so
great grief: I will have my penny worths on thine enemies, measuring to them as
they have done to thee.

Ver. 17. For I will restore health] It goes best with the Church when worst
with her enemies. It shall do so much more when all Christ's foes shall be made
his footstool.

Because they called thee an outcast] Concluding so from thine afflictions:
Quam chara dus esset, docuit, quod est victa, quod elocata, quod servata. Cic.
p^o Flacco.
The Jewish Nation, says Tully, show how well God regards them, that have been
so often subdued by the Chaldees, Greeks, Romans, etc. This was but a slender
argument; only God is moved by the enemies insolences and insultations, to
look in mercy the rather upon his poor despised and despited people.

Saying, This is Zion, whom no man seeks after] Illusio ex allusione, this
was a jear by playing upon her name: as if Zion signified a dry or waste place,
Per ludibrium and blasphemam contumeliam.
and therefore not much to be desired. Strabo indeed says as much of Judaea.
And Mount Zion at this day, nihil habet eximium, nihil expetendum, has no
great desireablenesse in it. But certainly Judea was once a land flowing with
milk and honey: and Mount Zion was in no small request. Howsoever none ought by
their bitter taunts to add affliction to the afflicted, but rather to weep with
those that weep: be pitiful, be courteous, 1 Pet. 3.8.

Ver. 18. The captivity of Jacobs tents] i. e. The poor captives that now live
at Babylon, as strangers in tents or huts.

And the City shall be builded upon her own heap] Or hill, sc. in Mount Moriah:
Jerusalem shall be inhabited in Jerusalem, Zech. 12. All this was prolusio
perfectae liberationis in Christo, says Junius, a type and pledge of perfect
deliverance by Christ.

Ver. 19. And out of them shall proceed thanksgiving] Mox ubi fides, inde
prodit and la^ and confessio. Faith is a fruitful grace: the very womb wherein
all the rest are conceived.

Ver. 20. Their children also shall be as aforetime] How easily can the Lord
turn again the captivity of his people, set them statu quo prius? Zach. 10.6.
They shall be as if I had not cast them off. See the Note there.

Ver. 21. And their Nobles shall be of themselves] Forreiners shall no more
domineer over them, but they shall have Governors of their own Nation, who
shall be more tender of them, and careful of their good. Some apply all this
(and well they may) to Jesus Christ who is here called Magnificus, and
Dominator, Christus Fortis ille and G^gat est; Oecol.
his Magnificent or honorable One, and his Ruler: who also is one of them, and
proceeds from amongst them. See Deuteronomy. 18.18.

And I will cause him to draw near, and he shall approach unto me] Either as
God, coequal and coessential with me; or as Mediator: and so he shall approach
unto me by the hypostatical union, (in respect of which he came the nearest
unto God of any that ever was or could) and by the execution of his Priestly
office, wherein he intercedeth for my people and reconcileth them unto me.

For who is this that engaged his heart] Who but my Son Christ durst do it, or
was fit to do it? he is a super-excellent person, as is imported by this
Mi-hu-ze, Who this he?

Ver. 22. And ye shall be my people, and I will be your God] sc. Through
Christ, and by his mediation. As for those that are not in Covenant with God by
Christ; as the devil will one day sweep them, so mean while

Ver. 23. Behold the whirlwind of the Lord goes forth with fury] Sensim sese
conglomerans ac demittens in eorum capita, the vengeance of God follows them
close at heels, till at length they be wherried away by that terrible tempest
at death, Job 27.20.

Ver. 24. The fierce anger of the Lord] See chap. 23.20.

In the latter days ye shall consider it] In the days of the Messiah, but
especially at the end of the world; when all these things shall have their full
accomplishment.

CHAP. XXXI.
Ver. 1. AT the same time] i. e. In the beginning of Zedekiah's reign, as
before, was this word uttered. Or rather, in those latter times forementioned,
chap. 30.24. after the return from Babylon, but especially in the days of the
Messiah. The modern Jews vainly apply it to the coming of their Messiah, quem
tantis etiamnum ululatibus exposcunt, whom they yet expect, but to no purpose.

Ver. 2. The people that were left of the sword] Of Pharaoh's sword, who
pursued them: Fieri dicitur quod tentatur aut intenditur.
and though he smote them not, because the Lord kept him off, yet he is said to
have done it: like as Balac afterward arose and fought against Israel, Josh.
24.9. he had a mind so to have done, but that he was overawed: he did not
indeed because he durst not.

When I went to bring him to rest] i. e. To the land of Canaan, after so long
trouble and travel. I effected that then, though it were held improbable, or
impossible: so I will do this promised reduction of my people from Babylon.

Indaeorum quiritantium verba. Zeg.
Ver. 3. The Lord has appeared of old unto me] This seems to be the peoples
objection: You tell us what was done of old: but these are ancient things, and
little pertaining to us, who are now under a heavy captivity; jam refrixit and
obsoleta videtur Dei beneficentia. Hereunto is answered

Yea I have loved thee with an everlasting love] I am one and the same: I am
Jehovah that change not, whatever thou may think of me, because I seem angry
at thy misdoings.

Therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee] Or, Therefore will I draw
out loving kindness toward thee, as Psalm. 36.10. See the Note there.

Ver. 4. Again I will build thee] See chap. 34.18.

Thou shall he adorned with thy tabrets] All shall be hail and merry with thee
as heretofore: yea thou shall have spiritual joy, which is res severa, severe
and solid; such as does not only smooth the brow, but fill the breast.

Ver. 5. Thou shall yet plant vines] Profunda pax erit: nemo te perterre
faciat. Thou shall have plenty, peace and security.

The planters shall plant them, and shall eat them as common things] i. e.
Shall have Gods good leave and liking so to do. Heb. Shall profane them, i. e.
not abuse them but use them freely, even to an honest affluence: See Levit.
19.23. with the Note.

Ver. 6. The watchmen upon the mount Ephraim] Such as are set to keep those
vineyards, ver. 5.

Shall cry Arise ye, and let us go up to Zion] As the ten tribes first made
defection, so shall they be forwardest in the Reformation. England was the like
alate.

Ver. 7. Shout among the chief of the Nations] Heb. neigh unto the heads of the
Nations ut illa vobis adhinniant, and pariter in Christi fide jubilent, that
they may join joys with you, and help to make up the quire.

Publish ye, and praise ye, and say, O Lord save] The Saints have never so much
matter of praise, but that they may at the same time find cause enough to pray
for more mercy, Psalm. 18.3.

Ver. 8. Behold I will bring them] Here Is a present answer to such a Prayer:
and this promise has its performance chiefly in the Kingdom of Christ, who
will not suffer the least or the weakest of his to miscarry. See Esa. 35.5, 6.

Ver. 9. They shall come with weeping] Prae gandio, inquit, flebunt, they shall
weep for joy: having first soaked themselves in godly sorrow by the spirit of
grace and of supplications (or deprecations) poured upon them, Zach. 12.10.
being sollicitous about their salvation.

And I will make them to walk by the rivers of waters] Heb. To the brooks of
waters, i. e. to the holy ordinances, as Psalm. 23.3.

For I am a Father to Israel] I do all of free grace.

Ephraim is my first-born] And therefore higher then the Kings of the earth,
Psalm. 89.27.

Ver. 10. Hear the Word of the Lord O ye Nations] Hear and bear witness of the
gracious promises that I make to my people: for I would have them noted and
noticed.

Ver. 11. For the Lord has redeemed Jacob] Redemption is a voluminous mercy,
an accumulative blessing.

From the hand of him that was stronger then he] sc. The Chaldean: but
especially from Satan, Matthew. 12.29. Joh. 12.31.

Ver. 12. Therefore they shall come and sing in the height of Zion] i. e. In
the Temple shall they celebrate that singular mercy, in the Congregation of the
faithful.

And shall flow together] i. e. Flock together by troops and caravans: flock
thither by sholes.

To the goodness of the Lord] Or, to the goods of the Lord, such as here
instanced, wheat, wine and oil; whereby also better things are figured: a
confluence of inward and outward mercies is here assured the Saints.

And their soul shall be as a watered garden] Where every good thing comes
forward amain: men's foecundata est rore coelesti. See Isa. 58.11.

And they shall not sorrow any more at all] As those do who have not this
contented godliness, but serve diverse lusts, to their great vexation.

Ver. 13. And make them rejoice from their sorrow] Or, after their sorrow. I
will turn all their sadness into gladness, their sighing into singing, their
tears into triumphs, etc.

Ver. 14. And I will satiate the soul of the Priests with fatnesse] i. e.
Provide liberally for my Ministers, Isa. 66.21. they and theirs shall be well
maintained. Terms taken from the good and fat parts of the Sacrifices, which
were allotted for the Priests.

Ver. 15. A voice was heard in Ramah] It was once, when the poor captives were
carried that way to Babylon, the mothers bitterly bewayling their Luctuosam
foecunditatem. It was also another time, when Herod barbarously butchered the
babes of Bethlehem, Mat. 2.16, 17, 18. But now the case is altered, joy is
restored, etc.

Rachel weeping for her children] Elegans Prosopopeja See the Notes on Mat.
2.18.

Ver. 16. Refrain thy voice from weeping] Take up in time O Rachel, and the
rest: God comfort the abject, 2 Cor. 7.6. he restores comfort to his
mourners, Isa. 57.18.

Ver. 17. And there is hope in the end] Or, for thy posterity. Tribulation
causes patience, and patience experience, and experience hope; lively hope,
such as makes not ashamed, is not disappointed. Spes in fundo. God can
recompense his peoples patience and obedience, in their heirs and executours.

Ver. 18. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself] Heb. hearing I have
heard; his moans and laments have rung in mine ears: So Hos. 14 8. I have
heard him and observed him. This is Gods speech concerning the Christian Church
of the Jews: for in this Sermon we may easily observe a frequent change of
persons, tanquam in opere Dramatico, as in an Interlude.

Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised] i. e. I was chastised to good
purpose, taught my duty, as Psalm. 94.12. See there.

Turn thou me] Give me the whole turn, that I be not as an untamed sturdy
Heifer, or as a cake half baked.

Ver. 19. Surely after that I was turned, I repented] After that I had turned
short again upon my self, as those Penitents, 1 King. 8.47. as Manasseh, the
Publican, Luke 18. and that Prodigal, Luke 15.17.

And after that I was instructed] Post quam ostensum fuerit mihi, Tremel. In
gloss. marginal.

Homer has it often (...), he smot on his thigh. Tully has the like, lib. 3.
Tuscul.


After that I knew my self, or rather was made known to my self, sc. by mine
afflictions sanctified: for Schola crucis, schola lucis: Afflictions are those
pillulae lucis, that serve notably to clear the souls eyesight.

I smot upon my thigh] Sicut mulierculae in puerperio facere solent, says
Luther: as traveling women use to do. It Is a token of greatest grief. See Ezekiel.
21.12.

I was ashamed, yea even confounded] Abashed and abased to the utmost: my
sorrow was deep and downright.

Because I did bear the reproach of my youth] i. e. The brunt and burden of my
reproachful practices in my youth. See Job 13.26. Psalm. 25.7.

Ver. 20. Is Ephraim a dear son? Is he a pleasant child?] q. d. Ey sure is he:
and never more dear and pleasant then when thus beblubberd: like as some faces
appear most oriently beautiful when they are most instampt with sorrow. Heb. Is
he a child of delight? q. d. He may seem to be otherwise by my hard dealing
with him: but so he is assuredly; Behold he whom thou love is sick, Joh. 11.

For since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still] Or so often as
I speak of him, I am mindful still of him. See Isa. 49.14, 16.

Therefore my bowels are troubled for him] Perstrepunt viscera mea, My bowels
work, as that mothers did toward her child, 1 Kings 3.26. as Croesus his dumb
sons did, (...). Herod.
when seeing a fellow ready to kill his Father, he burst out into Kill not King
Croesus. See Hos. 11.8. with the Notes.

Ver. 21. Set thee up way-markes] Statue tibi statuas Mercuriales. q. d. I will
surely bring thee back by the same way thou wentest hence into captivity:
therefore take good notice of the way now, that thou may know it again
another time. This God says to quicken their faith, and to ascertain them of
his love and savor: which is not like the winter-Sun, which casts a goodly
countenance when it shines, but gives little heat and comfort, etc. We must
also set up way-markes, observe how we fell from the Lord, repent and do our
first works.

Set thine heart toward the high-way] This is done says Austin, when God is
sought for Gods sake: sed vix diligitur Jesus propter Jesum, says the same
Father, but this is rearely done.

Ver. 22. How long will thou go about?] Hunting after humane helps, and
(refusing to set thy heart on the right straight way, ver. 21.) fetch a
compass, to thy loss of time and labor?

O thou backsliding daughter] Who wast whilom O virgin of Israel, ver. 21.

For the Lord has created a new thing in the earth] Or, will create: he is
even about it.

Sicut hostis circundat hostem.
A woman shall compass a man] i. e. Say some, the Jews (who are now looked
upon as weak women, and may say Imbelles damae, quid nisi turba sumus?) shall
compass about, and conquer the Chaldees those men of might. Or, as others
sense it, The Church Christian, how weak soever at first it may seem, and
inconsiderable, yet shall be able, by the confession of her faith, to resist
her most potent persecutours, and by faith to overcome them, 1 John 5.4. as she
did in the Apostles, Act. 4. and 5. in the noble army of Martyrs, and
Confessors. The text is generally understood of Christ's wonderful conception
in the womb of his Virgin Mother.

Ver. 23. Thus says the Lord of hosts] Et haec pertinent ad regnum Christi
propriissime, These words also to the end of the Chapter, do most properly
pertain to the Kingdom of Christ, says Oecolamp.

As yet] Or, Yet again, as ver. 5.

The Lord bless thee] This prayer is daily made for the Church, by all her
children.

Ver. 24. Husbandmen and those that go out with flocks] Agricola and pecuarii:
the Citizens of the Church shall be plaine-hearted and profitable persons,
living together in amity, and not jarring, as husbandmen and shepherds often
do; Cain and Abel for instance.

Ver. 25. For I have satiated the weary soul] Or, I will satiate, fill them
with my fullness, so that they shall have enough for their own, and not emulate
others. A good man shall be satisfied from himself, Prove. 14.14. as knowing
within himself that (whatever he has here, little or much) he has in heaven a
better and more enduring substance, Heb. 10.34.

Ver. 26. Upon this I awaked] Out of my prophetike dream.

And my sleep was sweet unto me] i. e. The promises (Christ in the promises)
were sweet unto me: and I was as much refreshed therewith, as with sound sleep
after hard toil or travel.

Ver. 27. I will sow the house of Israel] I will repeople the country: and
raise up many believers to Christ.

Ver. 28. Like as I have watched over them] I have been sedulous and assiduous.

To pluck up and break down, etc.] See chap. 1.10, 11. and 10.12. and 18.7.

So I will watch] I will make them a plentiful amends.

Ver. 29. In those days they shall say no more] There shall be tersius de
operibus Dei judicium, a righter judgment passed upon Gods proceedings. See of
this byword, Ezekiel. 18.2.

Ver. 30. But every one shall dye for his own iniquity] i. e. Every unbeliever
shall: neither shall the Gospel save him.

Ver. 31. I will make a new Covenant] The same for substance with the former
made with Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, and the Israelites in the Wilderness:
but new in respect of the form thereof, the manner of dispensing it, viz. more
clearly, freely, effectually and spiritually now under the Gospel, then in
those days of yore when they saw the Face of God only in that dark glass of
the ceremonies: whereas we with open face, etc. 2 Cor. 3.18.

Ver. 32. Not according to the Covenant] Not so, but a great deal better in
regard of larger measures of the Spirit now poured out upon all flesh: together
with the efficacy thereof in the hearts of Gods Covenanters, who have a
duplicate of Gods Law written within them, ver. 33. Lex jubet, gratia javat:
hence it is an everlasting Covenant, and the fruits of it are sure mercies,
compassions that fail not, as is here set forth.

Ver. 33. I will put my Law in their inward parts] This the Apostle calls the
law in their minds oppsed to the law of their members, Romans 7.23. for the
natural man is inversus decalogus, he is not subject to the Law of God, neither
indeed can be. But God puts into the hearts of his people the counterpant of
his holy Law: he stamps as it were a decalogue upon their spirits, he puts into
them an inward aptness, answering the Law of God without, as the lead
answers the mould, wax the seal, as tally answers tally, or as indenture
indenture.

And I will be their God, and they shall be my people] This promise is divini
mellis alveare, as One calls it, The hive of heavenly honey.

Ver. 34. And they shall teach no more every man his Neighbour] Deest coactie,
Oecolamp.
non deerit cohortatio. Men shall learn with much less ado, because taught of
God, and lively illightened by his Holy Spirit: and quando Christus magister,
quam cito discitur quod docetur? says Agustine, when Christ becomes a man's
Teacher, he must needs be a forwardly Scholar. Some make this to be the sense
of the words, that in Gospel Times the truths of Christ and the knowledge of
the Son of God should be so evident, that men might get more of themselves
without a teacher, then with one in the legal administrations: as Paul also
shows 2 Cor. 3. Not that men should have no need of teaching at all in those
times: for the best know but in part, and must daily grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3.18.

For they shall all know me] All mine Elesh shall know me in some competent
measure: know the Principles, Heb. 6.1, 2. and go on unto perfection: ib.

For I will forgive their iniquities] In heaven, and in their own consciences
also, Zach. 3.4. provided that they put this and the like promises in suit, by
their prayers, Mal. 6.11. Augustine, Mr. Perkins, and Archbishop Usher expired
with crying for mercy and forgiveness.

Ver. 35. Thus says the Lord, which gives the Sun. etc.] For their better
security and setlement; he borrows a comparison from the surest things, Sun,
Sea, etc.

Which divides the sea, when the waves thereof roar] Or who when I trouble the
the sea, the waves thereof roar, but cannot pass their bound which I have set
them. See Isa. 51.15.

Ver. 36. If these ordinances depart from before we] If they alter their
constant course.

Then shall the seed of Israel cease] Then shall the faithful fail, and the
Israelitish nation be utterly abolished.

Ver. 37. If heaven above can be measured] By man: for God measures it with
his span, Isa. 40.12.

And the foundations of the earth be searched out] If any man can dig or dive
to the Center.

Ver. 38. That the City should be built to the Lord] Jerusalem shall be
reedified, the Church eternally reestablished by Christ.

From the tower of Hananeel] Neh. 3.1. and 12.39. Zach. 14.10.

Unto the gate of the corner] 2 Kings 14.13. Zach. 14.10.

Ver. 39. Upon the hill Garth] Versus collem scabiosi, toward the hill of the
scabby, so Tremellius rendereth it: and Junius thinks it was so called because
thither they used to send their Lepers and Lazars. At Geneva, in times of
Popery there they had a in void place certain cottages set up whereunto they
sent their Lepers, wherewith that City then abounded, through the horrible
filthiness that was there in those days committed. But from the year 1535.
wherein they embraced the purity of the Gospel, there has been not above one
Leper seen in that City: So restifieth Matthaeus Cottherius in his exposition
of the Revelation printed at Sedan in France Anno 1625.

And shall compass about to Goath] Alias Golgotha, as some think: but these
places here mentioned, as also those, Zach. 8. and 14. as they were known to
the Ancients, so to us at this day they are unknown. Travelers tell us that
Jerusalem is now a poor obscure place, governed by a Turkish Sanzak; and that
Golgotha or Calvary is in the very midst of the town.

Ver. 40. And the whole valley of the dead bodies] Of Rephaim say some. of
Tophet say others: See on ver. 39.

Shall be holy unto the Lord] So is the holy Catholic Church, the new
Jerusalem which is above especially.

It shall not be plucked up, nor thrown down any more for ever] This cannot be
applied to the earthly Jerusalem, which was plucked up and thrown down by the
Romans once and again: but especially by Aelius Adrianus the Emperor, who laid
the whole Country waste almost, drove the Jews utterly out of it, set a Sow of
white marble over the chief gate of Jerusalem in reproach of their Religion,
and called the City by his own name Aelia, commanding the Jews not once to look
toward it from any tower or hill. It must be therefore meant of tht Church,
which cannot be ruinated.

CHAP. XXXII.
Ver. 1. THe word that came to Jeremiah] What this word was, see ver. 26.

In the tenth year of Zedekiah] The City had now been a year at least besieged:
Notanda est tam diutina populi pertinacia.
and yet these sinners against their own souls went on to do wickedly, and held
the Prophet prisoner, for the faithful discharge of his duty. Full forty years
had he been prophesying to them: and for many years he had foretold this seige,
and the following deportation, but could never be believed: and now he is
imprisoned, but not left destitute by God of prison-comforts; such as made his
Prison a Paradise, and his sleep sweet unto him, as chap. 31.

Ver. 2. And Jeremiah the Prophet was shut up in the Court of the prison] Where
he had some liberty more then at some other times, chap. 37.16, 20, 21. So had
Paul at Rome, Acts 28. Bradford in the Counter, etc. this was a mercy, and so
they esteemed it: Good people were suffered to come about them: and they made
use of that opportunity to do what good they could.

Ver. 3. For Zedekiah had shut him up] He who before had set him at liberty,
and thereby happily hoped to have stopped his mouth: but that might not be.

Behold I will give this City] This holy City, as the false Prophets styled it:
and therefore held this Prophecy little better then Blasphemy.

Ver. 4. And Zedekiah King of Judah shall not escape] As he hoped to have done,
either by his wiles or by his wealth: and accordingly attempted it, but all in
vain.

And he shall speak with him mouth to mouth] This was no small punishment to
Zedekiah, that he must look him in the face from whom he had so persidiously
revolted, even against oath: and hear his taunts, before he felt his fingers.
How then will graceless persons do to stand before the King of Kings, whom
they have so greatly offended at that great day? See Rev. 9.17.

Ver. 5. And there shall he be until I visit him] sc. With death: but the
Prophet uses a general term that might be taken either in good part, or bad,
for his own safety sake.

Ver. 6. The Word of the Lord came unto me, saying] He had Gods Word for his
warrant, and this bore him out against the jeares of the ungodly, who would
easily think it a very simple part in him who prophesied a desolation of the
whole land, to go about to buy land.

Ver. 7. Behold Hanameel the son of Shallum] This Shallum, and Hilkiah the
Father of Jeremiah, were brethren. And it was no less an honor to Hanameel to
have such a kinsman as Jeremy, then afterward it was to Mark to be Barnabas
his sisters son.

Buy thee my field that is in Anathoth] The Priests, though they had no
cornfieldsd, yet they had meadows for their cattle, gardens and orchards in the
suburbs of their Cities: which in some cases they might sell one to another,
till the year of Jubilee howsoever. Some say that if such a field were so sold
to a kinsman, as here, it remained to him for ever. But the possession of the
Levites might at any time be redeemed, Lev. 25.32.

For the right of redemption is thine] See Levit. 25.25, 32. Ruth 3.12. and
4.3, 4.


Ver. 8. So Hanameel my uncles son came to me] God rules and boweth men's wills
and all second causes, according to the good pleasure of his will: he does also
so frame and contemper them among themselves, that there may be an harmony, and
correspondency betwixt them.

Then I knew that this was the Word of the Lord] Or, that it was a business of
God, sc. for the better settling of the faithful, in the assurance of a return
out of captivity.

Ver. 9. And I bought the field] This was bravely done: Live. lib. 26. Plutar.
in Annib. Flor. l. 2. c. 6.
to make a purchase at such a time, when the enemy was seizing upon all. That
Roman is famous in history, who adventured to purchase that field near Rome
wherein Annibal had pitched his camp. Verum eorum res non erant ita deploratae,
but the Romans were nothing near so low at that time, as the Jews were at this.

And weighed him the money] That was the manner of payment in those times. Olim
moneta librabatur. Pater puellae id aurum in dotem viro appendit. Vnde and
nomen marcharum body nobis superest. Zegedin.
Hence the Hebrew Shekel from Shakel to weigh. Genesis 23.16. (our English word
Scale seems to come from it) the Greek (...) ponderare, Exodus 30.13. Mat.
27.9. or of statera for a balance: the Dutch and English Mark comes from a
like Original.

Even seventeen shekels of silver] No great sum, not much above forty
shillings; but it might be as much as the thing was worth, considering the
times especially.

Ver. 10 And I subscribed the evidence] Heb. I wrote in the book and sealed it.
Men love to be upon sure grounds in things temporal: oh that they were as wise
for their souls!

Ver. 11. So I took the evidence of the purchase, both that which was sealed,
etc.] There were then two copies of these contracts and covenants: for
preventing of after-claimes and quarrels.

Ver. 12. And I gave the evidences of the purchase unto Baruch] Who was
Jeremiah's household servant, and his Scribe or Notary: such as was afterward
Paulus Concordiensis to Cyprian.

In the sight of Hanameel, etc.] Here was good husbandry, Fullers Church hist.
which Bishop Andrews was wont to say was good Divinity.

Before all the Jews who sat in the court of the prison] Whither they came,
likely, Act. and Mon. 1457.
to hear the Prophet: as the well affected here did to hear and see the Martyrs
in Queen Maryes days: To Mr. Bradford (by his keepers courtesy) there was
such resort at his lecture and ministration of the Sacrament, that commonly his
chamber was well-nigh filled therewith.

Ver. 13. And I charged Baruch] See on ver. 12.

Ver. 14. That they may continue many dayes] Even beyond the seventy years of
Captivity; and then be produced again.

Ver. 15. Houses and fields and vineyards, etc.] How unlikely soever it may
seem: like as it did to Moses, that the people should eat flesh a month
together. He thought that God had made an unadvised promise, and prays him to
consider that the people were six hundred thousand footmen; and that the flocks
and herds would not suffice them. Jeremy seems to object some such matter in
his following prayer: especially, ver. 25. But God answers them both alike,
viz. that his hand was not waxen short, that nothing was too hard for him, that
he was never non-plust, etc. See ver. 27. with Number. 11.23.

Ver. 16. I prayed unto the Lord, saying] His heart began to boil with
unbelief and carnal reasonings: he therefore sets himself to pray down those
distempers. As a man may sleep out his drunkenness, so he may pray away his
perturbations. It was Jobs restraining of prayer, Eliphaz thought, that made
him so far to forget himself, and to out-lash, chap. 15.4.

Ver. 17. Ah Lord God] This Interjection in the beginning of his prayer
shows, that his heart was greatly grieved and perplexed. Nevertheless he
reigns in his passions, and runs not out into a brawle instead of a prayer
as Jonas did, chap. 4.1. See the Notes there.

Thou have made the heaven and earth by thy great power] Gods Might and mercy
are the good souls Jachin and Boaz, whereon it ever rests. These two does
Jeremy in this prayer of his chiefly plead, and fly to.

And there is nothing too hard for thee] Heb: nothing is hidden from thee, or
wonderful with thee. But for my part, I am at a great stand; neither know I how
to bring both ends together.

Ver. 18. Thou show loving kindnesse] See on ver. 17.

And recompensest the iniquity] Thou art not made all of mercy neither, as
silly folk are apt to conceit it.

Into the bosom of their children] Who have it in full measure; long though it
be first sometimes. Such Parents are parricides.

The Great, the mighty God] Surgit hic oration. Let us learn to represent the
Lord to our selves in prayer under fit notions and attributes: This will both
increase faith, and inflame affection.

Ver. 19. Great in counsel and mighty in work] See on Esaias 9.6. and 28.29.

For thine eyes are upon all the ways of the sons of men] Oh that we could
always look upon these eyes of God, as looking on us! it would be a notable
retentive from evil, and incentive to good.

To give unto every one according to his wayes] Gods providence (which is
nothing else but the carrying on of his decree) is that helm which turns
about the whole ship of the universe.

Ver. 20. Who have set signs and wonders] Psalm, 74.43. and 106.22. and 135.9.

O^os. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Even unto this day] Orosius writes, that the tracks of Pharaohs
charet-wheeles are yet to be seen at the red sea. Fides sit penes Authorem.

And have made thee a name] As Esaias. 63.12. ver. 21, 22, 23. See Psalm. 136.10,
11, 12, etc. and 105.44. Neh. 9.24, 26.

Ver. 24. Behold the mountaines] Raised by the enemies as high as the walls;
that they might fight with the besieged upon even ground.

Ver. 25. And thou have said unto me] Which now I cannot but seriously wonder
at, seeing how things are carried; yet I have obeyed thee without sciscitation.

For the City is given] Or, though the City be given.

Ver. 26. Then came the Word of the Lord] See on ver. 1.

Ver. 27. Behold I am the Lord, the God of all flesh] Yea of the spirits of all
flesh, Number. 16.22. but what can weak flesh do against the Almighty?

Is there any thing too hard for me?] See on ver. 15.17. Still God is careful
to confirm and comfort his Ministers: And here he does Jeremy, much what in his
own words.

Ver. 28. Behold I will give this City] as ver. 3.

Ver. 29. With the houses upon whole roofes] Such was their impudence, and so
far was this now from being as once the holy City. It was become a very
Poneropolis, excessively superstitious: as was afterward Athens, Acts 17.22.

Ver. 30. Have only done evil before me] Have made it their whole practice to
provoke me, like as ver. 23. they are said to have done nothing of all that God
commanded them to do: so crosse-grained they were, and to every good work
reprobate.

Ver. 31. From the day that they built it] Ever since Solomon beautified it,
and made it the Metropolis. Nevertheless Hegesippus was out, in saying that
Jerusalem was so called quasi (...). Solomon made it famous by his
magnificence; but odious, by his idolatry there.

Ver. 32. Because of all the evil] Their omissions, ver. 23. and commissions,
ver. 30. doing evil as they could.

Ver. 33. And they have turned unto me] See chap. 2.27.

Though I taught them] See chap. 7.13. and 25.3. and 26.3.

Ver. 34. In the house which is called by my Name] Templi Periphrasis haec est
emphatica, atque argumentosa.

Ver. 35. And they built] See chap. 7.31. and 19 5.

Ver. 36. And now therefore] Or, yet now notwithstanding, when God thus comes
in with his Non-obstante, what may not he do?

Ver. 37. Behold I will gather them] See chap. 16.15. and 23.3. This was
fulfilled especially in that golden age, and perpetual Jubily of the Gospel,
that began five hundred years after.

Ver. 38. And they shall be my people] See chap. 24.7. and 31.33.

Ver. 39. And I will give them one heart] Oneness or singleness of heart in
my service: and unanimity among themselves until they all come unto that
oneness of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect
man, etc. Ephesians. 4.13.

That they may fear me for ever] This the Jews say (but falsely) a man may do by
the power of nature. See ver. 40. and Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.

Ver. 40. And I will make] See chap. 31.31. Ezekiel. 39.29.

Ver. 41. Yea I will rejoice over them] Volupe mihi erit, it shall be as great
a pleasure to me to bless them, as it can be to them to obey me. See chap.
24.7. Ps. 119.2, 10.

Ver. 42. So will I bring upon them] chap. 29.10. and 31.28.

Ver. 43. And fields shall be bought] For an assurance whereof I have caused
thee to buy this field now.

Ver. 44. Men shall buy fields for money] All shall be statu quo prius in that
great restoration of all things. And with this Chapter ends the Commentary
of Hierom upon Jeremy.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Ver. 1. MOreover the Word of the Lord came unto Jeremiah the second time] To
the same purpose with the former, chap. 32. which is reckoned his fourteenth
Sermon, as this his fifteenth: by both we see, that the Word of God is not
bound, though the Preacher may, 2 Timothy 2.9. It runs and is glorified, is free
and not fettered, 2 These. 3.1.

While he was yet shut up] God forsakes not his Prisoners: but gives them often
extraordinary comforts. Philip Lantgrave of Hesse (being a long time held
prisoner by Charles the fifth, for the defense of the Gospel) was demanded what
upheld him all that time? he answered, Divinas Martyrum consolationes se
sensisse, that he felt in his soul the divine consolations of Martyrs, in whom
as the afflictions of Christ do abound, so do comforts by Christ abound much
more, 2 Cor. 1.5.

Ver. 2. Thus says the Lord the Maker thereof] i. e. Of the promise of
restoration, chap. 32. Or of Jerusalem, which he is said to make in the sense
that he made Moses and Aaron, 1 Samuel 12.6. that is advanced them.

The Lord is his Name] Jehovah the Essectiator: who gives being to all things,
and particularly to his Word.

Ver. 3. Call unto me and I will answer thee] Thou have a promise, and I will
perform it; but so as that thou Jeremy, and such as thou art, Daniel, Ezekiel,
Nehemiah, etc. pray over the promise. The Angel told Daniel, he came for his
prayer-sake, chap. 10.12.

And show thee great and mighty things] Or, abstruse and reserved things. Gods
praying people get to know much of his mind above others: like as John, by
weeping, gat the book opened; and Daniel, by prayer had the Kings secret
revealed unto him in a night vision, Dan. 2.18, 19. Been orasse, est been
studuisse, said Luther; who as he had much communion with God by prayer; so
holy truths were daily more and more made known unto him, he knew not how nor
which way, as himself said.

Ver. 4. Which are thrown down by the mounts] Or Catapults or engines of
demolition, used to batter with: See chap. 32.24.

And by the sword] Or mattocks, sc. after that the enemy had entered the City,
and cried, as Psalm. 137.3. Destruite, ex imis subvertite fundamentis: Down with
it, down with it, even to the ground.

Ver. 5. They come to fight with the Chaldeans] But they fight not in Gods
Name: for he has, for all their wickedness, hid his face from them; therefore
they fight with such sorry success: the houses which they would defend are
filled with their dead carcasses. This whole verse would be hemmed in with a
Parenthesis.

Ver. 6. Behold I will bring it health and cure] Vna eademque manus vulnus
opemque feret. This is Gods usual method and manner of dealing with his people,
Hos. 6.1. as a skilful Physician, primo pungit, deinde ungit.

Enecat, ut possit vivificare Deus. Revelabo. 1. vt ipsa exhibebo.
And I will reveals unto them abundance of peace and truth] Why then feri
Domine, feri: such gold as peace and truth cannot be bought too dear: The
Chaldee here has it Revelabo eis portam poenitentiae, I will reveal unto them
the gate of repentance, and show them how they may walk in the way of peace and
truth.

Ver. 7. And I will cause the captivity of Judah] As chap. 24.5. and 30.3. and
32.44. they shall be as if I had not cast them off, and I will hear them, Zach.
10.6.

Ver. 8. And I will cleanse them from all their iniquity] Which must therefore
needs be a filthy and loathsome thing: else what need cleansing? Christ, for
this cause, came by water and blood.

And I will pardon all their iniquities] This clause expounds the former, and
contains the mother-mercy.

Ver. 9. And it shall be to me a name of joy] i. e. An honor, that I shall
take singular delight in. I^ nomen latum, 1 laetificum.


And they shall fear and tremble for all the goodnesse] Which bodes no good to
them: for the Churches welfare is ever joined with the downfall and destruction
of her enemies.

Ver. 10. Again there shall be heard in this place] God loves to help his
people, when they are forsaken of their hopes.

Ver. 11. The voice of joy] See chap. 7.34. and 16.9.

The voice of them that shall say, Praise the Lord of hosts, for he is good]
This carmen intercalare the Jews sang joyfully at their return from Babylon,
Ezra. 3.11. and the Saints shall have cause to sing throughout all eternity.

And of them that shall bring the sacrifice of praise] Even the calves of their
lips, giving thanks to his name, Heb. 13.15. together with other Evangelical
sacrifices, as contrition, Psalm. 51.17. Confidence, Psalm. 4.5. Almesdeeds, Heb.
13.16. the obedience of faith, Romans 15.16. selfdenial, Romans 12.1, etc. The
Talmudists say, that the sacrifice of praise here mentioned shall continue,
when all other sacrifices are abolished: and this we see verified in the
Christian Church.

Ver. 12. In all the Cities thereof shall be an habitation of Shepherds] i. e.
Several sorts of buildings, yea even sheep-cotes and lodges for Shepherds and
their flocks. All these promises are Antitheta, opposite to those menaces,
chap. 7.34. and 16.9. and 25.10. See chap. 31.24.

Ver. 13. Shall the flocks pass again under the hand of him that tells them]
As shepherds use often to tell their sheep. Christ the great Shepherd and Bishop
of souls, knows all his sheep and calls them by name: he has them ever in
numerato, for he numbreth the stars also. See Joh. 10.3, 11, 12.

Ver. 14 I will perform that good thing] Praestabo verbum istud optimum, as
Tremellius well rendereth it. I will perform that best word or promise, viz.
concerning Christ, in whom all the former and future promises are Yea and Amen
to the glory of God, 2 Cor. 1.20.

Haec dicend^ bono sunt bona verba die. Ver. 15. I will cause the Branch of
righteousnesse] See the same chap. 23.5. This sweet promise concerning Christ
can never be too often repeated. The Greek and German versions have that clause
here also, as there, And a King shall reign and prosper, or understand.

Ver. 16. And this is the name wherewith she shall be called, The Lord is our
righteousnesse] Heb. this is that he shall call her Jehovah our Righteousness:
Called the Church shall be by Christ's own name (which is a very high honor) as
being his Spouse: and making up one mystical body with him. Hence she is called
Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. and the fullness of him who fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.
ult. See chap. 23.6. with Ezekiel. 48.35.

Ver. 17. David shall never want a man] The Man Christ Jesus, Luke 1.32.33.

Ver. 18. Neither shall the Priest -- want a man] The same Man Christ Jesus,
who is (as a King everlasting so) a Priest for ever after the order of
Milchisedech: and his sacrificing of himself once is more then equivalent to
the daily perpetual sacrificing. Whereunto may be added the continuance of an
Evangelical Ministry in the Church to the worlds end, Mat. 28.20. Ephesians. 4.11,
12, 13.

Ver. 19. And the Word of the Lord, etc.] Iterum de perpetuitate regni Christi
tractat and jurat, says Oecolampad. Once more he treats of the perpetuity of
Christ's kingdom, and assures it as by oath.

Ver. 20. If ye can break my Covenant of the day] God has hitherto kept
promise with nights and days, that one shall succeed the other: and will he
not then keep touch with his people?

Ver. 21. Then may also my Covenant] See ver. 17.18. The Poet has somewhat
like this, Jungantur anse saeva sideribus freta,
Et ignis undae, tartaro tristi polus,
Lux alma tenebris, r^scidae nocti dies, etc. Sen. in Octavia.



Ver. 22. As the host of heaven] See Genesis 13.16. and 15.5.

So will I multiply the seed of David] True believers.

And the Levites] godly Ministers. See Psalm. 68.11.

Ver. 23. Moreover] Or Again: Idem repetit, the same thing is repeated, that it
may be the better believed.

Ver. 24. Consider thou not what this people have spoken] This unbelieving,
misgiving, desponding people of mine.

The two families] Judah and Israel habentur pro peripsemate.

Ver. 25. If my Covenant be not with day and night] See on ver. 20. If there be
not a constant intercourse of either.

Ver. 26. Then will I cast away the seed of Jacob] The body of the faithful,
whom he rules by his Word and Spirit, Psalm. 105.1, 6. Romans 9.6. and Gal. 3.16,
17. and 6.16.

And will have mercy on them] This is a complexive promise, and better then
money, answers all things.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Ver. 1. THe Word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord] Still he voucheth his
Author, for more authority sake. And this is held to be his sixteenth Sermon.

And all the Kingdoms of the earth of his dominion] For never any Monarch was
master of the whole earth.

Ver. 2. Go and speak unto Zedekiah] Tell him plainly what shall become of him
and his, though thou be sent to prison for thy plain-dealing.

Ver. 3. And thou shall not escape] Whatever vain hopes thou may nourish, and
although thou think thou have a stake in store, howsoever the world goes
with the rest. See chap. 32.4, 5.

Ver. 4. Yet hear the Word of the Lord] A word of comfort. The Lord is good to
all: and his tender mercies are over all his works, Psalm. 145.9. Out of his
philanthropy he gives this wicked Prince a mitigation of his just punishment,
and a further time to repent: as Rev. 2.21. And possibly this goodness of God
might in time lead him to repentance, as Romans 2.4.

Thou shall not dye by the sword] And yet Josiah his Father (a far better man)
did: so unsearchable are Gods Judgments, and his ways past finding out.

Ver. 5. But thou shall dye in peace] Yet not as his Father Josiah did, in that
peace of God, unless he amended his manners: for he was reckoned among the
naughty figs.

And with the burnings of thy fathers the former Kings] With the usual
solemnities, at the exequies of the better sort of Kings: Nec una fuit
veteribus sepeliendi ratio. See. 2 Chronicles. 16.14. and 21.19. The Jews have a
tradition, that Nebuchadnezzar, upon a festival day, caused him to be brought
out of prison; and so abused him before his Princes to make them sport, that
for shame and grief thereof he dyed soon after: Joseph. Antiq. lib. 10. c. 11.
and then Nebuchadnezzar, to make him some recompense, caused him to be
honorably buried: suffering his quondam-subjects to burn sweet odours, and to
bewail his death.

Flanctus haec fuit ^ormula juxta Seder-Olam, He^! quia mortuus est Rex Zede^
^as b^bens faeces omnium aetatum: i. e. Luens peccata priorum saeculorum,
interpret Genebrardo.
And they will lament thee] The dues of the dead are, honorifice lugeri and
honest sepeliri, to be honorably lamented and laid up: which yet is not
granted to all good men; but heaven makes amends.

For I have pronounced the word] Both the comminatory part of this message and
the consolatory. But Zedekiah was so moved at the former, that he regarded not
the latter.

Ver. 6. Then Jeremiah spoke all these words] Never fearing what might follow.
And he had no sooner done but he was clapped up. See chap. 32.3.

Ver. 7. And against all the Cities of Judah which were left] These were not
many: for the Chaldaean conqueror, as an overflowing scourge, had passed
through Judah, and gone over all, reaching even to the neck, as Isa. 8.8.

Ver. 8. This is the word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord] Here begins a
new Sermon, reckoned the seventeenth: And here ought to begin a new Chapter,
says Piscator.

After that the King Zedekiah had made a Covenant] In their distress they made
some shows of remorse, and some overtures of reformation. So did Pharaoh, Exodus
8.8, 15, 28, 32. and 9.28, 34. and 10.17, 20. And the Israelites of old, Judge.
10.15, 16. Psalm. 78.34, 35, 36. See the Notes there. Demon languebat, etc.
Pliny in one of his Epistles to one that desired rules from him, how to order
his life aright, I will, said he, give you one rule that shall be instead of a
thousand: Vt tales esse perseveremus sani, quales nos futuros esse profitemur
infirmi. i. e. That we continue to be as good in health, as we promise and
begin to be when sick.

Hic septimus annus fuit typus aeternae liberationis post curriculum sex dierum
mundi sex mill annorum.
Ver. 9. That every man should let his man servant] Should manumit, and dismiss
him at six years end, according to the Law, Exodus 21.1, 2. The seventh year was
called the year of liberty; and then they were to let go their brethren that
served them: and this, in a thankful remembrance of their deliverance from the
Egyptian servitude. But this they had neglected to do: and now, to pacify Gods
wrath, and to prevent, if it might be, the Chaldaeans cruelty, this course they
took: and not altogether without success. For the seige was thereupon raised
for a season: and had they returned to God with all their heart, and with all
their soul, who knows what might have been further done for them? But they did
nothing less: therefore came wrath upon them to the utmost.

Ver. 10. Then they obeyed and let them go] They seemed to be very good, as
long as it lasted: See on ver. 8. So when God lays seige to men by sickness
or otherwise, then Covenants are made, and kept for a while concerning the
putting away of their sins: but no sooner does God slack his wrath, but they
retract their vows, and return to their wonted wickedness; Aegrotus surgit,
sed pia vota jacent.

Ver. 11. But afterward they turned and caused their servants] Coveteousness
prompting and pricking them on thereunto; for that is the root of all evil,
Stimulante avaritia.
1 Timothy 6.10. The Chaldaeans had drawn off, to go, belike, to fight with the
relief that was comeing out of Egypt, chap. 37.7, 11. and now these silly Jews
thought themselves out of the reach of Gods rod, perfidiously repealed their
vows, reimbondaged their servants, and are therefore worthily threatened with a
more cruel servitude to the Chaldaeans, for this their relapse and breach of
Covenant with God. Jun.


Ver. 12. Therefore the Word of the Lord] Of God the Son.

Came to Jeremiah from the Lord] From God the Father.

Ver. 13. I made a Covenant with your Fathers] Heb. I cut a Covenant. See v. 18.

Out of the house of bondmen] Such were you when there: why then should you
pull up the bridge before others, which your selves have gone over? make slaves
of those whom God had made free? Levit. 25.39, 42.

Ver. 14. At the end of seven years let ye go] He lays before them Gods Law
which they had transgressed, out of Exodus 21.2. Deuteronomy. 15.12. A Law so full of
equity, humanity, and benignity, that the honester Heathens approved and
observed it, as the Romans and Athenians: Only these latter had an action at
Law (which they called (...)) for a Master against his servant ungrateful for
his manumission, Val. Max. l. 2. c. 1.
and not doing his duty to his Master: for such were again to be made
bondslaves, if the crime could be proved against them.

Ver. 15. And you were now turned] Being frighted into a temporary reformation:
but all was in hypocrisy, as now well appears. Falling Stars were never but
Meteors.

In proclaiming liberty every one to his neighbour] Your servants were your
neighbors: and their flesh as your flesh, Neh. 5.5. and should have been so
considered. In the Law the servant paid the half-shekel as well as his Master.
And in the Gospel, Servus est domini sui (...).
as there is neither Jew nor Greek, so neither bond not free, but all are one
in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.28. whether he be Lord, or losel.

And ye had made a Covenant before] And have not all done so in Baptism that
Beersheba or well of an oath?

Ver. 16. But ye turned] Exprobrat recidivum Judaeorum scelus qui scilicet
primam virtutem turpiter deluserint and violarint. He upbraideth them, and
deservedly, with their Apostasy and perjury. Peter also thundereth against
such, 2 Pet. 2.

And polluted my name] sc. By the violation of your solemn vow: so does every
profligate professor, and ungirt Christian.

Whom he had set at liberty at their pleasure] Liberty is a desirable and
delectable commodity. Those that live in Turkey, Persia, yea or but in France,
etc. esteem it so.

Ver. 17. Ye have not harkened unto me in proclaiming liberty] Ye have not done
it, because ye have not continued to do it: ye have lost the things that you
had wrought.

Behold I proclaim a liberty for you] God loves to retaliate. Here he
abandoneth these Apostates to the plagues instanced. Let them use you at their
pleasure, says God: I have no mercy for such merciless wretches: neither care
I what becomes of you.

Ver. 18. That have transgressed my Covenant] His Covenant he calls it by a
weighty Emphasis; because about a business by him commanded, and wherein he
was engaged, not as a bare spectatour, but as a severe avenger of their
perjury. Hom. Il. l. 3. Tul. de Invent. Live. l. 1. Virg. Aeneid. 8. Hinc foedus
a foedo animali diviso.


When they cut the Calf in twain] To show the correspondency of wills whereunto
the contracters did bind themselves: and the punishment of dissection or other
violent death, whereunto they submitted themselves, in case they brake promise.
The rise of this rite in covenanting See Genesis 15.9, 10, 17. The Heathens used
the like ceremony, as is to be seen in Homer, Cicero, Livy, Virgil; -- and
caesa jungebant faedera porca. The Romans cut a sow in twain: and when it was
divided, the Faeciales or heralds gave one half to one party, and the other
half to the other, and said, So God divide you asunder if you break this
Covenant: and let God do this so much the more, as he is more able.

Ver. 19. The Princes of Judah] These were most of them cut in pieces by the
King of Babylon, as the calf had been.

Ver. 20. And their dead bodies] Chap. 7.33. and 16.4.

Ver. 21. Which are gone up from you] But will be upon you again ere long: they
are but gone back to fetch bear, as it were. You have deceived you servants
with a vain hope of liberty, and so you do now your selves. See chap. 37.8, 22.

Ver. 22. Behold I will command] i. e. By a secret instinct I will move.

CHAP. XXXV.
Ver. 1. THe Word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord] The eighteenth Sermon,
ordine tamen arbitario non naturali: delivered diverse years before the former:
and here placed, not in its proper order, but as it pleased him that collected
them into this Book.

Ver. 2. Go unto the house of the Rechabites] So called of one Rechab, the
Father of Jonadab, who was famous for his Piety in Jehu's days, 2 Kings 10.15.
three hundred years at least before this Prophecy of Jeremy. They were of the
posterity of Jethro Moses Father-in-Law; and lived up and down in the land upon
their employments, weaned from the world and exercising themselves in the Law
of God: See 1 Chronicles. 2.55. Where they are called the families of the Scribes
that dwelt at Jabez, as being men learned in the Laws of God. Of them came the
Essenes, a studious and abstemious Sect among the Jews, and they might better
then those Donatists, have taken to themselves the title of Apotactici, so
called from their renouncing the world.

And give them wine to drink] Heb. make them drink wine, i. e. set it before
them; and then leave them to their own liberty.

Ver. 3. Then I took Jaazaniah] Whether actually, or in vision only, it
skilleth not: but the former way probably.

Ver. 4. And I brought them into the house of the Lord] That it might be made a
public business: and so the better work upon all that should hear of it.

The son of Igdaliah a man of God] A Priest and Prophet or Teacher of the
people: So in the new Testament others are called Gods children, his servants,
and his people: but Ministers only are called Gods men, 1 Timothy 6.11. and 2 Timothy
3.17.

Which was by the chamber of the Princes] Or of the Prefects of the Temple,
that were next under the Highpriests.

Ver. 5. Drink ye wine] It Was a double temptation unto them. 1. To have pots and
cups of wine set before them. 2. To be bid drink it by a Prophet, and at
Prophets chamber. But they were resolved, in obedience to their Father Jonadab,
to forbear. Yet if Jeremy had said, Thus says the Lord, Drink wine, they ought
to have done it: but this he did not.

Ver. 6. We will not drink wine] This they were resolved on: not because they
were persuaded as Mahomets followers are, that in every grape there dwelt a
devil: but because Jonadab the son of Rechab their Progenitour, 2 Kings 10.15,
had, two or three hundred years before, charged them to forbear; not thereby to
establish any new arbitrary service or any rule of greater perfection of life
(as the Papists misalledge it in favor of Monkery and other will-worships and
superstitious observances) but only as a civil ordinance, Hae leges vita potius
erant honestatis quam salutis animae.
about things external, the foundation whereof is laid in the word, which
commends modesty, humility, sobriety, heavenly-mindednesse, etc.

Ver. 7. Neither shall ye build house] But be content and dwell in tents, as
the ancient Patriarchs were, and as your Ancestors in Midian: removing from
place to place, after the manner of the old Nomades: so shall ye be the better
prepared for a change in the state, which this good old man might foresee and
foresignify to his Nephews: enjoining them therefore to follow their shipeherdy
only, as men less addicted to the world, and bent for heaven.

That ye may live many days in the land] Whilst ye obey my charge. Long life
is promised to children that obey their Parents.

Where ye be strangers] The Rechabites were originally Midianites: but Jethro,
of whom they came, was a famour proselite to the Church: his son Hobab a guide
to Gods people in the wilderness, and his posterity imped and incorporated
into the body of Gods people, Judge. 1.16. Nevertheless they counted and called
themselves strangers, alienigenae, as those that looked for a better country
above. See Heb. 11.9.

Ver. 8. Thus have we obeyed the voice of Jonadab] Obedience to Parents, in
things not unlawful, is very commendable. Aristotle says, (...). Ar. Rhet.
it is not good for a man to dissent from the Gods, from his Father, and from
his Teacher. We read of a King of Poland who carried the picture of his Father
in a plate of gold about his neck: and when he was going about any great
business, he would kiss that picture, and say, God grant I may observe my
Fathers charge, and do nothing unworthy of him, etc.

We, our wives, our sons and our daughters] As themselves were obedient to
their Father, so had they their children obedient to them: whereas ill children
are punished in their posterity. Fullers holy State.
One complained that never Father had so undutiful a child as he had: yes (said
his son, with less grace then truth) my Grandfather had.

Ver. 9. Nor to build houses, etc.] Jonadab, being a prudent and withal a
mortified man, might foresee that the Israelites, being so wicked a people,
could not long continue. He knew also that wine was often an occasion of
drunkenness; trading in the world, of earthlimindedness; fair houses, of
lothness to leave the world: Haec sunt quae nos invitos faciunt mori, as that
Emperor once said of stately buildings. He therefore, for a quiet life, and
for their souls health, forbad them the use of these lawful things: and they
accordingly forbear them.

Ver. 10. But we have dwelt in tents] And fed much upon whitemeats, (as did
Heber the Kenite who was one of them, Judge. 4.) living in abstinence and bodily
labor, that we might be free to divine contemplations.

Ver. 11. Come and let us go to Jerusalem] So then it was lawful for them to
dispense with those their observances, in that inevitable necessity; like as
also they might have drunk wine, rather then have perished. But what can be
reasonably pleaded for that man of sin, who takes upon him to dispense with
Gods holy law, Bellarm. lib. 4. de Pontif. Romans
and de injustitia facere justitiam, ex nihilo aliquid, ex virtute vitium, to
make righteousness of unrighteousness, vice of virtue, something of nothing?

So we dwell at Jerusalem] But better they had kept out, and held to their old
course: for so they might have escaped some way.

Ver. 12. Then came the Word of the Lord] Then, after this famous example of
obedience thus proposed; an excellent way of teaching surely. Reason should
rule, and therefore lodges in the brain: but when reason cannot persuade,
example will.

Ver. 13. Will ye not receive instruction, to hearken to my Words?] Quae est
illa portentosa pertinacia? what a strange stiffeness and obstinacy in you is
this? am not I to be better esteemed and obeyed by you, then Jonadab is by the
Rechabites?

Ver. 14. The words of Jonadab -- not to drink wine are performed] So are the
words of Mahomet to like purpose, to this day, by the Turks: so are the
commands of the Popish Padres to their young Novices, though it be to make a
voyage to China or Peru, Per varios casm, per tot discriminarerum.

For unto this day they drink none] Neither dwell in houses as you do and may
do, eating of the fat, and drinking of the sweet without restraint, so that you
keep within the bounds of sobriety. I command you nothing, but what in reason
should be done for a worldly good, as well as for a spiritual.

Rising early and speaking] I began betimes with you: my Law I gave you in
Horeb, eight or nine hundred years since; and from that time to this, I have
constantly and instantly called upon you by my messengers for obedience:
whereas it is not yet full three hundred years since Jonadab left this charge
with his Rechabites; and dying, left none to see it fulfilled, or to reprove
them for their neglects.

Ver. 15. I have sent unto you all my servants the Prophets] But all to no
purpose. See on ver. 14.

Saying, Return ye now every man from his evil way And was this so great a
matter, to part with that which profits you nothing, yea which undoubtedly
will undo you?

And go not after other gods] For wherein can they bestead you?

And ye shall dwell in the land] This was more then ever Jonadab could promise,
or promising perform to his Nephews.

But ye have not inclined your ear] See chap. 7.24, 26. and 11.8. and 17.23,
and 34.14.

Ver. 16. Because the sons of Jonadab] This was a lively way of confuting their
contumacy: far more convincing then that of the heathens not changing their
gods, or the beasts knowing their owners, the birds their seasons.

But this people have not hearkened unto me] Whereas if I be a Father, where is
mine honor? and if a Master, where is mine obedience? Mal. 1.6. See the Notes
there.

Ver. 17. Behold I will bring upon Judah] Aut poenitendum aut pereundum. Men
must either repent, or perish; obey Gods Law, or bear the penalty; no remedy,
Heb. 2.2. 2 These. 1.8.

Ver. 18. Because ye have obeyed the Commandement] Obedience to Parents has an
ample recompense of reward: as that which is good and acceptable before God and
men, 1 Timothy 5.4.

Ver. 19. Jonadab the son of Rechab shall not want a man to stand before me for
ever] i. e. To be beloved by me, and to be in special favor with me, lifting
up pure hands in all places of their abode. Captive they were carried among the
Jews: but they returned also again with them, (as appears 1 Chronicles. 2. sub
finem) erantque Deo cordi and curae, and they were dear to God.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Ver. 1. ANd it came to pass in the fourth year] This whole Chapter is
historical and narrative, as also are some others besides this. Historias lege,
ne fias historia.

O^im liber erat instar mappae Geographicae.
Ver. 2. Take thee a role of a book] i. e. A volume, as Isa. 8.1. See the Note
there.

And write therein] Jeremy had a command to write: so have not our empty
Scripturients; whose rapes on the innocence of paper (as one phraseth it) make
the Press almost execrable. Pineda.
Ista prurientis calami scabies potius est, quam scriptio.

All the words that I have spoken unto thee] The sum and substance of all thy
Sermons for these three and twenty years past: See chap. 1.2. and 25.3.

Ver. 3. It may be that the house of Judah will hear, etc.] See here the
utility of the holy Scriptures: and the excellent use that may be made of
reading them. A man may be thereby doubtless converted, where preaching is
wanting; as diverse were in Queen Mary's days, Fox Martyrol.
when the Word of God was precious: as Austin was by reading, Romans 13.
Fulgentius by the Prophet Jonah: Franciscus Junius by Joh. 1. etc. The Eunuch,
Act. 8. and those noble Bereans, Act. 17.11. were notably prepared for
conversion, by this ordinance.

That I may forgive their iniquity and their sin] i. e. Their sins of all
sorts; giving them a free and full discharge.

Baruch Isle notarius and diaconus Jeremiae, sim^^que Propheta fuit. Oecol.
Ver. 4. Then Jeremiah called Baruch -- and Baruch wrote from the mouth] --
Dictantis ab ore pependit. Jeremy, it seems, had either not written his
prophecies, or not so legibly, or in loose papers only: now he has them fair
written out into a book; making the same use of Baruch as afterward Paul did of
Tertius, Romans 16.22. who himself wrote no very good hand, as some have gathered
from, Gal. 6.11. See my Notes there.

Ver. 5. I am shut up] Or I am detained, or restrained; happily by some legal
pollution that he had contracted, as by touching a dead carcass, etc. or by
some bodily infirmity, or by the lying in wait of his enemies, or by the Spirit
of God, as Act. 16 6, 7. for a punishment to the Jews by the Prophets absence
and silence; and for the safety of his servant in those perilous times.

Ver. 6. Therefore go thou and read in the roll] A Minister, when he cannot
himself officiate, must provide another in his room.

Which thou have written from my mouth] And which the holy Ghost has put into
my mouth, both matter and words.

Upon the fasting-day] A very fit time for the reading of the Scriptures: that
the people then convened might hear and fear, and supplicate, and convert, and
God might heal them. The Fast here mentioned was not the ordinary yearly fast
called the day of Expiation or Atonement: but another that was conceptivum and
liberum, kept on some special occasion for the averting of Gods judgment: such
as was that at Nineveh There was afterward indeed a yearly Fast kept in
November, to bewail this wicked practice of King Jehoiakim in cutting and
casting into the fire this blessed-book. Genebrard ex Menologio Hebraeor.


Ver. 7. It may be they will present their supplication] Heb. Their
supplication will fall before the Lord. Fasting of it self is but a bodily
exercise, and profits little. If the soul be not afflicted, rebel-flesh
tamed, prayers edged, and reformation effected, men fast to no purpose, Isa.
58.3, 5. Zach. 5.5, 7.

Ver. 8. And Baruch the son of Neri^h did according, etc.] Nihil de sua saliva
admiscens. He faithfully performed the Prophet Jeremyes commands; not standing
to cast perils, being thereunto heartened and hardened by Jeremy, chap. 45.

Ver. 9. They proclaimed a fast] Happily for fear of the Chaldaeans, who having
lately beaten Pharaoh-Necho, was like enough to invade Judea: or else, because
of that great dearth, chap. 14 1, 2, 12 See on ver. 6.

Ver. 10. Then Baruch read in the book] He read with a courage; verbis non
solum disertis sed and exertis, out of a chamber-window, that the people under
him might the better hear.

In the chamber of Gemariah] Who himself, it seems, was not present, but his
son Micajah was; and carried his father and the rest of the Princes the news,
ver. 12.

Ver. 11. When Micajah the son of Gemariah had heard] With what affection he
heard the book read by Baruch, is uncertain. We have many Herodian hearers
before us eftsoons; such I mean, as have an Herod's heart toward the Preacher;
and little do we know who they are that sit before us: those precious balmes we
bring break their heads with a witness, and make the blood run about their
ears.

Ver. 12. Then he went down into the Kings house] For there was his Father, and
the rest of the Princes, suam aulam vel gulam consectantes, following their
court-delights: whilst the people were now humbling themselves before the
Lord, and trembling at his Word. Great men, are many of them, of that Earl of
Westmerlands mind, who profanely said, I need not pray to God, as having
tenants enough to pray for me.

Ver. 13. Then Micajah declared unto them] See ver. 11.

Ver. 14. Therefore all the Princes sent Jehudi] Apparitorem Regis, ut ex
sequentibus constat. Jun.

Ver. 15. And they said, Sit down now] This was some courtesy, Reverenter
sedere susserunt. Oecol. Alter alterum intuentes vel alloquentes. Piscat.
and token of good respect to Baruch. These Princes were not all out so bad as
their King.

Ver. 16. They were afraid both one and other] Expavescunt and sese mutuo
recipient, they were afraid and looked one upon another, being much distracted
at this new and unexpected occurrence; neither wist they at first what to do,
being affected after a sort, and smitten with the weightinesse of the business.

We will surely tell the King] They durst do no otherwise: for if these things
should have come to the Kings ear, and they not first tell him, they might come
into the danger of his displeasure.

Ver. 17. Tell us, how did thou write all these words at his mouth]
Praeposterum movent interrogationem, they put an odd question, says one, Hos
fere simili responso eludere videtur sanctus Dei homo. Zeg.
when they should rather have bethought themselves of breaking off their sins
by Repentance. God loves Currists and not Quaerists, says Luther.

Ver. 18. And Baruch answered them] Answerably to the question they asked him,
ver. 17. Dignum patella operculum.

And I wrote them with ink in the book] The use then of writing with pen and
ink, is ancient among the Hebrews.

Ver. 19 Go hide thee, thou and Jeremy] This was well, but not all. They draw
not Baruch before the King to answer what he had done: but why do they not take
him to the King with his roll, and plead both for it, and him too? had they
been true Patriots and hearty friends to the truth, they would have done so.
But they knew that this wicked King could not endure the Prophets, chap. 26.21.
and 36.26. and one of their company had been the Kings agent in bringing Vriah
the Prophet out of Egypt, to be butchered by him, chap. 26.22.

Ver. 20. And they went in to the King] God by his providence so disposed it,
that both King and Princes, whether they would or not, should hear their doom:
and as for some of the Princes, they seem to have some good affections wrought
in them: but too weak to work unto true repentance to salvation.

Ver. 21. So the King sent Jehudi] See on ver. 14.

Ver. 22. Now the King sat in the winter-house] There sat he (in that his
stately and sumptuous Palace built by iniquity. chap. 22.) curant cuticulam ad
focum, keeping himself warm in his winter chamber, and careless of calling
upon God; whiles the people, cold and empty, were fasting and praying in the
Temple, and hearing the Word read by Baruch.

In the ninth moneth] sc. Of the sacred year: which month was part of our
November, and part of December, a cold season: but that thing of naught his
body which he now made so much of, was shortly after to be cast out unburied,
in the day to the heat, and in the night to the frost, ver. 30.

Quintillan.
Ver. 23. When Jehudi had read three or four leaves] Vespasian is said to have
been patientissimus very, very patient of truth: so was good Josiah, whose
heart melted at the hearing of the Law, 2 Chronicles. 34.27. but so was not this
degenerate son of his, Jeboiakim: but more like Tiberius that Tiger, who tore
with his teeth all that displeased him; Lib. 3. hist.
or like Vitellius the Tyrant, of whom Tacitus says, Ita formatae principis
aures, ut aspera quae utilia: nec quidquam nisi jucundum and non laesurum
actiperet: that his cares were of that temper, that he could hear no counsel,
though never so profitable, unless it were pleasant, and did suit with his
humors.

He cut it with the penknife] Why? what could he dislike in that precious
piece? Of Petronius his Satyricon one said well, Toll obscaena and tollis
omnia: Of Jeremies prophecies I may safely say, Toll sancta, and tollis omnia.
But this brutish Prince could not away with downright-truth, etc.

Oecolamp.
And cast it into the fire] O stultitiam! quid innocents chartae commeruerant?
O madness! what evil had those innocent papers deserved, that they must dye
this double death as it were? Those Magical books at Ephesus were worthily
burnt, Act. 19. Aretines love-books are so lascivious, that they deserve to be
burned, says Boissard, Bois. biblioth.
together with their Author. Many seditious Pamphlets are now committed to
Vulcan to be corrected, and more should be. But O sancta Apocalypsis, (as that
Martyr once said when he took up the book of the Revelation cast into the same
fire with himself) So, O holy Jeremy, what have thou said, or written, to be
thus flasht and then cast into the fire? Jehoiakim is the first we read of,
that ever offered to burn the Bible. Antiochus indeed did the like afterward,
and Dioclesian the Tyrant, and now the Pope. But though there were not a Bible
left upon earth, yet for ever O Lord, thy Word is stablished in heaven, says
David, Psalm. 119 89.

Until all the roll was consumed] So far was he from repenting of that his
wickedness, that he fed his eyes with such a sad spectacle, and was ready to
say as Solon did, when he burnt the Usurers bonds in Athens, that he never saw
a fairer or clearer fire burn in all his life.

Ver. 24. Yet they were not afraid] Ne paulum quidem perculsi sunt. The King
and his servants those Court-parasites, were not stirred at all at such a
Bible-bone-fire: but jeared when they should have feared, etc.

Nor rent their garments] Such was their stupor seu non-curantia, their
security and insensibleness of that high offense, for which their posterity
keep a yearly fast: See on ver. 6. Rending of garments in token of grief was in
use also among the Heathens. Homer says Priamus rent his clothes when he heard
of the death of his son Hector. The like has Virgil of his Aeneas; Tam pater
Aeneas humeris abscindere vestem
Auxilioque vocate deos. --


Suetonius says the like of Jalius Caesar, etc. Pro concione fidem militum
flens and vest a pectore dicissa imploravit. Suet. c. 55.


Ver. 25. Nevertheless Elnathan] Who had before been active for the King in
apprehending and slaughtering the Prophet Vriah, chap. 26.22. but now happily
touched with some rremorse for having any hand in so bloody an act.

Had made intercession to the King] Verum frigide admodum, but very coldly: and
such cold friends the truth has still not a few, at Kings Courts especially.

Ver. 26. But the King commanded Jerameel the son of Hammelech] Or the Kings
son, whom he might employ against these two servants of God: as once the King
of France sent his son and heir with an Army against the Waldenses. It is not
for nothing therefore that the curse is denounced against Jehojakim and his
posterity, ver. 30, 31.

But the Lord hid them] i. e. He provided for them a hiding place in some good
man's house; and there safe guarded them from these bloodhounds who hunted
after their precious lives. There in no fence but flight, nor counsel but
concealment, to secure an innocent subject against an enraged Sovereign.

Ver. 27. Then the Word of the Lord came to Jeremiah] Jehojakim took an ill
course to free himself forom trouble (as he counted it) by burning the Roll:
for Gods Word cannot be burnt, no more then it can be bound, 2 Timothy 2.9 And
shall they thus escape by iniquity? No verily: for it follows (and it is not
more votum then vaticinium, a wish then a Prophecy) In thine anger cast down
the people, O God, Psalm. 56.7.

Ver. 28. Take thee again another roll] Revertere, accipe. Gods Ministers must
be steadfast and unweariable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
forasmuch as they know that their labor is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.
ult.

And write in it all the former words] If all the Tyrants on earth should fight
against the very paper of the Scriptures, striving to abolish it, yet they
could not possibly do it. There will be Bibles, when they shall be laid low
enough in the slimy valley, where are many already like them, and more shall
come alter them, Job 21.31, 32.

Ver. 29. And thou shall say to Jehoiakim] i. e. Add this doleful doom of his
to the new written roll, and direct it to Jehojakim. Some think the Prophet
told him these things to his face, like as Eliah presented himself to Ahab whom
before he had fled from, and dealt freely with him: but that is not so likely.

Ver. 30. He shall have none to sit upon the throne of David] i. e. None to
make any reckoning of: for his son Jecon^ah reigned but three months and ten
days. And Zedekiah is not looked upon as his lawful successor, because he was
his Uncle, and set up likely by Nebuchadnezzar for a reproach to Jehojakim and
Jeconiah: Of Jehojakim it may be said, as was afterward of Ethelred King of
England: Ejus vitae cursus saevus in principio, miser in medio, turpis in exitu
asseritur. Malms. lib. 2. cap. 10.
and in as great spite as once Attilus King of Suesia made a dog King of the
Danes (in revenge of a great many injuries received by them) appointing
Councillors to do all things under his title.

And his dead body shall be cast out in the day to the heat] This was that
infamous burial of an ass wherewith he had formerly been threatened, chap.
22.19. His father Josiah was one of those few that lived and dyed with glory:
but he did nothing less.

Ver. 31. And I will punish him and his seed] See on ver. 26. The like is
threatened to Zedekiah, chap. 21.7. who was therefore the worse, because he
should hove been warned by his brothers miseries.

And I will bring upon them] See chap. 35.17. Malis horrendis adobruentur omnes.

Ver. 32. Then took Jeremiah] Who is therefore famous for his obedience: which
is then only right, when it is prompt and present, ready and speedy without
delays and consults, as here.

And there were added besides unto them many like words] So little is gotten by
relucting against the Word of God, and persecuting his messengers. What do
wicked men hereby but entangle themselves more and more, as one that goes
amongst b^yars? ( Did not my Word take hold of your fathers? Zach. 1.6. See the
Note there.) what do they else, O^pressus Christi Spiritus robustior in se
coactus exilit. Oecol.
but as she in the history, who m^st^king her looking-glass, for showing her
truly the wrinckles in her old withered face, brake it in displeasure: and then
she had for one glass many; every piece thereof presenting to her the decay of
her beauty, which she was so loath to take notice of: The best way is to pass
into the likeness of the heavenly pattern: See Mic. 2.7. with the Notes there.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Ver. 1. ANd King Zedekiah the son of Josiah] This also and the next Chapter
are, as the former, historical, and so easy to be understood, that to set long
notes upon them were, A Lap.
says One, rather to obscure them, then to explain them.

Ver. 2. But neither he nor his servants -- did harken] And this was these
undoing, sc. that they humbed not themselves before this holy Prophet, speaking
unto them from the mouth of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 36.12.

Ver, 3. Pray now unto the Lord our God for us] This King would seem to have
some more goodness in him then his brother and predecessor Jehojakim: but he
played the hypocrite exceedingly, as in other things, so in this, that he
obeyed the Prophets prayers, but would not obey his preaching. The like did
Pharaoh, Saul, Simon Magus, etc. Hez^kiah, sent to the Prophet I say for
prayers, but withal he humbled himself, and lived holily, which Zedekiah did
not.

Ver. 4. Jeremiah came in and went out] He was yet at liberty: as the Saints
have some Halcyons, yet are never unexercised, as we see in the Apostles, but
especially in Paul. Acts 5.13.


For they had not put him in prison] Not yet they had. It was in our late wars
a like difficult thing to find a wicked man in the enemies prisons, or a godly
man out of them.

Ver. 5. Then Pharaoh's Army was come out of Egypt] This then seems to be the
occasion that moved Zedekiak to send to the Prophet for his prayers, viz, that
God would be pleased to prosper the Egyptians coming to raise the seige: and to
keep off the Chaldeans from returning to Jerusalem. But God had before
signified his will to the contrary: and the Jews, trusting to humane helps,
took not a right course for their own presevation: See chap. 34.

Ver. 6. Then came the Word of the Lord] In answer to the messengers that came
to request prayers.

Ver. 7. To enquire of me] Or, to seek to me, to set me a work for you at the
Throne of grace.

Behold Pharaoh's army, etc.] The Talmudists tale here of what frighted back
the Egyptians, is not worth the telling It may be read in Corn, a Lapide upon
ver. 6.

Ver. 8. And the Chaldeans shall return] See cha. 32.12, 29.

Ver. 9. Deceive not your selves] As too too many do, qui praesumendo sperant,
and sperando pereunt.

For they shall not depart] sc. For altogether; not for any space of time, or
to any purpose. Like hereunto is that Mat. 9.24. the damosel is not dead.

Ver. 10. For though ye had smitten] Pro Anxesi ad icit Hyperbolen, he uses an
Hyperbolical supposition for illustration.

And there remained but wounded men amongst them] God cannot be without a staff
to beat a rebel. Virum malum vel mus mordet, says the Proverb, A mouse will
bite a bad man. Milez Cobelitz, a Christian soldier, sore wounded, and all
bloody, seeing Amurath the great Turk viewing the dead bodies after a victory,
rose up out of a heap of slain men, Turk. Hist. 200.
and making toward the Conqueror, as if he would have craved his life of him,
suddenly stabbed him in the bottom of his belly, with a short dagger which he
had under his coat, and so slew him.

Yet should they rise every man in his Tent] It is God who strengthens or
weakeneth the arm of either party, Ezekiel. 30.24. Those that fight against
spiritual wickednesses in their own strength, are sure to be foiled: and
although the unclean spirit may seem to be cast out, yet he will return to his
old house, and bring seven worse with him, Matthew. 12.

Ver. 11. For fear of Pharaoh's army] Or rather, because of Pharaoh's army,
whom now they drew off to encounter.

Ver. 12. Then Jeremiah went forth out of Jerusalem] Where he saw there was so
little good to be done by his Ministry. This, some think, was an infirmity in
him. Mr. Greenham, upon such a ground as this, was persuaded to leave his
charge at dry- Draiton in Cambridgeshire, and to go to live at London, where he
dyed of the plague: and as some reported, repented on his deathbed of having
so done.

To go into the Land of Benjamin] To Anathoth his own home: and if he went
thither for his one safety or convenience sake, why might he not?

To separate himself thence in the midst of the people] Vt lubricificaret
exinde in medio populi, that he might slide or slip away thence in the throng,
undiscerned. Pagnin. Vatab.


Ver. 13. Irijah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Hananiah] Of that Hananiah,
say the Rabbines, whose death Jeremy foretold, chap. 28.16, 17. This Irijah
ferox adolescens, as Josephus calls him, a fierce young man, bearing Jeremiah
a gradge, lays hold on him in the gate, and lays treachery to his charge:
Tac^tus.
unicum crimen eorum qui crimine vacabant.

Saying, Thou fallest away to the Chaldaeans] Jeremy had spoken much of the
Chaldaeans power, and foretold their victory. Hence he is here falsely accused
of falling away to them, and being false to his Country. Indeed if the
Chaldees could have fetched off Jeremy, as the French King Lewis did Philip de
Comines from the Duke of Burgundy (whose affairs thereupon declined
immediately) they might have made very good advantage of him. But he was far
enough from any such compliance with them: and could better have said then ever
Tully did, Ne immortalitatem contra Remp. acciperem, I would not be false to my
Country, for more then all this worlds good.

Ver. 14. Then said Jeremy, Luther.
It is false] Satanae pectus mendaciis foecundssimum est. It is no news for
innocence to be belyed, and to go with a scratcht face.

But he harkened not unto him] Right or wrong, he must before the Princes: who
do also handle the good Prophet very coursely.

Ver. 15. Wherefore the Princes were wroth with Jeremiah] Upon the Captains
false suggestion, which they should better have sifted into first, before they
had believed it: for Pellucet mendacium, nec per omnia quadrat, a lie is often so
thin, that it may be seen through, and soon found out.

And smot him] Perhaps with their own hands; as bloody Bonner buffeted some of
the Martyrs pulling off part of their beards.

And put him in prison] Causa nondum cognita, before they had heard his
defense. These Princes were worse then Jehojakims, chap. 36.19. or, if the same
men, they were now grown worse: and here was, as Bernard has it, seeds prima,
and vita ima; De Consider. lib. 2. Act. and Mon.
ingens authoritas, and nutans stabilitas.

In the house of Jonathan the Scribe] As bad as Lollards Tower to our Martyrs,
or the Bishop of Londons Cole-house, which Mr. Philpot thought to be the worst
prison about London.

Ver. 16. When Jeremiah was entered into the dungeon] Heb. into a place or
house of the pit or hole; where the Prophet could neither walk, nor handsomely
lie down, In domum eisternae.
when worse men a great deal had what liberty they lifted.

And into the cabins] Or cells where they scarce put any but traitors, and
like foul offenders. Such they had at Athens called Barathrum, at Rome
Tullianum, or Profundum maris, etc. into which whosoever was put, could hardly
be put to more misery.

And Jeremiah had remained there many dayes] Till the return of the Chaldees
likely. Canes lingunt ulcera Lazari.

Ver. 17. Then Zedekiah the King] Being now in distress because of the
Chaldees come again, and willing to hear from the Prophet some word of comfort;
which yet might not be, unless he had been better. If comfort be applied to a
graceless person, the truth of God is falsified.

Is there any word from the Lord?] Any new Oracle, and different from that of
destruction, which thou have so often rung in our ears, ad ravim and nauseam
usque?

And Jeremy said There is] sc. A word from the Lord; but the same as before:
for thou must mend, ere the matter will mend with thee.

Ver. 18. What have I offended against thee] As I know mine own innocence, so
I would thou should know that I am no Stoic, or stock indolent, or
insensible of my grievous sufferings, through the cruelty of thy Princes, who
have committed me to this ugly prison.

Ver. 19. Where are now your Prophets?] Let them appear now if you please, and
upon trial made, let truth take place. To this most equal motion when the King
said nothing, the Prophet proceeds to move again for himself, that he might
be removed at least to a more convenient place, unless they meant an end of
him.

Ver. 20. Therefore hear now I pray thee, O my Lord the King] As stout as he
was and impartial in delivering Gods message, in supplicating for himself he is
very submisse, and humble to his Sovereign, not daring to speak evil of
dignities, though he had wrongfully suffered much from them.

Ver. 21. Then Zedekiah the King commanded] For this curtesy of his to the
Prophet, God granted him a natural death, and an honorable burial in Babylon.

That they should commit Jeremiah into the Court of the Prison] Where he might
have more liberty and better accommodations: and where his friends cum adire
and audire possent, might come and hear him. See chap. 22.2.

And that they should give him daily a piece of bread] And a piece of a cake,
we say, is better then no bread. I read of a gracious woman who said that she
had made many a meals meat upon the promises, when she wanted bread. But Jeremy
(besides the promises, chap. 1. and elsewhere) was here by a sweet providence,
sustained in the prison, during that extreme famine in the City (whereof we
read in the Lamentations) when it was no small mercy to have a morsel of bread
to keep him alive. Sic amara interdum dulcescunt. Who would not trust so good a
God?

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Ver. 1. THen Shephatiah] Here was aliud ex alio malum, one affliction on the
neck of another. Matters mend with us as sour Ale does in summer, said Bishop
Ridley once, when he was prisoner. Poor Jeremy might well have said so, if ever
any, as appears by this Chapter, where we find him in a worse hole then was
that of Jonathan: but his extremity was Gods opportunity.

Shephathiah the son of Mattan, and Gedaliah, etc.] These four Princes here
named to their eternal infamy, were no small men, as appears in that the King
was not he that could do any thing against them, ver. 5. The grandees of the
world are greatest enemies (usually) to the truth. Little they had to say
against his doctrines; they quarrel with his affection, as a perturber of the
public place, ver. 4. Ahab charged the like crime upon Elias: the Jews upon
Christ, and afterward upon Paul: the Heathen persecutors upon the primitive
Christians: the heretics still upon the Orthodox, that they were seditious,
Antimonarchical, etc.

Ver. 2. Thus says the Lord, He that remains in the City] This is the
sef-same truth which he had preached before, and for the which he suffered. See
chap. 21.9. He is constant to his principles: and although it be commonly said
and seen that He who receives a curtesy sells his liberty, yet it was not so
with this holy Prophet. He had received some enlargement, and care was taken by
the King that a piece or a roll of bread should be brought him daily to the
prison out of the bakers-street: but that stops not his mouth.

Ver. 3. Thus says the Lord] And as long as the Lord says so, I must say so
too, whatever come of it, chap. 1.

Ver. 4. For thus he weakeneth the hands of the men of war] Thus out of canal
policy is piety impugned: So 1 Kings 12.27. Joh. 11.48. See on ver. 1.

Ver. 5. Then Zedekiah the King said, Behold he is in your hand] O nihili
Regem, qui ne verbulo quidem cruentis viris obluctatur! O King of clouts, says
One, who knowing the Prophets innocence and these Princes bloodthirstinesse,
durst not say a word for him, or against them! This inconstancy of his, and
impotency of spirit proceeded merely from diffidence and distrust in God.

Ver. 6. Then took they Jeremiah] Whom the King had now (against his
conscience, as afterward Pilate dealt by Jesus) either through fear, or
favor, betrayed unto his deadly enemies: and so he was in a pitiful plight,
in a forlorn condition. But Jeremiah De profundit, out of the deep called upon
God (whom he found far more facile then these Princes did Zedekiah) Thou
drewest near, says he, in the day when I called upon thee, Thou saidest fear
not, Lam. 3.57. I called upon thy name O Lord, out of the low dungeon.

And they let down Jeremiah with cords] With a murtherous intent there to make
an end of him privily, ut ibi praefocatus moreretur; ille vero usque ad collum
mersus ibi manebat, says Josephus; that he might there pine and perish: but
God graciously prevented it.

And in the dungeon there was no water but mire] A typical hell it was, worse
then Joseph's pit, Genesis 37. or Hemans lake, Psalm. 88.6. or any prison that ever
Brown the Sect master ever came into, who used to boast that he had been
committed to two and thirty prisons: and in some of them he could not see his
hand at noonday. Fullers Church-hist. p. 168.
He dyed at length in Northampton jayle, Anno 1630. whereto he was sent for
striking the Constable requiring rudely the payment of a rate.

So Jeremiah sunk in the mire] Up to the neck, says Josephus: and so became a
type of Christ, Psalm. 69.2.

Ver. 7. Now when Ebedmelech the Ethiopian] But a Proselyte, and a Religious
Prince; a stranger, but (as that good Samaritan in the Gospel) more merciful
then any of the Jewish Nation, who gloried in their privileges: See Romans 2.26,
27.

One of the Eunuches] And Eunuchs, say the Rabbines, are ordinarily more cruel
then other men: but so was not this Cushite. Piety is the fountain of all
virtues whatsoever.

Which was in the Kings house] As Obadiah was in Ahabs, Nehemiah in
Artaxerxes's, some good people in Herod's, Luke 8.3. and Nero's, Philip. 4 22.
Cromwell and Cranmer in Henry the eighths.

The King then sitting in the gate of Benjamin] Sitting in judgment, where
Jeremyes enemies had once apprehended him for a fugitive, but durst not try it
out with him, though Ebedmelech there treated with the King for him in the
presence of some of them, as it is probable.

Ver. 8. Ebedmelech] Not more the Kings servant (so his name signifies) then
Gods. Joseph of Arimathaea was such another, who went boldly to Pilate and
begged the body of Jesus. Faith quelleth and kills distrustful fear.

Ver. 9. My Lord the King, these men have done evil] What a brave man was this
to oppose so many Princes, and so potent, that the King himself durst not
displease them? It was Gods holy Spirit that put this mettle into him, and gave
him the freedom of speech, Psalm. 119.46.

And he is like to dye for hunger in the place where he is] Or, who would have
dyed for hunger in the place where he was.

For there is no more bread in the City] Cum panum annona sit pauca and parca.
What need he to be doubly murdered?

Ver. 10. Then the King commended Ebedmelech] A sweet providence of God, thus
to incline the heart of this effeminate, cruel, inconstant and impious King, to
harken to the motion, and to give order for the Prophets deliverance from that
desperate and deadly danger. A good encouragement also to men to appear in a
good cause and to act vigorously for God, notwithstanding they are alone, and
have to encounter with diverse difficulties.

Take from hence thirty men with thee] Four or fewer might have done it: but
perhaps the Princes with their forces might have endeavored to hinder them,
but that they saw them so strong.

Ver. 11. So Ebedmelech took the men with him, and went] The labor of love
that this Ethiopian performed to the man of God, is particularly and even
parcel-wise described, for his eternal commendation, and all men's imitation.

Ver. 12. But now these cast-clouts] Hence some gather that the Prophet was put
into this loathsome hole naked, or very ill clad at least. The Fathers
allegorize this story to set forth the vocation of the Gentiles, and the
rejection of the Jews.

Ver. 13. So they drew up Jeremiah with cords] And God was not unrighteous to
forget this their work and labor of love, Heb 6.10. Jer. 39.17, 18.

And Jeremiah remained in the Court of the prison] Manacled and fettered, as
some gather from chap. 40.4.

R. David Vatabl.
Ver. 14. Then Zedekiah -- took Jeremiah into the third entry] Which was right
over against the Kings house: this wretched King was so overawed by his
Counselors, that he durst not advise with Gods Prophet in their presence, or
with their privity.

Ver. 15. If I declare it unto thee] It is for the sins of a people, that an
hypocrite reigns over them, Job 34.30. Such a one was Zedekiah: and the
Prophet here freely reproves him for his hypocrisy.

And if I give thee counsel, will thou not hearken?] Or, And though I advise
thee, thou will not hearken to me. Thou art set, and have made thy conclusion
aforehand.

Ver. 16. So the King Zedekiah swear secretly unto Jeremiah] But what credit
was to be given to his oath who was notoriously known to be a perjured person,
as having broken his oath of fidelity to Nebuchadnezzar?

As the Lord lives that made us this soul] Hence the truth of that assertion
is cleared up unto us, that men's souls drop not down from heaven, nor are
propagated by their parents, but are created by God, and infused into their
bodies.

I will not put thee to death, neither will I, etc.] The former part of the
Prophets condition he swears to perform, but says nothing to the latter, as
having no such liking to it. So many come, now-adayes, to hear: who resolve to
practice only so far as they see good.

Ver. 17. If thou will assuredly go forth] Jeremy was semper idem, one and the
same still: no changeling at all, but a faithful and constant Preacher of Gods
Word.

Ver. 18. But if thou will not go forth] See chap. 32.39. Thus Zedekiah has it
both ways, that it may abide by him: but he was uncounselable, and
irreclaimable.

Ver. 19. Then Zedekiah said unto Jeremiah, I am afraid of the Jews] Thus
hypocrites will at one time or other detect themselves: as Zedekiah here
plainly declares that he more feared the loss of his life, honor, wealth,
etc. then of Gods favor and Kingdom: so do the most amongst us: Pilate feared
how Caesar would take it, if he should loose Jesus. Herod laid hold on Peter,
after he had killed James, that he might please the people. The Pharisees could
not believe because they received glory from men. This generous King cannot
endure to think that his own fugitives should flout him: but to be ruled by God
and his holy Prophet advising him for the best, he cannot yield. Thus still
vain men are niggardly of their reputation, and prodigal of their souls. Do we
not see them run wilfully into the field, into the grave, into hell? and all
lest it should be said they have as much fear as wit.

Ver. 20. They shall not deliver thee] This the good Prophet speaks from the
mouth of the Lord, to cure him of that causeless fear, and to bring him to a
better obedience: but it was past time of day with him to be wrought upon by
any thing that could be spoken, though never so well.

So it shall be well unto thee, and thy soul shall live] This is also the voice
of the Gospel, and the result of all the Promises.

Ver. 21. But if thou refuse to go forth] Promises and threatenings make an
excellent mixture: the tartness of the one gives us better to taste the
sweetness of the other.

Ver. 22. And behold all the women that are left] These shall mock thee and
make songs of thee, exagitantes regem socordissimum, for a simple and sorry
man, who has undone them all together with himself, by listening to
flatterers, and false Prophets.

-- Thy feet are sunk in the mire] In the mire of misery, where the Prophets
unworthy usage in the miry dungeon is hinted, and the King twitted with it, as
some hold. Some again think that Zedekiah in his flight did run into some
quagmire where he was taken.

And they are turned away backward] Thy flatterers have now left thee in the
lurch.

Ver. 23. So shall they bring out all thy wives and thy children] Or, thy women
(whether wives or Concubines, that crew of wanton creatures) and thy sons: for
his daughters were left behind, chap. 41.10. and 43.6. If therefore thou have
any care of those that are, or ought to be most dear unto thee, be ruled by me.

And thou shall cause this City to be burnt with fire] Heb. Thou shall burn
this City: Quicquid delirant reges, plectuntur Achivi.

Ver. 24. Let no man know of these words] Thus he who fears not God,
Muliebriter deprecatur Rex incredulus fidelem.
fears his own servants and Counselors.

And thou shall not dye] The crafty King would seem to be sollicitous of the
Prophets safety; but mainly intends his own.

Ver. 25 But if the Princes hear] In such fear flood he of his Princes, and
might truly say, as the Assyrian once did, Are not my Princes altogether
Kings? Esaias. 10.8. or as the Emperor of Germany did, I am King of Kings,
meaning that the Princes of his Empire would do what they lifted, for all him.
Zedekiah was only an image of a King.

Ver. 26. Then shall thou say unto them, I presented my supplication] This was
to tell part of the truth only (which might lawfully be done) and not to tell
an officious, or at least an oblique lie, as some would make it to be.

Ver. 27. So they left off speaking with him] Indigni utique qui ultra
monerentur. In una impietate solum stabiles.
The Princes were far worse then the King: who yet himself was none of the
best. They therefore were slain by the Babylonian Princes, when the Kings life
was preserved, though with the loss of his eyes, which yet might be a means to
open the eyes of his mind.

Ver. 28. So Jeremiah abode in the court of the prison] Which now God had made
to him a sanctuary of safety, and a very Bethlehem or house of bread. God can
easily turn a prison into a Paradise, and brown-bread and water into manchet
and wine, as he did to the Martyrs: One of them dated his letter thus, From the
delectable orchard of the Leonine prison.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Ver. 1. IN the ninth year of Zedekiah] See on 2 King. 25.1.

Came Nebuchadnezzar] He came to the seige in person: but soon after retired
himself to Ribbah, i e. to Antiochia in Syria, there to take his pleasure, and
there hence to send supplies to his forces, as need required.

Ver. 2. And in the eleventh year] See on 2 King. 25.2. the sacking of
Jerusalem fell out four hundred and seventy years after the building of the
Temple, in the forty seventh Olympiad: and when Tarquinius Priscus was King of
Rome.

The C^ty was broken up] See on 2 King. 25 4.

Ver. 3. In the middle gate] Called the second gate, Zeph. 2.10. See chap.
1.15. Jeremy lived to see sundry of his prophesies fulfilled. Jerusalem was
taken in or about the fortieth year of his prophesying: as it was afterward by
the Romans, in or about the fortieth year after our Saviors Ascension.

Even Nergal, Sharezar, Shamgar-Nebo] Here we have a list of the Babylonian
Princes, who first brake into the City. Their names are harsh and barbarous
(such as are now to our ears the Turkish Bashaws, Beglerbegs, Sanzacks, etc.)
but good enough for such to hear, as would not yield to the sweet name and
counsel of a gracious God. Those names that have Sar or Rab in them, are deemed
to be names of office; as Sarezer Master of the treasures, Rabinag Master of
the Magicians, etc.

Ver. 4. When Zedekiah the King saw them] Not entered, but ready to enter. See 2
King. 25.4.

He went out the way of the plain] Intending, likely for Egypt: but his journey
was shortened. So was Muliasses King of Tunis, when flying from his son Amidas,
he was discovered by the sweet perfumes he had about him; and being brought
back, had Zedekiah like, his eyes put out, with a burning hot iron.

Ver. 5. But the Chaldaeans pursued] See on 2 King. 25.5.

Ver. 6. See on 2 King. 25.6, 7.

Ver. 7. See on 2 King. 25.7.

Ver. 8. See on 2 King. 25.8.

Ver. 9. See on 2 King. 25.11, 12.

Ver. 10. See on 2 King. 25.11, 12. Sic vides miras rerum vices. See what a
wonderful turn of things was here on the sudden: and how that of Seneca was
here made good, Vna dies interest inter magnam civitatem and nullam, there is
but a days difference sometimes betwixt a great City, and no City. Josephus
and some others say, that the Rechabites, as men peaceable and given much to
contemplation, were also left in the land. This destruction of Jerusalem was,
says Oecolampadius, a kind of type of the general judgment. For like as in
Jerusalem the wicked perished, but the poor and peaceable were not only spared
but enriched, so shall it be at that day.

Ver. 11. Now Nebuchadrezzar -- gave charge, etc.] He had heard of Jeremy and
his preaching, by those Jews that by the Prophets persuasion sell to the
Chaldees: and now that promise took place, chap. 15.11. I will cause the enemy
to entreat thee well: -- Tandem bona causa triumphat.

Ver. 12. Take him, and look well to him] A wicked man, we see, may be loving
and liberal to a godly Minister for self ends. Let no man therefore rest in it
alone, as a sure sign of an honest man.

Ver. 13. So Nebuzaradan, etc.] These, who before were so active in destroying
the City, are now no less active in honoring the good Prophet. All things
work together for good to the godly: their greatest enemies shall one day do
them honor.

Ver: 14. They sent and took Jeremiah] But why did they not also loose him from
his bonds? chap. 40.1.

And committed him unto Gedaliah] Who being a chieftain among the Jews, fell to
the Chaldees (as it may seem) before the City was taken, according to Jeremy's
counsel: and is now set over the land, and has the Prophet Jeremiah committed
to his care.

The son of Ahikam] Who had rescued the Prophet, chap. 26.24. See the Note
there.

Ver. 15. Now the Word of the Lord] Which is never bound, 2 Timothy 2.9. but
tunneth and is glorified, 2 These. 3.1.

Ver. 16. Go and speak unto Ebedmelech the Ethiopian] Who yet was an Israelite
indeed by his faith and religion; as was likewise Jether the Ishmaelite, 1 Chronicles. 7.17. with 2 Samuel 17.25.

Thus says the Lord of hosts] Who will not fail to give unto him who shows
kindness to any Prophet of his, a Prophets reward, Mat. 10.

Behold I will bring my words upon this City for evil] See chap. 21.16. and
44.27.

And they shall be accomplished in that day before thee] Thou shall see it, but
shall survive it. And this prophecy may be unto us instead of a most certain
history.

Ver. 17. But I will deliver thee in that day] From the sword, the famine and
the pestilence: a thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy
right hand, but it shall not come nigh thee: Psalm. 91.7, 8. Val. Max.
only with thine eyes shall thou behold and see the reward of the wicked: and
that the Lord is sure though slow, tarditatem supplicii gravitate compensans.

And thou shall not be delivered into the hands of those men] Zedekiah's
Courtiers who do bear thee an aching tooth for thy kindness to my Prophet, and
have vowed revenge.

Ver. 18. For I will surely deliver thee] Heb. delivering deliver thee. It
would be a great stay of mind if God should say the same to us in particular
and by name, as he does here to this Ethiopian: And yet he says no less to us
in the precious promises, which we are by faith to appropriate.

But thy life shall be for a prey unto thee] Pro lucro cessura est: for saving
my Prophets life, thou shall have thine own: so sure a gain is godliness.

Because thou have put thy trust in me] What may not faith have at Gods hands?
Those that trust him, do, after a sort, engage him to deliver them, and to do
them good.

CHAP. XL.
Ver. 1. THe Word of the Lord which came to Jeremiah] This word what it was,
Jeremy will show, chap. 42.7. after the circumstances of his enlargement
related, and other matters of story premised. Vatablus rendereth it, Actio quam
gessit Dominus cum Jeremia.

After that Nebuzaradan -- had let him go from Ramah] Which was the place of
Rendevouz, whether Jeremy was also brought (with the rest of the Captives) and
manicled also (as he was found in the court of the prison) but soon set free,
and dismissed. A difference shall one day (at that great day especially) be
discerned between the righteous and the wicked: betwixt him that serves God,
and him that serves him not, Mal. 3. ult. Jeremy is here, by some oversight of
the officers (contrary to Nebuchadnezzars command, chap. 39.11, 14. but not
without a special providence of God) brought bound to Ramah, ad opprobrium
Gentis, and in gloriam suam: that the Jews, now captives, and to be carried to
Babylon, might see their madness in persecuting so true a Prophet, and
persevering in their sinful practices, to their so utter undoing, against all
admonition.

Ver. 2. And the Captain of the guard took Jeremiah] Took him and loosed him,
as he should have done before.

Saying, The Lord thy God has pronounced this evil upon this place] Oration
militaris, sed been Theologica: A strange speech to come out of such a man's
mouth. How could the captives present hear it, and not be affected with it?
Thus Baalams Ass sometimes rebuked his Masters madness, but to little good
effect.

Ver. 3. Now the Lord has brought it, and done according] A bad man, we see,
may speak piously. Samuel himsef could not have spoken more gravely, severely,
divinely, then the feind did to Saul, 1 Samuel 28. Well then may lewd men be good
Preachers, etc.

Ver. 4. And now behold I loose thee] I dismiss thee with all due honor, as a
true Prophet: however undervalued and afflicted by thine unworthy Countrymen.

Come and I will look well unto thee] Heb. I will set mine eye upon thee, that
is, I will give thee singular respect, and observe thee to the utmost.

Behold all the land is before thee] What could Pharaoh say more to Joseph?
Genesis 47.6. or Abraham to Lot? Genesis 13.9.

Ver. 5. Now while he was not yet gone back] But yet showed by his looks or
otherwise, that he was not willing to go to Babylon: Nebuchadnezzar, Ex ipso
vultu vel silentio Jeremiae, etc.
who had already set his eyes upon him, as ver. 4. perceiving it, said,

Go back unto Gedaliah] Who shall both protect thee and provide for thee.

So the Captain of the guard gave him victuals] i. e. Necessaries for his
journey; for he came out of prison nudus tanquam ex mari, bare and needy.

And a reward] Or, a present fit for a Prophet: donum honorarium, such as they
used to give the Seers, 1 Samuel 9.8. 1 King. 14. and such as he might safely and
comfortably take, as from God himself, who had promised it, chap. 15.11.

Ver. 6. Then went Jeremiah unto Gedaliah] Blessing himself from the Chaldaeans
proffered kindness, (as Luther also did alate from the great Turke's, who
invited him to him, and promised him to be his good Lord) he makes Moses his
choice, Heb. 11.25. and David's, Psalm. 84.10. rather to abide with Gods poor
people in the promsed land, then to be great in the Court of Babylon: How few
at this day would have been of his mind?

Ver. 7. Now when all the Captains of the forces that were in the fields] The
dispersed Jews with their Captains and Centurions, such as had lain lurking
during the seige, or had fled when Zedekias did and escaped.

Heard that the King of Babylon had made Gedaliah] Whom they knew to be a pious
and prudent man: and would be a father unto them instead of a King.
Nebuchadnezzar might have set a Babylonian Governor, who would have ruled them
with rigor; But God, in mercy to his poor people, moved him to make choice of
this man, famous for his mildness and integrity: to whom therefore they
resort, but not all for the same good end, as the sequel showed: for Ishmael
was a very Judas.

Ver. 8. Then they came to Gedaliah to Mizpah] Where Samuel dwelt, 1 Samuel 7.
not far from Shiloh.

Even Ishmael] Who was of the blood royal, chap. 41.1. and envyed Gedaliah, his
so great preferment, whom he looked upon for a transfuga, and a traitor, for
revolting to Nebuchadnezzar: which yet he did in obedience to Gods Word by the
Prophet Jeremy.

Ver. 9. And Gedaliah -- swear unto them] viz. That what he spoke was from his
heart; and out of good affection to them all.

Ver. 10. As for me, behold I will dwell at Mizpah] To agitate for you, to the
Chaldeans: and to secure you to mine utmost.

But ye, gather ye wind] Humanissima haec sunt, pia, and utilissima Gedaliae
verba ad populum: It Was wonder the Chaldees, after so long a siege, had left any
fruits behind them: Soldiers now-adayes lay all waste mostly.

Ver. 11. Likewise when all the Jews] Who had field into foreign parts, for
succor and safety.

Ver. 12. And gathered wine and summer-fruits very much] So is God wont to
reward those that love their Country.

Ver. 13. Moreover Johanan -- came to Gedaliah to Mizpah] Ishmael perhaps had
solicited them, to take part with him.

Ver. 14. That Baalis the King of the Ammonites] Set on work by Beelzebub the
prince of devils to hinder so good a work.

But Gedaliah -- believed them not] No more did Julius Caesar those that
forewarned him of the conspiracy against him. The Duke of Guise the same day
that he was slain by the command of Henry the third King of France, had a scrol
laid under his napkin, as he sat at dinner, wherein was witten, That his life
was in danger: he under-wrot They dare not; Speed. 1212.
and so threw it from him under the table. But it proved that they both durst
do it, and did do it, the same day. Gedaliah, likely, thought that Ishmael
durst not attempt any thing against him, because of the Babylonians: besides he
knew his own innocence, and Ismaels pretended familiarity with him; which he
might think the other Captains envyed. Sure it is, that good Gedaliah was too
secure. Nam qui omnia credit, and qui nihil credit, ex aequo peccat. It is no
less a fault to believe nothing, Seneca.
then to believe every thing; sine vano publica fama, Reports are neither to be
overheeded, nor over-slighted: especially where life is concerned.

Ver. 15. Let me go I pray thee, and I will slay Ishmael] He offers his
service for the slaying of Ismael, and it had been happy he had done it: sed
immodico obsequio sibi fidem derogat, his forwardness rendereth him supected.
Gedaliah seems to have been of our Queen Elisabeths temper, Camden.
who was heard to profess, that she could believe nothing of her people, that
parents would not believe of their children.

Ver. 16. Thou shall not do this thing] This just man would not have any man
dye ixdicta causa, before his cause had been heard, were he never so wicked.

For thou speak falsely of Ishmael] So Gedaliah thought: but it proved
otherwise. Ishmael is pleaded for, but without cause. Queen Elizabeth
complained that in trust she had often found treason; So shall all Princes: who
therefore had need to be very cautelous, and yet not over-credulous. Kingcraft
is not easily learned.

CHAP. XLI.
Ver. 1. NOw it came to pass in the seventh moneth] Within two or three
months after the destruction of Jerusalem. So soon did this wicked wretch, so
spurred on by ambition (which ever rides without reins) renew the miserable
fate of his forlorn Country. And the like did Barcocab and his seditions
accomplices after the last devastation: thereby bringing upon themselves again
the Roman forces, who thereupon, under Adrian the Emperor, utterly took away
both their place and their Nation.

That Ishmael of the seed royal] And therefore affecting the Kingdom, or at
least the ruledom: and envying that Gedaliah (a new man, or mushrom rather)
should be preferred before him.

And the Princes of the King] Who had been Princes, and Grandees, as the Hebrew
has it, in Zedekiak's days: with whom, likely, they fled and escaped,
stealing away by night, though he could not, 2 King. 25.4.

Even ten men with him] Whom Ishmael had promised, probably, to restore to
their Principalities, when he should be King or Viceroy at least under Baalis
King of Ammon, the great Engineer of all the ensuing mischief wrought by
Ishmael and these ten Desperado's together with their retinue.

Came unto Gedaliah] To whom before they had done homage: and now came,
pretending to give him a friendly visit.

Tuta frequensque via est per amici fallere nomen:
Tuta frequensque licet sit via, crimen habet.
And there they did eat bread] i. e. They feasted. Much treachery and cruelty
has been exercised at feasts. Absalom slew Amnon at a feast: so did Zimri King
Elah: so did Alexander, Philotas: so does the great Turk, many of his Bashaws;
the black gown is cast upon them as they sit with him at supper, and then they
are strangled.

Ver. 2. Then arose Ishmael] Taking the opportunity, when Gedaliah and his
guests were mero graves, says Josephus, merry with wine: and so, less able to
resist. Turk. Hist.


And the ten men that were with] They and their followers being pugnaces and
audaces, barbarous and brutish persons, skilful to destroy, Ezekiel. 21.31.

And smot Gedaliah the son of Ahikam] See on ver. 1.

And slew him whom the King of Babylon had made Governour] Yea for that very
cause, per invidiam and libidinem regnandi: So true is that of the Tragedian,
Simul ista mundi conditor posuit Deus, Sen. in Thebaide.

Odium atque regnum. --


Ver. 3. Ishmael also slew all the Jews that were with him] Not the Chaldaeans
only: his sword knew no difference; but, being fleshed in blood, he killed all
that came in his way; and the rather that his wickedness might not be noticed
(Mortui non mordent) but that he might carry on his bloody design the better.

Ver. 4. And no man knew it] Heb. A man knew not. See on ver. 3.

Ver. 5. That there came cert in from Shechem and from Shilo] Innocent men, qui
ne verbulo quidem immanem bestiam offenderant, who had not so much as by the
least word offended this brutish butcherly man: but came in the simplicity of
their hearts to worship God, and to wait upon Gedaliah, by the way: which last
seems to be Ishmaels main quarrel against them. See here Eccles. 9.12. with
the Notes.

Having their beards shaven and their clothes rent, and having cut themselves]
These might be well-minded men: though partly through ignorance of the Law in
those blind times, and partly through excess of passion, they went too far,
Heathen-like, in their outward expressions of sorrow ( Levit. 19.27. Deuteronomy.
14.1.) for the public calamity of their Country.

To bring them to the house of the Lord] i. e. To the place where Gods house
lately had been, though now razed and ruined: that there they might worship as
they could, and bewail the desolation of the City and Temple, as Hierom says
the Jews did yearly the destruction of the second Temple; hiring the Roman
Soldiers, that kept it, Vide pessimum ingenium: luget ut lugentes perdat.
Oecolamp.
to let them come to the place, and weep over it.

Ver. 6. And Ishmael came forth of Mizp^h, to meet them] This was another
manner of meeting then that at Mizpeh in Samuels days, 1 Samuel 7. O tempora! O
mores!

Weeping all along as he went] O deep dissimulation, and Crocodiles-tears! That
creature, having killed some living beast, lies upon the dead body, washes
the head thereof with her warm tears: which she afterward devouteth together
with the body. Tears (says the Author of the Turkish History speaking of
Andronicus another Ishmael) by nature were ordained to express the heaviness
of the heart, flowing from the eyes as showers of rain from the clouds: In good
men, the most certain signs of greatest grief, and surest testimonies of inward
torment; but in Andronicus you are not so: Turk. Hist. fol. 56.
you proceed of joy: you promise not to the distressed pity or compassion, but
death and destruction. How many men's eyes have you put out? how many have you
drowned? how many have you devoured? Thus He, and much more to like purpose.

Come to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam] This he says fraudulently, like Sinon in
the Poet, that he might fish and find out how they stood affected to Gedaliah
whom he so deadly hated, that he slaughtered these poor folk for once owning
him, or owing him any service.

Ver. 7. Ishmael the son of Nethaniah slew them] This hell-hound having once
(as other hounds) dipped his tongue in blood, can put no period to his
unparalleld cruelty.

He and the men that were with him] His slaughter-slaves, his Assassines to
help him: for he alone could not have done this bloody execution, unless he
had taken as much time thereunto as that Popish villain did in doing to death
those poor Protestants of Calabria Anno 1550. For as Ishmael here brought these
Eighty innocent men into the midst of the City as into a pound, and there slew
them: so Eighty-eight poor Professors of the truth according to godliness,
being all thrust up in one house together, as in a sheep fold, the Executioner
comes in (says Mr. Fox) and among them takes one and blindfolds him with a
muffler about his eyes, and so leads him forth to a larger place; where be
commands him to kneel down: which being done, he cutteth his throat, and so
leaving him half dead, and taking his butchers knife and muffler all of gore
blood, Act. and Mon. ^59.
comes again to the rest, and so leads them one after another till he had
dispatched them all.

Ver. 8. But there were ten men found among them] Qui miro astu sibi ab indigna
morte provident, who pleaded for their lives, were spared.

Slay us not, for we have treasures in the feild] And these we will willingly
part with for the redemption of our lives. They knew that Soldiers would do
much for money: and what is wealth in comparison of life? Wicked worldlings
would say the like to Death, if their tale might be heard. Henry Beauford
Cardinal, Bishop of Winchester, Fox Mart. vol. 1. p. 925.
and Chancellor of England, in the reign of Henry the sixth, perceiving that he
must dye, murmured at death, that his riches could not reprieve him, till a
further time.

So he forbear and slew them not] Ambition and Covetousness strove for mastery
in this man; and here covetousness conquereth cruelty: This also was it that
put him upon carrying his poor countrymen captive, as hoping to make prize of
them.

Ver. 9. Now the pit -- was it which Asa the King had made for fear of Baasha]
He had made it for some unknown use in the wars: and now is was filled with the
dead bodies of men, for a punishment say some, of his confederating with
Benhadad King of Syria: Vt semper impiorum foedera and confilia nobis sint
suspecta.

Ver. 10. Then Ishmael carried away captive]

Auri sacra fames quid non mortalia cogit
Pectora? --
Even the Kings daughters] His own kinswomen, whom the Babylonian had spared.
It may be he meant to marry one of them (as our Richard the third would have
done his neice Elizabeth) and so to have reigned in her right.

And all the people that remained in Mizpah] Who found less favor from a
false brother, then they had done from a professed enemy: so has the Church
ever done from heretics, then from heathens.

Ver. 11. But when Johanan the son of Kareah and all the Captains -- heard of
all the evil] Ishmael did what he could to conceal the wickedness, till he
had gotten away with his prize: but Rumor outran him, even Fama malum, quo non
aliud velocius ^llum.

Ver. 12. Then they took all the men, and went to fight with Ishmael] This act
of theirs carries the commendation of fortitude, of charity and of piety; like
as did that of Abraham in rescuing Lot: of Gideon and Jehosaphat in delivering
the Israelites from their barbarous and blood-thirsty enemies: of Scanderbeg,
Hunniades, Gustavus King of Sweden, etc. Unless Ismael and Johanan did as
Ismael the Persian King and Selymus the great Turk, who fighting for the Empire
of the East, Turk. hist. 515.
masked their aspiring thoughts under the veil of zeal to their Religion. It
well appears now to the world that neither of them were right, whatever they
pretended.

And they found him by the great waters that are in Gibeon] Where, in David's
days, those youngsters of Helkath-hazzurim had sheathed their swords in their
fellows bowels, 2 Samuel 2.16.

Ver. 13. Then they were glad] God, when he pleases, can suddenly and beyond
all hope, exhilarate men in the midst of miseries, and give deliverance. Turk.
hist. 269.
The like hereunto befell the poor Christian captives when Hunniades had
overthrown Mesites the Turks General.

Ver. 14. So all the people -- cast about and returned] Their hearts were with
Johanan before the battle, as the Athenians were with Flamimus the Roman
General, who came to rescue them, though their bodies were detained by the
tyrants within the walls of their City.

Ver. 15. But Ismael the son of Nethaniah escaped] But with what honor, with
what conscience could this Judas live among the Ammonites? surely this defeat
could not but be more shame to him before the King of Ammon, and more vexation
to his proud heart then death it self. The like befell Stukely the English
traitor in Spain.

Ver. 16. Then took Johanan -- all the remnant] This evil act of theirs does
quite overturn the glory of the former: whilst against the ancient command of
God, the Covenant made with the Chaldees, and the consent of the Prophets, they
will needs down to Egypt, to lean upon that broken reed, that never did them
good, but evil.

Ver. 17. And they departed] They roused from place to place: but being out of
Gods precincts they were also out of his protection: and could expect no good.

And they departed and dwelt in the habitation of Chimham which is by
Bethlehem] Where it seems that David (or Solomon, 1 King. 2.7.) had given him
some lands, which he called by his own name (as men love to do, Psalm. 49.11.)
Goruth Chimham. Josephus says there is a village near Bethlehem that is still
so called. See 2 Samuel 19.38.

To go to enter into Egypt] This was to go out of Gods blessing (as we use to
say) into the worlds warm sunshine: this was to put themselves into the
punishing hands of the living God.

Ver. 18. Because of the Chaldaeans, for they were afraid of them] But they
should rather have sanctified the Lord God in their hearts, and made him their
dread, as Esaias 8.13. The fear of man brings a snare: but whosoever puts his
trust in the Lord shall be safe, Prove. 29.25. See the Notes there.

Ob incustodia^.
Because Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had slain Gedaliah] And together with him
many Chaldaeans, whom Johanan and his captains should have cautioned and
better guarded; as the King of Babylon would better tell them, they thought,
and withal punish them for their neglect.

CHAP. XLII.
Ver. 1. THen all the Captains of the forces and Johanan] Or, even Johanan; he
among the rest and above the rest. Ille huic negotio non interfuit modo sed
etiam praefuit.

And Jezaniah the son of Hoshajah] Brother, belike, to that Azariah, chap.
43.2. a noble pair of brethren in evil.

And all the people] Who follow their Rulers: as in a beast the whole body
follows the head.

Drew near] They came, as clients use to do for learned counsel.

Ver. 2. Let we beseech thee, our supplication be accepted before thee] Here
they seem to humble themselves before Jeremiah the Prophet: which because King
Zedekiah did not, he came to ruin, 2 Chronicles. 26.12.

And pray for us unto the Lord thy God] Good words may be found even in
hell-mouth, sometimes. Who would think but these men had spoken, what they did,
unfainedly, and from their very hearts? when as it soon after appeared, that
all was no better then deep dissimulation. They had made their conclusion
aforehand to go down to Egypt: only in a pre^ence of piety, and for greater
credit, they would have had Gods approbation: which since they cannot, they will
on with their design howsoever, fall back, fall edge. O most hateful hypocrisy!
O contumacy worthy of all men's execration!

Ver. 3. That the Lord thy God may show us the way] But they had set themselves
in the way to Egypt, before they came with this request to the Prophet: why
went they else to Geruth Chimham, the rode toward Egypt, chap. 41.17. why were
they also so peremptory, when they knew Gods mind to the contrary? chap. 43.

And the thing that we may do] Good words all along: but those (we say) are
light cheap: Quid vero verba quaero, facta cum videam? they were as forward to
speak fair, as their ancestors were in the wilderness: but oh that there were
a heart in this people, says God, to do as they have said!

Ver. 4. I have heard you: behold I will pray] The wisdom from above is
perswasible, easy to be entreated, Jam. 3. ult. and good men are ready to
every good work, Tit. 3.1. Jeremy hoped they might speak their whole hearts,
and promises to do his best for them, both by praying and prophesying.

Whatsoever thing the Lord shall answer you, I will declare] Sic veteres nihil
ex se vel potuerunt, vel protulerunt. The Prophets spoke as they were inspired
by the Spirit of truth. Christ spoke nothing but what was consonant to the holy
Scriptures. The Apostles delivered to the Churches what they had received of
the Lord, Irenaeus lib. 3. Eccles. hist. lib. 4. cap. 14.
1 Cor. 11.23. Polycarp told the Churches that he delivered nothing to them,
but what he had received of the Apostles, etc.

Ver. 5. The Lord be a true and faithful witness between us] Did these men
know what it was so solemnly to swear a thing? Or were they stark Atheists,
thus to promise that with an oath, which they never meant to perform? At
sperate Deum memorem fandi atque nefandi. Their King Zedekiah paid dear for his
perjury to God and men.

Ver. 6. Whether it be good, or whether it be evil] i. e. Whether it please us,
or cross us: Veniat, veniat verbum Domini: and submittemus ei, sexcenta si
nobis essent colla, said a good man once: that is, Let Gods Word come to us
once, and he shall be obeyed, whatever come of it. These in the text seem to
say as much; but they say it only: neither was it much to be liked, that they
were so free of their promises, and all in their own strength, without any
condition of help from heaven: as if the matter had been wholly in their own
hands, and they had had free will to whatsoever good purpose or practice.

O coecas mentes hominum! We will obey the voice of the Lord] Yes, as far as a
few good words will go.

Pollicitis dives quilibet esse potest. Ovid.
Ver. 7. And it came to pass, that after ten dayes] So long God held his holy
Prophet in request: and so he does still his best servants many times, thereby
tying, as it were, the sacrifice to the horns of the Altar. How impatient
those wretched Roysters were of such a delay, we may well imagine (the Chinois
use to whip their gods, when they will not hear and help them forthwith) but
God held them off as unworthy of any answer, and seemed by his silence to say
unto them, as Ezekiel. 20.3. Are ye come to enquire of me? As I live, says the
Lord God, I will not be enquired of by you.

Ver. 8. And all the people from the least unto the greatest] For the Word of
God belongs to all, of all sorts: and as the lesser fishes bite soonest, so
the poor are Gospellized, Mat. 11.5. when the richer stand out.

Ver. 9. Unto whom ye sent me to present your supplication] Heb. to make your
supplication fall in his presence. This I have not ceased to do ever since, but
had no answer till now: and it may be that now you may the better regard it.
Cito data cito vilescunt.

Ver. 10. Then will I build you] Promittitur felicitatio; parabola ab
architectura and agricultura desumpta. God promises to bless and settle them,
by a two fold similitude, used also by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.9. ye are Gods
husbandry, ye are Gods building. See chap. 24.6.

For I repent me of the evil] A term taken from men, Genesis 6.6. though
repentance in men is a change of the will: but repentance in God is only the
willing of a change: mutatio rei, non Dei. See chap. 18.8.

Ver. 11. Fear not the King of Babylon] See on chap. 41.18.

For I am with you to save you] Not only to protect you from the Babylonian;
but also to incline his heart to clemency toward you, ver. 12.

Ver. 12. And I will show mercyes unto you] Tender mercyes; such as proceed
from the bowels, and of a parent, nay a mother. This was more then all the rest.

Ver. 13. But if ye say We will not dwell in this land] Because more barren
then Egypt: and besides beset with many and mighty enemies.

Neither obey the voice of the Lord your God] Which you ought to do, whatever
come of it: since rebellion is as witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15.

Ver. 14. Saying no: but we will go into the land of Egypt] Infamous for
idolatry, luxury, and the oppression of your Ancestors there: besides Gods
express prohibition, Deuteronomy. 17.16. and commination of it, as the last and
greatest plague, The Lord shall bring thee into Egypt, Deuteronomy. 28.68.

And there will we dwell] The Prophet now, by their looks, or some other way,
perceived their purpose so do do, whatever they had promised, ver. 5, 6.

Ver. 15. If ye wholly set you faces] As now I see you do: and shall therefore
tell you what to trust unto, with the froward God will wrestle, Psalm. 18.26.

Ver. 16. Then it shall come to pass that the sword which ye feared shall
overtake you there] Categorice intonat Propheta. God has long hands; neither
can wicked men anywhere live out of the reach of his rod.

And the famine whereof ye were afraid] Egypt was very fertile, the granary of
the world: and yet God could cause a famine there: he has treasures of plagues
for sinners, and can never be exhausted.

Ver. 17. They shall dye by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence]
Three threats, answerable to those three promises, ver. 10, 11, 12. in case of
their obedience. Metaph. a metallis.


Ver. 8. As mine anger and my fury has been poured forth] sc. Like scalding
lead, or burning bell-metal, which runeth fiercely, spreads far, and burns
extremely.

Upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem] Out of which fire I have late pulled you as
a brand, the smell thereof is yet upon your clothes as it were: Cavete.

Ver. 19. Go ye not into Egypt] Be ruled, or you will rue it, when you have
learned their evil manners, and shall perish in their punishments. It is better
for you to be in cold irons at Babylon, then to serve idols in Egypt at never
so much liberty. Your fathers brought a golden calf thence: Jeroboam brought
two.

Ver. 20. For ye dissembled in your hearts] Heb. ye seduced in your souls, or
in your minds. The Vulgar has it, you deceived your souls, and not God; by
playing fast and loose with him: by dealing with him ac si puer esset, scurra,
vel morio.

Ver. 21. But ye have not obeyed the voice of the Lord] Nay you take a clean
contrary course: as if ye would despitefully spit in the face of heaven, and
wrestle a fall with the Almighty.

Ver. 22. Now therefore know certainly that ye shall dye] In running from death
ye shall but run to it, as Jonas did.

Quo fugis Encelade? quascun que accesseris oras,
Sub Jove semper eris. --
CHAP. XLIII.
Ver. 1. ANd it came to pass that when Jeremiah had made an end, etc.] See
here how wicked men, and hypocrites especially, grow worse and worse, deceiving
and being deceived. Balaam being resolved to curse however, went not as at
other times, but set his face toward the wilderness, Number. 24.12. Now he would
build no more altars, but curse whatever came of it: so would these
refractaries, without Gods good leave, go down to Egypt, putting it to the
venture. Jeremyes sweet words were even lost upon them.

Ver. 2. Then spoke Azariah] See on chap. 42.1.

And all the proud men] Pride is the root of rebellion. See chap. 13.15. These
men's Pride budded, as Ezekiel. 7.10. and as the leprosy, brake forth in their
foreheads. See Hos. 7.1. with the Note.

Saying unto Jeremiah, Thou speak falsely] By this foul aspersion, not
proved at all, they seek to discredit his Prophecy: like as the Jews at this
day do the New Testament; and the Papists the book of Martyrs and other
Monuments of the Church, saying of them, So many lines, so many lies.

Ver. 3. But Baruc the son of Neriah sets thee on against us] A likely
matter: what should Baruc get by that? but malice cares not how truly or
rationally it speaks or acts, so it may gall or kill. Jeremy and Baruc must
be said to pack together, and to collude for a common disturbance: like as the
Papists say Luther and Zuinglius did; when as they knew nothing one of another
for a long time after that they began to stickle against Popery, in several
climates: and when they did hear of one another, they differed exceedingly, in
the doctrine of the Sacrament especially.

Ver. 4. So Johanan the son of Kareah, etc.] Nothing is more audacious and
desperate then an hypocrite, when once discovered. Now these subdoli show
themselves in their colors, appear in their likeness, going on end with their
work.

Ver. 5. But Johanan -- took all the remnant of Judah] Whose preservation had
been but a reservation to further mischief, a just punishment of their
incorrigibleness.

Ver. 6. And Jeremiah the Prophet and Baruc the son of Neriah] This was not
without a special Providence of God, that these Desperado's might still have a
Prophet with them, for the making of them the more inexcuseable. If it befall
any of Gods faithful servants, to be hurried whither they would not, as it did
Jeremy and Baruc here, Paul also and Peter, Joh. 21.18. Ignatius, Polycarp, and
other prisoners and sufferers for the truth in all ages, let them comfort
themselves with these examples.

Ver. 7. Thus came they even to Tahpanhes] A chief City of Egypt, called also
Hanes, Esa. 30.4. Hierom calls it Tunis; and Herodotus, Daphnis Pelusiae.

Ver. 8. Then came the Word of the Lord unto Jeremiah in Tahpanhes, saying] And
although many more words besides came to him whiles he was there, and many
remarkable passages fell out, yet the holy Ghost has recorded no more thereof,
then what we find in this and the next Chapter.

Ver. 9. Take great stones in thine hand] Bricks, wherewith Egypt abounded, as
being much of it muddy by reason of the inundation of the River Nilus: hence
also their chief City was called Pelusium, or Daphnis Pelusiae. See ver. 7. It
is ordinary with Jeremy to join Paradigms with his Prophecies, as here, that
they might be the more evident, and take the deeper impression.

Ver. 10. Behold I will send and take Nebuchadnezzar] By a secret instinct put
into his heart.

And will set his throne upon these stones] This was dangerous for Jeremy to
say at the Court-gate, and in the hearing of so many disaffected Jews, who
would be ready enough to make the worst of every thing. Some say they stoned
him with brickbats for this very prophecy.

Ver. 11. And when he cometh] Being sent and set on by God.

He shall smite the land of Egypt] As for their Idolatry, etc. so especially
for harboring these perfidious Jews, whom divine Vengeance still pursues
hot-foot, and will not suffer them to live anywhere, since they would not be
persuaded to live in Gods good land, and by his good laws.

Ver. 12. And I will kind's a fire in the house of the gods of Egypt] Goodly
gods they were that could not keep their Temples from burning. Diana, said one
jestingly, was so busy at the birth of great Alexander, that she could not a
while to be at Ephesus, where her stately Temple was at the same time set on
fire by Herostratus.

And he shall array himself with the land of Egypt as a Shepherd puts on his
garment] i. e. Easily and speedily shall he carry away the spoil of that rich
country, there being none there to hinder him either in taking them, or
carrying them away:

Pastor enim secum portat tectumque, laremque. Ver. 13. He shall break also the
images of Bethshemesh] Or Heliopolis, Lib. 2.
where the Sun was worshipped with great superstition, as Herodotus writes.
The Hebrews also called this City On or Aven, that is Vanity or Iniquity, as
well they might for the abominable idolatry there committed. Josephus says
that five years after this prophecy, Antiq. l. 10. c. 11.
Nebuchad^ezzar (who had Egypt given him as pay for his pains at Tire) invaded
Egypt; and the King thereof being slain, he set up another there, and took the
Jews that remained alive away into Babylon.

CHAP. XLIV.
Ver. 1. THe Word that came to Jeremiah] No word of comfort (how could it be,
so long as they lived in open rebellion against the Lord?) but all of reproof
and threatening: for why? they were obdurate and obstinate, and did daily
proficere in pejus, grow worse and worse.

Which dwell at Migdol] To these chief Cities Jeremiah resorted, to speak unto
them. Noph, alias Moph, Hos. 9.6. is held to be Memphis, now Alcair.

Ver. 2. Ye have seen all the evils that I have brought upon Jerusalem] And
should have been warned by this exemplum terrificum, dreadful instance of mine
indignation. They that will not take example, are worthily made examples.

Ver. 3. Because of their wickednesse] That root of all their wretchedness.

Ver. 4. Howbeit I sent unto you all my servants] Here the badnesse of men, and
goodness of God, come equally to be considered.

Saying, Oh do not this abominable thing which I hate] Is were happy if this
saying of God weres always, shrilly sounding in our ears, whenever we are about
to do any thing that is evil. It would surely be a notable Retentive from vice.

Ver. 5. But they harkened not] See chap. 7.24, 26.

Ver. 6. Wherefore my fury and mine anger was poured forth] A Metaphor from
metalles. See chap. 42.18.

Ver. 7. Wherefore commit you this evil against your souls] This
land-desolating, soul-destroying sin of idolatry.

Ver. 8. In that ye provoke me to wrath] This is a most pithy and peircing
Sermon all along: not unlike that preached by Steven, for the which he was
stoned, Acts 7. and likely enough that this was Jeremy's last Sermon also.

Ver. 9. Have ye forgotten the wickedness of your fathers] Mira hic verborum
apparet emphasis. What a powerful and pressing discourse is this! Sed surdis
fabulam, but they were as a stake in the water that stirs not.

Ver. 10. They are not humbled] Not tamed, not affected with attrition, much
less with contrition for their sins. This I tell thee, Jeremy: for to them I
am weary with talking to so little purpose. Plactuntur sed non flectuntur:
corripiuntur sed non corriguntur.

Ver. 11. Behold I will set my face against you for evil] I will be implacable
as you are irreclaimable.

Ver. 12. That have set their faces] I also will set my face against such, ver.
11. and they shall all be consumed and fall: Oh what work has sin made in the
world!

Ver. 13. For I will punish them] Let them never think that they shall one day
be settled again in their own country: they could easily come down into Egypt;
Sed revocare gradum, etc. Hic labor, etc.

I will watch them for ever going back again: let them set their hearts at rest
for that matter, it will never be.

Ver. 14. For none shall return, but such as shall escape] sc. From these
fighters against God, Johanah and his accomplices. The Talmudists tell us (but
who told them?) that Nebuchadnezzar at his conquest of Egypt sent back into
Judea, Jeremy and Baruch, etc.

Ver. 15. Then all the men which knew that their wives had burnt incense] And
by suffering them so to do, had consented to what they had done: for qui non,
cum potest, prohibet, jubet.

And all the women that stood by] Mulieres quicquid volunt valde volunt. Women
as they have less of reason then men, Omne malum ex Gynaecio.
so more of passion, being wilful in their way, and often carrying their men
along with them.

Sicut ferrum trahit magnes:
Sic masculum suum trahit Agnes.
Answered Jeremiah saying] One of the women speaking for the rest: and that
might well be one of Zedekiah's daughters; the men conniving, and well content
therewith, See ver. 19.

Ver. 16. As for the word which thou have spoken unto us in the name of the
Lord, we will not hearken unto thee] This is just woman-like: See ver. 15. When
man lost his free will, says One, woman got it: and whereas there came twelve
kabs (measures) of speech at first down from Heaven, women ran away with ten of
them, say the Rabbines merrily. Here they are very talkative and peremptory. In
some there is a strong inclination, a vehement impetus to whoredom, which the
Prophet Hosea calls a spirit of whoredom: Such there was in these women to
idolatry: they were fully set upon's.

Ver. 17. But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth out of our own
mouth] Heb. we will doing do every word has gone forth from our mouth; that we
may be dicti nostri dominae, as big as our words, our vows especially, ( as
ver. 25.) which we made to worship the Queen of heaven, in case we came safe
into Egypt.

To burn incense to the Queen of heaven] See chap. 7.18.

As we have done, we and our fathers, our Kings and our Princes] Antiquity is
here pleaded, and Authority, and Plenty and Peace. These are now the Popish
plea's, and the pillars of that rotten religion. It is the old religion say
they: and has potent Princes for her Patrons, and is practiced in Rome the
Mother Church, and has plenty and peace where it is professed, and where they
have nothing but Moss and Matins. These are their arguments: but very poor
ones, as were easy to evince. But as women (counted the devouter sex) have
always carried a great stroke with their husbands, as did Eve, Jezabel,
Eudoxia, etc. (the women of Antioch could do much against Paul, and Barnabas,
Acts 13.) so the people are indeed a weighty but unweildy body, Plus valet
malum inolitum quam bonum insolitum.
slow to remove from what they have been accustomed to. The Irish will not be
persuaded to put geeres and harness on their horses, but will have the plough
still tied to their tails, as they have been: neither in matters of religion
will they be drawn to leave their old Mumpsimus for the new Sumpsimus: so
powerful is usage, and so sweet our present though perverse opinions and
persuasions.

For then had we plenty of victuals] Just so does the Church of Rome borrow her
Mark from the Markets plenty or cheapnesse of all things. But one chief reason
of that, is the scarcity of money that was in our fathers days, and the plenty
thereof that is in ours, by means of the rich mines in the West Indies, not
discovered till the days of Henry the seventh. Hollinshead says, that some
old men he knew, who told of times in England, when it was accounted a great
matter that a Farmer could show five shillings or a Noble together in silver.

And were well, and saw no evil] Vbi utilitas ibi pietas, says Epictetus:
(...).

Si ventri been, si lateri. Horat.


and deos quisque sibi utiles cudis, says Another: for profit men will be of
any religion. If the belly may be filled, the back fitted, etc. modo serveat
olla, so the pot may boil, much will be yielded to: It is well observed that
the Papists are most corrupt in those things where their profit, ease, or
honor is engaged. In the doctrine of the Trinity and other points that touch
not upon these they are sound.

Ver. 18. But since we have left off to burn Incense to the Queen of heaven --
we have wanted all things] This was non-causa pro causa: Not unlike hereunto
was that gross mistake of certain Lutheran Ministers, Buroughs on Hos. tom.
1. page 465.
who not long since consulting at Hamborough about the causes and cure of
Germanies calamities, concluded it was because their images in Churches were
not adorned enough; which therefore they would procure done.

Ver. 19. And when we burnt incense to the Queen of heaven] So the Papists also
call the Virgin Mary, and idolize her, as the word here rendered to worship her
does properly signify: idoli rejectitii appellationem in eam transferentes.

Did we make her cakes without our men?] i. e. Without our husbands privity and
approbation? But is that a sufficient excuse? should not God be obeyed rather
then men? Plutarch. Moral. 318.
A wife is not to perform such blind obedience to her husband as Plutarch
prescribes, when he lays it as a law of wedlock on the wife, to acknowledge
and worship the same gods and none else, but those whom her husband honors,
and reputeth for gods.

Ver. 20. Then Jeremiah said unto all the people] The Prophet, without any
special command from God, moved with a spirit of zeal, confuteth that
blasphemy of theirs, and shows plainly that idolatry makes no people happy,
but the contrary: though this be an old plea or rather cavil, answered fully
long since by Cyprian against Demetrian, Augustine de civt. Dei, and Orosius.

Ver. 21. Ye, and your fathers, your Kings and you Princes] This was another
thing they stood much upon, that their fathers had done it: so had their
Grandees. If men can say We have sinned with our fathers, they think it is
enough. The heretic Dioscurus cried out I hold with the Fathers, I am cast out
with the Fathers, etc. yea Hierom once desired leave of Augustine to err with
seven Fathers, whom he found of his opinion. But what says the Scripture? Be
not ye the servants of men, 1 Cor. 7.23. And what said a great Politician, I
will not live by example, but by rule: neither will I pin my faith on another
sleeve, because I know not whither he may carry it.

Did not the Lord remember them?] When you thought he had forgot them. Sin may
sleep a long time, like a sleeping debt, not called for of many years, etc.

Ver. 22. So that the Lord could no longer bear] His abused mercy turned into
fury: See chap. 15.6.

Ver. 23. Because ye have burnt incense, etc.] See chap. 42.21. and 43.7.

Ver. 24. Hear the Word of the Lord] Not my word only. See on ver. 20.

Ver. 25. Ye and your wives] Who ought to be the better, but are much worse the
one for the other; the devil having broken your head with your own rib.

We will surely perform our vowes] A little better then many Popish votaries
(and others also not a few) do now-a days, Erasm. Col. in Naufr.
not unlike him in Erasmus, who in a storm promised the Virgin a picture of wax
as big as St. Christopher, but when he came to shore, would not give a
tallow-candle.

Ver. 26. Behold I have sworn by my great name] Jehovah, my incommunicable
name, my proper name: or by myself: and that's no small oath.

Ver. 27. Behold I will watch over them for evil] I will watch them a shrewd
turn, as we say: I will take my time to hit them, when I may most hurt them.

Ver. 28. Yet a small number] Methe mispar, men of number, a poor few: still
God reserveth a remnant for royal use.

Shall know whose word shall stand] Because they are so peremtory and resolute,
I shall try it out with them: I shall be as cross as they; yet still in a way
of Justice.

Ver. 29. That I will punish you in this place] Which you looked upon as a
place of surest security and safeguard: and would not harken to me opening my
bounties-bosom to you at home.

Ver. 30. Behold I will give Pharaoh Hophra] Called also Vaphres, and by
Herodotus Apries, Antiq. l. 10. c. 11. Hieron. in Thren. cap. 4.
being nephew to Necho who slew Josiah. A very proud Prince he says Apries
was, slain by Amasis, who succeeded him: but others gather from this text, and
from Ezekiel. 29.19. and 31.11, 15, 18. that he was slain by Nebuchadnezzar.
Josephus also and Jerome say as much.

CHAP. XLV.
Ver. 1. THe word that Jeremiah the Prophet spoke unto Baruch] It is thought
that Jeremiah preached his last when he prophesied in the foregoing Chapter the
destruction of Pharaoh Hophra, and together with him of the Jews that were
found in Egypt by Nebuchadnezzar. He seemed to them to speak stones (as the
proverb has it) and therefore they stoned him to death as Epiphanius, and
others report. Lapides loquitur.
This word that he spoke to Baruch belongs to chap. 36. and should have been
annexed unto it in a natural order; as appears both by the date and by the
matter. Baruch had with much pains and patience, first written out Jeremiah's
Prophecies, and then read them to the people, and afterward to the Princes.
For this piece of work he expected, belike, some good piece of preferment (as
the Apostles also did, for their forsaking all, and following Christ. Mat.
18.19.20. etc. Thus flesh will show it self in the best, and in many things we
offend all.) But instead of any such thing, Baruch, together with his Master
Jeremy, was sought for to be slaughtered: and besides he meets with here a
contrary Prophecy, whereby, before he is comforted, he is sharply reproved. 1.
For a dastardly despondency of mind, because his rising expectation, it seems,
was frustrated: 2. For a vain ambitious self-seeking, which was not hid from
God.

Ver. 2. Thus says the Lord the God of Israel unto thee O Baruch] Whom he
knows by name, and for whom he has in store an ample recompense of reward:
for never yet did any one do or suffer ought for Gods sake, that complained of
an hard bargain.

Ver. 3. Thou did say] i. e. Thou did think, like a poor pusillanimous
creature as thou art. But Jeremy could pity him in this infirmity, because it
had sometime been his own case, chap. 15. and may befall the best. Pray for me,
I say pray for me, said Father Latimer; for sometimes I am so fearful and
fainthearted, that I could even run into a mouse-hole.

For the Lord has added grief to my sorrow] So we do often complain, non quia
dura sed quia moll^s patimur, without cause, through feeble-mindednesse. And
when we speak of our crosses, we are eloquent often beyond truth: we add, we
multiply, we rise in our discourse, as here.

Ver. 4. Behold that which I have built, etc.] A Metaphor, as is before noted,
ab architectura and agricultura. I am turning all upside-down, and would
thou only go free and untoucht of the common calamity? It Is no whit likely, thou
must share with the rest.

Ver. 5. And seek thou great things for thy self?] This is, says One, as if
a man should have his house on fire, and instead of seeking to quench his
house, should go and trim up his chambers: or as if when the ship is sinking,
he should seek to enrich his cabin.

Seek them not] For what so great felicity can thou fancy to thy self in
things so fading, as the case now stands especially?

But thy life will I give thee for a prey] Which, in these killing and dying
times, in such dear years of time, is no small mercy.

CHAP. XLVI.
Ver. 1. THe Word of the Lord which came to Jeremiah against the Gentiles] God
had at first set him over the nations and over the Kingdoms (as a
plenipotentiary) to root out and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw
down, to build and to plant, chap. 1.10. This power of his the Prophet had put
forth and exercised against his own Nation of the Jews, whom he had doomed to
destruction, and lived to see execution done accordingly. Now he takes their
enemies, the neighbor Nations to do; telling them severally what they shall
trust to. And this indeed the Prophet had done before in part, and in fewer
words, under the type of a cup of wine to be divided among and drunk up by the
Nations, chap. 25.15, 16. etc. but here to the end of chap. 51. more plainly
and plentifully. Isaiah had done the same in effect, chap. 13. to 24. Ezekiel
also from chap. 25. to 33. that by the mouth of three such witnesses, every
word might stand; and this burden of the Nations might be confirmed. Jeremiah
begins fitly with the Egyptians, who beside the old enmity, had lately slain
good King Josiah, with whom dyed all the prosperity of the Jewish people, who
were thenceforth known (as the Thebanes also were, after the death of their
Epaminondas) only by their overthrows, and calamities.

Ver. 22. Against Egypt] First: That the Jews might not rely on that broken
reed as they did, to their ruin, because they would never be warned.

Against the army of Pharaoh Neche] Who had beaten Nebuchadnezzar Priscus at
Carchemish, and gotten all the Country from Egypt to Euphrates; but was
afterward himself beaten out again by Nebuchadnezzar the second, surnamed
Magnus, in the first year of his reign, which was the fourth year of Jehojakim:
Joseph. l. 10. c. 7. Hypotu^osis Ironica. State galeati, loricati, lanceati:
sed frustra. (...). Pausan.
who also was glad to become his tributary. Now this overthrow of the Egyptian,
who was driven out of all Syria, as far as Pelusium by the Babylonian, is here
foretold.

Ver. 3. Order ye the buckler and shield.] So Pharaoh is brought in bespeaking
his forces, when he was going to fight against Nebuchadnezzar: Or, so the
Prophet bespeaketh the Egyptians Ironically, and by way of scoff. q. d. Do so:
but all shall be to no purpose (see the like Isa. 8.9. Congregamini and
vincemini) yea though upon Pharaoh's should should be the same inscription that
was once upon Agamemnon, This is the terror of all mortal wights.

Ver. 4. Harness the horses] Those warlike creatures, but yet vain things for
safety, Psalm. 33.17. Prove. 21.31. Egypt was famous for the best horses, Deuteronomy.
17.16. 1 King. 10.26, 28. but the Lord delights not in the strength of an
horse, etc. Psalm. 147.10, 11.

Ver. 5. Wherefore have I seen them dismaia?] Surprised with a Panick terror.

And are fled apace] Heb. Fled a flight.

For fear was round about] A proverbial form, chap. 6.25.

Ver. 6. Let not the swift fly away] i. e. Think to save themselves by flight.

Nor the mighty man escape] i. e. Think to save himself by his might, be he
never so stouth-earted.

Herod. lib. 2. (...).
Toward the North] i. e. Toward Carchemish, the stage of the war, where
Pharaoh-Necho had beaten Nebuchadnezzar the elder, and is now beaten in the
same place by Nebuchadnezzar the younger, alterna victoria.

Ver. 7. Who is this that comes up like a flood?] Pharaoh with his forces is
here notably described, vivo sermonum color, and compared to an impetuous
river, that threatens to overflow and swallow up all. See Isa. 8.7.

Ver. 8. Egypt rises up like a flood] Nilus-like: the Egyptians were an
ancient, proud, luxurious people.

And he says I will go up and cover the earth] See the like vain vaunts of
this proud people, Exodus 1^ 9, 10.

Ver. 9. Come up ye horses] i. e. Ye horsemen, all the cavallery of Egypt, as
Exodus 14.7.

And rage] Or, bestir your selves as if ye were wood or mad: instar furiarum
discurrite per camp^s.

The Ethiopians and the Lybians] The Africans that were confederates and
Auxiliaries to the Egyptians.

Ver. 10. For this is the day of the Lord God of hosts] See Esaias 34.5, 6, 7, 8.

Ver. 11. Go up unto Gilead and take balm] See chap. 8.22. with Genesis 37.25. q.
d. thy calamity is no less uncurable then ignominious.

Ver. 12. The Nations have heard of thy shame] Of the shameful defeat given
thee: so that thou who wast once a terror to them, art now a scorn.

For the mighty man has stumbled against the mighty] And this is the sum of
the talk that goes of thee.

Ver. 13. The Word that the Lord spake] Another Prophecy, but against Egypt
also. God had yet a further quarrel to that Country for the death of good
Josiah, their delivering up Vriah Gods faithful servant to the sword of
Jehoiakim; their idolatry, pride, perfidy, etc.

How Nebuchadnezzar -- should come and smite the land of Egypt] In the five and
twentieth year of his reign, as Jeremy also had set forth by a sign, chap.
44.30,

Ver. 14. Publish in Noph, and in Tahpanes] See chap. 44.1.

For the sword shall devour round about thee] Egypt was no whit amended by the
former discomfiture at Carchemish: therefore is now wholly subdued by the
Babylonian Conqueror, about three and twenty years after. And the like befell
the Greek Empire overturned by the Turks.

Ver. 15. They stood not, because the Lord did drive them] He struck a Panick
terror into them: and then no wonder that men flee at the noise of a shaken
leaf.

Ver. 16. Yea one fell upon another] See ver. 12. in a confused flight, it is
wont so to be.

And they said] The Auxiliary and Stipendiary soldiers said so, when once they
saw that there was no good to be done for the Egyptians: Nebuchadnezzar having
so wasted all.

Steperus est.
Ver. 17. Pharaoh King of Egypt is but a noyse] A mere flash: one that vaunteth
and vapoureth, and that is all. So of Charles the eighth King of France,
Guicciardin says, that in his expedition to Naples he came into the field like
thundering and lightning, but went out like a snuff: more then a man at first,
and less then a woman at last.

He has passed the time appointed] He let slip his best opportunity: which, in
giving battle, is sometimes the loss of all. Charles King of Sicily and
Jerusalem was for this fault called Carolus Cunctator, i. e. the Delayer.

Ver. 18 As I live] Formula jurandi Elliptica, and Deo propria: let none
presume to swear in that sort.

Surely as Tabor is among the mountains] As Tabor surmounteth and commands
the little hills round about it, and Carmel the adjoining sea (over which it
hangs a promontory) so shall Nebuchadnezzar come into Egypt, and subdue the
whole Country.

Ver. 19. O thou daughter dwelling in Egypt] But not likely long to dwell there.

Furnish thy self to go into captivity] Heb. make thee instruments or
implements of captivity. Sarcinis reculisque collectis, prepare to be packing.

Ver. 20. Egypt is like a very fair heifer] Vitula elegans, a trim bullock,
Juvenca petusca.
worshipping Apis the Bull and Mnenis the Cow, and unaccustomed to the yoke of
subjection, as Hos. 10.11. but I shall bring her to it.

Destruction cometh] Or, excision from the North comes, comes, certo, cito,
penitus venit, Ezekiel. 7.6. there come those that shall cut up this fair heifer,
or fat calf.

Ver. 21. Also her hired men in the midst of her like fatted bullocks] Heb.
bullocks of the stall, not like to do much good service in respect of their
luxury and petulancy: Fat Eglon had but sluggish soldiers. Campania with her
delicacies, matred Hannibals forces. These mercenaries carried themselves as if
hired non ad militiam sed saginam, not to fight, but to fat themselves.

Ver. 22. The voice thereof (of Egypt) shall go like a serpent] Submissa voce
loquetur, she shall hiss and whisper, as being daunted and damped, Vox trepida
and prae metu instar serpentu^ st^idula.
scarce able to mutter or utter ought for fear, Esa. ^9.4.

Ver. 23. They shall cut down her forrest] i. e. Her many Cities. Herodotus
tells of one thousand and twenty Cities that were in the land of Egypt, in
the days of King Amasis.

Because they are more then the grashoppers] The Babylonian fellers are: Lib.
2. Diodor. l. 1. c. 31.
and those many hands, will make light work.

Ver. 24. The daughter of Egypt shall be confounded] This is, in plain terms,
Subjungit Epiphonema.
the sum of all that had been said before.

Ver. 25. The Lord of hosts, the God of Israel saith] And shall he say and not
do? Number. 23.19. shall the Word of God be broken? Joh. 10.35.

Ver. 26. Behold I will punish the multitude of No] Called populous No, H^die
dicitur Alexandria.
Nah. 3.8. (populous as Nineveh) so Galilee of the Gentiles: some render it
nourishing No.

And their Kings] Here Calvin conjectureth that Pharaoh had made many of his
Princes Kings for his greater magnificence: but this came down soon after. A
bulging wall is near unto a downfall.

And Pharaoh] Hophra, chap. 44.30.

And all them that trust in him] As the Jews in Egypt did.

Ver. 26. And afterward it shall be inhabited] Forty years after, Ezekiel. 29.13.
sc. in the days of Amasis, whom Cambyses the Persian conquered: after which it
remained subject to the Persian Monarchs 150. years says Eusebius, being but a
base and tributary Kingdom.

Ver. 27. But fear not thou, O my servant Jacob] If Egypt find so much favor,
as ver. 26. what may not thou hope for? See the same, chap. 30.10.

Ver. 28. Fear thou not O Jacob, etc.] See chap. 30.11.

But correct thee in measure, etc.] God deals much otherwise with his own
people then he does with unbeleevers, whose prosperity as it is full of
thorns, so their adversity is but a foretaste of eternal torment: whereas all
things, even afflictions also, work together for good to them that love God,
etc.

CHAP. XLVII.
Ver. 1. BEfore that Pharaoh smote Gaza] Called also Gazer and Gazera, having
its name not from the Persian Gaza signifying wealth or treasure, but from an
Hebrew word signifying strength. It was first smitten by Pharaoh at his return
from Carchemish likely, after he had slain Josiah, and afterward worsted the
Babylonian at Euphrates. Next by Nebuchadnezzar, this and the four other
satrapies of the Philistines were overrun then when he came against Egypt.
After that, it was besieged and taken by Alexander the great who laid it waste.
Yet was it built again and called Constantia after the name of Constantine the
great his sister, being one of the chief Cities in Syria, and having received
the faith. Eusebius de vit. Constant. l. 4.


Ver. 2. Behold waters rise up out of the North] The Chaldaean, as a mighty
torrent, shall overflow the whole Country and bury all as it were in one
universal grave of waters, as once at the deluge. So Esa. 8.7. This seems to
have been done somewhat before Egypt was destroyed: when Moab, Ammon and Syria,
and therein Palestine, drank of the same cup.

Ver. 3. The Fathers shall not look back to their children] Though never so
dear to them ((...) the Greeks call them, and the Latins have their Filius of
(...)) but shall be sollicitous of their own lives only; qui de Deo ne
tantillum quidem fuerant solliciti.

For feebleness of hands] Through fear and fail of vital spirits: so as to
forget natural affection also.

Ver. 4. Because of the day that comes to spoil all the Philistines] God will
find a time of vengeance to fall upon the wicked enemies of his people, though
he bear long with them. Patientia Dei quo diuturnior, eo minacior. The wicked
practices against the just and gnasheth upon him with his teeth. The Lord
shall laugh at him: for he sees that his day is coming, Psalm. 37.12, 13.

And to cut of from Tyrus and Sidon] The inhabitants whereof were the
Philistines kinsmen and confederates, but could not rescue them or deliver
themselves from the Chaldean Conqueror.

The remnant of the Country of Caphtor] These Caphtorius were neither the
Cappadocians, the Cyprians, nor the Colchians, as sundry make them; but as of
the same lineage with the Philistines, Genesis 10.13, 14. so their accomplices and
confederates, with whom therefore they were to fare alike.

Levit. 19.27, 28. Jer. 16.6.
Ver. 5. Baldness is come upon Gaza] i. e. Extreme grief, which might have been
prevented, had she profited by her former calamity, ver. 1. But till God come
in with sanctifying grace, Afflictions, those hammers of his do but beat upon
cold iron.

Adrichom.
Askelon is cut off] Or, is silenced: which was wont to be full of singing,
dancing and loud luring. Here was born, they say, Herod the insanticide,
surnamed therefore Ascalonita.

With the remnant of their valley] Palestine lay most of it low, and was yet to
be laid lower.

Ver. 6. O thou sword of the Lord] So called because whencesoever it comes, it
is bathed in heaven, Isa. 34.5. See chap. 25.29. Judge. 7.18, 20.

How long will it be ere thou be quiet? Erisne in opere semper? will thou ever
be eating flesh and drinking blood? war, the shorter, the better. Of the
Pirates war, as the Romans called it, Aug. de Civit. Dei.
Augustine reports to the just commendation of Pompey, that it was by him
incredibili celeritate and temporis brevitate confectum, quickly dispatched, and
made an end of.

Ver. 7. How can it be quiet?] Heb. How shall thou be quiet? Here the Prophet
quieteth himself howsoever by an humble submission to his holy will, who had
put the sword in commission. Gods will is the rule of right, neither can force
or entreaty prevail ought against it in this world: much less in the world to
come, where each one must hold him to his doom, which is irreversible.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Ver. 1. AGainst Moab] That bastardly brood, infamous for their inveterate
hatred of Gods Israel, at whom they were anciently irked, fretted, vexed,
though no way provoked, Number. 22.3. whom also they outwitted, by the counsel of
Balaam, in the business of Baal-peor, Number. 25. had been plagued and judged by
the Kings of Israel (by David especially) as also by Sennacherib, Isa. 15, and
16. but were no whit amended: and are therefore here, and Ezekiel. 25.9. threatened
with utter destruction by the Chaldeans; and that very much in a scoffing way:
like as they were a proud, petulant, scornful people, despisers of all other
Nations, but especially of the Jews their near neighbors and Allies.

Woe unto Nebo] Their oracular City, as it may seem by the name. See Esa. 15.2.

Eipolis.
Kirjathaim is confounded] It is of a dual form: and so seems to have been a
double City, as was of old Jerusalem; and as are now Rome, Prague, Cracovia.

Misgab is confounded] It signifies the high place: and is the same, say some,
with Bamoth, Number. 21, 20. and Selah, Isa. 16.1.

Ver. 2. There shall be no more praise of Moab] This may be taken either of a
City so called, or of the whole Country: as now Muscovia is often put for all
Russia. A^iopolis d^cta. Adudit s^^e Propheta ad singularum civitatum nomina.
Jun.


In Hesho^ they have devised evil against it] Or better thus, De Heshbone, etc.
As concerning Heshbon, they (the Chaldees) have devised evil against it. There
is an elegant allusion in the original, to the names of the places both in
H^shbon and in Madmen.

Ver. 3. A voice of crying] They would not cry for their sins: they shall
therefore cry for their miseries with desperate and bootlesse tears: and yet
worse one day.

Ver. 4. Moab is destroyed] i. e. Shall be shortly.

Her little ones have caused a cry to be heard] Whilst they either are forsaken
of their parents, as chap. 47.3. or else see them to be slain, or carried away
captives.

Ver. 5. Continual weeping shall go up] Heb. weeping with weeping shall go up.
i. e. They shall weep abundantly.

Ver. 6. Flee, save your lives] Whatever else ye lose.

And be like the heath in the wildernesse] Which is little worth: See chap.
17.6. Sit there sad and solitary.

Ver. 7. For because thou have trusted in thy works] Thy creature-confidence
and thine idolatry have undone thee.

Chemosh shall go forth into captivity] Chemosh (unde (...)) was the Moabites
God, and is thought to be the same with Bacchus, or Priapus. He is here called
Chemish by way of contempt.

Ver. 8. And the spoiler shall come] i e. Nebuchadnezzar.

As the Lord has spoken] Who has given him a commission, and made him his
executioner.

Ver. 9. Give wings unto Moab] Let him flee his utmost -- addat timor alas: but
the Chaldaean Eagle will easily overcatch him.

Ver. 10. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord deceitfully] Or slackly,
or hastingly, to the halves; Late patet haec sententia. The work of destroying
Moab is here mainly meant. But the text takes in all lawful employments; these
are Gods works, and must be done vigorously, with all our might, in obedience
to God, and for his greatest glory. Not Soldiers only that have a good cause
and in a good calling, must likewise take a good courage, and do execution
lustily: but Magistrates also, who are Keepers of both Tables of the Law, must
do right to all without partiality: accounting it better to be counted a busy
Justice then an honest Gentleman. Ministers must look to the Ministry which
they have received of the Lord, Verbi minister es: hoc age. Perkinsi hoc erat
symb^lum.
to fulfill the same. Every man in his particular place and station must be not
slothful in business but fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord: non tanquam
canis ad Nilum, sed ut Cygnus ad Thamesin: in Gods immediate service
especially, men must stir up themselves to take hold of him: minding the work,
and not doing it in a customary, formal, bedulling way. A very Heathen could
say, Aristides.
Ignavia in rebus divinis est nefaria, Dullness in divine duties is abominable.
And Numa King of the Romans made a Law, that none should be careless or
cursory in the service of God: and appointed an Officer to cry often to the
people at such a time Hoc agite, Mind what ye are about, and do it to your
utmost. He that is ambitious of Gods curse, let him do otherwise.

Ver. 11. Moab has been at ease from his youth] And his ease has destroyed
him, as Prove. 1.32. He dwells near the Mare mortuum, and is become a very
mare mortuum: i. e. a dead Sea. Because he has had no changes, therefore he
fears not God, Psalm. 55.19. Sibi constat in facultatibus, etc. he is rich and
resty: here is good booty for the Soldiers, who should therefore bestir them.

And he has settled on his lees] As having never been turned out of his
Country: which may well be called his mother, as the lees are called the mother
of wine. But now his time is come to be transvasated, to be emptied from vessel
to vessel, to be carried captive.

Ver. 12. That I will send him wanderers] Peregrinantes qui peregre agant eum,
the Chaldaean vagrants (as he proudly calls and counts them) but they shall
make a vagrant of him in good earnest.

And shall empty his vessels, etc.] Moab abounded with the best wine: but
dwelling so near Sodom, his grapes also became grapes of Sodom and clusters of
Gomorrah: his manners were Sodomitical too. It was but time therefore to send
those that should empty his vessels and break his bottels: carry him into
another Country where he might get a new taste, and his sent be changed.

Ver. 13. As the house of Israel was ashamed of Bethel] When their golden calf
was carried into captivity.

Ver. 14. How say ye We are mighty?] q.d. Ye have great cause to crack, and to
stand upon your pantables, as ver. 2.29, 30.

Ver. 15. Moab is spoiled] Quae hucusque, ^adem majore cum luce repetit. The
same again, but with more exornations.

Ver. 16. The calamity of Moab is near to come] S^e on ver. 15.

Ver. 17. All ye that are about him, bemoan him] And that ye may not want a
form, say ye, How is the strong staff broken!

Ver. 18. And sit in thirst] i. e. In want of all things.

Egregia est Prosopopoeja.
Ver. 19. Stand by the way and espy, etc.] What brave Rhetorike is here?
Tenendum quidem, Prophetas and Apostolos non affectasse artem dicendi: vide
tamen quanta eloquentia peroret Spiritus Sanctus.

Ver. 20. Moab is confounded] See on ver. 15.

Tell it in Arnon] In the Cities standing upon that river.

Ver. 21. And judgment is come upon the plain countrey] Such as the most part
of Moab was.

Ver. 22. And upon Dibon, and upon Nebo] These Cities beyond Jordan belonged to
Israel: but Moab had seized them, and now Gods Judgment comes upon them.

Ver. 23. And upon Kiriathaim] See on ver. 1.

And upon Bethmeon] Both Isay calls it, chap. 15 2.

Ver. 24. And upon Bozra] Called also B^zer, Josh. 22.36.

Ver. 25. The horn of Moab is cut off] i. e. His strength, power, glory,
Kingdoms: his Sultans and Princes, says the Chaldee.

Ver. 26. Make ye him drunk] Ebrietas modis omnibus maledicta: but here is
meant a dry drunkenness with the fierce wrath of God. Most things here spoken
are to be found in Isay: but here more clearly expressed. See chap. 25.21.

Moab also shall wallow in his vomit] As once he did when drunk with wine to
the derision of others, so now he shall when drunk with wrath. It will be a woe
time with drunkards one day doubtless.

Ver. 27. For was not Israel a derision unto thee?] sc. When he was carried
captive by Salmaneser: did not thou make thy self merry in his misery, and
compose Comedies out of his Tragedies?

Was he found among theeves] Was he therefore obnoxious because religious? What
reason had thou to shout after him, as one would do after a thief that is
taken stealing?

Impotentissime cachinnaris.
Thou skippest for joy] Thou shakest thy self, that is thy head: or thou
laughest till thou art ready to break thy midriff; -- Petulanti spleen
cachinnas.

Ver. 28. And be like the dove] That is glad to creep in at any cranny of the
craggy rock, to be hid from the Hawk.

Ver. 29. We have heard the pride of Moab] See Isay 16.6. Proud he was then,
and the same he is still: no changeling is he.

Ver. 30. I know his wrath] Passion is the eldest daughter of pride. See Isa.
16.6.

His lies shall not so effect it] Heb. his bars. Lies were his refuge, his
strength the bars he trusted to and leaned on.

Ver. 31. Therefore will I houle] Isa. 16.7. and 15.5.

Ver. 32. I will weep with thee for the weeping of Jazer] Or, more then the
weeping of Jazer. i. e. says Junius, more largely and lamentably, then Isay
bewailed Iazer, Isa. 16.8.9.

Ver. 33. And joy and gladness is taken] See Isa. 16.10.

Their shouting shall be no shouting] Their cheer shall be changed, their note
altered from what it was wont to be, at their gathering in the vintage. So it
shall one day fare with the drunkards and belly-gods; whose laetitia vertetur
in luctum, plausus in planctum, etc. mirth shall be turned into mounting,
clapping of hands into wringing of hands, hollowing into houling.

Ver. 34. From Heshbon even unto Elealeh] See Isa. 15.4, 5, 9.

At a heifer of three-yeers old] Which at that age, begins to low after the
bull.

Ver. 35. Moreover I will cause to cease] Such a scarcity there shall be of
people. See ver. 7. and Number. 21.28.

Ver. 36. Therefore my heart] See Isa. 15.5. and 16.11.

Ver. 37. For every head shall be bald] This was the doings among the
Easterlings, in times of mourning.

Ver. 38. There shall be lamentation] See Isa. 15.3.

Like a vessel wherein is no pleasure] See chap. 22.28.

Ver. 39. How has Moab turned the back with shame?] Heb. neck.

Submisit tristi colla superba jugo. Ver. 40. Behold he shall fly as an Eagle]
To an Eagle Nebuchadnezzar is compared, for his strength, swiftness, and
ravenousnesse.

Ver. 41. Kerioth is taken] Of this City, some say, was Judas Iscariot.

As the heart of a woman in her pangs] Which is very low: neither is such a one
in case to defend her self.

Ver. 42. Because he has magnified himself against the Lord] i. e. Against
his people, who are as the apple of his eye.

Ver. 43. Fear and the pit] See Isa. 24.17.

Ver. 44. He that fleeth] See Isa. 24.18.

Ver. 45. Stood under the shadow of Heshbon] As thinking they had had a good
bush on their backs.

But a fire shall come forth out of Heshbon] As once before it did, Number. 21.28,
29. and became a proverb.

Of the tumultuous ones] Of those revelling gallants.

Ver. 46. Woe be unto thee, O Moab] See Number. 21.29.

Ver. 47. Yet will I bring again the captivity of Moab] Laetiora demum
annuntiat. But because this was never that we find fulfilled in the letter,
therefore it was a presage of the calling of the Gentiles to an interest in
Christ, and benefit by him.

CHAP. XLIX.
Ver. 1. COncerning the Ammonites] Who are taxed in Scripture for their pride,
petulancy, and contempt of Gods Israel, whom they had always infested, and now
grossly injured, by encroaching upon part of their Country, which they had
seized on, as if Israel had been heirlesse, and themselvys next akin, which was
nothing so. See Zeph. 2.8.

Has he no heir?] Yes, Judah and Benjamin not yet captivated.

Why then does their King inherit Gad?] i. e. Gilead (Gad's portion beyond
Jordan) because it lies convenient for him. This, they would have done long
before; viz. in Jephtha's days: but then it would not be. Afterward, Saul and
David subdued them; but in Jehosaphats time they came again, together with the
Moabites and the men of mount Seir, to make a disturbance: but were defeated, 2 Chronicles. 20. Now, when those Israelites beyond Jordan were carried away, and
their land desolated first by the Syrians, 2 King. 10.33. and afterward by the
Assyrians, 2 King. 15.29. then, in likelihood, it was that the Ammonites thus
invaded the Country, and laid it to their own (Confer Am. 1.13.) that they
might dwell alone, in that part of the earth.

Ver. 2. Behold the days come, says the Lord] sc. After the subversion of the
Jewish Nation, Ezekiel. 21.33, etc. For Judgment commonly begins at the House
of God.

And I will cause an allarm of war to be heard in Rabbah] Megalopolis the
Metropolis of the Ammonites: it was afterward called Philadelphia, from
Ptolomie Philadelph who reedified it.

And it shall be a desolate heap] Heb. an hillock of desolation.

And her daughters] The neighbor Towns, and Villages.

Then shall Israel be heir unto them that were his heirs] It has been often
observed, that God loves to retaliate. How this was fulfilled, see 1 Macchab.
5.6. and Joseph. l. 13. c. 21.

Ver. 3. Howl O Heshbon] A City of the Gadites, but seized upon it seems,
first by the Ammonites, and then by the Moabites, chap, 48.2, 24, 25.

For Ai is spoiled] Not that Ai, Josh. 7.1. but another of that name, beyond
Jordan: Gaja Ptolomy calls it.

And run to and fro by the hedges] Hide you behind the hedges.

For their King] Or Malcham their idol: as Chemosh, chap. 48.7.

Ver. 4. Wherefore gloriest thou in the vallyes] Because fat and fertile; as
being near to Sodom and Gomorrah, that pleasant plain, Genesis 13.10.

O backsliding daughter] Or untoward and refractary. Sept. Thou daughter of
rashness, Appellat homines regni erroneos filiam vagam.
or of impudence, quae ita lascivis sicut puella quae libidinatur, and virum
quaris, says Oecolamp.

That trusted in her treasures] Never yet true to those that trusted them, 1 Timothy 6.17. Psalm. 52.7.

Who shall come unto me?] Or, Who can come at me?

Ver. 5. Behold I will bring a fear upon thee] Panicum vel bellicum.

Ver. 6. I will bring again the captivity] Then, when Christ shall come, the
Gentiles also shall be freed from the tyranny of sin, and terror of hell.

Ver. 7. Is wisdom nowhere in Teman?] The Edomites, and especially the
Temanites (of whom Elephaz, Job's friend was one) were famous for wisdom, Obad.
8. which although it be of excellent use for putting things to the best, yet
without the fear of God (which is the beginning of wisdom, Prove. 1.7.) and his
blessing, it proves not only unprofitable, but pernicious also. It is, says
James, earthly, sensual, and devilish. See what the Scripture speaks of it,
Job 12. and 1 Cor. 3.

Ver. 8. Dwell deep] Hide your selves in holes of the earth, grots in the
ground, clefts of the rocks, where you may best secure your selves from the
pursuing enemy.

Ver. 9. If grape-gatherers, etc.] See on Obad 5.

Ver. 10. I have uncovered his secret places] Where he had hid himself, or his
treasures, those sinews of war.

And he is not] sc. Any more a State or a people. Time shall triumph over him,
so that he shall but live by fame.

Ver. 11. Leave thy fatherless children, etc.] Thus God speaks to the
profane Edomites in derision; but to all true Israelites, in serious sadness:
and so it is very comfortable, and must needs be a good stay of mind to a dying
Saint, as it was to Claviger a Dutch Divine. He was held happy of whom
Cassiodore says, So many sons, Selnec. Paedag. Christ. par 2. p. 379. Quot
dedit familiae suvenes, tot reddidit Curiae consulares.
so many Counselors to the State: but he is happier that can say, So many
children, so many of Gods clients, heavens heirs, etc.

Ver. 12. Behold they whose judgment, etc.] See chap. 25.29. See also Obad. 19.

Ver. 13. I have sworn by my self, says the Lord] Because it seemed incredible
that Bezra should be beaten down: as also to show how exceedingly God was
incensed against the Edomites, to whom therefore also no comfort is spoken, as
is to Amon and Moab, in aftertimes.

Ver. 14. I have heard a rumor from the Lord] See on Obad. 1.

Ver. 15. For low I will make thee] See on Obad. 2. whence Jeremy took this,
and more besides, or else Obadiah from him.

Ver. 16. Thy terriblenesse] i. e. Thine insolency and cruelty wherewith thou
frightest folk. Or thine idol, that terrible business, so called in contempt.

Though thou should make thy nest] See Obad. 4.

Ver. 17. And Edom shall be a desolation] Heb. for a desolation. See on ver. 13.

Ver. 18. as in the overthorw of Sodom] See Genesis 19.24, 25.

And the neighbor Cities] Whereof See Deuteronomy. 29 23.

No man shall abide there] As little as in the dead Sea, where no creature can
live.

Ver. 19. Behold he shall come up] Nebuchadnezzar shall.

Like a Lion from the swelling of Jordan] As Lions at such a time are forced to
quit their dens, near Jordan.

Against the habitation of the strong] i. e. Against Idumaea.

But I will suddenly make him run away from her] As having soon conquered her:
or rather I will suddenly make him overrun it. i. e. Get above it, and become
Master of it.

And who is a chosen man that I may appoint over her] Or, For I will give
charge to him that is a choice one against her: i. e. To Nebuchadnezzar.

For who is that shepherd that will stand before me?] q. d. There is no
standing before God, and his Lion sent by him.

Ver. 20 Therefore hear the counsel] Now by counsel things are established.
(...).


And his purposes Or, contrivements that he has contrived.

Surely the least of the flock] The meanest of Nebuchadnezzar's men shall drag
them out of their shelters, as dogs do a dead carcass.

Ver. 21. In the red Sea] i. e. A long way off: yer not so f^r as the doting
Talmudists say, the Serpents cry was heard (when the Angels come down and cut
off his legs, according to that doom past on him, Genesis 3.14.) viz. all the
world over.

Ver. 22. Behold he shall come up and flye] See chap. 48.40*41.

Ver 23. Concerning Damascus] The chief City of Syria, so pleasantly situate,
so rich and luxurious, that one compares it to Corinthus or Ephesus. Julian
the Emperor in his Epistles, calls it the City of Jupiter, and the Eye of
the whole East. Tamerlan would not come into it, lest he should be detained
there by the delights and delicacies of it. He destroyed it in a displeasure,
and built three Towers with the skuls of those he had there slain (for a
trophie) with singular skill. It was built again by the Seldan of Egypt, and is
now possessed by the Turks.

There is sorrow on the sea, it cannot be quiet] Or, There is sorrow as upon
the sea which cannot rest.

Ver. 24. And fear has seized on her] Horrorem f^brilem apprehendit, Piscat.
She shakes as in a fit of an Ague.

Ver. 25. How is the City of praise not left?] Why is so praiseworthy and
renowned a City so demolished? See ver. 23. Cause enough there was, because it
was a valley of vanity, Am. 1. and Comus, Venus, and Bacchus there made their
divident, and shared their Devoto's.

Ver. 26. Therefore her young men] Or, Surely.

Ver. 27. And I will kindle a fire] See on Amos 1.4.

Ver. 28. Concerning Kedar] These Kedarens, the offspring of Kedar-Jshmael's
son, Genesis 25.13. dwelt or rather abode for most part in Arabia the stony, or
desert. Hagarens they were also called, and afterward Saracens of Saraca their
chief City, says Stephanus: or of Sarach, for more credit sake, as others
hold. Lib. de V^bib.
Of this people came Mahomet that grand-Impostour: and the Turks who have now
gotten into their hands so great a part of the habitable world. A rude people
they were in Jeremye's days, and uncivilized; yet because wicked, they are
here doomed.

And concerning the Kingdoms of Hazor] Their bead-city.

Ver. 29. Their tents and their flocks] For which they were termed Scenitae and
Nomades, as living a pastoral life in tents.

And they shall cry unto them, Fear is on every side] Magor-misabib might be
their word, wherewith, loudly-uttered, they might affright and overcome these
enemies: like as the Britones our Ancestors once overcame a mighty Army of
Saxons and Picts in this Land, by ringing out the word Hallelujah with a
courage among the mountains, nigh to the which the enemy had encamped. Ussi^r.
de Brit. Eccles. primord.


Ver. 30. Flee, get you far off] See on ver. 8.

Ver. 31. Arise, go you up into the wealthy Nation] Or, quiet Nation, that
dwells without care] Heb. in confidence: but such a security does not secure
any, but often betrayeth. Infelix felicitas quae non est in Domino, says
Oecolampadius here: There Is no true happiness, or safety but in God.

Ver. 32. Them that are in the uttermost corners] Or, that have the corners of
their hair cut. See chap. 9.26. and 25.23.

Ver. 33. And Hazor shall be a dwelling for Dragons] See chap. 9.11. and 12.22.
and 51.37.

Ver. 34. Against Elam] i. e. The Medes, say some; the Persians, say others; or
a people betwixt both: whose head-City was that Susa where Alexander found
fifty thousand talents of gold besides silver. Aristagoras also thus cheared up
his soldiers that besieged it; This City if you can but take, Cum Jove de
divitiis licet certetis, you may vie with Jove himself for wealth. These
Elamites joined with the Chaldees against the Jews, when they first wasted
Judea, and carried away Jehoiakim: Hence they are here so threatened, for their
cruelty then.

Ver. 35. Behold I will break the bow of Elam] In the use whereof they
excelled, being very skilful Archers, Esa. 22.6. Gunnes now-adayes carry it, as
bows of old.

Ver. 36. And upon Elam will I bring the four winds] i. e. Great concussions,
enemies on all sides, Scythians and Sarmatians especially out of the North.
Calvin thinks this Prophecy was fulfilled after Alexanders death, when his
captains strove most fiercely for the Kingdoms of the earth, which he had
subdued.

Ver. 37. For I will cause Elam to be dismayed] q. d. They trust in their great
strength, and hold themselves insuperable: but I can easily dispirit (and so
destroy) them. See ver. 5.14, 29.

Diod.
Ver. 38. And I will set my throne in Elam] i. e. I will solemnly execute my
judgments upon these people, as if I sat in my Judgment Seat in a public
Court, in the midst of them.

Ver. 39. I will bring again the captivity of Elam] Principally by bringing
them to Jesus Christ. In vit. Constant. Claruit Theod. Anno 390.
And so we read, Act. 2.9. of Parthians, Medes and Elamites amongst those first
and best believers. Eusebius also tells us, that in the Council of Nice there
was a Bishop from Persia. And Theodoret, a very good man, withal a great
writer, served the Churches of the Elamites.

CHAP. L.
Ver. 1. THe word that the Lord spoke against Babylon] Which was built by
Nimrod: as Ninive was afterward by his nephew Ninus, Genesis 10.11. Of the
greatness of this City, besides what we read in holy writ, much may be read in
Herodotus and Pliny. It was the head-City of the Assyrian and Chaldaean
Monarchy, which lasted above 1700. years, till Cyrus the Persian took the
Kingdom. Esaias prophesied against it in several Chapters. Habakkuk makes it his
whole business. Jeremy had set forth how Sheshak, that is Balthazar, should
drink the dregs of the cup of Gods wrath, chap. 25.26. Here, and in the next
Chapter, he discourses it more at large, showing how it was that Babylon was
to drink of that cup; and for more certainty, it is spoken of in this prophecy
as already done.

Ver. 2. Declare ye among the nations] Let all take notice of the good news:
there shall be a general jail-delivery; sing therefore Jo triumph.

Say, Babylon is taken] So Esaias 21.9.

Bell is confounded] This Bell was Nimrod, whose nephew Ninus set him up for a
god. Merodach (a restorer of their Empire, whereof Nimrod had been founder) was
likewise idolized. Merodach (...); sive sce t^ifer Chaldaica appellatione.
They are called dirty deities ( faeditates and stercora, a name good enough
for them) and said to be confounded. See Esa. 46.1. Sorrows also: because their
sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after another God, Psalm. 16.4.

Ver. 3. For out of the North there comes up a Nation against her] i. e. Out
of Media and Persia which lay Northward from Chaldaea. The Jews had their bane
out of the North, (as had been foretold, Jer. 1.14, 15.) sc. from Babylon. And
now Babylon is to be baned from the same quarter. This was some comfort
doubtless to the poor Jews in captivity.

Which shall make her land desolate] This was not fulfilled, till many years
after. Cyrus indeed began it: but Seleucus Nicanor finished it, Plin. lib. 6.
cap. 26.
by building near unto it another great City called Seleucia.

Ver. 4. In those days, and at that time] Destruction Babel salus est populo
Dei: so shall it be at the ruin of Rome.

The children of Israel shall come and the children of Judah together] In
better times they could not agree: but when they were both in a weeping
condition, misery bred unity: as it did also betwixt Hooper and Ridley, when
they were both in prison for the truth.

Going and weeping] Tears of sorrow for their sins; and tears of joy for
their deliverance by Cyrus, but especially by Christ.

They shall go and seek the Lord their God] Whom they had long been without:
and do now long and linger after.

Ver. 5. They shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward] As intent
upon it, and minding nothing else in comparison. Accurate sciscitabuntur.
It is good for a man to have his face set toward heaven and to make Religion
his business: looking at other things by the by, and out at the eyes end, as
it were.

Come and let us join our selves to the Lord] Be so joined to the Lord,
Iudivulse adh^re^unt Domino.
so glewed unto him, as to be one Spirit with him, in a conjugal perpetual
covenant.

Ver. 6. My people have been lost sheep] Per avia peccatorum aberrantes, lost
in the maze of sin and misery.

Their shepherds have caused them to go astray] True also of Papists and
Sectaries: miserably misled by their pretended Pastors; Impostours rather.

Ver. 7. All that found them have devoured them] As ravenous creatures do
wandering sheep. Straglers are a fit prey for Seducers.

And their adversaries said, We offend not] i. e. God will have it so, Jer.
40.2. but this was no good plea; Jer. 2.3.

The habitation of justice] Or, in the habitation of justice: in a land of
uprightness have they dealt unjustly, Esa. 26.10. which was no small
aggravation of their sin.

Even the Lord the hope of their Fathers] But these, as degenerate children,
have no such hope.

Ver. 8. Remove out of the midst of Babylon] Ho, Ho, come forth, as Zach. 2.6.
Away, this is not your rest, for it is polluted, Mic. 2.10. See Esaias 48.20.
Rev. 18.4.

Be as the hee-goates] That lead the flocks, generose and festinanter, freely
and readily. Sheep are fearful, and therefore go behind: goats are not so, and
therefore go before. There is good hope, says one, that we are going out of
Babylon, when the hee-goates go before the flock: when men of public place and
authority are active for reformation.

Ver. 9. From the North country] See on ver. 3.

Their arrows shall be as of a mighty expert man] Or, of a potent prosperous
man, that can hit where he pleases, and that without fail.

None shall return in vain] No shaft shall: or no soldier shall miss of
booty, for whereas Babylon, like a sea, had taken in the wealth of all Nations;
so it was meet that it should be exhausted: like as Rome was by the Goths and
Vandals, and as Constantinople was by the Turks and Tartars.

Ver. 10. And Chaldaea shall be a spoyle] See on ver. 9.

Ver. 11. Because ye were glad, because ye rejoyced] sc. In a thing of naught,
Causam ponit petulantiam and dicacitatem. Oecol.
as Am. 6.13. and in the miseries of my people ye were madly merry: therefore
shall ye be let blood in the vena cava.

Because ye are grown fat] Ye have laughed your selves fat, you have fatted
your selves as in a duy of slaughter, or of good cheer. It was at a feast that
Babylon was taken.

And bellow as bulls] Or, neigh as steeds, lusty steeds.

Ver. 12. Your mother shall be sore confounded] i. e. Babylon your mother-City:
or Babylonia your country: or your Monarchical greatness, which being in the
last place laid waste after other Nations, as Jer. 25. was foretold, shall with
shame cry out, Hui tam cito me qua primas obtinebam, etc. How is it, that I,
who was the head of Nations, am now the tail, etc?

Ver. 13. It shall not be inhabited, but be wholly desolate] Babylon stands
not now in the same place as of old: not is there hardly any ruins of the old
City remaining, as travelers tell us. Pausanias says, that in his time, there
was naught to be seen of it but the walls only: Lib. 8. In Isa. 13.
and Hierom says, that in his, it was turned into a park for dear. Omne in
medio spacium solitudo est. See on ver. 3.

Ver. 14. For she has sinned against the Lord] Yea she is a sink of sins, the
contagion of the world, the shop of Satan, the adversary of the Saints, etc.
So, and much more then so is spiritual Babylon, cito itidem casura, si essetis
viri (said Petrarch long since) that groaneth for a downfall.

Dedi^ionis est s^gnum. Dare manus est fateri se victum; victum ^eadere palmas
Ausoniividere. Virg.
Ver. 15. Shout against her round about] As they did once at Jericho; she shall
come down assuredly.

She has given her hand] i. e. She has yielded and cried quarter: add
hereunto, that two Princes of Babylon being displeased by Baltashar, sent for
Cyrus to take the City, and showed him how he might best do it. This was giving
the hand says Calvin.

As she has done, do unto her] -- Neque enim lex justior ulla est. See Judge.
1.5. with the Note.

Ver. 16. Cut off the sower] Leave not so much as an husbandman alive: who yet
are generally spared as harmless, and useful: they were left and let alone by
the Chaldaeans when they carried away the Jews, 3 King. 25.12. But here is
enjoined a more severe execution.

Ver. 17. First the King of Assyria has devoured him] Many Assyrian Kings
successively; but especially Sennacherib.

Has broken his bones] Heb. has boned him: has left nothing of him but the
bare bones.

Ver. 18. As I have punished the King of Assyria] And accordingly so he did:
for as Sennacherib first lost his army, and then his life; and then soon after,
that Monarchy was dissolved: so after that Baltasar was slain, the Empire was
translated unto the Persians.

Ver. 19. And I will bring Israel again to his habitation] Or to his fold, or
his pastures: See ver. 6, 17.

Ver. 20. The iniquity of Jacob shall be sought for, and there shall be none]
Because to the justified no sin is imputed. Nihil oblivisci solet praeter
injurias, He forgets nothing but injuries only, said Cicero of Caesar
flatteringly, say we of God truly. This to have known, is to feed in those
soul-fatting pastures, ver. 19.

For I will pardon them whom I reserve] Tegam quod fuit; quod erit, regam.

Ver. 21. Go up against the land of Merathaim -- and against the inhabitants of
Pekod] Two Babylonian Provinces, Ezekiel. 23.23. Calvin renders it The land of
exasperators, and the inhabitants of visitation, i. e. that deserve to be
punished. This is Gods commission to Cyrus.

Utterly destroy after them] i. e. Their posterity, as Dan. 4.11.

Ver. 22. A sound of battle is in the land] Barritus militaris: this is (not
the joyful but) the woeful sound: Sequitur executie. Oecol.
for war is a woe, which no words, how wide soever, can sufficiently set forth.

Ver. 23. How is the hammer of the whole earth out asunder?] Babylon was the
mawle of many Nations. Nimrod began it, and his successors took after him.
Charles Martel King of France, was so called for like cause. Augustine also was
worthily styled Haereticorum malleus the hammer of heretics: and Mr. Arthur
Hildersam Schismaticorum malleus, the mawle of Schismatics.

Ver. 24. I have laid a snare for thee] Thou wild-bull, ver. 27. Babylon was
unexpectedly taken by a stratagem, whiles they were in the midst of their
revels.

And thou w^st not aware] The palace was suddenly seized upon: but some parts
of the City knew not that the enemy was entered, till three days after: for it
was the greatest City that ever the Sun beheld, Aristot. Pollt. Paus. Arcad.
says Pausanias; and the most suddenly surprised.

Because thou have striven against the Lord] Heb. have mingled thy self with
the Lord, incertamen scilicet, to wrestle and fall with him, and to try
masteries.

Ver. 25. The Lord has opened his armory] Heb. treasury. Now Gods armory is
omne id sub caelo usque ad diabolos, all things both in heaven and under the
cope of heaven, as far as the very devils; whereby he is able to subdue his
enemies, and to bring them to nothing. Out of this treasury God took Darius and
Cyrus with their forces, and set them upon this expedition.

Ver. 26. Come against her] This he speaks to the Medes and Persians; who
though they were farther remote then they that could hear the Prophet; yet
God, who spoke by him, could and did speak home to their hearts, stirring them
up by a secret instinct to do this execution.

Ver. 27. Slay all her bullocks] Heb. sword them, sheath your swords in their
sides. See ver. 24.

Ver. 28. The vengeance of his Temple] Spoiled and burnt by the Chaldeans,
those wasters, as their name also signifies. Woe then to such as destroy Gods
living Temples.

Ver. 29. According to all that she has done] See ver. 15.

For she has been proud against the Lord] Who sets himself in battle array
against the proud, 1 Pet. 5.5.

Ver. 30. Therefore shall her young men] See on chap. 49 26.

Ver. 31. Behold I am against thee O most proud] Heb. O pride, in the abstract,
i. e. O Balshazzar; as of a certain Pope was said, Conditur hoc tumulo and
scelus and vitium.

Ver. 32. And the most proud shall stumble] Heb. Pride, or that man of pride.
Praefractarius ille, so Oecolampadius renders it, that stubborn man, who will
do wickedly against conviction of conscience.

Ver. 33. The children of Judah, and the children of Israel were oppressed
together] Or, were oppressed alike, sc. In their several deportations; and God
mindful of his Covenant, shows himself sensible of it; though for present he
seemed not to care what became of either of them; Ille dolet quoties cogitur
esse ferox.

Ver. 34. Their Redeemer is strong] Or, But their strong Avenger, whose name is
the Lord of hosts, he shall thoroughly plead their cause, i. e. right their
wrongs.

That he may give rest to the land] See on 2 These. 1.8, 9.

Ver. 35. A sword is upon the Chaldaeans] Those sworn swordmen of the Devil.

Ver. 36. A sword is upon the lyars] i. e. The prognosticators and wizzards.
Mendaces nominat divinos, as it was wont here to be sa^d A friar, a liar.

Ver. 37. A sword is upon their horses] Upon all their military preparations;
whereof see Herodot. lib. 1.

They shall become as womer] Elumbes, cowardly, and crestfaln.

A sword is upon her treasures] Which how inestimable they were, see Strabo
lib. 15. and Plin. l^b. 33. cap. 3.

Ver. 38. A drought is upon her waters] Which Cyrus did so drain by many
outlets, that without any great difficulty he took the City: ass^ulting it on
two sides. Lib. 3. cap. 7.
Frontinus says that thrice Babylon was taken by this stratagem. 1. By
Semiramis. 2. By Cyrus. 3. By Alexander the Great.

And they are mad upon their idols] Deos terrificos and truces, (...).
statues of their Kings and Worthies which were of a huge vast stature. See
Dan. 3.1.

Ver. 39. Therefore the wild beasts of the desart] See Esa. 13.21.

Ver. 40. At God overthrew Sodom] See Esaias 13.19. and chap. 49.18.

Ver. 41. Behold a people shall come from the North] As ver. 3.9. See chap.
6.22.

Ver. 42. Against thee, O daughter of Babylon] In like sort as thou did once
against Gods Israel, chap. 6.23. Now thou shall meet with thy match.

Ver. 43. The King of Babylon, etc.] See chap. 6.24. Dan. 5.6.

Ver. 44. Behold he shall come up] See chap. 49.19.

Ver. 45. See on chap. 49.20.

Ver. 46. See on chap. 49.22.

CHAP. LI.
Ver. 1. BEhold I will raise up against Babylon, and against them that dwell in
the midest] sc. Of the land of Chaldaea, in the royal seat and center of that
great Monarchy.

Ventum pestilentem. Vulg. (...). Sept.
A destroying wind] Blasting and boisterous: See chap. 4.11, 12.

Ver. 2. And I will send unto Babylon fann^rs] Who shall make as clean work, as
they once did in Judaea, disperse her inhabitants and dissipate her riches.

Ver. 3. Against him that bendeth] Periphrasis Babylonii, omnibus gentibus
infesti.

Ver. 4. Thus the slain shall fall] Both within the walls and without. (...),
there shall be neither measure nor end of manslaughters: as Plutrach says of
Rome in Sylla's time.

Ver. 5. For Israel has not been forsaken] Heb. widowed.

Though their Land was filled with sin] Heb. guilt, or delinquency, or
devastation. This Scripture has been fully made good to us of this Nation:
whilst the fullness of sin in us has not yet abated the fullness of grace in
God toward us. See those four gracious Yets, Zach. 1.17. with the Notes there.

Ver. 6. Flee out of the midst of Babylon] See chap. 50.8. So in the new
Testament we are called upon to flee and avoid the corruptions of the world and
of Antichrist, 1 John 2. Ephesians. 5. Rev. 14. and 18.4.

For this is a time, etc.] As chap. 50.15, 25, 27, 28. So 46.10.

Ver. 7. Babylon has been a golden cup] See chap. 25.15. Rev. 17.4.

In the Lords hand] i. e. Oeconomia and dispensatione ejus: He had the mixing
and distributing of it.

Ver. 8. Babylon is suddenly fallen] Chap. 50.2. So -- ruet alto a culmine
Roma, Rev. 14.8. and 18.2, 10.

If so be she may be healed] q.d. Try you may; but it is to no purpose. See c.
46.11.

Ver. 9. We would have healed Babylon] Say the foreign nations that came to
help her; or the people of God, Vox electorum. Oecolamp.
say others, that were kept captive by her; as Daniel and the rest.

But she is not healed] Or, she could not be healed. See Hos. 7.1.

For her judgment reaches unto heaven] It coelo clamor, proportionable to her
sin, Rev. 18.5.

Ver. 10. The Lord has brought forth our righteousnesse] i. e. Our just cause
and the righteousness of our religion, derided by the Babylonians.

Ver. 11. Make bright the arrows] q. d. Do so O Chaldaeans, if ye think it will
boot you any thing at all for the shoaring up of your tottering State, when as
the Lord is resolved to bring it down.

Hortatio I^onic^. Pisc.
Ver. 12. Set up the standard] An Irony all along, as ver. 11.

Ver. 13. O thou that dwell upon many waters] Euphrates and Tigris
especially, famous rivers running from Babylonia into the Persian sea. Hence
most Geographers hold, and not improbably, that that land was a part of the
garden of Eden: fruitful it was beyond credulity.

Thine end is come, and the measure (Heb. the cubit) of thy covetousnesse]
Cujus avaritia totus non sufficit orbis. The covetous Cormorants mouth (with
his Give Give) shall shortly be stopped with a spade-full of mould: and his
never-enough quit with fire enough, in the bottom of hell.

Ver. 14. Surely I will fill thee with men as with caterpillars] So they shall
seem both for multitude and humming noise, barritu militari.

They shall lift up a shout against thee] As pesants did at their harvest-home.
See chap. 48.33.

Ver. 15. He has made the earth by his power] And can therefore easily and
quickly unmake this great Monarchy. See chap. 10.12. with the Note.

Ver. 16. When he utters his voice, etc.] See chap. 10.13.

Ver. 17. Every man is brutish] See chap. 10.14.

Ver. 18. They are vanity] See chap. 10.15.

Ver. 19. The portion of Jacob, etc.] See chap. 10.16.

Ver. 20. Thou art my battle-ax, and weapon of war] Cestra fuisti mihi, Thou
have been my pole-ax, such as horse men use to batter their enemies helmets and
other harness.

Ver. 21. And with thee] O Babylonian King.

Will I break in pieces] Or rather, have I broken in pieces. And hence thy
perdition.

Ver. 22. With thee also will I break (or by thee have I broken) in p^eces man
and woman] But especially my people of the Jews, whom I more valued then all
the men and women in the world besides.

Ver. 23. The shepherd and his flock -- the husbandman and his yoke, etc.] This
particular enumeration is very Emphatical: so chap. 50.35, 37, 38.

Ver. 24. And I will render unto Babylon] See chap, 50.15, 29. Isa. 47.6, 8.
and 10.5, 6, 12.

In your sight] You my prisoners of hope shall live to see it, Psalm. 79.10.

Ver. 25. O destroying mountain] O Babylon, thou that art amplitudine and
altitudine instar montis; for thy large command and lofty buildings like a
mountain, and that do abuse thy power to other men's destruction.

And will make thee aburnt mountain] A great heap of ashes and rubbish, such as
burned and ruined Cities are.

Ver. 26. And they shall not take of thee a stone] Thou shall never be
reedified: So it is foretold of Rome, Tot a eris in cineres quasi nunquam Roma
fuisses.

Ver. 27. Set up a standard] Thus God the great Induperator bespeaketh the
Medes and Persians, as his field officers.

Prepare the Nations against her] Heb. Sanctify, call them together to wage
this sacred war against Babylon.

Call together against her the Kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, Xenoph. Cyrop. l^b. 7.
and Ashkenaz] i. e. Of both the Armenia's and of Ascania subdued by Cyrus,
before he marched against Babylon. Vatablus will have Ashkenaz to be Gothland;
the Jews, Germany: but these were too far remote.

Ver. 28. Prepare against her] Heb. Sanctify, as ver. 7.

With the Kings of the Medes] Darius and Cyrus.

Ver. 29. And the land shall tremble and sorrow] As a traveling woman, so
shall it be pained.

Ver. 30. The mighty men of Babylon have forborne to fight] At Cyrus his first
coming they gave him battle: but being worsted, they from thenceforth remained
in their holds till Babylon was taken.

Their might has failed] Or, their courage is shrunk, as Jacob's sinew did,
Genesis 32.32.

They became as women] See chap. 50.37.

Ver. 31. One post shall run to meet another] Observe how punctually all things
were foretold in the several circumstances, above fifty years before.

At one end] sc. where Euphrates had run, till diverted and dried up by Cyrus:
See on chap. 50.38.

Ver. 32. And that the passages are stopt] Or, taken, seized, surprised, as chapter
48.41.

And thereeds] Or Marshes, made by Euphrates overflowing. It is well observed,
that the Babylonians might by this Prophecy have been forewarned and forearmed
against Cyrus his stratagem: But they slighted it, and never enquired after it,
likely.

Ver. 33. The daughter of Babylon] Proud of her wealth and strength, as young
maids, many are of their beauty.

And the time of her harvest shall come] When God shall put in his sickle, and
cut her down, being ripe and ready. See Rev. 14.16. Genesis 15.16.

Ver. 34. Nebuchadnezzar -- has devoured me, he has crushed me] A graphical
description of the Babylonical cruelty.

He has cast me out] He has gorged himself with me, and laid up his gorge.

Ver. 35. The violence done to me and to my flesh] Torn and tossed as carrion, by
that ravenous beast: the Lord look upon it and require it.

Ver. 36. Behold I will plead thy cause] Not so much verbally as really: here is
a present answer to Isreal's cry.

Ver. 37. And Babylon shall become heaps] See chap. 50.39.

Ver. 38. They shall roar together like Lions] When hongerbit: The Babylonians
terrified, and the Persians tumultuating together. The old Latin Version has
it, they shake their shaggy hair.

Ver. 39. In their heat I will make their feasts] Or, I will dispose their
drinkings: that is, I will pour into their cups the wine of my wrath: Now
poison mixed with wine, works the more furiously. God can punish one kind of
drunkenness with another worse.

That they may rejoyce] That they may revel it and sleep their last: and so
they did, Ecce, hic compotationum est finis.
as being slain in a night of public solemn feasting, and great
dissoluteness, which was soon turned in moerorem and metum, into heaviness
and horror.

And not wake] Till awakened by the sound of the last trump. The Chaldee here
has it, They shall dye the second death, and not be quickened in the world to
come, sc. unto life everlasting.

Ver. 40. I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter] All that with
follows here to the end of this oration is no less easy then elegant; in
holding forth the power, justice, and truth of God in fulfilling this Prophecy
exactly, though diverse years after.

Ver. 41. How is Sheshack taken] i. e. How is Babylon destroyed beyond all
expectation! See chap. 25.26.

Ver. 42. The sea is come up upon Babylon] A sea of hostile forces; what wonder
therefore though she be taken?

Ver. 43. Her Cities are a desolation] See chap. 2.6. and 9.12.

Ver. 44. And I will punish Bell in Babylon] Nimrod was after his death called
the Babylonian Saturn: Belus, who succeeded him, the Babylonian Jupiter, as
Berosus testifies. This Idol of massy gold and of a huge bigness, was carried
away by Cyrus: thus Bell was punished.

And I will bring forth out of his mouth that which he has swallowed up] Bolum
ex ore Beli: such an elegancy there is also in the Original. Of the rich
presents, spoils, costly furniture found in Bel's Temple, see Diodore lib. 2.
Those taken from Gods Temple at Jerusalem, and laid up in his, 2 Chronicles. 36.7.
he was forced to regurgitate, Ezr. 1.7. and 5.14. See Job 20.12, 15.

Yea the wall of Babylon shall fall] Which yet was strong to a miracle, as
being two hundred cubits high (of the Kings cubits which were larger then
ordinary) and fifty cubits thick; having a hundred brazen gates, and many
stately towers, etc. All shall down says the Prophet.

Ver. 45. My people, go ye out of the midst of her] This is much pressed, chap.
50 8. ver. 6. and it was but need; for many of the Jews were as hardly drawn to
depart thence, as a dog ab uncto corio, from a fat morsel.

Ver. 46. And lest your heart faint] Or, And let not your hearts faint.

And ye fear for the rumour] sc. Of Cyrus his coming: fear it not, all is for
the best to you: your redemption draws nigh.

A rumor shall both come one year] sc. Of Cyrus his preparation, and then
another of his expedition toward Babylon.

Ruler against Ruler] i. e. Cyrus against Belshazzar: so Constantine against
Maxentius, Maximinus, Licinius, etc. this was for the best to the poor Church
of Christ.

Ver. 47. I will do judgment, etc.] See chap. 43.12, 13. Exodus 12.12.

Est Hyperbolica Prosopopaesa.
And all her slain shall fall] Her dancers One rendereth it: their merry dance
shall end in a miserable downfall.

Ver. 48. Then the heaven and the earth, etc. shall sing] There shall be as it
were a new face set upon the world, and all the creatures shall appear to be
well-apaid at the downfall of Babylon: under the oppressions whereof they even
groaned and labored. See what a like general joy there will be at the ruin of
Rome, Rev. 18.

Ver. 49. So at Babylon shall fall the slain of all the earth] Or rather of all
the land, i. e. of all Babylon, or Assyria. When God once comes to make
inquisition for the blood of his Saints, woe to the wicked, etc.

Ver. 50. Ye that have escaped the sword] sc. Of the Medes and Persians, who at
the taking of the City killed all promiscuously.

Go away, stand not still] Haste home to your own Country: for therefore has
the Lord delivered you from so many deaths and dangers: See ver. 25.

Remember the Lord afar of] Should not we mind heaven, and hasten thither?
Plotinus ap. Aug^st. de civ. Dei. l. 9. c. 16.
If a Heathen could say, ought not we much more? Fugiendum est ad clarissimam
patriam, ibi Pater, ibi omnia, Haste we home to heaven: there is our Father,
there are all things.

Ver. 51. We are confounded because we have heard reproach] This is the Jews
lamentation, as in the next verse we have the answer to it.

Ver. 52. Wherefore behold the days come] So soon is God up at the cry of his
poor people, Psalm. 12.5.

I will do Judgement] See ver. 37. and 49.

Ver. 53. Though Babylon should mount up to heaven] As her walls are said to
have been of an incredible height (see on ver. 44.) and her tower to have been
little less then four miles high, threatening heaven as it were.

Ver. 54. A sound of a cry comes from B^bylon] See chap. 48.3.

Ver. 55. Because the Lord has spoiled Babylon] Heb. is spoiling: for it was
long in doing: but as sure as if done together and at once. In like sort many
of the promises are not to have their full accomplishment till the end of the
world: as those about the full deliverance of the godly, the destruction of the
wicked, the confusion of Antichrist, etc.

And destroyed out of her the great voice] Of the revellers and roaring-boyes:
or of their enemies (as some rather sense it) breaking in upon them.

Ver. 56. For the Lord God of recompences] Princeps ille and arbiter justae
taelionis, God who loves to retaliate. Lib. 16.


Ver. 57. And I will make drunk] See ver. 39.

Ver 58. The broad walls of Babylon] See on ver. 44. Or, Lib. 6. c. 26.
the walls of broad Babylon that greatest of all Cities, says Strabo: the
compass whereof within the walls was near upon threescore miles, says Pliny.

Ver. 59. The word which Jeremiah the Prophet commanded Seraiah] This is now
the last part, viz. a type used for confirmation of this prolix preceding
Prophecy; uttered at Jerusalem happily in the fourth year of Johejakim, which was
the first of Nebuchadnezzar, and now to be read at Babylon in the fourth year
of Zedekiah, which was seven years before the destruction of Jerusalem, and
above Sixty years before the destruction of Babylon. God loves to
fore-signify, but Babylon would not be warned; which was a just both desert and
presage of her ruin.

When he went with Zedekiah] In company with him, say some out of the Jews
Chronicle: at which time Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him King, took an oath of
him to be true to him: which he afterward brake, and was pun^shed accordingly,
2 Chronicles. 36.13. Others think that Seraiah went not with Zedekiah, but for him,
and from him with a present to Nebuchadnezzar, that he might keep his favor,
or that he might be reconciled unto him after his revolt from him, 2 King.
24.20.

And this Seraiah was a great Prince] One that opposed the rebellion against
Nebuchadnezzar, or a peacemaker at Court, or the great Chamberlain, Heb. a
Prince of rest, or, Prince of Menucha, a place so called, Judge. 20.43. or a
quiet, honest and humble Prince: otherwise he would not have been thus
commanded by a poor Prophet: especially in a matter of so great danger, as it
might have proved, if publikly noticed.

Ver. 60. So Jeremiah wrote in a book all the evil] For Babylon's commonition
(if at least the book were read publicly, as some hold it was) and the Jewish
captives consolation.

Ver. 61. When thou come to Babylon and shall see] sc. The sinfulness, as
well as the stateliness of that City.

And shall read all these words] Or, then shall thou read all these words. They
who hold he did it publicly, extol the authority of the Prophet, the boldness
of Seraiah, and the mildness of the King of Babylon, somewhat like that of the
King of Nineveh, Jon. 3. but the most think he read it privately: yet not in
some closet a part by himself, but in some private house to his countrymen who
came unto him.

Ver. 62. Then shall thou say, O Lord, etc.] The promises are to be prayed
over, and then we may expect their accomplishment. Prayer also added to the
outward sign, according to Gods holy Word, makes it a sacramental sign.

Ver. 63. Thou shall bind a stone to it] See the like Symbol or Chria, Rev.
18.21. Where, by the mighty Angel, Alcazar understands the Prophet Jeremy.

Ver. 64. Thus shall Babylon sink] Ceremonies are to little purpose, unless
they have divine expositions annexed unto them.

And they shall be weary] That seek either to save it, or to restore it.

Thus far are the words of Jeremiah] sc. Concerning Babylon: See the like
concerning Moab, chap. 48.47.

CHAP. LII.
Ver. 1. ZEdekiah was one and twenty years old, etc.] For the exposition of
this whole chapter, see the Notes on 2 King. 24. and 25. 2 Chronicles. 36. and Jer.
39.1, 2, 3, etc. It is altogether historical, and set here fitly by Ezra or
some other Prophet, as an Appendix to the foregoing Prophecy, and as a Preface
to the Book of the Lamentations, which is nothing else but Jeremy's Elegy over
their doleful Captivity: not over King Josiah's death as Hierom would have it:
nor yet is it that Book that Jehojakim cut and afterward cast into the fire.
Jer. 36. as some of the Jew-doctors have doted. The Septuagint have set this
title upon it, And it came to pass after that Israel was carried captive, A
Lapide Prolog. in Thren. ex ^etro a Figneiro.
and Jerusalem laid wast, the Prophet Jeremy sat weeping, and wailing and
bitterly lamenting the case of his people. Thus they knit together this Chapter
and the ensuing Lamentations: which the Jews also are still said to read
together in their Synagogues, on the ninth day of the month Ab, which
answers to our July: because that on that day, the City was taken and
destroyed by the Chaldaeans, Jer. 52.7.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION ON THE Lamentations of JEREMY.
CHAP. I.
Ver. 1. HOw does the City sit solitary] Some tell us of Jeremyes cave, near to
Acheldama, Adriehom. ex Niceph.
where he sat in sight of the City now destroyed, and made her this Epitaph:
not altogether unlike that which David once made for his dear Jonathan, 2 Samuel
1.17. There he has his Ecah admirantis and commiserantis, his wondering and
condoling How once and again, and a third time, ver. 19 25, 27. And our Prophet
has the self-same (in sense at least) three several times in this one verse:
whence the Hebrews call the whole book by the name of Echa (How) which is the
first word in it: and begins with the first letter of the Hebrew Alphabet.
For it must be observed here that (for memory sake especially) this piece of
holy writ is, most of it made up in order of Alphabet, viz. the four first
chapters; and all of it with singular artifice in a poetical strain: take that
one passage for a taste, chap. 5.16. Oi na lanu, chi chattaxu (which runs
rhythmically) i. e. woe to us that we have sinned. And whereas other Poetry is
the luxury of such learning as is in words restrained, in matter (usually)
loose; here it is altogether otherwise. For the Prophet or Poet whether, id
sibi negoti credidit solum dari, makes it his whole business, to set forth
his peoples misery in the cause thereof, their sins and excesses: pressing
therefore to patience, to repentance, to earnest prayer, and to a confident
expectation of a gracious issue, together with a sanctified use of all their
sufferings: he had himself been a man of many sorrows all along: and now had
his share as deep as any in the common calamity. Besides which he could truly
say with Cyprian, Cum singulis pectus meum copulo, maeroris and funeris pondera
luctuosa participo: cum plangentibus plango, cum destentibus defleo, i. e. in
St. Paul's words, Who is weak, and I am not weak? grieved and I grieve not?
offended, and I burn not? 2 Cor. 11.29. And this he expresses in a stately
style and figurative terms, full of Passion and compassion; as, to show his
love to his Country, so to work upon his hard-hearted Countrymen, and to
excite them to repentance and better obedience.

How does the City] Lately a City, yea the City, the most famous of all the
Cities of the East, says Pliny; but now, alas, of a City become an heap: so
true is that of Seneca speaking of a great City burnt to ashes, Vna dies
interest inter magnam civitatem and nullam, there was but one day betwixt a
City and no City.

Sit solitary] Sit on the ground in a mourning posture, as Job did among the
ashes; and as Vespasian, after the last destruction of Jerusalem by his son
Titus, caused money to be coined, whereon was stamped the picture of Judaea in
form of a captive woman, sitting sorrowfully under a Palm Tree.

How sits this City late most populous,
Thus solitary? like a widow thus?
Empress of Nations, Queen of Provinces
She was, that now thus tributary is.
That was full of people] Full indeed at the three solemn anniversary feasts
especially. Austin says there were 3000000 present at that Passover, whereof
1100000 perished by the sword and famine, 100000 were led to Rome in triumph.
Sermon. 204. de Tempore.
Josephus testifies that at the last destruction of this City by the Romans
there were more then eleven hundred thousand people got into it. And although
Judaea was not above two hundred miles long and fifty miles broad; nothing near
so big as England, yet what huge armies brought they into the field in the
days of David, Asa, Jehosaphat, etc?

How is she become as a widow] Having lost her King, if not her God: happy, if
in this last respect, she be but quasi vidua, as a widow only and no more (see
2 Cor. 6.8. with the Note) if God at any time should say unto her, as Zach.
10.6. She shall be as if I had not cast her off, and I will hear her: or if she
could say of her self as that good widow in story did, Sola relicta solum Deum
sequor, Being left alone, I will follow after God alone.

She that was great among the Nations] So was Athens once the glory of Greece,
for both Arts and Arms; now a dog-hole in comparison. Sparta also, that other
eye of Greece, is now a small Borough called Misithra, having nothing to boast
of but the fame and thoughts of its former greatness.

And Princess among the Provinces] In David's and Solomon's days especially,
when that state was in the flourish; i. e. the praise of the whole earth, and
terror to all Nations.

How is she become tributary?] And by that means melted and exhausted, as the
Hebrew word imports. So was England once, when the Popes Ass: Oh the huge
sums that he sucked hence, to the wasting and impoverishing of the land! Of one
of his Agents here it is recorded, that at his departure he left not so much
money in the whole Kingdom, as he either carried with him, or sent to Rome
before him. Some of them derive their Mass from the Hebrew word Mas in the
text, signifying tribute; and in some respects well they may: per ^am scilicet
pietas omnis liquefacta est and dissoluta, says Rivet; for it is the bane of
men's souls, and a purge to their purses.

Ver. 2. She weepeth sore] Heb. weeping she weepeth, i. e. Sadly and soakingly,
or as we say, savourly: seeking that way to ease her sorrow, which is so deep
and downright.

She weeps when she should sleep.
Expletur lachrymis, egeriturque dolor. In the night] When grief may have its
full forth: and when widows are most sensible of their solitary and forlorn
condition.

Jam jacet in viduo squallida facta toro. And her tears are on her cheeks]
Haerent and perennant, seldom or never are they off. As hinds by calving, so
she by weeping cast out her sorrows, Job 39.3.

Among all her lovers she has none to comfort her] Optimum solatium
sodalitium, says one: And, Affert solatium lugentibus suspiriorum societas,
says another Father. It was no small aggravation of Jerusalems misery, that
her confederates proved miserable comforters, and her allies kept aloof off, so
that she had none to compassionate her. This is also none of the smallest
torments of the damned Ghosts, that they are unpittied of their best friends
and nearest relations.

All her friends have dealt treacherously with her] The Edomites and Moabites.
Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan the son of Kareah, etc. Every sinner
shall one day take up this Lamentation: And why? they have forsaken the
fountain of living waters, and hewed them out broken cisterns that can hold no
water, Jer. 2.13.

Ver. 3. Judah is gone into captivity] But with no good will: God has driven
them out, for their cruel oppressions and hard usage of their poor brethren
that served them. Thus the Chaldee Paraphrast, and not amiss. Others thus;
Judah, i. e. the inhabitants of the Kingdom, goes away, i. e. willingly leave
their country, goods, and dwelling, sc. before the desolation of Jerusalem,
because of affliction, Jun. Udal.
i. e. extremity of trouble, and great slavery, etc.

She dwells among the heathen] Where she can get nothing better then guilt or
grief.

She finds no rest] No more then did the dove in the deluge, Genesis 8.9.

All her persecutors, took her in the straits] i. e. At the most advantage to
mischief her: a term taken from hunters or high-way-men. The Chaldees took the
City, when it had been first distressed with famine: and then the Jews that
went down to Egypt for succor and shelter after Gedaliahs death, they caught
there, as mice in a trap, as this Prophet had foretold them, chap. 42.43. and
46. but they would not be warned. M^tsraim proved to be their Me^sarim, i. e.
Egypt their pound, or prison.

Ver. 4. The ways of Zion do mourn] So they seem to do because unfrequented,
overgrown with grass, and out of their kindly order.

Her Priests sigh] For want of employment.

The virgins were afflicted] Or discomfited: those that are usually set upon
the merry pin, and were wont to make mirth at those festivities.

And she is in bitternesse] Zion is: but for nothing so much, Cultus Dei
desertus est, and omnia luctifica. Jun.
as for the decay of religion, and the loss of holy exercises: when this
befalls, all things else are mere Ichabods to good people. See Zeph. 3.18.

Ver. 5. Her adversaries are the chief] Heb. are for the head. This was
threatened, Deuteronomy. 28.13, 14, 43, 44 This, when it falls out, is a great grief
to the godly. Therefore the Prophet Nahum, for the comfort of Gods Israel is
wholly in setting forth the destruction of their enemies, the Assyrians.

Her enemies prosper] See Jer. 12.1. they prevail and do what they list; so
that there seems to be neither hope of better, nor place of worse.

For the Lord has afflicted her] Not so much her adversaries and enemies,
Cavet scriptura ne haec potestas detur adversariis. Oecolamp.
or her oppressors and haters (as the words properly signify) that is, those
that oppress them in action, and hate them in affection.

Her children are gone into captivity] Those that were able to go: for the rest
were slain, chap. 4.

Before the enemy] Driven before them, as cattle.

Ver. 6. And from the daughter of Zion all her beauty is departed] Her glory,
as Esa. 5.14. that is chiefly the Temple, and the service of God in it: It is
now Ichabod with her. The beauty and bulwark of a Nation are Gods holy
ordinances.

Her Princes are become like harts] i. e. Heartlesse, bereft of courage; they
dare not make head against an enemy.

Before the pursuer] R. Solomon here observes, that the Hebrew word (...) is
written at full, so as it is scarce anywhere else, to note the fullness of the
persecution.

Ver. 7. Jerusalem remembered in the days of her affl^ction] Misery is the best
art of Memory. Then those privileges we prized not in prosperity, we recount
with regret: Bona a tergo formosissima: Magis carendo quam fruendo.
the worth of good things is best known by the want of them: and as we see
things best at a distance, so here. Afflictions are pillulae lucis, that do
notably clear the eyesight.

The adversaries saw her] sc. With a spiteful and scornful eye.

And did mock at her Sabbaths] Calling the Jews in contempt Sabbatarians: and
jearing them as those that lost more then a seventh part of their time that
way; and telling them in scorn, that now they might well awhile to keep a long
Sabbath, as having little else to do. Juvenal thus describes a Jew, -- cui
septima quaeque fuit lux
Satyr. 5.
Ignava, and partem vitae non attigit ullam.


Paulus Phagius tells likewise of a black-mouthed Egyptian, who said that
Christians were a colluvies of most loathsome lecherous people, that had a foul
disease upon them, and were therefore fain to rest every seventh day.

Perpetuo, assidue, and graviter peccavit.
Ver. 8. Jerusalem has grievously sinned] Heb. has sinned sin, has sinned
sinningly, doing wickedly as she could, Jer. 3.4. and having many
transgressions wrapped up in her sins and their circumstances, Levit. 16.21.
And this is here acknowledged as the true cause of her calamity. Profane
persons lay all the blame in this case upon God: as He in the Poet, O patria, O
divum domus Ilium, and inclyta bello
Maenia Dardanidum: ferus omnia Jupiter Argos
Virg. Aeneid. 2.
Transtulit. --
Postquam res Asiae Priamique evertere gentem
Immeritam visum superis, etc.


Therefore she is removed] Heb. therefore is she unto removing or wandering, as
Cain was, Ad modum Cain fraetricidae. Figuier.
when he went to live in the land of Nod: or as a menstruous woman is separated
from the society of others. Nidah for Niddah.

All that honored her] When her ways pleased the Lord.

Because they have seen her nakednesse] Her infamous wickednesses, for which
she has done penance, as it were, and is therefore despised. Or else it is a
term taken from a naked captive woman.

Yea she sigheth and turns backward] sc. To hide her nakedness from public
view. Or, going into captivity she looked her last look toward her dear
country, and fetched a sigh.

Ver. 9. Her filthiness is in her skirts] Taxat impudextiam insignem. She
rather glories in her wickedness, Paschasius.
then is any whit abashed of it: a Metaphor from a menstrous woman that is
immodest. Oh quam vulgar hoc hodie malum! See Isa. 3.9. But whence this
gracelesnesse?

She remembers not her last end] i. e. What a black tail of plagues sin
draws after it, Plura de extremis loqui pars ignaviae est. Tacit. lib. 2.
Hist.
and that for all these things she must come to Judgment. Memorare novissima is
a good preservative from sin: but most men are of Otho the Emperors mind who
thought it a piece of dastardy to speak or think much of death: whereas Moses
assures us, that by keeping out the thoughts of death, we keep our spirits
void of true magnanimity: and that one of those that will consider their latter
end would chase a thousand, Deuteronomy 32.30.

Therefore she came down wonderfully] Heb. with wonderment^: Her incogitancy
and inconsideratnesse, together with the licentious wickedness following
thereupon (being more heavy then a talent of lead, Zach. 5.7.) brought her down
with a powder, as we say, ita ut ad miraculum corruerit.

O Lord, behold mine affliction] If not me (as utterly unworthy) yet mine
affliction, as thou once did Hagar's, Genesis 16.13. and if I may obtain no
favor, yet why should the enemy insult to thy dishonor? Deuteronomy. 32.27. Psalm.
35.26. and 38.16. Jer. 48.26, 42. Zeph. 2.20.

Ver. 10. The adversary] The common enemy both of God and us, out of hatred of
the truth and the professors thereof.

Has spread out his hand] His plundring and sacrilegious hand.

Upon her pleasant things] But especially those that were consecrated to the
service of God in the Temple. The Rabbines here by pleasant or desirable
things, understand principally the book of the Law, which say they, the
Moabites and the Ammonites sought for in the Temple, that they might burn it,
because therein was forbidden their admission into the Church for ever.

Ver. 11. All her people sigh] And so think to ease their grief.

They shall seek bread] The staff of life, which, without repair by nutrition,
would be soon extinct; so in the spiritual life; which made Job prefer the word
before his necessary food. There is a famine of the Word, which is much worse,
Amos 8. Isa. 5. Pray against it, and prevent it.

They have given their pleasant things for meat] Which must be had at any rate:
much more must the food of the soul. Act. and Mon. 750. Keckerm. praefat.
Geograph.
Our forefathers gave five Marks or more for a good book: a load of hay for a
few Chapters of St. James or of St. Paul in English, says Mr. Fox. The Queen
of Castile sold her jewels to furnish Columbus, for his discovering voyage to
the West Indies, when he had showed his Maps (though our Henry the seventh loath
to part with money, sl^ghted his proffers) and thereby the golden mines were
found, and gained to the Spanish Crown. Let no man think much to part with his
pleasant things for his precious soul: or to sacrifice all that he has to the
service of his life; which next to his soul should be most dear unto him. Our
ancestors in Queen Mary's days were glad to eat the bread of their souls in
peril of their lives.

To relieve the soul] Heb. to make the soul come again. For Animantis cujusque
vita in fuga est: Life must be fetched again by food, when it is fainting away.

See O Lord and consider] Quam delicata epulatrix facta sim, to what hard meat
I am held, to how strait an allowance: See it, and be sensible of my prisoners
pittance, and how I have made many a meals meat upon the promises, when I have
wanted bread, as that good woman once said.

Ver. 12. Is it nothing to you all ye that pass by the way] Siste viator, Stay
passenger, have not a tear to shed? etc. Sanchez thinks that this is
Jerusalem's Epitaph made by her self, as to be engraven on her tomb to move
compassion. The Septuagint have (...); Hei, ad vos, subaudi clamo: Woe and
Alas, cry I to you. Make ye nothing of my misery? I wish the like may never
befall you: Ne sit super vos; for so some render the words.

Behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow] What we see in the
water, seems greater then it is: so in the waters of Marah: See chap. 3.1.
It Is sure, that no temptation takes us, but what is humane, or common to man, 1
Cor. 10.13. But what did the man Christ Jesus suffer? All our sufferings are
but chips of his cross, says Luther, not worthy to be named in the same day,
etc.

Wherein the Lord has afflicted me] This was yet no small allay to her grief,
that God had done it. The Stoics, who held that all came by destiny, were
noted for their patience, or rather tolerance, and aequanimity in all
conditions.

Ver. 13. Form above has he sent fire into my bones] Like as when the marrow
and natural moisture is dried up by a violent fever: or rather, as when the
solid parts of bodies below are lightening-struk from above, and scorcht by
these sulphurous flames that pierce unto them.

And it prevailed against them] Or. And he ruled it, viz. the fire: i. e. he
directed and disposed it.

He has spread a net for my feet] And so hamperd me an unruly creature, ut
constricta fuerim in ruinam, that there is no escaping from him: yea the more I
strive to get out, the faster I stick.

He has turned me back] Laid me on my back.

He has made me desolate and faint] My calamities come thick, one in the neck
of another; words are too weak to utter them: and yet here is very great copy
and variety of words: so that Paschasius says this book may well be called the
Lamentations of Lamentations: like as Solomon's Song is called for its
excellenty The Song of Songs.

Ver. 14. The yoke of my transgressions is bound by his hand] Compactum est.
Or, is bound upon his hand: that is, the Lord carries them in his continual
remembrance.

They are wreathed] Wrapped and wreathed together as a strong cord. My sins are
twisted together, says One, and sadly accented: so are the punishments of my
sins, says the Church here, neither can I get free: but as the heifer, by
wriggling against the yoke, galleth her neck, so do I.

And come up upon my neck] Praeclarum scilicet monile, and torques, mearum
virtutum index, and insigne.

He has made my strength to fall] Heb. he has caused my power to stumble, i.
e. so to stumble, as to fall: for he who stumbleth and yet falls not, gets
ground.

From whom I am not able to arise] Only God can raise me: and it is a work
worthy of God, who Dejicit ut relevet: premit ut solatia praestet.

Ver. 15. The Lord has trodden under foot] As unsavory salt; that is, he has
covered with the greatest contempt.

All my mighty men] Vulg. My Magnifico's or Gallants; in whom I too much
trusted.

In the midst of me] In the very bosom of their mother; as Caracalla killed his
brother Geta, consecrating the sword wherewith he so killed him.

He has called an assembly against me] Vocant adversum me tempus, so the
Vulgar version has it; (and Calvin to the same purpose) He has called the
time against me: i. e. a set time wherein to destroy my strong ones. Howbeit
One makes this inference from the words, D. Playfer.
For the very time which we have contemned, we shall be condemned: and for
every day which we have spent idly, we shall be shent severely. This is true,
but little to the present purpose: like as Hushai said, Ahitophel's counsel was
good, but not now.

The Lord has trodden her as in a wine-presse] By another like Metaphor, God
is said to have threshed Babylon as a threshing-flore, Jer. 51.33.

Ver. 16. For these things I weep] I Jerusalem, as ver. 2. Or, I Jeremy: Ovid.
Nam faciles motus men's generosa capit.

Mine eye, mine eye runs down with water] Continuitatem significat: imo
emphasin dicit; Niobe-like I weep excessively, and without intermission. God
would not have the wounds of a godly sorrow to be ever so healed up, but that
they may bleed afresh again upon all good occasion. As for worldly sorrow,
there must be a stop put to it, left what we have over-wept, we be forced to
unweep again.

Because the comforter that should relieve my soul is far from me] This was
very sad, and made both eyes run down with water. God stood aloof off, men were
slack to shore up a poor sinking soul. This was a condition and complaint not
unlike that of Saul, 1 Samuel 28.15. I am sore distressed: for the Philistines
are upon me, and God is departed from me, etc.

Ver. 17. Zion spreads forth her hands] But to whom? To God? She should have
done it sooner; namely whilst he stretched out his hands to her all the day
long. To the Babylonian? at barbarus nil nisi iras spirat, but his tender
mercyes are mere cruelties. God will not take the wicked by the hand, says
Bildad, Job 8.20. Men may not, when as God will not. No better course can be
taken in this case then that prescribed, Lam. 3.40, 41. then God will repent,
and men shall relent toward a distressed creature.

And there is none to comfort her] See ver. 16. This is often complained of as a
most heavy affliction.

The Lord has commanded] What marvel then that their hearts were so set off
from him, who had been so careless of keeping Gods Commands?

Jerusalem is as a menstruous woman amongst them] Or, as an abomination,
tanquam quisquiliae, vel tanquam foetidae aliquae sordes. Gods people are more
shamefully slighted and reproached in the world, then any else; and the
godliest, most of all.

Ver. 18. The Lord is righteous] Whatever I suffer, or say happily in my passion,
that may seem to sound to the contrary. Righteous art thou O Lord, and just are
thy judgments, said David, Psalm. 119.137. and after him Mauricius the Emperor
(when deposed by the traitor Phocas) and the noble Du-plessis when he heard of
the death of his only son, slain in the Low Countries.

For I have rebelled against his Commandements] Heb. against his mouth; and
have therefore deserved thus to feel the weight of his hand; to hear the rod
and who has appointed it: because I would not hear the word and who preached
it. I have imbitered his mouth, as some render the Hebrew text, and therefore
am worthily imbittered by him.

Hear I pray you, all people] See ver. 12. But how agrees this with that of
David, 2 Samuel 1.20. Tell it not in Gath? It is answered that David there would
not have that slaughter in Gilboah to be reported as the hand of the
Philistines, but of God.

My virgins and my young men are gone into captivity] Are carried out of this
land, the sign of Gods favor, and of heaven it self: And here lay the pinch
of their grief. Let young ones and maids (quibus hoaie fraena laxari solent)
obey God, unless they had rather perish.

Ver. 19. I called for my lovers, but they deceived me] My confederates, idols,
and other sweet-hearts, never yet true to any that trusted them. See Jer.
22.20. and 30.14.

My Priests and mine Elders, etc.] What then became of poor folk? and how
gracious was God to Jeremy in the provision made for him by the King, who yet
loved him not?

Ver. 20. Behold O Lord, for I am in distress* Thus ever and anon she is
lifting up her soul to God by an holy Apostrophe in some short yet pithy
expressions. And surely if a long look toward God speedeth, Psalm. 34.4, 5. Jon.
2.4, 7. how much more an hearty Ejaculation, as here?

My bowels are troubled] Lutulant, bulliunt, vel intumescunt: non solum
fluctuant, aut strepunt, ut alibi. My bowels boil and buble, or are thick and
muddy, as waters are after and in a tempest: or it is a Metaphor from mortar
made by mingling water with lime and sand. She was in a great perturbation: and
sought ease by submitting to Gods Justice, and imploring his mercy.

Mine heart is turned within me] Or, turns it self upside down. See Hos. 11.8.

For I have grievously rebelled] This was the right way to get ease and settle
all within, viz. to confess sin with aggravation, putting in weight, laying on
load.

Abroad the sword bereaveth, at home there is as death] Famine especially
(which is worse then the sword, chap. 4.9.)

-- and plurima mortis imago. R. Solomon interprets it of evil Angels.

Ver. 21. They have heard that I sigh] My friends have; and yet they pity me
not: this was a great vexation, and is much complained of. See ver. 2, 16, 17,
19.

All mine enemies have heard of my trouble: they are glad] This (...) is the
devils disease: the wicked compose Comedies out of the Saints Tragedies, and
revel in their ruins. But God people, in this case, have a double comfort. 1.
That God has done it (and not the enemy) that he has a holy hand in all the
troubles that befall them. 2. That their enemies shall not escape scotfree, but
be soundly punished.

That thou have done it] Or, but thou have done it: and sure we are, thou will
not overdo.

Thou will bring the day that thou have called] The dismal day of vengeance,
that thou have threatened Babylon with, especially by Isay and Jeremy.

And they shall be like unto me] Their future desolation is my present
consolation.

Ver. 22. Let their wickedness come before thee] God had pronounced Babylons
destruction, and therefore the Church might safely pray it: Think the like of
spiritual Babylon. God seems to forget the insolences of his enemies, and
deliverance of his people: we must mind him, and then it will be done. Only
let us see to it, that our fire of zeal for Gods glory burn clear, without the
smoke of self ends, and of private revenge.

As thou have done unto me for my transgressions] This was it that put a sting
into all her sufferings: but then she had this to support her, that her sighs
for her sins were many, and that her heart was faint or heavy through fear of
wrath; yet not without hope of mercy, which made her thus to repair unto him
by Prayer. Qui nihil sperat, nihil orat.

CHAP. II.
Ver. 1. HOw has the Lord covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud?] Heb.
with a thick cloud: nothing like that bright cloud wherein he appeared to his
people, as a token of his grace, at the dedication of the Temple, 1 Kings 8.10.
How comes it about, and what may be the reason of it? Oh in what a wonderful
manner and by what strange means has the Lord now clouded and covered his
people (whom he had established as Mount Zion) with blackest calamities and
confusion^s, taking all the luster of happiness and of hope from her, and that
in his anger, and again in the day of his anger?

-- tantaene animis coelestibus irae? And cast down from heaven to the earth]
i. e. From the highest pitch of felicity, to the lowest plight of misery. This
was afterward indeed Capernaums case: but when Micah the Morashite prophesied,
Mic. 3.12. Jer. 26.18.
that Zion should be plowed as a field and Jerusalem laid on heaps, it seemed a
Paradox, and very few believed him. Christ's disciples also had a conceit that
the Temple and the world must needs have one and the same period: which
occasioned that mixed discourse made by our Savior, Mat. 24. But Gods gracious
presence is not tied to a place: The Ark, Gods footstool (as here it is
called) was transportative till settled in Sion: so is the Church militant in
continual motion, till it come to triumph in heaven: and those that with
Capernaum are lifted up to heaven in the abundance of means, may be brought
down to hell, for an instance of divine vengeance.

And remembered not his foot-stool] The Temple and therein the Ark: to teach
them, that he was not wholly there included; nieither ought now to be sought
and worshipped anywhere but above. Sursum corda.

Sept.
Ver. 2. The Lord has swallowed up all the habitations of Judah] (...), as the
sea swalloweth up a ship; as an earthquake swalloweth up whole town-ships: as
fire swalloweth up fuel, or as Moses his serpent swallowed up the Sorcerers
serpents.

And has not pitied] This was worse then all the rest. Isa. 47.6.

He has thrown down] Not shaken them only and so left them standing; but
utterly subverted them, and that in great displeasure, Deo irritato, and irato,
God set on the Chaldees, and was the Author, not of their evil will, but of
their work.

He has brought them down to the ground] Though for their height they seemed
to threaten heaven.

He has polluted the Kingdom and the Priests] Which were held holy and
inviolable: Profanavit regnum coeli, say some Rabbines here, He has profaned
the Kingdom of heaven: for so they accounted the Commonwealth of Israel; which
Josephus calls (...) a God-government. But now God had dispriviledged them,
and cast them off as a thing of naught.

Ver. 3. He has cut off in his anger all the horn of Israel] i. e. All the
strength and beauty: the royal majesty especially, Psalm. 89.24. and 132.17.

He has drawn back his right-hand] Wherewith he was wont to shelter them, and
to fight for them: Or, Isreal's right hand, sc. by disabling them: for it is God
that strengthens and weakeneth the arm of either party, Ezekiel. 30.24.

And he burned against Jacob] Or, in Jacob: i. e. He declares his displeasure
among his people as clearly as a flame of fire that is easily discernd.

Ver. 4. He has bent his bow like an enemy] He does not only help the enemies,
but himself fights against us with his own bare hand. He has bent his bow,
id est, vim suam ultricem, says Origin, that is, his avenging force: So the
Poet faineth that Apollo shot his deadly shafts into the camp of the Grecians.

He stood with his right-hand] Heb. He was set: Vulg. Firmavit dextram suam, he
held his right hand steddily, that he might hit what he shot at.

In the tabernacle of the daughter of Zion] In Jerusalem that was sweetly
situated, as a tabernacle pitched in a pleasant plain; but now a field of blood.

He has poured out his wrath like fire] i. e. Abundantly and most vehemently,
perinde ac Aetna, Hecla, etc.

Ver. 5. The Lord was an enemy] This, the secure and foolish people would not
be drawn to believe, till now they felt it: therefore it is so reiterated.

He has swallowed up Israel, he has destroyed, etc.] This he had said before,
Redundanti copia exponit quae autea dixcrat.
ver. 2. but in cases of this kind people love to say the same things over and
over.

And has increased -- mourning and lamentation] Heb. lamentation and
lamentation, q. d. this is all he has left us. And this she speaks mourning,
but not murmuring: non litem intendit Deo, sed confessionem edit.

Ver. 6. And he has violently taken away his tabernacle] Redit ad deplorandam
religionem: nothing grieves a good soul so much as the loss of religious
opportunities. Old Eli's heart was broke before his neck, at the news of the
Ark taken.

As if it were of a garden] As if it were some cottage or hovel set up for a
short time in a garden, for the repose of the gardener, Es. 1.8.

He has destroyed his places of the assembly] Whence we were wont to hope for
help, in answer to our prayers. There it was that he formerly brake the arrows
of the bow, the shield, and the sword, and the battle, Psalm. 76.3. See the Note
there. Hence 2 Chronicles. 4.9. the great Court of the Temple, where the people used
to pray, is called Gnazarah, that is help and defense.

The King and the Priest] Zedekiah, and Serajah; and with them, the Kingdom and
the Priesthood, Haec jam pro vili, sub pedibusque jacent.

Ver. 7. The Lord has cast off his Altar] She goes over it again, as the main
matter of her grief, that she was bereft of the outward exercises of religion.
Long fecit, procul removit a se quasi remed osam, sibi ingratam and molestam.
His altar God had cast into a corner, as that which was an eyesore to him: --
his Sanctuary he abhorred or dissolved, etc.

They have made a noise in the house of the Lord] Where God was wont to be
praised with heart and voice, now the enemies reboate and roar out Jo triumph,
Jo Paean, Victoria, all is our own.

Ver. 8. The Lord has purposed to destroy] Non casu, non subito, non temere,
sed maturo and destinato decreto. Gods Providence (which is nothing else but
the carrying on of his decree) extends to smallest matters; much more to the
subversion of States and Cities.

He that stretched out a line] sc. Of destruction, or a levelling line: See 2
King. 21.13. Esa. 34.11. Jerusalem was built by line; and so it was destroyed
by him who does all things in number, weight and measure.

Ver. 9. Her gates are sunk into the ground] So they seem to be, because laid
on the ground, and covered with rubbish. The Rabbines fable, that the gates
sank indeed into the ground, that they might not come into the enemies power,
because the Ark had once passed thorough them; and when the Priests that
carried it sang, Lift up your heads O ye gates, etc. they opened of their own
accord.

The Law is no more] sc. Read, or regarded. Inter arma silent leges: the noise
of wars drowneth the voice of Laws.

Her Prophets also find no vision from the Lord] See Psalm. 74.9. with the Note.
Jeremy was alone, and happily thought when he saw all ruined, that he should
prophecy no more. Ezekiel and Daniel were far remote. This was no small
affliction that is here complained of. How woe-begone was sinful Saul, when in
his distress he could have no answer from God, either by Vrim, or Vision, etc.
but had the devil to preach his funeral?

Ver. 10. The elders of the daughters of Zion] Who sat once aloft passing
sentence; and held themselves, happily, too high to be told their duties by a
poor Prophet.

Sit upon the ground] After the manner of mourners.

And keep silence] Who were wont to be the oracles of the Country.

They have cast dust upon their heads] Those white heads of theirs, which they
had stained with foul practices.

They have girded themselves with sackcloth] Heb. sacks, instead of silks.

The virgins of Jerusalem] Who were wont to walk haughtily, and with
stretchtout necks, Isa. 3.16.

Hang down their heads to the ground] As if they were ashamed of themselves,
and had small joy of their beauty, and former bravery.

Ver. 11. Mine eyes do fail with teares] Those fountains (as the Hebrew word
signifies) are even drawn dry. I have wept till I can weep no more, as David
did; or I have wept my self blind, as Faustus the son of Vortiger (once King of
England) is said to have done.

My bowels are troubled] Heb. bemudded. See chap. 1.20.

My liver is poured upon the earth] I have well-nigh vomited up my gall, as Job
16.13.

For the destruction] Heb. the breach even to shivers: as young trees or ships
are broken by tempests.

Because the children and sucklings swoon in the streets] Miserabile etiam
hostibus spectaculum, a rueful sight.

Ver. 12. They say to their mothers] Lege and luge. Tu quibus ista leges
incertum est, Lector, ocellis:
Ipse quidem siccis scribere vix potui.
As often as I read the Lamentations of Jeremy (says Gregory Nazianzen) my voice
fails me, Orat. 1. pacificat.
and I am overwhelmed with tears: the misery of that poor people comes under
my view as it were; and my heart is therewith very much affected, and afflicted.

Where is corn and wine] Frumentum dicunt non panem: Corn they would have been
glad of, though unground says one: Wine they ask for and not water, which
notes an ill custom in their mothers to drink wine, and to give it their
little ones: but by corn and wine here may be meant necessary food, to keep
them alive.

When their soul was poured out into the mothers bosom] As it were giving them
their lives again, seeing they yielded them no food to preserve them alive.

Ver. 13. What thing shall I take to witness for thee?] q. d. Thou art such a
mirror of Gods heavy judgments, that I know not whence to borrow arguments,
nor where to find examples for thy comfort, so matchless is thy misery. It
exceeds that of the Egyptians under Moses, of the Canaanites under Joshua, of
the Philistines under David, of the Hebrews under Eli, etc. It is even
imparallel, and inexpressible: I have but one Simile to set it forth by: and it
is this,

Thy breach is great, like the sea] As far as the sea exceeds the rivers, so
does thy calamity exceed that of other nations.

Who can heal thee?] None but an Almighty Physician: surely in man's judgment,
thy bruise is incureable, and thy wound is grievous, Jer. 30.12.

Ver. 14. Thy Prophets] Thine and not mine; for thou art miserable by thine own
election, accessory to thine own ruin.

Have seen vain and foolish things for thee] Visions of vanity, saplesse and
savourlesse stuff: the fruit or rather froth of their own fancies, Jer. 23.9,
10, etc.

And they have not discovered thine iniquity] Conviction makes way for
conversion, and so preventeth utter subversion.

But have seen for thee false burdens] viz. Against Babylon: in confidence
whereof thou have been hardened and heartened in thy sinful practices, to thine
utter undoing.

And causes of banishment] sc. Eventually, and as it has proved.

Ver. 15. All that pass by thee clap] See chap. 1.18.

Is this the City] Gods palace upon earth, the porch of Paradise, etc. as they
said of Jezabel when she lay torn with dogs, Is this that Jezabel?

O quantum haec Niobe Niobe mutatur ab illa? Ver. 16. All thine enemies opened
their mouths against thee] They speak largely and freely to thy dishonor, the
very banks of blasphemy being broken down, as it were.

We have swallowed her up] But shall find her to be hard meat, such as they
shall digest in hell. See ver. 2, 5.

Certainly this is the day that we look for] Pray we, that the Papists may
never see here their long looked for day, as they have long called it.

Ver. 17. The Lord has done that which he had devised] Or, performed what he
purposed. See ver. 8.

He has fulfilled his Word that he had commanded] That is, his threats annexed
to his commands, and of as great authority as they.

In the days of old] And not two or three days only since Gods menaces are
ancient, and infallible: not uttered in terrorem only: neither it his
forbearance any acquittance.

And he has caused thine enemy to rejoice over thee] Still the Prophet calls
off this distressed people from the jeares and insolences of their enemies
whom they too much looked upon, to the just judgment of God who turned those
dogs loose upon them, to bark at them, and to bait them, in manner aforesaid.

Ver. 18. Their heard cried unto the Lord] i. e. They cried seriously at least,
if not sincerely. Some think it was not a cry of the Spirit for grace; but only
of the Flesh, for ease and freedom from affliction: wherefore the Prophet in
the next words turns to the walls of Jerusalem which were now broken down,
bidding them weep, since the people would not. And surely the stony walls of
men's houses, standing with bells of water on their faces before foul weather,
shall witness against such hard hearts as relent not, and so prevent not the
terrible tempest of Gods wrath for their iniquities. There are that render and
sense the text thus, Their heart cries against the Lord, i. e. the adversaries
set their whole power to devise blasphemy against God: let the Church therefore
pray in hope to be heard and to speed the better for the others insolences.
These by wall understand the people within the wall; Others O Mure, qui nunc es
merae ruinae, O poor shattered wall; or O City which art now nothing but bare
walls, without housing and inhabitants.

Ver. 19. Arise, cry in the night] A fit time for meditation and prayer, as we
read of David, Psalm. 119. and of the son of David, Luke 21.

In the beginning of the watches] When others are in their first (which is
their deepest and sweetest) sleep, break thy self of thy rest, that thou may
give God no rest. Esa. 62.6, 7. Omnibus signis et modis miseriam tuam expone
Domino, bestir thee every way: al^'s but little enough.

Pour out thine heart like water] That is, says Sanchez, weep till thou have
wept thy very heart out, if it were possible. Or as others, pour out thine
heart to God in humble and ingenuous confession and supplication: but then pour
it forth as water, (whereof every drop will come out) and not as oil, whereof
some will still stick to the sides of the vessel. Tundens pectus and non
effundens vitia, ea consol^d^t, says Austin. He who pretends to repent, and
yet parts not with his sins, does but increase them.

Lift up thine hands toward him] But withal thy heart, chap. 3.41.

For the life of thy young children] See on ver. 11, 12.

Ver. 20. Behold, O Lord, and consider to whom thou have done this] Even to
thine own inheritances, who suffer harder and heavier things commonly then any
others: And why? Ingentia beneficia, ingentia flagitia, ingentia supplicia,
their offenses are increased, their punishments are aggravated by their
obligations.

Shall the women eat their fruit, children of a span-long? 2 King. 6. Joseph.
de bell. l. 7. cap. 8.
] That they did so in the siege of Jerusalem by the Chaldees, it appears by
this question. In the famine of Samaria under Joram they did likewise: as also
at the last destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans: and at the siege of
Sancerra in France, Anno 1572. See the sad effects of sin, and shun it, if but
for the ill consequents of it.

Shall the Priest and the Prophet be slain in the Sanctuary of the Lord?] It
seems they were so, (but who they were we read not) although God had cautioned,
Touch not mine anointed and do my Prophets no harm. Priests were slaughtered,
where they used to slaughter beasts for sacrifices: but it may be they were
nothing better then Thomas Becket the devils Martyr here, Act. and Mon.
and Adam Beton that butcherly Archbishop in Scotland, who when himself was
butchered, cried out Kill me not, for I am a Priest.

Ver. 21. The young and the old lie on the ground in the streets] Oh the woe of
war! oh the bloody work that the sword makes wheresoever it is in commission!
Well may it be called an evil, an only evil by an Antonomasie, Esa. 45.7.

Ver. 22. Thou have called as in a solemn day my terrours] i. e. My terrible
enemies the Chaldees, being called in by thee their Generalissimo, came on as
cheerfully as if they had come to a solemn feast or some merry-meeting; and not
to a siege, and to a bloody war; which they cannot but know to be utrinque
triste, such as both sides usually suffer by.

Those that I have swadled and brought up] Singula haec verba ponderanda sunt:
singula enim ingens habent pathos. Here every word is very ponderous, and
pathetical: Indeed this whole book is so: which is the reason that there is no
great cohaerence in some places thereof to be discovered. For as he that is
under some grievous affliction, without observing of order, now cries, now
prays, now laments, now complains, etc. so does the Prophet here, in the name
of the Church, pour forth himself tumultuarily in a flood such words as his
grief ministered unto him: and grief is no methodical speaker.

CHAP. III.
Ver. 1. I Am the man] Here Jeremiah in the name and place of all the Jewish
people, sets forth his sufferings very passionately, and elegantly: (...),
says Synesius, for nothing is more Rhetorical then a man in misery: See on
chap. 1.12.

Oecol.
By the rod of his wrath] i. e. Of Gods wrath, whom yet he names not prae
magnitudine affectus, but refers to him all his sufferings, and alludeth
here, say some, to that rod, Jer. 1.11.

Ver. 2. He has led me and brought me into darknesse] Perstat semper in
Metaphora pastoriti^, say some, who by rod in the foregoing verse understand
Gods shepherds wand, wherewith, when he is displeased, he drives his unruly
sheep into dark and dangerous places: See Psalm. 23.3.4. Mic. 7.9.

Hinc inde continenter verberat. Jun.
Ver. 3. Surely against me is he turned] Metaphora a colaphizantibus, a Metaphor
from buffetters who double their blows; beating their adversaries on both
sides, as the smith does his red-hot iron upon the anvil, till he has shaped
it.

Ver. 4. My flesh and my skin has he made old] Withered it and wanzed it, so
that I am not like my self: facta videbor anus, as she said: See Psalm. 32.3.

He has broken my bones] Decayed and impaired, and that with greatest torment,
as befalls when bones are broken.

Ver. 5. He has builded against me] Bulwarks and batteries.

And compassed me with gall and travel] Or, with venom and vexation: See Jer.
8.14. In these and the like hyperbolical expressions we must note, that words
are too weak to utter the greatness of the Saints grief, when they lie under
the sense of Gods wrath, and heavy displeasure.

Ver. 6. He has set me in dark places] Dungeons happily which are a kind of
graves, and where poor prisoners lie as forgotten. The Persians called their
prisons (...) oblivions: And Ezekiel says that Babylon was to the Jews as a
grave, where they lay for dead, till those dead bones lived again, chap. 37.

As they that be dead of old] Free among the dead, and forgotten. It may be
said of a Saint in some cases, that Vivit, and est vitae nescius ipse sua.

Ver. 7. He has hedgd me about] Surrounded me with troubles, brought me into
straits inextricable, and importable.

Ver. 8. Also when I cry and shout] As poor Prisoners use to do, for relief and
release.

He shuts out my prayer] Or shuts his ear to my prayer. This was very
grievous to any good heart: more then it could be to Tully, a stranger to the
true God, who yet bewaileth the matter to his brother in these words, I would
pray to the gods for those things; but that, alas, they have given over to
hear my prayers.

Ver. 9. He has enclosed my ways with hewn stone] i. e. Most strongly and
closely, so that none can come at me.

He has made all my paths crooked] So that all things go cross with me: and
although they were never so well devised, yet still they sort out unto the
worst.

Ver. 10. He was unto me as a Bear lying in wait] So that if I do but offer to
stir, or seek to make escape, I am in danger to be devoured.

And as a Lion in secret places] God has many ways and means to bemeet with
sinners. He can stop them in their course, as he did Balaam, Jonas, others.

Ver. 11. He has turned aside my wayes] As ver. 9.

And pulled me in pieces] As a Bear or Lion does the silly sheep, that falls
into their paws. Carnali quadam intemperie haec effusa sunt. The Vulgar has
it, Confregit me.
He has broken me in pieces, sc. Attempting to leap over his hedge, ver. 7.
his stone-wall, ver. 9. In the year 1590 Nicolas Frischlin that famous Poet,
Orator, Alsted. Chron. 480.
and Philosopher, attempting to escape out of prison, was so broken, a capite
ad talos, a cute ad ossa.

Ver. 12. He has bent his bow] Chap. 2.4.

And set me as a mark] Which he is sure to hit. The Benjamites, Judge. 20. the
Parthians, Alcon the Cretian, Domitian the Emperor were excellent archers: but
Non semper feriet quodcunque minabitur arcus. Gods arrow never misseth the mark.

Ver. 13. He has caused the arrows of his quiver to enter into my reines] Heb.
the sons of his quiver, by an Hebraism: Renes sunt seeds libidinis.
So Horace has -- pharetram gravidam sagittis. Lib. 2. od. 21.


Job has many like complaints, chap. 7.20. and 8.4. and 16.12, 13. See there.

Ver. 14. I was a derision to all my people] Or, to all peoples. Our Savior
suffered all this, and much more, for us.

And their song all the day] Or their lute or k^t; whom they played on at
pleasure, and desired no better sport.

Ver. 15. He has filled me with bitternesse] Heb. bitternesses: alluding as
some think, to that jus seu embamma in quo intingebant agnum Paschalem, sauce
of bitter herbs wherewith they did eat the Passover (the juice of them
expressed:) to mind them of the bitter afflicions which they suffered in Egypt.

He has made me drunk with wormwood] Or Henbane, or Wolfe-bane rather, succo
cicutae.

Ver. 16. He has also broken my teeth with gravel-stones] i e. With gritty
bread: Comminuit scrupis dentes meos.
See Prove. 20.17.

He has covered me with ashes] The Greek and Latin have it, He has fed me
with ashes, which was worse then that bread made most of saw-dust, wherewith
they fed the Martyrs in the Marian times.

Ver. 17. And thou have removed my soul far off from peace] Prosperity and I
are twain; we are utterly unacquainted.

Ver. 18. And I said] But not so wisely. I was even almost tumbling into the
pit of desperation: I was stradling over it, as it were, but God preserved me.

My strength and my hope is perished] My strength to bear these miseries, and
my hope to be ever freed of them.

Ver. 19. Remembering mine affliction and my misery; the wormwood and the
gall] i. e. The bitterness that was in it, but of mine own commingling.
Impatiens quisque bis affligitur, Impatience redoubleth an affliction.

Ver. 20. My soul has them still in remembrance] But it is not good to plod
overmuch in this case. Such bitter pills should be swallowed whole, and not
chewed upon, unless it be for our further humiliation.

Ver. 21. This I recall to my mind] This? what? Gods infinite mercies, that
Cape of good hope: See ver. 22. So Psalm. 119.56. This I had; that is, this
comfort, or this ability to keep thy precepts.

Ver. 22. It is of the Lords mercy that we are not consumed] That we are yet on
this side hell. This sentence was much in the mouth of that famous Maria
Aegyptiaca: and should be much in all our minds and mouths, for a lenitive!

Exarescunt torrentes, metalla exhauriuntur, slumina desiciunt, prataitem cum
fructibus, etc.
Because his compassions fail not] Or are not spent, wasted: but, as the oil
in the cruse, as the spring ever runs, the Sun ever shines, etc. This
should ever shine in our hearts, as the Sun does in the firmament.

Ver. 23. They are new every morning] Yea every moment. We have continual
experiments.

Great is thy faithfulnesse] Gods mercy moved him to promise: his Truth to
perform. See 2 Samuel 7.18, 21. with the Notes.

Ver. 24. The Lord is my portion] And that is enough for me, should I never have
more. See Notes on Psalm. 16. That which gives content in any portion, is, 1.
The favor and presence of God. 2. That it is from the hand of a Father. 3.
That it comes to us in the Covenant of Grace. 4. That it is the purchase of
Christ's blood. 5. That it is an answer of prayers, and a blessing from above
on honest endeavors, etc. Vide autem, pie Lector, says an Expositour, See
here, good Reader, how this Prophetical Lamentation begins to be a guide to
godliness. For it does not, after the manner of silly women, throw out empty
words without wisdom: but teaches all along, either overtly or covertly, that
all things here below, Pe^d F^gueir.
how highly soever esteemed, are vanity and soon lost: but the grace of God is
solid and stable. -- Christum tollere nemo potest. Christ is a portion
unloosable, Deicola Abbas.
as One once answered to those that asked him, why he was still merry and
cheerful?

Emphatice loquitur.
Said my Soul] Not my mouth only: but I speak it from my very heart, which
rejoices in God my portion more then the many do in the increase of their corn
and wine, Psalm. 4.7.

Therefore will I hope in him] Expectabo ut teneam per speciem, quem teneo per
spem.

Ver. 25. The Lord is good unto them that wait for him] Which few can skill of,
and I have somewhat to do to hit on, Et hoc apertam er^ ditionem continet. Flgu.
but would not now have missed of for all the world.

To the soul that seeks him] Not giving over till he finds him.

Ver. 26. It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait, Heb. be
silent: not with a Pythargorical or monastical silence, ut non liceat lequi
locis and horis certis, but with an humble submission to Gods holy will, a
patient and peaceable behavior under his hand; waiting for a good use thereof,
and a gracious issue in the best time: To frame the heart whereunto, Aurea his
subnectitur sententia.

Ver. 27. It is good for a man that he bear the yoke from his youth] The yoke
of Gods law, Quo semel iste imbuta recens servabit odorem Testa diu. Hor.
and the discipline of afflictions: it is good to be betime in Gods
nurturing-house, and remain a good while there, that he be trained up in the
School of afflictions, that he be a well-beaten Soldier to the Cross. The
description of such a one follows.

Ver. 28. He sits alone] Sessio solitaria, as being much in meditation,
according to that counsel of the Preacher. In the day of adversity consider.

And keeps silence] When Gods hand is upon his back, his hand is upon his
mouth: See on ver. 26.

Because he has born it upon him] Or, When he has taken it upon him, taken up
his cross, as being active in suffering.

Ver. 29. He puts his mouth in the dust] He lies low at Gods ^eet: putting
himself into the hands of Justice, yet in hope of mercy. See 1 Cor. 14 25.

If so be there may be ^^pe] Heb. Peradventure there is hope, q. d. doubtless
there is: however, I will try, since I have lost many a worse labor.

Ver. 30. He gives his cheek to him that smites him] Humility (the product of
affliction sanctified) is still at her lesson, or rather practicing what she
has learned. David having suffered by Absalom, can well enough bear with
Shimei's tongue smitings: and the Apostles, after they had been in prison,
departed from the Council rejoicing that they were so far graced as to be
disgraced for the name of Jesus, Acts 5.41.

He is filled full of reproach] He can bravely bear all contumelies and
contempts for his conscience, taking them as crowns and confirmations of his
conformity to Christ.

Ver. 31. For the Lord will not cast off for ever] No, nor at all: however he
may seem to some so to do. Non deserit etiamsi deserat, says a Father: He does
not put his poople far from him, as the word here signifies.

Ver. 32. For though he cause grief] As sometimes he does in very
faithfulness, and that he may be true to his peoples souls.

Yet he will have compassion] He will repent and return and leave a blessing
behind him: that is certain, Joel 2.14.

Ver. 33. For he does not afflict willingly] Heb. From the heart; Non nisi
coactus, Non est Deo volupe, proprium, aut per se intentum* Paenas dat dum
paenas exigit, Sen. de Augusto.

Justu etiam supplietis illac^ymavit and inge^uit. De Vespas. Sueton.


as that Emperor said, when he sealed a writ for execution of a condemned
person: I would not do it but upon necessity. It goes as much against the
heart with God, as it can do against the hair with us: Ille dolet quoties
cogitur esse ferox.

Ver. 34. To crush under his feet all the prisoners of the earth] i. e. All
those that are in misery, to lay more load upon them, and so to crush them to
pieces, yea to grind them to powder. This he could as easily do as bid it be
done: but he takes no such delight in severity and harshnesse.

Ver. 35. To turn aside the right of a man] To wrest his right by false
witness and corrupt means, as wicked men use to do before the face of the most
High, or of a Superior under color of law: God likes none of all this,
though eftsoons for excellent ends he suffers it so to be, and orders it
when so it is.

Ver. 36. To subvert a man in his cause] By legerdemain to tilt the balance of
Justice on the one side.

The Lord approves not] Heb sees not. Non videt, i. e. non ei visum est, it
seems not good unto him he likes it not.

Ver. 37. Who is he] Tam imprudens and imperitus? Can any one be so simple as
to think that the enemy could do ought against us, but by the divine permission
and appointment? God, as he made all by his power, so he manageth all by his
Providence. This, the Egyptians hieroglyphically set forth by painting God, 1.
As blowing an egg out of his mouth, that is, as making the round world by his
Word. 2. As compassing about that Orb with a girdle, that is, keeping all
together, and governing all by his Providence.

Ver. 38. Out of the mouth of the most High proceeds not evil and good?] i.
e. Prosperity and adversity? q. d. Who doubts of that? Amos 3.5. Isa. 45.7.
Talk not then of ^ate and blind Fortune.

Ver. 39. Wherefore does a living m^n complain?] Mourn immoderately, or murmr
causelessly? If he mourn let him mourn for his sin, as the cause of his
suffering, let him revenge upon that. If he be tempted to murmr, let him
remember that he is yet alive, and that is more then his part comes to, since it
is the Lords mercy that he is not consumed, and sent packing hence to hell.
Life in any sense is a sweet mercy: even that which to the afflicted may seem a
lifelesse life, as Prove. 15.15. Let this patient us, that we are yet alive.

A man for the punishment of his sine?] Heb. man for his sin? for sin does as
naturally draw and suck punishments to it, as the Laod-stone does Iron, or
Turpentine fire: wherefore also the same word in Hebrew signifies both.

Ver. 40. Let us search and try our wayes] i. e. Make accurate enquiry into
them: so shall we soon find out selves to be a whole newfound world of
wickedness. Search we therefore, and do it thoroughly: Many either search not at
all (^hey cannot endure these domestical Audits: its death to them to reflect
and recognize what they have done) or as though they desired not to find: they
search, as men do for their bad money: they know they have it, but they would
gladly have it pass for current among the rest. Heathens will rise up in
judgment against such: for they prescibed and practiced self-examination;
Pythagoras once a day; Non prius in dulcem declines lumina somnum,
Quam prius exactae reputaveris acta diei, etc.
Phocyllides thrice a day, if Stobaeus may be believed.

Sermon.
And turn again to the Lord] Let self-examination end in reformation: else sin
will be thereby but imboldened and strengthened, as idle vagrants and lawless
subjects are, if questioned only, and not punished and restrained. Of turning
again to the Lord. See the Notes on Zach. 1.2.

Ver. 41. Let us lift up our hearts with our hands] Holy hearts, pure hands.
Instead of wrangling with God, as ver. 39. let us wrestle with him in prayer:
this is the only way to get off with comfort. Nazianzen says, that the best
work we can put our hands unto is, in coelos eas extendere, ad precesque
expandere, to lift them up to God in prayer. But then it must be with a true
heart, Heb. 10.22. See Job 11, 13. with the Notes.

Ver. 42. We have transgressed and have rebelled] We have committed evil, and
omited good, and failed in the manner, and are therefore justly punished. Let
God hear such words fall from our mouths, set a work by our hearts, and then we
may have any thing.

Ver. 43. Thou have covered with anger] Overwhelmed us with thy Judgments.
None out of hell have ever suffered more then the Saints: they have felt the
sad effects of displeased Love.

Ver. 44. Thou have covered thy self with a cloud] Hid thy face from us; and
secreted thy self as a Judge does (when he has passed sentence upon a
malefactor) that he may not be solicited to reverse it.

That our prayers should not pass through] The veil of the Temple was of no
debarring matter but thin and pervious, that the incense might easily pass
thorough it into the Holy of Holies: but now it was otherwise; God had set a
bar betwixt him and his people.

Ver. 45. Thou have made us as the off-scouring] Eradicationem says the
Vulgar: rasuram potius, not the rooting out, but the scrapings off. As the Jews
did rather extrinsecus radere peccata quam intrinsecus eradicare, Bern.
Exverras, Scobes and ramenta. Excreamenta and excrementa.
shave off their sins outwardly then root them out from within: so God made
them as despicable as the parings of a pavement, or of a leprous house.

And refuse] See 1 Cor. 4.13. with the Notes.

Ver. 46. All our enemies have opened their mouths against us] i. e. Reviled
and derided us: See chap. 2.16.

Ver. 47. Fear and a snare is come upon us] Heb. a pit: Great terror, and no
way to escape. See Isa. 24.17, 18.

Ver. 48. Mine eye runs down] Heb. mine eye descends, i. e. Falls as it
were wholly away. See chap. 1.16. and 2.18.

Ver. 49. Mine eye trickleth down and cease not] Put fire under the still,
and water droppeth from roses. Fiery afflictions cause drops of repentance: and
Repentance, like the Philosophers stone, makes golden afflictions, 1 Pet. 1.7.

Ver. 50. Till the Lord look down] Let God but see the Rainbow of sound
Repentance in our hearts, and he will soon shine forth, and cause it to clear
up.

Ver. 51. Mine eye effects my heart] Iisdem quibus videmus oculis flemus, we
see and weep with the same eyes. Lib. 2. cap. 32.
But Pliny wondereth where that humor is at other times, that flows out of
the eyes so readily and plentifully in case of grief.

Because of all the daughters of my City] Or, more then all the daughters, etc.
more then the most passionate women use to weep, Prae omnibus filiabus.
when they are most grieved.

Ver. 52. Mine enemies chased me sore] In most eager and extreme manner, with
utmost cruelty and craft.

As a Bird] Beaten from bush to bush.

Without cause] Jeremy and the godly party might say so: but not Zedekiah and
other perfidious ones.

Ver. 53. They have cut off my life in the dungeon] Where I lead a lifelesse
life, such as did Roger Bishop of Salisbury in King Stephens time, who
sustained such miseries in prison, ut vivere noluerit, mori nescierit, that
live he would not, and yet dye he could not.

And cast a stone upon me] As they did upon the mouths of dens, dungeons or
sepulchers, to make sure work. The Chaldee has it, they stoned me.

Ver. 54. Waters flowed over mine head] Many and great miseries have
overwhelmed and oppressed me, both in body and soul. These are frequently
compared to waters.

Then I said, I am cut off] sc. From the land of the living, but God was better
to me then my hopes.

Ver. 55. I called upon thy name, O Lord, out of the low dungeon] See Psalm,
130.1. Jon. 2.1. with the Notes.

Ver. 56. Thou have heard my voyce] Seem a man's case never so desperate, if he
can but find a praying heart, God will find a pitying heart. Prayer is the
best lever at a dead lift.

Hide not thine ear at my breathing] As breathing is a proof of animal life; so
is prayer, though never so weak, of spiritual. If therefore you cannot speak,
weep ( fletu saepe agitur non affatu, tears also have a voice, Psalm. 39.12.)
if you cannot weep, sigh, (a storm of sighs may do as much as a show of
tears) if you cannot sigh, yet breath, as here: God feels breath; and happy is
he that can say, In te spero and respiro, In thee I hope Lord: and after thee I
breath or pant.

Ver. 57. Thou drewest near] This thou have done, and this I hope thou yet wilt
do, Experience breeds confidence.

Ver. 58. O Lord thou have pleaded the causes of my soul] whereof those
Babylonians were no just Judges.

Thou have redeemed my life] It is the life, nay the soul of the Saints, that
the wicked hunt after, though they do not always profess so to do.

Ver. 59. O Lord, thou have seen my wrong] Thou have seen it and art sensible
of it: that is my comfort; for (...).

Judge thou my cause] As Psalm. 43.1. See there.

Ver. 60. Thou have seen all their vengeance] See on ver. 59. The Saints fare
the better for their enemies spite and cruelty: and they may very well plead
and present it to God in prayer.

Ver. 61. Thou have heard their reproach] Their spiteful speeches, and taunting
terms have come into thine ears.

And all their imaginations] Heb. Their contrivements. As the eyes of the Lord
are upon the righteous, and his ears are open to their prayers, Psalm. 34.15.
so he both sees the ill carriage, and hears the ill language of graceless
persons against the godly.

Ver. 62. The lips of those that rose up] See on ver. 61.

Ver. 63. Behold, their sitting down and their rising up] Or, at their both
sitting down (to meat) and at their rising up (from meat) I am their
musick-maker, their table talk, and the matter of their mirth: they make sport
with us, as the Philistines did with Sampson. David complains of the like
evil-dealing, Psalm. 35.15, 16, 17.

Ver. 64. Render unto them a recompense] Call them to an account: and requite
them. Let their music be marred, and the meal once ended, send them in a
reckoning.

Ver. 65. Give them sorrow of heart] In place of their mad mirth and sinful
music: turn their Psalm (as the vulgar renders the word Music in the
foregoing verse) into a black Sant^^, as they call it, ferale carmen, a doleful
ditty. Dabis eis scutum cordis, says the Vulgar. And indeed the word rendered
sorrow signifies a shield or cover. A lapide Mr. Buroughs Hos. Operculum
cordis, vel apostema cordis.
It notes, says one, the Gardiaca passio, whereby the heart is so oppressed,
and there is such a stopping, that it is as it were covered sicut scuto, as
with a shield; there is a lid as it were, put over the heart, to keep off the
most refreshing cordials, and so the heart is suffocated with sorrow. It is as
if he should say, put them into such a condition, that no creature may yield
them the least refreshment. Spira was in this condition.

Thy curse upon them] All the curses written and unwritten in thy book. This is
not more a prayer then a prophecy. How effectual Christ's curse is, may be seen
in the withered fig tree in the Gospel, presently dried up by the roots.

Ver. 66. Persecute and destroy them in anger] Since they are thine and our
implacable and irreformable enemies: be thou, Lord, implacably bent against
them, to their utter destruction: and since they think us not worthy to breath
in the common air (whom thou have made heirs of the world together with
faithful Abraham our Progenitour) destroy them from under these heavens of
thine, in the compass and cope whereof thou raignest and rulest all.

From under the heavens of the Lord] Do thou, O Christ (to whom the Father has
committed all judgment) root them out from under the heavens of thy heavenly
Father. Thus some Paraphrase the words: and observe therehence the mystery of
the Trinity: like as they do from Genesis 19.24.

CHAP. IV.
Pet. a Figueir.
Ver. 1. HOw is the gold become dim?] How? by way of wonderment again, as chap.
1.2. q. d. Quo tanto scelere hominum, and qua tanta indignatione Dei? What have
men done? and how has God been provoked, that there are such strange
alterations here all on the sudden? By gold and fine gold here understand the
Temple overlaid by Solomon with choice gold: or Gods people (his spiritual
Temple) who had now lost their luster, and dignity.

The stones of the Sanctuary are poured out] Come tumbling down, from the
demolished Temple.

Ver. 2. The precious sons of Zion] Those Porphyrogeniti, as the Greek
Emperors children were called, Sept. (...).
because born and bred up in a room made up of precious stones. Understand it
of the Jews in general (Gods peculiar people, precious in his sight and
therefore honorable, Isa. 43.4.) of Zedekiahs sons in particular who (as did
also the rest of the Jewish Nobility, if Josephus may be believed) poudered
their hair with gold dust, Antiq. l. 8. c. 7.
to the end that they might glister and sparkle against the beams of the Sun.
The precious children of the Church are all glorious within, by means of the
graces of the Spirit, that golden oil, Zach. 4.12. and the blessings of God
out of Zion, Psalm. 134.3.
which are far beyond all other the blessings of heaven and of earth.

As earthen pitchers] Weak and worthless.

Ver. 3. Even the sea-monsters] Heb. Whales or Seals: which, being Amphibii,
have both a willingness, Vulg. Lamiae.
and a place convenient to suckle their whelps.

The daughter of my people is become cruel] She is so perforce, being destitute
of milk for want of food, but much more by feeding upon them, ver. 10. and
chap. 2.20. Oh what a mercy is it to have meat! and how inexcusable are those
unnatural mothers that neglect to nurse their children, not out of want but
wantonness! Surely as there is a blessing of the womb to bring forth, so of
the breasts to give suck, Genesis 49.25. and the dry breasts and barren womb have
been taken for a curse, Hos. 9.14. as some interpret that text.

Ver. 4. The tongue of the sucking child cleaveth] For want of suck. That was a
miracle which is recorded of the old woman of Bolton in Lancashire, who took up
a poor child that lay crying at the breasts of her dead mother (slain, among
many others, by Prince Ruperts party) and laying it to her own dry breasts that
had not yielded suck for above twenty years before, on purpose to still it, had
milk came to nourish it, to the admiration and astonishment of all beholders.
This and another like example of Gods good providence for the releif of little
ones whom their mothers could not relieve, may be read of in Mr. Clarks Mirror
for Saints and Sinners, Edit. 3. fol. 495, 507.

And no man breaks it unto them] The parents either not having it for them,
or not having an heart to part with it to them.

Ver. 5. They that did feed delicately] Such uncertainty there is of outward
affluence. Our Richad the second was famished to death. Speed. Lib. 3. c. 4.
Henry Holland Duke of Excester, grandchild to John of Gaunt was seen to run
on foot bare-legged after the Duke of Burgundy's train begging his bread for
Gods sake: This I saw, says Philip de Comines. This Henry was brother in law
to King Edward the fourth, from whom he fled.

They that were brought up in scarlet] Qui nutriebantur in croceis sen cocceis,
In fimetis victum quaeritant prae inopia. Jun.
that were gorgeously arrayed, or, that rolling on their rich beds, wrapped
themselves in costly coverlets.

Embrace dunghils] There take up their lodgings, and there also are glad to
find any thing to feed on, though never so course and homely, The Lapwing is
made an Hieroglyphick of infelicity, because he has as a coronet upon the
head, and yet feeds upon the worst of excrements. It is pity that any child
of God, washed in Christ's blood, should bedabble his scarlet robe in the
stinking guzzle of the worlds dunghill: that any one who has heretofore soared
as an Eagle, should now creep on the ground as a bettle, or wallow as a swine
in the mire of sensuality.

Ver. 6. For the punishment of the iniquity of Zion is greater] For Sodom was
destroyed by Angels, Zion by malicious men: The enemies were not enriched by
Sodom, as they were by Zion. Sodom was destroyed in an instant; not so Zion,
for she had her punishment piecemeal; first a long seige, and then the loss of
all, after a world of miseries sustained in the seige. Julius Caesar was wont
to say, It is better once to fall then always to hang in suspense. Augustus
wished that he might dye suddenly: His life he called a Comedy, and said that
he thought he had acted his part therein pretty handsomely; Now if he might soon
pass through death, he would hold it an happiness. Soldiers wish is thus set
forth by the Poet; -- quid enim? concurritur, horae
Momento aut cita mors venit aut victoria laeta.
It is the ancient and manful fashion of the English (who are naturally most
impatient of lingering mischiefs) to put their quarrels to the trial of the
sword, Speed. 963.
as the Chronicler observes.

Ver. 7. Her Nazarites] Who served God in a singular way of abstinence above
other men. These had their rules given them, Number. 6. which whiles they observed,

They were purer then snow, whiter then milk] Temperance is the mother of
beauty, as luxury is of deformity. This is nothing to the Popish Votaryes those
Epicures and Abby-lubbers, Quorum luxuriae totus non sufficit orbis. Some by
Nazarites here understand their Nobles and such as wore coronets on their
heads: Nezar is a crown, 2 Samuel 1.10. 2 Kings 11.12. thus Joseph was a
Nazarite, Genesis 49.26. So Daniel and his three Associates, in whom that was
verified, Gratior est pulchro veniens in corpore virtus.

Ver. 8. Their visage is blacker then a coal] Heb. their visage is more darkened
then blackness. sc. With famine, fear, grief, and car: those vultures have so
fed upon them, that all sightlinesse and loveliness is lost. Think the same of
Apostates: God may complain of such, as Mic. 2.8.

Ver. 9. They that be slain with the sword are better] They suffer less pain
in dying, they are soon dispatched. See on ver. 6. But Famine is an hard weapon.

Triste genus mortis miseris mortalibus omne:
Est tamen imprimis triste perire fame.
For these pine away] By a lingering death, as Drusus the Roman: to whom meat
being denied, Speed. 766.
he had eaten the stuffings of his bed, says Suetonius: and our Richard the
second who was Tantalized and starved to death at Pomfret Castle, where his
diet being served in and set before him in the wonted Princely manner, he was
not suffered either to taste, or touch thereof.

Jam. 5.
Stricken through for want of the fruits of the field] Those precious fruits of
the earth, as James the Apostle calls them. These as a sword defend us from
death: and the want of them, as a sword, runs us thorough. In the time of
Otho the Emperor there was so great a scarcity of bread corn in Germany for
three years together, that many thousands dyed of hunger. Melancth.
In remembrance of which great dearth, there is yearly baked at Erphord a
little loaf, such as was then sold for much money.

Ver. 10. The hands of the pitiful women have sodden] Sodden them rather then
roasted them, lest they should be discovered by the smell, and so in danger to
be despoiled of them, as it sell out at the last seige by the Romans. Lege and
Luge.

They were their meat] In eadem viscera, ex quibus exierant, retrusi sunt: they
returned into the same bowels, whence they came forth.

Ver. 11. The Lord has accomplished his fury] Which he had long deferred; but
now has paid it home. Cave ne ira delata fiat duplicata.

He has poured out his fierce anger] As it were by whole buckets, or
paile-fulls. Gods anger may be set out in minums, as there may be much poison
in little drops: But woe be those on whom it is poured.

He has kindled a fire in Zion] His wrath is like fire that furious Element,
which at first burns a little upon a few bords, but when it prevails, it
bursteth forth into a terrible flame.

Ver. 12. The Kings of the earth, etc.] These knowing how impregnable a piece
Jerusalem was: how the Jebusites of old held out the Tower of Zion against
David, how long it had kept out Nebuchadnezzar, viz. for two years space
almost; how it had been preserved by God against Sennacherib, etc. looked upon
it as in a sort insuperable, and could not but see a divine vengeance in the
destruction of it.

Ver. 13. For the sins of her Prophets] These, these were the right cause of
her ruin. Not that the People were not faulty (for they loved to have it so,
Jer. 5. ult.) but those were the ringleaders in that general defection.

Ver. 14. They have wandered as blind men in the streets] Well might a certain
Expositour say, Hic versus cum sequentibus vary exponitur. The sense in short
is this, says One, that the Jews misled by their Prophets and Priests, were
so blind in knowledge, that every example of sin led to evil: which, for want
of grace, they could not refrain from.

Ver. 15. They cried unto them] The enemies in a mockery said aloud unto the
Jews.

Depart ye, it is unclean, depart, depart] Mimesis: q. d. You that are so pure,
and (as people say profanely amongst us) so Pope-holy, that none must come
anear you, but get away as far and as fast as they can, as if they were Lepers,
etc.

They said among the Heathen] The blind Ethnikes beholding the Jews
wickedness, have judged that it was impossible God should suffer them any
longer to live in his good land, since they would not live by his good Laws.

Ver. 16. The anger of the Lord has divided them] Say the Heathen still,
concerning the wicked Jews: continuatur enim hic instituta Mimesis.

He will no more regard them] Heb. look after them, sc. facie blanda ac
benevola, in mercy; Sacerdotes apud omnes gentes sunt venerabiles ob
ministerium.
he has utterly rejected them: For why?

They respected not the persons of the Priests] But vilely entreated them: See
Chron. 36.16.

Ver. 17. As for us, our eyes as yet failed] With long and vain looking: as
Psalm. 119.82, 123. For, As for us, some render Cum adhuc essemus, while as yet
we were, sc. a Nation: for now we are none. Fuimus Troes.

In our watching we have watched for a Nation] sc. for the Egyptians, Jer.
2.18, 36. and 37.7, 8.

Ver. 18. They hunt our steps] There is an elegancy in the Original, as if we
should say, They hunt our haunts.

That we cannot go in our streets] Because of their forts, from whence they
shoot at us. Satan does so much more: -- cui nomina mill,
Mill nocendi arts. --


Our end is come] We are an undone people.

Ver. 19. Our persecutours are swifter then the Eagles] Those swiftest of al
foul: whom Pindarus therefore calls the Queen of Birds, as the Dolphin is of
fishes for like swiftness. The Egyptians, their pretended helpers, were slow
as snailes; the Chaldees swifter then Eagles.

They pursued us] Or they chased us, or traced us, like bloodhounds.

They laid wait for us in the Wildernesse] They met us at every turn: and left
us no means of escape.

Ver. 20. The breath of our nostriles] King Zedekiah, in whose downfall we drew
as it were our last breath. The Chaldee Paraphrast understands it of Josiah,
with whom indeed dyed all the prosperity of the Jews, as with Epaminondas did
that of the Thebans; and with Theodosius, that of the Western Empire.

The Anointed of the Lord] Who yet for his perfidy was vilely cast away like
Saul, as though he had not been anointed with oil, 2 Samuel 1.21.

Was taken in their pits] A term taken from hunters, Ezekiel. 12.13. See ver. 20.
Jer. 52.8.

Under his shadow] As the chickens do under the hens.

Ver. 21. Rejoice and be glad] This is spoken to Edom by a certain Ironical and
bitter concession: q. d. Do so if thou have any mind to it: but thou shall soon
be made to change thy cheer. Thy flearing at us shall be soon turned into
fearing for thy self: thy mirth into mourning.

That dwell in the land of Vz] Job's country, called also Siria, says R.
Solomon, and happily from Seir. Evil is at next door by to those who rejoice at
the evils of others.

The cup shall pass through unto thee] The quassing cup of Gods Wrath, Jer.
25.18, 29.

And shall make thy self naked] To the scorn of all: Vt ebria and omotae mentis.
as drunkards who are void of shame and common honesty, baring those parts that
nature would have covered, See Jer. 49.10.

Ver. 22. The punishment of thine iniquity is accomplished O daughter of Zion]
A word of comfort in the close of this doleful ditty. The Sun of Righteousness
loves not to set in a cloud. See Isa. 40.1. Profane Elegies have no comfort in
them, as this has.

He will no more carry thee away into Captivity] i. e. No more in haste; after
thy return from Babylon. Carried away they were again, Accommodant huc Isa.
21.11. legentes pro Dumah Rom^.
many ages after by the Romans, whom to this day they therefore call Edomites,
and the Popes hierarchy the wicked kingdom of Edom, which they say shall be
certainly destroyed, as is here also foretold: and then shall they be brought
back again to Jerusalem, and there resetled by their Messiah. See the Chaldee
Paraphrast upon this text.

He will discover thy sins] i. e. Punish thee soundly for them, in the sight of
all men. See on Psalm. 32.1, 2. Job 20.17.

CHAP. V.
Ver. 1. REmember, O Lord, what is come upon us] This last Chapter is a brief
Recapitulation of what had been said in the four former, Propheta per (...)
repetit omnia mala supra commemorata, and remedium petit a Domino. Figuelr.
that they might be the better remembered and considered by the Reader. The
ancient Greek and Latin Bibles style it Jeremies prayer. Herein the Prophet, or
rather the Church lays open, as a Lazar, her sores and sufferings: and
beggeth to be remembered and considered of God. Not that either forgetfulness
or inobservancy can be found in him (for All things both past and future are
present with him) but these are Metaphorical expressions, and He allows us to
be his Remembrancers.

Consider and behold] Heb. behold and see: Affectum cum effecta conjunctum
significat.

Our reproach] This is that which man's nature is most impatient of: to the
Saints it is so much the more grievous, because they do quarter Arms with
Christ.

Ver. 2. Our inheritance is turned to strangers] So the Jews called all other
Nations, as the Greeks, Barbarians. From hence to ver. 19. there are so many
verses, so many several complaints. Whiles we are in this vale of misery and
valley of tears, we are sure of many ailements, and still to have somewhat to
cry for.

Ver. 3. We are orphans and fatherlesse] And so are become thy clients: just
objects of thy pity, Hos. 14.3.

Offic. 1.
Ver. 4. We have drunk our water for money] Fire, water, and air, are common
good, quae jure naturae sunt omnium and singulorum, says Cicero. Lysimachus
paid dear for a cup of water when he parted with his Kingdom for it. Dives
would have done as much in hell for a drop, and could not have it.

Our wood is sold to us] This was strange to them (who had enough of their own
growing, or might have it from the Commons for fetching) but just upon them for
their abuse of it to the service of the Queen of heaven, Jer. 7.18.

Ver. 5. Our necks are under persecution] For that we would not stoop to the
sweet yoke of thine obedience, but held it heavy, now we are under an
intolerable yoke of extreme slavery.

We labor and have no rest] Who once troubled Gods holy rest by bearing
burdens and working thereon, Jer. 17.21. In many places amongst us, Gods
Sabbath is made the voyder and dunghill for all refuse businesses. The Sabbath
of the Lord the sanctified day of his Rest (says a Reverend writer) is
shamelesly troubled and disquieted. B. King on Jo^. Lec. 7.
The Sabbath was never so profaned (says such another Reverend man yet living)
with heart, hand, foot, tongue, pen and Press, as of late. And is it not just
with God that those who would justle his religious Rest out of its right, Mr.
Ley his Fast. Sermon. before Parl. April 26. 1643.
should be restless in their condition? as Lam. 5.5. Thus He. All wicked men
acted and agitated by the devil day and night, may well cry out as here, We
labor and have no rest: but they are not sensible of this woeful servitude.

Ver. 6. We have given the hand to the Egyptians and to the Assyrians] Enemies
to the Chaldaeans, no less then they were to us: but hard hunger (that drives
the wolf out of the wood) has made us glad to be beholding to them for bread:
so ill have the cruel Chaldees relieved and rewarded us for our work.

Nobis soret jucundius semel emori, quam vitam in vitam vivere.
Ver. 7. Our fathers have sinned and are not] They had their payment, but not
comparable to ours: who have out-sinned them, and do therefore justly bear the
punishment of both their sins and our own too.

Ver. 8. Servants have ruled over us] And they are usually most insolent; as
was Tobiah the servant, Neh. 2.19. Cicero, after the defeat given to Pompey,
complains in a certain Epistle, Lords we could not away with, and now we are
forced to serve our fellow servants. This was Canaans curse to be a servant of
servants, Genesis 9.25. See the Notes there.

Ver. 9. We gat our bread with the peril of our lives] So did our good
Ancestors the bread of life, whilst their Preachers also were glad to do as
Jotham did, Judge. 9.21. when they had delivered what they had to say, run away,
and fly for their lives. See 2 Samuel 23.17.

Because of the sword of the wildernesse] Where rovers and robbers lay in wait
for us: neither could we pass them without apparent peril.

Ver. 10. Our skin was black like an oven] Or, at a chimney, Isa. 31.9. being
still beaten upon with the fire that is within it.

Because of the terrible famine] Propter procellas famis, because of the
tempests of famine, which, like a violent storm, bears down all before it.

Ver. 11. They ravished the women in Zion] Heb. they humbled, i. e. they
dishonested: although Virgo invita vexari quidem potest, violari non potest.
The Chaldee Paraphraseth thus, The wives were ravished by the Romans, and the
maids by the Chaldees: for the Jew-doctours do understand this book of the
Lamentations concerning both the destructions of Jerusalem.

Ver. 12. Princes are hanged up by the hand] Made to dye a dogs death, Calvin.
and (as some will have it) by their own hands, (...).

The faces of the Elders were not honoured] Magna fuit quondam capitis
reverentia cani:
Inque suo precio ruga senilis erat. Ovid.

But now it was otherwise with the Jewish Elders, who happily were not worthy of
their years, as we say: like as the Princes had done wickedly with both hands
earnestly, and were therefore not undeservedly hanged up by the hand: But if
Quakers amongst us might have their way, our families (says One) would soon be
like the cabbins of the Lestringonians in Sicily, where every body was at
liberty, and none regarded or reverenced their Seniours or Superiors.

Ver. 13. They took the young men to grind] i. e. To do any base and abject
business, Exodus 11.5. and 12.29. Frustra enim hic Hieronymus and alii
Sodomiticum quid cogitant.

And the children fell under the wood] Being not able to stand under such
unreasonable burdens as were laid upon their backs.

Ver. 14. The Elders have ceased from the gate] Where they were wont to sit,
Genesis 34.20. to judge between party and party.

The young men from their musick] From their ordinary and honest recreations
and disports.

Ver. 15. The joy of our heart is ceased] Heb. keeps Sabbath, i. e. is
vanished, and that because we made not Gods Sabbath our delight, as Isa. 58.13.

Ver. 16. The crown is fallen from our head] i. e. All our glory both of Church
and State, because we refused to serve God, which indeed is to reign in
righteousness. Now neither is all this, nor any of this spoken to exasperate
or exulcerate peoples hearts to fret against God, or to faint under their
pressures, but to put them upon the practice of true humiliation that so they
may not lose the fruit of their Afflictions: whence the following passage,

Woe unto us that we have sinned] Which as it runs sweetly and rythmically
in the Original: so it points us to that savory and sovereign practice of
lamenting our sins more then our miseries; and humbling our selves to the
utmost under the mighty hand of God, that he may lift up in due season.

Ver. 17. For this, our heart is faine] Ponit symbolum vere contritionis, we
are sin-sick even at heart: our sins are as so many daggers at our hearts, or
bearded arrows in our flesh.

For these things our eyes are dim] we have well-nigh wept them out: whereby
nevertheless out minds have been illightened. Lachrymae sunt succus cordis
contriti, seu liquores animae patientis.


Ver. 18. Because of the mountain of Zion which is desolate] q. d. Next unto
our sins (which are our greatest sorrow) nothing troubles us more then this,
that the public exercises of Piety are put down: Sion, the seat of Gods
Sanctuary is desolate.

Ver. 19. Thou O Lord remainest for ever] Alioqui totus totus desperassem, as
that good man said once in like case: Otherwise I should have but small joy of
my life. But thou art everlasting and invariable in essence, truth, will and
promises: This is mine Anchor-hold.

Thy throne from generation to generation] i. e. Thy most equal and righteous
ordering of all things, utut nobis quaedam confusiuscule currere videantur,
though some things may seem to us to be somewhat confusedly carried, and even
to run on wheels, yet it shall one day appear that there was a wheel within a
wheel, Ezekiel. 1. that is, an over ruling and all-disposing Providence.

Ver. 20. Wherefore do thou forget us?] Since thy Covenant runs otherwise? 2 Samuel 7.14. See on ver. 1.

And forsakest us so long time] Heb. to length of days, as Psalm. 23, 6. Not
for Seventy years only, but to the end of the world: till wrath is come upon us
to the utmost, as 2 These. 2.

Ver. 21. Turn thou us unto thee] That thou may turn thee to us, as Zach.
1.3. Let there be a through-reformation wrought in us: and then a gracious
restoration wrought for us.

Est Aposiopesis ad pathos.
Ver. 22. But thou have utterly rejected us] This is a sad Catastrophe, or close
of this doleful ditty. Sometimes Gods suppliants are put hard to it in the
course of their Prayers: the last grain of their faith and patience seems to
be put into the scale. When the Son of man comes with deliverance to his
praying people, shall he find faith in the earth? Hard and scarce: And yet he
comes often when they have even done looking for him: he is seen in the Mount, he
helps those that are forsaken of their hopes: Hallelujah. Sure it is that God
cannot utterly reject his people whom he has chosen, Romans 11. Tremellius
renders it, and so the Margin of our Bibles has it (and I think better) For
will thou utterly reject us, or be extremely wrath with us? sc. supra modulum
nostrum, according to thine infinite power, and above all that we are able to
bear? I cannot think it, neither does it consist with thy Covenant.

Here (as also at the end of Ecclesiastes, Isaiah and Malachy) many of the
Hebrew Bibles repeat the foregoing verse, Turn thou us unto thee O Lord, etc.
yet without pricks, left any thing should seem added thereby to the holy
Scriptures. The reason here of read in the end of the Prophecy of Isa. This is
also here observed by the most renowned Mr. Thomas Gataker, whom for honor
sake I name, and to whose most accurate and elaborate Annotations upon Isaiah
and Jeremy I have been not a little beholden, all along. These he finished not
long before his death, to the great glory of God and good of his Church: Fretum
Magellanicum.
And of him, and this worthy Work of his I may fitly say as a learned man does
of Magellanus the Portingal (that great Navigator) that the Strait or Sea now
called by his name, una navigatione simul and immortalem gloriam and mortem ei
attulerit, Boxhorn. histor. universal.
was both his death, and his never-dying Monument.

1 Samuel 7.12. Hitherto has the Lord helped us.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION ON THE BOOK of the Prophet EZEKIEL.
CHAP. I.
THe Book of the Prophet Ezekiel] The Book of Ezekiel; so the Hebrews call it;
and forbid any to read the beginning and ending of it till he be thirty years
of age, because it is so abstruse and mysterious. Nazianzen calls this
Prophet, The Beholder of great things; In Apolog.
and the Interpreter of visions and mysteries. Another calls him the
Hieroglyphical Prophet, A third Jeremy veiled, a hand shut up, A lap. Ez^chiel
scripturarum and Ocean^^, et mysteriorum Dei labyrinthus. Hieron. Many both
waters and readers have passed over this Prophet as dark difficult and l^ss^
useful. Greenhil. praef. Orat. 47.
and you know not what is in it, etc. Contemporary he was to Jeremy, though in
another Country, and a great confirmer of what he had foretold, but could not
be credited. To him therefore (as to many others) Ezekiel became (according to
the import of his name) The strength of God, who mightily enabled him (as
Lavater well notes) with a stout and undaunted spirit, to reprove both people
and Princes, and to threaten them more terribly and vehemently then Jeremy had
done before him. But, in the substance of their Prophecies, there is no small
conformity. Ferunt Ezechielem servum Jeremiae prius extitisse, says Nazianzen:
Some have affirmed that Ezekiel had sometimes been Jeremiah's servant, as was
afterward Baruch.

Ver. 1. Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year] sc. Since the Book of the
Law found, and that famous Passover kept in King Josiah's days, 2 King. 22.
and 23. since the eighteenth year of his reign, ver. 33 So elsewhere, they
began their account from some memorable mercy or remarkable accident: as from
the promise made to Abraham, the birth of Isaac, the departure out of Egypt,
the division of the Kingdom into that of Israel, and the other of Judah, etc.

In the fifth day of the month] Which was the Sabbath Day, say some: confer
chap. 3.16. Then was this holy Prophet in the Spirit, as was afterward also
John the Divine upon the Christian Sabbath, Rev. 1.10.

As I was among the captives] In Chaldaea. That rule of the Rabbines therefore
holds not, viz. that the Holy Ghost never spoke to the Prophets, but only in
the holy land.

By the river of Chebar] Which was rivus vel ramentum Euphratis, a part or
channel of Euphrates. There sat the poor captives, Psalm. 137.1. and there this
Prophet received this Vision (here) and his Vocation in the next chapter. It is
observed, that by the sides of rivers sundry Prophets had visions of God: by a
river side it was that Paul and his company met to preach and pray, Act. 16.13.
And of Archbishop Vssier (that most reverend man of God) it is recorded, His
life and death by D. Barnard.
that to a certain place by a waterside he frequently resorted (when as yet he
was but very young) sorrowfully to recount his sins, and with floods of tears
to pour them out in confession to God.

That the heavens were opened] Not by a division of the firmament, says
Hierom, but by the faith of the believer. The like befell Steven the
Protomartyr (when the stones were buzzing about his ears, Speed. 335. Vt
Montes Dei, Cedri Dei, civitas Dei.
Act. 7.) and (if we may believe the Monkish writers) Wulfin Bishop of
Salisbury, when he lay a dying.

And I saw visions of God] i. e. Offered by God, or excellent visions. Ezekiel
was not only a Priest and a Prophet, but a Seer also: Abraham was the like,
Joh. 8.56. with Genesis 20.7. This was no small honor.

Ver. 2. In the fifth day] The Sabbath Day, likely, that Queen of days, as the
Jews call it: see on ver. 1.

Which was the fifth year of Jehoiachims captivity] With whom Ezekiel, and
other precious persons (called by Jeremiah good figs) were carried captive,
Existendo extitit.
chap. 40.1.

Ver. 3. The Word of the Lord came expressely] Heb. by being has been, or has
altogether been; Accurate factum est, it really wrought upon me, and made me a
Prophet.

Unto Ezekiel the Priest] Whom therefore some have called Vrim and Thummim in
Babylon.

The son of Buzi] Thas this Buzi was Jeremy (so called because despised for his
plaindealing, as some Rabbines have affirmed) is as true as that Ezekiel
himself was the same with Pythagoras the Philosopher; which yet some Ancients
have fondly fancied.

In the land of the Chaldaeans] Though a polluted land, Mic. 2.10. and the
dewlling place of wickedness, Zach. 5.11. the mother of harlots, and
abominations of the earth, Rev. 17.5.

Sabbatian.
By the river Chebar] The Rabbines call it the Sabbath-river: and further tell
us, that it runs not, but rests on the Sabbath Day.

Hor.
-- Credat Judaeus Apella:
Non ego --
And the hand of the Lord was there upon him] Not only came Gods Word
expressly to him, but the power and Spirit of God came mightily upon him: so
that he felt the intrinsecal virtue of this hand (as one phraseth it) the
Spirit of God in his own heart; it was a quick and lively word unto him, and to
as many as believed.

Ver. 4. And I looked and behold] In this ensuing mysterious vision of a
whirlewind, four Cherubims, four wheels, a Throne upon the firmament,
formidabilis Dei forma proponitur, is set forth the appearance of the likeness
of the glory of the Lord, as it is expounded, ver. 28. that hereby the peoples
arrogance might be the better subdued, the Prophets doctrine more reverently
received, and the Prophet confirmed in his calling. The sum of this celestial
vision is, that the Divine Providence does rule in the world, and is exercised
in all parts thereof, and not only in Heaven, or in the Temple, or in Jury, as
the Jews then thought. As for the changes in the world (which are here compared
to Wheels) they befall not at all adventures, or by haphazzard; but are
effected by God, though all things may seem to run upon wheels, and to fall
out, as it fortuneth. At the day of judgment, at utmost, men shall see an
harmony in this discord of things: and Providence shall then be unriddled.
Meanwhile, God often wrappeth himself in a cloud, and will not be seen till
afterward. All Gods dealings, besure, will appear beautiful in their season;
though for present we see not the contiguity and linking together of one thing
with another.

A whirlwind came out of the North] i. e. Nebuchadnezzar with his forces: See
Jer. 1.13, 14, 15. fitly compared to a whirlwind for suddenness, swiftness,
irresistibleness. A lapide tells of whirlwinds in Italy which have taken
away stabula cum equis, stables with horses, carried them up into the air, and
dashed them against the mountains. See Habbak. 1.6, 7, 9, 10. and consider
that those Chaldaeans were of Gods sending.

A great cloud] Nebuchadnezzars army, Live.
Jer. 4.13. that peditum equitumque nubes, (2 King. 25.1. chap. 39.9) that
stormed Jerusalem.

And a fire enfolding it self] Heb. that receives it self within it self, as
in an house on fire. Understand it of Nebuchadnezzars wrath against Jerusalem,
much hotter then that furnace of his seven times more then ordinary heated,
Dan. 2. or rather of Gods wrath in using Nebuchadnezzar to set all on a light
free.

And a brightness was about it] The glory of Divine presence, shining in the
punishment of evildoers.

Out of the midst thereof as of the color of Amber] Not of an Angel called
Hasmal, as Lyra (after some Rabbines) will have it. Jarchi confesses he
knows not what the word Hasmal means. This Prophet only has it here, and
ver. 27, and chap. 8.2. as Daniel also has some words proper to himself.

Ver. 5. Also out of the midst thereof] i. e. From Gods glorious presence.

Came the likeness of four living creatures] i. e. Angels chap. 10.8. 14, 15,
20. Quaest. Acad. l. 4.
Intelligentias animales Tully calls them. See like visions, Dan. 7.9. Rev.
4.6, 7. These are said to be four: because God by his Angels diffuseth his
power thorough the four quarters of the world.

They had the likeness of a man] sc. For the greater part: they had more of a
man then of any other creature, as hands, legs, etc. ver. 7.8.

Ver. 6. And every one had four faces] To set forth, says an Expositour, that
the power of Angels is exercised about all creatures. It is as if the Angels
did bear on them the heads of all living-wights, i. e. did comprehend in
themselves all the Elements and all the parts of the world: not as if they did
move or act by their own power, but as they are Gods hands and Agents, employed
by him at pleasure, for the good of his Church especially, Heb. 1.14. as being
fit and ready to every good work: so should we strive to be, Tit. 3.1.

And every one had four wings] To set forth their agility, De ascens. meant. in
Deum, grad. 7.
their incredible swiftness, far beyond that of the Sun, which yet, if
Bellarmine reckons right, runs in the eighth part of an hour, seven
thousand miles: others say many more.

Ver. 7. And their feet were strait feet] Importing their right progress in
executing Gods will. We must also make straight or even paths for our feet:
lest that which is lame be turned out of the way, Heb. 12.13. See ver. 9.

And the sole of their feet was like the sole of a calves foot] Round, Hoc ad
agilitatem and varietatem cursus spectat.
and therefore easily turned: The Angels as they see every way, so they are apt
to go every way; and this with the greatest facility that can be.

And they sparkled] So swiftly they went, that their feet seemed to sparkle or
strike fire.

Like the color of burnished brasse] Burnished not blemished; polished, not
polluted.

Ver. 8. And they had the hands of a man under their wings] Faces, wings,
hands: all to express, says one, the sufficiency of Gods Providence for all
means of help. A little of the Angels, says another, is set forth by these
faces, wings, hands, feet: but the distinct knowledge of Angels as Angels is
reserved till we are like the Angels in heaven. Great Angels they are: but act
invisibly, for most part: Their hands are under their wings.

Ver. 9. Their wings were joined one to another] To show the unity of Angels,
the uniformity also of their motions in Gods service: there is a suteablenesse
and agreeableness betwixt them.

They turned not when they went] sc. Till they had effected that they went for;
and then they did, as ver. 14.

They went every one straight forward] The Angels, in the execution of their
office, keep a straight course, without deviating or detrecting, without
cessation or cespitation. Our eyes should also look right on, Prove. 4.25. and
we should make strait steps for our feet, Heb. 12.13. This is Angel-like. St.
Paul, that earthly Angel did so, Phil. 3.13, 14.

Ver. 10. They four had the face of a man, and the face of a Lyon] Hereby is
set forth the wisdom, strength, serviceablenesse, and perspicaciousness of the
holy Angels for the Churches good, all things requisite to great undertakings:
neither forbear they to serve us, though we have the sent of the earth, and
hell about us: quantumnis cos proh dolor, faetore peccatorum mon raro laedamus,
Deumque offendamus, though by the stench of our sins, Polan. Would any great
Prince detend a mean man full of fores and vermin?
we do frequently annoy them, and offend God.

And they four had the face of an ox] Angels are obsequious, painful, patient,
useful. The ox is of those beasts that are ad esum and ad usum; and is truly
called jumentum a juvando.

They four also had the face of an Eagle] Angels are shard-sighted, 2 Samuel
14.20. vigorous and vivacious, swift beyond belief, Dan. 9.21. and if they be
once upon the wing, there is no escaping for any wicked people or person.

Ver. 11. And their wings were stretched upward] Faces and wings are both turned
toward God; at whose beck and obedience the holy Angels wholly are, Psalm.
103.20. Or hereby may be imported the swiftness, sublimeness, and equality of
their service.

Two wings of every one] See on ver. 9.

And two covered their bodyes] See on Isa. 6.2.

Ver. 12. And they went every one strait forward] See on ver. 9.

Whither the Spirit was to go, they went] That is the Spirit of God, by whose
direction and conduct the Angels do all things. He is the great Agent that
sets Angels awork. Let us also be led by the Spirit of God: so shall we
approve our selves sons of God, Romans 8.14.

Ver. 13. Their appearance was like burning coules of fire] Angels are actuosi
and efficaces ut ignis, of a fiery nature, and of a fiery operation: as is also
the holy Spirit, ( Isa. 4.4. Mat. 3.11. Act. 2.3.) whereby they are actuated.
Angels are all on a light fire, as it were, with zeal for God, and indignation
against sin. Let us be like-affected. Paul was an heavenly spark: John Baptist
a burning and shining light. Chrysostom says that Peter was a man made all of
fire, walking among stubble. Basil was a pillar of fire. Latimer cried out
Deest ignis. In Bucholcere vivida omnia fuerunt, Melch. Adam.
etc.

It went up and down among the living creatures] The fire and flame did. Heb.
it made it self to walk, of it own accord and pleasure.

And the fire was bright] Let us also labor to kindle and keep quick the fire
of zeal upon the harth of our hearts, without all smoke or smutch of sin.

And out of the fire went out lightenings] The Lord is known by the judgment
which he executes: his noble works done by those instruments of his the holy
Angels are quickly noted and noticed: as in Sennacheribs army.

Ver. 14. And the living creatures ran and returned] As Soon as ever their work
was done, they came back to him who sent them out to know his further pleasure;
and to do him more service. When the Angel had lessoned the good women about
our Saviors Resurrection, he bids them go quickly and tell his Disciples,
etc. and then dismisseth them with Lo I have told you, Mat. 28.6, 7. q. d. Be
gone now about your business: you have your full errand: why linger ye? pack
away.

As the appearance of a flash of lightening] Which appears and disappeareth
in an instant.

Ver. 15. Behold one wheel upon the earth] Things here below are exceeding
mutable, and therefore compared to wheels: because they may seem to run on
wheels, and to have no certain course, but to be turned upside down eftsoons;
such is the various, promiscuous administration of them, to many men's thinking.
To set us right herein, here we have the vision of the four wheels: for each
of the four living-wights had a wheel by him, ver. 16. and chap. 10.9. to show
that God governs all the four quarters of the world by the ministry of his
Angels. This the Poets hammered at (but hit not on) in their foolish fable of
Fortunes wheel. St. James speaks of the wheel of nature, (...).
chap 3.6. And indeed this world is of a wheeling nature, moveable and mutable.
But God, who moves this wheel, who fuleth the world, is unchangeable and
eternal, Jam. 1.17. and his providence, and the ministry of his Angels sets
all the wheels in the world in motion.

Ver. 16. The appearance of the wheels -- was like unto the color of a
Beryll] Heb. as the eye or color of Tarshish, i. e. the sea or Beryl which is
of a sea-colour, even seagreen: whereby is represented the flux and
fluctuating constitution of things here below.

And they four had one likenesse] There is the same instability of things in
one place as in another, and the same overruling providence.

Their appearance and their work were as it were a wheel in the midst of a
wheel] God has a wheel (Providence) in all the wheeling businesses of the
world. These are so one within another, as that all their motion depends on
the Angels, whom he also moderateth, and orders at his own pleasure. Dr.
Pressed.
Whenever therefore we see such things come to pass that we can see no
reason for (as the Churches overthrown, the wicked exalted, etc.) consider that
one wheel is within another, and the wings of the Angels are one within
another, etc.

Ver. 17. When they went, they went upon their four sides] Or, according to
their four sides, i. e. thorough the four parts of the world, as they were
moved by the four living creatures.

And they returned not when they went] But kept on strait forward, without
stopping or stepping back. Diod.
A figure of the constant and consonant harmony which is in all the works of
Gods Providence toward the world, but especially toward his Church.

Ver. 18. As for their rings they were so high] Apsides earum tam amplae seu
altae ut propterea formidabiles. The rings or strakes (Heb. backs) of these
wheels were so broad and high, that they struck terror into the beholders. It
is hard to take the altitude of second causes. Well might one write a book of
the Vanity of Sciences, and another a Tractat Quod nihil scitur. I would see
the proudest of you all define the nature of a straw, as one preached in
Cambridge to all the Scholars: so of a flower, of a fly, etc. Well might David
say, Thy judgments, Lord, are a great deep, Psalm. 36.6. such as has neither
bank nor bottom. Well might Paul cry out O the depth! how unsearchable are his
ways, etc. Romans 11.23.

And the rings were full of eyes] Instead of cart-nailes. Understand hereby
Gods all-seeing Providence, which never erreth, but always orders the worlds
disorders to his own glory.

Round about them four] The Divine Providence is like a well-drawn picture,
which eyeth all that are in the room. See 2 Chronicles. 16.9. Psalm. 34.15. Zach.
4.10. Job 34.21. and 36.7. Jer. 16.17. and 32.17.

Ver. 19. And when the living creatures went, the wheels went by them] The
Angels are Gods hands, as it were, whereby are acted and agitated this lower
world and the second causes therein.

The wheels were lift no] The spirits of the creatures were heightened and
elevated to some unwonted and more then ordinary service, by some special
instinct. We use to say Magnarum rerum tarda molimina: when there are many
wheels, some will be always out. But it is otherwise here: and that of
Ambrose is verified, Nescit tarda mol^mina Spiritus sancti gratia, God can soon
effect great things by his powerful grace.

Ver. 20. Whithersoever the Spirit was to go] See ver. 1^. and take notice that
whatever the instrument is or means of this or that occurrence, God is the main
Agent. It is Christ who by his Spirit works all in all, in his Church, 1 Cor.
12.16. Ephesians. 1.11. Col. 3.21. Spiritus vitalis.
There falls not a hair from a man's head (nay not a bristle from a sows
back, says Tertullian) without God.

For the spirit of the living creatures] Or, of life. The Divine inspiration
was the procreant cause of the wheels motion. This is here called Haruach, that
spirit, by an excellency: Est Deus in nobis. The spirit is in the wheels, as an
invisible but irresistible Agent. The heart of the King is in the hand of the
Lord: he turns it whithersoever he will, Prove. 21.1.

Ver. 21. When those went, these went; and when those stood, these stood] This
is but the same again as before, but more fully and plainly: See the like, Joh.
1.2.

Ver. 22. And the likeness of the firmament] The glory of God in Christ is
revealed to the Prophet in this ensuing vision: even that great mystery of
godliness, God manifested in the flesh, etc. 1 Timothy 3. whereof this was a kind
of prelude. To like purpose also was that visiion. Isa. 6.1. with Joh. 12.39,
40, 41.

Upon the heads of the living creature] Between them and the Lord Christ, as a
skreen, and supplied likely the office or that other pair of wings, Isa. 6.2.
See Exodus 24.10.

Vide Plin. lib. 37. cap. 2. Chrystallus est gelu concretum.
Was as the color of the terrible crystal] Heb. of the formidable frost, that
is, of the most vehement frost; a Periphrasis of crystal. All things above are
dreadfully glorious: as all things below are pellucid, pervious, and clear to
Gods eye, like a diaphanous body, Heb. 4.13 Mountains of brass are as
transparent to him as the clearest Crystal. The firmament is so clear, that
Christ sees through it. Its a molten looking-glass, Job 37.18. and those
Atheists are utterly out who ask How does God know? can he judge through the
dark clouds? Job 22.13.

Ver. 23. Were their wings strait] sc. When they flew; for at other times they
covered their bodies with them, ver. 11, in reverence to Christ, their
Creator, and Lord.

The one toward the other] They serve the Lord Christ with one shoulder or
consent, they do all mind the same thing.

Congeries similium faciens ad amplificat.
Ver. 24. And when they went, I heard a noise of their wings] A very great
noise, as is here set forth by a threefold similitude,

Like the noise of great waters] Which fall with an horrible fragor, as with
the Catadupes for instance: See Psalm. 46.3.

As the noise of the Almighty] i. e. As thunder, Psalm. 29 4. and 18.13.

The voice of speech] When a man cries aloud, lifts up his voice like a
trumpet, sic clamans ut Stentora vincat.

As the noise of an host] Barritus ille militaris, besides the roaring of
Cannons, rattling of wheels, beating of drums, etc. This none hear, but the
spiritual man, who discerns all things, 1 Cor. 2.15. and has his senses
habitually exercised to discern good and evil, Heb. 5. ult.

They let down their wings] As expecting a new commission.

Ver. 25. And there was a voice from the firmament] i. e. From above the
firmament, even from Christ on the throne.

When they stood] When all was hushed: So Rev. 8.1. there was half an hours
silence in heaven, that is in the Church on earth, when the seventh seal was
opened. Sedate and silent spirits are fittest to hear Christ's voice, Job 4.16.

Ver. 26. And above the firmament] See on ver. 22.

Was the likeness of a throne] Far beyond that of Solomon, 1 King. 10.18, 19.
That was of Ivory, but this of Sapphire: that had a rich canopy over it, but
this the azured sky under it: See Exodus 24.10. all to set forth Christ's kingly
dignity, and surpassing Majesty.

And upon the likenesse] All was but likeness and appearance, because all was
visional here.

As the appearance of a man] This was the Man Christ Jesus, and this is the
last and best part of the vision, viz. Christ set by his father in
supercelestial places, far above all Principality and Power, etc. Ephesians. 1.20,
21. One of Austin's wishes was to have seen Christ on earth. Bid comes after,
and wishes rather to have seen Christ in his glory, and on his heavenly throne.

Ver. 27. And I saw as the color of amber] See ver. 4. Heb. chashmal, which
being read backward (as the Cabbalists observe) is Lammashach or Lammashiach,
i. e. Messiah.

As the appearance of fire] Christ is very terrible in his executions: and even
our God (as well as the Jews God) is a consuming fire, Heb. 12. ult. See Exodus
23.20.

From the appearance of his loins even upward] This may well be understood of
Christ's Divinity; as the parts downward, of his Humanity, partaking of the same
most resplendent glory, by virtue of the hypostatical union, and having
partner-agency with the Godhead, according to its measure, in the works of
redemption and mediation.

Ver. 28. As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud] Here (as in the
salt sea, or as in a pot of honey) the deeper the sweeter. The Rainbow was set
for a sign of the Covenant of mercy to mankind, Genesis 9.12. Isa. 54.12. See Rev.
10.1. with the Note.

This was the appearance, etc.] For no more of God can be seen by any mortal
wight, Exodus 33.20. This and other Prophets saw the Charret, but not the Rider
in in it, as the Rabbines say. Quasi fasees suos submittens.


I fell upon my face] As astonished, and as adoring the Divine Majesty.

And I heard a voice] This, the Vulgar Latin prefixeth before the next Chapter.

CHAP. II.
Ver. 1. ANd he said unto me] Christus solio sic infit ab alto, Christ from his
lofty throne thus bespake me, who had now my mouth in the dust, and had no more
to say but this, Speak, Lord, for thy servant hears.

Son of man] So this Prophet is called almost an hundred times in this Book:
four times in this short Chapter. The reason hereof I take to be this, says a
judicious Divine. He had visions both more in number and more rare in kind
revealed unto him, then any other Prophet had. Now, D. Gouge.
lest he should be exalted out of measure through the abundance of Revelations,
the Lord often puts him in mind of his estate by nature, that he was but a
son of man, a mortal man, even a worm.

Stand upon thy feet] God, for good ends, casts down sometimes those that are
dearest to himself: but then he comfort the abject, 2 Cor. 7.6.

Dejicit ut relevet, premit ut solatia praestet. And I will speak unto thee] So
Dan. 10.11. Oracles are for standers, not prostrate ones: they require utmost
attention of body, intention of mind, and retention of memory. See Number. 23.18.
Judge. 3.20. with the Notes.

Ver. 2. And the Spirit entered into me] This was right, when Word and Spirit
went together. See Isa. 59.21. with the Notes.

And set me upon my feet] Called me off from earthly cares, and made me hear
savingly. In the Scriptures the Holy Ghost speaks (...), 1 Timothy 4.1. Let him
that has ears to hear, hear etc. Let him draw up the ears of his mind to those
of his body, that one and the same sound may pierce both.

Ver. 3. I send thee to the children of Israel] So they will needs call
themselves: But what says God, Mic. 2.7. O thou that art named the house of
Jacob, is the Spirit of the Lord straitened? are these his doings? See the
Notes there.

To a rebellious nation] Heb. Gentiles: so the Jews call us Christians in
scorn: The Jews call the Turks Ishmaelites, the Ethiopians Cushites, but
Christians that call Gojim an abominable Nation, and Mamzer-goll, a bastard
people.
so God calls them here in great contempt, a rebellious nation (See Amos
9.7.) Gentes Apostatrices, as the Vulgar here has it.

They and their fathers have transgressed against me] A serpentine seed they
are, a race of rebels, neither good egg nor bird, but Mali corvi mala ova.

Even unto this very day] being nothing bettered by all that they have
suffered: See Jer. 16.13. Isa. 1.5.

Ver. 4. For they are impudent children] Heb. hard of face. Sin has oaded such
an impudency in their faces that they can blush no more then a a sack-but. Os
tuum ferreum, says Cicero to Piso, that brazen face of thine: and Durus hic
vultus lachrymare nescit, Thou can not blush, much less bleed for thine
offenses, says Seneca to one.

And stiff-hearted] Duri-cordes, incurvi cervicati, quosque citius fregeris
quam flexeris, such as will sooner break then bend. Many of our hearers,
alas, are no better. We do even wash a tile-sheard, draw water with a seive,
etc. Bern.


I do send thee unto them] About hard service: sed curam exegerit non
curationem, it is the care and not the cure of the charge, that is charged upon
thee.

Thou shall say unto them] Proficiscere, and Prophetato. Thou shall be as my
mouth, Jer. 15.19.

Ver. 5. And they, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear] Some
refractaries will not so much as hear a Minister of God; but bid him, as those
old Italians once did the Roman Ambassador, ad quercus dicere, se interim alia
acturos, speak to the posts, they had somewhat else to do then to give ear to
them. See 1 Cor. 1.22. Of those also that do hear, scarce the hundredth man
believes our report, says Calvin: nay scarce the thousandth man says
Chrysostom.

For they are a rebellious house] This was small encouragement. Hence Prophets
have so hung off, as Moses, Isay, Jonah, Jeremy, etc. Knox when called first to
preach, burst forth into abundance of tears. Bradford was hardly persuaded by
Bucer to enter into the Ministry, etc.

Act. and Mon.
Yet shall know that there has been a Prophet amongst them] Let them prove
incorrigible, they shall also prove inexcusable, and self-condemned. See 2 Cor.
2.16. with the Notes. Hieronym.
Convinced they shall be, if not converted: and who knows how the word, now
slighted, may hereafter work upon them? Saepe fit ut audientes verbum moleste,
Act. and Mon.
suscipiant fructuose: they may better bethink themselves.

Ver. 6. Be not afraid of them] Of their lordly looks (such as Steven Gardener
set upon Dr. Taylour, and was well told of it) of their bitter scoffs, dreadful
threats, as if they could undo us at their pleasure. Our times are in Gods
hands: kill us they may, but hurt us they cannot. See Jer. 1.17. Matthew. 10.25.
When Bonner said to Hawks A faggot will make you turn; Act. and Mon. 1443.
No, no, said Hawks, a point for your faggot, you shall do no more then God
permits you, etc. A Minister of God should live by faith, and not dye by
fear: he should make his hearers afraid of him rather, as Herod was of the
Baptist, V^lens of Basil, etc. When Eudoxia the Empress threatened Chrysostom,
Go tell her, said he, that I fear nothing but sin. I will rather choose to dye,
said Calvin, then comply with those that refuse to submit to Church discipline.

Quasi boves oestro agitati. Theodoret. Monitoribus asperi. Hor. Semper in ictu
est, Plin. l. 8. c. 29. Ferit obliquo ictu and inflexu.
Though briars (or rebels) and thorns be with thee] Refractarii and spinei,
such as thou can not handle without hurt, deal with without danger, 2 Samuel
23.6. Psalm. 55.21. and 58.10. Mic. 7.4. catching they are and scratching, as
sharp-pointed thorns, Number. 32.55.

And thou do dwell among scorpions] Which are most venomous and perilous
creatures, joined with fiery serpents, Deuteronomy. 8.15. Pliny says, that there is
not one minute wherein it does not put forth the sting to do mischief. It is
also a crafty creature, and occultis machinationibus ferit. The Churches
enemies are cruel-crafties, Neh. 4.11.

Be not afraid of their words] Their bubbles of words.

Nor be dismayed at their looks] Their swellings and brow-beatings.

Though they be a rebellious house] A race of rebels.

Ver. 7. And thou shall speak my words] Gods Word must be spoken, however it be
taken.

Whither they will hear] See ver. 5. Christ, once at least, preached away the
most of his hearers, Joh. 6.66. Beza so delivered himself with that evidence
and efficacy of truth in Colloquio Possiaceno, that Cardinal Lorrain wished
that either he had been dumb, or that his hearers had been deaf. Too many of
ours are so, etc.

For they are most rebellious] Heb. rebellion, in the abstract; as if they had
been transfomed into sins nature.

Ver. 8. Be not thou rebellious like that rebellious house] It is no hard
matter to symbolize with sinners: See Isa. 6.5. with the Note; to dwell among
them, is dangerous: for sin is catching, and often Epidemical. Precious therefore
and worthy of all acceptance is the Apostles counsel, Romans 12.2. Lawyers tell
us, that we must not look so much what men do at Rome, as what they ought to do.

Eat that I give thee] i. e. The roll, ver. 9. that is, whatsoever I shall
henceforth dictate unto thee, do thou get it by heart, digest it, propound it
to the people; work it first upon thine own, and then upon the affections of
thine hearers: See Rev. 4. and observe how alike the Lord dealt with Ezekiel
and John the Divine.

Ver. 9. Behold a hand was sent] A hand from heaven: A hand is index rei and
instrumentum operationis.

Palmoni hammidabber. Dan. 10.
And lo a roll of a book] The Jews folded or rouled up their books upon a
cedar stick, to preserve them from dust and other dangers: See on Isa. 8.1.

Ver. 10. And he spread it before me] Till Christ unfold heavenly mysteries, men
understand them not, Rev. 5.5. Matthew. 11.27. 1 John 1.18. and 15.15. He is the
excellent Interpreter.

And it was written within and without] To show abundance of miseries coming on
the Jews, and others. (...) gemitus sicut co^^mbae. Isa. 38.14.


Lamentation and mourning and wo] Foretold all along this volume, till Chapter
40. sad songs, doleful ditties.

CHAP. III.
Ver. 1. SOn of man, eat that thou findest] Eat this roll or volume, without
tergiversation, or so much as sciscitation: yield simple obedience to the
heavenly vision: It was in vision doubtless, that the Prophet did eat the
roll, Act. and Mon.
and not in very deed; as the foolish Patient did the Physicians Recipe, or as
Mr. Lewis of Manchester made the Bishops Summoner eat the citation which he
brough for his wife (a Martyr in Queen Mary's days) by setting a dagger to his
heart, and to drink to it, when he had done. It was non reipsa, sed spiritu,
says an Interpreter: See ver. 10.

Eat this roll, and go speak unto the house of Israel] First learn, and then
teach others; that thou may utter my mind readily, dexterously, and
affectionately; speaking a cord ad cor, and digging thy discourses out of
thine own bosom, as it is said of Origin, and after him of Petrus Comestor, who
merited that title, Ex intimo cordis affectu.
because by his often allegations of the holy Scripture, he seemed to have
eaten it up and disgested it.

Ver. 2. So I opened my mouth] Without delays or consults, Alsted. Chronol.
347.
I obeyed Christ's command, and hausi quodammodo donum prophetiae, and yielded
to become a Prophet. This was well; but not long after, Ezekiel, through
infirmity of the flesh, would have declined the office, and therefore sought to
lurk among his countrymen-at Thelabib, ver. 15. till Christ called him out
again and new-employed him. v. 16.

And he caused me to eat that roul] See on ver. 1.

Ver. 3. Cause thy belly to eat, and fill thy bowels] i. e. Deeply and duly
ponder and practice those holy truths thou have to press upon others: preach
thine own experiences, etc. See 1 Timothy 4.15.

And it was in my mouth as honey for sweetnesse] So was Gods Law to good David,
Psalm. 119.29.103. to Austin, Scripturae tuae sunt deliciae meae, says he, Thy
Scriptures are my delight: to Alphonsus, King of Arragon, who professed he had
rather lose his Kingdoms, then be without the knowledge of Gods blessed book,
which he had read over above a dozen times, together with such Commentaries
thereupon as those times afforded. See Rev. 10.10.

Ver. 4. Go get thee unto the house of Israel] This was a hard task, Vbi mel
ibi fell.
all things considered: but hard or not hard, there was a necessity of going on
Gods errand. Necesse est ut eat, non ut vivat, as he once said.

And speak with my words unto them] But see they be mine, and then I Will bear
thee out: then also they will the sooner take impression. Speak as the Oracles
of God, 1 Pet. 4.11.

Ver. 5. For thou art not sent to a people of a strange speech and of an hard
language] Heb. deep of lip, and heavy of tongue: as Jonas was so sent, Qui
strident sermon, and quast e profundo gutture barbarum loquuntur.
and those that now preach to the Natives in New England in their own language,
not without some good success.

But to the house of Israel] Amongst whom thou must use vulgari and vernaculo
sermon, who also are well seen in the Scriptures; they are indeed Gods
Library-keepers, which is no small privilege, Romans 3.2. and therefore the
better to be dealt with.

Ver. 6. Surely had I sent unto them, they would have hearkened] Or, If I had
sent thee to them, would they not have hearkened unto thee? It may seem by the
Ninivites, that they would, for they repented at the preaching of Jonas, Matthew.
12.41. at one single Sermon made by a mere stranger, who sang so doleful a
ditty to them, that their City should be shortly destroyed, etc. Vatabus
renders this text Dispeream nisi te audissent, si ad eos te misissem. And
could thou but skill of foreign languages, thou could not easily be
without Disciples. The punishment of strange language, Mr. Whatel. Prototyp.
says a grave Divine, was an heavy punishment; next to our casting out of
Paradise, and the Flood.

Ver. 7. But the house of Israel will not hearken unto thee] They will not: See
the like, Joh. 5.40. and 8.44. A man's will is his hell, says Bernard. And it
is easier, says another, to deal with twenty men's reasons, then with one man's
will. What hope is there of those that will not hear; or if they do, yet have
made their conclusion aforehand, and will stir no more then a stake in the
midst of a stream?

For they will not hearken unto me] Speaking unto them in the Scriptures. See
Hos. 8.12. Mat. 10.24, 25. Joh. 15.18, etc. Let this speech of God to the
Prophet comfort faithful Ministers contra cervicosos and cerebrosos istes
hypocritas that reject or resist their preaching. What are we that we may not
be slighted, when as Christ himself the Arch-Prophet is?

Curtius.
Impudent] Heb. stiff of forehead: This was a point next the worst. Illum ego
perjisse dico cui perjit pudor, said that heathen: he is an undone man who is
past shame.

Ver. 8. Behold I have made thy face strong against their faces] I have steeled
thy forehead, and strengthened thine heart, that thou shall budge for none of
them: I have rendered thee insuperable.

Ver. 9. As an adamant, harder then flint] Heb. strong above a Rock: instar
rupis quae in mari vadoso horridi Jovis, Joh. Wower Polymath.
and irati, ut ita dicam, Neptuni fer vidis assultibus undique verberata, non
cedit, aut minuitur; sed ob^^ndit assuetum fluctibus latus, and firma duritie,
Durus ut his animus solido ex adamante creatus. Hesiod.
tumentis undae impetum sustinet ac frangit. This invincible courage and
constancy in Gods Ministers, the mad world calls and counts pride and
pertinacy: but these know not the power of the Spirit, nor the privy armor of
proof that such have about their hearts.

Fear them not, etc.] See chap. 2.6.

Ver. 10. Son of man, all my words receive in thine heart, etc.] This is to eat
the roll, to turn it in succum and sanguinem, that it may surely nourish: See
on ver. 1, 2, 3.

Go get thee to them of the captivity] The fruit whereof they have lost in
great part; because so little amended thereby.

Unto thy people] For I can scarce find in my heart to own them. So Exodus 32.7.
God fathers that rebellious people upon Moses.

Whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear] q. d. let them choose:
and if they have a mind to it, be miserable by their own election. See chap.
2.5.

Ver. 12. Then the spirit took me up, and I heard behind me, etc.] This was for
the Prophets encouragement, and to put mettle into him, as it were, that he
might the better bear up amidst all, since he should shortly bear a part in that
Angelical consort, whose (...), as Theodoret has it, their daily service is
singing of Psalms.

Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place] i. e. From heaven, where
Saints and Angels glorify his name without ceasing or saciety. Monica after a
discourse with her son Augustine, about the happiness of heaven, concluded
thus, Quantum ad me astinet, fili, nulla re amplius delector in hac vita. Quid
hic facio? As for me, what make I here, since I take no more pleasure in any
thing that is here to be had? A picture of a globe of the whole earth, says
one, set out with all the brave things that sea and land can afford with this
sentence encircling it round, To be with Christ is far better, is a Christians
Emblem, and should be his ambition.

Ver. 13. I heard also the noise of the wings of the living creatures] In
consent with the former doxology.

That touched one another] Heb. kissed: noting the love and good agreement that
is betwixt the holy Angels: no woman is so well affected to her sister, as they
are one to another, in serving God and his people.

And the noise of the wheeles] As the Angels, so all actions and motions do, as
they can, sing praise to God.

Ver. 14. So the spirit lifted me up] As it did afterward also Philip, Act.
8.39, 40. not visionally but really.

And took me away] To Tel-abib.

And I went in bitterness, in the heat of my spirit] Heb. I went bitter in the
hot anger of my spirit, q. d. I was in a great pet, as considering that Gods
truths must be spoken, however they are taken: Hic ecce pilluld voluminis in
ore dule^, in ventre dissoluta, ventrem torquet and lancinat. Alapide.
and full ill they would be taken from me by mine untoward Countrymen. This
made me, for the time, much out of temper: but I soon denied my self, and got
the better of mine unruly passions. For

The hand of the Lord was strong upon me] I was overpowered by the Spirit of
God, who soon brought those high thoughts of mine into captivity and conformity
to Christ, 2 Cor. 10 5.

Ver. 15. Then I came to them of the captivity of Tel-abib] Which was the name
of some chief place or plantation of the Jews in captivity, says Diodat. It
was in the middle part of Mesopotamia, says Junius, between two rivers, Chebar
and Saocorah.

I sat where they sat] Sculking, and lusking, or at least not acting according
to my propheticke function, and the gift bestowed upon me, which I ought to
have stirred up and exercised for the good of my fellow-captives. This he
freely confesses, as giving glory to God, and taking shame to himself.

Seven dayes] Which circumstance of time increased his sins, says Polanus.

Ver. 16. And it came to pass at the end of seven dayes] Probably on the
Sabbath Day, that day of grace, and opportunity of holiness. God glorifieth his
free grace in coming to his offending Prophet, as the Physician does to his
sick Patient; and by setting him a work again, sealing up his love to him: like
as he also did to the eleven Apostles, by sending them abroad to preach the
Gospel, after that they had so basely deserted him at his apprehension, and
death upon the Cross.

Ver. 17. Son of man] So Christ constantly calls this Prophet, to keep him
humble. See chap. 2.1.

I have made thee a watch-man] I, who am the chief Bishop and Shepherd of
souls, 1 Pet. 2.25. have set thee in thy watchtower, with charge to look well
to my flock with golden fleeces, precious souls, that none be lost for want of
warning. See therefore that thou be Episcopus, not Aposcopus; an over-seer, not
a by-seer; a Watcher, not a sleeper: somnolentia Pastorum est gaudium luporum.
Ephrem. tract. de tim. Dei.
Shall the Shepherds sleep when as the wolves watch and worry the flock? Act.
20.29, 30. Herodotus tells of one Euenius, a City-shepherd, Lib. 9.
who for sleeping and suffering the Wolf to enter the fold and kill sixty
sheep, had his eyes pulled out. God threateneth the like punishment upon sleepy
watchmen, idol-shepherds, Zach. 11.17.

Therefore hear the Word at my mouth] Who am the Arch-Prophet, the only Doctor
of my Church, Mat. 23.8. and 17.4. admonish them therefore in my words, foresee
and foretell them their danger in my name, and stead. See Habak. 2.1. 2 Cor.
5.20.

Ver. 18. When I say to the wicked, Thou shall surely dye] When I bid thee tell
the wicked from me it shall be ill with him; for the reward of his hands shall
be given, Isa. 3.11. even death the wages of sin, Romans 6.23. death of all
sorts, which is the just hire of the least sin: woe then to the wicked, say.

And thou give him not warning] Heb. non expolieris, Gr. non distinxeris, if
thou do not distinctly and clearly warn him, seeking to rub off his rust, and
to make his soul clear and circumspect, as Psalm. 19.12. Eccles. 4.13.

To save his life] That iniquity may not be his ruin. Sin hales hell at the
heels of it.

But his blood will I require at thine hand] These are fulmina, non verba, not
words but thunderbolts, says Erasmus. This sentence sounding much in his ears
made Austin constant and instant in preaching, Lib. 3. de verb dom. sermon. 12.
and premonishing the people of their danger. Bernard also, for the same
reason, thus bespeaketh his hearers: if I deal not freely and faithfully with
you, it will be to your loss, and mine own danger. Timeo itaque damnum
vestrum: timeo damnationem meam, si tacuero.

Ver. 19. He shall dye in his iniquity] Because now he falls with open eyes.
De Temp. 99.
Many sorrows shall be to such wicked as will not be warned, Psalm. 32.9, 10.

But thou have delivered thy soul] sc. From thine other-mens sins, 1 Timothy 4.16.

Ver. 20. Again when a righteous man] So esteemed by others, and happily also by
himself; a self-deceiver.

Does turn from his righteousnesse] As he may soon do, where it is but a
semblance. Falling stars were never but Meteors.

And commit iniquity] This a righteous man, rightly so called, does not, Joh.
8.34. 1 John 3.8. See the Note.

And I lay a stumbling block before him] i. e. I cause him to prosper in his
sin, says Vatabius, which is an heavy judgment. Fatted ware is but fitted for
the shambles.

Because thou have not given him warning] Have not uncased and unkennel'd the
hypocrite, driving him out of his starting-holes.

And his righteousnesse] His works that were materially good, but not formally
and eventually. Bonum non fit nisi ex integra causa.

Sholl not be remembred] i. e. Reckoned to him: he shall not thereby set off
with God, or make amends by his good deeds for his bad: nay, his dissembled
sanctity shall pass for double iniquity, and he shall be held therefore the
worse, because he pretended to be better.

Ver. 21. Nevertheless if thou warn the righteous] As the best may need to be
warned: and must take it for a mercy.

Acer and ad palmae per se cursurus honores,
Ovid.
Si tamen horteris, fortius ibis equus.
Ver. 22. And the hand of the Lord] i. e. The Spirit of the Lord, whereby he
led his Prophet into all truth and holiness.

Arise, go forth into the plain] Or valley, where thou may be alone and at
liberty, solitary and sedate, that I may further converse with thee.

Ver. 23. Then I arose and went forth] Such prompt and present obedience
meets with mercyes unexpected.

As the glory which I saw] The same as before, for the Prophets further
confirmation. So Act. 10.10. and so God seals to us again and again in the
Sacrament of the Supper; showing us all his goodness, as Exodus 33.19.

And I fell on my face] The nearer any one draws to God, the more does
rottenness enter into his bones.

Ver. 24. Go shut thy self within thine house] q. d. Thou have a mind, I
perceive to do so: but it is not thy wisest way to decline thine office, how hard
soever it seems..

Ver. 25. Behold they shall put hands upon thee] Thy friends shall bind thee
for a mad man: See Mar. 3.21. with the Note.

Ver. 26. And I will make thy tongue] A spiritual and a special judgment upon
the people, thus to silence the Prophet. So he dealt by our Ancestors, upon
the setting up of Queen Mary.

Ver. 27. But when I speak with thee] As speak I will with thee again, by
prophetike revelation, ere long be.

He that hears, let him hear] See chap. 2.5. whether more or fewer hearken to
thee, be not troubled: I shall have my purpose howsoever.

CHAP. IV.
Ver. 1. THou also son of man] Hitherto we have had the Preface: follows now
the Prophecy it self, which is both concerning the fall of earthly Kingdoms,
and also the setting up of Christ's Kingdom amongst men. The siege, famine and
downfall of Jerusalem is here set forth to the life, four years at least before
it fell out: not in simple words, but in deeds and pictures, as more apt to
affect men's minds: like as he is more moved who sees himself painted as a
thief or skellum hanged, then he who is only called so. This way of teaching is
ordinary with the Prophets, Oecol.
and was used also by our Savior Christ: as when he set a child in the midst,
washed his disciples feet, instituted the sacraments, etc.

Take thee a tile] An unburnt tile, says Lyra; and so fit to pourtray any
thing upon: some take it for a foursquare Table, like a tile or brick, that
will admit engravement. Jerusalem, the glory of the East, was here pictured
upon a tilesheard. How mean a thing is the most stately City on earth to that
City of pearl, the heavenly Jerusalem?

And pourtray upon it the City] Not with the pensil, but with the g^aving tool:
Where yet (as in Timanthes his works) more was ever to be understood then was
delineated.

Ver. 2. And lay siege against it] This to carnal reason seems childish and
ridiculous: not unlike the practice of boys that make forts of snow: or of the
Papists St. Francis, who made him a wife and children of snow; fair, but soon
fading comforts: or of his disciple Massaeus, who is much magnified, because at
his masters command, he did (not Diogenes-like, tumble his tub, but) himself
tumble up and down as a little one, in reference to that of our Savior,
Sedulius l. 3. c. 1
Except ye be converted and become as little children, ye shall not enter into
the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 18.3. But it must be considered, that what the
Prophet did here, he did by the Word and Command of the most wise God. This
made the sacrifices of old, and does make the Sacraments still to be reverend
and tremend; because holy and reverend is his Name who instituted them. It
cannot be said so of Popish ceremonies, men's inventions: they have not Gods
image or inscription; and are therefore frivolous and fruitless, worthily cast
out of our Churches.

Ver. 3. Moreover take thee unto thee an iron pan] Sartaginem ferream, in token
of Gods hard and infl^xible hatred bent against so hard-hearted a people: whom
he will therefore fry as in a pan, and sees as in a pot, Jer. 1.13. so that
they shall pine away in their iniquities.

Set thy face against it, and thou shall lay siege] This the Prophet was to do
in the name and person of God and his Soldiers, the Chaldaeans. Hard hearts
make hard times, yea they make Deum, natura sua mollem, misericordem, and
melleum, durum esse and ferreum, (as one says) God to harden his hand, and
hasten men's destruction.

Ver. 4. Lie thou also upon thy left side] Which for so long a time to do,
could not but put the Prophet to great pain, and try his patience to the
utmost, especially if he lay bound all the while (as Theodoret thinks he did)
to set forth Jerusalems great miseries during the siege, or rather Gods
infinite patience in bearing with their evil manners, with so perverse a people.

Thou shall bear their iniquity] i. e. Represent my bearing it; and forbearing
to punish them for it.

Ver. 5. Three hundred and ninety dayes] That is, say some, the siege of
Jerusalem shall continue so many days, viz. thirteen months or thereabouts.
But they do better, who taking a day for a year in both the accounts (as ver.
6.) and making the forty of Judah to run along with the last year of Isreal's
390. end both at Nabuzaradans carrying away to Babylon the last relics of
Israel and Judah: and begin Isreal's years at Jeroboams Apostasy, Conf^r ch^o.
1.1, 2. with 3.15, 24, 25, 26, 27. and 8.1.
and Judah's at Huldah's prophesy in the eighteenth of Josiah's reign, when the
law was found but not observed by that idolatrous people (as appears by the
complaints made of them by Zephany and Jeremy) neither were they warned by
their brethrens miseries; the ten tribes being now carried into captivity.

Ver. 6. And when thou have accomplished them] That is, art within forty years
of accomplishing them.

Thou shall bear the iniquity of the house of Judah forty dayes] i. e. Years:
beginning at the eighteenth year of Josiah, or (as others compute it) at his
thirteenth year, and ending them in the eleventh of Zedekiah, which are the
bounds of Jeremy's prophecy. A very learned man yet living observes, that God
does here set and mark out Judah's singular iniquity by a singular mark: for
that they had forty years so pregnant instructions and admonitions by so
eminent a Prophet as Jeremy: yet were they impenitent to their own destruction.
And the like may well be said of Dr. Usher, that Prophet of Ireland, who (upon
the Toleration of Popery there) preaching before the State at Dublin upon a
special solemnity, made a full and bold application of this text unto them in
these very words. From this year, said he viz. Anno 1601.) will I reckon the
sin of Ireland; and dare say that those whom you embrace shall be your ruin,
D. Usher's fun. Sermon. by Dr. Bern. 39.
and you shall bear this iniquity. And it fell out accordingly: for, forty
years after, viz. Anno 1641 began the Rebellion and destruction of Ireland,
done by those Papists and Popish Priests then connived at.

Ver. 7. Set thy face toward the seige of Jerusalem] Steel thy countenance, be
stern and resolute, to show that the Chaldees should be so. Thus this Prophet
proceeds to write as it were in Hieroglyphics, and to preach in Emblems.

And thine arm shall be uncovered] i. e. Thou shall do thy work bodily: which
when soldiers and servants set themselves to do, they make bare their arms, ut
sint expeditiores, for quicker dispatch. Even Orators also pleaded with their
right arm (as Oecolampadius here notes) stripped up, and strecht out.

And thou shall prophecy against it] By these signs and dumb shows at least:
See chap 3.26.

Pertinacis poenae simulachrum est. Oecolamp.
Ver. 8. And behold I will lay bands upon thee] To show that he was unchangeably
resolved to ruin Judah, whom the Prophet here personateth. Some make the sense
to be this, I will give thee strength to hold out in that thy long lying on one
side, till the City be taken. Of a Nobleman of Lovain it is storied, that he
lay sixteen years in one posture, viz. with his face upwards. And Pradus says
he saw a mad man who had lain upon one side fifteen years.

Ver. 9. Take thee also unto thee wheat and barley, etc.] Promiscuam
farragintes, to show what shall be the condition of the City in the time of the
siege: Miscellan bread shall be good fare, but hard to come by in that grievous
famine.

Three hundred and ninety days shall thou eat thereof] Not sleep all the
while, as some Papists would have it, grounding their conceit upon their
Trent-Translation of ver. 4. Sleep thou also upon thy left-side, etc. but lying
and sleeping are distinct things, as may be seen, Psalm. 3.5. and 4.8.

Ver. 10. Twenty shekles a day] Five ounces, or ten at most: not Prisoners
pittance, qua proinde per diem trahitur magis anima quam sustentatur. See this
complained of Lam. 1.11, 19. and 2.11, 12, 19, 20. and 4.4, 9, 10. and 5.6, 9,
10. They had sinned in excess, and now they are punished with cleanness of
teeth. The famine of the Word is far worse.

Ver. 11. From time to time shall thou drink] i. e. At thy set times, in flata
tempora comparcito, make no waste: the least drop is precious.

Panem exhibuit Papa non ad purum ignem, sed ad oleta Questionariorum,
Sorbonistarum, and Canonicorum coctum Pol.
Ver. 12. And thou shall eat it as barley cakes] Baked on coals made of homely
fuel, mans-dung burnt.

And thou shall bake it with dung] For want of wood. Lam. 5.4. To the hungry
soul every bitter thin is sweet, Pro. 27.7.

In their sight] This then was more then a vision.

Ver. 13. Eat their defiled bread] Not able now to observe that ceremonial
purity in their meats which God had commanded. This was just upon them for
their worshipping those their dungy-dieties.

Ver. 14. Ah Lord God, behold my soul has not been polluted] Neither had it
been here by eating such like bread, because God bade him do it, and his
command legitimateth any thing. But a good soul fears and deprecateth all
kind of pollution: Keep thy self pure, 1 Timothy 5.22. Abstain from all appearance
of evil, 1 These. 5.22. The Prophet in this Prayer of his is very pathetical, Ah
Domine Jehovi^ not Jehova but Jehovi. See the like Genesis 15.2, 8. Deuteronomy. 3.24.
and 9.26.

Polan.
For from my youth up] Let us be as careful of spiritual uncleanness, since
the devils excrement, the corruption of a dead soul. Constantinus Copronymus is
reported to have delighted in stench and filth. The Panther prefers man's
dung before any meat: so do many feed greedily on sins murdering morsels.

Ver. 15. Lo I have given thee Cows-dung] This was some mitigation. Something
God will yield to his praying people when most bitterly bent against them.

(...) contabescer^, foetidum fieri.
Ver. 16. Behold I will break the staff of bread] Bread shall be very scarce,
and that which men have, shall not nourish or satisfy them; they shall have
appetitum caninum. See Isa. 3.1. with the Note, and take that good counsel,
Amos. 5 14, 15. lest we know the worth of good by the want of it.

Ver. 17. And be astonied] At their straits and disappointments.

And consume away for their iniquity] Levit. 26.31. They shall pine away in
their iniquity: this is the last and worst of judgments there threatened,
after those other dismal ones.

CHAP. V.
Ver. 1. ANd thou, son of man] See on chap. 2.1.

Take thee a sharp knife] This was the King of Babylon, as Isa. 7.20. The Turk
is at this day such another. Mahomet the first was, in his time, the death of
800000 men. Selymus the second, in revenge of the loss received at Lepanto,
Turk. Hist. 885.
would have put to death all the Christians in his dominions.

Take the a barbers razor] Not a deceitful razor, as Psalm. 52.2. but one that
will do the deed; sharp and sure. Pliny tells us out of Varro, Lib. 7. cap.
59.
that the Romans had no barbers, till 454 years after the City was built: ante
intensi fuere.

And cause it to pass upon thy head and upon thy beard] As hairs are an
ornament to the head and beard, so are people to a City. But, as when they
begin to be a burden or trouble to either, they are cut off and cast away: so
are people by Gods Judgments, when by their sins they are offensive to him;
dealing as Dionysius did by his god Aesculapius, from whom he presumed to pull
his golden beard. David felt himself shaved in his Ambassadors: so does God in
his servants (whose very hairs are numbered, Matthew. 10.30.) in his Ministers
especially (who, by a specialty, are called Gods men, 1 Timothy 6.11. and 2 Timothy
3.17.) with whom to meddle is more dangerous then to take a Lion by the beard,
or a bear by the hair.

Then take the balances to weigh] This shows that Gods Judgments are just,
to a hairs weight: And capillus nous suam habet umbram, says Mimus.

And divide the hair] Dii nos quasi pilas habent, says Plautus: imo quasi
pilos, says Another.

Ver. 2. Thou shall burn with fire a third part] i. e. with famine, pestilence,
and other mischiefs, during the siege of Jerusalem. Pythagoras gave this
precept among others, Vnguium, criniumque praesegmina ne contemnito. But God
finds so little worth in wicked people, that he regards them not, but
casts them, as excrements, to the dunghill, yea to hell, Psalm. 9.17.

And smite about it with a knife] They shall be slain with that sharp knife or
sword, ver. 1. after that the City is taken.

Thou shall scatter in the wind] Sundry of them shall fly for their lives: but
in running from death they shall but run to it, Amos 9.1, 2, 3, 4. and 2.13,
14, 15, 16.

Ver. 3. Thou shall also take thereof a few in number] A remnant is still
reserved, that the Lord God may dwell among men, Psalm, 68.18. See Jer. 44.28. 2
King. 25.12. Isa 1.9. and 6.10.

Ver. 4. Then take of them again and cast them into the midst of the fire] Thus
evil shall hunt a wicked man to overthrow him, Psalm. 140.11. (See the Note
there) he shall not escape, though he has escaped: his preservation is but a
reservation to further mischief, except he repent.

And burn them in the fire] Such he means as were combustible matter: for
there were a sort of precious ones amongst them, who being brought by God
through the fire, were thereby refined as silver is refined, and tried as gold
is tried, etc. Zach. 13.9. See the Notes there.

Ver. 5. This is Jerusalem] i. e. This head and beard so to be shaved, ver. 1.
by the hair of the head some think the wise men of that City are figured out,
and by the hair of the beard are the strong men: the razor of Gods severity
makes clean work, leaves no stub or stump behind it.

I have set it in the midst of the nations] As the head, heart, and center of
the earth: See Psalm. 74.10. Ezekiel. 38.12. and God had peculiar ends it it, that
the Law might go forth out of Zion, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem,
and that all Nations might flow unto it. Isa. 2.2, 3. Talis est Roma
Christianis, Such now is Rome to Christians, says a Lapide; bur lay a straw
there, say we; or as the Gloss says upon some decrees of Popes, Haec non
credo, I believe it not. See Rev. 17.5.

Ver. 6. And she has changed my judgments into wickednesse] This was a foul
change: this was to do evil as she could, Jer. 3.5. this was ingratitude of the
worst sort; such as Socrates called (...) manifest in justice. Such a wretched
change is complained of Jer. 2.11. and Romans 1.23, 25. Jude 4. but nowhere in so
high an expession as this, as One observes.

More then the Nations] Because the Jews had better Laws, but worse
dispositions then they.

Ver. 7. Because ye multiplyed] sc. Your transgressions and superstitions, or
because ye have abounded with blessings, and made me so ill a requital. Some
render it Quia tumultuastis ves plus quam vicinae gentes: and indeed there were
many murders committed amongst them, and many revolts from foreign Princes,
whom they had sworn to serve.

Neither have done according to the judgment of the nations] But have
out-sinned them qui deos suos quamvis viles and multos non mutant, who change
not their gods (as you have done Me, Jer. 2.10.11.) but follow the natural
light of reason (some of them at least do so) Romans 2.14. which you have
debauched. See 1 Cor. 5.1. Ezech. 16.46, 47, 48.

Ver. 8. Behold I even I am against thee] Whether thou will believe it, or not.
Thou hold it unlikely, but shall find it true, and that I am very serious,
not saying these things in terrorem only. Ecce me adversum te venientem, so
some render it; Behold I am upon my march against thee, and will punish thee
surely, severely, suddenly.

And will execute Judgements] For the non-execution of my Judgments in the
former sense taken, as ver. 7.

In the sight of the nations] In whose sight thou have so sinned, and who will
rejoice at thy sufferings.

Ver. 9. And I will do in thee that which I have not done] None shall suffer so
much here, or sink so deep in hell, as a profane Jew, a carnal Gospeller: who
is therefore worse then others, because he ought to be better. Oh the height
and weight of those Judgments that shall be heaped upon such. See Lam. 4.6.

And whereunto I will not do any more the like] For where ever read we that the
fathers did eat their sons in an open visible way? and the sons, the fathers?

Ver. 10. Therefore the fathers shall eat the sons] See this fulfilled in the
pitiful mothers, Lam. 4.10. and may it be thought says one, that their hungry
husbands shared not with them in those viands? Oh the severity of God. Cavebis,
si pavebis.

And the whole remnant of thee will I scatter] A miserably disjected people the
Jews are to this day; banished out of the world as it were, by a common consent
of Nations.

Ver. 11. Wherefore as I live says the Lord] This is Gods usual oath (in this
Prophet especially) and therefore should not be used as an oath or asseveration
by any other; since He only lives (to speak properly.)

Therefore will I also diminish thee] Or, I will break thee down, or I will
shave thee, as ver. 1. Jer. 48.37.

Ver. 12. A third part of thee, etc.] See ver. 2.

Ver. 13. Then shall mine anger be accomplished] God is then said to be angry,
when he does what men do when angry, viz. 1. Chide. 2. Smite.

And I will be comforted] This also is spoken after the manner of men, who are
much comforted when they can be avenged: Their song is, Oh how sweet is
revenge! Virgil.
-- animumque explesse juvabit. The same word in Hebrew that signifies
vengeance, signifies comfort also: for God, wll be comforted in the execution
of his wrath. But what a venomous and vile thing is sin, that causes the most
merciful God to take comfort in the destruction of his creature?

And they shall know that I the Lord have spoken it in my zeale] That is,
seriously threatened by my Prophets, whom they have vilipended, and derided,
but shall now feel the weight of their words.

When I have accomplished my fury in them] This he does not usually all at
once, but by degrees: he suffers not his whole wrath to arise till there be
no remedy, as 2 Chronicles. 36.16.

Ver. 14. Moreover I will make thee waste] In ariditatem, a dry and barren
wilderness; whose fruitfulness and plesantnesse is so much celebrated, not
only by divine but profane Authors also. See Psalm. 107.34. with the Notes.

In the sight of all] See on ver. 8.

Ver. 15. So it shall be a reproach and taunt] See this fulfilled, Lam. 2.15.16.

An instruction] They shall enjoy thy folly, grow wise by thy harms. Vulg.
Exemplum.
I will make thee an example to the Heathen.

An astonishment] A terror, some render it.

Ver. 16. When I shall send upon you tho evil arrows of famine] Not to warn you
(as Jonathans arrows did David) but to wound you to the heart, and to lay you
heaps upon heaps, Deuteronomy. 32.23, 24.

And break your staff of bread] See chap. 4.16. penuria fiet pecuniae, says
Oecolampadius here; you shall want money to buy you bread.

Ver. 17. Evil beasts, and they shall bereave thee] Rob thee of thy children,
destroy thy cattle, make thee few in number, and thy highway desolate, as was
long before threatened, Levit. 26.22. See 2 Kings 17.25.

I the Lord have spoken it] I Jehovah, who will give being to my menaces as
well as to my promises.

CHAP. VI.
Ver. 1. ANd the Word of the Lord came unto me] Junius observes, that this and
the two following Prophecies ( viz. those, chap. 7, and 8.) were delivered on
the Sabbath day; that is the proper season of preaching.

Ver. 2. See thy face toward the mountains of Israel] i. e. The Jews, who are
haughty and hard as mountains, who are asperi and inculti, rough and rude, as
Mountaineirs use to be. In Mount Olivet it self (besides other mountains) they
boldly set up their idols, even in the sight of the Lord: so that he never
looked out of the Sanctuary, but he beheld that vile hill of abominations;
called therefore by an elegant Agnomination, the Hill of Corruption, 2 Kings.
23.13.

Ver. 3. Behold I, even I will bring a sword upon you] Because ye are polluted
by man's sins, and so made hateful unto me. For as God thinks the better of the
places wherein he is sincerely served; yea where his Saints are born, Psalm.
87.5. or make abode, Isa. 49.16. so the worse of such places where Satan's seat
is.

Ver. 4. Your images shall be broken down] Heb. your Sun-images, whence also
Jupiter Hammon had his name, which Macrobius says was the same with the Sun.
Lib. 1. Sat. cap. 23.
See 2 Chronicles. 23.5.

And I will cast down your slain men] Cruentatos vulneratos, vel interfectos
vestros, such as when wounded, fly to their idols for safety.

Before your idols] Heb. your d^i stercorei, dunghil-deities, more loathsome
then any excrements.

Ver. 5. And I will lay the dead carcasses of the children of Israel, etc.]
That in the very places where they have sinned, there they may suffer. So in
the valley of Hinnom, and at Pilates Praetorium, etc.

Ver. 6. In all your dwelling-places] Omnia everram and evertam funditus: I
will turn all topsy-turvy.

Your works shall be abolished] Those toilesom toies, your Mawmets and
monuments of idolatry. This the Prophet tells them again and again: that he
might waken them, and work them to repentance.

Ver. 7. And ye shall know that I am the Lord] That I am dicti mei Dominus, one
that will be as good as my word. So shall all, not idolaters only, but
broachers of heresies also, quae furere and faetere cultores suos faciunt,
says Oecolampadius here.

Ver. 8. Yet will I leave a remnant] For royal use. See on chap. 5.3.

Ver. 9. And they that escape of you shall remember me] Here begins that
true Repentance never to be repented of, Psalm. 22.27. and 20.7.

Because I am broken off from their whorish heart] i. e. I am troubled, says
Piscator, I am tired out, says Zegedine, and made to break off the course of
my kindness. I am broken off from their whorish heart, so Polanus renders it:
that is, says he, I leave them, though loath to do it: the breach is merely on
their part: for they have an Impetus, a spirit of whoredoms in them, that
causes them to err, and go a whoring from under their God, Hos. 4.12. and 9.1.

And with their eyes] Those windows of wickedness through which the devil (who
is (...), as says Synesius) does often wind himself into the soul.

(...). Sept.
And they shall loath themselves] They shall displease themselves, says the
Vulgar; but that is not enough. Pudefient in faciebus suis, say others; they
shall bleed inwardly, and blush outwardly, deeply detesting their former
abominations, and not waiting till others condemn them, they shall condemn
themselves.

Ver. 10. And they shall know] By woeful experience. He that trembles not in
sinning, shall be crushed to pieces in feeling, said blessed Bradford.

And that I have not said in vain] In terrorem only.

Ver. 11. Thus says the Lord God] Sic ait Dominater Dominus.

Smite with thine hand] Manibus pedibusque obnixe omnia facito, do thine utmost
by gestures and speeches to make this stupid people perceive their sin and
danger.

Alas, for all the evil abominations] Propter omnes abominationes pessimas:
we cannot call sin bad enough: Oecolamp.
the worst word in a man's belly is too good for it. O perdita Israel (dicere
vult) quae tot malas abominationes operata es, etc.

Ver. 12. He that is far off shall dye of the pestilence] Pluribus verbis hunc
locum tractat. Ointments must not only be laid upon the part that aketh, but
also rubbed and chafed in: so must menaces and promises, that they may soak and
sink into the soul.

Ver. 13. Then shall ye know that I am the Lord] Vexatio dabit intellectum,
smart shall make wit: Aug.
See ver. 10. Four times in this chapter are these words used; Verba toties
inculcata, viva sunt, vera sunt, sana sunt, plana sunt.

Among their idols] See on ver. 4.

Where they did offer sweet savour] Idolatry is costly.

Ver. 14. Then the wilderness toward Diblath] Which was horriditate nobile,
bordering upon that terrible howling wilderness mentioned by Moses, Deuteronomy. 8.15.
See Jer. 48.22.

CHAP. VII.
Ver. 1. MOreover the word of the Lord came unto me] Five or six years before it
fell out. God loves to foresignifie, to premonish, or ere he punish. Let us
upon whom the ends of the world are come, take warning, and think we hear the
trump of God sounding, as here, An end is come, is come, is come, it watches
for thee, behold it is come: ver. 2, 3, 6.

Ver. 2. An end, the end is come] Exitium and excidium. Great Kingdoms have
their times and their turns, their rise and their ruin. The wickeds
happiness will take its end, surely and swiftly.

Upon the four corners of the land] Heb. the four wings: called also the four
winds, Mat. 24.31, They had defiled the land from corner to corner, as Ezra
9.11. God therefore now would sweep it all over, with the beesom of utter
destruction.

Ver. 3. Now is the end come upon thee] Even upon thee, O Israel: who would
ever have thought it? Lam. 4.12.

And I will send mine anger upon thee] Reveal it from heaven, as Romans 1.18.

And will judge thee according to thy wayes] i. e. I will punish thee for thy
ways, as Hos. 4.9. Obad. 15.

And will recompense upon thee] Heb. I will give or put upon thee all thine
abominations, q. d. Thou have hitherto put them upon me, but I will have a writ
of remove, and set them upon their own base, as Zach. 5.11.

Ver. 4. And mine eye shall not spare thee] Chap. 5.11. See on Jer. 13.14.

And thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee] Vt quae antea latuerant,
in apertum prodeant.

And ye shall know that I am the Lord] That smites you, ver. 9.

An evil, an only evil] viz. Without mixture of mercy: or that shall smite thee
down at one only blow, as 1 Samuel 26.8. See on Nahum. 1.9. The Vulgar, after the
Chaldee, renders it An evil after an evil, q. d. Lighter and lesser judgments
have done no good upon thee. Now I will finish the work and cut it short in
righteousness, Romans 9.28. Ruinam pracedunt stillicidia.

Ver. 6. An end is come, the end is come] Still the Prophet ringeth this
doleful knell in their ears, whom sin and Satan had cast into such a dead
lethargy, that they could not easily be arroused. Battologia est, sed
necessaria verborum redundantia, says Pintus.

It watches for thee] Which hitherto lay at the door, Genesis 4.7. sleeping
dog-sleep, as we say. In the Hebrew there is an elegant Agnomination between
hakets an end, and hekits watches. See 2 Pet. 3.3.

Ver. 7. The morning is come unto thee] The morning of execution, Visitaberis
summo mane, id est mature. Piscat. Florulenta felicitas occidit. Oecol.
as Jer. 21.12. Psalm. 101.8. Confer Hos. 10.15. Genesis 19.23.24. worse then the
Sicilian Vespers, or the French Massacre. Thine utter destruction, been mane in
te irruet, shall be upon thee betimes, as it was upon Sodom: and as the morning
light breaks in upon those that are fast asleep. Sicut decoctores multa sibi
promittunt, interim pereunt: so it befalls the wicked.

The day of trouble is near] Hajom mehumah, Day in Hebrew is thought to have
its name from the stir and noise that is made in it, the humming noise and
bustle of business. A troublesome and tumultuous day is here forethreatned,
such as that Esaias 22.5. and Zeph. 1.14, 15, 16, 17.

Not the sounding again of the mountaines] Not an empty sound, Virgil.
or an Echo (resonabilis Echo] but a worse matter, that shall do more then beat
the air.

Ver. 8. Now will I shortly pour out my fury] See on chap. 5.13.

And I will judge thee, etc.] See on ver. 3.

Ver. 9. I will recompense] The same as before. Nunquam satis dicitur, quod
nunquam satis discitur.

That I am the Lord that smiteth] Think not that I am made all of mercy, or
that I will ever serve you for a sinning-stock. Ye shall know that I have
verbera as well as ubera: and can so set it on as no creature can take it off.

Ver. 10. The morning is gone forth] Matutina sententia, the decree brings
forth, as Zeph. 2.2. See there.

The rod has blossomed] You have had your Floralia, and shall shortly have
your Funeralia. Nebuchadnezzar (that rod of my wrath) is at hand.

Pride has budded] And will shortly bring forth: viz. the bitter fruit of your
bold rebellion. Not much unlike to this was the Almond rod seen by Jeremy,
chap. 1.11.

Ver. 11. Violence is risen up into a rod of wickednesse] Their oppressions
speak them most wicked, and will make them most wretched.

Nor of their multitude] Or, their tumultuous persons, their Thraso's, says
Tremellius, quantumvis circumstrepant famulitio numeroso, with all their train
and retinue, that keep a clutter.

Neither shall there be wailing for them] Their dearest friends shall not dare
to lament the loss of them, for fear of the enemies who are present would
punish it. We read in the Roman history of one Vitia who was put to death by
the command of Tiberius, for that she had lamented Geminus her son, executed as
a friend to Sejanus. Tacit.


Ver. 12. The time is come, the day draws near] Let this voice ever sound in
the ears of those negligent spirits who cry Cras Domine: Advenit illud tempus,
pertigit illa dies.
whiling away their time as she, Rev. 2 21. and so fooling away their own
salvation, as those Virgins, Mat. 25.

Let not the buyer rejoyce] He shall have no such great joy of his purchase:
since the enemy shall shortly take all, and qui latifundia habuerunt, ne latum
pedem retinebunt, and no man shall be master of his own, nay not of a molehill.

For wrath is upon all the multitude thereof] Or, upon all the wealth thereof.
To like purpose the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.29. This then I say brethren, The time is
short, or trussed up, contracted, Let them that have wives be as though they
had none; they that weep as though they wept not; they that rejoice as though
they rejoiced not; and they that buy as though they possessed not, etc. Rebus
non me trado sed commodo, Sen.
said the wise heathen. Hang loose to all things here below: and labor after
that undefiled and unfadable inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.4.

Deuteronomy. 25.10.
Ver. 13. For the seller shall not return,] sc. At the year of Jubilee, by
reason of the lands desolation.

Which shall not return] Or rather, it shall not return, sc. void and
ineffectual: but shall be accomplished.

Neither shall any strengthen himself in the iniquity of his life] That Is but
an ill defense. The spirit of power and of a sound mind are fitly set together,
2 Timothy 1.7. Men's iniquity will be their ruin. Munster renders the text thus,
For that when as the vision was to the whole multitude thereof, no man
returned, neque ullus propter iniquitatem suam pro anima sua se roborabat,
neither did any one (by reason of his iniquity) strengthen himself for his own
soul, i. e. use means to escape the just punishment of it.

Ver. 14. They have blown the trumpet, even to make all ready] But all to no
purpose; since God has dispirited them (as he did the old Canaanites, the
Saxons and Picts in that Victoria Hallelujatica, the Germans against the
Hussites in Bohemia, etc.) and struck them with a Panick terror, with utter
despondency; so that they were feeble and faint-hearted, and the strong were
become as tow, Isa. 1.31.

Ver. 15. The sword is without, and the pestilence, etc.] No safety can be to
such as are pursued by the divine vengeance; (...).
called therefore by the Greeks (...), because there is no outrunning of it. Of
these three judgments (seldom separated) see chap. 4.

(...). (...) (...)
(...) Ver. 16. But they that escaped of them] Here we have the mournful
repentance of them that escaped, Fere autem fit ut, malo demum accepto, oculos
aperiamus, says Lavater here.

Heb. (...) ejulantes ut pueri solent qui virgis coercentur.
All of them mourning, every one for his iniquity] Thus Hezekiah mourned as a
dove, Esa. 38.14. And we mourn sore like doves, says the Church, Isa. 59.11.
happy if it be every man for his iniquity, and not for the punishment of it
only or mainly. See that it be a sorrow according to God, a sorrow to a
transmentation, 2 Cor, 7.10, 11.

Ver. 17. All hands shall be feeble] As after some grievous disease, or as in
extreme cold weather: ye shall not be able to handle your arms, wherein ye so
trust. God strengthens or weakeneth the arms of either party, Ezekiel. 30.24.

Vulg. Hieron. Septudg.
And all knees shall be weak as water] Fluent aquis: put a sudore ex gravi
angustia, vel potius urina, ex pavore. Not so those that wait upon God, Esa.
40.30, 31. Let wicked Thraso's think on this.

Ver. 18. They shall also gird themselves with sackcloth] They shall be a
miserable mourning people for a long while.

Horror shall cover them] Such heart-quake as is in earth quakes: horripilatis.

Scal.
Shame shall be upon all faces] Pudor a rebus putidis: ashamed they shall be of
their doings, ashamed of their disappointments.

And baldness upon all their heads] A sign of sorrow among the Jews. The
Romans (contrariwise) in times of sorrow suffered their hair to grow, says
Plutarch: so did Mephibosheth in David's days.

Ne sit ponderi quod prius fuit luxuriae. Hieron.
Ver. 19. They shall cast their silver in the streets] As burdensome, and not
beneficial to them. Thus Judas threw away his wages of wickedness: and many on
their deathbeds detest their cursed hoards of evil-gotten goods: saying unto
them as once Charles the fifth did, Abite hinc, abite long, away from me,
away, away.

Their gold shall be removed] Shall be for a dunghill, says the Vulgar: it
shall be esteemed, as it is, the guts and garbidge of the earth.

Their silver and their gold] See Prove. 11.4. Zeph. 1.18. Eccles. 5.8. with the
Notes.

They shall not satisfy their souls] Silver and gold are not eatable, as Midas
found, and the great Chaliph of Babylon, whom Haalon the great Chan of Tartary
affamished to death in the midst of his infinite treasures; Turk. hist. 113.
Plato in Cratylo scribit Tantalum dictum esse quasi (...). i. e. infelicissimum.
which though they were in valor great, and with great care laid together, yet
served they him not now to suffice nature best contented with a little.

Because it is the stumbling blok of their iniquity] Their wealth is the
occasion of their wickedness: and they are much the worse men for their worldly
substance. See Psalm. 52.7. with the margin. Jer. 5.27, 28. Luke 16.9, 13.

Ver. 20. As for the beauty of his ornament] That is mine Ark, says Junius: or
my silver and gold, ver. 19. as others.

He set it in majesty] In superbiam posuit, so some render it, they were proud
of their abundance: their good and their blood rose together, as the proverb is.

Therefore have I set it far from them] I will (for their ingratitude and abuse
of my good things) take away mine own and be gone, as Hos. 2.8, 9.

Ver. 21. And I will give it into the hands] So he did the pleasant land to be
plundered, the Sanctuary also to be rifled and rasacked by the Babylonians,
Syrians, Romans, etc. See Lam. 1.10. with the Notes.

And to the wicked of the earth] Sept. to the Pests of the earth.

Ver. 22. My face will I turn also from them] From the Chaldees, that they may
spoil at pleasure: or from the Israelites, that they may perish without
succor.

And they shall pollute my secret place] Even the Holy of Holyes, whereinto
none was to enter but the high Priest once a year: yet (besides these
Babylonian burglers) Heliodorus and Pompey did, but the one fell mad, and the
other never prospered after it.

For the Robbers shall enter into it] Effractores, by this name Breaechmakers,
the Jews at this day term our Nobles and Grandees.

Ver. 23. Make a chain] Which is an emblem of bondage.

For the land is full of bloody crimes] i. e. Capital crimes, unjust sentences
and other deadly evils.

Ver. 24. Wherefore I will bring the worst of the heathen] velut carnifices,
who may plunder you to the life, and take away your lives, Hab. 1.6, 7, 9. The
Jews were bad enough, but the Chaldees were worse, if worse might be;
Malignants above measure, Poneropolitans, breathing devils. A hard knot must
have a harder wedge, as the Proverb is.

I will also make the pomp of the strong to cease] I will crush the crests of
those Potentates, and lay them low. See Esa. 14.11, 12.

Their holy places shall be defiled] Sacella and lararia little, their Chapels
or Oratories made in or near unto their houses for divine worship.

Ver. 25. Destruction cometh] Not, mercy shall come, (...).
as the Septuagint ill render it) but utter excision: as when a weaver cutteth
the web he has finished, out of the loom, Isa. 38.12.

They shall seek peace] Of God, but all too late: of the Chaldees, but all in
vain: for they were Cockatrices, and would not be charmed, Jer. 8.17.15. and
12.12. and 16.5. Note here how Jeremy and Ezekiel say the same thing; as being
acted by the same spirit.

Ver. 26. Mischief shall come upon mischief] Aliud ex alio malum. I will heap
mischiefs upon them, Deuteronomy. 32.23. War is called evil or mischief by a
specialty, Esa. 45.7.

And rumor shall be upon rumour] sc. Of Nebuchadnezzars advance, acts and
atcheivements.

Then shall they seek a vision of the Prophet] As a drowning man catches at
the sprig of a tree, which before he slighted.

But the Law shall perish from the Priest] Not only Prophecy, which is an
extraordinary gift, shall fail them, but also the ordinary preaching of Gods
Word, and all good advice and provision of humane wisdom. And yet this foolish
people were wont to sooth up themselves and say, The Law shall not perish from
the Priest, nor wisdom from the Ancient, Jer. 18.

(...).
Ver. 27. The king shall mourn] With a funeral mourning, as the Sept. express
it: with a continued mourning, as the Hebrew imports.

The Prince shall be clothed with desolation] Opplebitur tristitia ad stuporem.

And the hands] Which they had so often lifted up to vanity.

According to their desertes] See ver. 3, 4, 8, 9.

CHAP. VIII.
Ver. 1. IN the sixth year] Of Jeconiah's captivity.

In the sixth moneth] Elul, answerable to our August.

In the fifth day] Which was Sabbath Day, says Junius.

Sedentes and quiescentes apti sunt ad percipiendam S. S. gratiam. Hinc apparet
(...) Dei. Lavat.
As I sat in mine house] In Mesopotamia, among the captives.

And the Elders of Judah sat before me] As their wont was upon the Sabbath Day,
2 King. 4.23. These Jews were ever learning, but never came to the knowledge of
the truth. Yet God still bore with them, and taught them better.

That the hand of the Lord God fell there upon me] i. e. The Spirit (the Spirit
of Prophecy, says the Chaldee) to whom the absolving and perfecting of Gods
Work is congruously attributed. He is fitly said to brood the waters, Genesis 1.2.
to overshadow the Virgin Mary, Luke 1.35. to seal the elect, Ephesians. 4.30. to
add ultimam manum; for God the Father does all by the Son, through the Holy
Ghost. Ezekiel had here a mighty impulse of the Spirit, which fell upon him
quasi fulgur efficax and penetrans, as lightening.

Ver. 2. Then I beheld and lo a likenesse] Of a man, likely. This was the Lord
Christ, whose eyes are like a flaming fire, Rev. 1.14. and even our God (as
well as the Jews God) is a consuming fire, Heb. 12. ult. Here, in the fire, was
set forth his vengeance against the wicked; in his brightness upwards, his
Majesty say some; his Clemency, say others,

As the color of amber] Or, of a coal intensely hot, as chap. 1.

Ver. 3. And he put forth his hand] As to me it seemed: for all was visional,
not real.

And took me by a lock of mine head] Tanquam herus inofficiosum servum. The
Prophet seems to have had no great mind to the matter: but there was no
remedy. Ducunt volentem fata, nolentem trabunt.

Where was the seat of the image of jealousy] Of Baal likely, for whom wicked
Ahaz had been so zealous, 2 Kings 16.14. and against whom God was ever so
jealous, as to devour whole lands by the fire of his jealousy, Zeph. 3.8.

Ver. 4. And behold the glory of the God of Israel] i. e. The glorious God of
Israel, Acts 7.2. See there.

Was there] sc. At the inner gate where that image of jealousy stood. The Jews
were great idolaters before the Captivity; not so afterward, Romans 2.22.

Chap. 3.23.
According to the vision] This befell for his further confirmation, ne remum
abjiceret, ut aiunt: this was now the third time; and all was but enough.

Ver. 5. The way toward the North] Where was the greatest concourse of
idolaters.

At the gate of the Altar] Why so called, see 2 Kings 16.14.

This image of jealousy in the entry] Idolatry committed in Gods own Temple was
most abominable; as when an adultresse has her stallions under her husband's
nose, Messalina-like.

Ver. 6. That I should go far from my sanctuary] Which is now become omnium
turpitudinum Arx (as was once said of Pompey's great theater at Rome,) a
receptacle of all roguery, and impiae gentis arcanum, as afterward Florus
unworthily called it.

And thou shall see greater abominations] All sins are not equally sinful then,
as the Stoics affirmed: but there are degrees of abominations. See Deuteronomy. 32.5.
with the Note.

Ver. 7. And he brought me] Mystagogus ille Angelus.

To the door of the court] Of the Priests court.

A hole in the wall] Which should have been kept in better repair.

Ver. 8. Behold a door] A secret door, by which they entered into their
idol-chappel. Such privy-passages there are in the Popish Monasteries, and in
the whole Romish religion not a few. Oecolamp.
Ante paucos annos suaviter convivebant Monachi and Nonnae, etc. The Council of
Trent was carried by the Pope with such infinite guile and craft, as that
themselves will even smile at the triumphs of their own wits (when they hear it
but mentioned) as at a master-stratagem. But the Author of the history of that
Council has found a hole in the walls of Rome, and many of our worthy
Champions have dug and discovered their detestable practices.

Ver. 9. Go in and behold the wicked abominations] No words are bad enough for
sin. Solomon calls it wickedness of folly, even foolishness of madness,
Eccles. 7.25. mischeivous madness, chap. 10.13. So Luke 16.11. Mammon of
unrighteousness, and 1 Pet. 4.3. abominable idolatries.

Ver. 10. And behold every form of creeping things] These, belike, were their
dii minorum gentium, their petty-deities, their vulgar idols; whereof as there
was great store, so not so great respect given unto them. This piece of
idolatry the Jews had learned of the Egyptians, who madly worshipped Oxen,
Asses, Goats, Dogs, Cats, Serpents, Crocodils, the bird Ibis, etc. Praeter
impietatem ingens stultitiae exuperantia ostenditur, says Theodoret on this
text: besides their impiety, were these men in their wits, think we? And what
shall we say of Popish superstition? Do not they religiously worshp Agnus
Dei's, relics of Saints, painted doves resembling the Holy Ghost, the Ass
whereon Christ rod, they say, Wolph. mem. lect.
on Palm Sunday? The tail of that Ass they show still at Genua, and require
low obeisance to be done thereunto.

Ver. 11. And there stood before them seventy men of the Ancients] The whole
Sanhedrin or great Council happily. Councils may err, and have done often. The
ill example of these Ancients was very attractive. Magnates Magnetes.

Jaazaniah the son of Shaphan] A Cheiftain amongst them; and happily, President
of the Council, whom they called Nasi or Prince. His father Shaphan was Scribe
in Josiah's days, as some think, 2 Kings 22.12.

And a thick cloud of incense went up] Abundantia nubis. Papists to this day
cense their images: semel singulis thuribulum ducat sacerdos, says the Roman
Masse-book. The Primitive Christians were pressed by their Persecutours to
throw at least a little frankincense into the fire: which when Origin and
Marcellinus did, through infirmity of the flesh, they were cast out of the
hearts of good people, and branded with the name of Thurificati, i. e. Incensed
persons.

Ver. 12. What the Ancients of Israel do in the dark?] Idolatry is a deed of
darkness. The Athenians had their Eleusinia, the Romans the rights of their
Bona Dea, and the Egyptians their Ofiridis Pamylia, all done in the dark. The
Popish Temples are many of them dark; and some so stuffed with presents and
memories, that they are thereby made much the darker.

For they say, The Lord sees us not] Atheism is the source of all
sinfulness. These fools, being in the dark, thought that God could not see
what they did there.

The Lord has forsaken the earth] Has cast of all care off us, and therefore
we must see to our selves, look us out some other deities. See Jer. 18.15. Lib.
2, cap. 7.
What a base speech is that of Pliny, Irridendum vero curam agere rerum
humanarum, illud quicquid est, Summum? It Is no way likely that God takes care
what becomes of man's matters: Os durum!

Ver. 13. Turn thee yet again] q. d. Little did thou think, Ezekiel, that thy
Countrymen of Jury were so prodigiously abominable, as now thou see: And
what more sure then sight?

Ver. 14. And behold there sat women] These were Priests of Isis, whose impious
and most impudent kind of worship is largely described by Herodotus, Diodorus
Siculus, Plutarch, and Eusebius: as celebrated with very unseemly ceremonies,
worse if it might be, then those of Priapus. But who would ever have looked for
such immodest doings among Gods professed people? See 1 Cor. 5.1.

Weeping for Tammuz] i. e. For Osiris King of Egypt, and idolatrously adoring
his image, which his wife Isis had advanced.

Ver. 15. Have thou seen this] q. d. And can thou easily believe thine own
eyes? Nevertheless these flagitious persons have the face to say, In all my
doings they shall find none iniquity in me: that were sin, Hos. 13.8. Say not
Popish Idolaters still as much?

Thou shall see greater abominations] Idolatry is stintlesse.

Ver. 16. Were about five and twenty men] These say some, were the King and his
Council: See chap. 11.1.

With their backs toward the Temple] And yet in a part of it: hoc fuit signum
nimiae improbitatis. Here to turn their posteriours upon Gods house, and Ark,
which they were commanded to look toward, Veluti Dominum in certamen
provocantes.
as a Type of Christ, was to bid open defiance to him, and to renounce his
service, cum ingenti contumelia sanctitatis Domini: Oh the unspeakable patience
of God!

And they worshipped the Sun] So did the Persians, under the name of Mithra:
the Assyrians, of Osiris: the Egyptians of Orus son of Isis, etc. Heathens
thought that Christians did so too, Tertul. Apol.
because anciently they prayed with their faces Eastward.

Ver. 17. And lo they put the branch to their nose] In honor to the Sun,
whose heat produces the most redolent wines. Or they might be branches of
Laurel, dedicated to the Sun. R. Solomon rendereth it, they put a stinck to my
nose, even ventris crepitum pro suffitu. Ecce ipsi subsannates. Sept.
Vah, Vah, Vah.

Ver. 18. Mine eye shall not spare] Chap. 5.11. and 7.4.

And though they cry in mine ears, etc.] Because it is the cry of the flesh
for ease, and not of the Spirit for grace.

CHAP. IX.
Ver. 1. HE cried also] God, to whom vengeance belongs, calls aloud and
with a courage, as we say) to the Executioners of his wrath, to come and fall
on.

Praefecti urbis.
Cause them that have charge over the City] i. e. The Angels here called the
visitations or visiters of Jerusalem, the prefects of the City.

Every man with his destroying weapon] Called ver. 2. a maule, or battle-ax,
telum dissipatorium,

Ver. 2. And behold six men came] Ad hunc Dei clamorem vel clangorem the Angels
came, the Chaldees came, at the call of this Lord of Hoasts, who has all
creatures at his beck and check.

By the way of the higher gate] Called also the New gate, Jer. 26.10. built by
Jotham, 2 Chronicles. 27.3.

Toward the North] Where stood the idol of jealousy, and whereby Nebuchadnezzar
entered: Per quod quis peccat, per idem punitur and ipse.

One man among them] This was a created Angel say some, chap. 10.2. Christ, the
Angel of the Covenant, say others, with more likelihood of truth.

Clothed with linnen] As High Priest of his people, and withal, an offering for
them, and that without spot, Heb. 7.

And a writers inkhorn by his side] An ensign of his Prophetical office, say
some: as his linen clothing was of his Priestly; and of his Kingly, that he
was Among or in the midst of the six slaughter-men, as their Captain and
Commander.

They went in and stood beside the brazen altar] Where they might receive
further instructions from God. So in the Revelation, those Angels that were to
pour out the vials of divine vengeance, are said to come out of the Temple.

Ver. 3. And the glory of the God of Israel] i. e. The Son of God appearing
upon the glorious Charret, 1.3. and 3.23. and being the brightness of his
Fathers glory, the express image of his person, Heb. 1.3.

Was gone up from the Cherub] i. e. From those four Cherubines, upon which the
glory of the Lord did then appear to the Prophet, chap. 8.4. He was gone from
his Ark, to show that the refractary Jews were now discovenanted: and from his
Mercy-seat, to show that he would show them no more mercy. Many removes God
makes in this and the two following Chapters, to show his lothnesse utterly to
remove. And still, as he goes out, some judgment comes in. Here he removes
from the Cherubims in the Oracle to the threshold: and upon that remove see
what follows, ver. 5, 6, 7. So for the rest, see chap. 10.1, 2. chap. 10.19.
and 11.8, 9, 10. chap. 11.23. and when God was quite gone from the City, then
followed the fatal calamity in the ruin thereof. But that he went away by
degrees, and not soon and at once, was an argument of his very great love and
long-suffering. He left them step by step as it were, and played Loath to depart:
but that there was no remedy. Tied he is not to any place, as these fond Jews
thought he was to their visible Temple, which now he is about therefore to
abandon, and to make their very Sanctuary a slaughterhouse.

Ver. 4. And the Lord] That great Induperator.

Go through the midst] Discriminate, make a difference, take out the precious
from the vile. God will sever his Saints from others in common calamities, and
deliver them, if not from the common destruction, yet from the common
distraction.

And set a mark upon the foreheads] Vulg. Et signa Thau. Whatever this mark
was, it was signum salutare. The letter Tau some think it was, as part of the
word Tichieh, i. e. Thou shall live; according to that, The just shall live by
his faith: or as part of the word Torah, i. e. The Law to show that these had
the Law of God written in their hearts, and this made them mourn to see it so
little set by. Howsoever, it is not the sign of the cross as Papists would
have it: but rather the blood of the cross, wherewith when believers are
sprinkled from an evil conscience (as the houses of the Israelites in Goshen
were with the blood of the Paschal-lamb) they are sure of safety here, and
salvation hereafter. The Election of God is sure, and has this seal, The Lord
knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19. and it shall appear by them, Psalm. 91. Tau is
the basis of the Hebrew Alphabet, says One, and marking by Christ is the basis
of all true comfort, and sound profession. Tau ends and closes up the
Alphabet, says another: so he who persevereth to the end, shall be saved. The
mark here mentioned was not corporal but spiritual, even the Merit and Spirit
of Christ, the Value and Virtue of his death and sufferings.

Of the men that sigh and cry] That sigh deeply, and cry out bitterly for their
own and other men's sins and miseries; and this out of Piety and Pity. These
are not many, yet some such are found in all ages, Rev. 11.3. Inter vepres rosa
nascitur, and inter feras nonnullae mitescunt. Ammian.
Le us mourn in time of sinning: so shall we be marked in times of punishing.

Ver. 5. Go ye ofter him] Go not till he has marked the Mourners: so chary
and choice is God of his jewels. Mercy is his firstborn, says One, and
visites the Saints, ere Judgments break out, Isa. 26.20, 21.

Ver. 6. Slay utterly old and young] A dreadful commission: see it fully
executed, 2 Chronicles. 36.17. all sorts, sexes and sizes of people were corrupted;
Immedicabile vulnus Ense recidendum.
and since there was no hope of curing, there must be cutting.

But come not near any upon whom is the mark] These were the precious sons of
Zion, the excellent ones of the earth (as whatsoever is sealed is excellent in
its kind, Isa. 28.25. hordeum signatum) these are the darlings, the favorites;
handle them gently therefore for my sake, touch not mine anointed, come not
near any such to fright them, but keep your distance.

And begin at my Sanctuary] From whence went forth profaneness into the whole
land, Jer. 23.15. These Sanctuary-men were an ill generation, at them therefore
begins the Judgment. God will be sanctified in all that draw near unto him.
Nadab and Abihu found the flames of jealousy hottest about the Altar. Vzza and
the Bethshemites felt that justice as well as mercy is most active about the
Ark. Murderers must be drawn from the Altar to the slaughter, Exodus 21.14.
Holy places were wont to be refuges: not so here, but the contrary.

Then they began at the Ancient men] At those seventy Seniours, chap. 8.11.
whose foul offenses had flown far upon the two wings of evil example and
scandal.

Ver. 7. Defile the house] Once hallowed by my self, but now abhorred and
rejected as a stews or sty of filthiness.

Fill the courts] That where they have sinned, there they may suffer, as did
Ahab, 1 King. 22.38. 2 King. 9.26.

Ver. 8. And I was left] And, as I was apt to think alone, Romans 11.3.

I fell upon my face and cryed] This is the guise of the gracious in evil
times; as may be seen in Moses, Jeremy, Paul, Athanasius, Ambrose, etc.

Ah Lord God] Adonai Jehovi, (not Jehova, as elsewhere usually) so the Saints
have sometimes prayed, Polan.
tanquam singultientes in patheticis precibus, or rather sighed out their most
earnest suits to God, as Genesis 15.28. Deuteronomy. 3.24. and 9.26.

Lavat.
Will thou destroy all the residue of Israel] Brevis quidem est haec querimonia
Prophetae: at multa complectitur: This is a brief but a complexive complaint,
and has much in it.

Nimis valde.
Ver. 9. The iniquity of -- Israel -- is exceeding great] Still there is a cause
(to be sure:) and Gods judgments are sometimes secret, ever just. And as swift
rivers, when they once fall into lakes or seas, are at rest: so are our
restless minds, when once they fall into the depth of the Divine Justice duly
considered.

Declinatione and detorsione judicii, (...).
And the City full of perversenesse] Or wresting of judgment. Mutteh, id est
mishpat din Mitteh, says the Hebrew Scholiast; that is judgment turned from
the biasse, as it were: when the balance of Justice is tilted of the one side,
as Paul's word imports, 1 Timothy 5.21.

For they say, The Lord has forsaken the earth] See on chap. 8.12. Hic est
fons omnium scelerum, says a Lapide: hinc ruunt homines in scelerum abyssum,
says Theodoret. When men are once turned Atheists, what will they not dare to
do? what should hinder them from laying the reins in the neck, and running
riot in wickedness?

Ver. 10. And as for me also] Quapropter etiam ego, wherefore also I: and
there is a stop, by an elegant Aposioposis.

Mine eye shall not spare] Chap. 5.11. and 7.4. and 8.18. See a just Commentary
upon these words, Jer. 9.3, 4, 5. -- 17.

Ver. 11. And behold the man -- reported the matter] The Vulgar has it
Respondit verbum: as if he had been asked before, whether he had done as was
bidden.

I have done as thou have commanded me] So did David, Psalm. 119.112. Act.
13.22. and the son of David, Joh. 17.4. and 14.51. and Paul; witness his
famous vox (...), 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8. Let every of us so carry the matter toward
God, that at death we may say with that servant, Luke 14.22. Lord, it is done
as thou have commanded.

CHAP. X.
Ver. 1. THen I looked, and behold in the firmament] Heb. In that expanse, or
firmament mentioned, chap. 1.22.

That was above the head of the Cherubims] Called before, living creatures,
chap. 1. Now God is represented as in his Temple, where things are more clearly
discryed and described, Psalm. 29.9. In his Temple does every one speak of his
glory. Cherubims the Angels are called, from the greatness of their knowledge,
says Hierom, as Gods Rabbines: or rather, because the Lord rides upon them,
Psalm. 18.20. and 99.1. as upon his chariot, 1 Chronicles. 28.19. Here they are said
to be under the firmament and near the throne, to execute Gods commands with
expedition. It is not therefore as those miscreants said, chap. 9.9. The Lord
has forsaken the earth.

There appeared ever them as it were a saphire-stone] i. e. Jehovah in his
glory.

As the appearance] It was but as, and as the appearance: we cannot see God as
he is. Some have seen Merchabah velo harocheb, say the Hebrews, the chariot,
but not the Rider therein.

Ver. 2. And he spoke unto the man] See chap. 9.2. Christ, who had marked the
mourners, scatters coals upon the rebellious City. Kiss the Son lest he be
angry, and ye perish.

And scatter them over the City] To show that Jerusalem was to be burnt by the
Chaldees: as must likewise Rome by the Kings of the earth: for strong is the
Lord who judges her, Rev. 18.8.

And he went in my sight] Saints see and foresee that oft-times which is hid
from others.

Ver. 3. Now the Cherubims stood on the right side] i. e. On the South side:
being now removed from the North-door, chap. 8.3, 4. with 9.3. as loathing that
place of so great idolatry.

And the cloud filled the inner court] To signify that now upon Gods departure
there should be darkness in the Temple, yea in the Priests court. Significat
sequentia tempora nubila fore. Lav.
See Psalm. 18.11. Rev. 15.8.

Ver. 4. Then the glory of the Lord went up from the Cherub] i. e. From the
Cherubims: so it had done once before, chap. 9.3. and returned again: to show
that he was even driven out by the peoples impenitency.

And stood over the threshold of the house] As taking his last leave of it.

And the house was filled with a cloud] Sublatenter abit a suo loco Dominus:
Oecol.
so Isa. 6.4. the house was filled with smoke. Josephus says that when God
departed, a voice was heard out of the Temple, saying, Let us leave these
seats: like as a little before the last desolation of it, there was heard
Migremus hinc, let us go hence. And a heathen writer says that a voice greater
then man's was heard, Audita major humana vox, excedere deos. Tacit.
that the gods were thence departing.

Ver. 5. And the sound of the Cherubims wings was heard] As applauding Christ's
act, and rejoicing thereat.

As the voice of the Almighty God] i. e. As thunder, Psalm, 29. Hereby might
also be signified insignis and insolita mutatio in urbe, a notable noise that
should be made in the City by clattering of arms, neighing of horses, roaring
of enemies, etc. The Hebrew word here used is Shaddai, which signifies
vastatorem and victorem, says Aben-Ezra, a Waster and a Victour.

Ver. 6. When he had commanded the man] Christ as Mediator was at his Fathers
command, Mat. 12.18. John 14.31. and 15.10.

Then he went in and stood beside the wheeles] As considering, says one, the
mutability and uncertainty of all things: and observing the equity of the
divine proceedings.

Ver. 7. And one Cherub stretched forth his hand] The holy Angels whom the Jews
looked upon as Ministers of Gods grace unto them ( Josephus calls them the
Keepers of the Jewish people) are here brought in as Ministers of those weapons
wherewith they were to be destroyed.

Who took it and went out] Nevertheless the City was not burnt, till four or
five years after this vision; Tam piger ad paenas Deus est, ad praemia velox.
Ovid.
Meanwhile how jocund were the Jews, as if no such judgment were likely to
befall them?

Ver. 8. And there appeared -- the form of a man's hand under their wings] Quasi
gladius intra vaginam, as a sword within the scabberd, ready to be drawn out
for execution. The hand, says Aristotle, is the instrument of instruments.
Nature has given us hands, says Cicero, multarum artium ministras, etc. to
act and do business. Angels have neither hands nor wings, to speak properly:
yet are said here to have both: to show their activity and celerity in Gods
service: Hands of a man they are said to have, to show that they do all
prudently and with reason: and these hands are under their wings, says one, to
signify their hidden nature and operation. A good man, like a good Angel,
says another, has the wings of contemplation, the hands of action: the wings
of faith, the hands of charity: Essays Mor. and Theol. p. 23.
wings whereon he raises his understanding, and hands wherewith he exciteth
his will, etc.

Ver. 9. And when I looked, behold the four wheels] This chapter compared with
the first, do, like glasses set one against another, cast a mutual light.

As the color of a Beryl stone] Lapidis Berylli thalassis: See chap. 1.16.
wheels are voluble, and the sea tumultuous: so are all things and places in
this present life: lay hold on life eternal.

Ver. 10. As if a wheel had been in the midst of a wheel] So intricate and
perplexed oft-times are Gods ways and works, that the wisest men know not what
to make of them, Zech. 14.6. In that day the light shall neither be clear nor
dark, but betwixt both, tanquam (...).

Ver. 11. Upon their four sides] That is, to their several quarters assigned
them by God, who does things methodically, and in order.

Translatio a re militari. Jun. Diod. (...). Omnia in omnes parts illustrat
Dei Providentia. Jun. Dei Providentia oculatissima. A Lap. Diod.
But to the place whither the head looked] That is, God who guided the whole
chariot by an universal and equal inspiration, chap. 1.12, 20, 21.

Ver. 12. And the whole body] viz. Of the Cherubims, as chap. 1. The wheels are
said to be full of eyes. God who over-ruleth all, is All-eye. His Providence is
like a well-drawn picture, which vieweth all that are in the room.

Ver. 13. It was cried unto them] By him who sat upon the throne, calling for
their obedience: as indeed all things here, yea even the senseless creatures
are Gods servants, Psalm. 119.91.

O wheel] O round world, q. d. Hear the voice of thy Maker and Master: or, oh
how unstable and changeable art thou!

Ver. 14. The face of a Cherub] i. e. Humana quidem, sed splendidissima, says
Junius: facies pueri alati, says another. There are that tell us that in the
Syriack tongue the word Cherub is taken from a word which signifies drawing
the plough, which is the bullocks proper labor. We must believe therefore, say
they, that Cherub signifies properly the figure of a bullock: under which
hieroglyphically was represented an Angel. The laborious Preachers face shall
once shine as an Angels.

Ver. 15. Were lifted up] Or, they lift up themselves, sc. to follow and attend
their departing Lord.

That I saw by the river of Chebar] And now saw again, for further confirmation.

Ver. 16. And when the Cherubims went] Angels have a great stroke in ordering
the affairs of the world, as has already been noted on chap. 1. Quod vero
candem rem saepe repeto, lectori molestum esse non debet, says Lavater in his
Preface to this Prophet.

Ver. 17. When they stood] See chap. 1.21.

The spirit of the living-creatures] Or, of life. God governs all events: He
moves the Angels, they the wheels. No Clock has so certain motions, as the
vicissitudes of all things are overruled by God.

Ver. 18. Then the glory of the Lord departed] This, the stubborn Jews would
never be drawn to believe possible, till it befell them: hence they hear of it
so often, but to little good purpose as to them.

Ver. 19. Over the East-gate] The gate of the Court where the people met and
prayed with their faces Westward: here now stood the Cherubims, and here stood
the Glory over them; that all the City might see that God was going from them,
and seek by all good means to retain him with them.

Ver. 20. And I knew that they were the Cherubims] Now at last I knew. Divine
light is darted into the soul by degrees: and at several times.

Ver. 21. Every one had four faces apiece] Ad taedium usque candem rem repetis,
ut nihil excusationis haberent. These careless and crosse-grained Jews are
told the same things thus over and over: to leave them without all excuse, if
they would not be wrought upon by all.

Ver. 22. They went every one straight forward] Let us, by their example, learn
to advance forward to the high prize of the heavenly calling in Christ Jesus.

CHAP. XI.
Ver. 1. MOreover the spirit lift me up] The same Spirit of God that lifted up
and acted the living wights, and the wheels: like as the same breath causes
the diverse sounds in the Organs.

Unto the East-gate] Of the outward Court, chap. 10.19.

Five and twenty men] Proceres populi, the Senators of the City with their
Prefect or President. The like number is now at Rome, and likewise at London:
an Alderman in each of the twenty four Wards, and a Mayor. See Rev. 4.4.

Among whom I saw Jaazaniah] I saw them and knew them by name, but for no good.

Judex locusta civitatis est malus. Scaliger.
Ver. 2. These are the men that devise mischief] That whet their wits and beat
their brains about it: the Politicians of the time, who like children are ever
standing on their heads, and shaking their heels against heaven.

And give wicked counsel] As Balaam and Ahitophel did of old: as Machiavel did
at Florence, and Gondamor here did of later times. The Prophet here names a
couple: and takes the same liberty to reprove them, that they took to do
amiss.

Ver. 3. Which say it is not near] sc. The evil day is not: the vision that he
sees is for many days to come: and he prophesies of the times that are far
off, chap. 12.22, 27. See Am. 6.3. Isa. 29.1. 2 Pet. 3.4. And this was likely
the evil counsel they gave the King and people: lulling them asleep in the
cradle of carnal security.

Let us build houses] Though Jeremy has counseled us to the contrary, chap.
29.5. though he (with all the wit he has) has told us that this City is the
Cauldron, and we are the flesh, chap. 1.13. Some such thing Jeremy had indeed
foretold: and these profane scoffers make a jear at it: Captant argutias quibus
elevant omnem fidem doctrinae coelestis. This made god Jeremy complain heavily,
chap. 20.7, 8. I am in derision daily, every one mocketh me, etc. Our Prophet
Ezekiel, though he name him not, yet confirms his holy sayings; and
threateneth his scurrilous adversaries. Ministers should stand by, and for one
another, etc.

Ver. 4. Therefore prophecy against them, prophesie] Vrget and repetit, ne
cunctetur. Out of greatest indignation against these Pests he pricketh him on
to Prophecy, as having vengeance in a readiness for the disobedient, 2 Cor.
10.6. Mockers shall be sure to have their bands increased, Esa. 28.22.

Ver. 5. And the Spirit of the Lord fell upon me] Et irruit in me Spiritus
Jehovae, with force and power: it was a mighty illapse from a God much offended.

Thus have you said] As ver. 3. but better ye had held your peace: or, thus
have ye thought, and as good ye might have spoke out.

For I know the things that came into your minde] Heb. And the ascensions of
your Spirit, I know it, i. e. I know them every one, as if they had all been
but one: I understand your Ironies, your sly jears, and will deal with you
accordingly. See Luke 24.38. Deuteronomy. 31.21.

Ver. 6. Ye have multiplied your slain in this City] Called therefore a bloody
City, chap. 22.2. and 9.9. and 7.23. and it shall therefore despume you. Vos
sicut spumae ejicieminis
Evil counselors are cruel and bloody minded: their craft is never but
accompanied with cruelty; and their cruelty seldom without: craft: none of them
wants their mate, as the Scripture speaks of those birds of prey and
desolation, Esa. 34.16.

Ver. 7. Your slain] Whether ye have slain them outright, or have laid them a
bleeding and a dying by your oppressions; for a poor man's livelihood is his
life, Mar. 12.44. Luke 8.43. he is in his house l^ke a snaile in his shell;
crush that, and you kill him.

Haec verba Monachi funibus trahunt ad Purgatorium proband. nixi autoritate
Originis.
And this City is the cauldron] Thus, their own words spoken in mockage, are
wittily retorted upon them, and driven back again down their throats, as it
were.

But I will bring you forth out of the midst of it] As rotten flesh to be cast
out, or as filthy scum to boil over.

Ver. 8. Ye have feared the sword] And yet they made as if they feared nothing;
they doubted not but to dye in their nest: but all guilt has fear, and all
such fear has torment.

Vellelus l. 2.
And I will bring a sword upon you] Such as all your craft can never keep off.
Ineluctabilis vis fatorum, cujus fortunam, mutare constituit, consilia
corrumpit. See Prove. 10.24. with the Note.

Ver. 9. And I will bring you out of the midst thereof] The same again, for
better assurance. We use to do so often, when we threaten ought.

Ver. 10. I will judge you in the border of Israel] In the Northern border,
even at Riblah, 2 King. 25.6.21. Jer. 52.10, 24, 27.

Virgil.
Ver. 11. This City shall not be your cauldron] Ye shall not be so happy as to
dye in your own native Country, atque ante or a patrum: but elsewhere, at
Riblah or Antiochia.

Ver. 12. And ye shall know that I am the Lord] That which ye would not take
knowledge of by the words of your Prophets, ye shall now be made to know by the
swords of your enemies.

For ye have not walked in my statutes] When God is about to proceed in
judgment against evil doers, there is ever a cause for it, and they shall know
it.

Ver. 13. And it came to pass that when I prophesied] God heweth men by his
Prophets, and slays them by the words of his mouth, and his Judgments are as
the light (or, lightening) that goes forth, Hos. 6.5. Elisha has his sword as
well as Jehu and Hazael, 1 Kings 19.17. See Jer. 1.10. 2 Cor. 10.6.

Pelatiah the son of Benaiah died] Suddenly, and before his time in Solomon's
sense, Eccles. 7.17. Driven away he was in his iniquity, Prove. 14.32. so were
Ananias and Sapphira, Magnum est subito opprimi.
Corinthus, Arius, Steven Gardener, Cardinal Pool, Dick of Dover, as they
called the persecuting Suffragan there, Nightingal Parson of Bocking, etc. See
Prove. 6.14, 15.

Then fell I down upon my face] Out of an holy solicitude about Gods Elect,
lest they also should have perished, as Pelatiah had done: whose very name
might seem somewhat ominous, for it signifies The escaped one of the Lord: and
therefore his so sudden death might portend destruction to the remnant of
Israel.

And cried with a loud voice] Sudden or singular Judgments put Saints upon
humble, earnest, and argumentative prayer.

Ver. 14. Again the Word of the Lord came unto me] In answer to my prayer;
though there was something in it of unbelief, and humane frailty. See Psalm.
31.22. with the Note.

Ver. 15. Thy brethren, even thy brethren] i. e. Thine unbrotherly brethren of
Jerusalem seek to unbrother and to unchurch thee and the rest of thy
concaptives. See Isa. 65.5. Papists and Sectaries deal so by us.

The men of thy kindred] Viri vindiciarum tuarum, or they that have the right
of redemption.

And all the house of Israel] Tota downs Israelis, quanta quanta est. The
Hierosolymitanes challenged the Lord, and the Land, and all therein to be
theirs; excluding and as it were excommunicating the Captives at Babylon, who
were dear to God. So dealt the Scribes and Pharisees by the Christians, Joh.
16.2. Acts 26.9, 10, 11. So did the Rogatian Heretics and the Donatists, who
gave themselves out (as now the Papists do) to be the only Catholics. The
Arians called the Orthodox (by way of scorn and contempt) Ambrosians,
Athanasians, Homousians, etc.

Get ye far from the Lord] Gressus removete, profani: Iee in malam crucem:
(...): ye are cut off from the people of God, and may go whither you will: we
are heirs and owners of the promises; ye are outcasts, and abjects.

Ver. 16. Although I have cast them] What a Cornucopia of comfort may this
promise be to poor prisoners, forlorn Exiles, and such as by sickness or
otherwise are necessitated to keep from public Ordinances, that they shall
have Gods presence and protection, the comfort and conduct of his Spirit, etc?

Yet I will be to them as a little Sanctuary] By hearing their prayers,
Sanctuarium modicum.
sanctifying their natures, bringing to their remembrance what things they have
heard and learned touching Me and my will, Themselves and their duties; They
should in Babylon worship God in spirit and in truth; and in the life to come,
the Lord God Almighty and his Lamb should be their Temple, Rev 21.22.

Ver. 17. I will even gather you from the people] How impossible or improbable
soever you may think it, and those of Jerusalem pronounce it. The Prophet Isay
in many Chapters of his Gospel (which begins at chap. 40.) sets himself
to cheer up these poor captives with good hopes of a return, after a little
while, Paulisper.
as some render the word Megnat in the foregoing Verse.

Ver. 18. And they shall take away all the detestable things] So God calls
their Mawmets and monuments of Idolatry; They chose rather to dye, then to
suffer Caligula's statue to be set up in their Temple by Petronius.
not daigning to call them by their usual names. After the Captivity the Jews
would never endure idols. To this day they say that there is an ounce of the
golden calf in all their sufferings.

Ver. 19. And I will give them one heart] Opposed to a divided heart (such as
the Paphlagonian Partridges are said to have) Hos. 10.2. that is partly for
God, and partly for the world, Ezekiel. 33.31. This oneness of heart truly and
entirely cleaving to God alone, is that boon that David so dearly beggeth,
Plin. l. 11. c. 37.
Psalm. 86.11. that he might attend upon God without distraction, 1 Cor. 7.35.
and as the visive beams are wholly bent upon the thing that is beheld by the
eye, and as it were concentred in it: so might his desires and endeavors be
entirely carried toward God, and firmly fixed upon him.

And I will put a new spirit within you] The same soul for substance, but
altered in the frame, renewed in the qualities thereof. Mark 16.17. they shall
speak with new tongues. So we read of a new Song: The strings are the same, but
the tune is changed. See Psalm. 51.12. Ephesians. 4.23. 2 Cor. 5.17.

And I will take the stony heart] Extraham, say the Sept. I will draw or pull
it out: which none can do but the hand of Heaven. God only can make the flinty
heart fleshly, that is, sensible, soft, pliant, penetrable, buxom and obedient
to his holy Will.

Ver. 20. That they may walk in my statutes] The Covenant of grace is suited to
all the exigencies and indigencies of a poor Saint: It is ordered in all
things, 2 Samuel 23.5.

Ver. 21. But as for them] This is added, lest any wicked men should misapply
the Promises, as they do quisperando praesumunt and praesumendo pereunt.

Ver. 22. Then did the Cherubims] Now God is utterly leaving the refractory
Jews, He did so much more, after their rejection of Christ and his Gospel.

Ver. 23. From the midst of the City] From the Eastgate.

And stood upon the mountain] Mount Olivet. There he made his last stand, to
see if they would meet him with entreaties of peace, that he might stop or step
back. Here it was that Christ wept over the City; and hence he went up to
heaven: after which came the Romans and destroyed it.

Ver. 24. By the Spirit of God] i. e. In a supernatural rapture.

Ver. 25. Then I spoke unto them of the Captivity] These were his proper
charge, and now Gods chiefest care: to them therefore he delivered the whole
counsel of God, which he had seen and heard for their better settlement.

CHAP. XII.
Ver. 1. THe Word of the Lord also came unto me] This variety of visions shows
the great unbelief of the people, whose Captivity and calamity is here further
described and assured by a new Type, which is set out in the first six verses,
and then applied in the ten following. One sermon pegs in another, (...).
and the man of God must stick to his work, and stand over it, 2 Timothy 4.2.

Ver. 2. A rebellious house] Heb. a house of rebellion, domus perduellis, that
has cast down the gauntlet of defiance against me.

Which have eyes to see, and see not] sc. To any good purpose: they will not
see, Isa. 26.11. and who so blind as such? they wink wilfully: which is no small
aggravation of their sin, Joh. 9.4. Ephesians. 4.18.

Which have ears to hear, and hear not] h. e. Castigatiores non evadunt, they
are not a button the better for what they hear: they draw not up the ears of
their minds to the ears of their bodies, that one sound might pierce both.

Ver. 3. Therefore thou son of man] i. e. Nevertheless do thou as thou art
bidden: and let what thou do and say be for a testimony against them,
stick in their souls and flesh, as the invenomed arrows of the Almighty
throughout all eternity.

Prepare thee stuff for removing] Heb. instruments, or vessels: Convasa res
tuas, collige sarcinas, pack up and away. See if this way thou can work upon
them.

It may be they will consider] sc. By this express sign, though they profit
not by thy plain preaching. Ministers must study their peoples souls: turn
themselves into all forms and shapes of spirit and of speech, to win upon them.

Ver. 4. Thou shall bring forth thy stuff] Arma viatoria, for an ocular
demonstration. What surer then sight?

Go forth at even] The King and his men of war were glad to do so, 2 Kings
25.4. but it would not do.

Ver. 5. Dig through the wall] Make any shift. Necessitas magnum telum. He that
digd Mortimer's hole (as they call it) at Nottingham Castle, earned his liberty
dearly. God might have said to the Prophet at once, Get thee gone out of thy
country, (how sad a thing that is, Ovid when banished, sets forth in many
elegant Elegies) sed cuncta per parts digerit, but he must do it piecemeal and
by degrees, that it may the more affect them.

Ver. 6. In their sight shall thou bear it upon thy shoulders] To show that
King Zedekiah himself should carry out some of his most precious things upon
his shoulders when he fled: See ver. 12. This was a base thing for a King to
do. King Alphonsus indeed is renouned for drawing a poor perishing man out of a
ditch, and bearing him on his back to a place of relief.

Thou shall cover thy face] In token that Zedekiah should be made blind. A just
hand of God upon him who had eyes and saw not, ver. 2. like as it was upon
Muleasses King of Tunis, who had those eyes of his digd out which had been
insets of lust, and which he often covered with his hat pulled over them, that he
might listen the better to wanton ditties and profane Music.

For I have set thee for a sign] Portentum, a sign portending their going into
Captivity.

Ver. 7. And I did as I was commanded] Though well laughed at for my labor, by
the mad world, ever besides it self in point of salvation; and looking upon
Gods Jordans, as Naaman did, with Syrian eyes. The outward signs in our
Sacraments are in themselves mean and ordinary matters; yet the Minister is to
make use of them, and the people to climb up to heaven by them as ladders of
life. Hence, even in the ancient Churh-liturgy, they had their Sursum corda,
Life up your hearts. Rideant Athei and ringantur.

Ver. 8. And in the morning came the Word of the Lord] Mane, id est, Mature.
God not only betime, but timously admonished his people: but they refused to be
reformed, would none of his counsel.

Quid sibi vult quod ita migras? Tu, habet emphasin. Lavat. Gnat Nasi massa.
Ver. 9. Has not the house of Israel -- said unto thee, What do thou?] q. d.
Nothing less: so stupid they are or so stubborn, that they never once asked
any such question: Or if they did, it was in a jear, as who should say, you are
a wise man to trouble your self and us in this foolish and childish manner: a
great deal of gravity sure you show therewhile.

Ver. 10. This burden concerns the Princes in Jerusalem] There is an elegancy
in the Original. Princes who over-burthen their people, shall one day have
their back burden of miseries. Potentes potenter torquebuntur.

Ver. 11. I am your sign] And, so it pleases you to make me your
mocking-stock. Sedrisus hic est Sardonius. Of such laughter one may safely say
it is mad: and of such laughter, What do thou? Eccles. 2.2.

Like as I have done] My removal is Mira, nova, inimica, and ludicra: but upon
you it will fall heavily, and horridly. That which has befaln me in type only,
shall befall you in truth and reality.

Ver. 12. And the Prince that is among them] Zedekias that profane wicked
Prince, chap. 21.25.

Shall bear upon his shoulders in the twilight] His precious things; see on
ver. 6. This though it be not recorded in the holy history, yet that it was so,
we are assured by this Scripture. Great men, in exigents stoop to low offices.
This load upon his shoulders might hinder his flight, and further his
surprizal, as it did Baiazets, when he was beaten out of the field by Tamerlan,
that he stayed to water his horse. The Vulgar rendereth it (but not well) in
humeris portabitur, he shall be carried on men's shoulders. The Pope indeed is
ordinarily so carried: but he was glad to foot it when forced by the German and
Spanish Soldiers. A. D. 1527. he was glad to secure himself in his castle St.
Angelo.

They shall dig through the wall] The door, happily, or inlet of some
underground passage.

He shall cover his face] See on ver. 6. This he did happily through fear, or
shame, or for a disguise: but his sin found him out.

Ver. 13. My not also will I spread upon him] Princes usually love hunting and
fouling. Lo, the Chaldees shall hunt him, and over-catch him.

And he shall be taken in my snare] Snares are set secretly, catch suddenly,
Iun.
hold certainly. A strong hold the Hebrew word here used, does also signify.

Yet shall he not see it] For his eyes were put out at Riblah, 2 King. 25. And
yet behold a greater blindness that befell him then this. Joseph. Ant. l. 6,
10. cap. 10. (...).
Josephus testifies that Zedekiah not understanding these words of Ezekiel,
and thinking them to be contrary to Jeremiah's words, he resolved to believe
neither of them.

Ver. 14. And I will scatter toward every wind] His lifeguard, Esquires of his
body, Auxiliaries. I will put him into an helpless condition: Psalm. 146.3. If
the Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help thee? said that King to her that
cried to him for help, 2 King. 6.27.

Ver. 15. And they shall know that I am the Lord] The Lord God of heaven, the
great and terrible God, Neh. 1.5. This they shall know magno suo malo, who
would not take knowledge what was said unto them by the Prophets.

Ver. 16. But I will leave a few men] Heb. Men of number, a company scarce
considerable, in comparison of the Many.

That they may declare all their abominations] Give glory to God, take shame to
themselves, and thereby do much good to those Heathens, hardened before by
their evil behavior. Vere magnus est Deus Ghristianorum, said one Calocerius
an Heathen.

Ver. 17. Moreover the word, etc.] See on ver. 1.

Ver. 18. Eat thy bread with quaking] With tumult and trepidation, as an
affrighted and perplexed person, that eats his bread in peril of his life.

Ver. 19. They shall eat their bread with carefulnesse] Better fast then feed
on such bread. Men may sooner by their carking care add a furlong to their
grief, then a cubit to their comfort, says One.

Because of the violence] The Jews were ever, and are still a covetous and
cruel people.

Ver. 20. And ye shall know] By woeful experience, ver. 15.

Ver. 21. And the Word of the Lord] See ver. 1.

Ver. 22. What is that Proverb] We have also many profane proverbs common
amongst us, as Thought is free, Every man for himself, and God for us all:
words are but wind. In space comes grace: Fair and softly goes far, etc.

The days are prolonged] Ludibrium crassum: The Greeks had many such ill
proverbs, Chrysostom. complains.
Because judgment is not speedily exicuted, etc.

Ver. 23. The days are at hand] Opponit aliud dictum fere tot syllabarum, a
plain and plenary confutation.

Ver. 24. For there shall be no more] God could have really confuted them by
present execution; but he is patient.

Ver. 25. For I am the Lord] And that you shall shortly feel to your small
comfort. What I have uttered with my mouth, I will perform with my hand without
fail.

For in your dayes] Within six years.

Ver. 26. Again the Word] See on ver. 1.

Ver. 27. For many dayes] Either it is nothing, or long hence.

Ver. 28. There shall none of my words be prolonged] Abused mercy turns into
fury.

CHAP. XIII.
Ver. 1. ANd the Word of the Lord] See on chap. 12.1.

Ver. 2. Prophecy against the Prophets] Illis enim omnia mala feru^tur
accepta. See Jer. 29.32, 33, 38.

That prophecy out of their own hearts] Whose prophesies came by the will of
man, 2 Pet. 1.21. and not cum privilegio.

Ver. 3. Woe unto the foolish Prophets] Wise enough they were in their
generation (and so are the foxes, whereto they are compared, ver. 4.) but in
the things of God, silly-simples, blinder then moles.

That follow their own spirit] And their own fancies; acted and abused by that
great lying spirit.

And have seen nothing] Nothing from God, though they thought and pretended
they had seen something. All was but lies, Jer. 27.10. dreams, Jer. 23.32.
things of naught, Ezekiel. 22.28. As Antipheron Orietes in Aristotle thought that
every where he saw his own shape and picture going before him: so here. Now a
woe is denounced against these; Vae is a little word, but very comprehensive, as
there is often much poison in little drops.

Ver. 4. O Israel, thy Prophets are like the foxes] Cowardly, crafty, cruel,
greedy: venatores eludunt, and cum mortuae videntur, reviviscunt. Heretics are
such, and false Prophets; Arius for instance.

Ver. 5. Ye have not gone up into the gaps] Reclaimed the People from their
impieties (those inlets of plagues) nor interceded for them by your prayers to
God to turn away wrath, but hastened it. Ye have built indeed a wall, and
dawbed it with mortar, but such as is untempered, ver. 10. arena sine calce,
like ill architects.

Neither made up the hedge] To keep foxes out of Gods vineyard: it is even
opentide.

To stand in the battle] As David's three Worthies did in the Barly-field and
delivered it, Turk hist. 417.
1 Chronicles. 11.14. Or as Marulla the maid of Lemnos, who like a fierce Amazon,
desperately fought with the Turks in defense of her country Coccinum (a City in
that Island) and kept them out, till more company came to her relief, moved
with the alarm.

Ver. 6. They have seen vanity] This is soon seen, ver. 3.

Saying, the Lord saith] By a lying pretense, familiar with falsaries, to
father their fancies upon God.

Ver. 7. Have ye not seen a vain vision?] i. e. I appeal to your own
consciences, have ye not falsely fained all? Seducers are extreme impudent, of
perverse minds, cauterized consciences.

Ver. 8. Behold I am against you] Heb. Behold I against you, by an angry
Aposiopesis. The Chaldee has it, I will send my wrath against you; and that is
an evil messenger; for who knows the power of thy Wrath? says Moses, Psalm.
90.11.

Dicit eos sore prorsus extraneos ch Ecclesia. Tesseris Ecclesiae
aspectabilibus abalienati permanebunt. Jun.
Ver. 9. And my hand shall be upon the Prophets] Gods hand is a mighty hand, 1
Pet. 5.6. the heaven is spanned by it, the earth held in the hollow of it.

They shall not be in the assembly of my people] Or, in the secret, or
counsels: they shall have no communion with them. A heavy threat: for the
communion of Saints, next unto communion with God, is the greatest comfort here
attainable.

Neither shall they be written] As members of that Commonwealth, (much less of
the Jerusalem that is above, Esa. 4.4.) but rooted out of the world, written in
the earth, Jer. 17.13. See Psalm. 69.28.

Neither shall they enter] They shall never come back out of Babylon, nor enter
into heaven.

Ver. 10. Because, even because] Heb. for that, and for that: an angry
Epiziuxes: See ver. 8.

Saying peace, peace] Making all fair weather before them, when as the storm of
Gods wrath (never to be blown over) was bursting out upon them.

And one built up a wall] Ipse aedificabat parietem, one of the devils chief
dirt dawbers: such as was Shemajah, Hananiah, etc. Jer. 28.29. who, together
with their she upholsters, that sewed pillows to allarwholes, ver. 17. made
foul work, and did much mischief among Gods people; like as do the Jesuits and
Jesuitisses (into whom all the old seducers have fled and hid themselves) at
this day.

And lo others daubed it] By cunning collusion, they plaistered and parjetted
over the mud wall that was so set up. Ita extruunt illi vel potius destruunt
Ecclesiam Dei, such proper builders were these. Like unto whom are the Popish
Priests, Ju^.
who bring the poor people into a fools paradise: and such idle Ministers
amongst us, as shoot off at best, a few pot-guns against gross sins: or when
they have done their worst at it, lick them whole again with I hope better
things of you, or I hope there are none such here, etc. Many silly people also
judge themselves honest, because the daubing Minister will give them the
beggarly pasport, and so dye like lambs, being woefully cheated, and willing to
be so, Jer. 5.31. Mat. 24.11.

With untempered morter] Which will make but a bulging wall; not like to stand
long.

Ver. 11. Say unto them] Tell them so from me, and they may trust to it: Dei
dicere est facere.

That it shall fall] And the fall of it shall be great, as Mat. 7.27. where our
Savior seems to allude to this text.

There shall be an overflowing shower] The Chaldaean army, Isa. 59.19. and 8.7,
8.

Great hailstones] Sept. (...), catapultes, Alloquitur grandinem velut
imperator suos milites. Lavat.
battering-rammes to make breaches in stone-walls. The Hebrew is Elgabish, i.
e. grandis grandinis lapides, huge hailestones of God own hurling.

Ver. 12. Lo^ when the wall is fallen] As fall it will and with a force,
because made of ill mortar: and they that stand under it for shelter shall
perish, as did sometimes seven and twenty thousand of Benhadads men in Aphek:
Vocat autem eloquenciam saecularem and Rhetoricam inanem lutum sine palea, etc.
says Oecolampadius here, i e. by untempered mortar is meant worldly eloquence
and empty Rhetorike in Sermons; this is as sand without lime, or as lime
without litter, hair, chafe or the like stuff to hold it together.

Where is the daubing] What Is your false doctrine come to? your work is lost,
if not your souls, 1 Cor. 3.15.

Ver. 13. I will even rent it with a stormy wind] Vento turbinum, with a
whirlwind or Hurrican. See Es. 25.4. and 29.6. Jer. 23.19.

And great hailsto^es in my fury] Thrice in this one verse is fury threatened:
so hot is Gods displeasure against Seducers.

Ver. 14. So that the foundation thereof shall be discovered] So that all men
shall see your falsehoods. See 2 Timothy 3.9. Rev. 17.16. The old whore is first
made naked and then desolate. Act. and Mon.
Mr. Philpot Martyr dealt plainly by the Popish Prelates in open-Convocation
when he said to them, Before God ye are all bare-arst: God has detected you,
etc.

And ye shall be consumed] See on ver. 12.

Ver. 15. Thus will I accomplish my wrath] Gods wrath is dreadful, when let out
in little minnums only: but when to be accomplished, who can abide or avoid it?

Neither they that daubed it] It may very well be that some of these
cementaries of Satan were slain by the people, when once they saw themselves
cheated by them into remediless misery.

Ver. 16. To wit the Prophets of Israel] A name too good for them: but so they
would needs be called. See Tit. 1.12. 2 Pet. 2.1.

Ver. 17. Likewise thou son of man] A Prophets work is never done: Agricolis
redit labor actus in ^rbem.

Set thy face against the daughtrs] The Prophet had rather have contended with
men then women, and more honor it had been for him; but he must do as bidden.
Mulieres genus fragile sunt: yet the Prophet must set his face against them as
stout agents for the devil, Mr. Weld Sectar of New England. Matildis Comitissa
vulgo dicta filia S. Petri.
who has ever made great use of them. Such were Noadiah, Neh. 6.1. that
Apocalyptical Jezebel, Briget Matild, those two Jezebels of New England. Mrs.
Hutchinson, and Mrs. Dyer, our late most impudent Preacheresses in London and
elsewhere.

Ver. 18. That sow pillows] In token of most certain and constant rest and
peace.

To make kercheifes] Vela vel pepla. The Roman Southsayers, caput velabant cum
volebant exordiri suos exorcismos, used the like ceremonies: so did those that
gave oracles at the den of Trophonius.

To hunt souls] And so to destroy them. See Prove. 6.26. Women are insinuative
creatures, especially when they have a repute for holiness, and are esteemed
prophetical.

Will ye hunt the souls] O indignum facinus! Are precious souls no more set by?

Upon the head of every stature] Fitting the humors of all sorts and sizes of
people: by prophesying to the younger of pleasure, and to the elder sort of
profit. David, by a like Art, tells old men of gold and silver, young men of
honey and honeycomb to be found in Gods statutes, Psalm. 19 10.

Will ye save the souls alive that come unto you?] q. d. I hardly think you
will. Will ye not kill and eat, as the hunter does his prey? or rather w^ll not
the devil deal by you both, as the cock master does by his fighting cocks, take
pleasure in their mutual killing one another, that he may make a supper of them
both?

Ver. 19. For handfuls of barley and for peices] Like so many base Gypsies, or
common beggars. A Gell. See Mic. 3.5.
Cato upbraided M. Caelius (and worthily) that being a pleader, he would sell
either his tongue or silence for a morsel of bread. These were low-prized
prophetesses.

To slay the souls] sc. By denouncing death to them, or by stirring up the
people to slay them as miscreants.

That hear your lyes] Such as deceive expectation: for so the word here used,
signifies.

Ver. 20. Behold I am against your pillows] Gods hatred against sin is such,
that he hates any thing that is made use of about it. The serpent was cursed,
because he had been abused by the devil.

(...).
To make them fly] High-pitches; as our High attainers with their new truths,
and strange speculations, do now pretend to do. Such were the Swenkfeldians,
(Stinkfeldians Luther called them for their ill savor) Swenkfeldius himself
bewitched many with those lofty terms (which were much in his mouth) of
Illumination, Scultet. Annal.
Revelation, Deification, the Inward and spiritual man, etc.

Ver. 21. And they shall be no more in your hand] Gods own people may be, for a
time, in the hand of Seducers, and taken in their nets, carried away by their
false opinions: but God will at length deliver his people out of their hand.

Ver. 22. Because with lies ye have made the heart of my people sad] False
doctrines and wicked practices grieve the hearts of the godly, and strengthen
the hands of the ungodly; as these unhappy times do abundantly evince. The
times truly are good (and in many respects better then they have been) but the
days are ev^l.

By promising him life] Though he walk in hell-wayes.

Ver. 23. Therefore ye shall see no more vanity] By rendering you not only
contemptible, but ridiculous: Or, by ridding the world of such pestilent people.

CHAP. XIIII.
Ver. 1. THen came certain of the Elders unto me] Rulers and chieftaines of the
captives in Babylon, pretending to be far better then those Elders at
Jerusalem, complained of chap. 8. but indeed no better: nay so much the worse,
because they had lost the fruit of all their afflictions, and were as arrant
hypocrites as those veteratores the Scribes and Pharisees, that came to John's
baptism, and to our Saviors sermons, with evil and exulcerate minds.

Non omnes sancti qui calcant limina Templi. A Doeg may set his foot as far
within the Sanctuary as a David.

And sat before me] Demurely, and (to see to) devoutly. But why could they not
stand to hear the Word of God for reverence sake? Balac did so, Number. 23.18.
though a King: And Eglon, though unweildy, Judge. 3.20. and a better man then
they both, Constantine the Great, as Eusebius records, and further tells
us, that being pressed, after long time of hearing, to sit down, De v^ta con^.
with a stern countenance he answered, It were a great sin in me not to hear
with utmost attention, when God is speaking.

Ver. 2. And the word of the Lord came] Lest the Prophet, seeing these seniors
coming thus unto him, should favor them too far, God uncaseth them as he does
(mostly) such gross hypocrites, in this present life; Jerob^am and his wife,
Ananias and Sapphirah, Simon Magus, and others for instance. How else indeed
should the name of such wicked wretches rot as they must? Prove. 10.

Ver. 3. These men have set their Idols in their hearts] Though they would seem
to abhor idols, yet the devil is at inn with them, and their hearts are no
beter then so many Idol-temples, as thou would easily perceive, had thou
but my fiery eyes, and could see their insides, as I do. Piscat.
Sustulerunt stercoreos deos suos super cor suum, they have laid their
dungy-deities upon their very hearts; a place where I only should be by right,
for it is the bridal-bed.

And put the stumbling block of their iniquity] i. e. They are impudent
sinners, as the Scholiast interprets it, and resolved of their course, whatever
comes of it. Hoc significat crassum Dei contemptum and quali professam
rebellionem.


Should I be enquired of at all by them?] q. d. No, never; I scorn the motion,
I abhor such ludibrious devotion as this is: Away with it. Piscator rendereth
the words, An ergo serio interrogor ab eis? Think thou that I am seriously
sought unto by these? q. d. Nothing less.

Ver. 4. I the Lord will answer him] Or, as I am the Lord (oath-wise) I will
answer him, but with bitter answers.

According to the multitude of his idols] i. e. As by his abominations he has
well deserved: or, concerning the multitude of his idols; that is a sin he shall
be sure to hear of, and to suffer for.

Ver. 5. That I may take the house of Israel in their own heart] Vt
deprehendam, or as others, ut reprehendam, that I may convince their
consciences of their impieties, and sting them to the heart with unquestionable
conviction and horror.

Because they are all estranged from me] And fallen in with the devil, who is
(...), as says Synesitu, a great promoter of idolatry. Idola sunt prima
saliva, Oecolamp.
and initium deficiendi a Deo. Idolatry paveth the way to utter Apostasy.

Ver. 6. Repent and turn your selves] Or, turn others: for true converts will
be converting their brethren. They like not to go to heaven alone.

And turn away your faces] Alii dicunt uxores vestras (says Lavater here) your
wives which are according to your hearts, like as in water face answers to
face. Wean them from their idols, and win them over to the true God.

Ver. 7. For every one of the house of Israel] The same over again, and yet no
vain repetition: duris enim illis capitibus res non potuit satis inculcari, to
these dizzards nothing could be said too much.

Or of the stranger] But proselyted to the Jewish religion, as Jethro, who was
the first of that kind that we read of.

Which separateth himself from me] As an harlot does from her husband: See Hos.
4.14. and 9.10.

I the Lord will answer him by my self] Non verbis sed verberibus, not with
words but with blows: Or, according to my most holy Truth and Justice. Or, by
my self, sc. do I swear, that I will do it: See ver. 4.

Ver. 8. And I will set my face against that man] I will look him to death: Or,
Vultuose torveque illum intuear.
laying aside all other business, I will see to it, that he be soundly paid.

And will make him a sign and a proverb] That when men would express a great
punishent upon any, Ier. 29.22. Tantalus, (...) ut vult Plato.
they shall resemble it to his, as the Jews did to Ahab's and Zedekiah's (that
naughty couple) and the Heathens to that of Tantalus and Tityus.

And I will cut him off from the midst of my people] This is yet a further and
a more formidable menace: this is far worse then to be a byword to the people.

Ver. 9. I the Lord have deceived that Prophet] I had not only a permissive but
an active hand in that imposture; not as a sin, but as a punishment of other
sins: See 1 Kings 22.20. Job 12.16. Jer. 4.10. 2 These. 2.11.

And I will stretch out mine hand upon him] i. e. Upon that false-prophet, who
although he has thus acted, not without my providence, yet has sinned against
my Law, which is the rule men must walk by, or else suffer for their
transgression. Aut faciendum aut patiendum. Now God has long hands, as we use
to say of Princes: neither may any think to live out of the reach of his rod.

Ver. 10. And they shall bear the punishment of their iniquity] Neither shall
excuse other: but as they have sinned together, so shall they suffer together,
quia volentes and scientes errabant, they wilfully went astray. Quandoquidem
hic populus vult decipi, decipiatur, they shall infallibly perish. An evil
Pilot may easily drown himself, and all that are with him on the same bottom.

Ver. 11. That the house of Israel may go no more astray] Thus when Gods
Judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness, Isa. 26.9. Those elect that were bad will become good: and they
that were good will be made better. Paena ad paucos, metus ad omnes.

Ver. 12. The Word of the Lord came again to me] The utter destruction of this
perverse people is once again denounced, and declared to be inevitable.

Ver. 13. Son of man] See on chap. 2.1.

When the land sins against me] i. e. The Inhabitants of the land; not as if
the land it self were alive and endued with reason, as Origin doated, and as
Plato held that the Spirit of God was the soul of the world. Hom. 4. in loc.


By trespassing grievously] Praevaricando perfide, by doing evil as men could.

Then will I stretch out my hand] See ver. 9.

And will break the staff] See chap. 4.16. and 5.26.

And I will send famine] Extreme famine, a heavy Judgment, as has elsewhere
been showed out of sacred and profane history.

Ver. 14. Though these three men] See on Jer. 15.1.

Noah, Daniel and Job] What could not these three (so mighty with God) have
done if the matter had been fe^sible? Daniel was now alive, and in his prime.
Ezekiel, his contemporary and fellow-Prophet, envyeth him not, but celebrateth
him: as also Peter does Paul, 2 Epist. 3.

They should deliver but their own souls] Because the decree was past, an end
was come, chap. 7.2, 4, 5, 6, 10.

Ver. 15. If I cause noisome beasts] As Lions, Wolves, Bears, Serpents, etc.
Great hurt has been done not only by such, as Number. 21.6. 2 Kings 2.24. and
17.25, 26. Josh. 24.12. but also by tamer creatures, Aug.
whem set on by God. Rebellis facta est, quia homo numini, creatura homini.
Rats, Coneys, Frogs, Wasps, Moths, have done much mischief.

Ver. 16. Though these three men were in it] All alive, and lustily tugging;
yet it would not do. In common calamities Heathens had their supplications and
sacrifices: Papists have their Letanies and Processions, though to small
purpose. Let us, in the like ease, up and be doing, that the Lord may be with
us.

Formula jurandi e^siptica.
They shall deliver neither sons] Heb. if they deliver sons, etc. q. d. then
never trust me more.

Ver. 17. Or if I bring a sword] The sword, whenever it comes, is bathed in
heaven, Esa. 34.5.

Omnis pestilentiae coeca and delitescens est causa. Fernel.
Sword, go through the land] When the sword rides circuit (as a Judge) it is
in commission: See Jer. 47.67.

Ver. 18. Neither sons nor daughters] Though never so dear to them: (...) the
Greeks call them.

Ver. 19, Or if I send a pestilence] Which Hippocartes calls (...), because
God has a special hand in it. Physicians can give no good reason of it.

In blood] i. e. In great slaughter, laying heaps upon heaps.

Ver. 20. Neither son nor daughter] Though it were an only one, and so more
dear to them.

They shall but deliver] Howbeit a good man also may dye of the Plague, as did
Oecolampadius, Greenham, etc.

Ver. 21. My four sore Judgements] Every of the four ( Cardan reckons three
more of like nature, viz. earthquakes, inundations, and great winds) are sore
judgments indeed, each of them is pessimum, i. e. perniciosum. Cavete.

Ver. 22. Yet behold] See a thing sudden and serious.

They shall come] Be Captives here, as you are.

And ye shall see their way] How wicked it was, and worthy of punishment.

Ver. 23. And they shall comfort] i. e. Quiet and qualify your spirits.

CHAP. XV.
Ver. 1. ANd the Word of the Lord came unto me] This shortest Chapter is added
to all the foregoing as a Corollary. In consists of a Type or Simile, and the
Application thereof. It is Gods usual way, and should be ours, to teach by
Similitudes. See Hos. 12.10. with the Note.

Ver. 2. What is the vine-tree more then any tree?] The Jews took upon them,
because a vine brought out of Egypt, and such as Gods own righ-hand had
planted. But insomuch as they were now become fruitless and also useless,
trees twice dead, plucked up by the roots, Jude 12. what had they to glory in
above other Nations? surely they were therefore worse then others, because they
ought to have been better. True it is, that a Vine in it self considered with
the fruit it bears, is no contemptible tree. But if it be withered or pulled
out of the earth, Lignum tenus, gibbosum and tortuosum.
it is no way comparable to other trees or shrubs, which, when felled, are put
to sundry good uses, that the Vine (a crooked, low, writhen thing) will never
serve to; as to make spears, doors, tables, ships, houses, etc.

Ver. 3. Shall wood be taken thereof, to do any work?] No, hardly: it is good for
nothing, no not so much as to make a pin or a peg of, to hang a hat or bridle
on, because it is a sappy and brittle wood. Think the same of that empty vine,
the profligate Professor; being abominable, disobedient, and unto every good
work reprobate. Tit. 1. ult.


Ver. 4. Behold it is cast into the fire for fuel] But then it must be taken
before it be over-dry: and so Corn. a Lapide testifies that they burn little
else in Italy but faggots made of vine-branches. See Joh. 15.6. with the Note.

The midst of it is burnt] Vstulatum, scorcht and seared, so that it is
altogether unuseful, and is therefore cast again into the fire, out of which
for some other purpose it had been pulled. Woe to Apostates: the hottest fire
in Hell abides them.

Ver. 5. Behold when it was whole] The Jews when at best, were too too bad: a
foolish people and unwise, disobedient and gainsaying all the day long: how
much more then now that they are hardened and seared with so many Judgments!

Ver. 6. As the Vine-tree] Adaptat parabolam: Here begins the Apodosis or
Application of the parable. That which is not for fruit, is for the fi^e. Salt
which has lost the savor, is thrown out.

So will I give the Inhabitants of Jerusalem] Those sinners in Sion, Isa.
33.14. those sacrificing Sodomites, Isa. 1.10. I will make them as a fiery oven
in the time of mine anger; I will swallow them up in my wrath, Psalm. 21.9.
besides that, hell gapeth for them.

Ver. 7. And I will set my face against them] See chap. 14.8. Levit. 17.10.

They shall go out from one fire] And then think themselves safe and happy: but
this is but gaudium lachrymosum; their preservation is but only a reservation:
for

Another fire shall devour them] A man pulls a brand out of the fire
sometimes, and then presently casts it in again: he gathers up the
sticks-ends, but it is to cast them into the middle of the fire: So deals God
oft-times with the wicked; to whom also whatsoever they suffer here is but a
typical Tophet. See Amos 5.19. Jer. 48.43.

And ye shall know that I am the Lord] i. e. True of my word, and terrible in
mine executions. The Prophets could not get you to believe that your sins were
so heinous, that my wrath was so hot, that your judgments were so heavy, etc.
but now ye shall surely feel what you would not then believe, and cry out Nos
insensati, etc, O we fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets
had spoken unto us!

When I set my face against them] As being fully resolved to have my full blow
at them, and to pay them home.

Ver. 8. And I will make the land desolate] The land it self often suffers
propter incolarum inemendabilem malitiam, Psalm. 107.4.
for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. Idolatry especially is a
land-desolating sin.

Because they have committed a trespasse] A grand trespass, a wickedness with
a witness; they have deeply revolted, and backsliden with a perpetual
backsliding. Apostates as they sin not common sins, so, with Core and his
accomplices, they dye not common deaths many times.

CHAP. XVI.
Ver. 1. AGain the Word of the Lord came unto me] For the better setting on of
what had been said in the foregoing Chapter, for cutting the combs of the
self-conceited Jews, and convincing the^m of their wickedness, and
wretchedness thereby. The Chapter consists of Law and Gospel, ver. 60 and is
a lively type animae peccatricis and poenitentis of an offending and repenting
soul.

Ver. 2. Cause Jerusalem to know her abominations] Which as yet she takes no
knowledge of. Rebuke her therefore sharply; that she may be found in the faith,
if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth.

Ver. 3. Thy birth] Heb. thy cutting out: Confer Isa. 51.1.

And thy Nativity] Vide insignem gentalogiam, vide (...) pudendum. Mutato
nomine de te Fabula narratur. De not. deor.
Tully says, the old Britons were as barbarous as the Scythians*

-- duris genuit te cautibus horrens Caucasus. Virg.
Thy father was an Amorite] An Amorite thou may seem to be rather then an
Abramite: for thou have filled the land (as they did, Ezr. 9.11.) from end to
end, with thine uncleanesse.

And thy mother an Hittite] Those worst of women, Genesis 27.46.

Ver. 4. Thy navel was not cut] None was so courteous as to do any of these
necessary good offices for thee, Plut. lib. de amore prol.
a poor, forlorn, helpless wretch. No creature is so shiftlesse as a new born
babe; which cast out and left to the wide world, must needsly perish.

Ver. 5. None eye pitied thee] No not thy mother, in whose heart God had
planted natural affection for that purpose. Neither would thy Lucina become thy
Levana (two heathen deities) to take thee up from the ground, where thou
layest, alas weltring in thy gore, and more like to a slain then a live child.

Ver. 6. And when I passed by thee] Not by chance, as Luke 10.31. but of free
choice, and accorging to mine eternal purpose.

And saw thee in thy blood] In this deplorable condition: blood is in this
verse thrice mentioned, to set forth the greatness of man's misery in his pure
(or rather impure) naturals, and the freeness of Gods Grace toward him, all
along, Matthew. 11.26.

I said unto thee -- live] God speaks spiritual life to his poor people, Isa.
55.3. and often repeateth to them his precious promises, whereby they come to
partake of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the
world through lust, 2 Pet. 1.4.

Ver. 7. As the bud of the field] He prosecuteth the Allegory of a miserable
maiden, with whom the matter begins to mend: Jam enim menses patiebatur,
ubera creverant and pili circa pubem: so that now she was marriageable.

And thou art come to excellent ornaments] Heb to ornaments of ornaments, such
as virgo nobilis, cum jam est nubilis, habet, young Ladies have, when grown up
especially. Whereas thou wast naked and bare] Heb. nakedness and rejection.
God looked upon us and loved us, when as yet we had not a rag to our backs. Cum
tu nuda esses, atque nudissima.


Ver. 8. Behold thy time was the time of love] When thou wast both fit for
marriage, and desirous of it. For as the man misseth his rib, so the woman
would be in her old place again, under the man's arm or wing, See Ruth 3.1, 9.

And I spread my skirt over thee] See Ruth 3.9. with the Note. I covered thy
nakedness, and took thee into my care and company, as a wife. A marriage-rite
is imported by this expression.

Yea I swear unto thee, etc.] So much ado God has with us, to make us
believe. The Apostle mentions the work of faith: She has somewhat to do
before she can fasten.

Ver. 9. Then washed I thee with water] I cleansed thee from all thy pollutions
by the Merit and Spirit of my dear Son. See 1 Cor. 6.11.

And I anointed thee with oyl] New-married wives were usually washed,
anointed, and richly arrayed. The dead also were washed, as Dorcas, and
embalmed, as Jacob, and Prove. 31.8. they are called been chaloph, which
signifies change of raiment. Death strips us all, but happy are they whom
Christ has spread his skirt over: See 2 Cor. 5.2, 3, 4.

Ver. 10. I clothed thee also with broidred work] Phrygionica vest variegata.
With variety of precious graces, whereby thou did outshine Solomon in all
his bravery: for one grain of faith is better worth then all the gold of Ophir:
and one remnant of Hope, beyond all the gay clothing in the world.

And girded thee about with fine linnen] The Church has a rich wardrobe for
woollens and linnens; Gods plenty of both.

Ver. 11. I decked thee also with ornaments] See ver. 7. such as render thee
amiable and admirable. Christ himself, who was not moved at all with the offer
of all the worlds good, Matthew. 4.10. confesses himself ravished with them,
Cant. 4.9.

Ver. 12. And I put a jewel on thy forehead] Heb. on thy nose, See on Genesis
24.47.

Ver. 13. Thus wast thou decked with gold and silver] Yea with far better
abiliments: for what is gold and silver but the guts and garbage of the earth?
It was observed of Queen Elizabeth (as of her father before her) King Rich. 2.
had one coat of gold and stone valued at 30000. ma^kes.
that she loved to go very richly arrayed. Her sister Queen Mary had, at her
Coronation, her head so laden with Jewels, that she could hardly hold it up.
This was much, but nothing to the Churches beauty and bravery, which yet was
all but borrowed; as is said in the next Verse.

Thou did eat fine flower, and hony] i. e. The very best of the best: thou
did eat of the fat and drink of the sweet of my holy Ordinances.

Ver. 14. And thy renown went forth] Pliny says of Jerusalem that it was the
most famous of all the Cities of the East; of the World he might have said, all
things considered.

Through the comeliness which I had put upon thoe] As Abraham's servant put the
jewels upon Rebecca. See on ver. 13. That Is a famous Canon of the second
Ara^sican Council, Tales nos amat Deus, quales futuri sumus ipsius done, Can.
12.
non quales sumus nostro merito: God loves us such as we shall be by his
free-gift, and not such as we are by our own merit.

Ver. 15. But thou did trust in thine own beauty] Thou grewest proud of it,
and thoughtest there was none such: when as thou might well have said of it
as he in the holy history did of his hatchet, Alas Master, it was but borrowed.

And plaidst the harlot] Being fair and foolish.

Lis est cum forma magna pudicitiae. Because of thy renown] Being puffed up with
the greatness of thy name and fame, which should have made thee more
morigerous, Prove. 27.21. See the Note there.

And pouredst out thy fornications] Indifferently and impudently, like a filthy
strumpet.

His is was] Quicunque vult, come as come would: so detestably insatiate wast
thou: The Papists boast of their Church, that she is a pious Mother, that
shuts her bosom to no man. Meretricis scilicet hoc est meretricissimae.

Ver. 16. And of thy garments thou did take] Thou sparedst for no cost to
trick up thy mawmets and monuments of idolatry. No more do Papists; witness
their Churches, yea their cloisters and Churchyards (for want of room within)
stuffed with their vowed presents and rich vestments: Besides that they do
gernish and furnish out their heretical doctrines with testimonies of holy
Scripture which they wrest, and with authority of ancient Fathers whom they
wrong: Quaerit diabolus a te ornari, said Austin to a scholar of his, who was
learnd and lewd: that is, The devil would fain be dressed up by thee.

The like things shall not come] Such a desperate idolomany as thine, can
hardly be matched or met with anywhere. So an Englishman Italienate is even a
devil incarnate. Julian the Apostate was by some called Idolian.

Masculine Images.
Ver. 17. Images of men] To be thy stallions, with whom thou might adulterize
and idolize. Vah scelus! Surely he is a rare man that has not some or other
idol whereon he bestows pains and cost. Little children keep your selves from
idols, 1 John 5.21.

Ver. 18. And tookest thy broidered, etc.] See ver. 16.

Ver. 19. My meat also -- thou have even set it before them] Either as
consecrated to them, or otherwise to be consecrated by them; which made Daniel
so scrupulous of meddling with the Kings meat, chap. 1.8.

Thus it was] Just so, and no otherwise; however thou would palliate the
business, and art ready to put me to my proofs, as Jer. 2.35.

Diod.
Ver. 20. Whom thou have born unto me] Who at their birth were mine by virtue of
my covenant; and who should therefore have been consecrated unto me. Polanus
here gives this good note; A Church, though it be idolatrous, may bring forth
children to God, by bestowing upon them the Sacrament of initiation or
regeneration: and God will acknowledge them for his children, till such time as
he has given a bill of divorce to that Church. This is done whenas she openly
betaketh her self to the bed of another husband by disowning Christ for her
God, Pol. in loc.
Lord, Bridegroom and Mediator: as the Asiatick Church has done by revolting
first to Nestorianisme, and now to Mahometisme. Let this be well noted against
the Anabaptists of these times.

Ver. 21. That thou have slain my children] Note that he yet calls them his
children though so born, and so murdered, See on ver. 20.

Ver. 22. Thou have not remembered the days of thy youth] Hence all thy
haughtiness and hauntinesse. We should often say as that noble Iphicrates the
Athenian once did (...) from how small to how great matters has the Lord
raised me?

Ver. 23. Woe woe unto thee, says the Lord God] Adouble Woe will fall very heavy,
here and hereafter: Woe and alas for evermore.

Ver. 24. That thou have also built unto thee] How stintlesse is sin? and how
like is this to Jeremys preaching, chap. 2, 3, etc?

An eminent place] Or brothelhouse, that thy madness may appear to all men.

Ver. 25. And h^st made thy beauty to be abhorr'd] By being made so cheap and
common. Sin is a reproach to any people, Prove. 14.34. idolatry especially, 1
Pet. 4.3.

And have opened thy feet] See on ver. 15.

Ver. 26. Great of flesh] T^rosi, sc. propter potentiam and petulantiam. The
Prophet persisteth in the Metaphor from the manner of shamelesly lascivious
women, such as was Messalina the wife of Claudius the Emperor; Me totum
recepit.
and she in Apulejus that entertained the Ass: See chap. 23.20. Flesh is here
and elsewhere taken for the privities, quod est membrum prorsus carneum.

Ver. 27. I have stretched out my hand over thee] To cut thee short, as Hos.
2.9.

And have diminished thine ordinary food] Diminni demensum tuum. What should a
father do but snatch away the meat from his child that marreth it? or a
husband, but hold his wanton wife to straiter allowance?

The daughters of the Philistines which are ashamed of thy lewd way] It must
needs be most lewd, that Philistines were ashamed of. Zimmah signifies
wickedness with a witness. Hierom interprets it an execrable and villainous
filthiness. So is Popish idolatry in the eyes of modern Jews: and the hellish
blasphemies darted out against God and Christ so ordinarily and openly by
Pseudo-Christians, abominable to the Turks, who do punish them for it, with
great severity.

Ver. 28. Thou have played the whore also with the Assyrians] By making sinful
leagues, and gadding so much about to change thy way, Jer. 2.36.

And yet could not be satisfied] It is as easy to quench the fire of Aetna,
as the thoughts set on fire by lust.

Ver. 29. In the land of Canaan] Thou have lived in my good Land, but not by my
good Laws.

And yet thou wast not satisfied] See on ver. 28.

Ver. 30. How weak is thine heart] Weak as water, melted in spiritual lust,
putrefying alive, and perishing daily, Sueton.
as Tiberius said he perceived himself to do at Capreae. This is here uttered
by way of admiration, and the word rendered Heart being otherwhere of the
Masculine gender, is here made feminine; to show how idolaters are effeminated
to a base and sensual esteem of God and his service.

The work of an imperious whorish woman] Of a strong whore; weak to do good,
Pervicacissima and procacissimae. Vne paillarde robuste. French.
but strong to do evil: so are all idolaters with their hippomanes and
cacoethes. The word rendered imperious signifies a Sultanesse or Queen; who, if
withal a queen, what will she not dare to do? See it in that whore of Babylon
who sits as a Queen, etc. The unbridled boisterousnesse of idolaters, see
Jer. 44.16, 17.

Ver. 31. And have not been as an harlot in that thou scornest hire] Whore
should be written Hoar, as coming from the word Hire; as the Latin Meretrix a
Merendo. Harlot is said to come of Arlet Mother to our William the Conqueror.
In spite to whom and disgrace to his Mother, the English called all whores
Harlots; adding an aspiration to her name, according to their manner of
pronouncing.

Ver. 32. Which takes strangers instead of her husband] This is a foul
mistake: wedlock should be chaste; the window of the Arkshut, that the waters
of the stood enter not into it.

Ver. 33. They give gifts to all whores] See ver. 31. Harlots are cruces and
crumenimulgae, says the Comaedian; crosses and suck-purses: See Luke 15.14.

Nuda Venus picta est, nudi pinguntur amores:
Nam quos nuda capit, nudos dimittat oportet.
Ver. 34. And the contrary is in thee, etc.] The Jews, before the Babylonish
captivity, were madly and above measure set upon the sin of idolatry, Oecolamp.
say their own Rabbines: so that if one clothed never so richly had seen an
idol on the further side of a broad pool, he would have gone through thick and
thin (etiam in cloacalem faetulentiam) to have worshipped it.

Ver. 35. Wherefore O harlot] A name good enough for such an odious huswife,
the shame of her sex. He is not worthy of an honest name, whose deeds are not
honest.

Hear the Word of the Lord] Hear thy doom, thy sentence: (...).
stoned thou shall be as an adulteress, slain with the sword as a murtheresse,
burnt with fire as an incendiary, because thou have burnt thy children in
honor of Moloch.

Ver. 36. Because thy filthinesse] Heb. thy po^son: Aerugo tua.
thy filthiness issuing from thee by reason of thine over-frequent and
excessive adulteries. He means the infamous fluxes of whores, says Diodat.

And by the blood] Heb. bloods, because scattered about in several drops.

Ver. 37. With whom thou have taken pleasure] Or, Jocundata es.
with whom thou have been commingled.

And will discover thy nakedness unto them] This is by modest women taken for
a very great punishment. Polyxena, when she was sacrificed, took great care to
fall handsomely. The Milesian maids would not be kept from killing themselves
till there was a law made, that such as so did, should be drawn naked through
the Market. Till the days of Theodosius Senior, if a woman were taken in
adultery, they shut her up in a stews, and compelled her beastly, and without
all shame to play the harlot, ringing a bell whilst the deed was doing, that
all the neighbors might be made privy to it. This evil custom that good
Emperor took away, making other laws for the punishment of Adultery.

Ver. 38. And I will judge thee as women that break wedlock] See Lev. 20.10.
Deuteronomy. 22.22. The Egyptians cut off the harlots nose, and the adulterers privy
members; The Romans beheaded them; the old Germans whipped them through the
streets. Canutus the Danish King in this land, banished them. Tenedius, a King
in another land, did cut them in sunder with an axe. By our laws they are to be
hanged, as by the Jews laws to be stoned, ver. 40.

And shed blood] See ver. 35.

I will give thee blood] God loves to retaliate.

Ver. 39. They shall throw down thine eminent place] So did the Turks throw
down many both images and Churches in Christendom, when people would not be
persuaded to cast images out of their Churches.

They shall strip thee also of thy clothes] So the Spaniards did the Dutch,
when once they grew fond of the Spanish fashions, as Lavater here notes.

Ver. 40. They shall also bring up a company against thee] The Chaldeans that
hasty and bitter Nation. Hab. 1.6.


And they shall stone thee] See on ver. 35.

Ver. 41. In the sight of many women] Those matrons whom thou have misused; and
many others who may well be warned, by thy just punishment, to keep their faith
to God and man.

Ver. 42. So I will make my fury toward thee to rest] Sept. I will dismiss
mine anger upon thee. Like as when H^m^n was hanged, Ahashu^rosh his wrath was
pacified, Esth. 7.10. and as when Jonah was cast overboard, the sea was calmed.

Ver. 43. Because thou have not remembered, etc.] Thou have not cared to
converse with thy self, nor to recogitate my goodness, and thine own badness.

But have fretted me] Or, have kept a stir with me, or rather, stirred up thy
self against me: and all through want of reflection and self-examination. See
Jer. 8.6.

Herodot.
I also will recompense thy way upon thy head] As the darts of those Thracians
(thrown up against Jupiter for raining upon them unseasonably) came down again
upon their own heads: so here.

Ver. 44. Behold every one that uses Proverbs] That is skilful at, and
exercised in gibing and jearing; Omnis paraemiator paraemiabit. (...).
as was Socrates (called therefore (...) the Scoffer) Democritus, Lucian, Sir
Thomas Moor, Erasmus, etc.

Shall use this proverb] This taunting Proverb.

As is the mother, so is her daughter] The birth follows the belly. Ill birds
lay ill eggs: Qualis hera, talis ancilla, etc.

Ver. 45. Thou art thy mothers daughter] As like her as if spet out of her
mouth: so like her, that thou art the worse again.

Your mother was an Hittite] And does therefore seek her daughter in the oven,
because she had first been there her self. See ver. 3.

Ver. 46. She and her daughters] i. e. Her Cities and villages.

That dwell at thy left hand] Thou art well set up therewhile; well neighboured.

That dwells at thy right hand] That did do so; but now dwells with devils;
being thrown out for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, Jude
7.

Ver. 47. Yet have thou not walked after their wayes] But have outsinned them.
Nolunt solita peccare, says Seneca of some; they will not sin in an ordinary
way: Et pudet non esse impudentes says, Austin, of others, i. e. they are
ashamed, not to be past shame.

But as if that were a very little thing] Paululum pauxillumque; A peccadillo.

Ver. 48. As I live, says the Lord God, Sodom thy sister has not done] Heb.
If Sodom thy sister has done, etc. q. d. then let me never be trusted more.
Here then is a double oath taken by God, to assure this people that they had
outsinned Sodom: a truth that they would not easily assent to. To this day we
cannot get men to believe that their natures are so naught, their lives so
lewd, their state so dangerous as the Preachers make them. Their hearts are
good, their penny good silver, etc. The Prophet Esaias lost his life, say the
Rabbines, for calling the Rulers of Jerusalem, Rulers of Sodom, and the people
of Judah, people of Gomorrah, Esa. 1.10.

Ver. 49. Behold this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, Pride] i. e.
Haughty-mindednesse, and high conceitedness of their own surpassing excellency
and stable felicity. This was the first firebrand that set Sodom on fire.

Fullness of bread] Gourmandise and surquedry. This fullness bred
forgetfulness; and this saturity, security.

Luxuriant animi rebus plerunque secundis:
Nec facile est aequa commoda mente pati.
And abundance of idlenesse] Tranquillitas tranquillitatis, rest of rest; and
this abused to idleness, deep idleness, which is the devils pillow, and the
mother of many mischiefs; for he shall not but do naughtily that does nothing.

Neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor] Inhospital they were and
unmerciful. The two Angels might have lain in the streets for them: neither
would they let them rest, when Lot had lodged them.

Ver. 50. And they were haughty] This sin of theirs is once more instanced as
the root of the rest, the hate of heaven, and gate to hell.

And committed abomination before me] That unnatural filthiness, which takes
its name from them. This in the Levant is not held a vice: and in Mexico, it is
one of the Spanish virtues.

Therefore I took them away as I saw good] sc. By raining down hell from heaven
upon them: hereby also God gave men an example of that rule, that heinous sins
bring hideous plagues, as Herodotus also says of the Fall of Troy.

Ver. 51. Neither has Samaria committed half thy sins] And yet thou look
aloof upon her as a far greater sinner then thy self, because already carried
captive, when as thou have done and spoken evil things as thou could, Jer.
3.5. outdone her a fair deal.

And have justified thy sisters] Who may well seem Saints in comparison of
thee; and yet are as naught as need to be.

Ver. 52. Thou also which have judged thy sisters] Passed many harsh and rash
censures upon them, not looking at all to the hinder-part of the wallet.

Bear thine own shame] Thou shall do it sure enough: for where sin is in the
saddle, there shame is on the crupper. Accept therefore the punishment of thine
iniquity, Levit. 26.43. give glory to God, take shame to thy self.

Ver. 53. When I shall bring again] Or, if I bring again, which I shall never
do. The Jew doctors indeed would from this verse gather that Sodom and all
shall one day be restored again: but that is like to be a long day. The Jews as
they had taken up the opinion of Pythagoras about Transanimation, so they had
that other of Plato about the great Revolution or Restitution of all things
after certain years.

Then will I bring again the captivity] The Jews were never perfectly restored,
in respect of the glory of the Temple, and the state of the Kingdom, etc.

Ver. 54. In that thou art a comfort unto them] Chap. 14.22. Solamen miseris
socios habuisse doloris, to have companions in misery is some kind of comfort.

Ver. 55. When thy sister Sodom and her daughters] See on ver. 53. The Jews
still dream that all this shall be done at the coming of their long lookt-for
Messiah, Hieron. in loc.
and in his reign on earth for a thousand years. That then also Jerusalem shall
be reedified and made up of gold, silver and precious stones, etc. So apt are
they to work themselves into the fools paradise of a sublime dotage.

Ver. 56. For thy sister Sodom was not mentioned] Thou thoughtest her not
worthy to be named in the same day with thee: and little dreamedst that thou
should be matched with her in misery. Or thus, Thou would neither hear
nor speak of her, though I had thrown her forth for an example of divine
vengeance, Jude 7.

In the day of thy pride] Heb. Prides: for pride buddeth, chap. 7.10. and (like
a great swelling in the body which breaks and runs with loathsome and soul
matter) it breaks forth into odious practices.

Ver. 57. Before thy wickedness was discovered] sc. By my punishments, by my
sending the Syrians and Philistines upon thee, in the days of Ahaz, to despoil
and despise thee. Confer Esa. 9.12.

Ver. 58. Thou have born thy leudnesse] i. e, The punishment of it, and yet art
little the better: See Esa. 9.13.

Ver. 59. I will even deal with thee] I will avenge upon thee the quarrel of my
Covenant, Lev. 26.25.

Ver. 60. Nevertheless I will remember my Covenant] Here begins the
Evangelical part of the chapter, which is for the comfort of the Elect, who
would be frighted to hear those direful threats: like as in an house we cannot
beat the dogs, but the children will fall a crying.

Ver. 61. And be ashamed] With a saving and savoury shame, (such as was that of
Ezra, and of the penitent Publican) proceeding from true compunction, and
producing repentance never to be repented of.

Jer. 31.31, 32, 33, 34. 2 Cor. 3.3. Heb. 8.8.
When thou shall receive thy sisters] Not Sodom only and Samaria, but all the
Gentiles whom thou have imitated; but now shall become a worthy example of
better things.

But not by thy Covenant] Made with thee in mount Sinai, but by a covenant of
grace made in mount Sion.

Ver. 62. And I will establish my Covenant] My new spiritual and eternal
Covenant, grounded upon the Messiah, and made with the whole Israel according
to faith.

Ver. 63. That thou may remember] Thy many out-strayes.

And never open thy mouth] To extenuate thy sins, or to murmur at thy
sufferings: but be silent and submissive.

CHAP. XVII.
Ver. 1. ANd the Word of the Lord came] In the foregoing chapter, God had
threatened the inhabitants of Jerusalem for violating their covenant with him;
and here he threateneth them no less for breach of Covenant with men. In case
of disobedience to himself, he shows much patience many times: but in case of
disloyalty to a lawful Sovereign, against oath especially, he is quick and
severe in his executions.

Ver. 2. Son of man, put forth a riddle] Acue acumen, sharpen a sharpening, or
whet a whetting. The Prophet might have expressed Gods mind in fewer words; but
then it would not have taken so deep an impression. Parents must whet Gods Word
upon their children, Deuteronomy. 6.7. Ministers upon their people, and Christians
upon one another for the increase of love and good works, Heb. 10.24. Riddles
exercise the wit, and parables help the memory, and excite both attention and
affection.

Ver. 3. A great Eagle with great wings] An Eagle (that King of birds) is a fit
emblem of an Emperor: as here it is of Nebuchadnezzar the Great, ver. 12. See
Jer. 48.40. and 49.22. Monarchs, Vide Pier. in Hieroglyph.
as Eagles, have quick eyes, long talons, fly high pitches, aim at great
matters, strive to get above all others, choose themselves high and firm seats,
etc. See Job 39.30, 31, 32, 33. with the Notes. Ajax is called (...) an Eagle
in Pindarus: so is King Pyrrhus in Plutarch; and took delight in that title.
The Spaniard was well laughed at by Captain Drake and his forces, when they
took Sancto Domingo, 1585. and found in the Town Hall the King of Spaines
arms, and under them a Globe of the world, out of which issued (not a well
plumed Eagle, but) a flying horse with this inscription, Non sufficit Orbis. We
could not so well bridle his Pegasus at Sancto Domingo (yet we put a stop to
him at Jamaica) but we have lately pulled his plumes in Flanders to some
purpose, by gaining from him Dunkirk (now held by the English) and likewise
Berghen another place of great strength now held by the French: This was
written, Jun. 28. 1658.
the good news whereof came to us yesterday, being June 27. 1658. praised be
the holy Name of God for ever.

Came unto Lebanon] i. e. Unto Judaea, which lies near the forest of Lebanon;
which forest also lies in the way from Babylon to Judaea.

And took the highest branch of the Cedar] Taleam, the top-branch. This was
Jechoniah, 2 King. 24.12.

Ver. 4. He cropped off the top of his young twigs] i. e. The Nobles carried into
captivity, with their King, Nul^a est objectio in lege quae non habet
solutionem in latere. Omnia Romae vaenalia.
as is to be seen ver. 12. So true is that saying of the Rabbines, that there
is no riddle in the law that has not a solution by the sides of it. And so
little cause had that Jesuit Barradius to borrow an argument from this text to
prove the Scriptures to be a riddle, and obscure.

And carried it into a land of traffique] Babylonia was so; See Rev. 18.11.
Rome is so, where all things are saleable and soluble; as was long since
complained.

He set it in a City of Merchants] Some City, of Babylon, says Diodat,
assigned to the Jews; which was commodious for traffic, to keep them from all
thoughts of war, and State policy.

Ver. 5. He took also of the seed of the land] No forrainer, but one of their
own country, and of the blood royal too, viz. Zedekiah. This was a great mercy:
as that most spitefully done of Attiius King of Suecia, to make a dog King of
the Danes: as did likewise Gunno King of the Danes make a dog King of Norway:
appointing Counselors to do all things under his title and name.

And planted it in a fruitful field] i. e. In Judea that good land (as
Rabshakeh also yields it to have been, whatever Strabo says to the contrary)
where Zedekiah might have lived bravely and reigned prosperously, could he but
have been content with his condition: -- At Paris ut vivat regnetque beatus,
Horat. Epist. 2.

Cogi posse negat. --


He placed it by great waters, and set it as a willow-tree] A well-contented
person grows up prosperously, as the willows by the watercourse.

Ver. 6. And it grew] And yet it had a great fall; viz. from a tall cedar to a
low vine. Zedekiah, though he had still the title of a King, and was not left
without wealth and dignity, yet it was far inferior to that of his
Predecessors.

Magna repent raunt, summa cadunt subito. Whose branches turned toward him] i.
e. Toward Nebuchadnezzar now the chief Lord of the land. To him looked and
leaned the Lords of the land, and so long they did well: for they and the whole
Kingdom thrived.

Ver. 7. There was also another great Eagle] sc. Pharaoh, another potent
Monarch; why called an Eagle, see on ver. 3.

And behold this vine did bend her roots toward him] Which was the worst chare
for her self that ever she did. The Devil of Discontent put her upon this
unhappy project: whereby, instead of mending her self, she soon marred all. So
true is that of Solomon, Wisdom is better then weapons of war: but one sinner
destroys much good, Eccles. 9.18. Zedekiah little thought once ever to have
been a King. Nebuchadnezzar made him so, when as he might as well have refused
him, for the rebellions of his two Predecessors. He had also dealt nobly with
him, though his vassal, and would have defended him against any adverse power,
etc. so that he had no reason at all to rebel, but that he was infatuated and
besotted by Ambition and Avarice, which Plutarch finely and fitly calls
(...), diseases natural to Potentates.

Ver. 8. It was planted in a good soil] He was well enough, if he could have
kept him so.

O fortunatos homines bona si sua norint. But discontent enjoys nothing:
Zedekiah likes not to be a vine, he must be a Cedar: Aut Caesar aut nullus.

Ver. 9. Shall it prosper?] How should it? say: Has ever any waxed fierce
against God (or his substitute) and prospered? Job 9.4. Is perfidy and perjury
the right way to prosperity? I trow not.

Shall he not pull up] He that is the great Eagle, ver. 3. who would be upon
them before they were aware.

Without great power or many people] i. e. For any great need there shall be of
them, since the work shall be done with little ado. If the Chaldaeans were but
a few, and they all wounded men, they should yet rise up and burn this City,
says Jeremy. See 2 Chronicles. 24.23, 24. Its no hard matter we know, to pluck up a
vine, root and branch. God tells us in the next verse that he can do it with
a wind, with a wet finger, as we say.

Ver. 10. Shall it not utterly wither?] As Jonah's gourd did, when smitten with
a worm: as Phocas his wall came down with a witness, because built upon mines
of gunpowder (sin lay at the bottom as One told him) which being once fired,
would blow up all.

When the East Wind touches it] Which is very hurtful to Vines, says
Columella. As all creatures, so the winds are Gods Agents: as to purge the air
( Rupertus calls them the beesoms of the air) and to refresh men's spirits, so
to execute many of Gods Judgments upon his rebels, as here. Aliorum perditio
nostra sit cautio: Let other men's destruction be our instruction.

It shall wither in the furrows where it grew] i. e. In Egypt, where it rained
not, but was all watered by furrows drawn from Nilus, to run into all their
fields. Here this vine should thrive, one would think, if anywhere; viz. in
moist and fat furrows: but it could not, because blasted by Gods curse.

Ver. 11. Moreover the Word of the Lord came unto me saying] God had one saying
more to this rebellious house by way of Explication here, and another of
Application for Comfort and Encouragement to the better sort among them, ver.
22, 23, 24.

Ver. 12. Know ye not what these things mean?] q. d. It Is much you should not:
there is no such great difficulty in the parable, but that ye are self-blinded
and will not see far of: either your wits serve you not in the things of God,
or if they do, you will make believe otherwise. Are ye not therefore rightly
called a rebellious house?

Tell them] For their learnings, and that they may be left without excuse. See
on ver. 4.

Ver. 13. And has taken an oath of him] An oath of allegiance. Heb. has
brought him into an execration, or an oath with cursing, that he shall be true
and loyal to him, and hold his Kingdom of him as his Leigh-Lord, and pay him
tribute. This though we find not in the books of Kings, yet from what we here
find, we are sure it was so.

Ver. 14. That the Kingdom might be base] The mighty of the land being taken
away, as ver. 13. and the spirits of the rest imbased by burdens and
oppressions in their estates and liberties.

But that by keeping of his Covenant] The breach whereof was the break-neck of
the State: as it has been of many others, and will be shortly of the Turks,
(who hold that there is no faith to be kept with dogs, that is, with
Christians) and of the Popes, who hold that there is no faith to be kept with
keretikes, that is, with Protestants. And for all others, it is written by an
Italian (no stranger to the Court of Rome) that their proverb is, Mercatorum
est, non regum, stare juramentis, that it is for Merchants and not for
Monarchs to stand to their oaths. Shall such stand? shall they thus escape by
iniquity?

Ver. 15. But he rebelled against him] As Ottocarus King of Bohemia did against
Rodolphus the first Emperor of Germany, by the instigation of his Queen: and
as Ladislaus King of Hungary did against Amurath the Turks Emperor, by the
encouragement of Capistranus the Popes Agent, to the very great reproach of the
Christian Religion.

Ver. 16. As I live] So surely will I punish perjury, and treachery. Histories
are full of examples in this kind: Mr. Greenhil.
and I have elsewhere recited some of them. That of Henry the third of France,
related by a Reverend man, deserves to be memorized: After great differences
between Him, the Cardinal, and Duke of Guise, he was reconciled unto them,
confirmed the reconciliation with many oaths, took the Sacrament upon it, and
gave himself to the devil body and soul in case he meant or should attempt any
thing against them. Yet, says the story, he caused the Duke to be killed in
his own presence, and the Cardinal his brother the next day after. Here was
breach of Covenant: but did he prosper, escape, do such things, and have
deliverance? No: within eight months after, he was slain by a Friar in the
midst of his Army.

Ver. 17. Neither shall Pharaoh] God will cause the strongest sinew in the arm
of flesh to crack. See Psalm 33.10, 11.

Ver. 18. Seeing he despised the oath] Despised it ex fastu quodam, out of
pride and disdain, as the word signifies, as Pascenius the Papist jeareth at
King James for inventing the oath of allegiance. There is in our Chronicles a
memorable story of one Sr. Ralph Percy slain upon Hegely-moor in
Northumberland, Speed.
by the Lord Mountacute General for Edward the fourth. He would no ways depart
the field though defeated; but in dying said, I have saved the bird in my
breast, meaning his oath to King Henry the sixth. Had false Zedekiah done so,
he had (for this once at least) escaped. But Ambition (whose Motto is said to
be Sic mea fata sequor) was his ruin.

Ver. 19. Surely mine oath] Because taken by my name, so that I am deeply
engaged, highly concernd it it.

Ver. 20. And I will spread my net upon him] See on chap. 12.13. The history
tells us, that when Zedekiah with his Nobles were gotten into the plains of
Jericho, and thought themselves out of danger, those great hunters the
Babylonians caught him, and carried him to their King.

Ver. 21. And all his fugitives] See on chap. 14.13, 14.

They shall know] Sero sapient: Vexatio tandem dabit intellectum: All too l^te
they shall knowledge it.

Ver. 22. I will also take of the highest branch of the high Cedar] Understand
this great and precious Promise of Zerubbabel and his successors, Insignis est
ha^ prophetia. Lavat.
but especially of Christ and his Kingdom. How often in the Prophets is he styled
the Branch? Isa. 11.1. And how ordinary is it with God, after dreadful threats
against the wicked, to come in with his Attamen for the comfort of his Elect,
who in their deepest distress have cause enough to encourage themselves in the
Lord Christ their God, as did David at the sack of Ziglag? 1 Samuel 30.6. Here
they are excited in the loss of all else, to fetch comfort from Christ's
descent from David, his Exaltation to the kingdom of the Church Universal, his
bounty and benefits, his bringing in the fullness of the Gentiles, and his
setting forth of his Fathers glory.

A tender one] Christ, of weak and low beginning. Tenellum. Psalm. 2.6.


And will plant it] Upon Zion (spiritual especially) upon Calvary, says
Theodoret, expounding the Septuagint, who render the text thus, I will hang it
upon the high mountain of Israel.

Ver. 23. In the mountain] In the Church, that highest top.

And it shall bring forth boughs, etc.] Christ shall yield food and defense to
all his.

All foul of every wing] i. e. The just, says the Chaldee, who mind heavenly
things, and mount upward.

Ver. 24. And all the trees of the field] i. e. All men, high and low.

Have brought down] This God loves to do, as Heathens could say.

Have exalted the low] Lavater thinks our Savior alluded to this text, in that
parable, Matthew. 13. of the grain of mustard seed.

CHAP. XVIII.
Ver. 1. ANd the Word of the Lord came unto me] This is often prefaced by the
Prophets, to make their sermons more authoritative, and authentike. Pausanias
tells us that some Heathen Sages, to add weight to their works, were wont to
perfix (...), i. e. God God.

Ver. 2. What mean you] Or, What Is come to you? (qua vos dementia cepit?) that
you do so toss this sinful and senseless Proverb amongst you both at
Jerusalem, Jer. 31.29. and also here at Babylon.

-- delicta parentum
Immeritus Judaee luis?
Must I be blasphemed rather then you faulted? Is it for your fathers sins only
that ye suffer? and do ye thus think to put off the reproofs of the Prophets,
as if your selves had not seconded and out-sinned your Fathers, and are
therefore justly punished?

The fathers have eaten sour grapes] Sin is no better: it is an evil and a
bitter thing to forsake the Lord, Jer. 2. what wild sour grapes your fathers
both bred and fed upon, see Isa. 5.2, 8, 11, 20, 21, 22, etc. and it was woe
woe unto them.

And the childrens teeth are set on edge] Or, stupefied. But is there not a
cause? and are there not sins enough with you, even with you to procure your
ruth and your ruin; but that I must be injurious rather, then you be found
obnoxious?

Ver. 3. Ye shall not have occasion any more] For I will shortly take an order
with you; and not by words but by blows vindicate my just Judgments from your
cavils and scurrilities.

Ver. 4. Behold all souls are mine] So that to show my Sovereignty, I may do
with them as I see good. Howbeit, let me tell you, that I slay none but for his
sins. i. e. idque ipsi sua injustitia evenit, non injuria mea, the fault is
merely in himself; so little reason is there that you shoud be thus quarrelsom
and contumelious against me.

The soul that sins it shall dye] i. e. Shall suffer for his sin either
here, or hereafter, without repentance. Every man shall bear his own burden:
every tub shall stand upon its own bottom; and every fox yield his own skin to
the fleaer, as the Jews at this day proverbially can say.

Ver. 5. But if a man be just] Keep faith and a good conscience: do good acts
and have good aims; do all as well as any, not this or that, but this and that
too (as here it follows) duties of Piety, and duties of Charity.

Ver. 6. And has not eaten upon the mountains] i. e. Has not offered there to
idols: for at their sacrifices they feasted: Exodus 32. the people sat down to
eat and drink, and rose up to play. See chap. 20.28. Hos. 4.13.

Neither has lift up his eyes to the idols [As every Papist does daily, and is
therefore no righteous person, such as is here described. Neither helps it,
that they are the idols of the house of Israel, and not the idols of the
Nations.

Neither has come near to a menstruous woman] Though his own wife, Levit.
18.19. and 20.18. Adulter enim est uxoris propriae ardentior amator, said an
Heathen. There is a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing,
Eccles. 3.5.

Ver. 7. And has not oppressed any] Either by force, or fraud.

Has given his bread to the hungry] Negative goodness alone is little worth.
Men must not only not rob the hospital, as we say, spoil the poor by violence,
but draw forth their souls and their sheaves both, to the hungry, and cloth the
naked with a garment, or they cannot have the comfort and credit of just men.

Ver. 8. He that has not given forth upon usury] Of this sin see what I have
said elsewhere, Exodus 22.25. Psalm. 15.5. Neh. 5.10.

Nihil interest inter funus and funus: nihil inter mortem distat and sortem.
Ambros.
Neither has taken any increase] Interest we call it now, after the French,
who first helped us to that fine word. But let the Patrones of usury consider
that what distinctions soever they bring for it, God allows here of no usury,
but condemns both Neshec the biting, and Tarbith the toothlesse usury, as
equally naught.

That has withdrawn his hand from iniquity] Whether it be injury to another,
revenge, raking together riches of unrighteousness, reaching after honors,
etc.

Has executed true judgement] Without partiality or passion, whether he be a
Judge or an Arbitrator.

Ver. 9. Has walked in my statutes] -- Quil^ges juraque servat. It is as if
the Prophet had said, There are many more characters of a righteous man: but I
shall shut up all with this: He that is right in his obedience for matter,
manner, motive and end, he is the man I mean, he shall suerly live.

Effractor.
Ver. 10. If he beget a son] As he may: for grace is not hereditarty. Heroum
filii noxae.

That is a robber] A breach-maker, whether upon the Laws of God, or of men: one
that is a postilent son, as the Sept. here have it, a plague to his Parents,
and to his Country.

And that does the like to any one of these things] Or, that does to his
brother besides any of these: as there are mill arts nocendi.

Ver. 11. And that does not any of these duties] Bare omissions may undo a man.
Not robbing only, but the not relieving of the poor, was the rich man's ruin.

Ver. 12. Has committed abomination] Such is every of the sins here instanced,
whatsoever some can say in defense of them. Has given forth upon usury, and
all.

Ver. 13. He has done all these abominations] Or, if he have done but one of
them, and undo it not again by true repentance.

He shall surely dye] Neither shall his fathers righteousness privilege him,
or prevail at all for him.

His blood shall be upon him] He is felo de se, his own deaths man, and his
mends he has in his own hands, as they say.

Ver. 14. Now lo if he beget a son that seeth] And withal sigheth, his eye
affecting his heart with grief and dislike.

And considereth] Viz. Of the ill consequents of those courses, and cavet and
pavet.

Ver. 15. That has not eaten] See on ver. 6.

Ver. 16. See on ver. 7.

Ver. 17. See on ver. 8, 9.

Ver. 18. Spoiled his brother by violence] A man had as good deal with a
Cossack or a Cannibal as with a truly covetous caytiffe. They hunt every man
his brother with a net, Mic. 7.2.

And did that which is not good among his people] It should be every man's care
to be some way serviceable to God, and profitable to Men. Let no man turn
himself into a cipher, nay into an excrement, that lives in the world to no
purpose, yea to bad purpose. Oh its good to do something whereby the world may
be the better: and not to come hither merely as rats and mice, only to devour
victuals, and to run squeaking up and down.

Ver. 19. Yet say ye, Why? does not the son bear the iniquity of the father?]
Thus these unreasonable refractaries will not be said, but continue chatting
against God, quasi dicant, certe tu non potes negare, etc. Some are (...),
Piscat.
2 These. 3.2. they have no Topics, there is no talking to them, they will not
be set down with right reason.

When the son has done that is lawful and right] What a meek, sweet and
satisfactory answer does God make to these importunate complainers against him!
Here we have their Replication and his Duplication: as ver. 25. we have their
Triplication and His Quadruplication. Oh the infinete Patience of our good God!

Ver. 20. The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father] The innocent son
shall not; unless it be in temporals only, and that in some cases, Turk. Hist.
Deuteronomy. 24.16. 2 Kings 14.6. 2 Chronicles. 15.4. It was the cruel manner of Vladus
Prince of Valachia, together with the offender to execute the whole family,
Act. and Mon.
yea sometimes the whole kindred. A like cruelty was used in Scotland by the
Popes appointment upon the kindred of those that had slain David Beton, in
revenge of the death of that butcherly Bishop. Lavater tells us here out of
the Annals of the Suitzers his Countrymen, Lav. in Loc.
that when Albertus the son of Rodolphus Caesar was slain by his nephew John
Habsparg and some other Nobles, his children Duke Leopold and Agnes Queen of
Hungary put to death not the murderers only, but their children and kinsfolk
also not a few: and utterly overturned diverse strongholds in Suisser-land.
But this was not the way of God, nor did it prosper in their hand. Cruelty
calls aloud for vengeance.

The righteousnesse] i. e. It shall be well with the righteous, and woe with
the wicked, Isa. 3.10, 11.

Ver. 21. But if the wicked will turn, etc.] That is, says Theodoret, so far
am I from punishing one for the sins of another, that I am ready to receive a
returning sinner, how far or how fast soever he has run out.

And keep all my statutes] For the best and rightest repentance is a new life,
says Luther.

Ver. 22. All his transgressions] So true is that of an Ancient, Quem poenitet
peccasse, poene est innocens, Penitence is near as good as innocence.

Piscat.
In his righteousnesse] Or, for his righteousness, tanquam ob causum sine quae
non, and ob promissionem Dei, not of merit, but mercy, and free grace.

Ver. 23. Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should dye] No verily; for
then he should do nothing but do and undo, make a world and unmake it again;
since we provoke him continually: but he is long suffering, Atque dolet quoties
cogitur esse ferox.

And not that he should return] Had not I rather pardon then punish? Is not
this last my work my strange work? Isa. 28.21.

Ver. 24. But when the righteous] He that is good in his own eyes, and passes
for good in the esteem of others, but yet is not really righteous: if such an
one do utterly fall away and lose that little that he seemed to have, what
wonder? Common grace can never hold out, or stretch to eternity. Bellarmine
says well, That which is true grace veritate essentiae only, may be lost: not
that that is true veritate firmae soliditatis, with the truth of firm solidity:
which latter being rightly understood may be called Special as the other Common
grace.

Ver. 25. Yet ye say] Ye will still hold your own, and no reason shall persuade
you. A stubborn man stands as a stake in a stream, lets all pass by him, but
he stands still where he was.

Matrem tuam occidisti: quid dicam amplius? Matrem tuam occidisti.
Is not my way equal?] This he had said before, but he says it again, (...).
Cicero aggravating the fact of a parricide uses these words, Thou have killed
thy mother, man: what should I say more? thou have killed thy mother, I tell
thee.

Are not your ways unequal?] They are so, and that apparently: but that your
mouth's out of taste, and ye cannot relish truth: your eyes are sore and ye
cannot behold the Sunbeams: you are prejudiced, biassed, perverted.

Ver. 26. When a righteous man turneth] q. d. Shall I say the selfsame over
again to you? I had need do so surely, and all little enough.

And dies in them] sc. In his wicked ways: this undoeth him, It is not
falling into the water that drowneth a man, but long lying under it.

Ver. 27. Again, when the wicked man turns away] This also he had said
before, ver. 21, 22, 23. but men had need to hear this sweet Promise over and
over, because there is in the best a natural Novatianisme, to doubt and
question pardon for sins, if great and grievous ones especially.

Ver. 29. Because he considereth] Consideration necessarily preceedeth
conversion, Psalm. 119.59. L^m. 3.40. Jer. 8.6. The Prodigal came to himself
first, and then went home to his father. See on ver. 14.

Ver. 29. Yet says the house of Israel] Yet, for all that I can say to the
contrary: they will still hold their own, they will be dicti sui domini, etc.
such was their impudency and petulancy. God therefore gives over the
Confutation, and comes to the Conclusion of this Contestation.

Ver. 30. Therefore I will judge you] I will word it no longer with you, but
clear up and vindicate my Justice (which you have calumniated) in your deserved
destruction, except ye repent.

Repent and turn your selves] Or, others. Lay aside your complaints and
contumelies against me, Isa. 27.5.
and take notice that the best thing you can do is to take hold of my strength
that ye may make peace with me, and ye shall make peace with me.

Ver. 31. Cast away from you, etc.] And so evidence the soundness of your
Repentance. He that repents with a contradicton (as continuing in his sins)
shall be pardoned with a contradiction, that is, call into hell.

All your transgressions] All as well as any: else ye do but take pains to go
to hell. Gideon's one bastard slew all his his ^eventy sons: so will one
bastardly sin, reserved and allowed, slay the soul. Men should do by their
sins, as our forefathers did by the Danes here, make an utter riddance of them:
and as the Sicilians did by the French among them, whom they not only massacred
to a man, but also ripped up all their own women that were with child by the
French, that not one drop of French blood might remain among them.

Make you a new heart] Wait upon God for it in the constant use of means, that
ye may bring forth fruits meet for repentance.

Ver. 32. For I have no pleasure] See on ver. 23. and chap. 33.11.

CHAP. XIX.
Ver. 1. MOreover take thou up a lamentation] A Threnodia, a doleful ditty. In
all ages things joyful and sorrowful, were made up in songs, and ballads for
popular use.

For the Princes of Israel] Those four last Kings ( Princes rather then Kings,
because vassals to Egypt and Babylon) who by moving unnecessay wars, wrought
their own and their Countries ruin.

Ver. 2. What is thy mother?] Whereby is meant thy City of Jerusalem and people
of the Jews, who took these four for their Kings, and soon had enough of them.

A Lionesse] So called for her nobleness, courage and cruelty.

She lay down among lions] Alludit ad coitum: it signifies that this State, by
conversing with other Heathen Princes, had been corrupted by them, and
conformed unto them.

She nourished her whelps among young Lions] From whom they took in but few
good Principles for young Princes. Wickedness is soon learned. Of a certain
Prince of Germany it was said, Esset alius si esset apud alios, his company
undid him: so it did Julian the Apostate.

Ver. 3. And she brought up one of her whelps] This was Jehoahaz.

It became a young Lyon] Cunning, and cruel, and having never a good property,
though the son of good Josiah: who might better have said then that Pope did of
his wicked son, Caesar Bergia, Haec vitia me non commonstratore dedicit, He
never learned it of his father.

It devoured men] He was a very Cannibal to his subjects, and made no more
conscience to undo a poor man, to seek and suck his blood, then to eat a
meals-meat when hungry, Psalm. 14.4.

Ver. 4. The nations also heard of him] His Lion-like disposition and practices
were soon noised and noticed.

He was taken in their pit] As Lions are taken by their hunters. Ex condicto
omnes convenient ut came capiant.
Tyrants hold not their own long: those beasts are made to be taken and
destroyed; as Nero, whom the Senate judged to death as an enemy to mankind;
and as Commodus who was, says Orosius, cunctis incommodus, a mischief to
mankind.

Ver. 5. Now when she saw that she had waited, and her hope was lost] She
looked for Jehoahaz his return out of Egypt, as Sisera's mother did for his
safe and victorious return from the battle; but all in vain. The hope of the
Hypocrite shall perish.

Then she took another of her whelps] A brat of the same breed, and of no
better condition, Judea changed her Lords often, but not her miseries: so did
Rome in the times betwixt Augustus and Constantine the Great: the names of
those few of them that were good, might be written within the compass of a
signet, as One said. Scarce any of them dyed a natural death, unless it were
Vespatian, Tack.
qui solus Imperatorum mutatus in melius, who also was the only Emperor that
became better by his preferment.

Ver. 6. He went up and down etc.] Of whom he learned to King it, and to
lionize it: See ver. 2, 3.

Learned to catch the prey] To pull his Subjects, and to make havoc, as our
Henry the third did, who was therefore called Regni dilapidator.

And devoured men] As ver. 3. See Jer. 20.17.

Ver. 7. And he knew their desolate places] He had made them desolate and
bereft them of their right owners whom he had devoured, and then seized them
for himself. Some read and render it, He knew their desolate widows, i. e. He
first killed up their husbands, and then lay with the widows: the men he
devoured, the women he defloured: such work this wicked Prince made, till God
took him in hand; as he did also the other three here lamented, of whom may be
said, as Plutarch does of Galba, Otho and Vitellius Emperors, that they were
like Kings in a tragedy, which last no longer then the time that they are
represented on the stage.

Ver. 8. Then the Nations set against him on every side] Nebuchadnezzar, with
the neighbor Nations his auxiliaries.

They spread their net over him] As they did also over the two last Kings
(though not here specified) Jehoiachin and Zedekiah, because they chose rather
to run the hazard of ruin by rebellion, then to continue safely with slavery.

Leones maxim foveis capiuntur. In claustrum.
He was taken in their pit] See ver. 4. an ordinary way of taking lions, as
Pliny tells us.

Ver. 9. And they put him inward in chaines] Or hooks. As lions are not looked
upon, but through a gate. God knows how to hamper the most truculent tyrants,
as he did also Bajazet.

They brought him into holds] Into some strong tower or rock where he dyed; and
his body was afterward thrown out upon a dunghill, Jer. 22.18.

Ver. 10. Thy mother is like a vine in thy blood] The same lamentation is here
continued, though under another parable, viz. of a wasted vine. Jerusalem was
once a generous fruitful spreading vine. It began to be so again in some sort
under Zedekiah, if he could have been contented. See on chap. 17.5, 8.

Ver. 11. And she had strong rods for scepters] So firm were the branches of
this vine, so many and likely to succeed him in the Kingdom were Zedekiah's
children; his Nobles also were men of great parts, and fit for greater
employments.

And she appeared in her height] High she grew, and withal highminded, and so
ripe for ruin.

Ver. 12. But she was plucked up in fury] And so thrown, with a force, to the
ground, as a man does a dry or barren plant.

The East wind dried up her fruit] See chap. 17.10. It is ventus urens and
exsiccans, this was Nebuchadnezzar and his Army.

Herodot. l. 1. cap. 193. Plin. l. 6. c. 26.
Ver. 13. And now she is planted in a wildernesse] Babylon was no wilderness,
but fruitful beyond credulity; But the poor captive Jews had little joy of it,
for some time at least.

In a dry and thirsty ground] In terra sicca and siticulosa: so it was to them
(though never so well watered) because they wanted there the waters of the
Sanctuary, and many other comforts of their own country. See Psalm. 137.

Ver. 14. And fire is gone out of a rod of her branches] i. e. Zedekiah by his
perjury and rebellion has ruined all; set all on a light fire.

So that she has no strong rod, etc.] None to speak of till Shiloh come.
Rulers indeed they had after this and Governors, Hag. 2.21. but no Kings of
their own Nation.

This is a lamentation] See on ver. 1.

And shall be for a lamentation] Jerusalem plangitur and plangetur. The nation
of the Jews shall never want matter of mourning.

CHAP. XX.
Ver. 1. ANd it came to passe] This chapter fitly follows the former. There
these Malcontents had complained that the fathers had sinned and the children
suffered. Here is evinced that there was never a better of them, that a
viperous brood they had been from the first, (...). Eras. Adag.
that they were some of them naught all.

In the seventh year] sc. Of Jechoniah's captivity: and every year seemed
seven, till the seventy were expired. The years of our misery we reckon; not so
of our prosperity, which yet we should duly prize and improve.

That certain of the Elders of Israel] Not Ananias, Azarias and Misael, as the
Jews fable: but worse men, rank hypocrites.

Came to enquire] But were resolved of their course, and had made their
conclusion before they came, ver. 32. Either the Prophet should chime in with
the false Prophets, who told them they should be sent home ere long: or else
they would for peace sake worship idols and comport with the Babylonians: which
yet if they had done, it might have proved nothing better with them then it did
with those Renegade-Christians in Turkey, who falling down many thousands of
them before Solomon the second, and holding up the forefinger, S. H. Blunt
vey. into Levant. p. 111.
as their manner is in token of their conversion to Mahometisme, he asked what
moved them to turn? they replied it was to be eased of their heavy taxations:
He disdaining that baseness, or not willing to lose in tribute for an unsound
accession in religion, rejected their conversion, and doubled their taxations.

Ver. 2. Then came] See on chap. 18. ver. 1.

Ver. 3. Are ye come to enquire of me?] q. d. I scorn the motion, I loath your
false looks: he packing with your putid hypocrisy. God will detect and shame
gross hypocrites, as he did Jeroboams wife, the rotten-hearted Pharisees,
Ananias and Sapphira, that sorry couple that consented to tempt the holy Ghost
(as these Elders also did) that is, to make trial whether he be omniscient, and
able to detect and punish them.

I will not be enquired of by you] The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination:
An causam ageres eorum? Abigend sunt potius quam docendi. Ostendit Dominus
ulcus profundum esse.
how much more when he brings it with a wicked mind, as these did? Prove.
21.27.

Ver. 4. Will thou judge them?] Or, will thou excuse them? Or, will thou
intercede for them? If thou have never so good a mind to do so, yet do it not:
rather reprove them for and convince them of their sins. Spare thy charity, and
exercise thine authority of having in readiness to revenge their disobedience,
2 Cor. 10.6.

Cause them to know the abominations of their fathers] By themselves avowed,
abbetted, augmented: their fathers iniquity they have drawn together with
cart-ropes of vanity.

Ver. 5. In the day when I chose Israel] Declared them to be my firstborn; and
so higher then the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 89.27.

When I lifted up mine hand unto them, saying, I am the Lord your God] This
sweet promise is not so easily (and indeed is never enough) believed: and is
therefore here confirmed by Gods solemn oath thrice repeated: that by two
immutable things (wherein it was impossible for God to lie) his people might
have strong consolation, Heb. 6.18.

Ver. 6. Into a land that I had espied for them] Humanitus dictum.
Finding it out as it were by diligent search, Number. 10.33. Look how a father
finds out for his son an habitation fit for him, a help meet for him, other
things necessary for his comfortable subsistence: so dealt God by his Israel.
He brought them to a land which himself had carefully sought out; his eyes were
always upon it from the beginning of the year even unto the end of the year,
Deuteronomy. 11.12.

Flowing with milk and honey] i. e. Abounding with choice and cheap commodities.

Which is the glory of all lands] Or, flower; decorem and disiderium. It was so
then, it is not so now, since the Jews were dispriviledged and disjected. But
as in the earthly paradise, after man fallen; cecidit rosa, mansit spina, the
rose fell off, the briar whereon it grew, remained: so here. See on Dan. 8.9.
and 11.16.

Ver. 7. Then said I unto them] Viz. Whilst yet in Egypt. This we find not in
Exodus: it is enough that we find it here. See Joh. 5 9. with the Note.

Cast ye away every man the abominations of his eyes] The idols to which your
eyes are lifted up, chap. 18.6. and which are or should be to you (as Alexander
called the Persian maids) dolores oculorum eye-griefes.

Ver. 8. But they rebelled against me] I might say what I would, but they would
do what their list. Good they were ever (if I may call it so) at resisting the
Holy Ghost; obstinate idolaters from the very first: so that God had even as
much ado to forbear killing them, as ever he had Moses in the same country for
neglecting to circumcise his child, Exodus 4.24.

Neither did they forsake the idols of Egypt] This we read not of in Exodus
neither: it is enough that we have it here. The ingratitude of these Israelites
was the greater, because God had done much for them, and was daily admonishing
them of better things.

Then said I, I will pour out my fury] It was not therefore for nothing that
Israel suffered so much in Egypt. Many now marvel at their own miseries, but
think not of their sins, the cause.

Ver. 9. But I wrought for my names sake] Lest the Heathens should say to my
dishonor, me non voluisse aut valuisse eos educere, that I either would not or
could not bring them out of the house of bondage. Ergo quod nomen suum in nobis
servandis asserat, sperandum est: It is also well to be hoped that God will
deal favorably with the reformed Churches (though ill deserving) for the
d^shonour that else would redound to himself. Fiat, Fiat.

Ver. 10. Wherefore I caused them] With a strong hand and an outstretcht arm I
caused it, against all the force of Egypt, Exodus 13.18. God has also mightily
brought England out of Egypt spiritual: and dealt with it not according to his
ordinary rule, but according to his prerogative.

And brought them into the wildernesse] Where I was not any wilderness unto
them or land of darkness, Jer 2.31. but a God All-sufficient; raining bread
from heaven upon them, and setting the flint abroach rather then they should
pine and perish.

Ver. 11. And I gave them my statutes] Which were far beyond the laws of the
twelve Tables in Rome; whereof yet Tully affirms, that they were far beyond
all the libraries of Philosophers.

And showed them my judgements] Statutes and Judgments are usually put in
Scripture for one and the same, though the Lawyers make a difference of them:
Prospers conceit was, that this people were called Judaei because they received
jus Dei.

Which if a man do] But that he can never do exactly: Evangelically he may; and
that suffices to life eternal.

Ver. 12. Moreover also I gave them my Sabbaths] A sweet mercy, without which
the best would even grow wild. What a wretch then was that Egyptian in Phagius
who said that those Jews (and after them, the Christians) had a loathsome
disease upon them, and were therefore fain to rest the seventh day?

To be a sign between me and them] A distinctive sign of my distinguishing
grace to Israel above others, who jeared them for sabbatizing, as those that
lost a seventh part of their precious time. To be also both a sign of a godly
person (Anciently when the question was propounded Servasti Dominicum? have
thou kept the Lords day? The answer was returned, I am a Christian, and can do
no less) and a means of conveying more holiness into his heart.

Ver. 13. But the house of Israel rebelled] They did little else; they made it
their trade for forty years long, Psalm. 95.

And my Sabbaths they greatly polluted] They vehemently violated: either they
rested only thereon, or else they shamelesly troubled and disquieted that
sanctified day of Gods rest. B. King on Jon.
The world, says one, is now grown perfectly profane, and can play on the
Lords day without book.

Then I said I would pour out my fury] Gods sayings are of two sorts: some are
the sayings of his eternal counsel, and these are immutable. Others of his
threatening only, and these often are conditional; God therefore threateneth that
he may not punish, says an ancient.

Ver. 14. But I wrought for my Names sake] Oh how often are we beholden to this
Motive, and do escape fair by this Means! See on ver. 9.

Ver. 15. Yet also I lifted up mine hand] Here we have an Epitome of Exodus and
Numbers.

Flowing with milk, and honey] See on ver. 6. If it be not so fertile and
desirable now, Joseph.
it is for the Jews inexpiable guilt in crucifying the Lord of glory. The like
befell Sodom, once as the garden of God, now a dead sea, where nothing can live.

Ver. 16. For their heart went after their idols] Heb. their dungy-deities:
those dirty delights carried them sheer away from God and goodness. Any
beloved sin will do so.

Ver. 17. Nevertheless mine eye spared them] It was by a Non-obstante of Gods
mercy, and by a prop of his extraordinary patience, that they subsisted.

Ver. 18. Walk ye not in the statutes of your fathers] With this text Frederike
the fourth, Prince Palatine, answered another Prince who pressed him to be of
his late Noble Fathers Religion. Laban swore by the god of Nahor, or Abram, and
of their idolatrous Fathers: but Jacob swear by the Fear of his Father Isaac,
his immediate Father more right in Religion, Genesis 31.53. Joshua would not
follow the footsteps of his forefathers, chap. 24. but a better precedent.
Christ says ego sum Veritas, non Vetustas: and contradicts that which was
said of old by those Kadmonim, who had corrupted the letter of the law by their
false glosses, Mat. 5.21. Antiquity must have no more authority then it can
maintain.

Ver. 19. Walk in my statutes] This is a surer and safer way. L^x Lux, Prove.
6.23. The Commandment is a lamp, and the law is light. Come therefore to this
light, that your deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God, Joh.
3.21.

Ver. 20. And hallow my Sabbaths] By abandoning as well spiritual idleness, as
corporal labor.

And they shall be a sign] See on ver. 11.

Ver. 21, 22, 23, 24.] See on ver. 13, 14, 15, 16.

Ver. 25. Wherefore I gave them also statutes that were not good] i. e. I gave
them up to their own inventions and hearts lusts, (which was worse then to be
delivered up to Satan) because they were ingrati gratiae Dei, as Ambrose has
it, they received the grace of God in vain. By statutes not good some
understand the Ceremonial laws, which commanded neither virtue nor vice in
themselves: Others, such decrees and ordinances of God in the wilderness as
were not good for them, but hurtful; as that for the execution of the
calf-worshippers, of the Baal-peorites, of Korah and his company, of the
murmurers at Kibroth hattaavah, etc. Solon being asked Whether he had given the
best laws to the Athenians? answered, The best that they could bear.

Ver. 26. And I polluted them in their own gifts] i. e. I rejected both their
persons and presents as unclean. So God would do our best performances (wherein
there would not else be so much as truth and sincerity found) were they not
wrought in us by the holy Spirit, and perfumed with Christ's sweet odours poured
into them.

Ver. 27. Your Fathers have blasphemed me] Because they trembled not at my
judgments whiles they hung in the threatenings, but went on wilfully in their
wickedness, putting it to the venture. This is a kind of blasphemy: Confer Number.
15.30, 31. this is a sin scarce to be expiated with any sacrifice: such a
sinner must be cut off.

Ver. 28. For when I had brought them into the land] It has been already
observed, that good turns aggravate unkindnesses: and men's sins are much
increased by their obligations.

Ver. 29. And the name thereof is called Bamah] i. e. A high place; a name good
enough in it self, but (as used by them) as odious to all good hearts, as a
brothelhouse is to a chaste Matron, she is the worse to pass by it and spetteth
at it: so should we in like case, Exodus 23.13. Psalm. 16.4. See Hos. 2.16, 17.
Zach. 13.2. Deuteronomy. 12.2.

Ver. 30. Are ye polluted after the manner of your Fathers?] q. d. Are you good
at that indeed? and have you yet a face to thredbare that paltry proverb of
yours, The Fathers have eaten sower grapes, etc. Give over for shame.

Ver. 31. And shall I be enquired of by you?] Is it ever likely to do well,
think you? Of witches good prayers (as some call them) one says well, Si
Magicae, Deus non vult tales: si piae, non per tales. See Jer. 7.9, 10. with
the Notes.

Ver. 32. And that which comes into your mind shall not be at all] You are
laying a plot for an accommodation with the Babylonish idolaters, a compliance
with them: and thereby you think to ingratiate, to get their favor and
friendship. But please not your selves in such a project: twill never be. So no
peace with Rome: The Moderator, Sancta Clara, and other such as sought to bring
us together, made a pretty show says one, if there had been no bible. Such
carnal professors are not unlike these in the text, as seeing the wickeds full
cups, and their own harder condition, are ready to revolt, that waters of a
full cup may be wrung out to them also, Psalm. 73.10.

We will be as the heathen] And so help our selves as we can, since God will not
help us.

Ver. 33. Surely with a mighty hand] You are ready to say, as Jer. 2.31. We are
Lords: we will come no more unto thee: But I shall sure subdue you as so many
perverse slaves or sturdy rebels. So unhappy is Apostasy: so little is got by
struggling, or by starting aside like a deceitful bow. God will rule over such
with rigor, he will have the better of them to their small comfort.

Ver. 34. And I will bring you out from the people] The heathens with whom you
have incorporated, hoping so to shun me, and to be out of the reach of my rod:
but I shall sure find and ferret you out of all your starting holes, I shall be
meet with you: Sennert. de febrib. l. 4. c. 15.
so God was here with the English by the sweating sickness, which hunted and
haunted also our contrymen in foreign parts, singling them out from others.
It reigned (or rather God reigned by it) some forty years together.

Ver. 35. And I will bring you into the wilderness of the people] Into the
most solitary and savage places of the world, for a fullness of misery without
the benefit of any good society.

And there will I plead with you face to face] i. e. Solus cum solis and sine
arbitris, having you there alone I will punish you to some purpose.

Ver. 36. Like as I pleaded with your fathers in the wildernesse] Where their
carkeises fell thick and threefold; till they were all consumed. Behold we dye,
we perish, we all perish, said they once to Moses in a pet: shall we be
consumed with dying? Number. 17.12, 13.

Ver. 37. And I will cause you to pass under the rod, and I will bring you
into the bond of the covenant] Why then Feri Domine, feri, smite Lord, smite,
so my sins may be pardoned, and my soul saved. Hic seca, hic ure, ut in
aeternum serves, said an ancient: do even whatsoever thou will with me, so I
may come to heaven, though I come to it by weeping-crosse.

Ver. 38. And I will purge out from among you the rebells] Making first a
difference, and then a riddance of them from among my Covenanters.

And they shall not enter into the land of Israel] But either dye by the way:
or if they live to enter, they shall find it a strange land to what they or
their fathers left it. Non eos perducam ad promissiones aeternas. Oecol.
See Jer. 44.14. Lavater makes the sense to be, They shall not enter into the
heavenly Canaan: See the like, Psalm. 95.11.

Ver. 39. Go ye, serve ye every one his idols] q. d. You may for me: and I had
rather you would then dissemble, as you do, and play on both hands, to the
scandal of the weak, and scorn of the wicked. For my part, I have done with you
for ever, take your own course.

And with your idols] Away with these abominable mixtures. I will be served
truly and totally, or not at all.

Ver. 40. For in mine holy mountain] In my Church and among my faithful people:
for to these he now speaks comfort.

There will I accept them] Ibi occurram eis, sc. quasi in amplexum sponsae; so
some render and sense the text: i. e. there I will meet them and accept them
with much sweetness.

And there will require your offerings] Not forbid and refuse them, as I did
theirs, ver. 39.

Ver. 41. And I will be sanctified in you] I will get me great glory by you
among the heathen, whilst you are non aliunde noscibiles quam de emendatione
vitiorum pristinorum, as Tertullian says of the Primitive Christians, no
otherwise to be known better from others, then by an alteration in you for the
better.

Ver. 42. Into the land of Israel] A pledge of a better place.

Ver. 43. Ye shall remember your wayes] Recognition is the first thing in
Reformation. See chap. 16.61.

And ye shall loath your selves] Dissecabimini in faciebus vestris, ye shall be
as it were slashed with a sword over your faces, like as those, Percutietis
facies vestras. Sept.
Acts 2. were pricked at heart; they felt their sins as so many daggers at their
hearts.

Ver. 44. And ye shall know that I am the Lord] A sin-pardoning and
heart-sanctifying God, a rich rewarder of all that diligently seek me, Heb.
11.6.

Ver. 45. Moreover, etc.] See on chap. 18.1.

Ver. 46. Set thy face] Prophecy freely and boldly, against Jerusalem which is
South from Chaldaea.

Against the forrest] Against Judea, which is mountainous and woody; having
good and bad trees in it.

Ver. 47. Every green tree] Good and bad shall to the fire together, chap.
21.3. See Luke 23.31.

Shall be burnt therein] Or scorched, if they may escape so.

Ver. 48. That I the Lord] Who my self am a consuming fire, Heb. 12. ult.

Ver. 49. Does he not speak parables?] Nonne artifex est parabolarum iste?
Davus sum non Oedipus.
Qui ergo non vult intelligi, vult negligi. He is so high that we cannot take
him, and shall therefore slight him as a mad man, or not much better. A
Preacher shall have much ado to please a profane people: Neither makes it
much to the matter: but it is grievous, Ah Lord.

CHAP. XXI.
Ver. 1. ANd the Word of the Lord] See chap. 18.1.

Ver. 2. Set thy face] See on chap. 20.46.

And drop thy Word] See Deuteronomy. 32.2. Amos 7.16. As drops of rain follow one upon
another, so do words: Speak thick, speak home, though they forbid thee to drop
such vinegar or nitre on their galled conscience, Mic. 2.6, 11.

Toward the holy places] i. e. Against the Temple which they so cried up, Jer.
7.5. like so many Oyster-wives, ad ravim usque.

Ver. 3. Behold I am against thee] That Is misery enough: for all the creatures
are soon against such: as a Noble man's servants draw their swords, when their
Lord once draws.

And will cut off from thee the righteous] Who are sometimes wrapped up with the
wicked in a common calamity. The husbandman cutteth down his corn and weeds
together; but for a different end and purpose. If the righteous also be judged
of the Lord, it that they may not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11.31.

Ver. 4. Seeing then that I will cut off from thee the righteous] Velut codem
contubernio deprehensos. This is repeated for more assurance, because it might
seem strange. The Sept. has it The unrighteous and the wicked: The Chaldee, I
will make the righteous flee, and destroy the wicked. But the Hebrew verity is
as before: neither need we wonder, since the best have their infirmities.

Ver. 5. have drawn forth my sword] And put it in commission; not to return,
till the Circuit ended; till it has done full execution.

Ver. 6. Sigh therefore -- with the breaking of thy loines] Gemituque and gestu
dolorem referas, show greatest grief, such as is deep and downright: Non ut
praficae in funeribus solent.
sigh till thy buttons fly; or, as a traveling woman.

Ver. 7. For the tidings] Ol the Chaldaeans coming. This was to the wicked as
those knuckles of a man's hand were afterward to Baltasar, to write them their
destiny: or as Daniel was to him, to read it unto them. Whenas the righteous
man is no whit afraid of evil tidings, his heart is fixed trusting in the Lord,
Psalm. 112.7.

And every heart shall melt, etc.] As wax before the fire: which, before the
danger, seemed to be made all of steel or adamant. The wicked, when in
adversity, are woefully despondent and crest-falne: as was the King of Sodom,
Genesis 14. Manasseh among the bushes, 2 Chronicles. 33.12. and others not a few, who
in their prosperity seem to face the heavens and to draw the devil himself to a
duel.

And all hands shall be feeble] The spirits and blood being run to the heart,
in that fright, to relieve it.

And all knees shall be weak as water] Heb. shall go into water, that is, they
shall bepisse themselves for fear, says Jerome: they shall be all on a cold
sweat, say others, or their knees shall shake, instar aquae tremulae, and knock
together as Belshazzar's did, Dan. 5.6.

Ver. 8. Again the word] See on chap. 18.1.

Exacutus and extersus.
Ver. 9. A sword, a sword is sharpened] Not only drawn but sharpened, that it
may wound swiftly and deadly: fourbished also, that it may the more affray, and
make the quicker dispatch. And that no doubt may be made of it, the word sword
is doubled.

Ver. 10. Sold we then make mirth?] Not, if we be in our right minds: for
would it not be now a mad mirth, when as we should be most serious and seek
God? See Isa. 22.12, 13, 14. with the Notes.

It contemns the rod of my son] Other Judgments forerun the sword: which
when they will not do the deed, the sword will then contemn the rod: that is,
it will set at naught whatever those have done, and come fourbished and
sharpened for the slaughter. See ver. 3.

Ver. 11. To give it into the hand of the slayer] Nebuchadnezzar; who will
therewith lay about him lustily, as Eleazar once did till his hand clave unto
the sword, 2 Samuel 23.10. or, as since Scanderbeg, who killed many hundred
Turks with his own hand, Turk. Hist.
and fought often with so much eagerness, that the very blood brake forth at his
lips.

Ver. 12. Cry and howl, son of man] Whilst others make mirth, as ver. 10. and
are insolent against God. Mourners shall be marked, chap. 9.4, comforted, Isa.
57.18.

Smite therefore upon thy thigh] See on Jer. 31.19.

Ver. 13. Because it is a trial] Sore and sharp, therefore cry and howl:
especially since they are not bettered. Hang heavy weights on rotten boughs,
they presently break: the best divination of men is at the parting way: See
ver. 21.

And what if the sword contemn even the rod?] q. d. What does this silly rod do
here? will they not stoop? Will they not put their necks under the yoke of Gods
Son? ver. 10. Let me come. I Will make them either bow or break; either yield, or
bleed.

Ver. 14. Smite thy hands together] So to show what I will do shortly, ver. 17.

Let the sword be doubled the third time] Doubled and trebbled, till it has
made an utter end of this untoward generation.

Which enters into their privy Chambers] Ferretting, and fetching them out of
their lurking-holes.

Oecol.
Ver. 15. Ah it is made bright] By this doleful exclamation the Prophet venteth,
himself, tanquam coram deformitatem cladis cerneret, as if he had seen the
execution.

Ver. 16. Go thee one way or other] This he speaks to the bright and sharp
sword; Trem.
stirring it up to make impression that way whereunto it was appointed,
quocunque occurrent tibi res comparatae.

Exultat quasi hortator gladii saevientis. Hier.
Ver. 17. I will also smite mine hands together] As animating the enemy, and
rejoicing at thy ruin. Chaldee, I will bring revenge upon revenge; --
animumque explesse juvabit.

Ver. 18. The Word of the Lord] See on chap. 18.1.

Ver. 19. Appoint thee two wayes] Pinge duas vias, ut chap. 4.1. by prophetike
action draw out two ways, by either of which Nebuchadnezzar may march against
Egypt, his present aim; as the great Turks now is Italy.

Choose it at the head of the way to the City] All this the Jews heard and
slighted, as being infatuated, and so fitted for destruction.

Ver. 20. And to Judah in Jerusalem the defenced] Either against the one or the
other of them (not against both at once, Ne Hercules quidem contra duos.
for they were both strong, and Jerusalem was well aware of it) for they had
both revolted from Nebuchadnezzar, and one of them was enough at once to
undertake.

Ver. 21. For the King of Babylon stood at the parting] Heb. at the mother of
the way, ubi via una in duas bifidata est. Ubi se via findit in ambas. Virg.


To use divination] Without which and offering sacrifice, the very Heathens
held it not fit to fight. But this their art of divination was (as One says of
Alchymie) Ars falsissima and fallacissima.

He made his arrows bright] Vulg. he mingled his arrows: that is, says Hierom,
he took two arrows, writing upon the one Jerusalem, and upon the other,
Rabbath. Then, putting them into a quiver together, he took one out, being
blindfolded: upon which seeing Jerusalem written, he divined that he should go
with success against Jerusalem.

He consulted with images] In which the devil sometimes spoke: See Aug. de C.
D. lib. 4. cap. 18.

He looked into the liver] This was much practiced by the Roman Generals: Lucan:
as by Caesar, when he went against Pompey.

Ver. 22. To appoint Captains] Heb. raws; fierce and forward to lead on their
soldiers, let them get off as they could.

To open their mouth] To storm and take it by an onslaught, and with a general
slaughter, non sine barritu militari, vociferatione, and claugore insolenti.

Ver. 23. And it shall be to them as a false divination] The Jews shall
believe nothing, till wrath comes upon them to the utmost. They shall laugh at
Nebuchadnezzar's fopperies, and think thee, O Ezekiel, to be little wiser then
him: Jun.
ludificabuntur te, adeoque teipsum, divinationis nefariae, quam de
Nebuchadnetzare praedicas, incusabunt: but they shall rue this their madness.

To them that have sworn oaths] But cared not at all to keep them. Lingua
juravi, Medea. Jusjurandum tanquam mantile adhibent quo nov^e noxae quotidie
extergeantur. Pacuvius.
men's injurata est.

But he will call to remembrance the iniquity] The perfidy and perjury which
they make nothing of. They that harden themselves in any one sin, put God in
mind, as it were, of the rest, which he had seemed to have forgotten.

Ver. 24. Because ye have made your iniquity] Your old sins, by an addition of
new ones.

Your sins do appear] You are scandalous, shameless as Sodom, Isa. 3.9.

Ver. 25. And thou profane] Or, worthy to be wounded to death.

Wicked Prince] Zedekiah, who now has his own told him plainly by a Prophet.
See the like done, 1 Samuel 13.13. 1 Kings 18.18. 2 Kings 3.13, 14. with the
Notes there.

Ver. 26. Remove the diadem] This was a fine linen cloth wherewith the Kings
head used to be bound about, and then the crown was set on. Diadema of (...)
circumligare.


Take off the crown] Our Richard the second, when to be deposed, was brought
forth crowned and in royal robes. Never, says the Chronicler, was Prince so
gorgeous with less glory, and more grief.

This shall not be the same] Haec non erit hae^. This crown or kingdom shall
not be as it has been.

Exalt him that is low] Jeconiah, or, as some will, Christ the King of the
Church.

And abase him that is high] Zedekiah: Just the same that Cambyses threatened
unto Egypt, (...). Herod. lib. 2.
Let him not henceforth be the Master of a molehill, nor owner of his own
liberty. In him let it appear that Mortality is but the stage of Mutability.

Ver. 27. I will overturn, overturn, overturn it] Curvam, curvam, curvam ponam
^am, So the Tigurines translate. A crown there shall be still; but such as
shall hang on one side of the head as it were. Princes of the people there
were. Those three Highpriests, Alexander, Arostobulus, and Hircanus, who
called themselves Kings, had very ill success.

Until he come] Christ the rightful King of Israel. To this text alludeth
Nathaniel, Joh. 1.49.

Ver. 28. Concerning the Ammonites] Who had likewise rebelled againg
Nebuchadnezzar, and were very injurious to Gods people: See Chap. 25.3, 6.
Zeph. 2.8, 9.

(...). Ver. 29. To bring thee upon the necks of them thee are slain] To deal
inhumanely with the dead: or to raise thy self upon the Jews ruin.

Ver. 30. Shall I cause it to return] No, but it shall still eat your flesh,
and drink your blood, till none remains.

In the land of thy nativity] In thine own nest, and on thine own dunghill.

Ver. 31. Into the hand of brutish men] Or, of burning men, Ardelionum,
artificum perditionis.

Saltem cum benedictione. Polan.
Ver. 32. Thou shall be no more remembred] The Ammonites were so rooted out by
the Medes and Persians, that besides what we find in the Bible, there is no
mention of their name. A type of such as are destroyed for ever in hell, being
fuel for that black fire, and eternally forgotten.

CHAP. XXII.
Ver. 1. MOreover the Word] See on chap. 18.1.

Ver. 2. Will thou judge] Or plead for, or excuse? See chapter 20.4.

The bloody City] The Saints slaughterhouse.

Ver. 3. In the midst of it] Public and impune.

Against her self] As a sinner against her own soul.

Ver. 4. Thou have caused thy dayes] Thou have accelerated thy punishment, as
the old world did.

Ver. 5. Shall mock thee which art infamous] This was forethreatened, Deuteronomy.
28.37. Our natures are most impatient of reproach: for there is none so mean,
but thinks himself worth of some regard. Gens haec (says Giraldus Cambrensis
of the wild Irish) sicut and natio quaevis barbara, etc. no Nation is so
barbarous but that although they know not what belongs to honor, yet do they
exceedingly affect to be honored, and well not abide to be reproached.

Ver. 6. Behold the Princes of Israel] Here begins the black bill or
bed-roll. And as in a fish corruption begins at the head, so in a Nation at
the Rulers.

Ver. 7. In thee have they see light by father and mother] Whom, very Heathens
honored as their (...), houshold-gods.

In the midst of thee, etc.] So Hierom complains of his country, In mea
patriae Deus Venture est, and in diem vivitur, that they were all belly-gods,
and had no goodness in them. So Bid complains of the ancient Brittons,
immediately before their destruction by the Saxons. Bradford cries out of the
iniquity of the times in King Edward's days: You all know, (says he in a
certain letter of his) there was never more knowledge of God, and less godly
living, and true serving of God. It was counted a foolish thing to serve God
truly: and earnest prayer was not past upon. Act. and Mon.
Preaching was but pastime: Communion was counted too common: fasting was far
out of use: alms was almost nothing. Malice, covetousnsse, and uncleanesse was
common everywhere, with swearing, drunkenness and idleness, etc.

Ver. 8. Thou have despised mine holy things] These are all foretokens of a
perishing people. Emphasin habet quod dicit sancta mea, Sabbata mea. Shall that
which has the impresse of God upon it be slighted, as his Sabbaths,
Sacraments, Ordinances? The holy God should in all these his holy things be
sanctified in righteousness, Isa. 5.16.

Ver. 9. In thee are men that carry tales] Heb. men of slanders, Exodus 23.1.
Levit. 18.16. Whisperers, backbiters, tale-bearers ( Pedlars, the Heb. word
signifies such as drop a tale here and another there) are viri latrones,
thieves (as the Septuagint here translate) yea they are murderers. The devil
was first a slanderer, and then a murderer. His agents first take away the
credit of the Church, and then wound her, Cant. 5.6. The Primitive Christians
were first belyed, and then cruelly handled: So were the French Protestants,
before the Massacre of Paris. Humphary Duke of Gloucester was by the people of
England (notwithstanding the open showing of his body, and his pretended
crimes) thought to be doubly murdered: viv. by detraction, and deadly
practice, says the Chronicler.

Ver. 10. In thee have they discovered their fathers nakednesse] i. e. Carnally
known their fathers wives or concubines, Reuben-like. See 1 Cor. 5.1. with the
Note.

Humbled her] i. e. Ravshed her: which was a double crime. See Levit. 18.19,
and 20.18. and 15.25.

Ver. 11. And one has committed] So the Poet, Hic thalamum invasit natae,
vetitosque Hymenaeos, Virg. Aen. lib. 6.

Ausi omnes immane nefas, auso que potiti, etc.


Ver. 12. Thou have taken usury and increase] Vsura quasi propter usum rei,
says One, and faenus quasi funus. Such money to necessity, is like cold water
to a hot ague, that for a time refreshes, but prolongeth the disease. It is
like the Timber-worm, which is wonderful soft to touch, but has teeth so hard
that it eats the timber: See on chap. 18.13.

And have greedily gained of thy neighbour] Sept. Thou have consummated the
consummation of thy wickedness in oppression.

And have forgotten me] All the forementioned evils are resolved into this as
the root and original of them: See the like, Romans 3.18. Dei oblivio convehit
omnem vitiorum catervam. Hieron.


Ver. 13. I have smitten my hand] In token of utmost indignation, as Number. 24.10.

At thy dishonest gain which thou have made] The Jew-doctours observe that
whereas twenty four several abominations are here reckoned up, the destruction
of the City is attributed chiefly to Covetousness. Lycurgus foretold his
Lacedaemonians, Plut.
that filthy lucre would be the overthrow of their City; and it proved so. The
like is reported of Constantinople, of Babylon, the seat of the great Chaliph,
Turk. Hist.
taken and sacked by Haalon brother to Mango the great Chan of Tartary, who
affamished to death the rich but wretched Chaliph in the midst of his hoards:
like as the Roman Soldiers first slew Ruffinus (who affected to be co-Emperour
with Arcadius) and then cutting of his right hand carried it up and down the
City, crying out to the people, Date stipem viro avaritiae inexplebilis, Parael
Med. hist. profan.
Give an alms to a man of unsatisfiable covetise.

Ver. 14. Can theine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong] Interrogatio
continens latentem Ironiam: q. d. Misella superbula, eris^e ferendo mala
futura? Thou poor proud thing of naught, can thou make thy party good with
Me? Can thou either in mind or body bear my wrath? will not thine heart soon
fall into thy heels, and thine hands be enfeebled when I shall grapple with
thee, and take thee to do?

And will do it] Thou think, likely, that all these are but terrible words,
devised on purpose to affright silly people, but I will do it.

Ver. 15. I will scatter thee] Deuteronomy. 4.27. and 28.25, 64.

And will consume thy filthinesse] By thy captivity and misery, I will refine,
Heb. Faciam ut integretur.
and reform thee: Zach. 13.9.

Ver. 16. And thou shall take thine inheritance in thy self] q. d. I will
abandon thee. Or, Thou shall be profaned and polluted.

And thou shall know that I am the Lord] Thou shall know me by my punishments,
whom thou would not know by my benefits.

Ver. 17. And the Word of the L^rd] See chap. 18.1.

Ver. 18. The house of Israel is to me become drosse] Recrementum argenti,
offalstuffe. Silver they were once, but now nothing less. Haec ad nos quo que
tranferenda sunt. This is even our case, we are quite degenerate, and
altogether unlike our zealous progenitors.

Heu! pietas ubi prisca? profana O tempora! Mundi
Faex, vesper, prope nox! O Mora! Christ veni.
All they are brasse] See on Isa. 1.22.

Ver. 19. I will gather you into the midst of Jerusalem] Velut catinum
fuforium, as into a red-hot furnace, or fiery crucible, chap. 24, 10.

Ver. 20. As they gather silver and brasse] The righteous perish with the
wicked: but either it is temporally only: or else, the seemingly righteous, who
are no better then reprobate silver.

And I will leave you there] A terrible threat. God will bring his enemies into
the briars and there leave there: See chap. 29.5. His own he will not leave,
or, at least, not forsake. He will be with them in the fire and water, etc.
Lord leave us not, says the Church, Jer. 17.17.

Ver. 21. And ye shall be melted in the midst thereof] As in a fiery furnace.
Such was anciently Egypt, Deuteronomy. 4. afterward Babylon: and in the year 1453.
Constantinople; where cruelly perished by the hand of the Turks, a very great
multitude of Christians.

Lavat.
Ver. 22. As silver is melted] The same again, for better fastening. Tam
diligenter de his malis concionatus est, ut conciones ejus vix sine taedio
legantur aut recitentur.

Ver. 23. And the Word] See chap. 18.1.

Ver. 24. Thou art the land that is not cleansed] From thy filthiness, and the
fire of my Judgments.

Nor rained upon] Non compluta: no mercy showed thee: no good done upon thee by
all.

Ver. 25. There is a conspiracy of her Prophets] They are all agreed to deceive
the people, and to persecute the true Prophets. Here we have a lively
description of the present Popish Clergy.

Plane palamque contra faciunt, quam ipsis imperavi lege. Jun.
Ver. 26. Her Priests have violated my Law] By infringing, and enforcing it to
speak what it never meant: to go two miles when it would go but one, etc.

They have put no difference] They have not taken out the precious from the
vile, but made it open-tide, and admitted all pell mell, as they say.

And have hid their eyes from my Sablaths] i. e. Either framed excuse that they
might themselves break it: or else connived at others that have.

Ver. 27. Her Princes in the midst thereof] There was in this State (as
Physicians say there is in some diseases) corruption totius substantiae, Lupis
ferociores and voraciores erant.
a general defection: and here they are particularly told of it; for (as
Isocrates says in his Oration to Philip King of Macedony) that which is spoken
to all, is spoken to none. See Mic. 3.11. Zeph. 3.3.

Ver. 28. And her Prophets have daubed them] Similes iis qui parietem
incrustant luto friabili and solubili: See chap. 13.4, etc.

Ver. 29. The people of the land have used oppression] Or, deceit. Eadem hodie
fiunt: charitas refrixit; omnia injuriis, calumniis, rapinis plena sunt.

Ver. 30. And I sought for a man among them] i. e. A competent company of holy
men, as once at Sodom, Genesis 18. at Jerusalem, Jer. 5.1.

That should make up the hedge] Which sin had thrown down.

And stand in the gap] By his Piety, and Prayers, The Primum Mobile, say
Astronomers, turns about with such swiftness, that but for the
counter-motion of the Planets and other Spheres, all would be fired: so would
this wicked world but for the Saints, who keep a constant counter-motion to the
corrupt practices thereof.

Ver. 31. I have consumed them with the fire] Since thou would not be
cleansed, nor rained upon in the day of indignation, ver. 24.

CHAP. XXIII.
Ver. 1. THe Word of the Lord] See chap. 18.1.

Ver. 2. There were two women] This is the same in effect with chap. 16. but
there more plainly, here parabolically expressed. Sermo est eruditus and
elegans, Lavat.
simul tamen spurcus and obscoenus, to set forth the hatefulness of idolatry,
creature-confidence, and adultery.

The daughters of one mother] sc. Synagogae, vel Sarae. Some think the Prophet
alludeth to Jacobs two sister-wives.

Ver. 3. And they committed whoredoms in Egypt] See chap. 20.8. Josh. 24.14.

Pet. Satyr.
They committed whoredoms in their youth] Like the Strumpet Quartilla in
Petronius, who said, Junonem ego meam iratam habeam, si unquam me meminerim
virginem fuisse.

There were their breasts pressed] Violatam virginitatem mammarum laxitas
consequitur.

Ver. 4. And the names of them were Aholah] i. e. Her Tent, not mine (so he
calls Samaria or the ten tribes) what have I to do with it or her? Confer 1
King. 12.16, 28, 31. She is gone to her Tent, and has set her up Tabernacles,
where to worship her golden idols.

The Elder] So called because more numerous and potent then the other two
tribes. She was also first in the defection.

And Aholibah] That is my tent is in her. So Jerusalem is called, because the
Temple and Testimonies of Gods special presence were there, as King Abijah well
pleads it, 2 Chronicles. 13.10, 11.

Samariah is Aholah] In figure she is: though some have held that these were
the name of two notorious strumpets in Egypt.

Ver. 5. And Aholah played the harlot when she was mine] Fornicata est sub me,
under color and covert of a marriage made with me. See what a fair gloss
Jeroboam set upon his foul idolatry, 1 King. 12.28.

On the Assyrians her neighbours] So they were now become, by the conquest of
Syria.

Ver. 6. Which were clothed with blew] With rich and gorgeous attire. Vestis
luxuriae nidus.

Ver. 7. Thus she committed her whoredoms with them] Heb. she bestowed her
wheredomes upon them, she was no niggard: a little entreaty served turn:
euilibet sui copiam faciebat, such was her idol-madnesse.

Ver. 8. Neither left she her idols brought from Egypt] Witness her two golden
calves brought therehence by Jeroboam, in imitation of Apis a calf dedicated by
the Egyptians to Serapis their chief idol.

-- Quis nescit qualia demens
Aegyptus portenta colat? Juvenal.

For in her youth] See on ver. 3.

And poured their whoredom upon her] This kind of language and the like is
here and elsewhere used, not to teach men to speak or do foul things, but the
contrary. Of Petronius his Satyricon it is said, Toll obscaena, and tollis
omnia: and that he was impurissimus scriptor purissimae Latinitatis. Of our
Prophet it may as truly be said, Toll sancta and tollis omnia. See on ver. 2.

Ver. 9. Wherefore I have delivered her] 2 King. 17.23.

Per quod quis peccat, per idem punitur and ipse. Ver. 10. These discovered her
nakednesse] i. e. They have shamefully punished her for a stinking strumpet, as
ver. 26.

And she became famous] For her sins and punishments, much talked of; Heb. a
name.

Ver. 11. And when her sister Aholibah saw this] And yet would not be warned;
which was a just both presage and desert of her utter destruction.

She was mere corrupt] She was therefore the worse, because she should have
been better.

Ver. 12. She doated] Amantes amentes. See ver. 5.

Ver. 13. Then I saw that she was defiled] Whence it is that man's nature is so
prone to idolatry, and why that sin is compared to adultery, see Polanus upon
this chapter, p. 538, 539, 540.

Ver. 14. For when she saw men pourtrayed upon the wall] So unbrideled was her
lust, that she fell a doting upon those quos tantum per umbram and imaginem
aspexerat, whose pictures only she had beheld. In some Popish Churches there
are to be seen wanton pictures: such as do rather kindle lust, then quicken
devotion. An eyewitness has told us in print, that in some places they will
assemble diverse of the fairest curtisans (when they would draw a picture of
the Virgin Mary, Spec. Eur.
to draw the most modest beauty of a Virgin out of the flagrancy of harlots.

Ver. 15. Girded with girdles] Rich clothes are often but fine covers of the
foulest shame. If every silken suit did cover a sanctified soul, it would be
brave.

Conciliatorem peccati oculum Talmudici nominant.
Ver. 16. And as soon as she saw them with her eyes] Here began the mischief: Vt
vidi ut perii! -- O culi sunt in amore duces. Many have dyed of the wound in
the eye.

And sent messengers unto them] Being themselves therefore, not long after,
sent into captivity unto them, that they might have enough of them.

Ver. 17. Into the bed of love] Or, of breasts, which are the symboles of love,
and seats of delight as Naturalists note. See Prove. 6.19. and 7.18.

And her mind was alienated from them] Heb. loosed or disjoynted, to do at
another while upon the Egyptians. Etiam vota post usum fastidia sunt.

Ver. 18. Then my mind was alienated from her] So Jer. 6.8. See there.

Ver. 19. In calling to mind the sins of her youth] This was to recommit them;
because she remembered them with delight. It argues an unmortified frame, when
recalling former evil acts proves a snare.

Ver. 20. Whose flesh is as the flesh of asses] qui sunt been mentulati (hon^s
sit auribus) and qui semine abundant. Commodus the Emperor, who had never a
good property in him, was for this called the Ass, as Hierom notes.

Circum fluunt and exundant omni scelere and impietate copiosissi^e.
And whose issue is as the issue of horses] Fluxus equorum est fluxus little,
that is, they are extremely libidinous and superstitious: so that there is no
ho with them.

Ver. 21. Thus thou calledst to remembrance] See ver. 19.

Ver. 22. Therefore O Aholibah] Flagitium and flagellum sunt ut acus and filum.
Sin and punishment are unseparable companions, they are tied together with
chains of Adamant.

Ver. 23. Pekod and Shoah and Koa] The inhabitants of these several countries,
subject to the Babylonians. See Jer. 50.21. K^a is by Strabo called Gaugamela.

Ver. 24. I will set judgment before them] i. e. I will put thee into their
hands to be punished.

And they shall judge thee according to their judgement] Without mixture of
mercy: whereas I use in the midst of judgment to remember mercy.

Rhodigin. l. 24. cap. 45. Pet. Damiaen. l. 1. ep. 21.
Ver. 25. And they shall take away thy nose and thine eares] He seems to
allude to the custom of the Egyptians, which was to cut off the nose and the
ears of the adulteress. John a certain Antipope was served in like sort by
the Romans. Paul the second deserved to be so served; of whom it is recorded
that he was so proud that he painted his face to please his Concubine: and that
he was once in a mind to have taken to himself the name of Formosus, Jac. Rev.
de vit. Pont.
but that he thought it was ominous; because his predecessor of that name came
to so ill an end.

Ver. 26. They shall also strip thee out of thy cloaths] Wherein thou have so
much prided thy self.

And take away thy fair jewels] Instrumenta mundi tui, the instruments of thy
decking, Isa. 3.

Ver. 27. Then will I make thy lewdness to cease from thee] Thy prepensed
wickedness. This benefit thou shall reap and receive of thine enemies cruelty.

Nor remember Egypt] Without regret.

Ver. 28. I will deliver thee] God has an holy hand in all the evils that
befall his people, by whomsoever.

Ver. 29. And they shall deal with thee hatefully] As ill as the wit of malice
can devise to do.

All thy labour] i. e. All that thou have labored for. Oh lay up grace, qua
nec ^ripi nec surripi potest.

And the nakedness of thy whoredoms] Nuditas tua scortationibus dedita.

Piscar.
Ver. 30. Thou art polluted with their idols] Whereby thou thoughtest to have
purged away thy sins, (as Papists also do) but it proves otherwise.

Ver. 31. Therefore will I give her cup into thine hand] An allusion to the
manner of feasts whereat the Symposiarch or Governor gave every guest his cup
fitly tempered. God is the great Modimperator.

Ver. 32. Thou shall drink of thy sisters cup deep and large] Yea though it
have eternity to the bottom.

Ver. 33. Thou shall be filled with drunkenness and sorrow] That dry
drunkenness; ut si catapotium bibas.

Ver. 34. And thou shall break the sheards thereof] i. e. Of the cup, which
thou shall cast away with utmost indignation: but thou have thy bane.

And pluck of thine own breast] For a revenge of thy fornication therewith
committed.

Ver. 35. Because thou have forgotten me] This was the source of all their
sins; and cause of all their calamities.

And cast me behind thy back] As an harlot loatheth her husband. It is laid to
David's charge that in that foul fall of his, he had despised Gods Commandment,
2 Samuel 12.9.

Ver. 36. Will thou judge] See chap. 20 4. and 22.2.

Ver. 37. And blood is in their hands] Adultery is the devils nest-egge, and
causes many sins to be laid one to and upon another: as here murder,
idolatry, etc.

To devour them] Not only to purge, and to dedicate them.

Ver. 38. They have defiled my sanctuary in the same day] When they had done
evil as they could, they exercised mine external worship, that they might seem
religious: So Isa. 66.3.

Ver. 39. For when they had slain] When their hands were full of blood, and
even reaking hot therewith. This was detestable impudency.

Then they came the same day into my Sanctuary] Citra conscientiam, Eras. ep.
lib. 16. ad obtrect.
as if they had done God good service. So Erasmus tells of a fierce Friar
Augustine of Antwerp who openly in the Pulpit there Preaching to the people,
wished that Luther were present, that he might bite out his throat with his
teeth: Fiducia in federibus.
so doing he would nothing doubt to resort to the altar with the same bloody
teeth, and receive the body of Christ.

Ver. 40. Ye have sent for men] Ye have trusted to foreign forces, and carnal
combinations.

For whom thou did wash thy self] Omnino te comparas ut Thais impudentissima,
ad pelliciendos and inescandos amatores; thou have acted the whore to the life,
to inveigle thy paramours.

Ver. 41. And satest] For entertainment-sake.

Whereupon thou have set mine incense] So fighting against me, as it were with
mine own weapons, and abusing my best gifts to my greatest dishonor; contrary
to Prove. 3.9.

Ver. 42. And a voice of a multitude being at ease] Or being jolly and jocund,
as at brothelhouses.

And with the men of the common sort] Heb. to the men: the basest and most
abject people also were taken into confederacy; even Arabians, Ethiopians,
Tartars; so cheap did thou make thy self; so fond wast thou of their
fopperies.

Ver. 43. To her that was old in adulteries] Inveteratae and detritae, withered
and oreworn.

And she with them] Is she (as Helena was (...)) the same still no changeling
yet?

Ver. 44. Yet they went in unto her] They committed idolatry without mean or
measure; being woefully hardened and habituated therein.

Ver. 45. And the righteous men] So the Chaldees are called: because less
wicked then the Jews (as the Scythians were better then the Athenians, and now
the Indians then the Spaniards) and because they executed the righteous
sentence of God, upon those flagitious Jews.

Ver. 46. I will bring up a company] A numerous army which shall make much
havoc and slaughter.

Ver. 47. And the company shall stone them] As by the law they did adulteresses.

Ver. 48. Thus will I cause lewdness to cease] Thus, if it may be done no
otherwise. Thus still if men will not mend by fair means, they are taken away
by death, that they may sin no more.

That all women may be taught] That all Cities and States may hear, and fear,
and do no more so.

Exemplo alterius qui sapit, ille sapit. Ver. 49. And ye shall bear the sins]
i. e. The punishment of your idolatry: neither shall ye have color of cause to
complain of my severity.

And ye shall know that I am the Lord God] This comes in ever and anon, velut
versus intercalaris, and has much weight in it to set on what is said before.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Ver. 1. AGain in the ninth year] Of Jehoiakims captivity, chap. 1.2. three
years before the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar.

Ver. 2. This same day] Ezekiel in Mesopotamia is told by God, and tells
others the very day that Nebuchadnezzar laid seige to Jerusalem. 2 King. 25.1.
Jer. 39.1. and 52.4. Heathen historians tell us of Apollonius Tyanaeus, that in
the self-same day and hour wherein Domitian the Emperor was slain at Rome, he
got up into a high place at Ephesus in Asia; and calling together a great
multitude of men, (...). Dio. Domit.
he spoke these words (...), well done Stephen, strike the murderer home, pay
him soundly: Thou have struck him, thou have wounded him to the heart, thou
have slain him outright; I commend thee for it. This (if it were so) was
brought to him by the devil doubtless. Our Prophet had a betrer intelligencer.

Ver. 3. Set on a pot] Deus cum prophet^ lequitur tanquam cum coquo: any thing
to make them sensible of their danger, and the destruction of their City now
fully determined. Reprasentat Tartarum, and ollam Vulcaniam inferni.
This pot is Jerusalem (and a lively representation of hell, says a Lapide)
the pouring of water into it a long siege: the flesh the Citizens, the fat the
rich ones, lauti and lascivi: the bones, the stoutest and best warriors, etc.
These scurrilous Jews had jeared at Jeremyes caldron or pot, Jer. 1.13. See on
chap. 11.3. now they are cast into the pot, and their jear driven back down
their very throats.

Ver. 4. Gather the pieces thereof into it] Let people of all sorts flock into
the City for safety-sake; that there, as in a pot, they may be boiled by a long
siege, and have sorrow enough.

Ver. 5. Take the choice of the flock] The King and his Peers.

And burn also the bones] The dry bones (the common people) for these will burn
like wood.

And let him sees the bones] The choice bones, ver. 4.

Ver. 6. Woe to the bloody City] i. e. Blood-guilty, and full of crimes capital
that call for blood.

To the pot whose scum is in it] Who are hardened in their wickedness, which
is evident to all men, and are not amended by punishments.

Let no let fall upon it] i. e. Let none escape unpunished. In wars oft-times
they cast lots to save some and slay some.

Ver. 7. For her blood is in the midst of her] She cares not who knows of her
murders and oppressions. He seems to allude to that law, that blood being
let out of a beast should be covered in the ground.

She set it upon the top of a rock] Super limpidissimam petram, says the
Vulgar, as glorying in it. So Abimelech slew all his brethren upon one stone,
Judge. 9.5. the Jews crucified our Savior on Mount Calvary.

She poured it not] Pudet non esse impudentem.

Agit cum illa ex lege talionis. Pol.
Ver. 8. I have set her blood upon the top of a rock] Where it will be seen afar
off and for along time. As her sin was in propatulo in open view; so (to cry
quittance with her) shall her punishment likewise be: my visible vengeance
shall follow her close at heels as a blood-hound.

Ver. 9. Woe to the bloody City] See Nah. 3.1. Hab. 2.12.

I will even make the pile for fire great] They shall undergo a long and sore
siege.

Ver. 10. Heap on wood, etc.] See on ver. 3.

And spice it well] Vulg. coquatur tota compositio, let the whole composition
be boiled, till all the virtue be boiled out. A Metaphor from Apothecaries.

Ver. 11. That the brass of it may be hot and may burn] This, J am vaecua
ardet Romae: jam enim and ipsa olla consumitur, in quae prius carnes and ossa
consumebantur. Hom. 18. in Ezekiel.
Gregory fitly applies to Rome taken and wasted by the Lombards: this City
ever since it was Papal (and then it first began to be so) was never besieged
but it was taken by the enemy.

Ver. 12. She has wearied her self with lyes] With seeking and trusting to
lying vanities, creature comforts. Others render it, she has wearied me with
lies, i. e. with false promises of amendment. Others, Frustra sudatum est,
pains is taken with them to no purpose.

And her great scum went not forth out of her] But is sodden into her partly,
and partly sodden over into the fire. A godly man clears himself of sin, as
spring water works it self clean: as the Sea will endure no poisonful thing,
but casts it upon the shore: as the sweet water, made brackish by the coming
in of the salt water, gets to be sweet again: so do Gods people work out
brackish and sinful dispositions, etc. The good heart admits not the mixture
of any sin, though sin may cleave to it as dross does to silver, yet like
right wine or honey, as the scum arises, still it casts it out: so here.

Ver. 13, In thy filthiness is leudnesse] i. e. Thou art desperately stiff
and stubborn: thy disease is complicate, and threateneth death.

Because I have purged thee] i. e. Called upon thee by my Prophets to cleanse
thy self of all filthiness of flesh and spirit, sought also to purge thee by
the soap of afflictions, and by the cudgel of calamities, Isa. 1.16. and 27.9.
with Isa. 1.5, 6, 7.

And thou wast not purged] From thy sin, which had gotten into thy very frame
and constitution, was weaved into the texture of thine heart.

Thou shall not be purged] But shall perish in thy sins (which is worse then to
aye in a ditch) and pine away in thine iniquities, ver. 23. He who is filthy
shall be filthy still: a fearful sentence.

Till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee] Till I have purged thee in
hellfire; which will be ever doing, but never be done; donec omnia tela
vindictae meae in te exhausero, till I have emptied my quiver, spent my wrath
upon thee.

Ver. 14. I the Lord have spoken it] And you may write upon it, Sententia haec
stabit. Think not that these are only big words, bugbear terms, devised on
purpose to affright silly people: for do it I will; yea that I will.

Ver. 15. Also the Word of the Lord] See chap. 18.1.

Ver. 16. Behold I take from thee the desire of thine eyes] i. e. Thy wife who
is impendio dilecta and visu pergratiosa, thy dearly beloved and greatly
delighted in.

With a stroke] With pestilence, palsy, or some like sudden death: This was no
small trial of the Prophets patience and obedience. Let us learn to hang loose
to all outward comforts.

Yet neither shall thou mourn or weep] Which might he have done, Est quaedam
flere voluptas. Ovid. l. 4. ed Trist. Fletus aerumnas len^t. Sen. Justa (...).
would have been some ease to him: for Expletur lacrymis, egeriturque dolor. As
hindes by calving, so do men by weeping cast out their sorrows, Job 39.3.

Ver. 17. For hear to cry] Heb. be silent, and so suffocate thy sorrows: ne
plangas, ne plores. Not as if the dead were not to be lamented (tears are the
dues of the dead, Mors mea ne careat lachrymis) or that it were unbeseeming a
Prophet to bewail his dead Consort: but to set forth by this figure, the
greatness of their ensuing sorrow, bigger then any tears: for Curae leves
loquuntur, ingentes stupent.

Bind the tire of thy head upon thee] Mourners, it seems, used to go
bare-headed, and barefooted, to cover their Mustachoes, to eat what their
friends sent them in at such a sad time to cheer up their spirits, Jer. 16.5,
7. The Prophet must do none of all this, Singultus devorat.
but keep his sorrows to himself.

Ver. 18. And at even my wife dyed] Though a good woman probably, and to the
Prophet a great comfort, the sweet companion of his life and miseries: yet she
dyed suddenly, and by some extraordinary disease. All things come alike to all.

And I did in the morning as I was commanded] Grievous though it were, and went
much against the hair with me, yet I did it. Vxorem posthabuit praecepto Dei.
Obedience must be yielded to God even in the most difficult duties: and
conjugal love must give place to our love to him.

Ver. 19. Will thou not tell us] They well knew that there was something in it
more then ordinary: for the Prophet was no Stoike, but sensible enough of what
he suffered.

Ver. 20. Then I answered them] The Prophet was ready to tell them the true
meaning of all: so should Ministers be: See Job 33.23. with the Note.

Ver. 21. Behold I will profane my Sanctuary] I will put it into the hands of
profane persons to be spoiled and polluted, for a punishment of your manifold
pollutions of it.

The excellency of your strength] The Jews had too high a conceit of, and did
put too much confidence in their Temple, which therefore they called as here
the excellency of their strength, the desire of their eyes, and that which
their soul pitied, animarum indulgentiam. The Temple of the Lord they cried,
but the Lord of the Temple they cared not for, Jer. 7.

Ver. 22. And ye shall do as I have done] Your grief shall be above tears, you
shall be so over gone with it: besides you shall have neither leisure nor leave
of your enemies to bewail your losses, etc.

Ye shall not cover] See on ver. 17. Antonius Margarita a Christian Jew has
written a book of the Jewish rites of superstitions, at the burial of the dead,
and otherwise: so has Leo Modena, another Jew, but no Christian.

Ver. 23. But ye shall pine away for your iniquities] Non tam stupidi prae
moestitia, quam prae malitia stipites. Oecol.
This was long since threatened, Levit. 26. and it is reserved to the last, as
not the least of those dismal judgments.

Ver. 24. Thus Ezekiel is unto you a sign] Portentum, portending no good to
you: whether he were made dumb, till these things were fulfilled, as some
gather from ver. 27. I have not to say.

Ver. 25. When I take from them their strength] their Kingdom, Temple, all.

And that whereupon they set their minds] Heb. the lifting up of the soul, or
the burden of their souls, that whereof they are most sollicitous.

Ver. 26. To cause thee to hear it] Viz. The performance of that which now thou
foretellest, but can not be believed, till Experience (the mistrisse of
fools) has better taugth it them.

Ver. 27. In that day shall thy mouth be open^d] Meanwhile make use of a
sacred silence, wait till a new Prophecy concerning this peope, shall be
committed unto thee (as was done, chap. 33.) Till then, prophecy against
forreiners, Ammonites, Tyrians, Egyptians.

CHAP. XXV.
Ver. 1. THe Word of the Lord] Contra Gentes, against those Nations chiefly
that molested the Jews after their overthrow by the Babylonians. Sins they had
enough besides: but for none did they suffer more deeply then for their malignity
toward Gods poor afflicted. The Ammonites, Moabites, Edomites, and Philistines
are here more briefly threatened: The Tyrians and Egyptians more at large;
because it seemed impossible that they should be brought down.

Ver. 2. Set thy face against the Ammonites] Look upon them firmo, torvo, and
minaci vultu, as if then would look through them: and having so lightened,
thunder accordingly.

Against the Ammonites] Who have had their part already of threatenings, chap.
21.28. but not therir full due.

Ver. 3. Because thou said Aha] Insolently insulting over mine Israel, when
under hatches: as when a tree is down, every man will be pulling at the
branches, and Leoni mortuo vel mus insultat: but it is ill meddling against Gods
Church, be it but by a frown or a frump, as here; An Aha or an Euge shall not
escape unpunished, Psalm. 35.21.

Ver. 4. I will deliver thee to the men of the East] To the Arabians (Keturah's
posterity) who were Shepherds, and Camel-masters.

They shall eat thy fruit, and drink thy milk] Sept. Thy fatness; (...).
est enim adeps lac coagulatum. The Ammonites (as now the Flemmings) were
(...), butter-boxes, as we say; and lived much upon milk-meats: So do we. Let
us use our plenty to Gods glory, lest we lose all.

Ver. 5. And I will make Rabbah] The Metropolis of the Ammonites: it signifies
that Great City, and was afterward rebuilt by Ptolomy Philadelph, and called
Philadelphia.

-- Valet ima summis
Mutare, Hor. lib. 1. Od. 34.
and insignem attenuat Deus
Obscura premens, etc.
Ver. 6. Because thou have clapped thine hands] Manibus plaudis, pedibus
complodis, etc. God is very sensible of the least indignity and injury, affront
or offense done to his poor people, by words, looks, gestures, etc. Cavete.

Ver. 7. Behold therefore I will stretch out my hand upon thee] God loves to
retaliate.

I will cause thee to perish out of the Country] So little a distance is there
eftsoons, says Seneca, betwixt a great City and no City.

Ludit in humanis divina potentia rebus:
Et certam praesans vix habet hora fidem.
Ver. 8. Behold the house of Judah is like unto all the Heathen] As
ill-protected and provided for as they; as much scourged by the Babylonian. See
to the contrary, Deuteronomy. 33.29. Happy art thou, O Israel: who is like unto thee,
O people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of
thine excellency, and thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee, and thou
shall tread upon their high places! Some read it, Behold the house of Jehovah,
and note an Emphasis in that word, as savouring of contempt and blasphemy, as 2
Kings 18.33, 34.

Ver. 9. Behold I will open the side of Moab] Heb. the shoulder (that is, the
border that is fortified) to let in the enemy: like as the side being opened,
an entrance is given into the body through the ribs, for the destruction
thereof, D. Mayr.
because the strongest defense is taken away.

Ver. 10. That the Ammonites may not be remembered among the nations] A fearful
hand of God upon them: as it was also upon some other peoples, who are so
utterly extinct, that the learned can now hardly divine where their seats were.

Ver. 11. And I will execute judgments upon Moab] Or, in Moab, where was no
care to execute justice and judgment, sed frigebant leges: jus situm erat in
manibus, etc. Might overcame right.

Ver. 12. By taking vengeance] Heb. by revenging revengement, out of a
vindictive spirit rejoicing at Juda's harms, and saying they were well enough
served. See the Prophecy of Obadiah, and Psalm. 137. Their father Esau was of a
spiteful spirit, Genesis 27.41. and they took after him, proceeding upon the old
score. Hence they are put for Gods and the Churches enemies by a specialty,
Isa. 63. Joel 3. Amos 9. A learned man has given us this Note: Esau signifies
a Doer or a Worker: Edom a ruddy, bloody, or earthy man. These Edomites were a
type of Justitiaries, who will needs be saved by their works and merits. These
are the deadlyest enemies of Gods people, war upon them continually, seek and
suck their blood, and shall at length suffer condign punishment.

And has grealy offended and revenged himself upon them] Wishing (as Caligula
did by the people of Rome) that they had all but one neck, (...).
that he might cut them off at one blow. Plane sunt serpents (says Luther
concerning hypocrites) quo nullum est animal vindictae cupidius, they are very
serpents, then which there is no living creature more revengeful.

Ver. 13. I will stretch out mine hand upon Edom] God has vengeance ready for
revengers. Immane verbum est ultio, says Seneca: they shall not escape
unpunished. See Prove. 24.17, 18. The Duke of Burbon being displeased at
Cardinal Wolsy, intended to have sacked Rome, and taken the Pope: But at the
first assault of the town, the Duke was the first man that was slain.

Ver. 14. I will lay my vengeance upon Edom] Edam ultionem in Edom: See v. 13.

By the hand of my people Israel] In the time of the Macchabees, likely this
was done. Or, by the hand wherewith I shall smite my people, that is, by the
Babylonians; so Piscator.

Joseph.
According to my fury] And not as the Commanders will. Titus would have saved
the Temple at Jerusalem from being burnt: but the soldiers would not.

Ver. 15. Because the Philistines have dealt by revenge] See on ver. 12, 13.
Heathens thought revenge lawful: and tallying of injuries to be but Justice.
But Christianity teaches us that non minus mali est refer injuriam, Lactant.
quam infer.

For the old hatred] The Philistines were of the old inhabitants the Canaanites;
and kept up a deadly feud.

Exscindam exscissores.
Ver. 16. I will out of the Cherethims] These were a part of the Philistines,
Zeph. 2.5. There is an elegancy in the Original: q. d. I will cut off the
Cutters.

And destroy the remnant of the Sea-coast] Palestina lay upon the Midland-sea,
Zeph. 3.5.

Ver. 17. And I will execute great vengeance upon them] Heb. vengeances. I will
pay them for the new and the old together.

CHAP. XXVI.
Ver. 1. IN the eleventh year] Of Je^ojachim's captivity, and Zedekiah's reign.

In the first day of the moneth] i. e. Of the fifth month; when the news came
to Tire of the destruction of Jerusalem twenty days before, which fell out on
the ninth day of the fourth month, 2 Kings 25.1.

Ver. 2. Because that Tyrus has said] Wicked men shall give account for their
hard speeches also. Antiq. lib. 8. cap. 2. Sarrano dormiat ostro. Virg. Geor.
l. 2.
Jude 15. if not sooner, yet certainly at the last day, with the whole world
all on a light fire about their cares. Tyrus was the chief City of Phaenicia,
built before Solomon's Temple, says Josephus: and anciently called Sarra, says
Servius, of the Hebrew Tsor which signifies a rock; because it was built upon
a rock. It became the most famous and wealthy Mart-town of the whole East: and
having so great resort to it from all parts, it was a very sinful place; and
framing comedies out of the Churches tragedies, has this Prophecy to champ
upon, for a rebater of its pride and petulancy.

Aha] See chap. 25.3.

That was the gates of the people] Whereinto they entered by troops and
caravant, for religion and traffic.

She is turned unto me] Vide hic ingenia mercatorum. Her ruin shall be my
rise; Lo, this is the world: envy and avarice rejoice at, and are fed with
other men's tears and losses: sed gaudent pyraustae gaudium. Contrariwise, God
is rich to all that call upon him, Romans 10. and in spiritual things there is no
envy, because they may be divided in solidum, one may have as much as another,
and all alike.

I shall be replenished] Mercibus and opibus, with wars and wealth. But how
long will it hold?

(...). Pindar.
Ver. 3. Therefore thus says the Lord God] And thy Merchants will soon do thee
word of it: for they are great news-mongers, and ill-news is swift of foot.

Behold I am against thee] Neither can thine Apollo help or deliver thee out of
my hands: no though thou chain that idol and nail him to a post, that thou
may be sure of him: for so these Tyrians did when Alexander besieged their
City and took it.

Ver. 4. And they shall destroy the walls of Tyrus] Which thou hold to be
inexpugnable: Hence this and the two following Chapters, purposely to undeceive
thee, if it may be.

I will also scrape her dust from her] Brought from other places, to make her
gardens: for she was built upon a rock, and in petram glabram: to a naked rock
will God now reduce her.

Ver. 5. It shall be a place for the spreading of nets] Of fishers nets, hung
up in the Sun to be dried. The Prophets usually fetch their comparisons from
things the people were most acquainted with and accustomed to, as here. Let
Ministers now do the like.

Ver. 6. And her daughters which are in the field] i. e. Other Cities and
colonies sent out by her, and subject to her; as she was olim partu clara
urbibus genitis, as Pliny says of her, the mother of many fair Cities, Leptis,
Vtica, Carthage. Some take it literally for people of both sexes.

Ver. 7. Behold I will bring upon Tyrus Nebuchadnezzar] A name as dreadful
then, as was at any time the name of the great Turk: a man as famous for his
valor and victories as ever was Hercules, says Megasthenes in in Josephus:
Antiq. l. 10. c. 13.
and such as whom we may well call as Orosius does Alexander, magnum miseriarum
gurgitem, and totius Orientis atrocissimum turbinem, the great Trouble-world.

Ver. 8. He shall slay with the sword] See on ver. 6.

He shall lift up the buckler] Or, a continued series of bucklers,

-- ut omnes
Far queant jubter densa testudine casus. Helepoles injiciet.

Ver. 9. He shall set engines of war] A graphical description of a siege.

And with his axes] Or, battering-rams, or slings. Heb. with his swords. Gr.
with his lances, ferramentis mucronatis helepoleos. Vide Am. Marcell. lib. 23.

Ver. 10. Thy walls shall shake] With the noise of one charret, walls and
windows seem to shake: what then with the rattle of so many? Me thought I heard
the noise and fright that shall be at the last day, said one that was at the
taking of a Town in the Low Countries. The fragour and terror was so great
say, A Lapide.
the Turkish histories (speaking of a bloody battle betwixt Amurath the third,
and Lazarus Despot of Sernia) that the Angels in heaven (so they are pleased to
Hyperbolize) Turk. Hist.
amazed with that hideous noise, for that time forgot the heavenly hymns
wherewith they always glorify God.

When he shall enter into thy gates] As our Henry the eighth did into Tournay a
City of France, which was ever counted so impregnable that this sentence was
engraven over one of the gates, Jannes ton me a perdu ton pucellage, i. e. Thou
have never lost thy maidenhead.

Ver. 11. And thy strong garrisons] Or statues, or idols. Their chief idols
were Apollo, Hercules, and Astarie: See on ver. 3. Curt. l. 4. Plut. Probl.


Ver. 12. And they shall make a spoil of thy riches] Raked together by right
and wrong. See on ver. 2. Male parta male dilabuntur. Sallust.


Ver. 13. And I will cause the noise of thy songs to cease] The Tyrians were
much addicted to Music, Isa. 23.16. Ezekiel. 28.13. Pleasure-mongers shall suffer
deeply, by pain of loss and pain of sense.

And the sound of thy harp] Qua tu O Tire, mercatrix quasi meretrix mercatores
ad te pellicis, wherewith thou gettest custom.

Ver. 14. Thou shall be built no more] i. e. Not in haste, and not at all by
the same inhabitants, nor with the like neatness, and celebrity. Some say it
was not built in the same place with Palaetyrus or old Tire: yet was it a
famous City again, near unto which our Savior wrought miracles; Hieron. Ulp.
diget. Tit. de ^ens.
in which Paul abode seven days with the brethren. Here Origin dyed, Vlpian
the great Lawyer was born, etc. Of this City read Gul. Tyrius de bello sacro.
lib. 13. cap. 1.

Ver. 15. Shall not the Isles] See the like Esa. 23.

Ver. 16. All the Princes of the sea] i. e. Of the neighboring Islands.

Cloth themselves with trembling] Luth. with mourning.

Ver. 17. And they shall take up a lamentation] The like shall be done shortly
at Rome, Rev. 18.9.

That wast inhabited of seafaring men] Who are usually the worst of men; whence
the Proverb Maritimi mores, etc.

On all that haunt it] Haunt the sea, littorales qui sunt fere duri, horridi,
immanes, latrociniis dediti, feri and inhospitales, tales olim Britanni.

Isidor.
Ver. 18. Now shall the Isles tremble] And seeing thy shipwreck, they shall look
better to their tackling. Alterius perditio tua sit cautio.

At thy departure] Into captivity. Or tuus exitus, hoc est tuum exitium.

Ver. 19. When I shall bring up the deep upon thee] As ver. 3. great forces.

And great waters shall cover thee] So that thou shall be irrecoverably lost,
as places drowned and never seen any more: Godwins sands here in Kent for
instance. These did once belong to Godwin Earl of Kent as his lands: but in
the reign of William Rufus they were overflowed, and remain to this day a
dangerous sandy place, where perished this present year 1658. Col. Reynolds and
others, in their return from Mardike.

Ver. 20. With the people of old time] The multitude of those that are dead
from the beginning of the world. Or, with the people of the old world, as
Hierom will have it: and that the Tyrians destruction both temporal and eternal
is hereby hinted.

When I shall set glory in the land of the living] i. e. In Judaes, (where the
living and true God is worshipped, and where are the right heirs of life) will
I reestablish my Church, which is my glory. Or when I shall glorify mine elect
in mine heavenly Kingdom.

Ver. 21. Yet shall thou never be found again] See on ver. 14.

CHAP. XXVII.
Ver. 1. THe Word of the Lord] See on chap. 18.1.

Ver. 2. Take up a lamentation for Tyrus] Fitly here compared to a goodly ship:
Apud Horat. Resp. navis nomine s^gnificatur. Carm. lib. 1. Od. 14.
and her desolation to a dismal shipwreck. Theodorets note on the text is, that
when we correct sinners or threaten them, it should be done with commiseration
and compassion. Here we have Gods own example for it: Ille dolet quoties
cogitur esse ferex.

Ver. 3. O thou that art situate as the entry of the sea] As now the City of
Venice is, -- Media insuperabilis unda. Environed with her embracing Neptune,
to whom (as the ceremony of throwing a ring into the sea implies, says one)
she marries her self with yearly nuptials. But has she so learned Christ? and
does not the Nebuchadnezzar of Constantinople now threaten her sore?

Thou have said, I am of perfect beauty] So that nothing can be added to me: I
am ocellus orbis. But who made thee to differ? is not all thy beauty borrowed?
will not this thy bulging wall down ere long?

Ver. 4. Thy borders are in the midst of the sea] Wherewith thou art compassed
and crowned as it were, Isa. 23.8. being half a mile distant from the
continent, till first Nebuchadnezzar and then Alexander the Great, by casting
earth, wood and stones into the sea, made it of an Island, a Peniland, etc.

Lib. 18. Lib. 8. Ant. cap. 2.
Thy builders] The Sidonians, says Justin; 240, years before Solomon's Temple
was built, says Josephus.

Ver. 5. They have made all thy shipboards] Of the most precious materials,
which with thy rich freight did incite and entice the Archpirate, to surprise
and make prize of thee.

Ver. 6. Of the oaks of Bashan] Those very best of the best. See ver. 5.

Out of the Isles of Chittim] i. e. Of Greece and the Archipelago, Genesis 10.4.
far set, and dear-bought. Benches and decks might well have been made of worse
matters: sed opulentiam fere sequitur superbia, luxus, libido, etc. wealth
breeds swelth, which is a dangerous symptom (as in the body, so) in the mind
too.

-- Pulcherrima regna Claudlan.

Luxuries vitiis, odiisque superbia vertit.
Ver. 7. Fine linnen] When course Canvas might have served the turn as well.

From Egypt] Which is held to be the finest, whitest, and costliest. O this
unnecessary bravery. Luxus est anteambulo ruinae: how many has it utterly
undone? When a man shall see a cloak embroidered over with Woods and Parkes and
Lordships, and lined with obligations and bonds and statutes, will not the
beggar soon catch such a Prodigal by the back?

From the Isles of Elisha] i. e. Of Italy, says the Chaldee Paraphrast: of
Greece, say others: the Fortunate Islands, say some; which are called the
Elysian Islands, for their pleasure and plenty.

Was that which covered thee] The Poop of thy ships. Of Cleopatra's sumptuous
ship or barge, the Poop whereof was of gold, the oars silver, the sails
purple, etc. See Plutarch in Anton.

Ver. 8. The inhabitants of Zidon] Famous all the world over for their skill at
sea, and otherwise.

Thy wisemen -- were thy Pilots] Wise they had need to be, that sit at the
stern of a state. Let them not therefore be ignorant, or idle, or otherwise
faulty, lest they mar all: let them be active Argonautes. They have their names
here in the Hebrew from the ropes of the ship, which they as Pilots, must
skilfully order: shifting sails according to the wind. Counsel also, in that
tongue, has its name from the same root. (...)


Ver, 9. The ancients of Gibael] Great Architects, 1 King. 5.18, but
persecutors of the Church, Psalm. 83.7.

Thy calkers] Or stoppers of chinkes, stuppa, pice, aliaeque materia, when the
ship springs a leak.

Ver. 10. They set forth thy comelinesse] They were to thee both for muniment,
and for ornament.

Ver. 11. And the Gammadims] These were not Pygmies, as the Vulgar renders it,
nor Medes as Symmachus, nor, Cappadocians, as the Chaldee Paraphrast: Not.
Hist. l. 2. c. 91.
but Syrians of a City called Gamalla; whereof see Pliny.

Ver. 12. Tarshish] i. e. The Carthaginians, say some: the Citizens of Tarsus
another colony of the Tyrians, say others.

They traded in thy Faires] Heb. in thy derelictions; because they left their
commodities behind them, taking others in exchange: for -- Non omnis fert omnia
tellus.

Ver. 13. Javan, Tubal, and Meshec] i. e. Grecians, Spaniards, and Moscovites
or Cappadocians, who were naturally of a servile disposition: Lib. 1. cap. 6.
they were anciently called Meschines, says Josephus, of Meshech the son of
Japhet, Genesis 10.2.

They traded the persons of men] i. e. They bought and sold slaves, as now they
do in Turkey.

Ver. 14. They of the house of Togarmah] i. e. The Germans, says the Targum,
who are still excellent horsemen. The Jews call the Turks the house of
Togarmah.

Ver. 15. The men of Dedan] Arabians, Genesis 10.7. The Septuagint render them
Rhodians.

Horns of Ivory] The Elephants two great Tushes, crooked as horns.

And ebeny] Hebenum, which has affinity with Eben, which signifies a stone:
for Ebony is a wood hard and heavy as a stone. The Chaldee renders it,
peacocks.

Ver. 16. The wares of thy making] Heb. works. The Tyrians were ingenious
workmen, as Hiram, whom Solomon therefore so admired that he called him his
Father.

And Agate] Or Chrysoprase, or Crystal, or Carbuncle, or Onyx. Hierom
confesses that he knows not what to call it.

Deuteronomy. 32.14.
Ver. 17. Wheat of Minnith] Where the best grew, even the kidneyes of wheat, as
Moses has it. Confer Judge. 11.33. Act. 12.20.

Pannag] Rozin or balsam, whereof Judaea yielded the best in the whole world.

For the wine of Helbon] i. e. Of Aleppe, say some, famous then for wine, now
for milk, whence also it has its name: for the Turks call milk Alep: and if
the Via lactea were on earth, it would be found there, says one.

Graecus vagabundus. Va^ab.
Ver. 19. Dan also] Anciently called Laish, Judge. 18. Javan or the Grecians were
great travelers.

Going to and fro] Discursatory. Horat.
Impiger extremos currit mercator ad Indos. See Notes on Psalm. 38.11.

Ver. 20. In precious cloaths] Heb. clothes of freedom: such as are worn by
Gallants and Magnifico's.

Ad vehiculum.
For charrets] Or saddles, or trappings.

Ver. 21. They occupied with thee in lambs] Heb. they were the merchants of thy
hand, or at thy hand: for cattle could not be carried far.

In these were they thy Merchants] Merchants are as useful in a Commonwealth,
as Mechanikes, for exporting and importing commodities. Only they must observe
the Gospel-standard, Whatever ye would that men should do to you, do ye the
same to them.

Oecol.
Ver. 22. The Merchants of Sheba and Raamah] i. e. Ethiopians and Indians. Erat
enim Tyrus emporium propemodum totius mundi.

With chief of all spices] All aromatical wares. Pliny reports of cinnamon,
that in his time a pound of it was worth a thousand denarii, that is 150.
crowns of our money. Gallen writes, that it was hard to be found, except in the
storehouses of great Princes.

The tower of Babel was 9164 paces from the ground.
Ver. 23. Haran] In Mesopotamia, or Charra in Parthia; where Crassus was slain.

And Channeh] Or Chalne: where the tower of Babel was built nine miles high.

And Eden] Where Paradise once was: sed periit rosae, mansit spina.

Chelmad] i. e. Media, says the Paraphrast.

Ver. 24. In all sorts of things] In omnibus perfectissimis, in the very best
commodities; whether for worth, or workmanship.

Aggravata es.
Ver. 25. Thou wast replenished and made very glorious] Or very heavy: as a ship
though not top-full, may yet have freight enough to sink it: so had this
Metaphorical ship Tyrus, enough to sink it, though not enough to satisfy it.

Ver. 26. Thy rowers have brought thee into great waters] Narrat Tyri
nanfragium. Omnium horu^ ruinam and rapinam praenunciat.
Here begins the Prophecy of Tyrus her woeful shipwreck.

The East-wind] Called the Mariners misery. The Chaldees were East from Tire,
the great wealth whereof solicited their poverty to set upon them, as the
wealth of Cyprus did the Romans.

Ver. 27. Shall fall into the midst of the seas] As a ship that sinketh, and
cannot be boyed up again.

Ver. 28. The suburbs shall shake] Or, the waves, or the boats which they throw
out of the ship. See on chap. 26.10.

Of the cry of thy Pilots] At their Conclamatum est: but why did they then
steer no better? Here we see all covet, all loose.

Ver. 29. And all that handle the ^ar] That have escaped to land with their
lives.

Ver. 30. To be heard against thee] Or for thee, or over thee, ver. 31. Rev.
18. 11, 15, 16.

Ver. 31. And they shall make] Maerebunt induti saccis, inducto calvitio. If
this had been for sin as it is offensivum Dei, and aversivum a Deo, then it had
been right.

Ver. 32. What City] An elegant Mimesis.

Like the destroyed] Quae obmutuit, like her that lost her voice and life
together.

Ver. 33. When thy wares] Good things are fairest on the backside: the worth
of them is best known by the want of them. Our eye sees not things but at a
distance.

Ver. 34. In the depths of the waters] i. e. In the overflowing of the wars,
ver. 26.

Ver. 35. They shall be troubled in their countenance] i. e. Appaled and
dispirited.

Ver. 36. The Merchants shall hiss at thee] Either as astonished at thee, A
Lapide.
or rather as deriding thee: like as he who sees another fall into the dirt,
first pittieth him, and then jeareth him. See the like Jer. 19.8. and 49.17.

Thou shall be a terrour] Because God has hanged thee up in gibbets as it
were. Or thou wast a terror once, but now a scorn.

And never shall be any more] See on chap. 26.14.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Ver. 1. THe Word of the Lord] See on chap. 18.1.

Ver. 2. Say unto the Prince of Tyre] Princes must be told their own, as well
as others. It was partly by flattery that this Prince was so high-flown. His
glory, wealth and wit also had so blown him up, that he forgot himself to be a
man. Tabael Josephus, out of Berosus, calls him: Diod^rus Siculus Ith^baal,
others Ethbaal; A most proud and presumptuous person he was, and a type of the
devil, who is the King of all the children of pride, Job 41.34. Here he holds
himself to be wiser then Daniel, ver. 3. yea to be the sum and perfection of
all wisdom, ver. 12. to excel the High Priest in all his ornaments, Os
humerosque Deo similis, ver. 13. yea to be above Adam, ib. above the Cherubims,
ver. 14. lastly to be God himself, and to sit in his feat, ver. 2. O Lucifer
out-devild! And yet as there were many Marii in one Caesar, so by nature, there
are many Ethbaals in the best of us: for as in water face answers to face, so
does the heart of a man to a man, Prove. 27.19. Julius Caesar suffered Altars
and Temples to be dedicated unto him, as to a god: and what wonder, when as his
flatterers told him that the freckles in his face were like the stars in the
firmament? Sueton.
Valladerius told Pope Paul the fifth (and he believed it) that he was a god,
that he lived familiarly with the Godhead, that he heard predestination it self
whispering to him, that he had a place to sit in council with the Divine
Trinity, etc. Prodigious blasphemy! Is not this that man of sin, that Merum
scelus spoken of by Paul, 2 These. 2.4? (see more of this there) Was it not he
that made Dandalus the Venetian Ambassador roll under his table, and as a dog
eat crusts there? and that suffered the Sicilian Ambassadors to use these
words unto him, Domine Deus papa miserere nostrum. O Lord God the Pope, have
mercy upon us. And again, O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world,
grant us thy peace!

In the midst of the seas] Where none can come at me. Yes Nebuchadnezzar could,
and did, though after thirteen years siege, as Josephus writes: a hard tug and
hot service he had of it; but yet he did the deed: as did afterward also
Alexander the great, who never held any thing unfeisible.

Ver. 3. Behold thou art wiser then Daniel] That oracular man, who was (...),
as one says of Homer, (...) the most wise and knowing man alive. His name was
now up at Babylon: and Ezekiel his Contemporary commends him. So does the
Baptist, Christ: and Peter, Paul, 2 Ep. 3. though there had been a breach
between them, Gal. 2.14. there was no envy. But such another Braggard as this
in the text was Richardus de Sancto Victore a Monk of Paris, who said that
himself was a better Divine then any Prophet or Apostle of them all. Paraei
hist. sac. medul. Moral. 17.
But How much better, says Gregory, is humble ignorance then proud knowledge?

Ver. 4. With thy wisdom -- thou have gotten thee riches] Which yet is not
every wise man's happiness. Aelian observes that the wisest and best of the
Grecians were very poor: as Socrates, Aristides, Phecion, Ephialtes,
Epaminondas, Pel^pidas, Var. hist. lib. 2. Eumolpus.
Lamachus, and others. Fortuna fere favet fatuis: nescio quomodo, bona mentis
soror est paupertas, says he in Petronius: Piety goes often yoked with poverty.

Ver. 5. Thine heart is lifted up because of thy riches] Like as the higher the
flood rises, the higher also does the boat that floateth thereon. A small
blast will blow up a bubble: so will a few paltry pound^s puff up a carnal
heart.

By thy great wisdom] Here God did nothing. And such for all the world, says
Oecolampadius, are our free will men, with their ego feci, this I did. Such
Feci's are no better then faeces says Luther, that is, dregs and dross.

Ver. 6. Because thou have set thine heart as the heart of God] Thou think
thy wisdom to be Divine, and thy self the only one. The Tyrians were famous
for their great wisdom, Zach. 9.2. and they are said to be the inventers of
many arts: yet should they not have overweened themselves in this sort: which
because they did, let them hear their doom.

Ver. 7. Behold therefore I will bring strangers upon thee] Who shall not at
all regard thy great wisdom, but grasp after thy wealth, and suck thy blood for
it. Neither will they favor thee the more because thou art a King, but slay
thee the rather, and say Hunc ipsum quaerimus, This is the right bird, as that
soldier said, who slew the most valiant King of Sweden, at the battle of
Lutzen.

Ver. 8. They shall bring thee down to the pit] There shall lie the greatness
of the god of Tire.

And thou shall dye the deaths] Death will make no difference betwixt a Prince
and a pesant, a Lord and a lozel. The mortal sith is master of the royal
scepter.

Ver. 9. Will thou say before him that slays thee, I am a god?] That will
prove a poor plea, and thou will soon be confuted: as afterward great
Alexander confuted his flatterers, when being wounded in fight he showed them
his blood.

Ver. 10. Thou shall dye the death of the uncircumcised] Not only a temporal
but an eternal death: as they must needs do that are out of the Covenant of
grace, whereof circumcision was the seal. This is the sad Catastrophe, of such
as dream of a deity. Of which number were Caligula, Herod, Heliogabalus,
Dioclesian, and other monsters, uncircumcised Viceg^ds, as we may in the worst
sense, best term them.

Ver. 11. More^ver the word] See on chap. 18.1.

Ver. 12. Take up a lamentation for the King of Tyre] Who shall have little
leisure to lament for himself; his destruction shall be so sudden. See on chap.
27.2.

Thou sealest up the sum] i. e. Thou art a pattern of perfection, in thine own
conceit at least: for a seal has in it the perfect form of him that is thereby
represented; and then is a letter perfected when the last act of setting to a
seal is done to it. Literae consignatae and clausae and absoluta sunt. Oecol.
(...). Plato. Hom.
Tu es omnibus numeris absolutum exemplar; so Vatablus and the Tigurines.

Ver. 13. Thou have been in Eden] As a bird of Paradise, or as a tree growing
there, -- (...). Thou art equal to Adam in the state of innocence: and thy Tire
is no whit inferior to the garden of God.

Flores in pratis fragrant, and purpura campis:
Gemma coloratis fulg^t speciosa lapillis.
Every precious stone was thy covering] Not thy diadem only was decked with them
(as the Popes triple crown is at this day with gemmes of greatest value) but
thy royal robe (not inferior, happily, to that of Demetrius King of Macedony,
which none of his successors would wear propter invidiosam impendii
magnificentiam, it was so extreme stately and costly) yea thy pantofles
possibly, as Dioclesians the Emperor holding forth his feet to be kissed, as
does also the Pope at this day, who has the cross in precious stones set upon
his pantofle, to the great reproach of Christianity.

The Sardius, Topaz, and the diamond] Nine of those rich stones that were set
in the Highpriests Rationale, or breast plate See on ver. 2.

The workmanship of thy tabrets] At thy birth, and at thine inauguration there
was great mirth made, concrepantibus tympanis, tibiis and tubis. What a deal of
joy and jollity was there lately expressed in many places for the birth of the
Prince of Spain?

Trem.
Ver. 14. Thou art the anointed Cherub] Or, thou art a Cherub ever since I
anointed thee for Protector: as the Cherubims cover the Ark with their wings,
so do thou thy people; and therefore take upon thee as if an earthly Angel.

Thou wast upon the holy mountain of God] Thou have been in heaven: or at least
on mount Sinai with Moses, where God appeared with millions of his Angels
having a fiery pavement under his feet, Exodus 24.10.

In the midst of the stones of fire] i. e. Of Seraphims, say some, those
flaming creatures, of lightenings and thunderbolts, say others, which thou
^utlest about at thy pleasure.

Saevum praelustri fulmes ab arce venit. Ver. 15. Thou wast perfect in thy
ways.] As the evil Angels also were: but now it is otherwise. Heaven spued out
them in the very first act of their sin, and soon after they were created. Look
thou therefore to speed accordingly, since iniquity is found in thee. Potentes
potenter torquebuntur.

Ver. 16. By the multitude of thy merchandise] Multa sunt frauds ubi mercatura
servet. Oecol.
Many Merchants think they may do any thing for their own advantage: cheating
and overreaching pass for virtues with them.

And thou have sinned] By suffering it so to be; for there is a passive
injustice as well as an active.

I will cast thee] I will bring thee down with a vengeance, (...).
and make thee an example of that rule, Great sins have great punishments.

Ver. 17. Thine heart, etc.] Fastus inest palchris.

By reason of thy brightnesse] Thine own splendour has dazeled thee. Magna
cognatio est ut rei sic and nominis, di^^is and vitiis.

That they may behold thee] And beware by thee.

Ver. 18. Thou have defiled thy sanctuaries] i. e. Thy kingly palaces, where
thou art looked upon and honored as a God (but a wretched one) and which for
stateliness may vye with my Sanctuary. Add hereto, that as none might come
into the Temple but Priests only: so none might come into the palace but
confiding persons: The Turks at this day suffer no stranger to come into the
presence of their Emperor, but first they clasp him by the arms, under color
of doing him honor, Turk. Hist. 715.
but indeed to bereave him of the use of his hands, lest he should offer him
any violence.

Therefore will I bring forth a fire in the midst of thee] Thou shall perish by
thine own sins, as a house is burnt by fire kindled within it self.

And I will bring thee to ashes] Which shall remain as a lasting monument of
the divine displeasure; as did the ashes and cinders of Sodom: and Herodotus
says the same of the ashes of Troy.

Ver. 19. Thou shall be a terrour] As Kings exceed all others in glory, so
their fall is often with so great ignominy, that they become a wonder and a
terror to all people.

Ver. 20. Again the Word of the Lord] See chap. 18.1.

Ver. 21. Set thy face against Zidon] An ancient and eminent City of Phenicia,
little inferior to Tyrus: in Josua it is called Zidon the great. Josh 11.
A very superstitious place, and a great enemy to Gods people.

Ver. 22. Behold I am against thee] Heb. I against thee, by an angry
Aposiopesis,

I will be glorified] Viz. In thy just destruction.

And shall be sanctified in her] See on Levit. 10.3.

Ver. 23. For I will send into her] These are Gods evil Angels.

And the wounded shall be judged in the midst of her] This was done likely by
Nebuchaduezzar: but certainly by Artaxerxes Ochus the Persian, as the Prophet
Zachary had foretold, chap. 9. and as Diodorus Siculus has left upon record.

Ver. 24. And there shall be no more a pricking bryar] For God will take away
the Canaanite out of the land, Zach. 14. omnem spinum dolorificum: he will by
his Judgments provide for his own glory, and for his peoples comfort.

Ver. 25. Then shall they dwell in their Land] Provided that they cleave close
to me: otherwise I will out them again. It has been elsewhere noted, that the
Promises are with a condition; which is as an oar in a boat, or stern of a
ship, and turns the promise another way.

Ver. 26. And they shall dwell safely therein] Or, in confidence: And this is
reiterated here to show what a mercy of God it is, to live secure, and free
from the fear of enemies.

CHAP. XXIX.
Ver. 1. IN the tenth year] The year before Jerusalem was taken, chap. 24.1.

In the tenth moneth] Called Thebeth, Estth. 2. and it answers to our
January, says Bid, Chronology is the eye of Prophecy, as well as of History.

In Euterpt.
Ver. 2. Set thy face against Pharaoh] This was Pharaoh Ophra, whom Horodotus
calls Apryes, and says, that he gave out that no God, how great soever could
deprive him of his Kingdom. Dionysius the tyrant of Sicily also was wont to
say, that his Kingdom was tied unto him with chains of adamant: but it proved
otherwise. Noli gloriari.

And against all Egypt] Which held it self able to hold out against all the
world, and is therefote here threatened at large in this, and the three next
Chapters.

Ver. 3. The great dragon] Or Whale, or Crocodile, the figure of Pharaoh; whose
Princes also and people are fitly compared to lesser fishes, and Egypt to
waters, wherewith it abounds. Oecol.
These shall all suffer together, says the Prophet: Principis enim calamitas,
populi clades est. Confer Psalm. 74.13, 14.

That lies in the midst of his rivers] That lies at ease in the swolen waters
of his Nilus, and battleth.

Which has said My river is mine own] The river Nilus waters Egypt and
makes it fruitful beyond credulity. They do but cast in the seed, and have
four rich harvests in less then four months, say travelers. Hence the
Egyptians were generally proud, riotus, and superstitious above measure: Plin.
Paneg.
Nequitias tellus scit dare nulla magis. The most poisonous flies are bred in
the sweetest fruit trees. See on 1 Timothy 6.17.

And I have made it for my self] i. e. Useful and serviceable to my Country,
with much pains and expense, by ditches, channels, watercourse, etc. These
were cleansed and repaired by the command of Augustus Caesar, Sueton.
when he had subdued Egypt, and reduced it into a Province. Some render it Ego
feci meipsum, I have made my self; a most arrogant speech!

Ovid.
Sum felix; quis enim neget hoc? felix que manebo;
Hoc quoque quis dubitet? tutum me copia fecit.
Major sum quam cui possit fortuna nocere.
Ver. 4. But I will put hooks in thy chaws] Speaking to Tyru^ a Sea-town,
Sea-Metaphors were made use of. Now he fetches them from waters and fishes,
that he may frame himself to his hearers: A good precedent for Preachers.

To stick unto thy scales] Thy subjects shall all follow thee into the field,
that there you may all fall together. Had they kept themselves in Egypt, they
might have been far safer; for that Country could hardly be come at by an
enemy. But they went forth to meet their bane, as if they had been ambitious of
destruction. God had a holy hand in it.

Ver. 5. And I will leave thee thrown into the wildernesse] As fish when they
are caught are cast upon the dry land, and there they dye: for how should a
fish live out of his own element? It may be the Chaldees sought Pharaoh and his
forces in the Wilderness, killed him and cast him out unburied; which the
Heathens held a great unhappiness: for they thought their ghosts could not
pass the river Styx, but must wander through Hels waste wildernesses, unless
their dead bodies were buried.

I have given thee for meat] Whales flesh is no better worth.

Ver. 6. And all the inhabitants, etc.] Shall feel my power in their just
destruction, though they think themselves insuperable.

Because they have been a staff of reed] See this fully expounded in the next
words. See also on Isa. 36.6. Jer. 37.7, 8. Egypt was a reedy Country, Lib. 13.
cap. 11.
as Pliny tells us. Arando autem ipsa per se fluctuat, and in necessitate
eludit.

Ver. 7. When they took hold of thee by thy hand] i. e. Made a Covenant with
thee, and hoped for help from thee. See Job 8.20. The holy Scripture is its own
best interpreter.

Thou did break] So unfaithful are many friends: so uncertain are all humane
helps.

And made all their loins to be at a stand] Thou leftest them in the lurch,
as we say, to shift for themselves as they could.

Ver. 8. And cut off man and beast] With both which thou aboundest exccedingly:
as being a very fruitful Country; populosa, and pecorosa.

Ver. 9. Because he has said, The river is mine, and I have made it] With this
proud speech he is twice twitted, see ver. 3. The Egytians so trusted in their
river Nilus, as if they needed no help from heaven. Aegyptus sine nube ferax,
says Claudian. Epigram. 6.
And Lucan to like purpose: Terra suis contenta bonis, non indiga mercis
Aut Jovis: in solo tanta est fiducia Nilo.
How much better might God have said to these Egyptians, then Vespasian did,
Haurite a me tanquam a Nilo, Come ye to Me the fountain of living waters, and
hew not out thus to your selves broken cisterns that can hold no water! But
they used in mockery to tell the Grecians, that if God should forget to rain,
they might chance to starve for it: they thought the rain was of God, but not
the river: Te propter nullos tellus tua post ulat imbres: T^bul. de Nilo.

Arida nec pluvio supplicat herba Jovi.
God therefore threateneth hers to dry it up, and so he did: Ingratitude
forfeiteth all. In the reign of Cleopatra, Nilus overflowed not the banks for
two years together, says Seneca: he brings in Callimachus telling of a time,
wherein it had not done so for nine years space. Hence Ovid, Creditur Aegyptus
caruisse juvantibus arva
Imbribus, atque annis sicca fuisse novem, Art. lib. 1. (...). Athenaeus.
(...). Nazianz.
.
Thus their gold-flowing and fruit-giving river failed them, because they
attributed too much to it. In Joseph's time they had seven years famine.

Ver. 10. And against thy rivers] The Jealous God will down with the earthly
idol, whatever it be: See on ver. 9.

And I will make the land of Egypt utterly wast] Heb. wast of wastes,

From the tower of Syene] i. e. From South to North.

Ver. 11. No foot of man or beast shall pass through it] This was solitudo
solitudinis indeed; a dreadful desolation. When it fell out, no history
mentions: but that it was so, is most sure. Oh the dismal effects of sin in
all ages, as now in sundry parts of Turkey, utterly unpeopled, though once
flourishing!

Ver. 12. In the midst of the Countries] Palestine, Moab, Edom, Judea, etc. See
Jer. 46.

And her Cities] Which are said to have been 20000. in the reign of Amasis, the
chief whereof were Alexandria, Thebes, Babylon, Memphis, etc.

Ver. 13. Will I gather the Egyptians] God loves to help men that are forsaken
of their hopes. Cyrus sent them home likely, about that time that he took
Babylon; and his son Cambyses had somewhat to do to subdue them; so high they
were soon grown and headstrong; humbled they were, but not humble: low, but
not lowly.

Ver. 14. Into the land of Pathros] A part of the lower Egypt; a corner of the
Country say some; but big enough to hold the remnant that returned.

And they shall be there a base Kingdom] Reditum and regnum illis promittit,
sed humile, a Kingdom God promises them, but base and abject; because subject
and tributary to the Persian, so that the Israelites shall no more lean upon
it. God often removes occasions of sin from his people, takes away their
stumbling blocks, that they may not fall under his heavy displeasure.

Ver. 15. It shall be the basest of the Kingdoms] And worthily for their
worshipping the basest creatures (See Romans 1.23, 24.) but especially for their
faithlesnesse to Gods Israel.

Turk. Hist.
For I will diminish them] As God has likewise done the Persians at this day
(who have undone their confederates, the Egyptians and Georgians) and the
Grecians no less; who have now lost their liberty, and are so degenerate by
means of the Turkish oppression, Ib. 260.
that in all Graecia is hardly to be found any small remembrance of the glory
thereof.

Ver. 16. And it shall be no more the confidence] For I will cut them, and keep
them short enough: I will pull their plumes, so that they shall not stretch
their wings beyond the nest: they shall have nothing so many clients, and
adherents.

Which brings their iniquity to remembrance] Creature-confidence is so hated
of God, that it inmindeth him of former miscarriages also, and causes him to
plague men for the new and the old together.

Ver. 17. In the seven and twentieth year] Of Jeconiah's captivity (as Ezekiel
ordinarily counts) or of Nebuchadnezzar's reign, say the Jew-doctours: when
as Tire was overthrown, some part of Egypt wasted, Jeremy and Baruch taken into
his protection. Sedar-olam.


The Word of the Lord came] This was Ezekil's last sermon, his swan-like song:
showing wherefore and whereby Egypt should be so laid waste.

Ver. 18. To serve a great service] For thirteen years together, as says
Josephus.

Every head was made bald] sc. By continual carrying upon their heads and
shoulders, earth, wood, and stones (for which they were much laughed at by the
Tyrian soldiers) to fill up that strait of the Sea, which separated Tire from
the Continent, before it could be taken.

Yet he had no wages] The Tyrians, when they saw they could hold out no longer,
had sent much of their wealth away to Carthage, and other places: much of it
also they cast into the Sea, says Lyra; so that Nebuchadnezzar at his entrance
found nothing but a bare rock, says Hierom, out of an old Assyrian Chronicle.

Ver. 19. Behold I will give the land of Egypt] As pay for his pains at Tire.
God is a liberal play master, and his retributions are more then bountiful.
Serve him therefore with cheerfulness.

Turk. Hist. 345. lb. 227.
Ver. 20. I have given him the land of Egypt] As the great Turk gave his
soldiers the rich spoil of Constantinople: and as Tamerlan never forgot the
good service of his servants, nor left the same long unrewarded; often saying
that day to be lost, wherein he had not given them something.

Because they wrought for me] By mine instinct, though beside their own intent.

Ver. 21. The horn] i. e. The strength, power and authority, in the Kingdom of
Christ especially, Luke 1.69.

The opening] Occasion to bless my Name.

They shall know] Nebuchadnezzar also and his Babylonians.

CHAP. XXX.
Ver. 1. THe Word of the Lord] See chap. 18.1.

Ver. 2. Woe worth the day] Ah de die ista. This shall be the voice much more
of reprobates at that last day of wrath and revelation of the righteous
Judgment of God, Romans 2.5. Enoch foretold this dreadful day, before Noah the
deluge: That day is longer before it comes: but shall be more terrible when it
is come.

Ver. 3. A cloudy day] Heb. a day of a cloud; which was rarely seen in Egypt.

Ver. 4. Great pain] Heb. pain upon pain, as the throws in childbirth.

Ver. 5. Chub] Certain Africans, who shall be worse put to it then were those
succeeding Africans, who had a prophecy (but not of like credit with this of
Ezechiel) that when the Romans sent an army into their country, Mundus cum tota
sua prole periret, which made them think the world should then be at an end.
But afterward the Romans sent an army thither under the conduct of one Mundus,
who in battle was slain together with his sons by the Africans, Lib. 15.
and discovered the illusion of the devil. The Septuagint render Chub
Spaniards; which I like the better, says Lavater, because Strabo says
Nebuchadonoser came with his victorious army as far as Spain.

Ver. 6. They that uphold Egypt shall fall] i. e. Their confederates; or as
some, their Tutelar gods. Herodotus writes that Cambyses wasted with the sword
Egypt and Ethiopia: killed their god Apis, and defaced all their idols. This he
did, doubtless, rather in scorn of all religion, then hatred of idolatry.

And the pride of her power shall come down] Tumbling down as a great and
weighty bullet, from a very high and steep mountain.

From the tower of Syene] See chap. 29.10.

Ver. 7. And they shall be desolate] See chap. 29.10. Non est Perissologia:
repetitur cum fructu. Lavat.


Ver. 8. And they shall know that I am the Lord] Men will not take knowledge of
this till they have paid for their learning. Vexatio dat intellectum, smart
makes wit.

When I have set a fire in Egypt] War is fitly compared to fire, it feeds upon
the people. See Esa. 9.19. with the Note.

Ver. 9. In that day shall messengers go forth from me] i. e. The Chaldeans by
an instinct from me, to subdue Ethiopia also.

In ships] For Nilus was navigable:

Lene fluit Nilus. -- Claudian.
To make the careless Ethiopians] Heb. confident Cush: Security ushereth in
calamity.

As in the day of Egypt] That cloudy day, ver. 3. when clouds of blood were
dissolved upon them: Or, that dismal day of old, when they perished in the red
sea, Exodus 15.14.

Ver. 10. I will also make the multitude] Or the great noise and hurry. They
shall have no more cause to complain that they are too many of them: so that
they cannot one live by another.

Ver. 11. The terrible of the nations] Tyranni gentium. Homo homini lupus.

Ver. 12. And I will make the rivers dry] The Chaldees shall drink them up, as
2 King. 19.24. or I will dry them up for a punishment of your vain trust in
them, and boasting of them, chap. 29.3, 9.

And sell the land] Pass it away utterly from you. The earth is the Lords: he
is the true Proprietary.

Ver. 13. I will also destroy their idols] He did so by Cambyses: See on ver.
6. he does so still by the Turks; when they invade Popish countries, they
break down their mawmets.

Out of Neph] Called also Moph, Hos. 9.6. afterward Memphis (the Metropolis of
idolatry; Nazianzen calls it (...), the mad City, because mad-set upon idols;
Apis especially) afterward Babylon, and now Aleair: (...).
famous for its incredible greatness, fair situation, pillars and Pyramids. It
was the seat royal of the Sultans, till taken by the Turks from Camson Gaurus
and the Mamalukes, about the year 1515.

And there shall be no more a Prince] For forty years at least.

Ver. 14. And I will set fire] See on ver. 8.

On Zoan] Or Tanis; the inhabitants whereof are said to be those giants called
Titanes.

And will execute judgments in No] Populous No, Nahum. 3.8. called afterward
Alexandria, now Scanderoen.

Ver. 15. And I will pour my fury upon Sin] Called afterward Pelusium, Deserto
Sinis nomen dedit.
and now Damiata.

The strength of Egypt] The key of the Kingdom.

Ver. 16. I will set fire on Egypt] See ver. 8.

Ver. 17. Aven] Called also Heliopolis, and Thebe.

Phibeseth] Or Bubaestis, called by Ptolomy, Her^um civitas.

Ver. 18. At Tehaphnehes] Or Daphne, the gate of Egypt, at which the Chaldees
entered.

A cloud shall cover her] See ver. 3.

Ver, 19. And they shall know] See on ver. 8.

Ver. 20. In the eleventh year] The year wherein Jerusalem was destroyed;
notwithstanding Pharaoh's fair promises and proffers to relieve her.

Ver. 21. I have broken the arm] Ita ut nulla art vel open, so that by no means
or medicines it can be made whole again. Losses received in war can hardly be
repaired.

Ver. 22. And will break his armes] I will utterly disable him, and drive the
field of him: he shall neither be able to defend himself, or offend his enemy.
See Psalm. 37.17.

Ver. 23. And I will scatter the Egyptians] Send them captive into other
countries, as by a whirlwind or Hurrican. This Metaphor we have often met with.
He was afterward hanged.

Herod.
Ver. 24. And I will strengthen the arms of the King of Babylon] God as he
sends the sword, chap. 14.17. musters the men, Esa, 13.4. orders the
ammunition, Jer. 50.25. renders the weapons vain or prosperous, Esa. 54. ult.
so he strengthens and weakeneth the arm of either party.

Ver. 25. But I will strengthen] See ver. 25.

And they shall know] See on ver. 8.

Ver. 26. See ver. 23. They would hardly believe it, and therefore are so often
assured it.

CHAP. XXXI.
Ver. 1. IN the third moneth] Two months after the former Prophecy; and a
month before the City was taken.

Ver. 2. Speak unto Pharaoh] Unto Pharaoh-Hophra, chap. 29.2. Say unto him
(though it will be to small purpose) Hear and give ear, Jer. 13.15.
be not proud, for the Lord has spoken it.

Whom art thou like in thy greatness?] q. d. Thou think thy self the only
one, and that there is none such; but what say thou to the Assyrian, whom
yet the Babylonian has now laid low enough?

Ver. 3. Behold the Assyrian was a Cedar] See chap. 17.3, 22, 23. Dan 4.10, 11.
with the Notes. The cedar is a very tall, fair, shady, leavy and lively tree:
Such was Esar-haddon King of Assyria: once a most potent Monarch: now, not the
master of a molehill. Now therefore (by an argument from the greater to the
less) if he so fell through his pride; shall not thou much more?

Ver. 4. The waters made him great] He had a confluence of all prosperities.
Watered he was, non aquis sed abyssis; est autem abyssus, inexhausta felicitas
and rerum affluentia. He over abounded with all outward happiness: in wealth,
victories, and triumphs, he gave place to no man.

Oecol.
Ver. 5. And his bought were multiplied] Amplissima ludit copia verborum.

Ver. 6. All the foules] See Dan. 4.12.

Ver. 7. Thus was be fair in his greatnesse] Once again he sets forth with
how great power and glory God had adorned this first Monarchy.

Ver. 8. The Cedars in the garden of God] No Kingdom in the world was
comparable to the Assyrian, for thirteen hundred years together.

Ver. 9. So that all the trees of Eden -- envyed him] Summa petit livor. The
tallest trees are weakest in the tops: and envy always aims at the highest.

Ver. 10. Because thou have lifted up thy selfe] Here he comes to describe
casum and cladem, the downfall and destruction of this flourishing Empire:
beginning with a short Apostrophe to Pharaoh. Be not high-minded but fear.
Believe not him who said Decent secundas fortunas superbiae, pride well
becomes prosperity: Plaut.
but rather believe what another says, and experience confirms, Sequitur
superbos ultor a tergo Deus, God punishes the proud, surely and severely.
Seneca.
A better author then either of them tells us, that Pride goes before
destruction: and an haughty spirit before a fall. Better it is to be of an
humble spirit with the lowly, then to divide the spoil with the proud, Prove.
16.18, 19.

Ver. 11. I have therefore delivered him into the hand of the mighty one] Of
Merodach Baladan, who of Governor, had made himself King of Babylon;
Metashenes, Josephus, lib. 1. c. 2.
and in the twelfth year of his reign, having overcome Esarhaddon son to
Sennacherib and last Monarch of Assyria, he adjoined that whole Empire to the
Babylonians; and reigned after that forty years.

He shall surely deal with him] Heb. In doing he shall do unto him, Pro sibitu
tractabo. Piscat.
i. e. he shall do what his list with him: as Tamerlan since did with Bajazet:
whom he carried about in an iron cage, using him on festival days for a
footstool; and feeding him like a dog with crumbes fallen from his table. All
which Tamerlan did, Turk Hist. 220.
not so much for hatred to the man (says the Historiographer) as to manifest
the just judgment of God against the arrogant folly of the proud.

Ver. 12. And strangers have cut him off] The greatet wealth, the greater spoil
awaiteth a man: as each one desires to lop the tree that has thick and large
boughs and branches.

And his boughs are broken] i. e. His Vasals, homagers, and auxiliaries.

And all the people of the earth] Who once sheltered under his shadow. But the
rule is, Arbor honoretur cujus nos umbra tuetur.

And have left him] And joined themselves to the Babylonian.

Sic cum fortuna statque caditque fides. Ovid.
Ver. 13. Upon his ruin shall all the foules] His dead body shall want decent
burial, as afterward did great Alexanders, great Pompeyes, our William the
Conquerours, Richard the thirds, etc.

Ver. 14. To the end tha^ none of all the trees] This is the use men should
make of Gods heavy judgments upon others. This man's father Sennacherib had a
statue set up in Egypt, says Herodotus, with this inscription: Lib. 2.
Let him that looks upon my misery learn to be modest and to fear God.

Neither their trees stand up in their height] Neque stent in seipsis, neither
stand in themselves, because of their height. Magna repent ruunt. In te stas
and non stas, said the Oracle to Austin: thou stand on thine own bottom;
thou will surely down.

For they are all delivered unto death] Without difference, pell-mell, lords
and losels together, as the Poet also sings; Sub tua purpurei veniunt
vestigia reges,
Deposito luxu, turba cum paupere mixti; Claudian.

Omnia mors aequat. --


Ver. 15. I restrained the floods thereof] I made them keep home, as mourners
use to do.

And I caused Lebanon to mourn for him] Heb. To be black, i. e. in
mourning-habit. Athenienses non nisi atrati sapiunt, said one.

Ver. 16. I made the Nations shake at the sound of his fall] As the earth seems
to shake at the fall of some mighty Cedar.

Sic subito casu, quae valuere, ruunt. Shall be comforted] In so noble a
companion and partaker of their misery. Confer Esa. 14.

Ver. 17. They also went down into hell with him] It was wont to be said, that
hell was paved with Kings crests and shavellings bald-pates: Henry the eight
was told on his deathbed, that he was now going to the place of Kings. See
Esa. 30.33. what a coile kept this Esar-haddon in his time, Oecolamp.
as being superstitibus terror, praemortuis laetitia, complicibus exitium, sui
ipsius ruina?

Ver. 18. To whom art thou like] He fitly returns to Pharaoh, applying all
this discourse to him.

In the midst of the uncircumcised] Chap. 28.10.

This is Pharaoh] This is like that of the Poet, Hic finis Priami fatorum: hic
exitus illum
Virg. Aeneid. lib. 2.
Sort tulit. --


CHAP. XXXII.
Ver. 1. IN the twelfth month] About a year and half after the City was taken.

Ver. 2. Take up a lamentation] i. e. A lamentable Prophecy, destructive to the
Egyptians: and it is very likely that they heard of it, but heeded it not;
tanquam monstra marina Dei verba praetereuntes.

Thou art like a young lion] For pride, fierceness and cruelty.

And thou art as a whale] Or Crocodile: thou domineerest over sea and land, far
and wide: thou playest Rex.

Thou came forth with thy rivers] With the arms of thy Nilus into the
Midland-sea: insanis bellis inquietans omnia, breeding a great bustle in the
Countries near adjoining.

Ver. 3. I will therefore spread out my net] Thou shall be taken in an evil
net, when thou little think of it. Evil shall hunt the violent man to
overthrow him, Psalm. 140.11. Look how Leo cassibus irretitus ait, Si
praescivissem: and as the whale enclosed by fishers is lugg'd to land, done to
death, cleft in pieces with axes, his flesh being made a prey for birds and
beasts, his blood far and near drenching the earth: so shall it fare with
Pharaoh and his forces.

Ver. 4. Then will I leave thee upon the land] As whales are sometimes left by
an ebb whilst they pursue lesser fishes: In June 1658.
there was one so taken near Greenwich lately: a piece of whose flesh was
showed unto me.

Oecol.
Ver. 5. With thy height] Celsitudine tua: with thy glory which thou hold
dearer then thy flesh or life.

Ver. 6. I will also water with thy blood] Instead of thy river Nilus.

The land wherein thou swimmest] Egypt, where thou sportest, as the whale does
in the mighty waters.

Natabunt colles and valles cruore tuo.
Even to the mountains] A most elegant Hyperbole: the like whereto, see 2 King.
21.16.

Ver. 7. And when I shall put thee out] Or extinguish thee: who art for thy
power and glory as one of the worlds great Luminaries.

I will cover the heaven, etc.] So great a fume, or rather so vile a snuff
shall exhale, that the heavens shall seem to be muffled, etc. It shall be once
again deep darkness over all the land of Egypt. Hypallage Poetica.
Another Hyperbole.

Ver. 8. All the bright lights of heaven] See ver. 7. All this shall befall the
world really and without an Hyperbole, at the last day, Mat. 24.29.

Impiaque aeternam patientur saecula noctem. Ver. 9. I will also vex] Or
grieve: See Eccles. 7.3. where the same word signifies anger and sorrow.
Nebuchadnezzars growing greatness shall be a cut and a corrosive to them.

Ver. 10. When I shall brandish my sword] As fetching my blow at them too; and
aiming where to hit them.

Every man for his own life] Which he knows he has forfeited, and has now
great cause to fear: since his neighbors house is on fire. Jam proximus ardet
Ucalegon.


Ver. 11. The sword of the King of Babylon] Here is that delivered plainly
which was before parabolically.

Ver. 12. By the swords of the mighty] Or, of the Heroes, or Giants.

The terrible of the nations] Grassatores, as Munster has it; inexpugnabiles,
as the Vulgar: such as with whom there is no dealing.

Ver. 13. All the beasts thereof] Egypt a most moist and fat Country, was full
of cattle.

Ver. 14. Then will I make their waters deep] There shall not be men lef to
derive them by ditches and channels into their grounds and pastures, for the
making of them fruitful.

And cause their rivers to run like oyle] i. e. Smoothly, and silently.

Lene sluit Nilus, sed cunctis amnibus extat Claudian.

Vtilior, nullas confessus murmr vires.
Ver. 15. When I shall make the land -- desolate] See here the sad effects of
sin, and beware.

Then shall they know that I am the Lord] Pleraque supra habuimus: ideo sum
brevior, says Lavater on ver. 12.

Ver. 16. This is the lamentation] And this is the epilogue of this former
Prophecy: the latter follows; being of the self-same argument, viz. a funeral
dirge and exequy over Egypt.

Ver. 17. In the fifteenth day of the moneth] i. e. Of the twelfth month, ver.
1. and about a fortnight after the former Prophecy. God loves to foresignify
and to do it often.

Ver. 18. Wail for the multitude] Prophesy their destruction: but do it not
without grief and regret.

Cast them down] Do thou foretell it, and I will not fail to fulfill it: (See
Jer. 1.10. with the Note.) Let them know that hell gapeth for them: and here I
give thee the keys thereof. So God does to every faithful Minister, Matthew. 16.
not to Peter only, nor to his pretended successor the Pope; whom therefore
Luther bravely slighted in these words of his, Contemptus est a me Romanus and
favor and furor: I care neither for the Popes favor, nor frowns.

Ver. 19. Whom do thou pass in beauty] What art thou better then other thy
comperes and accomplices in sin? Thou must also dance, Down to hell, Down to
hell, with the rest

Be thou laid with the uncircumcised] Strangers to the Covenant (whereof
Circumcision was a seal) sinners the Chaldee here calls them, such as the
devil sweeps: Sermon. of Repent. p. 70.
they are his birds, says Mr. Bradford Martyr, whom when he has well fed, he
will broach them and eat them, chaw them and champ them world without end, in
eternal woe and misery. (...), Cadaver.


Ver. 20. They shall fall] Carkeises have their names both in Greek and Latin
from falling.

Fit subito funus, qui modo vivus erat. We wonder now and then at the sudden
death of a man. In war many thousands exhale their breath without so much as
Lord have mercy on us. Death heweth its way through a wood of men, in a minute
of time, etc.

Ver. 21. The strong among the mighty] Who might have seen many fair summers,
had they not been cut off by Pharaoh's sword.

Shall speak to him out of the midst of hell] What they say to him, see Isa.
14.10. where we have the like Prosopopaeja Poetica.

Ver. 22. Ashur is there] To wit, in the belly of Hell, among the
uncircumcised, as Lazarus and other Saints are in the bosom of Abraham the
place of bliss. Slain they were with the sword: but that was but a beginning
of their sorrows, a trap-door to eternal torment. Virgil, by a like figure,
brings in Aeneas going down to hell, and there seeing Agamemnon, Dido, the
Titans, Cyclopes, and other Tyrants.

Ver. 23. Whose graves are set in the sides of the pit] In the bottom of the
burning Lake; which from the high top of a Kingdom is a foul fall. Their being
there buried may import, that they shall never come out.

Which caused terror] As breathing nothing but blood and slaughter, raising a
tempest wherever they came, so that they became terrores terrae, as dreadful as
devils.

Ver. 24. There is Elam] The Persians, who in the reign of Cyaxares, had been
subdued by the Scythians, and slain in great number, Jer. 49.34, etc.

Jun.
Into the nether parts of the earth] Into hell, as that rich glutton, Luke
16.23. where our Savior seems to allude to this place.

Yet have they born their shame] Carried the matter of it to hell with them,
where is perpetual shame and confusion: beside the vexing snuff they have left
behind them upon earth.

Ver. 25. They have set her a bed] i. e. The devils have set the Persian
multitude a bed, but an uneasy one, such as they set for that rich wretch, Luke
12.19, 20. who thought to take his ease, but was not suffered.

With all her multitude] The grave is the Congregation-house of all living, Job
30.23. Hell is of many dead, that dye in their sins.

He is put in the middest] In the hottest fire of hell.

Ver. 26. There is Mesh^c and Tubal] i. e. Say some, the Cappadocians and
Spaniards. Others, the Scythians and Sarmatians.

And all her multitude] See ver. 25.

Ver. 27. Which are gone down to hell with their weapons of war] They dyed not
gloriously as Conquerours: nor were buried triumphantly with their arms under
their heads (as valiant warriors were wont to be;) sed ingloria vita recessit,
but they dyed like dogs, and were basely buried, and yet that was not the worst
of it neither.

But their iniquities shall be upon their bones] They shall rue for their
cruelty and bloodshed. These shall be as a murthering-weapon in their bones,
Psalm. 42.10. throughout all eternity.

Ver. 28. Yea thou shall be broken] Thou O Pharaoh, shall have a deeper degree
of torment in hell. Potentes potenter torquebuntur.

Ver. 29. They shall lie with the uncircumcised] Though they were circumcised,
as now the Turks are, yet that shall not profit them. Faciunt and vespae favos:
and Simia quam similis turpissima bestia nobis!

Ver. 30. There be the Princes of the North] i. e. (says Junius) the Syrians,
Tyrians, and others.

And all the Zidonian^] All the Hunters, says the Vulgar; taking the word
appellatively.

Which are gone down] The same again; ad majus Pathos.

Ver. 31. Pharaoh shall see them] This is the Epilogue, or perclose of this
doleful ditty.

And shall be comforted] This was a miserable comfort: the like whereto is that
of some profane persons among us, who when threatened for their foul
practices, use to reply, If we do go to hell, yet we shall have company.

Ver. 32. For I have caused my terror] By Pharaoh's exemplary punishment. This
will make good men tremble at my Judgments, and bad men beware how they come
under my wrath.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Ver. 1. AGain the Word of the Lord came unto me, saying] A new commission to
preach again to his Countrymen: which he had not done, since chap. 24.27. See
the Note there.

Ver. 2. Speak to the children of thy people] I say of thy people: for I can
scarce find in my heart to own them, they be so ^ad.

When I bring the sword upon a Land] The sword is of Gods sending, chap. 14.17.
and whencesoever it comes, it is bathed in heaven, Isa. 34.5. Think the same
of any other public calamity, Amos 3.6. and therefore frame to a patient and
peaceable behavior under it. Among Philosophers the most noted sect for
patience, was that of the Stoikes, who ascribed all to Fate.

Ver. 3. He blow the trumpet] Hence the Ancients infer, Clem. Bern.
that a Bishop must preach, and that Praelati officium est sollicitudo non
celsitudo. He takes upon him the office of a constant Preacher, says Gregory,
that undertaketh to be a Minister.

Ver. 4. His blood shall be upon his own] The blame shall rest wholly upon
himself. Not to be warned is a just both presage and desert of destruction.

Ver. 5. But he that takes warning] Praevision is the best means of prevention.

Ver. 6. He is taken away in his iniquity] This a dismal kind of death, far
worse then that of dying in prison, or of dying in a ditch.

At the watch-man's hand] By whose treachery, or indiligence at least, he
miscarried.

Ver. 7, 8, 9. See Notes on chap. 3.17, 18, 19.

Ver. 10. Thus ye speak] But not well, whilst ye have hard thoughts of God,
Refricat verba desperantium. Omnis restitutionis species and spes a Deo nobis
praecisa est. Heb. 2.1.
and heavy thoughts of your selves; as if your sins were unpardonable; and that
ye were already ruined beyond relief: whereas true Repentance is a ready
remedy, a plank after shipwrak, that would set you safe, and render you right
again. This they had been told before, chap. 18. but to little purpose: the
word was not mingled with faith in their hearts, and did therefore run through
them, as water runs through a riven vessel.

And we pine away in them] Ita punimur ut per^amus. This the Prophet had
threatened, chap. 24.23. and they still stomackfully object it to him: it lay
as hard-meat, and they raise a cavil upon it: whereto the Lord answers;

Ver. 11. As I live says the Lord God, etc.] This is one of those precious
places, those melliflous hony-combes, which we should go on, sucking, toward
heaven, as Sampson once did toward his parents, Judge 14.9. Here, if anywhere,
we may find strong consolation. God when he swears, desires certainly to be
credited, says Tertullian. O happy we, for whose sakes God vouchsafes to
swear: Lib. de Poenitent. cap. 4.
and O thrice-wretched we, if we believe not God, no though he swear to us! Oh
(says Theodoret here) who can ever sufficiently admire the Lords great
goodness, who being so shamefully sl^ghted by the sinful sons of men, does yet
swear his readiness to receive them graciously, who have revolted grievously?
Well might Nazianzen say that God delights in nothing so much as in man's
conversion and salvation: (...), says Basil, i. e. he would we should fear
him, Suff^ndere mavult sanguinem quam effundere. Tertul.
not fall by his hand: redire nos sibi, non perire desiderat, (as Chrysologus
phraseth it) return unto him, not perish from the way, Psalm. 2.12

For why will ye dye?] Turn ye must, or burn. See chap 18.31, 32.

Ver. 12. Say unto the children] The same as before; only with a Proviso of
Perseverance in well-doing, for else all is lost. Non enim quaeruntur in
Christianis initia sed finis, says Hierom, The end is better then the
beginning.

Ver. 13. When I shall say to the righteous] See on chap. 18.24.

If he trust to his own righteousnesse] As thinking that he has thereby
purchased a license to commit iniquity.

Ver. 14. Thou shall surely dye] Viz. Except thou repent; for that alters the
case. Poenitency is almost as good as innocence.

If he turn from his sin and do] These two parts make up true Repentance.

Ver. 15. Give again that he had robbed] Quod rapuit reddideret. The law for
restitution see Number. 5.6, 7.

Ver. 16. None of his sins] This is point blank against the doctrine of
Purgatory.

Ver. 17. Yet the children of the people say] This was a second cavil of
theirs. See ver. 10. and chap. 18.25. Archesilas was surnamed Cavillator: so
might these well have been.

Their way is not equal] There is no equity at all in this causeless quarrel
of theirs.

Ver. 18. When the righteous turneth] To set them down, if right reason would
do it (and man should be mancipium rationis, a slave to reason) he repeateth
what he has said before.

Ver. 19. He shall live thereby] Provided that he rest not in his
righteousness, but learn to live by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.

Ver. 20. Yet ye say] But therein ye lie, which is not the guise of Gods
children, Isa. 63.8.

I will judge you every one after his wayes] And so wring a testimony, if not
from your mouths, yet from your consciences, of mine impartial Justice; such
as is that, Deuteronomy. 32.4. A God of truth, and without iniquity, just and right is
He.

Ver. 21. In the twelfth year] Some read the eleventh year: and indeed it was
wonder that such ill news came no sooner; for (...), says Sophocles.

Superstes stragis.
That one that had escaped] This God had promised, chap. 24.26.

The City is smitten] i. e. Sacked and burnt. This man spoke much in few.

Ver. 22. The hand of the Lord] i. e. The Spirit of the Lord, which acted me
and carried me out, 2 Pet. 1.21. See 1 Cor. 12.3.

And my mouth was opened] As God had promised, chap. 24.27. And this fell out
before the messengers narration. This was much for the prophets honor.

Ver. 23. Then the Word of the Lord] See chap. 18.1.

Ver. 24. They that inhabit those wastes of the land of Israel] Those poor few
now left in the land, 2 King. 25.12, 22. Jer. 40.5, etc. Surely they are poor,
they are foolish, they have lost the fruit of their affliction, miserrimi facti
sunt and pessimi permanent (as Austin says of some in his time) they are never
the less wicked, for being wretched.

Verba facis populi recitat. Abrahae se confer, imo praeferre audebant.
Speak] Bubbles of words. Antiquum obtinent; They are no changelings, not at
all crest-faln.

Abraham was one] And no such one, but that we may match him. Thus these proud
hypocrites set up their counter for a thousand pound, and stand upon their
comparisons, without all shame or sense.

The land is given to us] And here we will hold our own: for we are well worthy.

Ver. 25. Ye eat with the blood] Which wicked Saul would not do, 1 Samuel 14.
much less would righteous Abraham have done it; since it was against the light
and letter of the Law, Genesis 9.4. Levit. 7.26. Deuteronomy. 12.16. Nay ye do worse
things: and are you Abraham's children, and heirs of the promised land,
together with that faithful Patriarch? I trow not. See a like manner of
reasoning, Mic. 2.7. Joh. 8.39: So the learned Linaker, having read our
Saviors Sermon in the mount, and considering how little it is lived amongst
us, brake out into these words, Certainly either this is not Gospel, or we are
not right Gospellers.

Ver. 26. Ye stand upon your sword] Vivitur ex rapto, He that has the longest
sword carries it amongst you: ye are also very revengeful: ready to say with
him in the Poet, Caparene ap. Statum. Theb. 2. Mezent. ap. Virg. Aeneid. 10.
Martin. VI. vald. in candelab.
-- virtus mihi numen, and ensis
Quem teneo.
Dextra mihi deus, and telum quod missile libro.


Ye work abomination] This R. Solomon understands de Venere obscaeniore. It
is in the original, ye women work abomination, as prostituting your selves to
an unnatural filthiness, as the Casuists complain still of some Spanish
Curtezans.

And shall ye possess the land] q. d. Ye shall be set up: what should you
expect better then exilium and excitium, banishment and destruction?

Ver. 27. They that are in the wastes] Ver. 24.

Shall dye of the pestilence] Or else of the famine, which is worse. When,
where, and how this was fulfilled upon them, we read not: In Egypt likely,
whither they went after Gedaliah's death; if not sooner, at home, as Jeremy
also had fore-prophecyed, chap. 42, 43, 44.

Ver. 28. For I will lay the land most desolate] Heb. desolation and
desolation. God made clean work there; there was not a Jew left in the Country:
See Zach. 7.14.

Ver. 29. Then shall they know] By woeful experience.

Ver. 30. The children of thy people] These Captives in Babylon, no whit better
then those in Jury.

Still are talking] Detracting from thee, and deriding thee.

By the walls] Susurros miscentes clancularios: Vti otiosi and sanniones in
foro facere solent.
fearing left any one behind them should hear them, they get the walls at their
backs.

Come I pray you and hear] Thus they jear: and there are too many such scoffers
at this day.

Ver. 31. And they come unto thee] Very goodly.

And they sit before thee] Very demurely, and (to see to) devoutly; taking up
all the seats.

They hear thy Words] But they were as heartlesse in hearing, as they were
listlesse in praying, ver. 10.

They will not do them] Of the Athenians also it was said of old, that they
knew well what was good and right, but would do neither.

Their heart goes after their covetousnesse] Their heart is on their
halfpenny, as we say: neither can the Lodestone of Gods Word hale them one
jot from the earth. It should be Sursumcorda: but when many men's bodies are in
sacellis, Haram domisticam arae Dominicae prafer.
their hearts are in sacculis, as Austin complains: as Serpents have their
bodies in the water, their heads out of the water: so here. As those
Gergesites, they more mind a swine-stye then a Sanctuary.

Ver. 32. As a very lovely song] Or a love-song. Canticum amatorium. Vatab.
The word leaves no more impression upon carnal men's consciences, then a sweet
lesson upon the Lute in the ear, when it is ended; for then both the vocal and
instrumental sweetness dissolve into the air and vanish into nothing. Happy
was Austin who coming to Ambrose to have his ears tickled, had his heart
touched.

Ver. 33. That a Prophet] See on chap. 2.5.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Ver. 1. ANd the Word] See chap. 18.1.

Ver. 2. Prophecy against the Shepherds] Good Shepherds they should have been,
but they were naught, Jer. 23. and naught would come of them, for their
mal-administration.

Woe be to the Shepherds of Israel] Both to Princes and Priests, by whose evil
government the people were so bad, as in the former Chapter is fully set
forth: Qualis rex, talis grex, the Sheep will follow the Shepherd: the common
people are like a flock of Cranes; as the first fly, all follow.

Should not the Shepherds feed the flocks?] Such flocks especially as have
golden fleeces, precious souls? Oh feed, feed, feed, says our Savior to
Peter, Joh. 21.15. feed them for my sake (as the Syriack there has it) rule
them well, teach them well, go before them in good example, do all the offices
of a faithful Shepherd to them, and be instant, or stand close to the work, 2 Timothy 4.2. Dominus prope, the Arch-shepherd is at hand.

Ver. 3. Ye eat the fat] Ecce, lac and lanam recipitis: this ye might do, if in
measure; for the workman is worthy of his wages; see 1 Cor. 9.7. but ye gorge
your selves with the best of the best: and si ventri been, si lateri, as
Epicurus in Horace, if the belly may be filled, the back fitted, that is all you
take care for. In parabola ovis capras quaeritis, and vestrum maxim compendium
spectatis, ye are all for your own ends, nourishing your hearts as in a day of
slaughter, or of good cheer, Jam. 5.5.

Ye kill them that are fed] Heb. ye sacrifice them, so ye pretend, but mind
your own fat paunches: See Prove. 7.14.

But ye feed not the flock] As being falsi and sicti imo picti pastores,
mock-shepherds.

Ver. 4. The diseased have ye not strengthened] Five sorts of sheep are here
reckoned up that needed the shepherds best care and cure, but nothing was done;
or, if any thing, it was overdone: for with force and cruelty they ruled over
them. See 1 Pet. 5.3.

Ver. 5. And they were scattered, because there is no shepherd] None but an
idol-shepherd, Zach. 11.17. a foolish shepherd, ver. 15. and the sheep being a
foolish creature even to a proverb, (...).
and apt to wander into harms way, will never return to the fold, if not
fetched back; but stick in the thorns, or dye in a ditch, or run into the
wolves mouth.

Ver. 6. My sheep wandered] Through the shepherds supine negligence, or bloody
truculence. Surely, as the herd of Deer forsake and push away the wounded Deer
from them, so did these cruel shepherds: being non pastores sed impostores, non
Episcopi sed Aposcopi, non praelati sed Pilati; as Bernard wittily;
sheep-biters rather then shepherds: greedy dogs, Esa. 56.10, 11. grievous
wolves, Act. 20.29.

And none did search or seek after them] Nec erat qui quaereret aut requireret.

Ver. 7. Therefore ye shepherds hear the Word of the Lord] And oh that this
Word might ever sound aloud in the ears of all shepherds, as the voice of
heavens trumpet!

Hyperbaton aetiolog cum
Ver. 8. As I live says the Lord, surely because] God here seems to be in a
great heat, in a perturbation of spirit, causing a kind of impediment in his
speech: so thoroughly was he moved against these lewd shepherds, whose faults he
rippeth up again to make better way to their sentence.

Because my flock became a prey] To the Chaldees, but especially to that old
manslayer.

Because there was no shepherd] None but a company of Nominals, or rather
Nullities.

Ver. 9. Therefore, O ye shepherds] See ver. 7, 8.

Ver. 10. Behold I am against the shepherds] Heb. Lo, I against: by an angry
Aposiopesis.

And cause them to cease from feeding the flock] They shall be Officiperdae,
Quondams, laid aside like broken vessels, as have been some Kings of this land
in their several generations (one of recent remembrance) Popish Bishops not a
few, Bonner and others outed and deprived..

Ego, ego, Nominatium absolute ^o tu^. Oeconom. lib. 1.
Ver. 11. Behold I even I will both search] Ego ego reposcam and anquiram:
rather then the work shall be undone, I Will do all my self, and then it is sure to
be well done. Aristotle tells of a certain Persian, who being asked What did
most of all feed the horse? answered, the Masters eye: And of a certain African
of whom when it was demanded, What was the best manure or soil for a field?
answered, the owners footsteps, that is, his presence and perambulation.
Praesul ut praesit and profit suis, ab iis non absit, Shepherds should reside
with their flocks: the Archshepherd will not fail to do so.

Ver. 12. A^ a shepherd] He prosecuteth the Allegory drawn from shepherdy all
along; striking still upon the same string with much sweetness.

So will I seek out my sheep] Mat. 15.24. Psalm. 119. ult. Esa. 40.11.

In the cloudy and dark day] i. e. In the time of their calamity and captivity.
When things are at worst, God himself will set in: he reserveth his holy hand
for a dead lift.

Ver. 13. And I will bring them out from the people] This they could very
hardly believe: therefore he assures them of it again and again. God will do
the like for all his Elect, seem it never so impossible.

And feed them upon the mountains of Israel] Which are very high mountains:
but the Church, Gods hill, is higher, Esaias 2.2. See the Note there.

Ver. 14. I will feed them in a good pasture] Daily and daintily; feed them
among the Lillyes, Cant. 2.16. Psalm. 23.1, 2, 3. feed them with the flesh and
blood of my dear Son, Joh. 6.

There shall they lie in a good fold] Having a blessed calm in their
consciences, full of spiritual security, and freed from all annoyances, Mic.
5.5.

Ver. 15. I will feed my flock] Doing all the offices of a good shepherd for
them: and charging mine undershepheards to do so too.

And I will cause them to lie dow^] By giving rest to their souls, Mat. 11.
together with many happy Halcyons, that they may serve me without fear, Luke
1.74.

Ver. 16. I will seek that which was lost, etc.] As he did Peter, Paul, the
good thief, Matthew, Zac^etu, the Disciples after their shameful flight,
Austin; all us who like sheep were gone astray, etc.

But I will destroy the fat] P^nguem and petulcam, such as in whom fullness
breeds forgetfulness, as in Jeshurun, Deuteronomy. 32.15. Queen Elizabeth was told
in a Sermon by Mr. Deering, that once she was Tanquam ovis, like a meek sheep,
but now tanquam indomita juvenca, as an untamed heifer; and therefore wished
her to meet God by repentance. Here good Oecolampadius complains (and cause
enough he had) of some of Christ's fatter sheep, who were too too taunty and
troublesome to their fellows. The Lutherans of Suevia he might well mean; who,
in their Syngramma, used him very coursely: and Luther himself in his book of
private Mass, set forth An. Dom. 1533. passes a very uncharitable censure
upon his disease and death.

And I will feed them with judgement] Putting a difference, and dealing with
them as it is fit.

Ver. 17. And as for you, O my flock] I have a saying to you also (such as are
unruly especially) as well as to your shepherds.

Behold I judge between cattle and cattle] Between sincere Christians and
hypocrites, sheep and goats: and can soon shed them, and show them to the
world, who are fierce rams, and who are nasty goats: at last day howsoever, all
shall out, and a separation shall be made: the precious shall be taken out from
the vile.

Ver. 18. Seems it a small thing unto you] Extenuant hypocritae suam culpam
honesto titulo. Hypocrites make the best and the least of their sins; Oecol.
which good men acknowledge with aggravation; but the works of the flesh are
manifest: and here we have a lively picture of the Pop^sh Clergy, who eat up
the best, and tread down the rest, and pro salutaribus aquis suam salivam
hominibus obtrudunt, and for wholesome, obtrude brackish waters upon men, to
quench their thirst.

Ver. 19. And as for my flock, they eat] The poor misled and muzzled people are
glad to eat such as they can catch: they are fed with traditions, legendary
fables, indulgences, vowed pilgrimages, pennances, etc. If Luther had not come
in our way, say they, we could have persuaded the people to have eat grass.

Ver. 20. I even I will judge between the fat cattle] These are, says Austin,
those that presume of their own strength, and boast of their own
righteousness: being proud, insolent, and void of charity.

Ver. 21. Because ye have thrust with side and with shoulder] i. e. With
pretense of law on your side, and with power in your hand to do what you list;
Toto corpore et conatu.
for who can withstand you?

And pushed all the diseased with your hornes] i. e. With your
excommunications, and persecutions: See Esa. 66.5.

Till ye have scattered them abroad] For how should they abide it? they drive
them out of the fold, flock, pasture; so that they must either fly, or dye.

Ver. 22. Therefore will I save my flock] Viz. By Christ the true Shepherd:
who once found out him whom the Jews had unjustly excommunicated, Joh. 9.35.
and gave him encouragement. He knows all his sheep by name, as Exodus 33.12, 17.
and has promised them safety here, and salvation hereafter, Joh. 10.27. It is
not with the Saints, as Esa. 31.4. or as Amos 3.12. but as Jer. 31.10, 11, 12.
See the places.

Ver. 23. And I will set up one Shepheard] Who indeed is the only Shepherd.
Magistrates and Ministers are Shepherds: but Christ is the good Shepherd,
Joh. 10.11. the great Shepherd and Bishop of souls, 1 Pet. 2.25. Heb. 13.20.
the true Shepherd, above all for skill, love, and power: above Jacob, above
David of whom he descended, and by whose name he is here called: so Jer. 30.9.
Hos. 3.5. Ezekiel. 37.24.

Even my servant David] i. e. Christ the Son and successor of David, not David
George; as that odious heretic who dyed at Basile blasphemously applied this
text to himself as if he had been the man here intended. The Jews themselves
confess that Messiah is here meant.

He shall feed them] This is thus repeated, as that which contains a world of
comfort. It shows also that Christ will do it to the utmost. Jacob was a
sedulous Shepherd: Christ much more.

Ver. 24. And I the Lord will be their God] This is that Bee-hive of heavenly
honey we so often meet with in the Old Testament; which therefore those Sectaries
have so little reason to reject.

And my servant David a Prince among them] Captain of the Lords hosts, Josh.
6.2. Captain also of his peoples salvation, Heb. 2.10. Messiah the Prince, Dan.
9.25.

Ver. 25. And I will make with them a Covenant of peace] Pactum pacis, pacis
omnimodae, Jer. 31.13. Esa. 11.10. Joh. 14.27.

And will cause the evil beasts] That were wont to worry the flock. I will set
them safe from Satan and his impes, his instruments; such as was Nero the lion,
and bloody Bonner the Popes slaughter-slave here.

Ver. 26. And I will make them -- a blessing] By blessing them with all
spiritual benedictions in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 1.3. so that they shall be felices
and faecundi, happy and fruitful.

There shall be sh^wres of blessing] Or very large showers (2 Cor. 9.6.) of
divine doctrine, Esa. 55.9. and of righteousness, Hos. 10.12.

Ver. 27. And the tree of the field shall yield her fruit] There shall be a
confluence of all comforts and contentments.

When I have broken the bands of their yoke] Freed them from the Babylonish
bondage: but especially from the Tyranny of sin and terror of hell; when I
have broke the devils yoke from off the necks of their souls.

Out of the hands of those that served themselves of them] As did the devil,
whose drudges they were, and who had them wholly at his beck and check.

Ver. 28. And they shall be no more a prey to the heathen] As the Jews then
were and are to this day, being used by the Papists as spunges. The Christian
Hebrews also suffered with joy the spoiling of their goods: but then (for an
allay to their grief) they knew within themselves that which did sufficiently
support them, and make up their loss, Heb. 10.34.

Sept. plantam pacis.
Ver. 29. And I will raise up for them a plant of renowne] i. e. Christ the true
tree of life: Or the Church planted and rooted in Christ, and much renowned all
the world over. Christ mystical is a vine covering the whole earth.

And they shall be no more consumed with hunger] They shall have enough of all
good things, a sufficiency, though not a superfluity; a David's sat habeo,
because the Lord has heard the voice of my supplications, Psalm. 116.1.

Neither bear the shame of the heathen any more] God will bring them in credit
with those which formerly slighted and reproached them. God fashioneth men's
opinions, rules their tongues, promises to them who by patient continuance in
well-doing seek for glory and honor and immortality, eternal life: where the
Saints shall shine as the Sun in his strength, Romans 2.7. Mat. 13.43.

Ver. 30. Thus shall they know that I the Lord their God, am with them] They
shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord, Psalm. 107.43. they shall know
the salvation of their God, Psalm. 50.23. they shall have a plerophory of faith,
as Romans 8.38.

Ver. 31. And ye my flock -- are men] Sheep ye are, but rational sheep, having
your spiritual senses habitually exercised to discern good and evil, Heb. 5.14.
so that ye take and see my goodness, Psalm. 34.8.

CHAP. XXXV.
Ver. 1. MOreover the Word of the Lord] Chap. 18.1.

Ver. 2. Set thy face] Chap. 6.2.

Against mount Seir] Inhabited by the Edomites.

And prophecy against it] This had been done before, chap. 25.12. but not
enough. God has a further saying to them, and that for the comfort of his poor
people who might thus object: Peace and security from danger is promised us in
the foregoeing Chapter; but we have still many deadly enemies, and none worse
then our near allies and next neighbors the Edomites. Here therefore they are
heavily threatened with utter desolation for their malignity against Israel,
and their blasphemy against God.

Ver. 3. Behold O mount Seir, I am against thee] Ecce ego ad te, have at thee.

And I will stretch out my hand against thee] I will have my full blow at thee.

I will make thee most desolate] Heb. desolation and desolation: I will make an
utter end: desolation shall not rise up the second time, Nahum. 1.9. I will
make short work, Romans 9.28.

4. I will lay thy Cities waste] Even Theman, Dedan, Bozra mentioned in
Scripture: besides many others mentioned by Geographers, Maresa, Rhinocorura,
Raphia, Gaza, Anthedon, etc.

And thou shall know] To thy small comfort.

That I am the Lord] A Lord of Lords, a God of Gods, a great God, a mighty and
a terrible, which regards not persons, nor takes reward, Deuteronomy. 10.17.

Ver. 5. Because thou have had a perpetual hatred] An hereditary deadly feud
against Israel; Heb. an enemy of ages, yea of many ages continuance; such as is
(as we use to say of Runnet) the older the stronger.

And have shed the blood of the children of Israel] Vt diffluant, have let out
their lifeblood: all malice is bloody.

In time of their calamity] Watching the worst time, to do them the most
mischief.

In the time that their iniquity had an end] When I had in a manner done with
them, yet thou had not done with them: but did stir up Nebuzaradan to burn
the City and Temple with fire. This was to help forward the affliction, Zach.
1.15. See the Note there.

Ver. 6. I will prepare thee unto blood] Thou shall have blood thy bellyful,
which thou have so greedily sought and sucked. Satiabis te sanguine quem
sitiisti, cujusque insatiabilis semper fuisti, as the Scythian Queen said to
Cyrus's head.

Even blood shall pursue thee] As a bloodhound: It shall, it shall, believe me,
it shall.

Ver. 7. Most desolate] See ver. 3. Iterum repetit, ne excidisse videatur. I am
in good earnest.

Ver. 8. And I will fill his mountains] Oh the woe of war! (...). Bellum a
belluis.
the Greek word for it signifies much blood.

Ver. 9. I will make thee perpetual desolations] For thy perpetual hatred, ver.
5.

And thy Cities] See ver. 4.

Ver. 10. Because thou have said] Ungodly men must answer for their ungodly
speeches also, Jude 15.

These two Nations] Israel, and Judah.

Shall be mine] Such was their avarice and ambition that they made account all
was their own: they had in their hopes devoured these two Countries, which God
had reserved for a better purpose. He kept the room empty till the rerurn of
the natives; and the land kept her Sabbaths, resting from tillage, etc. And yet
these miscreants added

Whereas the Lords was there] Or, be it that the Lord is there, Though it be a
Jehovah shammah, as chap. 48.3^.
sc. to keep possession against us, we will out him, and have it, in despite of
him. O tongues worthy to be pulled out, cut in gobbets, and driven down their
throats, that did thus blaspheme.

Ver. 11. I Will do even according to thine anger] Let the Romish Edomites
expect the like punishment: their malice and mischief will come home to them.

And according to thine envy] That quick sighted and sharp-fanged malignity,
which none can stand before, Prove. 27.4.

Ver. 12. And that I have heard all thy blasphemies] Of both sorts: those in
the first table against my self, and those in the second table, against my
people.

They are said desolate] And we have helped after.

They are given us to consume] Heb. to devour; Nay, but stay till they be: and
then know, that ye may devour that on earth, that ye shall digest in hell.

Ver. 13. Thus with your mouth ye have boasted] Heb. magnified, setting your
mouths against heaven, your tongues also have walked thorough the earth, Psalm.
73.9. See the Notes there.

And have multiplied your words against me] When it would have better become
you to have multiplied your words before me in prayer and praises, (...)
as the Hebrew word here used (mostly) signifies.

Ver. 14. When the whole earth rejoyceth] sc. For my peoples deliverances. Or,
when the whole land, sc. of Israel rejoices: as it is sometimes hail and well
with the Church, when the wicked are in the suds. Judea was the world of the
world, as Athens was the Epitome of Greece, the Greece of Greece.

Ver. 15. As thou did rejoyce] As thou wast sick of the devils disease,
rejoiceing at other men's harms: so, by a strange turn of things, others shall
rejoice at thy just destruction, and revel in thy ruins: and at the last day
espcially, when thou shall be awarded thy portion with the devil and his
angels, 2. These. 1.6, 7, 8.

Thou shall be desolate, O mount Seir] This was accordingly effected shortly
after by Nebuchadnezzar and his Chaldees, Lib. 12. cap. 11.
as Josephus testifies: and is daily executed on the Churches enemies, who
shall all be ere long in the place that is fittest for them, sc. under Christ's
feet.

And all Idumea, even all of it] The Edomites that thought of seizing on others
lands, lost their own. They who covet all, do often lose all: yea even the
pleasure of that they possess; as a greedy dog swalloweth the whole meat that
is cast him, without any pleasure, as gaping still for the next morsel.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Ver. 1. Prophecy to the mountains of Israel] Better things then thou did to
Mount Seir in the foregoing Chapter. See Isa. 3.10, 11. with the Notes.

Ye mountains] That is, ye Mountainers, qui fere asperi atque inculti. Sed Nemo
aedeo ferus est qui non mitescere possit,
Hor.
Si moao culturae patientem accommodet aurem.


Ver. 2. Because the enemy has said] The Church fares the better for her
enemies petulancies and insolences against her.

Even the ancient high-places] Or the everlasting Altitudes. Judaea lay high:
the Church is much higher.

Are ours in possession] Thus the Edomites triumphed before the victory: So did
the Spaniards in 88, and God heard them, as chap. 35.13. for he is All-ear,
All-eye, etc. He is jealous for his people, Zach. 1.14. and jealousy is
quick-sighted, quick-conceited.

Ver. 3. Because they have] Heb. Because and Because, importing earnestness
and heat of indignation. So Levit. 26.43.

And ye are taken up in the lips of talkers] Heb. Ye are made to ascend upon
the lip of the tongue, and upon the evil fame of the people. God takes it
extreme ill, that his people should be traduced and diffamed; which yet has
been their lot in all ages; but he will not fail to vindicate them, and to
avenge them.

Ver. 4. Therefore thus says the Lord God to the mountains] For men there were
hardly any left, or not very fit to be dealt with, See ver. 1.

Which became a prey] To those man-eaters, ver. 3. qui diruerunt and
devoraverunt, who did eat up Gods people as they eat bread, Psalm. 14.4. making
themselves merry with their misery.

Ver. 5. Surely in the fire of my jealousy] Jealousy is hot as hell, Cant. 8 6.
it is implacable, Prove. 6.34, 35. and very vindictive. See Zech. 1.14. with the
Notes. Here God swears he will be even with these Edomites.

Which have appointed my land] This the Lord has never done with; so ill he
took it.

Ver. 6. Say unto the mountains and to the hills] To those lifelesse creatures
he directs his speech, to show that every creature groaneth and waits for
the redemption of our bodies: It fares the better also in this life present,
for the Elects sake: as it was once cursed for man's sin, and has lain
bed-ridden, as it were, ever since.

Because ye have born the shame of the Heathen] This, the Lord could not bear
with any patience.

Ver. 7. I have liftd up mine hand] Sworn solemnly. Men when they swear do so,
as taking God to witness. Three fingers they do often lift up and hold down two,
to signify, says Lavater, that God who is Three in One, has prepared a place
in heaven for such as swear rightly; but will thrust down to hell, those that
forswear themselves.

They shall bear their shame] They shall be paid home in their own coin, be
overshot in their own bow, be covered with their own confusion.

Ver. 8. Ye shall shoot forth your branches] Re-flourish and fructify: the
Christian Churches (those spiritual mountains) shall especially, Rev. 22.2.

For they are as hand to come] To come home out of Captivity, or to return to
God by repentance. The fall of Antichrist cannot be far off.

Ver. 9. For behold I am for you] Or I come to you, and I come with a
Cornucopia in mine hand.

Ver. 10. All the house of Israel, even all of it] The Israel of God in the
Kingdom of the Messiah, totum totum, quantum quantum, not one of them shall be
missing.

Ver. 11. And will do better unto you] This must necessarily be understood of
spiritual blessings by Christ: for temporals, they never had the like to those
in the days of Joshua, David, Solomon, Hezekiah, etc.

Ver. 12. Thou shall be their inheritance] Yea a type and pledge of that
heavenly inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.4. Rev. 21. and 22.

And thou shall no more henceforth bereave them] Provoke God to bereave them.
Terra abortiens populos.


Ver. 13. Thou land devourest up men] sc. By pestilence, famine, sword, evil
beasts: thou art an unlucky land, an unblest country, Girald. Cambrens.
feral and fatal to thine inhabitants. Hesiod says the like of his country
Ascr^; and Another, of St. David's in Wales, that it is a place neither
pleasant, fertile, nor safe. Strabo says the like of Judaea; but with a
despightful mind, as ver. 5. Those malevolent Spies said no less, Numb. 13.

Ver. 14. Neither bereave thy nations any more] Either by consuming them, or
spewing them out, as Levit. 18.28. and 20.22. and 26.20, 22. See what is said
of heaven, Rev. 22.3, 4, 5.

Ver. 15. Neither will I cause men to hear] I will cut off all occasions: and
remove all such stumbling blocks as whereat the nations dash and split
themselves.

Ver. 16. Moreover the word] See chap. 18.1.

Ver. 17. When the house of Israel] Vbique Scriptura vindicat gloriam Dei,
maxim autem hoc loco; Oecol.
This place of Scripture does singularly set forth the glory of Gods grace,
whilst it shows that man's destruction is wholly of himself, his help only of
God.

As the uncleannesse] As a menstruous clout, abhorred by all.

Ver. 18. For the blood which they had shed] These two gross sins are
instanced, viz. murder, and idolatry; lest they should plead, as Jer. 2.35. I
have not sinned, or as Hos. 12.8. In all my works they shall find none iniquity
in me: that were sin.

Ver. 19. And I scattered them among the Heathen] Whose idols they had
worshipped, and whose manners they had imitated.

Ver. 20. These are the people of the Lord] And these are the fruits of their
religion. Are these the holy people? etc. Lactantius complains of his times,
Lactant. de opific. Dei. pr^aem. Erasm. in Lactant.
that Gods Truth was evil spoken of by the Heathen, because Christians lived
loosly and leudly. Whereupon Erasmus cries out, O rem miseram! Oh lamentable!
Even in those purer times the piety of Christians was so much abated, that the
Gospel was therefore evil spoken of, for the evil lives of many that professed
it. What marvel then, says he, that Turks cry out upon us? that the banks of
blasphemy are broken down in persons disaffected to the power of godliness?

Ver. 21. But I had pity for my holy name] So he has still: or else it would
be wide enough with us. Some render it I spared, or tendered mine holy name:
and to free it from those imputations, I freely forgave my people and
reestablished them.

Ver. 22. I do not this for your sakes] To do good without respect of desert,
is royal; yea it is divine.

But for mine own holy names sake] God makes our utter unworthiness a foil to
set forth the freeness of his love, in maki^g us worthy whom he found not so.

Ver. 23. And I will sanctify my great Name] I will recover my reputation
among the heathen, by declaring my justice in your punishment, and my mercy in
your restoration. God, as he is moved by his own grace to do his people good,
so he aims therein at his own glory.

Ver. 24. For I will take you, etc.] I will effectually call you out of
darkness into my mavelous light, and cull you out from this wicked world. And
this is the first thing that God here promises to his Covenanters. More then
this, he promises them in the following verses, Justification, Sanctification,
and Preservation, or Provision of temporal blessings, that nothing may be
wanting to them that may make them happy. We should be often counting of this
coin, telling of this treasure.

Ver. 25. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you] He alludeth to the legal
purifications; especially that made by the ashes of a red cow mixed with
running water, wherewith the people were sprinkled, and so cleansed from legal
defilement, Number. 19. Semblably the Saints, sprinkled with Christ's blood from an
evil conscience, by the byssop-bunch of faith, and so washed with clean water,
( Heb. 10.22.) in baptism (the saving virtue whereof is permanent, 1 Pet.
3.21.) are justified and sanctified, 1 Cor. 6.11. This blessed sprinkling David
prays for, Psalm. 51. The Baptist also and others sprinkled those whom they
baptized: both to answer the ^^pes of the Law, Epist. 83.
and this prediction of the Prophet, understood by Hierom of Baptism; which is
a visible sign and seal of our being washed from the filth of sin by the merit
and Spirit of Jesus Christ, Tit. 3.5.

Ver. 26. A new heart also will I give you] For the old heart will never hold
out the hardship of holiness: the old fab^ike must be taken down, and a new set
up. See chap. 11.19. a new man both in constitution and conversation one must
be, or else he is no man in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.17.

And I will take away the stony heart] The natural heart, which is hard and
refractary; to every good work reprobate. Hord is that which resists the
touch. The old heart is inflexible to Gods Spirit, insensible of his word and
judgments, and impenetrable to his grace. Aug.
Where then is man's freewill? Garriant illi, nos credamus: there is no such
thing, believe it. Nature is wholly stony: it is God alone that of these stones
raises up children to Abraham.

And I will give you an heart of flesh] i. e. Tractable and capable of Divine
impressions, ready to every good work, Tit. 3.1.

Ver. 27. And I will put my spirit within you] Qui mulcendo and molliendo, who
by melting and mollifying your hard hearts, shall bring you to a better
obedience.

And cause you to walk in my statutes] Lex jubet, gratia juvat: God undertaketh
for himself and his people too, viz. to work in them what he requires of them.
Therefore it is an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things: and the fruits
of it are sure mercies, compassions that fail not, etc. See on chap. 11.20.

A Lap.
Ver. 28. And ye shall dwell in the land] i. e. In Judaea, or rather in the
Church, which began in Judaea, says the Jesuit well; the Church of Rome then
is not the Mother Church; no, though we take it in its Primitive purity.

Ver. 29. I will also save you from all your uncleannesses] This is often
promised, because not easily believed. No article of our Creed it so much
opposed by Satan, as that of the forgiveness of sin by Christ's merits: which is
the very life and soul of a Church. All the former Articles of the Creed are
perfected in this, and all the following articles are effects thereof: hold it
fast therefore.

And I will call for the corn] I have it at my call: and a Mandamus from me
will do it at any time. See Hos. 2.21, 22. with the Note.

And lay no famine] Which comes also at God Almighty his call, Psalm. 105.16.

Ver. 30. That ye shall receive no more reproach] The heathen were often twitting
Gods people with their outward wants and crosses, as if caused by their
Religion. So the persecutors did by the Primitive Christians, and so the
Papists still deal with the New-Gospellers, as they scornfully call the
reformed Churches.

Ver. 31. Then shall ye remember] The goodness of God shall lead you to
repentance: so many mercies heaped upon so undeserving, nay so ill-deserving
creatures, shall bring you to a deep detestation of your iniquities.

Your own evil ways and your doings that were not good] There are some things,
says one, that we can hardly forget, viz. our sorrows and our pleasures, as
Esau: some things we can hardly remember, as our faults, and our friends, as
Joseph's Butler. Augustine was famous (says another) for two of his works; his
Retractations, which are the confessions of his errors: and his Confessions,
which are the Retractations of his life. See chap 20.43.

And shall loath your selves] Or, Litigabitis intra vos contra stagitia vestra.
ye shall look upon your selves as worthy to be destroyed. Or, ye shall scold
within your selves against your iniquities.

Ver. 32. Not for your sakes] See on ver. 22.

Be ashamed] Abashed and abased, as was Ezra, chap. 9.6. Ephraim, Jer. 31.19.
the Publican, Luke 18.

Ver. 33. I shall have cleansed you] See on ver. 29.

I will also cause you to dwell] See ver. 28.

Ver. 34. And the desolate land shall be tilled] As now, blessed be God, it is
in the Palatinate, and other parts of Germany, though now is no small danger of
a new war: quod Dominus avertat.

Ver. 35. This land] Such a change can God soon make for worse or better. Fear
him therefore: fear the Lord and his goodness, Hos. 3.5.

Ver. 36. Then the heathen] Haec jam ex part facta sunt, says Oecolampadius.
This day is this Scripture fulfilled in our eyes: the ruined Churches are
reedified, and the matter well amended by this blessed Reformation: and Rome
knows it.

Ver. 37. I will yet for this be enquired of] i. e. Though I have promised my
people all these boones, yet I look they should put my promises in suit, by
praying them over. Prayer is an indispensable duty, and must not on any
pretense whatsoever be neglected.

I will increase them with men like a flock] Plenty of men and store of
children is a great blessing of God: yet some are ready to say of them, as that
Rustic did of his afflictions, when he was told they were Gods love tokens,
Luther.
Ah quam velim alios amare, non me.

Ver. 38. As the holy flock] The sheep that came up for sacrifice, at the
Passover especially: so will I multiply the sheep of Christ the true Shepherd.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Ver. 1. THe hand of the Lord] i. e. The force and impulse of the holy Spirit:
Theodoret Manus est impellere; manus est organum agendi.
fitly called the hand of the Lord, because holy men of old spoke and acted as
they were moved or carried out, by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 2. ult.

In the spirit] i. e. In a spiritual rapture.

And set me down] Not really but visionally.

In the midst of the valley] That same valley (some think) where (chap. the
first) he saw that glorious vision. Prophecies were often received; and prayers
are best made in one and the same place.

Which was full of bones] So it appeared to him in his ecstasy.

Ver. 2. And lo they were very dry] Ex vetustate and carry. This added to the
miracle.

Ver. 3. Can these bones live?] In the resurrection at the last day, he knew
they should; for amongst the Jews that was generally believed, Joh. 11.24. But
whether in this world, and at this time, that was the question: The
Jew-doctours boldly but groundlesly answer that these dead bones and bodies did
then revive: and that many of them did return into the land of Israel, and
married wives and begat children. But this is as true as that other dotage of
theirs, that the dead bodies of Jews in what Country so ever buried, do by
certain underground passages, travel into Judaea, and there rest until the
general resurrection.

O Lord God thou knowest] And he to whom thou art pleased to reveal it. (...).
The Russians in a difficult question use to answer, God and our great Duke know
all this.

Ver. 4. Prophecy upon these bones] Be thou the interpreter of my Will, who by
mine all-powerful Word do quicken the dead, and call things that are not as if
they were, Romans 4.17.

And say unto them, O ye dry bones] Together with Gods Word, many times, there
goes forth a power, Luke 5.17. as when he said Lazarus come forth, Joh. 11.43.
So it is in the first resurrection, and so it shall be at the last, Joh. 5.25,
28, 29. See the Notes.

Ver. 5. Behold I will cause breath to enter into you] i. e. Into each number
of you that belong to each body. Neither need the resurrection of the dead be
held a thing incredible, Act. 26.8. considering Gods Power and Truth. The
keeping green of Noah's Olive Tree in the time of the flood, the blossoming of
Aarons dry rod, the flesh and sinews coming to these dry bones, and the breath
entering into them, what were they all but so many lively Emblems of the
Resurrection?

Ver. 6. And cover you with skin] Superindam; that the flesh may not look
ghastly. The word rendered cover is Chaldee, and found only here, and ver. 8.

And put breath in you and ye shall live] As when man was first created, Genesis
2. and cannot God as easily remake us of something, as at first he made us of
nothing?

Ver. 7. So I prophesied] He might have said, why should I speak to these
bones? will it be to any purpose? but Gods commands are not to be disputed, but
dispatched, without sciscitation.

And there was a noise] A rattle, perhaps a thunderclap.

And behold a shaking] Perhaps an earthquake, as was at Christ's resurrection.
God will one day shake both the heavens and the earth. The heavens shall pass
away with a great noise (2 Pet. 3.10.) the earth also and the works therein
shall be burnt, and fall with a great crack. Then shall the Lord descend from
heaven with a shout, etc. 1 These. 4.16. such as is that of Mariners in a storm,
or of Soldiers when to join battle with the enemy.

Ver. 8. Lo the sinews and the flesh came up upon them] The body is the souls
sheath, Dan. 7.15. the souls suit: the upper garment is the skin, the inner the
flesh; the inmost of all, bones and sinews.

Ver. 9. And say to the wind] To the reasonable soul, that breath of God, Genesis
2.7. divinae particula aurae, as one calls it. In this better part of man, he
is not absolutely perfect, till after the resurrection: for though the soul do
in heaven enjoy an estate free from sin, pain or misery, yet two of the
faculties or operations of the soul ( viz. that of Vegetation and of sense) are
without exercise, till it be reunited to the body. Here we have a
representation at least of the Resurrection: which the Hebrews call Gilgul, the
Revolution.

Come from the four winds, O breath] i. e. From God that gave you, return
again at his command, to your own numerical bodies, wherever they lie. And to
this text our Savior seems to allude, Mat. 24.31.

Ver. 10. And the breath came into them] Deforas from without: as at first they
were infused by God, so they are still. This, Austin sometime and for some
space of time doubted of, and was therefore censured boldly but unadvisedly by
one Vincentius Victor, as Chemnitius relates it.

And they lived and stood up upon their feet] As life will show it self by
sense and motion. Live things will be stirring. Arida etiam peccatorum corda
Deus gratia vitali vegetabit.

Ver. 11. These bones are] That is, they signify and betoken. And here we have
the Accommodation or Application of the preceding Parable or Type: where also
we may soon see, that this chapter is of the same subject and method with the
former: only that which is there plainly, is here more elegantly discoursed;
viz. the deplorable condition of the Israelites in Babylon, together with their
wonderful deliverance and restitution in this and the three next verses.

Our bones are dryed] We lie in Babylon as in a sepulcher: we are buried alive,
as it were; we are free among the dead, free of that company.

We are cut off for our parts] q. d. Let them hope as hope can: we have hanged
up all our hopes now that the City and Temple are destroyed. Thus carnal
confidence as it rises up into a corky, frothy hope, when it sees sufficient
help: so it sits down in a faithless, sullen discontent and despair, when it
can see no second causes.

Ver. 12. Behold O my people] God owneth them still, though they had little
deserved it. Shall men's unbelief make the faith of God without effect? Romans
3.3. Tumulos desperationis aperit, he opens the graves of desperation, and
lets in a mavelous light. So the Lord did for his poor Church, by this
blessed Reformation begun by Luther: whose book de Captivitate Babylonica did
abundance of good. Scultet. Annal. dec. 2. ep. dedic.
As for that wrought here in England, a forreiner says of it, that it is such
as the ages past had despaired of, the present worthily admireth, and future
ages shall stand amazed at. O beatos qui Deum ducem e spirituali Babylonia eos
educentem secuti sunt!

Ver. 13. And ye shall know that I am the Lord] Ye shall experiment it. The
Reformed Churches have done so abundantly. Gloria Deo in excelsis.

When I have opened your graves] This is spoken over and over for their
confirmation, who were apt to think, the news was too good to be true.

Ver. 14. And shall put my spirit in you] Even my Spirit of Adoption, that soul
of the soul: this was more then all the rest. Thrice happy are they that are
thus spirited; they shall live and live comfortably.

Ver. 15. And the Word of the Lord] See chap. 18.1.

Ver. 16. Take thee one stick] A cleft stick which is res vilis and exilis, a
poor business in it self; but if God please to make use of so slender a thing,
it may serve for very great purpose: as here by the uniting of two sorry
sticks in the hand of the Prophet, is prefigured the uniting of Judah and
Israel, yea of Jews and Gentiles in the hand of the Lord, that is in Christ
Jesus who is the hand, the right hand, and the Arm of God the Father.

His companions] i. e. Benjamin and Levi, 2 Chronicles. 11.12, 13.

Ver. 17. And join them one to another into one stick] See on ver. 16. Man and
wife are as these two branches in the Prophets hand, enclosed in one bark: and
so closing together that they make but one branch.

Ver. 18. Will thou not show us what thou meanest by these?] People though they
should not be question sick, as some in St. Paul's time were, 1 Timothy 6.4. yet
they should be inquisitive after truth according to godliness, Tit. 1.1.

Ver. 19. And make them one stick] Taking away the deadly feud that has so
long time been betwixt them, breaking down the partition wall, etc. I will once
more bring them all under one King, and make them of one mind. Religion is the
only best bond of affection. The very heathens honored the Primitive
Christians for their unanimity. See Cant. 6.9. with the Note.

Ver. 20. Shall be in thine hand before their eyes] That by this Chria
publicly acted, they may be the better affected.

Ver. 21. Behold I will take the children of Israel] This was fulfilled when
the Jews, and with them many of the ten tribes also returned to their own
country, under Zorobabel and Ezra: As for the rest of the ten tribes that
returned not, they degenerated into Gentiles. The Jews say that they were shut
up by Alexander the great in the Caspian mountains: and shall therehence break
forth when the Messiah appears. Of the Jews in general Tacitus has observed,
that they are very kind to their own countrymen: but to all others very cruel.
This might happily move Alexander to serve them in that kind. There are that
understand that text, Rev. 16.12. the Kings of the East concerning the ten
tribes whom they place in China, which is called the land of Sinim (as Junius
conjectureth) Isa. 49.12. And who knows, but that when all Israel shall be
called, Romans 11.26. raised from the dead, ver. 15. joined into one stick, as
here, many of those poor Heathens in Asia and America may have part in the same
resurrection?

Ver. 22. And I will make them one nation] Who were before at deadly feud, and
fought many bloody battles. Solemur and nos hac promissione contra schismata,
Let us also comfort our selves with this promise against schisms, says
Oecolampadius. Christ will cause the false Prophets and the unclean spirit to
pass out of the land, Zech. 13.2. he will also so work in the hearts of his
people, that they shall with one mind and one mouth glorify God, even the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 15.6.

Ver. 23. Neither shall they defile] After the Captivity the Jews could never
endure idolatry. The Popish image worship is at this day a very great
stumbling block to them.

Out of all their dwelling-places] Where being mingled among the Heathen they
learned their works, Psalm. 106.35.

Ver. 24. And David my servant] i. e. Christ, who came to do the will of his
Father in the shape of a servant, Phil. 2.7. See Isa. 42.1.

And they shall all have one shepherd] Even David their King is for his
clemency here called a Shepherd (says Hierom) tending and tendering his
people: See chap. 34.

They shall also walk in my Judgements] All Christ's subjects can say, as those
Primitive Christians did, Nos non eloquimur magna, sed vivimus. Athenagoras in
his Apology says, No Christian is a bad man, (...), unless he be a
counterfeit.

Ver. 25. And they shall dwell in the land] So they did for six hundred years,
or near upon: and in heaven (whereof Canaan was a type) they shall live and
reign for ever.

Ver. 26. Moreover, etc.] See chap. 34.25.

And it shall be an everlasting Covenant with them] With all the Israel of God.

And I will place them] sc. In the holy Land, says Piscator: or else I
understand not what this word place them, or give them, means.

And will set my Sanctuary in the midst of them] i. e. I will indwel in them,
and walk in them, etc. as a Cor. 6.16. The Jews pray earnestly for the
rebuilding of their material Temple. Pray we as hard for the building up of the
mystical Temple.

Ver. 27. My Tabernacle also] i. e. Mine Ordinances, those Testimonies of my
special presence. See Rev. 21.3.

Ver. 28. Do sanctify Israel] i. e. Do set them apart for mine use: and will
see to their safety.

When my sanctuary] Wherehence they shall have continual both direction, and
protection.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Ver. 1. AND the Word] This particle And shows the dependence of this
discourse upon the former. Gods people shall be brought to their own country;
The Lord Christ also shall sit upon the throne of his Father David: But betwixt
these two great benefits the Church shall suffer much; and her enemies a great
deal more, when once God takes them to do.

Ver. 2. Set thy face against Gog] i. e. Against those last enemies of the
Church, before Skiloh come: the Kings of the lesser Asia and Syria before his
first coming (see the books of Maccabees) the Pope and Turk before his second
coming: See Rev. 20.8. with the Note. Against these Ezekiel is commanded to set
his face, that is, to prophecy with utmost intention of spirit, and contention
of speech.

Virtute opus est contra Antichristum d^cturo. Polan.
The land of Magog] Or, in the land of Magog, which some make to be Gogs
country, and especially Hierapolis (for which they allege Pliny lib. 5. cap.
23.) a chief City of Syria. This Hierapolis had its name from the multitude of
religious houses or idol-temples there erected. May not Rome, the Metropolis of
idolatry, Ptolom. in quarta Asiae tabula.
be rightly so called?

The chief Princes of Meshec and Tubal] People neighboring upon the Syrians,
and subject unto them, great enemies to Israel. See on chap. 27.13. In Meshec
or Cappadocia, the Turks began to grow great and formidable. As for Tubal,
Hierom and Josephus among the Ancients; Bellarmine and Gretserus among the
Jesuits, understand it of the Spaniards. R. David and Ahen-ezra take Meshec
for the Italians.

Ver. 3. Behold I am against thee O Gog] Ecce ego ad te, Have at thee Gog.

The chief Prince of Meshec and Tubal] These two are thus conjoined to show, as
some think, that Turks and Popelings shall at length join their forces to root
out the true religion: and that whilst they are tumultuating and endeavoring
the Churches downfall, Christ shall come upon them and confound them. See on
Rev. 16.14, 16. Propheta omnia loquitur magn^ficis verbis per Hyperbolas.
The Jews hold that this whole Prophecy shall be fulfilled at the coming of
their long-looked for Messiah: and whilst they take all things therein
according to the letter, they run into many very great errors.

Ver. 4. And I will turn thee back] As he did Antiochus Epimanes by the Jews:
the Turks often by Hunniades: the Popes forces by the Hussites in Germany, and
lately by the Suedes. It has been long ago foretold, and for many ages
believed, and by the Turks themselves not a little feared, that the Mohammedan
superstition by the sword begun, and by the sword maintained, Turk. Hist. 1153.
shall at length by the Christian sword also be destroyed, so that the name of
Gog and Magog (says the Historian) shall be no more heard of under heaven. A
cold sweat also stands at this time upon the limbs of the Western Antichrist,
by reason of the growing greatness of the Protestant Princes.

And put hooks into thy chaws] A Metaphor from those that catch Whales: Confer
chap 29.4.

And I will bring thee] But, for an ill bargain.

Ver. 5. Persia, Ethiopia, and Lybia] A numerous army from all parts. The
Church is against all the world, and all the world against the Church. Hic vir
totius orbis impetum sustinuis, said One once, concerning Athanasius. A silly
poor maid in the midst of many fierce and savage creatures assaulting her every
moment, is a true picture of the Church, says Luther.

Ver. 6. Gomer and all his hands] The Cymbrians or Cimmerians, says
Melancthon: the Galatians, says Theodoret.

The house of Togarmah] The Phrygians, as some: the Armenians as others will.
Of Antichrist his great power, See Rev. 9.1. -- 20. and 20.8. See on chapter 27.14.

Ver. 7. Be thou prepared] Comparator and comparate. Muster up all thy forces,
and see to their safety. But can thou ward of my blows? mote thy self up
against my fire?

Ver. 8. After many days thou shall be visited] sc. By mine heaviest
Judgments: for shall not God avenge his own Elect? -- though he bear long with
them. I tell you that he will avenge them speedily, Luke 18.7.8.

In the latter years thou shall come into the land] Antiochus, that little
Antichrist, did, and made havoc. It is the opinion of some very grave Divines,
that the great Antichrist before his abolition, shall once again overflow the
whole face of the West: Quod Deus avertat.

Which have been always waste] i. e. A long while.

Ver. 9. Thou shall ascend and come like a storm] With great hurry and terror:
but it shall soon blow over.

Thou shall be like a cloud] Sed cito transibis.

Ver. 10. Things shall come into thy mind] Ascedent verba super cor tuum, thou
shall machinate mischief: but it shall fall on thine one pate. O pray, pray,
said a holy man once, Pontifex enim Romanus and Concilium Tridentinum mira
moliuntur, for the Pope and his Council of Trent are hatching strange
businesses.

Ver. 11. I will go up to the land of unwalled villages] That care not to
fortify their towns, but commit themselves to God, and think to escape us: but
we shall soon show them their folly therein. The Hebrews have one and the same
word for folly and confidence, (...)
Psalm. 49.14. Eccles. 7.27. Psalm. 78.7. Job 31.24. See on Job 4.6. But in the
fear of the Lord is strong confidence: and his children (though their towns be
unwalled) have a place of refuge, Prove. 14.26.

Ver. 12. To take a spoil] Heb. to spoil the spoil, and to prey the prey. The
Antichristian rout are all for robbing and ravaging. What vaste sums of money
raked the Pope once out of England, which was therefore truly and trimly
called by Pope Innocent the fourth, hortus deliciarum and puteus inexhaustus,
his delicate garden, and pit that could not be drawn dry.

To turn thine hand] To plunder them to the very bones, as they say. Time was
when the Popes receivers here left not so much money in the whole Kingdom, as
they either carried with them, or sent to Rome before them, Of this Papal
expilation King John heavily complained, and could get no remedy: but Henry the
eighth would bear it no longer. England is no more a babe (said he in his
Protestation against the Pope:) there is no man here but now he knows that
they do foolishly that give gold for lead, Act. and Mon. 990.
more weight of that then they receive of this, etc.

Ver. 13. Sheba and Dedan] The Arabians, who lived by roving and robbing.

With all the young Lions] That lie in wait for gain, as Lions do for prey.

Art thou come to take a prey?] q. d. If thou art, we are ready to set in with
thee, or to traffic with thee for it. Mahomet came of these Arabians: the
Pope has his mony-merchants great store, Rev. 18.

Ver. 14. Prophecy and say unto Gog] Say it over again, that it may be the
better considered, for the strengthening of the hands and hearts of my people.

Shall thou not know it?] sc. By thine Intelligencers, and will thou not think
to make thine advantage of it? The Pope has his Coricaei in every corner of
Christendom: The Jesuits Colleges placed upon the walls of Cities afford them
passage into the City, or abroad into the world at pleasure, to give or receive
intelligence as occasion serves.

Ver. 15. Out of the North-parts] Ab Aquilone nihil boni: from spiritual
Babylon comes all mischief to the Church. The King of Syria is called King of
the North, Dan. 10.


A great company and a mighty army] Such was the army of Antiochus Epiphanes
against the Jews; of the Turk against Christians; of the Pope against the
Hussites, Waldenses, etc. He deceives the Nations which are in the four
quarters of the earth, to gather them together to battle: the number of whom is
as the sand of the sea, De Romans Pont. lib. 3. cap. 16. and 17.
Rev. 20.8. He has at his command the Italians, Walloons, Spaniards, whom
Bellarmine rightly reckons among the soldiers of Antichrist.

Ver. 16. And thou shall come up against my people] Oh happy they in such a
privilege, maugre all thy malice, Deuteronomy. 33.29.

In the latter dayes] Before the coming of the Messiah, first and second.

And I will bring thee] But for thy bane.

Against my land] The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, Psalm. 24.1.
but that land where God is sincerely served, is his peculiar portion. It was
said of old Anglia regnum Dei: Polyd. Virg.
It is now so much more.

When I shall be sanctified in thee] i. e. Glorified in thy just and utter
destruction.

Ver. 17. Art thou he?] It Is sure enough thou art he: for I cannot be deceived
in thee, nor shall fail to suppress thee.

By my servants the Prophets] Enoch, Jude 15. Hos. 2. Joel 3. Dan. 11. Zech.
14. Rev. 20.8. 2 Thessalonians. 2.

Which prophesied of thee] Though under another name.

Ver. 18. My fury shall come up in my face] Though it do not presently break
forth. Ira Dei quo diuturnior, eo minacior.

Poena venit gravior, quo mage tarda venit. God delights to make fools of his
enemies; he lets them prevail a while, and carry the ball on the foot, as it
were, that they may fall with the greater disappointment.

Ver. 19. For in my jealousy] God first kindles, and then speaks, and then
shakes the earth. His wrath is like Elijah's cloud; which was at first but a
small matter to see to: or as thunder which we hear at first a little roaring
noise afar off: but stay a while, it is a dreadful crack: or as fire that at
first burns a little upon a few boards, but when it prevails, bursteth out
in a most terrible flame.

Ver. 20. Shall shake at my presence] And wriggle into their holes; as worms do
in time of thunder.

And the mountains shall be thrown down] Hyperbolical threats, to set forth the
dreadfulnesse of Gods fierce wrath, which burns as low as hell it self.

Ver. 21. And I will call for a sword] Against Antiochus by the Maccabees;
against the Turk and Pope by the Christian Princes, Hunniades, Scanderbeg,
Queen Elizabeth, the late and present Kings of Sweden, the English and French
forces in Flanders now before Gravelin, after Dunkirk and Bergen taken from the
Spaniard. Certain it is, that ere long the Beast and the false Prophet shall be
taken, and all the fouls of the heaven filled with the flesh of those Kings and
Captains, that fight against the Gospel, Rev. 19.19, 20, 21.

Ver. 22. An overflowing rain, and great hail-stones] As once at the general
deluge, destruction of Sodom, discomfiture of the Kings of Canaan in Joshua's
days, chap. 10.11. Some think that these Judgments here threatened shall
toward the end of the world be executed upon Antichrist and his adherents,
according to the letter: See Rev, 16.21. See the Note there.

Ver. 23. Thus will I magnify my self] This end God proposes to himself in all
his works: and well he may; since he has none higher then himself to whom to
have respect. And let all this that has been said comfort us against the rage
and good success (if any such yet be) of the Antichristian rout; since these
are but (as he said once of decaying Carthage) the last sprunts and bites of
dying wild beasts.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Ver. 1. PRophecy against Gog] Prophecy again against him, for my peoples
greater comfort. The Jews (noted ever to have been a light, aerial, and
fanatical nation, apt to work themselves into the fools paradise of a sublime
dotage) they expounding this Prophecy according to the letter, conclude that
Christ is not yet come, because these things here foretold are not yet
fulfilled. When he does come, they say, he shall set up his kingdom at
Jerusalem, gather all Israel out of all coasts unto himself there, send each
one to his own Tribe, and that most certainly, by the operation of his holy
Spirit. There they shall be no sooner settled, and the kingdom not yet fully
stablished, In frusta vel scintillas redigam te. Pintus. Sextabo te.
but Gog and Magog shall bring a huge army against Jerusalem, where they shall
fall by the sword, lie unburied, etc.

Ver. 2. And I will turn thee back] Convertam vel Conteram te: See chapter 38.3.

And leave but the sixth part of thee] Or, strike thee with six plagues, or
draw thee back with an hook of six teeth, as chap. 38.4.

And will cause thee to come] This is much and often inculcated, that it is God
who brings in and drives out the Churches enemies. This is a quieting
consideration.

Ver. 3. And I will smite thy bow out of thy left hand] I will disarm thee:
Lib. 2.
as Herodotus reports of Sennacherib and his Assyrians in Egypt, that their
quivers, bowstrings and targets were gnawn to pieces by Mice and Rats in one
night, so that they were forced to fly for their lives: And as our Chroniclers
tell us that in the battle between Edward the third of England, and Philip of
France, their fell such a piercing shower of rain, as dissolved their strings,
and made their bows unseful. Dan. 237.


Ver. 4. Thou shall fall upon the mountains of Israel] Thither thou shall come
indeed (as Antiochus did into the Temple, Antichrist into the Church of God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.) but there thou shall take thy end.

Ver. 5. Thou shall fall upon the open field] Heb. the face of the field, which
thou shall dung with thy dead carcass.

Ver. 6. And I will send a fire on Magog] So God will one day on Rome that
Radix omnium malorum, Rev. 18.

And among them that dwell carelessly in the Isles] Who must not think there to
mott up themselves against my fire.

Ver. 7. I will not let them pollute my holy Name] As if I were less able to
deliver my people, or less mindful of my Promises.

Ver. 8. Behold it is come, and it is done] It is as good as done. So, Babylon
is fallen, i. e. it will fall certainly, quickly, utterly.

This is the day] O dieculam illam! when shall it once be? O mora! Christ veni.

Ver. 9. And they that dwell] Hyperbolical expressions; though the Jews hold
otherwise. See on ver. 1.

Shall set on fire and burn the weapons] Do not the Churches Champions so at
this day, ever since they proclaimed and proved the Pope to be that Antichrist:
burning up his weapons (his false doctrines and heresies) by the fire of Gods
Word, and giving their bodies to be burned for the testimony of Jesus?

And they shall burn them with fire seven years] i. e. Diutissime and
saepissime! This seven years is not yet out. The Jesuits say, Satan sent
Luther, and God sent them to withstand him. But there is a succession of
Luthers to find them work enough still, and to burn up their weapons, that the
Churches may be at rest.

Ver. 10. So that they shall take no wood] This must needs be Hyperbolical, as
are also sundry other passages in holy Scripture. When Luther burnt the Popes
decrees and decretals at Wittenberg, it was a fair fire doubtless, as Solon
once said of the fire he caused to be made at Athens, of the bills and bonds of
the Athenian usurers.

Ver. 11. I will give unto Gog a place there of graves] That Is all the portion
or possession he gets in the holy land.

On the East of the sea] The dead sea, or the lake of Sodom: a fit place for
Antichrist to be buried in: he shall at last be cast alive into a worse lake,
Rev. 19.20.

And it shall stop the noses of passengers] By reason of stench, or the mouths
of passengers from speaking evil of Gods people.

And they shall call it] For a lasting monument of Gods great mercy, in ridding
the country of such Pests.

Ver. 12. And seven months shall the house of Israel be burying of them] That
is, a long while: like as the Reformed Churches were in ^ooting out Popery,
those damnable doctrines, ceremonies, images, relics, bulls and books. Here
in England, the Romish Religion stood a whole month and more after the death of
Queen Mary, as before. December 27. it was permitted that the Epistles, Gospels,
ten Commandments, Lords Prayer, Creed and Letany should be used in the Vulgar
tongue. March 22. when the estates of the Realm were assembled by renewing of a
law of Edward the sixth, was granted the whole use of the Lords Supper; that
is, under both kinds. June 24. the sacrifice of the Mass was abolished, and
the Liturgy in the English tongue established. Camd. Elisab.
In July, the oath of Supremacy was ministered: and in August images were
removed out of Churches, broken or burnt: Tantae molis erat Romanam abscondere
gentem.

Ver. 13. And it shall be to them a renown] A Monument, or Trophie of their
triumph. When the Suitzers, Anno 1443. had vanquished the Thuricenses in
battle, Lanquet Chron. p. 263.
they banquetted in the place where they won the victory; using the dead bodies
of their adversaries instead of stools and tables.

Pollinctores. Vespillones.
Ver. 14. And they shall sever out men of continual employment] Viros
quotidianos, men that shall stick to it, making it their business. So do our
public Professors and others, to confute Popish Tenets, and to decry their
customs. In doing whereof they are assidui and accubui.

Ver. 15. Then shall he set up a sign by it] A statue, pillar, or sepulchral
monument, that the buriers may bury it. Oh that in like sort God would cause
the Prophet (all relics and rags of Popery, and other heresy) together with
the unclean spirit to pass out of our land, Zech. 13.2.

Ver. 16. And also the name of the City shall be Hamonah] i. e. Multitude or
Tumult: and all to keep up the memory of that signal victory. Near unto the
University of Cambridge, on the South-East side there appear aloft certain high
hills called Gogmagog-hills; but wherefore I know not. But not far from them is
Heretikes-hill, so called by the Papists, because Bilney and Latimer were wont
there to walk.

Ver. 17. Speak unto every feathered foul] A further explanation of that which
had been said, ver. 4.

Assemble your selves] Jer. 12.9. Rev. 19.17. See there.

To my sacrifice] To this great slaughter or enemies, whom I do sacrifice, as
it were, to my justice.

Ver. 18. Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty] Whose flesh may be, perhaps,
more delicate.

And drink the blood] Blood royal, of a noble alloy. Sed nihil inde colligas,
Oecol.
quam perpetuam eorum damnationem qui verbum Dei persequuntur, quique populum
Israel spiritualem exagitant. It imports the eternal damnation of Atheists
and Antichrists.

Ver. 19. Of my sacrifice] Or of my good cheer: So God calls it, to show how
well pleased he is with the destruction of his Churches enemies.

Ver. 20. With horses and charets] i. e. With men that ride on horses, and
fight out of Charets.

Ver. 21. And all the heathen shall see my judgment] Antiochus did so, and
Maximinus the Emperor, and other tyrants, when seized upon by such judgments
of God as they could neither avoid nor abide.

Ver. 22. From that day and forward] Their experience shall breed confidence.

Ver. 23. And the heathen shall know] They shall be convinced of the equability
of my proceedings, and the truth of my menaces.

Ver. 24. According to their uncleannesse] I have not showed my sovereignty, or
exercised tyranny toward them, but done them right.

Ver. 25. Now will I bring again] Three things he here promises his people,
notwithstanding all the sorrow. 1. Effectual Vocation. 2. Justification here.
3. Glorification, ver. 29. The Sun of righteousness loves not to set in a cloud.

And will be jealous] Or zealous; the zeal of the Lord of hosts, his free
grace, shall effect it.

Ver. 26. After that they have born their shame] Are become soundly ashamed of
their sinful practices: hoc enim ingenium est verae fidei, says Oecolampadius,
for this is the nature of true faith, to blush and bleed for sins past.

When they dwelt safely in their land] And so settled on their lees through
carnal security.

Ver. 27. And am sanctified in them] i. e. Have fully showed my sanctity and
majesty, both by their punishment, and by their deliverance.

Ver. 28. And have left none of them any more there] Here the Jews triumph and
say, When was this promise ever fulfilled? and how then can the Messiah be come
already? Hereunto it is rightly answered that this Prophecy is to be taken
partly literally, and so it was fulfilled at the return of the captives out of
Babylon. See Ezra ^.1. Partly spiritually; Lavat. in loc.
and so Christ will at the last day raise up every of his Elect (that Israel
indeed) and gather them to himself; not one of them shall be missing.

Ver. 29. Neither will I hide my face any more from them] They shall have
beatifical vision and fruition for ever. See on ver. 25.

For I have poured out my spirit] Have already, and will do yet more liberally
in the days of the Gospel, Act. 2.27. Joh. 7.38.

CHAP. XL.
Ver. 1. IN the five and twentieth year, etc.] After the defeat of Gog and
Magog comes in these last nine Chapters a new Prophecy, aptly depending upon
the former, concerning the Christian Church, and the spiritual state and
constitution thereof: which is here prefigured by types of rebuilding the
Temple, restoring the Levitical rites, and repossessing the promised land. To
those Jews who herehence expect a most glorious Temple and State at the coming
of their imaginary Messiah (and for whose sakes these high things are thus
expressed) Christ may well say as afterward he did to Nicodemus, Joh. 3.12. If
I have told you earthly things and ye believe not: R. Abba. R. Solomon. Gal. l.
5. c. 12.
how shall ye believe if I tell you of heavenly? The wiser of their Rabbines
(as Galatinus testifies) convinced by good reasons, understand these chapters
not of an earthly building according to the letter, but of an heavenly, and in
a mystical sense. And John the Divine so interprets this Scripture, Rev. 21.
and 22. viz. of the heavenly Jerusalem, that mother of us all. It is ordinary
with the Prophets to speak figuratively of the amplitude, splendor, and
magnificence of the Christian Church: as Isa. 54.11, 12. I will lay thy stones
with fair colors, and lay thy foundation with Sapphires, etc. that is, I will
erect and raise my Church and Temple among the Gentiles, and adorn and deck it
with luster and variety of precious graces. Divines observe, that God here
shows Ezekiel a new Temple bigger then the old Jerusalem, and a new Jerusalem
bigger then all the land of Canaan: (yea according to the account of some
learned Rabbines) bigger then all the world; for chap. 48.35. it was round
about eighten thousand measures, i. e. leucas say they. Now in opening of this
Prophecy, it must not be expected that something should be said to every verse,
as elsewhere has been done: and yet we must know that there is nothing in holy
Scripture that is not useful and profitable, 2 Timothy 3.16. though at first sight
it may seem otherwise. Metals lie hid in hardest quarries: wholesome herbs are
found often in roughest places, and precious stones in barren sands. Hippocrates
says that in the faculty of Physic there is nothing small, (...). De part.
anim. lib. 1. cap. 5.
nothing contemptible. Aristotle says in all nature nothing is so mean, vile,
and abject, that deserves not to be admired. The Rabbines have a saying that
there is a mountain of sense hangs upon every Apex of the Word of God, etc.

And brought me thither] sc. To Jerusalem (in vision) that valley of Vision. In
the beginning of this book, the spirit carried him into the plain of Shinar,
there to see a vision, purporting the destruction of the material Temple. Here,
toward the close of it, he is by the same hand carried to Jerusalem to see a
mystical Temple set up in the stead thereof, far more stately. The sufferings
of this life are in no comparison worthy of the glory that shall be revealed,
Romans 8.18.

Ver. 2. Brought he me] i. e. The Spirit brought me, who is called Gods hand,
ver. 1. quia a Patre Filioque quasi manus dimanat: so he is called the finger
of God, Exodus 8.19. that is, his power.

And set me upon a very high mountain] Moriah, where had stood the Temple which
overlooked the City: and had been a kind of heaven upon earth, wherein the holy
Priests and Israelites were as stars.

By which was the frame of a City] So the Temple seemed to him, for its many
courts, walls, towers, gates, etc. So does the Seraglio at this day.

Ver. 3. And behold there was a man] Christ the Sovereign Architect of his
Church, as Rev. 11.1. This might well be brought in with an Ecce. He appeared
after another manner in that first dreadful vision, chap. 1.

Whose appearance was like the appearance of brasse] Bright and durable;
importing Christ's purity and eternity.

With a line of flax in his hand] Christ's measuring-line is the holy Scripture,
and the preaching of the Word; so is also his measuring rod here said to be of
reed, but Rev. 11. of gold. Both these are in Christ's hand; to show that the
power and efficacy of the Word read or preached is from him alone: See 1 Cor. 3
9, 10. -- 18. and 2 Cor. 10.13. -- 17.

Ver. 4. Son of man] A most kind compellation, holding forth Christ's
Philanthropy or love to mankind. He calls us sons of men, who for our sakes
became the Son of Man, that we might become the sons of God. It is observed
that Ezekiel with the Seventy is (...) the son of man, but, Christ is (...)
that is, the son of Adam: he was the next and only other common-person.

Behold with thine eyes and hear with thine ears, and set thine heart, etc.]
We should give all possible diligence and heed to a discourse of the new
Jerusalem, that City of pearl; setting a work both our outward and inward
senses, and those well exercised, to discern both good and evil, Heb. 5. ult.

Declare all that thou see unto the house of Israel] For therefore have thou
seen it. The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. And as any man has received the gift, so let him minister
the same to others, 1 Pet. 4.10. What use is there of candle under a bushel?

Ver. 5. And behold a wall on the outside of the house] Betokening Gods
Almighty Protection of his Church and chosen, Esa. 26.1. Zach. 2.9. Job 1.
Psalm. 125.1, 2. Psalm. 46.1, etc.

Ver. 6. Then came he unto the gate] Henceforth we shall read of gates,
greeces, posts, porches, courts, chambers, windows, etc. after the manner of
Solomon's Temple now burnt to ashes. Concerning all which, various and very
different are the opinions of Interpreters. We shall see hereafter the whole
building in heaven: meanwhile, for many things here mentioned we must content
our selves with a learned ignorance, and not call it descriptionem insulsam,
Sanctius: Argum: in hoc cap.
as that Popish Commenter blasphemed: or think that the holy Penman spoke he
knew not what. This was basely to speak evil of the things that he knew not.
How much better those Rabbines, who meeting with many things here, inextricable
and inexplicable, say, Elias cum venerit solvet omnia?

Ver. 7, And every little chamber] Or Porters-lodge.

Ver. 8. He measured also the porch] This porch which had neither doors nor
roof that we read of, was symbolum caeli: De bell. Jud. l. 6. c. 6.
caelum enim undique conspicuum lateque patens significabat, says Josephus, it
represented heaven.

Ver. 9. And the porch of the gate was inward] Or, this was the porch of the
inner gate.

Ver. 10. And the little chambers] Here lay the door-keepers, whose office was
to keep out the unclean, 2 Chronicles. 23.19. Oh for such officers amongst us!

Ver. 11. And the length] That is, the height of the gate.

Ver. 12. The space also before the little chambers] Which space served either
for seats, walks, or eaves rather at either end.

Ver. 13. Door against door] The one facing the other, in a direct line.

Ver. 14. Even unto the post] i. e. The height was the same everywhere. See
these things best set forth by pictures at the end of Castalio's and Lavaters
Annotations on the Text.

Ver. 16. Narrow windows] i. e. Narrowed, the better to let in light: and so
shadowing out that spiritual illumination and joy wrought in the hearts of the
children of light. See Esa. 42.7. and 49.6. and 60.19, 20. Mic. 7.8. Luke 2.32.
Joh. 3.19. and 8.24. and 9.5. and 12.35, 36, 46.

Were palm-trees] As for ornament, so in token of Victory gotten by the Saints,
who do over-overcome, Romans 8.31. -- 37. 1 Cor. 15.54, 55.

Ver. 17. Then brought he me into the outward court] In this Temple were more
Courts and more Chambers then ever were in Solomon's. Heaven is large, and full
of mansions, Joh. 14.

And a pavement made] More costly and stately then that of Ahashuerosh, Esth.
1.6. Gods people are said to be living stones, 1 Pet. 2. more precious then
Sapphires, Esa. 54. firm as a pavement by faith, and low by humility;
submitting to their teachers, Heb. 13.17. and obeying from the heart the form
of doctrine delivered unto them, Romans 6.17.

Ver. 18. Was the lower pavement] See on ver. 17.

Ver. 19. An hundred cubits] Square.

Ver. 21. Of the first gate] i. e. Of the east gate, first measured.

Ver. 22. And their windows] See ver. 16.

And they went up unto it by se^^ steps] Whereby was noted the Saints progress
in knowledge and holiness, Luke 17.5. Romans 1.17. Rev. 22.11. still climing up
toward the heavenly Temple, Psalm. 84.7.

Ver. 31. And palm-trees] See on ver. 16.

Eight steps] See on ver. 22.

Ver. 35. And measured it according to these measures] Vilalpandus here notes,
that whatsoever is measured in one gate, the same is common to all the rest.

Ver. 38. Where they washed the burnt-offering] All must be pure and clean in
Gods Service. Pura Deus men's est, etc. This washing of the burnt-offering
prefigured Baptism says Polanus: as did the tables, ver. 39. the Lords Supper,
wherein Christ the Lamb of God is slain in out sight.

Ver. 39. Two tables] See on ver. 38.

Ver. 40. As one goes up to the entry of the North] Hereby was signified, say
some, that our corrupt affections must be mortified, and our lives laid down,
if need be for the truths sake, seem it never so hard to be done: sicut a
Septentrione venti flant aspexi, as North-winds are cold and comfortless.

Ver. 41. Four tables] Not Altars, nor yet Oyster-boards, as the Papists
scornfully call our Communion-tables.

Ver. 42. Wherewith they slew the burnt-offering] The faithful Ministers of the
Gospel do daily execute their Priestly offices, and have their instruments
according. See Acts 10.13. Romans 15.15, 16. Philip. 2.17. The Saints also, as
spiritual Priests, etc. Romans 12.1. 1 Pet. 2.9.

Ver. 43. And within were hooks] Where hung the beasts when they were slayed:
and afterward the Priests and offerers portions, till after the sacrifice,
they were shared out.

Ver. 44. Were the chambers of the singers] These were to set forth, that
Pastors should have all necessary help in their places by the other
Church Officers. The Levites were singers and porters, 1 Chronicles. 23. and 26.

Ver. 45. For the Priests] Let none else intrude into them. See 2 Chronicles. 26.16.

Ver. 46. Which come near] Exodus 19.22. Levit. 10.3. and 21.17, 18, 21, 23.

Ver. 47. So he measured] Christ does all things in his Church in number,
weight and measure: by his Spirit he orders the length, breadth and depth of
his spiritual house, and bestows his gifts by measure to each member, Romans
12. 2 Cor. 10. Ephesians. 3. and 4.

Ver. 48. The porch of the house] Which was covered over head to keep them dry
in foul weather. What Christ does for all his: See Isa. 4.5, 6. and Isa. 25.4.
with the Notes.

Ver. 49. The length of the porch was twenty cubits] After the cubit of the
Sanctuary, the weights and measures whereof were twice as large as those of the
Commonwealth: to show that God expects much more of those that serve him there,
then he does of others.

CHAP. XLI.
Ver. 1. AFterward] This Chapter is no less dark and difficult then was the
former: which made Hierom ready to desist and give over commenting, but that he
thought it better to say something then nothing, and was brought to know and
say that the greatest part of those things he knew, were but the least part of
that he knew not. What I do understand is good; so I think, is that I
understand not, said Socrates once of a certain dark Author. We may be sure it
is so here, and must mirari potius quam rimari: waiting for more light, and
praying to that purpose, as Ephesians. 1.17, 18.

He brought me to the Temple] Who had hitherto been held in the Porch. There
was a new Church to be now erected by the preaching of the Gospel: and this,
the measuring of the house, chap. 40. of the Temple, 41. of the courts, 42. and
of all the parts, notes.

And measured the posts] Or Fronts, or Frontispiece, as the Vulgar has it.

Which was the breadth of the Tabernacle] Made of old by Moses.

Ver. 2. And he measured the length there of] i. e. Not of the door, as Hierom
would have it: but of the Temple, the body and Basilike thereof, called the
first Sanctuary, Heb. 9.2.

Forty cubits] This notes, say some, the long-suffering and patience of the
Saints: like as the breadth twenty cubits, does their charity.

Ver. 3. Then went he inward] Toward the Holy of Holyes.

And the door] Which in the second Temple was but a veil, and rent at Christ's
Passion.

Ver. 4. And the breadth thereof twenty cubits] So it was a just square,
intimating the stability of the Kingdom of Heaven, a Kingdom that cannot be
shaken, Heb. 12.28.

This is the most holy place] The Holy of Holyes, the Oracle, the house of the
soul wherein the only firm hope of Israel rests (so the Jews called it) the
Adytum or inaccessible place, whither none might come but the High Priest only,
and that but once a year. Pompy and Heliodorus, for presuming to press into
it, were heavily plagued.

Ver. 5. He measured the wall] With the counter-forts added to it for strength,
and ornament: these are commonly called Pilasters.

Six cubits] sc. In breadth.

Ver. 6. And the side-chambers were three one over another, Substructiones.
Polan. Costae. Vatab.
and thirty in order] i. e. Three stories, and thirty in each story. Semblably,
there is a threefold rank or order of the members of the Church; there are
lowermost, midlemost and uppermost: these, as they have their several offices
and gifts accordingly, so they must keep to their own stations, do their own
business, live in love, and wait till called unto an higher room.

Ver. 7. And there was an enlarging and a winding about still upward] This
might inmind Gods people of heavenly-mindednesse, whereby their hearts will be
enlarged when got once above the world, as birds sing sweetly, when got aloft
into the air.

Went still upward] Let there be continual ascensions in our hearts: Sursum
corda.

Ver. 8. The foundations] Plus rei quam ostentationis habebant: Oecol.
The good soul rather seeks to be good, then seems to be so.

Ver. 9. And that which was left] Area pura, the void place. Piscat.


Ver. 10. And between the chambers] Vulg. the treasuries] In the Church much
more rome is taken up by such as are void of the treasure of Gods grace, then
by better men, rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom of Christ.

Ver. 11. Toward the place that was le^t] Which served the faithful, says
Hierom, for an Oratory, whither they went to pray.

Ver. 12. The separate place] The Temple, or, at least, some part of it.

Ver. 13. An hundred cubits] The Temple of Ephesus was 245 foot long, and 220
foot broad. Howbeit for spiritual employment, mystical signification, none ever
came near this edifice.

Ver. 14. Also the breadth -- an hundred cubits] Whereas Solomon's Temple was
but twenty cubits broad.

Ver. 15. An hundred cubits] See on ver. 13.

With the inner temple and the porches thereof] Summa and infima juxta curat,
Oecol.
nihil aspernatur.

Ver. 16. And the narrow windows -- and the windows were covered] Here Hierom
cries out O the depth of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! Here be windows, but
narrow and covered: which shows that we see not yet, nor can see into heavenly
things, but obscurely and obliquely. How little a thing does man understand of
God? The holy Place was without windows, Job. 26.14.
only there burned lights perpetually: but in the most holy Place there was no
light at all.

Ver. 17. By measure] Heb. measure. See on chap. 40.47. Pressa sub ingenti ceu
pondere palma virescit: Sub crucefic florent dedita corda Deo. Plin. l. 13. c.
4.


Ver. 18. And it was made with Cherubims and palm-trees] Viz. Upon the
partition-walls. This was to teach Christians, who are the Temples of God, 1.
To live like Angels for holiness. 2. To suffer as Palm Trees, any pressures or
pains for his sake with invincible patience. By their piety in their lives, and
patience at their death, the Primitive Christians won much upon their their
Persecutors.

Ver. 19. So that the face of a man] See chap. 1.10.

And the face of a young Lion toward the Palm-tree] The Palm Tree as it grew
best in Judaea, so it is probable that from the Temple at Jerusalem it came at
first, that the Heathens put the Palm for a sign of victory, and that the
picture of Victory amongst them had in the one hand a Palm, and in the other an
Olive branch. Wisdom, (the praise of a man) and courage (the property of a
Lion) zeal and discretion, as they make a good mixture, so they conquer and
carry it.

Ver. 20. And on the wall of the Temple] Yet this is no warrant for the use of
Pictures in our Churches; whether for worship as Papists, or for ornaments only
as Lutherans. Mr. Burr. on Hos. vol. 1. page 465.
At a consultation held not many years since at Hamborough by Lutheran
Ministers concerning the cause and cure of Germanies calamities, they concluded
it was because their images were not adorned enough; which therefore they would
procure done. A sad business!

Ver. 21. The Posts of the Temple] i. e. Of the doors of the Temple, were not
round or arched, but square: as are at this day the doors of the Pantheon in
Rome, says Vilalpandus, built of old in honor of all Gods: and now
consecrated by the Pope to the honor of all Saints, with like superstition.

The largeness of this Altar above that of old shows that the Saints under
the Gospel would make much more improvement of the Lord Jesus in prayer, and
make use of his mediation and intercession by Faith in their heavenly
sublimated supplications, then the Saints of old were ordinarily wont to do.
Cobbet of Prayer. page 235.
Ver. 22. The Altar] sc. That for incense, whereof see Exodus 30.6. but here of a
much larger size: See on chap. 40.1. This altar of wood and foursquare was a
Type of Christ (not of the Cross as Vilalpand doteth) in whom our prayers come
before God as incense, and He is the propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2.2. See
Exodus 30 1. Psalm. 141.2. Rev. 5.8.

This is the Table] One and the same Christ is All in All to his people, an
Altar to sanctify them and their offerings: a Table also to feed and feast them
with the most precious provisions: See Psalm. 23.5, 6. and 36.9 and 65.5. Prove.
9.1, 2. Isa. 25.6, 7, 8.

Ver. 23. Had two doors] Understand hereby the Means of Grace, and Ministers
dispensing the same, whereby souls are brough home to Christ.

Ver. 24. Two leaves] There are variety of Ordinances.

Ver. 25. Cherubimes and Palm trees] Let Ministers resemble Angels, and they
shall be victorious, and well rewarded. The Palm is a symbol of constancy, and
of a crown.

Ver. 26. And thick Planks] i. e. The heads or ends of thick beam^ or joyses,
supporting the rafters. We see what use there is of Architecture (among other
Arts) in expounding Scripture. Vilalpand says he bestowed two and twenty years
study upon this fabrike of the Temple here described.

CHAP. XLII.
Ver. 1. THen he brought me forth into the utter Court] sc. Of the Temple, at
both ends and on either side whereof there were spacious places, in manner of
our Churchyards, says One. Sequitur locus valde confusus and mulio
impeditissimus, says Castalio: this is a very dark and difficult Chapter, the
sense whereof I would fain learn of some other: for I know not what to make of
it: Thus He. Oecolampadius also to like purpose, (after R. Solomon) and thus
prays, Suggerat Dominus conanti quae ad gloriam illius, certe quae non
officiant, precor, etc. i. e. The Lord help our honest endeavors, that we may
do what may be for his glory, and not for the hurt of any Reader. That was an
holy prayer of his Colleague Zuinglius in like case; and may it be ours also,
Deum Opt. Max. precor ut vias nostras dirigat, etc. I beseech Almighty God to
direct our ways: and if at any time, Zuing. Epist. l. 3.
( Balaam-like) we shall obstinately resist the truth, let him set his Angel
against us, who with the terror of his sword may so dash this ass (our
ignorance I mean, and presumptuous boldness) against the wall, that we may
feel our feet (that is, our carnal sense and reason) crushed and broken; that we
no longer dishonor the name of our Lord God.

Ver. 2. Before the length of an hundred cubits] The measure mentioned in this
Chapter, The calling of the Jew. by Finch.
and whatsoever follows touching the division of the land, the seats of the
Tribes, the portions allotted to the Prince, Priests and Levites, the manner of
their sacrifices and oblations, are all new; varying from that which is in
Moses (though for their weakness by those outward things he shadoweth
heavenly) to show both the abrogating of the legal ceremonies, and the
establishing of a spiritual Christian Church: the magnificence whereof is here
set forth to the Prophet by the Lord Christ, qui Mystagogus noster est, who is
our God, and will be our Guide even unto death.

Ver. 3. Which were for the inner Court] Viz. Of the Temple, this was a figure
of the Church invisible; as the outward Court, described in this Chapter, was
of the visible and external.

The pavement which was for the utter Court] Which might signify that those who
would enter into heaven, must keep themselves unspotted of the world, undefiled
in the way, Psalm. 15. and 24.

Ver. 4. A way of one cubit] A narrow way, but such as led them into spacious
walks of ten cubits breadth inward. Strait is the gate and narrow the way that
leads unto life eternal, Mat. 7.14. but they that hit it, hold it, shall once
walk arm in arm with Angels, Zach. 3.7. See the Note there. Through many
tribulations we must enter into Gods Kingdom, Acts 14.22. but there, God shall
set our feet in a large room, as Psalm. 31.8. we shall walk at liberty on the
everlasting mountains. Let it be remembered, that this narrow way is but short:
it is but of one cubit, etc.

Ver. 5. Now the upper chambers were shorter] As being a kind of cock-lofts,
and not so fit for habitation.

Ver. 6. Therefore the building was straitned] As the rules of Architecture
direct, and as right reason required, Ne structura pondere dissiliret.
left the building should shrink under its own burden.

Ver. 7, 8, 9, etc.] Here the Rabbines call again for the help of their Elias:
See on chap. 40.6.

Ver. 13. They be holy chambers] Or, cells of the Sanctuary, belonging to those
that serve in the Sanctuary. God appoints his Ministers their several
stations; together with the bounds of their habitations.

Shall eat the most holy things] Ministers must eat as well as others (they are
not of the Camelion-kind, cannot live upon air:) and the Lord Christ has
ordained that as they which waited at the Altar were partakers of the Altar, so
also should they that preach the Gospel, live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14.

And the meat offering, and the sin-offering] i. e. The Priests share out of
them: For (besides their tithes, and gl^be or subburbs) the Priests had many
rich revenues, and were far better provided for then now-adays Gospel Ministers
are, however begrudged that little that is allowed them.

Ver. 14. Then shall they not go out of the holy place] Ministers may not leave
their station, lay aside their holy calling, entangle themselves with worldly
cares and businesses, but Hoc agere, make their Ministry their business;
giving themselves wholly to it. Verbi Minister es, hoc age: this was Mr.
Perkins his Motto. And, say to Archippus, Take heed to the Ministry which thou
have received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it, Coloss. 4.17.

But there they shall lay their garments] And not go amongst the people in
them, lest they make themselves over-cheap, or the people superstitious, by
placing holiness in their seeing or touching those holy vestments.

And shall put on other garments] Ministers, Oecol.
as in doing their office they must use all becoming gravity and authority, as
the Ambassadors of Christ: so, at other times, they must familiarize
themselves with their people, becoming all things to all men, in Paul's sense,
that they may win some.

Ver. 15. Now when he had made an end of measuring the inner house] The inner
part of the Church, the Church invisible is first and chiefly to be looked
into, rather then the external adjuncts, as multitude, prosperity, clarity,
antiquity, etc. the Substantials rather then the Accidentals. The Church of
Rome borrows her mark from the market, Plenty or cheapnesse, etc. Vilissimus
pagus, says Luther, the mean stvilage seems to me to be an ivory Palace, if
there be but in it a faithful Pastor, and a few true believers.

Ver. 16. Five hundred reeds] Lo here the large extent of the holy Catholic
Church, the Communion of Saints. See the Note on chap. 40.1.

Ver. 17.18. He measured the North-side five hundred reeds] To show that many
should come from all coasts and quarters to sit down with Abraham and Isaac and
Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 8.11. See the Note there.

Ver. 20. He measured it by the four sides] The Church is fair and firm, for it
is quadrangular: so is every true member thereof homo quadratus, apiece,
steadfast and unmovable, (...), always abounding in the Work of the Lord, etc. 1
Cor. 15. ult. his heart is fixed trusting in the Lord, Psalm. 112. He quits
himself well in all estates, and comes of a gainer. Gold is purged in the fire,
shines in the water: as, on the other side, clay is scorcht in the fire,
dissolved in the water. The new Jerusalem is said to lie apiece, Rev.
21.16. See the Note there.

CHAP. XLIII.
Ver. 1. Afterward he brought me] Non nisi dimenso prius montis ambitu: The
Prophet saw not the glory of God, till he had first seen the Mount measured,
the Temple restored. Men must (usually) wait upon God in the use of means ere
they see the King in his glory.

Even the gate that looks toward the East] Men must awake out of the West of
wickedness, and stand up from dead courses and companies, if Christ, the
day star from on high, shall give them light, Ephesians. 5.14. Luke 2.78, 79.

Ver. 2. And behold the glory] i. e. The vision of the glory. God who by the
Eastgate had left the Temple and the City, chap 10. does now the same way
return, and fills the house with the glory of his presence.

And his voice was like a noise of many waters] Importing the multitude of his
attendants, and his irresistible power, in his Gospel especially, which is the
power of God to salvation; and, like a mighty torrent, bears down all before it.

And the earth shined with his glory] How can it do otherwise, when the Sun of
righteousness comes in place, and irradiateth both Organ and Object, 2 Cor.
4.6. Into Solomon's Temple God came in a thick cloud; not so here. Light is now
more diffused then ever: woe be to those that wink, or who seek straws to put
out their eyes withal, as Bernard has it.

Ver. 3. And it was according to the vision] Being so much the sweeter and the
welcomer to me. Hence he so often repeateth it: And the Jew-doctours observe that
eight times in this one Verse. Visionis ac videndi vocabulum repetitur, the
word for Vision and to see it is made use of.

When I came to destroy the City] i. e. To foretell the destruction of it, chap.
9.2, 5. from which time forth it was a done thing: See Jer. 1.10. with the Note.

And I fell upon my face] In reverence to his Majesty, in admiration of his
mercy, and in the sense of mine own unworthiness. The nearer any one comes to
God, the lower he falls in his own eyes; and the more does rottenness enter
into his bones.

Ver. 4. And the glory of the Lord] See ver 2.

By the way of the gate] The ordinary entrance into the Temple. There, if
anywhere, God is to be found: where should a man be sought for but at his
house? Say he be from home a while, yet thither he returns: So here.

Ver. 5. So the Spirit took me up] Who was fain upon my face: The lowly shall
be lifted up.

And brought me into the inner court] As being a Priest: so is every true
believer, 1 Pet. 2.9. Rev. 1.6.

Filled the house] Gods presence is the full glory of each good soul. See Hag.
2.7.

Ver. 6. And I heard him speaking unto me] The man Christ Jesus, standing by.
Here then is a meeting and the mystery of the blessed Trinity: yea here is a
double mystery to be taken notice of: viz. those two wonderful unions of three
persons in one God, and of Christ's two natures in one person.

Ver. 7. The place of my throne, and the place of the soles of my feet] i. e.
My Church, which is unto me instead of heaven and earth. Behold the place of my
throne, etc. so some read it: others, as for the place of my throne, etc. Isa.
66.1.


No more defile] But hallow: for negative holiness alone is little worth.

Nor by the carcasses of their Kings] i. e. Their idols; not unfitly called
carcasses. Piscat.
1. Because void of life. 2. Stinking stuff. See Levit. 26.30. Jer. 16.18.
These were often brought in, and countenanced by their Kings.

Ver. 8. In their setting of their threshold by my thresholds] By broaching
falsehoods for truth, and setting humane devices in competition with the good
Word of God. That detestable decree of the Council of Trent is well known,
whereby the Apocrypha^ is set cheek by joule (as they say) with the holy Canon:
the Vulgar Translation, with the Original: traditions, with Scriptures; and
unwritten verities, with those that are written. This is intolerable
presumption: Jews and Turks do the like in their Talmud and Alchoran: that I
speak not of our Sect-Masters who boldly obtrude their Placits without just
proof, and require to be believed.

And the wall between me and them] Which they have wretchedly set up by their
sins, to their singular disadvantage, Esa. 59.2. or they have come under my
nose, as it were, to provoke me. Or, the nearer they were to Church, the
further from God.

Ver. 9. Now let them put away their whoredom] So shall all be well betwixt us:
See Jer. 3.1. Isa. 1.18. with the Notes. Piscator ictus sapiat. Some read it,
Now they will put away, etc. and so they did, after the captivity; but will not
be yet drawn to worship the true God aright: the Lord persuade their hearts
thereto. Fiat, Fiat.

And the carcasses] See on ver. 7.

And I will dwell in the midst of them for ever] This is the same with that,
Mat. 28. I am with you to the end of the world.

Ver. 10. Show the house] Heb. that house, sc. which I have showed thee in
visions: the idea of that Temple, which shall shortly be set up, its figure and
dimensions.

That they may be ashamed] Of having dealt so unworthily with a God so gracious.

And let them measure the pattern] Vt metiantur universe, that by a holy
Geometry they may, in the spirit of their minds take all the dimensions of it,
and be transformed into the likeness of the heavenly pattern. These are those
holy and heavenly Mathematikes, which none can learn but those that are taught
of God; Scholae Platonis haec fuit inscriptio, (...).
and without which, none can be Christ's Disciple: like as none might be scholar
to Plato, that had not the grounds of Geometry.

Ver. 11. And if they be ashamed of all that they have done] If they blush and
bleed at heart for their iniquities. Penitents are to be taught the truth which
is according to godliness: and all such are exactly to know and to do the whole
will of God, as had not rather be carnally secured, then soundly comforted.

Ver. 12. Upon the top of the mountain] The Church is as a City on an hill,
seen far and near, Mat. 5.14. and the members of it are still ascending from
one degree of grace to another, from strength to strength, till they see the
face of God in Sion, Psalm. 15.1. Heb. 12.22, 23.

The whole limit thereof round about shall be most holy] All the Lords people
are so, at least in profession, inchoation, honest endeavor, divine
acceptance: and shall be so one day in all perfection, Rev. 21.8, 27. and
22.14, 15.

Ver. 13. And these are the measures of the Altar] viz. Of burnt offerings,
which was in the Priests court; and not at all spoken of till now.

The cubit] viz. That of the Sanctuary.

Even the bottom] Heb. the b^som.

This shall be the higher place] Heb. the back, as that which bore all. We have
also an Altar, Heb. 13.10. even Jesus Christ the just one, who is both our
Ariel (Gods Lion, Rev. 5.5.) and our Harcel (Gods Mount) of four cubits, as
being preached unto the Gentiles in all parts, believed on in the world,
received up into glory, 1 Timothy 3.16.

Ver. 14. And from the bottom upon the ground] This so exact measuring of the
Altar may import, says Polanus, the faithful and perfect preaching of the
Gospel by the Apostles and all faithful Ministers of Gods Word after them, 2
Cor. 10.13, etc. 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. Rev. 11.1.

Ver. 15. So the Altar] Heb. Harcel, the hill of God, or the only place of
sacrifices.

And from the Altar] Ariel, the Lion of God: so called, because the fire of
this Altar devoured the sacrifices, as a Lion does the prey. See Esa. 29.16.

Ver. 16. Square in the four squares thereof] Christ the Christian Altar, is
complete, firm and fixed.

Ver. 17. And his stairs shall look toward the East] As leading to the Sun of
righteousness, and the light of eternal blessedness, arising out of heaven.

Ver. 18. These are the ordinances of the Altar] Christians also have their
sacrifices, (though of another alloy) to offer; and must look to the ordinances
of their Altar. Ministers must especially.

Ver. 19. And thou shall give to the Priests] All this is to be understood
spiritually, as being figuratively spoken.

A young bullock] Together with a goat and a ram, ver. 22, 23, 25. All that are
Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24. and
are still doing at it.

Ver. 20. And thou shall take of the blood] Christ, as Mediator, was
consecrated and qualified for the work.

Ver. 21. Without the Sanctuary] So Christ suffered without the gate, Heb.
13.11, 12.

Ver. 22. And they shall cleanse the Altar] To set forth how Christ cleanses
and sanctifies his people, Heb. 9.19. -- 24. Job. 17.19. Heb. 9.13, 14.

Ver. 23. Thou shall offer] See on ver. 19.

Plato sal^ominat (...), diu charis. Nihil utilius sale ^c so^e. Cael Rhodig.
l. 6. c 1.
Ver. 24. And the Priests shall cast salt upon them] Christians must have salt
within themselves, Mar. 9.50. and see to it, that all their speeches be
seasoned with the salt of mortification and discretion, Ephesians. 4. so shall God
make an everlasting covenant with them, even a covenant of salt. See Levit.
2.13.

Ver. 25. Every day a goat] Mortification must be a Christians daily practice.

Ver. 26. They shall purge] Thou and they together. We must also sanctify the
Lord God in our hearts, 1 Pet. 3.15.

Ver. 27. It shall be upon the eighth day] The services of mortified men shall
be accepted, on the eighth day especially, the Christian sabbath, in the holy
Assemblies.

CHAP. XLIV.
Ver. 1. THen he brought me back] From the Eastgate which was found shut, to
the Northgate where the Prophet received large instructions, ver. 4. Christ
must be followed, though he seem to lead us in and out, backward and forward,
as if we were treading a maze.

Ver. 2. This gate shall be shut] Is, and shall be; save only to Messiah the
Prince, Psalm. 118.20.
and to whomsoever he (as having the keys of David) shall open it. This gate
of the Lord into which the righteous shall enter, sc. by that new and living
way which Christ (their forerunner, Heb. 6.20.) has prepared and paved for
them with his own blood, Heb. 10.20. See Heb. 7.8, 9, 11, 12, 24.

And no man shall enter in it] No mere man, unless it be by Emmanuel: See Joh.
3.13.

Ver. 3. It is for the Prince] For Messiah the Prince, so Christ is called,
Dan. 9. Or, for the Chief Priest, who as he had a singular privilege herein
above other Priests, so has Christ, the High Priest of the Church Christian,
singular privileges above all his brethren.

He shall sit in it to eat bread] He shall sit at the right hand of the Majesty
on high, and enjoy heavens happiness, which is often compared to a feast, as Mat.
8.11. and 22.1, 2. See Esa. 53.11. He shall ascend up into heaven and
therehence come again to judge the quick and the dead, Act. 1.11. Heb. 9.28.
Some by Prince here understand the Ruler of the people; see chap. 46.1, 2. who
is peculiarly licensed to enter in at the Eastgate, and there to sit and eat
and drink his part of the Peace Offering: Confer Exodus 24.11. It is not meant
of Peter the Apostle (to be sure) much less of the Pope his pretended
successor, as some of his Parasites would have it.

Ver. 4. Then brought he me] See on ver. 1.

The glory of the Lord] See chap. 43.2, 5.

And I fell upon my face] See chap. 43.3. and 1.28.

Ver. 5. Mark well, and behold with thine eyes] Summon the sobriety of thy
senses before thine own judgment. See chap. 40.4. The refining of the
Ministry and discipline of the Church, with the same charge in regard of the
excellency of the matter repeated for attention, to ver. 17. and laws
prescribed to that purpose, ver. 17. to the end of the Chapter.

Ver. 6. And thou shall say to the rebellious] Heb. to rebellion. Vulg. to the
exasperating house.

Let it suffice you] Ye have sinned enough and more then enough, 1 Pet. 4.3.
Now that I have set you up a new Temple, turn over a new leaf for shame, as
chap. 43.10. when shall it once be? Jer. 13. ult.

Ver. 7. Strangers] Your selves are no better, Am. 9 7. strangers from the
covenants, Ephesians. 2.12. degenerate children, Esa. 1.4. alienated from the life of
God through the ignorance that is in you, Ephesians. 4.18. and through your blind
leaders of the blind, Priests of your own making, etc.

Uncircumcised in heart] Erroneous in judgment.

Uncircumcised in flesh] Enormous in practice.

When ye offer my bread] i. e. The fat and the blood (as it follows) which I
seem to feed upon as a man does upon bread.

Because of all your abominations] Or, besides all your abominations mentioned,
ver. 6.

Ver. 8. For your selves] Pro vestro arbitratu, non pro mea voluntate, as best
suited with your own ends, and fitted to your own humors.

Ver. 9. Shall enter into my sanctuary] See a like prohibition, 1 Timothy 3.3, 8.
Tit. 1.7. Such as were the Scribes and Pharisees, the Arrian Bishops, the
Popish Priests, the cleri (ut vocant) dehonestamenta amongst us, till cast out.

Ver. 10. And the Levites] The Apostate Priests, that for fear or favor, have
comported with idolaters; such as were the posterity of Ithamar, those
time-servers in Ezra, chap. 2.61, 63. those in the books of Macchabees, Demas
(if Dorotheus may be believed) Pau us Diaconus, Pendleton, Pflugius and
Sidonius, Authors of the Interim in Germany etc.

They shall even bear their iniquity] i. e. Degradation, as a punishment of
their iniquity.

Ver. 11. Yet they shall be Ministers in my sanctuary] Though lapsed, they
shall not be altogether discarded, (see 2 King. 23.9. Neh. 13.28. Capite
minuuntur, sed non Penitus eficiuntur.
) partly for the honor of the Priesthood: but principally, for the
encouragement of such as having fallen by infirmity, rise again by repentance.

Ver. 12. Because they ministered unto them before their idols] Being carried
down the stream of the times, and hurryed away by violent temptation, which
they afterward regretted and repented of. So did not those Popish Bishops and
Priests at the coming in of Queen Elizabeth; who were therefore worthily turned
out: even fourteen Bishops, six Abbots twelve Deanes, as many Archdeacons,
Camd. Elis.
fifty Prebendaries, fifteen Presidents of Colleges, many Parsons, and other
stiff Mass Priests.

Ver. 13. And they shall not come near unto me] How great then was the love of
the Lord Jesus to Peter and the rest of his Disciples after his resurrection;
as in sending them that sweet message, Mark. 16.7. so in readmitting them to
the work of the Ministry after so foul a revolt! Joh. 20.21, 22, 23. And does
he not the very same still for his poor sinful servants, who desire indeed to
fear his name, but are often overtaken in a fault through infirmity of the flesh?
Surely, Father Traves, (said Mr. Bradford Martyr in a letter to him) I have
clean forgotten God, I am all secure, idle, proud-hearted, utterly void of
brotherly love: I am envious and disdain others, Act. and Mon. 1511.
I am a very stark hypocrite, etc. Thus he, and much more to like purpose, in
his heavenly letters.

Ver. 14. But I will make them keepers] Which was one of the meanest offices.

Ver. 15. But the Priests the sons of Zadok] Who follow their fathers
footsteps, and are careful to fulfill the ministry that they have received in
the Lord: to be best in the worst times as right heirs of Moses his
benediction, Deuteronomy. 33.9, etc.

Oecol.
Says the Lord God] Them that honor me I will honor, 1 Samuel 2.20. This is a
bargain of Gods own making. Hujus rei fides penes Deum tota est, we may trust
to it.

Ver. 16. To my Table] i. e. To mine Altar, chap. 41.22. Mal. 1.7, 12. which as
often as they do, they receive a double pledge of the pardon of their own sins,
Joh. 20.23.

Ver. 17. They shall be clothed with linen garments] As so many earthly
Angels, Mat. 28.3. (See Rev. 4.4. and 7.13.) for innocence, and victory over
their corruptions.

And no wool shall come upon them] No brutish and sensual lusts and practices
shall be found in them. Lavat.
Ex brutorum lana vestes contexuntur.

Ver. 18. They shall have linen bonnets upon their heads] In token of constant
subjection to God, 1 Cor. 11.

They shall have linen breeches] For honesty sake; and to admonish them to
procure and provide for things honest not only in the sight of the Lord, but in
the sight of men, 2 Cor. 8.21.

With any thing that causes sweat] That they may not have an ill savor, or
seem to do Gods work to their own trouble: the Lord loves a cheerful giver.

Ver. 19 They shall put off their garments] See chap. 42.14.

They shall not sanctify the people with their garments] i. e. By the touch of
their garments. See Exodus 29.37. and 30.29. Ezekiel. 46.20. To sanctify the
people, in this text, is to persuade them that they are sanctified by the touch
or sight of the Priestly vestments. The Monks at this day make the silly
people believe, that they cannot be damned when they dye, if they be buried in
a Franciscans coul.

In orat. pro Rosc. Comado.
Ver. 20. Neither shall they shave their heads] What can the Popish shavelings
say to this -- qui ne pilum ullum viri boni habere videntur, as Cicero says of
Fannius Chaereas; noting it to be a sign of crafty malice to be shaven? And
indeed it is so bald and heathenish a ceremony, that some Priests in France are
ashamed of the mark: Spec. Eur.
and few of them have it, that can handsomely avoid it.

Nor suffer their lock^ to grow long] As women's: some heathen-Priests nourished
their heir to a great length. A shag-haired Minister is an ugly sight: bushes
of vanity become not such, of any men.

They shall only poll their heads] Or, round them. Certainly, says one, the
devil forg^t this text, Mr. Buroughs.
when he raised up that reproach of Roundheads. To have hairy scalpes is the
garb of Gods enemies, Psalm. 68.21.

Ver. 21. Neither shall any Priest drink wine] Wherein is excess, Ephesians. 5.18.
See Levit. 10.9.

Ver. 22. Neither shall they take for their wives] Ministers of all men should
be careful whom they wed, for many reasons. Hear what good counsel one Minister
of mine acquaintance gave another; Quaere tebi uxorem quae sit Pia, Pulchra,
Pudica,
Mr. Thomas Dugard.
Provida, verborum Parca, and Parere parata.


Ver. 23. And they shall teach] Ministers must be able and apt to teach, 1 Timothy
3.2. Tit. 1.9. Act. 20.28.

Ver. 24. They shall stand in judgement] i. e. Stand to the right, and not stir
from it: in matters of Religion especially; accounting every parcel of truth
precious.

They shall keep my laws] Not observe them only, but preserve them from the
violations of others.

Ver. 25. And they shall come at no dead person] Not defile their consciences
with dead works. Men's e luctu eluctetur.


They may defile themselves] So they keep a mean. Something they may yield to
nature, nothing to impatience.

Ver. 26. And after he is clensed] This is a new sanction in the new Temple: as
Vatablus observes.

Ver. 27. He shall offer his sin-offering] Because we do easily overshoot our
selves in things permitted. Licitis perimus omnes.


Ver. 28. And it shall be, etc.] This that follows, shall be their
inheritance, ver. 29, 30, 31. and whatsoever they want more, shall be made up
in Me.

Ver. 29. They shall eat] See on ver. 28.

Ver. 30. That he may cause the blessing] Tithe and be rich. See Mal. 3.10.
with the Notes.

Ver. 31. The Priests shall not eat, etc.] They shall not be greedy of filthy
lucre, nor oppressive. Popish Priests made so much gain of the dead, and so
devoured widows houses under a pretense of Dirges, Trentals, Masses for the
dead, etc. that there was a necessity in this Kingdom, of a statute of
Mortmain, to restrain them.

CHAP. XLV.
Ver. 1. MOreover when ye shall divide by lot] As chap. 48. where we have the
division of the land, and the several seats assigned to each Tribe. Here we
have first provision made for the Church Service, which Christ's people are most
zealous of, and do therefore allot, before any divident, a portion for the
Lords house and servants; and that very large, to prefigure the largeness of
the Church of the New Testament. See Rev. 7.9, 10, etc. Here Hierom
acknowledges himself to be in a Labyrinth: the Jews call again for their
Elias: Oecolampadius comes in with his Hujus loci mysteria tacitus veneror, and
thinks this part of the Prophecy such as no humane understanding can fathom.
Howbeit Nil desperandum Christo duce, and auspice Christo.

The length shall be] See the Note on chap. 40.1.

Ver. 2. For the suburbs] Which has its name in Hebrew from its being severed
from the City, and as it were cast out of it. It is better rendered, as in the
margin, void places.

Ver. 3. The length of five and twenty thousand] Here the same again is
repeated, as ver. 1. and further is showed how this holy portion of ground was
to be employed to the use of the Priests.

Ver. 4. And it shall be a place for their houses] Ministers should be resident
upon their charges, and as incumbent, dwell near, and as it were lean over
their work.

Ver. 5. For twenty chambers] i. e. For twenty rows of chambers.

Ver. 6. And ye shall appoint the possession of the City] After the
Church Service settled, and the Ministry provided for. Polit. l. 7. c. 8.
Aristotle his advice is (...) first take care of divine things; that is the
best policy.

It shall be for the whole house of Israel] A Rendezvous for them at
festival-times.

Ver. 7. And a portion shall be for the Prince] See on chap. 44.3. Understand
it of the civil Magistrate, who is Lord Keeper of both Tables of the Law, and
ought to have a special care of the Churches welfare. Here his portion is said
to lie on both sides of the oblation of the holy portion: and Cant. 8.9.
Magistrates are required to hem Ministers in with boards of Cedar, i. e. to
provide for their security, that they may be without fear among them, as
Timothy, 1 Cor. 16.10.

Ver. 8. And my Princes shall no more oppress my people] As Samuel foretold
they would do, 1 Samuel 9. and accordingly they did. But in the
Christian-Commonwealth it should be better, as indeed it was in the days of
Constantine the Great, Valentinian and Theodosius (which three godly Emperors
called themselves the Vassals of Christ) and is now (blessed be God) amongst us
at this day.

Ver. 9. Let it suffice you] Be content with your double portion, your so large
a lot: and that ye may be so, hear the laws that I lay upon you: remove
violence and spoil, execute judgment and justice. Take away your exactions,
etc. See that ye have just balances and a just Ephah. Let these things be done,
or you will be quickly undone. Is it not enough to be above men, but you must
needs be above mankind, as those Princes would be that would not be under the
Law!

Ver. 10. Ye shall have just balances] Levit. 19 35, 36. Prove. 11.1. and 16 11.
and 20.10, 23. Mic. 6.10, 11. See the Notes on those places. The Gospel-rule
is, whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them, Mat.
7.12. And, Let no man go beyond and defraud his brother in any matter: because
that the Lord is the avenger of all such; and the civil Magistrate is his
Minister, a revenger, to execute wrath upon him that does evil either by force
or fraud, Romans 13.4.

Ver. 11. The Ephah and the Bath shall be of one measure] Of the same capacity;
only the Ephah is the measure of dry things, and the Bath of moist.

Ver. 12. And the Shekel shall be twenty Gerah's] Exodus 30.13. Lev. 27.25. Number.
3.47.

Fifteen Shekels shall be your Maneh] Or (...) Mina, pound-weight.

Ver. 13. This is the oblation] After order taken that both Prince and people
might have whereof to make oblations, ver. 9, 10, 11, 12. here follow laws
concerning these matters also.

Ver. 14. Out of the Cor, which is an Homer] Only Cor is the Chaldee word,
Homer the Hebrew.

Ver. 15. Out of the fat pastures] Those that are well watered and most
fruitful. God must have the very best of the best, and that on pain of an heavy
curse, Mal. 1.14.

Ver. 16. For the Prince] i. e. Upon a levy made by the Prince for that
purpose. Of these oblations (prefiguring Evangelical sacrifices) the use
follows, chap. 46.4. it being first premised what the Prince should do over
and above these offerings of wheat, barley, oil, and lambs.

Ver. 17. He shall prepare the sin-offering] Or he shall offer, so some render
it; and apply it to Christ, so ver. 22. This Prince then is withal a Priest of
the tribe of Judah. Oecol.
See Psalm. 110 4. and Heb. 7.11, 12, etc. to the end. Heb. 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Non mirum quod hic haereant Judaei, here the Jews are puzzled.

Ver. 18. Thou shall take] Thou O Prince shall.

A young bullock] One and no more: ut unitas singularis sacrificii Christi
intimaretur.

Ver. 19. And put it upon the postes] This and other ceremonies were not
enjoined by the Law of Moses. The Jews cannot tell what to say to it: they will
not see that old things are past, and all things become new.

Ver. 20. And so thou shalt] This also is a new injunction, see ver. 19. and
very comfortable to those that sin of passion, or precipitancy. See 1 John 2.1,
2.

Ver. 21. In the fourteenth day] Upon that very day (not only observed then by
the Jews) was Christ our Passover sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5.7.

Ver. 22. Shall the Prince prepare] See ver. 17.

Ver. 23. A burnt-offering] In token of self-denial.

Ver. 24. A meat-offering] Made of meal in token of mortification, and
submission to God in all things.

Ver. 25. In the feast of the seven dayes] i. e. Of Tabernacles, wont to be of
eight days, Lev. 23.34, 35. Quam sunt nova omnia! Of Pentecost here is no
mention at all.

CHAP. XLVI.
Ver. 1. THus says the Lord God] In this chapter are set forth rations and
ritus, the laws and rites that were to be observed by Prince and people in
offering their sacrifices. It is the manner of performance that makes or
marreth any duty: there may be malum opus in bona materia, ill work in a good
matter.

The gate of the inner court] Of the Priests court.

That looks toward the East] That points to Christ the dayspring from on
high, the Sun of righteousness, who shines sweetly upon such as rightly
sanctify the Sabbath: and shall much more, when they come to rest with him in
heaven.

Shall be shut the six working dayes] Six days shall thou labor and do all
thy work. Neither does this binder holiness (as the Abby-lubbers pretend) but
further it: 1. By preventing temptation. 2. By nourishing experience of Gods
bounty and providence. 3. By filling the heart with objects of heavenly
thoughts. 4. By stirring up to prayer and praise, for each days mercyes.

But on the Sabbath it shall be opened] That the people may see Christ in the
glass of the ceremonies and call upon his name. We under the Gospel have a
clearer light and free access, on Lords-dayes especially, and other times of
holy meetings.

Ver. 2. And shall stand by the post of the gate] Waiting at the posts of the
gates of wisdom, Prove. 8.34. Constantine the Great stood up constantly at the
time of Gods public worship, for honor sake: So did our Edward the sixth.

Then he shall go forth] And the people come in, ver. 3. whose souls are as
precious to God as his.

But the gate shall not be shut, until the evening] The gate is open till the
evening; be ready therefore: when the Bridegrom is once gone in, the gate is
shut, and fools excluded, Matthew 25.

Ver. 3. Likewise the people of the land] The meanest of his subjects, if
faithful, may have as near access to God as himself.

Ver. 4. Six lambs without blemish] This was a larger sacrifice then Moses had
appointed, Number. 28.9. (Christians have more cause then Jews had to sanctify the
Sabbath) as that for the New Mons, ver. 6. was lesser: See Number. 28.11. Hereby
it appears that God was about to abrogate the Mosaical worship, and the
Levitical Priesthood: Lex enim posterior derogat priori. This the Jew-doctours
would fain say something to, but cannot tell what. The wit of these miscreants,
reprobat concerning the faith, will better serve them to divise a thousand
shifts to elude the truth, then their obstinacy will suffer them once to yield
and acknowledge it.

Ver. 5. As he shall be able to give] Heb. the gift of his hand: some render
it, according as it shall be given unto his hand, i. e. As God shall put into
his heart to give: and here he is not tied, as in the Law, to such a
proportion, but left to his Christian liberty.

Ver. 6. And in the day of the New-moon] Which pointed them to the coming of
Christ, by whom all things are become new.

It shall be a young bullock] It was wont to be two: See on ver. 4.

And six lambs and a ram] To signify, says Rabanus, that as it is necessary
for us to keep the Sabbath: so it is likewise that we rely upon Christ for
expiation as of our week-dayes sins, so also of those that we fall into even on
that holy day.

Ver. 7. An Ephah for a bullock] This was to shadow out, says Polanus, the
Communion of the Saints with Christ, and that Christ offers and presents
his Church with himself and in himself, to God the Father.

According as his hand shall attain unto] i. e. As he is able and willing; for
God straineth upon none.

Ver. 8. He shall go in by the way of the porch] This was the Princes
Privilege, that (as likewise the Priests) he might go in and go out at the
same Eastgate. It is fit that the Word and Sword should hold together, and
that Magistrates and Ministers shoul be singular in holiness.

Ver. 9. Shall go out the way of the South-gate] For more easy passage sake,
The Jews at this day depart out of the Synagogue with their faces still toward
the Ark, like Crabs going backward.
in such a multitude of people. But withal, to teach us many things: as 1. Not
to turn our backs upon the holy Ordinances. 2. To make straight paths for our
feet, Heb. 12.13. not looking back with Lot's wife, Luke 17.32. not longing for
the Onions of Egypt, as those rebels in the wilderness, but advancing forward
with St. Paul, Philip. 3.13, 14. looking forth-right, Prove. 4.25. having our
eye upon the mark, and making daily progress toward perfection. 3. That our
memories are frail, and here we shall meet with many things that will withdraw
us from thinking upon God. 4 That our life is but short; a very passage from
one gate to another: where to go back ( i. e. To add any thing to our lives)
it is not granted; since our time is lim^ted, Job. 14.3. Acts 17.26. and we are
all hastening to our long home, Eccles. 12.5. One being asked what life was?
made an answer answerlesse; for he presently went his way.

Ver. 10. And the Prince in the midst of them, etc.] For example sake (Vita
Principis censura est) and to see that all things be rightly carried in Gods
service. And although the Prince has many weighty occasions, yet he is to be
at the public Assemblies with the first, and to stay till the last.

Ver. 11. An Ephah to a bullock, and a Hin of oile] A whole Ephah, and a whole
Hin, whereas in the Mosaical service there was required but a certain part only
of either: Polan.
Because the Jewish Church was but of a part of mankind, but the Church
Christian is universal.

Ver. 12. A voluntary burnt-offering -- one shall then open him the gate, etc.]
Here is warrant for our weekday Lectures, a voluntary service well accepted:
provided that afterward one shut the gate, and men return to their honest
labors.

Ver. 13. Thou shall daily prepare a burnt-offering] God must be served daily
and duly, not on the Sabbath Day only: See Psalm. 72.15. The Papists are at
their Mass every morning, and they bind much upon this text for it. They have
a Proverb also, Mass and meat hinders no man's thrift.

Ver. 14. The sixth part of an Ephah] This is also different from the Levitical
Ordinance, Number. 15 and 28. Exodus 29.40. though R. Solomon here extremely
troubles himself (but to no purpose) to reconcile them.

Ver. 15. Every morning] Understand it of every evening also, as Exodus 29.38.

Ver. 16. If the Prince give a gift unto any of his sons] As Jehosaphat did
Cities to every of his sons; though they long enjoyed them not, through the
barbarous cruelty of their elder-brother Jehoram. Christ, the Churches King,
gives all his children gifts of great price; such as the world can neither
give nor take from them, spiritual blessings in heavenly things, and places,
Ephesians. 1.3. yea he bestows himself upon them, and is therefore called The
Gift, Joh. 4.10. and The Benefit, 1 Timothy 6.2.

Ver. 17. But if he give a gift of his inheritance to one of his servants] As
Alexander the Great, who going to subdue a great part of the habitable world,
gave away to his servants almost all he had; and when one of his officers asked
him What he would leave for himself? Don^a throni.
he said, Hope. Messiah the Prince, besides his choycest gifts to his dear
children, gives gifts unto men, even to the rebellious also, Psalm. 68.18.
these are common gifts, Dona scabelli.
temporal favors, external privivedges: See Mat. 7.22, 23. and 25.14, 15, etc.
Luke 19.12, etc. But as the servant abides not in the house for ever (as the
son does) Job. 8.35. so these gifts to servants (but for the behoof and benefit
of his Sons) are but till the year of liberty, or Jubilee, till the last day at
utmost, Levit. 25.10. Then shall the wicked give a dreadful account of all,
with the whole world flaming about their ears.

Ver. 18. To thrust them out of their possession] Ill accidents attend such
Princes, as affecting to be absolute in power, will be too resolute in will, or
dissolute in life; oppressing their subjects to enrich their servants and
parasites.

Ver. 19. Afterward he brought me] Here he returns again to things sacred,
viz. to show where the Priests should boil and bake.

Polan.
Into the holy chambers of the Priests] These holy cells or chambers are
particular Christian Churches, committed to the care of Christ's faithful
Ministers, Acts 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.2.

Ver. 20. Where they shall bake the meat-offering] i. e. The Ministers shall
endite or boil good matters in their hearts for the use of the people, and then
their tongues shall be as the pen of a ready writer, Psalm. 45.1. See there.
They shall not feed their hearers with crude and indigested stuff, but such as
is well boiled and baked with the fire of the holy Spirit, kindled on the harth
of their own hearts: that from the heart they may speak to the heart.

To sanctify the people] As in promiscuous Communions, where all are pelmel
admitted.

Ver. 21. In every corner of the Court there was a Court] And buildings in
every of them for the same purpose round about, ver. 22. These served, says
Hierom, to set forth the four parts of the world, out of all which the Church
is gathered by Ministers, etc. It served also, says Another, to show that in
Gods House, which is his Church, there shall always be provision both for his
Ministers and people. Those that have but from hand to mouth, have their bread
hot, as it were, from Gods hand, which is best of all.

Ver. 22. Courts joyned] Or made with chimnies. Caminata, vaporaria: See on
ver. 21.

Ver. 23. With boiling places] Such as the Ancients called Popinas, Nolo ego
Florus esse, Adrian. Imp.

Latitare per popinas.


Ver. 24. These are the places of them that boyl] Of Gods Cooks, who dress
spiritual food for the use of his people: See ver. 20.

CHAP. XLVII.
Ver. 1. AFterward he brought] Christus Mystagogus me duxit. (...), Christo
ducente and docente.
Follow God whithersoever he leads thee: this was an ancient rule among the
Heathens.

And behold waters issued out] i. e. The Gospel of grace, and the gifts of the
Holy Ghost thereby conveyed into the hearts of believers, and poured out upon
the world by the death of Christ, The Prophet seems to allude to those waters
which by conduits were conveyed to the Altar to wash away the blood of the
sacrifices, and filth of the Temple: which else would have been very offensive
and noisome. See the like, Zach. 14.8. where the Eastern and Western Churches
also are pointed out. See Rev. 22.1.

From under the threshold] Quod gloria Dei dudum triverat. Christ is that door,
Oecol.
Joh. 10.7. and fountain of living water, Jer. 2.13. Isa. 12.3. and 55.1. and
from the Temple at Jerusalem flowed forth the waters of saving truth to all
nations; and first Eastward, not Rome-ward, though the faith of the Romans was
not long after spoken of throughout the whole world, Romans 1.8.

Ver. 2. And behold there ran out waters] As out of a Vial.

On the right side] The right side is a place of honor and defense: The
doctrine of the Gospel has the pre-eminence, and is maintained by the
right hand of God against all opposites.

Ver. 3. And when the man that had the line in his hand] The Man Christ Jesus,
the sole Architect of his Church, and Measurer of his Gospel, and that by his
Gospel, which is the line in his hand, nec solum recta, sed and regula.

He measured a thousand cubits] It was not for nothing that Plato said, (...),
God is always measuring the world.

The waters were to the ancles] Grace is but a small thing at first, no more is
the Gospel, Matthew. 13.31, 32, 33. The Church were at first but a very few, Act.
1. that is 120, of all the great multitudes which had formerly followed Jesus:
Sed vix diligitur Jesus propter Jesum: It was more for the loaves then any
great love that the most followed him.

Ver. 4. Again he measured a thousand] This is a number of perfection. The
Gospel is a perfect doctrine, and is able to make the man of God perfect,
thoroughly furnished (or perfected) unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3.17.

The waters were to the knees] Grace grows by degrees: and the Scriptures have
their shallows wherein the Lamb may wade: like as they have their profundities
wherein the Elephant himself may swin. Confess. l. 5. cap. 13. Confess. l. 7.
c. 21.
Augustine contemned the holy Scriptures at first, as neither eloquent nor deep
enough for the elevation of his wit. But afterward, when he was both a better
and a wiser man, he saw his own shallowness, and admired the never-enough
adored depth of Gods holy Oracles.

Ver. 5 A river that could not be passed over] Representing, as the fathomlesse
depth of the Scriptures (which is such as that we may well do by it, as the
Romans did by a lake, the depth whereof they could not found, they dedicated it
to Victory) so the abundance of Spiritual graces in the Church, the love of
Christ which passes all knowledge, Ephesians. 3.19. the over-abounding goodness
of God, 1 Timothy 1.14. the superpleonasm of it, as the Apostle has it there. Oh,
(says Chrysostom speaking of this subject) I am like a man digging in a deep
spring; I stand here, and the water rises upon me: and I stand there, and
still the water rises upon me. It is indeed a sea that has neither bank nor
bottom.

Ver. 6. Son of man, have thou seen this?] And art thou soundly sensible
thereof? it is very fit thou should; that God may have the glory of his
great goodness and power in propagating the Gospel, and bringing forward the
work of his grace in the hearts of his people, maugre the malice of earth and
of hell. The Reformation wrought in Germany from how small beginnings grew it?
The establishing of that amongst us (how imperfect soever) to be done by so
weak and simple means, yea by casual and cross means against the force of so
potent and politic an adversary: this is to be looked upon as a just miracle.

To the brink of the river] Where my work was to stand and cry O the depth! O
how great things has God prepared for those that fear him! O the joy! the joy!
eye has not seen, nor ear heard, etc.

Arboretum Christi est Ecclesia.
Ver. 7. Behold at the bank of the river were very many trees] These were trees
of righteousness, fruitful Christians. See Psalm. 1.3. and 92.12. Isa. 44.3, 4,
5. and 55.11, 12, 13. Jer. 17.8. Rev. 22.2. where and elsewhere it is easy to
observe that John the Divine borrows the elegancies and flowers of this and
other Prophets, in his description of the Church Christian.

Ver. 8. These waters issue out toward the East country] In Galilaeam
anteriorem. See Acts 9.31. Piscat.
The Churches in Galilee walking in the fear of the Lord and comforts of the
holy Ghost, were multiplied.

And go down into the desart] Or, plain, i. e. into the plains of Moab, Number.
22.1. The Gospel works upon the worst, even to a transmentation.

And go into the sea] The dead sea. The law of the Spirit of life which is in
Christ Jesus, freeth men from the law of sin and of death, Romans 8.2.

The waters shall be healed] i. e. Made wholesome and useful: so great a cure
is done upon corrupt nature by the grace of the Gospel. He who was before
vitiorum vorago, lacus libidinum, mare sceleribus amarum ac mortuum, a lake of
lusts, a guzzle of vices, a dead sea of wickedness and wretchedness, shall by
a strange change become a pleasant river, pure, clear, sweet, and savoury;
beset not with such mock-fruit as the banks of the dead sea are said to be, but
with trees richly laden with the choicest fruits; as was to be seen in the
penitent thief, who as soon as Gospellized and converted, bestirred him and
bore abundance of fruit in a very little space.

Plin. l. 5. c. 16.
Ver. 9. Whithersoever the river shall come, shall live] Not dye immediately, as
they used to do in the dead sea; so bituminous and sulphurous were the waters
thereof: but live the life of grace here, and of glory in heaven. See Zach.
14.8. Acts 5.20.

(...), Aug. de C. D. l. 18. c. 13. (...). Histories tell us of 580. Jews
converted to the Christian faith at Axvernum by one Avitus a Bishop, and
baptized. Pappi Eccles. hist. epit. p. 214. Joseph de bell. lib. 1. c. 13.
And there shall be a very great multitude of fish] i. e. Of Christians. See
Mat. 4.19. with the Note. Christ himself from the initial Greek letters of his
names and title, was by some of the ancients called (...) a fish.

And every thing shall live whither the river cometh] The Gospel is the true
Aqua-vitae, the true aurum potabile, the true Physic for the soul; as one said
once concerning the Library at Alexandria.

Ver. 10. The fishers shall stand upon it] Upon the dead sea, where formerly
they had little enough to do. This sea is the wide world dead in sins and
trespasses, Ephesians. 2.1. These fishers are Christ's Apostles and Ministers, who are
called fishers of men, Mat. 4.19. and their preaching compared to fishing, Mat.
13.47. they fish with various success, as did Peter, Luke 5.5. but may enclose
a great multitude as he did, Acts 2.3. and as Farellus who gained five Cities
to Christ; who brought them to hand by whole shoales.

From Engedi] Called also Hazazon-Tamar, 2 Chronicles. 20.2. that is the City of
Palms, where grew the best balsam in the world, though it were near to the
dead sea.

Even unto Eneglaim] Which is likewise a place adjacent to the dead sea, where
Jordan falls into it, as Hierom testifies.

They shall be a place to spread forth nets] Dr. Preston being asked why he
preached so plainly, and did so much dilate his sermons, being of such
abilities? answered, he was a fisherman. Now such if they should wind up their
net, and so cast it into the sea, they should catch nothing: but when they
spread the net, Mr. Walls None but Christ. p. 400.
they catch the fish; I spread my net, because I would catch souls, said he;
and indeed he had a very happy hand at it.

The fish shall be according to their kinds] The sea, they say, has as many
kinds of living creatures as the earth has. There is that Leviathan, and there
are creeping things innumerable, Psalm. 105.

Ver. 11. But the myrie places thereof, and the marshes shall not be healed]
Sensual souls are seldom wrought upon by the word. Behemoth (the devil) lies
in those fenns and quagmires, Job 40 21. they are void of the Spirit, Jude 18
19. they say unto God Depart from us, we had rather dance to the Timbrel and
Harp, Job 21.11. whoredom and wine, and new wine take away their hearts, Hos.
4.11. he who had married a wife (or rather was married to her) sent word flat
and plain he could not come: others excused themselves more mannerly, Mat. 22.
such persons choose to remain in the sordes of their sins, and so are miserable
by their own election.

They shall be given to salt] Delivered up to strong delusions, 1 These. 2.15,
16. vile affections, Romans 1.26. just damnation, Rev. 22.11.

Ver. 12. Shall grow all trees for meat] Arbores esibiles: these are (...)
useful Christians, such as whose lips are feeding, and their tongues trees of
life, Prove. 11.30, and 15.4. See the Notes there.

Whose leaf shall not fade] They will not fail to make a bold and wise
profession of the truth. See on Psalm. 1.3. Jer. 17.8.

Neither shall the fruit thereof be consumed] But as the Lemmon-tree, which
ever and anon sends new fruits as soon as the former are fallen down with
ripeness. Or as the Egyptian fig tree, which yields fruit seven times a year,
says Solinus; and if you pull off one fig, another grows up presently in the
place thereof.

Because their waters they issued out of the sanctuary] Hence their so great
fruitfulness, viz. from the divine influence, Hos. 14.8. the Word and Spirit
going together, Esa. 59.21. hence it is that the Saints are neither barren nor
unfruitful, 2 Pet. 1.8.

And the leaf thereof for medicine] Gods people, by their holy profession of
religion, do much good to many souls: as did diverse of the Martyrs and
Confessors. Lucianus an ancient Martyr persuaded many Gentiles to the Christian
faith by his grave countenance and modest disposition: insomuch that Maximinus
that persecuting Emperor durst not look him in the face, for fear he should
turn Christian. And so Beda tells us of one Alban, who receiving a poor
persecuted Christian into his house, and seeing his holy devotion and sweet
carriage, Hist. Ang. l. 1. c. 7.
was so much affected with the same, as that he became an earnest professor of
the faith, and in the end a glorious Martyr for the faith. The like is recorded
of Bradford, Bucer, and others.

Ver. 13. This shall be the border] Here the Prophet returns again to the
dividing of the land, begun chap. 45.1, 2, etc. having hitherto interposed many
most memorable matters, and of great use to the Church.

Joseph shall have two portions] He had so by his fathers will, and for his two
sons, adopted by his father.

Ver. 14. And ye shall inherit one as well as another] Spiritual blessings are
divided in solidum amongst the community of Gods people: they all partake of
one and the same saving grace of God, righteousness of Christ and eternal
life, though there are several degrees of grace and of glory. See Gal. 3.26,
27, 28, 29. All Gods Sons are heirs, heirs of God, and coheirs with Christ,
Romans 8.17.

Ver. 15. And this shall be the border of the land] i. e. Of the Christian
Church: the borders whereof are here set forth as far larger then those of the
land of Canaan ever were.

From the great sea] The Mediterranean sea.

The way of Hethlon] From one end of the Kingdom of Damascus to another.

Ver. 16. Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim] Towns of Arabia deserta. All this is to
set forth the amplitude of the Christian Church spread far and near upon the
face of the whole earth; and therefore rightly called Catholic.
Roman-Catholike is contradictio in adjecto; for it is, a particular-universal.

Ver. 17. And the border from the sea shoil be Hazar-Enan] Forasmuch as the
borders in this description of the land are set to be such as never were in the
Israelites possession, the Jew-doctours are, will they nill they, forced to
confess that the land of Israel in the world to come shall be larger then ever
it had been. Now Heb. 2.5. Gospel Times are called the world to come.

Ver. 18. From Hauran] A town of Arabia deserta (Ptolomy calls it Aurana) but
Felix in this, This was Palmira, afterward Hadrianople.
that it is taken into the Church.

Ver. 19. From Tamar] Hazazon-Tamar which was near the sea of Sodom, v. 10.

In Kadesh] Not in Rephidim, Ezod. 17.7.

Ver. 20 Till a man come over against Hamath] To that place of the great sea,
from which lies a straight way from Hamath Eastward.

Ver. 21. So shall ye divide] Epilogus est. There is one and the same
inheritance of the Saints in light.

Ver. 22. An inheritance unto you, and to the strangers that sojourn among you]
What can the spiteful Jews say to this? who stick not to say that rather then
the bastard Gentiles (so they call Christians) should share with them in their
Messiah, they would crucify him a hundred times over and over. Under the old
Testament, though strangers lived with the children of Israel, yet they had no
inheritance with them at any time, as now they are appointed to have.

Ver. 23. See on ver. 22.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Ver. 1. NOw these are the names of the tribes] Who are in this chapter
assigned their several seats, and the land divided amongst them: but this
division is much different from that of old, which was a plain prediction of a
perfect and total abrogation of the Mosaical polity and Levitical worship;
together with a new state of the Church of God after the coming of Jesus Christ.

To the coast of the way of Hethlon] Chap. 47.15, 16, 17. Judaea was not, say
Geographers, above 200 miles long, and 50 miles broad: But R. Kimchi here
notes that the Talmudists affirm that the possession of Israel shall extend
unto the utmost coasts of the earth: Oecol.
id quod ex spiritu dictum existima: This was well and truly spoken, though
they understood not what they spoke; as dreaming only of an earthly Kingdom.
Psalm. 89.11, 12.
But as elsewhere, so here, the land of Canaan is put for the whole world,
whereof all true believers are heirs together with faithful Abraham, Romans 4.
whether they be Jews or Gentiles. Christ's Kingdom runs to the end of the earth,
Psalm. 28. and 72.8.

A portion for Dan] This tribe which was (for their shameful revolt from the
true religion, Judge. 18.) cut out of the roll, as it were, 1 Chronicles. 7. and Rev.
7. is here reckoned first of those who had partem and sortem, part and lot
amongst Gods people. So true is that of our Savior, Many that are first shall
be last, and the last shall be first, Mat. 19.30. and 20.1. Judge not therefore
according to the appearance, etc. Repent and God will reaccept. The sable of
Antichrist to come of this tribe, is long since exploded.

Ver. 2. From the East side to the West] The longitude is described, not the
latitude: for why? Christ's Kingdom is limitless, and his dominion without
dimension.

Ver. 3. A portion for Naphthali] There are many portions of inheritance in
Christ's Kingdom: there are also in heaven many mansions, Joh. 14.2. all which
shall be divided among the Elect.

Ver. 4. A portion for Manasseh] Which they do not of their own accord, and as
they see good, seize upon: but take their share set them out of the divine
sentence.

Ver. 5. A portion for Ephraim] An equal portion with his elder brother
Manasseh. In Christ's Kingdom all is of grace, nothing of merit.

Ver. 6. And by the border of Ephraim] There is a continuity and conjunction of
all the portions; to set forth the communion that is betwixt the Saints: a
sweet mercy, a heaven aforehand.

Ver. 7. A portion for Judah] Who is set next to the sanctified oblation of the
Lord, wherein were the portions of the Priests, Levites, City and Prince. He
must be a Jew inwardly, a confessor and witness of the truth, who shall have
part and portion in the privileges of Gods people.

Ver. 8. Shall be the offering] Whereof see chap. 45.1, 2, 3, etc.

Of 25000. reeds] Which being exactly cast up, says one, come to 45. miles,
and therefore cannot be meant of any City to be built by the Jews again after
their return from Babylon, but must be understood of the Church under the
Gospel.

Ver. 9. Unto the Lord] As distinguishing it from other oblations: here stood
the Sanctuary.

Ver. 10. And for them even for the Priests] No mention is here made of Cities
of refuge, as of old; for they shall not hurt nor destroy in all Gods holy
mountain: but the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the
waters cover the sea, Esa. 11.9.

Ver. 11. Of the sons of Zadok] See chap. 44.15, 16, etc.

Which went not astray] To be faithful with God in a common defection, is a
singular praise. See my Righteous man's Recompense, page 695.

Ver. 12. And this oblation of the land] Ministers of Gods Word may lawfully
take maintenance of the Church, 1 Cor. 9.

Ver. 13. The Levites shall have] But after the Priests. There are degrees of
officers in the Church, and good order must be well observed there.

Five and twenty thousand in length] These several portions set together make
up a perfect square: which serves well to set forth the beauty and firmity of
the Church of Christ.

Ver. 14. And they shall not sell of it] This law is here occasionally, and by
the way inserted. It seems to hold forth, that lands given to the Ministers
of Christ under the New Testament, may never be again taken away or put to any
other use, but to their maintenance for ever. See Mr. Clarks Mirror, chap. of
Sacrilege.

The first fruits of the land] i. e. This part thus consecrated to God, as the
first fruits of the earth were.

Ver. 15. Shall be a profane place] i. e. A common place: and so all Israel
were profane in a sense, sc. as compared to the Priests and Levites, those
consecrated persons. Symmachus and Theodotion reader it (...). See Deuteronomy. 20.6.

And the City shall be in the midst thereof] Ten miles at least distant from
the Temple; some say many more: to show, say they, what a long way he must go,
that would attain to eternal life: he must get above the world howsoever, who
would serve God acceptably.

Ver. 16. And these shall be measures thereof] This representation is merely
figurative and mystical: showing us how specious and spacious the Church of
Christ is.

Ver. 17. And the suburbs of the City] These were much larger then the suburbs
of the Temple, as may be observed by comparing, chap. 40. See chap. 45.2.

Ver. 18. For food to them that serve the City] To all the Citizens; who all
are to turn servitours to their fellow-brethren that come to the public
meetings, to serve one another in love: which they that do, shall not lose
their reward; but verily they shall be fed.

Ver. 19. Shall serve it out of all the tribes] i. e. At the common charge; and
by a general contribution.

Ver. 20. Ye shall offer the holy oblation four square] See on ver. 13. All
our dealings must be square: or else we are not of the holy portion, Epilogus
est.
of the new Jerusalem, Rev. 21.16.

Ver. 21. And the residue shall be for the Prince] His occasions are many, and
therefore his proportion is very large: yet must he not be Regni dilapidator,
the Waster of the Kingdom by his profuseness, as our Henry the third was
called, whereby he became ill beloved of his people.

Ver. 22. Being in the midst of that which is the Princes] The Prince was
taught by this position of his portion, to have an equal care of Church and
State.

Ver. 23. Benjamin shall have a portion] The division of the land as it ended
with Judahs portion in speaking of the seven former tribes, ver. 8. so here it
begins with Benjamins, in speaking of the five following.

Ver. 24, 25, 26, 27.] See the Notes on ver. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

Ver. 28. Even from Tamar] Not Jericho, but Palmira, called afterward
Adrianople of the Emperor Adrian, who rebuilt and beautified it.

And to the river] The river of Egypt called Sihor, Josh. 13.3.

Ver. 29. This is the land] This is the Epilogue of the whole chapter, as to
the greatness of the holy City. It remains only to touch at the situation and
measures thereof, the gates also and the Ministers, together with their use and
maintenance, the elegancy (lastly) and perpetuity of the City.

For inheritance] Not from the brook, as Tremellius mis-translateth it.

Ver. 30. And these are the goings out of the City] That is the utmost bounds,
as Rabbi Solomon glosseth.

Ver. 31. And the gates of the City] Through which all the Israel of God, both
Jews and Gentiles from all parts, Qua data porta, ruunt, do enter into the
Church of Christ; flowing and flocking thereto, as waters do to the sea, and as
the doves to their windows.

Three gates Northward] Twelve in all: the reason whereof, see in the Note on
Rev. 21.13.

One gate of Levi] Who though he had no lot in the land, yet he had a gate into
the City, as Vatablus here notes.

Ver. 32. Four thousand and five hundred] And the like on each side; of all
which are made up fifty and four miles at the least: so large is the City of
God: Niniveh was nothing to it, no more is Alcair, Scandereon, or Cambalu, the
Metropolis of Tartary, which yet is said to be twenty eight miles about.

Ver. 33. One gate of Simeon] Here all along the tribes are reckoned, not as
they were before in this Chapter, but as they are set down in Numbers, at the
marching of the Tabernacle in the midst of them; saving that whole Joseph has
here but one gate, and Levi is taken into the number of the twelve tribes. And
forasmuch as it enters not into the heart of man what God has prepared for
them that love him, and since this City is a type of heavens happiness, which is
fitter to be believed then possible to be expressed, therefore I am the less
troubled, says good Oecolampadius here, that I understand no more of this
surmounting matter.

Ver. 34. At the West Side, etc.] See on ver. 32, 33.

Ver. 35. It was round about eighteen thousand measures] See on ver. 32. and on
Rev. 21.16.

The Lord is there] Jehovah-shammah: this is the true Churches name, and the
true Christians happiness; such as no good can match, no evil overmatch, viz.
that wheresoever he is there God is, and therefore there heaven is: like as
where the King is, there his Court is: this very name implies Gods everlasting
being with his Church, according to those precious texts of Scripture, every
syllable whereof dropeth myrrh and mercy, Lev. 26.11, 12. Mat. 18.20. and
28.20. Joh. 14.23. 1 Cor. 15.28. Rev. 7.14. etc and 21.3, 4, 5. and 22.3, 4, 5,
6. This is the truth of that, which the Temple whilst it stood as a type or
figure did represent, This is my rest for ever; here will I dwell, Psalm.
132.14. God will not forsake his Church as he did the Synagogue, but have it up
to heaven to him, Rev. 21. where are crowns, scepters, Kingdoms, beatifical
visions, unutterable exstasies, sweetest varieties, felicities, eternities; and
all because Jehovah shammah, the Lord is there: to him be glory and praise
everlasting. Amen. So be it.

Soli Deo Gloria.
The Jews having finished a book, add,
Benedictus qui dat fatigato robur.
FINIS.
A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION ON THE BOOK of the Prophet DANIEL.
Ver. 1. THE book of Daniel] Written by himself (not by another of his name,
Lib 12. contra Christian.
in the days of Antiochus Epiphanes, as wicked Porphyry, that professed enemy
of Christianity, Mr Ascham.
blaterateth) like as Xenophon and Julius Caesar wrote their own acts so wisely
and impartially, as none have been so upright in writing the histories of
others. This divine Book is (for the matter of it) partly Historical, and
partly Prophetical. The historical part we have in the six first Chapters; sc.
a continuation of the history of the Books of Kings, Hieron. Ep. 103. ad Paulin.
during the whole time of the Captivity, and after it. Hence Hierom calls
Daniel Multiscum and totius Mundi Polyhistorem, a general Historian. The
Prophetical part (beginning at the seventh Chapter) foretells future things
in the several Monarchies, but very obscurely, according to that of the Angel,
chap. 12.9, 10. Go thy way Daniel; for the words ore closed up, and sealed till
the end of the time, etc. and according to that Hieroglyphick of Prophecy,
which hangs (they say) among other pictures in the Vatican Library at Rome,
like a Matrone with the eyes covered, for the difficulty. Whence it was, that
Paulinus Bishop of Nola, though able, would never be drawn to write
Commentaries; Cajetan and Calvin would set no Notes upon the Revelation: and
Piscator, after that he had commented upon the other Prophets, when he came to
Daniel, he met with so many dark and difficult passages, ut parum obfuerit,
says he, quin in medio commentandi cursu subsisterem, and calamum e manu
deponerem, that he was even ready to lay down his pen, Piscat. Epist. dedicat.
ante Com. in Dan.
and to lay aside the business. But this he did not, as considering that the
best, whiles here, know but in part, Prophecy but in part, etc. and that the
promise is, though none of the wicked understand this Prophecy, yet the wise
shall, chap. 12.10. Hierom well says, Quod alio tempore canitur, alio
cernitur. De vir. perfect.
that a Prophecy is therefore obscure, because it is said at one time, and seen
at another. And one thing that causes a cloud in Daniel is the transposing of
the history here often used: as the Prophesies contained in the seventh and
eighth Chapters, which were showed unto Daniel under the reign of Belshazzar,
in order should be set before the sixth Chapter, etc. He seems indeed to have
been laid aside in the days of Belshazzar, that drunken Sot, till the
handwriting on the wall brought him more in request again, chap. 5. That cock
on the dunghill knew not the worth of this peerlesse pearl, highly prized both
by his Predecessor and Successors, to whom he was a secretis, of their privy
Coucil. Famous he was grown (and worthily) for his extraordinary wisdom, Ezekiel.
28.3. and holiness, Ezekiel. 14.14. so that the Angel Gabriel styles him a man
of Desires or a Desirable man, Dan. 9.23. Seneca calls Cato Virtutum vivam
imaginem, a lively picture of Virtues. Pliny says that the same Cato Censorius
was an excellent Orator, an excellent Senator, an excellent Commander, Lib. 2.
and a Master of all good Arts. Paterculus says, that he was a man as like
Virtue, Dec. 4. lib. 9.
as ever he could look, and per omnia virtut^ diis quam hominibus propior. Livy
says, he was a man of rigid innocence, and invincible integrity. In vita
Catonis.
Cornelius Nepos, that being assayed and assaulted by many he not only never
lost any part of his reputation, but as long as he lived, grew still in the
praise of his virtues: as being in all things of singular prudence and
industry. Lastly, Cicero says of Cato, Cato Major.
that whereas he underwent the enmities of many potent persons, Splendida
peccata.
and suffered no little hardship all his time, yet was he one of those few who
lived and dyed with glory. How much more truly might all this be affirmed of
Daniel the Prophet, then of Cato the Censor? all whose virtues were but
glistring sins, and all whose praiseworthy parts and practices were but
tinckling cymbals, in comparison? Daniel's whole life was a kind of Heaven,
adorned with most radiant stars of divine virtues. Sixth. Senens. Bib. Sanct.
lib. 4.
And although we cannot say of him, as Aleander of Hales did of his scholar
Bonavanture in an Hyperbolical strain, that Adam seemed to him not to have
sinned in Bonavanture: such was his sanctity and knowledge: yet, with more
color of truth, might the like he said of Daniel, the Jews Jewel, and the
Worlds darl^ng. Torshel.
He wrote this Book part of it in Hebrew, and part in Chaldee; all, in a short
but grave style, evident and elegant, being a divine Polychronicon to the
worlds end, or (as One calls it) the Apocalypse of the Old Testament.

CHAP. I.
Ver. 1. IN the third year of the reign of Jehojakim] That wicked King, who
killed the Prophet Vriah, Jer. 26. cut Jeremia's Prophecy with a knife, and
cast it into the fire, Jer. 36. was a gross Idolater, 2 Chronicles. 36.8. and
therefore justly suffered.

Came Nebucahdnezzar] Surnamed Magnus, son to Nebuchadnezzar surnanamed
Priscus. See 2 King. 24.1, 2. 2 Chronicles. 36.8. with the Notes.

Ver. 2. And the Lord gave Jehojakim] Because the affliction by Pharaoh (being
but a mony-matter) had not a kindly effect, 2 King. 23.35. a heavier is now
sent. For as one cloud follows at the heels of another, so does one Judgment
of God upon another till Repentance, as the Sun, do interpose, and cause it to
clear up.

With part of the vessels] Not all as yet, by a sweet Providence, and for an
instance of Gods Patience.

Which he carried into the land of Shinar] Or Babylonia, Genesis 11.2. a part of
the Garden of Eden, as most Geographers think, but now the seat of Satan, as
Rev. 2.13.

To the house of his god] Jupiter Belus: See on Isa. 46.1.

Ver. 3. And the King spoke unto Ashpenaz] Which signifies in the Chaldee
tongue, the chief chider, or Controler of the Kings house: as Ctesias uses
Ashpamithres for chief-Priests. To this great officer the King commends the
care of his School.

And of the Kings seed, and of the Princes] As having been better bred, and so
more hopeful. Ingenium Galbae male habitat. Deformitas corporis cum ^urpitudine
certavit ingenii. Paterc.
Here Nebuchadnezzar minding nothing but the glory of his Court by these noble
waiters, unwittingly makes way for the Churches comfort.

Ver. 4. Children in whom was no blemish] Such as were Joseph, David,
Artaxerxes Longimanus, Germanicus, and others, in whom beauty proved to be the
flower of virtue, as Chrysippus called it. Of Galba the Emperor One said, that
his good wit dwelt in an ill house, like an excellent instrument in a bad case:
whereas Vatinius the Roman was not more misshapen in body then in mind. The
Heathens also advise us to beware of those whom Nature has set a mark upon.

And skilful in all wisdom] i. e. Ingenious and industrious, apt and able to
receive, and improve instruction. Tacitus tells us, that in the times of
Vespatian and Domitian, the children of the British Nobles were so witty and
well-bred, that the Romans infinitely admired them, for the debonnairenesse of
their natures, In vit. Jul. Agrico.
preferring the wits of the Britains, before the study of the Gauls. And
they are called Angli quasi Angeli, said Gregory the Great, concerning the
English boys presented to him.

And such as had ability in them] Daniel and his three friends are thought by
some to have been bred under the Prophet Jeremy, and to have begun to Prophecy
some years before Ezekiel.

To stand in the Kings Palace] i. e. To do him service. This is that which
learned men should aim at in their studies: viz. to lay forth themselves for
the public g^od. Paulum sepultae distat inertiae Celata virtus. Horat.


And whom they might teach the learning] Heb. the Book, that is, the Art of
Grammar, say some: But why not other Arts also learned by books, those
mutemasters? yet not so well (the Mathematickes especially) without a Teacher.
Joseph Scaliger who was (...), self-taught, and yet proved so great a scholar,
is by One called daemonium hominis, and miraculum naturae, more then a man,
even a very miracle.

And the tongue of the Chaldee] Which was not therefore the same with the
Hebrew, but a different dialect, or daughter of it. The most ancient tongue was
the Hebrew, preserved in Hebers family. The Hebrews and Chaldees had one common
Ancestour, viz. Arphaxad: and Abraham, being born in Chaldea, could speak both
Languages: but so could not Daniel and his fellows, till they were taught. Good
letters and languages are to be taught in Schools and Universities; Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin especially, the dignity and study whereof Christ would have to
be ever kept a foot in his Church, as appears by that inscription (not
without a Providence) set upon his cross in those three tongues, Joh. 19.19,
20.

Ver. 5. And the King appointed them a daily provision] A competent and
comfortable subsistence and maintenance: such as whereof, in time past, those
Abbylubbers had too much: and now Universities and Schools of learning have too
little; but far less should have, might some brainsick Sectaries be heard:
such as was that Weigelius who said, that in no University in the world was
Christ to be found: and that Christ would not have his Gospel to be preached by
devils, D. Arrowim. Orat. Anti- Weigel ad calc. Tact. Sacr.
and therefore not by Academikes; with a great deal more of such paltry stuff,
vented by that illiterate widgin.

So nourishing them three years] Those that stay overlong in the Universities
(standing there till they are sour again, and preaching only now and then, to
air their great learning) shall have the rust and canker of their abilities to
be a swift witness against them at that great day.

Ver. 6. Now among these were of the children of Judah, Daniel] Who had not his
name for naught, as we say, but by a providence: It signifies God is my Judge,
and so indeed he was throughout his whole life, but especially when they cast
him into the Lions den, chap, 16. David had also a son of the same name, and
that by Abigail, 2 Samuel 3.3. with 1 Chronicles. 3.1. in remembrance happily of the
right that God had done him upon the churl Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.39.

Hananiah, Mishael and Azariah] Good names all, and good men all, yet wrapped up,
with the rest, in a common calamity, but for excellent ends, as it afterward
appeared. Meanwhile, God much sweetened the affliction to these four, by their
mutual society.

Ver. 7. Unto whom the Prince of the Eunuchs gave names] Not without the
command of the king, chap. 5.12. as desirous to naturalize them, and by
changing their right names (which had the names of God in them, El and Jah) to
make them forget their religion; but that was better rooted, then to be so
easily razed out, though these new names were shrewd temptations to Apostasy
and Idolatry: as being compounded of the names of the Babylonish gods, and
means to make them honorable among the Chaldeans.

Ver. 8. But Daniel purposed in his heart] The change of his name (though he
utterly disliked, yet) he could not help: but to show that he was still of the
same religion, though he were but a child of twelve years old or thereabouts,
yet he purposes (first, and then performs it) to keep himself pure and free
from Heathenish defilements. Ver. 2.
What if the vessels of the Temple (by being brough into the treasure-house of
Nebuchadnezzar's god) were defiled, yet these elect vessels would not. Ad
leonem potius quam lennem. Tertul. Anselm.
So the Primitive Christians chose rather to be thrown to Lions without, then
left to lusts within. Yea I had rather be cast pure and innocent into hell,
says an Ancient, then go to heaven, being polluted with the filth of sin.
Daniel's greatest care is, ne contra legem Dei and conscientiam impuretur, lest
he should be defiled in the least: fall back, fall edge, as they say, he is
fully resolved against that. So the Prince of Conly when, at the Parisian
Massacre, he was put to his choice by the French King, whether to go to Mass,
to suffer death, or to endure perpetual imprisonment? answered, As for the
first, by the grace of God, I will never do it: And for the two last, I humbly
submit to his Majesty: let him do with me what he pleases.

That he would not defile himself with the portion of the Kings meat] That
which Scaliger says of Matthew Beroaldus, Vir doctus, and, quod familiam
ducit, pius, that he was a learned man; but (that which was his chief
commendation) he was also a godly man, may be better said of the Prophet
Daniel. Godly he was betimes, and of a child, as was also his Master Jeremy
(in whose works he was well read, Dan. 9.2.) Samuel, Timothy, Athanasius, Beza
who (amongst many other things) blessed God chiefly for this in his last will
and Testament, that at the age of sixteen years, He had called him to the
knowledge of the truth. Daniel had this happiness at twelve or thirteen: De
vita and obitu Sanct.
neither was he like rath-ripe fruit that are soon rotten ( Hermogenes was old
in his childhood, and a child in his old age) but although he lived 110 years,
as Isidor reckons, some say 130, yet he was best at last, and may very well
pass for a Martyr, though he came again safe out of the Lions den, like as
John the Evangelist also did out of the caldron of scalding oil, wherein he
was cast by the command of Domitian, in contempt of Christianity. Daniel's
piety appears in this, that he makes conscience of smaller evils also, such
as most men in his case would never have boggled at. He would not defile
himself with the portion of the Kings meat: he scrupled the eating of it, and
why? 1. Because it was often such as was forbidden by the Law of God, Levit.
11. Deuteronomy. 14. 2. Because it was so used, Ante c^bum sua habebant prothymata,
and laudabant deos suos. Jun.
as would defile him and his fellows, against the Word of God: for the Heathens
(to the shame of many Christians) had their Grace before meat, as it were,
consecrating their dishes to their Idols before they tasted of them, Dan. 5.4.
1 Cor. 8.10. 3. They could not do it without offense to their weaker brethren,
with whom they chose rather to sympathize in their adversity, then to live in
excess, and fullness, Amos 6.6. 4. They well perceived that the Kings Love and
provisions were not single and sincere, but that he meant his own profit, to
assure himself the better of the land of Judah, and that they might forget
their Religion. Lastly, They know that intemperance was the mother of many
mischiefs, as in Adam, Esan, the rich glutton, etc. That Is a memorable story
that is recorded by William Schickard concerning eleven Jew doctors, whom the
Heathen King of Pirgandy having in his power, Schickard. Jus reg. Hebr. c. 5.
p. 149.
put them to this hard choice, either to eat swines-flesh, or to drink wine
that had been consecrated to idols, or to lie with certain harlots. They chose
rather to drink the wine then to do either of the other two. But when they had
drunk wine liberally, they were easily drawn to do the other two things also.
Any one of these five reasons had been of force enough to prevail with Daniel
and the other three to forbear. They knew well that the least hair casts its
shadow: a barly-corn laid on the sight of the eye will keep out the light of
the Sun, as a mountain. The eye of the soul that will see God, must be kept
very clear, Matthew. 5.8, etc.

Therefore he requested] Modstly and prudently he propounded it, non
convitiando, sed supplicando, and petitioneth for liberty of conscience,
confessing his religion.

Ver. 9. Now God had brought Daniel into favour] God is never wanting to the
truly conscientious: let them choose rather to offend all the world then to do
things sinful, and they shall be sure of good success. The Prince of the
Eunuchs durst not yield to Daniel's request, but he connived at the Sewards
yieldance.

Ver. 10. I fear my Lord the King] This made him stand off as he did, in
pretense at least. Tertullian taxes the Heathens for this, Tert. cont. Act.
4.19.
quod majore formidine Caesarem observarent quam ipsum de Olympo Jovem, that
they feared Caesar more then they did their greatest god Jupiter. But he who
truly fears God, needs not fear any else.

Ver. 11. Then said Daniel to Melzar] Or, to the Steward, alimentator, the
Purveyour for the Pages of honor. The Prince of the Eunuchs might happily give
him an hint to go to this Melzar, who might do it with less danger.

Ver. 12. Prove thy servants I beseech thee ten dayes] All good means must be
used for the keeping of a good conscience: and then God must be trusted for the
issue. But did not Daniel herein tempt God? No: for besides that he had a word,
1. Of precept, Deuteronomy. 14. And 2. Of Promise, Exodus 23.25. ex arcana revelatione
certior factus est, it might be revealed unto him, that no inconvenience should
follow upon this course.

And let them give pulse to eat, and water to drink] Poor fare for Noble-mens
sons, but such as they were well apaid of. Nature is contented with a little,
Te ver. innoc. cap. 56.
Grace with less. The sobriety of Democritus and Demosthenes is much
celebrated among the Heathen. But what says Austin? Omnis vita infidelium
peccatum est, and nihil bonum sine summo Bono. Whatsoever is not of faith is
sin, etc. Daniel's sobriety was of another nature, of a better alloy. Papists
crack much of their abstinence from certain meats and drinks at certain times.
But Daniel's and Papists Fasts agree as harp and harrow. See my Commonplace of
Abstinence.

Ver. 13. Then let our countenances be looked upon] See the Note on ver. 12.

And as thou see, deal with thy servants] Thus humbly they bespeak the
Butler, or Purveyour, though themselves were nobly descended. God had made them
Captives, and they now carry their sails accordingly.

Ver. 14. So he consented to them in this matter] This had been well done, if
done for Gods sake; but it was nothinglesse: he had a hawks eye herein to his
own profit: he favored them because he meant to finger something from them.
These four made a mess.

Ver. 15. Their countenances appeared fairer] They had both better health (for
Tenuis mensa sanitatis matter, says Chrysostom, Gustato spiritu de sipit omnis
caro. Bern.
Spare diet is very healthful) and their good conscience or merry heart was a
continual feast to them. They had also Gods blessing upon their courser fair:
and this was the main matter that made the difference.

Ver. 16. Thus Melzar took away] See on ver. 14.

And gave them pulse] This slender diet was some help to their studies: (...).
for laden bellyes make leaden wits, says the Greek Senary: and Pinguis
venture macra men's, says Jerome, a fat belly makes a lean mind. A body farced
with delicious meats and drinks, unfitteth a man for divine contemplation.

Ver. 17. As for these four children, God gave them knowledge and skill in all
learning] Both natural and supernatural. In the Art of Grammar, says
Symmachus: in every book says the Latin Interpreter. There was potus ex font,
fletus in prece, somnus in codice, as Ambrose speaks, they drank Adams-ale,
prayed with tears, slept with a book in their hands. Whether they read the
curious books of the Magicians (fitter to be burnt, Acts 19.19.) is another
question. Osiander thinks that their Chaldaean Tutours would have obtruded
upon them such kind of learning also: but, as they abstained from the Kings
meat, so they did, likely, from such corrupt and unlawful arts. Other
commendable learning they looked into, as did also Moses, Solomon, Paul, etc.
But what meant Pope Paul the second to condemn all learned Artists for
heretics: and to tell his Romans that it was learning enough for a man to be
able to read and write? Nebuchadnezzar was of another mind, Jac. Rev. de vit.
Pont. 244.
and Daniel and his fellows went further then so. Learning has no enemy but
Ignorance.

In all visions and dreams] i. e. In all kind of Prophecy. See Number. 12.6.

Ver. 18. Now at the end of the dayes] i. e. After three years time of
studying. See on ver. 5. Account is to be exacted of time, and profiting. Pliny
said to his Nephew, Plin. Epist.
when he saw him walk out some hours without studying, Poteras has horas non
perdere, you might have spent these hours better. Ignatius when he heard a
clock strike, would say, Here Is one hour more now past, that I have to answer
for. Archbishop Vssier on his deathbed begged hard of God to pardon his
Omissions, who yet was never known to omit an hour, His life by D. Bernard.
but ever employed in his Masters business, reading, writing, preaching,
resolving doubts, etc.

Ver. 19. And the King communed with them] It seems he was himself a learned
King, able to pose them, and put them to it. So was Alexander the Great, Ptolomy
Philadelph, Julius Caesar, Constantine the Great, Charles the Great, Alphonsus
of Arragon, our Henry the first, surnamed Beauclerk, and King James, who was
able to confer learnedly with any man in his faculty. Alphonsus was wont to
say, that an unlearned King was but a crowned Ass; and that he would not be
without that little learning he had, for all that he was worth besides.

And among them all was found none like Daniel, Hananiah, M^shael and Azariah]
That which Patricius says of the son of Juba King of Namidia, taken captive by
Julius Caesar, may fitly be applied to these four noble captives, Quicquid
nobilitatis fortuna eripuerat, id long accumulatius ei restituerat bonarum
artium disciplixa, what luster soever they had lost by their captivity, was
abundantly made up and restored by their excellent learning.

Therefore stood they before the King] Who had no sooner proved them, but he
highly approved them. Cicero.
O Hortensii admodum adolescentu ingenium, ut Phidiae signum simul aspectum and
probatum est: So Daniels and the rest; neither need we wonder; since, beside all
other helps, they were taught of God.

Ver. 20. And in all matters of wisdom] God will honor them that honor him:
his gifts and graces he gives to pure souls, and according to their study of
purity, as to Daniel chiefly.

He found them ten times better] Masters of knowledge, skilled usque ad apices
literarum, Mr. Fuller.
and therefore highly favored by the King, who was himself a great
Philosopher. Daniel was a Leviathan of learning both divine, and humane, as one
says of Archbishop Vssier, Vnicum istius aetatis miraculum and Musarum
delicium, as Erasmus says of Alciat, the Miracle of his age, and the Muses
darling: one that better deserved, for his learning, to be called Magnus then
ever Albertus did. The perfection even of humane Arts is to be found in the
Church: see my common place of A^ts.

Ver. 21. And Daniel continued, etc.] And afterward also, though shrewdly
lifted at under Darius, chap. 6.4. and in the third year of Cyrus he was
overborn by the Councillors hired to hinder the building of the Temple, whom
he could not withstand, and therefore kept an extraordinary fast, Ezra 4.5.
with Dan. 10.3, 4.

CHAP. II.
Ver. 1. ANd in the second year] Of Daniels advancement, chap. 1.19, 20. Or as
Josephus has it, post annum secundum Aegyptiacae vastitatis, in the second
year after that Nebuchadnezzar had subdued Egypt, and other Countries, and so
established his Monarchy: whereupon likely was begun a new computation of the
years of his reign.

Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams] All was but one dream, but of many and weighty
matters. Quid sunt regna omnesque res and spes mortalium ni^ somnia
vigilantium? Plato.


Wherewith his spirit was troubled] God can easily trouble the troublers of his
Israel, and make the ringleader of their bondage the Trumpetter of their
Trophy, even nomen illud prolixum and terrificum, Nebuchadnezzar.

Ver. 2. Then the King commanded to call the Magicians] These had Cham for
their founder, says Pintus: but who can tell that? Daniel happily was forgotten
by Nebuchadnezzar, as David had sometime been by Saul, 1 Samuel 17.55, 56. A
sweet Providence it was that he was not called among the Magicians: God will
not have his matched or mingled with wicked ones.

Ver. 3. I have dreamed a dream] His thoughts had been occupied, belike, about
the issue of his Kingdoms, and thereupon he had a divine vision. He that is
moderately careful about the affairs of his lawful calling, shall not be
destitute of divine direction.

And my spirit was troubled] Heb. Troubled it self. Jesus also troubled
himself, but without sin, Joh. 11.33. See the Note there.

Ver. 4. Then spoke the Chaldaeans to the King in Syriack] i. e. In Chaldee
(whence there is here no Chaldee Paraphrase) or else if the Syriack were then a
distinct tongue from the Chaldee, as now it is, it was, belike, their learned
language: as now the Arabic is among the Turks.

O King live for ever] In this most officious salutation they flatter him, (say
some) or aver the immortality of the soul (as others) or wish him a long
life, as also Daniel does afterward.

And we will show the interpretation] Impostors are great braggers: but as the
Peacock in setting up his tail shows his Posteriors, so do these get to
themselves shame.

Ver. 5. The thing is gone from me] He had dreamt of Monarchies, and now
forgotten his dream. He might have hereby learned that Kingdoms are but
phantasmata, ludicra, empty bubbles, pleasant follies, children and tales of
fancy, etc. The fashion of this world passes away, 1 Cor. 7.31. surely every
man walks in a vain shadow, Psalm. 39.6.

Ye shall be cut in pieces] Practisers of unjust flatteries do often meet with
unjust frowns.

Ver. 6. Ye shall receive of me gifts and reward] This was that they gaped
after (but missed of) and therefore out of envy called not Daniel and his
companions (as some think) lest they should share with them.

And great honour] Great learning deserves great honor. Aeneas Sylvius was
wont to say that popular men should esteem it as silver, Noblemen as gold,
Princes prize it as pearls.

Ver. 7. They answered again and said, Let the King, etc.] Thus these proud
boasters vaunt of a false gift, and become like clouds without rain, as Solomon
has it, Prove. 25.14. See ver. 4.

Ver. 8. I know of certainty] There Is no halting before a cripple: Politicians
can sound the depth of one another, Dan. 11.27.

That ye would gain the time] Chald. buy or redeem it, that is make your
advantage of it, to evade the danger. And indeed if these sorcerers could have
gained longer time, much might have been done: for either the King might have
dyed, or been employed in war, or pacified by the mediation of friends, etc.
Time often cools the rage of hasty men, as 1 Samuel 25.33. How Hubere de Burgo
Earl of Kent escaped the Kings wrath by a little respite, see Godwins catalogue
of Bish. p. 193.

Ver. 9. There is but one decree for you] But that was a very tyrannical and
bloody one. It Is dangerous to affront great men, though in a just cause, Eccles.
10.4.

Saevum praelustri fulmen ab arce venit. Ovid. Procul a culmine^ and procul a
fulmine.
Till the time be changed] The Latin has it, till there be another state of
things: See on ver. 8.

Tell me the dream, and I shall know that ye can show me the interpretation
thereof] If you cannot tell it, surely you cannot interpret it: since they are
both of a divine instinct, and nothing is hid from God.

Ver. 10. There is not a man upon earth] Yes, there is: But this is the guise
of worldly wisdom, fingit se scire omnia, excusat ac ocoulit suam ignorantiam,
it would seem to know all things, and to be ignorant of nothing that is within
the periphery of humane possibility.

Ver. 11. And it is a rare thing] Exceeding man's wit.

Except the gods, whose dwelling is not with flesh] They cohabit not with men,
that we might converse and confer with them. Here these wisards 1.
Superstitiously affirm a multitude of gods, which the wiser heathens denied,
Thales, Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Chrysippus, etc. 2. They deny Gods
Providence, as did also the Epicures, who held that the gods did nothing out of
themselves. The Peripatetikes also held, that they had nothing to do with
things below the Moon: yea the Platonists and Stoikes placed the gods in heaven
only, and other spirits good and bad in the air, which conversed with men, and
were as messengers betwixt them and the gods. Thus these famous Philosophers
became altogether vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was
darkened, Romans 1.21. 3. They seem to affirm that man can know nothing of God,
unless he cohabited in the flesh with him. But we have the mind of Christ, 1
Cor. 2.16. and the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, Psalm. 25.14.
this is a Paradox to the natural man, 1 Cor. 2.14. Lastly they deny the
incarnation of Christ, that great mystery of godliness, God manifested in the
flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. Joh. 1.14.

Ver. 12. For this cause the King was angry and very furious] A cutting answer
may mar a good cause, Prove. 15.1. See on ver. 9.

And commanded to destroy all the wise men of Babylon] So rash is rage: it is
no better then a short madness. Cicero.
Sed de vita hominis nulla potest esse satis diuturna cunctatio, says the
Orator: In case of life and death, nothing should be determined, without mature
deliberation: for like as Saturn, the highest of the planets, has the slowest
motion of them all: Willet.
So, says one, should Princes, which sit in their high thrones of Majesty, be
most considerate in their actions.

Ver. 13. And the decree went forth that the wise men should be slain] And the
wise men were slain, says the Vulgar Latin: some of them, likely, were cut
off. The end of worldly wisdom is certain destruction.

And they sought Daniel and his fellows to be slain] Wicked decrees are wrested
to the butchery of the Saints: as was that of the six Articles here in Henry
the eighths days.

Tremel.
Ver. 14. Then Daniel answered with counsel] Retulit consilium and causam, he
conferred with Arioch the chief slaughterman; giving him good reasons wherefore
to defer further execution. This good turn he did for the Magicians and
Astrologers, who were his utter enemies.

Ver. 15. Why is the decree so hasty from the King] Daniel, though now in
danger of his life, forgets not his old freedom of speech: and God so
wrought, that the King, who was stiff to the Magicians, was tractable to
Daniel, ver. 16.

Ver. 16. Then Daniel -- desired the King to give him time] Not to study, or
deliberate, but to pray with fervency and perseverance, which is the best help
to find out secrets, Jer. 33.3.

And that he would show the King the interpretation] Beatus ait Plato, qui
etiam in senectute veritatem consequitur, he is happy who finds out the
truth, though it be long first, says Plato.

Ver. 17. Then Daniel went to his house] A house then he had (though he had
lost house and home for God) and thither he repaireth, as to his Oratory, well
perfumed with prayers.

And made the thing known to Ananiah, etc.] That they also might pray, setting
sides and shoulders to the work, as country men do to the wheel, when the cart
is stalled.

Ver. 18. That they would desire mercies of the God of heaven] All Gods
children can pray, Cant. 5.8. Those daughters of Jerusalem, though not so fully
acquainted with Christ, yet are requested to pray for the Church. But these
three were men of singular abilities, no doubt: and were themselves deeply
concerned.

Concerning this secret] In case of secrets and intricacies or riddles of
Providence, prayer is most seasonable; as being Tephillah (the usual Hebrew
word for prayer) a repair to the Lord for enquiry, or for his sentence, Genesis
25.22, 23.

Ver. 19. Then was the secret revealed] Oh the power of joint prayer! It seldom
or never miscarrieth, Act. 4. while the Apostles were praying together, the
house where they prayed shook: to show that heaven it self was shaken, and God
overcome by such batteries.

Alb. Mag.
In a night vision] Vigilia noctis, as he watched in the night: for he watched
as well as prayed, Ephesians. 6.18.

Then Daniel blessed the God of heaven] Who had not turned away his prayer nor
his mercy from him. Psalm. 66. ult. They that pray heartily, shall never want
matter of praise: and such shall be ever driving an holy trade betwixt heaven
and earth, till they cease to pray; but praise God throughout all eternity.

Ver. 20. Daniel answered and said, Blessed be the name of God] They who are
slight in praying, are usually as slight in praising, Job 35.13. with ver. 10,
11, 12. But Daniel was serious and zealous in both.

For wisdom and might are his] These and all other excellencies are in God
originally, eminently, transcendently. Daniel found it in this secret thus
revealed to him: how much more may we in the mystery of the Gospel now made
manifest, Romans 16.26.

Ver. 21. He changes the times and the seasons, etc.] And so shows, that
strength is his: such as is irresistible.

He removes Kings, etc.] As by the Kings dream, Daniel was well advertised.

He gives wisdom unto the wise] And so shows that wisdom is his: since all
the wisdom found in the creature is but a spark of his flame, a drop of his
Ocean.

Ver. 22. He reveals the deep and secret things] Daniel has never done; but
is uncessant and unsatisfiable in praising God. And although there was haste of
answering the Kings expectation, yet he shall stay, till God have his due.

He knows what is in the dark] See Psalm. 139.12.

Ver. 23. I thank thee and praise thee] A gracious man is a grateful man: there
is the same word in Greek for grace and gratitude. See on ver. 22. (...).
A thankful man will enumerate Gods mercies, and redouble his praises.

O thou God of my Fathers] The very best inheritance that we can leave our
children, is the true God.

Who have given me wisdom and might] Wisdom to dive into deep matters: and
might to manage it.

Ver. 24. Destroy not the wise men of Babylon] Who yet wished Daniel destroyed.
This was a noble kind of revenge; to overcome evil with good.

Ver. 25. I have found a man] Auliei aliorum sibi usurpant inventa.

Of the captives of Judah] His worth deserved better respect.

Ver. 26. The King answered and said to Daniel, Daniel se Danielem nominat.
whose name was Beltishazzar] So the King and Courtiers had called him: but he
took no felicity in that idolatrous appellation, which signified a treasurer to
Bell, or Baal.

Art thou able] Interrogatio Regis admiratoria.

Ver. 27. The secret which the King has demanded cannot the wisemen -- show
unto thee] And therefore thou have done amiss, first in seeking to them, next
in slaying them; though God has an holy hand in it for their just punishment.

Ver. 28. But there is a God in heaven] The Saints are ever tender of Gods
glory, Ezra 8.22. Let those that are endued with singular gifts beware of
self-admiration, apt to steal upon them.

Ver. 29. Thy thoughts came into thy mind upon thy bed] Kingdoms have their
cares: crowns are stuffed with thrones. These thoughts in the text were
preparatory to the ensuing dream. Eccles. 5.2. the chief Efficient or Author
whereof was God.

And he that reveals secrets makes known to thee] Yea, makes thee a conduit
of divine revelation to the Church.

Ver. 30. But as for me, this secret is not revealed to me, etc.] So careful
are Gods best Saints to give unto him all the glory, which they look upon as
Gods wife, in the enjoying whereof he is a jealous God, admitting no corrival
in heaven or earth. Thy talent has gained ten talents, says he in the Gospel:
I have not done it. And, Not I, but the grace of God that is in me, says Paul.
The glory of God and the good of his Church, is the chief thing that Saints
aim at.

But for their sakes] i. e. For the poor Jews sake, to whose prayer thou owe
this Revelation: toward whom therefore thou should exercise more clemency,
and alleviate their misery.

Ver. 13. Then O King sawest] sc. By the force of thy fancy. For in sleep the
reasonable soul comes into the shop of Phantasy, and there does strange works,
which are vented in our dreams.

And behold a great Image] A fit representation (and in a dream especially) of
worldly greatness. An image says Theodoret, is but the figure of a thing, and
not the thing it self: and this image in the text speciem habet gigantaam, and
prorsus Chimaericam, was a kind of Chimaera.

Sleid. de 4. Monarch.
Ver. 32. The images head was of fine gold] This is the first, and till now,
altogether unheard of Prophecy, concerning the four Monarchies of the World:
Res plane digna quae memoriae tota commendetur, says One: a Scripture worthy
to be well remembered, because it briefly comprehends the history of all Ages
to the worlds end.

Theodoric. Urias Anno 1414.
His breast and his arms of silver] The elder they are, the baser: So is Rome
Papal, of which one of her sons, above two hundred years since complained, not
without good cause, that she was become of gold silver, of silver iron, of iron
earth: superesse ut in stercus abiret, and that she would turn, next, into dung.

Ver. 33. Part of clay] The best things of of the World stand in an earthly
foundation, Huet.
Isa. 40.6.

Ver. 34. Which smot the image upon his feet, etc.] All the powers of the world
are but a knock, soon gone, Psalm. 2.9.

Ver. 35. Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, etc.] Those four mighty
Monarchies had their times and their turns, their ruin as well as their rise.

And the stone that smot the image became a great mount:] The Kingdom of
Christ, Hist. lib. 1.
little at first, increases wonderfully. Nec minor ab exordio, nec major
incrementis ulla, said Eutropius concerning Rome, may we better say concerning
the Church, which shall stand, when all other powers shall quite vanish and
disappear for ever; seem they for present never so splendid and solid. Sic
transit gloria mundi.

Ver. 36. This is the dream] By this time Nebuchadnezzar began much to admire
Daniel: who modestly takes in his Associates (as Paul also does Sylvanus and
Timotheus) when he says, And we will tell the interpretation thereof, sc.
(...), God assisting us.

Ver. 37. Thou, O King, art a King of Kings] And yet the whole Babylonian
Empire was but as a crust cast by God, the great housekeeper of the World, to
his dogs: as Luther somewhere says of the Turkish.

Ver. 38. Thou art this head of gold] An head the Babylonian Monarchy is
called, because it was the first of the four: And of gold, because administered
with great wisdom, fortitude, justice and other heroical virtues: because of
the glory also and greatness of it in all manner of magnificence: See Isa.
13.19. and 14.11. Jer. 27.6. Lib. 15. Geog.
Megasthenes and Strabo say, that Nebuchadnezzar was the mightiest of all other
Kings, and held of the Chaldeans, to have exceeded Hercules in courage. Ex hac
Danielis visione Gentiles fabulam acceperunt de quatuor saeculis, aureo,
argeneto, etc.


Ver. 39: And after thee shall arise another Kingdom] Viz. That of the
Persians, fitly set forth by silver, for their exceeding great wealth mentioned
by many Heathen Authors: the two silver arms are the Medes and Persians,
meeting both in Cyrus, as the two arms do in the breast. Cyrus also, by his
great strength and much bodily labor all his life long, got this other Empire.

Inferior to thee] sc. in fame and felicity. Chald. humilius, quia durius and
minus tolerabile, says One.

And another Kingdom of brasse] This is the third Monarchy, which is the
Grecian: not the Carthaginian, as Orosius and out of him Prosper would have
it. And it is fitly set forth by brass, which as it is a metal strong and
hard, so noiseful and loud-sounding. The belly notes the beginning and
greatness of this Kingdom, says One, under Alexander the Great. The joints
between the belly and thighs note the plucking up of this Kingdom after
Alexander's death, Parker. in loc.
to be divided into four, whereof the principal were two, the one of the
Selencidae, the other of the Lagidae, figured here by the two thighs of
brass: Hard and heavy to purge and perfect the Church, Park. ib.
See chap. 11.4, 5.

Ver. 40. And the fourth Kingdom shall be strong as iron] i, e. The Roman
kingdom, fitly compared to iron for hardness and hardiness. The two legs do
note the division of the Kingdom into the Empire of the East, and the Empire of
the West; first begun by Anthony and Augustus Caesar, afterward established by
Constantine Anno 330 and again more perfectly by Theodosius, Anno 395.

And as iron that breaks all these] Of the Roman greatness much is written
by many Authors, O bem jam totum victor Romanus habebat. Pet. Arb.
how they subdued and kept under other potent nations by their Legions
quartered amongst them, and by their Publicans exacting tribute of them.

Ver. 41. And whereas thou saw the feet and toes part of potters clay, etc.]
These feet and toes are the Roman Empire, yet continuing, but weaker then it
was before whilst it consisted of legs of iron, being now but of feet and toes.
And this Empire is divided as the feet and toes are. One part is the Kingdom of
the Pope in the West (He whom we call the Emperor, has now little or nothing
to do with the Empire, which was of Rome:) The other part, is the Turk in the
East, before whom three of the horns of the Empire are rooted out: See chap. 7
8.

Ver. 42. So the Kingdom shall be partly strong and partly broken] Or, brittle:
This we see daily fulfilled in the tottering Kingdoms both of that of the Turk
(which labors with nothing more then the weightinesse of it self, and yet
has been soundly battered alate by the Venetians) and the other of the Pope,
which declineth also apace, and shall do every day more and more, according to
that old Distich, Roma diu titubans, variis erroribus acta,
Corruet, and Mundi desinet esse caput.


Ver. 43. They shall mingle themselves with the seed of men] i. e. Endeavor by
interchangeable marriages to reunite the divisions: but that can as little be,
as iron can be mixed with clay; cleave they might for a while together, but not
incorporate.

Ver. 44. And in the days of these Kings] i. e. Of this fourth Mornarchy: for
the Roman Emperors were Kings, as Peter also calls them, 1 Epist. 2.17.
though they to avoid the hatred of the people, refused so to be styled. The
Pope, by a like hypocrisy, calls himself The servant of Gods servants; but
yet stamps upon his coin, That nation and country that will not serve thee,
shall be rooted out.

Shall the God of heaven set up a Kingdom] The Kingdom of his Son Christ. And
here we have in few words, the whole sum of the Gospel, and that truth which
is after godliness, Tit. 1.1. for the revealing whereof this whole dream was
revealed to the King.

But it shall break in pieces] Christ shall reign, and all his foes be made his
footstool.

Ver. 45. Forasmuch as thou saw that the stones was cut out of the mountain]
Christ is called a stone, 1. For strength. 2. For continuance. 3. For refuge.
4. For offense: he is Piorum rupes, reorum scopulus, as Val. Max. says of L.
Cassius his tribunal.

Without hands] i. e. Without man's help. Broughton on Daniel.


And that it brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver and the
gold] Broughtons note here is, Witty Daniel tells first how the last shall be
destroyed, and not how Nebuchadnezzar's house first should fall, (so chap.
7.11, 12.) where he shows his care to please the cruel tyrant, and his own
readiness of wit in the allusion that is in the Chaldee between chaspa and
caespa, clay and silver: which they that observe not cannot know why Daniel
brake the native order of speech for clay, iron, brass, silver and gold.

Ver. 46. Then the King Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face] Out of admiration,
and an opinion of some divinity in Daniel: See the like, Act, 14 11. and 28.6.
So the Salvages of Nova Albion stole upon the English (at their departure
thence) a sacrifice, and set it on fire ere we were aware, says Captain Drake,
for they supposed us to be gods indeed.

And worshipped Daniel] i. e. He was about to do it, but that Daniel utterly
and earnestly refused it, directing him to God (the sole object of divine
adoration) as appears by the next Verse. And indeed it had been better for
Daniel a thousand times to have been put to death, then to have suffered an
oblation and sweet odours to have been offered unto him. He had said enough
before to prevent such a mischief, ver. 28, 29, 30. See here, how Satan
tempts the Saints by extremes: Daniel who before was destined to death, is
now deified: and this was the more dangerous temptation of the two. Be not
ignorant of his wiles.

Ver. 47. The King answered unto Daniel] Who dissuaded him, with all his might
from doing on that sort, and inculcated that God was the chief Doer.

Of a truth it is that your God is a God of gods] Hoc fuit momentaneum, says
Calvin, this was but a flash: such as was found in Pharaoh, Saul, and other
Temporaries. For if it had been in truth, he would not have set up the golden
idol, etc. chap. 3. Nevertheless Nebuchadnezzar showed more ingenuity then our
stiff unperswadable Refractaries, and especially then the perverse Jesuits, of
whom it is noted, that they are so cross-grained and quarrelsom that they had
rather quaerere then credere, start questions then believe truth; and
pertinaciously dispute, then rest in the plainest interpretations.

Ver. 48. Then the King made Daniel a great man] This was, says Broughton,
about two years before the Captivity of Jechonias (when the good figs were to be
brought to Babylon:) an encouragement for the faithful to go willingly; their
own Nobles being so advanced in that Court.

And gave him many great gifts] This, Porphyry (that Atheist) snarleth at: viz*
that Daniel received these rewards and honors. But why might he not, since the
gifts he could bestow upon the poor Captives his fellow-brethren? and the
honors he could also improve to their benefit; himself did neither ambitiously
seek them, nor was vainly puffed up by them. A noble pair of like English
spirits we have lately had amongst us, D. Vssier and D. Preston, Contemporaries
and intimate friends to one another. The former, when he was consecrated Bishop
of Mead in Ireland, D. Bern. in his life.
had this Anagram of his name given him, James Mead, I am the same. The latter
when he might have chosen his own mitre, but denied all preferment that courted
his acceptance, had this Anagram made of him, Johannes Prestonius, En stas pius
in honor. Mr. Fuller. Church-hist. fol. 119.


Ver. 49. Then Daniel requested of the King] Acquainting him, likely, that by
their prays also, in part, the secret had been brought to knowledge, ver. 18,
19.

But Daniel sat in the gate of the King] As chief Admissional (so the Civilians
call it) without whose leave and license none might come into the Kings
presence. Himself, meanwhile, had an excellent opportunity of treating with
the King, upon all occasions, of such things as concerned the Churches good:
and this privilege no question but he improved to the utmost.

CHAP. III.
Ver. 1. NEbuchadnezzar the King made animage of gold] Having taken Tire (which
was that great service spoken of, Ezekiel. 29.18.) subdued Egypt, (which was his
pay for his pains at Tire) and overthrown Niniveh, (as Nabum had foretold) he
was so puffed up with his great success, that he set up this monstrous statue
of himself, to be adored by all, on pain of death. That it was his own image
which he here erected for such a purpose (as did also afterward C. Caligula
the Roman Emperor) it is gathered, 1. Because he did not worship it himself.
2. Because ver. 12. it is distinguished from his Gods. 3. Because this was long
since foretold of him, Isa. 14.14. that, Lucifer-like, he should take upon him
as a god: which because he did, he was worthily turned a grazing amongst
beasts, chap. 4. Meanwhile, take notice here of the inconstant and mutable
disposition of th^s proud Prince, as to matter of Religion. Vel^x oblivio est
veritatis, says Hierom, the truth is soon forgotten: Nebuchadnezzr (who so
lately had worshipped a servant of God as a god, and not being suffered to do
so, declared for the one only true God, and advanced his servants to places of
greatest preferment) is now setting up idolatry in despite of God; and cruelly
casting into the fire those whom he had so exalted, because they dissented.
Daniel, its likely, withstood this ungodly enterprise so far as he might, and
left the rest to God.

Whose height was threscore cubits] The ordinary cubit is a foot and half: but
the Babylonian cubit says Herodotus, was three fingers greater then the common
cubit: Plin. l. 34, c. 7.
so that this image might be Sixty seven ordinary cubits high. The Rhodian
Colosse was yet bigger then this: for it was Fourscore cubits high, made of
brass in the form of a man, standing with his two legs striding over an haven;
under which, Ships with their sails and masts might pass. The little finger of
it was as big as an ordinary man, being the work of twelve years, made by
Chares of Lindum, Theop. P^zel. Mell. hist.
and worthily reckoned for one of the worlds seven wonders. It was afterward
sold to a Jew, who loaded 900 Camels with the brass of it: for it had been
thrown down by an earthquake. This image of Nebuchadnezzar was thus great, to
affect the people with wonderment (so they wondered after the beast, Rev.
13.3.) and thus glorious (gilded at least, if not of solid gold) to perstringe
their senses, and with exquisite Music to draw their affections. The Papacy is
in like sort an alluring, tempting, bewitching religion. Hierom compares
heresy to this golden image: Irenaeus, worldly felicity, which the devil
enticeth men to admire and adore.

He set it up in the plain of Dura] In a pleasant plain, (mentioned also by
Ptolomy the Geographer) quo statua commendatior habeatur, Lib. 6. Geog.
that it might be the more regarded.

Ver. 2. Then Nebuchadnezzar the King sent to gather together the Princes]
Satrapas, not so called, quia sat rapiant, as Lyra doateth: for it is a Persian
word signifying such as were near the Kings person. Superstition first looks to
wind in great Ones, Ezr. 8.11. the vulgar are carried away to dumb idols, like
as they are led, 1 Cor. 12.2. They are sheepish and will follow a leader as
well into a penfold as a pasture: they also feed most greedily on the grass
that will rot them.

Ver. 3. Then the Princes the Governours] These envying the new favorites, and
fearing that the King (by his late confession, chap. 2.47.) had too good an
opinion of the Jews Religion, came readily to this dedication, and, probably,
had contrived it for a mischief to those three Worthies, as those, chap. 6. did
to Daniel.

Ver. 4. To you it is commanded] Chald. they command, i. e. The King and his
Council, as Esth. 1.13, 15. But what said the Heathen? Eurlp. in Phoeniss.
Obediemus Atridis honesta mandantibus, we will obey Rulers if they command
things honest: but not else, The Bishop of Norwich asked Roger Coo Martyr in
Queen Mary's days, whether he would not obey the Queens laws? He answered, as
far as they agree with the Word of God I will obey them. The Bishop replied,
whether they agree with the Word of God or not, we are bound to obey them, if
the Queen were an Infidel. Act. and Mon. fol. 1550.
Coo answered, If Shadrach, Meshac and Abednego had done so, Nebuchadnezzar had
not confessed the living God.

Ver. 5. That at what time ye hear] See on ver. 1. The allurements of pleasure
are shrewd enticements to idolatry, 2 Pet. 2.18. Sr. Walter Rawleigh said, Were
I to choose a religion to gratify the flesh, I would chose Popery. The
Catholics in their Supplication to King James for a Toleration, plead that
their religion is (inter caetera) so confortable to natural sense and reason,
that it ought to be embraced! A proper argument. I have read of a Lady in Paris
that when she saw the bravery of a Procession to a Saint, she cried out, Oh,
how fine is our religion, beyond that of the Hugenots!

That at what time ye hear the sound] So in the Papacy, when the Ave-Mary-bell
rings, which is at Sunrising, at noon, and at Sunsetting, all men in what
place soever, house, field, street, or market, Spec. Europ.
do presently kneel down and send up their united devotions by an Ave-Maria.

Ye fall down and worship] This is all is required; de certa confessionis forma
imperata, ne gry.

Ver. 6. And who so falls not down and worshippeth, etc.] Fire and sword are
Idolaters best arguments. But Conscience is the fountain and spring of duty;
and if that be not directed and awed by the Word of God, in vain are Acts of
Parliament and Proclamations, though backed with menaces: as if the spring of a
clock be down, in vain are all the wheels kept clean, and put in order.

Ver. 7. All the people, nations, and languages fell down.] They that come of
the yielding Willow, and not of the sturdy Oak, will yield with the time, and
ever be of the Kings religion. In Queen Mary's days here, and so in the
Palatinate lately, scarce one in five hundred stood out, but fell to Popery, as
fast as leaves fall in Autumn. See on ver. 5.

Ver. 8. Wherefore at that time certain Chaldeans came near, and accused the
Jews] All the Jews are accused, because some refused to worship. So still all
the generation of the righteous must be charged with the pretended miscarriages
of some few amongst them. The world we see, is no changeling, antiquum obtinet.
The Jews indeed, ever since the Captivity, have abhorred idolatry: and the
Papists worshipping of images (for which both Jews and Turks call them
idolatrous Christians) is a main scandal to them, Spec. Eur.
and a let to their conversion.

Ver. 9. They spoke and said -- O King, live for ever] Thus they insinuate
themselves by flattery: so Act. 24.2, 3.

Ver. 10. Thou O King have made a decree] Kings decrees are much urged by such
as are resolved to be of King Harries religion, whether he stand for the old
Mumpsimus, or the new Sumpsimus.

Ver. 11. And whosoever falls not down and worshippeth, that he should be cast,
etc.] This with a graceless man is a swaying argument: he will rather turn then
burn: as he came not frying into the world (as one said in Queen Mary's days)
so he cannot go frying out of it. Aug. de ^iv. D. lib. 18. c. 41.
Epicurus in word confessed a God (but indeed denied him) because Anaxagoras
was put to death for denying God at Athens, where Epicurus flourished.

Lib. 15.
Ver. 12. There are certain Jews] Everywhere spoken against, as were afterward
Christians, odio humani generis, says Tacitus, hated for their religion.

Whom thou least set over the affaires] This was it that irked these spiteful
accusers. Wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous: but who is able to stand
before envy? Prove. 27.4.

Shadrach, Meshac, and Abednego] Whom though thou have highly preferred, and by
calling them by the names of thy gods engaged them to thy religion, yet will
they not yield to it, but be singular and refractory.

These men, O King, have not regarded thee] Chald. have set no regard upon
thee. This was ever unicum crimen eorum qui crimine vacabant.

Ver. 13. Then Nebuchadnezzar in his rage and fury] His blood boiling at his
heart, as brimstone does at the match: for preventing whereof, nature has
placed the heart near to the lungs, ut cum ira accenditur, Pulmonis humore
temperetur, for an allay to the heat of it, lest perturbations should boil it
into brine.

Commanded to bring Shadrach] Who, it seems, were present at first, with an
holy boldness, confronting their idolatries in the very teeth of the King and
Nobles. Daniel is excused by his absence and ignorance. But perhaps
Nebuchadnezzar might show him the like favor as our Henry the eight did
Cranmer, who disputing zealously against the six Articles, Act. and Mon. 1037.
was willed by the King to depart out of the Parliament House into the
Council Chamger for a time, till the Act should pass and be granted: which he
notwithstanding with humble protestation refused to do: and so its likely,
would Daniel, who must therefore be excused as before.

Ver. 14. Is it true, O Shadrach, Meshac, etc.] q. d. I can very hardly believe
it. Certe tu non occidisti patrem, sure thou did not kill thy father, said
Augustus Caesar once to a parricide, whom he had in examination: And Suetonius
says that it was usual with him to examine malefactors in that sort, as if he
could not believe any such thing of them. Tremel. Buxto^f.
Some render the text Number de industria aut certo consilio? Do ye this on set
purpose to cross and provoke me? others (as Montanus) Nunquid desolatio? q. d.
what? you to oppose the command of a King? If this be suffered, what disorder,
yea desolation, must needs follow? Pride ever aggravateth any thing done
against its own mind.

Ver. 15. Now if ye be ready that at what time ye hear] Many can no sooner hear
flattering promises of preferment, as it were Nebuchadnezzars instruments, but
they presently fall down and worship the Babylonish idol: but these three
Worthies were none such.

And who is that God that shall deliver you out of my hand?] What God is he?
Sure a mean God he were, thou poor thimbleful of dust, could he not stay thy
hand, and stop thy blasphemous mouth with a spadeful of mould, and that in a
trice.

Ver. 16. Shadrach, Meshac, and Abednego answered] With an heroical faith, and
well-knit resolution. A sound faith and a clear conscience (says one) are able
by their native puissance, to pull the very heart (as it were) out of hell, and
with confidence and conquest to look even death and the devil in the face.

We are not careful to answer thee] The Saint has a Quietus est, that
supersedeth all his cares, Philip. 4.6. Some render it Non necesse habemus: As
the King would admit no discussing his decree, but would have it absolutely
obeyed; so they were at a point never to do it, nor to be removed from their
religion. The heavens shall sooner fall, said that Martyr, then I will start or
stir an inch from what I have professed. With the like undaunted courage
answered Cyprian the Proconsul, B^sil the Arrian Emperor Valens; D. Tailor,
Stephen Gardener; Mr. Hawks, bloody Bonner. A faggot will make you believe the
Sacrament of the Altar, said Bonner. Act. and Mon. 1445.
No, no, answered Hawks, a point for your faggot: what God thinks meet to be
done, that shall ye do, and no more.

Paenae sunt pennae queis super astra vehor. Ver. 17. Our God whom we serve is
able to deliver us] And deliver us he will either from death or thorough it:
and we are by his grace in utrumque parati, wholly at his dispose. Never ask
then, O King, Who is that God that shall deliver you? Our God is in heaven, and
does whatsoever he will in heaven and in earth. He well knows how to deliver
his out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust (be he King or Caytiffe) unto
the day of judgment to be punished, 2 Pet. 2.9.

From the burning fiery furnace] Sic fortissimum Martyrem (says Ambrose of
Laurentius, may we as well say of these) saevissima presecutoris flamma
superare non potuit; quod long ardentius veritatis radiis accensa men's ejus
fervebat. The fiery zeal of these men's spirits overcame and put out the most
scorching heat of the burning fiery furnace.

And he will deliver us out of thine hand] Hereof they were well assured,
because it would further set forth the cause of God, and work a greater
conviction in the King and his Nobles.

Ver. 18. But if not, be it known unto thee O King, etc.] We should not
condition with God, but commit our selves unto him in well-doing, as unto a
faithful Creator; being unchangeably resolved, rather to embrace fire then to
resist light. Thus did all the Noble Army of Martyrs, besides many worthy
Confessors: such as were the Prince of Condee at the Massacre of Paris, who
would not redeem his life or liberty by going once to Mass: John Frederick
Prince Electour of Saxony, to whom when Charles the fifth (whose prisoner he
then was) offered to enlarge him and to restore him to his former dignity,
Bucholc. Chron.
if he would but only assent to the Interimistical doctrine (as they then
called it) he absolutely refused. George Marquess of Brandenburg likewise
about the same time, professed openly at an imperial Diet held at Ausborough,
Malle sae, flexis ibi coram Caesarea Majestate genibus, spiculatori cerviceus
feriendam stati^^ praebere, quam Deum and Evangelium ipsius abnegare, Scul^ct.
Annal.
i. e. that he had rather hold out his neck to be cut off by the headsman
before the Emperor, then deny Christ and his Gospel. A^ ego Chrysostomum
secutus, said Calvin (when he was pressed to administer the Lords Supper to
some notorious offenders) after the example of Chysostom. I will dye, rather
then do it. Melch. Adam.
Lewis the French King being taken prisoner by Melechsala the Sultan,
conditions of peace being concluded betwixt them; for more assurance thereof,
the Sultan offered to swear, that if he failed in performance, to renounce his
Mahomet: Turk. hist.
requiring likewise the King to swear that if he failed, to deny his Christ to
be God. Which profane oath the King detesting, and wishing rather to dye then
to give the same, the Sultan wondering at his constancy, took his word without
any oath at all, and so published the league.

Ver. 19. And the form of his visage was changed] Chal. the countenance of his
face. Passionate persons vex and distemper their own hearts and bodies, Prove.
25.28. and are exceedingly disfigurged with furiousness of the looks,
extraordinary painting of the heart, beating of the pulse, swelling of the
veins, stammering of the tongue, gnashing of the teeth, as those Act. 7.54. So
the tyrant that martyred Laurence, stamped and stared, ramped and fared as out
of his wits, swelling like a toad, looking like a devil, etc. See on ver. 17.

That they should heat the furnace one seven times more] Whereas a lingering
torment had been heavier, as Bishop Ridley also felt it, and other Martyrs: but
he spoke as his passion prompted him, which often overshoots, Prove. 11.29.

Ver. 20. And he commanded the most mighty men] That they might be the more
strongly bound, and no resistance made.

Ver. 21. So these men were bound in their coats, etc.] Which, for haste of
the execution, were never taken off, as is usually done. But these executioners
were swift to shed blood, and had blood again to drink, for they were worthy.

Ver. 22. The flame of the fire slew those men] Who were over-forward in the
execution, and perhaps had been chief perswaders of the King to this whole
action. God uses his creatures (as he did also at the red sea) for the safety
of his Saints, and destruction of his enemies.

Ver. 23. And th^se three men -- fell down bound] Their binders were burnt, but
not their bonds so soon, lest the glory of the miracle should have been thereby
defaced.

Into the midst of the burning fiery furnace] Where yet these holy Salamanders
took no hurt. In the creatures there is an essence and a faculty whereby they
work; as in fire is the substance and the quality of heat: Betwixt these, God
can separate, and so hinder their working, as here he did. Quisque sollicitus
sit non tam de vita quam de vocatione, etc.

Ver. 24. Then Nebuchadnezzar the King was astonied] God can soon astonish the
stoutest; as he did Dioclesian the Tyrant, who laid down the Empire in a
discontent because he could not, as he desired, root out Christian Religion;
such was the constancy and courage of the Professors thereof. Antoninus the
Emperor set forth an edict in Asia, that no Christian should be persecuted:
for, said he, it is their joy to dye: they are Victors, and do vanquish you.

Ver. 25. Walking in the midst of the fire] As in some pleasant place. Tua
praesentia, Domine, Laurentio ipsam eraticulam dulcem fecit, says an Ancient,
i. e. Thy presence Lord, sweetened the furnace to these three Worthyes, the
gridiron to Laurence, Socrate^. Theodoret.
those exquisite tortures to Theodorus in Julians time, the Leonine prison to
Algerius the Italian Martyr (who calls it in the date of his letter a
delectable orchard) the fire wherein he was burnt to Bainbam the English
Martyr, Act. and Mon.
who in the midst of the flames which had half consumed his arms and legs,
utterred these words: Act. and Mon. 940.
O ye Papists, behold ye look for miracles; here now you may see a miracle; for
in this fire I feel no more pain then if I were in a bed of down; but it is to
me as a bed of roses.

And the form of the fourth is like the Son of God] i. e. Venustissima and
quasi divina, very beautiful and Angelical. The Heathens reputed those to be
Heroes or demi gods, in whom they beheld and admired any thing above the
ordinary nature of men, and their expectation; Truly this was the Son of God,
said that Heathen Centurion concerning our suffering Savior, Mat. 27.54. that
is a divine man, such as Homer calls (...). This fourth person here in the
fiery furnace, is by many held to be Christ the Son of God, who appeared at
this time in humane shape.

Ver. 26. Ye servants of the most high God] This was an high title, such as
David and other great Princes have gloried in Psalm. 36. title: see the Note
there. The devil gave it to Paul and his fellow laborers. Act. 16.17.
And they who deny it to Christ's faithful Ministers (loading them with names of
scorn and obloquy) show therein less ingenuity, then the devil himself.

Then Shadrach, Meshac, and Abednego came forth] Not till they were called, had
they any mind to come forth; for where could they possibly mend themselves? Any
place is a paradise, where God is present. Vbi imperator, ibi Roma. Noah was
well content to lie buried, as it were, in the Ark (which was made in the form
of a coffin) so long as God was there with him. Nos quoque non abhorremus a
sepulchris ipsis, says an Expositor; we also fear not to go down to the grave,
Rolloc.
so long as we may hear God saying unto us as once he did to old Jacob thinking
of his journey to Egypt, Fear not to go down into Egypt: for I will go with
thee, and I will also bring thee up again, Genesis 46.3, 4. Further note, how
these three Martyrs carry themselves toward the tyrant: they do simply obey his
command, and come forth: they are not puffed up by the strangeness of the
miracle wrought upon them, neither do they tattle, but suffer the matter it
self and experience to speak; showing themselves to all sorts to be looked upon
with greatest humility and modesty.

Ver. 27. And the Princes, Governors and Captaines] Who were more obstinate
then the King, and willing to have shut the windows le^t the light should shine
in upon them, but that there was no withstanding it.

Upon whose bodies the fire had no power] See on ver. 23. The creatures are at
a league with the Saints, Job 5.22.

Ver. 28. Then Nebuchadnezzar spake] Being convinced, but not converted, as
appears by the next Chapter, whatever Austin and others charitably thought to
the contrary. A wicked man may pray and praise God extemporally, Job 27.10.

And have changed the Kings word] Chald. secundo loco habuerunt, they have
preferred Gods Word before it.

Ver. 29. Therefore I make a decree] Magistrates then have to do with men in
matters of Religion, Deuteronomy. 13.6. Romans 13.4.

Which speak any thing amisse] But was this all he would do for God after so
clear convictions? it was very poor. A professor of the Turks law proclaims
before they attempt any thing, that nothing be done against religion.

Ver. 30 Then the King promoted] Restored them to their dignities, and strictly
forbad others to malign or molest them.

CHAP. IV.
Ver. 1. NEbuchadnezzar the King] This bare title seemed sufficient to him who
came now newly out of the furnace of sharp affliction, whereby he was tamed and
taken a link lower as we say.

Unto all People, Nations and languages] This Epistolary Narrative or
Proclamation was sent abroad a year or two before his death. And here observe,
says one, an omission of twenty seven years history, wherein the Church in
Babylon had her Halcyons: the Emperor being exercised in foreign wars, Mr.
Hue^.
and the Nobles disheartened from attempting any thing against those four
Worthies, as having had formerly such ill success.

That dwell in all the earth] Thus this great King is made a Catholic Preacher
of humility and moderation of mind.

Peace be multiplied unto you] Courtesy and kind language in great ones
draws all hearts unto them, as fair flowers do the eyes of beholders in the
springtide.

Ver. 2. I thought it good] Chald. It was meet (or seemly) before me: It was my
duty; so Junius.

To show the signs and wonders] Signs they were, because evident testimonies
of Gods Wisdom, Justice, Power: Wonders, because worthy to be wondered at.

Ver. 3. How great are his signs?] Mark how he is enlarged here: so should we.
If David bad had the thing in band, he would have cried out also, for his mercy
endures for ever: But Nebuchadnezzar celebrateth his Kingdom only: and that
also he had learned of Daniel, chap. 2.

Ver. 4. I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in my house] Having subdued all mine
enemies round about. But in the year of my triumph, behold a vision of my
downfall. Suspecta nobis debet esse tranquillitas.

And flourishing in my palace] But flourishing estates free not the mind of
burdensome cares, Eccles. 5.12.

Ver. 5. I saw a dream which made me afraid] It is seldom seen, that God
allows unto the greatest darlings of the world a perfect contentment:
Something they must complain of that shall give an unsavory verdure to their
sweetest morsels, and make their very felicity miserable.

Ver. 6. Therefore I made a decree to bring in all the wise men of Babylon]
Whom yet he had formerly found to be no better then Braghards and Impostours.
Was this man truly converted?

Ver. 7. Then came in the Magicians] As if they would do the deed. Seducers
make up with boldness, what they want of true worth, 2 Pet. 2.19.

Ver. 8. But at last Daniel came in before me] And why at last? Why was he not
sooner sent for? If the Soothsayers and Sorcerers could have served the turn,
Daniel had never been sought to. This is the guise of graceless men: they run
not to God, till all other refuges fail them.

According to the name of my god, and in whom is the spirit of the holy gods]
Is this the language of a true Convert? Should not former sinful practices be
looked upon with a lively hatred, and mentioned with utter distaste?

Ver. 9. Because I know that the spirit of the holy god^ is in thee] The spirit
of divination, and Prophecy.

And no secret troubles thee] Chald. puts thee to business. Now he who had
slighted Daniel before, to get what he desired, abaseth himself below the
dignity of a King to him.

Ver. 10. Thus were the visions of my head in my bed] He readily rememembreth
this dream of his, and roundly relates it: the more to befool the wisemen,
since the Scripture (whereof they were ignorant but Daniel well versed in)
reveals sufficient direction for the interpretation thereof, sc. Ezekiel. 31.1.
-- 12. The wisdom of this World is not unlike the pains taken by Moles, which
dig dexterously under ground, but are blind against the Sun-light.

Ver. 11. The tree grew and was strong] See Ezekiel. 17.12, 24. Plato compares a
man to a tree inverted, with the root above, and the branches below: he also
calls him (...), an heavenly plant: Homer calls great men (...).

Ver. 12. The leaves theref were fair, and the fruit] But because pride
harbored under these leaves and poisoned these fair fruits, they were broken
down, and trod under foot.

The beasts of the field had shadow under it] Great is the benefit of civil
government, and far extending. But mose men content themselves with a natural
use of it, as beasts of the field do of their food, without improvement of any
higher good.

Ver. 13. And behold a Watcher, and an holy One] i. e. An holy Angel, active
and watchful to know and do the will and commands of God for the good of the
Church. Hence Angels are said to be full of eyes, Ezekiel. 1. and to stand always
beholding the face of God, Matthew. 18.10. as waiting an employment. How ready
was that Angel here, ver. 31. to interrupt the proud King from heaven, and to
tell him his doom? So in the next words.

Ver. 14. How down the tree and cut off his branches] One Angel seems to call
to another to expedite the execution: so earnest they are in the Churches
revenge, Rev. 18.21.

Let the beasts get away] Let this great Conqueror be stripped at once of his
train and dignity. The Duke of Florence gave for his ensign a great tree with
many spreading boughs, one of them being cut off, with this Posy, Vno avulso
non deficit alter: but here it was otherwise.

Pintus in loc.
Ver. 15. Nevertheless leave the stump of his roots] Which, having life still
in it, may shoot out again.

Even with a band of iron and brasse] Hic ab arbore desilit Angelus ad
personam: this band intimates Nebuchadnezzar's madness: for mad folk use to
be bound.

Let his portion be with the beasts] Turn him a grazing among beasts, for his
beastly conditions.

Ver. 16. Let his heart be changed] i. e. Obbrutescat, nihil humanum sapiat: a
fearful judgment, and yet such as reprobates are usually delivered up to, Romans
1.24.

And let a beasts heart be given him] Let his Phantasy and appetite he so
changed, that upon a strong imagination that he is a beast, he may have
affections carrying him in all things to do accordingly. Little is said of this
in humane history. The Chaldee Chronicles are lost. Alpheus (as he is cited by
Eusebius) briefly says, Lib. 9. de ^iaepar. Ev.
that Nebuchadnezzar rapt with madness, presently vanished out of the company
of men, after that he had first foretold the overthrow of the Chaldaean
Monarchy. The Chaldaeans in Abidenus fragments record, that he was blasted by
some god, Brought. Conc. of Script.
and spoke of Babel's fall by the Persians.

And let seven times to pass over him] i. e. Seven years; like as Solomon's
Temple, that seven years work of many thousands, was by him destroyed.

Ver. 17. This matter is by the decree of the watchers] i. e. Of God surrounded
with his holy Angels as his Assessours, and Approvers of the divine Decree.

And the demand by the Word of the holy Ones] Petitio haec. sc. that the tree
may be cut down. It is hereby intimated, says Piscator, that the Angels, in
the consultation held for the punishing of Nebuchadnezzar's pride, petitioned
God that it might be so.

Ver. 18. This dream I King Nebuchadnezzr have seen] Such as would have
resolution, must fully relate their doubts, Genesis 41.17.

Ver. 19. Then Daniel (whose name was Belteshazzar] Which name he took no
felicity at all in, but the contrary. Nevertheless for the Chaldaeans sake in
whose tongue he wrote these things, and at whose good he therein aimed, he here
adds it.

Was astonished for an hour] So was not Nebuchadnezzar, who was the man
concerned. Ea fere est improborum securitas: the godly who have less cause are
affrighted often, when the wicked are hardened: See Habak. 3.16. with the Note.
Brad.
But they who tremble not in time of threatening, shall be crushed to pieces in
time of punishing.

My Lord, the dream be to them that hate thee] Daniel, after a certain pause,
makes this mannerly preamble to the interpretation of the dream, which could
not be very pleasing. But truth must be spoken however it be taken. So Philo
brings in Joseph prefacing to the interpretation of Pharaoh's Bakers dream,
Vtinam tale somnium non vidisses, etc. I would Sir, you had not so dreamed: but
since you have, I must deal plainly with you.

Ver. 20. The tree that thou sawest] See on ver. 11.

Ver. 21. Whose leaves were fair] See on ver. 12.

Under which the beasts of the field dwelt etc. A King should to all his
subjects, high and low, extend his favor, according to every ones quality and
degree.

Ver. 22. It is thou O King] i. e. It is that great Empire which thou hold,
and rulest.

Ver. 23. And whereas the King etc.] See ver. 13.

H^w the tree down] Sin ever ends tragically.

Yet leave the stump] Reserve him for a kingly state again; like as he had left
a stump in Judah, spared the kingly seed, showed pity to the remnant of the
Lord. The least favor that is showed to the godly, shall be repayed double,
Jer. 34.17.

Ver. 24. This is the interpretation] See ver. 19.

Ver. 25. That they shall drive thee] He says not who (whether Angels or men)
nor whither, for avoiding of envy and displeasure: th^s was an high point of
heavenly wisdom, which advises to observe, Quis, quid, ubi, quibus auxiliis,
cur, quomodo, quando. Nebuchadnezzar who had driven so many before him out of
their Countries, is now (by a just Judgment of God) himself driven out from
company, left being mad, he should do much mischief: for his brutish
conditions, he had now the bruits for his companions. He was wont to be fed
with dainty fare; he now eats grass as an Ox: for his purple robe horrido
pilo totus obtegitur, he is all covered with hair: Oec^l. D^od.
and for his precious ointments he is wet with the dew of heaven; ferinae vitae
damnatus. His disease, say some, was the Lycanthropy, not a phrensy only (as
that of Ericus King of Swethland, who being expeld his Kingdom, for grief fell
mad; for be^^des the brutish change of his mind, Willet.
his body was much changed in feeding and living among wild beasts: deformed he
was (not transformed) so that the beasts took him for a beast, as going upon
all four, and feeding as they did, although in shape differing from them, as a
monster amongst them. But when all is said that can be said, Hu^t.
sure it is that this change was supernatural, as appears by the occasion,
manner, degree, time, etc. every circumstance seeming a new creation.

And seven times shall pass over thee] For the glory of Gods Justice in his
expulsion, and of his Mercy in his Restoration. See ver. 16.

Till thou know] God will be sure to tame his rebels: for is it fit that he
should lay down the bucklers first?

Ver. 26. And whereas they commanded] See ver. 15. and further observe, how God
tempereth his Judgments with mercy; and that out of his mere Philanthropy.

That the heavens] i. e. The God of heaven, Luke 15.21. Mat. 21.25.

Ver. 27. Wherefore, O King, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee] Happy was
Nebuchadnezzar in such a faithful counselor at hand to advise him: more happy
then his successors Cyrus and Cambyses were in Croesus King of Lydia, who yet
more enriched them by his counsel then by all the wealth they had from him. But
Nebuchadnezzar was as yet uncounsellable, till God had tamed and humbled him.

Anticipa judicium ejus vera resc^piscentia. Jun.
Break off thy sins by righteousnesse] Be abrupt in the work, for delays are
dangerous, Heb. 3.7, 13. cut the cart-ropes of vanity as soon as may be, lest
they pull down upon us heaviest judgments. For the diversion of Gods anger,
get sin removed: take the bark from the tree, and the sap can never find the
way to the boughs.

And thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor] Nebuchadnezzar had been an
open oppressor: Daniel therefore preaches unto him of righteousness and
mercy. So Paul discoursed of righteousness, and temperance, and the Judgment
to come, Acts 24.25. before Felix (who was inexplebilis gurges, says Tacitus,
a covetous caytiff) and Drusilla, a filthy adulteress. Let this be a Mirror
for Ministers.

If it may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity] An futura sit prorogatio. Et
sane fuis aliqua prorogatio, nempe per annum. Repentance ever finds favor,
yea the very shadow of it, as in Ahab, 1 Kings 21. ult. Hierom thinks it
probable, that Nebuchadnezzar did for a time, as Daniel had advised him, and
had therefore for a temporary repentance a temporary tranquillity. Chrysostom's
Note upon this text is, Prolata est sententia ut non fi^t. God is Judex liber,
non juratus, as Zanchy says well, he punishes as he pleases.

Ver. 28. All this came upon the King Nebuchadnezzar] Because he repented not,
or not thoroughly, as he had been advised, being left of God to his own heart.
There is an infallibility in the curses as well as in the Promises: they will
surely light, Isa. 14.23, 24.

Ver. 29. At the end of twelve months he walked] sc. A twelvemoneth after the
dream, the interpretation thereof, and the good counsel given him thereupon. It
is some wonder how he could so soon forget all: but the world with the lusts
thereof had hardened his heart.

In the palace of the Kingdom] His idle walk, and his stately Palace, were some
occasion of his pride and fall. He walks and stalketh, musing of nothing but
his own greatness only.

Ver. 30. The King spoke and said] No man asking him any question, but himself
trumpetting out his own praises. Ordinarily the greatest wealth is tumourd up
with the greatest swelth against the Lord. What has this proud Prince yet in
him of a man, Great means make great minds. Joseph. Antiq. l. 16. c. 11. Vrbem
suam opponit coelo, eamque pro coelo habet.
more then his voice, and shape?

Is not this great Babylon that I have built?] Why no: it was built above a
thousand years before you were born: you have only beautified and fortified it.
It is God that builds the City, Psalm. 127.1. And they were your Ancestors,
Nimrod and Ninus, whom he made use of for that purpose: why then should you rob
him of his glory, and them of their right by your arrogance? The proud man (
Scianus-like) sacrifices only to himself: and ( Polyphemus-like) sets up
himself for the sole-doer. God is not in all his thoughts, Psalm. 10. And for
his words, hear Nebuchadnezzar here, or Mezentius in Virgil, Dextramihi Deus,
and telum quod missile libro. Aeneid.
Or that of Grevinchovius the Arminian, Ego meipsum discerno, atque in to cur
non mihi liceat ut demeo gloriari? I do by my free will make my self to differ
from others, and why may not I boast of such a thing as of mine own, in answer
to that of the Apostle, Who makes thee to differ? and what have thou which
thou have not received? Wittily does Luther call those Braggers Faces or Dregs,
who have much in their mouths Haec ego feci, This was my doing: and worthily
is that speech of Charles the fifth Emperor commended Veni, vidi, sed vicit
Christus, A Lap. in 2 Samuel 17.1.
beyond that of Julius Caesar Veni, Vidi, Vici: because he ascribes to Chrirst
the honor of his conquest.

For the house of the kingdom] The Palace indeed he had built, though not the
City: and therein he now prideth himself. The Bramble thinks it a goodly thing
to reign; and has great thoughts and words too of his shadow: and yet all is
but a shadow. The Turks build no stately edifices (besides their Mosches or
Churches) because their abode upon earth is to be but short, they say, and
therefore any dwelling may serve turn. That was a memorable speech of the
forementioned Charles the fifth, to whom when the Duke of Venice had showed his
princely Palace, like a Paradise upon earth, and now expected that the Emperor
should have exceedingly praised it, all that he said to it was this, Haec sunt
quae nos invitos faciunt mori. These are the things that make us loath to depart
out of the world. And no less memorable was that saying of Another to a great
Lord who had showed him his stately house and pleasant gardens, You had need,
my Lord, make sure of heaven: or else when you dye, you will be a very great
loser.

By the might of my power] See Habak. 1.16. with the Note.

Ver. 31. While the word was in the Kings mouth] So quick is God usually in his
executions, when men are once come to the height of pride, and do invade his
glory, affront his Majesty, Jer. 44.22. Acts 12, 23.

There fell a voice from heaven] By the Ministry of the Angels, who do
extremely hate proud persons, and are ready to speak and act ought against them.

O King Nebuchadnezzar] Not now Nebuchadnezzar my servant, (as once) but mine
opposite, and therefore the object of my wrath. Alexander the Great rewarded
his soldier that fetched his crown out of the water: but then, hanged him for
putting it on his own head. God will punish those eternally, that rob him of
his due glory.

Ver. 32. And they shall drive thee] See on ver. 25. and note that new
impieties work out old threatened curses, which seldom rot in the air, as we
use to say of Winter.

Ver. 33. The same hour was the thing fulfilled] When least expected. The like
befell the old world, Sodom, Pharaoh, Julian, etc. See 1 Thessalonians. 5.2, 3. As they
say of the metal they make glass of, it is nearest melting when it shines
brightest: so are the wicked nearest destruction, when at greatest luster.

And he was driven from men] By his own courtiers, and subjects. In him it well
appeared, that mortality was but the stage of mutability. The like was to be
seen in Nero and many other Roman and Greek Emperors; in Bellisarius, Bajazet,
our Richard the second, and Henry the sixth, who having been the most potent
Monarch for dominions that ever England had, was at last not the master of a
molehill, nor owner of his own liberty. Of Henry Holland Duke of Excester
grandchild to John of Gaunt mention has been made before. Within our
remembrance, in the reign of King James the Lord Cobham having been a man of
seven thousand pound a year, and of a personal estate of thirty thousand pound,
came nevertheless to a miserable end: for before his death he was lowsy for
want of apparel and linen, and had starved, had not a trencher-scraper
(sometime his servant at Court,) relieved him with scraps, in whose house he
dyed, being so poor a place, Court of king James. p. 37.
that he was forced to creep up a ladder through a little hole into his
chamber. The like strange change befell Sir Edward Greenill of Milcot in
Warwickshire, Court of King James. p. 37. Rolloc.
whom I very well knew.

And did eat grass as Oxen] By a singular judgment of Almighty God, who came
down from heaven, as it were, to fight a duel with this most proud man,
inspectante toto mundo, in the view of all the world.

And his body was wet with the due of heaven] Beside the brutish change of his
mind, his body was much changed by the inclemency of the air, and by his
feeding and living among wild beasts: Yet was he not in truth changed into a
beast, as Bodin thinks, so as that upward he was like an Ox, and in his
hinder parts like a Lion, as others have fabled. The substance of his body was
not changed, but only the quality of his substance and of his shape. Rupertus
well concludes, that this was the greatest change that is mentioned in
Scripture, excepting only that of Lots wife, who was changed into a pillar of
salt.

Till his hairs were grown like Eagles feathers] Thick and black.

And his nails like birds claws] Long and sharp: so that in his shape he came
nearer to a wild beast then to a man.

Ver. 34. And at the end of the dayes] When my pride was now subdued; but
hardly to sound conversion.

I Nebuchadnezzar lift up mine eyes] Happy he if with Simeon, his eyes had seen
Gods salvation. Many are humbled but not humble; low but not lowly.

And mine understanding returned] The use of his reason, whereof he had been
bereft, and an opinion put into him that he was a beast. Mad men are apt to
think themselves Kings, horses, or other creatures then they are.

Whose dominion is everlasting] A natural man will sooner confess God to be
true, just, powerful, wise, etc. then merciful: and all because the love of God
is not shed abroad in his heart by the holy Ghost, Romans 5.5.

Disce hominis (...), and ut ita dicam nihilitatem.
Ver. 35. And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing] He who
has seen any part of Gods greatness, will soon see his own vileness, and the
worlds nothingnesse.

Ver. 36. At the same time] When God had hid pride from me, which could not be
soon nor easily done: as when some vital part is corrupted, the cure is
difficult, and long in doing.

And my Counselors and my Lords] Who had ruled the Kingdom in the Interim,
among whom Daniel happily was chief.

Ver. 37. Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise] God as he is the first Author of all, so
to him as to the utmost end, quasi circulo quodam confecto, all honor ought to
return.

All whose works are truth] i. e. Right and righteous.

And those that walk in pride he is able to abase] See ver. 33.

Claudian.
Ingentes quercus, annosas fulminat ornos. CHAP. V.
Ver. 1. Belshazzar the King] Son to Evilmerodach, grandson to Nebuchadnezzar,
whose line failed in this King, according to Jer. 27.7. Of Evilmerodach Daniel
says nothing: because nothing remarkable fell out in his time, but what was
before related, 2 King. 25.27. See there.

Made a great feast] Of this feast, see Jer. 25.26. Herodos. l. 1. Xenoph. lib.
7. It was made, say some, upon occasion of a yearly solemnity, which continued
five days together, wherein the servants bare sway in every family, having a
master of misrule over them. Cyrus took this opportunity, says Xenophon, and
made himself master of the City: Nota hic Baltasaris miram vecordiam, says
one: that is, take notice of Belshazzars strange stupidity and security; that
having such a formidable enemy before the City, he should thus revel and bezel:
but he did it, perhaps, to show his valor, and how little he cared for the
Persians, who showed themselves soon after to be no contemptible persons.
Certain it is, that he minded nothing less at his feast then the deliverance of
Gods poor people, which now he was in working. Now were the seventy years
exactly ended: now therefore was Israel to be dismissed, and it was done. The
Rabbines have a tradition, that Belshazzar seeing the seventy years spoken of
by Jeremy expired, and the Jews, Lyra.
by the coming on of another Monarch not delivered, kept this feast in contempt
of that prophecy and people.

To a thousand of his Lords] Who it is like, were all drunk for company: what
wonder then that a land so sick of drink spewed them all out? Lords and losels
were grown desperate drunkards, ripe for ruin. Here were a thousand Princes,
but not one faithful Counselor, to better advise this festival King (as he is
called) wholly given over to dissolute lusts. Who can tell whether it were not
now with him as afterward with Vitellius the Emperor, when his enemy was at
hand, Tacitu^.
Vitellius trepidus, dein temulentus, to put away the fear of death, he made
himself drunk?

Ver. 2. Belshazzar whilst he tasted the wine] And was mastered by it; Jam
temulentus. Vulg.
being now in his cups, as they say, and well whittled, swallowed up of wine,
as the Prophet expresses it, Esaias 28.7. Aben-Ezra renders it, in consilio
vini, doing as the wine advised him.

Commanded to bring the golden and silver vessels] Being intoxicate he casts
off all care of God and man, and falls into the sins of sacrilege and
blasphemy.

Which his Father Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the Temple] And should have
restored them thither again. We read that when Gensericus had spoiled and
plundered Rome, he took the vessels of gold and silver which Titus had brought
from the Temple in Jerusalem, and carried them with him to Carthage, The life
of Justin by Mr. the Clark. 79.
and carried them to Constantinople. But the good Emperor Justinian would not
receive them into his treasury, but sent them again to Jerusalem, to be
disposed of for the good of the Church, according to the discretion of the
Christian Bishops who lived there.

Ver. 3. Then they brought the golden vessels] Made and appointed for a better
use; as were likewise much of our Church Lands, vessels and utensils,
concerning which a learned man thus complains, Possidebant Papistae, possident
jam Rapistae; Luther cried out earnestly against this abuse in Germany, Knox in
Scotland, Calvin at Genevah; I see, said he to the Senate there in a Sermon,
that we have taken the purse from Judas and given it to the devil: neither can
I endure such sacrilege, which I know God in the end will punish most
severely. Belshazzar paid dear for his bowsing in the boules of the Sanctuary.

And the King and his Princes -- drank in them] As if they had been
swine-troughs. This was to out-sin his father and grandfather, who yet were
none of the best.

Ver. 4* They drank wine] To the honor of their goddess Shac: for so these
feast-dayes were called (...), being like the Roman Saturnalia.

And praised the gods of silver and of gold] As if these their dunghill-deities
had mastered and spoiled the God of Israel, who either would not or could not
defend his temple and people, from falling into the power of their invincible
conqueror. This was blasphemy in an high degree: and therefore presently
punished by God.

Ver. 5. In the same hour came forth fingers of a man's hand] Taken off from the
arm. This strange sign marred all the mirth immediately, making good the
Proverb, Vbi uber, ibi tuber, ubi mil, ibi fael. Lege Dei aeterna sancitum est
ut illicita voluptas pariat ultric^s conscientiae su^ias and supplicia, juxta
illud Apocal. 18.7. Carnal mirth goes out in a snuff.

Upon the plaster of the wall] When the wrath of God is revealed from heaven
against unrighteousness, he would have it to be well noted and noticed by all.

Ver. 6. Then the Kings countenance was changed] How soon is carnal joy
extinct, the gallantry of it checked with troubles and terrors! how suddenly
is it put out as the fire of thorns! Psalm. 118.12. Eccles. 7.6. Surely as
lightening is followed with rending and roaring: and as comets, when their
exhaled matter is wasted, vanish and fill the air with pestilent vapors: so
is it here.

So that the joints of his loins were loosed] If a bare citation to judgment
were so terrible to this jolly Prince, what shall the judgment it self be?
Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, etc.

And hiis knees smote one against another] The writing on the wall he could
neither read nor understand: but his conscience had written bitter things
against him, which being now held to the fire of Gods wrath become legible, as
things written with the juice of an onion are, when brought to the fire. The
wounds also of an accusing conscience pierce the members of the body, Prove.
17.22. The mark that God set upon Cain was, in likelihood, the perpetual
trembling of his hands and whole body. Luctant.
Tullus Hostilius, who profanely derided the devotions of his predecessor
Numa, had deservedly for his gods Pavorem and Pallorem. Caracalla, after the
murder of his brother Geta was so haunted with the furies of his own evil
conscience, that he forbad any so much as to name him on pain of death, and was
well-nigh mad: so was Theodoricus the Tyrant, upon the sight of the fishes head
set before him, wherein he thought he saw the face of Symmachus whom he had
wrongfully slain. The like befell our Richard the third after the murder of his
two innocent Nephews; and Charles the ninth of France after the Massacre at
Paris.

Ver. 7. The King cried aloud to bring in the Astrologers] Daniel seems not
to have been in any request in the days of this dissolute Prince: Neither was
there any Courtier that would mention him, or mind the King of him till the old
Queen came in. Such Combibones are unfit comforters: many of them, likely, were
by this time, buckt with wine, and then laid out to to be sunn'd, and scorned.

Shall be clothed with scarlet, etc.] A troubled heart will give any thing for
release, as Cain, Spira, etc.

And shall be the third ruler in the Kingdom] i. e. Next to my self and the
Queen Mother. Thus he promises to another a third place, who could not promise
to himself any place. Spirat superbiam miser.

Ver. 8. But they could not read the writing] Vtpote coe^itate and stupore
perculsi, they could not so read it, as to make any good sense of it. It may be
the initial letters only were set down, or else without pricks, or in a strange
Character, the Samaritan, or some other. The honor of the work was reserved
for a better man.

Ver. 9. Then was King Belshazzar greatly troubled] In the midst of his feast
he was thus damped and cast into his dumps; according to that of Amos, chap. 8.
ver. 10. I will turn your feasts into mourning, and all your songs into
lamentation. Yet find we not in him any sign of true remorse. Whoredom and wine
and new wine had even taken away his heart, Hos. 4.11. robbed him of himself,
and laid a beast in the room.

Ver. 10. Now the Queen] The Queen Mother, whom Heredotus calls Nicochris,
and greatly commends for her wisdom and ability of speech, which in a woman
is a comely ornament, Prove. 31.26. 1. She was not at this riotous feast, which
is an argument of her temperance. 2. She prudently insinuates into the King by
the ordinary salutation, O King live for ever. 3. She advises him to bear up,
and not to be over-troubled. 4. She makes honorable mention of Daniel, cujus
virtutum sola est admiratrix, and persuaded the King to make use of him, by her
own experience. We use to say that women's wits are best at a pinch. Most sure
it is that women have proved sometimes more prompt for counsel then men, Judge.
13.23. and some we may find, who, beside their sex, have little of a woman in
them. See 2 Samuel 20.16. Herodotus makes this Nicochris as famous as Semiramis.

Ver. 11. There is a man in thy Kingdom] Once famous for his Oracles, and
highly promoted by thy grandfather Nebuchadnezzar. Thus this old Queen speaks
of ancient things. She was not therefore Belshazzars wife (as Porphyry
scoffingly objected) but his mother at least, if not his grandmother.

In whom is the spirits] See on ver. 10.

The King, I say, thy father] This was a check to Belshazzar, for neglecting so
worthy a person as Daniel, whom his grandfather had so highly honored.

Ver. 12. Forasmuch as an excellent spirit, etc.] Very excellent is the grace
of the Spirit in godly hearts, Colos. 1.29. neither can natural conscience do
less then stoop and strike sail to the image of God, in whomsoever.

And dissolving of doubtis] Chald. knots, that is, perplexed and obscure
speeches and sentences.

Now let Daniel be called] Who will not obtrude himself, nor like the marry
gold open and shut with the Sun; but, as the violet which grows low and hang^
the head downward, hiding it self also with its own leaves: so Daniel, were it
not that the fragrant smell of his many virtues betrayed him to the world, would
choose to live and dye in his self-contenting secrecy.

Ver. 13. Then was Daniel brought in] Wise men are never found to be
unnecessarily forth-putting, or over-forward to express themselves. They know
Qui been la^uit been vixit; and qui been tacuit, been dixit: and when they must
speak, use as few words as may be, and as direct to the point.

Art thou that Daniel] Daniel had deserved of the Babylonian State to have been
better known of Belshazzar, and better respected. But this is the worlds wages.

Which art of the children of the Captivity of Judah, etc.] What needed all
this? he never learned it surely of his Queen Mother. She had spoken all good
of Daniel, and inminded the King of another both office and name. He only takes
notice of Daniel's captive condition, and vaunts of his grandfathers victory:
moving this insolent and unseasonable question in tanta necessitate and
consilii inopia, Art thou that Daniel? etc.

Ver. 14. I have even heard of thee that the Spirit, etc.] This silly and
shallow Prince has nothing to say but what was put before into his mouth by
his wiser grandmother: Only what she discreetly concealed, viz. that Daniel was
one of the Captives, etc. hoc unum commemorat gloriosus Rex, that he blures
out, Oecolamp.
in a way of upbraiding.

Ver. 15. But they could not show the interpretation of the thing] They could
not read nor interpret it. Such as seek to Sorcerers are worthy to lose their
labor, as a punishment of their folly. Suidas testifies that the Citizens of
Alexandria in Egypt devised and decreed, that Astrologers should pay a certain
tribute to the State out of their gettings, and that it should be called The
fools tribute, because none but fools and light fellows would repair to such
for direction.

Ver. 16. And I have heard of thee] As far off as he makes it, Belshazzar
could not be so ignorant of Daniel, as he would seem to be, since he understood
punctually the dreams, honors, and troubles of his grandfather, ver. 22. But
this he took for a piece of his silly glory, to make it very strange, as if he
had never heard of Daniel till now.

Ver. 17. Let thy gifts be to thy self] Honors, Pleasures, Riches, Hac tria
pro trino numine Mundus habet, Bus as Moses, by the force of his faith,
overcame them all, Heb. 11.24, 25, 26, 27. so did Daniel here; throwing off the
offers of them, and answering the Kings proud speech with a grave Invective
which he begins somewhat abruptly* not without indignation, as having to
deal with a wicked and desperate man, rejected of God. Ministers must carry in
them a retired majesty (says One) toward the persons of wicked men, 2 Kings
3.14.

Ver. 18 O thou King, the most High God gave Nebuchadnezzar] See here the
necessary and profitable use of history, which has its name, says Plato,
(...), from stopping the flux and overflow of impiety in others; Exemplo
alterius qui sapit, ille sapit. Domestical examples are most prevalent: as, not
to profit by them is a great provocation, and yet too too common, Psalm. 49.14.
Lamech was nothing bettered by Cain's punishment, but the contrary. Jude
inveyeth against such as made no use of Sodoms ruin: this was a just presage
and desert of their own. And kingdom, and majesty, and glory, and honour] His
offenses were much increased by these many obligations.

Ver. 19. Whom he would he slew] De facto loquitur, non de jure: See the like,
1 Samuel 8.10, 11, etc. Lib. 5. cap. 11.
See the Notes there. Lactantius tells of a certain tyrant, qui lucem vivis,
terram mortuis denegabat, who would never let his subjects rest alive or dead.

Ver. 20. But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardend in pride]
Pride is of an hardening property, causes men to commit sin with an high hand,
as Pharaoh. The increase of the spleen is the decrease of the body: so is pride
of the soul, and overturneth the whole man. Evagrius notes it for a special
commendation of Mauritius the Emperor, that he was not puffed up with his
preferments.

Ver. 21. And he was driven] See on chap. 4.22. Lege historiam, ne fias
historia.

Ver. 22. And thou his son O Belshazzar, have not humbled thy heart] It was no
small aggravation of his sins not to be warned, and now he shall hear of it on
both cares. The putting out of the French Kings eyes (which promised before
with his eyes to see one of Gods true servants burned) who sees not to be the
stroke of Gods hand? Act. and Mon. fol. 1914.
Then his son Francis, not regarding his fathers stripe, would needs yet
proceed in burning the same man. And did not the same God give him such a blow
on the ear, that it cost him his life?

Ver. 23. But have lifted up thy self aginst the Lord of heaven] As did also
Pharaoh, Senacherib, Herod, Acts 12. whose acts were set forth with false and
flattering praises by Nicolas Damascenus, as Josephus complains: but so are
not Balshazzar's by holy Daniel, Antiq. lib. 16. cap 11.
who yet is, almost, his only Historiographer.

And whose are all thy wayes] Chald. thy whole journey.

Ver. 24. Then wat the part of the hand] Completa peccati mensura, non
differture poena, when sin is once ripe, punishment is ready. The bottle of
wickedness when once full with those bitter waters, will soon sink to the
bottom.

Ver. 25. Mean, Mean, Tekel, Vpharsin] These words signify, He has perfectly
numbered, he has weighed, and it falls in pieces: They were the Samaritan
Characters, Weem^e.
says One; therefore the Babylonians could not read them, nor could the Jews
understand them, though they knew the characters, because they understood not
the Chalde^ tongue as Daniel did. See on ver. 8.

Ver. 26. Mean, God has numbered thy kingdom] He has cast up thy reckonings,
taken account of thy mal-administration, and calls for satisfaction. So he
dealt with Pharaoh King of Egypt; Cum duplicarentur lateres, venit Moses, when
the tale of bricks was doubled, then came Moses: and when the four hundred or
the four hundred and thirty years of their Captivity in Egypt were exacty
expired, the same night were the firstborn slain. So the tyranny of the Roman
Emperors was numbered at the end of three hundred years after Christ, when
they, sounding the triumph before the victory, had foolishy engaven upon
pillars of marble these bubbles of words, Nomine Christianorum deleto qui Remp.
evertebant, We have utterly rooted out the name of Christians those traitors
to the Commonwealth. So, lastly, God has numbered the Popes kingdom, and
well-nigh finished it. Let him look to the year 1666. It Is plain, Satan shall be
tied up a thousand years: 666 is the number of the beast; Antichrist shall so
long reign; these two together make the just number.

Jupiter ipse duas aequato examine lances Sulline^. Virg.
Ver. 27. Tekel, Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting] As the
former was a term taken from creditours, so this from light coin; deprehensus
et minus habere, thou art not current. Others may think thee weighty enough and
worthy, but God pondereth the hearts, Prove. 22.2. and finds thee fit to be
refused, ut nummus reprobu^.

Ver. 28. Peers, thy kingdom is divided and given to the Medes] This had been
long before prophesied of Isa. 13.17. yea Genesis 9.25. And now Chams posterity
felt his fathers curse. Nimrod the founder of Babylon came of Cham: Madai or
the Medes were of Japhet, and Elam or the Persians, of Sem. Gods forbearances
are no quittances. Let all wicked ones look to it. What is Mean but death?
Tekel but Judgment? Peers but hell or utter separation from God, and all to be
passed thorough by their poor souls, if timely course be not taken? Hear this
all ye drunkards, who glory in drinking the three Outs, etc.

Ver. 29. Then commanded Belshazzar, and they clothed Daniel] No nay but they
would do it, and he at length admitted it: partly, that he might not seem to
slight the Kings courtesy and to be disaffected: and partly, that thereby he
might be the better known to the Persians, for the comfort of Gods poor people.

And put a chain of gold about his neck and made a proclamation, etc.] All this
the King commanded to be done, out of an admiration of Daniel's divine wisdom,
and that he might be dicti sui dominus as good as his word. But not a word hear
we of his repentance, such was his stupidity: nor does Daniel exhort him to it,
because he saw him to be past feeling, and knew that the decree was gone forth.

Ver. 30. In that night was Belshazzar -- slain] By Gaddatha and Gobrya two of
Cyrus his Commanders who had been wronged by Belshazzar, Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. 7.
(as Xenophon also testifies) and now took revenge on him, after that they had
betrayed the City, and brought in Cyrus his army. So fell that famous Babylon
-- fuit Ilium and ingon^ Gloria Teuerorum.

Ver. 31. And Darius] Called by C^^sias (...), which comes near to Dariaves, as
the Chalde^ here calls him. He is thought to be the same with Cyaxares son of
Astyages, and uncle to Cyrus.

Being about threescore and two years old] Born the same year, say the Rabbis,
Sedar Olam.
wherein Nebuchadnezzar besieged Jerusalem and destroyed it. So Austin was born
the same day is Afrike, that Pelagius was in Wales (say Chronologers) by a wise
and watchful providence of God for the good of his Church.

CHAP. VI.
Ver. 1. IT pleased Darius] Chald. Pulobrum fuit coram Dario. Order, he knew,
must be observed, or the kingdom could not continue. Himself also was ancient
and needed Assistants. It was honor and work enough for him illos judicare
qu^s constituit judices aliorum (as Petr. Blesensis says that our Henry the
second did) to judge those whom he had made Judges of others. The great Turk
does so to this day, whence few of his Grandees (his Visiers especially or
chief Officers) dye in their beds.

An hundred and twenty Princes] For his 120 Provinces, which afterward came to
be 127, Esth. 1.1. Monarchs will ever be adding.

Ver. 2. And over these three Presidents] Triumvires five tres Rationalet,
three to whom the rest should Audit, and be accountable.

And the King should have no dammage] In his rights, and in his revenues, which
were, says Herodotus, yearly fourteen thousand five hundred and threescore
Eubojan talents, raised out of the several satrapies.

Ver. 3. Then this Daniel was preferred above the Presidents] Chald. He became
a conqueror over those Exarehes: so that he might have been called as Charles
the Great once was, Pater Orbis, the Worlds Father; or as Titus, the Worlds
Darling; Orbis deliciae. Mirabiliae mundi.
or as Oath the third, the Worlds wonder. He was indeed no less: and that,
Darius well found by him. Whether he took him with him into Media, as Hierom,
out of Josephus, relates, I have not to say. If he did, it seems that after
the death of Darius, he returned again to Babylon, and there served King Cyrus,
verse 28.

Because an excellent spirit was in him] Not only of Prophecy, but of prudence,
justice, zeal, and other virtues, which, if a Governor want, he is as a Sun
without light, a bird without wings, a Master of a ship without an helm, etc.

And the King thought to see him over the whole realm] Thus dignity waits
upon desert, and envy upon dignity, which made David love his hook the better
after he had seen the Court; and Daniel was never fond of this great preferment
whereby, for his own particular, he got nothing, nisi ut turbatior viveres,
occupatior interiret, Feriunt summos fulmina montes.
(as he said) but vanity and vexation of spirit. High-seats are never but
uneasy: neither want there those, that are lifting at them, and laboring to
overturn them.

Ver. 4. Then the Presidents and Princes sought] Chald. Were seeking, they made
it their business so to do. Envious men are always in excubiis, set in their
watch, to observe where they may fasten their fangs, and do most mischief. See
Prove. 27.4. with the Note.

But they could find none occasion] His innocence thratled their envy, and made
them, since they could not come at his heart, to feed upon their own.

Nor fault] Neque in facto, nec in signo: and yet they waited for his halting,
as Psalm. 38.16, 17. and watched as eagerly for it, as a dog does for a bone. A
blameless behavior disappointeth malice, and makes it drink up the most part
of its own venom.

Forasmuch as he was faithful] Homo quadratus, a square-dealing man, and such
as against whom lay no just exception. Homo virtuti simillimus, as Paterculus
says of Cato Major, A man as like Virtue her self as could be possible.

Ver. 5. Then said these men] But whatsoever they said, Daniel said Ego sic
vivam ut nemo eis credat, My life shall be a real refutation of their lies.

Against this Daniel] This was the best language they could afford him: so,
Behold this dreamer, said Joseph's brethren; and This fellow, said the
Pharisees of Christ: and This Pest, said they of Paul, that most precious man
upon earth. In envy is steeped the venom of all other vices.

Except we find it against him concerning the Law of his God] Whereof Daniel
was both a strict observer in himself, and a zealous preserver in others.
Religion then was the quarrel, and all the fault they could find with him,
Novum crimen C. Caesar, etc. and yet no new accusation neither. The first man
that ever dyed, dyed for religion: and still All that will live godly in Christ
Jesus (if they will needs do it, and be set upon it) shall suffer persecution.

Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse pium. Ver. 6. Then these Presidents and
Princes assembled together to the King] Or, thro^ged tumultuously, as resolved
to have that they came for. James and John, from the word here used, are called
Sons of thunder, Mark 3.17. It seems these men came to the King with a
bustle, Filii fremitus sive fragor^^.
and a rattle, to affright him into a consent to their motion.

King Darius, live for ever] This was to sprinkle him with Court-holy-water, as
they say.

Ver. 7. All the Presidents of the Kingdom] Not all neither: for Daniel would
sooner have dyed a thousand deaths, then have voted such a gross impiety. But
he was one of the most that knew least of the Council, and it was he against
whom hac endebatur faba, this plot was laid; though it proved at last to be
against themselves.

The Governors and the Princes, the Counselors and the Captains] A rabble of
rebels conspiring against heaven. Non numeranda sunt suffragia, sed expendenda.

To establish a royal statute] But a very irreligious and injurious one: the
like whereunto was that prohibition in France of Henry the third, Polan. in
locum. Heyl. Geog.
that it should not be lawful for householders to pray with their families: and
that of the Jesuits at Dola forbidding the common people to say any thing at
all of God, either in good sort or in bad.

That whosoever shall ask a petition of any god or man] What not of their own
gods? nor yet of Cyrus, who was compartner with Darius in the Kingdom? But like
enough these complotters might think hereby the rather to ingratiate with the
old dotard Darius who feared the virtue and valor of his Nephew and colleague
Cyrus; and would say with tears, as Xenophon reports, that Cyrus was more
glorious then he, and had more applause of the people.

Ver. 8. Now O King establish the decree] Confirm it, that it may receive the
force of Law.

According to the Law of the Medes and Persians that alters not] This was too
much to be given to any law made by man, so mutable a creature. I have read of
a people whose laws lasted in force but for three days at utmost: This was a
fault in the other extreme. The Persians laws were therefore irrepealable,
because they worshipped Truth for a goddess, to whom Inconstancy and Change
must needs be opposite and odious. But this was no good reason neither; unless
the Lawmakers shall be supposed such as cannot err, nor will any thing unjust:
which can be truly attributed to none but God only.

Ver. 9. Wherefore King Darius signed the writing] As well enough content to be
so dignified, yea deified. So was Alexander the Great, Antiochus (...) Herod,
Domitian, Dominus Deus noster Papa: Vah scelus!

Ver. 10. Now when Daniel knew that the writing was signed] Which he knew not,
belike, till it was proclaimed and published: and then, it may be, he did as
much against it, as Latimer did herein like case, by writing his mind unto King
Henry the eighth, after the Proclamation for abolishing English books. See his
letter in the book of Martyrs, and marvel at his heroical boldness and
stoutnesse; Act. and Mon. 1591.
who as yet being no Bishop, so freely and fearlesly adventuring his life to
discharge his conscience, durst so boldly to so mighty a Prince, in such a
dangerous case, against the Kings law and Proclamation, set out in such a
terrible time, take upon him to write and to admonish, that which no counselor
durst once speak unto him, in defense of Christ's Gospel.

He went into his house] He left the Court (as no fit air for piety to breath
in) and get him home, Exeat Aul^ qui v^lit esse pius.
where he might more freely and comfortably converse with his God. Tutissimus
est qui rarissime cum hominibus, plurimum cum Deo colloquitur, says a good
Divine: that is, he is safest, who speaks seldom with men, but often with God.

And his windows being open in his chamber] This was his wont, belike, at other
times: and now he would not break it, to the scandal of the weak, and the scorn
of the wicked, who watched him, and would have charged him with dissimulation.
should he have done otherwise. Say not therefore What needed he thus to have
thrust himself into observation? could he not have kept his conscience to
himself, and used his devotions in more secrecy? our Politick-Professours and
Neuter-passives indeed could and would have done so. But as Basil answered once
to him that blamed him for venturing too far for his friend, Non aliter aware
didici, I never learned to love any otherwise: so might good Daniel here have
done; his zeal for God would not suffer him to temporize, or play on both
hands. It shall well appear to his greatest enemies, that he is true to his
Principles, and no flincher from his religion. His three companions were alike
resolved, chap. 3. and Paul, Act. 21.13. and Luther when to appear at Worms,
and many more that might here be mentioned.

Toward Jerusalem] For the which he was now a petitioner, since the time to
favor her, yea the set time was come, Psalm. 102.13. There also sometime had
stood the Temple, not without a promise of audience to prayers made in or
toward that holy place, 1 King. 8.43. which also was a type of Christ, etc.

He kneeled upon his knees] Constantino the Great (as Eusebius tells us)
would have this as his portraiture, a man on his knees praying: to show that
that was his usual practice and posture.

Three times a day] At morning, noon, and night: thus constantly, beside other
times also upon emergent occasions. All the power and policy of Persia could
not keep God and Daniel asunder, no not for a few days, Philip. 3.20. Ephesians.
2.19. it is a part of our (...) our City-employment or spiritual-trading with
God, to pray: and if prayer stand still, the whole trade of godliness stands
still too. Clean Christians therefore, typed by those clean beasts in the law,
Levit. 11.3. must rightly part the hoof. rightly divide their time, giving a
due share thereof to either of their callings as Daniel did: sanctifying both
by prayer, and at hours of best leisure, Psalm. 55.17.

And prayed and gave thanks before his God] Chald. Confessed, either his sins,
that he might get pardon thereof: or else Gods benefits, the glory whereof he
thankfully returned unto him. Prayers and praises are like the double motion of
the lungs. Let every breath praise the Lord.

As he did aforetime] An excellent custom doubtless and most worthy to be
kept up:

Arist. Ethic. lib. 8. cap. 5.
(...). Ver. 11. Then these men assembled] But for ill purpose: as did also our
Saviors enemies, Luke 22.6. and Stevens, Act. 7. the Popish Councels: at Rome
they have a meeting weekly de propaganda fide, for the propagating of the
Romish Religion, and abolishing of heresy as they call it.

And found Daniel praying] The Sun shall sooner stand still in heaven, then
Daniel give over to pray to his Father in heaven.

Ver. 12. Have thou not signed a decree?] But should wickedness be established
by a law? Psalm. 94.20.
See on ver. 7. So in France there was published an edict whereby the people
were forbidden on pain of death, D. Arrowsus. Tact. Sacr. p. 89.
to have in their hou^^ any French book, wherein the least mention was made of
Jesus Christ.

Ver. 13. That Daniel] He was principal president, and deserved a better
attribution then That Daniel; But ill will never speaks well of any.

Which is of the Captivity] This also is terminus diminuens, q. d. This royal
slave, whom thou have preferred above us all, and have moreover some thoughts
to set him over the whole realm, ver. 3. New men shall be much spighted. 'Twas
therefore no ill counsel, Fortunam reverenter habe quieunque rep^^te
Auson.
Dives ab exili progrediere loco.


Regards not thee, O King] Chald. puts no respect on thee. This is common,
falsely to accuse Gods most faithful servants as Antimagistratical, because
they refuse to obey unlawful and impious decrees.

But makes his petition three times a day] They say not to whom he made it,
which might have helped him much: for the King might conceive that he made it
to some other man. It Is an evil office to omit such circumstances as may help
the accused, 2 Samuel 16.3.

Ver. 14. Th^^ the King when he heard these words was sore displeased with
himself] As good reason he had: but Sero inquit Nero. Now he found himself
circumvented by his wily flatterers: but why was he such an Epimetheus or
After-wit?

And set his heart on Daniel] But All-too-late. Lee cassibus irretitus dixit,
Si praescivissem. The fools Had-I-wist should be carefully prevented. To
disavow the willing of Daniels death, and to lay the blame upon his
counselors, is a poor shift of a weak Prince.

And labored till the going down of the Sun] Alleging reasons for Daniels
deliverance: as that he was a loyal subject, an excellent Ruler, that the
Decree was fraudulently wrung from the King, upon pretense of finding out
false-hearted Subjects, that it was maliciously wrested to the ruin of a right
Patriot, etc. But no reason will rule unreasonable and absurd men as they are
called, (...).
2 These. 3.2. men that have no Topics, nor will hear of any, as the word there
signifies.

Congregaverunt se supra regem.
Ver. 15. Then those men assembled unto the King] Or, kept a stir with the King,
from Psalm. 2.1. Doubtless, says Broughton, Daniels spirit thought of David his
fathers terms: so ver. 6. They came cluttering about the King.

Know O King that the law of the Medes and Persians, etc.] This he knew as well
as they: but they press him to do accordingly. So did those Ignatian Boutefeaus
in Germany, who in the year one thousand five hundred eighty two cast abroad
this bloody Distich; Vtere jure tuo, Caesar, s^ctamquo Lutheri
Euse, rota, ponto, funibus, igne nota.


Ver. 16. Then the King commanded, and they brought Daniel] Besides and against
his conscience, Rex regendum se praebet impiis nebulonibus, the King yields
to the importunity of these wretched Malignants, and condemns an innocent:
See Mat. 27.24. This makes Calvin conclude ne micam quidem pictatis fuisse in
h^^ r^g^, that there was no goodness at all in this King.

And cast him into the den of Lions] So little assurance of a continued
felicity is there to any Princes favorite: witness Joab, Abner, Haman,
Callisthenes, Sejanus, Ruffinus, Eutropius, Stilico, Alvarez de Luna, who told
those that admired his fortune and favor with the King of Castile, you do
wrong to commend the building before it be finished.

Now the King spoke and said unto Daniel] Many oppressing Landlords, says
one, are like Darius that prayed God to help Daniel, but yet sent him to the
Lions den. How many friends at a sneez have we now-adayes? says another: the
most you can get of them is God bless you, Christ help you.

Ver. 17. And a stone was brought and laid upon the mouth of the den] To make
all suit, as they thought; and that there might be no privy packings with the
keepers, for Daniels deliverance. But God had an holy hand in it for the
greater manifestation of the miracle.

And the King sealed it] Ne videlicet alia perimeretur morte ab insidiatoribus,
says one, rest the conspirators, understanding that the Lions did not meddle
with him, should some way else dispatch him, as the Persecutors dealt by some
of the Martyrs.

That the purpose might not be changed concerning Daniel] The Latin
interpreter has it, Lest any thing should be done against Daniel: he feared
not the Lions so much as the men, says the ordinary gloss there.

Ver. 18. Then the King went to his Palace and passed the night fasting] As
good reason he had, for the love and loss of such a Counselor, whom he had
unwittingly betrayed, but wittingly condemned; and now he is self-condemned for
so doing: his conscience was perplexed for his injustice, so that he cares
neither for meat, nor music.

Ver. 19. Then the King arose very early in the morning] He had lain all night
on a bed of thorns through trouble of mind, and was glad to get up: especially
since sleep (the Parenthesis of men's griefs and cares) was quite gone from him.

And went in haste] Chald. with perturbation.

Unto the den of Lyons] Quo veni^ leo, Galatin. l. 5. c. 8.
and liberavit leonem de ore leonis (say the Jew-doctours by a kind of riddle)
whither came God and delivered this Cuer-de-lion out of the mouth of the Lions.

Ver. 20. And when he came to the den, he cried with a lamentable voyce] With a
piteous distressed voice: far otherwise then did Daniel, ver. 21. who chose
rather to be cast into the den of Lions, then to carry about a Lion in his
bosom, an enraged conscience, as did Darius here, and afterward Theodoricus
King of Italy, who had caused B^^tius and Symmachus to be unjustly beheaded,
but carried the horror of it to his grave. How good is it therefore to keep
the bird in the bosom always singing as Daniel did; and as those primitive
Christians, who chose rather ad leonem projici quam ad leno^e^^, to be thrown
to Lions without, Tertul.
then to be left to lusts within, such fleshly lusts as war against the soul, 1
Pet. 2.11. against the peace of it principally.

Is thy God whom thou servest continually] A fair deal better then did Cardinal
Wolsey, who yet, when he came in a morning out of his privy chamber, most
commonly heard two Masses: and what business soever he had in the daytime
(when he was Lord Chancellor) he would not go to bed with any part of his
service unsaid, no not so much as one Collect. Nevertheless, The life and death
of Cardinal Wolsey. p. 18.

Semetipsum detestatus e^t quod Regi potius quam Deo placere studuisset. Scult.


when he was sent for up by Henry the eighth to be put into the Tower, he
bewailed himself and said, that if he had been as careful to serve God, as he
ever was to please the King, it would have been much better with him. To be a
servant of the living God is an argument of sa^^cty, chap. 3.17.

Ver. 21. O King live for ever] Daniel does not curse the King (as some
impatient spirits would have done, and as some think the damned in hell do God)
but wishes him a long and happy life, vote amabili. He uses the ordinary
form, but with a better mind. His wish of the Kings welfare was non in labris
natum sed in fibris, it was heartsp^^ng, it was an holy prayer.

Ver. 22. My God has sent his Angel] Glad to be employed for the safety and
service of the Saints, Heb. 1.14. whence it is, that these heavenly courtiers
delight more in their names of ministry (as Angels, watchers, etc.) then of
dignity, as Principalities, Thrones, etc.

And has shut the Lions mouths] Though they were savage and hungerstarved, yet
Daniel was kept from the paws and jaws of these many fierce, and fell Lions,
by the power of god thorough faith, Heb. 11.33. How the Angel stopped the Lions
mouths, whether by the brightness of his presence, or threatening them with his
finger, Number. 22.27, 33. or by making a rumble amongst them like that of an
empty cart upon the stones, Ari^^ot. Plin.
or by presenting unto them a light fire (which things Lions are said to be
terrified with) or by causing in them a satiety, or by working upon their
fantasy, etc. we need not enquire. The Lord well knows how to deliver his 2
Pet. 2.9. and one way or other, will not fail to do it, Psalm. 34.19.
Archimedes the great Mathematician was slain by a common soldier who was sent
for him, notwithstanding that Marcellus the Roman General had given charge that
he should be spared. The Temple of Jerusalem was burnt, though Titus the
Emperor had commanded the contrary. When one told the Duke of Parma that he
had shot Sir Philip Sidney, instead of a reward he cursed him for killing so
incomparable a man, of whom, though an enemy, he heartily wished that he had
been preserved: all that are dear to God are sure to be protected: he will
rather work miracles, then they shall be forsaken, Jon. 2.10.

And also before thee O King have I done no hurt] Though I have not obeyed
thine edict, to the wounding of my conscience. It was therefore an unadvised
speech of Philip King of Spain, who said that he had rather have no subjects
then Protestant subjects: and out of a blind bloody zeal he suffered his eldest
son Charles to be murdered by the cruel inquisition, because he seemed to
favor the Lutherans. How well might this young Prince have said as here,
Against thee, O King, have I done no hurt?

Ver. 23. And commanded that they should take Daniel up out of the den] Pull
him up with cords, as they did Jeremy in like case, chap. 38.

Mos priscus Christianorum fuit ut in suis sepulchris inter alia Resurrectionis
symbola Danielem in lacu inter leones stantem sculperent. A Lapide in loc.
So Daniel was taken up out of the den] A lively type of Christ's resurrection
from the pit. So was Joseph taken from prison, and made Lord of Egypt: Sampson,
breaking the bars and carrying away the gates of Gaza: David, so often oppressed
by Saul, and yet exalted to the Kingdom: Jonas, his being drawn out of many
waters, Mat. 12.39.

Because he believed in his God] Of such force is faith, of such power is
prayer: for it may well be thought that he prayed hard (with David, Psalm.
22.21.) Save me from the Lions mouth: so will I declare thy name unto my
brethren. The prayer of faith shall save the afflicted: and questionless,
justifying faith is not beneath miraculous, in the sphere of its own activity,
and where it has the warrant of Gods Word. Let such as desire a special
providence, believe, wait, and walk uprightly, 2 Chronicles. 16.9.

Ver. 24. And the King commanded, and they brought these men which had accused
Daniel] Chald. which had accused accusations against Daniel. Now they shall
lick of the same whip, (...). Hesiod.
and find (to their small comfort) the truth of that divine proverb. Whose
diggeth a pit, shall fall therein, etc. Prove. 26.27. See Eccles. 10.8. Psalm.
7.16. with the Notes.

They cast them into the den of lions] A just and proper punishment, yet not
executed without too much severity, as some think, because their wives and
children were cast in with them. But for that, others say that as these were
part of their goods; so, by consent at least, they were partakers of their
crimes, and therefore justly perished with them.

Heb. 10.31.
And the lions had the mastery, etc.] It is a much more fearful thing to fall
into the punishing hands of the living God. Such shall have the cauls of their
hearts torn in sunder, Psalm. 50.22.
etc. Oh consider this ye that forget God, seast he tear you in pieces, etc.

Ver. 25. Then King Darius wrot] See on chap. 4.1.

Ver. 26. I make a decree] It is the honor of Princes to make laws for the
maintenance of religion, 2 Chronicles. 30.4, 5.

And his Kingdom, that which shall not be destroyed] Daniels dialect touching
Christ and his Kingdom, chap. 2.44. and 7.14, 27. By conversing with that good
man Darius had learend something: as those that walk much in the Sun are apt to
be tanned and discolored.

Ver. 27. He delivers and rescueth] By this and the foregoing Verse it may be
evidently seen, that Darius was acquainted with Nebuchadnezzar's two dreams,
and affected with them.

Ver. 28. So this Daniel prospered] And still solicited the Churches cause.

And in the reign of Cyrus the Persian] Under whom he affronted the Counselors
hired against the returned Jews, Ezra 4.5. with Dan. 10.1, 3. He lived also
under Cambyses, but was out of credit with that rakeshame.

CHAP. VII.
Ver. 1. IN the first year of Belshazzar] Here begins (to speak properly)
the Prophecy of Daniel, or rather the second Part of Daniel's works; which is
concerning visions exhibited of God, by divine Revelations, not to others, but
to himself. This vision is the subject and groundwork of the rest that follow,
to the end of the Prophecy. One not unfitly compares it to a general Map of
the whole world; the rest to particular tables of several countries.

Daniel had a dream and visions of his head] God renewed unto him the same
thing by vision, which he had exhibited before by dream: Jun.
in recompense of his religious care to know the matter, and to record it, for
the Churches comfort.

Then he wrote the dream] 'Twas Gods will, the visions of the Prophets should be
written, Isa. 30.10. and published to the Church, Isa. 31.10.

Ver. 2. Daniel spoke and said] His writing is called his speaking, Willet.
to teach us to receive the writings of the Prophets and Apostles with no less
reverence then if we had heard them speak with their own mouths.

I saw in my vision by night] The night does in Scripture frequently signify
trouble: This vision by night was of troublesome business, viz. hurlyburlies
in the world, and persecutions in the Church.

And behold the four winds of the heaven strove upon the great Sea] i. e. There
was a huge bussel upon the earth, by means of the four successive Monarchies:
See Rev. 13.1, 11. The World is fitly called the great Sea, ever unquiet and
full of commotions; which are also called winds, for their boisterousnesse
contrariety of nature, and inconstancy.

Ver. 3. And four great beasts] Regnorum feritas bestiarum nomino demonstratur,
says Hierom, The fierceness of the four Kingdoms is set forth by the name of
beasts. Bellum a belluis. Monarchies are mostly gotten, kept, Regna mundana
parantur and retinentur bellis.

Commune vitium Monarchiis est tyrann^.


and governed with violence and tyranny, Psalm. 76.4. Cant. 4.8.

Ver. 4. The first was like a Lion] Which is the king of beasts (as the Eagle
is of birds) generous, strong, fierce, fair-conditioned: so were the Assyrian
Monarchs, in comparison of those that followed them.

And had Eagles wings] Whereby is noted their victorious celerity, and alacrity
in seizing upon Kingdoms, as Obad. 4. 2 Samuel 1.23. Jer. 4.13. and 48.40. Ezekiel.
17.8

I beheld till the wings thereof were pluckd] sc. By the Medes and Persians,
taming Babels insolency, and making her Inhabitants tributaries and slaves,
Xenophon.
to till their ground, and to maintain their garrisons; saluting them as their
Masters wherever they met them.

And made stand upon the feet as a man] i. e. Brought down to the common rank
of men, and no longer lift up as an Eagle.

And a man's heart was given to it] Which before thought it self as good as God;
Cor humanum, id est, molle ac timidum. Piscat.
now had low and common spirits: not as once, imperious and impetuous.

Ver. 5. And behold another beast, a second like to a Bear] Which is nothing so
generous and ingenuous as a Lion: but slow, dull, cruel, ravenous: Such were
the Persians: a mountainous, tough, uncivil people, of barbarous and beastly
cruelty.

And it raised up it self on one side] sc. By joining with the Medes, by whose
help Cyrus subdued the Syrians, Xenoph.
Assyrians, Arabians, Cappadocians, and many more nations not easily reckoned:
who, to gratify him, desired to be ruled according to his pleasure.

And it had three ribs in the mouth of it] Whilst they conquered three parts of
the known World, pushing Westward, Northward and Southward, chap. 8.4. Westward
by Cyrus, Southward by Cambyses, and Northward by Darius Hystas^i^.

And they said (or, it was said) thus unto it, Arise, devour] Intimating, that
it was God who turned this Bear loose upon the nations, and gave them to him
for a prey. Tyrants prosper by Gods permission, Joh. 19.11.

Ver. 6. After this I beheld, and let another, like a Leopard] Which is a
creature cruel, desirous of man's blood, crafty, spotted, and very swift of
foot: So were the Grecians; Alexander especially (the founder of that third
Monarchy) active, bold, and headlong: but directed much by those who had been
Councillors to his father Philip, a subtle Prince; Leopard-like, he was
spotted (by a mixture of virtues and vices) he was very quick of dispatch
((...), never deferring any enterprise) he much delighted in wine, and so took
his death: like as the Leopard is no way else to be taken, but by such a bait
laid for him.

Which had upon the back of it four wings] Denoting the rapidity and celerity
of Alexander, and some other of the Grecian Monarchs, in overrunning
countries, as if they had flown.

The beast had also four heads] i. e. This Monarchy was, after Alexander's
death, divided into four Satrapies, or rather Kingdoms: Cassander had
Macedonia, Antigonus Asia, Seleucus Syria, and Ptolomy Egypt.

Ver. 7. Behold a fourth beast] Not likened to any certain beast, because none
can be named so cruel, which can express the cruelty of this fourth Monarchy,
viz. that of the Romans, no although it were (...). It is a namelesse monster,
Hom.
made up of all the properties of the former beasts, Rev. 13.1, 2. The
Rabbines, with their wild-boar out of the wood, Psalm. 80. fall far short of it.
Luther not unfitly compares the Church of God to a silly poor maid, sitting in
a wood or wilderness, Loc. Com.
and beset with hungry Lions, Wolves, Boars, Bears, and with all manner of
hurtful and cruel creatures.

Dreadful and terrible] Because able and ready to annoy others with great evils.

And strong exceedingly] So that it passed for a Proverb, Iras^i populo Romano
no^^^ impuus potest, It is not safe for any nation to fall out with the Romans:
for they are sure to be tamed and tawed with their iron teeth.

And it had great iron teeth] i. e. Conquering captains, such as Scipio (of
whom Eunius sang thus, Si fas coedendo coelestia scandere cuiquam,
Mi soli coeli maxima porta patet.)
Pompey, who by his great acts and achievements merited the name of Magnus;
and Julius Caesar who be bore the Phrasalian wars, had taken a thousand towns,
conquered three hundred nations, ^^yl. Geog.
took prisoner one Million of men, and slain as many.

And stamped the residue with the feet of it] i. e. With their Provincial
Magistrates; such as were Verres, Pilate, Felix, etc. said to have nails of
brass, ^.19. and fitly compared to petulan^ wild beasts, which when they can
feed no longer, trample with their feet on the residue of the prey. The poor
Jews had hard measure from them always.

And it was diverse from all the beasts] In respect of diversity and strange
multiplicity of forms of government.

And it had ten horns] Which the Angel afterward interprets of Kings or
Kingdoms, ver. 24. This fell out not long after Constantine the Great, when the
Roman Empire began to moulder and fall in-pieces. About the year 456. it
appeared broken into ten parts; which by a learned Interpreter are thus
reckoned. The kingdom of the Britons, of the Saxons, both in Britanny: of the
Frankes, of the Burgundians, in France: of the West-Gothes in the Southern part
of France, and part of Spain: of the Sueves and Alanes in part of Spain: of the
Vandals in Africa, a little before in Spain: of the Alemans in Rhetia and
Noricum, Provinces of Germany: of the East-Gothes in Pannonia, a little after
in Italy: of the Greeks in the remnant of the Empire.

Ver. 8. And I considered the horns] For without a serious and sedulous
consideration, I could not have kenned it: so slily and secretly works the
Mystery of iniquity.

And behold there came up among them another little horn] This is Antiochus
Epiphanes say some, the great Turk say others, the Pope say a third sort (and
with them I concur) whose Kingdom is here called a little horn: because the
Pope was, at first, a mean Minister of the Roman Church; viz till Constantine's
time. Afterward, he was only Primat and Metropolitan of the Churches of Italy:
no man took him for a Prince, no not when he began to write Volumus and
jubemu^, We will and command you, A. D. 606. but he grew up by degrees, and
cunningly gat among the ten horns, till at length he overtopped them.

Before whom there were three of the first horns plucked up by the roots] These
were (according to some) Chilperick the French King, Frederick the Emperor,
and King John of England, whom he made his vassal. Others reckon them to be
Chilperick, the Exarch of Italy, in the time of Gregory the second, and
Desidorius, King of Lombards slain by Charles the Great at the instigation of
the Pope. For three Kingdoms coming under him, let it be considered whether
they be not Spain, Germany and France: or whether this prefigured not (says
One) his triple crown?

And behold in this horn were eyes like the eyes of a man] In respect of his
feined curtesy, and profound policy. To be sharpsighted, is commendable: but to
be wittily wicked is to do the devil doubty service.

And a mouth speaking great thing] Big swollen with blasphemies, both against God
and his Vicegerents upon earth. Pope Boniface wrote to Philip the Fair, King of
France, Volumus te scire te in temporali and spirituali nobis subjacere. We
would you should know, Sir, that you are to subject your selves to us, Alsted.
Chron.
both in temporals and spirituals, etc. Accordingly he took upon him to overtop
and command, at pleasure, all Christian Kings and Emperors. The application
that the malicious Jew-doctours blasphemously make of this little horn to our
Lord Jesus Christ, is worthy of all execration.

Ver. 9. I beheld till the thrones were cast down] All these tyrannous
dominions overturned: Some read it, till the thrones were set up: for till the
last Judgment, Antichrist is to continue, ver. 21, 22, 25, 26.

And the Ancient of days did sit] i. e. God Almighty, whom Thales also, an
Heathen Philosopher, called (...), the most Ancient of all that are. The Poets
say also, that Saturn, the father of their gods, had his name from his fullness
of years. Gods Eternity and Wisdom is set forth by this his Title here: Laert.
in vlt. Thalet. Saturnus est appellatus quod saturetur ann^. Cic. de not. deor.
lib. 2.
like as also is, by his white garments, his Majesty and Authority: by his hair
as pure wool, his Innocence and Integrity in Judgment: by his throne like the
fiery flame, his just Anger and Severity, against the man of sin especially: by
his wheels (or the wheels thereof, viz. of his Throne: for Princes thrones used
in those days to be set upon wheels) as burning fire, is set forth his
Facility and Dexterity in executing his Judgments: his Efficacy also, since all
things are fiery.

Ver. 10. A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him] The last and
great Judgment must needs be very dreadful, when as (beside that wicked men
shall give account with all the world flaming about their ears) the Law they
shall be judged by is a fiery Law, Deuteronomy, 32.2. the tribunal of fire, Ezekiel.
1.27. the Judge a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. His Attendants flaming Seraphims;
his pleading with sinners shall be in flames of fire, 2 These. 1.7. The trial of
their works shall be by fire, 1 Cor. 3.13. The place of punishment a lake of
fire, fed with tormenting temper, and kindled by the breath of the Lord, Isa.
30, 33. Well may the sinners in Zion be afraid, and fearfulness surprise
hypocrites: well may they run away (if they can at least tell whither) with
these words in their mouths, Who among us shall dwell with this devouring fire?
who amongst us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? Isa. 33.14.

Thousand thousands ministered unto him] There is an innumerable company of
Angels, Heb. 12.22. and when Christ comes to judge the world, he shall bring
them all with him; not one being left behind him in heaven, Mat. 16.27. that he
may have their assistance in the sentence and execution of Judgment, 1 Cor.
6.2, 3.

Sedendo and quiescendo animasit prudens. Aristot. Physic. lib. 6.
The Judgment was set, and the books were opened] Terms taken from judgments
amongst men, wherein inditements are read, proofs are produced, Laws also are
considered. The books that shall here be opened, are Gods Records, and
Consciences Register: quae scripta sunt non atrame^^o sed flagitiorum
inquinamento (says Ambrose) which are written not with ink, but with sins
filth.

I beheld then because of the voice of the great words] As Antichrist shall be
judged for his blasphemies, so shall all ungodly men for their hard speeches,
Jude 12. yea for their waste words, Mat. 12.

Cotton the Jesuit confesses that the authority of the Pope is incomparably
less then it was, and that now the Christian Church is but a diminutive.
Ver. 11. I beheld even till the beast was slain] Till the whole body of the
monster, and with it the Papal kingdom came to ruin. This Bellarmine
confesses, and lamenteth that ever since we began to call the Pope Antichrist,
the Church of Rome has suffered loss.

And his body destroyed and given to the burning flame] The Revelation (which
is an heavenly Commentary upon this Prophecy) has it thus, The beast and the
false Prophet were cast alive (for more torment) into a lake of fi^e burning
with brimstone, Chap. 19.20.

Ver. 12. As concerning the rest of the beasts] The four great Monarchies (as
was before noted) had their times and their turns; their rise, and their ruin.

Yet their lives were prolonged for a season] Such is the Lords lenity,
respiting his enemies for a time, 1 Kings 21.29. The Persian and Turk, are yet
puissant Princes. The success that the Antichristian rout yet has in some
places, makes good that which was sometime said of dying Carthage, Morientium
nempe bestiarum violentiores esse morsus, i. e. The bites of dying beasts are
more violent then ordinary.

Ver. 13. I saw in the night visions, etc.] Here comes in the fifth Monarchy
(properly so called) the kingdom being wrested from the fourth tyrant. Well
might Hierom call Daniel Polyhistora, the general Historian.

And behold one like the son of man] So Christ showed himself often to the
Fathers, before his Incarnation, for their confirmation in that Article, which
being the ground of his Passion was to be especially believed, for the
foundation of Christian faith. Christ's Godhead also (another main Article) is
here not obscurely deciphered, whilst he is said to be like the son of man;
therefore he is more then a mere man. Again, he came with the clouds: confer
Mat. 24.30. Then shall they see the son of man coming in the clouds, as in his
charet of State. Add hereunto his solemn glorious access unto the Father
(that Ancient of days, that is the Eternal God) as being his Co^qual, of the
same nature, power, glory, etc. with his Father, and Coeternal unto him. So the
Lamb is said to approach to him that sat upon the Throne, to receive the Book,
Rev. 5.7.

Et qui assisteba^^ ei abtulerant eum, sic Cyprian. legit.
And they brought him near before him] The Angels did: as great men's Attendants
are said to bring their Masters to the Court.

Ver. 14. And there was given him dominion] Christ has a manyfold right to the
kingdom: it is his by Inheritance, conquest, donation, etc. This is comfortable
to consider of: forasmuch as he will not reign without his Members, who all
hold all in capite: and have all already, 1. In precio: 2. In promisso: 3. In
primitiis.

That all people, nations and languages, etc.] Christ's Kingdiom is first
universal, secondly perpetual: so was none of the former; though the Roman was
very large (teaching from Euphrates to great Britain) and the Assyrian very
lasting, of a thousand and four hundred years duration.

Ver. 15. I Daniel was grieved in my spirit] Chald. My spirit was stabbed
thorough, so that my body became as an empty sheath, or scabbard. Oh the
rerrour of that last Judgment, when such a man as Daniel was so affrighted to
see the manner of it in vision only! If the righteous scarcely be saved, etc.

In the midst of my body] Chald. of my sheath: the body is but the souls sheath
(Pliny, in the history of Hermotinus Clazometius, Lib. 7. cap. 52.
makes use of the same Metaphor) and compared to the soul, it is but as a clay
wall that encompasseth a treasure; as a wodden box of a Jeweller; as a course
case to a rich instrument; or as a mask to a beautiful face.

Ver. 16. I came near unto one of them that stood by] i. e. To one of the holy
Angels, as ver. 10. Let us have recourse in like case, to Christ's Ministers,
who are called Angels of the Churches: like as Angels, by a like change of
name, are called ministering Spirits, Heb. 1.14. The Preaching of the Gospel is
taken from the Angels, Luke 2.10. and given to the Ministers: hence Paul was
sent to Ananias for further direction, Act. 9. and Cornelius to Peter, Act. 10.

And asked him the truth] i. e. The thing hereby signified. See Joh. 1.17. and
14.7. holy minds are industrious after knowledge.

Ver. 17. These great beasts -- are four Kings] i. e. A succession of Kings,
all of them truculent and savage toward the Saints.

Which shall arise out of the earth] And as toads, strive who shall dye with
most earth in their mouths.

Ver. 18. But the Saints of the most high] Or, the most high Saints, highly
exalted in Christ, and preferred far above those earth-sprung Mushrom-Monarchs,
ver. 17. who are of the earth earthy, and partake not of the inheritance of the
Saints in light. Now this is a very true definition of a Church, says Junius
here, viz. Caetus sanctorum ad excelsa, a company of Saints partaking of an
high and heavenly calling, Heb. 3.1.

Shall take the Kingdom] Take it by force, Matthew. 11.12. lay hold on the
promised inheritance: yet not till it is given them, and the time is come, ver.
22.

Ver. 19. Then I would know the truth] See ver. 16. And take notice that godly
minds are not content with the knowledge of things in gross: but covet a
particular and distinct knowledge, Phil. 3.10.

Ver. 20. And of the ten hornes] See ver. 7.

And of the other that came up] See ver. 8.

Whose look was more stout then his fellows] i. e. Then the ten horns:
Antichrist exalts himself above Kings, and above all that is August, 2 These.
2.4. See the Note there.

Ver. 21. I beheld, and the same horn made war with the Saints] With the
Waldenses; against whom the Pope turned his Croisado's, Thuar.
those armies of the Cross which had been first appointed against the Saracens.
This war began in the year one thousand one hundred and sixty, and yet
continues, and must till the end of the reign of Antichrist, ver. 9 10 26.

And prevailed against them] As they did against the ancient Waldenses or
Leonists: and against their posterity lately in Piedmont. Yea it is the opinion
and fear of some great Divines, that Antichrist, before his abolition, shall
once again overflow the whole face of the West, and suppress the whole
Protestant Churches.

Ver. 22. Until the ancient of days came] Not by change of place, but change
of Providence, Zach. 14.3, 4.

And judgment was given to the Saints] As Approvers of Christ's righteous
judgment.

That the Saints possessed the Kingdom] sc. In Christ their head, ver. 10.

Ver. 23. Thus he said] So ready are the holy Angels to further good desires,
Mat. 28.1, 2.

Ver. 24. And the ten horns out of this Kingdom] He says not Kingdoms: this
makes against those that make the Seleucidae and Lagida, the fourth Monarchy.

And he shall be diverse from the first] For the first were secular Kings, but
he styles himself chief Bishop and head of the Church, having both Peter's
keys, and Paul's sword, etc.

And he shall subdue three Kings] See on ver. 8.

Ver. 25. And he shall speak great words] As Pope Julius the third did: when he
called for his pork-flesh (forbidden him by his Physician as naught for his
gout) al despito di Dio in despite of God: Act. and Mon. 1417.
and missing a cold Peacock which he commanded to be set up for his supper, he
raged extremely at his steward: and being desired to be more patient, he
replied, If God were so angry with our first Parents for an apple; may not I,
who am his Vicar, be so much more for my Peacock! See on Rev. 13.5.

And shall think to change times and laws] i. e. He shall usurp a power over
religion, and men's consciences, set up holidays, canonize Saints, appoint
fasts, order times, etc.

Until a time and times and half a time] i. e. Until that time which God
alone knows, and has in his power.

Ver. 26. But the judgment shall sit] And then an end of him howsoever.

Ver. 27. And the Kingdom and dominion] When once Christ's foes shall be in that
place which is fittest for them, viz. under his feet.

Ver. 28. Hitherto is the end of the matter] This seems added, to stop all
curious enquiries after things not revealed.

My cogitations much troubled me] For the ensuing troubles of Gods people,
under those godless tyrants.

And my countenance changed] Chald. my brightnesses. I looked wan and pale;
much study will cause it, Eccles. 12.12. as it did in Mr. Fox the Martyrologue,
so that his friends knew him not.

CHAP. VIII.
Ver. 1. IN the third year of the reign of King Belshazzar] Which was his last
year, when Babylon was close besieged: therefore Daniel was not now really at
Shushan, but in vision only, ver. 2.

A vision appeared unto me] Whilst waking, likely: and for further explication
of the former vision, chap. 7. whereof because Daniel made so good use,
ampliorem gratiam accipit, says Oecolampadius, he now receives further grace.

Ver. 2. I saw in a vision] God revealed himself to men waking in vision (as
well as in dreams, Heb. 1.1.) wherein the Prophets saw things actually done,
which hereby they knew were to be done, 1 King. 22.17.

Anthenaeu^.
I was at Shushan] Which signifies a lilly, so it was called for the
pleasantness of the place: now it is called Valdac, of the poverty of the
place. Here it was that Alexander found fifty thousand talents of gold, besides
silver great store. It was once the seat-royal of the Kings of Persia, and gave
name to the whole Province Susi^nt. See Neh. 1.1. Esth. 1.1.

And I was by the river of Vlai] Called by Heathen Authors Eulaeus; but better
(...). Plin. l. 6. c. 27.
It compassed the Temple of Diaena at Shusan round, and (as some say) the whole
City. Pliny says, that the waters of this river were highly esteemed, so that
the Persian Kings drank thereof.

Ver. 3. There stood before the river a ram] With a golden fleece, and full of
flesh. This was the Persian Monarch: who is also said to stand, because of his
slow motion, and sluggish disposition; and before the river, because the
Persians ruled over many Nations, signified by waters, Rev. 17. A ram stalketh
stately before the flock, as a Captain; but they are only sheep which he
leads: let a dog but lay his nose over the hedge, and away they run all: so
did the sheepish cowardly Persians before Alexander.

Which had two hornes] These were the States of Media and Persia.

But one was higher then the other] i. e. The Persians at length became higher
then the Medes, and overtopped them.

And the higher came up last] Cyrus after Darius, uniting both nations into one
Monarchy.

Ver. 4. And I saw the ram pushing Westward, etc.] Hereby are set forth the
Persian wars; and especially those waged by Cyrus, who subdued many nations,
and grew very great, as did also his successors, but especially Darius
Hystaspes.

Neither was there any] None could resist his rage, nor escape his reach.

Ver. 5. And as I was considering] Such as are studious, shall see more of Gods
mind, Rev. 1.12.

Behold an hee-goat came from the West] i. e. From Greece and Macedon, West
from Persia. This goat, more nimble, swift and potent then a ram, was the
Grecian Monarch Alexander, who came capering and praunsing over the whole
earth, that is, over the whole Persian Monarchy, and more; setting fire on all
Asia, as the Magicians foretold he would do, as being born the same day that
Diana's Temple at Ephesus was set on fire. This Alexander the great was Dux
gregis ipse caper: of all whose victories we have here a notable abridgment,
Joseph.
more like an history then a Prophecy. The High Priest Jaddus is said to have
showed it to Alexander in his march against Darius Codomannus the last King of
Persia: who thereby much encouraged in his enterprise, bestowed upon the Jews
many favors, and freedoms.

And touched not the ground] Alexander was notably nimble, thinking nothing too
hard for him to atcheive, and sl^pping no opportunity. Apelles picture^
Alexander with a thunderbolt: signifying his great swiftness in his exploits.
When he was to encounter with Darius his army at Graxicum, Parmenio persuaded
him to stay till the next day: but he would not: neither was success wanting.
With wonderful celerity, in six years space, he overrun so great a part of the
habitable world, that he might rather seem to fly then to march.

And the goat had a notable horn between his eyes] This notable horn is
Alexander founder of the Grecian Monarchy. The Macedonians were at that time
called Aegeades, i. e. goatish (the occasion whereof see in Justin, lib. 7.)
Sic Darius dicitur Aiil. i. e. Aries Persiae Hebraice and Chaldaice Elam.
Alexander is here fitly called hircus caprarum, an hee-goat, or the horn of
sight, between the eyes of that goat. A sit emblem of a good Prince, whose
virtues are conspicuous as an hornis, who defends his people and offends
their enemies: who like this horn rising up betwixt the eyes, is circumspect
and well-advised, doing all with counsel, Prove. 24.6. Alexander had his father
Philips counselors about him, who were excellent in wisdom, beyond any that
came after them in the same Empire.

Ver. 6. And he came to the ram that had two hornes] He came: this may betoken
the slower preparations of Philip King of Macedony.

And ran unto him] Alexander did, by quick and furious marches: Nil actum
credens dum quid superesset agendum
Fertur atrox. -- De Cas. Lucan^



Ver. 7. And I saw him come close unto the ram] Who stood for a while in his
stoutnesse, and brought several huge armies into the field; not less then
fifteen hundred thousand: but all would not do. The fairest states are subject
to change in their greatest flourish, Ezekiel. 31.18.

In so magna ruunt: laetis hunc numinarebus
Crescendi posuere modum. -- Lucan.

And he was moved with choler against him] Neither would he be pacified with
promise of great gifts, and of part of the Kingdom, and the marriage of his
daughter.

And smot the ram] By overthrowing the Persian armies in three main battles at
Granicum, ^t Issum, and at Arbela, (...). Strabo.
not far from which is the mountain Nicatorium so called by Alexander as a
constant trophie of that famous victory.

And there was no power in the ram to stand before him] In that last battle at
Arbela, the whole power of Persia was overturned: and Darius Codomannus was
slain by Bessus one of his own Captains. It is observed, that great Kingdoms
often fall and are destroyed under such Kings as are of the same name with the
founders thereof: Darius here for instance: so Philip of Macedon, and Philip
the Father of Perseus the last King of that Country: so Constantine the Great,
and Constantine Palaologus: Augustus and Augustulus, etc.

And stamped upon him] i. e. After full conquest, he crowed, insulted,
triumphed: at the instance of his concubine Thais, he caused the most goodly
palace in the world at Persopolis, to be set on fire.

Ver. 8. Therefore the hee-goat waxed very great] The Greeks became Lords of
all: their Emperor was and re and nomine magnus, not called great for naught:
he began to take upon him as a god, and would be counted son to Jupiter Hammon.
He called for divine honors, and slew Callisthenes (his Tutor) because he
would not yield thereto. Alexander orbi magnus, Alexandro orbis angustus est.
Seneca. Athenaeus.
This intolerable pride was a sure forerunner of his fall: his heart swelled so
fast that the case could no longer hold it, but cracked. The world was a cage
or little-ease to him: therefore is he soon turned out of it: and of heavens
darling, made the disdain of all.

And when he was strong, the great horn was broken] Surfeiting and drunkenness
cast him into a fever, whereof he dyed in the flower of his youth, and height
of his enjoyments: such is the instability of earthly Monarchs worldly glory.
Magna repent ruunt, summacadunt subito. Being not unlike those Flores horae
very pleasant for the time, but dead and withdrawn in a trice. The vanities of
this life, says one, at our most need, and when we least think, Turk. hist.
331.
quite forsake us: leaving even them that most sought after them, and most
abounded in them, shrouded oft-times in the sheet of dishonor and shame. Great
Alexander lay unburied thirty days together: his conquests above ground
purchased him no title for habitation under ground. The like befell Pompey the
Great, out William the Conqueror, and other like.

And for it came up four notable horns] i. e. Four potent Princes, out of the
shipwreck of his Empire: which four, in process of time, came to two, Dan.
11.5, 6.

Ver. 9. And out of one of them] Out of the posterity of Seleucus King of Syria.

Came forth a little horn] This was Antiochus surnamed Epiphanes, Illustrious:
Polybius called him Epimanes, the mad man. He is here called a little horn,
because he was vile and base from the very first to the last of him. Indeed he
was born a Prince, but without a Kingdom: a mere Nullatenensis, till he became
an V;surper. He was sent for an hostage to Rome by his father Antiochus Magnus,
whom the Romans had ^ndgeld into a treaty: taking away from him the best part
of his Kingdom. After his fathers death, he stole away from Rome and seized
upon the Kingdom of Syria, casting out of it his nephew Demetrius who was the
right heir. Afterward, he got into his hands also the Kingdom of Egypt, under
color of Protector to his young nephew Pt^lomy Philometor. And being
therehence discharged by the Romans, and made to answer Parebo, I will be gone,
he went thence in a rage, and like a mad man recked his teem, as we say, upon
the poor Jews, playing the devil amongst them.

Toward the South] i. e. Egypt.

And toward the East] Persia, which he also conquered.

And toward the pleasant land] i. e. Judaea, called here Decus, Capreolus, the
delectable and desirable Country, by reason of its great prerogatives. So
Ezekiel. 20.6. Psalm. 48.2. See there.

Ver. 10. And it waxed great even to the host of heaven] Or, against the host
of heaven, so the Church militant is called. The Saints are the worlds great
luminaries* yea the only earthly Angels; although wicked people count and call
them the filth and off couring of all things.

And of the stars] Such as shone in the light of holy doctrine, Rev. 1.10.
Persecutors spite is specially against such, Zach. 13.7.

Ver. 11. Yea he magnified himself] extolled, or extended himself, such was his
insolency.

Even to (or against) the Prince of the host] Christ the Captain of his peoples
sufferings, and of their salvation, Heb. 2.10. he bare an hostile spirit
against the God of the Jews (such an hell-bound hardly ever was born) casting
him out of his place, and setting up in his room J^piter Olympius, that is, the
devil: he defaced also and burnt up the books of the Law, all he could light
on, 1 Mac. 1.59.

Ver. 12. And an host was given him] Or, the host was given over, for the
trasgression against the daily sacrifice: The Jews were grown to a great
height of profanesse, even in Malachies days, as is to be seen, chap. 1, 2, 3.
And by this time doubtless, they were become much worse. God therefore, for
punishment, turned this Tiger loose upon them.

And it cast down the truth to the ground] The doctrine of truth, together with
the Professors thereof. The like whereunto is still done by the Romish
Antichrist, to whom some apply all this part of the Chapter, as the proper and
genuine sense of the Text. See the visions and Prophecies of Daniel expounded
by Mr. Thomas Parker of Newbery in New England, page 43, 44, etc.

And it practiced and prospered] Wicked practices against Religion may prosper
for the time, Acts 12.1, 2, 3. It was therefore no good argument that the Earl
of Darby used to George Marsh Martyr, telling him that the Dukes of
Northumberland and of Suffolk, and other of the new persuasion had ill luck:
Act. and Mon. 1421.
and were either put to death, or in danger so to be. And again, he rehearsed
unto him the good hap of the Queens highness, and of those that held with her:
and said, that the Duke of Northumberland confessed so plainly.

Ver. 13. And I heard one Saint speaking] i. e. One holy Angel: for they are
sollicitous of Gods glory, and sensible of the Saints sufferings, whereof they
would have a speedy end: and should not we be so too, weeping with those that
weep, and rejoicing with those that rejoice?

And another Saint said unto that certain Saint which spake] Anonymo illi qui
loquebatur, so Piscator rendereth it: others To the wonderful Numberer who
spoke, i. e. who commanded Gabriel to declare the vision to Daniel, ver. 16.
This was Jesus Christ, the Wisdom and Word of God: He who knows all the
secrets of his Father as perfectly as if they were numbered before him.

How long shall be the vision] It appears then that Angels know not all
secrets, but that their knowledge is limited: they know not so much, but they
would know more, Ephesians. 3.10. 1 Pet. 1.12.

Concerning the daily sacrifice] The loss whereof was a just matter of
lamentation to godly minds. See Zeph. 3.18.

And the transgression of desolation] Transgression is a land-desolating evil,
Lam. 1.9.

And the host to be trodden under foot] i. e. The Professors of the truth were
over-turned: some by persuasion, others by persecution.

Ver. 14. And he (...) unto me] Not to the Angel, but to me, who should have
proposed the question: the holy Angel did it for me.

Unto two thousand and three hundred dayes] Heb. to the evening and morning two
thousand and three hundred, i. e. to so many natural days consisting of 24.
hours, which in all do make up six years, three months, and twenty days. This
point of skill Daniel here learneth of the Wonderful Numberer Christ, who has
all secrets in numerato, and will put a timely period to his peoples
afflictions. Not full seven years did they suffer here, much less Seventy, as
once in Babylon. How he moderateth the matter, See on Rev. 2.10. How this
Prophecy was fulfilled, See 1 Maccab. 1.12, 13, 14. 2 Maccab. 4.12, etc. with 1
Maccab. 4.52.

Ver. 15. And it came to pass when I, even I Daniel] Not another, as that
black-mouthed Porphyry slanderously affirmed, that not the Prophet Daniel saw,
Porphyr. cont. Christian. l. 12. Hieronym.
and uttered these Prophecyes so long before they fell out, but another who
lived after the reign of Antiochus wrote an history of things past, and entitled
it falsely to Daniel, as a prophecy of things to come. O^durum!

Then behold there stood before me] They who seriously and sedulously seek
after divine knowledge, shall find means to attain unto it. Rev. 13.1.

Ver. 16. And I heard a man's voice] This was the Man Christ Jesus the great
Doctor of his Church, and Commander of Angels, viro similis, quia incarnandus.

Make this man to understand] Angels and Ministers make men to understand
secrets, give the knowledge of salvation to Gods people, Luke 1.77. not by
infusion but by instruction.

Ver. 17. So he came near where I stood] Let our obedience be like that of the
Angels, prompt and present.

I was afraid] Through humane frailty and conscience of sin.

Understand O son of man] Ezekeil and Daniel only of all the Prophets, are so
called: happily lest they should be exalted above measure with the abundance of
the revelations.

For at the time of the end shall be the vision] i. e. That this vision of the
daily sacrifice intermitted for so many years, and the abomination of
desolation (the picture of Jupiter Olympius) set up in the Sanctuary, shall be
toward the end of the Greek Monarchy.

Ver. 18. I was in a deep sleep] In a Prophetical ecstasy, or Trance, wherein
I was laid up fast, losing, for the time, all manner of action and motion, that
my soul might be more free to receive divine revelations.

But he touched me and set me upright] Heb. made me stand upon my standing, who
was yet all the while in a deep sleep. The touch of the Angel kept him from
reeling to and fro; and made him stand firmly.

Ver. 19. In the last end of the indignation] In the final end of the
Greek-persecution, which shall not pass the Lords appointed time.

Ver. 20. The ram which thou sawest] See ver. 3.

Ver. 21. And the rough-goat] Hircus, hircus. See on ver. 5.

Ver. 22. Now that being broken] See ver. 8.

Ver. 23. And in the latter time of their kingdom] In the 137 year of the
Greek-Monarchy.

When the transgressors are come to the full] Heb. are accomplished: when the
Jews are grown stark naught. This was the reason why God set over them such a
breathing-devil, as was Antiochus; for a punishment of their open impiety and
formal Apostasy. When Phocas the traitor had slain Mauricius the Emperor,
there was an honest poor man, says Cedrenus, who was earnest with God in
prayer to know why that wicked man so prospered in his design: To whom answer
was returned by a voice, that there could not be a worse man found: and that
the sins of Christians and of Constantinople did require it.

A King of fierce countenance] Heb. hard of face, that is brazen-faced,
impudent, and withal, Acutus and astutus.
acute, subtle, and of a deep reach. Antiochus, Julian, the Duke of Alva were
such.

Ver. 24. Not by his own power] but by his policy-rather, and by the persidy of
others, Dan. 11.23.

And he shall destroy wonderfully] Mirificentissime. In three days he slew
fourscore thousand in Jerusalem: forty thousand were put in bands, and as many
sold.

And shall prosper and practise] Shall do whatsoever he lists: as if he were
some petty-god within himself.

And shall destroy the mighty] So the Jews are called because stout and
undaunted, and whiles they kept close to God, insuperable: as when otherwise,
weak as water. See Hos. 13, 1. with the Note.

And the holy people] Federally holy, at least.

Vers^tulus and varsatilis.
Ver. 25. And through his policy also] Incumbens intelligentiae suae, leaning on
his own wit, and that great Elixar called Reasan of State, which can make, for
a need, Candida de nigris, and de candentibus atra.

And by peace shall destroy many] Undo them by promises of prosperity and
preferment, which are dangerous baits, Mark 4.9. they were sawn asunder, they
were tempted, Heb. 11.37. Julian the Apostate went this way to work: and
prevailed to make many Apostates.

He shall also stand up against the Prince of Princes] God almighty; by
destroying the daily sacrifices, and by setting up idolatry in the Temple.

T^tro morbo.
But he shall be broken without hand] i. e. By the visible vengeance of God
(See 1 Maccab. 6.8, etc. and 2 Maccab. 9.5, etc.) who laid upon him a loathsome
disease, and wrapped him up in the sheet of shame.

Ver. 26. And the vision of the evening] See ver. 14. Lyra by the the morning
would have understood the time of Antiochus; by the evening the time of
Antichrist, who was prefigured by Antiochus.

Is true] Heb, truth, and so plain, that I need say no more of it.

Wherefore shut thou up the vision] Keep it to thy self in sacred silence: and
reserve it in writing, for posterity: See chap. 12.49. Isa. 8.16.

For it shall be for many dayes] i. e. For about 300 years hence. The Lord
would have visions concealed, till toward the accomplishment.

Ver. 27. And I Daniel fainted and was sick] So deeply affected was he with the
vision, and should we be with the word preached: it should work upon our very
bowels, and go to the hearts of us, Jer. 4.19. Acts 2.37.

Afterward I rose up and did the Kings businesse] Viz. King Belshazzar's, with
whom, though he was out of grace, yet not out of office under him, and will not
therefore be indiligent. Malo mihi male esse, quam molliter. Seneca.
Let us not neglect the work of the Lord, though less able to perform it. A
sick child's service is double-accepted.

But none understood it] Daniel dissembled his sorrow for Sion before scorners,
Esth. 5.1. Taciturnity is no contemptible virtue.

CHAP. IX.
Ver. 1. IN the first year of Darius] i. e. Of Darius Priscus, who, together
with Cyrus the Persian, took Babylon, and with it the kingdom or Monarchy of
the Chaldaeans, chap. 5.31. by the consent of Cyrus who married his daughter,
and had the Kingdom of Media with her for a dowry, after Darius his death,
Cyrop. l. 8.
as Xenophon testifies.

The son of Ahasuerus] Called Cyaxares by the Greek historians. Both these
names signify a great Prince, an Emperor: like as now we say the Great Turk,
the Great Cham of Cataia, etc.

Ver. 2. I Daniel understood by books] Consideravi in libris: Daniel was a
great student in the Scriptures, and well knew that there was no readier way to
speed in heaven, then by putting the Promises in suit. The like also was done
by Jacob. Gen 32.9, 12. (See the Notes there) by David, 2 Samuel 7.19, 25. by
Eliah, 1 Kings 18.42. and others. If we speak in our Prayers no otherwise then
the Lord does in his Promises, there shall be a sweet consort of voice, begun
by the Spirit in the Promises, seconded in the spirit of faith by the Saints
prayers, and answered by God in his gracious Providence. Daniel here took this
course; and had not only what he begged, but a revelation concerning the Lord
Christ, beyond expectation.

Ver. 3. And I set my face unto the Lord God] i. e. Toward the habitation of
his holiness at Jerusalem, but especially in heaven: I looked up unto the
hills, (...).
from whence I looked for help. This, Daniel did daily, chap. 6.10. but now
with more then ordinary intention and devotion, he presents an inwrought
prayer (as St. James calls it, chap. 5.16.) edged with fasting, and downright
humiliation. He doubts not thereby to set God to work, as David did, Psalm.
119.126. He knew that a long look toward God speedeth, Psalm. 34.4, 5. Jon. 2.4,
7. how much more an extraordinary prayer?

Ver. 4. And I prayed unto the Lord my God, and made my confession] The Saints
themselves, when they sin against God, are suspended from the Covenant: hence
it is their custom when they seek the Lord for any special mercy, to begin with
humble confessions, as does David, Ezra, Daniel.

O Lord the great and dreadful God] It is good in the beginnings of our
prayers, to propound God to our selves under such attributes and spiritual
notions, as wherein we may see the very thing we pray for. Haec est ars orandi
and mendicandi.

Ver. 5. We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly,
and have rebelled] Mark how full in the mouth the good Prophet is, and how he
exaggerateth, confessing against himself and his people, laying on load. Good
men extenuate not their offenses: every sin swells as a toad in their eyes.

Ver. 6. Neither have we hearkened] Sins of omission are in a special manner to
be lamented in prayer, Jer. 9.1, 10, 13. for as omission of diet breeds
diseases: so, of duties.

Ver. 7. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee] Let God be justified in
all his Judgments: say of him as Deuteronomy. 32.4.

Deo da claritatem, tibi humilitatem. Aug.
A God of truth, and without iniquity: just and right is He. But unto us
confusion of faces] Whilst we look upon flagitia aeque ac flagella nostra, our
sins and miseries, we cannot but blush and bleed before thee.

Ver. 8. O Lord, to us belongs confusion of face] The same again is
acknowledged, not without a special Emphasis. q. d. We are extremely abashed,
and abased to the utmost.

Ver. 9 To the Lord our God belong mercyes and forgivenesses] Matchless
mercyes, pardons ready prepared for poor penitents, not for proud Pharisees,
such as Bellarmine was, if at least it be true that is reported of him, that
when the Priest came to absolve him, he could not remember any particular sin
to confess, till he went back in his thoughts as far as his youth. Vae hominum
vitae quantumvis laudabili, says an Ancient: Woe to the best, unless they may
find mercy with the Lord. And Fuligat tells us, that Bellarmine, when he came
to dye indeed, begged of God to reckon him among his Saints, non aestimator
meriti, sed veniae largitor, not weighing his merits, but pardoning his
offenses.

Ver. 10. Neither have we obeyed] See on ver. 6.

The voice of the Lord our God] It is the Lord who speaks in, and by his
Ministers. This, because men either know not or weigh not, they run another way
when God calls to them, as young Samuel did, 1 Samuel 3.5.

Ver. 11. Yea all Israel] There is a general defection, the whole body of
Israel has deeply revolted: a rabble of rebels have taken up arms against
heaven, even a Giantlike generation.

Therefore the curse] Confirmed by oath, by adjuration, and execration.

Is poured upon us] As by whole paileful^: the Vulgar has it stillavit super
not maledictio, the curse has dropped upon us. There may be much poison in
little drops howsoever.

Because we have sinned against him] This he has never done with, but still
holds his finger on this sore, as his greatest grievance.

Ver. 12. And he has confirmed his words] What he had spoken with his mouth,
he has fulfilled with his hand. There is an infallibility, as in Gods
Promises, so in his Menaces.

And against our Judges] By whose remissness all was out of order: hence they
smarted before and above others.

For under the whole heaven] This verse is an Abridgment of Jeremy's
Lamentations.

Ver. 13. All this evil is come upon us] But unless God set in and sanctify,
his hammers (afflictions) do but beat upon cold iron, Jer. 2.30.

Yet made we not our prayer] Little or no right prayer was made by the Captives
all those Seventy years (and yet they had their set yearly fasts, Zach. 7.)
because they failed therein both quoad fontem and quoad finem. See the Notes of
Zach. 7.5.

That we might turn from our iniquities] This they had no mind to, therefore
they lost those prayers they made; they fa^ted to themselves and not to God,
Zach. 7.5. See on Joh. 3.10.

And understand thy truth] Those that turn from their iniquities, shall know
more of Gods truth. The pure in heart shall see God, Mat. 5.3.

Ver. 14. Therefore has the Lord watched upon the evil] To bring it at the
just time, and when it might do us most mischief; but all in a way of Justice,
Isa. 31.2. as Daniel acknowledges in the next words.

For the Lord our God is righteous] See ver. 7.

For we obeyed not his voice] Neither that of his word, nor that of his rod,
Jer. 31.19. M^c. 6.9. Isa. 9.13, 14.

Ver. 15. And now O Lord God, that have brought thy people] Thanksgiving is an
artificial begging: and every former mercy is a pledge of a future, 2 Chronicles.
20.^0.7.12.

And have gotten thee renown] Heb. made thee a name, and yet a greater name
have promised to make thee by bringing us back from Babylon, Jer. 16.15.

We have sinned, we have done wickedly] Such as desire mercies, must first deny
their worthiness of them, 2 Samuel 5.18. confessing their sins with utmost
aggravation.

Ver. 16. O Lord, according to all thy righteousnesse] Not that of equity, but
the other of fidelity, 1 John 1.9.

Thy holy mountain] So Jerusalem is called, because dedicated to the Holy One;
who also chose it for the seat of his royal resiance, the place of his holy
Oracle.

Thy people are a reproach] And this reflecteth upon thee, as needs it must,
since they do quarter arms with thee.

Ver. 17. Now therefore O our God] Since thou have shown us our sins, and seen
our reproach, whereof we are sure thou art very sensible, Psalm. 79.4.

Hear the prayer of thy servant] Who assumeth the boldness to plead his
interest in thee, and his relation to thee.

And his supplications] Which are nothing else but prayers redoubled and
reenforced, as Genesis 32.11. Esaias 63.16.

And cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary] Do it, oh do it now: for the
time to favor Zion, yea the set time is come. And this I can tell, because thy
servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust thereof, Psalm.
102.13, 14. See the Notes there. That whole Psalm, being a prayer for the
afflicted, may seem to have been made by this Prophet Daniel.

For the Lords sake] i. e. For thine own sake, or for thy Son Christ's sake, the
Mediator and Advocate of his people: for so he was in the Old Testament also,
Heb. 9.15. like as still he is the High Priest of the New: And as whilst the
people were praying without, the Priest was offering incense within the Temple,
Luke 1.9, 10. So is Christ interceding for us whilst we are praying.
Whatsoever therefore ye do in word or deed, do all in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him, Colos. 3.17.

Ver. 18. O my God, incline thine ear and hear, open thine eyes and behold,
etc.] Thus growing to a conclusion of his prayer he prays more earnestly: he
stretches out his petitions as it were upon the tenters with those good souls,
Act. 12.5. (...).
he stirs up himself and takes better hold, as resolved not to let him go
without the blessing. The like, before him, did good Hezekiah, with whom he
concurreth in the very letter of his request, Esa. 37.17. See the Notes there.

For our own righteousnesses] Which are nothing better then a rotten rag, a
menstruous clout, such as a man would not dain to take up or touch.

But for thy great mercies] Through the merits of the promised Messiah.

Ver. 19. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive] This was to pray, yea this was to strive
in prayer, Luke 13.22. to strive, as those of old did, in the Grecian
exercises; some whereof were with fists and batts: to strive and struggle, even
to an agony, as the Greek word signifies, and as the Lord Christ did, (...).
Luke 22.44.
who being in an agony prayed yet the more earnestly: he sweat and sweltered
out, as it were, his soul, through his body in prayer. Be we now followers
herein of Christ as dear children, and of Daniel here who is a worthy pattern
to pray by. Cold suitours (who want the aspiration of the spirit to pronounce
Shibboleth) do but beg a denial.

O Lord hearken and do, defer not] This is coelum tundere, preces fundere,
Tertul.
misericordiam extorquere, as those Primitive Christians did; to bounce at
heaven gates, Beneficium se putabit accepisse, cum rogaretur ignoscere. Ambr.
orat. de exit. Theod.
to tug hard with God, to wring the blessing out of his hands, who looks to be
importuned; and counts it for a kindness to be asked forgiveness, as Ambrose
says of Theodosius the Emperor.

Ver. 20. And whilst I was speaking and praying] When (happily) I had now new
done: and yet not so done, but that my heart was yet lifting and lifting; as a
bell-rope is often hoysing up, after men have done ringing the bell.

And confessing my sins] So precious a Saint was not without his sins. These
therefore he confesses that he might be the fitter to beg mercy for the
Church; having first made his own peace with God, and so in case to lift up
pure hands in prayer. The like does David, Psalm. 25, and 51.

For the holy mountain of my God.] This was his main request, and to God
mavelous acceptable. Surely if the Lord saw us ( Daniel like) studying his
share more then our own, we might have what we would, and God even think
himself beholding to us, as one phraseth it.

Ver. 21. Yea whilst I was speaking in prayer] This he recognizeth and
celebrateth, as a sweet and singular mercy. God sometimes hears his people
before they pray, Isa. 65.24. Psalm. 21.3. ( David was sure up betimes when he
prevented the Lord with his prayer, Psalm. 88.13. and 119.147.) somet^mes whiles
they are praying (as he did those, Act. 4.31. and 12.5, 17. and Luther who came
leaping out of his study* where he had been praying, with Vicimus, Vicimus in
his mouth: that is, we have gained the day, got the conquest) but if not so,
yet certainly when they have now prayed, Isa. 30.12. Jon. 2.1. Jer. 33.3. Mat.
7.7. Luther affirms that he often gat more spiritual light by some one ardent
prayer, Ipse ego in una aliqua ardenti oratione meae plura saepe didici quam ex
multorum librorum lectione aut accuratissima meditatione consequ^ potuissem.
Tom. 1. According to the account of Astronomers it must be ab^ve 160. millions
of miles from heaven to earth. All this space the Angel came flying to Daniel
in a little time.
then ever he could do by the reading of many books, or by most accurate
meditation thereupon:

Even the man Gabriel] i. e. The Angel Gabriel in man's shape.

Whom I had seen in the vision] And whom I had good cause to remember the
longest day of my life, for the good offices he had done me formerly.

Being caused to fly swiftly] Heb. with weariness of flight. Not that the
Angels flee, as fouls (though a certain Friar ( a liar certainly) undertook to
show to the people a feather of the Angel Gabriels wings) or that they are ever
wearied with speeding Gods commissions and commands, for the Churches good: Sed
datur hic assumptae speciei, but these things are spoken to our apprehension.

Touched me] With a familiar touch, in token of encouragement: prensando
mimirum, ut solent qui contact^^ familiari promptam benevelam que mentem
indicant.

About the time of the evening oblation] When the joint prayers of Gods people
were wont to come up before him, quasi manu facta: and Daniel hops they may
do so again. Qui nihil sperat, nihil orat.

Ver. 22. And he informed me and talked with me] Rather then the Saints shall
want information and comfort, God will spare one out of his own train to do
them any good office, Luke 1.19. Gal. 3.19. neither will the greatest Angel in
heaven grudge to serve them.

I am now come forth to give thee skill] Not by infusion (for so the Holy Ghost
only) but by instruction, as was before noted. It is well observed by one, that
this following Oration of the Angel contains an Abridgment of the New
Testament, and a light to the Old: for confirming Daniel, is touching the
ensuing deliverance out of Babylons captivity, he further advertiseth and
assures him of the spiritual deliverance which Christ shall effect by his
Gospel at his coming: and therefore, describing the times most accurately, he
plainly sets forth the salvation of the Church Christian, and the
destruction of the stubborn and rebellious Jews, who judge themselves unworthy
of eternal life.

Ver. 23. At the beginning of thy supplications] Thy prayer was scarce in thy
mouth, ere it was in Gods ear. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous and
his ears are open unto their cry, Psalm. 34.15. See the Note. He heard at the
very first, but answered not till Daniel had tugged with him. See Jam. 5.16, 17.

For th^^ art greatly beloved] Kimchi reads it, a man of measures, a man
every inch of thee. But the word is not Hamiddoth, but Chamudoth, a man of
desires, a favorite in heaven, Rerum expetendarum cupid^^. Vatab. De
deratissim^^ es. Trem.
because desirous of things truly desirable. Christ is said to be totus totus
desiderabili^ lovely all over, Can. 5.16. The Saints are also so in their
measure, as on the contrary the wicked are not desired, Zeph. 2.1. but loathed
and abhorred, Prove. 13.5.

Therefore understand the matter] Good men shall know Gods secrets, Genesis 18.17,
19. Psalm. 25.14.

Ver. 24. Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people] i. e. Seventy weeks of
years: ten Jubilees, which make up four hundred and ninety years. Thus the very
time is here particularly foretold, when the Messiah should be revealed, and
put to death. The like hereunto is not to be found in any other of the
Prophets, as Hierom well observes. This therefore is a noble Prophecy: and
many great wits have been exercised about it. Cornelius a L^pide speaks of
one learned Gentleman, who ran out of his wits, after many years study upon it.
The Doctors are much divided about the beginning and ending of these seventy
weeks. I choose rather thus to compute then to dispute.
From the outgoing of the word, ver. 25. seems to me to fix the beginning of
these weeks on Cyrus his decree concerning the holy City and the Temple to be
reedified. The end and period of them must be at the death of Christ; though
some will have it at the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans. It is well
observed by the learned, that the Jews, after their seventy years captivity,
have seven seventies of years granted, for the enjoying of their own country
(Gods mercies bear the same proportion to his punishments which seven (a
complete number) have to an unit) besides the mercy of mercies, the grace of
the Messiah.

Upon thy people] Of whose welfare thou art so sollicitous and inquisitive.

To finish the transgression] Transgressionem illam, that great tran^gression
of our first Parents in Paradise, that whereby sin entered into the world, and
death by sin, Romans 5.12. Now Christ by his death took away the power, and
destroyed the dominion of all sin, Romans 6.11, 12.

And to make an end of sins] Heb. To seal up sins that they come not into Gods
sight against us, ever to be charged upon us. A Metaphor say some, from the
Jews manner of writing in Rolls, which being wrapped up and sealed on the
backside, all the writing was covered.

And to make reconciliation for iniquity] viz. By the expiatory and
propitiatory sacrifice of himself for his Elect; whereby the divine Justice is
fully satisfied.

And to bring in everlasting righteousnesse] Those righteousnesses of the
Saints, Rev. 19 8. both Imputed and Imparted Righteousness, called here
everlasting, as that which shall make the Saints accepted of God for ever,
never can be lost as Adams was.

And to seal up the vision and prophecy] i. e. To fulfill all the Prophetical
predictions concerning the life and death of the Lord Christ.

And to anoint the most holy] This was done when Christ was baptized, say some:
but others better, when he ascended into heaven, consecrating it to the service
of God therein to be performed by the Elect, throughout all eternity: like as
Moses once consecrated the most holy place to the ceremonial service there to
be performed by the High Priest.

Ver. 25. Know therefore and understand] See on ver. 24. Here the Angel
brancheth the whole seventy sevens into three heads, or into three distinct
periods of time.

Shall be seven weeks] Which make forty nine years: these the Angel purposely
speaks of a part; because they chiefly concerned the reparation of the City
made under the Persian Monarchy. Within this first seven weeks or forty nine
years, the street of Jerusalem was rebuilt, and the wall with trench, though
the times proved troublous* and full of straits.

And threescore and two weeks] Which make four hundred thirty four years; the
events of which are mentioned, ver. 26. as those of the seven years following,
ver. 27. out of which it might easily be supplied, and is therefore here
omitted by the Angel.

Ver. 26. And after threescore and two weeks] See on ver. 25. within these
threescore and two weeks befell the Jews many memorable things, as may be seen
chap. 8 and 11.

Shall Messiah be cut off] Excindetur, not abscindetur, cut off, that is by
wicked hands crucified and slain, Act. 2.23. not only cast out of the synagogue
and excommunicated, as that malicious Rabbine read and sensed this text. Others
of the Jew Doctors by the evidence of these words have been compelled to
confess that Messiah is already come: and that he was that Jesus whom their
forefathers crucified. See for this R. Samuels Epistle to R. Is^ak set down at
large by Dionys. Carthus. in his Commentary on this text. See also R. Osea his
lamentation for this inexpiable guilt of the Jewish Nation, recorded by
Galatinus, lib. 4. c. 18. Polanus reports, that he living sometime in Moravia
where he used the help of some Rabbines for the understanding of the Hebrew
tongue, heard them say that for this ninth chapters sake, they acknowledged not
Daniel to be authentical, and therefore read it not amongst the people, lest
hereby they should be turned to Christ, finding out how they had been by them
deceived.

But not for himself] i. e. Not for any fault of his, nor yet for any good to
himself, but to mankind: whence some render these words, There being nothing
therein for him: Et non sibi vel nihil ei.
others, when he shall have nothing, i. e. nothing more to do at Jerusalem, but
shall utterly relinquish it and call his people out of it to Pella, etc.

And the people of the Prince that shall come] i. e. Titus his soldiers, whose
rage he himself could not repress, Joseph.
but they would needs burn down the Temple, which he would fain have preserved,
as one of the worlds wonders. Messiah the Prince had a hand in it doubtless;
whence also those Roman forces are called his armies, Mat. 22.7.

Shall destroy the City] That slaughterhouse of the Saints.

And the Sanctuary] That den of thieves.

And the end thereof shall be with a flood] i. e. Their extirpation shall be
sudden, universal, irresistible, as was Noah's flood. How this was fulfilled,
see Josephus, Hegesippus, Eusebius, etc.

And unto the end of the war, etc.] The Romans shall have somewhat to do; but
after tedious wars, they shall effect it.

Ver. 27. And he (Messiah) shall confirm the Covenant] See ver. 24. with many]
Heb. with his Rabbines, that is, with his Elect. Confer Esa. 53.11. Job 32.9.
Jer. 41.2.

For one week] i. e. In the last seven years of the seventy.

And in the midst of the week] i. e. In three years and a half, he shall by his
passion, disannul the Jewish sacrifices and services.

And for the overspreading (or wing) or abominations] i. e. For the abominable
outrages committed by the seditious Jews those zelots (as they called
themselves) who filled the Temple with dead bodies. Others, from Mat. 24.15.16.
with Luke 20.20, 21. think the Romans to be meant who set up their Eagles
(their ensigns) in the Temple, together with the images first of Caligula, and
then of Titus their Emperors.

Perpetua and consummatiss. consumptione urgentur.
Even until the consummation] Until the end, and to the utmost. The Jews have
often attempted, but could never yet recover their country, nor are like to do.

Shall be poured] As if the windows of heaven were opened, as once they were at
the flood: See ver. 26.

CHAP. X.
Ver. 1. IN the third year of Cyrus King of Persia] This whole chapter is but a
Preface to the ensuing Prophecy, or visional prediction, recorded in the two
following chapters. It begins at the third year of Cyrus his Empire: and
reaches till the time of the Jews rising from the dust of their dispersion,
say some, to the end of the world, say others, with whom I concur.

A thing was revealed unto Daniel] Who now must needs be very ancient: yet at
those years (an hundred or more) gave himself to understand and search into
divine secrets. The more any one knows of God, the more he would still know.
Moses newly come from the Mount, cries to God to show him his glory. David,
that gulf of holy learning, is often at his Teach me thy statutes, etc.

And the thing was true] i. e. Plain and proper: not as former visions,
figurative and obscure.

But the time appointed was long] sc. Till all be fulfilled, which will not be
till the last judgment.

And he understood the thing] And so was the better able to propound it to the
Church. For what a man does not himself understand, he cannot well and fitly
deliver to others.

And had understood the vision] sc. Given unto him: for unless God give us
both Sight and Light, we perceive not heavenly doctrine, neither indeed can do.

Ver. 2. In those days I Daniel was mourning] Though a great man still, and in
great account, yet not now so great at Court, as to hinder and defeat the
malicious designs of Cambyses his Counselors; who being bribed by the Jews
Adversaries, put a stop to the Temple-work at Jerusalem, Ezra. 4.1, 2, 3, 4.
This disaster cast good Daniel into his dumps, so that he fasted three full
weeks (a tanto and tali, Abstinet ab omni cura cultuque corporis, sua sponte.
See the like, 1 Samuel 31.13.
sed non a toto) and longer might, had not the Angel taken him off by an answer
of peace, ver. 12.

Three full weeks] Heb. weeks of days, to distinguish them from those Seventy
weeks of years, chap. 9.24.

Ver. 3. I ate no pleasant bread] Bread he ate (for Animantis cujusque vita in
fuga est, life will fail if not maintained by food) but course bread, panem
cibarium, atrum, and siligineum, and no more of that neither, then needs must.
He voluntarily abridged himself of lawful delights, macerating and mortifying
his flesh, that he might communicate with his poor afflicted brethren, and pray
the harder for them. Fasting enflameth prayer, and Prayer sanctifies fasting.

Neither did I anoint my self at all; All delights of sense must be laid
as^ide in a time of solemn humiliation (but yet without annoyance, and
uncomlinesse) as music, mirth, perfumes, brave apparel, 2 Samuel 12.20. Jon.
3.8. Exodus 33.4, 5, 6. 1 Kings 21.27. cheerfulness, outward joy, and pleasure,
Mark 2.20. Luke 5.35. with Mat. 9.15. Judge. 20.26. 1 Samuel 7.6. It is spoken of
as a foul sin, Isa. 58.3. behold in the day of your Fast ye find pleasure.

Ver. 4. And on the four and twentieth of the first moneth] The day is thus
noted, because the matters here revealed were most memorable.

As I was by the side of the great river] Meditating, likely, (because the City
was full of noise and tumult) and praying, as Acts 16.13. Broughton gives this
reason, because Seleucus Nicator, founder of the Seleucida, much spoken of in
the ensuing vision, built his chief City upon this river.

Which is Hiddekel] i. e. Sharp-swift: called also Tigris from the swiftest of
all beasts the Tiger: Plin. l. 6. c. 7.
but Curtius and Pliny say that Tigris in the Median language signifies an
Arrow. Here Daniel was personally present, and not visionally only: See ver. 7.

Ver. 5. Then I lift up mine eyes and looked] Viz. After my long fasting,
praying and meditating. So Moses and Elias, those great Fasters, met together
with our Savior gloriously in the Mount at his Transfiguration. It is
abstinence, not fullness, that makes a man capable of heavenly visions o^
divine glory.

Behold a certain man] Heb one man, a singular man, a glorious person; Messiah
the Prince, described here by his habit and parts as a Judge, say some, or as a
Priest, say others: See chap. 12.6, 7. Rev 1.13, 14, 15. and 10.5.

Clothed in linnen] To show his innocence and purity, as also his
righteousnesses ( Imputed and Imparted) wherewith he cloatheth his Saints, Rev.
19.8. that fine white linen and shining.

Whose loins were girded with fine gold of Vphaz] Or of Ophir, Peru, happily, or
Malaca, or Sophala. This golden girdle about his loins denotes Christ's
strength and alacrity, Psalm. 93.1. Luke 17.8.

Ver. 6. His body also was like the Beryl] Of an azure color, like the
heavens. The second Adam is the Lord from heaven, 1 Cor. 15.47. Some render it
the Chrysolite, which is of the color of the Sea; to note, say they, his power
to purge the Church by his Word, Spirit, and Judgments, as by the water of the
Sea.

And his face as the appearance of lightning] Which both shines and
terrifieth, and soon appears from the one end of the heaven to the other,
Matthew. 24.27. Christ suddenly discovers all things though never so remote,
Psalm. 90.8. Ezekiel. 1.13.

And his eyes as lamps of fire] To note his omniscience, his wrath also and
readiness to revenge, Jer. 32.19

And his arms and his feet like in color to polished brasse] To note his
omnipotency in the execution of his wrath, whilst he trampleth on his enemies,
Scintillantes purissime.
as he that has brazen arms and feet can easily break in pieces a potters
vessel.

Ser pitus 1. Maris.
And the voice of his words like the voice of a multitude] Or, as the noise of
many waters, Rev. 1.15. noting the efficacy of Christ's doctrine: See Acts 2.4.

Ver. 7. And I Daniel alone saw the vision] Holy Prophets alone are capable of
holy visions, 2 Pet. 1.19.

For the men that were with me saw not] Sensible they were of some alteration
upon the waters, and somewhat wrought upon; not for their information, but
separation from Daniel, that he might more freely undergo the heavenly rapture.
See the like, Acts 9.7.

But a great quaking fell upon them] Through sense of sin, and fear of wrath.
This served to show the truth of the vision.

Ver. 8. Therefore I was left alone] Daniel, though much affrighted, keeps
his station, when the rest fled and hid themselves. Good is the counsel of the
Apostle, Heb. 12.13. Make straight steps unto your feet, lest that which is
halting be turned out of the way: but let it rather be healed.

For my comeliness, etc.] See chap. 7.15, 28. and 8.27.

Ver. 9. Yet heard I the voice of his words] What these words were, is not here
expressed; but by comparing, they may be gathered to be the same with those,
chap. 8.18. bidding Gabriel to draw near, and speak unto the Prophet.

Then was I in a deep sleep] See chap. 8.18. The more the outward man is bound,
the fitter he is for holy Communion with God, 2 Cor. 12.2, 3.

Ver. 10. And behold an hand touched me] i. e. The hand of the Angel Gabriel,
who was sent by Christ to dictate unto Daniel the Prophecy following. It is
Christ's use to signify Prophecyes by his Angel ( Rev. 1.1, 2.) and this Angel
is accordingly strengthened by Michael, ver. 21. that is, by Christ.

Which set me upon my knees] In a praying posture: but yet he continued
trembling, ver. 11. and was not raised and restored but by certain degrees: the
better to frame and fit him to a religious attention and docility.

Ver. 11. O Daniel, a man greatly beloved] Such shall know Gods secrets, Prove.
3.32. See chap. 9 23.

Stand upright] Heb. stand upon thy standing. God by his Grace and Word will
raise up those that humble themselves in his presence.

Dejicit ut relevet. -- Ver. 12. Fear not Daniel] Disquieting and expectorating
sears should be laid aside, 1 John 4.18.

For from the first day] See on chap. 9.23. Let us but find a praying heart,
and God w^ll presently find a pitying heart, though he may delay for a season
to send in an answer. Though Danel heard nothing of his prayers for three-weeks
space, yet was the Angel at work all that while for the removal of impediments.
Daniel in the meanwhile wrought hard with God, as it is elsewhere said of
Jonathan, 1 Samuel 14.45.

And I am come for thy Word] Brought hither by thy prayers. God will come, but
he will have his peoples prayers lead him into the field as it were.

Ver. 13. But the Prince of the Kingdom of Persia withstood me] By this Prince
of Persia some understand wicked Cambyses; Melancthon. Osiander. Pappus.
Others, an evil Angel, that by his suggestions swayed Cambyses to oppose and
retard the reedifying of the Temple. There is a principal devil, Prince of this
world: and there are, as some hold, Princes or Principal spirits in Countries
and Nations under him, Ephesians. 6.12.

But lo Michael one of the chief Princes] i. e. Christ the Lord of Angels,
head of the Church, chap. 12.1. Rev. 12.7. By these chief Princes may be
understood the three Persons in Trinity; or the created Angels. The Septuagint
translate the word (...), the cheerful ones, who serve the Lord readily,
freely, and joyfully in his wars, making Sion as dreadful to all her enemies,
Psalm. 68.17. as those Angels once made Sinai, at the delivery of the Law.

And I remained there with the Kings of Persia] With Canmbyses and his
Counselors, to repress their rage, and to blast their designs against the
Church: which, when it is opposed, the holy Angels interpose, Psalm. 34.7.

Ver. 14. Now I am come] As it were with weariness of flight, as chap. 9.21.
See there. Comfort will come at length, Heb. 10.37.

In the latter dayes] Toward the end of their polity, and not long before the
coming of the Messiah, who shall begin another age, and as it were a new world,
Ezekiel. 38.8. Heb. 2.3.

Ver. 15. I set my face toward the ground, and I became dumb] Cohorrui totus,
and vox faucibus haesit. See how deeply Gods darlings are, eftsoons, affected
at the hearing of his holy Word, H^b^k. 3.16.

Ver. 16. And behold one like the similitude] i. e. The Angel in humane shape,
as ver. 10.

Touched my lips] Restored unto me my speech. Good affections wanting
expression shall have Gods furtherance.

And said unto him that stood before me] i. e. To Christ, whom he had seen,
ver. 5 6.

My sorrows are turned upon me] Heb. my bowels which are even strained, and
straitened.

And I have retained no strength] It is ordinary with Gods people in their
prayers to complain much of their own weakness, Jer. 31.18.

Ver. 17. For how can the servant of th^s my Lord] Qui tantulus sum, and tam
imbec^llis. Gods praying servants use to speak as broken men. They well
understand 1. Their Distance. 2. Dependence.

Talk with this my Lord?] Prayer is a holy interparlance with the divine
Majesty: (...) 1 Timothy 2.1.

Neither is there breath in me] I am hardly able to bear up* or breathe. Humane
frailty cannot endure Gods presence without fainting Rev. 1.17.

Ver 18. Then there came again and touched me] Not all at once, but by four
degrees was Daniel raised. 1. He is set upon his knees and palms of his hands,
ver. 10. an Emblem or Prayer. 2. He is caused to stand upon his feet, though
trembling and silent, ver. 11.15 3. His mouth is opened to speak, though not
without much weakness, fears and sorrows, ver. 17. 4. He is fully strengthened,
here. Park.
God loves to hold his praying people long in request. He is also a God of
Judgment, Isa. 30.18. (one that well understands when and how to bestow his
favors:) Blessed are all they that want for him.

Ver. 19. Be strong* yea be strong] Holy Angels are ready to strengthen such,
as are ready to faint in holy duties.

Ver. 20. Know thou wherefore I came unto thee?] q.d. I told thee that
before, ver. 14. and I look thou should remember it.

I will return to fight with the Prince of Persia] To defeat and prevent his
tyranny and cruel intents against thy people (see ver. 13.) not without the
devils hand and help.

And when I am gone forth] sc. Out of Persia.

Lo the Prince of Graecia] Great Alexander, whom I will fetch in, so that the
Persians shall have henceforth little leisure or mind to meddle with the Jews.
There were other Grecian Captains also before Alexander who found the Persians
somewhat to do, as Leonides, Miltiades, Themistocles: but he overturned their
Monarchy.

Ver. 21. In the Scripture of truth] i e. Ex usu sorensi.
In Gods infallible and unchangable decree, which (for our apprehension) are
here compared to court rolls and Records. And Gods Providence (which is
nothing else but the carrying on of his decree) is that Helm which turns
about the whole ship of the Universe.

And there is none -- but Michael your Prince] But how many reckon we him at?
as that King once said of himself to his fearful soldiers. He alone is a whole
army of men, Van and Rear both, Isa. 52.12.

CHAP. XI.
Ver. 1. ALso I] i. e. I Gabriel the Angel, glad of such an office, for the
good of Gods people, whereunto also I was sent by Christ, chapter 10 9, 10.

In the first year of Darius the Mede] Who now began to think of sending home
the captive Jews, but had some hesitations and fluctuations of mind about it.

I stood to confirm and to strengthen him] Angels cannot inlighten the mind, or
powerfully incline the will of man (for so the Holy Ghost only does:) but, as
instruments of the Holy Ghost, they can stir up phantasms of the Word read or
heard; they can also propose truth and right to the mind, advise and persuade
to it as Counselors, and inwardly instigate as it were by speaking and doing
after a spiritual manner, suggesting good thoughts, as devils do evil: Yea they
can strangely wind themselves into men's imaginations, so as to appear to them
in their dreams, Matthew. 1.

Ver. 2. And now I will show thee the truth] The plain naked truth, in proper
and downright terms, dealing with thee more like an Historian then a Prophet.
Truth is, like our first Parents, most beautiful when naked.

Behold there shall stand up yet three Kings in Persia] Three besides Darius;
viz. Cyrus, Cambyses, and Darius Hystaspis: for, as for Smerdis or the Magus,
who took upon him to be the son of Cyrus, and usurped the throne after
Cambyses, for six months, Herodot. in Thalia.
the holy Angel holds him not worth naming.

And the fourth shall be far richer then they all] This was Xerxes, who was
called the Hoarder of his Kingdom, like as his Father Darius had been called
the Huckster, Regni caupo.
for his unmeasurable riches gathered out of all the East, and prepared for the
war against Greece.

And when he shall be strengthened by his riches] Which were never true to those
that trusted them.

He shall stir up all] He shall bring into the field a million of men, and
cover the seas with his ships, thinking to bear down all before him; but was
shamefully defeated by the Grecians, and forced in a small fisher-boat, to get
back into Asia, where falling into inordinate lust and cruelty, he was killed
by Artabanus, and left this war hereditary to his successors, until the ruin
of the Persian Kingdom by great Alexander, of whom in the next verse.

Ver. 3. But a mighty King shall stand up] Alexander the Great, the founder of
the Greek Monarchy; who with 30000 footmen and 5000 horsemen overran and
subdued a great part of the habitable world. See chap. 8. The devil by his
oracles foretold him of his victories, having stolen his skill out of this
Prophecy of Daniel.

Ver. 4. And when he shall stand up] And seems to be best underlaid, set to
live, as we say, when he stands on his best bottom, expecting Ambassadors at
Babylon from all the world, requiring divine honors from his Grecians, and
enjoining the Jews that their dates should be taken from his reign, and that
all the Priests sons born that year should be called Alexanders.

His Kingdom shall be broken] As brittle ware is apt to be.

And shall be divided toward the four winds] Sic transit gloria mundi, fitly
compared to the wind, as chap. 2. to a dream, to a shadow, to a dream of a
shadow. Great Alexander's Kingdom was first broken into many pieces by twelve
of his Princes, until, eleven years after his death, it became quadripartite,
etc. Here is foretold, being divided amongst four of his Chieftains, Cassander,
Antigonus, Seleucus and Ptolomy: till at length, these two last ga^ all into
their hands, and yet were ever jarring and warring, as appears by what here
follows.

And not to his posterity] For all his Kindred were killed up by Cassander;
with whom it chei^ed accordingly.

Nor according to his dominion] For although they were all sovereign Princes,
yet they fell far short of Alexander in command and warlike fame, chap. 8.22.

Antiq. lib. 1 2. cap. 1.
Ver. 5. And the King of the South shall be strong] Ptolomy King of Egypt
together with his whole family, line, and race, the Lagidae, shall be eminently
strong; and a great enemy he was to the poor Jews, as Josephus storieth.

And one of his Princes] i. e. O^ Alexanders Princes, meaning Seleucus Nicanor
King of Syria, together with his house and line called the Seleucidae.

And he shall be strong above him] i. e. Stronger then Ptolomy, and that the
poor Church shall feel; for Judaea lay betwixt these two potent Princes, and
was therefore beaten on both sides: perinde ac Isthmus inter duo maria
interjacens, or as bread-corn ground betwixt two milstones. This was here
foretold, and much more, three hundred years before it fell out, that we may
know that there is an Omnipotent and Omniscient Majesty, who decrees and does
whatsoever himself pleases.

His dominion shall be a great dominion] Viz. as long as it will hold. Besides
Syria and Babylon, Seleucus had more of Asia then ever any had but only
Alexander. So our Henry the sixth, till deposed, had been the most potent
Monarch for dominions that ever England had: yet afterward he was not the
master of a molehill, nor owner of his own liberty, as has been said before.

Ver. 6. And in the end of years] In process of time, after that these two
Kings had sufficiently worried and wearied out one another, in bloody wars.

They shall join themselves together] Heb. shall associate themselves, viz in a
friendly amity: and shall make interchangeable marriages, but to little
purpose, as it proved. Tu^k. Hist: 464.
So Calo Joannes the Christian Emperor of Trapezond gave his daughter Despina
in marriage to Vsuncassanes King of Persia, but with ill success: for he soon
after lost his Empire.

For the Kings daughter of the South] Bernice (or as others call her, Berenice
or Beronice, i. e. the daughter of innocence or purity) the daughter Ptolomie
Philadelph so called, for that he married his own sister; Junius.
and therefore his daughter Beronice was not right-named.

Shall come to the King of the North] to Antiochus Theus King of Syria (so the
Milesians first surnamed him, Pausan. Appian.
because he had driven out their tyrant Timarch) and he took it upon him, to
his utter undoing: for this god was afterward poisoned by his wife Laodice.

To make an agreement] Marriages made in policy, to serve dishonest ends, are
ever of ill success, 1 Samuel 18.21, 28.

But she shall not retain the power of the arm] Her interest in her husband,
her Queendom, and her life were soon after lost. She was not sent home again
(as Ann of Cleeve was here) but sent out of the world, together with her son,
In Syriac.
and all her retinue, by Laodice, whom Appian makes to be her own sister: but
that is not likely.

Neither shall he stand] i. e. Antiochus Theus, who was poisoned by his jealous
wife, a just punishment from a jealous God.

Nor his arm] His young son by Bernice.

And he that begat her] Her father Ptolomy Philadelph, who dyed soon after.

Ver. 7. But out of the branch of her roots] One of her stock, her own brother
both by father and mother.

Shall one stand up in his estate] Ptolomy Euergetes shall succeed his father
Philadelph: and making war against Seleucus Callinicus, son of Antiochus Theus
by Laodice, in revenge of his sister Bernices death shall prevail and overrun
the greatest part of Callinicus his Kingdom.

Ver. 8, And shall also carry captives their gods] Goodly gods they were the
while, and likely to defend their worshippers. He brought back also the
Egyptian mawmets, carried away by Cambyses (rather in scorn of all religion,
then hatred of idolatry) and was thereupon called by that superstitious people,
Euergetes, that is, Benefactour.

Ver. 9. So the King of the South shall come into his Kingdom] Called out of
Syria by a commotion at home, the Parthians invading Egypt: but he soon quelled
them, and quieted his own country. Josephus writes, Lib. 2. cont. Appian.
that this Ptolomy Euergetes in his return out of Syria went to Jerusalem; and
in thankfulness to the God of the Jews, offered his oblations at the Temple
there. Antiq. l. 12. c. 2*
Of his father Philadelphus also he reports, that he redeemed one hundred and
twenty thousand Jews that were slaves in Egypt, and sent them home, and
bestowed many rich gifts upon the Temple at Jerusalem.

Ver. 10. But his sons] Callinicus his sons; viz. Seleucus Ceraunus, and
Antiochus Magnus -- quasi duo fulmina belli.

Shall be stirred up] At not enduring that Ptolomy Philepator son of Euergetes
should possess any part of Syria under their noses.

Lib 5.
Shall assemble a multitude of great forces] Seventy thousand footmen, and
fifty thousand horsemen, says Polybius.

Ceraunius id est fulminem: quod audaci and veloci ingenio praeditus. Justin.
And one shall certainly come] One, not both; because Ceraunus (who seemed to
be as swift and as irresistible as Lightning, and therehence had his name) was
slain by Nicanor: so that Antiochus Magnus was King alone.

And shall overflow and pass thorough] To wit, against the Captains of Ptolomy
in Syriae, Attalus and Theodatus.

And he shall be stirred up even to his fortresse] To Ptolomies fortress, or
fortified City Raphia, which lies in the entrances of Egypt, says Hierom.

Ver. 11. And the King of the South] Ptolomaeus Philopator, so called say some
per Antiphrasin, because he killed his father; he slew also his both sister and
wife Eurydice: and was otherwise very vicious, and yet victorious.

Even with the King of the North] i. e. With Antiochus Magnus, who was so
called perhaps, says one, for undertaking much, and performing little.

Pausan. lib. 5. Spoliavisset regno Antiochum, si fortunam virtute juvisset.
Justin.
And he shall set forth a great multitude] Sixty two thousand footmen, and six
thousand horsemen.

And the multitude] Antiochus his army: himself hardly escaping with life
through the deserts.

Ver. 12. His heart shall be lifted up] So that he shall flight his enemy, and
not pursue his victory, but give himself up to a luxurious life. Vincere scis
Annibal, victoriauti nescis, said that Roman General.

Ver. 13. For the King of the North] Antiochus Magnus.

Shall return] After Philopators death, to fight against his young son and
successor Epiphanos.

Hierom.
And shall set forth a multitude greater then the former] Gathered out of the
upper parts of Babylon: He called in the help also of Philip King of Macedon,
and other Princes. His army is said to have consisted of three hundred thousand
footmen, besides horse and Elephants.

And shall certainly come] Heb. by coming he shall come, i. e. surely, swiftly,
suddenly: but to small purpose.

Lib. 2. c. 8. Lib. 5. c. 5.
And with much riches] Gold, silver, purple, silks, ivory, at Florus and
G^llius testify:

Ver. 14. And in those times there shall many stand up against the King of the
South] Many of the Jews who supplied Antiochus, in this expedition of his
against Egypt, Effractores, Praevaricato^es.
both with men and other warlike provision. Howbeit sundry Jews (called here
robbers or refractories, fierce, furious and desperate fellows) adhered to
Ptolomy Epiphanes, who gave them leave to build a Temple in Egypt: which was
accordingly also done by Onias, not far from Memphis, upon pretense of
fulfilling that prophecy, Isa. 19.19. called here establishing the vision.

But they shall fall] As they did afterward by the Romans, who destroyed the
Jews there in great multitudes, and burnt their mock Temple.

Ver. 15. So the King of the North shall come] i. e. Not the Romans (as some
would have it) but Antiochus Magnus still. He had been foiled at Raphia, now he
greatly prevails against the Egyptians. If we Princes (said our Henry the
seventh) shall take every occasion that is offered, the world shall never be
quiet, but wearied with continual wars.

And the arms of the South shall not withstand] Scopas the Egyptian General,
though very skilful and valiant, shall be beaten by Antiochus into Sidon,
besiged there, and forced to yield: all the power of Egypt being not able to
raise the siege, and relieve Scopas. The battle is not always to the strong,
Eccles. 9.11.

Ver. 16. And he shall stand in the glorious land] Heb. the land of ornaments,
that is Judaea, which lying betwixt these two potent Princes, was perpetually
afflicted, as corn is ground asunder lying betwixt two heavy milstones. Now
Judaea is called the glorious or beautiful land, Ezekiel. 20.6, 15. it is called
the comeliness of all countries,
not so much for the fertility thereof ( Babylon was much more fertile) nor for
the miracles done therein (many great works had been likewise done in Egypt) as
for the sincere service of God there set up. This is the beauty and bulwark of
any Nation. Foreign writers have termed England The fortunate Island, the
Terraflorida, the Kingdom of God, the Paradise of pleasure, etc, Plato
commends the Attick Country for this, that the Inhabitants were (...), the
right Natives that grew out of it at first: (...). Thucyd. (...). Plato.
but especially for this, that it was (...) a place that loved God and was
interchangeably beloved of God. May that be evermore Englands commendation!

Which by his hand shall be consumed] Gods Church goes to wrack both by South
and North. All she comfort is that whether North or South Wind blow on Gods
garden, they shall blow good to it at length, Cant. 4.16.

Ver. 17. He shall also set his face] Antiochus longed sore to be Lord of
Egypt, and therefore undertook a third expedition against Epiphanes: but that
not succeeding to his mind, he seweth the Foxes skin to the Lions hide, and
seeks to get that by treachery, which by open hostility he could not.

And upright ones with him] Or equal conditions with him: he shall palliate his
treachery with very fair pretenses: he shall seem to do righteous things,
drawing a fair glove over a foul hand: Thus shall he do.

And he shall give him the daughter of women] The fair Cleopatra, his beautiful
daughter: like as Saul gave Michal to David, to be a snare to him. Filiam e
mulieribus selectam^


Munera pulchrae quidem mittis, sed mittis in hamo. Martial.
Corrupting her] Suborning her to make away her husband Ptolomaeus Epiphanes.
This was devilish policy; Simulata necessitudo duplex simultas: but it took not.

But she shall not stand on his side, neither be for him] As became a good
wife, she ^lave to her husband: so did the abovementioned Michal, in whom
though we find no great store of religion (for both she had an image in the
house, and afterward mocked David for his devotion) yet nature had taught her
to prefer an husband to a father.

Ver. 18. After this he shall turn his face unto the Isles] Missing of his
design for Egypt, and losing also much in Asia Minor, which Epiphanes got of
him, by means of his Queen Cleopatra, Antiochus, as an enraged Lion, falls
upon foreign countries, as Hellespont, Chersonesus, Eubaea, Rhodes, Cyprus,
Samos, Colophon, etc. He marched also with his army into Greece, being stirred
up thereunto by Hannibal, who being vanquished in Africa by Scipio, had fled to
Antiochus into Asia, and there hatched what mischief he could against the
Romans.

But a Prince for his own behalf] i. e. Scipio the Roman Consul, or as some
will, M. Acilius their General.

Shall cause the reproach offered by him to cease] i. e. Shall recover the
countries that he had taken from the Roman State, and shall also drive back
again, down his throat, those contumelies and opprobrious speeches that he had
thrown out against the Romans; who afterward overcame him thrice by sea and
land, forced him to accept of very hard conditions, shred him of a great part
of his Kingdom, Live. Dec. 4. l. 8; Appian. in Syriac.
and called him in contempt Antiochus sometime the Great.

Ver. 19. Then he shall turn his face] Not accepting the aforesaid hard
conditions, till beaten again by the Romans, he was forced so to do; he fled
into the utmost parts of his Kingdom of Syria, and there kept him in forts, not
daring to wage war any more.

But he shall stumble and fall and not be found] He and his Army shall be hewn
in pieces by the rude rabble in the Elymeans Country, Strabo. lib. 16.
whilst he went about to rob the Temple of their Jupiter Belus.

Ver. 20. Then shall stand up in his estate a raiser of taxes] Heb. one that
causes an exactour to pass over, who shall gather no less sums of curses then
of coin. This was Seleucus Philopator, son to Antiochus the great, and his
fathers darling (whence also he had his surname) but not the peoples darling,
as Scipio was at Rome, whom they called Corculum or sweet heart. For this
Seleucus King of Syria being the Romans tribute-gatherer (to whom he was to pay
according to his fathers agreement a thousand talents by the year) he was hated
of the people, and poisoned by Heliodorus a great man about him, in favor of
Antiochus Epiphanes his brother, and successor in the Kingdom.

Ver. 21. And in his estate shall stand up a vile person] This was his true
title (as Wicked was Hamans, Illustrious.
Esth. 7.6.) though he affected to be called Epiphanes or Famous: and Josephus
reports that the Samaritans (to curry favor with him when he tormented the
Jews) styled him Antiochus the mighty god. O detestable! surely that which is
highly esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16.15.
But the bramble thinks it a goodly thing to reign: so does not the Vine and
Figtree, Judge. 9. A good man honors them that fear the Lord: but contemns
a vile person, Psalm. 15 4. Mr. Fox, when one asked him, saying, Do ye not
remember such an honest poor man for whom you did something? yes, said he, I
forget Lords and Ladies to remember such. And again when a great Lord and
wicked met him in the streets, and asked him How do you Mr. Fox? he said
little: do you not know me? said the great Lord: No, not I, said Mr. Fox. I am
such a one, said he. Sir, I desire, said Mr. Fox, to know none but Christ and
him crucified.

To whom they shall not give the honor of the Kingdom] But he shall take it
whether the Nobles will or not: and so might well have been called as his
father sometimes was, Antiochus Hierax, the Hawk or Puttock, for his swooping
and ravaging.

But he shall come in peaceably] Under pretense of a Protector to his nephew
Demetrius, as did our Richard the third.

And shall obtain the Kingdom by flatteries[ Winning men's hearts by presents,
courtesies, and secret practices.

Ver. 22. And with the arms of a flood shall they be over flown] The Egyptians
shall by the forces of Antiochus Epiphanes, who in the minority of his sister
Cleopatra's son Ptolomy Philometor, invaded Egypt, and overthrew his two
Captains Euleus and Leneus, as with a storm or flood.

Yea also the Prince of the Covenant] Tryphon the chief contriver of a Covenant
betwixt the two Kings, after the former overthrow. He was made away by
Antiochus, that himself might do what he lifted in Egypt, during the nonage of
his nephew Philometor.

Ver. 23. He shall work deceitfully] Outwitting the wisest among the Egyptians,
who yet were held great Politicians. See Esa. 19.11, 13.

And shall become strong with a small people] He shall come in (as Protector
and coad^utor to his nephew Philometor) with a small number, left the Egyptians
should be affrighted: but being thus gotten in, he shall play his pranks to
some purpose.

Ver. 24. He shall enter peaceably even upon the fattest places of the
Province] i. e. Upon Memphis in the very heart of the Country.

And he shall do that which his fathers have not done] i. e. Rob and spoil, as
never any of his Ancestors did before in Egypt.

Ptolo. hypom. lib. 1. and 5.
And he shall scatter among them the prey] Throwing handfuls of money among the
vulgar as he went along the streets: and all to ingratiate and to steal away
their hearts. Absalom did the like at Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 20.

And he shall forecast his devices against the strong-holds] By sowing
dissension betwixt Philometor, and Physcon his younger brother. The devil was
as great a Master then as since, with his D^vide and impera, make division, and
get dominion.

Ver. 25. And he shall stir up his power and his courage] Antiochus shall:
himself being stirred up by the devil, that restless spirit, who continually
makes ado in the world. Fuit etiam Antiochus ingenio inquieto, versatili,
turbido, vago and vario: unde multa machinatus est, pauca ad felicem exitum
perduxit. Howbeit in this second expedition against Egypt, he prospered.

Ver. 26. Yea they that feed of the portion of his meat] His own Courtiers,
Captains and Pensioners, corrupted by Antiochus, betrayed Philometor: see 1
Mac. 1. In trust I have often found treason, said Queen Elizabeth.

Ver. 27. And both these Kings hearts shall be to do mischef Philometor being
beaten shall seek agreement, give great gifts to Antiochus, and feast him: sed
reconciliatione vultira, but with a fox-like and fained amity, each of them
still re^^ining their ancient hatreds. Burning lips and a wicked heart, are
like a potsheard covered with silver-dresse, Prove. 26.23.

And they shall speak lyes] This is ordinary with the wicked, Psalm. 62.9. but
it is the property of the godly man to speak the truth from his heart, Psalm. 15.

For yet the end shall be at the time appointed] i. e. The end of those wars
shall be when God sees good, and has predetermined it.

Ver. 28. Then shall he return into his land with great riches] But little
content. Gain, when it is either the Mammon of unrighteousness, or wages of
wickedness, is true loss.

And his heart shall be against the holy Covenant] i. e. Against the Jews, Gods
Covenanters, and against the true religion. The Church is, haeres crucis, says
Luther: the truth goes seldom without a scratcht face.

Ver. 29. At the time appointed] After two years.

And come toward the South] Toward Egypt, 1 Mac. 1.30.

But it shall not be as the former] Expedition, ver. 25.

Or as the latter] Mentioned ver. 40. God often crosses the wicked in the height
of their hopes, Job 20 6.

Ver. 30. For the ships of Chittim shall come against him] i. e. Publius
Popilius the Roman Legate shall come in Italian or Grecian ships, and shall,
Joseph. l. 12. c. 6. Live. dec. 5. l. 5. ^pplan. in Sir. ^ustin.
in the name of the Senate and people of Rome, command Antiochus to depart with
his army out of Egypt, and that forthwith. So true found Antiochus that of the
Poet Omne, sub regni graviore, regnum est.

Therefore he shall be grieved and return] And reck his teen upon the poor
Church of God: turning his rage against the Jews.

And have intelligence with them that forsake the Covenant] None are so
dangerous and desperate enemies to the truth as Apostates, and Renegado's, such
as were here, Jason, Menelaus, etc. 2 Mac. 4. who privily packed with Antiochus
against the City and people.

Ver. 31. And arms shall stand on his part] i. e. Antiochus his Princes and
Commanders, whom he sent to spoil Jerusalem; such as were Philip the Phrygian,
Andronicus, Apollonius, Bacchides, etc. who made havoc of Gods people, and
revelled in their ruins.

And they shall place the abomination of desolation] The abominable idol of
Jupiter Olympius. The like whereunto was done here in England in those Marian
times, of abhor^ed memory, which yet lasted no longer then those of Antiochus,
sc. five or six years.

Ver. 32. And such as do wickedly against the Covenant] Apostates sin not
common sins, as Karab and his accomplices dyed not common deaths. Forsakers of
the Covenant, ver. ^0. will soon become wicked doers against the Covenant, as
here: till they become altogether filthy, Psalm. 53.3. See 1 Pet. 2.20, 22.
Matthew. 12.43, 45. Luke 9.62.

-- non debet aeratro, Sedulius.

Dignum opus ixercens, vulium in sua terga refer.
But the people that do know their God] The faithful Hassideans, and zealots,
Irritamenta and Terriculamenta.
who know and worship their G^d aright; these shall persevere, and overcome all
Allurements and Affrightments of the World.

Ver. 33. And they that understand, etc.] God shall provide in the worst of
times, that his people shall have Teachers and faithful Monitors. I find in the
registers (and wonder at it, says Mr. Fox) that in Queen Maryes days, one
neighbor resorting to, and conferring with another, Act. and Mon.
eftsoons with a few words of their first or second talk, did win and turn
their minds to that wherein they desired to persuade them touching the truth of
Gods Word and Sacraments.

Yet they shall fall by the sword and by flame] The Instructers especially
shall. Of this persecution the Apostle seems to speak, Heb. 11.35, 37.

Ver. 34. They shall be helped with a little help] With the valiant Asmonians
or Maccabees who were but a handful, and yet did great exploits against the
Antiochians; so did the Hussites in Bohemia against the Pontificians. But why
were they helped with a little help? that through weaker means, they might see
Gods greater strength.

But many shall cleave to them with flatteries] So did the false Samaritans:
See on ver. 21. And so the Donatists went to the Goths, when the Arians
prevailed. Hypocrites will not sail in a storm. Something they will do for God,
but little or nothing it is they will suffer.

Ver. 35. And some of them of understanding shall fall] Depth of divine
knowledge, and height of holiness, is no target against persecution: the best
fall under it soonest. None out of hell have ever suffered more then Saints.

To try them] As hard weather tryes what health: hang heavy weights on rotten
boughs, and they suddenly break. Withered leaves fall off in a strong wind: not
so the green, that have sap.

Act. and Mon.
And to purge and to make them white] As foul and stained clothes are whitened
by laying abroad in cold frosty nights. Black soap makes white clothes: so,
said that Martyr, does the black cross help us to more whiteness, if God
strike with his batteldors. You know the vessel before it be made bright (said
John Careless the Martyr in a letter to Mr. Philpot another Martyr) is soyled
with oil and other things that it may scour the better. Oh happy be you, that
you be now in this scouring house: Ib. 1743.
for shortly you shall be set upon the celestial shelf as bright as Angels,
etc. Refiners of sugar, says Another Author, taking sugar out of the same
chest, D. Goodwin.
some thereof they melt but once; other again and again; not that it has more
dross in it, but because they would have it more refined: so deals the Lord
with his best children, etc.

Ver. 36. And the King shall do according to his will] In Judaea he shall,
though in Egypt he could not, because the Romans trumped in his way, ver. 30.
put a stop to his rage there. But the Jews were looked upon by the proud Romans
as a despicable people: and of the God of the Jews Cicero speaks basely, not
holding him worthy to be compared with Bacchus or Venus, Orat. pro. Flacco.
etc.

And he shall exalt himself, etc.] A type and picture of the Pope of Rome, 2
These. 2.4.

Till the indignation be accomplished] Till God have avenged the quarrel of his
Covenant, and the set time of deliverance be come.

Ver. 37. Neither shall he regard the God of his Fathers] He shall disannul his
own ancient religion, caring neither for the old Mumpsimus, nor the new
Sumpsimus, as they say, but showing himself to be a rank Atheist: See 1 Maccab.
1.43.

Nor the desire of women] sc. in an honest lawful way of matrimony; But be
addicted to vagrant lust, yea and to the sin against nature with women (as some
sense it) a Deo prohibito and perdito: in which case the Turkish women, when so
abused by their husbands (those filthy beasts) may sue a divorce; St. Henry
Blounts voy. into the Levant.
which they do by taking off their shoes before the Judge, and holding them
the soles upward, but speaking nothing, for the unnameablenesse of the fact.

Nor regard any God] See my Common place of Atheism.

Ver. 38. But in his estate shall be honor the God of forces] Or, As for the
Almighty God, in his seat he shall honor, yea he shall honor a god whom his
fathers knew not, etc. that is in Gods holy Temple at Jerusalem Antiochus shall
set up Jupiter Olympius, who was none of the dii Syri: for the Syrians
worshipped Apollo, Diana, Atargatis, Geog. l. 16.
as Strabo testifies. See 2 Maccab. 6.2.

Shall he honour] This doubling of the word seems to show the Angels
indignation, at the indignity of the fact. See the like, Genesis 49.4.

Ver. 31.
Ver. 39. Thus shall he do in the most strong holds] Heb. in the fortresses of
munitions, i. e. both in the Temple (called elsewhere a strong-hold) and in the
places of defense near unto the Temple, where he set a garrison, to force the
people to worship his Idols.

Whom he shall acknowledge and increase with glory] Or, those whom he shall
acknowledge (to be favorers and furtherers of his abominable idolatry) those
he shall increase with glory: he shall raise and prefer them, as he did Jason,
Menelaus, etc.

And he shall cause them to rule over many] In praestantes illos (so Piscator
renders it) over the godly Jews, Gods Rabbines.

And he shall divide the land] sc. Of Judaea.

For gain] Heb. for a price. Sic omnia Romae vaenalia: All things are saleable
and soluble at Rome.

Ver. 40. And at the time of the end] The year before his death.

Shall the King of the South] Ptolomie Philometor.

And the King of the North] Antiochus his third expedition into Egypt (see ver.
39) in favor of Physcon.

And shall overflow] i. e. Victoriously overrun Egypt.

Ver. 41. He shall enter also into the glorious land] Judaea, as ver. 16. but
for no good. In Greece they say, Where the Grand Signior once sets his foot,
there grows no more grass.

But these shall escape] Because they shall side with him.

Ver. 42. He shall stretch forth his hand also] He shall be very victorious
toward his latter end, that he may be the riper for ruin: fatted ware are but
fitted for destruction.

Ver. 43. Shall be at his steps] i. e. Obey him as their Captain.

Ver. 44. But tidings out of the East, etc.] It it seldom seen that God
allows to the greatest darlings of the world a perfect contentment: but
something or other they must have to trouble them still.

Ver. 45. And he shall plant the Tabernacles of his palace] i, e: 1 Mac. 3.40.
and 4 3.
He shall pitch his tent royal (in token of full power given to his Captains
Lysias and the rest) in Emmaus, near to Jerusalem, to keep the Jews in
subjection.

Between the Seas] The Dead Sea, and the Midland Sea, Polyb. Joseph. l. 12. c.
12.
which are the bounds of Judaea, called here the glorious holy mountain.

Yet he shall come to his end] A loathsome and lamentable one: See 1 Maccab.
6.8. 2 Maccab. 9. not so much because he would have spoiled the Temple of
Diana, but because he did spoil the Temple at Jerusalem.

CHAP. XII.
Ver. 1. ANd at that time] i. e. In the last days, and toward the end of the
World: for in this Chapter seems to be set forth the State of the Church in
the last times, that it shall be most afflicted: yet she shall be fully
delivered by Christ's second coming to Judgment. Cyprian was in like sort wont
to comfort his friends thus, Venit Antichristus, sed superveniet Christus;
Antichrist will come, but then Christ will come after him, and overcome him.

Shall Michael stand up] i. e. The Lord Christ (that Prince of Angels, and
Protector of his people) not a created Angel, much less Michael Servetus that
blasphemous heretic, burnt at Geneva, who was not afraid to say, as Calvin
reports it, se esse Michaelem illum, Ecclesiae custodem, that he was that
Michael the Churches Guardian. David George also another blackmouthed heretic
said that he was that David foretold by the Prophets, Jer. 30.9. Ezekiel. 34.23.
Hos. 3.5. and that he was confident that the whole World would in time submit
to him.

Which stands for the children of thy people] For all the Israel of God, to
whom Christ is a fast friend, and will he while the government is upon his
shoulder, Isa. 9.6.

And there shall be a time of trouble] To the Jews by the Romans (after Christ's
ascension, Mat. 24.21.) to the Christians, by the Romists.

And at that time thy people shall be delivered] The elect both Jews and
Gentiles shall be secured, and saved.

Every one that shall be found written in the book] Called the writing or
catalogue of the house of Israel, Ezekiel. 13.9. and the Lambs book of life, Rev.
21.27. which is nothing else but conscriptio electorum in mente divina, says
Lyra, the writing of the elect in the divine mind, or knowledge: such are said
to be written among the living in Jerusalem, Isa. 4.4.

Ver. 2. And many of them that sleep in the dust] Many for all, as Romans 5.18,
19. these are said to sleep, which denotes the immortality of the soul, and
the resurrection of the body. The soul lives in the sleep of death, as it does
in the sleep of the body in this life.
And this the poor Jews, when to lose land and life for the truth, are here
seasonably and plainly told of (amidst other things that are but darkly
delivered) to bear up their sinking spirits. Awake they shall as out of a sweet
sleep, those that are good, and then be full of Gods Image, Psalm. 17. ^it. The
wicked also shall come forth, but by another principle, and for another
purpose: they shall come out of their graves, like filthy roads against this
terrible storm, etc.

Some to everlasting life] Which is here first mentioned in the old Testament.
See Matthew. 25.45. Joh. 5.29.

And some to shame and everlasting contempt] Christ shall shame them in that
ample Amphitheatre, and doom them to eternal destruction. Graevissima paenarum
pudor est, says Chrysostom. Oh when Christ shall upbraid reprobates and say,
Ego vos pavi, lavi, vestivi, etc. which way will they look? or who shall say
for them? They shall look then upon him whom they have pierced and lament,
(...).
but all too late: they shall be sore ashamed of their sinful practices which
shall all be written in their foreheads: and this shall be as a bodkin at their
hearts, that ever they turned their backs upon Christ's bleeding embracements,
whilst they refused to be reformed, hated to be healed.

Ver. 3. And they that be wise] And withal do what they can do to wise others
to salvation, as all wise ones will: for Goodness is diffusive of itself, and
would have others to share with it: charity is no churl.

Shall shine as the brightness of the firmament] A good amends for their
present sufferings, chap. 11.33. with Romans 8.18. Solomon allowed little or no
considerable reward to his workmen, Mat. 13.42.
Cant. 8.12. but Christ does: For they shall shine as the firmament, yea as the
Stars, yea as the Sun in his strength, yea as Christ himself shines, they
shall appear with him in glory, Colos. 3.4. Their souls shall shine through
their bodies as the candle does through the lanthorn: their bodies shall also
be so light-some and transparent, says Aquinas, that all the veins, humors,
nerves and bowels shall be seeen as in a glass: for so the light pierces the
firmament and Stars. Let us therefore keep these bodies of ours clean and
filth-free: that they may be fit vessels and receptacles of such a transcendent
glory.

And they that turn many to righteousnesse] Heb that justify many, sc.
Ministerially, as instruments in Christ's hand: for we preach Christ, yea we
give what we preach: We give the knowledge of salvation for the remission of
sins, Luke 1.17. we deliver men from hell, Job 33.24. we save the souls of them
that hear us, 1 Timothy 4.16.

As the Stars frr ever and ever] What a glorious place is heaven then?
Festinemus ad clarissimam patriam: corrigamus mores and moras, etc. What though
Christ's Ministers be here slighted and slurred? they shall one day shine as
stars, yea the meanest of them -- velut inter stellas Luna minores. What then
the Doctores Seraphici?

Ver. 4. But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words] Since the full understanding of
them is reserved to after-t^mes, and event will prove the best interpreter; as
it does in all Prophecies, which are as riddles till accomplished: and men must
mean while be content with a learned ignorance. Omnis prophetia priusquam
compleatur, aenigma est. Irenaeus.
But what meant Jachid^es the Jew to give us this gloss upon the text, God
sealed up the time of the coming of the Messiah, revealing it only to Daniel;
and that his coming might be accelerated by their deserts, like as for their
sins, which are many, it is retarded? He concludes well howsoever; God will
one day give us a clear vision, viz. when he shall bring back our Captivity,
then shall we understand things as they are.

Even to the time of the end] The time appointed, ver. 9.

Many shall run to and fro] For increase of divine knowledge they shall spare
for no pains. care or cost: as the Queen of Sheba, the Ethiopian Eunuch, etc.
See Prove. 18.1. Acts 17.11, 12. Increase of knowledge is promised only upon our
industry, and it is especially promised to these latter times, Joel 2.28.
wherein we find to be (as in our climate) much light, little heat: our heads
are so big (like children that have the rickets) that the whole body fares the
worse for it. Bullinger thus interprets the text, that toward the end of the
world men shall run to and fro, being certain of nothing, but destracted in
opinion, variis se adjungent sectis, Zegedin.
they shall join themselves to diverse sects. They shall run to and fro, says
Another Expositor, velut canes famelici, as hungry dogs, and there shall be
much knowledge in the world, that is, there shall be innumerable opinions and
sect^ abroad, wherewith many being infected shall be at no certainty in the
matters of salvation. For the confirmation therefore and comfort of the last
ages of the World, wherein these things shall befall, shut up the words, and
seal the book.

Ver. 5. Then I Daniel looked] As being as yet unsatisfied.

And behold there stood other two] Angels, on each bank of the river Tigris, by
whose interrogation Daniel is further resolved about the vision.

Ver. 6. And one said] i. e. An Angel inquisitive about the affairs of the
Church, for Daniel's further information.

To the man clothed in linnen] Of whom see chap. 10.5.

Which was upon the waters] See chap. 8.16.

How long shall it be to the end of these wonders?] i. e. The forementioned
mysteries, viz. concerning the Saints sufferings, the end of the world, the
coming of Christ, the resurrection of the dead, life and death everlasting?

Ver. 7. And I heard the man] The Man Christ Jesus.

When he h^ld up his right hand and his left hand] Assuring and assevering the
matter with both hands earnestly.

That it shall be for a time and times and an half.] i. e. For a time most
certain with God, and by him determined; but to us uncertain and unknown.
Broughton thinks that this term of three years and an half shows the term
of Christ's persecution in the days of his flesh, which was just so many years.
But there is more in it then so. See Revel. 6.11. a parallel text; and such
(like glasses set one against another) do cast a mutual light.

When he shall have accomplished to scatter the power] When the Church shall be
at the greatest under, when the number of the Elect shall be consummated, and
they sorely afflicted by the Devil and his Agents, then shall Christ appear to
their relief, as it were out of an engine. See 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1 Timothy 4. Rev. 6.

Ver. 8. And I heard but I understood not] This he ingenuously confesses: for
the best know but in part, 1 Cor. 13. And if any man thinks that he knows
ought, he knows nothing yet as ought to know. 1 Cor. 8.2. Let this be noted
by such as profess to know (beyond the periphery of humane knowledge) all that
is knowable. Any created Understanding is but (as Aeschylus says of fire
stolen by Prometheus) (...), a spark of the All-wise Gods fire, The Prophets
themselves understood not some things that were showed unto them, (...). Lib.
6. de Rep.
without a further light from the Father of lights: whose alone it is to
illighten both Organ and Object, as Plato also could say.

What shall be the end of these things?] An end he much desired, and the Angel
for him. ver. 6. But men must have patience, and wait Gods end. Ye have need of
patience or tarryance, (says the Apostle, Heb. 10.36) that after ye have done
the will of God (and suffered it too, grievous though it be for present) ye may
receive the promise. Good men find it often more easy to bear evil, then to wait
till the promised good be enjoyed.

Ver. 9. And he said. Go thy way Daniel] q. d. Though dearly beloved, Quiesce,
tibi satis esto.
yet of some things thou must be content to be ignorant* It should suffice thee
to be of Gods Court, though not altogether of his Council: See ver. 13. There
is a laudable and learned ignorance; as of Vnnecessaries, of Impossibles, or of
Vnprofitables; such as are the term of our lives, the end of the world, the
Reprobation of others* etc.

For the words are closed up] Viz. Till future ages, which are more concerned
in them, and till which these things shall be concealed.

Ver. 10. Many shall be pur^fied and made white. etc.] q. d. It is enough for
thee to know, (and that I should now tell thee) quales sint futuri homines
postremi saeculi, what kind of folk there shall be toward the end of the
world: Some shall be good people, and they shall meet with hard measure, but
all shall be for the best unto them in the end: See chap. 11.35. Others shall
be as bad, and so desperately set upon sinning, that they shall mind nothing
else (no not when these Prophecies are fulfilled) but be destroyed for lack of
knowledge, Hos. 4.6. Infatuaci seducentur, and seducti judicabuntur, being
infatuated they shall be seduced, and being seduced they shall be judged, as
Austin's Note is on 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.

Ver. 11. And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away.] sc.
By Antiochus, as has been before said; and with the knowledge whereof I would
have thee to rest satisfied.

There shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety dayes] Which are the three
years and a half mentioned before, says Diodate, with thirteen days over, for
some unknown reason. The Wonderful Numberer has all in numerato. The Russians
use to say in a difficult question, God, and our great Duke know all this. The
Jews in like case say, Messiah when he comes will tell us all things we desire
to be informed of.

Ver. 12. But blessed is he that waits and comes to the thousand, three
hundred and five and thirty dayes] Here are forty five days more then in the
former number: and Probably they were, from the restoration of Gods service
until the death of Antiochus (a blessed time to Gods poor persecuted people, as
was here the death of Queen Mary) or else until some other signal mercy, as the
victory that Judas Machabaus and his brethren had, about that time, over the
Edomites, Ammonites, and Moabites, who thought to root Israel quite out.

Ver. 13. But go thou thy way] Here Daniel to his great comfort has a fair and
favorable dismission out of this life, before those great clashings and
confusions should come, which had been foreshewn to him. So Austin and Paraeus
dyed a little before Hippo and Hidelberg were taken.

Till the end be] Whenever it shall be, sooner or later, thou shall be sure to
awake out of the dust of death unto everlasting life, as ver. 2. Yea thou shall
shine as the Stars for ever and ever, ver. 3. All that thou have to do now, is,
to prepare for such an end, and to wait till thy change shall come, comforting
thy self against death, with the hope of a blessed resurrection.

For thou shall rest] Thy soul shall rest in Abraham's bosom, thy body in the
grave as in a bed of down, until the Resurection of the Just. Mors aerumnarum
requies, was Chaucers Motto.

And stand in the lot] i. e. In thine own order, 1 Cor. 15.23. and in that
degree of heavenly glory which shall be given thee as thy lot (in allusion to
the promised land, divided amongst the Israelites by lot) and as the reward of
a faithful Prophet, instrumental to the good of many, who shall bless God for
thee thoroughout all eternity.

Ipse quidem studui been de pietat^ mereri:
Sed quicquid potui, gratia, Christ, tua est.
Sel^.
Quid sum? Nil: quis sum? Nullus: sed gratia Christi
Quod sum, quod vivo, quodque laboro, facit.
FINIS.
AN Alphabetical TABLE OF All the Principal things contained in this whole WORK.
A
ACtion: Life consists in it; b. page 125. being acted by God, let us act
vigorously for him, b. 207, 353. a. 164 Adultery: See Whoredom. Affliction:
make the best of it, a. 12. Men are best when worst, a. 139. faint not in
adversity, a. 161. God afflicts his in measure, and for good, b. 63. rejoice
in affliction, b. 86. it is but short; b. 71. it instructs, b. 92. exciteth
devotion, b. 94. it is in love, not fury, b. 96. in measure, 97. for a cure, or
for a curse, ib. purges out sin, ib. God afflicts not willingly, b. 102. but
most wisely, b. 102, 103. and in measure, b. 152. why God afflicts his own,
b. 173. Affliction sanctified is a great mercy, b. 258. Some are good only in
Afflictions, b. 322 Alcair a great City. b. 473 Alexander the great described,
b. 552, 557 Alms: Give liberally, a. 16, 131. cheerfully, a. 150. of your own,
a. 296. Motives and Directions, a. 297, 298, 299. Alms-deeds are acceptable, b.
189 Ambition: Limitless, a. 166. masked with Religion, b. 341. pernicious, b.
439 Angels, Gods Agents, b. 393. their knowledge, swiftness, serviceableness,
etc. ib. See also on Dan. 9, 10, 11, 12. Anger: defer it, a. 129. it is allayed
by time, a. 168. proud wrath stigmatized, a. 145. it is unruly, a. 177. moderate
it, and why, a. 263. Rash anger is over-hot, b. 532. angry, not fit to be
conversed with, a. 154 Antinomy, Dogmatical and Practical, a. 195 Apostates are
dangerous creatures, a. 241, 249. their doom, a. 84 Arnold martyred for plain
dealing, b. 300 Arrogancy intolerable, b. 470. arrogant boasters, b. 539
Astrologers: their vain predictions, b. 150. their covetousness, b. 151. they
befool folk. b. 543
B
BAbylons strength, b. 364. ruin, b. 360 Bancrofts Epitaph, b. 114 Beauty
abused, a. 62 Bellarmines rash censure, a. 348 Blasphemy, b. 485 Blind folk are
sharp-witted, b. 136 Boasting, a. 134. proud boasters, a. 168 b. 539. praise
not thy self, a. 176 Britain soon converted and perverted, b. 195 Butas a
cunning thief, b. 228
C
CAto Major commended, b. 520 Causes of things are unknown to us, b. 395
Chaldee tongue, b. 521 Chinois are a great people, b. 156 Children: to be
corrected, a. 79, 194, 195. Catechized, 140. children cruelly punished for
parents faults, b. 441. Duke Dudleyes children dyed all childless, b. 290
Cities die as well as men, b. 85 Colosse Rhodian huge, b. 531 Company good:
keep such, a. 77. comfort and benefit of it, a. 240, 241, 242. Man a sociable
creature, b. 26, 27 Company evil: danger of it, a. 33. shun it. a. 20
Compassion excels alms, b. 190. Saints pity the wickeds misery, b. 69, 70
Conscience is a divine faculty, a. 139. power of it, a. 270. what it is, b.
192. it is spring of duty, b. 531. comfort of a good Conscience. a. 96, 97, 120.
force of a clear Conscience, b. 533. burden of a wounded Conscience, a. 125.
terror of an evil Conscience, b. 542, 549, 281 Confession finds mercy, a.
186. b. 232, 233 Content has comfort, a. 97 Christ: Affect a unity with him,
a. 314. his sweetness, a. 315. run to him, a. 316. let him alone have the
heart, a. 323. his dear love to his Church, a. 326. why he is compared to
common creatures, a. 328. his fullness, a. 329. b. 175, 176, 197. his gifts to
all his, b. 512. Love the Lord Jesus, a. 333. provoke him not, ibid. he is at
hand to help his, a. 334. our safety is from him, 332. his death a pledge of
Gods greatest love, a. 349. deny thy self for Christ, ibid. He is a branch, b.
21. his Incarnation and Government, 39. by him we conquer, b. 46. his names,
offices, etc. b. 46, 47, 55.56, 57, 197, 198. The Lord our Righteousness a
sweet name. b. 290, 291. his humiliation, b. 168, 169. his satispassion is our
satisfaction, ibid. our sins are imputed to him, b. 170. his singular patience,
ib. come freely to him, b. 170 Church: not always so visible, a. 337. it is
Christ's workmanship, a. 347. a Vineyard, b. 24. Her beauty, a. 350. it is a
borrowed beauty, b. 431. she is invincible, b. 43. Gods nest, b. 113. she has
Gods presence with her, b. 518. See Saints. Conference, sweet, a. 350.
profitable, a. 55, 67, 99, 167, 179 Contention to be stinted, not stirred, a.
118. contentious persons are pests, a. 119. incendiaries, a. 175. dissentions
of brethren, a. 126. See Seedsmen of Sedition. Conversion: Philosophy converts
not, a. 224. wonderful Conversions, a. 356. Instances of Converts, b. 10, 11.
sound conversion, b. 514. Gain others to Christ, a 93. by Gospel-conversation,
b. 515 Corruption: seeds of all sin found in all, a. 180. we are all in the
dark, a. 200. Natural man described, b. 193 Counselors: good, a. 61. to be
valued, a. 78. do all by good advice, a. 136 Covenant, New, b. 315
Covetousness, destructive, a. 4. 141, 142. troublesome, a. 101. unsatiable, 249,
250. b. 26, 243. earthy, b. 55, 56. miserable, b. 275. restless, a. 250. basely
tenacious, a. 253, 297, 298. covet not, a. 188, 189. punishment of
covetousness, b. 453. Courage of a Christian, and his armor, a. 353 Cruelty of
wicked ones, a. 66. such shall have no mercy, a. 190 Curiosity sinful, a. 165
Curse causless comes not, a. 171 Custom evil, hardly left, b. 265 Cyrus
commended, b. 134. his many conquests, b. 144. riches, ibid. his name whence,
ibid. his Religion, b. 145
D
DAmascus a pleasant City, b. 357 Dancing disgraced, a. 234 Daniel: the worlds
darling, b. 545. his praise, b. 520. his learning, b. 524. his prophecy dark,
b. 519 David George an odious Her^^ick, b. 484 Death: mind mortality, a. 262,
300, 301. b. 370. Death unavoidable, a. 277. disarmed to a Believer, b. 90. who
are often taken away from evil to come, b. 182, 183 Dejectedness dangerous, a.
280 Delight in sin damnable, a. 55 Desertion a great affliction, b. 173, 174.
let such trust in God, b. 161. See the Notes on Cant. 5. Desires accepted, a.
63. rewarded, a. 77. not so sluggish wishes, a. 146. beginings highly accepted
in heaven, a. 336. b. 8 Diligence ingratiateth, a. 155, furthereth Gods
service, b. 511 Dreams: what they are, b. 294. See a. 248 Devil of discontent,
b. 437 Drunkenness damnable, b. 28. a great sin, a. 133. a mischief, a. 159.
and the mother of mischief, a. 210, 211. See b. 30, 99. 522. great drunkards,
b. 27
E
EArths compass, b. 129 Edward 6. commended, a. 294, 350 Queen Elisabeths
Majesty, a. 107. her mothers diligence and bounty, a. 213. Eloquence, a rare
gift, a. 135. very useful in the Church, a. 92, 110. commendable in a Preacher,
a. 308 Englands happiness, a. 360 English witty, b. 521. hunted once by
sweating sickness, b. 448 Envy: mischief of it, a. 89, 115, 162 Essenes came
from Rechabites, b. 324 Evil devices end ill, a. 87 Examples: profit by
domestical examples, or perish, b. 543, 544 Excuses avail not, a. 151 Ezekiel,
the hieroglyphical Prophet, b. 391. dark and deep, b. 500, 502, 509. why so often
called Son of man, b. 397 Eyes: look well to them, a. 22, 121
F
FAith, founded upon saving knowledge, b. 172. particularly applies, a. 324.
holds her own of Christ, a. 344. expells ignorance; b. 90. causes peace, b.
91. patience, b. 101. the force of faith, b. 450 False-witness a pest, a. 68. a
lewd liar, a. 81 Fast: a true one described, b. 188. read the Word on
Fast-dayes, b. 327 Fear of God, foundation of wisdom, a. 3. it is humble, a. 11.
watchful, a. 44. has happiness, a. 88. fear and obey God, a. 310. fear him
only, b. 44 Fear: base, betrayeth men, a. 56, 197. b. 60, 61. caused by sin, b.
37. punished in Mr. Holt, a. 211. it is often causless, a. 182 Few good, a. 273. few
saved, b. 71, 238 Flattery, odious, a. 178: pernicious, a. 3 Folly is
talkative, a. 50. 293. tells all, a. 193. all places full of fools, a. 224.
when a fool is to be answered, and when not, a. 172. a fool all over, a. 290.
and he proclaims it, ibid. Formalists rejected, b. 246 Friendship true, what,
a. 118 Frugality: be thrifty, a. 181, 182. unthrifts, a. 230 Fruitfulness
spiritual, b. 200
G
GAtakers great pains was his death, b. 390 Gileads precious balsom, b. 252
Gluttons condemned, a. 184, 255, 256, b. 82, 239 God: his omniscience, a. 92,
95. he forms our thoughts and speeches, a. 103, 104. his decree shall stand,
a. 236. All things are present to him, a. 237. his surpassing greatness, a.
248. b. 185. his forbearance no quittance, a. 278. he protecteth his in danger,
b. 22, 137. his back-parts only are seen, b. 32. nothing is hid from him, b.
105. his anger, b. 111. he repents of the evil, b. 127. is present with his in
danger, b. 137. his love more then motherly, b. 157. immense, ibid. his
omnipresence, b. 213. his attributes yield comfort, b. 256. he is our portion,
b. 380 Godliness, has peace and plenty, b. 8. the gain of it, b. 116, 156. See
Grace. It is aviled by the world, b. 193 Gog and Magog who, b. 492.
Gogmagog-hills, b. 497 Good chief: opinions about it, a. 217 Gospel, a feast of
fat things, b. 90 glory of Gospel Times, b. 498 Grace only is substantial, a.
7. gainful, a. 13, 14, 45, 49, 78, 84. better then wealth, a. 264, 265. it is
victorious, b. 134. enobleth, b. 137. refreshes, a. 12. is not propagated, a.
51. is small at first, b. 513, 514. No perfection of it here attainable, a.
270. See Godliness. Grave, a bed of rest, b. 183 Great men should be good, a.
107. if wicked, they prove a public mischief, a. 185. they are set up for such
purpose, a. 183. self-willed Princes perish. a. 342. Crowns are stuffed with
cares, a. 243. tell great ones the naked truth, a. 276. their sins are
pernicious to many, a. 228. they are generally imitated, b. 49. Dignity should
wait upon desert, a. 291. Kingdoms have their cares, a. 284. great ones if
wicked, ill-spoken of at death, b. 288. Some brought to extreme poverty, b.
385, 539. Ill Princes a punishment to the people, b. 560. Princes duties, a.
118. See Kings, Magistrates.
H
HArm watch, harm catch, a. 176 Hatred is bloody, a. 192. mutual hatred of good
and bad people, a. 198 Heart: keep it carefully, a. 21. watch it, 22, 33. give
it to God, a. 158. reflect often upon it, a. 260. it is deceitful and desperately
wicked, b. 273, 274. God searches it, ibid. it is the fountain of all our
misery, b. 223. when once it becomes hard and horny, a. 158. dead and dedolent,
b. 35 Hear, attentively, b. 177. Many hearers are dull and unteachable, b. 99.
Yea scoffers at the word. b. 100 Heathens, why called Pagans, b. 238. they
change not their Gods, b. 225 Heaven, curiously wrought, a. 14. its great
height, a. 165. its unconceivable happiness, a. 331 Heavenly-mindedness, a.
100. Let there be continual ascensions in our hearts, a. 345. heavenly
Geometry, b. 505 Hell, its horror, a. 95. hellfire what, b. 112 torments, b.
161. think of them, b. 217, 218 Heretics are all in extremes, a. 240. they
flatter men: b. 292. Lay-Preachers a great mischief, b. 293. Brown the
Sect-master died in Gaol, b. 337. See Seducers. History: Excellency and use of
it, a. 221 Holiness is amiable, a. 275. gets fame, a. 52. Walk accurately, a.
22. 37. look forth-right, b. 511. be strict and scrupulous, b. 523 Humility
has favor, a. 17. honor, a. 58. a. 103. b. 83. true worth is humble, a. 199
Hypocrisy is hateful, a. 175, 177. b. 51. hypocrites are vindictive, a. 319.
their services rejected, b. 5, 6. yet they outdo better men, b. 187. have
specious pretenses, b. 214. upbraid God with their services, b. 187. shall be
affrighted, b. 119. detected, b. 445. detested, b. 51. appear in their colors,
b. 334, 344
I
IDleness mischeivous, a. 30. wastes, a. 31. a sluggard graphically described,
a. 239 Idolaters, wilfully ignorant, b. 129. spare for no cost, b. 148
Jeremiah's, worth, and sufferings, b. 219, 220, 269. how long he prophesied. b.
220. his modesty, b. 221 Jests, salt, provoke, a. 192 Jesuits, great
troublers, a. 209. quarrelsome Quaerists, b. 53. blood-thirsty, b. 548 Jews:
their desperate unbelief, b. 168. devilish spite, a. 177. they make up two
Christ's, b. 168. blaspheme the Gospel, b. 44. they kneel not, out of pride, b.
147. their conversion, b. 492. A Jew converted by Esaias 53. b. 167. their
desolation, b. 35, 36. Jerusalems Epitaph. b. 371 Ignorance of Popish Priests,
b. 276 Impatience betrayeth us, a. 171 Impudency in sin, b. 17. 231. 243. D.
Story impudent. b. 243 Infants, why called cake-bread, b. 248. Christian
infants Gods children, b. 432 Insensibleness under Gods judgments, b. 94.
incorrigibleness, b. 1, 31 Integrity: state of it, a. 273, 274 King John's reign
troublesome, b. 71 Joy spiritual sweet, a. 83, 99, 144. Just only Joy, a. 191.
b. 46. such ought to be cheerful, a. 283, 284 Joy carnal hinders holiness, a.
261. ends ill, a. 84. 263. it is mad mirth, a. 174. unfound, a. 191. a flash; a.
225. a toy, ib. mad, ibid. Isaiah and his Prophecy described, b. 1 Ithiel and
Ucal, who: a. 199 Judgment general, a. 310, 311: the fire of the last day, b.
553 Just man is safe from evil, a. 70. rich; a. 93. joyful, 144. bold, a. 182
Justification and Sanctification go together, a. 105 Justitiaries, a. 205
K
Kings; their best guard, b. 139. learned Kings, b. 524. Kingdoms are empty
bubbles, b. 525. The Roman Empire is mouldering, b. 553. See Great ones, and
Magistrates. Knowledge, got by reading and hearing, a. 2. beg and dig for it;
a. 7. it is sweet; a. 161. we know but little, a. 200. a. 281. learn of
inferiors, b. 65. Great Scholars ignorant of God; b. 105
L
LAw of God: Its equity and utility, b. 153 Lawsuits tedious, b. 286 Learning,
pleasant, a. 55. prized, b. 523. Learned Kings, b. 524. Daniels Learning, ibid.
Levellers, dangerous creatures, a. 291, 292 Life, full of sorrow, a. 233.
over-loved, a. 253. Sweet, 300. short and uncertain, b. 15 Love: our love is a
reflex of Christ's love; a. 358 Lusts: fly youthful lusts, a. 73. lust is
unsatisfiable, a. 180 they are thorns, and why, b. 234 Luxury is attended by
beggary, a. 144. undoes many, b. 465 Lying a great sin, a. 33. such as Saints
will beware of, b. 203
M
MAgistrates; must judge the poor justly, a. 194. how far they are to be
obeyed, b. 531. regiment without righteousness, a. 187. places of judicature
abused, a. 237. Evil underofficers; b. 114. like Prince, like people, a. 193.
See Kings, great persons. Man, set to School to other creatures, a. 29, 209.
has in him the malignities of all the creatures, b. 139 Man is born to misery,
a. 260 is miserable, a. 231, 256 Manner of performance; b. 510 Manichees mad
conceit of God, b. 145 Married couples should love dearly, a. 324 Martyrs:
their five virtues; b. 301. they astonished their tormentors* b. 534 Mass,
whence so called, b. 368 Mediocrity, beg a mean estate, a 203, 204. keep a
mean, a. 269 Meekness mollifieth, a. 91 Melancthon praised, a. 223. timorous he
was, b. 223 Mercy abused, turns into fury, b. 135. Gods mercy matchless, b. 230
Merit-mongers vain, b. 207. self-justitiaries, b. 209. these are the Saints
greatest enemies. b. 461 Ministers: obey them, a. 6. they are Cryers, a. 41.
Noble preachers, a. 218, 219. eloquence befits them; a. 308 Ministry
blasphemed, a. 309. persist to press necessary truths, a. 336. inculcate the
same truths, b. 99 Ministers dignity and duty; a. 346, 347, 351, 352. let them
be bold, b. 107. Ministry is a sweet mercy, b. 110 Ministery-miracles, b. 123.
Minsters mostly labor in vain, b. 154. Yet must preach on, b. 155. able and
apt to comfort the feeble-minded, b. 159. A mirror for Ministers, b. 160. Dumb
dogs described, b. 181. ignorant, greedy, sleepy, ib. drunken, b. 182. preach
earnestly, b. 186, 187. young preachers, b. 221. preach boldly, b. 222, 223. be
compassionate, b. 253. shall meet with many troubles, b. 279. and have the
worlds wages, b. 281. a profane preacher a great mischief, b. 291, 292. bad
Ministers may convert souls, b. 293. Ministers are watchmen, b. 401. must be
resident, b. 486. must dilate, b. 515. ill Ministers are the Devils
Dirt-daubers, b. 425. Christ's love to his offending Ministers, b. 507.
Ministers wives, what they should be, b. 508 Miracles: 365. at a birth, b. 172.
the old Woman of Bolton suckling a forlorn babe, b. 384 Mocking at Gods
Menaces, b. 29. at religion, b. 118. at the word, punished, b. 102. a scoffer
converted, ibid. See Scorners. Mortification of sin, b. 234, 235 Mortify all
as well as any, b. 443 Muleasses King of Tunis justly made blind, b. 422
Multitude, no good plea, a. 62. follow it out to evil, b. 43 Murmuring against
God, a. 128. complain not of the times, a. 263, 264 Murderers must be executed,
a. 188 bloody men make bloody ends, a. 158
N
NAme: a good name a great blessing, a. 102. precious, a. 147. better then
riches, 148. sweet, a. 257; 258. get and keep it, b. 199 Nebuchadnezzars
distemper, what? b. 537, 538, 540 Noble Preachers, a. 218, 219
O
OAths: how to swear aright, b. 234. fear an oath, a. 286. petty oaths great
sins, b. 239. A wretch dying swearing, a. 22^, 230 Obedience Evangelical, a.
130 Obstinacy, a kind of blasphemy, b. 447 Offenders for a word, b. 106 Old age
full of infirmities, a. 303, 304, 305, yet venerable if good, a. 113
Opportunity* improve it, a. 118 Oppression a great sin, a. 9^, 154 Oppressors,
Thieves, b. 9, 10 Ordinances are sweet, a. 339, 340
P
PAins taken to small purpose, a. 294. Papists, perfidious, b. 118. bloody, ib.
idolatrous, b. 142. superstitious as the Egyptians, 413. blasphemous, b. 499.
their invocation of Saints, b. 205. their roaring out Rorate before Christmas,
b. 145. Romish Edomites, b. 122 Parents: good parentage a great honor, a. 115.
rob not parents, a. 189. contempt of them exquisitely punished, a. 207. observe
them, b. 325 Partiality naught, a. 163 Passion proclaims folly, a. 68, 69
Patience lesseneth the cross, b. 306 Paul's painfulness, b. 166 Peace spiritual
is a Jewel, a. 116. the wickeds peace unsound, b. 154 Perjury punished, b. 438
Persecution befalls the best, a. 318. wicked hate them, b. 196. conspire
against them, b. 50. are Gods rods, b. 51. terror of, 88. b. 120. Persevere in
well-doing, a. 262 Plain-dealing best, a 106. See Arnulph. Plato detained the
truth, b. 138 Persians Laws, why irrepealable, b. 546 Policy enemy to piety, b.
107, 237, 355 Worldly wisdom flat folly, b. 526 Pope^ his pride, b. 467, 553.
downfall, 495, 496. the number of his name, 544. his blasphemy, 556. he joins
with the Turk against the truth, b. 493 Poverty excuses not from duty, a. 42.
it is disregarded, a. 86. forgot, a. 287. deprecate it, a. 204 Pragmaticalness
censured, a. 174 Praise the Lord for all, b. 58. for recovery out of sickness,
b. 124. wicked cannot do it, b. 126 Prayers: power of prayer, a. 63. 94. it
ever prevails, a. 102. pray in humility, a. 166. with importunity, a. 203.
constancy, ibid. and b. 547. in few words, a. 246. what to pray for, a. 203.
pray o^, b. 205. though but broken petitions, b. 125. in secret, a. 337. God
hears his, and why, b. 212. he hearreth not the wicked, a. 5. carnal prayers,
a. 146 Pride hateful, a. 32. self-conceited, a. 68. breeds brawls, a. 75.
swells, b. 467. breaks, a. 109. b. 98. 475. 530. mischief of pride, a. 141.
purse-proud. a. 150. self-conceited, foiled, a. 271 Profess Christ wisely and
boldly, a. 343 b. 141. openly, b. 547. to the last, a. 353. good words and no
more, b. 261 Promises: they are full of sweetness, a. 329. b. 479. suck
sweetness out of them, b. 215 Proverbs of Solomon praised, a. 1. 50. See
Solomon. Providence orders all, a. 106, 113, 138, 150. This Heathens doubted
of, denied, b. 130. One event to all, a. 228, 282, 286 Public Spirit a common
blessing, a. 60. honor of public benefactors, b. 190 Prosperity in sin a
plague, b. 34 559 Punishment of sin: God befools those whom he will destroy, b.
338. he loves to retaliate, b. 78. he has variety of plagues, b. 88. he begins
at his Sanctuary, b. 415. See Sin. Purity: love of it, a. 150
Q
QUakers cross-grained, b. 132
R
RAin is of God, b. 241 Raptures spiritual, a. 331, 332 Reformation wrought
here by degrees, b. 496 Remission of sin is free, b. 140. full, b. 143.
plentiful, b. 178. above all that we can think, 179. Sin unpardoned lies
heavy, b. 279 Renovation, the new creature, b. 163. all things new in Christ,
a. 222. the change, a. 345 Repent, b. 233, 234. thoroughly, b. 7. speedily, b.
80. lest, All too late, b. 247. Repentance the best defensive weapon, b. 83. It
reingratiateth with God, b. 516. It is twofold, b. 19 Reproaches: We are
naturally impatient of them, b. 452. slight them, a. 220 Reprobation, a. 105
Reproof: a friendly office, a. 263. if fitly performed, a. 167. bear it well,
a. 103. love a faithful Reprover, a. 48, 63. Many are thereby enraged, a. 95,
96 Restitution, b. 199 Resurrecton, proved, b. 94, 95. See b. 490 Revenge is
bloody, a. 85. crossed, b. 426 do not avenge your selves, a. 16. 137. 164
Riches profit not, a. 58. protect not, 64. stave not off death, 252. are
uncertain; a. 251. ill-gotten bring a curse, a. 226 Money the Monarch of this
world; a. 296 Rivers: Good meetings at Rivers sides, b. 392 Rome must be burnt,
a. 207. See Pope, Papists.
S
SAbbath, kept and broken how, b. 191. scorned, b. 370 Sacrament of the Lords
Supper sweet to Saints, a. 323 Sacrifices Evangelical, b. 320 Sacrilege, a.
138, sacrilegious buildings, b. 287. See b. 541 Saints, their excellency, a.
72, 274, 275. beauty and bravery, a. 322. safety, b. 119. dignity, b. 200.
sobriety, b. 527. their love to Christ, a. 340. eager desires after him, 341.
they will not lie, b. 203. their sins are soon ripe, b. 223. A Saint is homo
quadratus, b. 504. much honored, b. 158 Saracens whence, b. 357 Satan
foretells not things future, b. 133 Scandal: Shun scandalous practices, a.
289 Scriptures: their worth, a. 75, 76. sweetness, 110. extolled, 309. a Rule
of life* b. 109. blasphemed, b. 122. Two Testaments, a. 315. distinction of
verses but alate, b. 111. Scripture is plain, a. 43. profitable, b. 498
Scorners odious, a. 160. b. 183, 184. See Mocking. Security precedeth
destruction, b. 61. 101. it is a spiritual judgment, b. 104 Seedsmen of
sedition, a. 32. Make-bates, a. 69. 112. Shun such, and why, a. 163 Seducers:
a. 185. dangerous creatures, a. 292. Foxes, and why, a. 338. shun them, a. 320
smell them out, ibid. they lead to Atheism, b. 293. See Heretics.
Self-conquest the best, a. 113 Self-delusion, b. 143. deadly, a. 83, 111
Self-flattery pernicious, a. 140 Self-love sinful, a. 143 Self-examination, b.
381, 382 Sensualists, hardly converted, b. 515. they shall smoke for it, a.
201, 202 Separation a great sin, a. 122 Severity sometimes necessary, a. 138
Shame for sin double, b. 11 Silence, seasonable, a. 235 Sin: the bitter-sweet
of it, a. 136, 272. has punishment at the heels of it, a. 27, 70, 255. b. 13,
17, 18. it destroys whole States, a. 91. freedom from guilt and filth of it,
b. 8. Saints sins turn to their good, a. 319. upbraid them not with sins
repented of, a. 111. they work out sins scum, b. 459. Hide not sin, a. 186.
bewail the sins of the times, b. 452 Sincerity of Saints, a. 357. it is
perfection, b. 92. known by uniformity, a. 172 Slander slurreth the best, a.
264 Sycophants are Serpents, a. 293. b. 283 Solomon: his great wisdom, a. 217,
218. his three books, a. 153. his Proverbs praised, a. 1, 2. his Ecclesiastes,
a. 218. Canticles, a. 312. his Observations are lost, a. 223. his Fasciculus
temporum, a. 232. he was well taught, a. 229 Sorrow godly, bettereth the heart,
a. 261. Mourn for sin, b. 67 Soul, is of God, and returns to God, a. 307
Spirit, is Gods hand, b. 412. puts mettle into the Saints, a. 330. his still
voice, b. 110. he is of a fiery nature, b. 23. why compared to water, b. 58
Submission appeaseth, a. 108. submit to Gods holy hand, a. 267. consider, 268.
submit to superiors, a. 275 Superstition grossly mistaken, b. 347. superstition
of forefathers is to be abandoned, b. 447 Suretyship unadvised dangerous, a.
28
T
TAle-bearers: frown upon them, a. 170. they are murderers, b. 452. See
Slanderers, and Seedsmen of Sedition. Tears: sow in tears, a. 233. sorts of
tears, a. 238. Crocodile tears, b. 340 Thoughts: evil, b. 236. rid them, ibid.
they are not free, a. 100. See Heart. Tillage very useful, a. 249. it is of Gods
teaching, b. 103 Time: discern it, a. 277. redeem it, a. 300. make the best of
it, a. 232. waste it not on trifles, b. 176. our time is short, our task long,
a. 285 Tongue: govern it, a. 127. be advised what you speak, a. 101, 198.
gracious language, a. 214, 335. Tongue mischievous to many, a. 57, 93 Treason
comes to light, a. 296. Traitors Meed, b. 117. good men often charged with
treason, b. 332 Trent-Council discovered, b. 413. their high-presumption, b.
505 Trinity, a. 302. made man, ibid. Trust God only, a. 10. rest on him, b. 108
make him thy refuge, a. 124. they are happy that so do, a. 109.
creature-confidence disappointed. a. 125, 169 Truth: prize it, a. 158. it
seeks no corners, b. 147 Turkish Empire Vaste, b. 95
V
Vainglory naught, a. 170. See Boasting. Victories of English over the
Spaniard, b. 436 Union with Christ, affect it, a. 315, 339 Vows: make and keep
them, a. 247. a vow for holiness, b. 522 D. Ushier preached sixty years, b.
221. his Prophecy of Irelands desolation, b. 403 Usury, unlawful, a. 184. b.
440. 453
W
WAR wastes people, a. 89, wisdom best manageth it, a. 145. Sword in
commission, b. 352 Wigelius an Antiacademian Widgin, b. 521 Whirlwinds,
violent, b. 393 Whoredom pernicious, a. 8, 9.23, 24, 25, 34, 35, 36, 39, 40,
41, 151, 273. costly, b. 433. Harlot and Whore whence, ibid. Two adulterous
Priests punished, b. 308. Whoredom how punished in sundry Nations, b. 434, 456.
a beastly punishment of it, b. 433 Wicked are dross, a. 165. uncounsellable, a.
190. uncorrigible, a. 181. ambitious of destruction, a. 66. they stink, a. 323.
yet often they live long, 208, 279. they are restless, b. 186. desperately
naught, b. 228. wilfully, b. 244 praise them not, a. 182 Widows Gods Clients,
a. 100 Wife; good and evil, 64. a. 80. Good Wife precious, a. 127, 130. rare,
212. described, and praised, a. 212, 213, 215, 216. an evil Wife a great
plague, a. 143, 144 Wine comfort, a. 211 Wisdom, true, what, a. 65. wherein
it consists, a. 76. it does much in War, 145. saves and sacketh Cities, a.
287, 288 Women unfit for Government, b. 18. they often sway their husbands, ibid.
they are still made use of by the Devil, b. 346, 347. their pride and luxury
punished, b. 19, 20 Word of God, powerful in operation, a. 153. b. 2. 57.
accompanied with the spirit, b. 194. it is pure, a. 202. add not to it, ibid. it
shall be accomplished; b. 8, 9. It is light, b. 45. loathed, a. 178. a famine
of it, a. 195. blasphemed, a. 202. it is fire, b. 294. a hammer, ibid. will still
show men their faults, b. 330. abuse of it is dangerous, b. 282.
Scripture-poetry. b. 364 Works of God: God is much seen in them; b. 28. the
wonder of the Sun, a. 220. of the winds, ibid. rivers, ibid. of man's body, 299,
306 World: a Wilderness, a. 345. all here is vanity, a. 219. unsatisfactory, a.
221. empty, a. 227. vexatious, a. 229 changeable, b. 64. World wheels about, b.
394. See 558. Worship of God: prepare to it, a. 244 be not slight and overt in
it. a. 245, 246. grow not secure after it, a. 342. Speak reverently of holy
things, a. 173. Men's persons must first be accepted, a. 140
Y
SErve God in Youth, a. 303
Z
ZEal: be resolute for God, b. 533. Laurence his Zeal, ibid. God hates the
Lukewarm, b. 296
FINIS.

