THE TRAGICK-COMEDY OF TITUS OATS, Who sometime went under the Notion of The
Salamanca Doctor: Who being Convicted of PERJURY And several other Crimes, at
the King's Bench Bar, Westminster, May 16. 1685. had his Sentence to and in the
Pillory, to be VVhip'd at the Carts Arse, and to be sent back to Prison.
PERJURY. PERJURY.

depiction of Titus Oats in the pillory SPECTATUM ADMISSI RISUM TENEATIS AMICI.

depiction of Titus Oats being whipped at the back of a cart

WHet all your Wits, and Antidote your Eyes,
Before you hazard here to play this Prize;
Or gaze (like Eagles) on a Show so rare,
No time brought forth an Object yet so fair;
Lo! here is the Bug-Bear-Rampant of the PLOT,
Which Whig on Tory (in a Shamm) Begot;
Here A-la-mode the Guardian of the Land
In a New-fashion'd Pulpit now does stand;
The Tub's o're-whelm'd, and all the Hoops are flung,
And Deput- Jack he peeps out through the Bung.
Barcochab's here, the Star of Englands Sky,
Deciphered now The Son of PERJURY;
The Aegyptan-Cow, the Oaten-blasted Blade,
Which has (these several Years) eat up our Trade;
The States Anatomist, the Church Confusion,
Who Dreamed a Plot, and Swore it was a Vision;
A Doctor who Degree did never Commence,
A Rhetoritian that spoke never Sense;
Like Proteus he still changes to the time,
His Pulse and Temper suits with any Clime;
His Birth's equivocal, by Generation
Seditions By-Blow, Loyaltys privation;
A Linsey-Woolsey Emp'rick of the State,
That hugs the Church, and knocks it over the Pate.
He stands in state, and well becomes his station,
Using a Truckling-Stool for Recreation:
Now should he, in contempt of Peter's Chair,
Leap from the Pillory to the Three-leg'd Mare,
And with Empedocles desire to be
But Canonized an Oaten-Deity,
He would spring up (but that he is a Sot)
A Mandrake, to conceive another PLOT.
His Crime no Man can balance with a Curse,
For still the Hydra does deserve a worse:
Then let him live a Minotaur of Men,
Like Hirco-Cervus Couchant in his Den;
The Monument of Mischief, and of Sin,
To spread no farther than the Sooterkin
Of old Sedition, set before our Eye,
As Buoy and Beacon unto Loyalty;
Yet at the Wheels of Fortune let him Dance
A Jigg of Penance that can make him Prance;
Resenting all his Errors (though in vain)
With fruitless wishes calling Time again;
His Face is Brass, his Breech no Rod will feel,
And who knows but his Back is made of Steel;
His Soul is proof, perhaps his Body may
Be made of Mettle harder than the Clay;
Then put him to the touch, make Titus rore,
The Chase is turned, now he is Son of a W --
Then conjure him with Eggs and Kennel Dirt;
And Contradictions that his Mouth did squirt;
To tell his Name, we will Christian him once yet,
And mold and Agnoun which can with him fit;
He is no Doctor, for by horrid Lies
He cures Sedition, only Tinker-wise.
He is no Papist, for he never had Merit,
Nor yet a Quaker, for he has no Spirit.
He is no Protestant, for want of Grace,
To keep him from a falsifying face.
He is no Turk, for always (like a Swine)
He loved to wallow in a Tub of Wine.
No name can fit him, therefore let him be
The grumbling Ghost of Old Presbitery.
London, Printed by J. M. and Published by Randal Tailor, MDCLXXXV.


