A TREACHEROUS PLOT OF A CONFEDERACY IN IRELAND, With the Rebels at Calway,
with furniture of Guns, and Ammunition for War.

Brought over in ships of salt, but being discovered, were prevented and the
names related of the chief Agents. With a Relation of the Rebels, in the
Province of Connoge, who were discomfitted, and about 100 of the Rebels slain,
and 20 of them taken prisoners, who afterward beset the Earl of Clanrickets
house, and slew 30 of his company, but by other Aid were afterward driven to
fly into the woods. With their cruelty to Sir Thomas Nevill, whom they hanged
on his own grounds, and cut him all to pieces, with many other lamentable
Relations.

The Report whereof being sent over by Mr. August, Minister of Gods Wood in the
County of Lymbricke.

London, Printed for James Salmon and are to be sold in Grubstreet, near to
the Flying Horse. 1641.

THE Treacherous Plot of Confederacy in Ireland.
THe Rebels have done much harm in the Country of Calway, in the province of
Conog where they spare no cruelty to any Sex, estate or degree whatsoever, and
that even upon the Lords day: on which day if they are not shedding of blood,
they have meetings of plays, gaming, pastimes, bagpipes, drinking, and
abominable venery, and wantonness in every place where they come.

Upon St. Andrews day last, being the 30 of Nov. 1641. there pitched about the
number of 300 Rebels in arms near Logreags, and Artaure, who marched with
Spanish Colors, and Arms in their Ancient, and 100 more pitched near
Temenage, who hovered up and down about the woods and villages thereabouts,
seeking an opportunity to work their wicked designs.

Their intent was (as it was conceived) to march to Vort Omnie to surprise the
Earl of Clanrickards house, and to take away, and overthrow his forces; which
consist of an hundred horse, and as many foot, which is the best strength
thereabouts: but it seems that their intent was as well to surprise the Castle
of Logrags, and the Fort of Callway also, as well as the forces of the said
Earl, but they were preverted at that time.

The said Castle of Logerage, and the Fort of Calway were in great danger to
have been betrayed into the hands of the Rebels, by some popish soldiers,
with certain popishly affected Gentlemen and Merchants that were inhabitants
there.

They conspired a plot with the Rebels, in which plot they intended a bloody
design in cruel manner, against the Castle, Fort, and towns thereabout,
wherein had they accomplished their designs, they would, as it is justly
feared, bin as cruel to the Protestants there, as they are in other places
thereabouts.

To contrive this Plot covertly and suttlely not to be taken notice of, they
had contrived a way to strengthen themselves with Ammunition from France, for
there were there enhabiting certain Merchants, whose ships were come from
thence laden with salt: The coming of which ships, as it does appear, were an
Item to the Rebels, to give them notice of the time, which caused them then to
march into those parts, as it is conceived. These ships being laden with salt,
were presently gone about to be unladed, to which Office, were picked out by
the Merchants, such who they thought fittest for that secrecy: yet were there
discerned by the Officers, to be brought from the ships, muskets and swords:
which being discovered to the Protestans there, the matter was further sought
into, and it was found, that there were brought over from France, buried in the
salt, beside the said muskets and swords, diverse other Ammunition for war;
brought over, as is conceived, for to strengthen the Rebels against the
Protestants, or at least the Papists thereabout to assist them in the betraying
up of those places into their hands by the said forces, by which means, both
the Fort and Castle, and all places thereabouts were in great danger.

About this time, the ships being well nigh unla-which was about St. Andrews
day, as before, the rebels marched about these places, where they began to
insult and fall upon the people, putting many to the sword, so the Protestants
at Callway, and therabouts, seized on the Ammunition, and strengthened
themselves: whereby they fell upon the Rebels, and there was a great battle
fought between them, which wrought a great fear to all people thereabouts: but
there came in good aid to the Protestant side; so that in that fight they
received not much hurt, only somewounded. But of the Irish rebels there were
taken twenty, which were sent to the States to be censured, and above an
hundred slain, and wounded so sore, that they are not likely to live, and the
rest returned back again, and fled for their lives to another part of the
running Camp.

The next day they returned again with a greater Force, but marched two or
three miles from Logrags on the other side toward the Earl of Clanrickards
again, against whom they have long conspired, and they marched so furiously in
the night, that they were come to the said Earl of Clanrickards before they
were taken notice of, or their return known: so that in the morning ere they
were aware, the houfe was beset with the Rebels, who began to pull down the
walls, and discharged against the house, which they could not come near,
because the wall is so large about the house, so the forces of the Earl
prepared themselves, and came forth against them; but the Rebels being too
strong for them, slew about 30 of their company in a short space, and
discomfitted the Lord and his company exceedingly, so that they were all in
great fear.

But it pleased God to send them up relief from the town, and some other
Protestants that came in from other places thereabouts to relieve them, whereby
the Rebels were so beset on a sudden, that they were feign to fly, and take
the woods.

The Names of the most notable Agents in the Plot. Are
Teg Borke, Gentlemen. Darmod Okelley, Gentlemen. John Lench, Merchants. Thomas
Athie, Merchants. Francis Kinvin, Merchants.
The Earl of Torent is in great danger to be surprised; for there is great
wait laid for him by an Army of Rebels, that came out of the Country of Cork,
and the Country of Lymbicke: but we hope that they will not be able to
prevail against him: for he is strongly fortified with 100 horse, and 300
foot, who are provided for that place where he is, who guard the Castle, and
are appointed for the defense of the Town.

The Names of the chief Rebels in those parts, are
Gatell, Markardy Duffe of Bendaffe. Daniel O donoham of the Lepo.
(...) The other part of the Rebels do march toward Kingsale Castle, and the
New-fort, which may prove of the most dangerus consequence of all, in case they
should once be settled there; for from thence they can soon have wealth,
ammunition, and relief from Spain, which is much suspected, and feared, for
that is the chief Castle of all the Western parts of Ireland for strength,
and convenience, and lies upon the Seacoast, where relief may come in from
Spain with little trouble, which God prevent them of.

The Rebels took Sir Thomas Sevell, and hanged him upon a tree in his own
grounds, and cut his flesh in pieces, carrying pieces thereof up and down in
their hands, saying, this is the flesh of one of the R^lers against our holy
Father the Pope.

These, and such like, are the miseries of that Kingdom of Ireland at this
time: God in his mercy send them comfort.

FINIS.

