TREASON made Manifest; OR, A DISCOURSE By way of DIALOGUE BETWEEN Richard and
William: In Relation to the Trials and Convictions Of the Two Arch-Traytors,
VIZ. Edward Fitz-Harris, AND Oliver Plunket,
Titular Archbishop of DUBLIN IN IRELAND.

Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, J. Wright, J. Clarke, W. Thackeray, and T.
Passinger. 1681.

Treason made Manifest; OR, A Discourse by way of Dialogue BETWEEN Richard and
William, etc.
Richard. HA Neighbor Will, and where are you going in all this haste, if a
Man may be so bold as to ask you the question?


William. Why Neighbor is it possible that you should not know where I am
going?


Rich. Yes, it is possible, for as yet I know not.


Will. Then in good faith sit down upon this Ale-Bench, and I Will tell ye.


Rich. Be quick then, for I have but a little while to stay.


Will. As quick as you will, good Neighbor, for if I overstay my Market, I
shall buy but bad Pennyworths.


Rich. Why, are you going to Market then, pray what de'y design to buy that
you fear to come too late?


Will. Buy Neighbor, why News, new Minted News, what do you think I intend to
buy, that is the greatest Chaffer now adays.


Rich. But pray where is it to be sold?


Will. Why every where, there is few or no Markets but what yields little or
much, but at this I am going to they sell it by Sackfull, setting it up by way
of Auction, so that at the burning of an inch of Candle, and Twopence price, a
Man may purchase as much as his Head can bear.


Rich. Well, but all the News now is about Fitz-Harris, who as it is said on
the 9th of June was Tried at the King's Bench, for the Highest of Treason that
witty Mischief could invent.


Will. It Is true Neighbor, and there he was Cast for his Life, being fairly
convicted of his Treasons.


Rich. It Is but just he should, and condemned too, nay, after that Drawn,
Hanged and Quartered, who dare attempt the Deposing and Murdering of his
sacred Majesty, who is the Breath of our Nostrils, as a worthy Judge was once
pleased to say upon the Bench; and not only his, but to destroy all our lives
and Liberties, by raising Rebellion and bring in a French Power, thereby to
enslave us to the Tyranny of the Pope.


Will. Could this be proved against him upon his Trial?


Rich. Proved, yes, under his own Hand, and by several witness of candid
Reputations, who swore it positively.


Will. But in what manner, or by what means, did he design to accomplish such
his wicked designs?


Rich. By Libelling the King, to render him odious to his subjects, by Charging
him with such things as no good Man can express without horror and detestation;
by endeavoring to set all in a Flame, or Combustion of Civil War, which
should be Carried on under the name of the Non-Conformists, so that the Father
should have been against the Son, and the Son against the Father, to have
sheathed their swords in each others bowels, till all had been weakened and
ruined, when as the Popish Army was to be raised here, and the powers of France
was to have broken in upon us, and so to have born down all before them.


Will. That had been sad indeed, for then our lives had been like Chaff before
a Torrent fire.


Rich. Yes, this had been our case had this Instrument of Rome and Hell set on
and managed by the art and cunning of the Iesuitick Policies succeeded.


Will. But pray how did he go about to perfect this Design, I have here the
measures he took, but it was so imperfectly related, that I could make nothing
on it.


Rich. Why, he having some small acquaintance with one Mr. Everard, being the
Gentleman that was kept so long in the Tower, he came about the 21th of Febr.
last to his Chamber, and there falling into discourse with him about several
matters, began to commiserate him for the hard usage he had suffered, since his
adhearing to the Protestant Intrest, telling, him if he would forsake it, and
cleave to the Popish Party, he should not only meet with great Rewards, but
likewise be put into places of trust.


Will. And did the Gentleman believe or give credit to what he said?


Rich. Yes, he seemed so to do, but it was only to find what he would be at,
for he knew him to be a great Villain.


Will. Well, and how did he proceed, had they any farther discourse?


Rich. Why then he began to open his mind, and proposed to him the Indicting
of so venomous and Treasonable a Libell, that I think no Age e're heard the
like, as for me, my hair stood an end when I heard it read in Court.


Will. Why, what might it contain that it struck you with such horror.


Rich. Nay, it contained what I will not presume to repeat; nor can I liken it
to any thing, unless the Box which Pandora sent to Epimetheus, full fraught
with Plagues and dire destruction.


Will. But how come this to be discovered?


Rich. Why the honest Gentleman, for so I may well call him for detecting so
horrid a Villainy, disclosed the business to several worthy persons.


Will. But did he let Fitz-Harris know he did so?


Rich. No I Will warrant ye, but gave the more countenance to proceed, and
promised to take his Instructions for drawing up the Papers, and Appointed him
a time to come for them, when as he had placed a Gentleman to over-hear the
discourse that passed betwixt them.


Will. And did he come according to Appointment?


Rich. Yes, he did, and uttered many Treasonable words, promising the Gentleman
that he should have four Guinnys from the French Ambassadors Confessor, and
that he should be entered a Pensioner to the French King, and have several
Thousand Crowns.


Will. And how did the Gentleman like this proffer?


Rich. Not at all, for he boggled at it, saying it was a Treasonable Design,
and that he knew not what to think on it; Think on it (said Fitz-Harris) why the
more Treason the better, am not I deeper concerned in it then you? have not you
my Hand for it, and is there not many great Persons concerned in it, or words
to this effect.


Will. Well, and what was to have been done with those Papers you speak of just
now, how should they have been disposed of?


Rich. Why several Thousands Coppies were to have been dispersed amongst the
People in Penny-Post Letters, and many put into Gentlemen's pockets, and they
apprehended with them about 'um, so that it could not choose but blow up a flame
of horrid mischief, for all the Kings good subjects were to have been b^ought
into the Plot, and to be taxed for endeavoring to raise Rebellion and
Insurrection, so that the Popes Agents thought themselves Cock-sure of
prevailing against us, this being their last, but most dangerous shift, and
showed it self to be the very Spawn of the Jesuits, but Heaven that has
hitherto blasted their Designs, prevented it, and broke the Cockatrices Egg
e're it could be hatched.


Will. And was this Sworn against him at Trial.


Rich. It was, and much more then I can remember; but stay, I had forgot one
passage that was very material, which was, That one of the Gentlemen that gave
Evidence against him (whose known Fidelity renders him of unspotted Reputation)
because he would not be mistaken, marked the Papers that Mr. Everard brought to
him, and whilst he looked through a Crevice, he saw Fitz-Harris make several
alterations, crossing out some and putting in other some, and after he was
departed, found those Papers to be the same he had set his private Mark upon,
and that at the taking them up, the Ink was wet.


Will. And did not they apprehend him at that time?


Rich. No, but some days after, and carrying him before a Magistrate, he
confessed a Treasonable Paper to be his own handwriting.


Will. Well, but what answer did he make to what was sworn against him:


Rich. Truly little or nothing to the purpose, for he rather strove to Justify
what he had done, then any ways to deny or detest against such wicked designs,
insisting that he had been Impeached by the Commons, and that his cause say
before them.


Will. Well, and how then, was he ever the better for that Allegation?


Rich. No, nor could he, for the Court before had overruled that Plea, and all
the Judges of England given their opinions, it was in the power of the Court to
Try him.


Will. But did he produce no Witnesses to testify for him?


Rich. Yes, several, and many of them persons of Quality.


Will. And what could they say in his behalf?


Rich. Why truly very little or nothing that would avoid his Cause, for it was
so foul that no good Subject could any ways countenance it, but rather their
Evidence tended to his prejudice.


R. Why did he call them, seeing their Testimonies availed him nothing, and he
had better been without 'um.


W. Why, to prove that he had been with them from the King about business of
importance.


R. And did they agree he had:


W. Yes, they agreed that he had been with them, but they did no ways believe
his Majesty sent him.


R. Was that all?


W. No, no, he called several to testify that he had received Moneys by his
Majesty's Order, the which he would have put an evil Construction on.


R. And was it proved?


Will. Yes, that he had received about 200 l. but that it was given him out of
Charity, his own Petition being produced, so that you may see what a Monster he
is.


Rich. Well, but how came he off at last?


Will. Why, when about fourteen Witnesses had been heard, the Kings Council
summed up their Evidence to the Jury, laying open to them the nature of the
Crime in all its horrid Circumstances,; and when they had done, Fitz-Harris
addressed himself to them in a threatening way, bidding them beware what they
did, for his Cause lay before the Parliament, and that if they found him Guily
his Blood would lie at their doors, and that he doubted not but that it would
be revenged.


Rich. And do you think they believed him?


Will. Nay, I cannot tell as to that, but after the Court had given in their
Charge, they made some scruples, and seemed not well satisfied till the Court
had given them farther Instructions; and what did they do then?


Rich. Why then they went out, and staying near an hour, they returned, and
gave in their Verdict, That he was Guilty of the High Treason for which he
stood Indicted; which Verdict was accordingly taken and Recorded: the Court
telling them they had found a very good Verdict.


Will. And did the People seem pleased with it?


Rich. Yes, and gave such a Hum as made the Hall ring again.


Will. Well, I wish all Traitors the like success: but Neighbor, it is reported
that one Oliver Plunket another Irish Traitor, and Titular Archbishop of
Dublin, was Tried the day before, Pray what became of him?


Rich. Why he was found Guilty of High Treason.


Will. In what Nature? or where Committed?


Rich. For the most part in Ireland, and the Evidence Sworn against him in
Court, was to this purpose, That he held Correspondence with the French King,
and that he was to deliver up certain Towns upon the Seacoast to the French,
that they might Land an Army: and farther, that in order to the leavying War in
that Kingdom, he had made several Collections of moneys, and that he had
endeavour's to compass the Death of His Majesty, and enslave that Kingdom to
Popery, and the Insulting Tyranny of the French Power.


Will. And was all this proved against him in Court?


Rich. Yes, and much more, even by his own Countrymen.


Will. Pray what could he say for himself in this case?


Rich. Why truly little or nothing, for Treason is always attended with a
guilty Conscience, only he objected against the Insufficiency of the Witnesses,
alleging he stood Convicted upon record.


Will. And did he produce those Records in Court?


Rich. No, but being asked why he had not done it, his answer was, That he had
not time nor opportunity enough to procure them.


Will. But had he no Witnesses to testify in his behalf?


Rich. Yes, one or two, I think, but their Evidence was not any thing material
for his advantage.


Will. Why? did not they speak to the purpose?


Rich. No, but only endeavored to degrade some of the Kings Evidence, but
could give no grounds for what they said, it being altogether groundless.


Will. Well, and why did not he send over for his Witnesses, as he said he
would the last Term, seeing he had time enough allowed him?


Rich. It Is true, he might have done it; nay, he said he did, but that they
being for the most part Priests, they durst not come over without His
Majesty's(...)



