Imprimatur.

Johannes Battely RRmo P. ac Dno Dno Wilhelmo Archiep. Cantuariensi a Sacris
Domesticis.
Ex Aedib. Lamb. Apr. 10. 1686.
OF THE SACRAMENT OF BAPTISM, In Pursuance of an EXPLICATION OF THE CATECHISM
OF THE CHURCH of ENGLAND.

BY GABRIEL TOWERSON, D.D. and Rector of Welwynne in Hartfordshire.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVII.

TO THE Right Reverend FATHER in GOD FRANCIS Lord Bishop of ELY, AND LORD
ALMONER TO His Majesty.
My Lord,
YOUR Lordship's favorable acceptance of my Discourse of the Sacraments in
General, with the desire I have, if it may be, to put an end to the whole, has
prompted me to make the more have to present your Lordship, and the World with
this of Baptism in particular.

Two things there are in it, which I thought my self most concerned to clear,
and which therefore I have employed all requisite diligence on, the Doctrine of
Original Sin, and Infant Baptism: The former being in my opinion the foundation
of Christianity, the latter of our interest in it. For if there be no such
thing as Original Sin, I do not see but some persons heretofore might, and may
hereafter live with such exactness, as not at all to stand in need of a
Savior. And I see as little, if Infant Baptism be null, what interest any of
us can have in him, according to the ordinary dispensation of the Gospel, who
have for the most part been baptized in our Infancy, or at least have been
baptized by those that were.

Throughout the whole Treatise I have endeavored to retrive the ancient notion
of Baptism, to show what advantages are annexed to it; and what duties it
either involves, or obliges to. To either of which if I have given any light,
or strength, I shall hope I have done some small service to the Church, and
which your Lordship in particular will take in good part from

Your Lordship's Most obliged Most obedient, and Most humble Servant. GABRIEL
TOWERSON.
Wellwyne Aug. 23. 1686.
THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST PART.
Of the Rite of Baptism among the Heathen, and the Jews.
THe Heathen themselves not without the knowledge of another World, and of the
insufficiency of natural Religion to bring them to the happiness thereof.
Occasion taken by them from thence to enquire after other ways of obtaining it,
and by the Devil to suggest the mysteries of their respective Deities as the
only proper means of compassing it. Those mysteries every where initiated into
by the Rite of Baptism; partly through Men's consciousness of their past sins,
and which they judged it but meet they should be some way purged from, and
partly through the policy of the Devil, who thereby thought to procure the
greater veneration to them: That as it was a Rite, which was in use among God's
own people, so naturally apt to represent to Men's minds their passing from a
sinful to a holy Estate. Of what Service the Heathens use of this Rite is
toward the commendation of the Christians Baptism, and a transition from thence
to the use of it among the Jews. Which is not only proved at large out of the
Jewish Writings, and several particulars of that Baptism remarked, but that
usage farther confirmed by several concurring proofs; such as is in particular
the no appearance there is otherwise of any initiation of the Jewish Women, the
Baptizing of the whole Nation in the Cloud, and in the Sea, and a remarkable
allusion to it in our Savior's Discourse to Nicodemus. The silence of the Old
Testament concerning that Rite shown to be of no force, because though it take
notice of the first Jews being under the Cloud, and passing through the Red
Sea, yet it takes no notice at all of their being Baptized in them, or of their
Eating, and Drinking that spiritual Repast whereof S. Paul speaks. The
Baptism of Christians copied by our Savior from that of the Jews, and may
therefore, (where it appears not, that he has made an alteration) receive an
elucidation from it. p. 1.

The Contents of the Second Part.
Of the Baptism of the Christians, and the Institution of it.
THe Institution of the Christian Baptism more ancient, than the Command for it
in S. Matthew 28.19. though not as to the generality of the World, nor it may
be as to the like explicit Profession of the Trinity. As is made appear from
Christ, or his Disciples baptizing in Judea, not long after his own Baptism by
S. John. Enquiry thereupon made, whether it were not yet more ancient, yea as
ancient as Christ's execution of his Prophetical Office. Which is rendered
probable from our Saviors making Disciples before, and the equal reason there
appears to have been for his making them after the same manner with those of
Judea; From Christ's representing to Nicodemus the necessity of being born
again of water, and the spirit, which is shown at large to be meant of a true
and proper Baptism; As, in fine, from Christ's telling S. Peter, when he asked
the washing of his Hands, and Head, as well as Feet, that he, who had been
washed, needs not save to wash his feet. An answer to the supposed silence of
the Scripture concerning so early a Baptism, and that shown to be neither a
perfect silence, nor an unaccountable one. p. 23.

The Contents of the Third Part.
Of the outward visible Sign of Baptism.
THe outward visible Sign of the Christian Baptism shown to be the Element of
Water, and enquiry thereupon made wherein it was intended as a Sign; Which is
shown, in the general, to be as to the cleansing quality thereof, more
particularly as to the use it was put to toward newborn Infants, and that
application of it which was first in use, even by an immersion, or plunging the
Party baptized in it. Occasion taken from thence to enquire farther, how it
ought to be applied, more especially whether by an immersion, or by that, or an
aspersion, or effusion. Evidence made of an immersion being the only legitimate
Rite of Baptism, save where necessity does otherwise require; And enquiry
thereupon made, whether necessity may justify the Application of it by an
Aspersion, or Effusion, and, if it may, whether the case of Infants be to be
looked upon as such a necessity. What is to be thought of those additions,
which were anciently made, or continue as yet in being in the outward
solemnities of Baptism. Where the sign of the Cross in Baptism is more
particularly considered, and answer made to those Exceptions that are made
against it as a Ceremony, as an addition of Men to the Institution of Christ,
and as a supposed Relic of Popery, or giving too much countenance to the
Papists abuses of it. p. 43.

A Digression concerning Original Sign, By way of Preparation to the following
Discourses.
The Contents.
OF the ground of the present Digression concerning Original Sin, and enquiry
thereupon made, what Original Sin is. Which is shown in the General to be such
a corruption of the Nature of every Man, that is naturally engendered of the
offspring of Adam, whereby it becomes averse from every thing, that is good,
and inclinable to every thing, that is evil. The nature of that corruption more
particularly inquired into, and shown by probable Arguments to be no other,
than a Privation of a Supernatural Grace. That there is such a thing, as we
have before described, evidenced at large from the Scripture, and that evidence
farther strengthened by the experience we have of its effects, and the
acknowledgments of the wiser Heathen. Enquiry next made from whence it had its
beginning, which is shown to have been not from any evil Spirit, or Demon, the
pravity of matter, or the evil habits the Soul contracted in a praeexistent
state, but from the pravity of our first Parents. This last at large confirmed
out of the Doctrine of the Scripture, and followed by some light reflections
upon the means, by which it is conveyed. A more just account from the Scripture
of its being truly, and properly a sin, partly from its having the title of a
sin, but more especially from its being represented as such, upon the account
of our Obligation to the contrary. A consideration of those Objections, which
are commonly made against the Doctrine of Original Sin; Which are shown either
not to be of that force, whereof they are esteemed, or however not to be a
sufficient bar to what the Scripture has declared concerning it. p. 89

The Contents of the Fourth Part.
Of the things signified by Baptism on the part of God, or its inward and
spiritual Grace.
THE things signified by Baptism are either more general, or particular: More
general, as that Covenant of Grace, which passes between God, and Man, and
that body of Men, which enter into Covenant with him; More particular, what the
same God does, by virtue of that Covenant, oblige himself to bestow upon the
Baptized, and what those Baptized ones do on their part undertake to perform.
These latter ones proposed to be considered, and entrance made with the
consideration of what God obliges himself to bestow upon the Baptized, called
by the Church, An inward, and spiritual Grace. Which inward, and spiritual
Grace is shown to be of two sorts, to wit, such as tend more immediately to our
spiritual, and eternal welfare, or such as only qualify us for those Graces,
that do so. To the former sort are reckoned that inward, and spiritual Grace,
which tends to free us from the guilt of sin, called by the Church forgiveness
of sin; That which tends to free us from the pollution of sin, called by our
Catechism A death unto it; And that, which tends to introduce the contrary
purity, and has the name of a New birth unto righteousness. To the latter sort
is reckoned our union to that Body, of which Christ Jesus is the Head, and by
means whereof he dispenses the former Graces to us. Each of these resumed, and
considered in their order, and shown to be, what they are usually styled, the
inward, and spiritual Graces of Baptism, or the things signified by the outward
visible Sign thereof. p. 185

The Contents of the Fifth Part.
Of Forgiveness of sin by Baptism.
OF the relation of the sign of Baptism to its inward, and spiritual Grace, and
particularly to Forgiveness of sin; Which is either that of a means fitted by
God to convey it, or of a pledge to assure the Baptized person of it. The
former of these relations more particularly considered, as that too with
respect to Forgiveness of Sin in the general, or the Forgiveness of all Sin
whatsoever, and Original Sin in particular. As to the former whereof is
alleged first the Scriptures calling upon Men to be Baptized for the
remission, or forgiveness of sin, Secondly the Church's making that Forgiveness
a part of her Belief, and Doctrine, Thirdly the agreeing opinions or practices
of those, who were either unsound members of it, or Separatists from it, And
Fourthly the Calumnies of its enemies. The like evidence made of the latter
from the Scripture's proposing Baptism, and its Forgiveness as a remedy against
the greatest guilts, and in special against that wrath, which we are Children
of by Nature. From the premises is shown, that the sign of Baptism is a pledge
to assure the Baptized of Forgiveness, as well as a means fitted by God for the
conveying of it. p. 203

The Contents of the Sixth Part.
Of Mortification of sin, and Regeneration by Baptism.
OF the relation of the sign of Baptism to such inward, and spiritual Graces,
as tend to free us from the pollution of sin, or introduce the contrary purity;
And that relation shown to be no less than that of a means, whereby they are
conveyed. This evidenced as to the former, even our death unto sin (which is
also explained) from such Texts of Scripture, as make mention of our being
baptized into it, and buried by Baptism in it, or from such as describe us as
cleansed by the washing of it. The like evidenced from the same Scripture
concerning the latter, even our new birth unto righteousness; As that again
farther cleared as to this particular by the consentient Doctrine, and practice
of the Church, by the opinion the Jews had of that Baptism, which was a Type,
and exemplar of ours, and the expressions of the Heathen concerning it. The
Doctrine of the Church more largely insisted upon, and exemplified from Justin
Martyr, Tertullian, and S. Cyprian. p. 217

The Contents of the Seventh Part.
Of our Union to the Church by Baptism.
OF the relation of the sign of Baptism to our Union to the Church, and that
relation shown to be no less than that of a means, whereby that Union is made.
This evidenced in the first place from the declarations of the Scripture, more
particularly from its affirming all Christians to be baptized into that Body,
as those, who were first baptized after the descent of the Holy Ghost upon the
Apostles, to have been thereby added to their company, and made partakers with
the rest in the Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship, in breaking of Bread, and in
Prayers. The like evidence of the same Union to the Church by Baptism from the
declarations of the Church it self, and the consequences of that Union shown to
be such, as to make that also to be accounted one of the inward, and spiritual
Graces of that Baptism, by which it is made. p. 237

The Contents of the Eighth Part.
Of the Profession that is made by the Baptized Person.
THE things signified by Baptism on the part of the baptized brought under
consideration, and shown from several former discourses (which are also pointed
to) to be an Abrenunciation of sin, a present belief of the Doctrine of
Christianity, and particularly of the Trinity, and a resolution for the time to
come to continue in that belief, and act agreeably to its Laws. Our resolution
of acting agreeably to the Laws of Christianity more particularly considered,
and the Profession thereof shown by several Arguments to be the intendment of
the Christian Baptism. What the measure of that conformity is, which we profess
to pay to the Laws of Christianity, and what are the consequences of the
Violation of that Profession. p. 249

The Contents of the Ninth Part.
Of the right Administration of Baptism.
AFter a short account of the Foundation of the Baptismal relation, and
reference made to those places from which a larger one may be fetched; Enquiry
is made touching the right Administration of Baptism, as therein again, First,
Whether Baptism ought expressly to be made in the name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, Secondly whether Schismatics, and Heretics are valid
Administratours of it, Thirdly, to what, and what kind of persons it ought to
be administered, Fourthly, Whether it may be repeated. The two first of these
spoken to here, and first, Whether Baptism ought to be expressly administered in
the form proposed. Which is not only shown to be under obligation from the
express words of the Institution, but answer made to those Texts, which seem to
intimate it to be enough to baptize in the name of the Lord Jesus only. The
Baptism of Schismatics, and Heretics more largely shown to be valid, unless
where they baptize into a counterfeit Faith, and the several objections against
it answered. p. 265

The Contents of the Tenth Part.
Of the Baptism of those of riper Years.
TO what, and what kind of persons Baptism ought to be administered; Which, as
to those of riper years, is shown to be unto all, that come duly qualified for
it. What those qualifications are, upon that account inquired into, and
Repentance, and Faith shown from the Scripture, as well as from our own
Catechism to be they. That Repentance, and Faith more particularly considered,
the definitions given of them by our Church explained, and established. The
former whereof is effected, by showing what Repentance does presuppose, what it
imports, and to what it does naturally dispose us: The latter by showing what
those promises are, which by the Catechism are made the object of our Faith, or
Belief, what that Belief of them does presuppose, what is meant by a steadfast
Belief of them, and what evidence there is of that being the Faith, or Belief
required to the receiving of Baptism. p. 287

The Contents of the Eleventh Part. Of the Baptism of Infants.
WHat ground Infant Baptism has in Scripture, and particularly in what it
suggests concerning Christ's commanding his Disciples to suffer little Children
to come unto him. S. Paul's giving the Children of the faithful the title of
Holy, and the Circumcision of Infants. The concurrence of Antiquity therein
with the Doctrine of the Scripture, and that concurrence farther strengthened by
the Pelagians so freely admitting of what was urged against them from thence. A
brief account of that remission, and regeneration, which Infants acquire by
Baptism, and a more large consideration of the Objections, that are made
against it; More particularly of what is urged against the Regeneration of
Infants in Baptism, or their ability to answer what is prerequir'd to it on the
part of persons to be baptized, or is to be performed by them in the reception
of it. Where the Regeneration of Infants is more largely considered, and what
is promised for them by others shown to be both reasonable, and sufficient. p.
309

The Contents of the Twelfth Part.
Whether Baptism may be repeated.
WHat the true state of the present question is, and that it is not founded in
any supposed illegitimateness of the former Baptism, but upon supposition of
the baptized persons either not having before had, or forfeited the
regeneration of it, or fallen off from that Religion, to which it does belong.
Whereupon enquiry is made, whether if such persons repent and return, they
ought to be baptized anew, or received into the Church without. What there is
to persuade the repeating of Baptism, and what the Church has alleged against
it. The Churches arguments from Ephesians. 4.4. and John 13.10. proposed, but waved.
The Churches opinion more firmly established in the no direction there is in
Scripture for re-baptization in those cases, but rather the contrary, and in
the no necessity there is of it. The Arguments for rebaptization answered. p.
365

ERRATA.
In the Title over the Pages.
Page 253. for Baptism, r. Baptized.

TEXT.
Page 57. l. 16. after do add not. p. 134. l. 11. after of add that. p. 228. l.
17. corruption. p. 244. l. pen. embodied. p. 262. l. 22. violaters. p. 306. l.
14. for boil r. bogle. p. 324. l. 7. for force r. face. p. 330. l. 24.
faithful. p. 354. l. 18. r. as was.

Margent.
Page 6. l. penult. (...) p. 7. l. 17. (...). p. 16. l. 1, 2. Exo. 16.32. p.
61. l. 8. for Sacramentum. r. incrementa. p. 235. l. antep. (...). ib. l. ult.
(...). p. 291. l. 6. (...). p. 335. l. 4. (...).

OF THE SACRAMENT OF BAPTISM.
PART I. Of the Rite of Baptism among the HEATHEN, and the JEWS.
The Contents. The Heathen themselves not without the knowledge of another
World, and of the insufficiency of natural Religion to bring them to the
happiness thereof. Occasion taken by them from thence to enquire after other
ways of obtaining it, and by the Devil to suggest the mysteries of their
respective Deities as the only proper means of compassing it. Those mysteries
every where initiated into by the Rite of Baptism; partly through Men's
consciousness of their past sins, and which they judged it but meet they should
be some way purged from, and partly through the policy of the Devil, who
thereby thought to procure the greater veneration to them: That as it was a
Rite, which was in use among God's own people, so naturally apt to represent to
Men's minds their passing from a sinful to a holy Estate. Of what Service the
Heathens use of this Rite is toward the commendation of the Christians Baptism,
and a transition from thence to the use of it among the Jews. Which is not only
proved at large out of the Jewish Writings, and several particulars of that
Baptism remarked, but that usage farther confirmed by several concurring
proofs; such as is in particular the no appearance there is otherwise of any
initiation of the Jewish Women, the Baptizing of the whole Nation in the Cloud,
and in the Sea, and a remarkable allusion to it in our Savior's Discourse to
Nicodemus; The silence of the Old Testament concerning that Rite shown to be of
no force, because though it take notice of the first Jews being under the
Cloud, and passing through the Red Sea, yet it takes no notice at all of their
being Baptized in them, or of their Eating, and Drinking that spiritual repast,
whereof S. Paul speaks. The Baptism of Christians copied by our Savior from
that of the Jews, and may therefore, (where it appears not, that he has made
an alteration) receive an elucidation from it.

THough the Baptism of Christians be my proper business, and ought accordingly
to be made the subject matter of my Discourse; yet I think it not amiss to
premise something concerning the use of the like Rite among the Heathen, and
(which is of much more consideration) among the people of the Jews: Partly
because Christianity may seem to have borrowed her Baptism from the Baptism of
the latter, and we therefore may borrow some light from it toward the clearing
of our own; And partly because it may appear both from the one, and the others
Baptism, that Christianity has laid no other imposition on us, than what the
general reason of Mankind, or a more early Tradition prompted others to the
embracing of.

For the understanding whereof we are to know, that as the Heathen themselves
were not without a presension of another World, wherein the Souls of Men should
be treated according to their demeanor here; So they alike saw, or at least
suspected, that they could not expect a happy futurity by a bare compliance
with those rules, which natural Religion suggested to them: Partly, because
they saw but too well that they could never arrive at a perfect compliance with
them, by which means they should always stand in need of the divine favor, and
forgiveness; And partly, because they knew it to be in the power of their
offended Deities to prescribe what ways, and means they thought good for Men's
obtaining a reconciliation with them. This therefore being the general, and
indeed natural sense of Mankind, and not a little quickened at the first by what
they might learn from God's own people concerning the Sacrifices, and other
Rites, whereby he appointed them to atone him; Men began to look out every
where for proper means to obtain the favor of their Gods, and the Devil, who
was willing by all means to precipitate them into destruction, did either by
himself, or his Agents suggest such, as might gratify those their hopes, but
withal not only no way profit them, but debauch their minds so much the more.
Only lest too gross a deceit should come to be discerned, he took care, among
other things, that what he suggested should be concealed from the generality of
Men, and indeed even from those, who were desirous to understand them, till
they had approved themselves by a long expectation, and the undergoing of all
those things, which were preparatory to them. From hence it was, that the
mysteries of the several Heathen then Deities came to have their beginning, and
name; Those of the Mother of the Gods in Samothracia, and of Hecate in many
places. Hence those famous ones of Ceres and Proserpina at Eleusis in Attica,
of Bacchus in Boeotia, and of Mithras in Asia. In fine, hence those of Orpheus
almost all over Greece, and of Isis in Egypt, and many other places: They
Clcero de leg. lib. 2. Mihi autem cum multa eximia, divinaque videntur Athenae
tuae peperisse, atque in vitam hominum attulisse, tum nihil melius illis
mysteriis, quibus ex agresii immanique vita exculti ad humanitatem, and
mitigati sumus, initiaque, ut appellantur, ita revera principia vitae
cognovimus, neque solum cum laetitia vivend; rationem accepimus, sed etiam cum
spe meliore moriendi.
, who were not without a due esteem of piety and virtue making the end of those
mysteries to have been the procuring to those that were initiated into them a
possibility of living happily in the other World, whilst nothing but extremest
miseries attended the neglecters of them.

Sophocles -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
But because mysteries of this nature were not to be communicated to all, no
nor yet to any before they were purged from their past sins; Therefore care was
taken first of all (as we learn from Clemens Alexandrinus Strom. lib. 5. p.
424. (...), etc.
) that they should pass through certain purgations, or washings, and which
though (as Tertullian De Baptismo. c. 5.
speaks) performed viduis aquis, that is to say, with such, as had not the
incubatition of God's Spirit, yet were, as he afterward Ibid. Certe ludis
Apollinaribus, and Eleusiniis tinguntur, idque se in regenerationem, and
impunitatem perjuriorum suorum agere praesumunt.
affirms, both administered, and received as effectual Symbols of a new Birth,
and a freedom from the punishment of their offenses. It was thus in particular,
that Men were initiated into the mysteries of Eleusis, even the lesser ones,
and such as were preparatory to the greater, and he who initiated them into
them entitled (...) Hesych. (...).
or the Waterer. It was thus, as we learn from Tertullian De Bapt. c. 5. Nam
and sacris quibusdam per lavacrum initiantur Isidis alicujus, and Mithrae.
, that they initiated Men into the rites of Mithras, and so too into those of
Isis: The Chief Priest of that Goddess (as Apuleius Milesi. 11. citat. a
Seldeno de success. ad leg. Hebr. c. 26.
describes his own initiation) leading the party, that was to be initiated, in
the Company of that Religious band to the next Bath. Where having first
delivered him to the usual washing, and asked pardon of the Goddess, he
sprinkled him all about, and bringing him back to the Temple, after two parts
of the day were spent, placed him before the feet of the Goddess.

How this way of initiation by Baptism came to prevail so generally, is hard to
say, and I will not therefore be over positive in defining. That, which seems
to me to be the most probable, is, that those mysteries, to which this way of
initiation belonged, came all out of the same forge, even the contrivance of
the Devil, and his dependants, to whom, though ignorantly, the Heathen offered
1 Cor. 10.20.
Sacrifice; That he suggested such an initiation to them, partly in imitation
of those Baptisms, or washings, which God had appointed among his own people,
and partly as a Symbol, which did most naturally represent to their minds their
passing from a sinful to a holy Estate: Sin, by reason of the odiousness
thereof, coming to have both the esteem, and name of Pollution, and that
therefore, which professed to do it away, best represented by that Element,
which was most proper to purge away the natural one; In fine, that they, to
whom that form of initiation was proposed, being thereby possessed with a good
opinion of the sacredness of those mysteries, to which it led, and a hope of
its also purging them from their former guilt, greedily embraced it, and made
it as sacred in their own esteem, as it seemed to be in the design of those,
that instituted it. Which moreover they were more easily persuaded into,
because they found it much more easy thus to wash away their Sins, than to
purge their Conscience Heb 9.14.
from dead works by repentance, and amendment. By these degrees, I suppose, it
was, that Baptism came, even among the Heathen, to be the general form of
initiating them into their respective mysteries; And had those mysteries been
as sacred, as their initiation into them was specious, it might have served to
them for a perpetual monument of that inward, and far better purity, which it
becomes all those to put on, who hope for approbation from the Divine Majesty.
But as that initiation of their's had for its Institutor some false God, or
other, or rather some Evil Spirit, who acted the part of one; As it was
moreover an Introduction into abominable mysteries, as well as into
unprofitable ones; Witness in particular those so much talked of mysteries of
Eleusis Arnob. adv. Gent. li. 5. and Clem. Alex. (...) p. 10.
, and which I will favor chaste Ears in concealing: so I have insisted on it
for no other reason, than to show, how willing the Devil was to procure credit
to his mysteries by it, and how easily Men were prevailed upon by the
speciousness thereof to engage themselves in the pursuit of them. Which, though
it were no commendation to those mysteries, to which it was applied, yet is a
sufficient one of the Rite it self, and will add yet more luster to that
Baptism of ours, which leads to a Religion, that is as spotless as it self.

From the Baptism of the Heathen pass we to that of the Jews, and so much the
rather, because if such a Baptism can be proved, it will not only be a farther
commendation to our own, but it may be also give light to it: He, who came not
to destroy the Law, and the Prophets, but to fulfill them (as Christ himself
declared Mat. 5.17.
in the very entrance upon his Ministry) being likely enough to have had a
regard to their Baptism also, and to have copied out his own Baptism by it. And
indeed if any credit may be given to the most Authentic writings the Jews now
have, and to one Maimonides.
of the most sober Rabbis, which that Nation has ever produced, there will be
no reason to doubt of the Jews having, even from Ancient times, the same way of
initiating Men into their Religion, which Christianity does now prescribe. For
from their Writings it has been observed, (and the express words of their
respective Authors alleged Seld. de Jure Not. and Gent. li. 2. c. 2. etc. Ham.
in his Quaer. concern. Inf. Baptism.
for it) that the Males of the native Jews were of Old initiated into that
Religion by Baptism, or washing of the whole body, as well as by Circumcision,
and an Oblation, and the Females by Baptism, if not also by an Oblation; That
the Males of their Proselytes of Justice (sutably to the Males of those native
Jews, into whose Religion they were admitted) were initiated by Baptism, and an
Oblation, as well as by Circumcision, and the Females by Baptism, and an
Oblation; That the Baptism of Proselytes was to be performed in a natural
receptacle of Waters, as in a River, a Pool, or a Fountain, and the whole body
washed in it; That there were three Men appointed to preside over their
Baptism, and who, as the Baptized persons stood in the water, were to lean over
them, and twice explain to them some of the more weighty, and lighter precepts
of the Law; That where the Proselyte was a Female, she should be encompassed
with other Women to preserve her from being seen by the Triumviri, and they to
depart, when she was to come out of the water; That this Baptism being rightly
performed was not to be repeated, and that in what condition Proselytes were
baptized, that is to say, whether in a servile or free condition, (for that was
then to be professed) in that they were to abide; That, from the time of their
being thus proselyted, they were for the main accounted of as Jews, and had the
title of such, that they were accounted of as persons new born, yea so far,
that after that time they were not to own any of their former Relations; In
fine, that that new birth was looked upon as so singular, that it gave occasion
to their Cabalistical Doctors to teach, that the old Soul of the Proselyte
vanished, and a new one succeeded in its place. For all these particulars have
been observed concerning that Baptism whereof we speak, and the Baptism it self
not only made as ancient as Moses, but deduced by them from that command of God
Exodus 19.10.
, whereby Moses was enjoined to sanctify the Israelites, and cause them to
wash their Clothes, against the time that God declared from Mount Sinai that
legal Covenant, which they were then to enter into.

Whether the Jewish Writers might not somewhat overlash in making their Baptism
so very ancient, or err in assigning the former Command as the Original
thereof, is a thing I mean not to dispute, and much less will I concern my self
so far in it, as to vindicate them against all opposers. But as it is hard to
believe, they would attribute so great an antiquity to that, which was not at
least somewhat antienter than our Savior's time, which is all we are concerned
to assert; So it will be much more hard to detract altogether from their
testimony, if it has any concurring proofs, and be otherwise fairly defensible
against the adversaries thereof. Now that the testimony of the Jewish Writers
is not without some concurring proofs, and such as will at least add to the
probability thereof, will appear if we consider first, that though Circumcision
both was, and was intended as a means of initiating the Jews, yet it was such a
form of initiation, as was competible only to the Males. By which means, if
there had been no other form of initiation, all of the Female Sex, who were
undoubtedly as much in Covenant with God, as those of the other, must have been
debarred of any visible Sacrament to assure them of their interest in it. Which
though it be not so great an inconvenience, as to enforce altogether the use of
somewhat beside Circumcision, because the Females might be initiated in their
Fathers, yet will make it reasonable enough to believe, that God, with whom
there is no respect of Sexes, appointed some form of initiation, by which they
might be alike admitted. I say Secondly, that as Circumcision was not
competible to those of the Female Sex, and not unlikely therefore that there
might be some other ceremony for their initiation; So it is apparent from S.
Paul 1 Cor. 10.2.
, that however God might deal with the Jews before, or after, yet all of them,
in their passage from Egypt unto Canaan, were baptized into Moses in the
Cloud, and in the Sea. For being so, it is not difficult to believe, that the
same form of initiation might afterward have force in those, who were not
capable of Circumcision, yea even in them, that were capable of it, after the
Rite of Circumcision was over, if it were only to put them in mind, of that
deliverance they received by it: Especially, when their Eucharistical Manna,
though thence forward not enjoined to be used, because it ceased from among
them, was yet laid up in the Ark of God Exodus 32.16. etc.
to put them in mind of God's nourishing them by it. I say Thirdly, that though
Baptism might not be enjoined at the first, or at least enjoined only for the
use of those, who were not capable of Circumcision, yet it might by the advice
of their Governors, and the approbation of those Prophets whom God raised up
among them, be afterward added to Circumcision, both upon the account of their
Forefathers being commanded to sanctify themselves, and wash their Clothes
when they appeared before God at Mount Sinai, and as a farther declaration to
them of the impurity of their Nature, and of that pure, and holy estate, which
they entered into. For if their forefathers were, even by the command of God, to
sanctify themselves with washings toward their entering into Covenant with God
at Mount Sinai, what should hinder such of their posterity, as presided over
that Nation, to make an addition of the like Baptism? Especially, when all was
little enough to admonish them of their own natural impurity, and of the
necessity that lay upon them of purging themselves from it. I observe Fourthly,
that though there be not any express mention in the Scripture of that Baptism
whereof we speak, nor indeed of any like it beside that of John the Baptist,
which being immediately from Heaven ought not to be drawn into example; yet is
it sufficiently intimated by our Savior, where, upon Nicodemus's wondering how
a Man could be born of Water, and the Spirit, he with equal wonder demanded Joh
3.10.
, Art thou a Master of Israel, and know not these things? For as that is a
sufficient indication, that the notion our Savior advanced was no stranger to
the Israelites, and therefore neither such a Baptism, as was the subject of it;
So it became yet more clear by the Jewish Writers representing the Baptism of a
Proselyte as giving a new birth unto him: That as it is the same in effect with
the product of Christ's Baptism, so making it yet more reasonable to believe,
that our Savior had an eye to it, when he wondered so much at Nicodemus for
stumbling at that property in his. All which put together, because tending
toward the same thing, will make it yet more reasonable to believe, that the
Jewish Writers spoke not at adventure, when they represented the Rite of
Baptism as a Rite of their own Nation, and by which both themselves, and their
Proselytes had been of old initiated, no less than by the Rite of Circumcision.
If there be any thing to hinder the admission of it, it must be the silence of
the Old Testament concerning it, or at least concerning the Institution of it.
But as we find no great mention, even of Circumcision it self after the five
Books of Moses, and may therefore the less wonder at the no mention of Baptism,
especially if, as it might be, instituted after his time; As we find as little
mention, even where it might have been more reasonably expected, of the first
Jews being baptized into Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea, or of their
Eating, and Drinking that spiritual repast, whereof S. Paul speaks 1 Cor.
10.3, 4.
: So there is as little reason therefore to wonder at its silence concerning
this Rite, especially considering, what is notorious enough from thence, that
God from time to time raised up Prophets among them. For their Authority, and
Preaching might suffice to constitute, or confirm a matter of greater moment,
than the Rite of Baptism, as added to Circumcision, can be supposed to have
been.

There being therefore no great doubt to be made of a Baptism among the Jews
antecedent to that of John the Baptist, and our Savior, it will not be
difficult to believe first, that our Savior had an eye to it, when he
appointed the same Rite to initiate Men into his Religion: Partly because it
was his avowed Profession, that he came rather to reform, than destroy their
former Economy; and partly because he might the more reasonably hope to bring
them over to that faith, which it was an initiation into. It will be as easy
to believe, Secondly, upon the score of the same condescension, and compliance,
that Christ departed as little as might be from their manner of Administration
of it, or from the ends, which it was appointed for among them; such a
compliance being equally necessary to carry on his design of bringing them over
to his Religion. The consequence whereof will be thirdly, that where it does
not very plainly appear that Christianity has made an alteration in it, we
interpret the Baptism thereof conformably to that of the Jews, from whence it
appears to have been transcribed. How much more then, where there are any fair
hints in Christianity of its symbolizing with the Doctrine of the other? The
result of which will be fourthly, our having recourse upon occasion to the
Baptism of the Jews for the better clearing, or establishing the Doctrine of
our own. Which as I shall therefore not fail to do as often as their Writings
shall furnish matter for it; so having said thus much concerning their Baptism,
and that of the Heathen, I will pass on to the Baptism of the Christians, and
confine my self yet more strictly to the consideration of it.

PART II. Of the Baptism of the Christians, and the Institution of it.
The Contents. The Institution of the Christian Baptism more ancient, than the
Command for it in S. Matthew Matt. 28.19.
, though not as to the generality of the World, nor it may be as to the like
explicit Profession of the Trinity. As is made appear from Christ, or his
Disciples baptizing in Judea, not long after his own Baptism by S. John.
Enquiry thereupon made, whether it were not yet more ancient, yea as ancient as
Christ's execution of his Prophetical Office. Which is rendered probable from
our Saviors making Disciples before, and the equal reason there appears to
have been for his making them after the same manner with those of Judea; From
Christ's representing to Nicodemus the necessity of being born again of water,
and the spirit, which is shown at large to be meant of a true, and proper
Baptism; As, in fine, from Christ's telling S. Peter, when he asked the washing
of his Hands, and Head, as well as Feet, that he, who had been washed, needs
not save to wash his feet. An answer to the supposed silence of the Scripture
concerning so early a Baptism, and that shown to be neither a perfect silence,
nor an unaccountable one.

NOW the first thing to be enquired after is the Institution of it, and so much
the rather, because though there is no doubt as to the thing it self, yet there
is as to the first beginning of it. For there are, who have thought this
Sacrament to have been first instituted by our Savior immediately before his
Ascension, and when he gave command to his Disciples Matt. 28.19.
to go, and teach, or disciple all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And I willingly grant (because
our Savior was sent only Matt. 15.24.
to the lost sheep of the House of Israel) that that was the first institution
of it, as to that more general extent it was to have in the World, and it may
be too as to that clear, and explicit profession of the Trinity, into the Names
of which our Savior afterward commanded to baptize: Because such Doctrines as
that were to be poured into the Disciples by dgrees, and according as they
should be able to receive them. But that the Sacrament it self had a more early
Institution, will appear from the mention there is of our Savior's baptizing
long before, or at least of his Disciples doing it by his Commission, and
Appointment.

For the clearing whereof we are to know, that whatsoever he may be thought to
have done, before he first passed into Judaea after his own Baptism by John the
Baptist, yet there he Joh. 3.22.
, or his Disciples Joh. 4.2.
baptized; yea to so great a number, that John's Disciples Joh. 3.26.
affirmed to their Master, that all men came to him, and it; and news was
afterward brought to the Pharisees Joh. 4.1.
, that he made, and baptized more Disciples, than John himself. Into what
profession is not difficult to conjecture from our Savior's being said to make
Joh. 4.1.
Disciples by it, and from the Baptist's affirming in allowance of our
Savior's Baptism, that he that believed on the Son Joh. 3.36.
, should have everlasting Life, but he, that believed not the Son, should not
see life, but, on the contrary, have the wrath of God abiding on him. For what
could that assertion have signified toward the legitimating of our Savior's
Baptism, especially when John himself admonished Men by his to believe on him,
that should come after him Acts 19.4.
, that is, on Christ Jesus? Were it not, that our Savior, or his Disciples did
expressly baptize Men into the belief of him, and of that August Authority, and
saving power, which was vested in him as the Messiah. Which makes me wonder so
much the more, that Tertullian De Bapt. c. 11.
should make that Baptism of the Disciples but of the same nature with that of
John, but above all at his asking, how Christ could be supposed to baptize into
himself, when he at that time made it his business to conceal who, and what he
was. For as John the Baptist was not wanting Joh. 1.29, etc.
to discover what he was; so our Savior was so far from being reserved as to
that particular, that the very first of those Disciples, that came to him, did
both acknowledge him Joh. 41.45.
as the Messiah immediately, and represent him as such to other Men.

But let us rise yet higher, than Christ's baptizing in Judaea, though that be
not far removed from his first setting up for Disciples, because whilst John
was yet Joh. 3.22, 23.
baptizing, which is the time, from whence the Scripture Act. 1.22. -- 10.37.
makes our Savior's preaching to commence. Not that there are any express
proofs before that time of his baptizing any Disciples, but that it may be some
probable proofs may offer themselves for it, and such as we cannot reasonably
refuse. Of which nature I reckon first his making Disciples before that time,
and particularly those Disciples, whom he made use of to baptize in the Land of
Jury. For if our Savior made Disciples before, why not after the same manner,
wherein he made those of Judaea? He had to induce him to it the custom, that
then prevailed among the Jews, of making Disciples by that solemnity, as
appears both by their so admitting Proselytes, and the Baptism of his
Forerunner. He had to induce him to it the greater likelihood there was thereby
of inviting others to the same Baptism, than if those, who were the first, and
chief, and moreover made use of by himself to baptize, had not first been
baptized themselves: Because so there could have been no pretense to refuse the
Baptism he proposed, whereas otherwise they might have rejected it as a thing
unnecessary to be had, or scrupled it as proceeding from incompetent
Administrators of it. In fine, he had to induce him to it that, which prevailed
with himself Matt. 3.1^.
to receive the Baptism of John, even their fulfilling all righteousness, who
were not only the first of his Disciples, but ordained by himself to be a
pattern unto others. Which inducements as they are of no small force to
persuade his baptizing from the beginning, because but suitable to his own
proceedings, or the common reasonings of Mankind; so will no doubt be accounted
such, if there be not equal probabilities to the contrary, as which are the
only things, that can take off the edge of them. Now what is there of that
nature, that can persuade Christ's omission of Baptism, unless it be either the
Scripture's silence, which shall be afterward considered, or his willingness
thereby to intimate, that he had not so tied his own Graces to an external
Rite, but that he could, and would upon occasion conferr them without it? But
beside that there was a like fear thereby of Men's neglecting his appointments
upon a presumption of their receiving his Graces as the Apostles did; This may
seem to have been too early a season for such an intimation, because before Men
were well confirmed in his Authority, or ability to conferr them, even by the
ordinary solemnities. For if they were not as yet well confirmed in that, how
should they dream of a greater power, yea not rather be thereby tempted to
question altogether his Authority, because departing so far even from the
example of John the Baptist, whom all Men Matt. 21.26.
accounted as a Prophet?

But beside that our Savior made Disciples before, and may therefore not
improbably be thought to have made them after the same manner; We find yet
farther, that before he baptized those of Judaea, he represented the solemnity
of Baptism as a thing necessary to enter Men into that Kingdom of God, to which
he invited them: Our Savior not only telling Nicodemus, that except a Man were
born again Joh. 3.3,
, he could not see the Kingdom of God, but yet more plainly, that except he
were born again of Water Joh. 3.5.
, and of the Spirit, he could not possibly enter into it. For how could Christ
represent that as necessary, which be himself had not afforded to his first,
and chiefest Disciples, nor, for ought that does appear, ever after did? For if
he did, he would certainty have done it before he made use of them to baptize
others; Partly because they were the first Disciples he had, and partly because
so they would have been more apparently qualified to have administered the same
Baptism unto others. If therefore Christ represented Baptism as necessary, even
before his baptizing in Judaea, it is not unreasonable to think he had both
instituted, and administered it before: Especially, when the Disciples he before
had cannot well be thought to have had it afterward, as in reason they must
have had it, if it were so necessary as our Savior affirmed it. And possibly
neither would they, who are otherwise persuaded, have in the least suspected
the force of this argument, had it not been for an opinion of theirs, that our
Savior spoke not in this place of Baptism, but of Men's being born again of
that spirit of God, which has the same cleansing quality with water: So making
that speech of our Savior to be that, which the Rhetoricians call an (...),
and consequently resolvable into a watery, or cleansing Spirit, as Virgil 's
pateris libamus and auro, is into pateris aureis, or golden Dishes. Even as
they suppose the Scripture Matt. 3.11.
meant when it affirmed, that Christ should baptize with the Holy Ghost, and
with fire, that is to say, with that Holy Ghost, which has the purifying, and
warming qualities of that Element. I will not now say, though I might, that
that figure might have been more allowable here, if that speech of Christ could
have been so fairly resolved into a watery Spirit, as pateris and auro may be
into pateris aureis; Which that it cannot be is sufficiently evident from
Gold's being the proper Material of those Dishes, whereof the Poet speaks,
which water to be sure is not of the other. But neither will I any more than
say, that Christ's baptizing with the Holy Ghost, and with fire does not make
at all for this figure, because it is certain that at the day of Pentecost,
which was the most notorious descent of the Holy Ghost, and particularly
referred to by that Baptism Act. 1.5.
, Christ baptized his Disciples with a material fire, as well as that. But I
say, which is more material, that there is great reason to understand our
Savior here of that Baptism by water, which we have affirmed his words to
import. For so first (as Mr. Hooker Eccl. Pol. li. 5.9.59.
did long since observe) the Letter of the Text persuades, and which we are not
lightly to depart from, unless we will make the Scripture a very uncertain
Rule, and indeed to prove any thing, which wanton wits would have it. So
secondly (as the same Hooker Ibid.
observes) the Ancients Justin Martyr. Apol. 2. p. 94. Tertul. de Bapt. c. 13.
Cyprian Epist. 73.
without exception understood it, yea he Tertul. ubi supra.
, who makes the Baptism now under consideration, even the Baptism of Christ
before his Ascension, to be but of the same nature with S. John's. So thirdly,
we have cause to understand Christ here, because expressing what he here
intended by a new birth from water; which is the property Tit. 3.^.
of that Baptism, he afterward commanded the Apostles to administer. In fine,
so several circumstances both of the Text, and Context perfwade, and some too,
that are not so ordinarily taken notice of. Of which nature I reckon as none of
the least that, which gave occasion to them, even Nicodemus's coming to Jesus
by night Joh. 3.2.
and there, and then acknowledging to him, that he was a teacher come from God,
and that he himself was induced to believe it by the miracles our Savior
wrought For that secret confession of his being not only not agreeable to that
more public one Matt. 10.32.
, which our Savior required, but (as appears by the answer he returned to it)
intimated by him to be insufficient, because letting him know, that except he
was born again of water, and the spirit, he could not enter into the Kingdom of
God; Nothing can be more agreeable to our Savior's mind, than to understand
those Words of his of Men's making a more public confession of him in order to
their Salvation, if the Words can with any reason be thought to admit of it.
Which that they may is evident from hence, that, whatever our Savior now
understood by them, the like expression Tit. 3.5.
became afterward an usual periphrasis of Baptism, which was a public
confession of our Savior. I say secondly, that as the occasion of the words
does naturally lead to such a sense, as will make them import a more public
Confession of our Savior; So it will consequently prompt us to understand them
of such a new Birth, as is performed by Water, and the Spirit, rather than of
that, which is performed by the Spirit alone: That, as it is a Birth, which
manifests it self to the Eyes of others, which this cannot be supposed to do,
so being a Birth therefore, which may publicly declare our Confession of him,
by whose appointment we are born again. Agreeable hereto thirdly is the sense
of the words themselves, if those Jews, of whom Nicodemus was sometime a
Ruler, may be listened to in this affair; They not only affirming their own
Proselytes to have been admitted by Baptism, but that Baptism also represented
as a thing, which gave them a new birth, yea so far, as to make them put off
their old relations by it. For what then can be more reasonable, than to think,
that our Savior, when he spoke to a Jew, spoke the same Language with them,
and consequently, that, as he spoke of being born of Water, as well as the
Spirit, he meant a like Baptism by it. Especially, when it is observable,
fourthly, that our Savior asked Nicodemus, not without some amazement, Joh.
3.20.
, Art thou a Master in Israel, and know not these things? For what was this,
but to intimate yet more, that the new Birth, whereof he spoke, was no stranger
to themselves, and consequently, because he spoke of being born of Water, that
he meant a Baptism by it? Add hereunto, fifthly, our Savior's affirming
himself in the former Discourse to have spoken of earthly Joh. 3.12.
things, and (as one would think) therefore of such a Birth, which though
influenced by God's Spirit, yet had something of earthly, as that is opposed to
heavenly, adhering to it: As, in fine, the Evangelist's subjoyning to this
Discourse of a new Birth by Water the mention of our Savior's Joh. 3.22.
passing into Judaea, and there baptizing; There being not a fairer account
either of that connection, or our Savior's proceedings, than that, agreeably to
what he had said concerning the necessity of Men's being so born again, he went
into Judaea, and baptized, and so made way for their entrance into God's
Kingdom. Such evidence there is of our Savior's meaning a proper Baptism, when
he spoke of the necessity of Men's being born again of water, and of the
Spirit; And if our Savior meant such a Baptism, there is as little doubt of
his having before both instituted, and administered it, yea even from the time
of his setting up for Disciples; There being not the least appearance of
Christ's baptizing those first Disciples afterward, which yet he must have
done, considering the necessity thereof, if they had not been baptized before.

I will conclude what I have to say concerning the earliness of our Savior's
Baptism, when I have added from a passage of Christ to S. Peter the farther
probability there is of his, and the other Apostles having received it, and
therefore, if they did so, of their having received it from the beginning of
their Discipleship: That I mean, whereupon S. Peter's begging of Christ to wash
not only his feet, but his hands, and his head, if (as our Savior had told
him) he could have no part in him, unless he washed him, Christ is said to have
made answer Joh. 13.10.
, that he, that had been washed, even by a more general washing, needed not
save to wash his feet. For as our Savior intimates by that expression, that
he, and the rest had passed under the former washing, and consequently did not
need such a general washing a second time; so he may not improbably be thought
to have meant the washing of Baptism, and which though in it self an outward
purification, yet was attended with an inward, and spiritual one: Partly,
because it is certain that our Savior had before this time made use of the
Baptism of Water to purify Men unto himself, and may therefore be well enough
supposed to allude unto it; And partly, because that Baptism, or washing will
be more directly opposed to that, which our Savior intended, and which though
designed by him to signify a more spiritual purgation, even that of the
affections, or actions, yet was performed by him by an outward washing. For why
then should we not think, that the Apostles had that more general washing of
Baptism? Especially when we know that about this time Christ administered to
them the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and which as it is in order of nature
after that of Baptism, and may therefore not unreasonably be thought to have
been preceded by theirs, so is an evidence that Christ meant, in some measure
at least, to conduct them by the same Rites, and Ceremonies, wherewith he
intended to bring other Men unto himself.

One only thing there is, which can any way prejudice the former Discourse,
even the silence there is in the New Testament of any Baptism by Christ before
that in Judaea, yea the silence there is of it in that very Evangelist, who
takes such particular notice of the other. And surely such a silence would have
been of no small force, if it had been either a perfect silence, or an
unaccountable one. But as that story cannot be looked upon as perfectly silent,
which affords so many probable proofs of what it is pretended to be silent in;
so there may be reason enough given of its ascending no higher in its account
of Christ's administration of Baptism, than that, which was performed by him in
Judaea: Partly, because the Author of it had before acquainted his Readers with
Christ's representing it as generally necessary Joh. 3.5.
to Salvation, and from which, and the following practice of our Savior in
making Disciples, Men might reasonably enough collect his having so made the
former ones; And partly because he knew, that what was defective in his account
of our Savior's Baptism, might be abundantly supplied to posterity (to whom
he, and the other Evangelists principally wrote) by what those other
Evangelists Matt. 28.19. Mark 16.15, 16.
had said concerning Christ's giving command to his Apostles of baptizing all
Nations in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. For
that, together with his own account of our Savior's Baptism, was enough to let
them know (and therefore enough for their own purpose) that as Christ himself
initiated Men by Baptism, yea represented it as necessary to Salvation, so it
was his absolute will, and pleasure, that those, to whom his Apostles, and
their Successors published his Gospel, should be initiated by the same means,
if they meant to enter into the Kingdom of God.

The outward visible sign of the Christian Baptism shown to be the Element of
Water, and enquiry thereupon made wherein it was intended as a Sign; Which is
shown, in the general, to be as to the cleansing quality thereof, more
particularly as to the use it was put to toward newborn Infants, and that
application of it which was first in use, even by an immersion, or plunging the
Party baptized in it. Occasion taken from thence to enquire farther, how it
ought to be applied, more especially whether by an immersion, or by that, or an
aspersion, or effusion. Evidence made of an immersion being the only legitimate
Rite of Baptism, save where necessity does otherwise require; And enquiry
thereupon made, whether necessity may justify the Application of it by an
Aspersion, or Effusion and, if it may, whether the case of Infants be to be
looked upon as such a necessity. What is to be thought of those additions,
which were anciently made, or continue as yet in being in the outward
solemnities of Baptism. Where the sign of the Cross in Baptism is more
particularly considered, and answer made to those Exceptions that are made
against it as a Ceremony, as an addition of Men to the Institution of Christ,
and as a supposed Relic of Popery, or giving too much countenance to the
Papists abuses of it.

BUT because whatever doubt there may be of the first Institution of the
Christian Baptism, Question. What is the outward visible sign or form in
Baptism?

Answer. Water, wherein the person is baptized in the name of the Father, etc.


yet there neither is, nor can be any doubt of our Savior's instituting it
then, when he was about to take his leave of his Disciples; Therefore pass we
on to the Sacrament it self, which (agreeably to the procedure of our own
Catechism, and the method before observed, when I entreated of the nature of a
Sacrament in the general) I will consider, I. As to its outward and visible
Sign. II. As to its inward and Spiritual Grace, or the thing signified by it.
III. As to that relation, which its outward, and visible Sign bears to its
inward, and Spiritual Grace. IV. As to the Foundation of that Relation. For as
the nature of the Sacrament of Baptism will be found to lie within these four,
so I no way doubt we shall be able to reduce to one, or other of these generals
whatsoever is any way necessary to be known concerning it.


Now there are four things to be inquired concerning the first of these, even
the outward and visible sign of Baptism. First, what that outward and visible
sign is. Secondly, wherein it was intended as a sign. Thirdly, how it ought to
be applied. Fourthly, what is to be thought of those additions, which were
anciently made, or continue as yet in being in the outward solemnities of
Baptism.

1. As touching the outward, and visible sign of Baptism, there is no doubt it
is the Element of Water, as is evident from the native signification of the
word Baptism, which signifies an immersion, or dipping into some liquid thing,
from the matter of those Baptisms, which were in use among the Jews, and which
our Savior (because making use of the same word to express his own Baptism by)
is in reason to be supposed to have so far conformed it to, but more especially
from the account we have of the Administration of it, both whilst our Savior
continued here, and after his Ascension into Heaven. For thus after S. John had
said Joh. 3.22.
, that our Savior, presently after his entering upon his Prophetic Office,
came into the Land of Judaea, and there baptized, he immediately subjoined Joh.
3.23.
, that John the Baptist also was then baptizing in Aenon near to Salim, because
there was much water there. For as it is evident from thence, as well as from
other places Matt. 3.6. -- 13.
, that the Baptism of John was a Baptism by Water; so the Evangelist mentioning
John the Baptist as practicing the same thing with our Savior, shows the
Baptism of our Savior to have been so far like it, and consequently to have
had Water for the Instrument thereof. The same is yet more evident as to the
practice of our Savior's Disciples, after his more general Command Matt. 28.19.
of Baptism, and his own Ascension into Heaven. For thus we find Philip and the
Eunuch going down into a certain water Act. 8.38.
, by which they passed in order to the Baptism of the latter; As that too,
after the Eunuch had admonished him Act. 8.36.
, see here is water, what does hinder me to be baptized. And thus too we find
S. Peter Act. 10.47, 48.
, before he gave order for Cornelius, and his companies being baptized in the
name of the Lord, demanding of those of the Circumcision, that came with him,
whether any Man could forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which
bad received the Holy Ghost, as well as themselves; Thereby intimating, or
rather expressly declaring, that our Savior's Baptism was, as to the outward,
and visible sign, the same with that of John the Baptist, and other the
Baptisms of the Jews.

2. Water therefore being no doubt the outward and visible sign of Baptism, and
so declared to be by the manner of its Administration; The next thing to be
inquired into is, wherein it was intended as a sign, which will appear to have
been in these three particulars: First in respect of that cleansing quality,
which is natural to it, secondly in respect of that use which it was put to
about newborn Infants, thirdly in respect of that manner of Application of it,
which was first used, and no doubt generally intended, I mean the dipping of
the Party baptized in it.

That the Water of Baptism was intended as a sign in respect of the first of
these, will need no other proof, than Ananias's admonishing Paul to arise and
be baptized, and wash Act. 22.16.
away his sins, calling upon the name of the Lord. For it appearing, on the one
hand, that the Baptism, to which Paul was invited, even the Christian one, was
a Baptism by Water, and, on the other hand, that it was at least ordained for
the remission Act. 2.38.
of sins, and so the putting away their guilt; Nothing can be more reasonable,
than to think, that when Ananias subjoined to the precept of being baptized
that of washing away his sins, he meant his washing them away by Baptism, and
consequently that the Water of Baptism was both a sign of something relating to
the putting away of his sins, and a sign too in particular in respect of that
cleansing quality, which is natural to it, because that Baptism, to which it
belongs, is described as washing away the other.

But beside that Water was intended as a sign in respect of that cleansing
quality, which is natural to it; There is equal reason to believe, that it was
also intended as such in respect of the use it was then put to about newborn
Infants, even the washing away of those impurities, which they contracted from
the Womb. We have (as Mr. Mede did long since observe Disc. on Tit. 3.5.
an allusion to this custom in the description, which God gives of the poor
and forlorn condition of Jerusalem, when he first took her unto himself, under
the parable of an exposed Infant. For as for thy Nativity, says he, Eze. 16.4.
in the day that thou wast born, thy Navel was not cut, neither wast thou
washed in water to supple thee, thou wast not salted at all, nor swadled at
all: Thereby intimating what was then done to Infants in their Nativity, and
particularly the washing them from their impurities. And how generally received
this custom was, even among the Heathen, may appear (as the same Mr. Mede Vbi
supra.
has observed from what was done to the (...), or (...), who were persons
Hesych. in utramque vocem.
, to whom the Rites of Burial had been performed as dead, but did afterward
appear again in the World. For as these were looked upon as born anew Plutarch
Quaest. Romans statim ab initio. (...) --.
into the World, so like newborn Infants they were to be washed with Water
before they could be admitted to the conversation of Men, or allowed to enter
into the Temples of their Gods. But so that the Water of Baptism was intended
for a sign, is evident from its being styled the laver Tit. 3.5.
of regeneration, or a new Birth, and from the addition, that was made to it in
after times of giving milk Tertul. de Corona c. 3. Inde [nempe post
immersionem] suscepti, lactis and mellis concordiam praegustamus.
and honey to the new-baptized persons, as that too to declare their Infancy
Idem adv. Marcion. li. 1. c. 14. Sedille quidem usque nunc nec aquam reprobavit
creatoris qua suos abluit, nec oleum quo suos uncuit, nec mellis and lactis
societatem, quos suos infantat, etc.
. For this evidently shows this second Birth to relate to the first, and
consequently, that the Element of Water, and the Regeneration by it, though
borrowed more immediately from the Baptism of the Jews, yet was intended by our
Savior (as I no way doubt it was also by the Jews) as of like use with that,
which was applied to newborn Infants, and to represent alike washing away of
natural pollutions.

One other particular there is, wherein I have said the Water of Baptism to
have been intended as a sign, and that is in respect of that manner of
application, which was sometime used, I mean the dipping, or plunging the party
baptized in it. A signification, which S. Paul will not suffer those to forget,
who have been acquainted with his Epistles. For with reference to that manner
of Baptizing we find him affirming Romans 6.4.
, that we are buried with Christ by Baptism into death, that like as Christ was
raised up from the dead, by the glory of the Father, even so we also should
walk in newness of life; And again Romans 6.5.
, that if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall
be also in the likeness of his resurrection. To the same purpose, or rather yet
more clearly, does that Apostle discourse, where he tells us Col. 2.12.
, that as we are buried with Christ in Baptism, so we do therein rise also with
him through the faith of the operation of God, who has raised him from the
Dead. For what is this but to say, that as the design of Baptism was to oblige
Men to conform so far to Christ's Death, and Resurrection, as to die unto Sin,
and live again unto Righteousness, so it was performed by the ceremony of
immersion, that the person immersd might by that very ceremony, which was no
obscure image of a Sepulture, be minded of the preceden death, as in like
manner, by his coming again out of the Water, of his rising from that death to
life, after the example of the Instituter thereof? For which cause, as has
been elsewhere Expl. of the Creed, in the words, And Buried.
observed, the Ancient Church added to the Rite of immersion the dipping of the
party three several times to represent the three days Christ continued in the
Grave (for that we find to have been the intention of some) and made the Eve of
Easter one of the solemn times of the Administration of it.

3. The third thing to be inquired concerning the outward visible sign of
Baptism is, how it ought to be applied, where again these two things would be
considered. First, whether it ought to be applied by an immersion, or by that,
or an aspersion, or effusion. Secondly, whether it ought to be applied by a
threefold immersion, or aspersion, answerably to the names into which we are
baptized, or either by that, or a single one.

The former of these is, it may be, a more material question, than it is
commonly deemed by us, who have been accustomed to baptize by a bare effusion,
or sprinkling of water upon the party. For in things, which depend for their
force, upon the mere will, and pleasure of him, who instituted them, there
ought, no doubt, great regard to be had to the commands of him, who did so; As
without which there is no reason to presume, we shall receive the benefit of
that ceremony, to which he has been pleased to annex it. Now, what the command
of Christ was in this particular, cannot well be doubted of by those who shall
consider first the words of Christ Matt. 28.^9.
concerning it, and the practice of those times, whether in the Baptism of
John, or of our Savior. For the words of Christ are, that they should.
Baptize, or Dip those, whom they made Disciples to him (for so, no doubt, the
word (...) properly signifies) and, which is more, and not without its weight,
that they should baptize them into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost: Thereby intimating such a washing, as should receive the
party baptized within the very body of that Water, which they were to baptize
him with. Though, if there could be any doubt concerning the signification of
the words in themselves, yet would that doubt be removed by considering the
practice of those times, whether in the Baptism of John or of our Savior. For
such as was the practice of those times in Baptizing, such in reason are we to
think our Savior's command to have been concerning it, especially, when the
words themselves incline that way; There being not otherwise any means either
for those, or future times to discover his intention concerning it. Now what
the practice of those times was as to this particular, will need no other proof
than their resorting to Rivers, and other such like receptacles of waters for
the performance of that ceremony, as that too because there was much Water
there. For so the Scripture does not only affirm concerning the Baptism of John
Matt. 3.5, 6.13. John 3.23.
, but both intimate concerning that, which our Savior administered in Judaea
(because making John's Baptism, and his to be so far forth of the same sort
Joh. 3.22, 23.
) and expressly affirm concerning the Baptism of the Eunuch, which is the only
Christian Baptism the Scripture is any thing particular in the description of:
The words of S. Luke Act. 8.38.
being, that both Philip and the Eunuch went down into a certain water which
they met with in their journey, in order to the baptizing of the latter. For
what need would there have been either of the Baptist's resorting to great
confluxes of Water, or of Philip, and the Eunuch's going down into this, were
it not that the Baptism both of the one, and the other was to be performed by
an immersion? A very little Water, as we know it does with us, sufficing for an
effusion, or sprinkling. But beside the words of our Blessed Savior, and the
concurrent practice of those times, wherein this Sacrament was instituted; It
is in my opinion of no less consideration, that the thing signified by the
Sacrament of Baptism, cannot otherwise be well represented, than by an
immersion, or at least by some more general way of purification, than that of
effusion, or sprinkling. For though the pouring, or sprinkling of a little
Water upon the Face may suffice to represent an internal washing, which seems
to be the general end of Christ's making use of the Sacrament of Baptism; yet
can it not be thought to represent such an entire washing, as that of newborn
Infants was, and as Baptism may seem to have been intended for, because
represented as the laver Tit. 3.5.
of our regeneration: That, though it do require an immersion, yet requiring
such a general washing at least, as may extend to the whole Body; As other than
which cannot answer its type, nor yet that general, though internal purgation,
which Baptism was intended to represent. The same is to be said yet more upon
the account of our conforming to the Death, and Resurrection of Christ, which
we learn from S. Paul to have been the design of Baptism to signify. For,
though that might, and was well enough represented by the baptized persons
being buried in Baptism, and then rising out of it; yet can it not be said to
be so, or at least but very imperfectly by the bare pouring out, or sprinkling
the Baptismal Water on him. But therefore as there is so much the more reason
to represent the Rite of immersion, as the only legitimate Rite of Baptism,
because the only one, that can answer the ends of its Institution, and those
things, which were to be signified by it; so especially if (as is well known,
and undoubtedly of great force) the general practice of the Primitive Church
was agreeable thereto, and the practice of the Greek Church to this very day.
For who can think either the one, or the other would have been so tenacious of
so troublesome a Rite, were it not that they were well assured, as they of the
Primitive Church might very well be, of its being the only instituted, and
legitimate one.

How to take off the force of these Arguments altogether, is a thing I mean not
to consider; Partly, because our Church See the Rubric in the Office of
Baptism before the words, I baptize thee, etc.
seems to persuade such an immersion, and partly, because I cannot but think
the forementioned Arguments to be so far of force, as to evince the necessity
thereof, where there is not some greater necessity to occasion an alteration of
it. For what benefit can Men ordinarily expect from that, which depends for its
force upon the will of him, that instituted it, where there is not such a
compliance at least with it, and the Commands of the Instituter, as may answer
those ends, for which he appointed it? And indeed, whatever may have been done
to Infants, which I no way doubt were more or less baptized from the beginning,
the first mention we find of Aspersion in the Baptism of the Elder sort, was in
the case of the Clinici, or Men who received Baptism upon their sick Beds; and
that Baptism represented by S. Cyprian Epist. ad Magn. 76. In Sacramentis
salutaribus, necessitate cogente, and Deo indulgentiam suam largiente, totum
credentibus conferunt Divina compendia.
as legitimate upon the account of the necessity, that compelled it, and the
presumption there was of God's gracious acceptance thereof because of it. By
which means the lawfulness of any other Baptism, than by an immersion, will be
found to lie in the necessity there may sometime be of another manner of
Administration of it; and we therefore only enquire, whether the necessity of
the party to be baptized can justify such an alteration, and what is to be
looked upon as such a necessity. And indeed though that Magnus, to whom S.
Cyprian directed the forementioned Letter, seemed to question the lawfulness of
such a Baptism, and that Father, as his manner is, spoke but modestly
concerning it; yet there is not otherwise any appearance of the Ancient
Churches disapproving the Baptism of the Clinicks, because they were not loti,
but perfusi, as S. Cyprian expresses it. For even he himself does there
intimate, that they Aut si aliquis existimat eos nibil consecutos, eo quod aqua
salutari tantum perfusi sunt, etc. non decipiantur, ut si incommodu^ languoris
evaserint, and convaluerint, baptizentur. Si autem baptizari non possunt, qui
jam Baptismo Ecclesiastico sanctificati sunt, cur in fi^^ sua, and Domini in
dulgentia scandalizentur? Cypr. ubi supra.
, who liked not the Baptism of the Clinicks, did not yet care to baptize them
again. He adds farther, that they who had been so baptized, were known to have
been delivered thereby from that unclean spirit, which before possessed them
Denique and rebus ipsis experimur, ut necessitate urgente, in aegritudine
baptizati, and gratiam consecuti, careant immundo spiritu, quo antea
movebantur, and laudabiles ac probabiles in Ecclesia vivant, plusque per dies
singulos in augmentum coelestis gratiae per fidei Sacramentum proficiant. Cypr.
ibid.
,,and after their recovery, gave as good proof, as any, by their holy living,
of their being sanctified by that Baptism. In fine, that they, who differed
from him, as to the rebaptization of Heretics, (which was the sounder part of
the Church in that particular) did, without any difference, admit those, who
had been baptized by Heretics Et tantus honor habeatur haereticis, ut inde
venientes non interrogentur, utrumne loti sint, an perfusi, utrumne Clinici
fint, an Peripatetici. Cypr. ibid.
, neither were scrupulous in enquiring, whether they were washed or sprinkled,
Clinicks or Peripateticks. Which passages alone are a sufficient proof, that
the generality of the Church looked upon sprinkling as enough, where there was
any just necessity to constrain it. But so (to omit other proofs) we may be
satisfied even by that Canon Cod. Eccl. Vniv. can. 57. cum not. Just.
, which was made against some of the forementioned Clinicks; The utmost, that
Canon pretended to do against them, being the hindering them from being promoted
to the Priesthood, as that too, not because of any unlawfulness in the manner
of their Baptism, but because there was sometime a presumption, that that
Baptism proceeded rather from necessity, than choice, or that they had (as
Tertullian De Poenit. cap. 8.
speaks, deferred the receiving of it, that they might in the mean time indulge
to their sins, as nothing doubting, but their future Baptism would wipe off
all. There being therefore no doubt to be made (so far as the judgment, or
practice of the Church can warrant us) that necessity does justify a bare
Aspersion in Baptism; Enquire we, for our farther confirmation in it, what
there was in the Scripture to induce them to it, or establish us in the belief
of it. Which I conceive to be their understanding from thence 1 Pet. 3.21.
, that though Baptism was the thing, that saved, yet it was not so much by its
washing away the filth of the flesh, as from that answer of a good Conscience,
which it did involve; That, though the external washing was also necessary in
its kind, and, where it might be had, in those circumstances also, wherein it
was instituted, yet since God had declared Matt. 12.7.
, That he would have mercy, and not sacrifice, there was reason enough to
believe, that he required no farther a compliance in this particular, than was
consistent with the safety of Men's lives to afford; especially, when what was
wanting in the application of the outward visible sign might be made up by the
form of words, wherewith it was administered, and Men admonished thereby of
those significations of Baptism, which the visible solemnities thereof did not
suggest. For, the several ends of Baptism being thus secured, there was still
the less reason to be scrupulous about the means, or think God would be
rigorous in exacting them. But so they might be yet more assured (as it appears
St. Cyprian Ubi supra.
was) by what the Prophet Ezekiel Ezekiel. 36.25.
brings in God as speaking concerning the times of the Messiah; Even that he
would sprinkle clean Water upon them, and they should be clean from all their
filthiness, and from their Idols. For as it appears from what follows Ezekiel. 26,
27.
, even that God would give the persons there spoken of a new heart, and a new
Spirit, take away their stony heart from them, and put his own spirit within
them, that this whole passage was spoken more particularly with reference to
the times of the Messiah, Maimonides himself Explic. Tract. Sanh. c. 10. apud
Pocock. Port. Mosis, p. 160.1.
so applying this, and the like passages; So we cannot therefore better
interpret the sprinkling of clean Water upon them in order to it, than of the
Water of Baptism, and which the Spirit of God expressing by the term of
sprinkling of Water shows it to have foreseen a necessity of its being so
administered oftentimes, and his own allowance of it. All which things whosoever
shall consider, will, I doubt not, see reason enough to think, that necessity
may justify an Aspersion in Baptism, and nothing more therefore left to
enquire upon this Head, than what may be looked upon as such a necessity, which
will bring the question yet nearer to our selves. Now as there can be no doubt
of sickness being such, and particularly such a sickness, as fastens Men to
their Beds; So we shall therefore have nothing more to consider of, than the
case of Infants, and to whom as Baptism is generally administered, so it is also
performed by an effusion, or sprinkling. With what necessity, is the thing we
are to enquire, and so much the rather because the Greek Church uses
immersion, or dipping to this very day, and the Muscovitish Church after its
example. For if the coldness of any Clime may be thought to make that Rite
dangerous to such tender Bodies, one would think they of the latter should find
it to be such, and therefore see a necessity of changing it. For the clearing
whereof we are to know, that as they, who use the Rite of immersion, even in
warmer Countries, are so sensible of the tenderness of Infant Bodies, that they
make use of warm Water to baptize them; So the Muscovites making use of it
without any danger (if yet they always do so) will not make it cease to be such
to Infants of other Countries: There being, as every one knows, no small
difference between the Bodies of Infants, as well as those of Men, and to some
of whom therefore, and in some Countries that may be exceeding dangerous, which
Infants of other Countries find no such inconvenience by. And indeed as such an
Immersion of Infants, especially in these Northern parts, cannot generally be
thought to be without its hazard, how warily and carefully soever managed; As
it may be yet more hazardous to weaker Infants, and whom, as it would not be
thought fit to deny Baptism to, so as little, to do any thing to send them out
of the World; so I am apt to believe upon second thoughts (for I have elsewhere
Expl. of the Creed, in the Words, And Buried.
spoken more harshly concerning it) that that Rite came to be disused here
after a sufficient proof of the inconveniences thereof; Because (as Erasmus
notes Vid. Pamel. in not. ad Cypr. epist. ad Magnum.
, it was in use among us, even in his time, and the Liturgies, that have been
in force since, not excepting the present one, seem rather to persuade the use
of it. For our Forefathers being so strangely tenacious of that Rite, and both
they, and their posterity not without a venerable opinion of it, it cannot well
be thought they should come at length so generally to disuse it, but that they
found by experience, that it was not without its hazard, and so more prudently
omitted. However it be, our Church has acquitted it self from all blame,
because manifestly licensing See the Rubr. of Bap^. before the Words, I baptize
thee, etc.
the sprinkling of Infants with respect to the weakness of their State; And I
have the more carefully noted both that, and the ground of our practice, the
better to defend our selves from a retort of the Romanists, when we charge them
with Sacrilege in the matter of the Eucharist for taking away the Cup from the
Laity. For why not (as they sometime answer) as well as change the Rite of
Immersion in Baptism into that of sprinkling? Especially, when a great part of
the Symbolicalness of that Sacrament lies in the manner of the application of
its sign. Which Answer of theirs were not in my opinion easy to be repel'd,
were it not, that we have that necessity to justify our practice, which they
cannot pretend for their own.

Having thus said enough concerning the applying of the outward sign of
Baptism, whether by an Immersion, or Aspersion, which was the first thing I had
to consider; Enquire we in the next place how often that application ought to
be made, that is to say whether as many times as there are persons in the
Godhead, into which we baptize, or once for all into the three. The ground of
which question is not only that distinct profession of the Trinity, which
Baptism was intended to declare, but the appearance there is of the Churches
using a threefold immersion from the beginning. For, not to mention any other
proofs, Tertullian, who flourished within an hundred years after the last of
the Apostles, does not only mention the threefold immersion, as a thing in use
in his time, but as a thing which was derived to them from Tert. de Corona, c.
3. Ergo quaeramus, an and Traditio nisi scripta non debeat recipi. Plane
negabimus recipiendam, si nulla exempla praejudicent aliarum observationum,
quas sim ullius scripturae instrumento, solius traditionis titulo, and exinde
consuetudinis Patrocinio vindicamus. Denique, ut a Baptismo ingrediar, Aquam
adituri ibidem, sed and aliquanto prius in Ecclesia sub Antistitis manu
contestamur, nos renunciare Diabolo, and pompae, and angelis ejus. Dehine ter
mergitamur, amplius aliquid respondentes, quam Dominus in Evangelio
determinavit. Item adv. Praxeam c. 26.
Tradition, and which, considering the time wherein he lived, cannot well fall
short of an Apostolical one. And thus much certainly ought to be allowed to
this, and other testimonies, that in or near the Apostolical Age, the more
fully to express that distinction of persons, into the Faith of which Christ
commanded to baptize, Men were with the command, or allowance of those who
presided in the Church, plunged into the Baptismal Water at the mention of each
person's name. But as that threefold immersion cannot be collected from the
command of Christ, because simply enjoining to baptize into the Faith of the
Trinity, and which one immersion may declare as well as a threefold one; As
there is as little appearance of such a threefold immersion from the account we
have in the Scripture of the administration of it: So it is but reasonable to
think, that as ancient as it was, yet it was postnate to the single one, and
had its rise from some Men's beginning to call the Doctrine of the Trinity in
question (as we find by Tertullian they did very early) and, the better to
color their own error, as well as to overthrow the other, admonishing Men
from St. Paul, that Baptism was peculiarly intended to baptize Men into
Christ's death. For beside that they, who consider the primitive face of
Christianity, will need no other proof than that to persuade them to believe,
that the more simple any Rite is, so much the more ancient it ought to be
thought to be; That Apostolic Canon (...), etc. (...). Can. 50.
, which commands the deposing of him, who should not use a threefold immersion,
but a single one, does not so much as prefer the threefold immersion to the
single one simply, and absolutely considered, but as opposed to that single
one, which was made use of to baptize Men into the death of our Lord, and not
into the Faith of the Trinity. Thereby not only not condemning the single
immersion considered in it self, but also intimating the triple one to have
been rather instituted at first to obviate that heretical opinion. And if this
were the rise of the triple Immersion, as is probable enough from the premises;
The single one, abstracting from any command of the Church to the contrary,
will at least be as lawful as that, and nothing therefore left to us to
enquire, but what is to be thought of those additions, which were anciently
made, or continue as yet in being in the outward solemnities of Baptism.

4. As touching the additions, which were anciently made in this particular,
and concerning which they, who desire an account, may meet with an ample one in
Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity Part 1. c. 10.
; They were either such, as they thought more peculiarly warranted to them by
an Apostolical Tradition, of which nature till better information I must needs
think the triple Immersion to have been, or such as were brought into the
Church by those, who presided in it, the more effectually to declare the
intention of that Sacrament, to which they were added by it. Which they thought
they might most assuredly do, if they made use of such farther Rites, as did
represent yet more to their senses what that Sacrament was intended to declare.
And indeed, as that way of Instruction was in part warranted by the Sacraments
themselves, because professing by sensible things to teach Men Spiritual ones;
As it became yet more necessary by the grosness of the Vulgar sort, and that
infinity of Ceremonies, to which they had been before accustomed: So that,
which afterward made them faulty, was either the exceeding multitude thereof
(and which experience assures us does rather obscure, yea overwhelm the thing
signified by them, than help toward the declaration of it) or their advancing
by degrees into the same repute, or necessity with the signs of Christ's own
Institution. Which is so true, that they came in fine to be represented, as
means, and conveyers of Grace, as well as significative thereof; Thereby making
them Sacraments, rather than appendages of such; and which whosoever goes about
to do, must necessarily usurp the place of God, and Christ, as to whom alone it
does belong (because the only givers of Spiritual Graces) to make any ceremony
the conveyer of them. But as that Church, whose Catechism I explain, has been
so far from multiplying Rites in Baptism, that she has contented her self with
one single one, even the Sign of the Cross; So she has so explained her own
meaning in it, both in that form of word In the Office of Bapt.
, wherewith she appoints it to be made, and in a Canon Can. 30.
devised expressly for that purpose, that it will not be easy for considerate
Men to believe, that she represents it as a Sacrament, or indeed that she may
not require the conformity of her Children to it. Only, because they, who
separate from the Church, have made the injunction of that Ceremony one of the
particular reasons of their separation, and occasion may well be taken from
thence to show the ground both of that, and others, which are as yet retained
in the Church of England, I will set my self to consider the exceptions, that
have been made against it, and return a particular answer to them.

Now there are three sorts of charges, which are brought against this Ceremony,
and which therefore it will be necessary to consider; Its being a Ceremony, and
so less agreeable to a spiritual, and substantial Religion; Its being an
addition to the Institution of Christ, and therefore implying something of
imperfection in that; As lastly, its being a relic of Popery, or giving too
much countenance to the errors of it.

The first of these is certainly one of the most unreasonable charges, that
were ever advanced against our Church by the Adversaries thereof. As will
appear if we consider the nature of those, for whose edification that, and the
like Ceremonies were intended, The use such things are of to procure respect to
those Institutions, to which they are annexed, And the nature of that Religion,
with whose Offices they are intermixed.

That I allege as one ground of this, and the like Ceremonies the very nature
of those Men, for whose edification they were intended, is their being composed
of Flesh, as well as Spirit, and consequently the need they stand in of such
sensible helps to awaken their understandings to consider, and their affections
to embrace what they were designed to represent. For being so framed, it is not
easy to believe, that, if there were not somewhat in all actions of moment to
affect Men's sense, they would intend them as they ought, or be duly affected
with them. Of which yet if any doubt be made, we have the constant practice of
the World to justify it, because rarely, if ever, suffering that, which was
such (though there wanted not words to express their meaning) to pass without
some visible solemnities. Thus, as Mr. Hooker Eccl. Pol. li. 4.. 1.
did long since observe, Abraham proceeded with his Servant, because not only
obliging him to take a Wife for his Son out of his Kindred, but to accompany
that Oath of his, with the putting of his Hand Genesis 24.2-9.
under his Master's Thigh. And thus too Israel made Joseph swear -- 47.29.
, that he would not bury him in Egypt: Both of them, as is not unlikely, from
some received custom of that time, because as they say Vatabl. in Genesis 24.2.
, yet observed in some of the Eastern parts, and as a token of the homage the
Party swearing owed to those to whom they swore, and of their readiness to
execute it in the thing sworn to by them. In like manner, as the same Mr.
Hooker Vbi supra.
has also observed, it was an Ancient manner in Israel concerning redeeming,
and exchanging for the Man, who refused to redeem, to pluck off his Shoe, and
Ruth 4.7.
give it to him, that would; As among the Romans, when they made any Man Free,
not only to declare before the Magistrate, that they intended to make him such,
but to strike him on the Cheek, to turn him round, and have his Hair shaved
off, the Magistrate, after that, touching him with a White Rod, and bestowing a
Cap, and a White Garment on him. Of which, and infinite other instances, that
might be produced, what account can be given, but that Men have generally
thought such solemnities but requisite to imprint the things, to which they
were annexed, upon the minds of those, that were concerned, and procure a due
estimate thereof? But so it appears, that they themselves were in a great
measure persuaded, who showed themselves the greatest Enemies of the Ceremonies
of the Church; Because obliging those, that took their solemn League, and
Covenant, to swear to the Contents thereof with their hands lift up to the most
High God, as is expressed in the very entrance of it. For why that Ceremony of
lifting up of the hands, especially in a Covenant, that was intended to beat
down the supposed superstition of the Church of England, were it not that they
themselves found it in a manner necessary to awaken the minds of Men to intend
the Religion of it?

But beside that humane nature does, by the very contexture of it, require such
kind of solemnities to awaken their minds, and affections; It is not a little
to be considered of what use they are to procure respect to those Institutions,
to which they have been at any time annexed. For may not Men observe that
usefulness in the solemnities of all civil affairs, and particularly in those
solemnities, which are observed in Courts of Judicature? Does not the very
raising high of those Benches, on which the Judges sit, admonish Men of their
Superiority over them? Do not those Robes, whereby they are differenced from
other Men, draw the Eyes of the Vulgar to them, yea mind them of that greater
difference there is between the Judges, and themselves, as to that power,
wherewith they are also invested? Have not the same persons therefore (whatever
clamor has been raised against things of that nature) kept up them, and the
like solemnities among them? Have they not done it in those very instances,
which have been scrupled at in the Church? For how superstitious a thing in a
Bishop, or other Clergy Man has the use of that Cap been, which these earthly
Gods the Judges, and when they are about their great Master's work, do not only
not scruple at, but diligently retain? As knowing, that such marks of
distinction do naturally lead Men to consider those persons, or things, to
which they are applied, as of a peculiar nature, and accordingly, if they
deserve it, to respect them. And if such be the usefulness of external
solemnities in other matters, why should they be excluded from our Religion?
Nay, why should they not (considering the momentousness thereof) be rather
applied to it?

Especially if we consider thirdly the nature of that Religion, with whose
Offices they are intermixed by us. For though that do more peculiarly call us
to the intending of spiritual things; Though it do loudly proclaim the
abrogation of the Ceremonial Law of Moses, and not obscurely condemn the
substituting of any the like burdensome one: Yet as it no where condemns such a
number of Ceremonies, as may serve the better to lead Men to the contemplation,
and regard of spiritual things, so it gives a sufficient countenance to them by
the Sacraments I am now upon, and by those other usances, which were in vogue
with the first Professors of it. For how can that Religion be looked upon as an
enemy to Ceremonies, which requires Men to be initiated into it by the water,
and immersion of Baptism? Yea to keep up their interest in it by partaking of
the Bread, and Wine of the Eucharist, those signs of our Savior's Crucified
Body, and of the spiritual benefits we reap by it? And though we do not find
that our Savior instituted any other Ceremonies, or at least not with a design
of giving them the same lasting obligation; Yet as we find our Savior giving
command to his Disciples, when he first sent them out to Preach, to shake off
the dust of their Feet Mark 6.11.
against those that would not hear them, as a testimony of their contempt of
God's word, and of their own resolution not to have to do with them in the like
kind which was a kind of Excommunication of them; So we find that Paul, and
Barnabas (though under no obligation from the former command, because but a
temporary one) shook off the dust of their feet Acts 13.51.
against those Jews of Antioch, that rejected, and expelled them, as the same
S. Paul after that, when the Jews of Corinth opposed themselves, and
blasphemed, shaking his raiment at them -- 18.6.
as a testimony of his rejecting them, in like manner, and leaving them to go
unto the Gentiles. For what was this but to declare by a significant Ceremony,
that as they had rejected the Counsel of God toward themselves, so God had
rejected them in like manner, neither would that his Ministers should make the
like proposals to them? The same is yet more to be said upon the account of
Imposition of hands, and which, though from no Command of Christ, was either
used, or approved by the Apostles themselves, both in the Ordination of
Ministers 2 Timothy 1.6.
, and receiving penitent Sinners to Absolution 1 Timothy 5.22.
, and pardon. For these being noted Acts of that Religion, which we profess,
and yet by the allowance of the Apostles themselves transacted by the Ceremony
of Imposition of Hands, make it evident, that our Religion does rather commend,
than reject such visible solemnities, where they are sparingly, and discreetly
applied.

That first charge against the sign of the Cross being thus wiped off, even
that which pretends to discard it upon the account of its being a Ceremony; Let
us see, whether it be likely to suffer any more by the pretense of its being an
addition of Men to the Institution of Christ, yea to one, that is not without
visible solemnities of his own appointment: Such additions seeming to imply the
imperfection of that, to which they are made, and which there is the less
reason to believe in the present affair, because care has been taken by our
Savior as to the outward form of its Administration, as well as to more
material things. And surely so such Additions might very well be thought to do,
if either they were represented as of the Essence of the Sacrament, or our
Savior had professed to prescribe, or direct the whole form of the
Administration of it. But as it is notorious enough, that the Church of England
does not represent the sign of the Cross as pertaining to the Essence of the
Sacrament, because administering it after Baptism first given, yea after the
mention of the Minister's receiving the baptized person into the Congregation
of Christ's flock; So our Savior is so far from prescribing the whole external
form of its Administration, that he has left us to the general tenor of his
Doctrine, and the directions of our own reason, even for those things that are
more material, yea for such as are directed See the Directory in the
Administration of Baptism.
by those very Men, who cry out against us for adding to Christ's Institution.
For where, I beseech you, is there any prescription of other words concerning
Baptism, than what is implied in that short belief, into which he commands to
Baptize? Where to admonish all, that are present, to look back to their own
Baptism, and to repent of the violations of the Covenant they made with God in
it? Where any directions for requiring the Parent of the Child to bring him up
in the nurture of the Lord, yea to require the Parents solemn promise for the
performance of it? Nay where, which is of all others the most material, any
Prayer to Almighty God for the sanctifying of the Water he is going to make use
of, and which I no way doubt is necessary to the Consecration of it? All, that
the Institution of Baptism represents to us, being the baptizing those, that
offer themselves to it, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. Now if our Savior has not professed to prescribe, even as to the
things before directed, but left Men to the general conduct of his Doctrine,
and the guidance of their own reason; What appearance is there as to his
prescribing after what external form, and order, all these things were to be
done, and which if he has not, there is no doubt the Governors of the Church
may order, as they shall see fit, yea do so without any fear of being thought
to charge his Institutions with imperfection? They being not to be thought to
do so, who prescribe rules concerning those things, which the Institutions of
Christ profess not to give perfect directions in. The only thing, which has
occasioned Men's misapprehensions first, and then their passing so severe a
Censure upon humane prescriptions in this kind, is an hasty opinion they have
taken up of Christ's being as particular in directing the external management
of sacred Duties, as Moses appears to have been as to the services of the Law.
For which yet they have had no other pretense, than a misapplied Text of the
Author to the Hebrews Heb. 3.2.
, even Christ's being as faithful in that house of God, which was committed to
his charge, as Moses was in his. But beside that there appear not any such
particular directions from God to our Savior, as there were sometime given to
Moses, and our Savior therefore not to be looked upon as unfaithful, for not
reaching out such particular directions to us; Besides that, if our Savior did
not furnish such particular directions, yet he has furnished his Church with a
far greater portion of his Spirit, and which may serve to it as a guide to fit
those Services for its respective members; Beside lastly that the Services he
enjoined, because to be exercised among people of several Nations, and humors,
were not capable, as to circumstances, of such strict limitations, as that,
which was to be exercised in one single Nation only: There is nothing more
evident to those, that read the Scriptures, than that Christ has given no such
particular directions, and all Arguments from Christ's fidelity therefore of no
more avail in this affair, than those, which the Papists are wont to draw from
the wisdom and goodness of God, toward the proving of an Infallible Guide. For
as no wise Man will be persuaded by such Arguments against the Testimony of his
own senses, which assure him of the errors of those, whom they would have to
be Infallible; So no considering Man will be persuaded by the other into a
belief of those particular directions, which are not any where to be seen, nor
which they themselves, who maintain those directions, have yet been able to
show. For when they have said all they can toward the evincing of their
Conclusion, the utmost they are able to prove is, that Christ has given some
general directions concerning the Administration of religious Offices, and
which as it does not prejudge the giving of more particular ones, so does much
less make them to reflect any imperfection upon the Institution of Christ,
because pretending not to concern it self about them.

One other Charge there is, which is more peculiar to the sign of the Cross,
and that is its being a relic of Popery, or giving too much countenance to
the Papists abuses of it. But as they, who advance the former of these, make
Popery much more Ancient, than it is for the advantage of Protestantism to
allow; It being certain from Tertullian De Coron^ cap. 3.
, that this Ceremony was in use in his time in almost all the actions they set
about: So our Church has taken care to prevent in its own Members all
misapplications of it, or the giving the least encouragement to those, that are
made of it by others; Partly by confining the use of it to the Administration
of Baptism, and partly by representing it as only a token of Men's being not
ashamed to own the Faith, and reproaches of him, who suffered upon it. Which is
certainly a more proper course to discountenance Popery, than it can be thought
to be to remove the use of it altogether: Because at the same time we disavow
the errors of that, we show by our Practice our allowance of the Ceremony it
self, and, together therewith, our accordance with the Primitive Church, which
is the only plausible thing the Papists have to boulster up their own cause, or
reproach us with the neglect of.

A DIGRESSION Concerning ORIGINAL SIN, By way of PREPARATION TO THE Following
Discourses.
The Contents. Of the ground of the present Digression concerning Original Sin,
and enquiry thereupon made, what Original Sin is. Which is shown in the General
to be such a corruption of the Nature of every Man, that is naturally
engendered of the offspring of Adam, whereby it becomes averse from every
thing, that is good, and inclinable to every thing, that is evil. The nature of
that corruption more particularly inquired into, and shown by probable
Arguments to be no other, than a Privation of a Supernatural Grace. That there
is such a thing, as we have before described, evidenced at large from the
Scripture, and that evidence farther strengthened by the experience we have of
its effects, and the acknowledgments of the wiser Heathen. Enquiry next made
from whence it had its beginning, which is shown to have been not from any evil
Spirit, or Demon, the pravity of matter, or the evil habits the Soul
contracted in a praeexistent state, but from the pravity of our first Parents.
This last at large confirmed out of the Doctrine of the Scripture, and followed
by some light reflections upon the means, by which it is conveyed. A more just
account from the Scripture of its being truly, and properly a sin, partly from
its having the title of a sin, but more especially from its being represented
as such, upon the account of our Obligation to the contrary. A consideration of
those Objections, which are commonly made against the Doctrine of Original Sin;
Which are shown either not to be of that force, whereof they are esteemed, or
however not to be a sufficient bar to what the Scripture has declared
concerning it.

AN account being thus given of the outward visible Sign of Baptism, Question.
What is the inward, and spiritual Grace?
which is the first of those things I proposed to entreat of; Reason would,
Answer. A death unto Sin, and a new birth unto Righteousness. For being by
nature born in Sin, and the Children of wrath, we are hereby made the Children
of Grace.
(as well as the method before laid down), that I should consider the things
signified by it: Which, on the part of God, and Christ, are an inward and
Spiritual Grace, as, on the part of the baptized, an Abrenunciation of their
former sins, and a resolution to believe, and act, as Christianity obliges
them to do. But because both the one, and the other of these suppose the
baptized persons to have been before in a sinful Estate, and our Catechism in
particular to have been born in it, and by that, as well as by the sins they
afterward contracted, to be made the Children of wrath; Therefore it will be
but necessary for us to premise something concerning that sinful Estate, as
which Baptism both presupposes, and professes to provide a remedy for.

Now as that sinful State, whereof we speak, is best known by the name of
Original Sin, and will therefore most commodiously be described by it; So I
will make it my business to enquire What that is, and what appearance of the
being of it, from whence it had its beginning, and by what means it is
conveyed, whether, as it has for the most part the name of a Sin, so it be
truly, and properly such, and what is to be said to the Objections, that are
made against it.

I. To begin with the first of these, even what Original Sin is, and which, in
the general, may be defined to be such a Corruption of the nature of every Man,
that is naturally engendered of the offspring of Adam, whereby it becomes
averse from every thing, that is good, and inclined to every thing, that is
evil. I call it a Corruption of nature to distinguish it from nature considered
in it self, and as it was in the first formation of it: Partly, because Nature
being, as such, the work of God, cannot be supposed to be corrupt; And partly
because the Scripture assures us, that whatsoever it now is, God made it
upright Eccl. 7.29.
, and so free from all corruptions whatsoever. But so also do I entitle it the
Corruption of the Nature of every Man, that is naturally engendered of the
offspring of Adam: Partly, because the Scripture, where it entreats of it,
represents all Men as under the Contagion of it, and partly to exempt our Lord,
and Savior from it, who was engendered after another manner, and whom the same
Scripture assures to have been free 2 Cor. 5.21.
from all sin, yea to have been so Luke 1.35.
from his Birth. I call it lastly such a Corruption of humane Nature, whereby
it is averse from every thing, that is good, and inclined to every thing, that
is evil. Which I do upon the account of the Scripture's representing it as a
sinful Psa. 51.5.
one, and which, as such, will make those in whom it is, averse from good, as
well as inclinable to evil, yea averse from all, that is good, and inclinable
to all evil: Because good, yea all good is opposite to such an estate, and
evil, yea all evil connatural to it. If they, in whom that corruption of nature
does as yet abide, be not always actually prevailed upon to reject that good,
from which we have affirmed them to be so averse, or to pursue that evil, to
which we have affirmed them to be inclinable, it is not because they want any
averseness for the one, or inclination to the other, but for some other
collateral considerations: Such as is, for example, the reputation, or
advantage, that may accrue to them from the espousing of any thing, that is
good, or the omission of any thing, that is evil For all good, and all evil
being of one uniform nature, because becoming good or evil by the conformity
they bear to the divine Laws, or by their deviation from them; where there is
an inclination to any thing that is good, there must be an inclination to all,
that is of the same nature; as on the other side where an averseness from any
thing, that is evil, an averseness for all that, which is alike a transgression
of the Divine Laws. But as therefore nothing can hinder us from representing
natural corruption as making Men averse from all that is good, and inclinable
to every thing that is evil; So neither can any thing oblige us to extend the
force of it so far, as to make it to determine them in all their actions, and
accordingly to carry them to an actual rejection of all, that is good, or a
pursuance of all, that is evil; Partly because Men may, and often do act
contrary to their natural aversions, or inclinations, where there is hope of
temporal advantage, or fear of any temporal evil; And partly, because we do not
only find few natural Men proceeding to the extremity of Impiety, but find also
great variety among them in the omission of good Actions, or the commission of
those that are evil. Of which variety what account could be given, when the
Corruption of Nature is, and must be equal, because all Men were alike in, and
are alike descended from Adam, were it not that even that Corruption leaves
place for the performance of many good, and the avoiding of many things, that
are evil? For to ascribe that variety either wholly, or principally to the
different degrees of God's restraining Grace, is not only to speak without all
Authority, that I know of, but to take away all diversity between the evil
demerits of natural Men, and, together therewith, all different degrees of
punishment; yea to make the Corruption of Nature the only proper ground of
punishment. For as, if there be nothing but God's restraining Grace to take off
natural Men from falling into the worst of sins, the greatest actual sinner
cannot deserve more punishment, than he who offends in a far less degree;
Because all demerit arises from the pravity of the will, which is not more or
less for the mere absence, or presence of God's restraining Grace: So the
greatest actual sinner cannot become obnoxious to punishment upon the score of
any other Corruption than that of Nature; That as it makes all his actual sins
to be necessary, and therefore in reason to bear the whole blame, and
punishment, so receiving no new aggravation from the want of that restraining
Grace, which might have withheld the party from them, in as much as that want
(if it be a fault) is no less the result of his natural corruption, than his
actual offenses are. But therefore also as we cannot look upon natural
corruption as determining Men to all their actual errors, without taking away
all diversity between the demerits of natural Men, yea making natural
Corruption the only proper ground of their punishment; so they, who do so, will
be found to contradict the declarations of the Scripture, as well as the
allowed practice of the World. For why, if there be no difference between the
demerits of natural Men, should those, that are in Authority, mete out
different punishments to them according to the different degrees, or kinds of
those offenses, which they commit? Nay, why should the Scripture affirm, that
it shall be more tolerable for some sinners Matt. 11.22, 24.
, than for others at the great day of judgment? That, as it is a judgment of
righteousness, so being consequently to mete out equal punishments to all
sinners, if there be but an equality in their demerits. Again, if natural
Corruption be upon the matter the only proper ground of punishment, as it must
of necessity be, if it be the unavoidable cause of actual sins; How comes the
Scripture to declare, that God will reward every Man according to his works
Romans 2.6.
, yea the wicked Romans 2.8.
according to his works, as well as the righteous according to theirs? For if
natural Corruption be the only proper ground of punishment, the works of Men in
propriety of Speech can have no concernment in it, and much less (as the
Scripture declares) be the principal object of judgment, and therefore of that
punishment, which it shall award. The utmost in my opinion, that can be said in
this particular, is that as Men by the Corruption of their Nature are averse
from every thing, that is good, so that averseness will indispose those, in
whom that Corruption abides, to all good actions whatsoever, and infallibly
take them off from them, where either some work of God upon their minds does
not thrust them on to them, or the comeliness, or profitableness thereof shall
not more strongly impel them to the practice of them. The former whereof will
make the consent of such persons even to those good actions, which they
perform, incomplete, and imperfect, and indeed a consent to them rather as
expedient, than good; whence it is that our Church Art. 13.
represents them as having the nature of sins: The latter cause them to neglect
all such, as are not in a manner thrust upon them by God, or have not one of
the former motives to incite them to the practice of them, yea present to their
minds, when they ought to make use of them. Which will occasion such persons
for the most part to neglect all good actions, where there is not place for
serious thoughts, as in cases of surprise, or where they have not been
habituated to the practice of virtue, or to the consideration of the comeliness
or profitableness thereof. But as where there is place for serious thoughts,
there may be place also for the former motives to impel Men to the practice of
that, from which they are otherwise sufficiently averse; So it is not unlikely
that the minds of those, who have been before habituated to the practice, or
contemplation of Virtue, may be thrust on by the former motives to pursue many
things, that are good, yea acquit themselves singularly in them. Of which yet
if any doubt be made, we have the laudable example of several Heathens to
convince us thereof, and who, because Heathen, cannot be supposed to be free
from the power of natural Corruption, or to be thrust on by other motives, than
the former, to the doing of such actions, from which they are naturally so
averse. In like manner, As Men by the Corruption of their Nature are inclined
to every thing that is evil, as well as averse from every thing that is good;
So that inclination will dispose those, in whom it is, to an allowance of all
evil actions, and infallibly betray them, into them, where God's restraining
Grace does not withhold them, or the indecency, or dangerous consequences of
the other do not alike keep them back. The former whereof will make their
abstaining even from those evil actions, which they avoid, to be but an
imperfect abstinence from them, and indeed an abstinence from them rather as
inexpedient, than evil; The latter cause them to fall into all such, from which
they are not restrained by God, or by a present, and intense consideration of
the indecency, or danger of them. Which will occasion such persons for the most
part to fall into all evil actions, where there is not room for serious
thoughts, as in cases of surprise, or where they have not been habituated to
the avoiding of vice, or the consideration of the indecency, or dangerousness
thereof. But as, where there is room for serious thoughts, there may also be
place for the former reasons to take them off from the practice of that, to
which they are otherwise sufficiently inclined; So it is not unlikely, that the
minds of those, who have been before habituated to the avoiding of Vice, or the
consideration of the indecency, or dangerousness thereof, may be taken off by
the former reasons from the pursuit of evil things, yea acquit themselves
singularly in it. As is farther evident from the resistance, that has been
made by several Heathens to all the temptations of sin, and who, because
Heathen, cannot be supposed either to have been free from natural Corruption,
or to have been taken off by other means, than the former, from the doing of
those evil actions, to which they were so strongly inclined.

But because what we have hitherto said concerning the Corruption of our Nature
does rather tend to show what effects it has upon us, than what that
Corruption is; And because that word, whereby we have chosen to express it, is
but a Metaphorical one, and will therefore serve yet less clearly to declare
the thing intended by it; Therefore it may seem but reasonable to enquire yet
farther, what it is, and wherein it does consist, as without which we shall
discourse but imperfectly concerning it Now as that question cannot otherwise
be solved, than by the knowledge of that Estate, of which it is affirmed to be
a Corruption; So I shall therefore enquire again what that Estate was, and then
what relation this Corruption bears to it. As touching that estate, wherein
God did at first create our Nature, most certain it is first (for so Solomon
Eccl. 7.29.
affirms it to be) that it was an estate of uprightness, that is to say such an
estate as fitted Man for the obedience of all those Laws, which God had obliged
him to perform. That, as it is the most usual signification of the word we
render upright, and accordingly rendered by the Chaldee Paraphrast right, and
innocent before God, so best answering the account before given concerning the
depravation of humane Nature, and particularly in those of the Female Sex. For
Solomon speaking in the 26th verse of the deceitfulness of that Sex, and of the
influence that deceitfulness of theirs would have upon sinful Men; Affirming
afterward because representing the event of his search as contrary to the
desires of his Soul, that though he could find one Man among a thousand of a
better temper, yet he could not find One such Woman among them all; He must
consequently, when he comes to say that he found only that God made Man
upright, be thought to mean such an uprightness, as was opposite to that
general depravation, whereof he before complained. There being therefore no
doubt to be made that God created our Nature in a state of uprightness, even in
such a one as fitted Man for the obedience of all those Laws, which he was
obliged to comply with; Enquire we in the second place wherein that state of
uprightness consisted, but which we shall not find to be of so easy a
resolution, as the former: Because there is some presumption of its consisting
in a right disposition of our natural faculties; And there is some presumption
of its consisting in a supernatural Grace overruling, and directing those
natural faculties to those pious purposes, for which they were chiefly
designed. We have to perfuade the former of these the natural ability of the
understanding to discern the invisible things of God by the things, which he
has made, and the natural propension of the Will to embrace that, which is
good, and therefore also the chiefest good, where that is clearly apprehended,
and where there is no depravation in the Will (as to be fure there was not at
first) to draw it to lesser ones. In fine, we have to persuade it the power the
superior faculties of the Soul have even now over the Inferior ones, and
which we may well believe in that state of Innocence to have been of sufficient
force to keep them within those bounds, which God, and Nature had set them.
This, I say, we have to persuade that uprightness, wherein our first Parents
were Created, to have consisted in a right disposition of their natural
faculties; And we are not without reason on the other hand to persuade the same
uprightness of Nature to have consisted in its being overruled, and directed
by a supernatural Grace: Because without such a supernatural Grace our first
Parents could not have come to the knowledge of God, but by the knowledge of
Created Beings, and the excellencies thereof, and (what that knowledge would
have produced) a love, and affection for them. Which would not only have made
God to be loved after his Creatures, who as being the first, and chiefest good
ought to have the precedence thereof, but endangered also the diminution of our
affections to him by the prepossession of them by the other. To which of these
two reasonings to give the preeminency is hard to say, and I will not therefore
be over positive in determining concerning the force of them, nor therefore,
whether Original Righteousness were a right disposition of our natural
faculties, or a supernatural Grace overruling, and directing them. But as how
equal soever those reasonings may be in themselves, yet nothing will hinder our
inclining rather to the one, than the other, if the Scripture, which is the
best judge of things of that nature, seem to favor such an inclination; So I
must needs say that the Scripture Genesis 1.28, etc. -- 2.15, etc.
seems to favor those reasonings, which makes Original Righteousness to be a
Supernatural Grace: Because not only representing Adam as imbued from the very
first with the knowledge of God, which yet he could not be without a revelation
from him, but as moreover freely conversing with God, and receiving both Laws,
and privileges from him. For as it appears from thence, that God did
immediately shine upon his mind, and so far forth therefore influenced him by a
supernatural Grace, so it is not unlikely that he, who so shone upon his mind,
did as immediately influence his will, and affections, and so dispose him to a
compliance with those Laws he imposed upon him: That, as it was but agreeable
to the immediate illumination of his underanding, so becoming yet more
necessary by the different inclinations of his Flesh, and Spirit, and which the
presence of a Supernatural Grace may seem but requisite to bring to a due
compliance with each other, and with those Laws, which God had imposed upon
them both. And I shall only add, that if that uprightness, wherein our Nature
was at first Created, were no other than a Supernatural Grace, as is at least
highly probable from the former reasonings, and the declarations of the
Scripture; We shall need to assign no other relation of that Corruption of
Nature, whereof we speak, than that of a simple privation of the other. For if
the desires of the Flesh could so far prevail even under a supernatural Grace,
as to carry our first Parents to the eating of that fruit, which God had so
severely forbidden them; The simple privation of that supernatural Grace may
well suffice to give birth to all our evil inclinations, and consequently pass
for a sufficient account of that Corruption of our Nature, whereby, as I said
before, we become inclinable to Evil, as well as averse from Good and which
what evidence we have of the being of, is in the next place to be inquired.

II. Now as we cannot certainly better inform our selves concerning the present
state of our Nature, than from him who, as he was the Author of it, so is
intimately present to it; So I will therefore begin with that account, which he
has given us of it, and which we shall find to bear an ample Testimony to that
Corruption, whereof we speak. For the evidencing whereof I will show First,
that it affirms all Men whatsoever to be under sin, yea under a perpetual
course of it. Secondly, that it affirms them to be so from the time they
begin to be in a capacity to offend. Thirdly, that they are so from a principle
bred in them, and derived to them from their birth.

1. That all Men are under sin S. Paul does so fully declare, that we shall
need no other Testimony than his to evince it; More particularly, where he
affirms that both Jews and Gentiles Romans 3.9.
are all under sin; That though the former may seem of all others to have been
most free from it, yet the Law Romans 19.
had not stuck to affirm, that there was none Romans 10, etc.
righteous, even among them, no not one; That there was none that understood,
none that sought after God; That they were all gone out of the way, they were
altogether become unprofitable, that there was none, that did good, no not one;
In fine, that all the World must thereby Romans 19.
be looked upon as guilty before God, because, as he afterward Romans 23.
speaks, all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God. But so the same
Scripture did long before declare, with an addition of all Men's being under a
perpetual course of sin, as well as in some measure tainted with it; It being
not only the voice of God concerning that part of Mankind, that lived before
the flood, that every imagination Genesis 6.5.
of the thought of their heart was only evil continually, but alike intimated
by him concerning that part, which was to follow, even to the end of the World.
For affirming, as he does Genesis 8.21.
, that he would not any more drown the World, because the imagination of Man's
heart is evil from his youth, he both supposes that Mankind would again give
occasion to it by their evil imaginations (as without which otherwise there
could be no occasion for God's suspending it) and that Mankind would do so also
in every individual, and Generation of it: The former, because he speaks of the
imaginations of Mankind in the general, and which are therefore to be extended
to all the individuals of it; The latter, because if any Generation of Men were
likely to be free from those imaginations, there would so far forth have been
no need of his declaring, that he would not drown the World, because no ground
for bringing it on the Inhabitants thereof. But therefore, as we have reason to
believe from the places before, recited, that the World always was, and will be
under sin, yea under a constant course of it; So we shall be yet more confirmed
in it, if we compare the latter place with the former, as the likeness, that is
between them, will oblige us to do: There being not a more apt sense of that
latter Speech of God, than that he would not again drown the Earth, because he
knew the imaginations of Men would be as evil as they had before been, and he
therefore, if he were disposed to take that vengeance, to bring a flood often
upon it, to the no profit of those, that inhabited it, as well as to the
defacing of the Earth it self. Which will make the condition of Man to be so
sinful, that it cannot be otherwise, unless by some powerful means delivered
from it.

2. But so also may we infer from thence, which was the second thing to be
proved, that all Men are under sin from the time they begin to be in a capacity
to offend: That, as it affirms the imagination of Men's heart to be evil, so to
be evil from their Youth, and, as I should therefore think, from the time they
begin to be in a capacity to be guilty of it. Not that that Age, to which we
are wont to give the denomination of Youth, is the first wherein Mankind begins
to be in a capacity to offend (for there is but too much evidence of that in
the riper years of Childhood) but that we cannot well understand that Text of
any other youthful Period, than that wherein Mankind begins to be in a capacity
to reason, and consequently also to offend: Partly, because the word we render
Youth is sometime used even for infancy Judges 13.7. Exodus 2.6.
, and ought not therefore without manifest reason to be removed too far from
it; But more especially because it is the manifest design of God in the place
we speak of to aggravate the evil of Men's imaginations from the earliness
thereof, and that earliness therefore to be carried as high, as the capacity
Men are in to imagine evil will suffer the doing of it.

3. Now as nothing therefore can be wanting toward the proof of Original
Corruption, than that they, who are so universally, and so early under sin, are
so also from an inward principle, and such an inward principle too, as was
derived to them from their birth; so we shall not it may be need any other
proof of that, than their being so universally, and early under the other: The
former of these persuading Men's being under sin from some inward principle,
the latter from such an inward principle, as is derived to them from their
Birth. That I make Men's being so universally under sin, an argument of their
being so from some inward principle, is because as so general an effect must be
supposed to have some general Cause, so no external Cause, how general soever,
can be supposed to produce it without the assistance of the other. As will
appear if we consider the force of example, and which as it is the most
general, and the most effectual external Cause, that can be assigned, so is
that, into which they who deny the Corruption of Nature, are wont to resolve
the universality of sin. For neither first is even Example of so great force,
as infallibly, and universally to draw Men to the imitation of it; For some Men
are Virtuous, even when they have an ill example before them, and others as
Vicious, where they have a good. Neither secondly has it any force, but what
it receives from Men's aptness to imitate those, with whom they converse. Which
as it will make it necessary for us to have recourse to an inward principle,
even for those effects, which are produced by the mediation of example, so make
our very aptness to imitate the evil examples of others, a branch of that
inward principle, which we affirm to be the cause of so universal an impiety.
Only because we are yet upon Scripture proofs, and which the more express they
are, so much the more convictive; Therefore I shall yet more particularly
endeavor to evince from thence, that as all Men are under sin, so they are so
by an innate principle. But so S. Paul gives us clearly enough to understand,
because both asserting such a principle, and that all actual sins are the
issues of it: The former, where he represents even the Man, who was under the
conviction of the Law (and who therefore might be supposed to be most free from
the contagion of sin) as Carnal, yea sold under it Romans 7.14.
, as one, who had sin dwelling in him (for so he affirms no less than twice
Romans 17.20,
) and as one too, who had a law in his members Romans 23,
that warred against the law of his mind, or (as he afterward entitles it) a
law of sin; The latter, where he represents that carnality, and sinful
captivity, under which the Jew was, as the cause of his doing what he would not
Romans 15.
, and omitting what he would, That sin, which dwelt in him, as doing all the
evil Romans 17.20.
he committed, And that law, that was in his members, as warring against the
law of his mind Romans 23.
, and bringing him into Captivity unto the law of sin. For what more could be
said on the one hand to show the thing S. Paul there speaks of to be an inward
evil principle, and which, because even in those, who were under the Law, is
much more to be supposed in the Gentiles? Or what more on the other to show
that evil principle to be the parent of our actual sins, yea that which gives
being to them all. And I know nothing to take off the force of it, but a
supposition of St. Paul's speaking in that place of Evil habits, and which as
they must be confessed to be of the same pernicious efficacy with Original
Corruption, so to have been for the most part the condition both of Jew, and
Gentile, before they came to be overtaken by the Gospel. But how first
supposing the Apostle to have spoken only of evil habits (for nothing hinders
us from assigning them a part in that Body of sin) How first, I say, does that
agree with the account he before gave concerning sins entering in Romans 5.12.
by Adam, and our being constituted Romans 19.
sinners by him. For though Original Corruption may come from him, yet evil
habits can be only from our selves, and consequently those sins, that flow from
them? How secondly supposing none but evil habits to be here intended, can we
make that Body, or law of sin, whereof S. Paul speaks, to be the portion of
all, that are under an obligation to Baptism, as that Apostle plainly
supposes, when he makes the design of Baptism Romans 6.6.
to be the destruction of it? For to say nothing at present concerning the case
of Infants, because the best evidence of their Obligation to Baptism is the
Corruption of their Nature, and that Obligation therefore rather to be proved
from Natural Corruption, than Natural Corruption from it; Neither can it be
denied, even from the Commandment Mat. 28.19.
, that our Savior gave concerning Baptism, that all adult persons are under an
Obligation to it, nor therefore but that they carry about them that body of
sin, which Baptism was intended for the destruction of. But so all adult
persons cannot be supposed to do, if that body of sin be no other, than evil
habits; Because it must be sometime after that maturity of theirs before they
can come to those evil habits, or therefore to be under an Obligation to that
Sacrament, which is to destroy it. In fine, how supposing none but evil habits
to be intended by that body, or law of sin, whereof the Apostle speaks, can we
give an account of so holy, and just a Law, as that of Moses is, stirring Romans
7.9.
Concupiscence in those, that are under it, and not rather hindering it from
coming to effect. For as nothing hinders the proposing of that Law before such
persons come to any evil habits, and therefore also before there is any thing
in them to stir them up to such a Concupiscence; So nothing can hinder that
Law, when duly proposed to them, from preventing all such Concupiscence, as it
was the design of the Lawgiver to forbid: Because as the persons we speak of
must be supposed to be without any contrariety in their Nature to the matter of
that Law, which is proposed; So they must also be supposed to be in that state,
wherein God had set them, and (because God cannot be thought to place Men in
any other estate, than that of uprightness) in such a state, as will make them
willing to listen to the divine Laws and receive their directions from them. By
which means the divine Laws shall rather keep Men's Concupiscence from coming
to effect, than give any occasion for the stirring of it. I conclude therefore
from that, as well as the former arguments, that the evil principle spoken of
by S. Paul cannot be evil habits, and consequently nothing more left to us to
demonstrate, than that it is derived to us from our Birth, or rather from our
Conception in the Womb, which is all, that is affirmed concerning Original
Corruption. Now that that evil principle, whereof we speak, is derived to us
from our Birth, will become at least probable from what was before said
concerning the earliness of Men's being under sin, yea their being so, as the
Scripture instructs us, even from their Youth. For as it is hard to believe,
that all Men should be so early under sin, if it were not from some inward
principle, that was antecedent to that Age (For what should otherwise hinder
some of them at least from preserving their integrity for some time, especially
supposing, (as that tender Age makes it reasonable to suppose) a more peculiar
watchfulness of the Divine Providence over it?) So it will be much more hard to
believe, supposing that evil principle to be antecedent to their Youth, that it
should not be derived to them from their Conception, and Birth: The Ages
preceding that being not in a capacity to produce in themselves such an evil
principle, and therefore to be supposed to have had it transmitted to them
together with their Nature, and so also by the same means, and from the same
time, in which that their Nature was. And indeed, as even the tenderest age
falls under death, and not unreasonably therefore concluded to be some way, or
other under sin, if (as S. Paul Romans 5.12.
speaks) death entered by it, and so passed upon all Men, for that all have
sinned; So there want not some places of Scripture, which do yet more directly
evince, that the first beginnings of our Nature are tainted with that, of which
we speak. Of this sort I reckon that of Job Job. 14.4.
, which is so commonly applied to this affair, even his demanding of God, with
reference to himself Job. 1, etc.
, and all other Men, who could bring a clean thing out of an unclean? and
thereby therefore intimating that it was not to be done. For as it is manifest
from his alleging that the better to countenance his own expostulation
concerning God's bringing him into judgment, that by the unavoidable
uncleanness there intimated must be meant a sinful one, as which alone could
either dispose him to such actions, as could be a proper matter for judgment,
or be alleged in bar to a severe one: So it is alike manifest from Job's
asking, who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean, that Men are not only so
unclean in their Nature, but that they become so by those evil principles, out
of which they are brought, and so also from the time that they were separated
from them. Of the same Nature is that of our Savior, where he asserts the
necessity of Men's being born again of water, and the Spirit, upon the account
of their being before but flesh Joh. 3.6.
, because born of flesh. For as we cannot well understand our Savior of any
other flesh, than flesh corrupted, or rather of the whole Nature, that is so;
Partly because of the opposition, that is there made Ibid.
between a fleshly, and spiritual temper, and partly because that is the most
usual notion of it in the New Romans 7.18, 25. Gal. 5.19, 24.
Testament: So neither therefore but conclude all Men to become such flesh by
those fleshly persons, from whom they are born, and so also from the time that
they receive their being from them. But of all the Texts of Scripture, which
are commonly alleged in this affair (even the earliness of that evil
principle, wherewith we have said all Men to be imbued) there is certainly none
of greater force, than the profession, that David makes Psalm. 51.5.
, that he was shapen, or born in iniquity, and conceived by his Mother in sin;
That, if it entreat of the Corruption of humane Nature, making it as early as
the first beginnings of it, because speaking as manifestly of its Conception
Ham. Annot. in locum.
, and Birth. And indeed as we have no reason to believe from any thing the
Scripture has said concerning David, or his Parents, that what he spoke of his
own formation was to be understood of that alone; so we have much less reason
to believe, that he intended any other thing by the sin, and iniquity thereof,
than that Original Corruption, whereof we speak. For beside that the letter of
the Text is most agreeable to that notion, and not therefore without manifest
reason to be diverted to another; Beside that that sense is put upon it by the
most eminent Fathers Voss. Pelag. Hist. l. 2. Part. 1. These. 1.
of the Church, and the Doctrine contained in it confirmed by the concordant
Ibid. These. 6.
testimonies of them all; Beside that that sense has the suffrage of one of
the most learned Ham. ubi. supra.
of the Jewish Writers, as the thing it self the consentient belief of all the
rest; Aben Ezra resolving the meaning of the Psalmist to be, that in the hour
of his Nativity the evil figment was planted in his heart, even that
Concupiscence (as he afterward interprets himself) by which he was drawn into
sin: Beside all these, I say, it is no less agreeable to the scope of the whole
Psalm, and particularly to the care he takes in the Verse before to condemn
himself for his offenses, and so justify the severity of God, if he should
think good to take vengeance of them. For what could be more suitable to that,
than to lay open, together with his actual sins, that polluted Fountain from
whence they came, and so show himself to be vile upon more accounts, than one,
and God to have as many reasons to chastise him? And I shall only add, that as
that sense cannot therefore be fairly refused, because conformable to the
design of the Psalmist, as well as to the letter of the Text it self, and to
the interpretation of the Ancients, as well as either; So they seem to me to
add no small confirmation to it, who can find no other means to elude it, than
by making the words of the same sense with that hyperbolical expression of the
same Author, where he affirms Psalm. 58.3.
, that the wicked are estranged from the Womb, and that as soon as they are
born, they go astray speaking lies. For as it cannot be denied that there is a
very wide difference between Men's being conceived, and born in sin, and their
going astray from their Mother's Womb, and their own birth; This latter
expression importing that iniquity, which follows after it, whereas the former
denotes the condition of the Conception, and Birth it self: So it is evident
from what the Psalmist adds in the place alleged concerning the wicked's
speaking lies, that he there entreats of actual sins, which as no Man denies to
require a more mature Age for the perpetration of, so make it necessary to
allow an Hyperbole in it; Whereas the place we insist upon has not the least
umbrage of actual sins, and is therefore under no necessity of being
interpreted conformably to it.

But because it can hardly be imagined, but if there be such a thing as
Original sin, it will produce suitable effects in those, in whom it is; And
because it can as little be thought, but that those effects will lie open to
the observation of all, that shall take the pains to reflect upon them;
Therefore enquire we in the next place, whether that Original Sin, whereof we
speak, does not discover it self by suitable effects, and so add yet farther
strength to what the Scripture has affirmed concerning it. A thing not to be
doubted of, if we reflect upon the behavior of Children, as soon as they come
to have any use of reason. For do not some of those, as the Psalmist speaks
Ibid.
, go astray from their Mothers Womb, speaking lies? Do not others discover in
their actions as much of malice, and revenge? Are not a third sort as
refractory to the commands of their Superiors? Does not a fourth equally pride
it self in all it is supposed excellencies? Now from whence, I beseech you,
proceeds all this untowardness of behavior, but from as untoward a principle,
and such a one too, as is interwoven with their very Being, and derived to them
with it? For shall we say from the force of Example? But experience assures us
of the contrary, because visible in such Children, as have no such examples
before them, and who moreover do not want a severe education to prevent, or
correct it. Shall we then say from some previous habits? But the same
experience assures us of the contrary, because it is antecedent to any evil
habits, and therefore not imputable to them. Shall we say lastly (and more than
that we cannot say) that it proceeds from their natural temperament? But as I
no way doubt, and shall not therefore stick to confess, that the Corruption of
our Nature runs out that way, which our natural temperament leads it; So I see
no necessity to grant, that that natural temperament has any other interest in
our untowardness, than by inclining our natural Corruption to that particular
evil, to which we are carried. For to make it any other way the cause of that
untowardness is to charge it upon God, because he must be confessed to be the
Author of all that is purely natural in us. Only if it be said, that that
natural temperament may incline Children, before they have any free use of
reason, to those untowardnesses, whereof we speak, and so at length by the
means of those untowardnesses produce such an habitual inclination to them,
that their more free reason, when they come to it, shall not be able to
surmount it; I answer, that that indeed might well enough be granted, if we had
no reason to believe, that God would so watch over them by his providence, as
to hinder their natural temperament from having such an influence upon them.
But as we have reason enough to believe, from the love God bears to his own
Workmanship, as well as to Piety, and Virtue, that he would not be wanting in
that particular to the estate of Children, if it were no other than such as he
himself had placed them in; So we must therefore believe also, that that
temperament of theirs is not the cause of their miscarriages, but somewhat else
that is not from God, and which, because not from him, he does not think
himself under any necessity to provide against.

And indeed though some, who call themselves Christians, have notwithstanding
the former evidences, opposed themselves against that, which we have offered as
the Original cause thereof; Yet have the more sober Heathen, though ignorant of
the occasion of it, both acknowledged, and lamented it, and so furnished us
with a farther argument for the belief of it. For thus (as Dr. Jackson Coll. of
his Works, Book 10. Chapter 8.
did long since observe) we find one of them affirming that the nature of Man
is prone to lust, and another, that nature cannot separate just from unjust.
Thus a third (as the forementioned Author remarks) that to Man of all the
creatures is sorrow given for a portion, to him luxury in innumerable fashions,
and in every Limb; To him alone ambition, and avarice, to him alone an
unmeasurable desire of living; In fine, that whilst it is given to other
creatures, yea the most savage ones, to live peaceably, and orderly together,
Man is naturally an enemy to those of his own stock. To the same purpose are
those, which are quoted by Grotius De jure Bedi ac. Pac. li. 2. c. 20. sect.
19. and in Annot. in locum.
, if they are not also yet more worthy of our remark; Such as are, that among
the other incommodities of mortal nature there is the darkness of Men's minds,
and not only a necessity of erring, but a love of errors; That we have all
sinned, some in weightier instances, others in lighter, some of set purpose and
design, others it may be carried away by other Men's wickedness; That we do not
only offend, but we shall offend to the end of our lives, and although some one
may have so purged his mind, that nothing shall any more disturb, or deceive
him, yet he comes to innocence by offending; That this evil disposition is so
natural to Men, that, if every one be to be punished, that has it, no Man
shall be free from punishment; That there is therefore a necessity upon those,
who are entrusted with the power of Chastisement, to wink at some errors; He,
who punishes Men, as if they could be free from all sin, exceeding the measure
of that correction, which is according to nature, or (as another has expressed
it) showing himself injurious to the common infirmity of Men, and forgetful of
that infirmity, which is humane, and universal. For as it is evident from
these, and the like passages, that they, from whom they fell, had the same
opinion of the State of Nature, which Christianity obliges us to take up; So
that opinion of theirs cannot but add to the confirmation of our own, and to
the belief of that depravation, which it is the design of this Discourse to
evince: Because not taken up either in whole, or in part from prejudices
imbibed from Books, but from the experience they had of its effects, and which
as they themselves could not but feel, and acknowledge, so we have no reason to
question, because conscious of the like effects of it in our selves.

III. There being therefore no doubt to be made, but that there is such a thing
as Original Sin, because sufficiently attested by the Doctrine of the
Scripture, and our own, and other Men's experience; It cannot but be thought
reasonable to enquire, from whence it had its beginning, and so much the rather
because both Scripture, and reason assure us, that it cannot be thought to have
had its Original from God. Now there are but four things, from whence it can be
supposed to proceed, and within the consideration whereof therefore this
Enquiry of ours will necessarily be bounded; some evil Demon, or Spirit, which
concurrs with God to our production, or the natural pravity of that matter,
which God makes use of in order to it; Some evil habits, which Souls
contracted, before they were sent into their present bodies, or some pravity in
those from whom they first descended, and which is transmitted from them to
particular souls, and persons. The first of these opinions is attended with
this great inconvenience among many others, that it charge God either with
malignity, or impotency; With malignity, if willingly suffering any evil spirit
to mix it self in his productions; With impotency, if not able to hinder it,
though he would. The second, as it is alike injurious to the power of God,
because subjecting that power of his to the indisposition of the matter, so it
makes Original Sin to be natural, and unavoidable, and consequently also those
actual sins, that flow from it. By which means it not only renders all our
endeavors against them useless, but casts a blemish upon those divine Laws,
which pretend to forbid them, and upon those divine judgments, which pretend to
punish them. For neither can God without great unreasonableness forbid what is
not to be avoided, nor punish it without the imputation of injustice. But it
may be though Original Sin had not its beginning either from some evil spirit,
or the pravity of the matter, which are the two first opinions, which pretended
to give an account of it; yet it might, as is suggested in the third, arise
from such evil habits, as Men's souls contracted before their descent into this
World, and into those bodies, wherewith they are invested. That indeed might
yet more reasonably be believed, that I say not also (abstracting from the
Authority of the Scripture) much more reasonably, than the account, that is
given of it from Adam, if there were but equal reason to believe, that Men's
Souls had any separate existence antecedently to their conception in the Womb.
But as that is a thing for which there is not any solid ground either in
reason, or Scripture, and the supposition of it therefore the mere issue of
fancy, and conjecture; So it is sufficiently confuted by the ignorance Men's
Souls are under of any such previous estate. For why, if Men's Souls had any
such previous existence, should they not be conscious of it, and of the things,
that were performed by them in it? Nay, why should not God take care to fix
such a remembrance in them, that so what was wanting in their former estate
might be supplied by them in their following one? For as it is not easy to
suppose, that the corruptible body should so far stupefie the Soul, as to
hinder it from emerging in time out of sleep, in which it may seem to have been
cast, and accordingly from calling to mind what had been before transacted
within it; Because though the Body may be some hindrance to the faculties of
the Soul, yet it does not hinder them from coming in time to exert their proper
operations: So it is much less easy to suppose, that God should not however
bring to it is memory its past State, and Actions, by which it offended against
him; Partly to make it sensible of its former guilt, and God's choosing to
punish it by thrusting it into a Body, and partly to make it so much the more
careful to break off from those sins, by which it had before offended him;
These, as they are the only imaginable ends, why God should thrust an offending
Soul into such a Body, so being perfectly lost to that Soul, in which there is
no consciousness of it is former state, and of those enormities, which were
contracted in it. I conclude therefore, that whatever may be said as to this
particular concerning Original Sin, yet it did not take its rise from the evil
acts, or habits of the Soul in any praexistent estate, and nothing therefore
left to us to resolve it into, but the depravedness of those, from whom we all
descended, and from whom it is transmitted to particular Souls, and Persons.

I deny not indeed, that even this Account is not without its difficulties, and
such as it will be hard, if not impossible perfectly to assoile. I deny not
farther, that those difficulties are much enhanc'd by the ignorance we are
under concerning the Original of humane Souls, and which whilst we continue
under, it will not be easy for us to show, how that depravedness of Nature
should pass from them to us. But as those difficulties are no ways comparable
to the difficulties of two of the former, even those, which resolve Original
Sin into the malignity of some evil spirit, or the pravity of matter; So they
can much less be thought to be of force against the testimony of the Scripture,
if that (as I shall afterward show) favor its arising from the pravity of our
first Parents: Partly because the thing in question is a matter of fact, and
therefore to be determined rather by testimony, than the force of reason, and
partly because the testimony of Scripture is the most Authentic one, as being
no other than the testimony of God. Now that there wants not sufficient
evidence from thence, that that Original Sin, whereof we speak, arises from
the pravity of those, from whom we first descended, will appear if these three
things can be made out; First, that the sin of all mankind entered in by Adam;
Secondly, that it entered in by Adam not merely as the first that committed it,
or tempted other Men by his ill example to do the like, but as more, or less
the cause of all their sins by his own; Thirdly that he became the cause of all
their sins through his, by depraving thereby his own Nature, and then
communicating that depravation to those, that descended from him.

That the Sin of all Mankind entered in by Adam, will need no other proof, than
that known Text of S. Paul Romans 5.12.
, even that by one Man sin entered into the World, and death by sin, and so
death passed through unto all Men, for that all have sinned. For as we cannot
well interpret the word sin of any other, than the sin of all Men, because
there is nothing in the Text to limit it to any particular Man's, so much less,
when S. Paul does afterward affirm, that that death, which entered in by it,
passed thorough unto all Men, for that, or because all had sinned by the means
of him; That as it makes death to pass upon all Men with respect to their
several sins, and consequently their several sins to be the immediate door by
which it enters, so making those several sins therefore to be included in that
sin, which he before affirmed to be the cause of that death, and, together with
it, to have entered in by Adam.

But because among those at least, by whom the Scripture is acknowledged, the
question is not so much, whether all sin entered by Adam, but after what manner
it entered by him; And because, till that be known, we cannot speak with any
certainty concerning the derivation of the corruptness of our Natures from that
of our first Parents or Parent; Therefore pass we on to show, according to the
method before laid down, that as the sin of all Mankind entered in by Adam, so
it entered in by him, not (as some have vainly deemed) merely as one, who first
committed it, or tempted others by his example to do the like, but as one also,
yea especially, who by the malignant influence of his sin was more or less the
cause of all those sins, that followed it. That the sin of all Mankind entered
not in by Adam either merely, or principally as one, who first committed it,
will need no other proof than his being not the first committer of sin even in
this sublunary World, but that Serpent, who tempted our first Parents to it.
For as he, and his fellow Angels sinned before them in those glorious seats, in
which they were first bestowed; So he sinned also before them here by that
temptation, which he suggested to them, and without which they had not fallen
from their integrity. Which as it is an evidence of sin's not entering in by
Adam in that sense, and consequently that that was not the sense intended by S.
Paul; So is the more to be considered, because S. John attributes this entrance
of sin to the Devil 1 John 3.8.
, yea makes all the committers of sin to be therefore of him. But besides that
Adam was not the first of those that sinned, and we therefore not so to
understand S. Paul, when describing sin as entering by him; Neither was he the
first of humane kind that sinned, which will be a yet farther prejudice to the
former surmise. For (as we learn from the story of the Fall Genesis 3.6.
, yea from this very Apostle elsewhere) 1 Timothy 2.14.
Adam was not deceived, that is to say, was not the first that was so, but the
Woman being deceived was in the transgression. Which what is it but to say,
that sin did not enter in by Adam in that sense, and consequently that that was
not the sense intended by the Apostle in it? Only if it be said (and more than
that cannot be said in it) that we are not so to understand S. Paul, when
describing sin as entering by Adam, as not also to suppose him to connote the
Partner both of his Bed, and of his transgression; As I will not be forward to
deny the suggestion altogether, because believing them both to have contributed
to the production of our transgressions, as well as Nature, so I cannot forbear
to say upon the account of that which follows, that we ought to consider Adam
as the more especial instrument in it. Because S. Paul not only represents him
Romans 5.14.
in particular as the Type, or Figure of him, that was to come, but both
describes him all along under the notion of one Man Romans 5.12.15, 16. etc.
, yea makes a great part of the likeness, that was between him and Christ to
consist in it. Which could by no means have been proper, if he had meant no
other by sin's entering in by Adam, than entering in by him as one of the first
committers of it. For in this sense Eve must necessarily have had the
preeminence, because not only offending before her Husband, but tempting even
him to do the same. From that first sense therefore pass we to the second, and
which indeed is both more ancient, and plausible, than the former. For as it is
as old as that Pelagius Vid. Voss. Hist. Pelag. li. 2. part 2. These. 1.
, who first called Original Sin in question, so it allows the sin of Adam to
have had an influence upon other Men's sins, as well as to have given beginning
to the being of it. But that it has as little solidity, or pertinency to the
words, whereunto it is applied, will appear if we reflect upon the sequel of S.
Paul's Discourse, or the subject matter of that, which is offered as the
interpretation of it. For is there any reason to think (without which that
interpretation can be of no avail) that Adam by his sin tempted all his
posterity to offend? Nay, is there not reason enough to believe, that that
example of his contributed little to Men's following sins, yea contributed
nothing at all to many of them? For how many Men have there been, to whom the
knowledge of his sin never reached? How many are there yet, who are under the
same ignorance, or may hereafter be? And must not these therefore be looked
upon as exempted from the influence of his ill example, and consequently, if
their sins entered in by Adam, be acknowledged to have entered some other way?
And though the same be not to be said of those, to whom the Scriptures have
come, because those are not without the knowledge of his sin, nor incapable of
being influenced by his example; Yet is there as little reason to think, that
that example of his contributes much to their sins, or indeed ever did to
theirs, who lived nearer to him, and so were more likely to have been inflicted
by him. For beside that a sin so chastis'd, as that was, was not very likely to
draw their thoughts toward it, and therefore as little likely to tempt them to
the imitation of it; Beside that many of them might have no actual
consideration of it, as no doubt many now have not, even when they offend in
the like kind; They might have been influenced, and no doubt were by other sins
of his, as much, or more than by his first transgression, or by the ill
examples of those, that were nearer to them, rather than by any of his. In fine
they might have been, and no doubt often were influenced by the baits of
pleasure, or profit, and thereby drawn aside from their integrity; These having
been as apt to influence them, as the example of that sin, by which their
several offenses are supposed to have entered into the World. And I shall only
add, that as that sense cannot therefore be reasonably imposed, if we regard,
as no doubt we ought, the subject matter of it; So we shall find as little
encouragement for it from the sequel of his Discourse, whose words are now
under consideration. For beside that he himself may seem sufficiently to
obviate it by affirming presently after Romans 5.14.
, that there were many of those, that sinned, that did not, nor well could sin
after the similitude of Adam's transgression, because knowing nothing at all of
any such positive law, as he transgressed; It is the main design of his
Discourse to compare the good, that Christ brought by his obedience, with the
hurt which that type of his did by his transgression. Which comparison had been
but a frigid one, if all the hurt, that Adam did us, was by the force of his
ill example: Because it is certain that Christ's obedience was of a much more
efficacious influence in the kind of it, as well as in the degree, and would
therefore rather have been vilified, than any way illustrated, or commended by
the comparison, if the malign influence of Adam's sin had reached no farther,
than that of an example. I conclude therefore, that what ever was meant by
sin's entering in by Adam, yet something more was meant by it, than its entering
by him either as the first committer of it, or as one, who by his ill example
tempted others to do the like. And indeed as the instance but now alleged,
even the likeness, that is between Adam's sin, and Christ's obedience, makes it
but reasonable to look upon all sin as entering also by Adam, as more, or less
the cause of it, so it stands yet more confirmed by what S. Paul affirms in the
ninteenth verse, especially as it lies in the Original: The purport thereof
being, that Men are constituted sinners by his disobedience, yea that they are
so constituted sinners by it, as Men are constituted righteous by the obedience
of Christ. For though the words (...) may in themselves be capable of a softer
sense, and accordingly signify no more, than Men's being reputed, and used as
sinners upon the account of that transgression, which Adam committed; Yet I see
not how that sense can be thought to fit them here, or indeed any other than
that of constituting, or making Men sinners: Partly because their being
constituted sinners by Adam's disobedience is rendered by S. Paul Romans 5.18, 19.
as the reason of their condemnation by it, and ought therefore to be
distinguished from it; And partly because they are said to be constituted
sinners by Adam's disobedience, as they, who belong to Christ, are constituted
righteous by his obedience. For the obedience of Christ procuring Men's being
really righteous, as well as their being reputed such, yea procuring their
being really righteous in some measure, that they may be so accounted of, and
used; What can be more reasonable than to think, that that disobedience of
Adam, which is affirmed to be like it, is of the same causality, and
accordingly constitutes, or makes Men sinners, as well as accounted of as such.

One only thing remains toward the clearing of the matter in hand, even the
derivation of the corruptness of our Nature from that of our first Parent, or
Parents; And that is, that as all sin entered in by Adam as more, or less the
cause of it by his own, so he became the cause of it by his own by thereby
depraving his own Nature first, and then communicating that depravation to
those, that descended from him. Of the former whereof as there cannot well be
any doubt, considering the hainousness of that sin, which he committed (That as
it could not but occasion the withdrawing of the Divine Grace from Adam, so
neither but draw after it the depravation of his Nature, as which received all
its rectitude from the other) so there will be as little doubt of the latter,
if we compare what S. Paul here says concerning Adam's being the cause of all
our sins by his own, with what he afterward says Romans 7.17, 20.
concerning Men's falling into actual sin by virtue of an evil principle, that
dwells in them. For if all actual sin proceed immediately from such an evil
principle, that evil principle must be also from Adam, as without which
otherwise he could not be the cause of our sins by his own, nor constitute us
sinners by it.

IV. I will not be over positive in defining by what means this evil principle
is conveyed, because I am not well assured how our very Nature is. It shall
suffice me to represent (what may tend in some measure toward the clearing of
it) That Original sin, cleaving to our nature from the first beginnings of it,
must consequently be conveyed to us by the same general means, by which our
nature is, even by natural generation, yea that the Scripture teaches us so to
reason, where it affirms Men to be conceived in sin Psalm. 51.5.
, to become flesh by being born Joh. 3.6.
of flesh, and unclean Job. 14.4.
by being brought out of those Parents, that are so; That, though the more
particular means, by which Original Sin is conveyed, cannot with any certainty
be assigned, because it is alike uncertain, whether those Souls, in which it is
most reasonable to place it, be either traduced, or immediately created, yet
there would not be any uncertainty as to this particular, if we believed the
Souls of Men to be traduced, as several of the Ancients Vid. Vossi. Hist.
Pelag. Lib. 2. Part 3. These. 1.
, and not a few of the Moderns have believed (For so it would not only not be
difficult to apprehend the particular means of the others conveyance, but
almost impossible to overlook them, because making it to pass together with
those Souls, to which it adheres, and diffuse it self from thence to those
Bodies, to which they are united) That, though the traduction of Souls be not
without its difficulties, and such as I shall not be so vain as to attempt the
solution of, yet it is in that particular but of the same condition with the
immediate Creation of them, that I say not also less exceptionable, as to the
business of Original Sin; In fine, That, as it has nothing from Scripture to
prejudice the belief of it, as appears by the solutions, which have been long
since Hotham's Introd. to the Trent. Philosophy.
given to the Objections from it; So it seems to me much more agreeable to that
account, which it gives of the Creation, and indeed to the Nature of a Parent.
For what can be more clear from the Story of the Creation, than that God
designed once for all to Create all the Beings, which he intended, leaving
them, and particularly Man, to carry on the Succession by those productive
principles, which he had planted in them? For if so, what should hinder us from
believing, but that Men produce their like after the same manner, that other
Creatures do, and by the same Divine Benediction, and concurrence. Sure I am,
as they will otherwise fall short of the powers of inferior beings; as well as
be an anomalie in the Creation, so they will be but very imperfectly in the
condition of Parents, because contributing only to that part, which is the
least considerable in their Posterity. Only as I list not to contend about any
thing, of which I my self am not more strongly persuaded; So I shall leave it
to those, whom the immediate creation of Souls better pleases, to make their
advantage of it, and satisfy themselves from it concerning the means of
Original Sin's conveyance. Which if they do, they shall do more, than the great
S. Augustine could after all his travails in this Argument; Because professing
that he could not find either by reading or praying, or reasoning Ep. 157. ad
Optatum.
, how Original Sin could be defended with the opinion of the Creation of Souls.

V. I may not dismiss the Argugument that is now before us, or indeed so much
as attend to the consideration of those Objections, that are made against it,
before I have also inquired, whether that, which has the name of Original Sin,
be truly, and properly such, and not rather so styled in respect of that first
sin, from which it proceeded, or in respect of those sins, to which it leads.
For beside that that Church, whose Catechism I have chosen to explain, leads us
to the consideration of it, because both there, and elsewhere Art. of Relig. 6.
affirming it to have the nature of a Sin, to make us the Children of Wrath,
and to deserve God's Wrath and Damnation; The resolution of it is of no small
moment toward the right stating of our duty, and the valuableness of that
remedy, which Christianity has provided for it. For neither otherwise can we
look upon Original Sin as any proper matter for our Repentance, whatsoever it
may be for our lamentation, nor upon Baptism as bringing any other pardon to
Infants, than that of the Sin of their first Parents, and which they who look
upon Original Sin as rather our unhappiness, than fault, are generally as far
from charging them with. This only would be premised for the better
understanding of it, that by Sin is not meant any actual transgression of a Law
(for no Man was ever so absurd, as to affirm that concerning Original Sin) but
that which is contrary to a Law in the nature of an evil habit, and both
imports an absence of that Righteousness, which ought to be in us, and an
inclination to those evils, from which we ought to be averse; This, as it is no
less the transgression of a Law, than any actual sin is, so making the person,
in whom it is, as obnoxious to punishment, and consequently to be looked upon
as yet more properly a sin. Now that that, which we call Original Sin, is
really such in this latter notion, will appear if these two things be
considered; First, that the Scripture gives it the title of sin, Secondly, that
it represents it as such upon the account of our being obliged by the Law of
God to have in us a contrary temper. That the Scripture gives that, whereof we
speak, the title of sin, is evident from those Texts, which we before made use
of to prove the being of it; More particularly from that Psa. 51.5.
, which represents David as conceived, and born in sin, and those Romans 7.17-20.
, which represent us all as having sin dwelling in us. For these having been
before shown to speak of Original Sin make it evident that the Scripture gives
it the title of Sin, because in the former places representing it under that
notion. And though I will not from that only Topic conclude it to be properly
such, because the Scripture makes use of figurative expressions, as well as
proper, yea does so in this very particular whereof we speak (for thus it
sometimes gives the title of sin to that, which is intended only as the
punishment thereof) yet as we may lawfully infer from thence, that there is
more cause to believe Original Sin to be properly, than figuratively such, till
the contrary thereof be made appear, The proper sense being otherwise to be
preferred before the figurative; So that there can be no place for the
figurative sense, if that, which is there represented as a sin, be elsewhere
represented as such upon the supposition of our being obliged to have in us the
contrary temper. Which that it is will appear from such Texts, as do more
immediately affirm it, or such as affirm those things, from which it may by
good consequence be deduced. Of the former sort I reckon that, which is
immediately subjoined by David to the mention of his being conceived in sin,
and brought forth in iniquity Psa. 51.6.
. Behold thou requirest truth in the inward parts, and shall, or rather have
made me to understand wisdom secretly. For as we cannot but look upon what is
there said concerning God's requiring truth in the inward parts as spoken with
relation to that sin, whereof he before complains, and to the mention whereof
he subjoyns the mention of the other; So neither (considering it to have been
his intent to aggravate his sinfulness before God) but look upon it as also his
intent to aggravate the sinfulness of his frame by that piety which God
required of him. Which supposed, Original Sin will not only be found to be so
entitled by the Scripture, but to have had that name bestowed upon it upon the
account of Men's obligation to the contrary, and consequently to be truly and
properly such. And though there be not it may be many more Texts of that
nature, or which therefore can be thought so directly to affirm, that it
becomes the sin of those, in whom it is, upon the account of their obligation
to the contrary; Yet will it not be difficult to find others, which do as
clearly assert those things, from which it may by good consequence be deduced.
Such as are those which make Original Sin to be a proper matter for confession,
yea to induce a guilt upon the person, in whom it is. But so the Prophet David
does plainly suppose in that very Psalm, which we but now made use of; Because
not only confessing Psa. 51.5.
the sinfulness of his Nature together with that of his external actions, but
begging of God, immediately after that confession of his, that he would purge
him Psa. 51.7.
with Hyssop from it. For as we have no reason to exclude that from the matter
of the desired purgation, which immediately precedes the Prayer that is put up
for it; So much less reason to doubt, after that Prayer for the purgation of
it, of its inducing a guilt upon the person, in whom it is: The use of Hyssop
in the Old Law (as appears by several places Exo. 12.22. Lev. 14.6.
in it, and a consentient Text in the Epistle to the Hebrews Heb. 9.19, etc.
) being to sprinkle the Blood of the Sacrifices upon those, who were any way
obnoxious to its censures, and so deliver them from the severity thereof. For
what other then could the Psalmist mean by that Prayer of his, than that God
would purge him from that, and his other sins by the blood of an expiatory
Sacrifice? Or so meaning be thought to intimate more clearly, than that that,
from which he desired to be purged, stood in need of such a Sacrifice, and
consequently was no more without its guilt, than his actual transgressions
were. Only, if that notion may not be thought to be of sufficient clearness to
build so important a Conclusion on, it will not be difficult to strengthen it
yet more by the word the Hebrew makes us of for purge, and those Prayers, which
the Psalmist subjoyneth to it; By the former because literally (...)
signifying a purification from sin, by the latter, because importing it to be
his desire Psalm. 51.7, 8, 9.
, that God would wash him from it, that he would cause those bones, that had
been broken by it, to rejoice, and in fine, that he would hide his face from
his sins, and blot out all his iniquities: These, as they are known and usual
expressions for the remission of sins, and consequently importing the guilt of
those, to whom they are applied, and their purification from it, so with this
farther reason to be so taken here, because the Psalmist afterward begs Psalm.
51.10.
, that God would purify him from the filth of them, and renew a right spirit
within him.

VI. Now though from what has been said it be competently evident, that the
Doctrine of Original Sin is not without good Authority to warrant it, yet
because that Doctrine has been impugned by the Pelagians of Old, and since
that by the followers of Socinus, therefore it may not be amiss for the farther
clearing of it to consider their Objections against it, and either return a
direct, and satisfactory answer to them, or at least show, that they ought not
however to be admitted as a bar against what the Scripture has said concerning
it. To begin with those Objections which respect the being of it, or rather
tend to show that it has no being in the World; Which are either such, as
consider it as a simple corruption of humane Nature, or such as do also
consider it as a sinful one. Of the former sort are those, which represent it
as a thing unconceivable, how it should come into humane Nature, which the
better to persuade, they allege plausible reasons against all those means,
whereby it may be supposed to find admittance. For these being destroyed, they
think they may lawfully infer, that there is indeed no such depravation upon
humane Nature. Of what force those reasons are will be then more seasonable to
enquire, when I consider what is objected against the fountain of Original
Corruption, or the means by which it is conveyed. At present it may suffice to
say, that of what force soever they may be thought to be, yet they are not of
sufficient force to destroy the being of Original Corruption, which is the
thing for which they are here alleged; Partly, because many things may be, yea
be assured to us, of the original, or conveyance whereof we our selves are
perfectly ignorant (for who doubts of the being of humane Souls, though he
neither knows, nor well can, whether they be traduced, or infused) and partly
because the testimony of Scripture, with the experience we have of its effects,
is a much more forcible argument of the being of it, than all the former
reasons are of the other: These being direct, and immediate proofs of its
existence, whereas the other are only indirect, and mediate. From such
objections therefore as consider Original Sin as a simple Corruption of humane
Nature, pass we to those, which consider it also as sinful, and which indeed
seem most hardly to press upon it: Such as are, that all sin is the
transgression of a Law, which Original Sin seems not to be; That it requires
the consent of the will of him, in whom it is, which cannot well be affirmed of
that; As in fine, that the Scripture it self may seem to make that, which we
call Original Sin, rather the Parent of Sin, than sin it self, because making
sin to arise James 1, 13, etc.
from the conception, and parturition of it. As to what is objected from the
forementioned Scripture, it is either nothing at all to the purpose, or very
much against the purpose of those, that allege it: Partly because by the sin
there spoken of can be meant no other, than actual sin, and nothing therefore
to be concluded from thence, but that all actual sin is the product of Men's
Lust, and partly because that Text makes even actual sins to be the product of
Men's Lust, yea of such a lust as draws them aside, and enticeth them. For
who can well think the Parent of such Children to be of a better Nature, than
the Children themselves, especially when she is described as giving birth to
them by false, and deceitful Arts? Such Arts as those reflecting no great
honor upon the Mother, but on the contrary making her to be altogether as
criminal, as the other. If therefore they, who impugn Original Sin as such,
would do it with any advantage, it must not be by Arguments drawn from
Scripture, which will rather hurt, than profit them, but by Arguments drawn
from reason, and particularly by such as represent Original Sin as no
transgression of a Law, and therefore no sin properly so called, or as a thing
which has not the consent of the will of him, in whom it is, and therefore yet
farther removed from it. As concerning the former of these, even that which
represents Original. Sin as no transgression of a Law, I answer that they, who
so speak, must deny it to be such, either because it is no Act, or because
there is no Law, which it can be supposed to be a transgression of. If the
former of these be their meaning, I willingly grant what they allege, but I
say withal, that it will not from thence follow, that it is no sin at all. For
if Men are obliged by the divine Law to a pious, and innocent temper, as well
as not to swerve from it in their actions, the want of that happy temper, or
the having a contrary one will be as much the transgression of a Law, as the
want of the same piety in their actions. Which will consequently devolve the
whole force of that Objection upon the supposition of there being no such Law
of God, which requires the former temper, or which therefore Original Sin can
be thought to be a transgression of. But as I have already made it appear in
some measure, that there is in truth such a Law, as requires a pious, and
innocent temper, so I shall now endeavor to strengthen it by some more
particular proofs, and by answering those exceptions, that are made against it.

In order to the former whereof we are to know, that as the Law we speak of
must be supposed to have been given to Adam, as that too not only in his
private, but public capacity, and as he may be thought to have been the
representative of all Mankind (there being no other Law, which can be supposed
to concern us, before we come to be in a capacity to apprehend, and obey it) so
I shall endeavor to make it appear first, that there was such a Law given to
Adam, and then that it was given to him not only in his private, but public
capacity, and as he may be thought to have been the representative of all
Mankind. Now that there was a Law given to Adam, requiring a pious, and
innocent temper, as well as the preserving that piety and innocence in his
actions, will need no other proof than God's creating him in it, and the love
he may be supposed to bear unto it. For as we cannot think God would have ever
entrusted such a Jewel with Adam, if it had not been his intention that he
should preserve, and exercise it, so much less, when the holiness of the divine
Nature persuades his love to it, as well as the declarations of his word. For
what were this, but to make God indifferent, what became of his most excellent
gifts, which no wise person, and much less so hearty a lover of them can be
supposed to be? If therefore there can be any doubt concerning the Law we speak
of, it must be as to its having been given to Adam in his public capacity, and
as he may be supposed to have been the representative of all Mankind. Which I
shall endeavor to evince first by showing what I mean by his public capacity,
secondly by showing that Adam was set in such a capacity, and thirdly that the
Law we speak of was given to him as considered in it. By the public capacity
of Adam I mean such a one, whereby as he was designed to be the Father of all
Mankind, so God made him a kind of Trustee for it; In order thereunto both
giving him what he did for their benefit, as well as his own, and obliging him
for their sakes, as well as his own, to see to the preservation of it, and act
agreeably to it. Which if he did, his Posterity as well as himself should have
the benefit thereof, and God's favor together with it, but if not, forfeit
together with him what God had so bestowed upon him, and incurr the penalty of
his displeasure. Now that Adam was set in such a capacity (which is the second
thing to be demonstrated) will appear from the Scriptures making him the cause
of all Men's death by his offense, and disobedience. For the effects of another
disobedience being not otherwise chargeable upon any Man, than as that other
may be supposed to be appointed to act for him; If the effects of Adam's
disobedience were to fall upon all his Posterity, he also must be supposed to
have been appointed to act for them, and consequently to have been set in that
public capacity, whereof I speak. Which will leave nothing more for us to show
upon this Head, than that that Law, which requires a pious and innocent temper
was given to Adam in that capacity. But as we can as little doubt of that, if
his contracting a contrary temper was as fatal to his Posterity, as to himself;
So that it was, will need no other proof than his producing the like temper in
them, and that temper's proving as deadly to them. The former whereof is
evident from what I before said to show, that Original Sin had its beginning
from Adam, the latter from S. Paul's Romans 7.24.
calling it a Body of Death, or a Body that brings it: The Genitive Case Grot.
i^ loc.
among the Hebrews, and Hellenists, being usually set for such Adjectives, as
betoken a causality in them; Even as the Savor of Death is used for a deadly
one, or that which brings death, and the Tree of Life for a life-giving one,
or that which was apt to produce, or continue it.

I deny not indeed (that I may now pass to those Exceptions that are commonly
made against it) that it may seem hard to conceive how Adam should be set in
such a capacity, as to involve all mankind in happipiness, or misery, according
as he either continued in, or fell from that integrity, wherein God created
him. I deny not therefore, but that it is equally hard to conceive how God
should give him such a Law, the observation, or transgression whereof on his
part should redound to the account of his Posterity. But as every thing, that
is hard to be conceived, is not therefore to be denied, if it be otherwise
strengthened with sufficient proofs; So it would be considered also, whether it
be not much more hard to conceive, how God should otherwise involve Infants,
and Children in those calamities, into which they often fall, especially in
National Judgments: It being certainly more agreeable to the divine Justice, to
conceive those to have some way, or other offended, and consequently thereto to
have fallen under the displeasure of it, than to conceive them to suffer it
without any offense at all. For why then should we not think, especially when
the Scripture has led the way, that God obliged them in Adam to a pious, and
innocent temper, and which they losing in him, they became obnoxious with him
to the same sad effects of his displeasure? And though it be true, that there
is this great imparity between the cases, that the effect of God's displeasure
upon occasion of Original Sin is made to reach to eternal misery, as well as to
a temporal one, whereas the case we before instanced in concerns only a
temporal punishment: Yet as they do thus far agree, that a punishment is
inflicted, where there is no actual sin to deserve it, which is sufficiently
irreconcilable with the understanding we otherwise have of the divine Justice;
So that great imparity may be much abated by considering, that God has
provided a Plaster as large as the Sore, (even by giving his Son to dye for all
Mankind) and appointed the Sacrament of Baptism to convey the benefit of it.
For as the consequents of Original Sin will be thereby taken off from so many
Infants at least, as are admitted to that Sacrament, so that mercy of his to
those, and the assurance we have from the Scripture of his giving his Son to
dye for all may persuade us to believe, that though he has not revealed the
particular way to us, yet he has some other way to convey the benefit of that
death to those, who are not admitted to the other.

But it will be said it may be (which is a no less prejudice against the being
of Original Sin) that all sin, to make it truly such, must have the consent of
the will of those, in whom it is, as well as be the transgression of a Law. A
thing by no means to be affirmed concerning that, which we call Original Sin,
because not only contracted before we had a being, and therefore also before we
had so much as the faculty of willing, but moreover conveyed to us, when we had
neither reason to apprehend it, nor any power in our wills either to admit, or
reject it. And indeed how altogether to take off the force of that Objection is
beyond my capacity to apprehend, or satisfy the understandings of other Men:
Because as I cannot see how any thing can be a sin, which has not also the
consent of the will of those, in whom it is, so I am as little able to conceive
how Original Sin should have the consent of ours, either when it was first
contracted, or when it was transmitted to us. But as I am far less able to
conceive how Infants, and Children should come to be so severely dealt with
without any offense at all, or therefore without having some way, or other
consented to one; So I think first, that that difficulty may well be laid in
the balance against the other, yea alleged as a bar to the supposed force of
it. For why should my inability to apprehend how Infants, and Children could
consent to Original Sin, prevail with me to deny the being of it, when a far
greater inability to apprehend how the same persons should come to be so
severely dealt withal without it, does not prevail with me to deny that severe
usage of them? Neither will it avail to say (which is otherwise considerable
enough) that we have for the belief of this last the testimony of our senses,
which is not to be alleged as to the other. For the question is not now
whether the severe usage of Infants, and Children may not more reasonably be
believed, than their Original Sin, upon the account of the greater evidence
there may be of it; But whether we can any more deny the Original Sin of
Infants, and Children upon the account of our inability to apprehend, how they
should consent unto it, than we can deny the severe usage of the same persons
upon the account of our inability to apprehend, how they should come to be so
dealt with without the other. Which that we cannot is evident from hence, that
we are equally at a loss in our apprehensions about the one, and the other,
that I say not also more at a loss about the latter, than about the former. And
indeed, as we find it necessary to believe many things notwithstanding our
inability to apprehend how they should come to pass, and ought not therefore to
deny the being of any one thing upon the sole account of that inability; So our
apprehensions are so short as to the modes of those things, of the being
whereof we are most assured, that it will hardly be deemed reasonable to insist
upon the suggestions of them, against the affirmations of the Scripture: Partly
because of the Authority of him, from whom it proceeded, and partly because we
cannot so easily fail in our apprehension concerning the due sense of the
affirmations of it, as in the deductions of our own reason concerning the
things affirmed; Nothing more being required to the understanding of the one,
than a due consideration of the signification of the words, wherein they are
expressed; whereas to the right ordering of the other, there is required a due
understanding of the Nature of those things about which we reason, which is
both a matter of far greater difficulty, and in many cases impossible to be
attained. Whatever difficulty therefore there may be in apprehending how
Original Sin could have the consent of those, in whom it is supposed to be, and
consequently how it should be truly and properly a sin; Yet ought not that to
be a bar against our belief of it, if the Scripture has represented it as
such, and which whether it has, or no, I shall leave to be judged by what I
have before observed from it.

From such Objections, as are levelled more immediately against the being of
Original Sin, pass we to those which impugn the derivation of it from Adam,
and from whom we have affirmed it to proceed. Which Objections again do either
tend to show, that it had its Original from something else, or that it cannot
be supposed to have its Original from Adam. An opinion has prevailed of late
years, that that, which we call Original Sin, took its rise from the sins of
particular Souls in some praexistent estate, and from those evil habits, which
they contracted by them. And certainly the opinion were reasonable enough to be
embraced, if the praexistence of Souls were but as well proved, as it is
speciously contrived. For, that supposed, it would be no hard matter to give an
account of the rise of that Corruption, which is in us, nor yet of God's
afflicting those on whom no other blame appears: That corruption, as it is no
other than what particular Souls have themselves contracted, so making them as
obnoxious to the vengeance of God, as any after sins can be supposed to do. But
do they, who advance this hypothesis, think the plausibleness thereof a
sufficient ground to build it on? Or are problems in Divinity no other way to
be determined, than those of Astronomy, or other such conjectural Arts are? I
had thought that for the resolution of these we ought rather to have had
recourse to that word of God, which was designed to give us an understanding of
them, to have examined the several assertions of it, and acquiesced in them,
how difficult soever to be apprehended. I had thought that we ought to have
done so much more, where the Scripture professes to deliver its opinion, and
does not only not wave the thing in question, but speaks to it. Which that it
does in the present case will need no other proof than the account it gives of
the Original of Mankind, and then of the Original of Evil. For as it professes
to speak of Adam not only as created by God, but as appointed by him Genesis 1.28.
to give being by the way of natural Generation to all, that after him should
replenish the Earth (which how he should be thought to do, if he were only to
be a means of furnishing them with a Body, who had the better part of their
being before, is past my understanding to imagine) so it professes to speak of
the same Adam as one by whom sin, and death Romans 5.12. 1 Cor. 15.21, 22.
entered into the World, as well as the persons of those, on whom it seizes.
And can there then be any place for a precarious hypothesis about the Original
of Mankind, or the evils of it? Can there be place for advancing that
hypothesis not only beside, but against the determinations of the Scripture? Do
not all such hypotheses proceed upon the uncertainty of the matter, about which
they are conversant? Do they not come in as a relief to the understandings of
Men, where they cannot be satisfied any other way? But how then can there be
place for such a one, where the Scripture has determined? How can there be any
place even for the most specious, and plausible? For as that cannot be supposed
to be uncertain, which the Scripture has determined; So no plausibility
whatsoever can come in competition with the determinations of God, such as
those of the Scripture are. But such it seems is the restlesness of some Men's
minds, that if they cannot satisfy their scruples from what the Scripture has
advanced, they will be setting up other Hypotheses to do it by. Wherein yet
they are for the most part so unlucky, as to advance such things themselves, as
have nothing at all of probability in them. For who can think it any way
probable, that, if men's Souls had an existence antecedent to their conception
in the Womb, they should not in the least be conscious of it, nor of any of
those things, which were transacted by them in it? Is it (as one has observed,
who seems to have been the first broacher of it in this latter Age) is it, I
say, for want of opportunity of being reminded of their former transactions, as
it happens to many, who rise confident that they slept without dreaming, and
yet before they go to bed again recover a whole series of representations by
something that occurred to them in the day? But who can think, when the Souls
of Men must be supposed to carry in them the same evil tendencies, and
inclinations, that they should never light upon any one thing, which might
bring back to their minds what they had formerly transacted, or but so much as
that they had a being antecedent to their present one? For whoever was so
forgetful of his dreams, as not to remember he was sometime in a dreaming
condition, yea that he actually dreamed in it? Is it secondly (as the same
Learned Man goes on) by a desuetude of thinking of their former actions, and
whereby it sometimes comes to pass, as he there observes, that what we have
earnestly meditated, labored for, and penned down with our own hands, when we
were at School, becomes so lost to our memories, that if we did not see our own
handwriting to it, we should not acknowledge it to be our own? But does this
come home to the present case? Does it persuade such a forgetfulness in the
Souls of Men, as not only not to remember their particular actions, but not so
much as that they were in a condition to act any thing, or acted any thing
under it? For though a Man may forget the particular exercise he did at School,
yet can any Man (though he slept an Age, and never so much as dreamed in all
that time of being at School, or any other thing, be supposed, if he awoke in
his right wits, to forget he was sometime in such a place, and performed some
exercises in it? Is it lastly by means of some distemper, that happens to the
Soul by coming into an earthly Body, and by which the forementioned person
conceives the Soul may suffer in its memory, as we see it sometime does in its
present state by casualties, and diseases, yea so far as to make the person
forget his own name? But though the Soul should be supposed to fall into such a
forgetfulness by entering into a body (as we see it is a long time before it
comes to exercise its respective faculties) yet is there any reason to think it
should continue in it after it has gotten above the infirmities of the other,
yea so far as to reason with that clearness, wherewith this Author does in many
things, and with great plausibility in all others? For though Men may happen to
be so stricken by a disease, as to forget even their own names, yea have
undoubtedly suffered in that nature; yet is there no evidence from story that I
know of, or indeed presumption for the supposition of it, that though the
parties did again recover the free use of their faculties, yet they were unable
to look back to their pristine state, or call to mind any of the passages
thereof. So much more specious, than strong are the reasons that Author
alleges to show the Soul to be in a natural incapacity to call to mind its
pristin state, and actions. And yet if they proved what they intended, they
would hardly make it credible, that it should be without all knowledge of them:
God, who thrusts it down into its present state by reason of its former
errors, being likely enough to bring them to its mind, though it should be
otherwise ignorant of them. Otherwise he should neither make it sensible of its
own guilt, and his choosing thus to punish it, which is one supposed end of his
thrusting it down, nor careful to break off from it, which is another. And I
shall only add, that as we cannot therefore be in any great danger from those
Objections, which pretend to derive Original sin from another principle; So
shall we not now be much incommoded by the force of those Objections, which
profess more directly to impugn the derivation of it from Adam. For as those
Objections are principally founded upon the incompetency of Adam to involve all
mankind in the guilt of his transgression, so I have not only made it appear
already, that Adam was no way incompetent for that purpose, because appointed
by God as the representative of all mankind, but said enough, though not to
answer, yet to silence what is objected against it from the supposed want of
our consent to his transgression. Which will leave nothing more for us to do,
than to consider what is objected against the means, we have before assigned of
the conveying of that Original Sin whereof we speak. But as I have not been
positive in assigning the particular means of its conveyance, and must
therefore be the less concerned to answer what is objected against them; So I
shall oppose to all those Objections the assurance we have from the Scripture
of our having it in us from our Conception, and Birth, yea contracting it from
those fleshly, and unclean persons, from whom we are descended: That, as it is
enough to show that it is conveyed to us by the same general means, by which
our very nature is, so making it at least probable that it passes from them to
us together with our Souls, and from thence diffuseth it self unto our Bodies.
And how far a probability so founded ought to prevail against all the
Arguments, which are opposed to the traduction of Souls, especially when the
Scripture seems to favor that traduction also, will be no hard matter for him
to judge, who shall consider on the one hand the shortness of our own
reasonings, and on the other what difficulties attend the Creation, and
Infusion, as well as the traduction of Souls. For as those very difficulties
will oblige us to sit down after all with a probable assent in this affair, so
the shortness of our own reasonings to guide that assent rather by probable
testimonies of Scripture, than by probable arguments from Reason: Because as we
are more assured of the truth of those testimonies, than we can be of the truth
of any of those arguments, which we ground our selves upon in this affair; So
we cannot so easily fail in our apprehensions concerning the other; Nothing
more being required toward the apprehending the force of the former, than the
due consideration of the sense of the words, wherein they are expressed,
whereas to the apprehending of the force of the latter we must have a clear
knowledge of the nature of those things, about which they are conversant, which
is certainly a matter of far greater difficulty, and wherein therefore we may
more easily mistake. Only if what is said in this particular may not be thought
to be satisfactory, because rather a bar to what is objected against the
traduction of Souls (and consequently of Original Sin) than any direct answer
to it; I shall desire those, who are dissatisfied with it, to give such an
answer, as they themselves demand to what is objected by the other party
against the immediate Creation, and infusion of them: It seeming not so easy
to imagine (that I may not now press them with any other inconveniences) that
God should create a Soul on purpose to infuse it into such incestuous
conceptions, as he himself cannot but be thought to abhor. For my self, as I
can with equal ease digest the traduction of Souls with all its
inconveniences, or rather acquiesce in that evidence, which the Doctrine of
the Scripture, and the simple nature of a generation do seem to suggest; So I
shall hardly think it reasonable to quit it, till they, who assert the Creation
of Souls, free it from the former inconvenience, and other such difficulties,
wherewith it is alike encumbred. For till that be done, the traduction of Souls
will not only be of greater probability, but serve more clearly to declare how
that corruption, which our first Parents contracted, passed from them unto
their Children, and so on to succeding Generations.

PART IV. Of the things signified by Baptism on the part of God, or its inward
and spiritual Grace.
The Contents. The things signified by Baptism are either more general, or
particular: More general, as that Covenant of Grace, which passes between God,
and Man, and that body of Men, which enter into Covenant with him; More
particular, what the same God does, by virtue of that Covenant, oblige himself
to bestow upon the Baptized, and what those Baptized ones do on their part
undertake to perform. These latter ones proposed to be considered, and entrance
made with the consideration of what God obliges himself to bestow upon the
Baptized, called by the Church, An inward, and spiritual Grace. Which inward,
and spiritual Grace is shown to be of two sorts, to wit, such as tend more
immediately to our spiritual, and eternal welfare, or such as only qualify us
for those Graces, that do so. To the former sort are reckoned that inward, and
spiritual Grace, which tends to free us from the guilt of sin, called by the
Church forgiveness of sin; That which tends to free us from the pollution of
sin, called by our Catechism A death unto it; And that, which tends to
introduce the contrary purity, and has the name of a New birth unto
righteousness. To the latter sort is reckoned our union to that Body, of which
Christ Jesus is the Head, and by means whereof he dispenses the former Graces
to us. Each of these resumed, and considered in their order, and shown to be,
what they are usually styled, the inward, and spiritual Graces of Baptism, or
the things signified by the outward visible Sign thereof.

BUT to return to that, from which I have diverted, even the things signified
by the outward visible sign of Baptism, which are either more general, or
particular: More general, as that Covenant of Grace, which passes between God,
and Man, and that Body of Men, which enter into Covenant with him; More
particular, what the same God does by virtue of that Covenant oblige himself to
bestow upon the Baptized, and what those Baptized ones do on their part make
profession of. Of those more general things I have given some account already
Of the Sacraments in general, Part 2.
, and shall have occasion, as I go, to add yet farther light to them; I will
therefore proceed forthwith to the consideration of the more particular ones,
such as are on the part of God an inward and Spiritual Grace, and on the part
of the Baptized an abrenuntiation of their former sins, and a resolution to
believe, and act, as Christianity obliges them to do.

Now the inward and Spiritual Grace of Baptism is of two sorts, to wit, such as
tend more immediately to our spiritual, and eternal welfare, or such as only
qualify us for those Graces, that do so. Of the former sort again is that
inward and Spiritual Grace, which tends to free us from the guilt of sin, best
known by the name of forgiveness, or that which tends to free us from the
pollution of sin, called by our Catechism a death unto it, or lastly that which
tends to introduce the contrary purity, and has the name of a new birth unto
Righteousness. Of the latter sort is our union to that body, of which Christ
Jesus is the head, and by means of which he dispenses the former Graces to us.
For that each of these is signified on the part of God by the outward visible
sign of Baptism, and consequently is a part of its inward and Spiritual Grace,
will appear if we descend to particulars, which therefore I will now set my
self to do.

To begin with those inward, and Spiritual Graces, which tend more immediately
to our spiritual, and eternal welfare; Among which as I assigned the first
place to forgiveness of sin, so I shall make it my business to show first, that
that is a Grace which is signified by the outward visible sign of Baptism, and
Secondly give a more particular account of the nature of that forgiveness,
which I have said to be signified by the other.

That forgiveness of sin is a Grace signified by the outward visible sign of
Baptism, will appear if these two things can be made out; First, that the
outward visible sign of Baptism has a relation to the forgiveness of sin, and
Secondly that it has the relation of a sign unto it. For if the outward
visible sign of Baptism has the relation of a sign to the forgiveness of sin,
Forgiveness of sin, as being its correlatum, must be looked upon as signified
by it. That the outward visible sign of Baptism has a relation to the
forgiveness of sin, S. Peter will not suffer us to doubt, because admonishing
Act. 2.38.
the Jews to be baptized for the remission of sins; And as little doubt can
there well be of its having the relation of a sign unto it, which is the only
thing we are at present to consider: Partly, because Baptism has been before
Of the Sacraments in general, Part 2.
shown to have been intended by God as a sign of many things, and why then not
as a sign of that forgiveness, to which I have shown it equally to relate, and
partly because it is proposed to us as washing away Acts 22.16.
the sins of those, that are sprinkled with it. For as if the Water of Baptism
be to be considered as washing away Men's sins, it must be upon the account of
its being a sign of that inward Grace thereof, that does so, as which alone can
be a just foundation of attributing such a property to it (for neither can the
Water of Baptism put away Men's sins, but by means of that Grace, which it
conveys, nor with any propriety even so be said to wash them away, but upon the
account of the likeness there is between its own natural property, and that of
the divine Grace, which will make the Water of Baptism a sign, or
representation of it) So if the Water of Baptism be to be considered as washing
away Men's sins, it will equally lead us to believe, that it ought to be
considered in particular as a sign of that forgiveness, whereof we speak:
Partly, because that forgiveness is an undoubted correlatum of Baptism, and
partly because the term of washing away Men's sins is most frequently made use
of to denote the forgiveness of sins, and that outward sign therefore, to which
such a washing is attributed, intended as a sign of the forgiveness of them. I
conclude therefore that whatever else may be thought to be excluded from the
signification of the Water of Baptism, yet it has the relation of a sign to
the forgiveness of sin, and that forgiveness therefore to be looked upon as one
of the Graces signified by it. And I shall only add, that this was always so
acknowledged in the Church, that even the Pelagians themselves, though they
denied all sin in Infants, and consequently left no place for the forgiveness
of sin in them, yet did allow of their being Baptized for the remission of sins
according to the rule of the Universal Church, and the tenor of the Gospel, as
appears from the words of Pelagius himself Vid. Voss. Hist. Pelag. li. 2. part.
2. These. 4.
, and those of his Scholar Coelestius.

There being therefore no doubt to be made, that forgiveness of sin is one of
those inward, and Spiritual Graces, which are signified by Baptism, it may not
be amiss for the farther clearing of that Grace, to say somewhat concerning the
nature of it, both as to those sins it pretends to assoile, and the measure of
its forgiveness. But because I have elsewhere Expl. of the Creed. Art. of The
forgiveness of sins.
given no contemptible account thereof, and shall have occasion to resume it,
when I come to show what farther relation the outward visible sign of Baptism
bears to this, and its other inward Graces; I shall content my self to observe
at present, that as that forgiveness, which is signified by it, has a relation
to all our past sins, so it relates in particular to Original Sin, and
consequently tends alike to the cancelling of its Obligation. Witness not only
the Churches applying this sign of it to Infants, as that too, as was before
noted for the remission of sins, but S. Paul's making that quickening Ephesians.
2.1. etc.
, which we have by Baptism, to save us as well from that wrath, which we were
the Children of by Nature, as from our own vain conversation, and the
punishment thereof. For other sense than that as the generality of the Latins
Vid. Voss. Pelag. Hist. li. 2. part. 1 These. 2.
did not put upon the Apostles words, so neither is there indeed any necessity
for, or all things considered any probability of: Partly because the Apostle
might intend to aggravate the sinfulness of Men's former estate from their
natural, as well as contracted pollutions (even as David aggravated his Psalm.
51.5.
where he deplores his Adultery, and Murder) and partly because there is
sufficient evidence from other Texts of Men's being sinful by their birth, as
well as practice, and which as S. Paul's Children of wrath by Nature is more
strictly agreeable to, so is therefore more reasonable to be interpreted of.
And I have insisted so much the longer both upon this particular, and the Text
I have made use of to confirm it, because as Original Sin is one main ground of
Baptism, and accordingly in this very Catechism of ours represented by our
Church as such, so she may seem to make use of that very Text to evidence the
being of Original Sin, and the efficacy of Baptism toward the removing of it:
Her words being, that as we are by nature born in sin, and the Children of
wrath, so we are by Baptism made the Children of Grace.

From the Grace of forgiveness of sin pass we to that, which tends to free us
from its pollution, entitled by our Church a death unto it. A grace, which as
the corruption of our Nature makes necessary to be had, so cannot in the least
be doubted to be signified by the outward sign of Baptism: It being not only
the affirmation of S. Paul that all true Christians are dead Romans 6.2.
to sin, but that they are buried by Baptism Romans 4,
into it, that they are by that means planted together into the likeness Romans 5,
of Christ's death, and that their Old Man, even the Body of sin, is crucified
Romans 6.
with Christ in it. For as that, and other such like Texts Col. 2.12.
of Scripture are a sufficient proof of Baptism's having a relation to our
death unto sin, as well as unto the death of Christ; So they prove in like
manner, that it had the relation of a sign unto it, and consequently make the
former death to be one of the Graces signified by it: Because not only
describing the Rite of Baptism under the notion of a death, and Burial, which
it cannot be said to be, but as it is an image of one, but representing it as a
planting of the Baptized person into the likeness of that death of Christ,
which is the exemplar of the other. For what is this but to say, that it was
intended as a sign, or representation of them both, and both the one, and the
other therefore to be looked upon as signified by it. The same is to be said
upon the account of those Texts of Scripture, which represent the Water of
Baptism as washing Acts 22.16
away the sins of Men, or (if that expression may not be thought to be full
enough, because referring also to the forgiveness of them) as sanctifying, and
cleansing Ephesians. 5.26, 27.
the Church, to the end it may be holy, and without blemish. For as that shows
the Water of Baptism to have a relation to that grace, which tends to free the
Church from sinful blemishes, so it shows in like manner, that it was intended
as a sign of it, and of that inward cleansing, which belongs to it: There being
not otherwise any reason why the freeing of the Church from sin by means of the
Baptismal water should have the name of cleansing, but upon the account of the
analogy there is between the natural property thereof, and the property of that
Grace, to which it relates.

One only Grace remains of those, which tend more immediately to our spiritual
welfare, even that which our Catechism entitles a new birth unto righteousness.
Concerning which I shall again show (because that will be enough to prove, that
it is a Grace signified by it) that the Water of Baptism has a relation to it,
and then that it has the relation of a sign. I allege for the former of these
S. Paul's entitling it the laver of regeneration Tit. 3.5.
, as our Savior's affirming Joh. 3.5.
before him, that we are born again of that, as well as of the Spirit; For the
latter what has been before shown in the general concerning its having been
intended as a sign of the things, to which it relates. For if the Water of
Baptism were intended as a sign of those things, to which it relates, it must
consequently have bin intended as a sign of our new birth, because by the
former Texts as manifestly relating to it. But so we shall be yet more fully
persuaded, if it carry in it a representation of that new birth, to which it
does relate. Which that it does will need no other proof, than its being an apt
representation of that spiritual purity, which the Soul puts on at its first
conversion, and wherein indeed its new birth Ephesians. 4.24.
consists. For so it is in part by that cleansing quality, which is natural to
it, and which induces a purity in those bodies, to which it is applied; But
especially by the use that was formerly made of it toward the washing of
newborn Infants from those impurities, which they contracted from the Womb:
This last serving to set forth the first beginnings of our spiritual purity, as
well as the former does that purity it self. And I shall only add, that as a
resurrection from the Dead is also a kind of new Birth, and accordingly so
represented by the Scriptures themselves (witness their entituling our Savior
upon the account of his Resurrection the first-begotten Col. 1.18.
from the dead, yea making that Resurrection of his to be a completion Acts
13.33.
of that signal prediction of God Psalm. 2.7.
Thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee) So the same Scriptures do not
only represent our new birth unto Righteousness under the notion of a
Resurrection, but sufficiently intimate that whether Birth or Resurrection to
be a Grace signified by it: Because not only admonishing us to look upon our
selves as a live unto God by Baptism Romans 6.11.
, as well as dead unto sin in it, but as risen Col. 2 12.
with Christ therein through the faith of the operation of him, who raised him
from the dead. For how come Men by reason of their being alive unto God through
Baptism to be affirmed to have risen with Christ in it, but upon the account of
that Baptism of theirs being a representation of that new life, or birth, which
we have by the means of it, as well as of the Resurrection of our Savior?

I will conclude what I have to say concerning the inward, and Spiritual Grace
of Baptism, when I have taken notice of that, which though it do not
immediately tend to our spiritual, and eternal welfare, yet qualifies us for
those Graces, that do; Even our union to that Body, of which Christ Jesus is
the Head, and by means of which he dispenses the other graces to us. For that
that is also signified by the outward visible sign of Baptism, will appear if
we consider that visible sign as having a relation to it, and then as having
the relation of a sign. Of the former whereof as S. Paul will not suffer us to
doubt, because affirming all 1 Cor. 12.13.
whether Jews or Gentiles to be baptized into that body; So there will be as
little doubt of the other from the general design of its institution, and from
what S. Paul intimates in the former place concerning it: That expression of
being baptized into the body of Christ importing our being received by Baptism
within it, as the body of the Baptized is within those waters, wherein he is
immersed. Which will consequently make that Rite a true, and proper sign of Our
Union to Christ's Body, and that union therefore a thing signified by it.

Such are the things, which are by Baptism signified on the part of God, and
Christ, or (that I may speak in the language of our Church) the inward, and
spiritual Graces thereof. It remains that I also show the things signified by
it on the part of the Baptized, even an Abrenunciation of their former sins,
and a resolution to believe, and act, as Christianity obliges them to do. But
because both the one, and the other of these will be more clearly understood,
if they be handled apart, and whatsoever is to be known concerning each of them
laid as near together as may be; Therefore having begun to entreat of the
inward and spiritual Grace of Baptism, I will continue my Discourse concerning
it, and accordingly go on to enquire what farther relation the outward visible
sign of Baptism has to its inward and Spiritual Grace, or Graces, and first of
all to Forgiveness of sin.

PART V. Of Forgiveness of sin by Baptism.
The Contents. Of the relation of the sign of Baptism to its inward, and
spiritual Grace, and particularly to Forgiveness of sin; Which is either that
of a means fitted by God to convey it, or of a pledge to assure the Baptized
person of it. The former of these relations more particularly considered, as
that too with respect to Forgiveness of Sin in the general, or the Forgiveness
of all Sin whatsoever, and Original Sin in particular. As to the former whereof
is alleged first the Scriptures calling upon Men to be Baptized for the
remission, or forgiveness of sin, Secondly the Church's making that Forgiveness
a part of her Belief, and Doctrine, Thirdly the agreeing opinions or practices
of those, who were either unsound members of it, or Separatists from it, And
Fourthly the Calumnies of its enemies. The like evidence made of the latter
from the Scripture's proposing Baptism, and its Forgiveness as a remedy against
the greatest guilts, and in special against that wrath, which we are Children
of by Nature. From the premises is shown, that the sign of Baptism is a pledge
to assure the Baptized of Forgiveness, as well as a means fitted by God for the
conveying of it.

NOW as the outward visible sign of Baptism has, beside that of a sign, the
relation of a means fitted by God to convey the inward, and spiritual Grace,
and of a pledge to assure the Baptized person of it; So being now to entreat of
its relation to that of the Forgiveness of sins, we must therefore consider it
under each of them, and first as a means fitted by God for the conveying of it.

In the handling whereof I will proceed in this method; First, I will show that
it has indeed such a relation to Forgiveness in the general, Secondly, that it
has such a relation to the Forgiveness of all sins whatsoever, and
particularly of Original.

That the outward visible sign of Baptism has such a relation to Forgiveness
in the general, will appear from the ensuing Topics.

I. From the plain, and undoubted Doctrine of the Scripture. II. From the
consentient Doctrine, and Belief of the Church. III. From the whether
practices, or opinions of the unsound members of it, or Separatists from it.
IV. From the Calumnies of the open Enemies thereof.
I. What the Doctrine of the Scripture is in this affair cannot be unknown to
any, who have reflected upon what S. Peter said to those Jews, who demanded of
him, and his fellow Apostles what they should do to avert the guilt they had
contracted, and what Ananias said to Paul, who was remitted to him upon the
same account. For to the former S. Peter made answer among other things that
they should be baptized Acts 2.38.
for the remission of sins; Which shows what Baptism was intended for, and what
therefore, if they were duly qualified, they might certainly expect from it: To
the latter Ananias, that he should arise, and be baptized, Acts 22, 16.
and wash away his sins. Which effect as it cannot be thought to referr to any
thing but the preceding Baptism, and therefore neither but make that Baptism
the proper means of accomplishing it; So can much less be thought to exclude,
or rather not principally to intend the washing away the guilt of them: Partly
because (as was before observed) that is the most usual sense of washing away
sins, and partly because most agreeable to the disconsolate condition Paul was
then in, as well as to the foregoing declaration of S. Peter.

II. To the Doctrine of the Scripture subjoyn we the consentient Doctrine, and
belief of the Church, as which though it cannot add to the Authority of the
other, yet will no doubt conferr much to the clearing of its sense, and of that
Doctrine, which we have deduced from it. Now what evidence there is of such a
consent will need no other proof than the Doctrine of her Creed Creed in the
Communion-serv.
, and the use she made of the simple Baptism of Infants to establish against
the Pelagians the being of that Original Sin they called in question. For how
otherwise could the Church call upon Men to declare, that they believed one
Baptism for the remission of sins? Yea, though she thought it otherwise
necessary to inculcate Baptism, as well as remission, and the single
administration of it, as well as either. For beside that both the one, and the
other might have been declared by themselves, as well as in the tenor, wherein
they are now exhibited; Had it not been a thing otherwise certain that
remission of sins was an effect of Baptism, to have subjoined it to Baptism, as
it is now, would have been a means to render it uncertain, and consequently all
the hopes of a Christian together with it. Again, if there had been any the
least doubt in the Church concerning this relation of Baptism, I mean as a
means to convey remission of sins to the Baptized party; How could she have
made use of the simple Baptism Voss. Hist. Pelag. li. 2. Part 2. Antithes. 4.
of Infants to establish against the Pelagians the being of that Original sin,
which they called in question? For that Argument of hers proceeding upon the
supposition of remission of sins by Baptism, as that again upon the supposition
of something to be remitted in the party baptized, which in Infants could be no
other than that Original Sin, which she asserted; If Baptism had not been
certainly intended for the remission of sins, that argument of hers had been of
no force, yea rather weakened, than any way strengthened that Original Sin,
which she maintained: Especially, when it was a like certain, and accordingly
replied by the Pelagians, Voss. ibid. These. 4.
that Baptism had other uses, and for which it might be supposed to have been
conferred upon Infants, though they had nothing at all of sinful in them.

III. But beside the suffrage of the Church of God, which both published this
Doctrine in her Creed, and argued others from it; It is farther to be observed,
that those, who were none of the soundest members of it, nor indeed as yet
perfect ones, confirmed it by their opinions, and practices, as they also did
in some measure, who yet separated from it in this affair. Witness, for the
former, their deferring their Baptism to their death beds; Whether (as the
Fathers Tertal. de Poenitent. c. 8.
sometime charged them) that they might sin so much the more securely in the
mean time, or (as I rather think for the most part) because they were not well
assured of the like efficacious means for the forgiveness of them. For which
soever of these two were the occasion of that delay, manifest it is even from
thence, that they had a high opinion of the forgiveness of sin by Baptism, but
much more from the hazard they ran of going out of the World without it, and
the contrariety of that their delay to the practice of the first Christians
Acts 2.41.
, as well as to the sentiments Cod. Eccl. Vniv. can. 57.
of their own times concerning it. It being not to be thought, that Men of
ordinary prudence would run upon so great an irregularity, as well as danger,
unless they also believed, that if they happened to obtain Baptism, they should
obtain together with it so plentiful a forgiveness, as would make ample amends
for the other. And though we cannot so reasonably expect the like evidence from
Heretics, and much less from those, whose business was in a great measure to
depretiate the value of Baptism, as it is certain the Pelagians was; Yet as
even they (as was before Expl. of Bapt. Part 4.
observed) allowed the Baptizing of Infants into the same rule of Faith with
those of riper years, and consequently into remission of sins; So they denied
not, as to Men of riper years Voss. Hist. Pelag. li. 2. Part. 2. These. 4.
, that Baptism was efficacious toward it, and that as they were baptized into
the belief of remission of sins, so they received that remission by it.

IV. In fine, so notorious as well as prevalent was the Doctrine of forgiveness
of sin by Baptism, that the adversaries of the Church, and of Christianity took
occasion from thence to calumniate them for it, and made that Doctrine of
theirs one of their greatest crimes. Of which, to omit others, we have a
remarkable proof in Julian Orat. cui tit. (...) p. 53.
, who makes Constantius, or rather Christianity in him, thus to bespeak the
World. Whosoever is a corrupter of Women, or a Murderer, or impure, or
abominable, let him come with confidence. For having washed him with this
water, I will make him presently clean; And though he be afterward guilty of
the like crimes, yet I will take care to cleanse him from them, if he will but
smite his breast, and knock his head. The former part whereof is a manifest
allusion to Baptism, and its effects, the latter to the penitential discipline
of the Church. And it ought the rather to be taken notice of, because as it
bears witness to that forgiveness of sin by Baptism, which has been hitherto
our design to advance, so it will contribute in part toward the proving, what
comes next in order, even

That the outward visible sign of Baptism has that relation, whereof we speak,
to the forgiveness of all sins whatsoever, and particularly of Original Sin:
There being little doubt as to the former of these, if (as Christianity is
there made to speak) adultery, and murder were washed away by the waters of
it. But so that Christianity it self taught, as well as was affirmed by this
its adversary to do, is not only evident from what has been elsewhere said
Expl. of the Creed. Art. The forgievness of sins.
concerning its tendering forgiveness of sins indefinitely, and particularly in
the laver of Baptism, but from the quality of those criminals, whom it invited
to forgiveness by it. For thus we find it to have done those Jews Acts 2.38.
, whom it before charged Acts 23.
with the murder of our Lord, and him in particular Acts 22.16.
, who elsewhere 1 Timothy 1.13.
confesses himself to have been a blasphemer, a persecuter, and injurious, yea
was intent upon that execrable employment at the time he was first invited to
forgiveness. But therefore as I cannot either conceive, or allow of any other
abatement in this forgiveness, than that which is to be made upon account of
the sin against the Holy Ghost, and which what it is, has been elsewhere Expl.
of the Creed. Art. The forgiveness, etc.
declared; So I shall need only to take notice of the reference it has to that
Original Sin, which is the unhappy parent of all the rest. Not that there can
be any great doubt as to the pardon of that, where it appears that the most
heinous actual sins are pardoned, but because Baptism has been thought by our
Church See the Office of Bapt. and the Catechism.
to have a more peculiar reference to it, and because if it can be proved to
have such a reference to its forgiveness, it will be of signal use to show the
necessity of baptizing Infants, in whom that sin does alike predominate. Now
though it be hard to find any one Text of Scripture, where that forgiveness,
whereof we speak, is expressly attributed to Baptism; Yet will it not be
difficult to deduce it from that Ephesians. 2.1. etc.
, which I have before shown to entreat of our becoming the children of wrath by
nature, as well as by the wickedness of our conversations. For opposing to the
corruption, or rather deadness, which accrues by both, the quickening we have
together with Christ, and which quickening he elsewhere Col. 2.12.
as expressly affirms to be accomplished in us by Baptism; Affirming moreover
that quickening to bring salvation Ephesians. 2.5-8.
, and peace Ephesians. 14-17.
, and reconciliation Ephesians. 16.
(for so he discourses of it in the following Verses of that Chapter) he must
consequently make that quickening, and the means of it to tend to the
forgiveness of both, and particularly of natural corruption: Because as that
quickening is by him opposed to both, so it must in this particular be looked
upon as more peculiarly opposed to the latter, because that is more peculiarly
affirmed to make Men the Children of wrath, and vengeance.

Such evidence there is of the outward visible sign of Baptism being a means
fitted by God to convey that forgiveness, whereof we speak; And we shall need
no other proof than that of its being also a pledge to assure the baptized
person of it. For since God cannot be supposed to fit any thing for an end,
which he does not on his part intend to accomplish by it; He, who knows himself
to partake of that, which is fitted by God to convey forgiveness of sin, may
know alike, and be assured as to the part of God of his receiving that
forgiveness, as well as the outward means of its conveyance. For which cause in
my Discourse of its other inward, and spiritual Graces I shall take notice only
of that outward, and visible sign as a means fitted by God to convey them,
because its being also a pledge may be easily deduced from it.

PART VI. Of Mortification of sin, and Regeneration by Baptism.
The Contents. Of the relation of the sign of Baptism to such inward, and
spiritual Graces, as tend to free us from the pollution of sin, or introduce
the contrary purity; And that relation shown to be no less than that of a
means, whereby they are conveyed. This evidenced as to the former, even our
death unto sin (which is also explained) from such Texts of Scripture, as make
mention of our being baptized into it, and buried by Baptism in it, or from
such as describe us as cleansed by the washing of it. The like evidenced from
the same Scripture concerning the latter, even our new birth unto
righteousness; As that again farther cleared as to this particular by the
consentient Doctrine, and practice of the Church, by the opinion the Jews had
of that Baptism, which was a Type, and exemplar of ours, and the expressions of
the Heathen concerning it. The Doctrine of the Church more largely insisted
upon, and exemplified from Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and S. Cyprian.

I Have considered the sign of Baptism hitherto in its relation to Forgiveness,
that Grace, which tends to free men from their guilt, and is for that purpose
conveyed by Baptism to us; I come now to consider it in its relation to those,
which either tend to free them from the pollution of sin, best known by the
name of a Death unto it, or to introduce the contrary righteousness, and is
called a new birth unto it. Where again I shall show in each of them, that as
the outward work of Baptism has the relation of a sign unto them, so it has
equally the relation of a means fitted by God to convey them, and where it is
duly received, does not fail to introduce them.

To begin (as is but meet) with that, which has the name of a Death unto sin,
because sin must be first subdued, before the contrary quality can be
introduced; Where first I will enquire what we are to understand by it, and
then what evidence there is of the sign of Baptism's being fitted to convey it.

For the better understanding the former whereof we are to know, that as Men by
the corruption of their nature are inclined unto sin, and yet more by the
irregularity of their conversations, so those inclinations are to the persons
in whom they are, as a principle of life to a living Creature, and accordingly
do both dispose them to act sutably thereto, and make them brisk, and vigorous
in it. Now as it cannot well be expected, that where such inclinations prevail,
Men should pursue those things, which piety, and virtue prompt them to, so it
was the business of Philosophy first, and afterward of Religion, if not wholly
to destroy those inclinations, yet at least to subdue them in such sort, that
they should be in a manner dead, and the persons, in whom they were, so far
forth dead also; They neither finding in themselves the like inclinations to
actual sin, nor hurried on by them, when they did. How little able Philosophy
was to contribute to so blessed an effect is not my business to show, nor
indeed will there be any need of it, after what I have elsewhere Expl. of the
Creed. Art. I believe in the Holy Ghost.
said concerning the necessity of the divine Grace in order to it. But as
Christianity does every where pretend to the doing of it, and (which is more)
both represents that effect under the name of a death unto sin, and compares
Men's thus dying with that natural death, which our Savior underwent, so it
may the more reasonably pretend to the producing of it, because it also
pretends to furnish Men with the power of his Grace, to which such an effect
cannot be supposed to be disproportionate. The only thing in question as to our
present concernment is, whether as the outward work of Baptism has undoubtedly
the relation of a sign unto it, so it has also the relation of a means fitted
by God for the conveying of it, and what evidence there is of that relation.

Now there are two sorts of Texts, which bear witness to this relation, as well
as to its having that more confessed relation of a sign. Whereof the former
entreat of this Grace under the title of a death unto sin, the latter of a
cleansing from it. Of the former sort I reckon that well known place to the
Romans, where S. Paul does not only suppose all true Christians Romans 6.2.
to be dead to sin, and accordingly argue from it the unfitness of their living
any longer therein, but affirm all, that are baptized into Jesus Christ Romans
6.3.
, to be baptized into that death, yea to be buried by Baptism Romans 6.4,
into it; to be planted together Romans 6.5,
by that means in the likeness of Christ's death, and to have their old Man Romans
6.6.
, or the body of sin crucified with him. For shall we say that S. Paul meant no
more by all this, than that the design of Baptism, and the several parts of it
was to represent to us the necessity of our dying, and being buried as to sin,
and that accordingly all, that are baptized into Christ, make profession of
their resolution so to do, but not that they are indeed buried by Baptism as to
that particular. But beside that we are not lightly to depart from the
propriety of the Scripture phrase, which must be acknowledged rather to favor
a real death, than the bare signification of it; That Apostle does moreover
affirm those, whom he before described as dead, to be freed Romans 7.18.
from sin, yea so far Romans 7.18.
as to have passed over into another service, even that of righteousness, and
to have obeyed from the heart Romans 7.17.
that form of Doctrine, into which they had been delivered. Which supposed (as
it may, because the direct affirmation of S. Paul) will make that death,
whereof we speak, to be a death in reality, as well as in figure, and
accordingly (because Men are affirmed to be baptized into it) show that Baptism
to be a means of conveying it, as well as a representation of it. Agreeable
hereto, or rather yet more express is that of the same Apostle to the
Colossians Col. 2.11.
though varying a little from the other, as to the manner of expression. For
having affirmed them through Christ to have put off the body of the sins of the
flesh by a circumcision not made with hands, and consequently by a spiritual
one, he yet adds (lest any should fancy that spiritual Circumcision to accrue
to them without some ceremonial one) in the Circumcision of Christ, even that
Baptism, which, conformably to the circumcision of the Jews, he had appointed
for their entrance into his Religion by, and wherein he accordingly affirms, as
he did in the former place, that they were not only buried with him, but had
risen together with him by the faith of the operation of God, who raised him
from the dead. From whence as it is clear, that the putting off the body of the
sins of the flesh (which is but another expression for a death unto them) is
though accomplished by a spiritual Grace, yet by such a one, as is conveyed to
us by Baptism, so it becomes yet more clear by what he adds concerning Men's
rising with him in the same Baptism, even to a life contrary to what they had
before deposited, through the faith of the operation of God. For as we cannot
conceive of that rising with Christ as other than a real one, because there
would not otherwise have needed such a faith, as that, to bring it about; So
neither therefore but think the like of that death, which it presupposes, and
consequently that that Baptism, to which it is annexed, is a means of conveying
it, as well as a representation of it. But so we may be yet more convinced by
such Texts of Scripture, as speak of this death unto sin under the notion of a
cleansing from it. Of which nature is that so often alleged one Ephesians. 5.26, 27.
concerning Christ's sanctifying, and cleansing his Church with the washing of
water by the word. For as it appears from what is afterward subjoined as the
end of that cleansing, even that the Church might not have any spot, or
wrinkle, but that it should be holy, and without blemish; As it appears, I say,
from thence, that the Apostle speaks in the verse before concerning a cleansing
from the filth of sin, which is but another expression for the putting off the
body of sin, or a death unto it; So it appears in like manner from S. Paul's
attributing that cleansing to the washing of water, that the outward sign of
Baptism is by the appointment, and provision of God, a means of conveying that
spiritual Grace, by which that cleansing is more immediately effected, and that
death unto sin procured.

From that death unto sin therefore pass we to our new birth unto
righteousness, that other inward, and spiritual Grace of Baptism, and the
complement of the former. A Grace of whose conveyance by Baptism we can much
less doubt, if we consider the language of the Scripture concerning it, or the
Doctrine, as well as practice of the Church; The opinion the Jews had of that,
which seems to have been its type, and exemplar, or the expressions even of the
Heathen concerning it.

For what less can the Scripture be thought to mean, when it affirms us to be
born of the water Joh. 3.5.
of it, as well as of the spirit, yea so, as to be as truly spirit Joh. 3.6.
, as that, which is born of the flesh, is flesh? What less can it be thought to
mean, when it entitles it the laver of Tit. 3.5.
Regeneration, and which is more, affirms us to be saved by it, as well as by
the renewing of the Holy Ghost? What less, when it requires us to look upon our
selves as alive Romans 6.11.
unto God by it, as well as buried Romans 6.4.
by it into the former death, or (as the same Apostle elsewhere expresses it)
as risen with Christ in it Col. 2.12.
through the faith of the operation of God, who raised him from the dead? In
fine, what less when it affirms us to be sanctified with the washing Ephesians. 5.26.
of it, as well as it elsewhere does by the influences of God's Spirit. For
these expressions show plainly enough, that Baptism has its share in the
producing of this new birth, as well as the efficacy of God's Spirit; And
consequently that it is at least the conveyer of that Grace, by which it is
more immediately produced.

And indeed as, if men would come without prejudice, they would soon see enough
in those expressions to convince them of as much as I have deduced from them;
So they might see yet more (if they passed so far) in the doctrine, and
language of the Church, to confirm them in that Interpretation of them. For who
ever even of the first, and purest times spoke in a lower strain concerning
Baptism? who ever made less of it, than of a means, by which we are
regenerated? I appeal for a proof hereof to their so unanimously See Part 2.
understanding of Baptism what our Savior spoke to Nicodemus concerning the
necessity of men's being born again of water, and of the spirit. For as all men
whatsoever interpret that of our new birth unto righteousness, and, so far, as
the spirit of God is concerned in it, of the means, by which it is produced; So
they must therefore believe, that if the Ancients understood it of Baptism,
they allotted that its share in it, and consequently made it at least a
conveyer of that Grace, by which this new birth is produced. I appeal farther
to the particular declarations of some of the most eminent among them, and
which whosoever shall seriously consider, will wonder how it should come to
fall back to a naked, and ineffectual sign. For Justin Martyr Apolog. 2. p. 93,
94.
speaking concerning those, who had prepared themselves for Baptism, affirms
them to be brought by the brethren to a place, where water is, and there to be
regenerated after that way of regeneration, wherewith they themselves were.
Which what it was, and of how great force he afterward shows, by affirming
them thereupon to be washed in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as
that too conformably to what our Savior spoke concerning the necessity of
men's being born again, To what the Prophet Isaiah meant, when he said, Wash
you, make you clean, put away wickednesses from your souls; And in fine, to
procure their deliverance from that, whether natural, or habitual corruptions
they were under the power of. For these things show plainly enough, that as he
spoke of the Baptismal regeneration, so he spoke of it too as a thing, which
procured, as well as figured the internal regeneration of them. To the same
purpose does Tertullian discourse, and particularly in his Tract de Baptismo;
Witness his calling it, in the very beginning thereof, that happy Sacrament of
our water, wherewith being washed from the faults of our present blindness, we
are freed into eternal life His affirming presently after, that we the lesser
fishes, according to that (...), or greater one Jesus Christ, are born in the
water, neither can continue safe, unless we abide in it; That we ought not to
wonder, if the waters of Baptism give life, when that Element was the first,
that brought forth any living creature; That, as the Spirit of God moved at the
beginning upon the face of waters, so the same spirit of God, after the
invocation of his name, does descend from Heaven upon those of Baptism, and
having sanctified them from himself gives them a power of sanctifying others.
For these and the like passages show as plainly, that that Author looked upon
the outward sign of Baptism as contributing in its place to the production of
our new birth, or sanctification, as well as to the representation of it. But
of all the Ancient Fathers, that have entreated of this affair, or indeed of
that Sacrament, which we are now upon the consideration of, there is no one,
who has spoken more, or more to the purpose than S. Cyprian, or whose words
therefore will be more fit to consider. Only, that I may not multiply
testimonies without necessity, I will content my self with one single one, but
which indeed for the fullness thereof will serve instead of many, and be
moreover as clear a testimony of our dying unto sin by Baptism, as of our
regeneration by it. For when (says he Epist. ad Donat.
) I lay in darkness, and under the obscurity of the Night; When uncertain and
doubtful I floated on the Sea of this tossing World, ignorant of my own life,
and as great a stranger to truth, I thought it exceeding difficult, as the
manners of Men then were, that any one should be born again, as the divine
mercy had promised, and that being animated to a new life by the laver of
salutary water, he should put off that which he was before, and whilst the
frame of his body continued the same, become a new Man in his heart, and mind.
For how (said I) is it possible, that that should be suddenly put off, which
either being natural is now grown hard by the natural situation of the matter,
or contracted by a long custom has been improved by old Age, etc. To these,
and the like purposes I often discoursed with my self; For as I was at that
time entangled with many errors of my former life, which I did not then think
it was possible for me to put off; So I willingly gave obedience to those
vices, that stuck to me, and through a despair of better things, I favored my
evils, as though they had been my proper, and domestic ones. But after that
through the assistance of this generating water the blemishes of my former life
were washed off, and my mind thus purged had a light from above poured into it;
After that the second birth had changed me into a new Man through the force of
that spirit, or breath, which I sucked in from above; Then those things, which
were before doubtful, became exceeding certain, and manifest; things, which
were before shut, were then laid open, and dark things made light. Then that,
which before seemed difficult, appeared to help, rather than hinder, and that,
which sometime was thought impossible, as possible to be done. So that it was
not difficult to discern, that that was earthly, which being carnally born did
before live obnoxious to faults, and that that began to be God's, which the
Holy Ghost now animated. You your self verily know, and will as readily
acknowledge with me, what was either taken from, or bestowed upon us by that
death of crimes, and life of virtues. Which as it is an illustrious testimony
of the force of Baptism in this particular, and with what reason we have
affirmed it to be a means of procuring the former death, and birth; So I have
the more willingly taken notice of it, because it comes so near even in its
expression to what our Catechism has represented as the inward and spiritual
Grace thereof: There being no great difference between a death of crimes, and
life of virtues, which is the expression of that Father, and a death unto sin,
and a new birth unto righteousness, which is the other's. And I shall only add,
that as the Doctrine of the Church must therefore be thought to bear sufficient
testimony to Baptism's being a means of our regeneration; So its practice is in
this particular answerable to its Doctrine, and though in another way proclaims
the same thing. Witness what has been elsewhere observed concerning its giving
Milk, and Honey See Part 3.
to the new Baptized person, as to an Infant newborn, its requiring him
presently after Baptism to say Expl. of the Lord's Prayer in the words Out
Father.
Our Father, etc. as a testimony of his Sonship by it; And in fine its making
use of the word regenerated to signify Baptized: As is evident for the Greek
Writers from what was but now quoted out of Justin Martyr, De vita B. Martini
c. 1. Necdum tamen regeneratus in Christo agebat quendam bonis operibus
Baptismatis candidatum.
and from Sulpitius Severus among the Latins. Which things put together make it
yet more clear, that whatever it may be now accounted, yet the Church of God
ever looked upon the Sacrament of Baptism as a mean of our internal
regeneration.

And indeed as it is hard to believe, that it ought to be otherwise esteemed,
considering what has been alleged either from Scripture, or the declarations
of the Church; So it will appear to be yet harder, if we consider the opinion
of the Jews concerning that, which may seem to have been both it is Type, and
exemplar. For as I have made it appear before Part 1.
, that even they were not without their Baptism, and such a one, as was
moreover intended for the same general ends, for which both their Circumcision
was, and our Baptism is; So I have made it appear also Ibid.
, that the persons so baptized among them were accounted as persons newborn,
yea so far, that after that time they were not to own any of their former
relations; In fine, that that new birth was looked upon as so singular, that it
gave occasion to their Cabalistical Doctors to teach, that the old soul of the
Baptized Proselyte vanished, and a new one succeeded in its place. For if this
was the condition of that Type of Christian Baptism, how much more of the
Antitype thereof? Especially when it is farther probable (as has been also
Part 2.
noted from the discourse of our Savior to Nicodemus) that he both alluded in
it to that Baptism of theirs, and intimated the conformity of his own Baptism
to it in that particular.

And though after so full an evidence of this relation of Baptism to
regeneration it may seem hardly worth our while to allege the expressions of
the Heathen concerning it; Yet I cannot forbear, for the conformity thereof to
the present argument, to take notice of one remarkable one of Lucian Lucian.
Philopatr. p. 999. (...).
, who brings in one Triepho thus discoursing after his scoffing manner. But
when (says he) that Galilean lighted upon me, who had a bald Pate, a great
Nose, who ascended up to the third Heaven, and there learned the most excellent
things (meaning, as is supposed S. Paul) he renewed us by water, made us to
tread in the footsteps of the blessed, and delivered us from the Regions of the
ungodly. In which passage under the title of renewing men by water he
personates the Christian Doctrine concerning their being regenerated, or
renewed by Baptism, and accordingly makes it the subject of his reproach.

PART VII. Of our Union to the Church by Baptism.
The Contents. Of the relation of the sign of Baptism to our Union to the
Church, and that relation shown to be no less than that of a means, whereby
that Union is made. This evidenced in the first place from the declarations of
the Scripture, more particularly from its affirming all Christians to be
baptized into that Body, as those, who were first baptized after the descent of
the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, to have been thereby added to their company,
and made partakers with the rest in the Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship, in
breaking of Bread, and in Prayers. The like evidence of the same Union to the
Church by Baptism from the declarations of the Church it self, and the
consequences of that Union shown to be such, as to make that also to be
accounted one of the inward, and spiritual Graces of that Baptism, by which it
is made.

HAving thus given an account of such inward, and spiritual Graces of Baptism,
as tend more immediately to our spiritual, and eternal welfare; It remains that
I say somewhat of that, which though of no such immediate tendency, yet is not
without all, because qualifying us for the reception of the other: That Union I
mean, which we thereby obtain to Christ's mystical body the Church, and by
which we, who were before Aliens from it, as well as from God, and Christ,
become members of the Church, and partakers of the several privileges thereof.
Which Union if any Man scruple to reckon among the inward, and spiritual Graces
of Baptism properly so called, I will not contend with him about it; Provided
he also allow of it as a thing signified by it on the part of God, and Christ,
and as moreover a Grace, and favor to the person, on whom it is bestowed. For
as that is all I ask at present concerning the Union now in question; So what I
farther mean by it is being an inward, and spiritual Grace shall be cleared in
the process of this Discourse, and receive that establishment, which it
requires. In order whereunto I will show the outward and visible sign of
Baptism to be a means, whereby that Union is made, and then point out the
consequences of that Union.

That the outward visible sign of Baptism is in the nature of a means, whereby
we are united to the Church, will appear if we reflect upon what the Scripture
has said concerning it; or the agreeing declarations of the Church it self.
For what else (to begin with the former) can S. Paul 1 Cor. 12.13.
be thought to mean, where he affirms all whether Jews, or Gentiles, or of what
ever other outward differences, to have been baptized by one spirit into one
body? For as it is plain from the foregoing 1 Cor. 12.12.
verse, or verses, that S. Paul entreats of Christ's Body the Church, and
consequently that the baptizing here spoken of must be meant of our Baptizing
into it; So it is alike plain from what it was designed to prove, as well as
from the natural force of the expression, that it was set to denote also our
being united to it thereby. For as we cannot impose a more natural sense upon
Baptized into that body, than our being received by Baptism into it, as the
Baptized person is within the water, and conseqently some way united to it; So
much less if we consider what it was intended to prove, even 1 Cor. 12.12.
that Christians, how many soever, are but that one body. For how does their
being baptized into it prove them to be that one Body, but that that visible
sign, by which they are so, unites them to one another, and to the whole? A
mere sign of Union, though it may show what the partakers thereof ought to be,
yet being no just proof of what they are, and much less (as S. Paul seems to
argue) that they are so by the means of it. And indeed, as it will therefore be
hard to make the sign here spoken of to be any thing less than a means of our
Union to the Church; So especially, if we consider what is elsewhere said
concerning those, who first after the descent of the Holy Ghost, were baptized
in the name of Christ: S. Luke not only affirming of those new baptized ones,
that they were added to Acts 2.41.
the Apostles, and their other company, (which he afterward expresses Acts
2.47.
by added to the Church) but that they were partakers Acts 2.42.
with the rest in the Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of
bread, and in Prayers. For this shows their having an interest in all the
privileges of that Body, and therefore much more their being united to it. But
so it appears that the Ancient Church esteemed of it, whose determination is of
the more force, because it is only about the supposed means of Union to its own
Body; Justin Martyr, after he had spoken of the baptizing of such as offered
themselves to the Christian Church (which he himself expresses, when so
baptized, by (...), or conjoined with themselves) affirming that they were
immediately brought where the brethren were assembled, there to partake with
them of the common Prayers, that were then offered up, of the kiss of peace,
and of the Lord's Supper. Which last particular I have the more confidently
represented the new baptized persons as then admitted to, because the same
Father does not only make no distinction between them, and the other brethren
in it, though he subjoyns the business of the Eucharist to the former Prayers,
and kiss of peace, but affirms the same Eucharist presently after to be lawful
to none to partake of, but those that believed their Doctrine, received the
laver of regeneration, and lived as Christ delivered. For as he intimates
thereby the admission of those that believed, and were baptized, if they were
also such as lived as Christ delivered, which the new baptized were in reason
to be accounted, till they had given proof to the contrary; So there is reason
to believe from the use of Excommunication in the Church, that that addition of
living as Christ delivered was not made to bar the new baptized from it, till
they gave farther proof of such a life, but to intimate the exclusion of those,
who, after they had been admitted to it, lived otherwise, than Christianity
prescribed: So making the persons excluded the unbaptiz'd, or ill living
Christians, and consequently the contrary thereto admitted. I deny not indeed,
that the Rite of Confirmation did very anciently come between the receiving of
Baptism, and the Eucharist. I deny not farther, because of what was before
Expl. of the Sacrament in general. Part 4.
quoted from Justin Martyr concerning the particular Prayer that was made for
the new baptized person, that the substance thereof was then in use, even
prayer for grace for him to live as he had but now professed. But as the design
of Confirmation appears to have been to procure for the new baptized a more
plentiful effusion of God's Graces, which is no intimation at all of his having
been before no perfect Christian, or not perfectly united to the Church, so
Baptism may for all that be looked upon as the means of our Union to the
Church, which is all, that I have taken upon me to assert. For the farther
evidencing whereof I will in the next place allege a passage of Tertullian De
Bapt. c. 6.
, which will, though not so directly, prove the same thing; That I mean where
he says, that when the profession of our faith, and sponsion of our salvation
are pledged under the three witnesses before spoken of, there is necessarily
added thereto the mention of the Church, because where those three are, even
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, there is also the Church, which is the body of
the Three. For as it is evident from thence, that Men were even from his time
baptized expressly into the belief of the Church, as well as into the belief of
the Trinity; So it will not be difficult to infer, that they were also
baptized into the unity thereof, and made members of the Church by it: Because
as he affirms the Trinity to become Sponsors of our Salvation in Baptism, as
well as either Witnesses, or objects of our Profession; So he affirms those
Sponsors to be as it were emboyed in the Church, and consequently to exert
their saving influences within it, which supposes Men's being united to it by
Baptism in order to their partaking of the salutariness of the other. And
indeed, though in that form, which our Savior prescribed Matt 28.19.
for Baptism, there is mention only of baptizing in the name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, yet inasmuch as he prescribed that very form for the
making of Disciples Ibid.
by, he must consequently be supposed to propose it for the aggregating them to
that body, which he had already begun to frame, and making them alike members
of it.

There being therefore no doubt to be made of the outward visible sign of
Baptism being a means of our Union to Christ's mystical body the Church, it may
not be amiss (if it were only to manifest the great advantages thereof, as to
that particular) to show the consequences of that Union. Which we shall find in
the general to be a right to all those privileges, which Christ has purchased
for it; More particularly to the partaking of its Sacred Offices, and in, and
through the means of them of those inward, and spiritual Graces, which those
Sacred Offices were intended to procure, or convey. For every member of a
Society being by that membership of his entitled to all the privileges, that
belong to it as such; He, who becomes a member of Christ's Body, the Church (as
every Man, who is united to it by Baptism, does) must in his proportion be
entitled to all those privileges, which Christ has purchased for it, and
particularly to the privilege of partaking of its sacred Offices, and in, and
by the means of them, of those inward and spiritual Graces, which those sacred
Offices were intended to procure, or convey. Which how great a commendation it
is of our Union to that Body, and consequently of that Baptism, by which it was
made, will need no other proof than the Scripture's assuring us that Christ is
the Savior Ephesians. 5.23.
of that Body, and the promises it makes to those Prayers Matt. 18.19, 20.
, that are made by it, and to that Euchrist Matt. 26.26, etc.
, which is administered in it; The purport of those promises being no other,
than the granting what is asked by it, and particularly all those benefits,
which Christ's Body and Blood were intended for the procuring of. And if these
be, as no doubt they are, the consequences of our union to the Church by
Baptism, yea so far (as I have elsewhere Expl. of the Creed, Art. of The
forgiveness of sins.
shown) that they are not ordinarily to be attained out of it; That very Union
may not improperly be styled one of its inward and spiritual Graces, because
leading to those, that are most strictly such, and indeed the only ordinary
means of obtaining them.

PART VIII. Of the Profession that is made by the Baptized person.
The Contents. The things signified by Baptism on the part of the baptized
brought under consideration, and shown from several former discourses (which
are also pointed to) to be an Abrenunciation of sin, a present belief of the
Doctrine of Christianity, and particularly of the Trinity, and a resolution for
the time to come to continue in that belief, and act agreeably to its Laws. Our
resolution of acting agreeably to the Laws of Christianity more particularly
considered, and the Profession thereof shown by several Arguments to be the
intendment of the Christian Baptism. What the measure of that conformity is,
which we profess to pay to the Laws of Christianity, and what are the
consequences of the Violation of that Profession.

HAving thus considered the things signified by Baptism on the part of God, and
Christ, best known by the name of its inward, and spiritual Graces; It remains
that I give the like account of the things signified by it on the part of the
baptized, or the things the baptized person makes Profession of by it. Which,
as was before observed, are an Abrenunciation of sin, a present belief of the
Doctrine of Christianity, and a resolution for the time to come to continue in
that belief, and act agreeably to its Laws.

That something is signified by Baptism on the part of the baptized, as well as
on the part of God, and Christ, is evident from what was before said Of the
Sacrament in general, Part 2.
concerning the nature of a Sacrament in the general, and Baptism's Ibid.
relating as well to something to be performed by the baptized, as to those
divine Graces, or privileges which we expect from the other.

That the things before mentioned are the things thus signified by it, has
also been elsewhere Expl. of the Aposties Creed.
declared, and so, that it would not be difficult for a diligent Reader to
satisfy himself from thence. But because what I have said concerning them lies
dispersedly in my former Discourses, and would therefore require more pains,
than I ought to impose upon my Reader, to find it out, and apply it to the
present Argument; I will here, though very briefly, consider them anew, and if
not (which would be too tedious) repeat all that I have said concerning them,
yet point him as I go to the particular places, from whence they may be fetched.

That Abrenunciation of sin is one of the things signified by Baptism is not
only evident from the manner of administering it in the Primitive times, and
which together with the form of their Abrenunciation, and our own are set down
in my account of the Preliminary questions, and answers of the Catechism, but
also from the general tenor of that Religion, which Baptism is an initiation
into; That requiring the renouncing of all sin, and wickedness, and therefore
supposing the baptized person to do so, when he takes that Religion upon him.
For which cause as an express Abrenunciation was heretofore required, and
continues so to be to this very day; So it was signified, as by other Rites,
and particularly by the baptized persons putting off his clothes in order to
his Baptism, as putting off together with them the Old Man, and his deeds, so
by the Rite of Baptism it self: He, who submits to that, implying thereby his
looking upon sin as a Moral impurity, and which therefore for the future he
would not have any thing to do with.

The second thing signified by Baptism on the part of the baptized is his
present belief of the Doctrine of Christianity, more especially of the Doctrine
of the Trinity. As is evident from that Baptism's being commanded by our
Savior to be made in, or into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost. For to be baptized into the name of those persons importing the
owning of those persons as our Masters Expl. of the Creed. Art. I believe in
the Holy Ghost.
, and our selves as the Disciples of them; To be so baptized moreover importing
the owning of those persons as alike Ibid.
Masters of us, and consequently, because the Father cannot be owned in any
lower relation, as partakers of the same divine Nature, and Authority; Lastly,
to be so baptized importing the owning of them in particular by a belief of the
Christian Doctrine, that being the most signal instance of that Discipleship,
we receive by it; The belief of the Doctrine of Christianity, and of the
Trinity in particular must be looked upon as signified by Baptism on the part
of the baptized, and those baptized ones consequently as making profession of
that belief by it. For which cause as the rule of Faith, or the Creed Introd.
concerning Catechizing, etc.
was given to those to learn, who were willing to be initiated into
Christianity, so they were particularly interrogated Expl. of the Prel. Quest.
and Answers.
as to their belief of the Articles thereof, and then, and not till then
baptized into it, and the privileges thereof.

The third and last thing signified on the part of the baptized is a resolution
for the time to come to continue in the belief of Christianity, and act
agreeably to its Laws. Both which will receive a sufficient confirmation from
S. Peter's affirming Baptism to be the Answer, or stipulation of a good
conscience toward God, and from what I have elsewhere Ibid.
said concerning it. For as it is evident from thence, that Baptism signifies
on the part of the baptized a stipulation, or promise of somewhat to be done by
him; So it will not be difficult to infer from thence, that it signifies also
a stipulation, or promise to continue in that belief of Christianity, into
which he is baptized, and act agreeably to its laws. As will appear, whether we
consider that stipulation as having a good conscience toward God for the object
of it (in which sense I should think S. Peter ought to be understood) or, as I
find many others to do, as proceeding from such a conscience. For a good
conscience having a due regard to the several parts of that Religion, which it
makes profession to espouse; He, who with relation to Christianity stipulates
from a good conscience, or makes that good consoience the object of his
stipulation, must consequently be thought to stipulate, or make a promise of
answering the several parts of it, and therefore also (because they are parts
of Christianity) of continuing in its Faith, and acting agreeably to its Laws.
And hence, (as was before Expl. of the Sacrament in general, Part 1.
observed) this, and the other Institution of our Religion had of old the name
of Sacraments, as importing a Vow, or promise to Christ of believing in him, or
obeying him. And hence also, that the Ancients argued Ibid.
the unlawfulness of superinducing an humane, or military Sacrament upon a
divine one, and answering to another Master after Christ. Which we shall the
less need to wonder at, if we remember that that Baptism, whereof we speak, was
copyed from the Baptism of the Jews Expl. of Baptism, Part 1.
, and particularly from that of John the Baptist. For concerning the former of
these it has been observed Ibid.
, that those three men, that presided over it, leaned over the baptized persons
as they stood in the water, and twice explained to them some of the more
weighty, and lighter precepts of their Law. For what reason think we, but to
let them know, that they were baptized into the obedience of the one, and the
other, and that they accounted that Baptism of their's as a Profession of it?
And though we do not find the like affirmed concerning the Baptism of John the
Baptist, which because an extraordinary one, and immediately from Heaven, I
have distinguished from the other; Yet, which will come all to one, we find it
entitled the Baptism of Repentance Mark 1.4. Acts 13.14.
, and (which is more) that Baptist enjoining upon those Publicans Luke 3.12,
etc.
, who came to be baptized by him, to exact no more than was appointed them, as
upon those Soldiers, that came upon the like errand, to do violence to no man,
to accuse no man falsely, and to be content with their wages: Such affirmations
as these being pregnant proofs, that a resolution of living piously, and
virtuously was a thing signified on the part of the baptized, and that their
taking upon them the former Baptisms was a profession of it. Now if that
Profession were the intendment of the former Baptisms, and particularly of that
of John the Baptist, why not also of the Baptism of Christ? Especially, when
John's Baptism of Repentance was to prepare men for the Kingdom of Christ, and
to which therefore we may suppose a stricter piety to belong, and they, who
were baptized into that Kingdom, plunged more deeply into the Profession of the
other. I will conclude this affair, when I have added, that it appears from the
Institution of Baptism, that the design, and end of it was to make Disciples
Matt. 28.19.
unto Christ. For it appearing from other words of his, that they, and they
alone can be his Disciples, who take up their Cross Luke 14.27.
, and follow him, forsake all Luke 14.33.
for him, and in fine abide Joh. 8.31.
in his words; If the design, and end of Baptism were to make men Disciples
unto Christ, it must consequently oblige those, who take it upon them, to take
upon them also the performance of the other, as to which that Discipleship
obliges them.

Now though therefore there can be no great doubt concerning the baptized
person's making profession of acting agreeably to the Laws of Christ, yet there
may be as to the measure of that conformity to them, to which his Baptismal
Profession obliges him; That imperfect state, wherein we are, and the baptized
person's being from the beginning Expl. of the Lords Prayer in the words, Our
Father, etc.
taught to pray for the forgiveness of his Trespasses seeming to require an
abatement of it; And because too I have more than once obliged my self to
enquire, what keeping of God's holy Will, and Commandments, is incumbent upon
us from our Baptismal Profession, and that Christianity, which it enters us
into; Therefore for the farther clearing this part of our Baptismal Profession,
as well as for the answering my own obligations, I will now set my self to
enquire, what the measure of that conformity is, which we profess to pay to the
Laws of Christ, and what are the consequences of the violation of that
Profession.

As concerning the former of these I shall not doubt to affirm it to be
adaequate for the matter of it to the several species of those Laws, which
Christianity obliges us to; S. Paul having expressly told us Tit. 2.11, 12.
, that that Grace, which brings salvation, teaches men to deny all ungodly,
and worldly lusts, and to live righteously, godlily and soberly in the present
World. I shall not stick to affirm, Secondly, that that Conformity, which we
make profession of, ought to answer so far as we can carry it, the several
particularities of the Christian Laws, as well as the several species thereof:
Less than that being not to be supposed to be the Profession of those, who make
profession of a good Conscience toward God; A good Conscience, as such,
prompting him in whom it is to conform so far as he can to every particular of
his Law, to whom he professes an obedience. But neither Thirdly shall I stick
to affirm, that that conformity, which we make profession of, ought to be so
entire, and full, as not to be interrupted at any time by a wilful violation of
any Law, or a violation of them in scandalous instances; Such as those are,
concerning which S. Paul has affirmed Ga^. 5 2^.
, that they, which do such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: He
answering not the divine law, so far as he can, who proceeds to either of
those, because the Grace of Baptism, with a moderate care, must be supposed to
be of sufficient force to preserve men both from the one, and the other. Such I
take to be the Conformity, which Christianity obliges us to, and which
consequently the baptized person must be supposed to make profession of. And I
would to God, that as all Christians make profession of such a one, so their
lives, and conversations were more answerable to it, than the experience both
of our selves and others assures us it is. But as the contrary thereof is too
apparent to need any farther proof, so I think it therefore but reasonable, for
the better awaking of those baptized ones, to set before them in the next place
the consequences of the violation of their profession.

Whereof the first, that I shall assign, is, that so far as they depart from
that Profession of theirs, so far forth they sin against that very Baptism of
theirs, which was intended for their recovery from sin, and against that saving
Religion, into which it admits them: That Baptism, which enjoins upon them the
making profession of a good Conscience, enjoining consequently the answering
that profession by a suitable piety, as without which that Profession would be
but an hypocritical one. From whence as it will follow, that there will be
little reason to believe, that they shall enjoy the benefits of Baptism, who
answer not the Profession of it; So much less if we consider what that was,
that made their Profession to be of any avail at the first, even the
presumption it gave, that the person, that made it, would (as occasion offered
it self) give suitable demonstrations of it. For if that presumption were the
thing, which made the Profession of a good Conscience to be of any avail at the
first; Those demonstrations failing, those benefits must be supposed to fail,
which were collated upon the presumption of them. But from thence it will
follow Thirdly, that they, who answer not their former profession, can much
less promise to themselves farther spiritual blessings here, or an interest in
the other World; They, who could not be admitted to the first privileges of
Baptism but upon a presumption of their future piety, being much less likely to
be admitted to the participation of others, after that presumption appears to
be null. It will follow Lastly, that they who answer not the Profession of
Baptism by a piety suitable to it, must consequently fail altogether of the
benefits thereof, if that Christianity, into which it entered them, had not
provided them of a remedy against the violations of their Profession. Which,
though it will not make the case of those violatiors desperate, yet will show
it to be so dangerous, as to oblige all, who have a care of their Salvation, to
prevent what they may such violations of it, or endeavor to repair them
afterward by a speedy, and severe repentance, and a more fixed, and settled
piety: Lest, as it may sometime happen, they be cut off before they can make
use of the remedy proposed, or by reason of their former violations have not
the grace given them to do it.

PART IX. Of the right Administration of Baptism.
The Contents. After a short account of the Foundation of the Baptismal
relation, and reference made to those places from which a larger one may be
fetched; Enquiry is made touching the right Administration of Baptism, as
therein again First, Whether Baptism ought expressly to be made in the name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Secondly whether Schismatics, and Heretics
are valid Administratours of it, Thirdly, to what, and what kind of persons it
ought to be administered, Fourthly, Whether it may be repeated. The two first of
these spoken to here, and first, Whether Baptism ought to be expressly
administered in the form proposed. Which is not only shown to be under
obligation from the express words of the Institution, but answer made to those
Texts, which seem to intimate it to be enough to baptize in the name of the
Lord Jesus only. The Baptism of Schismatics, and Heretics more largely shown
to be valid, unless where they baptize into a counterfeit Faith, and the
several objections against it answered.

I Have hitherto entreated of the outward visible sign of Baptism, of its
inward and spiritual Grace, or the things signified by it, and the farther
relation that outward sign bears to them. It follows that I entreat of the
foundation of that relation, the Fourth thing proposed to be considered.

Now as the Foundation of that relation has been shown Expl. of the Sacrament
in general, Part 2.
to be no other, than the Institution of Christ, as that again not so much as
delivered by him, as applied to that water in which it is subjected; So I have
in the same discourse said Ibid. Part 2, 3.
so much concerning the Institution of this, and the application of that
Institution to the outward visible sign thereof, that I shall need to say the
less here. It may suffice briefly to observe from thence, that when the
Minister has prepared the water of Baptism by a declaration of the end of its
Institution, and by imploring the Holy Spirit on it, Christ, who has promised
to be with him in that ministration of his, gives it the relation of the
Sacrament of Baptism, and consequently makes it apt to convey the several
graces thereof to those, who are to partake of it. Which will leave little more
for us to consider, as to the Sacrament of Baptism, than the right
Administration of it, or what may without any violence be reduced to it.

Now there are Four things, which are especially to be inquired in order to the
clearing of that, which is now before us.

I. Whether Baptism ought expressly to be administered in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. II. Whether Schismatics, and
Heretics are valid Administratours of it. III. To what, and what kind of
persons it ought to be administered. IV. Whether it may be repeated.
I. The ground of the first of these, even whether Baptism ought expressly to be
administered in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
is not any the least doubt of those being the express words of the Institution,
or of their not admitting, considered in themselves, of any variation from it,
but the accounts we have from the Scripture of the administration of that
Sacrament either by the hands, or at the command of the Apostles, and other
such inspired men: Those seeeming to intimate it to be enough to baptize in the
name of the Lord Jesus, as comprehending within it an acknowledgement of the
other two persons, and indeed of all other the substantial Articles of his
Faith, in whose name we are so baptized. For thus when those Jews, to whom S.
Peter Preached on the day of Pentecost, were wrought upon so far, as to ask
what they ought to do in order to their Salvation; S. Peter's answer was Acts
2.38.
that they should be baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus: Which accordingly
we may believe to have been done by those, that gladly received the word,
because it is afterward Acts 2.41.
said of them, that they were baptized, that is, as one would think, in that,
and that only name, which had been prescribed. Thus again it is said Acts 8.16.
of those, who had been baptized by Philip at Samaria, that they were baptized
in the name of the Lord Jesus, without any the least hint of their being
baptized in any other name: As in like manner Acts 10.47.
, that S. Peter gave order for the baptizing of Cornelius, and his company,
after that the Holy Ghost had by his preaching descended upon them. In fine
thus we find, that the Disciples of Ephesus Acts 19.5.
were, who it seems till that time had not only no gifts of the Holy Ghost upon
them, but not so much as any knowledge, whether there were any Holy Ghost, or
no. Which place is the more to be stood upon, because those Disciples having
before so little knowledge of a Holy Ghost, one would think he that told the
story of their taking upon them the Christian Baptism at the hearing of what
was said to them by S. Paul, should have expressed that Baptism of theirs by
their being baptized into the belief of the Trinity, and particularly of that
Holy Ghost, which they seem before to have been ignorant of. But as we are not
lightly to think, nor indeed without an irrefiagable reason, that those first
Disciples of Christ made use of, or countenanced any other form of Baptism,
than what their Master had so clearly, and expressly prescribed; So there is
nothing of any such moment in the places before alleged to persuade their
making use of, or giving countenance to any other. On the contrary the Text
last mentioned, if taken in all its parts, seems rather to persuade those
Disciples having been baptized in the very words of the Institution, than only
in the name of the Lord Jesus. For S. Paul asking, as by way of wonderment,
unto what they had been before baptized, if they had not (as they said) so much
as heard of any Holy Ghost, seems to intimate that all, that then received the
Christian Baptism, could not but know from the very form of it, that there was
such a thing as a Holy Ghost. Neither will it avail to say, as was before
objected, that if that had been S. Paul's intention, or the certain form of
Baptism, S. Luke, who tells the story, should in reason have expressed it by
their being baptized into the Trinity, and particularly into the name of him,
whom they were before so ignorant of. Because S. Luke's business was not so
much to give an account of the form of their Baptism, as to acquaint us, that
whereas before they had been only baptized into John's Baptism, upon their
understanding from S. Paul, that John himself directed those, that came to it,
to believe on him that should come after him, that is on Christ Jesus, they
were then expressly baptized into the Baptism of Christ, or (as S. Luke there
expresses it) into the name of Jesus Christ: So opposing the baptizing into
the name of Jesus Christ not to the baptizing in any other form, and
particularly into the name of all the three persons, but to the Baptism of John
only, and as the name of Jesus Christ might discriminate their present Baptism
from it. And though it be true, that the like is not to be said as to the
foregoing Texts, because there is no opposition in them between the Baptism of
John, and that of Christ. Yet may a fair account be given, without supposing
that to have been the form of Baptism, of the Scriptures expressing those
primitive Baptisms by baptizing into the name of Jesus only; Because our
Savior was the immediate Author of that Religion, into which those Baptisms
were made, and the baptizing into his name therefore no improper expression of
a baptizing into the whole of it, and into every part, and particle thereof. I
will conclude this affair, when I have added that as it appears from Justin
Martyr (...). Apolog. 2. p. 94.
one of the Antientest Writers the Church has, that Baptism was in his time
administered in the name of the three persons; So all, that have mentioned the
Creed, have represented it as a thing given to those, who were to be baptized,
and into which therefore we are to think, that if men were not minutely, and
particularly baptized, yet they were at least into the capital Articles thereof.

II. It appearing from the premises, that Baptism ought expressly to be
administered in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
which is the first of those things we proposed to consider; Pass we on to
enquire, who are valid Administrators of it, or rather whether Schismatics,
and Heretics are. A question which will best be voided by considering the
force of those Arguments, which the condemners of their Baptism have produced,
and particularly which S. Cyprian their chiefest Champion has. Now those are,
that Schismatics and Heretics, are by that their Schism, and Heresy deprived
of the Spirit of God themselves, and cannot therefore be supposed Quis autem
potest dare quod ipse non habeat? aut quomodo potest spiritalia agere, qui ipse
amiserit spiritum Sanctum? Ad Januarium. Ep. 70.
to conferr it upon others. That Schismatics, and Heretics, as such, are out
of the Church, and consequently can neither themselves enjoy any privileges
that belong Nam cum dicimus, Credis in vitam aeternam, and remissionem
peccatorum per Sanctam Ecclesiam, intelligimu^ remissionem peccatorum non nisi
in Ecclesia dari, apud Haereticos autem ubi Ecclesia non sit, non posse
peccatadimitti. Cypr. ubi supra, and alibipassim.
to it, nor be instrumental toward the procuring of them for others; That by
their Schism and Heresy they are sinners Sed and Baptizato quam precem potest
facere sacerdes sacrilegus, and peccator? Cum scriptum sit, Deus peccatorem non
audit, sed qui eum coluerit, and voluntatem ejus fecerit, illum audit. Cypr. Ib.
before God, and whom therefore we cannot suppose that God will hear for other
persons; In fine, that Heretics in particular deprave that Faith Vid. Cypr. ad
Jubaian. Ep. 73.
, into which Baptism is required to be made, and consequently must be supposed
to baptize into a a false, and counterfeit one. But how little force there is
in these Arguments, as to the invalidating the Baptism of Schismatics, or
Heretics, will appear upon a more narrow inspection into them.

For be it first that Schismatics and Heretics are by that Schism, or Heresy
of theirs deprived of the Spirit of God themselves; Be it that they cannot
therefore be supposed to conferr it upon others: Yet will it not from thence
follow, but they may be valid Administratours of Baptism, and they, who receive
it from them, receive the Spirit of God with it. Because that Spirit of God,
which goes along with Baptism, is not conferred by them, but by him, whose
Institution Baptism is, and consequently no way depending upon their having the
Spirit of God themselves. All, that the Minister confers on his part toward the
procuring of that Spirit, is to prepare that Baptismal Water, which it is by
the Institution of Christ to accompany, and to administer it, when so prepared,
to those who are to be baptized with it. Which if the Minister does according
to the Institution of Christ, there is no doubt the Spirit of God will follow
of course, whether he, who administers Baptism, partake of that Spirit, or no.
Otherwise a sinful Minister would be as invalid an Administrator of Baptism, as
the most Schismatical, or Heretical one.

But it may be there is more of weight in Schismatics, and Heretics being out
of the Church, and as such in no condition either of enjoying in themselves
those privileges, that belong to it, or being instrumental toward the
procuring of them for others. And so no doubt there would, if they were fully,
and perfectly out of the Church, nor retained in any measure to it. But how
first, if Schismatics, and Heretics were fully, and perfectly out of the
Church, could S. Cyprian Ad Quintum, Ep. 70.
himself allow the receiving of such without a new Baptism, who had after their
Baptism in the Church fallen into Schism, or Heresy? These, as they were no
less Schismatics, and Heretics than those, that were baptized by Heretics,
and consequently alike out of the Church; So being, if to be received again, to
be received after the same manner, that is to say by a new Baptism. Neither
will it avail to say (as that Father Ibid.
pleads for himself) that those, who have been baptized in the Church, are to
be looked upon as wandering sheep, and as such, when they return, to be received
into the Fold, whereas the other are wholly aliens, and profane. For if
Schismatics, and Heretics be fully, and perfectly out of the Church, those
also, what ever they before were, must cease to be looked upon as Sheep, and
consequently, if admitted, be admitted as aliens, and profane, as well as
those, who were baptized out of the Church. And indeed as it appears by the
same Father Ad Quintum, Ep. 71.
, that those who opposed him, and the Bishops that took part with him, argued
the validity of the Baptism of Heretics from the Churches receiving those
without a new one, who had fallen after her Baptism into Schism or Heresy; So
if we will allow the Baptism of the latter, we must allow the Baptism of the
former, or find out some other reason to overthrow it. For if the rightly
baptized Schismatic, or Heretic were a Sheep, though a wandering one,
notwithstanding his Schism, or Heresy; The Schismatic, or Heretic, whom that
wandering Sheep ran after, might as well be a Pastor, though a wandering one too,
and consequently be in a condition, following the order of the Institution, to
bring new Sheep to the great Shepherd, and Bishop of our Souls. That, which I
suppose occasioned that Father's mistake (for so I hope I may now have leave to
call it, because the Church of God has generally done so since) but that I
say, which occasioned S. Cyprian's mistake, was his not distinguishing between
being fully, and perfectly out of the Church (which I should think none but
Apostates can be, if they also are) and being only partly, and imperfectly so,
as Schismatics, and Heretics are. For as Schismatics, and Heretics must be
supposed to retain so far to the Church, as they do not separate from it in
Communion, or belief; So it is but a just piece of charity to think that Christ
who knows men's infirmities, and prejudices, will not invalidate such acts of
theirs, as are purely charitable ones, and wherein moreover they consent with
the Church of God (whatever they may do as to other things) and with his own
blessed Institution. I deny not indeed, but that to be even so out of the
Church, as Schismatics, and Heretics are, is a very dangerous thing, and does
without a special mercy of God make them liable to Damnation. But as I do not
therefore think, that we ought to look upon it as a desperate one; So there may
be so much of honest simplicity of mind even in them, and a readiness to
embrace the truth, whenever they are convinced of it, that Christ, who laid
down his life for the worst of men, may so far at least consider them, as to
give his blessing to those acts of theirs, which are both charitable in
themselves, and managed with a just consent to his own institution, and the
practice too of that Church, from which in other things they have departed.

And this answer, with a little variation, will furnish one to that objection,
which represents Schismatics and Heretics as sinners before God, and whom
therefore we cannot suppose God will hear for the person to be baptized. For
though I grant that such persons are sinners before God, yea that whatever they
do by way of separation from the Church is to be looked upon as of the same
nature, and consequently that their very baptizing also may be; Yet as I do not
think that every thing, that is sinfully done, is therefore invalid (for so for
ought I know many true Churchmens good actions also might be) So Christ may
hear even such persons, when they act agreeably to his own Institution, both
for the regard he bears to that, and for that honest simplicity, and good
meaning, which is, if not in them that administer Baptism, yet in those that
join with them, and whose Minister I have before said Expl. of the Sacram.
ingen. Part. 3
the Consecratour to be in that affair.

One only Objection remains on the part of Heretics, and that is their
depraving that Faith, into which Baptism is required to be made, and
consequently thereto, as is supposed, baptizing into a false, and counterfeit
one. And I no way doubt that, if Heretics baptize into a false, and
counterfeit Faith, their Baptism is null, because contrary to that Institution,
which gives validity to all. Upon which account we must look upon the Baptism
of those persons as null, who have baptized in any other form, than in the name
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Of which sort was that of the Heretics
spoken of by Irenaeus Adv. Haeres. li. 1. c. 18.
, who instead of baptizing according to the form of the institution, did
baptize their Disciples into the name of the unknown Father of all things, into
truth the Mother of all things, into him that descended into Jesus for the
union, and redemption, and communion of powers. To which others it seems added
certain Hebrew names, the better to amuse those, that were initiated by them.
The like may reasonably enough be thought of the Baptism of many other of the
Ancient Heretics, although we have not it may be so certain grounds from
Antiquity for their depraving the very form of Baptism. For being, as appears
from their tenants, Christians in name, rather than in reality, and beside that
advancing such uncouth, and monstrous ones, it is not easy to think they
should have such a regard to Christ, or his Institution, as to keep to that
form, which he prescribed. Which supposed, there is not the least difficulty in
giving an account of those 46 (...);
and 47 (...), etc.
. Canons of the Apostles, which do so far reprobate the Baptism of Heretics,
as to require a reiteration of it. For if the Heretics there intended were
such as are before described (as is not unreasonable to believe even from the
words of the Canons themselves) there is no doubt their Baptism was, and ought
to be looked upon as null, because deviating from that Institution, which gives
validity to all. But because it appears from a passage of S. Augustine Caeterum
quis nes^it non esse Baptismum Christi, si verba Evangelica, quibus symbolum
constat, illic defuerint? Sed facilius inveniuntur haeretici, qui omnino non
baptizant, quam qui illis verbis non baptizant. De Bapt. contra Donat. li. 6.
c. 25.
, that whatever the antienter Heretics did, yet later ones, or at least for
the most part kept to the words of the Institution; Therefore we must go on to
enquire, whether Heretics may not however, be presumed to baptize into a
false, and counterfeit Faith, even that which they themselves advance, and
consequently give such a Baptism as is null, and void. And to speak my mind
freely, though with submission to better judgments, I conceive such Heretics
may be presumed to do it, who advance a Heresy, that directly, and manifestly
contradicts the Faith of Baptism, and particularly the Faith of the Holy
Trinity. Which I do in part upon the Authority of the Nicene Council Can. 19.
, and in part also upon the Authority of Reason. For though there be not the
least presumption, that the followers of Paulus Samosatenus made use of any
other form of Baptism, than the Catholics did; Though there be some
presumption on the contrary, that they made use of the very same form, because
though they denied a Trinity of Persons, yet they asserted one, and the same
God to be rightly entitled by the names of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; Yet did
the Nicene Council notwithstanding, (because of their direct, and manifest
denial of the Trinity, and their affirming Christ to be a mere Man) so far
disallow their Baptism, as to require the reiteration of it. As indeed why
should it not, when those Paulianists did so directly and manifestly contradict
the sense of that form, whereby they pretended to proceed? That direct, and
manifest contradiction of theirs proclaming to the World, that though they
baptized in the same form of words with the Orthodox, yet in a perfectly
different sense, and consequently departed alike from that Institution, which
was to give force to it. I say not the same of the Baptism of the Arians, where
they made use of the same form of words, which the Institution prescribed, as
it is certain that many De Arianis, qui propria sua lege utuntur, ut
baptizentur placuit. Si ad Ecclesiam aliqui de hac haerisi venerint,
interrogent eos fidei nostrae sacerdotes symbolum. Et si perviderint in Patre,
Filio, and Spiritu sancto eos baptizatos, manus eis tantum imponatur, ut
accipiant spiritum sanctum, etc. Council. Arel. c. 8.
of them did; Partly because the Church received those, that had been so
baptized by them without any new Baptism; And partly because neither so
directly, and manifestly contradicting the Doctrine of the Trinity by their
own, nor varying from the prescribed form, as some other of them did, they may
be reasonably presumed to have left the form by them used to its proper sense,
whatever that was, and to what he, who prescribed it, did intend it. Which
supposed, what should hinder Christ from giving force to that Baptism, which is
so administered by them? These, as they do not at all vary from the Institution
of Christ, so in this particular, even in the application of the Baptismal
water to the Baptized parties, acting not in their own, or in their peoples
names, but in the name of Christ, and who therefore may the rather be supposed
to give force and virtue to it. The result of the premises is this. A Heretic
is indeed obliged to baptize into the truly Christian Faith, neither can any
man otherwise promise force from that act of his. But if he baptize into that
faith (as he may even whilst he continues such) his Baptism is valid, neither
can any man doubt of a blessing from it, who comes prepared for it, and, when
he comes to know in what company he has been engaged, renounceth that, and
their Heresy, and both submits himself to the discipline of the Church, and
keeps to the communion of it.

PART X. Of the Baptism of those of riper years.
The Contents. To what, and what kind of persons Baptism ought to be
administered; Which, as to those of riper years, is shown to be unto all, that
come duly qualified for it. What those qualifications are, upon that account
inquired into, and Repentance, and Faith shown from the Sripture, as well as
from our own Catechism to be they. That Repentance, and Faith more particularly
considered, the definitions given of them by our Church explained, and
established, The former whereof is effected, by showing what Repentance does
presuppose, what it imports, and to what it does naturally dispose us: The
latter by showing what those promises are, which by the Catechism are made the
object of our Faith, or Belief, what that Belief of them does presuppose, what
is meant by a steadfast Belief of them, and what evidence there is of that being
the Faith, or Belief required to the receiving of Baptism.

III. BEing now to enquire, Question. What is required of persons to be
baptized?

Answer. Repentance whereby they forsake Sin, and Faith, whereby they
steadfastly believe the promises made to them in that Sacrament.


according to the method before laid down, to what, and what kind of persons
the Sacrament of Baptism ought to be administered, for my more advantageous
resolution thereof I will consider it first as to those of riper years, and
then as to Infants, and Children.

That I give the precedence to those of riper years, though such Baptisms as
those are little known among us, is because there is no doubt Baptism began
with them, and could not indeed have found any other entrance into the World;
The Baptism of Infants, in the opinion of those, who do most strongly assert
it, depending upon the Baptism of their Parents, or of those, who are in the
place of them. Of whom, if some had not been baptized in their riper years,
those Infants, that claimed by them, could not with reason have pretended to
it. Of those of riper years therefore I mean first to entreat, and show to
what, and what kind of persons among them the Sacrament of Baptism ought to be
administered.

Now as it is clear from our Savior's injunction Matt. 28.19.
of discipling, and baptizing all Nations, that none of what condition soever
are to be excluded from it, who are qualified, as Christianity requires, for
the receiving of it; So the only thing therefore farther necessary to be
inquired into on this Head, is how men ought to be qualified for it, or (as our
Catechism expresses it) what is required of them. For supposing those
praerequisites of Baptism, he who enjoins the discipling, and baptizing all
Nations, must consequently be supposed to enjoin the administering of it to all
such, in whom those praerequisites are.

Now there are two things again, as our Catechism instructs us, which are
required of all those, that are to be baptized; Repentance, whereby they
forsake sin, and Faith, whereby they steadfastly believe the promises made to
them in that Sacrament. And for these two things at least it has the
astipulation of the Scripture, and I may add also of that Profession, which is
made by the baptized person in Baptism, and which having before established, I
may now the more securely argue from. Witness, for the Scripture, S. Peter's
Acts 2.38.
enjoining those Jews, (who demanded of him, and the rest, what they ought to
do in order to their salvation) to repent, and so be baptized in the name of
the Lord Jesus; And Philip's replying upon the Eunuch, who asked what did
hinder him to be baptized, that if he believed Acts 8.37.
with all his heart, he might: Thereby more than intimating that, if he did
not, he could not be baptized at all, though all other things concurred to the
receiving of it. And indeed, what less can be supposed to be required of such
persons, when (as was before Expl. of Bapt. Part 8.
observed) the baptized person makes Profession in his Baptism of renouncing
all sin, and wickedness, and of a belief in that Jesus, into whose Religion he
is admitted? That Profession of his supposing Repentance, and Faith to have
been before in him, as without which otherwise he could not there make a
sincere Profession of renouncing sin, or of believing in the name of the Lord
Jesus. But so (that I may add that by the way) the Ancient Church appears to
have required, before she admitted men to the participation of Baptism; Justin
Martyr, where he professes to give a sincere account of her doings in this
affair, telling those he wrote his Apology to, that such as were persuaded, and
believed that the things taught and said by the Christians were true (...).
Apol. 2. p. 93.
and moreover took upon them so to live, were taught to pray, and ask of God
with fasting the forgiveness of their former sins, and then, and not till then
brought by them to the place of Baptism, and there regenerated after the same
manner with themselves. Which is so clear a proof of the Ancients believing
Repentance, and Faith to be prerequisites of Baptism, that nothing need to be
added to it.

For the clearing of the first of which we are to know, that though Repentance,
in strict speech, be nothing else than a sorrow of mind for those sins we stand
guilty of before God; Yet as even so it presupposes a right apprehension of
those sins, as without which we could never be brought to a due sorrow for
them, so taking Repentance (as our Catechism, and the Scripture also sometime
does) as one of the two prerequisites of Baptism (For S. Paul in one place Acts
20.21.
makes that Repentance, and Faith the sum of his Preaching to the Jews, and
Greeks, and in another Heb. 6.1.
the foundation of our Christianity) it will be found to imply in it whatsoever
that sorrow for sin does naturally dispose men to, as well as that sorrow it
self: The same S. Paul elsewhere professing that he showed both to the Jews,
and Gentiles, that they should turn unto God, as well as Repent; and do works
meet for Repentance, as well as either. To attain therefore a due understanding
of this Repentance, as well as to clear that definition of it, which our
Catechism has given us, it will be necessary for us to enquire what this
Repentance does presuppose, what it imports, and to what it does dispose us.

That, which Repentance does most manifestly presuppose, is a right
apprehension of that sin, about which it is to be conversant; And may be
fetched in part from the dictates of our own reason, but more especially from
the declarations of Christianity concerning it. Such as are, that sin is the
transgression of a Law, and particularly of that of God, and that, as such, it
justly exposes us to his wrath, and indignation: Partly, as it is a violation
of his Authority, to whom we are naturally subject, and partly as an equal
affront to his goodness, who gives us our being, and all things else, and who
therefore ought more diligently to have been attended to. In fine, that it has
for its wages Death both temporal, and eternal, and under each of which,
without the mercy of God in Christ, the sinner must necessarily fall. For as
these are known in part, from the dictates of our own reason to be the
properties of that sin, whereof we speak; So they are much more known to be so
from the Doctrine of Christianity, and consequently to be known by us toward a
right apprehension of that, which ought to be the matter of our sorrow.

But from hence it will be easy to collect, what that sorrow for sin does
import, which is required of all those, that take upon them the Profession of
Christianity. Even that it imports such a sorrow of mind, as has a regard to
the violation of God's Authority and Goodness by it, as well as to the evils
which are like to arise to it from our selves; Our sorrow being in reason to be
suited to that, which is most considerable in the object of it. And indeed, as
otherwise it will be rather a sorrow for punishment, than sin, because sin, as
such, is a transgression of God's Law, and consequently our sorrow for it to
have a more especial regard to the affront, that is offered him thereby; So it
will much less deserve those titles, which are given it by the Scripture of
being a sorrow, or repentance toward Acts 20.21.
God (for so it is sometime styled) and a sorrow 2 Cor. 7.9.
according to God, or a Godly one, as it also is: That being neither toward
God, nor according to God, which has not a regard to that affront, which is
offered to him by sin, as well as to the evils, which are like to accrue unto
our selves.

But because even such a sorrow will not qualify us for Baptism, unless we add
thereto what the same sorrow does naturally dispose us to; Therefore to make
out more fully the true nature of Repentance, as well as to clear our Churches
definition of it, I will proceed to that, and show what those things are. Of
which nature I reckon first an ingenuous confession of sin, and earnest prayer
to God for the pardon of it; Sorrow for sin, when considered only with
reference to its appendant punishment, being likely enough to dispose us so to
confess, and ask pardon of it, if it were only to unburthen our selves, and
free our selves by that, and prayer from the punishment we have deserved. How
much more then, when considered as a sorrow for that affront, which we have by
means of our sin offered to God's both Authority, and Goodness? He, to whom
such an affront is matter of sorrow, being likely enough to be thereby disposed
so far to acknowledge that Authority, and goodness, as to own them upon the
postfact by confession, and prayer for pardon: He who confesses, and asks
pardon of God, acknowledging that God had, and has an Authority to command,
and punish him, as he, who does the latter, that God is of equal goodness, as
of whom otherwise it would be in vain for him to ask pardon for his offenses.
Whence it was, that when the Church proceeded by strict, and safe measures, she
not only taught those, that offered themselves to Baptism, to ask of God with
fasting the forgiveness of their forepast offenses, but (as we learn from
Justin Martyr Vbisupra.
added her own prayers, and fasts to theirs, so the better to encourage, and
give force unto the others. I reckon of the same nature secondly, a resolution
to forsake sin, and pursue the contrary virtues. Which I do not only upon the
Authority of the forementioned Father, who reckons that Loco prius citato.
also as a prerequisite to Baptism, but as it is a thing, to which sorrow for
sin, does alike naturally dispose us; He, to whom sin is so irksome, needing no
other motive, than that irksomeness, to oblige him to forsake it, and pay a
more perfect submission to that Authority, and goodness of God, which he has
before so shamefully violated. I reckon thirdly, as a thing, to which sorrow
for sin does equally dispose us, a present forsaking of those sins, which we
are under a temptation to commit, as well as a resolution to do so for the time
to come; There being the same force in a due sorrow for sin to dispose men to
that, as there is to a resolution of afterward forsaking it. For which cause
the Ancient Church did not only refuse such persons Baptism, as were of any
unlawful Profession Introd. concern. Catech. etc.
, till they actually abandoned it, but made proof Ibid.
also for a considerable time of the resolutions of others, and, till they had
given her such proofs, did not admit them to it. They finding no doubt by
manifold experience, that many that offered themselves to Baptism, made little
Conscience afterward of avoiding those sins, which they had before so solemnly
resolved against, and made public profession of abandoning. And though it do
not appear, that the Apostles themselves took this course, they baptizing men
immediately upon the bare profession of their Repentance, and a resolution
afterward to bring forth fruits meet for it: Yet as the reason of that possibly
might be, either because of that exuberance of Grace, which was then bestowed
upon their new Converts or because, by means of their Ambulatory life, they
could not well deferr the Baptism of those, that offered themselves, till they
had made some considerable trial of them (which will exempt such Churches from
their example, where there is no such exuberance of Grace, and where moreover
they have settled Pastors to intend the affairs of them) So we cannot think the
Apostles would have ever given Baptism to such persons, as should before that
Baptism of theirs have fallen into those sins, which they erewhile made
profession of abandoning: Sorrow for sin, where it is hearty, and real, no
doubt disposing men as well to a present forsaking of it, as it does to a
resolution concerning it. Which will make the Repentance pre-required to
Baptism to be (as our Catechism expresses it) a Repentance, whereby as
occasion offers, we actually forsake sin, as well as resolve for the future to
abandon it.

An account being thus given of the first thing pre-requir'd to Baptism, and
our Churches definition of it both explained, and established; Pass we on to
that, which is alike pre-required to it, even that Faith, whereby we steadfastly
believe the promises made to us in that Sacrament. Where again I will enquire,
I. What those promises are, which we are so to believe. II. What that belief of
them does pre-suppose. III. What is meant by a steadfast belief of those
promises. IV. What evidence there is of that being the Faith, or belief, which
is pre-requir'd by Christianity to the receiving of that Sacrament.


I. Now though that Catechism, which I have chosen to explain, give no other
account of those Promises, than that they are such as are made to us in that
Sacrament; Yet is it not difficult to collect from thence, and from what is
before said concerning the Parts of a Sacrament, that the Catechism means no
other promises, than those which make a tender of its inward, and spiritual
Graces. For a Sacrament being before divided into an outward, and visible sign,
and an inward, and spiritual Grace as the only proper parts of it; And the
outward, and visible sign being in like manner represented in it as no farther
of value, than as conducing to possess us of the other: No other promises can
be supposed to be intended here, than such as make a tender of those inward,
and spiritual Graces, as which indeed are the only things considerable in it.
Which will consequently make the promises here intended to be those, which make
a tender for the present of remisssion of sins, and sanctification, and in the
end of everlasting life.

II. Those therefore being the promises, which are to be the object of the
Catechumens Faith, and which accordingly he is steadfastly to believe; It will
not be difficult to show, what that belief of them pre-supposeth, which is the
second thing to be inquired into. For that belief of them must at least
pre-suppose a belief of all that, which is necessary to bring us to the belief
of the other. More particularly it pre-supposeth, as to our selves, that we
believe our selves to be naturally under a state of sin, and death, as without
which there could be no place for that sanctification, and remission, which is
promised in Baptism; And that we are yet farther off from any title to
Everlasting life, as which if we had, there would have been no need of a
Promise in Baptism of it. It presupposes again as to Christ, in whom all the
promises of God are Yea, and Amen, a like steadfast belief that there was such a
person as Jesus Christ, and that he was appointed by God to convey such graces
to us; That, agreeably to the predictions of the Scripture, and the will of God
concerning him, he took upon him our nature, and suffered in it to purchase
those Graces, and that he ever since intends the exhibiting of what he has so
purchased; The belief of these, and the like Articles of our Faith being as
manifestly presupposed to the belief of those Promises, which in this place we
are required to intend.

III. That which will it may be more concern us to enquire, is what our
Catechism means by a steadfast belief of them. For my more orderly resolution
whereof I will enquire first what it means by belief, and then by a steadfast
one.

Now by belief may be meant either a simple assent of the mind, and in which
sense there is no doubt it is oftentimes taken in Christian Writers; Or there
may be meant also a belief with affiance, and such as beside the assent of the
mind, or understanding to them, does also connote a trust in them, or in God
because of them. By virtue of which (as I have elsewhere discoursed Expl. of
the Decal. Com. 1. Part 3.
concerning the grace of trust) the heart, or will is prompted to desire, as
well as assent to the matter of the divine promises, and acquiesce in those for
the obtaining of it. And indeed if we may judge any thing by our Homilies, (to
which the Articles Art. 11.
of our Church do also particularly referr us in the point of justifying Faith)
this latter belief must be here intended; Because a belief, which has for its
end the remission of sins in Baptism, and consequently a justifying one. For
the right, and true Christian Faith (says one of our Homily of Salvation. Part
3.
Homilies) is not only to believe that the Holy Scripture, and all the
forecited Articles of our Faith, are true, but also to have a sure trust, and
confidence in God's merciful promises to be saved from everlasting damnation by
Christ. And it is not only, says another Hom. of Faith.
, the common belief of the Articles of our Faith, but it is also a sure trust,
and considence of the mercy of God through our Lord Jesus Christ, and a
steadfast hope of all good things to be received at God's hands. In fine, says
the same Ibid.
Homily, the very sure, lively Christian faith is not only to believe all
things of God, which are contained in holy Scripture, but also to have an
earnest trust, and confidence in God, etc. Which supposed (as we may, because
we can have no more Authentic interpretation of it) to be the sense of the
belief here intended, it will not be difficult to show, what our Catechism
means by a steadfast one.

For considering the belief of these Promises as an Assent of the mind to them,
so a steadfast belief will imply that, which is free from all doubts, and which
the mind of man gives to those Promises without any the least fear of their
being any Collusion in them; Which the mind of man may well give, considering
whose those Promises are, and that they have both God, and Christ for the
Authors of them. On the other side, if we consider the belief intended as
including in it also an affiance, or trust, and by virtue of which the heart,
or will is prompted to desire, as well as believe the matter of those Promises,
and acquiesce in those Promises for the attaining of it; So this steadfast
belief will also imply such a one, as is firmly rooted in the heart, or will,
and can no more be rooted out of it by the force of temptations, than the other
by doubts, or scruples. And indeed, as I do not see how any other belief, than
that, can answer such glorious promises as are made to us in the Sacrament of
Baptism; so I see as little reason to doubt,

IV. What evidence there is of that being the Faith, or belief, which is
pre-requir'd by Christianity to the receiving of it. For though S. Luke may
seem to intimate by the account he gives of the Baptism of the Samaritans Acts
8.12.
, that they were baptized upon a simple belief of what Philip preached
concerning the things of the Kingdom of God; Yet he does much more clearly
intimate afterward, that Christianity required another sort of belief, and such
as was accompanied with an adherence of the will unto them: He making it the
condition of the Eunuch's Baptism afterward, that he should believe with all
his heart Acts 8.37.
; Which is an expression, that in the language of the Scripture referrs rather
to the will, and affections, than to the understanding, but however cannot well
be thought not to include them there, where the believing with all the heart is
required. And indeed, as I do not see, considering the Doctrine of our First
Reformers, why this notion of Faith should be so exploded, as it seems to me
lately to have been; As I do much less see why men should so boil at that
Justification, which was wont to be attributed in an especial manner to it: So,
if I live to finish the work I am now upon, I will in a Comment upon the
Epistle to the Philippians (which I have almost gathered sufficient materials
for) endeavor to clear both the one, and the other, that men may neither take
occasion from thence to discard good works as unnecessary, nor yet stay
themselves upon any other, than the promises of Christ, and on which the
holiest men upon earth, when they have been approaching near God's tribunal,
have found themselves obliged to cast themselves. In the mean time a little to
repress the youthful heats of those, who can hardly forbear smiling at such
antiquated notions, I will set before them the advice, which was ordered to be
given to sick persons, when good works to be sure were not without their just
repute. It is among the Interrogatories, which are said Field of the Church,
Append. to the 3d. Book pa. 303.
to have been prescribed by Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, and particularly
after that, which prompts the Priest to ask, Do thou believe, that thou can
not be saved, but by the death of Christ, and the sick persons Answer, that he
did so. Go too therefore (as the Priest was taught to proceed) and whilst thy
soul remains in thee, place thy confidence in this death alone, and in no
other thing, commit thy self wholly to it, cover thy self wholly with it,
immerse, fix, and wrap thy self wholly in it. And if the Lord God will judge
thee, say, I put the death of our Lord Jesus Christ between me, and thy
judgment, otherwise I contend not with thee. And if he say that thou art a
sinner, say, Lord I put the death of our Lord Jesus Christ between me, and my
sins. If he say to thee thou have deserved damnation, say, Lord, I put the
death of our Lord Jesus Christ between me, and my evil deserts, and I offer the
same death for that merit, which I ought to have had, and have not. If he
continue as yet to say, that he is angry with thee, say, Lord, I oppose the
death of our Lord Jesus Christ between me, and thy displeasure. Words, which
show what kind of Faith was sometime thought to be a justfying one, and what
stress was laid upon it, before ever Fanaticism, or any thing of that nature
was heard of in the World.

PART XI. Of the Baptism of Infants.
The Contents. What ground Infant Baptism has in Scripture, and particularly
in what it suggests concerning Christ's commanding his Disciples to suffer
little Children to come unto him. S. Paul's giving the Children of the faithful
the title of Holy, and the Circumcision of Infants. The concurrence of
Antiquity therein with the Doctrine of the Scripture, and that concurrence
farther strengthened by the Pelagians so freely admitting of what was urged
against them from thence. A brief account of that remission, and regeneration,
which Infants acquire by Baptism, and a more large consideration of the
Objections, that are made against it; More particularly of what is urged
against the Regeneration of Infants in Baptism, or their ability to answer what
is prerequir'd to it on the part of persons to be baptized, or is to be
performed by them in the reception of it. Where the Regeneration of Infants is
more largely considered, and what is promised for them by others shown to be
both reasonable, and sufficient.

FRom the Baptism of those of riper years, Question. Why then are Infants
baptized, when by reason of their tender age they cannot perform them?

Answer. Because they promise them both by their sureties, which promise, when
they come to age, themselves are bound to perform.


pass we to that of Infants, or Children, the only Baptism upon the matter now
celebrated, and therefore so much the more carefully to be cleared and
established. In order whereunto I will enquire, I. What ground it has in
Scripture. II. What countenance from Antiquity. III. What Infants acquire by
it. IV. What the principal objections against it are, and how they are to be
solved.


I. Now as it is plain to me both from Tertullian's De Baptismo c. 18. Ait
quidem Dominus, Nolite illos prohibere ad me venire. Veniant ergo, dum
adolescunt, veniant dum discunt, dum quo veniant docentur. Fiant Christiani,
qaum Christum nosse potuerint.
arguing against that Text, and the Apostolical (...). li. 6. c 15.
Constitutions alleging it, that the Ancient Church grounded the Baptism of
Infants upon Christ's Mark 10.13. etc.
commanding his Disciples to suffer little Children to come unto him, and
blessing those, that came; So I am yet more confirmed in it by the unprofitable
pains Tertullian took to take off the force of that Text, or rather the pitiful
evasion he made use of in order to it. For had not the Church laid great stress
upon that passage of the Scripture, why did not he, as the World has since
learned to do, wholly omit the mention of it, as a Text no way pertinent to the
business of Infant Baptism? Or, if he thought good to take notice of it, why
did he not turn the force of it another way, and say, as others have, that
nothing more was intended by it, than to let men know they must put on the
property of little Children, if they meant to enter into Christ's Kingdom? For
either of these certainly had been more proper, than what we find him to
allege in these words, as to the delaying of the Baptism of Infants. The Lord
indeed says, Forbid not Children to come unto me. Let them come therefore,
when they are grown, let them come when they may learn, and when they may be
taught whither they are to come. Let them be made Christians, when they may be
able to know Christ. For what is this to the purpose of our Savior, who
checked his Disciples for hindering those from coming to him, who were brought
to him before they were in a condition to learn, who in all probability were
brought to him in their Parents arms, and were both taken by him into his own,
and blessed by him even then? For if the Disciples were checked for going about
to hinder such Children, his meaning was that they should suffer such to come
unto him, and not keep them back from coming, till they ceased to be such. But
of such force it seems was that Text then thought, that some reply however must
be made to it; Or the deference men had for the Church, that urged it, would
have spoiled his device of delaying the Baptism of them, till they came of
years. Which will make it so much the more reasonable to enquire, what there is
in the Text it self, which might justify the confidence of the one, or give
occasion to the impertinent answer of the other.

For the better discovery whereof we are to know, that when certain persons not
named, but it seems who looked upon our Savior as a man of God, brought their
Children to Christ, that he might touch them, that is to say, as our Savior
expounded their meaning, that he might lay his hands upon them, and bless them;
His Disciples, whether as looking upon it as no way beseeming their Master to
concern himself about Children, Aret. in locum. Primum rem Christo indignam
judicare videntur; nam judicio, and ratione carent, Christum non intelligunt.
Deinde majora sunt, quae agat; adsunt enim turbae, quas docere debet. Major hic
fructus, major etiam and dignitas, and labor.
or that he had greater business then in hand, even the instructing of the
Elder sort, rebuked those that brought them for that their supposed
unreasonable desire, and offer. But as our Savior who better understood Aret.
ubi supra. Sed expendi debet Christi officium, qui pro omnium salute natus est
in hunc mundum. Deinde infantes etiam ad foedus dei pertinent; Nam Abraamo
dixit, Ero and tui, and seminis tui post te, Deus. Et quia una est ratio
salutis, unum ostium, una janua, debuit etiam infantum haberi ratio.
his own salutary office, and Childrens pertaining to the Covenant, did with as
much, or more displeasure rebuke them for that their rebuke, and signified it
both by his countenance, and voice; So he charged them, that they should by no
means hinder Children from coming unto him Aretius iterum. Est enim ratio cur
arcendi a Christo non sint: Quia talium est regnum coelorum, hoc est, sunt
haeredes vitae aeternae; ^^go a Christo, qui janua est ad vitam, non debent
arceri. Deinde cum talium sit regnum dei, ergo horum magis est, ad quorum
similitudinem alii, ut accipiant, iidem redire debent.
, because the Kingdom of God belonged to such as they: Thereby intimating, that
even those Children had a right unto it, and were not therefore to be hindered
from coming to him, who was the way, or rather the gate into it. For if the
Kingdom of God belonged to such as they, much more to those Children, to whom
elder persons ought to become like, that they might be in a capacity of
obtaining it. As indeed otherwise, what force is there in the reason alleged
for the suffering, and no way forbidding young Children to come unto him? For
they, who have in purpose of heart what the other have only natuturally, may
both be invited to tend toward, and be possessed of the Kingdom of Heaven,
though the other be no way brought to Christ, nor receive any blessing from
him. In as much as their humility, and innocence is the result of God's spirit,
and of their own will, and consequently more likely to be acceptable, whereas
the other's is only the result of their constitution, and age. And I cannot
therefore but think, that the true reason of our Savior's making use of the
word (...), or such, instead of (...), or these (for of such, says our
Savior, is the Kingdom of heaven) was not in the least to exclude Children
from having a right to the Kingdom of Heaven, as who alone were directly, and
immediately concerned in the present Argument; But to let the World know at the
same time Aret. in Matt. 19.13, etc. Nec juvat quod aliquid hic urgent (...),
and non (...), talium, and non horum. Nam communem ostendit modum
justificationis, etc. Amplius igitur aliquid dicere voluit, and hos pueros
vitae haeredes esse, and ad illorum similitudinem nobis etiam redeundum esse.
, that elder men ought to put on the properties of Children to make them
partakers of it. As he afterward Mark 10.15.
more expressly signifies, when he tells them, that whosoever shall not receive
the Kingdom of God as a little Child, he shall not enter therein. Which
supposed a way is opened for the inferring of that Baptism of Infants, which,
this passage both now, and of old was made use of to evince. For it appearing
from the premises, that Infants have a right to the Kingdom of Heaven, and
upon, and by virtue of that right to be brought to Christ also; They must
consequently have a right also to those means, which are by the same Christ
appointed to put them into the possession of his Kingdom. Which Baptism
certainly being, and so, that, ordinarily at least, none can enter into that
Kingdom without Joh. 3.5.
being born again by it, it cannot without injustice be withheld from those
Children, to whom the other does appertain. Neither will it avail to say,
though the Objection be not to be despised, that by this rule our Savior
should either himself have baptized, or ordered his Disciples to baptize those
Children, that were now brought unto him for his blessing. For beside that one
Argument will not solve another, and much less hinder the matter thereof from
being true, or conclusive; There might be reason enough, though the premises be
allowed, for our Savior's not baptizing, or requiring his Disciples to baptize
those Children, who were now brought unto him for his blessing: Partly upon the
account of the incompetency of those, that brought them, and who being not
Disciples themselves, but as is probable, of the multitude Mark 10.1. Matt.
19.2.
that followed him, could not claim from our Savior, nor he so regularly
bestow Baptism upon their Children; And partly to let the World see, that he
was not ti'd to any methods himself in the dispensing of the graces of that
Kingdom. For that our Savior, by that blessing which he gave them, gave those
Children rem Sacramenti, or the Graces of Baptism, and so showed yet more the
title Children have to it, cannot well be doubted of by any, who shall consider
how zealous he was for their being brought to him, as that too upon the account
of the title they had to the Kingdom of Heaven. For considering that zeal of
his, and the ground of it, what can be more reasonable than to think, that our
Savior agreeably thereto did by his blessing conferr upon them that
Evangelical regeneration, which was to fit them for the Kingdom of Heaven, and
without which considering the impurity of their nature, and the necessity of
being thus born anew, they could not regularly obtain it. And I have been the
more particular in deducing, and pressing the present argument; Partly because
led thereto by the mere force of the Text it self, and the Authority of the
Church that employed it, till by accident I fell upon those things I have
before quoted out of Aretius; And partly because I think it a better service to
the Church of God to strengthen one old Argument, than devise many new ones:
Such a course procuring the more respect to the Church's both opinion, and
practice, as showing it to proceed upon substantial Arguments, and such as in
themselves are not lightly to be refused.

My second Argument for the Baptism of Infants shall be taken from that
holiness, which S. Paul 1 Cor. 7.14.
attributes to the Children of Christian Parents (yea where only one of them is
such) upon the account of their descent from them. For S. Paul having before
persuaded the believing party to continue with the unbelieving one, supposing
that unbelieving one to be as willing to continue with the believer, as a
motive to the doing of it alleges, that the unbelieving party is sanctified
by the believing, and proves that sanctification again by the holiness of the
Children, that come from them, as which otherwise those Children could not have
in them, but the contrary. Now I demand what that holiness is, which S. Paul
supposes to be the property of those, who come from such a sanctified couple,
that is to say, whether an inward holiness, or an outward one? If they, who
would avoid the force of this Text as to the Baptism of Infants, say an inward
holiness, they say more than we desire, or can with truth be affirmed, because
though Original Sin be traduced from the Parents, yet inward holiness is not,
as being the product of the Spirit of God, and his instrument Baptism. But if
they do however attribute such a holiness to those Children, they say enough to
evince, that Baptism ought not to be denied to them. For who (as S. Peter spoke
Acts 10.47.
upon another occasion) can forbid the water of Baptism to those, who have
received the Holy Ghost, as to be sure all, that are internally holy, have? It
remains therefore, that if the Children of such matches be not internally holy,
they are externally so, and that external holiness therefore, if it may be, to
be investigated by us. Now I demand First, what external holiness can be
imagined in those Children, but such by which they come to belong to God in a
more peculiar manner, than the Children of other matches do? This being the
nature of all things, that are externally holy, whether by the voluntary
consecration of men, or the Institution, or choice of God. I demand secondly,
supposing those Children to belong more to God, than the Children of other
matches, whether by their thus becoming the peculiar property of God, they may
not be supposed to be more dear to him, than the Children of other matches are?
Every one naturally having an affection to such, as belong to him, suitably to
that nearness, wherein they belong to him. I demand Thirdly, supposing the
Children of such matches to be more dear to God than the Children of others,
whether we are not to think he will take a more particular care of them, than
of others? The care of any person being always suitable to the affection he
bears to those, who are the object of his care. I demand Fourthly, whether,
supposing such a particular care of the Children of such matches, he will not
take a more particular care of them as to their eternal welfare, than he does
of the Children of other men; All other care, without this, being of little
value to the party cared for, and, beside that (as experience shows) equally
extended by God to the Children of other matches, as well as to the descendants
of Christians. I demand Fifthly, supposing such a particular care as to their
eternal welfare, whether he will not also allow them more means toward the
compassing of it, than he can be supposed to allow to the Children of other
Parents? All care, where it is reasonable, and just, employing suitable means to
bring that care of its unto effect. Now what peculiar means does, or can God
allow to the Children of Christian Parents, as to the procuring of their
eternal welfare, supposing them to die before they come of years, as the
generality of them do, unless it be the Sacrament of Baptism? For as these, no
more than other Children, are capable of the benefits of the Gospel by the
graces of Faith, and Repentance; So they have no other way therefore, save the
Sacrament of Baptism, either to be delivered from the guilt of Original Sin, or
enstated in Christ's heavenly Kingdom. I conclude therefore, that the Children
of Christian Parents, or of either of them being holy, they do by that holiness
of theirs acquire a right to a greater holiness, I mean the holiness of
Baptism. And indeed however Tertullian could in his book Cap. 18.
De Baptismo argue the delay of Infants Baptism, as that too upon their no need
of it, or not being qualified for it; Yet as he could see enough elsewhere to
make him believe, that every soul is reckoned in Adam, till he be anew enrolled
in Christ by the receipt of the Sacrament of Baptism De anima c. 39. Hinc enim
and Apostolus ex sanctificato alterutro sexu sanctos procreari ait, tam ex
seminis praerogativa, quam ex institutionis disciplina. Caeterum, inquit,
immundi nascerentur, quasi designatos tamen sanctitati, ac per hoc etiam saluti
intelligi volens fidelium filios, ut hujus spei pignore matrimoniis, quae
retinendae censuerat, patrocinaretur. Alioquin meminerat Dominicae
definitionis, Nisi quis nascetur ex aqua, and spiritu, non ibit in regnum dei,
id est, non erit sanctus. Ita omnis anima eousque in Adam censetur, donec in
Christo recenseatur, etc.
, so he could see enough too in the Text I am now upon, to make him
acknowledge, that the Children of the De anima c. 39. Hinc enim and Apostolus
ex sanctificato alterutro sexu sanctos procreari ait, tam ex seminis
praerogativa, quam ex institutionis disciplina. Caeterum, inquit, immundi
nascerentur, quasi designatos tamen sanctitati, ac per hoc etiam saluti
intelligi volens fidelium filios, ut hujus spei pignore matrimoniis, quae
retinendae censuerat, patrocinaretur. Alioquin meminerat Dominicae
definitionis, Nisi quis nascetur ex aqua, and spiritu, non ibit in regnum dei,
id est, non erit sanctus. Ita omnis anima eousque in Adam censetur, donec in
Christo recenseatur, etc.
faithful are holy by the prerogative of their seed, as well as by the
discipline of their Institution, and by that holiness of theirs designed, or
marked out for a better holiness, and so for salvation. Which as it is the
holiness, that I have been all along enforcing, and endeavoring to evince from
thence Children's right unto another; So of what force it is toward the
inferring of it, will need no other light, than that, which we have from
Tertullian. For with what force can any man deny them the holiness of Baptism,
who are designed, or marked out for it by the prerogative of their birth, and
(as it may happen, and often does) can no other way attain that holiness, or
that salvation, which is consequent upon it? But because some men have advanced
another, and a more improper holiness, even that by which Children become the
issue of a lawful marriage, and not of an unlawful mixture; And because too
they have in part advanced that holiness upon the difficulty of comprehending,
how the unbeliever can otherwise be sanctified by the believer, than by making
the match between them two to be lawful; Therefore I will both set my self to
show, that the unbeliever may be otherwise sanctified by the believer, than by
making him, or her to be a lawful match to the believer, and that the holiness,
which S. Paul attributes to the Children of such a match, cannot be understood
of such a holiness, whereby they become a lawful, or legitimate Issue. And I
allege for the former of these the unbelieving Husband's, for instance, being
so sanctified by the believing Wife, as not only to become a lawful Husband to
her, but a Christian one, and so, as to entitle the Issue of them both to the
common privileges of Christianity. Which is brought about by the unbelieving
Husband's becoming one flesh, not any longer with an unbelieving Wife, but with
a believing, and Christian one, and from whom that sanctification is derived to
him. Even as the same S. Paul affirms 1 Cor. 6.16.
him, that converseth with an Harlot, to become one flesh with that Harlot,
with whom he does so converse, and so receive pollution from her. Neither will
it avail to say (as possibly it may be) that the believing Wife is as much one
flesh with the unbelieving Husband, as the unbelieving Husband is with her, and
may therefore be as unclean by him, as he can be supposed to be sanctified by
her. For neither first is the believing Wife as much one flesh with the
unbelieving Husband, as the unbelieving Husband is with her, unless it be as to
the use of, or power over one another's Bodies: Partly, because, where there is
so great an inequality in the match, the denomination is in reason to be taken
from the better party, which to be sure the believer is; And partly, because
that consent of mind from which this union proceeds, and by which it is to be
upheld, is more entire, and full upon the part of the unbelieving Husband, than
it is upon the part of the believing Wife. For whilst she consents to dwell
with him merely as the Partner of her Bed, and conformably to the offices of
such a one, of which she gave a sufficient proof by abandoning him as to his
Religion, and continues to do the like by the continuance of that abandoning;
The unbelieving Husband, on the other side, by being (as S. Paul expresses it)
1 Cor. 7.12, 13. (...).
well pleased to live with her notwithstanding, consents in some measure to
dwell with her as a Christian, and gives no contemptible indication of a
farther consent with her in that Religion: There being otherwise no great
likelihood of his continuing his Complacency, as well as cohabitation to her,
who had abandoned him as to his. But therefore as the believing Wife is not so
much one with the unbelieving Husband, as he is with her, and cannot therefore
be so likely to be polluted by him, as he is to be sanctified by her; So she
becomes yet less likely to be polluted by him, because communicating with him
in such Act, or Acts, as are not only lawful in themselves, but moreover the
indispensible duties of that marriage, which she had contracted, and which,
whilst he is thus pleased to dwell with her, she is by our Apostle himself
obliged to maintain. And indeed as from such a match there is more reason to
expect sanctification to the unbeliever, than there is of any fear of pollution
to the other; So there will be yet less doubt of it, if we consider the
sanctification here spoken of, not as an inward, but an outward one, and such
an outward one too, by which the party sanctified attains only the privilege
of being accounted of as a Christian Husband, and accordingly of conveying to
those Children, that descend from them both a right to the Sacrament of
Baptism. For what less can be expected from a merciful God, where the
unbeliever, though continuing such, yet takes pleasure notwithstanding that in
his Christian Consort? And she, on the other side, though abominating his
Infidelity, yet in compliance with that marriage, wherein Christianity found
her, cohabits with him notwithstanding, and no doubt both does, and will employ
all her kindness, and endeavors to gain him to a farther approbation both of
her, and of the Religion she has espoused? Which supposed, a way will be open
to give a clearer account of the thing intended, and withal of the force it is
of to persuade the believing Wifes continuing with the unbelieving Husband, if
he (as is supposed in the present case) is as willing to dwell with her: The
force thereof lying in this, that the believing Wife should in that case be so
far from being polluted by the converse of the unbelieving Husband (which was
no doubt these Corinthians fear, when they put this case to S. Paul) that on
the contrary the unbelieving Husband should be so far sanctified by her, as to
be to her in the place of a Christian one, and enjoy all the privileges of
such; The unbelieving Husband by becoming one flesh with the believing Wife
becoming so far Christian also, and so accounted of both by God, and the
Church. Of which they had this undeniable proof, that the Children of those
matches were not looked upon as unclean, or heathen (which they must have been
in part, if the unbeliever had not been someway sanctified, as well as the
believer) but accounted of as so far holy, or Christian, as to be admitted to
those privileges, to which the Children of Christian Parents were, and
particularly to that Baptism, by which a better holiness is conveyed. This I
take to be a fair, and clear account of the Apostle's words, and particularly
of that holiness, which he attributes to those Children, that descend from the
forementioned Parents. And I am yet more confirmed in it by the fondness of
that notion, which has been set up to supplant it, and by which the Children
of such matches become the issue of a lawful marriage, and not of an unlawful
mixture. For beside that they, who advance this notion, make the words Else
were your Children unclean, etc. to referr rather to the precept of the
believer's cohabiting with the unbeliever, than to the unbeliever's being
sanctified by the believer, to which last yet it apparently referrs, and is
assigned by S. Paul as a proof of; They suppose that in this notion of theirs,
which there is not the least ground for, and which indeed this very place does
sufficiently confute. For who ever said, or could say that the marriages of the
Heathen were unlawful, which yet they must have been, if there needed the
cohabitation of the faitful to make them lawful, and the Children that were
born of them to be legitimate? Nay who sees not that S. Paul supposes those
marriages to be lawful, when he requires the believing party to cohabit with
the unbeliever? For otherwise no doubt he would rather have advised to break
off all commerce with the Infidel, or proceed to a new contract. Both which yet
he is so far from, that he seems to me not very willing to allow of a perfect
breach, even when the unbeliever does depart from the believer. For though he
faith 1 Cor. 7.15.
that a brother, or sister is not in bondage in such a case, and may therefore,
if they please, look upon themselves as loosed from the unbeliever; Yet he
tells them Ibid.
withal that God has called us to peace, and therefore, (as I understand him)
that breaches of that nature would be avoided as much as might be; And he tells
them too 1 Cor. 7.16.
, that if they would not be over forward to make use of that liberty, which the
unbeliever gave them by deserting them, there might be hopes of the unbelieving
Wife, or Husband being wrought upon by the believer's patience, and
forbearance, and reconciled both to them, and their Religion. However as there
is no pretense from this place of the believer's making the marriage between
the unbeliever and themselves to be a lawful one, as which was so before; Nor
therefore for making the holiness of their Children to be no other than a civil
one, and by which they only became a legitimate issue; So there is the more
reason still to understand the holiness of that match, and the issues of it, as
one that entitles them to the outward privileges of Christianity, and by which
the unbelieving whether Husband, or Wife comes to be accounted of as a
Christian one, and the Children of both parties as having a right to that
Sacrament, by which all are to be initiated into Christianity, and partake of
its Regeneration and Remission.

My third and last argument for the baptizing of the Infants, or Children of
Christian Parents shall be taken from the Circumcision of those Infants, or
Children, which descended from the posterity of Abraham, and after which I do
not see what doubt can be well made of the other: Partly, upon the account of
the Analogy there is between Circumcision, and Baptism, and partly upon account
of the Children of Christian Parents having as good a right to the blessings
exhibited in them, as the Children of those, who were of the posterity of
Abraham. For supposing (as was before Expl. of the Sacram. in general. Part 4.
shown, and may hereafter Answ. to the object. against Infant Baptism.
be farther cleared) that Circumcision relates to the same spiritual blessings
with Baptism, and particularly to the righteousness of Faith; And supposing
farther that the Children of Christian Parents have as good a right to those
blessings, and that righteousness, as the Children of those, that were of the
posterity of Abraham; By the same reason that the Children of these were
entitled to that Circumcision, which was intended to exhibit those blessings,
and that righteousness among them, the Children of the other shall be admitted
to that Baptism, which was intended to exhibit them among us: Those Children,
which have an equal right to the blessings exhibited, having an equal right to
those means, which were intended for the exhibition of them. Now that the
Children of Christian Parents have as good a right to the former blessings, and
righteousness, as the Children of the Posterity of Abraham, will appear from
those Parents of theirs being equally the Children Romans 4.11.
of Abraham with those, that were of his posterity. For being equally his
Children, they must consequently be supposed to give their Children as good a
right to the former blessings, and the means that was intended to exhibit them
among us, as the posterity of Abraham did their Children to the like blessings,
and that means which among them was intended for the exhibition of them.

II. The Baptism of Infants being thus made out from the Scripture, and by such
passages thereof also, as cannot be easily avoided; Pass we on to enquire, what
countenance it has from Antiquity, as which if it be any thing considerable,
will the more firmly establish it. Where the first, that I shall take notice
of, is a passage of Justin Martyr, I do not mean what is commonly quoted out of
his Questions, and Answers, ad Orthodoxos Quaest. 56.
, it being questionable enough Vid. Coci Censur. quorund. Script. in Script.
Just. Martyr.
whether that Book were his, or at least as we now have it, but what may be
found in his second Aplogy Page 62. (...).
, and concerning which there is not any the least controversy in the Church.
In which Apology speaking of the excellency of the Christian Law above that of
any humane ones, in setting bounds to the carnal desires of men he has these
words. And there are many men, and women of sixty, and seventy years of Age,
who having from their Childhood been discipled unto Christ, have all their time
continued incorrupt, or Virgins; And I boast that I can show such among all
sorts of men. For why should we also speak of that innumerable multitude of
men, who have changed from intemperance, and so have learnt these things? For
Christ called not the just, or temperate to repentance, but the ungodly, and
intemperate, and unjust. Which words to an unbiast Reader cannot well signify
less, than Childrens being then baptized into Christianity; That Father not
only making mention of certain persons, who had from their childhood been
discipled unto Christ, which we know from our Savior Matt. 28.19.
to have been effected by Baptism, and continued too all their time incorrupt,
or Virgins (which yet is a comtent proof of their being baptized, when
Children) but opposing them to such persons as had changed from intemperance,
and rather learnt that purity afterward, than been discipled into it at the
very first: That opposition of his making it yet more evident, that he meant
such persons as were discipled to Christ from their very childhood, and before
they were in a capacity of learning him, and his doctrine by instruction. To
this is Justin Martyr subjoyn we another of Irenaeus, which is yet more clear
for the Baptism of Infants. For Christ (says that Father Omnes enim venit per
semetipsum salvare: Omnes, inquam, qui per eum renascuntur in Deum, infantes,
and parvulos, and pueros, and j^venes, and seniores. Ideo per omnem venit
aetatem, and infantibus infans factus, sanctificans infantes, and in parvulis
parvulus sanctificans hanc ipsam habentes aetatem. Adv. haeres. li.a.c. 39.
) came to save all persons by himself; All I say, who by him are born again to
God, Infants, and little ones, and Children, and Young Men, and Old, Therefore
he came in every Age, and was made an Infant to Infants, sanctifying Infants,
and a little one among little ones, sanctifying those of that age, etc. Where
we have him not only affirming Christ to have come to save Infants, as well as
others, yea to have been made an Infant himself to sanctify them, which shows
them in his opinion to have had a general right to the blessings of
Christianity, but speaking of several of them as born again unto God by Christ,
which is as much as to say baptized: That as it is the way, by which all are to
be so born, even by the Doctrine of Joh. 3.^.
our Savior, so the way too, by which the Ancients apprehended it to be
effected. For thus where Justin Martyr entreats of the Baptism of those of his
time, he tells us Apolog. 2. p. 93. 4.
that they, who were to partake of it, were brought by the Christians to a
place where water was, and there regenerated after that manner of regeneration,
wherewith they themselves had been. And to the same purpose also this very
Irenaeus Adv. haere^. li. 1. c. 18.
, because not only attributing the same regeneration to it, but representing it
as the Doctrine of the Gnostics, as to that Baptism which they set up against
our Savior's, that it was necessary for those, who had received perfect
knowledge, to be so regenerated into that virtue, or power, which is above all
things. Which passage, with the former one, makes it yet more manifest that
Irenaeus meant by such Infants, as were born again by Christ unto God, such as
had been regenerated by Baptism, and consequently that the Baptism of such was
no stranger in his days. I think I shall not need to insist upon the days of
Tertullian, because what the practice of that time was is evident from his
disputing against Infant Baptism, or at least advising to delay it: There being
no place for such a dispute, or advice, if the thing it self had not been then
in use, and in use too (as he himself intimates) in obedience to that precept
of our Savior, which enjoined the suffering little Children to come unto him
in order to their partaking of his blessing, and Kingdom. And indeed as Origin,
who lived not long after him, does not only assert the same practice of infant
Baptism, but affirm In Romans 16.
the Church to have received it as a Tradition from the Apostles; So
Tertullian's Scholar, and great admirer S. Cyprian Epist. 59.
gives such an ample testimony to it, that I know not what need to be added to
it. For one Fidus having questioned him concerning the cause of Infants, who he
thought ought not to be baptized till the eighth day according to the law of
Circumcision, S. Cyprian in a Council of sixty six Bishops made this following
Answer to his demand; That he, and the whole Council that was with him, had
quite other thoughts of that affair, they universally judging that the mercy,
and grace of God was to be denied to none, that was born of men. And again,
that if remission of sins were upon the faith of the parties given to the
greatest Offenders, neither was any of them debarred from Baptism, and grace,
how much less ought a newborn Infant to be debarred of it, who had no other
sin to answer for, but what he drew from Adam, and who came so much the more
easily to receive pardon of sin, because it was not his own proper sins, but
those of others, that were to be forgiven him? For which cause the opinion of
the Council was, that no one ought to be debarred by them from Baptism, and the
Grace of God, and that, if that were to be observed, and retained as to all
persons whatsoever, it was much more to be observed, and retained as to
Infants, and newborn persons, whose very tears wherewith they entered the
World, seemed more to deserve it both from them, and the divine mercy. I omit
for brevity sake the many testimonies of S. Augustine to the same purpose, and
his affirming Aug. Sermon. 10. de verbis Apost.
in particular, that the Church always had it, always retained it, and received
it from the faith of it is predecessors; And shall content my self, as to this
particular, with his, and the Church's pressing the Pelagians Vossi. Histor.
Pelag. li. 2. part. 1 These. 5.
with the practice of Infant Baptism, and those Pelagians, how much soever
straightened by it, yet choosing rather to evade the force of it, than to deny in
any measure the truth of the thing alleged: It being not to be thought, that,
if there had been any the least suspicion of the Antiquity of Infant Baptism,
or indeed of its being derived to the Church from the Apostles, either the
Catholics would have so confidently alleged it against the Pelagians, or the
Pelagians so easily, and without any the least opposition have admitted it.

III. Now as if we allow Infants to be capable of Baptism, we must consequently
allow them the graces of that Sacrament, because Baptism was intended to convey
them; So I must needs say, I do not see why (supposing Original sin, which has
been before sufficiently established) we should scruple to attribute to them
the graces of that Sacrament, and particularly remission, and regeneration. For
if Infants are naturally under the guilt of Original sin, there is so far forth
place for, and a necessity of remission; And if the same Infants are naturally
under the pollution of it, or (as our Catechism expresses it) are by nature
born in sin, and the children of wrath, they are alike capable by Baptism of
being regenerated, or made the children of grace. Not that there is, or can be
even in baptized Infants any actual perception of, or adhesion to that, which
is spiritually good, but a disposition to both, and by virtue whereof the soul
is fitted, and inclined to each, when years, and opportunity invite: As the
same soul is to reason, and will, when it arrives at years of maturity, by
virtue of those natural faculties, that are from the beginning in it. Which is
a sort of regeneration, that is most suitable to the state of Infancy, and
beyond which therefore, whilst they continue in that state, we are not
reasonably to expect; But is withal as true a regeneration as that, which is
wrought in those of riper years, and by which the souls of the parties
regenerated actually perceive, and cleave to that good, which the other is only
disposed to: That actual perception, and adhesion being not so much any part of
their regeneration, or new birth, as the effects, or issues of it.

IV. But because how clear soever Infant Baptism may thus far seem, yet it
cannot be denied to be encumbred with many, and great difficulties, or at least
such as appear so to men of prejudiced minds; Therefore it will be but
necessary, before I leave this head, to select such of them as seem to be most
pressing, and return a satisfactory Answer to them: Whether they be such as
relate to the grounds, on which I have endeavored to establish it, or such as
strike more directly at the thing it self.

That, which is most to be considered of the former sort, is that See Jer. Tail
Liberty of Proph. Sect. 18. number. 13.
which pretends to evacuate the Argument from the Circumcising of the Infants
of Abraham's posterity to the Baptizing of the Children of Christians. Which it
endeavors in part from Circumcisions being but a Type, or figure of Baptism,
and so either proving nothing at all without some express to signify such a
thing to be its purpose, or after the nature of such things, directing us
rather to a spiritual childhood in order to Baptism, than showing a natural
childhood to be a due subject of it; And in part also from Circumcisions being
not in all things a rule to the Christians Baptism, and particularly not in the
persons, that are to be baptized (Women as well as Men being confessedly the
subject of the latter) nor in the time of their receiving of it. For if
Circumcision be a sufficient direction for the baptizing of Infants, why not
also a like direction for the confining of it to the Males? And if it were to
be a direction as to the baptizing of Infants, why not also as to the baptizing
of them upon the eighth day (which was the day of administering Circumcision) as
that Fidus, whom S. Cyprian answered, seemed to be persuaded, and accordingly
argued it from the like administration of Circumcision.

As to what is objected concerning Circumcisions being but a type of Baptism,
and so either proving nothing at all without some express to signify such to
be its purpose, which is not pretended in the present case, or if proving any
thing as to the matter of childhood, yet directing rather to a spiritual, than
a natural one; I answer that as I see not why Circumcision should be looked
upon as only a type of Baptism, nor indeed as any type at all, unless it be in
a general sense, and as a thing that is like unto another may be looked upon as
a type of that, to which it is so, in which sense I my self have also used the
word, and allow it so to be, so we do not at all argue from Circumcision, as it
may be supposed to be a type of Baptism, but as a sign of the same
righteousness of Faith, of which Baptism is, and of the same gracious Covenant,
that assures it. And in this sense as nothing hinders us to argue from
Circumcisions being bestowed upon Infants then, that that which is a sign of
the same righteousness of faith under the Gospel is in reason to be extended to
the same persons; So there is this in particular to enforce it, that Christian
Parents would otherwise fall short, in the account of God, of the privileges
of the natural descendants of Abraham. Of which what account can be given, when
Abraham, from whom they both claim, is declared to be the Father of them both,
yea is said by S. Paul to have received the sign of Circumcision, not only as a
seal, or assurance to himself of that righteousness of faith, which he before
had, but a seal, or an assurance also of his being to the same purposes a
Father Romans 4.11.
of those that believe, though they be not circumcised, as well as a Father of
those that were.

There is as little reason to be staggered by what is alleged in the second
instance, that if Circumcision be a sufficient direction for the baptizing of
Infants, it may as well be a direction for the confining of it to the Males,
and for the confining of it too to the eighth day after the Infants birth.
Because first the Sacrament of Baptism has nothing in it to confine it to the
Males, as Circumcision had, but on the contrary is equally fitted to be
administered to both Sexes. And secondly because it appears from what was before
said Part 1.
concerning the Rite of Baptism among the Jews, that the want of Circumcision
was afterward supplied to the Females by Baptism, and they thereby even in
their Infancy initiated into the same Covenant with the other. For this shows
yet more, how little reason there is to argue from Circumcisions being confined
to the Males, that therefore Baptism ought to be so; Or rather how much more
reason there is to extend it both to Male, and Female, and so to all of the
same Infant estate. If therefore there be any thing to hinder our arguing from
Circumcision in this particular, it must be its not being pretended by our
selves to be a direction as to the day of its administration, as well as to the
persons, to whom it ought to be administered. But beside that there is a vast
difference between the persons, to whom any Sacrament is to be given, and the
precise day, on which it is to be so, and therefore not the like reason for
Circumcision's directing as to this, as there is for its directing as to the
other; What Circumcision directs as to the case of Infants is more a favor,
than a command, whereas what is directed as to the precise day is rather a
command, than a favor. Now it being a ruled case, That Favors are rather to
be enlarged, than restrained, especially under a Dispensation, which is so
manifestly gracious, as that of the Gospel is, there may be reason enough for
our interpreting what is said concerning the Circumcision of Infants to the
equal, or rather greater benefit of Infants now, and consequently that
Sacrament, which came in place of it, to be rather hastened, than deferred to a
day, to which possibly they may not arrive, but however to be given them as
soon, as a convenient opportunity presents it self. Add hereunto the difference
there is between Circumcision, and Baptism as to the trouble, or danger, which
may attend the administration of them to such tender bodies, as those of
Infants are. For there being a greater trouble, and danger to Infants from the
Rite of Circumcision, than there is from the Rite of Baptism; There might be
greater reason for the deferring of that to the eighth day, than there is for
the deferring of this. And what is therefore, as to that particular, directed
concerning Circumcision, not to be drawn into example in the matter of Baptism,
though other more material, and more advantageous circumstances are.

But leaving what is commonly urged against the Argument from the Circumcising
of Infants, because, as I suppose, sufficiently assoil'd by the foregoing
discourse. Let us take a view of such Objections as strike more directly at
Infant Baptism, or at least of the more material ones. Such as I take to be
first the want of an express command, or direction for the administering of
Baptism to Infants; Secondly, their being incapable of that regeneration, which
is the great intent and end of Baptism, or giving no suitable indications of it
afterward; Thirdly, their being as incapable of answering what is prerequired
to it on the part of the persons to be baptized, or is to be performed by them
in the receiving of it.

That which seems to stick much with the Adversaries of Infant Baptism, and is
accordingly urged at all turns against the Friends, or Asserters of it, is the
want of an express command, or direction for the administering of Baptism to
them. Which objection seems to be the more reasonable, because Baptism, as well
as other Sacraments, receiving all its force from Institution, they may seem to
have no right to, or benefit by it, who appear not by the institution of that
Sacrament to be entitled to it, but rather, by the qualifications which it
requires, to be excluded from it. And possibly more might be of the opinion of
the Objecters, if there had not been before an express Law for admitting
Infants to that righteousness of Faith, of which Baptism is a sign, and a means
of conveyance, and for admitting them too by such an outward sign, as that of
Baptism is. But such an express law having been before given by God, and that
law as notorious as any law in either Testament, there was no reason See
Stillingfleet's Irenicum. Part 1. cap. 1.. 3.
for God to give any such express law for the so administering of Baptism, or
for us to expect it from him: It being easy to collect from the Analogy there
is between the two Sacraments, and the great graciousness of the present
dispensation, that what was communicated to the Children of Abraham's posterity
by the sign of Circumcision, which was then the standing way of administering
it, was alike intended for the Children of those, who were to as good, or
better purpose the Children of the same Abraham, and intended too to be
transmitted to them by their particular Sacrament, and to which (as was before
observed) the great graces of the Gospel were annexed by our Savior Joh. 3 5.
himself. Which Argumentation is so much the more reasonable, because it
appears by what was but now suggested, that our Savior, whose Institution
Baptism was, gave a sufficient indication of his own kindness to that tender
estate, yea of his owning those, that were of it, to have a right to that
Kingdom of Heaven, to which Baptism by his own appointment was intended to
admit men.

The next great Objection against the Baptism of Infants is their supposed
incapacity of that regeneration, which is the great end, and intent of Baptism,
or giving no suitable indications of it, when they begin to be in a natural
capacity to exert it. The former whereof the Anabaptists argue from the
Scripture's speaking of it 1 Pet. 1.23.
as produced by the word of truth, and other such rational means; As the latter
by the little appearance there is of it in many of those, that are baptized,
after they arrive at the years of discretion: Especially where, as it often
happens in the Dominion of the Turks, they are taken away from their Parents,
before they come to be of any years, and bred up in the Mahumetan Religion. For
under this they are so far from giving any indications of a Christian
regeneration, that our Religion has no greater, or more implacable enemies,
than they.

As to what is argued toward the proof of Infants incapacity of regeneration
from the Scriptures speaking of it as produced by the word of truth, and other
such rational ways of procedure, I must needs say I do not see why it should be
alleged in this particular, unless it any where intimated, that there was no
other way of producing it, no not in the Souls of Infants. For the Scripture
speaking to, and of men converted from Judaism, or Heathenism to Christianity,
and consequently brought to it in a rational way; What is spoken of their
regeneration, is not to be drawn into example here, unless the same Scripture
did any where intimate that there was no other way of regeneration than that,
or it could not be otherwise produced. Which beside the affront it offers to
the omnipotency of God's spirit, and which even in men must be supposed to have
the chiefest stroke, will need no other confutation, than Gods creating man at
first after his own image without any concurrence of his, and producing in our
Savior, even in his conception, that perfect holiness, which was in him. For
why may not God produce in an Infant that imperfect regeneration, whereof we
speak, as well as he did that more perfect Righteousness, and true Holiness,
wherewith our first Parents were created, or that more excellent, as well as
more durable one, which he did in our Savior from the very beginning, and
which the Scripture it self attributes to the Holy Ghost's overshadowing his
Mother's Womb? But it may be, though Infants are not incapable of regeneration,
and so far forth cannot with reason be debarred the Sacrament of it; Yet there
is evidence enough upon the postfact, that no such thing is collated in their
Baptism, and that Baptism of theirs therefore not to be looked upon as a
legitimate one. For if the regeneration we speak of were collated in the
Baptism of Infants, it would, (because all Infants are alike qualified for that
Sacrament) be collated in some measure upon all of them, which yet the future
behavior of many of them does render justly questionable: Many of them being
untoward enough, when they first come of years, though advantaged by a suitable
education, and others (as before said) taken away early from their Christian
Parents, and both educated in a contrary Religion, and made zealous Proselytes
of it. Which things how they should be consistent with that regeneration,
whereof we speak, is at least very difficult to apprehend. And possibly these
two things have stuck more with considering men than most of the other
Arguments that have been brought against Infant Baptism, and have perhaps given
as much trouble to all those, who have duly considered them. But whether they
are in truth of that force, which they seem to be of, may well be doubted by
those, who shall consider this regeneration as the state of Infants requires,
or at least makes it reasonable enough to do; I mean as a weak, and imperfect
thing, and rather as the seed of a more strong, and perfect regeneration, than
a thoroughly formed, and well settled one. For so if we conceive of it, we shall
find no great difficulty to apprehend first, that where there is not only
nothing of a Christian education to excite, and improve it, but a contrary one
from the very beginning, and such a one in particular as Christian Children
have from the Turks; So, I say, it will not be difficult to apprehend, but it
may be perfectly overwhelmed, and choked by it: As that seed in the Parable
was, that was sown among Thorns, or as that may be supposed to be, that is
covered over with rubbish, and hindered by it from sprouting forth. And though I
cannot say the same of the regeneration of such persons, as have afterward had
a Christian, and it may be a careful education to excite it (for here one would
think it should every where more forcibly exert it self) yet this I may, which
will be of equal force, that in that case it may equally fail for want of those
persons exciting it, in whom that seed is sown, or of their answering by their
care, and endeavor that education, which is made use of in order to it. For
Baptism (as has been often said) being in the nature of a stipulation, or
Contract, where somewhat is to be performed by the party Baptized, as soon as
he is in a capacity to do it, as well as by him, with whom the contract is
made; No wonder if, when the baptized person comes to be in a capacity to
perform his part, and does not, he with whom the Contract is made, do first
withdraw his blessing from that, which he has before sown in him, and
afterward the seed it self. For in either of these cases we cannot expect such
indications, or effects of the Baptismal regeneration, as otherwise we might,
and as do actually show themselves in many of those, who have been made
partakers of it. It may be enough that God has furnished such persons with a
regeneration, which during their minority will qualify them for, and secure
them to his Kingdom, and a regeneration too which, if well improved, will grow
into a more complete, and effectual one, and in fine bring them to a due
holiness, and unto God. If the baptized persons will, when they are in a
capacity to do better, neglect to excite it, or will oppose it, they must thank
themselves, if they miscarry, and not lay the blame upon any failure on
Christ's part, and much less deny his having conferred it on them.

The third, and last great Objection against the Baptism of Infants is their
being incapable of answering what is prerequired to it on the part of the
persons that are to be baptized, or is to be performed by them in the receiving
of it. Which incapacity they argue, as to the former of these, from the
Scripture's pre-requiring Faith, and Repentance to it, as the latter from that
stipulation, which Baptism involves, and which Infants are equally
incapacitated to make.

The Answer, which our Catechism makes to these difficulties, or at least to
the former, is, that they promise them both by their sureties, which promise,
when they come to Age, themselves are bound to perform. And possibly this
Answer might be better digested than it is, if the minds of those, who argue
against Infant Baptism, were more free, and unprejudiced, than they commonly
appear to be. Because first what is urged against Infant Baptism upon the
account of its being a stipulation, or Contract is equally of force against the
Circumcision of Infants, because that was equally a Covenant, or rather a sign
of it, and a means of entering into it. Which notwithstanding, the Infants of
Abraham's posterity were by the Command of God himself admitted to it, and
thereupon reckoned as in Covenant with him. Now if the Infants of Abraham's
posterity were by the Command of God admitted into Covenant with him; What
should hinder the Infants of Christians from Covenanting in like manner with
him, and so far forth from being admitted to the participation of that
Sacrament, which is a sign of the same gracious Covenant, and a means of
entering into it? Again Secondly, though Infants cannot in strictness Covenant
with God, because neither having reason enough to apprehend the terms of it,
nor will to determine themselves to the performance of them; Yet as they may by
favor be admitted to a partnership in a Covenant, and where God, or Christ is
the person, with whom they contract, obliged when they come of years to answer
their part in it, so by the same favor of him, with whom they contract, what
is done to them, or for them, may be interpreted as a promise on their part for
the performance of it. By which means though they should not be capable of a
strict, and proper stipulation, yet they may of that, which is interpretatively
such. The only farther doubt in this affair is, whether God accepts of such a
stipulation, which his accepting of it under the Covenant of Circumcision, and
from the Children of Abraham's natural posterity will easily remove. For the
Covenant of Baptism being no way inferior in it self to (or rather but the same
Covenant in a different dress with) the Covenant of Circumcision, nor the
Children of Abraham's spiritual seed inferior to those of the natural one; What
was accepted of under the Covenant of Circumcision, and from the Children of
Abraham's natural seed may as reasonably be presumed to be accepted of under
Baptism, and from the Children of his spiritual. How much more, when (as was
before shown) his Son, and our Savior Christ Mark 10.14.
has commanded Children to be brought to him for his benediction, and grace,
and his Apostle and our great Instructor S. Paul declared the Children of
Christians to be holy, yea where but one of the Parents is so? Thus we may
rationally answer what is objected against the stipulation of Infants, and
consequently against their taking upon them what is required of them in the
receiving of Baptism; Which will leave nothing to us to make answer to, but
their supposed incapacity for that faith, and repentance, which seem to be
pre-required to it, and which one would think they, that are to be baptized,
should bring with them in some measure, as well as make a promise of. But
beside that those Texts Mark 16.15, 16. Acts 2.38. Acts 8.37.
, which speak of these prerequisites, do all manifestly relate to adult
persons, and such as are brought to Baptism by the preaching of the Gospel, and
therefore not lightly to be urged in the case of Infants; There are these three
substantial reasons to make a difference between Infants, and Men as to this
particular. First, that Infants are not admitted to Baptism, and the graces of
it upon the account of any right in themselves, but of the right of their
Parents. Secondly, that they are admitted for the present to a lesser portion
of the Divine graces, than adult persons are, and such as are rather the seeds
of them, than any thoroughly formed, or well settled ones. Thirdly, that what
right they receive by their Baptism to future, and more perfect privileges,
depends for their actually attaining them upon their exhibiting that faith, and
repentance, which at the time of their Baptism they only made a promise of. For
if (as is alleged in the first reason) Infants are not admitted to Baptism and
the Graces of it, upon the account of any right in themselves, but of the right
of their Parents; What should hinder the Church from lending Accommodat illis
matter Ecclesia aliorum pedes ut veniant, aliorum cor ut credant, aliorum
linguam ut fateantur, ut quoniam quod aegri sunt alio peccante praegravantur,
sic cum hi sani sunt alio pro eis confitente salventur. Aug. de Verb. Apost.
Sermon. 10.
, or Infants from borrowing from it the feet of other men, that they may come,
the heart of others that they may believe, the tongue of others that they may
confess, that because, in that they were sick, they were pressed down by
another sin, they may, when they are made whole, be saved by the confession of
another? If again (as is alleged in the second reason, and proved before in
the matter of regeneration) Infants are admitted for the present to a lesser
portion of the divine Graces, than adult persons are, and such as are rather
the seeds of them, than any thoroughly formed, or well settled one; Who can think
but that a like difference ought to be between them as to the pre-requisites of
their Baptism, and that therefore not to be urged as to the case of Infants,
which was prerequired of the other? In fine if (as is alleged in the third
reason) what right Infants receive by their Baptism to future, and more perfect
privileges, depends for their attaining of them, upon their exhibiting that
Faith, and Repentance, which at the time of their Baptism they only made a
promise of; It may be time enough, when that right is to be actuated, to
exhibit that Faith, and Repentance, and so make way for it, as they, who are of
years, do. Otherwise more shall be supposed to be required of Infants, than is
of adult persons themselves; Because that Faith and Repentance is not required
of the latter, till the full privileges of Baptism are to be bestowed upon
them. And I shall only add, that if care were taken that the Faith, and
Repentance of those, who were baptized in their Infancy, were as well inquired
into, and proved as their knowledge in the Catechism is, before they were
allowed to be confirmed; The Church would not only better discharge the trust,
that is reposed in her as concerning those persons, whose Faith and Repentance
were not before proved, nor could be, but more effectually stop the mouths of
the Anabaptists, than all the Arguments she, or her Sons offer for Infant
Baptism, will ever be able to do. For so she would make it appear, that though
she contented her self in their Baptism with the promise that was made for
them, or rather with that tacit stipulation, which their very Baptism involves;
Yet she was as mindful, when they came of years, to oblige them to the
performance of it, and to give due proofs in their own persons of all those
things, which Baptism in adult persons does either pre-suppose, or oblige to
the performance of.

PART XII. Whether Baptism may be repeated.
The Contents. What the true state of the present question is, and that it is
not founded in any supposed illegitimateness of the former Baptism, but upon
supposition of the baptized persons either not having before had, or forfeited
the regeneration of it, or fallen off from that Religion, to which it does
belong. Whereupon enquiry is made, whether if such persons repent and return,
they ought to be baptized anew, or received into the Church without. What there
is to persuade the repeating of Baptism, and what the Church has alleged
against it. The Churches arguments from Ephesians. 4.4. and Joh. 13.10. proposed, but
waved. The Churches opinion more firmly established in the no direction there
is in Scripture for rebaptization in those cases, but rather the contrary, and
in the no necessity there is of it. The Arguments for rebaptization answered.

IV. THE fourth, and last question relating to the right Administration of
Baptism is whether it may be repeated. Which question is not founded in any
supposed illegitimacy of the former Baptism (for that is here taken for granted
to have been good, and valid) but upon supposition of the baptized persons
either having not before received, or forfeited the regeneration he acquired by
it, or fallen off altogether from that Religion, into which he was baptized. In
which cases, supposing the person to repent of his former either impiety, or
Apostasy, it is inquired whether he may be baptized anew, or received into the
Communion of the faithful without it.

Now though, if Men would abide by the Doctrine of the Church, this question
would be of easy resolution; S. Cyprian Epist. 71. Ad Quintum. Nos autem
dicimus eos, qui inde veniunt, non rebaptizari apud nos, sed baptizari. Neque
enim accipiunt illic aliquid, ubi nihil est, sed veniunt ad nos, ut hic
accipiant, ubi gratia, and veritas omnis est, quia and gratia and veritas una
est.
himself, who was so fierce for the rebaptizing of those, who had been baptized
by Heretics, yet advancing not that Assertion of his upon a belief of
Baptism's being to be repeated, provided it were a legitimate one, but on
supposition of the former Baptisms being no true, and genuine one; Yet will it
not be of so easy a resolution, if that Authority be laid aside, and the thing
in question weighed rather by Arguments, than suffrages. For what do they
differ in effect from Heathen, or Infidels, who either never before had, or
have fallen quite off from the regeneration, or faith of Baptism? And if they
differ not at all from them, why should they not, if they repent, and return,
be received as Heathen, or Infidels, I mean by the Sacrament of Baptism?
Especially, when in the ordinary dispensation of God the graces of the
Sacrament are annexed to the Sacrament, nor can be expected without it. For,
that supposed, why should not these men, being to begin their Christianity
anew, come a second time under that Sacrament, which is to enter beginners
into it, and give them the regeneration, and remission of it?

Of what force these Objections are, shall be afterward considered; The only
reason of my present mention of them is to show, that the question is not
without its difficulty, and that if we will satisfy our understandings so, as
to be able to satisfy others, we must enquire into the grounds of the Churches
opinion, as well as be satisfied, that the Church has been so persuaded. Which
we shall find the more reason for, because one principal Text, which has been
alleged, seems not to come up to it, nor indeed to have any relation to that
affair; That I mean, which suggests one Baptism Ephesians. 4.5.
as well as one Lord, and one Faith in him. For the design of the Apostle in
that place being to persuade the Ephesians to unity, and peace among
themselves, as that too, among other things by there being one Lord, one Faith,
and one Baptism, cannot so reasonably be thought to mean any other, than that
they all had one common Lord, to whom they related, one common Faith in that
Lord, and one common Baptism, or mode of initiating into it: That unity, as it
best agrees with that one hope of their calling, by which they are also pressed,
because declared to be one Ephesians. 4.4.
, in which they were all called; So most naturally, and most immediately
enforcing that agreement with one another, for the inculcating whereof they are
all suggested. I say not the same, nor can of that unity of Baptism, which
imports only a single administration of it to one, and the same person; That
unity, though it may oblige the person to stick close to his Religion, and to
the profession he has made of it in that one Baptism of his, yet persuading
not any adhesion to, or unity with other Baptized persons, than as they may be
supposed to partake in common with him in it. But it may be there is more force
in what is alleged from our Savior, where he says Joh. 13.20.
, that he, that is washed, even by a more general washing, needs not save to
wash his feet. And so no doubt there is, if by the former washing be meant the
washing of Baptism, as some of the Ancients conceived, and as I have elsewhere
Part 2.
made it probable. But there is this exception against it, as to the thing we
are now about, that it seems to suppose the more general purity procured by it
to abide, and men's affections, or actions only to have some pollution in them.
Whereas those, concerning whose rebaptization we entreat, either never had, or
have forfeited their baptismal regeneration, or fallen off altogether from that
Religion to which it belongs.

Now that, which in my opinion ought to have the first place in our thoughts is
the no direction there is in Scripture for the repetition of Baptism, where the
like Apostasy, or impiety has happened, but rather a direction to a contrary
course. And I instance for the proof thereof in Simon Peter, after he had
denied, and forsworn his Master; And in Simon Magus, after he had proceeded to
so great a degree of impiety, as to offer the Apostles money for the gift of
the Holy Ghost. For to the former of these even S. Peter, we find no other
washing directed, save that Luke 22.61.
of penitential tears; Nay we find him admonished Luke 22.22.
, as well as licensed after that conversion of his to set himself to the
strengthening of his brethren. Which in all probability he would not have been
without a foregoing Baptism, if our Savior had meant for the future, that
nothing but a new Baptism should be able to convert such Apostates to himself:
His passing over so great an Apostasy in a prime disciple of his upon his bare
repentance being apt to encourage other men to presume of the same unto
themselves. Neither will it avail to say, that this instance will not reach the
case, because it does not appear, that S. Peter was baptized before. For
supposing that he were not, which yet (as was heretofore Part 2.
observed) in all probability he was, the case of the Rebaptizers will not be
rendered better, but rather so much the worse for it. For if he was not
baptized before, there was the more reason he should be baptized now, if
nothing but a new Baptism generally can wash away Apostasy. The instance of
Simon Magus is yet more clear, and unexceptionable, where the regeneration of
Baptism has not been before received, or forfeited after the receiving of it.
For that Simon Magus either never received, or had now lost the Baptismal
regeneration, is evident from the words of S. Peter to him; That holy man not
only cursing him Acts 8.20.
for his offer of money, but telling him in express terms, that he had neither
lot, nor part in the matter Acts 8.21.
of Christianity, and that his heart was not right in the sight of God, in fine
that he perceived, that he was in the gall of bitterness Acts 8.23.
, and in the bond of iniquity. Which notwithstanding, the same S. Peter
directed him only Acts 8.22.
to repent of that his wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of his
heart might be forgiven him. Which how could S. Peter have done, especially in
so notorious a case, if a second Baptism had been necessary to wash away that
sinful estate, which the former Baptism had not purged, or at least which had
returned after it.

My second Argument against the repetition of Baptism is the no necessity of it
in either of the forementioned instances. As will appear whether we consider it
as a means of obliging us to that piety, which our Religion requires, or as a
means of conveying the graces of it. For in the former notion it is as really,
and effectually an obligation to a Christian life in an unsincere person, or
one who afterward apostatizeth, as if it had been never so heartily intended;
The obligation thereof arising not from the secret sentiments of the person,
that is baptized, or his constancy to his profession, but from the nature of
the thing it self, and the Institution of God, that prescribed it. Provided
therefore we take upon us the Sacrament it self, we tie our selves by it
without remedy, neither can there therefore be any need of our obliging our
selves by it a second time, unless he, who instituted it, should require it of
us. It is true indeed so far as we have departed from it whether by Apostasy,
or impiety, so far it will concern us to own it again to our Lord, and Master,
by our repentance of the breaches of it, and a repetition of the same vows unto
him; And it will concern us too, if the Church requires it, to satisfy that
also, that we do so repent, and will amend. But as both the one, and the other
may be done without the repetition of our Baptism, so a frank acknowledgment
with our mouths, together with the receipt of the Lord's Supper, may very well
serve for those purposes, because serving a like to declare them. But it may be
the principal difficulty in this affair lies in what concerns Baptism as a
means of conveying the graces of it, and particularly our regeneration, and new
birth. And I must confess I was for some time at a loss what to think in it,
till I considered that the Sacrament of Baptism was not either a physical
cause, or conveyer of Grace, that we should think the grace of it could not be
in the receiver of Baptism, unless it were either presently produced in him, or
conveyed to him, but a moral instrument thereof, or a means to which God has
annexed the promise of it. For such a one by the favor of that God, who has
annexed the promise of his Grace unto it, may operate at a distance, as well as
in presence, and accordingly may convey it to the receiver of Baptism, as well
after his Baptism, as together with it, yea convey it after the baptized person
has lost it, as well as it did at first. Which supposed, the only remaining
difficulty will be, whether we may reasonably expect it from God, supposing the
baptized person to return, and repent. A thing, which they have little reason
to question, who believe God to allow a second Baptism upon it, and we shall
have far less, if we reflect upon the former instances of Peter, and Simon
Magus. For if God will allow of the remedy of a second Baptism upon repentance,
why not also allow the first Baptism to be the means of conveying his graces,
and our health, and soundness? Especially, when the breaches of it come to be
acknowledged, and the vow thereof renewed. And if God accepted of S. Peter upon
his bare repentance, and directed Simon Magus to no other remedy, than that,
and prayer; We may as well suppose, that if he accept us at all, he will accept
us upon that, and our old Baptism, and so make that cooperate to the
respective graces of it.

These I take to be sufficient Arguments against the repetition of Baptism, and
the more, because they also suggest as satisfactory answers to what has been
before alleged for it. For neither can they be looked upon as Heathen, and
consequently as standing in need of a new Baptism, who however they may have
renounced the old, whether by their Impiety, or Apostasy, yet ever were, and
ever will be under the obligation of it. And much less after their repentance,
and return can they be thought to want it toward the producing of that
regeneration, which they are without: Their former Baptism, through the favor
of him who annexed the promise of regeneration to that Sacrament, being as
effectual for that purpose, as any new Baptism what soever. Baptism is indeed
generally necessary to regeneration, it is so necessary that no man living can
promise it to himself without it; But if it be of as much value, as necessity,
it may, and no doubt will induce him, who is the dispenser of his own graces,
to confer it upon a former, as well as upon any new administration of it.

FINIS.

