KNAVERY IN ALL TRADES: OR, THE Coffee-House. A COMEDY. As it was ACTED in the
CHRISTMAS Holidays by several Apprentices With great Applause.

With LICENSE.

LONDON, Printed by I. B. for W. Gilbertson, and H. Marsh; and are to be Sold
at the Royal Exchange, Fleet Street, and Westminster Hall, 1664.

PERSONS NAMES.
COmpound, a Vintner. Rasey, his Drawer. Pickle, an Oyleman. Samphire his Man.
Pepper, a Grocer. Smoke his Man. Subtler a Victualler. Froth; his Tapster.
Mahoone, the Coffee-Man. Hunt-Cliffe, a Cast-Cou^tier. Sweet-Lips, Wife to
Compound. ^live, Wife to Pickle. Frail, Wife to Pepper. Compliance, Wife to
Subtler. Rampant, Wife to Mahoone. A Man servant, and A Maid servant, belonging
to the Coffee-House. Several Gentlemen, and other Persons.
Knavery in all Trades.
Or, the Coffee-House.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Froth, Rasy, and Smoke. Froth. I Have made an escape as hard as one of
Jupiters to see thee, Rasy; The heat of our morning business is over; and now
my Stomack's more raw and cold then the weather; therefore prithee one half
Pint of the best, if thou love me.


Rasy. I know thy meaning, thou shall have it Lad in a pint Pot.

Exit.
Smoke. An hon^st Rogue I warrant him.


Froth. Here can I drink at any time a Pint of Sack would make a Cat speak
Greek or Hebrew for a Groat.


Smoke. 'T must be thy Grandams groat, then.


Froth. A good plain Harry, or a Besses do, or any Coin will tantamount to
four-pence.


Smoke. How, man?


Froth. True man; there is an Art in it will puzel all the Poets and Legerdemane
-- men living. A friend in a corner is as good as a penny in a man's Purse, I
need say no more.


Smoke. It Is good, to be acquainted with such a friend.


Froth. Creep e're you go; deserve him first, every man is not Froth, I nick
you there; one courtesy requires another, so much for that, ka me, ka thee.


Enter Rasy. Rasy. Score a pint of White Wind in the Rose there.


Smoke. White Wind! we called for Sack.


Froth. Pass by his Ignorance; friend have thou a Pallat? here is to thee.


Smoke. By all the Wares in my Master's shop, and my Mistresses Compter too,
excellent Sack.


Rasy. Hold your peace, cannot you fare well, but you must cry Roast-meat?


Froth. This Smoke is such a vapor.


Smoke. Are you for a Pipe? I have right special in my Box.


Froth. Would choke a Dog I warrant it.


Smoke. The best Spain affords I promise you.


Froth. I care not if I take a whiffe, -- what say thou Rasy?


Rasy. I dare not, it is too soon, come, mind your drinking, one Quart more,
that is pint a piece, and we have done.


Froth. Gramercy, honest Rasy; and so have at thee.


Smoke. Bring a Light, and Pipes too.


Rasy. Well, I shall.

Exit Rasy.
Froth. Now sirrah, say I Have brought you acquainted with a trusty Trojan, one
that does prize his friend, that is such as I am, that scorns to be behind hand
in requital. If thou will be of our Society, then study that.


Smoke. By this hand thou know I am as prodigal of my Master's Goods as
another can be of his; If I can serve Rasy in any thing relates to our Trade he
shall command me.


Froth. why, that is well said; I Will tell him so.


Smoke. Pray do, I warrant him a witty fellow: I like his way of scoring
White Wind for Sack, it is ingenious, and undiscoverable.


Froth. Unless the Master come into the Room, and smell into the Pot.


Smoke. That Is but a hazard, and care must manage it.


Froth. Thou do inspect well.


Smoke. I am not ignorant of good fellowship Froth; and have been at the like
sport in the City, when the visible Pint of Sack has past the Bar, and the
merry quart Bottle by cleanely conveyance brought in the Breeches, and
dedicated to good fellows; and now and then (as the house fills, and Company
resolved to stay,) a Quart scor'd in the Crown and brought to us in the Myter,
for which the elevated Gentlemen pay, and we pass upon Paroll, that is, to
return again, and be merry upon the like account; and these are kindnesses I
meet withal.


Froth. And how do thou requite 'em.


Smoke. Know Froth, I hate to be ingrate, I will not boast my doing^; but while
my master has Rasons, Currants, Figs, Sugar, Nutmeg, Cloves, all sorts of Spices
and Tobacco, they shall march in Pounds and Ounces to my friends, Lads.


Enter Rasey. Froth. Thou will deserve us then; come sprightly Rasey, we thirst
for thee.


Rasey. As I Am a Christian the b^st Gentlemen comes to the house tastes not
better; and so my love to you.


Froth. Thou do well, here is one that would be one of us, and though I say it
an intelligible puppy, one will come to hand upon a good occasion; Mr. Pepper's
man the Grocer.


Rasey. How do you call him Gynney?


Froth. No Smoke, or what you will, but certainly his proper name is Smoaker,
for that the Pipe is never out of his mouth; however he is good natured, and
true hearted.


Rasey. The fitter for our Company.


Froth. He swears he is so taken with thine, thou shall not want any thing his
Masters Shop affords.


Rasey. I thank ye, Froth knows me well enough.


Froth. And thou know me well enough Rasey:


Rasey. I Rogue, we are brothers.


Smoke. I hope you will entitle me too, and if you want a fourth man, I Will
bring one that is true blew, an Oyle-man's Apprentice, who shall furnish you
better, and with more variety then he that cries your Olives, your Capers, your
Samphire, your Barbaries, your Cowcumbers, your Anchoves, and your new Pickled
Oysters, and cost you nothing.


Froth. By all means let us know him.


Smoke. A kind soul, and will spend his Money freely too.


Rasey. Or else he does nothing, -- will he Game.


Smoke. I never tried him.


Froth. Now thou talk of Gaming, what is become of the little Dapper Clark,
how does he hold out?


Rasey. Pox take him, he won four pound of me but the other day, I hope to
retreive it.


Smoke. Thou have only drawn him in.


Rasey. No, hang him, were he as good at Clerkship as he is at Gaming, he would get
more Money then his Hide could carry.


Smoke. Is he so good at it.


Rasey. It is his prayers and his daily bread; and yet I know sometimes he
wants a dinner, but that is when his Mint is broke and he wants recruting; for
the best of Gamsters does not always win, and then the Rogue will spend high
when he has it, Whores a little, and keeps himself neat and trim, fit for good
Company.


Smoke. By this hand Rasey, now we are Brothers (for I will be so whether thou will or no) if thou be excellent at that sport, I will bring thee acquainted
with such a young fry of Apprentices thou shall want for no Commodities.


Froth. By this hand I Will go snip, and so shall thou.


Rasey. Agreed, agreed.


Smoke. Why should not we four that is our brother Oyleman, (as yet unknown to
you,) our brother Vintner here, our brother Tapster, and Ego my own self,
brother to all, love one another? the Drapery, and the Mercery Pedees comply to
cheat their Masters in gross, to please their Concubines, ('twere Porter like
to say Whors,) and we never cheat our Masters but in parcels to please our
selves and keep up merry Society, and for ought I know our Masters are greater
Cheats then we are, what say you Brothers.


Rasey. A learned speech, you have hit right, -- within, why Rasey. I come, I
come; the truth on it is I could say something as to our own calling, as to
Balm and Shamlee, the merry mixtures, stumings, and sophistications, but it is
an ill Bird defiles its own Nest they say; and truly I think it not necessary
for a man to discover the adulterations and deceits in his own Calling.


Froth. Though we can say something as to our Callings too, it is wisdom to
hold our peace, the truth on it is, Cheating like the Wandering Jew is every
where; but of all cheats I hate your Coffee-House cheat.


Rasey. Why a Turk's as bad as a Jew, if not worse.


Smoke. For my part I think they are principl'd alike.


Rasey. But the vanity of our Nation is such, that rather then we shall
cheat'em they will bring in the devil to do it.


Smoke. A Song in three parts, the Jew, the Turk, and the Devil.


Froth. Troth Rasey some of your quality are served in their kind, and suffer
for their own sins, what had they to do to take another calling upon them,
to sell Ale in silver Tankerds, ordered with Sugar, and a nick name, and sell
it for 6d. a Pint, half pint? and then Beer put into a Rhenish Wine Cask and
sold for March Beer, strewn with a little Sugar at a groat a Tankerd, and all
to cozen the poor Victualler.


Rasey. That my Master was never guilty of.


call within Rasey. Froth. I do not say he was.


Rasey. I am coming, -- however I have a plaguey spleen at the Coffee-House that
cheats us all.


Smoke. No, he cheats not us, we furnish him with Tobacco, and he pays
honestly, but still he is but a Turk as the Song goes.


Rasey. Would I could meet with some Poet that would handle the Humors of the
Coffee-House a little, as I Am a Christian I Would be civil to him.


Froth. I know one, Rasey, that does love thee dearly; I must confess he cares
not much for me, yet he will take his mornings draught in Ale, to please his
company, but Sack is his best mistress, Coffee he abhominates.


Rasey. Prithee bring him hither.


Call within, why Rasey. Froth. He has been here, and thou can not but know
him.


Rasey. I come, I come, -- I am more called upon, then any servant in the
house; look you there is my Groat, -- pay at the Bar, I Will take the Quart-pot
down into the Cellar.


Froth. Here Is our two Groats, prithee do thee pay the Reckoning.


Rasey. I will.


Smoke. Deer Rasey I am thy humble servant, by this hand when next we meet I
will requite this kindness.


Froth. You Rogue I must have a pound of Verina's, for a friend in the mean
time.


Smoke. Thou shall have it.


Froth. Come go to our house and't shall not cost thee a farthing stay all day.


Smoke. I dare not do that.


Exeunt. ACT I. SCENE II.
Enter Mahoone and his Maid. Mahoone YOu damm shade ver be de hoar your Metres,
and de shack nape dogbolt Rog a me man, begar dis devell Vife mind nothing in
de Varld but de foke she spoil all a de men me keep, she he a de Bed to breed
leshery, and call a me men to rub her Gumms, begar, and let me do all a de
varke my self; ver be de hoar you shade.


Maid. My Mistress forsooth.


Mahoone. Yes a dat Bish.


Maid. She is rising forsooth.


Mahoone. De gran pock take her pour me, vat ave you done vid de milk for de
Chocolet?


Maid. It is within Sir.


Mahoone. Vid in, diable be vid in der be no ting in de Pan begar.


Maid. It is in the Bole forsooth.


Mahoone. Vat boll you shade? de boll ver dat hoar your Metres do pish.


Maid. Yes forsooth.


Mahoone. Fesh me de Boul hedder; it vill be day presant de Company come to de
owse, noting for them begar; call de dog Rog a my man.


Maid. Yes forsooth.

Exit Maid.
Mahoone. O de devell? dis hoar Bish my vife no come yet? a begar; he dat marry
de Anglish woman marry the Serpent, de Snake in bosom, de devell and all, dey
do noting but keep a deire Bed and tink on dyable, vat be dis? vere be de milk
you shade.


Enter Maid with the Boul. Maid. The Cat it seems has lapt it up Sir.


Mahoone. A de Dog, bish Cat, de shade my maid, de hoar mine vife, and the Dog
hores son my man, begar dey will undo me, fesh me de Eggs you damm shade.


Maid. Yes forsooth.


Mahoone. Hoar, you shall no yes a forsoot, me go my self you be de lucky hoar
shade you shall no go.

Exit Mahoone.
Maid. A body had better be out of their life then live with such a mandring
hell hound, he will find the Eggs broke too, and then I shall lead such a life all
this day. --


Enter Mahoone with Egg shells in a Basket. Mahoone. O diable! vere be de Eggs
you shade, bish, damm bish hoar, shade vere be de Eggs? eere be de Sells? you
shade hoar vere be de Eggs?


Maid. You see, they are broke sir.


Mahoone. Broak a, you damm shade old Nick break a your neck, pour dat broak!
begar you damm shade, de hoar my vife, and de dog Rog a my man break me to
sivers, to noting by and by; me vill no dure dis begar, take you dat varming
one, two, tree, four times.


Maid. I could not help it sir.


Mahoone. Elpe it! begar you elp noting, -- O shack Rog my dog man, very good
time ven all my tings be spoild den you come a de luck on it.


Enter his man rubbing his eyes. Man. Why sir it is not so late, it is not day
yet.


Mahoone. Begar dat be brave no day yet! dat be very fine; shacknape vill you
lie abed pour de day? begar you be no servan pour moy, Mine Trade be in de
Nite* Ater de Teefe break de owse ver ave dey to come but to de Coffee-Owse?
vere come a de young Clerks, de Prentices ven dey be drinc but to the
Coffee-Owse? ver come de Plotters, de men of design, but to de Coffee-Owse?
and in de Nite; the best time; begar dey be de best Customers too; begar dey
drink mush of de Coffee, and mush of de Chocolet begar: now be you no Rog shack
dog?


Man. I am no Rogue nor no Dog.


Mahoone. Begar you be de Rog and de dog, you be de one, two, tree, four, sis
Rogs and de dogs, me tell you dat now.


Wife. Bless me what ado is here, what is the matter?


Enter his Wife. Mahoone. De matter! go hang your self shade hoar, begar you be
de hoar of all de Varld.


Wife. I, I, we know your words no slander.


Mahoone. Begar you vid dis shack dog, dis shack nape, dis ogoly cur my man and
no mind my business, de Eggs be broke, and de milk a be spild for de Chocolet.


Wife. Is that it, have you made all this din for a little flatten milk, and a
few rotten Eggs, they all stood you not in three pence.


Mahoone. No matter for dat; dough the milk be stale, de ^etter to make a de
Chocolet, dough de ^ggs be rotten dey be better for de Chocolet, and den de
Sugar make all fine begar: but you be carless, mind noting for your profit, let
all de Rog in de Town come upon you, every Barber, Fidilere, Tayleer and
Tapster be all Turks, now begar, and sell de Coffee Bougra de Anglish dey be
all sheats begar, me can live better in any place of de varld den in dis
Country, me travail every vere and no man take mine Trade from me, and dis be
all long a you, may foy, you tell my gredience to every body, pock take you for
your pain.


Wife. You are always so jealouse of me sweetheart.


Mahoone. Diable sweet art; begar you be de cunning hoar, me jealouse of you
ha, ha, he, ave me no reasons you shade, begar me ave no Chocolet pour de
Company to day, and de Coffee two tree Gallons begar de pock shack dog, de Cat
sirreverence into de Caldron, faugh, faugh, fe, fe, fe.


Man. Oh sir let it boil well, a Dog or Cats Turd is as good as the Berry it
self, 'twill give a rare hogo sir, and make the drink the better.


Mahoone. De better! dat be very fine, you make me leeve a dat, but me no care,
it shall do, -- you damm shade go your ways and knock de devil up for some
Eggs and some Milk, begar me loose vun silling by dis business, devil fesh you
for a hoar.


Wife. You are a foul mouth base fellow.


Mahoone. Begar me took you from Dog and Bish-yard and made you de woman, and
you prove de hoar, de damm hoar a de varld.


Wife. If I were never so bad I were good enough for a damned Turk.


Mahoone. Diable! me kick you begar unto de Devell, and make you de hoar of de
House.


Maid. Good Master. --


Man. I pray, sir. --


Wife. Let the Rogue come, the Renegado Rogue, I Will give him his Passport.


man and maid stand between Them. Mahoone. Vat, have you got your Shampians
here you hoar, Bish, shade, dis be very fine. knock. So much for dat, -- get
you up de Shamber, the Company come in; me make no noise, open de door you
shack dog, and you shade my maid; get you de Milk and de Eggs Presto: begar me
vill do strange ting before Nite.


Wife. Hang you Rascal.


Exeunt severally. ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Hunt-Cliffe, and Mrs. Sweet-Lips. HVnt-Cliffe. How now, where is thy
Husband?


Sweet-Lips. Gone into the City.


Hunt-Cliffe. How has he looked on thee since he Trapan'd us at Epsome, prithee?


Sweet-Lips. With the same eyes he did before, and as lovingly faith la, only
sometimes he will tell me jestingly 'twas a wild frolique in me; and so it was
indeed, we might have been far more securely merry nearer hand.


Hunt-Cliffe. Do think he is not Jealouse?


Sweet-Lips. If he be, he shows it not.


Hunt-Cliffe. How does he speak of me?


Sweet-Lips. Very well faith La; he thinks you a right honest man, and shall
not loose a penny by ye, he had rather trust you then a hundred Courtiers.


Hunt-Cliffe. I believe him, it is safer to trust one Man then a Hundred. What
will thou drink this morning?


Sweet-Lips. Any thing.


Hunt-Cliffe. A Cup of Hypocras, 'twill warm thee within Wench; come kiss me,
poor Rogue do not want a Course this morning?


claps her Cheeks. Sweet-Lips. You talk wildly, you have not slept to night
well certainly. Who Is at Bar there? within anon, anon. Rasey bring a Cup of
Hypocras for Mr. Hunt-Cliffe enter Rasey. here, and make a Toast.


Rasey. I shall forsooth.

Exit Rasey.
Sweet-Lips. I hope dear Hunt-Cliffe you are no friend unto the Coffee-House.


Hunt-Cliffe. I hate the Liquor perfectly, give me the Sack, it breeds good
Blood.


Sweet-Lips. The other is a dryer, a monstrous dryer, and the greatest enemy
unto the affairs relate unto our Sex that can be; if you love me you must hate
that, my Husband is too much addicted to it.


Hunt-Cliffe. Let fools, and Sots affect it, Wisemen slight it.


Enter Compound. Compound. Oh Squire Hunt-Cliffe, how fares your body?


Hunt-Cliffe. It will fare better by and by, we wait for Wine.


Enter Rasey with the Wine and Toast. Sweet-Lips. But new come in I protest my
Dear -- look thee, the Wine is not touched yet.

Hunt-Cliffe. Come, here is to thee, it is Hypocras man.


Compound. I care not, I Have newly drank Coffee.


Hunt-Cliffe. What? an enemy to thy own Calling!


Compound. Some two or three hours hence I Am for you:


Hunt-Cliffe. I shall Sup here to Night.


Sweet-Lips. And welcome too, Sir.


Hunt-Cliffe. Some friends of mine are newly come to Town, I am obliged to
Treat.


Sweet-Lips. What will you have provided sir?


Hunt-Cliffe. A douzen of Cocks, and half a douzen of Teale, as many
Partridges, and a couple of Pullets, will do the business.


Sweet-Lips. They shall be ready sir.


Hunt-Cliffe. Twixt six and seven.


Compound. I like not things that run at six and sevens.


Hunt-Cliffe. I prithee fail me not.


Compound. You have my Wife's word for it sir.


Hunt-Cliffe. I must to Court about some special business; add this Wine to my
Account.

Exit Hunt-Cliffe.
Compound. So -- to your Account! I think you will make no Account on it, still
scoring: I never saw a penny of his Money.


Sweet-Lips. He brings good Company to the House, my Dear:


Compound. And always scores his part o'th Reckoning; a precious purchase,
what will begot at last by such a Customer? prithee wilt hold out?


Sweet-Lips. He Will pay thee all my Dear, I Will warrant it.


Compound. Nay, then I Am in a likelihood indeed to be well paid, if you be his
Security.


Sweet-Lips. Not so neither my Dear; his Money he says will come up very
shortly.


Compound. It has been long a coming, and the truth is, would I could see it
once, I have small mind to trust him longer.


Sweet-Lips. As you please for that my Dear; but take my word the Gentleman's a
very civil Gentleman.


Compound. I wish he prove so.


Exeunt. Enter Mrs. Frail, and Smoke. Mrs. Frail. What, does you Master think
to Coope me up in his Counter? faith sir no, he takes his pleasure, and I Will
take mine; let him look to his Commodities himself, I have other Commodities in
Town to look after beside his, and as I take it a great deal better: if he
calls for me when he comes in, tell him I Am gone to see my sister Touchstone.


Smoke. I shall forsooth.


Mrs. Frail. And I pray keep you the house, though your shoos be made of
running Leather.


Smoke. Yes, yes.

Exit.
Enter Mrs. Olive. Frail. Sister Olive, how do thou do?


Olive. I came purposely to see you.


Frail. Wilt go along with me to the Play?


Olive. No, no, I dare not.


Frail. How dare not! art thou a fool, I Would fain see whether my Husband could
bring me to that pass or not, I believe I should break his heart first.


Olive. Oh fie, do not say so.


Frail. I protest I should, why, woman we were not born to be their slaves,
it is our selves make our selves so.


Olive. You talk merrily.


Frail. And so might thou, had thou not been a fool; thy own good nature
first subjected thee; and now thy Husband keeps thee at a Beck; thou were an
humble Worm and he will tread on thee, spurn thee to nothing, triumph in his
Tyrany, and thou remain a Mome, a suffering Idiot.


Olive. You wrong my Husband there, he scorns to beat me.


Frail. But he does worse, he pinches back or belly; or else thy Purss I Am
sure'on't; ^he'l not spare thee a penny to buy Pepins or scarce Pinns.


Olive. He Is somewhat wary I confess, but not so bad, as you would make him.


Frail. There Is our sister Touchstone the Goldsmith's Wife, she leads a life
as merry as the day is long.


Olive. The happier she; and yet you do not hear me complain, I am contented.


Frail. So are patient fools; but women that have wit, are not so tame: if
thou will see a Play it shall cost thee nothing, I Will warrant thee a Ticket,
she has a friend, a Player, a pretty fellow that at any time will pleasure her,
and her friends too.


Olive. I do not love to buy my pastime at so dear a rate.


Frail. How like an Ass thou talk, it is wondrous pretty to have a Player
hand us into the House; and when the Play is done out to the Tavern, where we
are merry, Laugh until we tickle.


Olive. Without your Husbands!


Frail. Or we were worse then mad; yet now and then Touchstone, himself comes
to us, an easy natured man, full of belief, dare trust the Player and his
wife together, even in the Bed he is so fond of both.


Olive. Oh fie upon it, there will no good come on it.


Frail. And if her friend take her to Finsbury, (as now and then we must go
see our Cosen supposed living somewhere,) she leaves word, and he perhaps
soberly follows after, and if she is gone from thence, or never was there, she
is prepared with an excuse for either, against she comes home; your Players are
huge witty and fit a Woman for that purpose rarely; which the good man does
hugg with eager credit, and gives his friend thanks for the care he had of his
dear wife. This is the fruit of Tickets; now if you will see a Play, be one of us,
we will find you Tickets and your Husband too.


Olive. I am not grown so desperate I thank you, nor you I hope, although you
talk so wildly.


Frail. Is mirth termed wildness then? prithee turn Recluse, shut thy self up
in shop, and stinck a Month, then come abroad to air thy self, and see who
will endure thy Company; what, deny to see a Play? refuse a noble Ticket?
tha'rt Earth already, doubtless.


Olive. 'T makes no matter, you will ticket it so long that at the last I fear
you will come behind hand in your Reckoning; I Will trouble you no more sweet
Mistress Frail.

Exit.
Frail. It Is not desired, good Robin Wisdoms Daughter. The Baggage though has
touched me to the quick; pox take the Reckoning, would it might miscarry, but if
it be, here is one I Am sure concerned in it.


Enter Hunt-Cliffe. Hunt-Cliffe. What talking to thy self?


Frail. A thing came in my head that did direct my eyes down to my Belly, but
let that pass -- methinks you are mighty smug as though you came but lately from
your dear beloved Sweet-Lips.


Hunt-Cliffe. Now thou vexest me; I must confess she courts me with as eager an
appetite as ever, but I slight her, the thought of thee draws all my faculties
unto their proper center thy dear Bosom; but why so trim art thou for walking,
love?


Frail. I am invited by a friend of mine, a sprightly jovial Girl, one I call
sister, to see a Play.


Hunt-Cliffe. I prithee what is her Name?


Frail. One that is not in your List I promise you; fie Hunt-Cliffe fie, will
you never leave enquiring after new Faces, where is the love to me you seem so
much to glorify your self in?


Hunt-Cliffe. Do thou distrust my love, dear heart, my soul and all that do
belong to it are thy Vassals: the Light's not constanter unto the day, then I to
thee, and do thou doubt me dearest?


Frail. Nay, nay, with her I dare adventure thee, she is my friend, I know she
will not wrong me, besides she has a friend some say dare fight, and he a
strict eye carries over her.


Hunt-Cliffe. So let him; thou art my Hysperides. But hear thee is my Band and
half shirts done?


Frail. They Will be brought home within a day or two. Will you go with us to the
Play?


Hunt-Cliffe. If you command me, but you know my stock is low, my Moneys will
not come to Town this month yet, and I hate when I Am frolique to be scanted.


Frail. I have a Piece; doubtless she will bring another to serve her friend; and
that will do it I warrant thee.


Hunt-Cliffe. Well I Am thy servant still.


Exeunt: Enter Smoke and Samphire. Smoke. What wind drove thee this way?


Samphire. The breath of my Mistresses commands, I am sent to a Customer with
these two Barells of Anchoves.


Smoke. When will thou remember me:


Samphire. Oh -- for thy friends Rasey and Froth.


Smoke. I you Rogue did you not promise it.


Samphire. And will perform't I vow with the first opportunity -- where is thy
Mistress? I need not ask for thy Master, I know where he is, he and mine are at
the old sport, the merry game.


Smoke. And my Mistress is at hers by this time or I Am mistaken, she will not be
one of the last couple in Hell I warrant her.


Samphire. A shrewd woman able to break a man's back if he had no other ways
to do it, but I Have a Mistress so far from those ways, she is as modest, as
loving, and as careful a wife as any in the City; when he has been out all
night and perhaps lost twenty or thirty pound at Dice, she takes no notice
on it, but bids him welcome home in the morning with all the sweet words she can
devise, gives him a Cawdle, has him to bed, and there he sleeps till three or
four a Clock in the afternoon, and then he is ready for the sport again.


Smoke. A brave woman, mirour of Patience.


Samphire. Nay, I Have over heard him swear unto himself, he feared he should be
damned for wronging so good a wife, and by this hand the very thought of her
sets me into a trembling; when I Am about to steal Oil, Oysters, Anchoves, or
any other Comodity to pleasure a friend, but when I consider that it cannot
last, and he must break if he holds on his course, I then take hardy grace and
make me friends of the unrighteous Mammon.


Smoke. Let me not live if it ben't the wisest course, I promise you I practice
it, I find my Master draw one part of the house his way, and my Mistress draws
another part her way; and if I (lying in the Shop) don't draw another part my
way, let the Rafters of the house fall upon my head.


Samphire. I like that well, there is but one way to that Wood, a false Key, my
friend.


Smoke. I hope thou do not think me unprovided of such an Engine.


Samphire. We shall be brothers by and by, how could I else (my Mistress being
so over -- vigilant,) accomodate my friends and my self too, and send Time
merrily about his business.


Smoke. Froth has the same trick too, and so has Rasey (but not a word but mum
I charge thee Samphire,) we can keep at our Randevouze from one till five in the
morning, and enter the Tenements with such security as though we had been
Tenants there all night.


Samphire. When shall we meet?


Smoke. I Will give thee notice.


Samphire. shall we not drink together?


Smoke. A Cup or two at the next door, I Will get a friend to take care of my
Shop the while, and call me if need be -- Remember Rogue your promise to my
friends.


Samphire. Pugh, we will talk of that by and by.


Exeunt. Enter Subtler, Compliance delivered (as in the Bar,) and Froth
attending. Subtler. I protest I never knew such bad Trading in my life.


Froth. Every one complains sir, except the Coffee-Houses, and they are never
empty.


Subtler. They are some hinderance indeed, especially in a morning, but we have
Interlopers nearer us, God bless us from a Gun; each paltry Coachman, Butler,
or Cast-serving-man now set up the Victualling Trade; the time has been, we
have not had a Room empty before this time o'th day, that Company (as one may
say) have sat on one another Lap.


Compliance. And many turned away too, sweet heart, which we would willingly
now entertain:


Subtler. Pox take their Receptacles, how do they fill, below?


Froth. ^ut thinly truly sir, take one time with another I believe our Custom
is as great as theirs.


Subtler. I think not, Froth; I do not find it so in my Accounts, and yet I
understand not any reason why Gentlemen should forsake my house, I never was
wanting in my due respects and regard toward them, and have endeavored to
please all Companyes, and distaste none.


Compliance. That has been my care too sweet heart.


Froth. Some men think themselves bound to come always to one house, and love
to see the fashion of others, you know sir new Brooms sweep clean; and new
Comers promise much to Customers.


Subtler. And perform as little after a while; but I have been civil to many,
not only trusted 'em with my Commodities, but lent 'em money out of my Purss,
which is not yet discharged; methinks Gentlemen (as they are Gentlemen) (I name
no man,) should think of such civilities, I see 'em daily frequent those
places, (though they think they dance in Tenibris) and could take a course that
would not please 'em, but I had rather (and 'twould be part of satisfaction to
me) enjoy 'em at my house as formerly, for I owe much civility to a Gentleman,
and 'twould go against the hair for me to trouble 'em.


Compliance. Yet Gentlemen should do like Gentlemen.


Subtler. That Is true sweet heart, but every like is not the same. Do You see how
they flock in yonder? I protest if we have no better Trading, I shall never
leave thee money enough when I am dead, to be married in thy white Satin Gown
to another, as thy Predecessor was; no, no, Hercules then supported but one
victualling house, and now he has three. Watches. More Company -- they are past
the Gun -- and the Crown -- they come hither now I warrant ye -- welcome
Gentlemen.


Enter two or three Gentlemen. 1. Gent. Give us that when we are going


Compliance. What are you pleased to have?


2. Gent. A Brick -- and what --


1. Gent. Half a Breast of Mutton.


Compliance. You shall -- show a Room there.


Exeunt. Froth. Will you please to walk in?


Enter 2. or 3. more: Subtler. Here are more sweet heart -- welcome Gentlemen
-- why where are you there? show these Enter Servant. Gentlemen a Room.


Compliance. What will you please to have Gentlemen?


1. Gent. How -- what say you! a couple of Chickins.


2. Gent. I, I.


Compliance. What Bread Gentlemen?


1. Gent. No Brick; Manchet, and fresh Beer.


Compliance. You shall Gentlemen, will you please to walk in?


Enter two or three Clerks. Exeunt. 1. Clerk. Mr. Subtler how do you?


Subtler. The better to see you all well Gentlemen -- where are you there --
does no man hear me? show these Gentlemen a Room.


Enter Froth. Froth. You Are welcome Gentlemen.


Compliance. What are you pleased to have?


2. Clerk. A Ma^chet or two, and your best Butter.


1. Clerk. and a Cup of nappy Ale.


Froth. That I Will promise you Gentlemen -- will you walk in?


Enter two or three more. Exeunt. Subtler. Here are more Compa^y sweet heart.


Compliance. I hope thou have complained without a cause, it may prove a good
Morning.


Subtler. Happy be lucky -- where are you there? show these Gentlemen a Room.


Enter Servant. Compliance. What will you please to have?


First. A Role, and a Cup of your best Ale.


Second. Bring me a single pot of Purle.


Compliance. You shall, you shall.


Exeunt. The Scene is drawn. ACT the Third.
Enter Pepper and Pickle. Pepper. HE has pickled you.


Pickle. And peppered you (my friend) or I Am mistaken.


Pepper. A pox take all ill luck, who brought him to us?


Pickle. The Devil upon Dun's back I think, I Am sure I Have lost seven pound.


Pepper. And I Am not much behind thee, do think he did not put the slirr,
upon us were his Dice right?


Pickle. Right for his purpose doubtless.


Pepper. I know not, but as I could guess he played the square.


Pickle. And we the Coxcombs, now could I hang my self to think upon the Carke
and care my Olive takes at home.


Pepper. I shall not fret my neck for that matter, for I have one as careless
as thine is careful, and faith we are well met; if I chance to eat a Spider I
hope thou wilt visit my Carcass in the Grave, ycliped Ludgate; there are as merry
Worms as heart can wish boy.


Pickle. Be no Lillyan Rogue, Predict not; I fear my Stars e're long will
direct me that way, if I become thy fellow Collegiate once. A short life and a
merry life we will cry; in the mean time let us tope a Pint at the Rose and so
march home.


Exeunt. En^er two or three Gentlemen. Gent. Tom, wilt drink a Glass of Wine,
or Breakfast with us?


2 Gent. Neit her.

I am but just come from the Coffee-House, and must not drink, nor eat till
Dinner time.


3 Gent. An imposition ridiculous! and he is but shallow brained inclines to
keep it.


2 Gent. That Is your opinion, but I find it otherwise:
If I abstain not some few hours, it will not Operate effectually.

3 Gent. Dares the Turks Bill avouch that Language! he has stolen it from
Salvator Winter the grand Operator; tell him I Will justify't.


1 Gent. Did not mind his words? a said he must abstain, or 'twould not do:
his Body's then beholding more to Abstinence then to the Liquor; and I will
maintain't a Cup of Ale-berry, or Warme-Broth exhibited to his small Guts,
observing lesser time then now he foolishly prescribes himself, shall actuate
in all parts of his Body, and do his business better.


3 Gent. Abandon it. A currish cynicall Drink; I am persuaded the first
Inventer was Diogenes Canes, an utter Enemy to sweet Society.


1. Gent. It is supposed (and credited by most) the Berry grew upon a Bramble,
near the River Stix, and the Devil to congratulate his Coze the Turk, after a
mighty slaughter, made on the Christians, sent a graft of it to Turkey, where
it since has spread it self, and like to Locus overrun the Country; That it
being grown both troublesome, and loathsome, the Turk (to ridd his Country
often) Transports it, and sends it by the basest of his People, with a large
sale of most Non-sensicall virtue, to vend it amongst the Christians, and so
poison 'em.


3 Gent. Much probabillity in it, believe me, Tom; for look but on the color of
the Liquor, and if it don't resemble Stix in self, never trust Complexions, nor
believe old Poets; and then the Scent on it does conclude it came from old
Gehenna, Lucifers deep Furnace, a stench to stifle virtue and good manners.


2. Gent. A learned Lecture!


1 Gent. Nay, it is most pernicious unto the brain, it fires the Pericranium,
disorders all the faculties, presents Ideas most delusive; Treason, Murder,
(the hand helps to ambition) twins of villainy: Brutus ('it is thought) drank
heartily of it when he designed the death of Royal Caesar; and Cataline Caroust
it with more greediness, then the blood of slaves; The Friar that murdered
Harry the Fourth of France drank of it; Vaux and Noll (the last grand
Conspirator) tossed it up and made no bones on it: (Treason went down merrily.) It
is a drink fit for dark Lanthorn men, but such as love their reason, and the
light, will walk our way (boy) drink good Sack, and laugh.


2 Gent. Prithee let me go, do not bayt me thus.


1 Gent. As I Am a friend to goodness, it is my fear (if thou continu'st longer
in thy error) thou'st be detected in some Pamphlet, for an Idiot, but a man of
far design. I would not have Treason lurk under this thin hide of thine, for
there the danger lies, or Caesar speaks untruth, (with Reverence.)


2 Gent. All this will not do.


3 Gent. But mark the folly, Tom, of you Coffee-House hunters you pretend it
does preserve your health, keeps you alive better then the Juice of Li^num
vite, or Aqua-Mirabilis; when (for pr^batum) the^e was hanged last Sessions a
precious Pick-pocket that drank it frequently, and with the like observance, as
thou d^st; and yet you see, mortus est, nay, I am confident, that had thou
brought a Gallon on it to the Gallows, and made him drink it, 'twould not have
saved his life: where rests the virtue of your Horse-pond-Liquor then?


2 Gent. Well, well, this noice converts me not nor will I drink with ye.


1 Gent. Go hang thy self Jew; better Company will.

There will be ten Pound offered ere't be long, to bring some Traitor in, and I
hope to find thee.


2 Gent. Pugh, if that be all do your worst.


3 Gent. Farewell burnt bread and pudle water.


Exeunt severally. The Coffee-House discovered; three or four Tables set forth,
on which are placed small Wax-Lights, Pipes, and Diurnalls. Enter Mahoone
triming up the Tables, his Man ordering the Fire-pots and China Cups, his Wife
in the Bar, his Maid employed about the Chocolet. Mahoone. Vat be you doing
dear, hoar, shade?


Maid. I am making the Chocolet, sir.


Mahoone. make a de devell! be de Chocolet to make now? bougra! de damm hoar,
bish, shade, vill break a me, begar; she put in to a mush Milk: you shade,
hoar, une quart a de Milk, and deux quarts o de vater, vid one two Eggs, and a
little Sugar make a de boon Chocolet may foy. Vife, pray you look to her,
begar she be de hoar a de house, -- velcome, velcome, you been velcome.


Enter 2. or 3. first. Monsieur Mahoone? Bon jour.


Mahoone. Diable de Monsieur; me be no French man, me be de Country of de Turk.


second. You imitate their broken dialect.


Mahoone. Me travel all the Varld, me speak all de Lingua; damm a de Frensh, me
love a de Anglish, dix temps better, by our great Prophet Mahomet. Vat vill you
drinc?


third. Coffee, bring me a Cup of Coffee.


1. and 2. And us the like.


Mahoone. You shack dog mind, a your business. ver vill you be? vid dese
Gentlemen? Enter more Company. very good, vat vill you have?


2 Company. Coffee, Coffee.


Mahoone. Roga, mind your business; de Coffee, de boyne Coffee; de Coffee
Cordial for dese Gentlemen. Mind a your business shack nape, me tell you dat.
Begar, Gentlemen me tell you une ting, mine Coffee, be de Coffee of all de
Varld, make a de man -- ha, ha, ha -- merry, may foy; it cure a de Ish in de
Code, it make a de man strong, very good strong, dat be vorne a vay vid
venery, and de droping a de shine in une two tree score years and no more
begar, better den de devell Doctor, be sure of dat. Enter more Company. You be
velcome, vat vill you ave?


3 Company. Coffee, Coffee.


Mahoone. Coffee! you be vise men begar; Coffee! de better drinc in de Varld;
it make a de man strong, very good strong; me tell'd you dat before, to the
second Company. It make a de Turk so strong, dat une Turk kill une
douzane'Cristians for a breakfast; dat make them so mighty begar.


3 Company. Thou Wilt never leave thy braging, thou art a right French man.


Mahoone. Begar me be no Frensh man, me no lie, me tell you de true -- mind
your business dear shack nape. You be velcome: vat vill you ave?


Enter more Company. 4 Company. Chocolet.


Mahoone. Chocolet! you be very vise men for dat; de better drinc in de Varld,
it make a de man strong, very good strong, for de voman, une Turk get une
douze de enfans e're matin begar, dat make them so numerous -- you damm shade
mind a you business, and bring de Chocolet for dis Company -- you damm shade,
mind a me.


Maid. Yes, sir.


Enter more Company. Mahoone. So very good, mine Owse fill by and by; vat vill
you ave?


5 Company. Some Chocolet, and some Coffee.


Mahoone. Four boue, may foy! de Chocolet and de Coffee make a de man live for
ever! you shack dog, nape, mind a de Coffee, and you damm shade, hoar, bish,
mind de Chocolet -- me till you une ting, vud de Anglish drinc no oder drinc
den de Chocolet and de Coffee, dey vud kill all de Turks in Cristendom; and
conquer all de Varld begar.


5. Company. Thou art the lying'st fellow --


Mahoone. Me tell de true, begar, -- O so mush for dat -- vill you sit a little
farther, give room to Enter more Company. dese Gentlemen.


6. Company. With your leave Gentlemen.


Mahoone. Vat vill you ave?


6 Company. Some Coffee, and some Chocolet.


Mahoone. Very vell; begar you know de ting dat be good for de body, me knew
dat before.

Ver be you damm shade, bring de Chocolet presant.

You shack dog, pack Rog, vat do you do? mind a your business, and be Ang'd.


The several Tables take notice of the Diurnals. first. What speaks the
Diurnal?


third. It says the Turk will be here within this Month.


fourth. We were told that a Month ago, and he is not come yet: but what other
News do you hear.


fifth. The Roguish Boys at Westminster ('it is said) cry Doxyes twelve a penny.


Sixth. They are cheaper then shotten Herrings then.


first. Or Rotten Apples.


second. Pox on it, few on 'em e're were sound at Core.


seventh. What Tom, art thou there? hang me if I saw thee.


second. Nor I thee, Harry how do do?


seventh. Much at one, how does Trading walk.


second. Curssed lamely, she has the Gout in her great Toe.


third. IN faith I think (Gentlemen) it is the running Gout that vexes her; and
it is thought she will (if the disease continues) kick her heels up.


seventh. No great matter, Trade was always a Strumpet fit for any man.


fourth. But Lilly they say has put out a strange Prediction that Cucombers,
Reddish and Lettice, shall be very plentiful this year.


fifth. We shall have Sause then, get Meat where we can.


sixth. You know the Proverb more Sause then Pig.


first. Bring some more Coffee.


fourth. And Chocolet.


Mahoone. Me do your business presant.


Company at second Table. first. Why Gentlemen, look you, the thing is this, if
he come on that side, why then you know he comes not on the other side, but put
case he should devide his Army and march both ways, then you know who can keep
him back.


second. What does the fellow mean?


first. I know what I know, and there is an end, if he Land at Dover once he will
be in England presently.


Company. Ha, ha, ha.


first. Why Gentlemen it is no laughing matter, I know what I know, few words
are best; for certain the greatest part of his Army was seen on Calice Sands
four Nights ago, though the Diurnal mention it not, yet it is as prodigious for
ought you know as the late great Whale.


third. Gentlemen, has any of you seen the Play of Harry the eight?


fourth. Many years ago I did.


fifth. And so did I.


third. It Is rarely set forth, they say.


first. Gentlemen as I Am a Christian I ought to speak, I know and you cannot
but all know, that if the Turk come into England once 'twill be the worse for
the whole state of Christendom.


third. Let him come, we have* Jews enough to entertain him. Bur sir, they say
it is done rarely well.


fourth. I cannot believe it, it is impossible they should do any thing so well
as I have seen things done.


fifth. When Tailor Lowen, and Pollard were alive.


fourth. Did you not know Benfield, and Swautted?


fifth. Did I not know 'em? yes, and hum'd them off a hundred times.


fourth. But did you know Mat Smith, Elis Worth, and Fowler at the Fortune?


fifth. Yes, and I will tell you by a good token; Fowler you know was appointed
for the Conquering parts, and it being given out he was to play the Part of a
great Captain and mighty Warrior, drew much Company; the Play began, and ended
with his Valor; but at the end of the Fourth Act he laid so heavily about him,
that some Mutes who stood for Soldiers, fell down as they were dead e're he
had touched their trembling Targets; so he brandisht his Sword and made his
Exit; never minding to bring off his dead men; which they perceiving, crauld
into the Tyreing house, at which, Fowler grew angry, and told 'em, Dogs you
should have lain there till you had been fetched off; and so they crauld out
again, which gave the People such an occasion of Laughter, they cried that
again that again, that again.


fourth. I but what do you call him was the man; he played the devil in Doctor
Faustus, and a fellow in the Gallery throwing a Tobacco-Pipe at him; I hope to
see thee (quoth He) e're long as bad as I am, what is that quoth the fellow? the
Son of a Whore quoth He.


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha.


first. You talk of your Players, I am for the Fencers, there are none living
now like old Bradshaw, old Batty, Chatterton, and Ned Gibs.


fifth. I, and the Miller, I remember them too.


fourth. What Swan the Wrestler? know him? I think I did.


first. And so did I, then there was Will the Labourer and Will the Pewterer,
that were hanged -- O they were nimble men.


fourth. And Jack the Butcher, a stout Rogue, and the Gentleman Wrestler; they
were brave men indeed, there is none left live like 'em. The sport that I have
seen in Lincolnes-Inn-fields, and Moore-fields -- did you not know little Dick
that kept the Ring?


first. What the old fellow? he and I has cracked many a Cup together; I was a
Gamster too in those days, I loved to raise a Cudgel, and try a fall, as I
did my Dinner.


fourth. And so did I, I did so pay a Butcher at Bradshawes School once, -- I
came up to him thus -- He rises, and extending his Arm hits the Person sets
next him in the mouth


second. What do you mean by this, sir?


fourth. I was but showing how I came on.


second. I promise you were in another place you should not come off so, sir.


first. He meant no harm, only to show his skill.


second. Let him do it some where else.


first. The place is as free for us, as it is for you, sir, for our money.


fourth. Nay if the Gentleman be angry, let him turn the Buckles of his Girdle
behind him.


third. Come, you do not well, first to give an Offense, and then to justify
your self in it!


Mahoone. Vat be dat? vat be dear? hoe make a de noise, make a de devell, no
stay in my Owse begar, take you de varning a dat.


fourth. Well, well, we have done. Bring us some more Coffee.


first. And Chocolet.


Mahoone. Vid all mine art, four bone.


2. and 3d. Sit you merry -- take money here.


Enter Hunt-Cliffe. Hunt-Cliffe. My dearest Rampant how do?


Wife. Prithee love get thee into the next Room, I Will come to thee presently.


Hunt-Cliffe. Do not stay.

Exit. Hunt-Cliffe.
Wife. I cannot from thee my dearest.


second. Who takes money?


third. They mind it not, let us begone.


Mahoone. Vere be you dear? you damm shade at de Bar, you hoar my Wife, take a
de Reconing you hoar.


Wife. Have I been gone so long with a Pox to you?


first. Nay Gentlemen we are going too.


Man servant. There is a China Cup broke, and to pay for.


fourth. Very right, what is the price?


Man servant. Eighteen pence.


fifth. How? fie upon it.


Mahoone. No less begar, den vne silling and vne six pence.


fourth. It Is unreasonable, but how ere we will pay't.


first. This comes of fooling.


Exeunt. Mahoone. You be de velcome Gentilemen.


Wife. Would they were all gone, I sit on Thorns till I am with my Hunt-Cliffe.


Company at the Third Table. first. It Is talked there has been a great Overthrow
given lately to the Turk, 3000 Slain, besides the Prisoners taken, which
doubtless must come near that number, and most wealthy Prizes.


second. I Am glad on it, but alas, sir, it is to them. but a mere Flea bite in
comparison, to such a loss on our side; they can spare thirty or forty Thousand
and never shrink for it.


third. With favor, I should think it were good Policy, and I presume much
Honor to our Nation, if twenty Thousand men well Disciplined, were sent to his
Dominions and there plagued him, 'twould gore him to the Guts, and make him
draw his Army homewards with a pouring vengeance.


second. O sir, 'twould cost a world of Money, that, and we are poor; I must
confess 'twould be a brave exploit, and fill the mouth of Fame. But it cannot
be.


first. Pray why, sir?


second. Why for many Reasons Sir, as the case stands now we have a Gang of
Fellows would change Sides with them, and among friends we should generally
make better Turks then Christians.


third. He cannot be a perfect English man, that to promote his Countries
Honor would not sell half his Patrimony.


first. It were a shame the Frenchmen should take such an Honor from Us.


second. For my part (Gentlemen) I do protest I would contribute willingly my
part to further the Design; would it were Working.


third. You speak nobly.


fourth. What do you hear of Ludlow?


third. Nothing but mum.


second. Here Is none but friends, good sir what is it?


third. He is turned Turk -- pray pardon me,

I speak but as I Have heard.


fourth. Why is that such a crime? but without fooling, is he changed?


third. I wish he were if he be not.
Why do not thou think he were changed for the better;
Come you know the Old Saying,
A bad God makes a good Devil; and that sort of Christian makes an excellent
Turk.


fifth. Sir, as to your business fear it not.


sixth. I hope so, sir.


fifth. We have 'em upon the hip, fear it not man, I Will warrant thee.


sixth. The Suit has cost me a deal of Money.


fifth. And more 'twill cost thee, but they shall pay all at last with a
Circumferentibus.


sixth. Nay then I care not, though I sell two of my Oxen more.


Company at the first Table call to pay. Mahoone. Vere be de damm shade, de
hoar my Vise? begar she be gone again -- hoar, hoar, vere be you hoar.


Wife. My head does so ache Sweetheart.


Mahoone. Begar my head ash, you lie -- look Hunt-Cliffe. steals out. out a,
look out a, a gran pock take you pour moy.


1. Company. Here take your money.


3. Company. And ours too.


Wife. What have you had Gentlemen -- Oh I cry you mercy you are welcome
Gentlemen. Exeunt Companyes. Lord how glad am I the heat of this business is
over.


M^hoone. Vat vas dat shack Rog dog vas vid you hoar, in de room?


Wife. A Cosen of mine you never saw before.


Mahoone. Your Cosen! all de devells in hell be your Cosen me tink. Give me a
de money.


Wife. Take it, and be choakt with it.


Mahoone. Very good Vife, very good Vife.


The Scene is drawn ACT the Fourth.
Enter Froth, Sm^ak, Rasey, and Samphire. Smoke. Look you, look Rogues, but my
dear Brothers, I have brought my friend Samphire according to promise.


Froth. He Is welcome, get you into that Room, I Will shut the door upon you, be
not seen, I Will provide for you.

Exit.
Rasey. Make have, I shall be mist at home.


Samphire. I am very glad of your Acquaintance.


Rasey. I am the like of yours.


Smoke. When comes the things you wot on?


Samphire. To night without fail, when my Master and Mistress are a Bed.


Enter Froth with a huge Flaggon of Ale. Froth. Here Is that holds at least
three Quarts; when this is out it shall be filled again, and there is a Jack to
drink out of.


Rasey. A good Rogue.


Froth. Hear me, have an eye to the Door, if any offer to turn the Latch, clap
your Flaggon under the Table an call manfully for three Jacks of Ale, I Will
pay't.

I come, I come, I come.


Call within Froth, Froth. Smoke. Oh brave Rogue -- remember Rogue a Morsel?


Froth. Well, I Will do what I can. I come, I come,


Exit. Call again. Samphire. He seems to be as true a Trout as e're struck water.


Rasey. A real Rogue.


Enter Froth. call within. Froth. I come, I come, I come: here Rogues fall to,
I have nib'd a cold Chicken, and half a Breast of Mutton for you, and here is a
slice or two of Household Bread, good Provinder you Raskalls, I come, I come.

call again. Is your Flaggon empty?


Smoke. We have dreyn'd him.


Froth. Give't me, I Will fill't again, and then happy man be his dole -- I come,
I come,.

Exit Froth.
Smoke. Now Rogue, you see what Company I keep.


Samphire. I am proud of 'em, and will not die in their Debts.


Rasey. I dare not stay, I Will only take a snap, and so be gone.


Samphire. And so must I.


Enter Froth with more Ale. Froth. I come, I come, I come -- Has any been with
you yet?


Omnes. No, not any.


Froth. The better; come, two Jacks a piece will send it packing.


Smoke. Have at thee Boy.


Froth. So; now get you about your businesses, he thrusts them out. the house
begins to fill, get you that way.


Exeunt. Enter Subtle and his Wife, and some Gentlemen. Subtle. Why Froth, why
Froth -- please you to walk in.


Froth. I come, I come, you are welcome Gentlemen.


Wife. What will you please to have; a couple of cold Chickens, or half a
Breast of Mutton?


1. Gent. The half Breast of Mutton, what say you?


2. Gent. I, 'twill do very well.


Wife. You shall have it presently.


Subtler. Froth, show 'em a Room.


Froth. Will you please to walk in, Gentlemen.


Exeunt. Wife. Where are you there, my folks are mad sure; prithee Sweetheart
reach me the half Breast of Mutton hither.


Subtle. Here Is no such thing, unless you will divide a Breast in two.


Wife. Lord, how thou talk! there is half a Breast ready cut.


Subtle. My eyes are my own sure.


Wife. Prithee let me see, I should have eyes too -- odds so there is a Chicken
gone too; we are like to thrive at this rate! four and sixpence in a morning!


Subtle. But then consider --


Enter Froth. Froth. Mistress, Mistress, the half Breast of Mutton, Mistress
the Gentlemen are in have.


Subtle. Here has been more have then go^d speed it seems.


Wife. What is become of the Mutton, and one of the Chickens?


Froth. What Mutton forsooth?


Wife. The half Breast, and the fellow to this Chicken.


Froth. Alas how should I know forsooth, I have not eyes here, and in the
Cellar too; the Bell-man's Dog was here but even now, a shirking Cur, and yet I
cannot say he had it.


Subtle. Who ever had, the Devil choke him with it.


Froth. I sir, but it is past that by this time.


Exeunt Enter Mr. Pepper and his Wife. Pepper. And so, my Lady.


Wife. It is even so my Lord; and what think you on it?


Pepper. Why scurvily! and very scurvily! But tell me, Frail, (let thy Soul
dictate to thee) do I deserve this scorn, these slights, these base untoward
Answers! have I not been a Husband -- indeed too, too, too Kind --


Wife. Too much of one thing is good for nothing, you know it, it has been your
own Doctrine.


Pepper. I, but my dear Frail I now am sincking.


Wife. What remedy, would you have me sinck with you sir?


Pepper. No my Dear; give me but an account of some goods that I miss, they will
be a help to us in our necessity.


Wife. In Faith sir no, what goods I have I Will keep; and they will keep me, if not
something else will.


Pepper. This is audatiousness beyond example; the common Brothels would not
entertain a Wife so hideous, so monstrous evil; Ingratitude is worse then
Whordom, Frail, consider that and weep.


Wife. Ha, ha, ha, weep, for what? for seeking to preserve my self against the
storm is coming? let Ludgate be thy Grave and perish there, I Will be Frail
still, and take my pleasure.


Pepper. Woman provoke me not -- tell me where my Goods are?


Wife. Thrown into the Thames.


Pepper. Vile woman, would I could throw thee after 'em.


Smoke. Oh master, master, there are two of Enter Smoke. in have. your
Creditors without, are very earnest to speak with you, but I told 'em you were
not within; and there stands behind 'em an ill looked Rogue a Sergeant on my
conscience.


Pepper. Prithee Wife go to 'em.


Wife. I go to 'em! what to do?


Pepper. See who they are, give 'em good words, and tell 'em I will be with 'em
suddenly.


Wife. To much purpose indeed.


Exit Frail. Pepper. In the mean time, besure you do convey the choicest of my
Goods are now remaining, with my Debt Books, and all my Box of writings to my
friends house, where I intend to be for some time 'till I can Compound my Debts.


Enter Frail. Frail. They are gone; you may take your walk when you please
sir.


Pepper. Come, I hope thou wilt be in a better humor er't be long.


Frail. I Am not of your opinion in good truth sir.


Exeunt. Enter Hunt-Cliffe, and Sweet-Lips. Hunt-Cliffe. What does thy Husband
think I can Coin money? were not for thy sake he should lick his spiggot and
know his Nails for want of Company, e're I would cross his Threshold.


Sweet-Lips. O but dear Hunt-Cliffe for my sake.


Hunt-Cliffe. Death! what would have me do? I have it not, thus to be vexed
for paltry thirty pound! I Will be a stranger here, or never let me --


Sweet-Lips. Oh not so my dear; thou wilt break my heart then, I prithee hear me.


Hunt-Cliffe. What would thou say?


Sweet-Lips. My Husband is a very loving Husband.


Hunt-Cliffe. What Is that to me.


Sweet-Lips. And now and then when he does get old Gold, he gives it me to
hoord; that at this time I praise my Stars I have I think far more then will
discharge your Debt.


Hunt-Cliffe. What of all this?


Sweet-Lips. And here they are, which I (to save your Credit) have robbed my
Cabinet of; not thinking any thing too dear for thee, with whom I have
entrusted my very self.


Hunt-Cliffe. Well, what then?


Sweet-Lips. If you will take the care to Pawn 'em Hunt-Cliffe, but not to
loose 'em, for they are as precious as is my Husbands love, and my well being;
and how near that is guess your self.


Hunt-Cliffe. Oh my poor Rogue.


Sweet-Lips. None will deny thee Silver on 'em, but be sure they be laid safe,
or I Am undone for ever.


Hunt-Cliffe. Do thou fear me? have I a Soul?


Sweet-L. Then take 'em as the pledges of my love, but so as they may be
returned again, I trust thee with my life in parting with 'em.


Hunt-Cliffe. Pox on the dirt, I prize thy sweet conditions beyond a world of
such like trash as this.


Sweet-Lips. Dear Hunt-Cliffe if thou do regard my quiet, be careful to
redeem them in some time, and I Will contribute toward it what I can.


Exeunt. Hunt-Cliffe. My dear thy Obligations are Charms to me.


Enter Pickle, Olive, and Samphire. Pickle. Samphire about your business, let
my Writing and Debt Books -- Lord I am over come with passion.


Olive. I prithee be not so, I Will run a share with thee in all thy sufferings.


Pickle. That Is my torture; Oh must thy goodness, thy indulgence meet the
cruelty that does pursue my vanity, my profuse living, my extravagancies, my
Creditors wound me not half so much as the sharp thoughts of thee.


Olive. Yet hear me dearest, do not despair nor throw a mercy from thee, I
doubt not but my care has so provided, thou may be able to appease thy
Creditors, and stop their violence.


Pickle. Alas poor thing what can thou do?


Olive. Why you shall see provided, my dear Husband: (and yet I must beg pardon
for that Covenant, it being too peremptory for me to proffer --)


Weeps. Pickle. Prithee my Dearest.


Olive. I say if you will please to look about you for the future, I dare warrant
your Recovery, then never flinch for it.


Pickle. Say thou so my better Genius. Samphire stir nothing till my wife
and I do consult further.


Exeunt. Samphire. Now my hopes are spoild, no matter; I shall become the
honester, farewell Smoke, thou art but a vapor, and Froth, thou art but wind,
and for Rasey, he is too dear a Companion.

Exit.
ACT the Fifth.
Enter Compound and Sweet-Lips. COmpound. Was ever man stockt with such
impudence, he sends with that authority to provide a Supper, and of no small
consequence; as though he owed me nothing, or I bound to feed his Riot for a
copy of his ugly Countenance.


Sweet-Lips. Why truly Husband, and speak but the bare truth, the man is
handsome, handsome enough indeed la.


Compound. I have seen (for all your wise opinion) a far handsomer forsake the
world at Tyburn.


Sweet-Lips. Oh this money.


Compound. Were not to bring a scandal on my house, he should not have
digested scarce his Supper, e're I had Sergeants to salute his person; and yet,
for ought I know it shall be done.


Sweet-Lips. Oh good, my heart, how do you know but he has brought you money;
disgrace him not before his friends, he is a Gentleman, think on that; I am
persuaded he would never have ventured (being well acquainted with your
frequent Threats) to invite his friends but on a handsome score: take my word
for this night, and in the morning do what you please.


Compound. By this hand I will.


Exeunt. Enter Mahoone in his Shirt. Mahoone. Nebor, mine good Nebor vere be
you dear? vere been mine Vife, begar she be de hoar o de Varld, she robe a me o
all mine money my l'argent begar, for de foke, vy Nebor, vere be mine Vife? me
break house to day, me be undone, de grand pock take you all, vere be de hoar
de dam bish hoar mine Vife? me be mad as de dog, bish, all mine money begone;
me be mad begar.


Enter his Wife. Wife. Did ever man make such a monster of himself! why don't
you come to bed?


Mahoone. Oh shade! vere have you been! foke, foke, foke, a pock take you for
me. Vere be mine money you hoar shade? vere be de money you took to day, shade?


Wife. Are you not ashamed to disturb your Neighbors?
Come to bed, and you shall know all.

Mahoone. Know all! vat be dat? me come to bed! very good, de devel come to
bed, me no come to your dog-bish hole you shade.


Wife. Why then go hang your self.

Exit.
Mahoone. Out a hoar shade vere be mine money you damm shade vere be mine
money? me murder you, and send your Sole to de devell begar: mine money, mine
money, mine money.


Exit running. Enter Hunt-Cliffe, and two or three Gentlemen. Hunt-Cliffe. More
Wine, who waits there? why Rasey you Ra^kall more Wine.


Rasey. I have it here Sir.


Enter Rasey. Hunt-Cliffe. Bid your Master come to me.


Rasey. My Mistress Sir!


Hunt-Cliffe. No, your Master, sirrah.


Rasey. I unde^stand you Sir, but I believe you have ridden him so much he will not
endure the Bit.


Aside. Hunt-Cliffe. Why do not stir?


Rasey. I Am gone Sir.

Exit.
1 Gent. Hunt-Cliffe, thou art a Prince.


2 Gent. Disgu^s'd or near upon it.


Hunt-Cliffe Wh^le these Spanckers last, Boys --


1 Gent. Where lives thy Mammon, thy kind hearted devil?


Hunt-Cliffe. I have a legend, pretty smooth faced devils, such as would draw
you from your prayers, to sin; fine soaking dev^ls.

Oh Sir, are you come?

Enter Compound. Compound. I suppose you sent for me.


Hunt-Cliffe. In very good time Sir; how stands Accounts between us?


Compound. What mean you Sir?


Hunt-Cliffe. I pray let us know it Sir, even from the beginning of the world
unto this present t^me Sir: I abhor a Sergeant, and your poor stratagems; what
do I owe you Sir? I Have money for you, I hope you will not refuse it.


Comp. Forbid I should; Sir I'^e fetch you up a Bill.


Shakes his Pockets. Hunt-Cliffe. Pray do S^r, and put our Reckoning into it.


Gentlemen. By no means, we will pay our shares.


Compound. As you please for that Gentlemen.


Hunt-cliffe. Do as I bad you Sir.


Compound. It shall be done Sir.

Exit.
Hunt-cliffe. I hate to have such d^rty fellows think I am beholding to 'em,
my soul's above it; men that have narrow though^s crouch to such wretches, but
mine are boundl^ss --


Enter Compound. Compound. Here it is Sir, and the precise day set down for
every Reckoning, I sco^n to wrong you Sir.


Hunt-cliffe. A righteous Stewa^d -- so -- right -- well -- very well -- just
-- it is granted; and know I scorn to wrong you punctual Compound, the Total is
20. Pound, make your Acqu^tance, and that a general one, and your money's ^eady.


Compound. I sir, that is soon done, my Wife's a W^tch sure,

Aside. She told me she bel^ev'd this night he would pay me, the Acquitance Sir is
ready.


Writes. Hunt-Cliffe. Let me see it -- from the beginning -- very well -- now
Gentlemen I hope you w^ll subscribe as Witnesses?


Gentlemen. I, I.


Hunt-Cliffe. Now tell your money, sir, Nineteen old Pieces, with their
Allowance, friend may pass for twenty pound, your Debt.


Throws him. the Gold. Compound. Bless my eye sight, my own Gold upon my life,
the Gold I gave my Wife in keeping -- Oh vile Woman, Oh wretched man -- give me
back my Acquittance, the Golds not right, it is base Counterfeit Gold, Oh my
vexation!


1 Gent. Art mad, the Gold's good Gold.


2 Gent. Current I warrant thee.


Compound. If it be, he came not lawfully by it, it is not well gotten, and I
shall never thrive with it.


3 Gent. Have a care what you say, friend.


Hunt-Cliffe. What does the fellow murter?


Compound. None of your f^llow yet Sir, I am no Cheat, give me my Acquittance,
t^ke your ill got Goods, and I Will take my course for my Debt -- what paid with
a Pig from my own Sow! -- Rasey bid your Mistress come hither presently -- I
shall run mad indeed.

Exit.
Hunt-Cliffe. I know where his Shoo wrings him; his Wife gave me this Gold to
p^wn for Silver -- pox on the oversight, I shall loose her love for ever.


1 Gent. Oh 'twas a gross mistake.


2 Gent. Not like a Gentleman.


3 Gent. Pay him in his own Coin?


Enter Compound and his wife. Compound. Come, come, the Key of your Cabinet?


Wife. Lord, why thus hasty Husband; I cannot find it presently.


Compound. How crept these things into that Gentleman's, that worthless
Gentleman's Pocket? you know 'em do you not?


Wife. Oh my misery -- a Gentleman! a Villain, a perjured Villain --


aside. Compound. Answer me to my question?


She Weeps. 1 Gent. Poor Creature he has struck her dumb -- fie Hunt-Cl^ffe,
fie.


2 Gent Pox of this business, it is a nasty business.


Hunt-Cliffe. Come, let us leave him freting in his own grease, l'le not endure
the storm.


Exeunt Hunt-Cliffe and Gentlemen. Compound. Charge a Constable with the Rogue,
he has robbed me -- oh Woman what have thou done? what have thou made me do?
open thy shame, and mine to all the world, I shall not stir forth of my doors,
but be pointed at by each Prentice boy, become the talk a^ every Coffee-House.


Wife. Dear Husband upon my Knees I beg your Pardon never will I commit an
error like Knecls. to this.


Compound. It was thy Just moved thee to do it now, and that is such a Cankar
it will eat w^ole Families up.


Wife. He never did attempt (if you will believe me Husband) any uncivil Act
toward me since first he came to the House, I looked upon him for a Gentleman;
and knew you would arrest him, (you had sworn it) if that he paid you not this
night.


Compound. What then? must you rob me therefore to pleasure him?


Wife. I lent 'em him to pawn for S^lver, on condition he would redeem 'em in a
month, to which he swore most vehemently.


Compound. Rise, I forg^ve thee, be wiser Wench, hereafter, and though he
thinks he does securely swim, if there be Law in the Land I Will hamper him.


Exeunt. FINIS.

