BY Virtue of an Order to me granted by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in
Parliament Assembled, dated on Thursday the 28th of October. 1680; I do appoint
Randal Tailor, near Stationers Hall, to Print this Trial of Roger Earl of
Castlemaine, and that no other Person or Persons print the same.

JO. COMB.
London, Januar. 12. 1680-1.
THE TRIAL OF ROGER EARL OF CASTLEMAINE FOR High Treason, In Conspiring the
Death of the KING, The Subversion of the Government, and Introducing of Popery
and Arbitrary Power. BEFORE The Lord Chief Justice SCROGGS, etc. At the KING's
BENCH Bar at Westminster, the 23th June 1680: Where he was Acquitted.

LONDON, Printed for S. G and N. E. and are to be sold by Randal Tailor near
Stationers' Hall, 1681.

THE TRIAL OF ROGER EARL of CASTLEMAINE.
ROGER PALMER Esque Earl of Castlemaine in the Kingdom of Ireland, having been
Arraigned at the Kings Bench Bar the Sixteenth of June 1680, for High Treason:
To which he Pleaded Not Guilty, etc.

On Wednesday the 23th of June 1680, being appointed for his Trial, the Court
being sat, and the usual Formalities performed, the Lieutenant of the Tower
delivered him into Court, and then the said Court proceeded as follows.

Clerk of the Crown, Cryar, Make Proclamation.


Proclamation for silence.

Crier, O yes! Our Sovereign Lord the King does strictly charge and command all
manner of Persons to keep silence upon pain of Imprisonment.

O yes! If any one can inform our Sovereign Lord the King, the Kings Sergeant
at Law, the Kings Attorney General, or this Inquest, now to be taken of the
High Treason, whereof Roger Palmer Esquire; Earl of Castlemain in the Kingdom of
Ireland, stands Indicted, let them come forth and they shall be heard; for the
Prisoner stands at the Bar upon his deliverance.


Clerk of the Crown, Crier, Make an O yes.


Crier, O yes! You good Men that are empannelled to enquire, between our
Sovereign Lord the King and Roger Palmer Esquire; Earl of Castlemain within the
Kingdom of Ireland, answer to your Names


Clerk of the Crown, Roger Palmer Esquire; Earl of Castlemain in the Kingdom of
Ireland, hold up thy hand. These good Men that were lately called and now here
appear, are to pass between our Sovereign Lord the King and you upon your Life
or Death, if you challenge any of them, you must speak as they come to the Book
to be Sworn, and before they are Sworn.


JURY.
Sir John Cutler Knight and Baronet. Sir Reginald Foster Baronet. Henry
Herriott Esquire Richard Cheney Esquire Thomas Johnson Esquire John Robert's Esquire Francis
Dorrington Esquire Hugh Squire Esquire Charles Good Esquire John Pulford Esquire Edward Claxton
Esquire Francis Mayhew Gent.
Crier, O Yes, Our Sovereign Lord the King does strictly charge and command all
manner of Persons to keep silence upon pain of Imprisonment.


C. of the Crown. Roger Palmer Esquire; Earl of Castlemain in the Kingdom of
Ireland, hold up your hand.

You Gentlemen of the Jury that are now Sworn look upon the Prisoner and
hearken to his charge.

You shall understand that he stands Indicted by the Name of Roger Palmer Esquire;
Earl of Castlemain in the Kingdom of Ireland; for that he as a false Traitor
against our most Illustrious and Excellent Prince and Lord, Charles the Second,
by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of
the Faith, etc. and his Natural Lord; not having the Fear of God before his
Eyes, nor weighing the Duty of his Allegiance, but being moved and seduced by
the Instigation of the Devil, his Cordial Love, true due and Natural Obedience,
which true and Faithful Subjects of our said Sovereign Lord the King ought to
bear toward him, altogether withdrawing, and contriving, and with all his
might intending, to disturb the Peace and common Tranquillity of this Kingdom,
and to bring and put our Sovereign Lord the King to Death and final
Destruction, and alter the true Worship of God within this Kingdom established
to the Superstition of the Romish Church, and to stir up and move War against
our said Sovereign Lord the King within this Realm of England, and to subvert
the Government thereof, the Twentieth day of June in the Thirtieth Year of the
Reign of our said Sovereign Lord, Charles the Second, of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. at the parish of St.
Giles in the Fields in the County of Midd. with diverse other false Traitors, to
the Jurors unknown, did traitorously imagine and intend the killing, death and
final destruction of our said Lord the King, and to change and alter and
utterly subvert the Ancient Government of this Kingdom, and to depose and
wholly to deprive our said Lord the King of his Crown and Government of this
Realm of England, and to extirpate the true Protestant Religion: And to
accomplish and fulfill the same most wicked Treasons and Traitorous Imaginations
and Purposes aforesaid, the said Roger Palmer Esquire; Earl of Castlemain in the
Kingdom of Ireland, and other false Traitors, to the Jurors unknown, the same
Twentieth day of June, in the Thirtieth Year aforesaid, with force and Arms, in
the Parish of St. Giles in the Fields aforesaid, in the County aforesaid,
Advisedly, Devilishly, Maliciously, and Traitorously, did assemble, unite, and
gather themselves together, and then and there, Advisedly, Devilishly,
Maliciously, Subtily, and Traitorously did consult and agree, to bring our said
Sovereign Lord the King to Death and Final Destruction, and to deprive him of
his Crown and Government of England, and to Introduce and Establish the
Religion of the Church of Rome in this Kingdom; and the sooner to fulfill and
accomplish the same most wicked Treasons and Traitorous imaginations and
purposes aforesaid, he then and there did Falsely, Maliciously, and Traitorously
promise diverse great Rewards, and did pay diverse Sums of Money to several
Persons unknown; and then and there falsely and traiter ously did write diverse
Notes, to incite several other Persons to accomplish the Treasons aforesaid,
against the Life of our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity, and
contrary to the form of the Statute in such Case made and provided.


Clerk of the Crown, Upon this Indictment he has been Arraigned, and has
pleaded thereunto Not Guilty, and for his Trial he puts himself upon God and
his Country, which Country you are.

Your charge is to inquire, Whether he be Guilty of the High Treason whereof he
stands Indicted, or not Guilty? If you find him guilty, you are to inquire,
What Goods and Chattles, Lands and Tenements, he had at the time when the High
Treason was committed, or at any time since? If you find him not Guilty, you
are to say so and no more; and hear your Evidence.


Crier, O yes, If any one will give Evidence on the behalf of our Sovereign
Lord the King, against Roger Palmer Esquire; Earl of Castlemain in the Kingdom of
Ireland, let him come forth and he shall be heard; for the Prisoner now stands
at the Bar upon his deliverance.


M. Bonithon, May it please you my Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, the
Prisoner at the Bar stands Indicted for High Treason; for that he intended to
disturb the Peace within this Kingdom established, and to destroy and alter the
Government, and to bring the King to Death and Final Destruction, and to alter
our Religion to the superstition of the Church of Rome, did on the Twentieth
day of June in the Thirtieth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord the King,
consult and treat with several other Persons, and that he with these Persons,
did agree to destroy the King and alter the Religion, and cause Rebellion; and
further to accomplish these Treasons, he did promise and agree to pay several
Accounts and deposite several Sums of Money, and did likewise write and publish
several Books.

To this he has pleaded Not Guilty. If we prove these things, you are to find
him Guilty.


At. Genesis May it please your Lordship, my Lord Castlemain here stands Indicted
for High Treason; that is, for Designing to Murder the King and alter the
Government and Law; and this is but a parcel of the Plot, which has been
carrying on a great while, and many persons tried for it; and some have
suffered and been executed for it. And, my Lord, we will give your Lordship
Evidence, This my Lord Castlemain has at several times conspired the Death of
the King, and that he has reproved persons for not doing it. And, my Lord, he
has been in Consults among Jesuits, where these Matters have been carried on,
and this whole Design has been negotiated. And my Lord Castlemain has been
consenting and agreeing to all these Matters. And, my Lord, when the Trials
were in hand, it did appear upon those Trials there were many persons brought
from St. Omers to be Witnesses against Dr. Oats, to prove he was not in
England at that time when he said in his Depositions that he did consult with
the Jesuits; and these persons my Lord Castlemain had the management and
instruction of at that time. And all along at the Old Baily my Lord Castlemain
was present there, and did countenance these persons, and was an Intercessor
for them. These are but Branches and Circumstances, what is material we will
prove by Witnesses.


Art. Genesis Come Doctor Oats, Pray tell what you know.


Prisoner, My Lord, I have a long time wished for this day; and your Lordship
may very well remember it. The reason why I have so much desired a Trial, is
because I thought it a means, and the best means, and the only means to show to
the World my Innocence, and also to show to the World how much I have been
calumniated by this Charge.


L. C. J. What have you to say? Have you any thing to say against Doctor Oats?


Prisoner, No, my Lord. I only say this, here I am a Prisoner at the Bar, and I
have pleaded not Guilty, and throw my self upon this Court; and therefore I am
very willing to hear what this man will say.


D. Oats, My Lord, I humbly move the Court. Whether or no, I may use my own
Method?


L. C. J. Give your Charge, we direct nothing.


D. Oats, My Lord, In the year 1677, I was sent ever into Spain by the Jesuits
that were here in England; where I remained for several months, and transacted
Business for them; and my Lord, I returned from Spain in November, and brought
several Letters from some English Fathers there; among which there was one
directed for my Lord Castlemain. My Lord, I did not deliver the Letter to him,
but my Lord, the Contents of the Letter were to this effect --


L. C. J. How came you to see the Contents?


D. Oats, My Lord, I was at the writing of the Letter, and so I did see the
Contents of it.


L. C. J. Did the Priests show it to you? Or did you only see it yourself?


D. Oats, No, my Lord; It was shown me by them: And the Contents of this
Letter were, That the Fathers in Spain were very zealous to concur with the
Fathers here in England in the Design, which was the Subversion of the
Government, altering the Religion, and the Destruction of the King.


L. C. J. Was that in the Letter?


D. Oats, No, my Lord, not in words at length.


L. C. J. What was, as far as you know, the very Expression of the Letter?


D. Oats, The word Design, my Lord.


L. C. J. Only that, to promote the Design?


D. Oats, Yes my Lord: And under that word we did comprehend all those things,
that is, as we usually took it among one another.


L. C. J. Did you deliver this Letter to my Lord Castlemain?


D. Oats, No, my Lord, I did not deliver this Letter; but when I went to St.
Omers we received an Account from my Lord Castlemain of his receipt of this
Letter.


L. C. J. What did you do with it?


D. Oats, I left it with the Provincial, my Lord, who was then Mr. Strange.


L. C. J. Was it not given to you to give it him?


D. Oats, It was given me to give the Lord Castlemain, but being then a
stranger to him, I was willing to send one of his own Messengers with it.


L. C. J. Where was my Lord?


D. Oats, I cannot tell, my Lord, I did not see him then. I went over to St.
Omers in December 77, or the latter end of November.


L. C. J. Where were you when you gave this Letter to the Provincial?


D. Oats, I was in London, my Lord.


L. C. J. Where did you receive this Letter?


D. Oats, In Spain, My Lord, at Valledolid, of one Armstrong.


L. C. J. Who was it directed to?


D. Oats, To my Lord Castlemain; but I did not then know him, and so I gave it
the Provincial, my Lord, I went over to St. Omers in the latter end of November
or the beginning of December 77, and after I had been there some few days,
there did arrive a Packquet from London to St. Omers, in which there was a
Letter from my Lord Castlemain.


L. C. J. To whom?


D. Oats, To the Fathers of the Society of St. Omers, in which my Lord
Castlemain gave them an Account of a Letter that he had lately received from
Spain.


L. C. J. How did you know the Contents of this Letter;


D. Oats, My Lord, I was Privy to their Letters.


L. C. J. Was you acquainted with my Lord Castlemains hand?


D. Oats, My Lord, I will give you an Account of that, I did not know it then,
but only as it was generally said among us.


L. C. J. How was it subscribed?


D. Oats, Castlemain, My Lord, and sometimes, my Lord, he subscribed himself
Palmer.


L. C. J. How many Letters have you seen?


D. Oats, Several Letters,


L. C. J. Was this the first?


D. Oats, This was the first as near as I can remember. And, my Lord, he gave
an Account in that Letter, that he had received a Letter from Spain, and was
glad the Fathers in Spain had so good an Opinion of his Integrity in the Caused


L. C. J. Did he say from whom he had received it?


D. Oats, My Lord, I cannot remember that, that he had received a Letter I am
certain.


L. C. J. Do you know what the purport of the Letter was?


D. Oats, Yes, my Lord, I will give you a plain Account. My Lord, he wrote he
had received a Letter from Spain, and that he was glad the Fathers in Spain had
so great confidence in his Integrity. And, my Lord, in March there came another
Letter from my Lord Castlemain: for my Lord Castlemain had left some things at
Liege, wherein he did complain of the Fathers, that they made no more haste for
to send his things to him; some odd things he had left there, and, my Lord, he
gave an Account of a certain Letter he received from the Rector of Liege, whose
Advice he did not like, for the Rector of Liege and the Rector of Gant were
mighty Zealous that the Secular Clergy should be personally present in this
Affair.


L. C. J. Did he write so? I would have you say what he writ.


D. Oats, My Lord, I have told you, he gave an Account that he was unwilling
to have the secular Clergy engaged, because they were a loose sort of Men, and
of no Principles, and therefore he thought them not fit to be trusted. My Lord,
in April there was a Consult: I came over from St. Omers in April, some three
or four, or five days before the Consult, I am not able to guess at the
particular time, but it was near upon the Consult. My Lord, this Consult was
divided into several Companies after they had met at the White-Horse Tavern,
wherein they did some things that did relate to the Order, as to send Father
Carry to Rome. After that they divided themselves into several Companies,
wherein they did agree in ordering the Death of the King.


L. C. J. You were by?


D. Oats, My Lord, I was employed by them to give an Account of the Sense of
one company to another.


L. C. J. Were you by when they concluded the Death of the King.


D. Oats, Yes, my Lord, I was then present.


L. C. J. Did you sign among the rest?


D. Oats, My Lord, I don't come here to accuse my self.


L. C. J. You are Pardoned if it be so.


D. Oats, My Lord, I did consent. My Lord, In this consult they met together,
and an Oath of Secrecy was administered, my Lord Castlemain was there too within
some few days after the Consult, that is, the Gentleman whom I accuse for
Treason, I say, did come, and enquired about the Copies of some Letters for to
be sent up into Germany, and did desire that an Agreement between them and the
Monks might be made up, there being a difference between them; so that they
might have the Assistance of that Order to carry on the Design.


L. C. J. What Gentleman was this?


D. Oats, It was the Prisoner, my Lord, at the Bar.


L. C. J. Would the Gentleman let you hear him say, that he desired Assistance
to carry on the Design, and you a stranger to him?


D. Oats, My Lord, I do not think I was a stranger to him so much as he was a
stranger to me, he knew I was their Servant and employed by them.


L. C. J. Would he say in your hearing, that he desired their Assistance to
carry on the Design, and you did not know him?


D. Oats, My Lord, I did not well know him at that time, and I brought several
Messages from the Fathers, and from Mr. Langhorn, and I gave them an Account
before him.


L. C. J. How often had you seen him?


D. Oats, That time he was there, my Lord.


L. C. J. How many Messages had you?


D. Oats, I will tell your Lordship where I had been, I had been at Mr.
Simmonds's, who was then Confessor to the Earl of Aurundel, who is since turned
Protestant; Confessor to him as he pretended, and we looked upon him to be. And
I had been at Father Cain's, who was in Turnmill-street, and I had been, my
Lord, at Mr. Langhorn's in the Temple, and some other places which I do not now
remember, it is so long since. So, my Lord, I gave them Account of my business,
and I did see that Gentleman, but did not know his Name, till, my Lord, in June.


L. C. J. When was this?


D. Oats, This was, my Lord, as near as I can remember in May.


L. C. J. So you did not know his Name till Three Weeks or a Month after?


D. Oats, No, my Lord, It was in the latter part of June.


J. Jones, You saw him first in May?


D. Oats, Yes, my Lord.


J. Jones, And you did not see him till after the Consult? I don't ask you
whether he was there or no, but whether you saw him before the Consult was
Signed?


D. Oats, No, my Lord.


L. C. J. How did you come to know his Name?


D. Oats, My Lord, In June Mr. Langworth and I were going over
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, intending to go to the Fountain in Fullers Rents, because
there was a sort of Drink that he loved, and we were to drink together, it was
in the Evening, and so in our way as we went, we met with my Lord Castlemain,
whom Mr. Langworth did salute, and then we came back to Mr. Fenwick's Chamber.


L. C. J. With whom did you come back?


D. Oats, With my Lord Castlemain.


L. C. J. Did you know his Name?


D. Oats, Mr. Langworth told me, It was the Prisoner at the Bar, my Lord, and
the Prisoner at the Bar was giving an Account of some Letters he had received
out of the Country; and Mr. Langworth was giving him an Account how forward
the Rector of Liege and the Rector of Gant were in offering to have the secular
Clergy engaged with them, and some other Discourse they had which I cannot
remember, but about the Design.


L. C. J. What did they talk of at that time? You must as near as you can tell
us what Discourse they had.


D. Oats, I will give your Lordship this, They were speaking of the
Transactions of the Consult, and how unanmious the Fathers were in Signing the
Consult.


L. C. J. Who was speaking of it?


D. Oats, Mr. Langworth and Mr. Fenwick, and my Lord Castlemain was present.


L. C. J. They did talk of it?


D. Oats, Yes.


L. C. J. Did they mention the particulars of that Consult?


D. Oats, Yes.


L. C. J. What was that?


D. Oats, Laying aside the King.


L. C. J. And what else?


D. Oats, And bringing in the Popish Religion, the Catholic Religion, I speak
their own words.


L. C. J. And this Discourse they had in the hearing of my Lord Castlemain.


D. Oats, Yes, and my Lord Castlemain said, Now he should be revenged for the
Injuries done to him.


L. C. J. Go on.


D. Oats, I have nothing else to say of my Lord Castlemain, that I can think
of at present


L. C. J. Now my Lord, you may ask him what Questions you think fit.


Prisoner, Mr. Oats, Repeat your Journey again.


D. Oats, My Lord, I say this, I went a Shipboard in April, I returned from
Valledolid in November, I arrived in London in November, and staid in London
some time, and then I went to St. Omers in November or December new Style or
old Style, I staid at St. Omers, from thence I went to Watton, then, my Lord,
in the Month of March we went to Liege, and returned back again: In the Month
of April, we came hither, some time before the Consult, and staid here some
time after.


Prisoner, What time were you at Liege, pray Sir?


D. Oats, In March 77.


J. Jones, The end of 77.


D. Oats, No, my Lord, we were at St. Omers again in March.


L. C. J. You returned in March 77/78


D. Oats, Yes, my Lord, the Style does so alter.


Prisoner, That is before Lady Day?


D. Oats, Yes, my Lord, it was before Lady Day, we Arrived here in London in
May or in April, and we staid here some few days.


Prisoner, When did you come over again, pray Sir?


D. Oats, My Lord, it is now Two Years ago or better, and I cannot remember
every particular time. My Lord, we were here in May.


Prisoner, I will ask him as many Questions as I think reasonable, and when, my
Lord, I do desire times and he cannot tell the times, he must tell me so.


L. C. J. Mr. Oats, Answer my Lord what Questions he asks you.


D. Oats, I will tell my Lord, Castlemain as near as I can remember, my Lord.


Prisoner, Mr. Oats, When was it you came over?


D. Oats, Really it was some few days before the Consult.


Prisoner, How many days do you think?


D. Oats, Really I cannot remember.


L. C. J. I suppose you have your Memorials.


D. Oats, Really, my Lord, no.


L. C. J. Have you any thing more to ask?


Prisoner, Yes, my Lord, a great many Questions. Were you present, Mr. Oats,
pray, at that Consult, when I consented to the Kings Death? Was you by?


D. Oats, I was present at the Consult; but I do not charge you to be at the
Consult.


L. C. J. He asks you where it was he agreed to it?


D. Oats, At Mr. Fenwick's Chamber, I remember it was about Seven or Eight a
Clock that we were going over Lincolns-Inn-Fields.


L. C. J. How long might you be at Fenwicks?


D. Oats, It was about 11 or 12 a Clock I came away.


Prisoner, When you met me in Lincolns-Inn-Fields, was I in a Coach or on Foot,
or was any body with me?


D. Oats, I cannot say whether your Lordship had a Man with you, or no.


L. C. J. Was there any body with him?


D. Oats, I did not take notice of that.


L. C. J. You were two hours together, pray let me ask you this Question, What
was your Discourse about?


D. Oats, That was part of the Discourse, my Lord.


L. C. J. What? You have given us a very short Account of it in Four lines: You
were two hours together, What was the main of your Discourse about?


D. Oats, My Lord, I will give you as plainly as I can, the Discourse at that
time.


C. L. J. Pray let us know what the main of your Discourse was about.


D. Oats, One part of their Discourse was about the Revenues of their
Colleges, and how they had suffered by the French's taking St. Omers, and what
losses they had sustained by reason of the change of Government by the
Conquest; for the Crown of Spain had entailed on the College of St. Omers Five
or Six Hundred a Year, for the maintaining the Foundation of their House, or
Foundation Rent, and it was taken away by reason of the Conquest that France
had made over the Spanish Dominions there; and they were consulting how they
should Write to Father Le Chese to be an Instrument to move the French King to
restore this Annuity, that was a Settlement entailed upon it.


L. C. J. How came you into this Discourse?


D. Oats, This was after the other Discourse.


L. C. J. How came you to Discourse this Affair here in England?


D. Oats, I will tell your Lordship as near as I can remember: When we met in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, Mr. Langworth recommended me to my Lord Castlemain, and
bad me take notice of him. I cannot say this is my Lord Castlemain, but this is
that Man I saw.


L. C. J. Did he call him by his Name?


D. Oats, He told him that I was such a one, and that I was serviceable to
them. And upon our way as we went to Mr. Fenwick's Chamber, he inquired into
the Causes of my coming over so soon again, for he said I went over but last
Month. Said he, How came it to pass he came over so soon again? Says he, We
wanted him to do some business for us. And there were more particulars of the
Transactions of the Consult mentioned to my Lord Castlemain.


L. C. J. How did they bring in the Particulars of that Design?


D. Oats, This is as near as I can remember.


L. C. J. How came they to talk of laying aside the King and bringing in the
Catholic Religion?


D. Oats, My Lord, After they had given an Account of the Transactions of the
Consult: This was one part of the Consult.


L. C. J. Pray how came they to bring it in, in Discourse?


D. Oats, My Lord, they spoke of the particulars of it.


L. C. J. I wonder what introduced the particulars: Was it to acquaint him with
those particulars?


D. Oats, My Lord, I have nothing to say to that, they were things so
generally talked of by those of the Jesuitical party, that when ever they met,
they scarce did talk of any thing else but of that, and so they did at this
time.


L. C. J. Pray tell me the whole discourse, as you can remember, that relates
to this time.


D. Oats, My Lord, I have told your Lordship, we met with my Lord Castlemain
in Lincolns-Inn-Fields. I have told you, my Lord, that we went to Mr. Fenwicks,
I have told you, my Lord, that after some Discourse (how it was introduced; I
cannot be positive, but as near as I can remember) they were speaking of my
going over and coming again so soon, my going from the Consult to St. Omers and
returning again into England so soon, and so one word brought in another.


L. C. J. Did you know then that my Lord Castlemain had ever heard of this
matter before?


D. Oats, My Lord, I don't know; but I am morally certain as to my self; but I
cannot swear he did?


At. General, Did he speak of it to him as a stranger to it?


D. Oats, No.


J. Jones, By the Letter you spoke of he knew before.


L. C. J. Answer my Brother's Question, Was the Letter you had seen, before or
after that Discourse at Fenwicks?


D. Oats, My Lord, that was after the Consult.


L. C. J. Then you know he did know of the Design?


D. Oats, My Lord, I think not of the particulars of the Design.


L. C. J. That is, he knew of this Design for the main. When you talk of the
Design you always mean the Consult?


D. Oats, No, my Lord, when we say the Consult, we mean what was agreed on at
that Consult, not concerning these matters that were done Six Months before.


L. C. J. Mr. Oats, Tell me when you mention the Design and the Consult. Do
not you always mean the Death of the King and the bringing in Popery?


D. Oats, Yes, my Lord, but the terms are not convertible: For, my Lord, when
we say the Consult, there was something else done, my Lord, as that Consult
which had not an absolute Relation to the Design, and of that I will give your
Lordship one instance, as the sending Father Carry to Rome, which they did in
some Three Years.


L. C. J. Some trivial matters concerning their own Government, but the thing
you talk of is the same Consult and Design.


D. Oats, When I speak of the word Design, it was so taken among us, and so
received by my Lord Castlemain.


L. C. J. How can you say it was so received by him?


D. Oats, Because he used the same word, and answered us according to our
Interpretation.


J. Jones, My Lord, he speaks of the Design thus, There was a Design for the
Killing the King, there was a Design of the Priests and Fathers for it; but,
says he, Afterward there was a general Consultation, and this Design came to
be formed by this general Consult, which my Lord Castlemain, as he thinks, had
no knowledge of till the time they met together in Lincoln's Inn Fields, and
afterward went and discoursed about it.


L. C. J. It is very fair, that he does not know that my Lord Castlemain had
any knowledge before the Consult of this business; but, he says, The Design
upon which the Consult was, that he might know, which was to destroy the King,
and bring in Popery. And he says, My Lord Castlemain did understand this word
Design in that sense they did; because he answered their Letters according to
their Interpretation of it. How do you know he understood the word Design in
its utmost capacity as you understood it?


D. Oats, When we have our Words, we have our Keys whereby we understand them.
But I will answer this Question to the satisfaction of the Gentlemen of the
Jury. My Lord, he has many times spoken in his Letters of introducing the
Popish Religion, and annexed it to the word Design of promoting the Catholic
Religion here in England.


L. C. J. Now methinks you have brought the word Design to something else than
Killing the King.


D. Oats, Yes, my Lord, The Subversion of Religion and the Government.


L. C. J. Did he put in Government? Did he talk of bringing in the Catholic
Religion and altering the Government.


D. Oats, No, my Lord, I will not say that.


L. C. J. When we are examining concerning Men's lives, we must be careful of
their words in such matters.


D. Oats, One part of my Evidence I have omitted, Your Lordship did ask me how
I came to know my Lord Castlemain's hand. My Lord, sometimes we received Letters
from him subscribed Palmer, and sometimes subscribed Castlemain, sometimes some
other Name which I may not remember; and they were generally received as from
him. And I have seen my Lord Castlemain write, for that Night, as near as I
remember, it was Post-night.


L. C. J. At Fenwick's Chamber?


D. Oats, At Fenwick's Chamber, and my Lord Castlemain did write a Letter,
subscribed it and sealed it, and I was fain to go to the General Post House, it
was so late.


J. Jones, What did he subscribe then?


D. Oats, No, my Lord, I saw no more than the Superscription.


L. C. J. Then you did not see his Name to it?


D. Oats, No, my Lord. My Lord Castlemain did ask, Why he had not Answers to
such and such Letters? For several Letters I had seen which were not of much
moment.


L. C. J. I wish you had one that was of moment.


D. Oats, It cannot be expected, my Lord, that I should have them.


L. C. J. My Lord, ask him what you please.


Prisoner, You say, Mr. Oats, you received Letters from me in Spain.


D. Oats, I never said so.


Prisoner, You saw Letters in Spain from me?


D. Oats, Yes, I have seen Letters in Spain that were from you.


Prisoner, Look you, Mr. Oats, Pray let me ask you a Question, you said this,
That you did not know me when you met me at the Consult?


D. Oats, What Consult?


Prisoner, At Fenwick's Chamber.


D. Oats, I did not know you at Wild-house.


Prisoner, There you met me first.


D. Oats, There I met the Prisoner at the Bar.


L. C. J. He says he did not know you at Wild-house, but he came to know you by
Langworth in Lincolns-Inn-Fields, and then you went together to Fenwick's
Chamber.


Prisoner, Mr. Oats, Did not you say, that at Wild-house you did not know me,
nor I you?


L. C. J. He says he cannot tell whether you knew him or no, but he did not know
you.


Prisoner, Was I familiar with you?


D. Oats, No, my Lord.


Prisoner, Did I talk Treason at Wild-house?


D. Oats, It was the Discourse of the day, but I do not remember every
particular of the Discourse, but I remember what your Opinion was concerning
the Rector of Liege and the Rector of Gant.


Prisoner, Was there any thing about killing the King at Wild-house?


D. Oats, Really my Lord, I cannot remember, I wont charge it there because I
am upon my Oath; though I morally believe, as to my self, that there was
discourse bad enough there.


Prisoner, Mr. Oats, Pray will you hear me, then the acquaintance I had with
you was by Mr. Langworth, and then we went that Night to Fenwick's Chamber, and
there we staid very long, and there we had all this Discourse?


D. Oats, Yes.


Prisoner, Look Mr. Oats, Was there any by besides Mr. Langworth and Mr.
Fenwick?


D. Oats, Really, my Lord, I don't remember any body was by, unless a Maid
might come to fill a Cup of Drink or so.


Prisoner, Mr. Oats, Pray Mr. Oats, did you and I ever meet together after
that time?


D. Oats, Really, my Lord, I cannot be exact in that.


Prisoner, Did you never see me nor Discourse with me after that time?


D. Oats, I cannot recollect my self as to that I cannot remember.


L. C. J. He does not remember that ever he was with you afterward?


Prisoner, You don't know whether ever I discoursed with you afterward?


D. Oats, I don't remember.


Prisoner, Very well, Mr. Oats, Look, you, Sir, you don't remember that I ever
had any Discourse with you after that time; and no body was by but Mr. Fenwick
and Mr. Langworth?


D. Oats, As I remember.


Prisoner, Was not there another Priest there?


D. Oats, There is no body occurs to my Memory.


Prisoner, Mr. Oats, you brought me Letters from Spain.


D. Oats, I brought a Letter from Spain directed to ^ou in 77.


Prisoner, Was I in Town or out of Town?


D. Oats, I delivered it to the Provincial.


Prisoner, You went over to Liege; did not you see me there?


D. Oats, No, my Lord, I did not see you there, I only went to wait upon a
Gentleman that was a Priest afterward, that went to take orders.


Prisoner, Did you not see me at Liege?


D. Oats, No, my Lord.


Prisoner, You were at Liege, did you stay there?


D. Oats, I lay there one Night.


At. General, Have you any thing to ask, my Lord?


Prisoner, Presently, my Lord.


J. Jones, It is very reasonable my Lord should question you. You own him to be
the Lord Castlemain, When was it you did first discover this business
concern^^g my Lord Castlemain?


D. Oats, My Lord, I did discover my Lord Castlemain to be in the Plot, the
Last Sessions of the Long ^arliament, and I accused my Lord Castlemain this
^rinity Term was Twelve Months, and my Lord Castlemain was committed: for when
Mr. Dangerfield came in and accused my Lord Castlemain, I brought a Charge a
second time against my Lord Castlemain.


J. Jones, Did you discover all this then?


D. Oats, I did charge him for having an hand in the Design in general.


J. Jones, To the Parliament?


D. Oats. Yes, to the Parliament.


Prisoner, You say when I assented to the Kings Death in Fenwick's Chamber,
that I said, I should now find a time to be revenged.


D. Oats, Pray, my Lord, don't put me to mention such reflecting Evidence.


Prisoner, When you were before the King, you did in pursuance of this speak of
a Divorce.


D. Oats, My Lord, I will give Evidence as to that if that my Lord comes to be
Indicted for his Priesthood.


L. C. J. My Lord may ask what Questions he shall think fit.


At. General, My Lord says he has said it, and what he said in another place
he is not to treat now of.


Prisoner, Suppose I can prove him an Ill Man in any place, is not that fit to
be spoken of here? Since he has brought the King upon the Stage, and since he
has accused me before the King and your Lordships of a Devorce, I ask him
whether he saw it?


D. Oats, I will tell your Lordship what I said as to the Divorce, I heard it
discoursed of generally among the Fathers beyond Sea, and this was some other
part of the Discourse at Wild-house; and I heard my Lord Castlemain say that he
had been at great charg to carry on that business of the Divorce.


Prisoner, At Wild-house?


D. Oats, At Wild-house. Now, my Lord, I took no notice of it, because it was
not my business. But, my Lord, after that there was a Priests Chamber that was
searched, and there was the whole Case stated; now what is become of the State
of that Case, my Lord, I cannot tell.


L. C. J. By whom was that Case stated?


D. Oats, There was a Letter found, whereby my Lord Castlemain should have the
matter directed, in order to the carrying on the Divorce that was to be between
him and his Wise Barbara.


Prisoner, Did not you tell the King that you saw the Divorce in Strange's hand?


D. Oats, My Lord, I will tell you this, I gave an Account to the King, that I
saw in Strange's hand an Acconnt of a Divorce that was between my Lord
Castlemain and Barbara Dutcheis of Cleaveland.


Recorder, My Lord, if he ask too many Questions that don't relate to this
matter, it is impossible to give an Account of every particular.


Prisoner, My Lords, I humbly submit this Case.


Recorder, Ask him what you said to such a man upon the Ninth of August was
Twelve Month, must he give an Account?


L. C. J. He must say he does not know.


Recorder, Indeed it is reasonable that my Lord Castlemain should ask him some
questions, and that Mr. Oats should give him an Account.


At. General, My Lord, will you give me leave to speak? If he may ask
questions about such foreign matters as this, no man can justify himself.


L. C. J. This is not so mighty remote but use may be made of it.


At. General, If he should ask whether he were such a day at such an house,
and tell him yes, and mistake the day; any man may be caught thus.


Prisoner, How can a man be caught in the Truth?


At. General, My Lord Castlemain may, if he can, catch him in any thing he
gives in Evidence here.


Prisoner, My Lord, if your Lordship overruled me, I will say no more. Mr.
Attorney says I come to catch him, I confess I do.


At. General, You should not ask him Foreign Questions.


L. C. J. He asks a plain Question, why do you labor so much that he should
not ask, Whether he had seen the Divorce? My Lord Castlemain, I have asked the
question for you, Whether or no he said he had seen the Divorce? and he does
not remember whether he said so or no.


At. General, My Lord, I think with your Lordships leave, that he is not bound
to answer Questions, that are not to the Evidence.


L. C. J. If so be he would come to make Application, it may be well enough.


At. General, I say it for the Method of the Evidence, my Lord, that I would
not have these Excursions.


Prisoner, I desire your Lordship that I may say out what I have to say. I say
this, that no man in the World that speaks truth can be caught, neither will
Mr. Attorney suffer me to catch him.


At. General, I say you have liberty to catch him in any thing that does
belong to the Evidence.


Prisoner, I come to show you the fitness of it to this Affair. He comes and
tells you, among other Consults, of Wild-house, and my meeting him in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, the recommendations of Mr. Langworth, and going to
Fenwicks Chamber, where we talked of altering the Government, and my assenting
to kill the King: and since you have brought the King upon the Stage, I will
refresh your Memory a little, since you talk of revenging my self, look you if
you did not mention a Divorce to the King and also to my Lord Chief Justice.


At. General, My Lord, you are under a mistake.


Prisoner, Pray give me leave, Mr. Attorney.


At. General, You make such Excursions into Foreign Matters.


Prisoner, Mr. Oats, you did say you saw a Divorce, I ask you whether you saw
a Divorce, and where, or whether you said so?


L. C. J. He says, he does not remember he said so.


D. Oats, I do not remember whether I said so or no, my Lord, I have it down
but indeed I did not set my thoughts a-work.


At. General, He has given you an Answer that may satisfy you.


J. ^aymond, He has Papers wherein he has entered Memorandums to refresh his
Memory, but these Papers he has not by him.


L. C. J. Then he may say he has not.


At. General, That he has already, my Lord.


L. C. J. Have you any more to say?


Prisoner, I have, my Lord, if you will give me leave to write down two words.


Prisoner, Mr. Oats, You told my Lords the Judges that I did say, I was at
great expense about a Divorce.


Dr. Oats, Yes,


Prisoner, That is very well, Mr. Oats.


At. General, Call Mr. Dangerfield.


[ D. Oats was going out of the Court.

Prisoner, May Mr. Oats go out of the Court.


Court, Yes, yes.


D. Oats, I will be within call, my Lord.


Prisoner, I only submit it to your Lordships, Whether or no a Witness may go
out of the Court?


D. Oats, I will stay then.


At. General, Swear Mr. Dangerfield.


Prisoner, Pray stay.


L. C. J. Why so?


Prisoner, Here I am a Prisoner, my Lords, and submit it to your Lordships,
Whether or no Mr. Dangerfield, who has had the Censure of this Court, may be a
Witness? Whether or no Council shall show reasons to your Lordship, whether he
may speak or no.


J. Jones, You must show your Exceptions that you have against him.


Prisoner, My Exception is this, That he was convicted of Felony, that he broke
Prison, and was outlawed upon it. Besides this, my Lord, he is a Stigmatick,
has stood in the Pillory and was burnt in the hand. Now I humbly beseech your
Lordships, that you will be pleased to hear what my Council can say, and then,
my Lords, if your overruled, I shall give place with all my heart.


L. C. J. I think it reasonable, if you desire Council, that they should be
allowed to speak.


At. General, If your Lordship please, when my Lords Exceptions appear.


J. Jones, What are your Exceptions, my Lord?


Prisoner, That I told you, beforehand, he is an outlawed person, he is
convicted of Felony.


J. Jones, When was he outlawed?


At. General, In the 27th. Year of the King, and we say he has a Pardon in
the 30th Year of the King.


L. C. J. How do you prove he was burnt in the Hand, my Lord?


At. General, When was he burnt in the Hand?


Prisoner, Call Briscoe.


At. General, We bring a Pardon unto that, and that will restore him.


[A Record produced.

At. General, That Record we confess, show the Pardon, show the Pardon.


L. C. J. Now go to that for which he was burnt in the hand.


At. General, Here is a Pardon that extends to them all.


[ The Pardon Read; Decimo tertio die Januarii Anno Regni, etc.

L. C. J. This does not do it.


At. General, Yes, my Lord, it does.


L. C. J. Is that the Newgate Pardon?


At. General, Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. We have had it in the Court.


At General, Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. And Felony and Outlawry is in it*


At. General, Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. Where is that for which he was burnt in the hand?


At. General, For that we give an Answer; he was received to the benefit of
his Clergy, and he was burnt in the hand, and his Pardon is after that too.


L. C. J. So it is.


At. General, Then his Pardon answers them all.


L. C. J. Now you see, my Lord, you think Dangerfield ought not to be a
Witness, who has gone through so many Pnnishments, outlawed for Felony, and
burnt in the hand for Felony; Mr Attorney makes Answer, we have a Pardon, and
by that he is restored, as he says, to be a Witness again. If you desire
Council to speak to this point, Whether or no a man branded and burnt in the
hand for Felony, and afterward is pardoned, is capable of being a Witness? I
see no reason to deny it you.


At. General, If there be matter for Council to speak in that Case, we must
submit, if your Lordship make it a doubt.


L. C. J. I do for my own part; in this I am clear, if a Man were Convicted of
Perjury, that no Pardon will make him a Witness, because it is to do the
Subject wrong. A Pardon does not make a Man an Honest Man, it takes off
reproaches; and the Law is wise in that, the Law will not suffer endless
contumelies to be heaped upon Men, nor to be called perjured Rascals, and such
things. It is only to prevent upbraiding Language, which tends to the breach of
the Peace. But in my Opinion, if a Man stands Convicted in Court, for Perjury,
no Pardon can ever make him a Witness and set him upright again. But that is a
different Case from this, we are upon this single Case, Whether a Man that is
burnt in the hand for Felony, whether a Pardon can set him right or no? For
this I make more doubtful than the other: for a Man may be, that has committed
a Robery, would be afraid to forswear himself; for though one is a great, the
other is a greater Sin, and that in the Subject matter; which considered, I
think it reasonable to allow my Lord Council to speak to that single point,
That a Person being burnt in the hand for Felony, and afterward Pardoned,
whether he is capable of being a Witness?


Prisoner, Then I do name Mr. Jones; Mr. Saunders, and Mr. Darnal.


L. C. J. Very well.


[Mr. Saunders was called, but was not in Court.

L. C. J. Are you prepared, Mr. Jones, to speak?


Mr. Jones, No, my Lord.


J. Jones, My Lord, do you except against that one particular?


Prisoner, I stand upon both; his being Pillored and Burnt in the hand.


L. C. J. Will you admit that he stood in the Pillory?


At. General, I know nothing of it.


L. C. J. I will tell you, my Lord, you will see whether it be necessary to
protract this or no; for your Council will hardly undertake to argue unprepared
about this Point, and if the Trial should be Adjourned, it would be very
troublesome. I think it the duty of my Place to discharge my Conscience for you
and against you as the matter shall fall out; and if so be that you should
insist upon it; and he be capable of being a Witness, supposing it so; yet I
must say, you may give in the Evidence of every Record of the Conviction of any
sort of Crimes he has been guilty of, and they shall be Read. They say last
day there were Sixteen, if there were an Hundred they should be Read against
him, and they shall all go to invalidate any Credit that is to be given to any
thing he shall Swear.


Prisoner, My Lord, I humbly submit my self to your Lordship. Sixteen we have,
I bring but Six. You shall have them Mr. Attorney when you please.


L. C. J. My Lord, if you think it worth you while to put it to Council, to
argue, Whether he may be a Witness, or whether you think it may be as well for
you, supposing he be a Witness, the producing those things against him, or the
Records of those Crimes that he has been Convicted of; whether that will be as
well for you or no, I leave it to your self to do as you think best?


Mr. Darnal, I conceive with submission to your Lordship that he cannot be a
Witness.


L. C. J. Are you prepared to speak to it now?


Mr. Darnal, My Lord, I am ready to offer somewhat to your Lordship why I
conceive he ought not to be Sworn: but I desire first that the Pardon may be
Read, because many Persons and Offenses are comprised in it.


L. C. J. It is a Pardon for Felonies and Out-lawries of Felony in general.


Mr. Darnal, If the Persons and their Offenses are severally and sufficiently
pardoned, then, my Lord, I will proceed unto the other Point.


J. Jones, The whole is good.


D. Darnal, Then, my Lord, I conceive, notwithstanding this Pardon, Mr.
Dangerfield ought not to be Sworn, and that no Person attainted of Felony
(though Pardoned) can be a Witness. My Lord, it has been Adjudged in 11 Henry
the 4th. Quadragessimo primo, that a Man Attainted of Felony (as Mr.
Dangerfield is) though he be afterward Pardoned, cannot be Sworn of a Jury. My
Lord, the same question has been resolved since, In Nono Jacobi. It is
reported in Mr. Brownlow's and Goldsborough's Reports, Folio Tricessimo Quarto.
And my Lord Cook in Mr. Bulstrode's Second Reports, 154. In Brown and Crashaw's
Case, is of the same Opinion. He says, A Man Attainted and Pardoned, cannot
serve upon any Inquest, and that by the same reason the Testimony of such a man
for a Witness is in all Cases to be rejected.


L. C. J. Who says so?


Mr. Darnal, My Lord Cook.


L. C. J. Men do not slight my Lord Cook. Where do you say that is?


Mr. Darnal, It is in Mr. Bulstrode's Second Reports, in Brown and Crashaw's
Case, Fo. 154.


J. Jones, But you should have brought these Books hither.


Mr. Darnal, I suppose Sir they may be had in the Hall. My Lord Cook gives this
Reason for it in that Case, He says, That notwithstanding his Pardon he is not
Probus and legalis homo


J. Jones, That Pardon was before any Judgment it was a Pardon of Felony before
any Trial or Judgment; but here is a Conviction.


Mr. Darnal, My Lord Cook puts the case there of a Man Attainted. And, my Lord,
Induodecime Jacobi, It is reported in Brownlow's Reports, Folio. 47.


J. Raymond, Which of his Reports?


Mr. Darnal, I know but of one set out in his Name alone, the other (which is
called the First Part) is set out in his and Goldsborough's Name. I have Mr.
Brownlow's Reports here, and if your Lordship please you may see it.


L. C. J. What is the Page?


Mr. Darnal, Forty Seven, my Lord, The case there reported is, The King
Pardoned a Man Attaint for giving a false Verdict; yet he shall not be at
another time Empannell'd upon any Jury; and the reason given there is, that
though the Punishment was Pardoned, yet the Guilt remained.


J. Jones, That is a very short Note, and not so much in the Book as you have
mentioned.


Mr. Darnal, I writ it word for word out of the Book, Sir, and I am sure there
is so much in my Book. My Lord, in Mr. Justice Crooke's Elizabeth, Fol. 686. in
Shelborn's Case, it is held, that though the King may Pardon Simony, yet he
cannot enable a Simoniack to retain a Living.


L. C. J. The Act does make him not capable.


Mr. Darnal, I conceive, Sir, it is upon the same reason, because the Pardon
cannot take away the Guilt, though it may the Punishment of the Offense.


J. Raymond, He cannot dispense with Simony, he cannot give a dispensation to
take a Living.


Mr. Darnal, My Lord, upon these Resolutions and the reason of them, I humbly
submit it to your Lordship, whether Mr. Dangerfield (having been Attainted of
Felony, though he be since Pardoned) can be a Witness.


At. General, My Lord, with your Lordships Favor, this is quite contrary to
the constant and general Opinion, and contrary to the constant Practice: For,
my Lord, with your Lordships Favor, when a Man is Pardoned for any Crime, if a
Man cannot say he is a Felon, or he is Perjured, then he cannot be reckoned so to
any intent or purpose whatsoever.


L. C. J. I told you before it is consonant to all the Reason and Law in the
World, that a Pardon should stop Men's Mouths from reviling speeches that
signify nothing: but it is one thing to say men shall not go reviling, that
can have no consequent good, but which tends to the Breach of the Peace, and
another thing to say he shall be Liber.


At. General, My Lord, when the King gives him a Pardon, it is as if he had
never committed the Offense.


L. C. J. He may be outlawed, notwithstanding the Kings Pardon, and then it is
not as if he had never committed the Offense.


J. Jones, It restores him to wage battle, and it makes him Liber and legalis
homo: for if a man may wage battle, he is Liber and legalis homo.


At. General, Then, my Lord, if he be so, he shall be a Witness: For my Lord,
in the Point of Perjury, a man that after a Conviction of Perjury had a Pardon,
has been admitted several times.


L. C. J. Was the Exception taken, Mr. Attorney?


At. General, Yes, my Lord, and he rejected before he had a Pardon.


J. Raymond, How many Men have been Witnesses that have been convicted of
Felonies, after the Kings have Pardoned them?


Recorder, I will not adventure to say that there has been a particular
Objection made, and so that the Court has had the Debate of it: but I will
undertake to give your Lordship several instances of Men that have been
Convicted, and the Judges sitting there knew them to be so Convicted, and did
not take notice of it.


J. Raymond, I speak of Witheringon particularly?


Recorder, He was a Witness, though every man did know that Witherington was
Convicted. I beg your Lordships leaves to speak it, that the Judges themselves
did know that he was Convicted and had received Sentence of Death.


Sir F. W. The constant Practices of the Judges is a mighty Conclusion.


L. C. J. What think you, Mr. Attorney, if a Man be Convicted of Felony, and
afterward has a General Pardon, is he a Witness.


At. General, Yes, truly, my Lord, it signifies the same thing, my Lord, as to
be a Freeman again.


J. Jones, He cannot be of a Jury, if he be Attainted of Felony, and the reason
is because he is not Probus and legalis homo: and why he should not as well be
of a Jury as a Witness I cannot understand.


At. General, There is a great deal of difference, my Lord, a great many Men
may be admitted to be Witnesses that cannot be admitted to be Jury men.


J. Jones, Show me any man that is excluded from a Jury and admitted to be a
Witness, except in the case of Kindred.


At. General, An hundred.


L. C. J. Show me any Man who being of a Jury was excluded, and yet made a
Witness.


At. General, A Villian was not admitted to be a Jury man, but a Villain was
always to be a Witness, and that was a point of Infamy.


L. C. J. What Infamy was contained in being a Villain?


At. General, He was a Criminal, he was not Liber homo.


L. C. J. But though he be not a Freeman, he may be an honest man.


Recorder, My Lord Hobart says, A Pardon takes away the Guilt.


L. C. J. It takes away Guilt so far as he shall never be questioned; but it
does not set a Man as if he had never Offended. It cannot in reason be said, a
Man guilty of Perjury is as Innocent as if he had never been Perjured.


At. General, I say if a Man be Pardoned he is as if he were not Guilty.


L. C. J. If I were in my Lord Castlemain's Case, I would submit it; but when
he has given his Testimony, my Lord shall have liberty to give in the Records
against him of what Crimes he has committed.


J. Jones, I do confess indeed that my Lord Hales in his little Book of the
Pleas of the Crown, says, That a Man that has had the benefit of his Clergy,
is restored to his Credit.


J. Raymond, If that case be allowed it is a plain case, for there is no Man
can wage Battle, but he that is Liber and legalis homo.


Recorder, A Man broke Prison and therefore he could not wage Battle, he
replies the King has Pardoned me that Felony, and thereupon he is admitted to
wage Battle.


J. Jones, Where there is no Judgment given in the Case, and the King does
Pardon a Man, that does make a very great difference.


Recorder, In the Case of Witherington, my Lord Chief Justice did look upon the
Records, and afterward said he was a good Witness and was Admitted.


Prisoner, If you have Law by you I must consent.


L. C. J. Then you must consent.


Recorder, There are several Persons, who have had Pardons after Robberies, and
we are forced to make use of some of these Fellows.


L. C. J. Before Conviction.


Recorder, No after Conviction, my Lord, I have known a Prisoner at the Bar,
when my Lords the Judges have been there; to be a Witness. And if the Court had
made any doubt, it would have been a Question before this time of day.


At. General, My Lord, if you please Mr. Dangerfield may be Sworn. If your
Lordship pleases.


L. C. J. My Lord shall have the benefit of excepting against his credibility.

Then Mr. Justice Raymond went down to the Court of Common Pleas, to know their
Opinion.


J. Jones, Have you any other Witness in the mean time?


At. General, No, my Lord, he is a principal Witness.


Sir F. W. Besides the common Practice, here is a Book that says, he shall wage
Battle.


J. Jones, That is, when there is a Pardon before Conviction.


Sol. General, But here, my Lord, he says the Reatum is taken away, and then it
takes away his disabilities too. The difference can be nothing here before
Conviction, and after, because before Conviction there is a disability, before
Conviction he is disabled from waging Battle: So that that makes no difference
before Conviction, and other Cases after Conviction, and the disability is
taken away by the Pardon, and he is restored to be a Freeman.


L. C. J. There is a disability upon Presumption, tho not upon Conviction.


Sol. General, There is the same legal impediment in the one as in the other:
but his Credit is left to the Breast of the Jury.


Recorder, When a Pardon comes, it takes away not only Poenam but Reatum, and
the Reason my Lord Hobart gives.


L. C. J. Nay give your Reason.


Recorder, For Felony is Contra Coronam and Dignitatem, is a Fault against the
King, and when the King Pardons it, it ceases; and in another place it is said,
It Pardons all disabilities incident to him.


J. Jones, That is before Conviction still.


L. C. J. Don't my Lord Cook tell you expressly, That the taking a Pardon does
not prove any Offense? You take a Pardon, it ought not to be concluded that you
are Guilty; but the proper conclusion of a Wise Man is, that you would be safe:
It cannot be thought that every Man that has a Pardon in England is guilty of
all those Offenses that are there Pardoned.


J. Jones, There is a difference between a General Pardon and a particular
Pardon; when a Man does accept of a special Pardon, it must be intended that he
has some Consciousness of Guilt, or else he would not take it; but he that is
Included in a general Pardon, may be clear, because all Men are Included in it,
unless some Persons particularly excepted* and the difference is taken in that
very point from accepting a General and a Special Pardon.


L. C. J. That the Acceptance of a General Pardon, does not barely of it self
intend Men to be Guilty of the Crimes, is plain, and the reason is most
apparent, for besides that Men be safe, so there be times that give a Reason
why Men should have a Pardon, because no man knows when he is safe; Perjury so
abounds that no man can say he is safe, and that is a Reason why Men should be
very willing to accept of Pardons.


Clerk of the Crown, Here Is my Lord Hales's Book about the Pleas of the Crown.


Recorder, He says when the King has discharged and pardoned him, he has
cleared the Person of the Crime and Infamy.


J. Jones, It is so no doubt.


Sir F. W. May we pass upon these Authorities?


J. Jones, Sir Francis, We are not willing to go about it till it be concluded,
for that purpose we have desired my Brother Raymond to know the Judges Opinions
of the Common Pleas.


Recorder, He does expressly say it has restored him to his Credit, and in
Witherington's Case he did call for the very Records.


At. General, If it restore him to his Credit, I hope it shall not blemish him
so much when he is Sworn, that he shall not be believed.


L. C. J. We will not have any prepossession in that Case, his Crimes shall be all
taken notice of: Is it fit to have Men Guilty of all sorts of Villainies, and
not to observe it.


J. Jones, In that very Case, my Lord Hobart says, A Man may say of a Pardoned
Man, he was a Felon, though he cannot say now he is a Felon, and now what can
be objected to this Case?


Recorder, Things may be objected against a Person, and his Credit left to the
Jury, but the Question now is; Whether he shall be a Witness or no?


L. C. J. We have Men grown so Insolent, they behave themselves with that vile
Insolence, that now they take upon them to speak against whole Societies of
Men; as if so be there were any thing in them that should render them better
then their former Lives or Natures. Humility becomes penitents, and no wicked
Man is supposed to be penitent, that has not that; but these carry it with
that Insolency, as if they were not concerned themselves, when God knows the
best of them discover what they do; by being but parties themselves.


[Mr. Justice* Raymond returned from the Court of Common Pleas.

L. C. J. I will tell you what my Brethrens Opinions are, he has put it to
them on both Accounts, That he was convicted of Felony and Burnt in the Hand
for it, that he was outlawed for Felony, and has a General Pardon. They say
they are of Opinion, That a General Pardon would not restore him to be a
Witness after an Outlawry for Felony, because of the Interest that the Kings
Subjects have in him. But they say further, That where a Man comes to be Burnt
in the hand, there they look upon that as a kind of more General Discharge,
then the Pardon alone would amount to, if he had not been burnt in the hand.
They say, If he had been Convicted of Felony, and not Burnt in the hand, the
Pardon would not have set him upright, but being Convicted and Burnt in the
hand, they suppose he is a Witness.


Sir F. W. Swear Mr. Dangerfield.


L. C. J. The very Attainder is taken away, and so all is gone.


At. General, Come Mr. Dangerfield are you Sworn?


Mr. Dangerfield, Yes, Sir.


At. General, Pray tell what you know of my Lord Castlemain.


L. C. J. I perceive my Brethrens Opinion is, That if a Man were convicted of
Perjury, if there be no Burning in the Hand in the Case, that a Pardon could
not set him upright, because of the Interest of the People in the King.


At. General, Come, Mr. Dangerfield, are you sworn?


Mr. Dangerfield, Yes, Sir.


At. General, Then pray say what you know of my Lord Castlemain.


Mr. Dangerfield, About this time Twelve Month, my Lady Powis sent me with a
Letter for the Prisoner at the Bar, my Lord Castlemain.


L. C. J. Don't you know him?


Mr. Dangerfield, Yes, my Lord, this is the Person. And, my Lord, the Contents
of that Letter I know not: but his Lordship made me stay till he wrote an
Answer, and the Contents of the Answer, my Lord, were to this effect: For I
returned with the Answer, to the Lady Powis, and she opened and read it while I
was present.


L. C. J. Aloud?


Mr. Dangerfield, Aloud, my Lord.


L. C. J. To you.


Mr. Dangerfield, To me.


L. C. J. Who was there?


Mr. Dangerfield, Mrs. Cellier was there besides. And the Contents of this
Letter were, This Person I like well, and though he be no Scholar, he will
serve to Instruct the Youths as he shall be directed. By the Youths were meant
the St. Omers Witnesses.


L. C. J. How do you know?


Mr. Dangerfield, Because I know my Lord was employed for that purpose. I know
his Lordship did use to Instruct the Youths; and it was a common saying among
them, when one of them was out of his part, they used to say, I must go to my
Lord Castlemain.


L. C. J. What part?


Mr. Dangerfield, That which they were to say, and one of them did say, I am
out of my Lesson, I must go to my Lord Castlemain.


L. C. J. When did he say so?


Mr. Dangerfield, Before the Trial, my Lord, and my Lord Castlemain went along
with them to the Trial, and his Lordship complained of some ill usage that the
Witnesses received there. His Lordship was one of the Persons that employed me
to get Lane out of the Gate House, my Lord, and his Lordship sent me to a
Solicitor of his, whose Name was Mr. Lawson (the Person is now in Court) to
take an account how far he had proceeded in this Affair. I did take an Account,
and I proceeded in it afterward and got him discharged.


L. C. J. How came you into my Lords acquaintance?


Mr. Dangerfield, That was the first time, when my Lady Powis sent me with that
Letter, my Lord. A pretty while after this, in the Month of July, I went to
wait upon his Lordship at his House in Charing Cross, the same place where I
found his Lordship before; and I was to take his Advice a bout some Letters
that came from one Nevil alias Pain. Those Letters and List of Names I showed
his Lordship, and he gave his Approbation of them, and desired good store of
Copies might be writ: for it was of consequence and ought not to be neglected.
And asked me, Are there working Persons employed in that business? And said he,
Encourage them, and I will pay my part. So my Lord, after there were a great
number of Copies writ of these Letters, I writ a Letter to my Lord Castlemain,
to let his Lordship know that the People had finished their work, and that
there was something more to be done as a Gratuity; and then his Lordship in
Answer to this Messenger (who is here also in Court) with a Letter his Lordship
sent Forty Shillings for his part. And Mrs. Cellier told me she received Forty
Shillings and disposed of it to the use intended; now, my Lord, the Contents of
these Letters were to the same effect with those Letters and loose Papers which
I conveyed into Colonel Mansell's Chamber; and these all tended to the
promoting the Sham-plot, my Lord.


L. C. J. Pray tell me what was the Subject of these Letters; what was the
substance of them?


Mr. Dangerfield, To the promoting the Sham-plot. my Lord.


L. C. J. That is a General no Body knows what to make of.


Mr. Dangerfield, I will give your Lordship an Account in particular: The
contents of many of them were to this purpose.


L. C. J. Were they not all alike?


Mr. Dangerfield, The Copies were the same, and there were so many Originals to
draw Copies from.


L. C. J. Were not the Originals all to the same purpose?


Mr. Dangerfield, Agreeable in Point of sense.


L. C. J. Pray tell us the purpose of them?


Mr. Dangerfield, The purpose was, That so many Letters should be conveyed into
the Houses of several Persons of Quality in this Kingdom, that were called
Presbyterians: for that was the Notion, that all Persons, that were not for the
immediate promoting of the Catholic Interest, lay under; because they looked
upon that Notion to be most obnoxious.


L. C. J. Who and where?


Mr. Dangerfield, In general, my Lord.


L. C. J. In general, where?


Mr. Dangerfield, By my Lady Powis and the Lords in the Tower.


L. C. J. Were you by when the Lords in the Tower did agree to it?


Mr. Dangerfield, When my Lord Peter and my Lord Arundel did.


L. C. J. What did they agree to?


Mr. Dangerfield, My Lord the thing is this, after they received an Account
from one Mr. Pain, I brought a Billet from that Pain; wherein was contained a
Ground or Scheme of the Presbyterian Plot; so from thence it derived its First
Name, my Lord: so that when I came to Discourse with the Lords in the Tower
about it, they called it the Presbyterian Plot; and Mrs. Cellier and the Lady
Powis said, This is a Notion that will do the business, as it is most
obnoxious, and as best to our purpose.


J. Jones, How far was my Lord Castlemain concerned in this?


Mr. Dangerfield, I have not heard his Lordship speak of it under that Notion.


L. C. J. Pray let us hear what you can say against my Lord Castlemain.


Mr. Dangerfield, Now, my Lord, some considerable time after I had gotten Lane
out of Prison, I was employed by several other persons, his Lordship was one,
and he sent me to his Lordships Solicitor, that is now in Court. A pretty
while after this, and the Letters and Lists of Names, containing matter to the
same effect as I told you before, as those in Mansell's Chamber, and all
tending to the Credit of the Sham Plot, or the Presbyterian Plot. Now, my Lord,
a pretty while after this, in August, as near as I can remember; about the
middle of August, I went to wait upon his Lordship, the very next day after I
had been treated withal in the Tower to kill the King, whom God preserve, my
Lord; and his Lordship had a Servant then in the Room, and he sent his Servant
down Stairs, and looked upon me with a very Austere Countenance: Said he, Why
would you offer to refuse the business for which you were taken out of Prison?


L. C. J. To you?


Mr. Dangerfield, To me, my Lord.


L. C. J. Who was by?


Mr. Dangerfield, No body, but his Lordship and my self; for he sent his
Servant out before: So he asked me, Why I would offer to refuse the business I
was taken out of Prison for? I asked his Lordship, What that was? Said he, Was
not you at the Tower yesterday? Yes, my Lord, I was. Would your Lordship have
me Kill the King, I suppose that is the business. Yes, that is, said he Upon
which my Lord fell into such a fury, that I was fore'd rudely to leave the
Room, and went down Stairs. I think at the same time his Lordship was writing
the Compendium of the late Plot; for there I saw some words in a Paragraph that
lay upon the Table, which I afterward saw in that Book. There was Ink set upon
the Table, and open in his Lordships hand. And his Lordship did use in his
Discourse to call his Majesty Tyrant.


L. C. J. Have you heard him? In what company?


Mr. Dangerfield, In his familiar Discourse. As to ask when his Majesty will
return from Windsor? Says he, When the Tyrant pleases. And I remember I heard
his Lordship mention the word Tyrant to Mrs. Cellier at Powis-house.


At. General, How came that Discourse about Killing the King? What was the
occasion of that Discourse?


L. C. J. Had you refused it to my Lord?


Mr. Dangerfield, Yes, my Lord, I refused.


L. C. J. What did you say to him?


Mr. Dangerfield, I said any body but my King, my Lord.


L. C. J. He said, Why did you refuse to do that for which you were taken out
of Prison? What is that my Lord? Was not you at the Tower yesterday? Why will not
you do it? What is it, my lord? Is it to Kill the King? I suppose that it is,
says he, That your Lordship intends. Yes says he, That is it, why will not you do
it? That is what he says.


At. General, That is the Evidence we give.


J. Jones, You say he was very violent.


L. C. J. Was you ever in his company afterward.


Mr. Dangerfield, No, not after that, my Lord, that I know of.


L. C. J. What kind of fury did he show to you at that time?


Mr. Dangerfield, My Lord, he was in a great rage, as his Lordship is very
choleric; he was bustling about, and I knew not what he intended to do, and I
was unwilling to stand the Test of his Anger. His Lordship seemed by his look
to be meditating Revenge.


L. C. J. How?


Mr. Dangerfield, I say this, After his Lordship had sent his Servant out of
the Room, said he, Why would you offer to refuse the business for which you
were taken out of Prison? Said he, Were not you at the Tower yesterday? Said I,
Yes, my Lord, I was; Would you have me kill the King? Is that the business?
Yes, that it is, said my Lord very angrily.


Prisoner, When did you go to the Tower? Was this the next day after it?


Mr. Dangerfield, The next day after it.


Prisoner, Mr. Dangerfield, Pray let me ask you one Question, Did not I
threaten to kill you, or have some of my Servants kill you, if you came unto me
again?


Mr. Dangerfield, One time his Lordship saw me at my Lady Powis's house, and he
showed me a very particular Favor. I speak it in the presence of Almighty God,
nothing out of revenge, nor for any sort of Interest.


Prisoner, Was I never angry with you but at that time?


Mr. Dangerfield, No, my Lord, I know not or any other time that your Lordship
was angry.


L. C. J. Now what say you, my Lord?


Prisoner, The First thing I desire to do, is, here are two Gentlemen gives in
Evidence against me, the one is Mr. Oats, the other Mr. Dangerfield. Mr. Oats
says, That he in Spain did see several Letters from me: That when he came over
into England, he brought a Letter from Spain to me, that that Letter was given
to the Provincial, and the Provincial (he supposes) gave it me. Now, my Lord, I
only desire this, that the first thing that shall be done, is, that you will
please to call Mr. Parker, who will show you what a kind of Man Mr. Oats is.
And I am glad, since you say that Mr. Dangerfield is a good Witness, that I can
prove that every word he says is a lie. And so begin with Mr. Oats,


Prisoner, My Lord, I would offer you a Record, a Record of some particular
Actions from Hastings.


L. C. J. Read the Record.


[The Record Read.

L. C. J. What use can you make of this?


Prisoner, My Lord, the case is only this, My Lord, I will tell you, here is
Mr. Oats, this is only to show what kind of Man this Mr. Oats is. Mr. Oats
he comes and accuses a Man at Hastings for Buggery, there he is Indicted and
comes to his Trial, and then he is found Innocent: Now, my Lord, I sent for
this Mr. Parker, to tell your Lordship what kind of man this Mr. Oats was, and
for that purpose show the whole proceeding.


L. C. J. My Lord, you shall have all the Justice in the World; but we must
have right done to the Kings Evidence. You have brought in a thing, whereby all
you can make against Mr. Oats is this, That he was the Prosecutor of a Man for
the Crime of Buggery, and is supposed to have taken his Oath there, and
notwithstanding the Jury would not believe him, and found the Man not Guilty.


Prisoner, My Lord, I come to show you the motives how the Jury came to clear
him, that is, by proving this man was in another place at that time, and
satisfied the Court and Jury, that he was from Eleven a Clock or sooner, till
Eight or Ten a Clock with them in Company; where it was only the malice that
was between Oats and Parker. And several Witnesses that were in the place
where he said the Buggery was committed, said that he was not there, and they
Witnesses positively said they were with him, and all looked upon Mr. Oats as
a detestable man, and sent him out of the Court.


L. C. J. Do you prove this by any but Parker?


J. Raymond, This ought not to be admitted; for if it be, Mr. Oats stands here
to answer all the Faults that ever he committed.


L. C. J. Here is the Case, Supposing it be true now, that Mr. Oats,
prosecuted a man for Felony, and he gave Testimony, supposing it should be so,
and yet the Jury acquitted him; What use can you make of it? You can make no
Inference; it is a thing we must allow all the Juries in England: For there is
Witness generally given on both sides, and when there are for the Plantiff, the
Defendants Evidence are all Perjured, and when for the Defendant the Plaintiffs
Evidence are Perjured.


Prisoner, My Lord, this is the Inference. Thus much I make of it, that this
Parker is Innocent. Oats swears positively he did so, the other swears
positively this man was not there, to show the Malice Oats had against him.


L. C. J. My Lord, you can go no further than you have gone. The result of all
is, that the Jury found him not Guilty: For what grounds no man can come to
say, but the Jury men themselves. No man can tell what prevailed with the Jury
to find him not Guilty, that is in their own Consciences, and these are things
that cannot be Examined. His Jury, notwithstanding Mr. Oats was the only
Prosecutor, they found him not Guilty, and it amounts to nothing.


Prisoner, My Lord, there is another thing, while this man was in Prison, what
does Oats do, but comes here to London, accuses the Father, who was a
considerable man in the Town, a Justice of the Peace, and Mayor the year
before; accuses him because he should not assist his Son, accuses him before
the King of speaking scandalous words. Then he gets him by a Messenger brought
up before the Council, the King was present at the hearing, and there it was
proved to the King, as the order of Council shows, that he was an honest man,
and so the Council sent Oats away with the greatest contempt, and freed the
other man.


L. C. J. Was this before the Plot was discovered?


Prisoner, Yes, my Lord, in pursuance of it.


L. C. J. You said it was that he should not help his Son, his Son was not free.


Prisoner, No, he was in Prison, my Lord.


Recorder, My Lord, may think hard if he has not some competent liberty; but
he must keep to the business. You say, that notwithstanding he has the Opinion
of the Court, that the Jury must take notice, then the Jury must take notice it
signifies nothing.


Prisoner, Very well. Having told you this, I desire you would be pleased to
take notice, after Oats was thus forced to run away from Hastings, here it
seems he was converted to be a Papist, by a Person whom Mr. Oats has since
converted to be a Protestant; and you shall see what an Account this Gentleman
will give of him.


L. C. J. What is his Name?


Prisoner, Hutchinson.


L. C. J. What will you do against him?


Prisoner, Several things, my Lord.


L. C. J. You must not do it. If you are able to disprove Mr. Oats, in any of
these particulars, you may do it. If you alledg Testimony against the
particular matter he has sworn, you will do very well; but pray, my Lord, keep
to that.


Prisoner, I will, my Lord. I will submit any thing to your Lordships Commands,
and therefore, my Lord, I will tell you for what reason I sent for this man, to
tell you how Mr. Oats went to Spain, and how he lived in Spain.


L. C. J. If you can show the Jury any reason why they should not believe his
Evidence, that will be very proper.


L. C. J. What is your Name?


Hutchinson, My name is Hutchinson.


Prisoner, Mr. Hutchinson, pray say what you have to say, and not follow Mr.
Oates's method, I only ask you this Question, Sir, Whether you did convert this
man, that is, reconcile him to the Church of Rome?


Hutchinson, Yes, my Lord, that I did.


L. C. J. You ought not to ask him such Questions; you bring him in danger of
his life; you are not to ask him such Questions.


Recorder, Let us see the Statute Book.


Clerk of the Crown, It is High Treason.


L. C. J. You thought this had been meritorious now, and it is High Treason.


Recorder, This it is to abound in a man's own sense. We must beg your Lordships
Advice in this.


L. C. J. Are you a Protestant now?


Hutchinson, Yes, my Lord.


Prisoner, He was a Priest, and confesses his Error.


L. C. J. Did you know Oats first in Spain?


Hutchinson, No, my Lord, I knew him first here, and we were in company, and I
told him, He could not be a true Priest, since he was of the Church of England.


At. Genesis He offers such things as are not Evidence.


L. C. J. Pray what do you know of his Employment in Spain?


Hutchinson, I received Letters from him when he was in Spain. He went over to
study Philosophy and Divinity there, and I saw his recommendations to the
Rector of Liege.


L. C. J. Did you see him?


Hutchinson, Yes, my Lord, I did see him before he made this disturbance.


L. C. J. What disturbance? Do you know? What Discourse had you with him?


Hutchinson, I employed him in writing for me.


L. C. J. Writing what?


Hutchinson, In writing certain things against the Corruption of the Church of
Rome. He had Ten Shillings I gave him, and this was before the Discovery he
made (as he pretends) of the Plot. And he told me he would suffer no more for
Conscience sake. It is an hard thing, said he, Mr. Berry, for a man to want
Bread. Upon which I gave him Ten Shillings.


L. C. J. He says, having been formerly with Mr. Oats, he employed him to
transcribe many things for him, and Mr. Oats said to him, he was resolved no
more to suffer for Conscience sake. How, says he, not so. Oh but Mr. Berry,
said he, it is a very sad thing to want Bread. And upon that, he says, he gave
him Ten Shillings for his pains in writing.


Hutchinson, And hereupon, my Lord, in May was Twelvemonth, he sent for me,
when I heard he had done some more mischief* and I went to him, my Lord.


L. C. J. That was after the Discovery?


Hutchinson, Yes, my Lord, upon that he was very kind to me, and gave me Twenty
Shillings. Said he, Mr. Berry, you have been civil to me, and you shall never
want any thing, so long as I have it. Said I, Mr. Oats, are these things true,
that you swear against the Jesuits? Said he, as I hope for salvation they are:
And that was the truest word he spoke these three years. Then said I, Mr.
Oats, answer me this only one thing, There are an Hundred and twenty Persons
that saw you every day, and dined and supped with you at St. Omers, and these
you have recommended to me for Virtuous People, and I know them to be so. He
said, They are Outlawed men.


L. C. J. What did Mr. Oats say more?


Hutchinson, He was with me frequently, my Lord.


Recorder, He paid you your Angel well when he gave you Twenty Shillings.


Hutchinson, Mr. Oats, Speak the truth, there is a God in Heaven.


Dr. Oats, Shall I be allowed to satisfy the Court as to this Evidence? I
will give the Court a very good account.


L. C. J. The substance is this, That you were poor. Is it true that he gave
you Ten Shillings?


Dr. Oats, My Lord, I believe I might not have much money among them.


L. C. J. And you said, You would suffer no more for Conscience sake?


Dr. Oats, That is not so, my Lord.


L. C. J. And, That it is an hard thing to want Bread?


Dr. Oats, My Lord, I never wanted Bread.


Hutchinson, But you said so to me, Mr. Oats.


At. Genesis Hark, Mr. Hutchinson --


Dr. Oats, To show the Invalidity of this Evidence, my Lord, the Bishop of
London has turned him out of his Living at Barkin.


L. C. J. What is that?


Dr. Oats, To show that he is not fit to be trusted.


L. C. J. Why you have never a Living.


Dr. Oats, Yes I have, my Lord.


L. C. J. Where?


Dr. Oats, In Kent, my Lord.


L. C. J. How long have you had it?


Dr. Oats, I was restored to it last Summer.


Recorder, He says, That he had Discourse with him concerning his Priesthood,
Whether Mr. Oats thought himself to be a good Priest, that is, as he was made
by the Order of the Church of England?


At. Genesis He says, He converted Mr. Oats to be a Papist.


Dr. Oats, And I have a Charge of High Treason against that man, for seducing
me from my Religion, my Lord. I will swear he turned me to the Church of Rome,
and I desire it may be recorded.


Dr. D. I have one thing to tell your Lordship, the man is mad, he is
distracted.


L. C. J. This Doctor of Divinity is a very honest man, he will tell you.


Dr. D. He was my Curate at Barkin, and my Lord of London having some
Information against the manner of his Preaching, sent me word to Rippon, he
would provide me another Curate. On Saturday last, dining with him, my Lord
told me he was distracted.


Recorder, His Behavior is a very concurrent Testimony.


J. Raymond, I appeal to my Lord, if I did not tell him as he came into the
Court, that he was a distracted man.


L. C. J. Call another Witness.


Prisoner, Here Is a Gentleman was his School-fellow at Vallodolid. I ask you
Mr. Armstrong, Whether you knew any thing of Mr. Oats there?


L. C. J. How long had he been there?


Armstrong, He was Three months there before me.


L. C. J. How long was he there in all*


Armstrong, A matter of a month.


L. C. J. Was he not there Four months?


Armstrong, Yes, a matter of Four months in all.


L. C. J. He says, He had been there Three months before he came, and a month
after he came; and that then he was but a common Scholar.


Dr. Oats, My Lord, I will satisfy the Court when they question me?


L. C. J. In what would you satisfy us?


Dr. Oats, About being a Scholar. I was ready to commence when they came; but
being they were Strangers in the Town, not being Town Scholars, and not
undertaking Philosophical Dictates, the Fathers did pray me to show them the
way to School; and I went with them two or three times.


L. C. J. Call another, my Lord.


Prisoner, Mr. Palmer and Mr. Dorrington.


L. C. J. Did you know Mr. Oats at St. Omers?


Palmer, Yes, my Lord, and he was an ordinary Scholar there, and dined and
supped with us.


L. C. J. You said he dined at another Table.


Palmer, Yes, my Lord, he did dine at a Table by himself; but it was at the
same time.


Dr. Oats, Had I Scholars Commons? Pray my Lord ask them that.


Palmer, He had the same Commons that we had; but they had a respect for him as
he was an ancienter man, and that was the reason that he had more freedom than
the rest.


Prisoner, My Lord, He says he came from St. Omers at the Consult, Pray Sir,
who did you come along with? Did you come with Hilsley?


Dr. Oats, Hilsley came with me in the Pacquet-boat.


Prisoner, Call Mr. Hilsley and Osbourne -- My Lord, this Gentleman. I would
bring nothing to offend your Lordship, or nothing that has been old, if it had
not some new inference from it: Therefore, my Lord, this is the reason that I
sent for Mr. Hilsley. Mr. Hilsley did you come with Mr. Oats in April in the
Pacquet-boat?


Hilsley, No, my Lord.


Prisoner, You left him at St. Omers.


Hilsley, Yes, my Lord.


Prisoner, Now, my Lord, I have several Witnesses to prove this. And pray, Mr.
Osbourn, tell my Lord what he said to you.


Osbourn, My Lord, about the latter end of April, I heard Mr. Hilsley was in
Town, I went to see him, and one time at a Coffee-house about the Turnstile w^
fell in Discourse.


L. C. J. My Lord, you say you have two Persons of Quality. I will tell you my
Lord what you shall expect, I will not be for one and not for the other; but be
equal as near as I can. If he comes only to testify what Hilsley told him, it
signifies nothing.


Prisoner, I do depend upon Hilsley, but this is that Hilsley told him, That
there was one Oats at St. Omers.


L. C. J. That is no Evidence, nor can Ladies of Quality prove by their own
Experience what Mr. Hilsley affirms, That Oats came not over with him.


Prisoner, My Lord, They can tell, and one Lady a Protestant, that talking with
this Gentleman before the Plot --


L. C. J. This is only Discourse what another man says. If Mr. Oats himself
should have said so, then indeed it is proper; but to show you this, it is
impossible, supposing they speak truth, that is, if they do witness what they
do not, That long before they heard of the Name of Oats, this Gentlemau should
tell them one Oats was left at St. Omers; it signifies nothing.


Prisoner, Does not that confirm Mr. Hilsley's testimony?


L. C. J. No, indeed.


Prisoner, I only refer this to you, my Lord; Hilsley says in April he did
leave Oats, and here are four or five Witnesses that Hilsley told them so.


J. Jones, All that my Lord says, is this, That he did leave Mr. Oats at St.
Omers. If it be objected, They are Catholics, as they call them, says my Lord,
Hilsley did tell this Story before there was any Plot. Why should he tell them
so? It is not in favor of that Religion that he speaks; but the time of
testifying such a thing, shows he speaks true. This is all.


Prisoner, This is the Inference, This is only to corroborate and show you the
credit of his testimony.


J. Raymond, It may be a mistake though, and it is of no more force than what
he says now.


At. Genesis They were all mistaken in that matter.


Dr. Oats, My Lord, he did leave me at St. Omers, but I overtook him at Calais.


L. C. J. Will you swear it Mr. Oats?


Dr. Oats, I say upon my Oath I did it.


L. C. J. It were a great matter if you had any body to prove that this
Gentleman came alone, but that is still but one man's testimony.


Prisoner, But here is Confirmation to his Evidence, that he could not invent
it.


At. Genesis You had Sixteen once, but the contrary was proved and believed, and
so it may be again.


Prisoner, Call Mr. Gregson and Rigby. Mr. Gregson were not you Landlord to Mr.
Oats before the Plot was discovered? How long before the Plot did he lie at
your House?


L. C. J. What time?


Gregson, A Week before Easter 77.


J. Raymond, When did he go away from you, Sir?


Gregson, The Sunday after Easter day.


J. Raymond, When did you see him again?


Gregson, He came to me about All Saints.


J. Raymond, The same year?


Gregson, Yes.


Dr. Oats, Who paid for my Quarters? Pray ask him that, my Lord.


Gregson, He paid for it himself.


Dr. Oats, Did not Mr. Fenwick pay for it?


Gregson, He did after you came from St. Omers.


Dr. Oats, My Lord, when I came last from St. Omers, I went directly to his
House.


Prisoner, Was not he in a poor condition?


Gregson, He was then indifferently poor.


Prisoner, My Lord, This is only to prove his condition.


Dr. Oats, My Lord, I had only what the Jesuits allowed me.


L. C. J. You had nothing but what they allowed you?


Dr. Oats, Nothing else, my Lord.


J. Jones, They allowed you a very scanty living.


Prisoner, Call Mr. Littcott. Mr. Littcott, Do you know any thing about a
Divorce?


L. C. J. What should he know?


Prisoner, Pray, my Lord, don't discourage me.


J. Raymond, But you must not ask things that are not to the purpose.


Littcott, My Lord, It was morally impossible there should be a Divorce.


L. C. J. Was there any endeavor by my Lord concerning it?


Littcott, There was no such Design.


L. C. J. How was that? But pray mind, you will be morally not believed else:
Do you know my Lord used any endeavors, in order to obtain a Divorce?


Recorder, That is all that he says, He never knew any thing.


Prisoner, I only say this, my Lord, Mr. Oats comes here and says, That he
heard me say, That I did spend a great deal of money. Now if I satisfy the
Court that I never spent a Farthing toward a Divorce --


L. C. J. If he had said, Your Lordship laid out Sums of money, then it had
been an Answer to that, if you could prove you had not.


Prisoner, You know I stand here accused for a great Crime, pray give me leave.


J. Raymond, If it were a matter of moment we would.


Prisoner, Pray, my Lord, hear me, here is a Man says, I spent a great deal of
money about a Divorce; I come to tell your Lordship, That this very man, before
your Lordships, and also before the King; and if your Lordships have forgot it,
I will show you Witnesses that he spoke it before the King, and before the
House of Commons; that I did actually sue out a Divorce* Now I will show my
Lord that I neither could nor did go about it.


L. C. J. We are not to take notice of that now. If he did say a false thing
before the House of Commons, we cannot take notice of it now: For we cannot go
to try whether he said so, and whether that be true or false.


Prisoner, I humbly beg my Lord, If this man that is upon his Oath has sworn
before the King, that he did actually see the Divorce, and I prove that it was
impossithat he should see the Divorce, because it was impossible to get a
Divorce --


L. C. J. What then?


J. Raymond, You must not be permitted to prove that, it is not pertinent to
the Question.


Prisoner, My Lords, with humble submission to you, he has told me this before
your Lordships, that I spent a great deal of money about a Divorce.


L. C. J. My Lord, You will be satisfied, when we have acquainted you what the
ordinary Proceedings of a Court of Justice are in this Nature; what is, and
what is not to be admitted. If you should come to prove Mr. Oats had falsely
sworn a thing in another Court, and five or six Witnesses shall come and say it
is not true; we are not to hearken to it. The reason is this, first you must
have him perjured, and we are not now to try, Whether that thing sworn in
another place be true or false? Because that is the way to accuse whom you
please; and that may make a man a Liar, that cannot imagine this will be put to
him: and so no man's testimony that comes to be a Witness, shall leave himself
safe. And this is another Case, If he swore in another place what is
contradictory to what he says now; then it is proper. If you could prove that
he had sworn in another place that he never saw you, it is very proper: but now
to us he says, That he does not remember whether ever he had seen a Divorce, or
that you had sued out a Divorce. All that he remembers is, That you said, you
had expended a great deal of money about a Divorce, and that is all he
testifies here.


Prisoner, My Lord, my Evidence against Mr. Oats is this, That he waves what
he said before, when I came to ask him, and says, I don't remember. Now, my
Lord, if he lies in one thing, he may in another.


J. Raymond, No man can remember all the things that ever he did in his life.


Prisoner, I have Witnesses to appeal to, to witness every thing; and I
represent it here to you, that I would with all my heart have Indicted him of
Perjury, but for Mr. Attorney General: for I Employed Two to Attend the Clerk
of the Peace for Copies of the Indictments against Mr. Langborn and Mr.
Ireland; they did come to the Clerk of the Peace, says the Clerk of the Peace,
I cannot do it without Mr. Atturney's Authority. My Lord, says he, I would give
them you with all my heart, but I must have leave from the Table.


At. General, No, my Lord, I told you, I would not give it you without you had
an Order from the King, and the Council did not think fit to give it you.


Prisoner, I think this is a little pertinent.


J. Jones, How does any thing that your Lordship excepts against in this
Gentleman's Testimony contradict it self? All that you accuse him of is, That
Mr Oats had said he heard you say, you had spent a great deal of Money about a
Divorce.


Prisoner, I only show, if you are pleased to hear it, that he reported to the
King that he actually saw the Divorce.


J. Jones, That agrees well enough with what he says now.


Prisoner, He said so in your Lordships hearing.


L. C. J. I don't remember it, If I did I would speak of it; I don't remember
it upon my word.


J. Raymond, I protest I don't remember a word.


J. Jones, In the Court did he say it?


J. Raymond, Here we are all three that were present, I protest I don't
remember it; but as to the business of the Divorce, I might look upon it as
impertinent, and so possibly might not mind what he said.


Prisoner, I only offer this to you, and if your Lordships command me to desist
I will desist.


Dr. Oats, I desire my Evidence to prove that I was in Town.


J. Raymond, Pray, Mr. Oats, you are an Evidence, you must be governed by Mr.
Attorney.


L. C. J. It would be very fit, Mr. Attorney* to prove that Mr. Oats did come
over with Hilsley in the Packet Boat.


J. Raymond, Mr. Oats, I remember very well gave an Account of his coming
over, said he, I did come over with such and such persons, and among the rest
was Mr. Hilsley. This is only to prove that he was at the Consult.


At. Genesis We can prove it.


[Records produced against Mr. Dangerfield.

L. C. J. Here is, That he was burnt in the hand, and Outlawed for Felony,
Pilloryed for Cheating, Twice Pilloryed, and see whether he was Whipped or no.


Sir F. W. I know nothing of the Pillory.


J. Raymond, Here was a Record of being burnt in the hand, and a Record for
putting away false Guinneys.


L. C. J. For that he was to stand in the Pillory.


Clerk of the Crown, Here is one Record for another Shilling gilt.


L. C. J. Was that in the Pillory too?


At. Genesis He was fined Fifty Pounds.


Clerk of the Crown, Here are Three in Salisbury for Three several Guinneys,
and he was Adjudged to the Pillory for them all.


At. Genesis It was all at one Assizes, my Lord.


L. C. J. My Brother Tried him.


Clerk of the Crown, He was Tried before Mr. Justice Jones, and to stand in the
Pillory for all three.


L. C. J. What have you else to say?


Prisoner, Call Mrs. Cellier and Mr. Dowdal.


L. C. J. What is your Name, Sir?


Dowdal, My Name is Bennet Dowdal.


L. C. J. What have you to say to him, my Lord?


Prisoner, Mr. Dowdal the case is this, Mr. Dangerfield tells me. I was angry
with him at such a time for a business at my house; was I not angry with him at
Powis house for going to the Lords in the Tower?


At. General, Then he did go about it?


Dowdal, Mrs. Cellier spoke to me to speak to Mr. Dangerfield not to be
troubled at your anger.


J. Raymond, When was this?


Dowdal, After the Jesuits died.


Prisoner, He proves this, That Mrs. Cellier spoke to him to pacify Mr.
Dangerfield, and Dangerfield did tell him I was angry with him for going in my
Name to the Lords.


J. Raymond, He says no such thing, my Lord.


L. C. J. You must not ask him what Mrs. Cellier said.


Mrs. Cellier, This day Twelve Month he and I had been employed in writing
Copies of some Letters, and I sent him to my Lord to know if he would go
something toward the Printing them, and he went from him to the Lords in the
Tower. In an hour and half after, my Lord came to me very angry: Mrs. Cellier,
said he, I thought you would not forfeit your discretion to send such a Rascal
to me; if you send him to me again I will bid my Servants kick him. And, said
I, to Mr. Dangerfield, you are not to note that; for he is a very good Man, and
may be angry one time and pleased another; and I would have sent him another
time, and said he, Pray Madam, don't send me thither, I would rather go an
hundred miles of your Errand.


L. C. J. Dangerfield, that Discourse you had with my Lord, was it before the
Jesuits dyed or after?


Mr. Dangerfield, What Discourse?


L. C. J. When you discoursed about killing the King.


Mr. Dangerfield, No, my Lord, Two months after.


L. C. J. When was the time that these words were spoken?


Mr. Dangerfield, When his Lordship was in that Passion.


L. C. J. When was that?


Mr. Dangerfield, My Lord, it was about the middle of August.


L. C. J. Was you ever in his Company after?


Mr. Dangerfield, No my Lord, I saw him once at Powis House.


L. C. J. Had he ever been angry before?


Mr. Dangerfield, No not till this time, my Lord.


L. C. J. Here Mrs. Cellier witnesses that this day twelve month, my Lord was
extremely angry, insomuch that when she would have had you go on an Errand you
would not.


Mr. Dangerfield, My Lord, that time I had been with my Lord Castlemain, I went
home to Mrs. Celliers house, which I did then call my home, and said I, My Lord
Castlemain is most violently angry with me.


L. C. J. When was this?


Mr. Dangerfield, This was the latter end of August.


L. C. J. But she talks of this time Twelvemonth.


Mr. Dangerfield, It is no such thing my Lord.


Mrs. Cellier, I said, Pray carry this Letter to my Lord Castlemain: Pray
excuse me, said he, I had rather go an hundred Miles than go by his door.


L. C. J. Whereas Dangerfield says, He had this Discourse in August, Mrs.
Cellier says in June or July, this day twelvemonth particularly she gave him a
Letter, and he said, Pray excuse me, I would go an Hundred Miles for you; but I
would not go into my Lords Company again if I could help it.


Prisoner, My Lord, Mr. Dowdal can tell it.


L. C. J. Did he acknowledge to you my Lords anger in the beginning of July?


Dowdal, It was within a week after the Jesuits died.


L. C. J. I don't know that.


Dowdal, It was about the Twenty first of June.


L. C. J. Here are two Witnesses, one says in June or the beginning of July;
says Mrs. Cellier, this day twelvemonth, he came and told me my Lord was
extremely angry with him. And she would afterward have had him carried a
Letter: But he said, Pray excuse me, I would go an hundred miles, but he would
not go again to him if he could help it. And Dowdal says he told him about that
time of my Lords anger with him.


At. Genesis Hold your tongue, Mr. Dangerfield.


J. Raymond, What Jesuits?


Dowdal, The five Jesuits.


Prisoner, If you please, my Lords, I would only tell you this. My Lords, you
see that these two Witnesses testify, that I was angry with Mr. Dangerfield, in
June, My Lords, I only say this to you, that when I was Examined at the Council
before the King of this Particular, my Lord Chancellor asked him the
Particulars of it, and he did confess this thing which I now prove. Now my
Lords, I infer this, if I was so angry with him for offering to go to the
Tower when he went to the Tower in my Name --


L. C. J. That they have said, that you were very angry.


Dowdal, Dangerfield told me so, that he was angry about his going to the Tower
in my Lords Name unknown to him.


L. C. J. Here are two Witnesses to prove, that my Lord was angry with him for
going to the Tower in his name, and they both testify he was extremely high and
refused to carry a Letter to my Lord; and yet he says in August following he
had this Discourse.


Prisoner, I have now only one thing to say, what has past between Mr. Oats
and Mr. Dangerfield.


L. C. J. Do it as near as you can.


Sir F. W. We have some other Evidence to answer this.


At. Genesis If your Lordship please, we will call two or three Witnesses to
Prove the Point. First to prove this last thing, that we have been in my Lords
company later than my Lord speaks of.


L. C. J. He says August.


At. Genesis We will prove after that time, that is the time that pinches us.


Prisoner, My Lady Powis is in Court, will you hear her?


Lady Powis, My Lord, I never did send a Letter by Mr. Dangerfield to any body
in my life, nor I never read a Letter in Mr. Dangerfields presence, nor never
had him so much in my company to read a Letter or any tittle to him.


L. C. J. I will tell you Gentlemen, what he says, Mr. Dangerfield swears he
carried a Letter from my Lady Powis to my Lord Castlemain, and there was an
answer brought back, and that, that answer of my Lord Castlemains was read
before him, and (you will do well to call Mrs. Cellier in again) my Lady Powis
does deny that she ever sent a Letter by him to my Lord Castlemain, or any body
else, by him in her life; or that she ever communicated any Letter to him: This
is apt Evidence, this is the truth of it; for it answers directly to what he
says against my Lord Castlemain.


[ Sir Richard Barker.

L. C. J. What say you, Sir Richard Barker, can you give any account of Oats?
When was Mr. Oats in Town? What time that you know of?


Sir R. B. My Lord, I remember we were once upon this before your Lordship.


L. C. J. In 78?


Sir R. B. Yes my Lord, the Evidence that I gave, my Lord, was only this, that
my servants told me that Mr. Oats had been at my house: It was before
Whitsontide, in May 78


L. C. J. Did you see him then? When was it you saw him?


Sir R. B. My Lord, I saw him after.


L. C. J. How long after?


Sir R. B. My Lord, it was about the latter end of June.


L. C. J. He says to his own knowledge he saw him in June.


At. Genesis But we have his servants here too, Phillip Page, and Cecily Mayo.


L. C. J. Do you hear, Mrs Cellier, was there any Letter sent by my Lord
Castlemain to my Lady Powis, that was read before you and Dangerfieild? Mrs.
Cellier, No my Lord.


L. C. J. Here are two witnesses, my Lady says there is no such thing, and Mrs.
Cellier says it.


Prisoner, There is another thing, that is, The teaching the Scholars at St.
Omers, that I taught the Scholars their Lessons.


-- Turner.

Sollic. Genesis Pray inform my Lord and the Jury, what time it was you saw Mr.
Dangerfield at my Lord Castlemains.


L. C. J. What Month can you charge your self to say, you saw Dangerfield in my
Lord Castlemains company.


Turner, I cannot say just the time.


L. C. J. Might it be August?


Turner, I cannot well tell, I think it might be about July.


J. Raymond, Why do you think so?


L. C. J. You are not asked to accuse your self in any thing, but when you saw
them together.


Turner, I was coming down stairs, my Lord.


J. Raymond, You don't tell when it was.


L. C. J. Tell us whether you can tell or no: If you are doubtful, say you are
doubtful; but speak the truth.


Turner, I cannot be positive.


L. C. J. It might be in June, or July, or August, but you think July?


Turner, Yes, Sir.


Sir F. W. The sooner it is after that the Evidence is, the better against it.


At. Genesis Madam, I think your Ladyship says you never sent a Letter by
Dangerfield?


Lady Powis, Yes, Sir.


At. Gen, Nor did you never receive any Notes from him?


Lady Powis, I have received some Notes from Mrs. Cellier, which were his
Writing.


L. C. J. But did you ever receive a Letter from my Lord Castlemain?


Lady Powis, Never, my Lord.


-- Woodman.

J. Raymond, What do you say, Mr. Attorney?


At. Gen, Hark you, Woodman, were you sent with any Letter?


Woodman, To whom?


At. General, To my Lord Castlemain, or any body?


Woodman, I was sent with one Letter, it was Mrs. Celliers, my Lord.


L. C. J. To whom?


Woodman, To my Lord Castlemain; as I remember, my Lord, I took it from Mrs.
Celliers Daughter.


At. Genesis Did you ever receive any money of my Lord Castlemain?


Woodman, Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. What was it? How much was it?


Woodman, About Three Pounds or Thirty Shillings, I believe.


L. C. J. How do you believe it?


Woodman, To the best of my thoughts it was.


At. Genesis Was it for Dangerfield?


Woodman, My Lord I don't know that.


L. C. J. Have you any more?


Solic. Genesis My Lord I have this to say to prove Dr. Oats was in London in
April 78.


L. C. J. He does not deny but he might be here too.


Prisoner, I don't dispute it, my Lord, I have only this one word more. It is
not of Treason, but it is against my Reputation; because this man, before your
Lordship, I think has accused me of it; and I think, my Lord, I shall give you
very good satisfction: that is, that the boys that came from St. Omers were not
instructed and taught by me. Now if you please, my Lord, to give me leave to
show it, I have done. Look, my Lord, the thing that I can say, is this, Mr.
Littcott.


J. Raymond, You see he said it was morally impossible.


Prisoner, Pray my Lords.


J. Raymond, I will undertake you will say it is time lost.


L. C. J. I would stay some time to observe to the Jury what I have taken
notice of with all my heart, but I should be gone.


Prisoner, I have done my Lord, I would not say any thing to disgust any body.


L. C. J. Gentlemen of the Jury, I will deliver my Observations in this Cause
as I would in any Cause, to the best of my Understanding, and will make those
Observations that are as Natural as I know how to do; and proper for you to
take notice of. It is in vain to dispute what my Lord stands indicted of: It is
for attempting to murder the King, and change our Government and our Religion.
To prove this, there has been Two Witnesses only that are material, and that
is Mr. Oats in the first place, and Mr. Oats his Evidence, the Sum of it is
to be reduced --


L. C. J. Mr. Attorney, do you stand up to speak any thing?


At. Genesis If your Lordship pleases, we will Sum up the Evidence for the King,
not to offend your Lordship.


L. C. J. If you would be short, Mr. Attorney, we would not hinder you of any
thing.


At. Genesis I Will be very short.

If it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, My Lord Castlemain
is here charged with High Treason. The proof that we have against him is by two
Witnesses, that is, Dr. Oats and Mr. Dangerfield. Mr. Oats he does swear
this, namely, That after the Consult (for I will bring it in short) that after
the Consult that was for killing the King and altering the Government, my Lord
Castlemain being acquainted with it at Mr. Fenwick's Chamber, did hope it good
success, and that he should come to be revenged. Mr. Dangerfield he has
proved, That being treated with to kill the King, and having refused to do it,
my Lord Castlemain was very angry with him for it; and said, Why wan't you do
that for which you were taken out of Prison? Here are two Witnesses express.
What is said against Mr. Oats signifies nothing. As to Mr. Dangerfield there
are some Exceptions, which we must confess to be true; but he is a Witness, and
my Lord, such matters are to be expected to be proved by such Witnesses: for if
a man will discover Robberies, he must go to such persons as do such things;
and if Treasons, it must be among them that have been employed in such things.
Though he were a dishonest man before, yet he may be honest now. He was never
guilty of any Treason but as he was employed amongst them. There are some
Witnesses brought to encounter him, and one is my Lady Powis, who, as he says,
sent him with a Letter to my Lord Castlemain; but she says she did never send a
Letter by him: And others say he would never come at my Lord Castlemain after
he was angry, which was in June. Now for that, Gentlemen, you do hear Turner
say, That in July or August, for he cannot tell which, he thinks it might be
July, he saw Dangerfield at my Lord Castlemains; so that that encounters that
Evidence.


L. C. J. If Mr. Attorney had not interrupted me, I would not have left out any
thing of this nature; for I would be certainly careful, where the Kings life
lies at Stake. I would be sure to preserve my Sovereign above all things, and
therefore no man ought to think that I should be partial in a Cause wherein our
Religion and the Life of the King and the Government is in danger. But I must
say on the other side, That there should be good competent Proofs of these
things against those accused, because their Lives and Fortunes, and Honors,
and a^l are at stake. And so, Gentlemen, we shall discharge our Consciences to
the best of our understandings, and deal uprightly on both hands.

For the Case it stands thus, It is truly observed by Mr. Attorney, That there
are but two material Witnesses to the Charge of this Indictment, that is to
say, Mr. Oats and Dangerfield. Mr. Oats his Testimony is in two things, the
one close, the other is more remote. That more remote, is, That he had a Letter
to send to my Lord Castlemain, which he gave to the Provincial to send it, and
as he says, he saw a Letter subscribed Castlemain, and that afterward by
seeing him write a Superscription, he could recollect the Character so well,
that he believed that to be his hand which he saw in Spain among the Jesuits,
or the Fathers, as they call them there, to whom they communicated that Letter;
wherein he mentioned the general Design, that is, the bringing in Popery; which
is the bringing in the Catholic Religion, as they call it. That is more
remote. He says there were Letters past between them, wherein my Lord approved
of some things and disapproved of others, which related to the Design; by
which, says Mr. Oats, we meant the whole Matter and Transaction of Killing the
King; and that does appear by that Letter he saw of my Lord Castlemains, for
that annexes to Design the advancing the Catholic Religion. The first time he
saw him, he did not know who he was, and there, at Wild house, he says, That my
Lord Castlemain should drop out some words which were suspicious, and one thing
as if he understood something of this matter that they had then in agitation.

But more particularly, he says, That when he came to Fenwick's Chamber, there
was the great matter. They talk*d before but of the Design in general, at Wlld
house; but afterward meeting in Lincoln's Inn Fields, where he was told who he
was, they went to Fenwick's Chamber, where they fell a discoursing about
several things that related to the Concern, and at last they tell upon the
matter in hand, and said, They were glad to see the Fathers so unanimous in
this ma^ter. I asked about what matter? He said, The Killing of the King and
bringing in Popery: To which he says, That my Lord should make Answer, He
wished them good success in their Design, and that then he should be revenged.
This is the substance of what Mr. Oats says: Against whose Testimony, I must
tell you there has been but little. There is but little thrown upon Mr. Oats
by way of disgrace and infamy. For that Verdict that the Jury sound against his
Evidence, it is not material; for then every man must be accused, when the Jury
does not go according to the testimony he gives. It is not to be denied, but
there is something said against him in another particular, and that is his
coming over from St. Om^rs, where he says that Mr. Hilsley came over with him
in the Packet Boat, but Mr. Hilsl^y denies it. Mr. Oats would have salved it,
by saying he left him at St. Omers. It Is true, says Mr. Oats, but I overtook
him afterward: but he says to the point, that he came not with him. Now it is
not denied on the other hand, but Mr. Oats might be here, and my Lord of
Castlemaine seems to admit it, and it is probable enough Mr. Oats might be
here. This is all I remember in reference to Mr. Oats. You must weigh well
with your selves how probable or not probable, what he does swear is. But I
must tell the Jury they are to weigh the natures of people among themselves, as
they carry probability or not, or else the confidence of a Swearer shall take
away any man's life whatsoever. And to that that Mr. Oats says first, I
understand not how he should be so free, Mr. Oats being a Stranger to him,
when he knew not my Lord, and does not know whether my Lord knew him or no. But
he says, my Lord must needs see the Jesuits trusted him, and that might make
him more confident: That afterward going to Fenwick's House, he spoke broader;
in plain English. They were talking of a Design to kill the King and bring in
the Catholic Religion, and Mr. Oats says, he wished them good success in the
Design, and that then he should be revenged. How far this Oath is to be taken
or not, I must leave to your Consideration.

The next is Mr. Dangerfield, for nothing infamous is proved against Mr. Oats.
Dangerfield is a man of whom there is enough. You see what Crimes there are,
for it is the Duty of every Judge, and I cannot see how he can discharge his
Conscience, and the Duty he ows to the Government, in respect of his Oath and
Place, if he does not make those just Observations to the Jury which are done
in all Cases: That is to say, when men have contracted great Crimes upon
themselves, though by Law they may be Witnesses; yet it has always been
observed, and their Credit left to them to consider of. You see how many Crimes
they have produced, a matter of six great enormous Crimes; and by them you will
see how far you ought to consider his testimony. Had Mr. Dangerfield been
guilty only of being concerned in the Treason, and come in as a Witness, I
should have thought him a very competent Witness; for that is Mr. Oats his
Case: but they prove Crimes of another sort and nature, and whether the man of
a sudden be become a Saint, by being become a Witness, I leave that to you to
consider; and how far you are satisfied in the main.

The next thing is the opposition to his Testimony. He has sworn that he
carried a Letter from my Lady Powis to my Lord Castlemain, and an Answer
returned Lack from my Lord to her, and that my Lady Powis did read it in the
presence of Mrs. Cellier and him. Of this my Lady Powis has been asked (it is
true they are not upon their Oaths, but that is not their fault, the Law will
not allow it) and my Lady Powis has affirmed to it, as much as lay upon her to
do, that she never sent a Letter by Mr. Dangerfield to my Lord Castlemaine, nor
any Body else. And whereas he says Mrs. Cellier was present, she says, she
knows of no such Letter, nor was any read in her company* And this is a
contradicting his Evidence, supposing him to be a man otherwise untouched. And
whereas Dangerfield says that in August he was with my Lord, and he said, How
chance you would not do that thing for which you were brought out of Prison?
What? would you have me kill the King? Yes, says he, that it is. And my Lord
speaking very angrily and very roughly, made him think it time to withdraw out
of his company, and never come into his company more; and that this was the
time of his anger, and no other time; my Lord rather complementing him, as he
would say, with friendly salutations. But they produce Witnesses against this.
Says Mrs. Cellier, this day Twelvemonth, and says the other about a week after
the Jesuits were executed, which was about the beginning of July, says she, I
would have you carry a Letter to my Lord Castlemain: Says he, I would not do
that, I would go an Hundred miles upon another Errand, but I would not go to
him. Another Witness says, my Lord was mighty angry with him, and told him the
cause, because he went in his Name to the Lords in the Tower. First, This
contradicts what he said, as if there had been no anger before. The next is,
That it is very improbable that my Lord should be angry with him so much, that
my Lord should be very angry with him for going in his Name to the Tower, and
afterward for his refusing to kill the King; when he said, Why did you not do
that you came out of Prison for? What, my Lord, to kill the King? Yes, that.
This is an Argument in opposition to his Testimony.

The next is a Consideration for his Testimony, Turner-says in an swer to that,
In July he takes it, but cannot charge himself, whether June, or July, or
August; but he himself thinks July; that he saw him at the Lord Castlemain's
House. And the Kings Council would gather from that, there could not be such an
unwillingness to go before that time, it being after the time they speak of,
that this man saw him there. Whether or no it was in June, or July, or August,
is something uncertain. So that I have repeated as near as I can all that is
substantial on either part, and I have according to the best of my
understanding dealt fairly on both sides; and observed to you what has been
sworn against my Lord, and what has been said in contradiction to what they
swear; and what appears upon Record, as to Dangerfield.

There is a great deal of difference between Mr. Oats his Testimony and Mr.
Dangerfield's; for you may believe one, when you may perchance not believe
another. There are not those things cast upon Mr. Oats that are upon Mr.
Dangerfield. Now I must tell you, though they have produced two, if you believe
but one, I think (if so be my Brethrens Opinions be otherwise, I would be very
willingly contradicted in this matter) if two Witnesses are produced, both
speaking materially to the thing, the one is believed and the other not,
Whether upon these two Witnesses the Jury can find a Person Guilty, or no? I am
of Opinion it is but one Witness, if you don't believe one; and I am sure one
is not sufficient to find one Guilty; and therefore if so be you are of another
Opinion, let us deal fairly and above-board; that it may appear we deal rightly
between the King and his Subjects, and so preserve men that are accused and not
guilty.


J. Jones, I think in the first place, my Lord has very faithfully delivered
the Evidence; and I do think it necessary, in a Case of Treason, That there
must be Two Witnesses believed by the Jury.


J. Raymond, I never heard any man question it. If the Law says, There must be
Two Witnesses produced, it says, They must be both believed.


L. C. J. Now you have our Sense of it.


[The Jury went from the Bar and returned.]

Cler. of the Crown, Are you all agreed of your Verdict?


Jury, Yes.


Clerk of the Crown, Who shall speak for you?


Jury, The Foreman.


Clerk of the Crown, Roger Palmer Esquire; Earl of Castlemain in the Kingdom of
Ireland, Hold up thy hand, look upon the Jury.


Clerk of the Crown, Is Roger Palmer Esquire; Earl of Castlemain in the Kingdom of
Ireland, Guilty of the High Treason whereof he stands Indicted, or not Guilty?


Jury, Not Guilty.


Clerk of the Crown, This is your Verdict, You say he is not Guilty, so you say
all?


Jury, Yes.


FINIS.

