A TREATISE PROVING By what our Savior says concerning SWEARING, St. Matthew.
5. 34. First that Swearing is restrained and explained by him in point of
Religion and Piety: And Secondly, that it is not taken away quite in the
concerns of Civil Right and Policy.

Published for confinement unto those that are loose in this matter, and for
liberty of Conscience unto such as bind themselves where they have no need: The
one's excess being a misbehaviour against Religion, and the others defect, an
error against Government and Policy.

Let not the one be overmuch wicked, nor yet be foolish, for why should he dye
before his time?

Eccl. 7. 17. And let not the other be righteous overmuch, nor make himself
over wise, for why should he destroy himself?

Eccl. 7. 16. By an elderly man, a Master of Arts, of above forty years
standing; during life, bound to pray for the good estate of Lincoln College in
Oxford.

LONDON, Printed by M. W. in the year M DC LXXX II.

Christian Reader,
WHereas the Doctrine of a right unto Christians to hold a propriety of Goods
and substance, does suppose a concession of the like right unto them to wage
Law in the defense thereof, provided their matters be of weight unto them
(according to their estates) and their cases of necessity, and that waging of
Law is it, that ordinarily gives such occasion as is just, for men to be
Sworn, I have in a word and by the way touched upon both these Rights; to
insist upon either would require another Treatise, and that may prove needless,
if in this matter of Swearing, which is most in controversy, and of greatest
difficulty, I may be heard; in order whereunto, I hope to obtain, if not of
those that gainsay, yet of those that scruple the lawfulness of Swearing in any
case, that they will weigh my Reasons or Arguments without prejudice, and the
rather because of their so doing, they may have this benefit, namely, be set
free in Conscience by Oath, both to set an end to strife in particular cases of
difference, and also to serve the public, in undergoing such Offices and
Services thereof, as they may be called unto: For the performance whereof, the
more men fear an Oath, the more they are to be trusted, and the better to be
accepted: To fear an Oath in this case is very commendable; but to refuse to
swear at all, to deprave and exclaim against it is intolerable, the public is
not only hindered, but also affronted by this. And how can men be so impudently
silly, as to think wilfully and opinionatively to incommode the public, and
yet themselves to take no harm by it? I hope such will no longer persist in the
one, to occasion the other, when by this Treatise they shall be convinced, that
for Conscience sake they have no need to do so. Farewell.

Swearing Disabused, but not forbidden quite.
But I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, for it is Gods
Throne, etc. Matthew. 5. 34.
OUr Savior says, (Mat 5. 17.) Think not that I am come to destroy the Law, I
am not come to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it, (...), to set it out to the
full. I am not come to loose men from any Obligations or duties of the moral
Law, which formerly lay upon them; but I am come to vindicate the Law from such
corruptions as the vitiousness of times, men and manners, has brought upon it,
as in this particular of Swearing.

It was acknowledged by the Jews, that men ought neither to forswear
themselves, nor yet to take Gods name in vain in any wise, and yet
vain-Swearing was much in use among them, so much in use, that they did not
think much the worse of themselves for it, (provided that they did not use the
name of God in it.)

To avoid this therefore, forbearing the name of God, they used the names of
other things, infinitely below God, and yet of no small esteem with them, as by
Heaven, by the Earth, Jerusalem, the Temple, the Altar, etc. thinking by this
shift, if not to swear without sinning, yet to extenuate the sin of Swearing.

This device possibly they had from the Heathens, who were wont to be very
sparing in swearing by their Gods, choosing rather to make their vain and light
Oaths by such things as were obvious to them, and present before them; the
Grecians said, (...), etc. In like manner Philo reports of the Jews, viz. That
in swearing vain and customary Oaths, they did it not by God, but by Heaven, by
the Earth, by Jerusalem, etc.

Though these forms and fashions of Swearing in use among the Jews were born
with by those that read the Law unto them of old time, yet did not that make
them to be lawful, therefore Christ being come to fulfill the Law, utterly
declares against them, saying, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, etc.
Swearing is the subject of the Text above written, the lawfulness and
unlawfulness whereof, viz. in diverse respects, I purpose (by Gods help) to
deliver in two propositions, whereof the one is expressed by the words of the
aforementioned Text, and the other by a just consequence to be deduced from
them:

The first proposition is, That no manner of vain and light Swearing under what
form or notion soever was or is tolerated by the Law of God; In this sense it
is that our Savior (who is the best expounder of the Law) says, Swear not at
all.

The second Proposition is, That the action of Swearing, simply considered in
it self, without any evil circumstances to deprave it, is no more forbidden
unto us under the New Testament, than it was heretofore unto the Jews under the
Old. Our Savior takes not away Swearing it self, but the abuse of it.

Though of the first Proposition there needs little or nothing to be spoken
(our Saviors words being so plain and peremptory) for proof of Doctrine, yet
may a few words be made of it, by way of illustration, and for instruction in
righteousness. Thus therefore

Calvin observes, That in all ages, and in most Nations, the generality of
people are very apt to have an use, and a custom of idle and vain Swearing,
such is their incogitancy that they do not duly weigh how great a crime it is
to abuse the name of God, and if herein (forbearing the name of God) they use
the names of other things, they are never the nearer to be quit from blame;
nay, in so doing they commit two evils at once, first they give to the creature
the honor due to the Creator; and then under the names and pretense of the
creatures, they abuse God himself, it being impossible for us to swear by them
without reflecting upon him: Says St Augustine, If a man swear by a stone, and
do it either vainly or falsely, God is concerned in it, the stone hears not,
but God will punish the deceiver, he will punish the profane Swearer.

That God is abused under the name and pretense of his creatures, when they are
sworn by, appears by our Savior Christ, both showing how it is done, and also
giving a reason why it ought not to be done; the manner how it is done, he
shows to be by Heaven, by the Earth, etc. The reason why this ought not to be
done he gives, saying, For Heaven is Gods Throne, the Earth is his footstool,
etc.

There is somewhat of this indirect and slight kind of Swearing yet among us
notwithstanding the reformation of Religion, and the light of the Gospel, so
clearly shining unto us; to spare the name of God, we Swear one while by one
Saint, and another while by another; and sometimes we are so modest that to
spare the Saints, we Swear by inanimate things, as may be by this Light, by
this Fire, by this Cup, by this Drink, etc. (...), just the heathenish kind of
Swearing viz. by such things as are obvious to us, and present before us:

The Jews heretofore by the devices and shifts they used in Swearing instead of
being able to delude the Law of God, did only show themselves to be grossly
ignorant in what they did, so ignorant that our Savior calls them fools, and
blind upon that account, Matthew. 23. from ver. the 16th to the 22th. Woe unto
you, ye blind guides which say, whosoever shall Swear by the Temple, it is
nothing, but whosoever shail Swear by the Gold of the Temple, he is a debtor.
Ye fools, and blind: For whether is greater, the Gold, or the Temple that
sanctifies the Gold? And whosoever shall Swear by the Altar, etc. To level
this comparison, and to end the strife, our Savior says, Swear not at all.

Wherefore do men indulge themselves this idle custom of Swearing? what is it
good for? there is no man thought to speak less truth, than he that hardly
speaks any thing without an Oath, such a one is never the nearer to be trusted
for being sworn: say'th Juvenal to such a one, Quamvis jurato nolim tibi cedere
testi, for matter of trust it is as good for a man to say nothing, as to swear
every thing he says.

Sober men look not for Oaths one from another upon common occasions either of
discourse, or dealing, ordinarily their communication is no more than yea, and
nay; and when oaths are due from them, though they pay them, yet do they it,
not without fear, and trembling; of very great weight and moment they think it
to be for them solemnly to call upon God to be a witness to what they say.

To be detered from profane, common and customary Oaths, as also from indirect
forms and fashions of Swearing, let men consider how strictly our Savior
Christ does sorbid them, so strictly as to admit of no toleration of former
times to prescribe for them; Ye have heard that it has been said by them of
old time, etc. But I say unto you, Swear not at all. To this Prohibition so
strict, and Authentic, our Savior is pleased to give also a reason, why such
vain Swearing ought to be forborne, viz: because it comes of Evil: it comes of
Evil, not single, but double, of Evil within us, and from Evil without us; from
within us, it comes of all manner of Licentiousness, and unruliness of passion,
Pride, Arrogance, Presumption, Irreverence toward God, disdain toward Men,
Profaneness, Blasphemy, etc. from without us, it comes of the instigation of
the Devil, that evil one, who desires nothing more than the dishonouring of
God, and that by us Men, for whom God has done so much as nothing might be
done more. The instigation of the Devil is apparent in this sin of Swearing, so
as hardly in any other sin so much; It is a sin that is so directly against God
that it seems to have no greater design than to abuse him to his face.

If any man that is a Common swearer shall say that in Swearing he intends no
such thing; I would ask such a one, why does he Swear then? is he so vain as to
Swear intending nothing? if he say he intends the confirmation of what he
says, I would ask him again, If he be of so little credit as to have need by
Oath to confirm every word he speaks, or does he think those he converseth
withal to be so like himself, as not to trust him otherwise?

But it being no news for either profane, common and customary Swearing, to be
reproved, or for indirect and devised forms and fashions of Oaths to be
exposs'd, I will dismiss them at present and apply my self to the second
proposition, wherein as there is much question made among us now adays; so
would it be worth while to render it (as it ought to be) viz. questionless: If
men be scrupulous in Thesi, viz. Whether it be lawful to Swear at all or not,
what shall they do in this or that particular that may require an oath?

The Second proposition therefore is, That the Action of Swearing simply
considered in it self without any evil circumstances to deprave it, is no more
forbidden unto us under the new Testament than it was heretofore to the Jews
under the Old, our Savior takes not away Swearing it self, but the abuse of it.

From our Saviors words read so far as Swear not at all, and no farther, the
Manichees long time, the Anabaptists of late, and a Sect of Gainsayers among us
at present, do hold opinion, that though Gods people heretofore under the old
Testament might Swear upon just, and weighty occasions, yet Christians now
under the new Testament may not Swear at all, as if the one Testament did
condemn the other, and not (as the truth is) the latter expound the former.

Under color of these words of our Savior partially taken and applied, viz.
reading, Swear not all, and leaving out the rest of the Text wherein our
Savior's sentence is contained, they spare not to call into question the
general practice of all Kingdoms, States, Policies, Corporations, and Societies
throughout all Christendom, in the constitutions whereof there is hardly any
thing of moment wont to be established without an Oath.

If according to their opinion, Swearing be a thing that is, simply and
absolutely evil in it self, then for us to say that Civil States and Policies
cannot be maintained without it, is no more excuse, than to say that: Civil
Policy and true Christianity cannot consist together.

A thing that is absolutely sinful, is not to be continued in, no not, though
the world were to be preserved by it, and absolutely sinful Swearing is, if it
be absolutely forbidden by Christ; how therefore it is forbidden by him is the
thing that is to be inquired into, the sinding out whereof decides the Question.

We see that this matter of Swearing is the Subject of one instance among
diverse more that our Savior gives to the Jews to show how the Law of God was
abused among them; the occasion therefore of these words, Swear not at all, our
Savior took not from the Action of Swearing simply considered in it self, but
from the abuse of it among the Jews; partly through vain and customary Oaths,
and partly through indirect and devised forms and fashions of Swearing.

In the very action of Swearing they neither taught nor did otherwise than as
God himself did expressly command, or at least allow them to do, Deuteronomy. 6. 13.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him, and shall Swear by his Name.
From hence it must needs follow (our Saviors business in this Sermon being not
to destroy, but to reform, and explain things) that he did not mean to take
away Swearing it self, but only the abuse of it.

That it was said by them of old time, Thou shall not forswear thy self; it was
right, their fault was that they did not say also, Thou shall not swear at all
by the Heaven's, by the Earth etc. or use any other such indirect, and devised
kind of Swearing; our Savior blames them not simply for Swearing, but for
Swearing in such manner as they did, by Heaven, by the Earth, etc. a manner
inconsistent with so holy and reverend a thing as the making Oath may be.

Our Savior in saying, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, nor by the Earth,
etc. does no more take away all manner of Swearing from among Christians, than
he does all manner of dominion and authority from among his Disciples in saying
unto them that in the exercise of those things it should not be among them as
it was among the Gentiles, Matthew. 20. 25, 26.

There is a right manner of Swearing as well as a wrong, a holy and reverend
taking of Gods name, as well as a taking of it in vain; Swear not at all, is
not all that our Savior says in this matter; if it were it would be the
harder on our side: but that which he says is, Swear not at all, neither by
Heaven, etc. Swear not at all as ye are wont to do, viz. by the Creatures, that
among them ye make a difference, as if it were a greater matter to Swear by one
of them than by another, is to no purpose; I say unto you, in this kind, Swear
not all.

The sentence of our Savior's speech is to forbid altogether such devised
forms, and fashions of Customary, and vain swearing as were then in use among
the Jews, and might be afterward among Christians, if he did not forbid them.

If our Savior's sentence were full and whole in these words, Swear not at
all, then wherefore does he instance in such things as men were wont to make
vain Oaths by? If he meant that there should be no Swearing at all, then
wherefore serves his instancing in particulars, as by Heaven, by the Earth?
etc. was not that to show what manner of Oaths he would have to be forborne?
where care is taken for the reforming of the manner, it implies that the thing
it self is left to stand.

Certainly our Saviors sentence must needs go along with the instance that he
gives, and what is it that he would have to be reformed, but that and the like
manner of Swearing that he does instance in?

A reformation is a taking away not of the substance of things, but of such
evil qualities and conditions of manners, as have been brought in upon them,
our Savior by the words above mentioned takes not away Swearing it self, but
only that which is faulty, and frivolous in it, he lets it be, (as he does in
the case of Matrimony) as it was from the beginning, but not as men's devices
made it to be in process of time.

If a Physician forbid his patient either to eat gross Meat, or to drink Wine,
saying, Neither eat gross Meat, nor drink Wine at all, does he therefore forbid
him altogether either to eat, or to drink? does not his instancing in gross
Meat, and Wine, imply that he leaves him liberty to eat and drink otherwise?
restraining him only in those things that he does instance in, namely, gross
Meat, and Wine.

So here, our Saviors instancing in what manner of Swearing is to be forborne,
implies, that Swearing it self is left to remain, but of those several forms,
or fashions of Swearing devised by men, there is not one allowed more than
other; to the utter undoing of all these our Savior says, Swear not at all.

Moreover, let me compare this instance concerning Swearing, with such
instances of other things as our Savior gives to the Jews, to show how the
Law of God was abused among them.

The first is concerning murder, Ye have heard (says our Savior) how it has
been said by them of old time, Thou shall not kill, But I say unto you,
whosoever shall be angry with his Brother without a cause, etc. if our Savior
had said whosoever shall be angry with his Brother (and no more) shall be in
danger, etc. we might think the very passion of anger to be forbidden quite;
but in saying, Whosoever shall be angry with his Brother without a cause shall
be in danger, etc. We see that the prohibition lies not against anger it self,
but against such anger as is without a cause.

The passion of anger is as human as any other passion may be. A man may be
angry so as not to sin in it, says the Apostle, Be angry and sin not; my
Argument here hence is, that as to be angry for just cause is no sin, so
neither is it to Swear upon just grounds, and in a due manner.

The second instance is in the case of Adultery, says our Savior, Ye have
heard by them of old time, Thou shall not commit Adultery, etc. But I say unto
you, Whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, etc. To look on a woman
simply considered in it self, is no more harm than to look on some other thing;
the harm is to look on her so as to lust after her, and that adulterously too.
Now who knows not that our Savior's restraint lies not against that which
is innocent, but only against that which is harmful and evil?

The third instance is in the case of Divorcement, wherein our Savior says,
It has been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a bill
of divorcement; But I say unto you, whosoever shall put away his wife, saving
for the cause of fornication, causes her to commit adultry, etc.

Here our Savior does not absolutely forbid men to put away their wives but to
put them away in such manner as they were wont to do, viz. lightly either for
no cause at all, or else for no such cause as might deserve unto their wives so
great a discomfort, and there being no such cause, saving the cause of
fornication, our Savior restrains it only unto that.

So then when as in the three instances going before, our Savior does not
abolish the things instanced in, but restrain them, forbidding them not
absolutely but conditionally, in diverse respects binding and loosing the same
thing, the forbidding of that which is abusefull and evil, always supposing,
the granting of that which is useful, and good.

What reason have we to understand him otherwise in this instance concerning
Swearing? he allows us to be angry, but not without a cause; to look on a
woman, but not to lust after her; to put away wives, but not except for the
cause of fornication.

So in this case of Swearing, to swear idly, vainly, profanely,
superstitiously, rashly, and inconsiderately, as it is sinful and evil in it
self; So is it forbidden by our Savior Christ: but to Swear by the name of God
and in his fear, soberly, and judiciously, either in an assertory Oath for the
vindication of a truth, and the decision of strife, or in a promissory Oath for
confirmation of faith giving, and promise making, this is useful and good, and
therefore by our Savior Christ it is left as supposed, granted, allowed.

That it is so, appears, in that our Savior in this instance as in the rest is
pleased to explain himself so far as to express what abuse it is that he would
have to be reformed, namely to Swear by Heaven, by the Earth or any other such
Oath.

Herewith does altogether agree even in terminis that which St James writes,
Chap. the 5. ver. 12. saying, Above all things my brethren, Swear not, neither
by Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath, (i. e.) of that
kind, form, or manner, But let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay, (i. e.) let
your speech be single, without the addition of idle Oaths; lest ye fall into
Condemnation, (i. e.) lest ye be found to sin against God, and be convict
thereof; for idle Swearing, such as that by the Creatures is, is not a thing
indifferent, or an offense not to be taken notice of, as ye may be apt to think
it is.

By St. James his delivering himself thus in the matter of Swearing, almost in
the very words of Christ, and by our Saviors explaining himself as he does, I
think that against men's partial application of the words, Swear not at all,
reading them so far, and no farther, my proposition stands firm and sound; viz.
That the action of Swearing simply considered in it self without any evil
circumstance to deprave it, is no more forbidden unto us under the new
Testament than it was unto the people of God under the Old.

Our Savior by expounding the Law took not away Swearing it self, but the
abuse of it.

Our Saviors sentence ends not at Swear not at all; to look to making a
sentence of our Saviors words without reading them along to by Heaven, by the
Earth etc, I take to be great partiality: a Comma is the utmost point that can
be between these words, and that not otherwise than because of the distinction
following, viz. neither by Heaven, nor by the Earth, etc.

To make a sentence of the words Swear not at all, without reading farther, is
a mere fallacy, viz. of dividing those things that ought to be joined together.

Another argument yet I may draw from the Laws being altogether one and the
same, both before, and after the coming of Christ: Our Savior himself says,
He came not to destroy the Law, therefore it abides; The old Commandment of the
Law, and the new Commandment of the Gospel is but one and the same Commandment,
1 John 2. 7. 8.

Our Savior came to fulfill the Law; Whereas it had been said by them of old
time, Thou shall not forswear thy self, etc. our Savior says not, But I say
unto you, thou shall forswear thy self, that had been to destroy the Law
indeed; He leaves that to stand, and adds unto it that which should have
been also said, namely, neither shall thou Swear vainly at all, no though it
were but indirectly (i. e.) not by God himself, but by Heaven, by the Earth,
etc. this indirect kind of Swearing the Jews devised on purpose to favor their
fond humor of Swearing, so as to make of it but a light thing

Says Calvin, the whole Law agrees with the Gospel both in condemning the
same vices, and also in commanding the same virtues.

It was the part of the Messiah at his coming, to take away nothing of the
Moral Law, but to explain, to reform, and to restore it in all things. Says
Ireneus, Christ fulfilled the Natural and Moral things of the Law, by setting
them out more clearly and fully than they were before: and says St. Hierom,
even as a Painter in making a Picture, by making a second draught does not blot
out the first, but illustrate and make it plain; no more does our Savior
Christ in what he does by the Law, it is still the same Law for him, only it is
more fully and amply set forth by him as in a second Edition.

I contract my Argument into an Enthymeme thus, viz. To Swear by the God of
Heaven and Earth was allowed by the Law, unto the people of God of old time as
a thing natural and moral, (they being duly called unto it,) therefore it is
allowed unto us in like manner.

From whence had Abraham his warrant to Swear his Servant? was it not from
Nature? (such Swearing being a natural worshipping of God) the like may be said
of Abraham Swearing to Abimelech: of Abimelech also and Isaac swearing each to
other, of Jacob swearing to Laban, etc.

I presume the Arguments I have used hitherto may pass for demonstrative, what
I shall add, shall be but illustrative, viz. Arguments taken from things so
familiar, that the consequence of them is easy, and the deduction manifest. As
thus,

If the action of Swearing were a thing that were simply evil, then should not
the Angels be made to do it, as is done Rev. 10. 5, 6. much less would God
himself do it, as is done, Heb. 7. 21. And what did our Savior when the High
Priest adjured him by the living God to tell whether he were the Christ, the
Son of the Blessed, yea or not? did he refuse to submit to this adjuration, or
did he make direct and plain answer to what was thus rigorously demanded of him?

Among the Jews, the person that was adjured thought himself as much concerned,
as if he had taken an Oath, and indeed in effect what was or is it less? Our
Savior therefore having held his peace otherwise, (even unto Pilates wonder)
yet when by the High Priest he was adjur'd by God, he made answer straight,
Matthew. 26. 63, 64.

What shall we think of St. Paul, who in his Epistle to the Romans to assure
them that he did always make mention of them in his prayers, takes God to
witness, saying, For God is my Witness, Romans 1. 9. and 2Cor. 1. 23. I call God
for a record upon my Soul: and Gal. 1. 20 he says, Before God I lie not.

Now whereas St Paul Swears not but in things of a Spiritual concern, there
have been those (and those good men too) that would restrain the lawfulness of
swearing only unto things of that nature, urging that things temporal and
carnal, (the things wherein we are so fond of having propriety, and about the
which we are so apt to strive) are not worth so great a confirmation as an Oath
may be: In favor of this they quoted some words spoken by St. Augustine, and
they might the like spoken by St. Hierom, St. Basil, and many others; good men
have been always very precise to forbid all lightness and easiness of Swearing.

Swearing by the Creatures they would have to be none at all, and for the
Creatures (i. e.) for our Rights and interests in them, they would have
Swearing to be as seldom, and as sparing as may be, and in this we subscribe
unto them; yea, I hold that a Christian ought to choose to sustain some loss and
damage, rather than to save it by the taking of an Oath.

What St. Paul to the Corinthians says, concerning going to Law, the same may
not unaptly be applied also to this matter of swearing, (which is a thing that
does necessarily accompany the other) concerning going to Law, he says, why do
ye not rather take wrong? etc. It is rather, the Apostle says, not altogether.

My second Argument for illustration is, That by Swearing upon just grounds,
and in due manner such as is prescribed, Jerem. 4. 2. Glory is given unto God.

Glory is given unto God, when his properties of omniscience, omnipresence,
omnipotence, a perfect love of truth, and hatred of falsehood are ascribed unto
him, and declared of him, all which is done when we solemnly call upon him to
be witness unto that which we have occasion to say, in something that is either
secret or doubtful unto men, and therefore questionable so far, that the debate
cease not until his holy and blessed name be interposed, the which thing
doing, must necessarily put an end to that strife, Exodus 20. 11. This Text is
quoted Heb. 6. 16. like as also that of the Prophet Isaiah, Phil. 2. viz. That
every Tongue shall confess, or Swear unto God; every Tongue, (i. e.) of every
Nation, and of every Generation.

That to swear by God was not peculiar to the Jews, so as to end with their
Policy or Commonweal, but to last and be among the Nations when they should
convert and turn to the true God, appears, Jer. 4. 2. in the latter part of the
Verse.

There is nothing of the ceremonial Law in this matter of Swearing, no nor yet
of the judicial Law, in any thing that was proper unto the Jews, for what
either cause or need had they to make use of it then, more than we have now? To
them it was a special method of giving glory to God, and so it is to us; to
them it was an end of strife, and so it is unto us.

There is nothing among men more sacred, reverend and holy than an Oath duly
taken and kept: The Religion and Conscience of Swearing is many times in the
Holy Scripture synechdochically taken for the whole sum of Gods Worship and
Service. Jerem. 4. 2. Psalm. 63. and Isaiah 45. 23.

Here it may be objected, That if that which we call just and lawful Swearing
be a worshipping, or a service doing to God, then the oftener it is done the
better, we cannot call upon God in prayer, praise and thanksgiving too often,
therefore neither can we Swear too often, for that also is a calling upon God,
and that so as to give Glory unto him.

To this I answer, By denying the Consequence, viz. that though Swearing after
a due manner be a worshipping of God, yet does it not follow that therefore the
oftener Swearing is used, the better: My reason for this is, That as things are
not to be done, but according as occasions are given for them, and there being
not like occasions for Swearing, as are for Praying and Praising, it cannot be
inferred of the one, as of the other, viz. That the oftener it is done, the
better.

The occasions for prayer and praise are continual, and they meet to be done
upon every occasion; but with swearing it is not so, the occasions for it are
but rare and seldom, nor yet is it meet to be done upon every occasion.

In every need a man may pray, and for every benefit he ought to praise and
give thanks, Pray always, and in all things give thanks, 1 These. 5. 17, 18.
But as for swearing, it is possible a man may lead so private and quiet an
estate of life, as not to have such an occasion for Swearing, as may make it
lawful, in all his days.

God is not honored by our swearing, but when it is done in such a matter, and
in such a case, as may both deserve, and have need of so great a Test as an
appeal to be made unto him, who is over all from the beginning, and before whom
are all the ways of men open and manifest; an approver of the truth, and a
revenger of falsehood and wrong.

I would ask those that are against all manner of Swearing, that whereas our
Savior in the close of his speech concerning Swearing says, But let your
communication be yea, yea, nay, nay, for whatsoever is more than these comes
of evil; does he say this in opposition to swearing by the Heaven, by the
Earth, and other such indirect Oaths? or does he say it against all manner of
Swearing whatsoever? if they say the former, then the difference b^tween us and
them is at an end, for we say so too. But if they say the latter, then how
comes it to pass, that our Saviors own communication was more than that, viz.
more than yea and nay, for sometimes he used asseverations, and those not
single, but double, saying, Verily, verily, I say unto you: viz. when the
matter propounded by him did require more than ordinary heed to be given unto
it.

I demand, were our Saviors asseverations of verily, verily, needful in such a
case, or were they not? If the opponents say they were needful, then will I
infer that bare yea and nay, being not sufficient upon some occasions, for our
Saviors own communication, how much less may they be for ours? If they say
they were not needful, then how will they save themselves from charging our
Saviors communication with having more in it than it ought to have?

My third Argument for illustration I take from a known Maxim of the Decalogue,
viz. That every such precept as is expressly affirmative, does implicitly
contain in it the negative of that which it does affirm, and so on the
contrary. My Argument here-hence is, that as the third Commandment being a
negative Precept, does expressly forbid the taking of Gods name in vain, so does
it implicitly command the taking of it so, as that God may be magnified and
honored thereby. Parallel to this is the ninth Commandment, which also being
expressly negative, as it forbids to bear false witness against our Neighbor;
so does it implicitly command us to bear true witness, either for him or
against him according as he gives occasion.

This also seems to include in it somewhat of an Argument to prove not only the
lawfulness, but also an expediency in some cases of making Oaths. To bear
witness to the truth is a thing that is expedient, yea, necessary to be done. A
true Witness delivers Souls, Prove. 14. 25. Shall I forbear to deliver Souls,
(i. e.) To save men's lives for want of taking an Oath, without the which my
testimony may not be received in Law, so as to put an end to strife? And yet
notwithstanding my asserting the lawfulness of making Oath, yea, and of waging
Law too, upon just and necessary occasions. I will confess again and again,
that it behooves Christians to be meek Spirited, quietly disposed, yea to study
to be quiet: Says St. Paul, If it be possible, and as much as lies in you,
live peaceably with all men; he does not simply and absolutely say, live
peaceably, etc. But if it be possible, and as much as lies in you, Romans 12. 18.

It behooves a Christian to take some wrong, rather than either go to Law, or
make Oath upon every light occasion; yea, in matters of weight, let him not
vindicate himself by these means (as just and as lawful as they be) until he
has used all the means of patience and forbearance that may be.

If in this case I should recommend to the practice of the men of this
Generation, our Saviors Method prescribed Matthew. 18. I should not be heard at
all, nevertheless I will mention it; as thus, namely, That the injured person
do tell his offending brother his fault in private, if that avail not, then
that he take unto him one or two more; and if that will not do, then that he
tell the Church; and if after all this the offender still remain refractory,
our Saviors Sentence is, That he be no more regarded than a Heathen man, or a
Publican, and why should not a man go to Law with such a one, there being no
expectation left him of coming by his right by any other means? nay, what shall
a man do in such a case but seek his remedy where God has ordained it for him,
namely from the Magistrate? The powers that be, are ordained of God. Romans 13. 1.

Is the Magistrate Gods Minister ordained unto him for good, and shall not he
make use of him for his protection?

Christianity is not a destruction to Magistracy and civil policy, but rather a
help and an ease unto them, Christians being so moderate about their concerns,
and walking by such rules of forbearance that they molest them not with
Complaints and Suits, either causless, or needless.

Moreover, Christianity does not forbid men to have any thing of their own, but
only requires them to be moderate about what they have; though St. Paul made no
more reckoning of carnal and earthly things than of dung, in comparison of his
having Christ, yet did he not renounce all manner of propriety in them to
himself, much less did he enjoin it unto others, but upon occasion, he says,
that he did labor with his hands thereby to get his living; which implies
that he held a propriety in what he did earn and get; and for matter of Right,
he says, that he had power to forbear working, and yet to eat and drink
nevertheless, which implies that he held a Right for him to live by his
Ministry.

And for suffering, as constant as he was to endure, he neither neglected nor
disdained to save himself by such means as he might use, without offending God:
To avoid going to Jerusalem there to be judged before Festus, by whom and in
which place he was sure to perish, he appealed unto Casar, and that very
resolutely, saying, No man may deliver me unto them, viz. unto the Jews, I
appeal, etc. Acts 25. 11.

FINIS.

