A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF THE Honorable Colonel Robert Roll of
Heanton Sachville in the County of Devon Esquire;

By William Trevethick M.A. and Pastor of Petrockstow in the same County.

Hier. Ad Marcellam de laudibus Asseilae. Nemo reprehendat quod in Epistolis
aliquos aut laudamus, aut carpimus, cum and in arguendis malis, sit correptio
caeterorum: and in optimis praedicandis, bonorum ad virtutem studia concitentur.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Edward Brewster at the Crane in Paul's
Churchyard, 1661.

TO THE Noble and hopeful young Gentleman Mr. SAMUEL ROLL, the only Son and
Heir of the Honorable Colonel Robert Roll of Heanton Sachville in the County
of Devon Esquire late deceased.
SIR,
THE honor and esteem which I have born unto your family, ever since I had the
happiness to be acquainted with it, together with the many favors which I have
received from it, and especially from your Parents of happy memory; have
sufficiently engaged me, with all readiness, to lay hold upon any opportunity,
of giving testimony thereof in the best manner that I can. In order whereunto I
was not unwilling to answer the call to the performance of that last, though
sad office, of waiting on the funeral Solemnities of that worthy Gentleman,
your dear father, and my honored Patron. An account whereof (since you could
not be a hearer, that you might have a sight of it) is here presented to your
view. It was hard for me to think any thing of mine worthy of such public
notice; and it was no less difficult to withstand the desires of such as (with
me) are able to command. Such as it is I here humbly submit it to your
ingenuity and candor; not doubting (although there were little in it that might
merit your acceptance) but that any remembrance of such a father to such a son,
will and some favorable entertainment.

And now Sir, (If with your good leave at least upon this occasion I may use
the liberty of being your remembrancer) that the Lord in his wise and holy
providence has deprived you of both your parents; It is to give you to learn
betimes, to have your dependence on him alone, who is your heavenly father, who
ever lives and cares for you; whose eye you are always under, where ever you
go, and whatever you do; if you cleave unto him, he will never leave you, Psa.
17 10 Isa 49 15
nor forsake you, When my father and my mother forsake me, (says the Psalmist)
then the Lord will take me up.

That you have so early (as it were in your first setting forth) met with the
cross, it may seem tedious at present, but yet I trust it will be for your
profit hereafter.

Et mage principio grata coronis erit. Martial.
The Lord is a wise Father, That son whom he loves, Pro. 13.24.
he chasteneth betimes. He knows how apt our minds are to be corrupted
(especially in youth) with ease and prosperity.

Luxuriant animi rebus plerunque secundis It is therefore good (says the
Prophet) for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth. Lam. 3.27
Quam utile est ad usum secundorum per adversa venisse. Plin. Paneg. ad Trajan.
If the Lord begin to teach you in your youth, I trust when you are old he will
not forsake you.

Esteem that (I beseech you) the best breeding, to be bred up in the nurture
and admonition of the Lord Account no gain like to the gain of wisdom and
godliness, no loss like to the loss of the favor of God and your time. Titus
the Emperor (who for his humanity and moral virtues, was styled Deliciae humani
generis) if any day had passed without doing of some good, Pezel. mellif. hist.
part. 2. p. 174.
was wont (...) complain, Amici, diem perdidi, my friends, I have lost a day.

The eyes of all your friends and relations are upon you, hoping to find their
loss in their honored and beloved friends, your dearest parents, to be made up
in you. And that their expectations may not be frustrated; Now is your time to
furnish your self with those abilities, by which you may become serviceable to
your God, and your King, an honor and ornament to your Country and family, and
a rejoicing to all that love you and desire your happiness. Let neither those
endowments of nature, nor these principles of education and grace which the
Lord in a gracious measure has blessed you withal, be either lost or
corrupted. The truth is, you are in the midst of a world of temptations and
snares, ready to beset you on every side. But alas what is the world with all
the pleasures and allurements thereof, but vanity and vexation of spirit, like
Creusa's Ghost.

Par levibus ventis, volucrique simillima somno. Virgil. Aenid. l. 2.
What is the pleasure of Hawks and hounds, but a mungril pleasure? What are
gamings at Cards and Dice, but the firebrands of passion, and the consumption
of treasure and time? What is there in rioting and drunkenness, in chambering
and wantonness, but the impoverishing of the Estate, the distempring and
weak^ing of the body, and without repentance the ruin both of body and soul
unto eternity?

Those that are the first with Abner to call forth the young men thus to arise
and play, will be the first with him to cry out at length, 2 Samuel 2.14.26.
This will be bitterness in the latter end. He that will not be warned of them
in time, will mourn at last, when his flesh and his body are consumed, and say,
How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof, Prove. 5.11 12, 13.
and have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them
that instructed me?

Let it not seem tedious or grievous unto you, that for a time your condition
requires, that you be subject to Tutors and Governors. It is but to this end
that by learning first how to govern your self, you may be the better qalified
to rule and govern others; and the readiest way to know how to command, is
first to learn how to obey. If you persuade your self (as I am apt to believe
you do) that those your worthy friends and relations, to whose care and
inspection, the Lord by your father has committed you, are both faithful and
wise, and will omit nothing that in conscience toward God, and Love toward
you, they judge necessary, nor advise you to any thing inexpedient or
superfluous; and that their affections toward you are so real and tender, that
nothing will be more their grief, then your not profiting, nor rejoicing, then
when they shall see (through the blessing of God upon their endeavors) that as
you grow in years and in stature, so (as is said of our Savior) that you
increase in wisdom and favor with God and man. This will encourage you to
attend unto them with patience and content, and to observe and practice their
councels and prescriptions with diligence and delight. Neither will it less
profit you, or prevail with you, if you observe their practice as well as their
precepts. It being a great advantage and furtherance to our instruction, when
God gives us such for our guides, as will confirm and clear up their rules by
their own examples.

Non sic inflectere sensus
Humanos edicta valent quam vita regentis. Claud. de 4. Honori consolatu paneg.

You will find all means little enough, to accomplish you with those virtues
and graces which are requisite to your condition, though you meet with precept
upon precept, line upon line; one precept upon another, and one example upon
another. As it is not a common measure that you should rest in; so should the
means by which you endeavor to attain it be more then ordinary.

To abound only in outward things, is rather excess than excellency. If you
have only more wealth, and higher titles than others, therein doubtless you may
exceed many good men, and as many (if not more) bad men, may exceed you. To be
rich, and to abound in the things of the world, is no more then is common to
the wise, and to the foolish, to the righteous and to the wicked, to be noble
and the base. But to be rich in good works, and to excel in the endowments of
the mind, is peculiar unto them that are truly virtuous and noble. Let it
therefore be your endeavor to make it appear, that as much as you are advanced
beyond others in the favors of the world, so much you are above them in the
favor of God, and in the virtues and graces of his Spirit.

Let not the bounty of God toward you in the things of this life, be abused to
serve either the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, or the pride of life.
Lest while you take and use them, rather as a possessor of that which is your
own, then as a Steward and Dispencer of that which is another; you should be
numbered among the men of the world, which have their portion in this life.
Psalm 17 14 Luke 14.25. Luke 6.2.
How sadly will it fare with him, to whom it shall be said, Son remember that
in thy life time, thou receivedst thy good things. Woe unto you that are rich,
for ye have received your consolation. Yea rather let it be your resolution,
whenever the Lord shall bring them into your hands, to use them as becomes a
faithful and wise Steward, even as the instruments and ornaments of virtue and
grace. And then you shall be sure to be blessed when the Lord shall come and
find you so doing. In the mean time the season and opportunity of giving glory
to God, and gaining honor to your self, by doing of good, is but short and
uncertain. Neither is it so much a long life, or a lasting Name, as a good
life, and a good name that is desirable. And that not to be attained by a far
fetched pedigree, or by the Blazon or display of Heralds, but by noble and
virtuous actions; even your Orators and Poets being Judges. Non perpetua fama,
Plin. ubi Sup. 47.
sed bona concupiscenda est, ea porro non imaginibus and statuis, sed virtute
ac meritis prorogatur. Virgil.


Breve and irreparabile tempus
Omnibus est vitae, Aeurid. l. 10
sed famam extendere factis,
Hoc virtutis opus.
A man's whole life is but a day, and youth is but the morning of that day, and
how swift are the wings of that morning? how soon will your Sun ascend to its
miridian? And as soon decline and hasten toward its setting. Ars longa, vita
brevis; there is much work to be done, and but a little time to do it. He that
will do his days work had need begin in the morning.

Let your best time be spent in doing of your best works. Think not the prime
and flower of your youth too good, to be consecrated to God and his service. It
is no way becoming a noble and generous spirit, to offer up that which is
worst to God, to bestow the best and choicest wine upon the service of sin, and
to reserve nothing but the dregs for God. Let not your youth be spent in making
works for repentance in age. That is the season which Satan most especially
lays hold on to spread his nets, and to lay his snares, with utmost craft and
subtilty, and to press on his temptations with greatest violence; because
therein he finds the greatest success, and still promises himself the easiest
victory It was young Amnon, whom he prevails with, and draws to lust. 2 Samuel
13. beg. v. 28. and chapter 15.
And young Absalom whom he wrought to murder and rebellion. Prove. 7.7.
It was a young man over whom the harlot prevailed. Mat. 19.
And it was a young man that would follow Christ no farther then he could carry
his possessions with him. And hence it is that the Apostle sees cause to warn
young Timothy (though a very good man) to fly youthful lusts, 2 Timothy 2.22.
and to mind Titus, Tit. 2.6.
to exhort young men to be sober minded. That you may be the better able both
to discern and to avoid such dangers: Let the Word of God wherein you have been
instructed, dwell in you richly (or plenteously) in all wisdom, Col. 3.16.
and that will make you rich in wisdom, even wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy
3.15.17, 17.
and thoroughly instructed to every good work. Psalm. 119 9.
When the Psalmist puts the question, Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his
way? His answer is, by taking heed thereto according to thy word.

Non erit hoc artis, sed pietatis opus. Let no day pass without consulting the
Oracles of God. Prove. 20.29.
The glory of young men is their strength: May it be your glory to be strong in
the Lord, Ephesians. 6.16.
and in the power of his might, and to be strengthened with might by his Spirit
in the inner man. Thus says the Lord, Let not the wise man glory in his
wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man
glory in his riches: But let him that glories, glory in this, that he
understands and knows me, etc. This was it that encouraged the Apostle to
write unto young men, 1 Jo. 2.13, 12.
because they were strong, and the word of God abode in them, and they had
overcome the wicked one. It was no less an honor then a comfort to good
Obediah, 1 Kin. 18.2.
that he could say, that he feared the Lord from his youth.

How was the Apostle filled with joy, when he called to remembrance the
unfeigned faith that was in Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.5
which dwelt first in his Grandmother Lois, and in his mother Eunice? And
Timothy by his steadfast persevering in the faith, procured this honor unto his
parents, to have their names made as lasting as the Scriptures. A serious
profession of religion and godliness has been derived upon you through more
generations. To mention the honor and dignity, the wealth and greatness of any
of your Progenitors: what rich purchases they have made, what stately
structures they have raised, what Titles of honor they have achieved, were
but vanity, and apt to occasion evil rather then good. Abraham (who is so much
renowned in the book of God for his faith and obedience) is remembered for no
other purchase then of a place to bury in; Genesis 22.15
for no other buildings, then of Altars to the Lord; and for no higher Titles
then such as might serve to set forth his spiritual relations: Abraham the
father of the faithful, Chap. 23. Genesis 17.5 Romans 4.17 Genesis 26.24. 2 Chr. 20.7
Isa. 41.8.
the servant and the friend of God. It suffices, if with your patience I may
mind you, that as God by your Progenitors has conveyed riches and honor in
a large measure unto you: so that it may be your care to leave them with a
blessing to your progeny. That which may add much to your contentment in the
enjoying of them, and to your encouragement in the using of them well, amongst
many other reasons this may be one, That whatever they are, they are not such,
as have been either hastily gotten, or increased by usury or unjust gain, which
would have left them without a blessing. Pro. 20.21. and 28.8.
I received it from that worthy Knight and your honored Grandfather, Sr.
Samuel Roll: when he was about to leave the world, that he acknowledged it
(with thankfulness to God) as an especial blessing that neither he, nor his
father, nor his Grandfather, (notwithstanding their many and great transactions
in the world) had ever borrowed or lent upon usury. And indeed it is no less a
blessing to be kept from being tempted with the gain of lending, then to be
delivered from the necessity of borrowing upon usury. What pity it were that an
inheritance so justly acquired and accompanied with such a blessing, should
ever be misused or misspent.

Let the Justice, Temperance, Sobriety, Meekness, Moderation, together with
those other virtues which were eminent in your Ancestors; become yet more
eminent in you. Their hatred of vice, and love and practice of virtue, has
rendered their memory grateful and blessed. Prove. 10.7
The very instruments and occasions of evil were an offense unto them. Amongst
other disorders, against which they testified their dislike, gamings at cards
and dice, have not been so much as tolerated in their families (as I have been
credibly informed) for well near, if not for more then a full century of years.
The religious order observed by your great grandfathers father ( Henry Roll in
the government of his family, especially in the sanctification of the Lords
day, has been long since made public to the world. I hope the mentioning of
these things, will not be unto others an occasion of envy, nor to you of
vainglory. My only aim is to offer them as incitements to godliness and
virtue, and as examples worthy of imitation, and chiefly to you, with whom I
trust they will not be unapt to prevail. The beginning and continuance of them,
was their honor, and the perfecting and propagating of them will be yours. It
is no less honorable, than easy to add unto that which has been well begun.
And it is a far greater diminution of honor to posterity to come short of the
virtues of their Ancestors, then of their outward estate or splendour in the
world. Quanto majorum vita praeclarior, tanto posterum socordia flagitiosior.
But I trust (through grace) that there will be no cause to that those things
which have been so happily begun, and so long continued, and that with such
remarkable testimonies of the favor and blessing of God, shall receive either
an end or an abatement in you. It was cause of rejoicing to hear, how
affectionately you received the wise and holy admonitions and counsels of your
dying father. I hope they will ever live with you, and you in them. I shall add
no more, but that which David by inspiration from God, when he was a dying,
spoke unto Solomon his Son, and which the Lord by him speaks unto every son of
a religious parent, Know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a
perfect heart, and with a willing mind: for the Lord searches all hearts; and
understands all the imaginations of the thoughts: if thou seek him he will be
found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.

That the Lord may be the guide of your youth, the strength and shield of your
life, and in life and death your exceeding great reward, is the hearts desire,
and prayers to God of him, who is,

SIR, Yours, most affectionately and humbly to serve you for your souls good.
William Trevethick.

TO THE READER.
THE intent and scope of the ensuing discourse, is the comforting of the
living, and the commemorating and vindication of the dead. For the former, the
grounds are the same, which Jesus Christ made use of to the same purpose, being
taken from that which is a main article of our faith, and the support and stay
of our Christian hope; to wit, the resurrection of the dead, together with the
power and interest which Christ has in it.

For the latter, that which is here delivered has not proceeded from any great
affection that I bear to Panegyricke or Encomiastical Pulpit-discourses in the
behalf of the dead. I know well how much they are distasted by many grave and
learned Divines, who have judged them prejudicial to the reputation of the
Minister, in exposing him to censure; to the honor of the dead, in that the
forwardness of the Son, to celebrate their virtues, may occasion others, to
become the more busy in discovering and publishing their vices: and to the
edification of the living, many of which may be too apt to take occasion
therehence, to grow the more regardless of well doing, presuming that however
they behave themselves while they live, they shall not miss of praises enough
when they are dead. Nevertheless their censure being not so general, but that
even themselves admit of some exceptions. As where the person has been of
eminent desert, their lives free from manifest scandal, or where their names
either have been, or are apt to be traduced. As for the former reasons I have
most usually in my Sermons upon such occasions totally forborne them; so for the
latter I have been moved to make some use of them in this; and I trust without
offense to any that are sober minded: for if they consider what great pains and
charge many heathens have been at in embalming and interring the bodies of such
of their dead, Herod. Euterpe.
as deserved well of them while they lived, only because they supposed it a Su
53. prema officia justa Vocarunt Latitini, quod just fierent lis, qui de nobis
been merentes mortui fuerant.
duty of nature and humanity, They will at least bear with us, if (according as
we are Dr. Feat. Cav. mist. p. 831.
taught) we take it to be as much, if not more a duty of Christian charity to
keep alive our friends good name as to bury his dead body. And indeed it is of
a far more lasting obligation. This is but once to be performed, but that is
ever to be maintained. This is the duty but of a day, but that of our whole
life.

A good name is that which all good men do much set by: as that which is as
necessary for themselves in respect of others, as a good conscience is for
themselves. It is better than precious ointment (says the wise man.) Ointment
be it never so precious, does but affect the outward sense; but a good name
affects the hearts of those to whom it comes. The savor of a precious ointment
may fill the house, but a good name fills the Country. Joh. 12.3. Mar. 6.14.
That continues but for a little space, but for a moment, but this for ages,
for generations, it out-lives the Owner, is too strong for death, and triumphs
over the grave. Precious ointment may be common to all that are rich, but a
good name is peculiar only to such as are good. Therefore it is also said, That
a good name is rather to be chosen then great riches. Prove. 22.1 Honor hominis
praecipuus thesautus est, Baldus cas. consc. l. 4. c. 1. c 15 Pro. 15.30
It is of more value, silver and gold cannot purchase it. It does more good to
him that possesses it, it quiets and comforts the soul, and makes the bones
fat: It procures more and better friends; every good man will be a friend to
him that has a good report. It does more good to others, by provoking and
encouraging them to the study and practice of goodness, by which only a good
name is to be acquired. It is one of those special blessings which God has
promised to such as love (and are beloved of) him. Gen 12.2 Pro. 10.7.
To do well is our duty, and to hear well a great part of our reward. Heb.
11.39.
And therefore by how much the more precious it is, and by how much the more
every man is concerned in it, by so much the more careful we should be to
preserve our own, Periculum famae aericulo. vitae and crudelis esse putatur qui
famam suam negligit, Bald. ibid. Exodus 21.24 Levit. 24.20 Deuteronomy. 19.21
and by so much the more tender of staining or blemishing that which is
another. And if the Laws of God and of man be so severe against such as spoil
their neighbor of any part of his estate, or deprive him of any limb or member
of his body: There is little reason for such as do him a greater injury (as in
robbing him of his good name) to expect an easier Judgment.

But as God will not suffer his servants to want such as shall bear witness to
their graces, and cause the savor of their good report to sprend abroad. So
Satan (who is the envious one) wants not his instruments, (...) 2 Timothy 3 3
(communicating with him both in nature and name) are ready to follow them with
a flood of calumnies and reproaches. Quanto ille cui invidetur successu meliore
profecerit, tanto invidus in majus. Prove. 27.4.4 incendium livoris ignibus
mardescit. Cyprian de zelo et livore.
And indeed envy is the ordinary lackey at the heels of virtue, which ever
increases with the merit of its object, and wishes and designeth the worst
evil, to the greatest good, even to annihilate or to reduce it into nothing.
And hence as hatred is one of the worst of passions, so envy is one of the
worst and most dangerous effects of hatred. Wrath us cruel, and anger is
outrageous, but who is able to stand before envy? surely not our first parents
in their innocence before the envy of the serpent, nor Abel in his
righteousness, before the envy of Gain, nor Joseph in his integerity, Prove 14
30. Job. 52
before the envy of his brethren; nor Jesus Christ in his perfection, before
the envy of the Pharisees; no north envious man before himself. Envy is the
rottenesse of the bones. And envy slays the silly one. He is grieved at that
good in another which never hurt him, but from which he might receive much
good, and by which he might be made much better. Yea he often repineth at that
good in another which he loathes, Acts 13 44 45
and hates to receive in himself.

And where envy is once conceived in the heart, evil speakings will soon
break out in the tongue; and secret whisperings into open backbitings. Romans 1
29 30 2 Cor. 12 20 1 Pet. 21
These are the ordinary attendants on envy. And an evil report, being usually
at first, but whispered in the ear ( Parva metu primo says the poet) is
readily taken up, Virgit.
by such as to whom it is as rare to speak good of others, as to do good
themselves. And being once set on foot, it makes a shift to spread, though it
be but reeling from Tavern to Tavern, and from Alchouse to Alehouse, (the
common shops where such wares are vented) Bacchatur fama per urbem. It is an
elegant description of Fame which is given by the Poet.

Monstrum horrendum, ingens, Aeveid. l. 4
cui quot sunt corpore plumae,
Tot vigiles oculi subter, --
Tot linguae; totidem ora sonant, tot subrigit aures.
A dreadful monster (says he) that has as many eyes, and ears, and tongues,
as a bird has feathers. To note how quick she is in espying, how curious in
listening, and how busy in divulging of evil. He calls her indeed a Goddess,
but with all gives her an attribute suitable to her deity. Dea foeda, The
unclean Goddess, that pollutes and desiles every thing she touches, the
tongues of such as report, and the ears of such as hear, and the hearts of
such as give her the readiest entertainment, and especially the names of such
as she traduceth: It being her design, to disguise the fairest and most
unblemished names, and so to expose them to public censure, under the deformed
vizor of an evil report.

How much the name, and repute of this worthy gentleman, (upon whose account,
this is tendered to thy view) has suffered in this way, is more then enough
known already; and how unjustly may in part appear, by that which follows in
the close of this discourse: what is there delivered is (as has been said)
much more then I use, but yet far less then he deserved. The truth is, however
in ordinary converse he was most affable yet in affairs of consequence he was
sufficiently reserved. It was his use when his occasions did require it, to
have recourse to such as by reason of their callings and employments were most
likely to give him satisfaction. He was not wont to consult his Physicians in
matters of Divinity, nor his Minister in matters of Physic, nor either in
matters of State. He knew well what influences was like to proceed from such
stars as moved beyond the sphere of their own activity. All that I can
pretend unto is little more then was obvions to common observation. Only the
experience I had of him, and the opportunity of converse for many years, may
enable me to add this much, for the farther confirmation of that which has
been said, That he was a person (as far as I could discern) no way biassed by
private or self interest. Places of profit he neither needed, nor disired at
all; and places of power, or trust, not so much as was wished. He was sensible
of the vanity and danger of popular applause, and therefore willingly declined
it. Not but that he highly prized the affections of his country of which he had
frequent and large experience, and was willing to serve them. But that he might
not be rashly hurried on upon designs, where he saw neither rational nor
probable grounds to hope to accomplish them. He knew well that men are apt to
be esteemed: not according to their undertakings or endeavors, but success.
And the same men who are most prodigal in praising the courage of such as are
bold and forward in attempting, will be no more sparing to upbraid them with
rashness and folly, if in the issue, or event, they answer not their
expectations. The taunts, and reproaches of light and inconsiderate persons, he
valued at a low rate, supposing them to be promoted by such as rather envied
then desired his happiness; and it may be, were angry because they could not
do him a greater displeasure. It is the easiest way of blunting the edge of
Calumny, to slight and to neglect it.

But what need I say more? Since the Lord in his most wise and gracious
providence has, in a good measure, removed that which was one maine cause, of
all these evils, (to wit our civil broiles) and that in such a way, as who
would ever have expected, that after all those miserable distractions and
confusions, that were grown so general, and dreadful, throughout the
Christian world; to the dishonor of God, the ruin, and destruction of
Christian poople, and to the infinite reproach of our Christian profession;
even when they were at their very height, and when (according to humane
apprehension) nothing was to be expected (at least in these nations) but utter
desolation: The Lord himself in zeal to the glory of his own name, and in
compassion to his people should send us help from his holy place. And that also
in such a way of love and peace, as became him who is the God of love and
peace, which if duly considered according to all its circumstances, was such a
miracle of mercy as our progenitors never saw, and our posterity will not
believe. Sufficient (if any thing may be sufficient) to provoke us to be at
love, and peace, amongst our selves. The season, and instruments, which he had
appointed for this work, he reserved to be disposed of by himself; that he
alone might appear to be both the Auther and the finisher of it. When his time
was come, and his instruments were set on work, all things succeeded without
let, or interruption. The less there appeared of man, the more of God: and he
that ascribes all the glory to him, Shall have never the less himself. For he
has said, those that honor him, he will honor.

Having therefore such an instance of the kindness and love of God, 1 Samuel 2 30
toward such a people as were living in malice and envy, hateful or hated,
and hating one another. I may conceive the better hopes, that such as do desire
to approve themselves to be like unto God, and are not utterly void of that
most Christian grace of Charity, will be the more apt to accept of that which
is here tendered for their satisfaction in the behalf of the dead. And for
others, who being little studious of doing good themselves, are best at leisure
to find faults in others, as Hierome speaks, Qui sua non ornant, aliena
carpunt, My prayer shall be, that God will give them better minds, and then,
and not till then, will they effectually know it to be their duty Mat. 7.12
to do to others as they would others should do to them; and to set as much by
the esteem of others as they would that others should set by theirs. In the
meantime Let all Christians mind that it is their duty, Jam. 4.11
not to speak evil one of another, Ps. 15.2
no nor to hear evil either ne auribus caluminiari. They are said to be far
from good men, who give Pro. 17.4 1 Pet. 2.17
heed to fals^ lips, or a naughty tongue. Let us make conscience of the
contrary duty.

We owe Job. 31 13.14 15
honor to all men. What man so despicable, that has not something in him,
that is worthy of honor. He has communion with us in the same Pro. 22.3
nature, and is capable of communion with us in the grace and glory To. 14.4
vid. Ames. de cons. l. 5 c. 13.
. It is true wicked men are not to be honored as they are such, nor so as may
confirm or encourage them, or others to have fellowship with them, in their
evil ways. Yet we may not deny them a testimony of that virtue which is in
them; nor deprive them of that honor which God has put upon them; Lest we
should reproach the Almighty, or despise the ways of his providence, as if he
might not do with his own as he pleased. Mat. 20.15 Romans 13.7
Shall our eye be evil because he is good? We must render unto all their dues,
even honor to whom honor is due. Alas if this be all that wicked men shall
have, it is but a slender portion, and such as affords but small matter of
glorying unto them, or of envy unto us. In a word A good name is that depositum
or pledge, Peccat qu audit sugillantem, seu detrahenetem, assentiendo, vel non
resistendo, quam id facere deberet Azpilcueta manual. confess. c. 18. n. 37.
wherewith every man is entrusted in the behalf of his neighbor; and it is a
crime of an high nature to be unfaithful in a common trust.

That I might not offend either by assenting to, or not resisting of such an
evil, (as a learned casuist says I might) I have endeavored in some measure
to right the wronged, and to rectify the wrong-doer. And it is not unlikely but
that such as have offended through evil affection will be impatient of being
contradicted. Where a those that have failed through mistak or inadvertency,
will take it in good part to be better informd, the proof whereof I shall
leave to such as think it worth the observation.

Being somewhat sensible, that while I have been pleading for others, I may be
thought to need an Apology in the behalf of my self, for that I have presumed
so far upon the patience of the reader, who may be apt to blame me for making
the porch too large for the house, or for prefixing such large Epistles to a
single Sermon. But for this I shall say, That the sin of uncharitableness is
great and spreading, and we cannot lightly raise the feuce too high against it.
And for both, I shall say, no more but this. That when we speak, or write, or
hear, or read for God, or our souls, to caution against sin, or to quicken to
duty; we should not easily suffer our selves to complain of tediousness. The
Apostles of Christ though their Epistles be not very short, yet say they had
written briefly and in few words; as to show the excellency of the matter, and
their zeal to their duty; so also, to intimate, that as themselves had not been
weary in writing, Hebr. 13 22 1 Pet. 5.12
so neither should they to whom they had written, be weary in reading, If that
which is here tendered thou shall receive and use with profit, neither of us
shall have cause to repent of our labor. And that it may be so, I shall make
this my only request, Isa. 48.17
that we may mutually commend each other to him who has said that he is the
Lord our God which reaches us to profit.

Thine in the service of Christ William Trevethick.

JOHN. 11.25. Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection and the life: he that
believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live.


THe historical narration of Christ's miraculous raising Lazarus from the dead;
as also of the preparations to it, and the consequents of it, are the main
subject matter of the Evangelists discourse in this chapter.

That we may know who this Lazarus was, he is set forth ( v. 1.) by the
indisposition of his body, he was sick: and also by the place of his abode, he
was of Bethany. Which place is described, 1. By some others of its inhabitants
(as it seems) better known to the disciples then Lazarus was. It was the Town
of Mary and her sister Martha. 2. By its Situation, it was nigh unto
Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off, v. 18. At this time the condition of the
place was suitable to its name, Bethany (according to the notation of the word)
signifying a house of sorrow or mourning. Lazarus a noted man of the town is
dead, and there is much sorrow, and many mourners. Mary and Martha his sisters
are weeping, the Jews also that came to comfort them weep, yea even Jesus
Christ himself wept. v. 33, 35. Here was a great mourning at Lazarus his grave.
We read of one Lazarus mentioned by Jesus Christ Luke 16.20. But whether that
discourse be parabolicall as Theophilact. Justin. q. 60. Theophilus Antiochen.
l. 4. All^gor. Eucher. in quaest in Lucam. Alius preterea nemo, quod sciam.
Quin om ^^s alii auctores historiam esse dicunt inquit Maldon^t. in loc.
some, or historical as Tertull an l. de anima. c. 2. Ambr^s. Jren. l. 2. c.
62. and plures al^^ apud Mal donat. Calvin. in loc.
most of the ancients affirm: Tertullian adversus Marcionem l. 4. p. 274. edit.
Basil. 1562.
Pet. Martyr in 1 lib. S^m. c. 28. p. 161.
Some of which understanding by the rich man to be meant Herod, and by Lazarus
John the Baptist, supposing, as it seems, that Christ conceald their proper
nam's to avoid the odium of the times.

Or whether that be a mixed discourse, partly historical, and partly
parabolicall, as Maldon. in loc. Menoch. in loc.
others conceive: however otherwise they differ, they generally agree that
Lazarus spoken of there was not the same with him whom Jesus raised from the
dead. As it may also farther a pear by his outward estate and condition in the
world. Lazarus spoken of in Luke, is said to have been a poor miserable beggar,
ready to perish through want. But this whom Christ raised again, was no way
likely to be such. His sisters (whose affection toward him, sufficiently
manifected in this discourse, would not fuffer them, to see him beg) seem to be
persons of wealth and repute, (to omit the conjectures of Vid Calvin. and
Maldon. and Menoch. in loc.
some) even by that magnificent act of Mary, in pouring that precious ointment
on the head of Christ, which Judas said might have been sold for 300 pence
after the rate of 7 d. ob. (the value of their penny) amounts to 9 l. -- 07 s.
-- 06, sterling. Bunting. Itinerarium p. 391.
300 pence Joh. 12.5. yea and for more, Mar. 14.5.

An act so graciously accepted and so highly honored by Christ, Mat. 26.13
that it is followed with a memorial of as larg extent, and of as long
continuance as the preaching of the Gospel. Sufficient to argue her condition
was not very mean. Besides the great concourse of the citizens of Jerusalem, to
visit and comfort them: which was, says Maldonat, propter Marthae Mariaeque
nobilitatem aliasque virtutes, Mos erat Judaeoru^, mortuos praesertim
honorabiliores, in Sepeluncis Sepelire.
for the respect they did bear to their nobility, and other vitues. And also
the manner of his interment, being buried in a cave or vault; which (as is
said) was most usual for such as were more honorable and of the better sort.

But to pass by those things which are of the lowest concernment. There are
other intimations given by the Evangelist, by which they are rendered more truly
remarkable, and of eminent worth and note to us: which are,

1 Their mutual love, manifested each to other, by their cohabitation, (or
dwelling together) not only in the same town, but also as it seems in the same
house: And farther by their mutual care for each other, as here, when Lazarus
was sick, their first and chief care was to send for Jesus Christ, the great
physician both of soul and body.

2 Their love to Jesus Christ, evidenced by their frequent attending on him,
and entertaining of him; taken notice of, and commended in all the Evangelists.
Matthew. 26.6, etc. Mark. 14.3, etc. Luke 10.38, 39. Joh. 12.2, 3.

3 Jesus Christ his love to them all, as is expressed in the fifth ver. of this
chapter, where it is said that Jesus loved Mary and her sister and Lazarus.
Which he also makes manifest, by his sympathizing with them in their sorrows,
instructing them where they are ignorant, strengthening their faith, comforting
them in their afflictions, raising up again of Lazarus from the dead, etc.

Thus they that love Christ, and love one another are beloved of Christ.

The preparatory acts, that go before this miracle are:

1 the message which his sisters sent to Christ, to acquaint him with his
sickness. That they went not themselves but sent, might proceed from the
regard they had to their brothers weakness, and their own modesty. Suitable
whereunto is the message which they send, wherein they prescribe nothing as to
his coming, or sending or doing, but only commend-his case to Christ saying,
Lord behold he whom thou love is sick, v. 3. and so leaving him to the
freedom of his own will, to do as seemed good unto him. Which argues the
sobriety, and meekness of their spirits, that in a matter of the greatest
weight, even in a case of life and death, they were so ready to submit unto his
pleasure, whereunto we have

2 The answer which Jesus Christ returned by the messenger sent him, wherein he
aslures them of life, and safety to the sick, and of advantage to the glory of
God and of Christ. This sickness says he is not unto death, but for the glory
of God, that the son of God may be glorified thereby, v. 4. And this we may be
sure to gain by an hummble, and submissive address to Christ, in the sickness
of the body; though we may not be sure to be freed from death temporal, yet we
may be sure of comfort in the promise of being freed from death eternal.
However this ought to support the spirit of a Christian, that Christ shall be
magnified in his body, whether it be by life or by death Phil. 1.20.

3 The discourse which Jesus Christ had upon this occasion with his disciples,
wherein he signfieth to them, his purposes to return into Judea to raize up
Lazarus from death; wherein he suffers not himself to be discouraged from his
duty, by the danger which they suggested, might attend him in the doing of it;
with all giving them to understand, that one special end, which he proposed to
himself, in this undertakin, was the strengthening of their faith, v. 15. And
not of theirs only, but also the begetting, increase, and perfecting of faith,
in all the elect that remained yet to be called in.

And to that purpose this being one of the greatest and last miracles that ever
he wrought, while he was conversant in the world, and also a most remarkable
demonstration of his almighty power and Godhead. He has caused it the more
particularly to be recorded by the Evangelist, with all its circumstances. As
the place where it was don, near Jerusalem, they that doubted needed not to go
far to inquire out the truth of it; the time when, it was near the Passover,
when the Jews in great multituds from all parts resorted to Jerusalem: The
means whereby he effected it were the same by which he still upholds the world;
even by the word of his power, The witnesses in whose presence he did it, they
were many, and those of all sorts, men and women, friends and foes, some that
believed, and some that were hardened, who went their ways and accused him to
the Phaisees. ver. 46.

All which circumstances are so exactly recorded, to the end, that they which
were present might the better remember it; and that they which were absent
might the easier believe it. Ut inde rem pene natura sua incredibilem,
diligenti circumstantiarum descriptione credibilem redderet. To the end that a
matter which in its own nature was in a manner incredible, by an exact
description of all its circumstances, might be rendered apt to be believed.

4 We have also here at large set down, that consolatory discourse, which Jesus
Christ held with Martha, upon the occsiaon of the death of her brother. Wherein
we may observe, the course which Christ takes, and the subject which he makes
choice of, to comfort and restore her grieved and afflicted spirit. And that is
the doctrine of the resurrection, and of life eternal: wherein he especially
labors to regulate and confirm her faith.

As to the main that there should be a resurrection, she no way doubted, but
concerning the power of Christ, and his interest in that work, she did much
need to be farther instructed. In the 21. v. She seems too much to confine the
power of Christ to his corporal presence. Lord (says she) if thou had been
here, my brother had not died.

As if according to his Deity, he were not every where present, or as if the
distance of place could hinder his power from working of miracles.

In the 22. v. she seems to ascribe, all the power that Christ had to do any
thing for her, unto the prevailency of his prayers to God. Implying, that she
did not believe, that he was able to do it of himself, when she says but, I
know that even now whatsoever thou will ask of God, God will give it thee.

And whereas v. 23. Christ had promised that her brother should rise again. v.
the 24. She captiously diverts it, or turns it off, applying it to his rising
again in the resurrection of the last day. As if Christ could not make good his
word till then, or as if the consolation which she might receive from the
doctrine of the last resurrection were but of light concernment.

This weakness or wavering of her faith, Christ corrects in the words of my
text; where he informs her, that he is not only the ministerial, or
isntrumental cause, (as she seemed to suppose) but the very author, and
principal effioient cause of the resurrection and the life.

I am the resuerection and the life. etc. Which words I shall consider, 1
Absolutely as they are in themselves. 2 Relatively with respect to the context.


1 As they are considered absolutely they contain two distinct affirmative
propositions.

In the first of which, we have anassertion, of the power, and interest which
Jesus Christ has, in the resurrection and the life. Jesus said unto her, I am
the resurection, and the life.

In the second, we have the specification of the proper, and adaequate subject,
or material cause, of the resurrection, and the life, and that is the
believer, He that believes in me, shall live.

Whereunto he also adds an amplification of his power from the extent of it,
and that both in respect of the quantity of the Subject, it reaches to every
one that believes, be they never so many; He that believes, it is indefinitly
expressed in this verse, but yet explained in the next verse, to be understood
as universal, where he says, whosoever believes in me. And also in respect
of the quality of the subject, whatsoever his condition may be: be it never so
desperate: Though he were dead, yet shall he live.

2 As they are considered relatively.

1 They are inferred by way of argument: for the correcting and curing of
Martha's ignorance, unbelief and Error. 2 For the moderating and quieting of
her passions now apt to be distempered by immoderate grief. 3 For the
regulating, and improving of the present dispensation of providence, in the
death of her brother, and of her mourning upon that occasion.
Before I come to the observations, I shall endeavor to unfold the terms.

And 1 in order to the opening of the first propositon, I shall show what we
are to understand.

1 By the resurrection. 2 By the life. 3 How Christ is said to be the
resurrection and the life.
2 In the opening of the second proposition, I shall show, 1 Who it is that
Christ means by these words he that believes in me. 2 How he that believes
in him shall live.


3 In the opening the words whereby the power of Christ in raising of the dead,
is amplified: I shall show what is meant by these words, though he were dead
yet shall be live.

First the resurrection is sometimes taken in the Scripture figurativly, What is
meant by resurrection, To. 6.4, 5 Ephesians. 2.5, 6 and 5.14. Colos. 3. 1 Rev. 20.6
Rivet in Psalm. 16. p. 120 Romans 6.4 Resurrectio prima est transitus a morte
peccati ad vitam gratiae. Sixtus Senens. Biblioth. Sanct. l. 6. Annot. 347. est
spiritualis omnium salvandorum ex morte peccati reviviscentia, Pareus in loc.

Mortuorum resurrectio dicitur. Mortuorum itaque vocabulo non est nisi quod.
amisit animam, de cujus facultate vivebat. Corpus est quod amittit animam, et
amittendo fit mortuum: ita mortui vocabulum corpori competit. Porro si
resurrectio mortui est, mortuum autem non aliud est quam corpus, corporis erit
resurrectio. Resurrectio est ejus quod cecidit. Tortullian adversus Marcion. l.
5. p. 308. 309. n. 17. edit. Basil. 1562. Ca^o est, quae mo^te subruitur, ut
exinde a cadendo cadavere enuncielu. Resurrectio caducae rei est (i.e.) carnis,
Idem carnis resur. de. l. p. 56, 57. n. 14.


for the raisin again of the soul, from the death of sin, to the life of grace;
which is called a passing from death to life, Joh. 5.24.

This is called the first resurrection; which is nothing else but regeneration,
the efficient cause where of is Jesus Christ, and this is only of the elect.

And it is also taken properly for the raising up of the body, which was fallen
by death.

And yet not of the body without the soul, Anima est quae corpus (...).
but as death does dissolve that union and conjunction which is between the
soul and the body, so the resurrection shall restore it, whence it is also
called a regeneration Mat. 19.28. Piscat. in loc. Musc. in Ps. 2. p. 22.6.
Because as in the first birth, a man (...) brought forth consisting both of
soul an^ body, so in the resurrection, (which is as another birth) he shall be
raised u^ an entire man consisting both of soul an^ body.

Briefly, The resurrection proper^^ taken, is a supernatural act of God
whereby the same soul is reunited (...) the same body; to the end that the same
person (even the same entire man may be presented in the day of judgment to
receive the rewards or punishment of his forepassed life. Job. 19.26, 27^ 2
Cor. 5.10.

This also is twofold, according to the differing condition of the persons that
are to be raised up. The hour is coming in the which all that are in the grave
shall hear his voice, and sha^^ come forth, they that have done good unto the
resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of
damnation. Joh. 5.28, 29. By which i^ appears that of the resurrection, thu^
properly taken, Jesus Christ is also the author and efficient.

Secondly by The life, we are to understand principally life spiritual, and
eternal, together with all the degrees of it from its beginning in grace to
its perfecting in glory, in that it is such a life, as is the fruit and
consequent of faith, as he immediately expounds it, when he says, He that
believes in me shall live, never die. This is indeed the life, by way of
excellency, whereof Christ alone is the fountain and spring: when he is called
the Prince of life; Act. 3.15.
he that has life in himself, and from whom it is derived unto others, who by
faith draw it from him as water from a fountain. According to that of Paul,
Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I now
live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the son of God.

All mankind by nature are in an estate of death, and no one of them is put
into an estate of life, Calvin.
but he that is risen from the dead: none can rise from the dead but by him who
is the resurrection, none can live but by him who is the life. He that has the
son has life, and he that has not the son has not life. 1 John 5.12. In a
word the life here spoken of, is chiefly life spiritual and eternal, begun in
grace, and to be perfected in glory: unto which life, there is no true way, but
by him who is the way, the truth, and the life, Joh. 14.6.

And thus you have heard what we are to understand by the resurrection, and
what by the life. In the third place, I am to show, how Christ is the
resurrection, and the life. And I find it expressed by a learned author
somewhat to this effect.

Christ, Lanc in. colos. 3.
as God, is the resurection and the life properly and efficiently; As man, and
as he has died for our offenses, and was raised again for our justification,
so he is the resurrection and the life materially: Cartw. Harm. in loc.
as mediator, and so he is the resurrection and the life formally even in and
by whom they rise and live: As he is the head of the body (the Church) so he is
the life of the members, by which they are raised from the dead, and are alive
unto God, and do live the life of God, that is the life of grace here, and
shall at last with him also live the life of glory. When Christ who is our life
shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory, Colos. 3.4.

To speak a little more particularly to the words. Whereas he says I am the
resurrection, and the life. Singula verba emphatica Sunt. Every word has its
force.

I] and not another, nor by prayer to another, nor by the power of another; but
of my self, and by mine own power. I am] not I have been, or I shall be, but I
am: This is a manner of speakeing which is most proper unto God, who is ever
the same, and by thus speaking, he would have us to know, that it is always in
his power to do it when he will, by whom he will, and as he pleases. For as
the father raises up the dead, and quickneth them: even so the son quickneth
whom he will, Joh. 5.21.

He speaks in the present tense, time past is not, and time to come is not
yet, Tempus praesens est tantum tempus. Time has no being but at present.

I am the resurrection] more Hebraeorum, aftes the manner of the Hebrews; He
uses the abstract for the concrete, but in an active sense; As when the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 1.30. He is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption; his meaning is, that Jesus Christ is he that
does make us wise, and righteous, and holy, etc. So here when Christ says, I
am the resurrection, it is as if he had said, I am he that does raise the dead.

Martha had said, concerning her brother, I know that he shall rise again in
the resurrection at the last day. And Christ replyeth in effect (Thou may as
well believe that he may be raised now; Per quem tunc resurget po test and
modo, quia ego sum resurrectio. August.
since he is present by whom he shall be raised then, for (says he) I am the
resurrection, and I can as easily do it now as then.

(I am the resurrection and the life) first the resurrection and then the life;
quia prior est restitutio a morte in vitam quam vitae status, Calvin.
the restoring from death to life is before the state of life. The resurrection
from the death of sin, must go before the life of grace, and the resurrection
both from death temporal, and death spiritual must go before a full enjoyment
of the life of glory.

This may suffice for the opening of the terms of the first proposition. I come
now unto the Second.

He that believes in me shall live. In which proposition we have the proper
subject of the resurrection and the life, He that believes, the act that
qualifieth and diposeth that subject, and that is faith. The object that gives
life and virtue to that act, and that is Christ, he that believes in me. And
lastly the grace that is promised to reward, and crown it, and that is life. He
that believes in me shall live.

The subject of the resurrection in general is that which is fallen (as has
been said,) The subject of the resurrection at the day of judgment, are the
dead bodies universally both of good and bad. The subject of the resurrection,
and the life or from the death of sin, to life spiritual, and eternal, are
all and only the elect, which the father has given unto Christ; for all they,
and only they do come unto him by faith. Joh. 6.35, 37, 39, 40, 44, 47, 53, 54.
All and only they, do perform that act, whereby they become fitly qualified,
and disposed, to partake of such a grace; And that not only in general way, as
they are a body: but every one for himself: every one that is thus to be raised
by Christ, is to believe for himself. The just shall live by faith. Therefore
he says, He that believes in me; And yet he spakes indefinitly, so that it is
all one as if he had said every one that believes in me, as Joh. 6.40. or
whosoever believes in me, as in the next verse after the text. Which notes
also the object of faith, Jesus Christ. And to receive and rest upon him, as
the Christ, the son of God, as the only author of life and Salvation is to
belive in him, as appears by Martha in her answer v. 27. which is also the same
with Peter's, Mat. 16.16.

And He that beliveth in Christ, is every one that by a true faith does lay
hold, and rest, upon Christ for life and salvation.

And he that thus believes in him shall live, that is, shall live spiritually
and eternally, He shall forthwith receive that life which shall never have an
end. He shall never die, that is spiritually and eternally.

This also may serve for the unfolding of the terms of the second proposition.
I come in the third place to the amplification of the power of Christ in these
words. Though he were dead yet shall he live. Wherein he sets forth the
exceeding greatness of his power in regard of the extent of it, and that,

1 In respect of the quantity or number of those that are to be raised up, be
their multitude never so great, howsoever dispersed, of whatsoever nation,
kindred or tribe; whether Jews, or Gentiles; Barbarians, Scythians, bond or free.

2 In respect of their quality, be their condition never so desperate; yet he
that believes, whosoever believes, every one that believes, Though he were
dead, yet shall he live.

That is (say some) Though he were dead in the body, Piscat. in loc.
yet shall he live again the body unto life eternal, Menoch. in loc.
as he that believes not shall rise again but unto death eternal.

Or though he were dead, Cartw. Metaph. in loc.
yet seeing I am the resurrection and the life, if it be for the glory of God, I
can and will (as often as I please) restore him unto life again: nether need I
stay for the last day.

There are others that understand it especially of the spiritual death of the
soul, Calvin. Maldonat.
or of the souls being dead in sin, and by the power of Christ to be quickened
to a new and spiritual life; yet not without respect to the body, which though
dead naturally, yet by his power should be raised up again.

But which way soever of these two the words are to be understood, there may
arise a doubt.

1 If Christ speaks of the death of the body, how does he require faith of the
dead? can the dead believe? The dead praise not the Lord, neither any that go
down into silence. Psalm. 115.17. And as they can not praise him, so neither can
they believe in him. In death there is no remembrance of him. Psalm. 6.5. They
that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy truth, Isaiah 38.18.

2 If he speak of the spiritual death of the soul by sin, and of the raising
up of such to the life of grace, what is this to the business in hand. The
question is, of restoring life to Lazarus his dead body, and he speaks of
giving life to the soul that is dead in sin.

For answer unto these, there is no doubt but that Christ's answer to Martha is
both proper and pertinent, though every one may not so readily apprehend it.

But to the doubts themselves. To the first we may say that he does not require
faith of the dead sensu composito, that is, that those that are dead in body
should believe; but of the living, as if he should have said, He that while he
lives does believe in me, though he were even now dead, yet shall he be raised
up again, and live in the body, and that eternally; and thus he seems to
explain himself in the very next words, where he says, whosoever lives and
believes in me shall never die.

Again when he says, though he were dead yet shall he live, it is to note,
either his omnipotency, in that he can and will give life unto him, and cause
even the dead to live. Or that although he be dead in respect of us, yet he is
still alive in respect of Christ; in whom all believers live, and shall never
die. And thus he is to be understood when he says of Lazarus, his sickness
that was not unto death, v. 4.
and yet afterward he says, Lazarus is dead. His sickness was not unto
death, v. 24.
in respect of Christ, who could and would raise him up again: Sharpius
Symphonia. loc. 176.
yet he was dead in respect of men by whom he could not be numbered amongst the
living.

As Paul said of Eutichus when he was dead Act. 20.9, 10. So may it be said of
every believer, even when he is dead, his life is in him. His grave is but his
bed, In mortis umbrajacet
Jsa. 57.2. and his death his sleep, as Christ said of Lazarus when he was
dead, our friend Lazarus sleeps, v. 11. He sleeps in Jesus, 1 Cor. 15.18
1 These. 4.14. He is still united unto Christ, he is a member of that body
which lives eternally. Calvin.
Death it self unto belivers is a deliverance from death.

And that of the Jews may be truly applied unto them, their grave is not the
house of the dead, but Both Chajim domus viventium the house of the living.

To the second, though it should be understood of a spiritual death, yet it is
very suitable to the matter in hand. And it is a forceable argument to confirm
the faith of Martha in this, that Jesus Christ was able to raise her brother
again. He that is able to raise the soul from the death of sin, and to cause it
to live the life of grace, can also raise the body from death temporal unto
life eternal in the last day, and he that can raise the bodies of all the
elect unto life eternal in the last day, can raise the body of one man unto
life temporal now.

Furthermore whereas he was sought unto for restoring of life to the body. He
answers that he was both able and ready to give more then they desired, even
life not only to the body but also to the soul. Thereby taking an occasion from
her insisting so much upon the life of the body to raise up her faith, and to
quicken her desires after the life of the soul, which is of more necessary and
worthy concernment, especially seeing she was now conversing with one who had
both these in his power to confer.

And this was usual with Christ to take occasion from men's discoursing of
outward, and corporal things to lead them on to spiritual things, and from
temporal to eternal, as may be seen, Johnn 4.13. etc. Joh. 6.26, 27.

And this arises from that special respect which Christ bears unto the souls
of his elect. Whence it is that he makes it his first care, uses more words,
and takes more pains, to raise up Martha's dead faith, then to raise up her
brothers dead body. And therefore he seems to turn her off from the discourse
of raising of her brother, upon which she was so passionatly set, and leads
her into a discourse of spiritual life. Although it be not to be doubted but
that he comprehends under these expressions, a double dispensation of grace;
viz. that he would raise the soul from a spiritual death, to a spiritual life;
and the body from death temporal to life eternal, a taste whereof he was now
about to give in raising Lazarus from the dead.

I shall give you the Sum of all that has been said by way of explication in
this short paraphrase. And it is as ^f Christ should have said, Martha thou
impliest by thy discourse, that thou have but low thoughts of me and my power:
and that thou imaginest me to be only the minister or dispenser of the
resurrection; that is such a one as only by prayer can obtain from another the
power of raising the dead. Thou look upon me only as a man that is a
prophet, and that by some more then ordinary grace; and favor, can prevail
with God. But thou must know, and it is thy duty to believe; that I am God as
well as man, and therefore that I am he, who has that power, in and of my
self, by which I am able to raise and do raise the dead to life, and that I am
the very root and fountain of life by whom the dead do rise, and the living do
live, whether naturally or spiritually, temporally or eternally. And also that
he, whosoever he be, that by a true and lively faith does lay hold, and rely
upon me, as such, whatsoever his condition may be, yea though he were dead, yet
shall he live: though he were dead in respect of the body, yet by me shall he
live again ^n the body. Though he were dead in sin (^s every one is before he
believes) yet by his faith in me, shall he be raised up to live, the life both
of grace and glory.

I come now to the observations.

And first from the words absolutely considred as they propose the author and
efficient cause of the resurrection and the life, and as they contain an
assertion of that absolute and independent power, and interest which Jesus
Christ has in the resurrection and the life. We may observe,



2 From the subject of the resurrection and the life, together with the
qualification or limitation thereof, or the person to whom only Jesus Christ is
the resurrection and the life; held forth in the second proposition, in these
words He that believes in him.



Such as do sincerly believe in Christ, are the only proper and adequare
subject of the resurrection and the life. Or

Such as sincerly believe in Christ are they, and they only, who by the power
of Christ are, or shall be raised from death to life spiritual and eternal.

3 From the amplification of Christ's power from the extent of it. He can and
will raise them be their condition never so desperate. Though he were dead yet
shall he live.



Secondly from the words relatively considered. 1. As they contain a doctrine
delivered and asserted by Jesus Christ, for the correcting and curing of
Martha's ignorance and error, concerning his almighty power and godhead.

life, is an especial means to cure the ignorance, and to prevent the error,
we are apt to be corrupted withal, concerning the power and Godhead of Christ.

2 Whereas Jesus Christ for the moderating, quieting and comforting of Martha's
spirit now apt to exceed in mourning and grieving, for the death of her
brother, does especially make choice of, and insist upon the doctrine of the
resurrection, and the informing her in, and affecting her with, his absolute
power in it, and over it.



3 Whereas Jesus Christ does take occasion to moderate, and improve Martha's
mourning over her brothers dead body, and her desire of having it raised up
again to life temporal; to mind her of the true and effectual means of
quickening and raising up her own dead soul, to life spiritual, and eternal.



The words of the text are few, but fruitful. I may compare them to those few
loaves and fishes, which in the hands of the disciples, seemed unto them by
much too little to satisfy so many thousand hungry stomachs, as then stood in
need of refreshment. But being blessed and broken by Christ, they multiply so
exceedingly, that they become enough for all and to spare.

In like manner these words of Christ looked upon with a carnal eye, or as only
in the hands of a man, what are they among so many that every one should have
his portion. But if Christ by his spirit do bless and dispense them in the way
of his ordinance they will multiply and be enough for all. Yea such is the
nature of this food, that every one may carry away the whole, and yet never a
one have ever the less.

To each of the observations I shall speak particularly, but very briefly. The
first is this,

Jesus Christ is the author of the resurrection, and the life. Or Jesus Christ
is the author and efficient cause, both of the resurrection of the body, and of
the life both spiritual and eternal.

1 That he is so is manifest in the text; and therefore needs not any farther
proof: neither shall I add any more but only this, that we have Jesus Christ
asserting his power, and efficiency, in the resurrection, four several times in
one and the same chapter. viz. Joh. 6.39, 40, 44, 54. and in the life both
spiritual and eternal no less John 5.21, 22, 24, 25, 26.

2 How he is so I shall show in these particulars.

1 Jesus Christ is the author and efficient cause of the resurrection and the
life, as he is God, not excluding the father or the spirit. For it is said that
the father raises up the dead and quickneth them. Joh. 5.21. 1 Cor. 6.14. And
also that the spirit raises and quickneth the dead Romans 8.11.

The father by the son, and through the spirit, 2 Cor. 4.14. Opera Trinitatis,
ad extra, sunt indivisa.

As he is the judge of the world, so he is the resurrection, both of the elect,
and reprobate, Joh. 5.27, 28. Even as the opening of the prison doors, and the
bringing forth of the prisoners, is by the power and authority of the Judge. So
the opening of the graves, and the raising of the dead is by the power and
authority of Jesus Christ.

3 As mediator, and so he is the author of the resurrection and the life, of
believers only. And that

1 By his merit, 1 Cor. 15, 21, 22. since by man came death, that is by the
merit of man's sin, even by the sin of the first Adam. By man came also the
resurrection of the dead, that is by the merit of the righteousness of Christ
who is the second Adam.

2 By his efficacy, power and virtue, whereby he quickneth whom he will. He
shall change our vile body, Joh. 5.21
that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working
whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself, Phil. 3.21.

3 By inchoation, Christ is risen from the dead and become the first fruits of
them that slept 1 Cor. 15.20. that is of believers. Christ is to believers as
the firsts fruit to all the rest of the fruits; be and therefore if all the
fruits sanctified, through the Sanctification of the first fruits, then so
shall all believers be raised by the resurrection of Christ.

The use of this point, is to confirm our faith, in the doctrine of the Godhead
of Christ. None can raise the dead of himself, and in his own name, and by his
own power, but God only. And hence by his raising up of himself, he is said to
have been declared, to be the son of God with power, Romans 1.4. And this was one
of those signs by which he evidenced himself to be the Christ to John's
disciples, Math. 11.5. in that by him the dead were raised up.

And as the resurrection of the dead, is one of those principles, or
fundamentalls of the doctrine of Christ, which are most necessary for all
Christians to know and believe. Hebr. 6.1, 2. So to know and believe that
Christ is the author or principal efficient cause of it, is no less the duty
of all that profess to believe Jesus Christ to be the son of God? which is
another article of our faith. And therefore to the end that Jesus Christ might
fully confirm Martha in the faith of his Godhead; he thoroughly instructs her
concerning his power and efficency in the resurrection: which if she should
receive, she must also necessarily believe him to be God.

And accordingly it follows, when Christ puts her to the question ver. 26.
Believe thou this? she readily answers, ver. 27. Yea Lord I believe that thou
art the Christ, the son of God.

The truth is, the doctrine of the resurrection is a difficult point. Durius
creditur resurrectio carnis, quam una divinitas says Tertulians. That is, the
rection of the body, is harder to be believed, thence it is (says he) that
heretics commonly begin, l. de resurrectione carnis. p. 46. n. 2.
with the resurrection of the body, and thence (having shaken the hope of the
resurrection) they ascend at length to the questioning of the Deity. Which is
the reason he gives for his dealing first with that subject. That so the
saithfull being Sufficiently confirmed in this, they might be the better
grounded in all the rest. As if they should be weakened in this, they would be
doubtful in all the rest. Fiducia christianorum, ibid. p. 45.
resurrectio mortuorum, says the same Author, The hope of a christian, is the
resurrection of the dead. Toll spem resurrectionis and resoluta est
observantia omnis pietatis. Chrisostom. in Mat. 22.
Take away the hope of the resurrection, and all esteem of religion is vain. If
there be no resurrection of the dead (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.) then is
Christ not risen and if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and
your faith is also vain, and ye are yet in your sins, ver. 13. etc. Then they
also which are fallen a sleep in Christ are perished. If in this life only we
have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable, ver. 18.19.

Whereas on the contrary if we be established in these points; That there shall
be a resurrection; And that Christ is the Author and efficient of it, then it
follows, That Jesus is the Christ the son of God which should come into the
world. And that whosoever believes in him shall never die. As will farther
appear in the handling of the second doctrinall observation, to which now I
come, and it is this.

Such as do sincerly believe in Christ, are the only proper and adequate
Subject of the resurrection and the life. Or

Such as do sincerely believe in Christ, are they and they only who by the
power of Christ, are or shall be raised from death to life spiritual and
eternal. I do not say that believers are the only adequate subject of the
resurrection, Dan. 12.2, 13
as if none should rise but they; The wicked shall rise also, but to the
resurrection of condemnation. But I say that belivers are the only proper and
adequate subject of the resurrection and the life, or of the resurrection to
life spiritual and eternal. He that hears my word, and believes on him
that sent me, has everlasting life. The hour is coming, in the which all that
are in the graves shall hear the voice of the son of man, and shall come forth,
they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life, Joh. 5.24 28, 29. And
this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the son, and
believes on him, may have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the
last day, Joh 6.40. They and only they shall rise and die no more, whosoever
believes in me shall never die. Joh. 11.26. Only such as have a part in the
first resurrection, are they over whom the second death shall have no power,
Rev. 20.6.

Because they only have received that immortal seed, and principle of
spiritual and eternal life. He that believes on him that sent me, has ever
lasting life, and shall not come into condemntion, but is passed from death to
life, Joh. 5.24.

2 Because of their near relation to God. They that shall be accounted worthy
to obtain that world, and the resurrection from the dead cannot die any more,
for they are equal unto the Angels, and are the children of God, being the
children of the resurrection, Luke 20.35, 36.

3 Because of their near relation unto Jesus Christ, they are members of his
body, being ingrafted into him by faith, and therefore they shall rise with
him, Jsa. 26.19. With my body shall they arise. Whence they are said to be
begotten again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the
dead, 1 Pet. 1.3. And if we believe (says the) (Apostle) that Jesus died and
rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. 1
These. 4.14. They only are given of God the father unto Jesus Christ. And this
(says he) is the will of the father which sent me; that of all which he has
given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day.
Joh. 6.39. Which he will do accordingly, v. 40, 44.

4 They only have attained to that grace which sets all other means on work,
and renders them effectual, and that is faith, which is that grace which is
the resurrection of the soul, and in a ^ort enlivens the soul, gives life unto
the life. Though not of it self but by virtue of its object which is Jesus
Christ; ^aith is the vessel by which we draw water but of the wells of
salvation, the conduit pipe by which we conveigh home to out own souls, that
life which is in Christ.

This point is of use to inform us,



2 What it is alone that makes any one capable of an interest in the
resurrection, and the life, by Christ, and that is faith.

3 What we must be, if we will have Christ to be such (even the resurrection
and the life) to us, we must be believers. We must be ingrafted into Christ by
faith, we must be members of his body if we will be partakers of of his
resurrection. We must be in covenant with him, and to that end we must by true
and unfeigned repentance break off, and dissanull our covenant with sin, and
that with Loathing and abhorrency, as that which will infallibly hinder, and
dissolve all union, and communion between Christ and our souls. We must also by
a ready, cheerful and sincere obedience, serve and glorify God in whom we
profess to believe. If we be believers indeed, we must evidence it, by our
living the life of faith, even by adding works to our faith, Gal. 5.6. Jam.
2.17 etc.
it must be a faith working by love. Faith without works is dead, show me thy
faith by thy works.

Non dicitur de mortuis lege naturae, and separatione animae accorporis, sed de
his qui pecato mortui sunt. Hieron. in Isaias. c. 26 1
Jesus Christ is not the resurrection and the life to them. They are dead they
shall notlive, they are diseased, they shall rise, all their memory shall
perish, Isa. 26.14. They are dead in their sins, and continuing such they
cannot live the life of grace, and shall not live the life of glory. He will
indeed raise them up again, but it will be only as a judge, calling them out of
their graves as Malefactors out of their prisons, to appear before him to
receive their sentence only (as has been said) to the resurrection of
condemntion, Joh. 5.29.

Where by unbelievers I do not understand only Jews and Heathens, Turks, and
such like infidels which never made a profession of the name of Christ. But
also such as though they profess that they know God, yet in their works deny
him. And even of such the Apostle says, that they are abominable, and
disobedient, and to every good work reprobate, Tit. 1.16. These may be
Christians in name, and outward profession, but unbelievers yea worse then
infidels in deed.

To such I may spoke in the words of the prophet Amos chapter 5.18. Woe unto you
that desire the day of the Lord, to what end is it for you? the day of the Lord
is darkness and not light; even very dark and no brightness in it. And as
another prophet speaks in a like case. The mighty man shall cry there
bitterly. That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of
wasting and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominesse, a day of clouds and
thick darkness, Zeph. 1.14, 15.

But alas many (yea too many) are apt to deceive themselves, saying that they
do believe, and repent and obey too, and that they do many things, and that
they are better then many other men are. Thus the Pharisees, Luke 18. He can
say, God I thank thee, I am not as other men are extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, or even as this Publicane. And he did many good things too, and yet
he did but deceive himself. In like manner Saul can meet Samuel with a great
deal of confidence, and say, blessed be thou of the Lord: I have performed the
commandment of the Lord, 2 Samuel 15.13. yea Samuel has much a do to convince
him; He stands to it v. 20. Yea. says he, I have obeyed the voice of the Lord,
and have gone the way which the Lord sent me. When as all the while he was in
the very way of rebellion and stubbornness. ver. 23.

And are there not many, who have far less to say for their works, and yet can
boast much more of their faith; and though their words be never so evil, and
their communication never so corrupt, and their actions never so vile; ye^ they
can bless themselves, and thank God, they have a very good heart, and a strong
faith; and are as good christians, and as sound believers as the best.

And what is this but (as Mr. Shepard rightly calls it) a bramble faith, Sound
believers. p. 72.
which indeed lays hold upon Christ, but as the bramble does upon our skin, it
only pricks and Scratcheth him, causing nothing but reproach to his name, and
grief to his spirit, Romans 2.24. Phil. 3.18, 19. And what will be the end of
such deceit, but (as the Aposile says) destruction to them that trust to it.

Christ is the resurrection and the life to them. All that ever he has done or
suffered, has been for them; That he took on him the form of a servant, and
humbled himself to the death of the cross, was laid in the grave, and for a
time continued under the power of death: That he rose again from the dead, and
ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of the Majesty on high:
Whatever he was in his humiliaton, whatever he has been, or is, in his
exaltation, he has been and he is wholly for believers. For their sakes says
Jesus Christ I sanctify my self, that they also might be sanctified through the
truth. Joh. 17.19. For their sakes I sanctify my self (i.e.) Offero me tibi in
sanctam victimam. Chrisost homil. 81. Piscator. in loc.
I offer my self an holy sacrifice. And by once offering he has perfected
forever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. For their sakes, it is, hat he
ever lives making intercession for them, Heb. 7.25. So that whatsoever times
or changes may come, they are sure it shall go well with them. Even when there
shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon and in the stars, and upon the
earth distresses of Nations, with perplexity, as the sea and the waves roaring,
Luke 21.25. When the sun shall become as sackcloath of hair, and the moon shall
become as blood: And the stars of heaven shall fall unto the earth, even as a
fig tree casts her untimely figs, when she is shaken with a mighty wind: When
the heavens shall pass away like a Scroule, and the element shall melt with
fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein will be burnt up.
And every mountain and Island shall be moved out of their places. And men's
hearts shall fail them for fear. And the Kings of the earth, and he great men,
and the rich men, and the chief captains and the mighty men, and every bond
man, and every freeman, shall ^ide themselves in the dens and in the rocks of
the mountains. And shall say to the mountains and rocks fall on us, and hide
(...) from the face of him that sits on the ^hrone, and from the wrath of
the lamb. ^et says Jesus Christ unto believers, when ^e shall see the son of
man coming in a ^loud with power and great glory: Even ^hen these things begin
to come to pass, ^^en look up and lift up your heads for your ^edemption
draws nigh, Luke 21.28. ^ehold the day comes that shall burn as ^oven, and
all the proud, yea and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble, and the day
that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave
them neither root nor branch. But unto you that fear my name, shall the son of
righteousness arise with healing in his wings. Mal. 4.1, 2


This is the portion of believers, and of them alone, a stranger does not
intermeddle with their joy. To them only is Jesus Christ the resurrection and
the life, and to them he is so, be their condition what it will. He that
believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live. Which brings me to the
third point of doctrine, raised from the Amplification of Christ's power from
the extent of it, He can and will raise them, be their condition never so
desperate.

Though he were dead yet shall he live. Matthew. 28.18. That is, An absolute and
supreme authority over all things both in heaven, and earth, is committed to
the hands of Jesus Christ (as he is mediator) for the good of his Church. And
if all power in heaven and earth, be in the hands of Christ, then he may do
what he will in heaven, and earth, nothing can let him.

1 He can remove all hindrances. If any thing could hinder Jesus Christ from
raising of believers unto life erernall, death and hell would do it; but these
cannot. I have the Keys of hell and of death, says Jesus Christ, Rev. 1.18.
By his having of the keys understand the power and authority of his office, he
has the chief authority and command over these. And these are the greatest and
most powerful enemies of believers.

Death is the king of terrors. And Hell is the second death, even death, Job.
18.14
eternal, the utmost issue and effect of sin, which is the sting of death.

Moreover death and hell are comprehensive viles, they contain under them all the miseries of this life, and of that which is to come (if at least it may be
lawful to call in life) weakness and sickness in the body, shame and reproach
to the name, losses in the estate, crosses in relations, grief and vexation in
the mind, and lastly the separation of the soul from the body, and of both from
God, and to be given up to the worm that never dies, and to the fire that
never goes out. Now thy dominion over these is in the hands of Jesus Christ,
he has them all in his power and at his dispose. He has vanquished all these
enemies and triumphed over them; And by death destroyed him that had the power
of death, that is the devil; And delivered them, who through fear of death,
were all their life time subject unto bondage, Heb. 2.14, 15. He has led
captivity captive. And he must reign till he has put all his enemies under his
feet, 1 Cor. 15.25. He shall have a full and absolute conquest over them. They
shall be so thoroughly subdued, that they shall never rise again.

2 As he can remove all hindrances and oppositions, that nothing may resist
him: So he can command all helps and furtherance what ever may be requisite. He
can command the sea to give up the dead that are in it, and death and hell to
deliver up the dead that are in them, Rev. 20.13. even with more ease, and
better success then a conqueror can command his captives that are at his
mercy. He can give power to all means that they shall be effectual, if he
speak but the word it shall be done. By the word of the Lord were the heavens
made, and all the hosts of them by the breath of his mouth, and all power both
in heaven and earth is in his hands, as was showed even now.

And if this be so, that the power of raising of believers from death to life
spiritual and eternal, be so fully and absolutely in the hands of Jesus
Christ, then how much does this commend, and magnify the privilege and
happiness of believers; He that is their Lord and Master, their brother and
friend, and head and husband, who is so inseparably and unchangably theirs, and
has loved them better then his own life; has all things in his own power
life, and death, both temporal and eternal, are in his hands, and he can
dispose of them at his pleasure; so that they may boast and glory in this
saying with the Psalmist; He that is our God is the God of salvation, Ps. 68.20.

And I may say unto every believer as the women said unto Neomy. Blessed be the
Lord which has not left thee this day whithout a kinsman, who shall be unto
thee a restorer of thy life, and a nourisher of thine old age: for thy daughter
in law which loves thee, which is better to thee then seven sons, has born
him. And blessed be God for Jesus Christ whom he has given unto thee, and who
has loved thee better then his own life, behold even he it is that has the
power in his own hands, to be the restorer of thy life, yea the raiser of thee
up unto eternal life. And it is better that it is in the hands of Christ, then
in the hands of any friend in the world, were there but such a power put into
the hands of a father, or brother, or kinsman, or friend, we should be apt to
rejoice in it, and to esteem it a great privilege, and yet it is possible they
might fail us. But it is impossible that Christ should fail.

Yea it is better then if it were in our own hands, for had we such a
privilege, and were but left to the liberty of our wills (as Adam was) we
should be as apt to commit a forfeiture as he was.

And therefore that the foundetion of God might stand sure, and that the Lord
might know who are ^is. He has reserved it in a surer hand. God has raised up
the Lord, and will also raise up us by his own power. 1 Cor. 6.14. and 2 Cor.
4.14.

But here it may be Questioned, that if there be such a full and absolute power
in the hands of Christ of raising up believers when he please, and that to life
spiritual, and eternal, in respect of all the degrees of it; even a full power
of raising them up from the death of sin to the life of grace, and of
recovering them after all their relapses, the raising them up to higher
degrees, and at last to raise them from death natural to life eternal, and
from the grave to glory.





own body; to lie so long in their graves, to corrupt and putrify, and that
there should be no difference, between the condition of the believer, and
unbeliever, neither that their dust shall be capable of being distinguished the
one from the others.

For answer unto these, though there were no other reason to be given but this
in general, that it is the will and good pleasure of God to have it so, yet
that were sufficient to set bounds to our curiosity, in inquiring after the
reasons of his dispensations. But yet it may be farther said (though all that I
shall add will be in order to the better understanding of that.)



1 He does not do so by all, some are sanctified and raised up in the very
womb, (...) 1.15.
Jer. 1.5. and from the womb. Some in their youth; and some not until they are
ready to drop into the grave.

2 That he raises up some sooner or more early then others does not proceed
from any worthiness that is in one more then another either in respect of
birth, that one is born of better and more gracious parents then another, or
that one has had better education then the other, or that the one has better
natural or acquired parts, or has had better means or opportunities, or
naturally had better inclinations to be wrought upon.

Manasseh the son of good Hezekiah, who in all likelihood, as he had the
privilege to be born of a very Sincere and gracious father who doubtless was
not wanting in the duty of a father either in precepts, example or prayers,
besides other good means were not wanting, neither for any thing that appears
did he want parts to apprehend and approve them. And yet we see it was long ere
he was raised up.

Josiah the son of wicked Amon in a worse time, and under less means, and yet
he is raised up betimes, 2 Chronicles. 34.3.

3 I answer affirmatively. It is 1 To manifest the liberty, and power of his
own will, in the dispensation of his grace. It is in his power to do with his
own as he please. Neither have they that were called in at the first hour,
reason to boast of themselves, or to envy at others, that come in after them,
that they are made equal unto them. Nor they that are raised up, (as it were)
in the last hour, cause to murmur, that they had not a more early call. Mat.
20.15
Is it not lawful (says he) for me, to do what I will with mine own.

2 To magnify the exceeding riches of his goodness, in his for bearance, and
long-suffering, until the sinner has filled up the measure of his iniquity,
and is become in a manner ripe for judgment: and when (in man's apprehension)
nothing was to be looked for, but that the reward of his hands should be given
him: As who would ever have thought, having seen Manasseh acting over all those
hor^id abominations, 1 King. 21
Idolatries, witchcrafts, murders, with all their several aggravations, even
to an obstinate resisting, 2 Cron. 33 10
and rejecting the means, which were vouchsafed him for his reformation: that
yet the Lord should retain any thoughts of mercy and grace toward such an
Apostate; And that even then he should cause a spirit of light and life to
enter into him, and to raise him up, by a sound and thorough repentance, and to
cause him to live the life of grace. This must needs be to the praise of the
glory of his grace: and to provoke men, Gal. 1.24.
to glorify God in them, and to cry out, O the depth of the riches not only of
the wisdom and knowledge of God (as the Apostle in another case) but also of the
bounty and love of God our Savior! To. 11.33.
not unto the wise and prudent, not unto the righteous or just, which need no
repentance: Psa. 68.18 Tit. 3.3, 4, 5
But to the rebellious also, to the foolish and disobedient, deceived, serving
diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one
another. Act. 9.1.
Even while they are yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the
Saints. Surely (may they say) it is not by works of righteousness which we
have done, but according to his mercy that he saves us.

Heb. 10.14. (that is) he has done all that was required on his part for the
perfecting of them; by the merit and efficacy of his death he has purchased
for them, and bestowed upon them, reconciliation with God, remission of sins,
the purification of their consciences, and eternal redemption.

But such is the incapacity of the subject, that is of believers, in respect of
that mass of corruption that is always resisting of the workings of Christ,
by the spirit: that it will not suddenly be subdued.

There are many graces to be exercised and improved, which cannot be perfected
on a sudden, knowledge, and faith, and Love, and hope, and patience; must have
time to grow in. The spiritual man, as well as the natural, has different
estates, to be passed thorough, an estate of infancy, and childhood before a
full stature; A child though of never so able, and learned a teacher, cannot
presently be made a perfect Scholar, it is a work of time. The master may have
much to communicate, but he must be content to wait the time till the Scholar
be able to receive it. I have many things to say unto you (says Jesus Christ
to his disciples) but ye cannot bear them now, Joh. 16.12. I could not speak
unto you brethren as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, 1 Cor. 3.1 2 Hebr.
5.11 12, 13, 14.
even unto babes in Christ, I have fed you with milk, and not with meat, for
hitherto ye were not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able.

2 The ordinary way of Christ's working, is in the use of means; Now the means
by which he raises up the elect, from the death of sin, to the life of grace
are his ordinances? which he has also appointed, Romans 10 14.1 Cor. 1.21 1 Pet.
2.3 and 2.2. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13 Col. 1.28.
for their building up unto perfection, which they in time attain unto by the
effectual working of his spirit. Whereas should they be as soon perfected, as
they are regenerated, many prophesies, promises, and institutions of Christ in
his word, would remain unaccomplished, and useless.

3 Jesus Christ does take the more time, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
for the raising up of believers unto perfection; That he may have the better
oportunities, for the glorifying of ^he wisdom, and power, of the truth and
faithfulness, and of the patience and goodness of God.

The Lord could as soon have given unto the children of Israel the possession
of the land of Cannan, as the promise of it; Act. 13.18
but chose rather to delay them for a long time in Egypt. And to suffer their
manners forty years in the wilderness: that he might get him honor by the
destruction of his enemies, and preservation of his people. In like manner
though he could as suddenly perfect, as regenerate believers, yet he takes more
time, that he may the more advance his own name, in the manifestation of his
special providence over them, and in the better preparing them for glory.

How long Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on
them that dwell on the earth. And it was said unto them, that they should rest
for a little season, until their fellow servants also, and their brethren that
should be killed as they were, should be fullfilled Rev. 6.9, 10, 11.

2 They are suffered to rot, and putrify, and to be turned into dust, and to
be mingled without distinction. That the power of God may be the more
manifested in their resurrection, and because the time of setting a difference
between the righteous and the wicked is not till then. vid. Petr. Martyr. i^^ 2
Reg. c. 4. f. 280. B.


I have done with the observations arising from the text, absolutely
considered. I come now unto those which have been raised from it as considered
with relation to the context. The first whereof (being the fourth in order) is
taken from the words as they contain a doctrine delivered, and asserted, by
Jesus Christ: for the correcting, and curing of Marthas ignorance and error,
concerning his almighty power and Godhead.

Whence we have observed that,

we are apt to be corrupted withal, conceruing the power and Godhead of Christ.

That which has been already spoken in the handling of the first observation,
I suppose may save me the labor and the time, that otherwise might have been
employed in enlarging upon this. There you have heard that Jesus Christ is the
author or efficient cause of the resurrection, and the life. And in the
application, we made use of it, for the confirming of our faith in the Godhead
of Christ. I shall therefore add no more, for the proof or application of this
point: but only this, That he which does know, and believe that Jesus Christ is
the author, and efficient cause of the resurrection, and the life, cannot
doubt, but that the fullness of the Godhead, dwells in him bodily or
substantially.

2 From the words, in relation to the context. Whereas Jesus Christ for the
moderating, quieting, and comforting of Martha's spirit, now apt to exceed in
mourning and grieving for the death of her brother, does especially make choice
of and insist upon the doctrine of the resurrection, and the life; and the
informing her in, and affecting her with, his absolute power in it and
Sovereignty over it.

I say, to be informed, to exclude ignorance, and to be rightly informed, to
avoid error. I say first to be informed, in it and then to be affected with
it. Because the information of the judgment, must go before the motions of the
will; and that not only as a guide to conduct unto the right end, but also as a
counselor to advise unto the proper means, and also as Gods minister in some
sort to command, (that is not by any power or authority of its own but) by
manifesting what is the will of God; whereunto our wills are to be subject; and
by proposing the promises, and threats, either to quicken the dullness, or to
check the unrulinesse of our affections.

And I say both to be rightly informed and affected, because both are
necessary. To have the mind enlightened, and the heart not affected, is to have
light without life; and much affection without knowledge is but distempered
passion, Jam. 3.6.
not unlike to hell fire which has much heat, but no light. There is neither
profit, nor comfort in the want of either. But to have the mind rightly
informed in the truth of the docrine of the resurrection, and the life; and of
Christ's power, and interest in it, and to have the heart sincerely affected
with it, quiets the mind and revives the spirit. And he that lays his friend
in the grave, being persuaded of his interest in Christ, will have his fears so
tempered with hope, and his grief with patience, as it is with the husbandman,
Amos 9.13
in a time of peace when the plowman overtakes the reaper, and the treader of
grapes him that sows seed. Jam. 1.2.
The believer is always sowing and reaping together; he reaps good out of
evil, and comforts from crosses, and joy in temptations. The life of a
christian is much like unto that of those Troglodites in Ethiopia amongst whom
it is said toto anno seritur ac metitur All the year they are sowing and
reaping, Scalig. Exercit. 249. distinct. 2.


The use of this piont is to show the vast difference that is between the
sunerall mournings of Christians and heathens.

The heathens indeed made death a Goddess, because of her power (beatting down
all before her) but yet they gave her no divine honors, nor temple, nor
priest, nor altar, nor sacrifice, nor festival days, because they looked upon
her as one that did them all the mischief, and from whom they hoped for no good.

And for a like reason they crowned Pluto (by whom they signified death or the
grave) with the leaves of the Cypress tree, The like is said of the Pi^e tree,
which also for that cause is used by some for an emblem of death.
which as they say is a tree of that nature, that being once cut down never
buds nor grows again. And therefore it is not to be marvelled at, if they
exceeded in sorrow for their dead, Since it is manifest they were men without
hope. But for Christians it ought not to be so with them. To such the Apostle
speaks, Brethren I would not have you to sorrow even as others which have no
hope. 1 These. 4.13. Ephesians. 2.12.
For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which
sleep in Jesus will God bring with him, 1 These. 4.13, 14.

They that die in the faith, die in the Lord, they sleep in Jesus, Christ is
still their head, and they his members, and if he be risen, they must needs
rise also. As long as the head is above water the members cannot be drowned.

The heathen complaind that their dead were ungrateful.

Flebant, Ver. Aeued. l. 6.
and cineri ingrato suprema ferebant. Though they cried never so loud, yet
there was no reply, though they performed never so many rites and services yet
there was no return: but for believers their faith speaks when they are dead.
Heb. 11.4.
Their faith in God, their covenant with God, their prayers to him, and all
that ever they did, or suffered for God, are written in Gods book, and are as
so many speaking remembrancers before the Lord. Exodus 17.14 1 Samuel 15.2 Isa.
37.35. Exodus 20.5 6. Deuteronomy. 9.27
Wicked men's evil works speak also: but it is for vengeance upon their wicked
offspring, the speaking of believers is for good to their posterity, that
walk in the same faith.

2. Use. This shows what they are concerning whom their friends may thus
comfort themselves in their death, they are beli^^^rs and none but they: None
but such as believe in Jesus, do sleep in Jesus, and none but such as sleep in
Jesus, will God bring with him.

If ever we desire that our friends may have any thing to comfort themselves
withal, concerning us, when we are dead, we must be of the number of those
that die in the faith, otherwise we leave our friends comfortless and to mourn
without hope.

But here it may be questioned 1 What is it to die in the faith? 2 Who are they
that (as we may judge do) die in the faith? For answer


1 To die in the faith, is to die in a constant dependence, and reliance, on
the truth, and faithfulness of God, in the promises, for remission of sins,
and life eternal in Christ, (in whom all the proses are yea, and amen, that is,
made, and perfected) so that such, as neither the multitude nor greatness of
their sins, or miseries, can overthrow their faith. But that they can and do
believe, that though they die, yet that in Christ they shall live, and that
eternally, may be said to die in the faith. Thus it is said of Abraham and
Sarah, and Isaac, and Jacob, and their posterity, that though they received
not the promise, that is the accomplishment of the grace promised, whether it
concerned their Salvation by the Messiah, or the possession of the land of
Canaan, which was but a type of their inheritance in heaven: yet they died in a
steadfast belief, and expectation of it, and therefore it is said, they all died
in the faith, Hebr. 11.13.

And thus all that die, in a firm persuasion of the remission of their sins,
and of eternal life, in and thorough the merits and mediation of Christ, may be
said to die in the faith; and such as do so inseparably cleave unto the Lord,
that death cannot separate them, may be said to die in the Lord. And such are
pronounced blessed. Rev. 14.13.

Such as do not thus die in the faith, die in their sins. If ye believe not
that I am he, ye shall die in your sins, Jo. 8.24. And as there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. that is by faith, so
there remains nothing but condemnation to such as die without it.

But since all our comfort concerning our deceased friends, depends upon their
dying in the faith, or at least upon our judging of them to be such, I shall
therefore in answer to the second Question endeavor to show who they are, that
as, we may judge, do die in the faith. And they are (as I humbly conceive) such
as these.

1 They that die in a sound and serious profession of the doctrine of faith. He
that abides in the doctrine of Christ, he has both the father and the son, 2
ep. Joh. 9. Piscat. in loc.
id est, verum Deum novit, ac proinde vitae aeternae particeps est. He has
knows the true God, and therefore is partaker of eternal life. Joh. 17.3.

2 They that die in a professed serious denial and renouncing of their own
righteousness, Philip. 3.9.

3 They that die in a serious profession of an unfeigned repentance of their
sins, and of all their aberrations from the rule of faith and life. He that
has given us a command concerning him that shall trespass against us seven
times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to us saing, I do repent,
that we should forgive him, does thereby manifest how charitable he would have
us to be in judging of offenders, when they profess repentance, neither is the
Lord less gracious toward sinners himself. I said (faith the Psalmist) I will
confess my transgression unto the Lord and thou gave the iniquity of my sin,
Psalm. 32.5.

4 Those that die in a serious profession of love, and affection, to God, and
his ways, and servants, owning and approving, of them, and persuading others
to the same duty. 1 John 4.7, 12. Thus Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob when they
were on their beds, or near dying, gave such evident testimonies, of their love
to God, and his ways; they have this testimony given them, that they died in
the faith.

5 They who so steadfastly lay hold upon the mercy, and grace of God, in Christ,
for life, and salvation; that neither the temptations of Satan, nor the
allurements of the world, nor the troubles of life, nor terror of death, can
cause them to faint, or fall from the faith, which they have professed: but
that they persevere therein unto the end. These (as I conceive) we may, and
ought to judge, that they die in the faith. Infidells, and reprobates, are not
wont to die thus. See the difference between the penitent and impenitent,
thief; the one dies owning, and honoting of Christ; the other up braiding,
reproaching, and railing upon him. Luke 23.39. etc.

In our judging in these cases, these, or the like cautions are to be observed.

1 We must know that we cannot judge of the final estate of others by a
judgment of faith or infallibility; we have nothing revealed to warrant us in
so doing, and therefore our judgment, being only conjecturall, or at best but a
probable opinion and no certain knowledge; that it may be as indeed it ought to
be a judgment of Charity, it becomes us to be sober, and moderate in judging of
others, and to that end we are to consider,

2 What cautions the spirit of God (speaking in the word) has given us against
rash judgment. Jam. 4.11, 12.
Why do thou set at naught thy brother? We shall all stand before the
judgment seat of Christ. Every one of us shall give an account of himself to
God. Let us not therefore judge one another any more, Romans 14.10, 12, 13.

Again judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring
to light, the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest, the counsels
of the heart. 1 Cor. 4.5.

The judgeing of the dead is indeed a a final judgment, which belongs not unto
us but unto Jesus Christ. It is true, the saints shall judge the world, that is
they shall be present with, and approvers of, and consenters unto the judgment
of Christ, not that their judgment shall prevent, but follow after the judgment
of Christ.

3 Our judging of others in our own thoughts, must be such as we will be
willing should come under the judgment of God; how often do we find Christ
bringing the Pharisees to shame, for their evil, and mis-judging thoughts. See
Matthew. 9.4. and 12.25. Luke 7.39. etc.

We must judge of others, as we would be judged our selves: for with what
judgment we judge, we shall be judged, Mat. 7.1, 2. and with what measure we
mete, it shall be measured to us again, whether it be in mercy or justice.

4 If we manifest our judgment to others, we must be sure, that it be according
to truth; and also that the manifesting of it is for the glory of God, the
edification of our neighbor, and in discharge of our own duty; that we have a
call to it, and that it is either necessary, or very expedient, and seasonable,
and that we shall be at least in danger of sin if we do it not. Let us
therefore take heed to our ways, that we sin not with our tongues. Let us
first commune with our own hearts, and say to our selves, every one apart, is
this my duty? is this according to the rule? what good shall I do in so doing?
have I a call to it at this time; in this place, and in this company?

And here the sad occasion of this solemnity may have its place to be spoken
to. And were I to speak of one that rather needed an Apology to excuse him,
then deserved an Elogy in his commendations, I should require no more, but to
confine mine auditors to the rules last mentioned.

But (blessed be God) this eminent person, of whom I am to speak, was one
whose tongue, and pen were so ready to be employed in the behalf of others in
their distress, that though I should be silent, yet even they whose potent and
successful orator he has often proved, would stand forth and praise him in
the gates.

The Scriptures (which are to be our rule in all our undertakings are not
sparing, in giving an honorable memorial to the dead. We find three instances
of men of different tempers. David performs this office more then once; In the
2 Samuel 1. We have him lamenting, not only over Jonathan, a good man, and his
faithful friend; but also over Saul, a very bad man, and his professed enemy
that fought his life. Yet in respect of his usefullness to the commonwealth of
Jsrael; he will not let him pass without a laudatory commemoration of
whatsoever was praiseworthy in him, with concealment of his vices.

And Abner (though none of the best) yet he has an honorable interrement, and
a funeral oration, and all the people are called in, to mourn over him, and
the King himself follows the bier, lamenting and weeping over him. And if any
should ask the reason, why so much ado for Abner? What, (says David know you
not that there is a prince and a great man fallen this day in Israel, 2 Samuel 3.
A man that was useful, and apt to be an instrument of much good, to his
people, in such a time as that was, for the making up and healing of the
breach, that was then between the tribes, and was now ready to be employed in
that work. And such the Scriptures (as it is conceived) sometimes call good
men. As Micah. 7.2. The good man is perished; that is, say some, The useful
man, that might be isntrumental for good, is cut off, and taken away, perished
as to his place, and people, and that in such a time, wherein he might have
done much good, and wherein he could ill be spared. In which sense also is that
text (probably) to be understood, Romans 5.7. Scarcely for a righteous man will
one die, yet peradventure for a good man some would even dare to die. By the
righteous understanding one that is in himself a righteous and virtuous man. By
the good such as have deserved well of us, from whom we have received good. So
that it is as if he had said, though for an ordinary man, though godly, one
would hardly die, Willet in Romans 7. Q. 11. parag. 7.
yet for a good man, that is some eminent useful man, he would not only be
ready with the Galathians to pluck out his eyes, but also to lay down his life.

And doubtless at least in this sense, we may say a good man is fallen, a
useful man, that would have been isntrumental for much good: and that in a
time when there is most need of such, and when he could but ill be spared. But
I shall not rest in this. there are some things that deserve a remembrance in
his several relations.

In his relation unto God, In respect of his faith: he was no self-justiciary,
he trusted not to his own righteousness: But professed his full assurance of
the free pardon of his many and great sins through the only merits of Jesus
Christ; on whom he laid hold as his only Savior and redeemer.

In respect of his repentance, He was sensible of the burden of his sins,
complaining of indisposition and deadness of his heart, unaptnesse unto good,
and of the thronging in of vain and unprofitable thoughts, which were ever
ready to trouble and distract him, when he would willingly be doing of his
duty. And that he found the time of the sickness of the body, an ill time for
spiritual exercises. And although in the time of his health, he was careful
to attend the Lords work, upon the Lords day; constantly frequenting the
public worship of God both morning and evening, most usually present with the
first: and was also careful to have the worship of God kept up in his family,
as being desirous, that both he and his house might serve the Lord: Yet neither
that which he performed in public, or private, did satisfy him, But that in
the time of his sickness, when it pleased God to put him upon the calling of
himself to remembrance, and to affect his heart with the thoughts of his
spiritual estate. He professed that there was nothing that troubled him but
his sin. And that sin which God most especially set home upon his spirit, and
for which (in a day of solemn seeking unto God) he made it his earnest desire,
that God might be sought unto in his behalf, for the pardon of it, was his
neglect of duty. It is that which most of us little think on in the time of our
health, when we slight or neglect an ordinance of God. an opportunity of
worshipping God, and of doing good to our souls; that the remembrance of this
will be bitterness in the end. In the time of our sickness, when the spirit of
God, instead of bringing to remembrance, the consolations of God in his word,
shall only remember us of our slighting and neglects of of the word, and then
instead of giving us repentance, God by death shall sweep us away in our sins,
and judgment shall find us as death leaves us, and when we look for comfort we
meet with nothing but rebukes: How sad will our condition be? The sluggard
(says the wise man, Prove. 20.4.) will not plow by reason of the cold,
therefore shall he beg in harvest and have nothing. As he that is slothful
in his particular calling, may justly expect to be in wants when others are
reaping the fruit of their Iabours. So he who in his life time (which is the
time of spiritual plowing) is negligent in the duties of his general calling:
In the day of judgment which is the time of harvest (with the foolish virgins,
and the rich Glutton) shall beg in vain. Such as for fear of cold, or love
of ease, do now carelessely neglect the public assemblies, and ordinances of
God, or heedlessly, or unprofitably attend them, shall beg at last for grace
and comfort, and be sent empty away Pro. 1.24.28. Only herein the riches of
Gods grace is to be magnified, if he give us to see the evil of it, and to
repent in time. Think of this I beseech you who ever you are, that at such
times as when the ordinances of God are dispensing, can content your selves,
either to lie sleeping in you beds, or to be walking in the streets, or
sitting in a Tavern or Alehouse, or following the sevice of your lusts; when
you should be waiting on the service of God. Look to it, God will make you
sorry for this another day. I am bold to commend the example of this servant of
God to your consideration, who thought it not below himself to profess his
desires to be humbled before the Lord for neglects of this kind; though
probably he might be able to give better excuses, then any of these
forementioned, yet nothing would satisfiy till God did speak pardon, and peace.

In his relation to the Church he showed himself to be a true member, by his
compassionating of the missereies, and relieving the necessities of the
members, even of foreign Churches, when oportunities were offered, and also by
his lamenting the divisions, and fearing the dangers, of our own Church at home.

He was a lover of good men, and especially of good ministers and that for
their work sake. And in testimony thereof, it was his desire and endeavor,
that in all places, either in Church or Commonwealth, that were in his power to
dispose of there might be such set up as be judged able and like to do good in
them. Neither was he willing that this affection should die with him: But he
commended it as one of his last charges to him whom he desired to be an heir to
God and his grace, as well as to him and his estate.

In his relation to the commonwealth (I mean the common good of his country)
He was a resolute assertor of his countries liberties, not fearing to reprove,
or withstand the irregular actings of any to their prejudice. How much was he
grieved at his countries sufferings? How earnestly did he desire the hastening
of her deliverance? How sorry that the way and means of deliverance were so
much, and so often obstructed. His judgment was as he was pleased with some
freedom to express himself (even in the greatest excess of all the actings to
the contrary) that the only person under heaven that was likely to heal our
breaches was he whom we trust the Lord in mercy has made to be such indeed,
even our gracious sovereign.

And whereas some have been apt to conceive some prejudice against him, because
he suffered not himself to be persuaded into that height of action which was
expected, when they thought it seasonable. I doubt not but that he did concur
with them, in their general end, but might not be so well satisfied in the
means. It was not (I am assured) through want of will, and readiness, to do
his Country service, but because the ways proposed, appeared to him more
likely to increase then ease her burdens.

There is none that knew him, (laying but their passions aside) that would
easily judge it to be sloth or cowardice, that he was not more apt to hearken,
but rather prudent wariness. Decipi non potest, qui non est facilis audire. He
is hard to be deceived, that is not easy of belief. The simple believes every
word, but the prudent man looks well to his going, Prove. 30.6.

Peritia est, non segnities, quum sensum miles veteranus accendit. It ought to
be esteemed wisdom or skillfullnesse, when an experienced soldier does stir
up, and awaken his sense to look before he leap. He was not apt to be rash in
undertaking, but what ever he undertook for the service of his country, he was
resolved to go thorough with it, with all faithfullness and integrity,
professing himself ready to loose all, but a good conscience. Yet even then
when others were censuring of him, he was not wanting to do his country good,
and that in such ways, as were more safe and sure. And doubtless a wise
patient will prefer the leysurely working of a skillfull Physician, in a way
that is safe: before the violent attempts of such as may pretend to a speedier
cure. As knowing that violent actings are even hazardous. and do but seldom
prosper.

In his relations to his family, friends and neighbors, he was not wanting in
any respects that might belong unto them.

As to his compassionating of, and liberality toward the poor in relieving
them in their necessities; I cannot deny him this testimony, that in requests
of that nature, I have not only obtained what I desired, but also thanks for
the motion.

His sobriety, temperance, and moderation in his health, his meekness, and
patience in his sickness, were known to all that converst with him.

In a word, he was such a one as deserved to be honored in his life, and to be
lamented in his death.

Be therefore sensible, all ye his relations, and lament your loss.

Children, you have lost a dear and tender father; who (as his expression was)
feared nothing more, then that he should love you too much. Brethren and
sisters, I nead not mind you, who may be apt to be more then enough sensible of
the reality and constancy of his love toward you, and delight in you, even
unto the last.

Kindred, and friends, and neigbours rich and poor, I need say no more, but that
you have lost a great friend, and truly that is a great loss.

Servants, you have lost a master that loved you while he lived, and was not
unmindfull to make some provision for you when he was preparing for death.

I shall add no more but this, The Church has lost a generous and an
uncorrupted patron, and his country a constant and a faithful patriot.

But yet if any there be that shall be ambitious of adding to their own praise,
by detracting from his, or of extenuating their own errors, by aggravating of
his. I know detractors may be apt to mutter and whisper saying, it were well if
all this were true, and it were well if something else were not true. And why
are not his failings censured, as well as his virtues praised?

Such I shall answer as our Savior does those importunate Jews, who were so
severe in demanding justice upon others. He that is without sin let him cast
the first stone at him, Joh. 8.7. There is no doubt but he had his failings and
sins, yea and if you will hear and believe him bearing witness against
himself, They were many and great. But yet this is the manner of Gods
proceedings, 1 Cor. 11.31
such as judge, and condemn themselves, shall not be judged, nor condemned of
the Lord. And shall mortal man be more just then God? shall a man be more pure
then his maker? Job. 4.17.

Yea but peardventure some good men may be troubled, because he did no more
good.

Brethren, It is desirable that good should be done by others. But it is more
profitable for us to be found doing of good our selves. I have said, that I
have often found him ready to do good, and willing to communicate; and had the
Lord given him but a little more time, I have reason to believe that he would
have done much more good; and that he did no more I cannot but in part impute
the blame unto my self, in that in some respect I had not been his remembrancer
more seasonably.

The truth is, in great men, it is something to find some good, and not rare to
find much evil; their actions are subjest to many observers, if they do well
they lose no praise, if they do evil no reproach. If Jeroboams son, has but
some good thing found in him toward the Lord God of Israel, it is not
forgotten. Be you therefore persuaded, to be always doing of more good your
selves, lest you should be found guilty of the same neglect you condemn in
others. And entreat the Lord with all earnestness, that wherever he gives a
large estate, he would also give a large heart, or else, it is but in vain for
us to look for a large hand.

I hope that which has been spoken may be of some use for the support of such,
as are mourning over their dead. But yet if any shall exceed, the last
observation raised from the text, relatively considred, may be of some
advantage to them; Which is this

When any are apt to exceed in mourning over their friends dead body, wishing
it might be restored again to life temporal: It is seasonable to mind them of
the most effectual means of raising up their own dead souls unto life
spiritual and eternal.

Thus dealt Jesus Christ with Martha here, she is ever minding, and speaking of
the death of her brother, and of the raising up of his body. And Christ takes
her off to a more serious and profitable consideration, of the spiritual (and
in some respect) dead estate of her own soul, and of the means of quickening
and raising it up to the perfection of life, spiritual and eternal.

And believe it this is the greatest concernment we have to look after, even
the resurrection of our souls: and to that end we are to lay hold upon Christ
by faith, which is the only means of raising up and quickening dead souls. He
that live and believes in me shall never die. Believe thou this, says Jesus
Christ to Martha. Thou hear that Christ is the resurrection of the body,
from death temporal, and of death spiritual, and eternal; and that he that
believes in him shall never die, but do thou believe? Believe thou this?

What would it have availed Martha, if Christ should have raised up Lazarus,
his dead body frow the grave, and have left her own foul to lie dead in sin.

And what would it avail us if Christ should now raise our dead friend to life
temporal, and not raise our dead souls unto life eternal.

Let us stir up our selves to take hold on God; let us live the life of
faith, and we shall be so far from being over grieved, at the death of our
friend, that we shall joyfully entertain our own. We shall be as willing to
leave the world, as the tired mariner is to leave the sea, after he has been
spent with the tediousness of a long and dangerous voyage, after he has passed
many a painful day, and tedious night, and bitter storm, with much longing
expexctation, and yet sees no land. If at length he once more comes within ken
of that his whished shore, how is he then ready to leap for joy; and to cry out
with him in the poet.

Italiam, Italiam, primus conclamat Achates. Virg. Aneid. l. 3.
Oh my friends, my companions, be of good cheer, behold, I see, I see that so
long looked for and desired shore. Behold yonder is the place of our rest, the
habitation of our parents and wives and children, and kindred, and friends, It
seems to me as if I saw how they rejoice at our arrival, Oh slack not, but
have that we may be in their bosoms. Even so is it with the dying believer, he
is come within sight of heaven, and is ready to cry out with Steven, even then
when his enraged enemies were round about him, and that cut to the heart, and
gnashing on him with their teeth; He can then cry out and say (looking up
steadfastly unto heaven) Behold I see the heavens opened, and the son of man
standing on the right hand of God. How willing and cheerful is he to bid the
troublesome, inconstant and envious world adieu, being now ready to enter into
that haven of rest, the arms of his savior.

Let us be sound and steadfast in the faith, let us be servent in charity,
constant lively, and a bounding even to the full assurance of hope; Let us live
in a conscionable, and cheerful exercise of every grace, and let patience have
her perfect work: for as much as we know in so doing our labor will not be in
vain in the Lord. This will evidence that we have our part in the first
resurrection, and blessed and holy are such, for over them the second death
shall have no power.

FINIS.
Courteous. READER, These books following are printed for, and sold by Edward
Prwster at the Crane in Paul's Churchyard, 1661.
MR. Elton his Commentary on the 7.8, 9. Chap. of the Romans. foll. Mr.
Hildersham his 108. Lectures on 4th. John. foll. Mr. Hildersham his Lectures on
51. Psalm. foll. Mr. Georg Newton his Commentary on John. 17. foll. Dr. Iermium
on all the Proverbs. foll. Bp. Williams his right way to the best Religion,
wherein at large is explayned the principle heads of the Gospel. foll. The
Largest Church Bible. foll. Mr. Pryns Hidden works of darkness brought to
light. foll. Mr. Ball his Treatise of the nature and life of faith. 4. Mr. Ball
his larg and small Catt. 8. Mr. Bonthams Christian conflict. Mr. Baxter of
Crucifying the world by the cross of Christ. 4. Dr. Burges several select
sermons preched before the Parliament. 4. A collection of several select
sermons preched before the Parliament. 4. Mr. Cawdrey of the Inconsistency of
the Independent way with Scripture and its self. 4. Mr. Cawdrey he Answers to
G. Firmium about Baptism The Agreement of the associated Ministers of Essex
and Chester. Canans Calamity, or the destruction of of Jerusalem. 4. Mr. Coohe
learned Treatise of Babtisme 4. Mr. Collye of the Salbate, and against free
admission to the sacrament; several sermons of Mr. Paul Baycon. Mr. Barlowes
guide to Glory. 4. Mr. Calvin on Jeremiah. 4. Mr. Negus of faith and obediance.
4. Mr. Ienkins sermons. 4. Mr. Ienkins his answer to John Goodwin. 4. Mr.
Gattaker against Lilly. 4. Galleni Opuscula Varia Annotonic. 4. Spelinam
consilia. foll. Spelinam Psalterium Saxonicum. 4. Mr. Geree against
Anababtists. 4. Mr. Josselynes state of the Saints departed; Gods cordial to
comfort the Saints remaining a live. 8. Mr. Randoll on 8th. Romans. 4. Mr.
Randoll on the Church. 4. Dr. Hollidayes Motives to a good life in ten sermons.
4. Mr. Rutherfords divine right of Church Government. 4. Dr. Potter of the
Number. 666. 4.
There is now in the press a book entitled Fides Catholica or a vindication
of the Church of England etc. by Mr. William Annand Minister of Gods word at
Leighton in Bedford-shere.


