THE Trial and Determination OF TRUTH: In ANSWER to The Best Choice for
Religion and Government.

Believe not every Spirit; but try the Spirits, whether they are of God; for
many false Prophets are gone out into the World,

1 John 4. 1. That thou may know how thou ought to behave thy self in the
House of God, which is the Church of the Living God, the Ground and Pillar of
the Truth,

1 Timothy 3. 15. LONDON: Printed in the Year 16

THE PREFACE TO THE READER, GENTLE or SIMPLE.
WE are fallen into a most ill-natured and censorious Age, apt to interpret
every thing spoken or acted, designed or written, in the worst sense; It Is rare
to find a Man who will not take with the Left Hand, what is offered with the
Right. Yet, being a Friend to Truth, (which was in danger to suffer by the
Mistakes and Errors of a late Book, Entitled, The Best Choice, etc.) I have
here ventured to make an Apology, (such as it is) and to say all I honestly
could, in the Vindication of the Saints therein mentioned; who out of an
unusual Modesty, or for some other Reasons, best known to themselves, have for
diverse Months concealed their Talent; talked only of an Answer, but published
none.

This Trial of Truth was calculated, and chiefly designed for the Meridian of
SCYDROMEDIA, but may indifferently serve any County or Corporation in England,
as a fair Intimation to all Freemen and Freeholders, to distinguish betwixt
Church and Conventicle, Truth and Falsehood; and on that Side which is safest
from Deceits, There to fix, there to vote in all Elections of Future
Parliaments. If there should be amongst the Electors, Men disturbed in their
Understandings by the Heat of Enthusiasm, or whose Wisdom is altogether sensual
and worldly; who presumptuously make Heaven stoop to Earth, hiding their
private and secular Designs under the Venerable Name of Saints, or the Sober
Party; I don't once concern my self with them in this Endeavor to advance
Truth: The former cannot, and the latter will not be convinced. There Is no Ear
so deaf, as that which Interest has stopped; and none so miserably blind, as
those that resolvedly shut their Eyes against the plainest Demonstrations of
Truth. The Words of an old Author are at this day verified of the English, What
they like not, they never understand.
JEOF. CHAVCER.

Yet Truth ought not to be quite run down for want of an Advocate; nor shall
Sir A. and my good Friends be a^^^'d, whilst it is in my power to make a
tolerable Defense for 'em. And truly, Friends! I have a hard Task on it. The
grievous Immoralities of Life, the Blemishes of Humane Nature, the many Designs
of this wicked World, appear so plainly at the bottom of our Zeal, and Stifness
for our several Opinions, that it is more ingenuous and advisable, to own some
things to be sordid and base in our Proceedings, than by an over strict
Justification of our Doings, we put the Church up on Enquiries, lest after an
impartial Search, we should stand condemned by all Good Men. It Is but a folly
to deny what we cannot hide; That secular Ends are very apt to mix with, and
shelter themselves under the shadow of Religion. This has been the Old Artifice
for Mischief in all Ages; we should be wiser than venture our Stake upon a Game
so well known, that every Child in Understanding, can now perceive the Cheat.

Far be it from me to write one Syllable in Dishonor to True Religion: That
must needs be a Right Noble and worthy Thing in it self, and very powerful with
Mankind, when the bare Show of it can serve to carry on those Designs, which
neither Wit nor Force can effect. All I ask of the Whole Body of Dissenters,
is, if possible, To be Honest; to aim at nothing but what is good and
warrantable, to prosecute all their Affairs by lawful Means. Do no irregular,
unworthy or base Act; but with Purity of Soul bear a principal regard to the
Rules of their Duty, and the Dictates of a well-inform'd Conscience. Build
their Practice, not upon treacherous Quagmires, bold and impious Opinions, but
upon solid, safe, approved, and welltry'd Principles, which tend to the
Upholding of Virtue, Government, and Humane Society: So that they can be
content to have their Thoughts sounded, their Actions sifted to the bottom,
could even wish that their Breasts had Windows, that their Hearts were
transparent, that all the World might see through them; because the more
curiously the Ways of an Honest Man are marked, the more exactly his Dealings
are scanned, the more thoroughly his Intentions are penetrated and known, the
greater Approbation he is sure to receive from Good and Wise Men. But Men made
up of Deceit and Treachery, desire to keep on the Vizor; are fearful to be laid
open, to have the Varnish wiped off, their Intrigues unravelled, and their
Intentions quite stripped of the Veils that now enfold them. All agree in this,
(even by the Light of Nature) That Honesty is the best Policy, and the most
infallible Method of Safety and Security, in all the Transactions of this
World: Yet it would puzzle a good Philosopher to find so much of it here in the
Sunshine of the Gospel, as is apparent among Turks and Indians in their darkest
Night of Ignorance and Infidelity.

I conclude this in the Words of Salvian, written as a Monition to all
Christians. How much is Religion concerned in this, that without comparison we
should be better than Heathens? But how Sal. lib. 3.
much (with Grief and Horror I bewail it,) does it tend to the Prejudice of
Christian Life and Action, if we are worse than Heathens? This is to be worse
when we are more guilty. You may be offended perhaps that read this, and at the
same time, condemn it. I refuse not thy Censure; Si mentiar, condemna; condemna
si non probavero; If I prove not what I say by good Authority, then let me bear
the blame. Judge as you see Cause.

Farewell.
THE Trial and Determination of TRUTH: In ANSWER to The Best Choice for
Religion and Government; Or, The Vindication of the SAINTS in SCYDROMEDIA.
THIS Ancient BOROUGH (known formerly by other Titles) goes at present under a
strange Disguise; an odd Name will best correspond with some late Transactions
there; a Place and People so much changed for the worse, that if the Old
Catieuchlani (who had it before the Romans) were now alive, they would fancy
themselves unhappily cast upon some wild newfound Land, inhabited by the
Family of Error and her Daughters, of which none were alike, unless in this,
That all are Deformed. If Saint Augustine the Monk, and Venerable Bede (whom we
account Favorers of the worst, that is, the Romish Religion) should once more
visit our divided Scydromedia, and consider the irreligious state of it, at
this time, they would presently cross themselves, and get out of it with all
speed, to avoid Dangers. If those many Christian Bishops, who here held a
Conference and Consultation in those elder Times, (Times of less Learning and
more Honesty) should have occasion with other Spirits to enter our enchanted
Castle and Corporation, they might see sufficient Reasons for the change of its
Name, and could not but wonder at the many Vicissitudes of Time, Place, and
Manners.

But Sir Antbony Putt and I, will not pretend to be much seen in the
Antiquities of our Town and Country; that is a Study we must resign to a more
Able, Faithful, and Judicious Antiquary, who has already detected Sir H. Chapter
our Mistakes in point of Elections, and will publish them in due time. It Is no
Prudence for Men of our small Reading, and less Judgment, to print more than
they can make out, or come under the Correction of the more Learned. To prevent
such farther Disgrace, we ask Pardon of that Worthy Gentleman, for once daring
to invade his peculiar Province without leave. Well, waving Antiquity in this
case, let us survey the present State and Condition of this Borough: What
deplorable Alterations it has suffered within our Memory! How unnaturally have
some Men degenerated from the Principles, Honor, and Temper, of their
Ancestors! Where the Grandfather and Father were constant Blessings, in their
Piety, Beneficence, and Good Example, to all Men; the Son unlearns all his
Parents Virtues, and becomes a Reproach to his Family, a very Curse and Plague
to the Plate he wells in. He that a few Years ago passed for an undoubted
Oracle, every Word of his was a Law with the Common People, was as Infallible
as the Pope Himself, has now, alas! lost Ground to amazement: His Cardinal
Dissenters begin to have other Sentiments; to think, in good earnest, they may
be safest without him; their Liberty as sure, their Traffic more unlimited,
and their Reputation more clear, if, by laying him aside, they free themselves
from their unpolitick Practice of opposing the Church. The meanest of the
People have their Eyes open; can now see as far into a Millstone as other Men;
can tell ye, that all is not Gold that seems so; that there is difference
betwixt Words and Deeds, Pretense and Truth, and do mortally hate to be
deceived: They see plainly what was meant by setting up the Borough against
the Corporation; the mighty Outcry of, Danger! Danger! like, Fire! Fire! to
amuze and confound the Multitude; that had they either not Voted at all, or
joined with the Mayor and Aldermen against Sir Anthony, their Danger and Loss
had not been so great, in setting aside a Man greedy of Honor, as the Injury
and Mischief of destroying the Unity and Friendship of the Town, dividing it
into Parties, and begetting Hatred and Malice one against another. They now
believe that the Civil Rights and Liberties of Scydromedia, may well be
maintained without his Help; and that the Advice and Assistance of Honorary
Freemen (in choosing the fittest Men to serve in Parliament) can be no wrong to
a Corporation: That to rob Men of their Peace, Reason, and Religion, is a
greater Crime than to See the Case of Elections stated.
hinder a few insignificant Votes (if that had been intended:) The Poorer sort
had not created Enemies, by confronting the Rich, on whom their Work or Relief
must depend. Time and Consideration do Wonders; some Men that heretofore would
venture starving rather than not Vote for our Worthy Patriot, now are of
Opinion they had better stay at home, and stand neuter; and then, though they
strictly oblige neither Party, yet by leaving it to others of better Judgment,
they enrage none. People are afraid of a Case.
Glorious and Just Design, because such a Pretense once ended in the most
Barbarous Murder of King Charles I. They made him in truth a Glorious King; but
sent him to find a Kingdom in another World; ever since that time, the Wind of
Reformation has blown over us; we Vid. Case.
have breathed in an unwholesom Air. The Contagion has spread into all adjacent
Parts; some leading, busy Dissenters, like diseased Sheep, have infected, not
the whole Flock, but very many that came near them. Poor Sir Anthony I Am sure
is the worse for 'em; he has no mind to be made a Tool to any Power or Interest
whatsoever, if he was not forced to it by his beloved Honor: Being puffed up
with that, he and his Magna Charta pass some coarse Compliments on Mr. Mayor,
the Aldermen, and all the Church-Party; calling them Arbitrary, Infolent
Magistrates, Multipliers of Electors, Thieves, Treasonable, Impudent Fools,
Injurious, Time-servers, Carriers on of Tricks, Men of black Designs; Men of no
Reason, Frantic Undertakers. But we must suppose, that these Words are to be
taken Ironically; that he meant just contrary to what he said: And truly
without the help of this deceitful Trope, we had been hard put to it, to take
off the Absurdities and Contradictions of that printed Paper.

Now let us try at the Book, if we can answer that; justify the Saints, and
preserve our Members, the Work's done; Sed hic Labor! hoc Opus! In order to it,
let Sir A. put on as good a Face as he can, genteely frisk about the Town,
visit every diminutive Cottager, say, Sir, I Am your humble, most faithful, and
most obedient Servant; you're all mistaken in me; I am the same Man I was in
King Charles II. 's Time; that no Revolution can change my Temper; that with
all my Faults, you had better have one you do, than one you do not know. If he
meets a Man that has but an Hose or Clout on his Head, let our obliging Knight
bend his Body with Hat and Hand to the Ground, and in all Circumstances act the
Part of Popularity to the life. I Confess he is too great a Master that way than
to need my Directions.

Let my Lady Castle spend no more of her precious Time in vainly Coaching to
Park or Play, in making unnecessary, unwelcome Visits to the Gentry; these will
never promote our Cause. Mrs. Maggot, or any other of the Holy Sisters, or
whatever they are, that will help to carry on our Good Design, must have the
Honor of being my Lady's Companions; nay, she shall attend them in House,
Street, Coach, in all Places, and seem fond, very fond of 'em, for want of
better Society -- Let the 'Squire forbear watching and waiting under his
amorous Oak; the Prize is taken; and was I fit to advise a Counselor, that
Tree should not longer stand as a living Monument of his dying Honor: Let him
not altogether lurk within doors, but try his Skill upon the Dissenting
Females; some more than common Familiarity with them, may chance to turn the
Tide for all this. The Leading Presbyterians are sure Cards, to oppose Church
and Kingly Government; the Independents may be easily wrought into any pious
Mischief; and the Quakers are generally too proud to submit to the plainest
Truth, or go one step out of their own way. And yet the wisest Heads amongst
'em are staggered at the Book, and know not well what to say against it. But,
to our comfort, I perceive all Sects are more inclined to favor Popery
(whatever their Clamours may be to the contrary) than to encourage the Church,
and vote for the Defense of it.

For my part I Will try what Service I can do in pursuing this Method:

1. Enquire out the Author. 2. Discover the Errors of the Book. 3. Bring our
Cause to a fair Trial. 4. Determine according to Truth.
1. First, For the Author. It Is hard to find out who this Friend Henry is,
whether Quaker or not: If I own the Truth, he was a wise and honest Man and
were it not in hopes of securing Voices by People's Ignorance, I could heartily
wish all Englishmen knew and considered so much as he has written: O Interest!
Interest! I cannot like any thing that crosses Thee. Plain Dealing's a Jewel;
but have a care of the latter part of that known Proverb: Why should any Man
create Enemies to himself? Had he not meddled with our Diana, and the
Crafts-men, to expose them; had not he defended Monarchy, Episcopacy, and the
Whole Religion and Government of the Church of England, (at such a conjuncture
in which we are contriving to subvert 'em) I could have more freely excused and
pardoned that Author. Now we must wait long enough for a Republic; we have
been plagued with Bishops for above Sixteen hundred Years already, and it is to
be doubted we shall never get rid of 'em while the World endures. We have
blackened the Church with more than bare Suspicions of Popery, and must never
again use that Trick to deceive the People: All the Dissenters in the Kingdom
(if they understand Sense, and the force of Argument) must confess that the
Church of England is Orthodox and Apostolical, and that no just Imputation of
Popery can be fastened on her.

I desire the Author in his next Edition, to abate something of his Virgin
Modesty, in concealing his Name, and Residence. The Hornets may buzz about, but
cannot sting him; or if they do, he has many Friends; Men of Honor, Art, and
Integrity, to take care, that the Venom may not prove Mortal. The Danger is not
worth naming; when the Religion-Broker is so pleased with his Gainful Recipe,
that he offers Twenty Pounds in Requital. Mr. Maggot seems concerned, that the
Author would not give him leave to be grateful. Our Knight extravagantly
promises a Full Bottle of the Best, and to give him the Honor of seeing the
Parliament for his Reward. The Churchmen are more obliged, for those
convincing Reasons on their side, which require some Time and Skill to answer;
Porringer and Mouth may be excused; for Charity's grown cold among their
quondam Benefactors.

If a Woman, one of the Fair Sex (as some say) was the Author; and is as lovely
in Body as Mind; our good Members earnestly desire to be most intimately
acquainted with her. If Law, Divinity, and Physic (as most think) were engaged
in this Composure; w' are over-match'd by far: All we can do, (besides This
Trial) is by way of Recrimination; which will neither invalidate the Book, nor
extenuate our own Faults. Truth will prevail. We may endeavor to blemish their
Reputations, attempt to render these Gentlemen as immoral and vile as we are;
yet, without all peradventure, the Envy, Hatred, Malice, Lying,
Spiritual-Pride, Beastiality, Deceit and Treachery, too commonly approved and
practiced among Dissenters, do by as many Grains outweigh the smaller
Infirmities and Failures of the Church of England, as the solemn and deliberate
Crimes of riper Years, do the Extravagancies of inadverting Youth.

Whoever was the Composer, we shall hardly dance after his Pipe. He has set a
fairer Copy than the Dissenters of Scydromedia will transcribe in one day. In
compliance with their Temper, I Will try if I can spoil the Music; blot and blur
the Book to make it less valuable: For, though I cannot discover the Author, I
have found out,

2. Secondly, The Errors of the Book, which I intend to bring in as Evidence
against it -- I should begin at the wrong End; a preposterous Method is most
agreeable to all our Proceedings. It Is very true, of Making Books there is no
End. This is not the first time our choice Friends have been read in Print, and
cannot be the last. I doubt not, but we shall daily afford fresh Matter for
ingenious Men or Women to try their Wits on. Oh! If we had truly feared God,
and kept his Commandments, we had never been troubled to answer this Untoward
Book. It may not be judged a Matter of Imprudence, in entering first upon the
Conclusion of it; there being but here and there a little in the Body and
substantial Part, but what is too firm and unanswerable. However, at present,
we'll call it a silly, vain, scurrillous Pamphlet, meriting not so much Regard
as the bare reading it amounts to, let the Churchmen say what they will of the
Validity of its Arguments, of the Truth of its History; That this Conference
has done the Church of England Right, and the Inhabitants of Scydromedia no
Wrong; there are yet some Errata's or Mistakes to be retracted or amended in
the next Edition, else, by my Consent, it shall never pass Muster amongst the
Saints. But for the better Satisfaction of the World, and that Truth and
Justice may take place, the COURT has impanell'd a Jury of several Persuasions;
that the Book, with the Persons and Matters therein represented, may have fair
Play.

The Jury, indifferently chosen, are, Five Churchmen, Four Presbyterians, Four
Independents, and Four Quakers. Honest Men and True, stand together, and hear
your Charge! viz.

Judge. A late bold Pamphlet, called, The Best Choice for Religion and
Government, written in favor of Church and King, questioning the Reputation of
the Saints, under the Names of Latitudinarians, Presbyterians; Independents,
Seekers, etc. who have here put themselves upon this Trial of Truth -- You are
to enquire therefore, without Favor or Malice, Whether Guilty, or not Guilty?
And to take special Care, before Verdict given, That you duly and impartially
consider, the Matters and Things urged on both Sides; that Sentence may pass
accordingly. You, Gentlemen of the Jury! I am farther to inform you, that the
Matters in Question are Matters of Fact, whereof You are the proper Judges:
Attend then,

First, To the Evidence for the Saints, drawn out of the Errors and
Insufficiencies of that Book; no less than Fourteen of 'em.

Mr. Mouth complains of the Book for Flattery and Untruth: His Father Error 1.
was no Committee-Man, in the late Blessed Times of Plunder and Rapine; He was
one of your honest Sequestrators; one of those conscientious Men, that first
seized, and then took away the Goods of Church and Kingdom; Religiously
converting them to better and more holy Uses, leaving a well-gotten Inheritance
to his Children. We have an English Proverb, Blessed is the Son whose Father
goes to the Devil; true enough of such Fathers, who (swelled with Pride,
hardened with other Vices, and given over to Invincible Prejudice, Invincible
Perverseness,) do seldom end with True Repentance: Yet you know, Gentlemen!
That the Son is not to bear the Iniquity of the Father, to be punished for it,
if he does no way partake in the Fathers Sins. It Is very rare, I confess, but
not impossible for such a Son to turn Honest, in making full Restitution to
every injured Man, though he leaves himself as naked Aesop's Crow. And if
Miracles are not ceased, this may be Mr. Mouth's Case, and when it is so, the
Church has no farther Cause to grate upon him for his unfortunate Descent, but
be overjoyed at the true Conversion of so great a Sinner.

The Book finds mighty fault with the present Choice of rude and illiterate
Error 2.
Commissioners, few real Gentlemen being employed in that Province. And what of
all this? Though, it is true, an honorable Cobbler should not go beyond his Last,
nor by ill Management make the public Taxes over-grievous to the People; yet
there wants not a Salvo or two for this sore Inadvertence: It serves (if for
nothing else) to take off the Odium and Blame from the Gentry; and does good
that way: It gives us a bitter Taste of Popular Government, creates a nobler
Esteem for the Gentlemen of the County, than if we had never known the
difference betwixt Rudeness and Civility, by the Carriage of these Men.

Is It not a great Incivility to force a Knight and Baronet to confess he is no
true Friend to a Corporation, where he expects Favor? That he Error 3.
never did or can do good there? What Boldness is this, Gentlemen of the Jury,
to assert a thing so apparently absurd! Pray who was it that removed the
Soldiers? Who that procured the Assizes? Ask the General, consult the Judge;
they will tell you, perhaps, they heard nothing of our Knight in all this: But
may we not believe Sir Anthony's Letter before their Sayings? Litera scripta
manet, when Words vanish into Air, and are forgotten. I desire our Trusty
Secretary A. B. to produce that Letter in Court, show publicly that 'twas no
Sham: And then --

The Book prates about one John Ponteus -- There Is no such Man now Error 4.
living: and it is a great Rudeness, if not Inhumanity, to disturb a dead Man's
Ashes: Was he here, you would see how much he resents this Indignity, to have an
ingenious Man's Name fixed on an illiterate Broker. This Man snuffs at the sign
of the Devil's cloven Foot, very unwilling to own that this Emblem of Mischief
is made out by his endeavor to rend and divide the Church. He denies his
having the Pictures of a Woman and Child in the Book mentioned; and thinks it
time to forget the old Story of the poor Widow and Orphan, so much talked of to
his disgrace. He gained nothing by that Bargain; his offering Twenty Pounds for
their Goods above his own Appraisement, when he was entrusted in that Affair
(as the most Righteous Man that could be found among the Saints) should be
looked on only as his Charity to the Widow and Orphan; and not to conclude from
that Offer, that he had left room in the Valuation to be a Knave to them.

Another of the Book's Errata's is, the bringing a sweet innocent Babe Error 5.
upon the Stage of Contempt, to expose him so soon as born. Poor Creature!
incapable of making the least defense for himself; 'twas unfairly done; no Man
knows what Bar or Obstruction this may prove to his ensuing Fortune.

Friend Henry was too plain beyond Good Manners, in telling the Saints Error 6.
what the Companion of Vice is; little thinking how near it borders upon
Impudence, for him to undertake the Regulation of Elections, or what Mischief
he has done by declaring for the Church. All this struck such a Damp among the
Dissenters, that they seemed for a while to be void of sense. It brought so
great a Disorder into the peevish Constitution of our principal Patron, our
modern Thomas Aquinas, that in mere Spleen and Discontent he scarce staid to
bid adieu to the Saints. Ah! had we lost twenty Sir Anthonies, and twice that
number of hopeful 'Squires, (if such and so many might be found) and kept this
Champion of our Cause alive, our Sorrows would be dry, not half so
insupportable as this Loss to the whole Party.

Old Father -Elymas, with his empty Porringer, looks wondrous sour Error 7.
and uneasy, thinks it very hard measure to be damned for Feeling: He might
well hope to be exempted out of the Catalogue of Offenders, since so many of
his own Saints, are guilty of greater Crimes. Besides, he stiffly pleads
Predestination for all things, and excuses himself and others in this
Argumentative Way; If Men lie under an inevitable Fate of sinning, it is very
unreasonable to condemn them for those Faults, not in their own Power to avoid.

This Book would ridicule Mr. Mouth for his want of Learning; He Error 8.
scorns your Bono Fido's, or Stattu-Co's: these were merely put upon him. Pray,
Gentlemen hear him speak for himself and Friends.

MOUTHEI ORATION.
SI vitae vilitati, ut Sanctorum non minimus, ausus sim patrocinari; Estote
Judices! plurimum Amoris nostri infelicis delictum, tueri possim. Quidni enim
id liceat, quod Majoribus probatum? and sancitum Legibus? Apud Lydios in morem,
Filias meretricari; and nactas eo quaestu dotem adferre sponsis.
Prostituebantur olim in Templis Virgins, and (si Fides Authoribus) victima
crat quaeque polluebatur. Nonne scortis quondam Romae Vicus? and iis Impunitas
quamdiu Suburra? Filias Sodomitis Loath ut Hospitibus parcerent, obtulit; and
caedem cogitavit, posse stupro redimi; An peccavit tradendo? aut scelere
immunis? si Bonum Amor, Quorsum in omnes non diffunderetur? Id Leges sinunt,
quibus corporum usus permittitur; and nihil Natura fecit, quod commune non est.
Non me tamen latet, quid Ecclesiae Reverendi (moribus austeri, and apud suos,
ob dignitatem in Honor) de his statuunt. In nos, quasi codices sacri
pugnarent, and quod Religioni and Communitati sit noxium, a nobis tueretur.
Tali autem Virorum Genere, quis pellicatu, Lege aut Scientia Inclytus, tangi
volet? Trahunt and coercent Fata; Obest consilio Juvenum Ardor, quibus pro
ratione Impetus, and pro virtute Temeritas est.

Dixi.
If Mr. Mouth was no part of a Scholar at the Penning of that Book, I Will
promise you he is wonderfully improved in a little time; He has said more than
could well be expected from him, to make it out, That a Community of Women is
no Sin. He likes any thing that is common, but Common Prayers; and if that Part
of the Book is not sufficiently answered, I Am much mistaken; so far I believe,
we have outdone the Church.

The Church-Party are not generally those very Wise Men, as they are
represented. They daily enrich their Enemies, and give little or no
Encouragement Error 9.
to their true Friends; don't show any great Love or Regard for their Religion;
are not half so industrious, so hearty, so united in their Endeavors, to
preserve their Church in its due Splendor and Reputation, as others are to
eclipse her Glory, and depress her to the very Ground. The Book, you see, is
faulty in this Particular. The Dissenters are wise; they do all within the
compass of their Power, to keep up their Conventicles with Number and Riches,
while the careless Churchmen mind little but to talk, drink, or swear for
their Religion, and so leave it.

As to the fearful Bill, or Charge, drawn up against the young Counselor; it is
found defective in Form, though the Matter seems true. 'Twas Error 10.
at first very surprising; he knew not what in the World to say to it. Now the
Saints are inclined to think, it is all a perfect Mistake, because He flatly
denies the Accusations: begins to appear again in Public, and follows Mr.
Month's Ghostly Advice, p. 25. For who can believe the Man guilty of an evil
Act, that with Heart of Stone, and Face like Brass, can tell the World he is
not so? If the Relations are for Law, He has Skill enough in that to evade
their Trial. He knows when to demurr, and when plead. If they would punish him
in any other Members, than the Offending Ones, out comes an Audita Quaerela;
Let 'em demand the Bold Pyrate's full Restitution of the Virgin-Treasure, He
returns a Non est invent' in nostra Balliva. And to secure his Right of
Elections, proceeds by a Quare Impedit; and is able to produce diverse loose
Precedents in these known Cases. But if all these Shifts and Projects fail, he
can hide his Head in the Low Countries, till Time has worn out the Memory of
his Crimes; lest by continuing in any Part of this envious Nation, he should be
stopped with a Ne Exeat Regno, and be undone for ever.

'Twas one blind side of the Book, to propose the Best Choice for Religion and
Government, as sufficient to persuade Dessenters to unite with the Church,
Error 11.
where both these are in greatest Perfection. You may silence, but shall hardly
persuade them; see it in Mr. Maggot's Case. At first reading the Book, he was
startled, and crept close into his Wool for shelter: But now being warmed and
revived by his Sheep's Clothing, begins to be more brisk and airy; will not
allow the Church to be the Best Choice; because we the dissenting Brethren
cannot endure to own our Errors and Imperfections. It Is a Rarity to find one of
a hundred, that will be prevailed on by good Reason and Argument; the far
greater number consulting with Men of Stout and Obdurate Consciences, (in which
the Spirit of God never dwells) will sooner die, or venture the Ruin of Church
and Kingdom, than recede one small step from their beloved and destructive
Practices.

But why all this noise about the Church? as if the Church was injured Error
12.
in our Choice of Sir Anthony: Is not he the Son of a Church? a moderate
Churchman? He goes sometimes to Church; and has been heard say, He was never
at a Conventicle in all his time. Now, if Sir Anthony does sincerely love the
Church, (as every true Member of it ought to do) He Will certainly in all Things,
in all Times, Cases, and Circumstances, espouse her Interest; give her all the
Demonstrations of Kindness and Fidelity, that can be given: Can any Man consent
to pull down that Church, wherein (if at all) he hopes to be saved? To despise
or neglect, much less to spurn against a most Pious Mother, that has provided
to make him happy in both Worlds? -- If by a Moderate Churchman is meant, One
that cares not how little he is concerned in the Communion of it; One that is
indifferent or cold in all the Parts of its Worship; that is not strictly tied
up to the Rules and Orders of it, but is at Liberty to prevaricate, upon any
Worldly Consideration; That to please or gratify a Party, can omit, alter, or
abbreviate the Church's Prayers; play fast or loose with his Religion; can
betray the Church, to serve himself. He Is properly no Churchman at all, no
true, no sound Member of it: Is rather like a Wooden-Leg, tied on, and taken
off at pleasure, than by natural Ligaments and Nerves, knit to the
Ecclesiastical Body. The Church often suffered, and can have no good from such
loose, such false Professors. I see no Reason to engage the Dissenters to
choose such a Moderate Churchman as before described; since it is not very
probable, that a Man can be true to another Party, kind to other Religions, who
is unfaithful to his own. But if by a Moderate Churchman, is signified one,
who being a true Christian, cannot dissemble with God and the World; gives
Caesar and the Church their due Respect and Deference; is yet of that sober,
meek, patient and charitable Temper, as to pity and pray for his very Enemies;
Is not for taking advantages of all Offenders; not for insisting strictly on
the Summum Jus, the utmost Rigor or Extremity toward them: But, demeaning
himself so equitably and fairly in the Administration of Justice, in
Differences and Contests, and generally in his Dealing with all Men, as to
promote the Welfare of Mankind, and as much as is possible for an honest Man
to do, for preserving of Concord and Amity one with another: Such a Benign,
Lovely, Christian Temper does the Church of England, above all others, commend
and practice at this day; Has ever esteemed it her Glory to keep the Medium
between the Two Extremes of Severity and Remissness: Such Moderation as the
Dissenters never used toward her, when they had the Power; nor can they show
it to one another, when ever their Circumstances shall happen to require it.

Oh! But Sir Anthony was a Fellow-Sufferer with the Dissenters; was Error 14.
secured, and carried to Prison, (when the Government was in Danger, and he
suspected as an Enemy) though he called himself a Churchman. And have not
Dissenters Reason to look on him as a Friend, whatever the Book says to the
contrary? It Is no matter for considering the Cause; whether our Persecution was
or was not for Righteousness sake; whether Dissenters then suffered as
Christians, or for some other Reason? But suffer they did, That remains so
fresh in our Memories, that we can neither forget nor forgive it.

We are unwilling to remember (on the other side) how miserably the Loyal
Episcopal Party were plundered, sequestered, decimated; dungeon'd, starved and
often stunk to death; what Oaths and Covenants were rigorously imposed on the
Wicked; what restraints were laid upon their Liberties, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical; though all this while they had Law and Right standing for them.
But the Saints at that time (Ruling by the Law of Liberty and good Conscience)
published an Ordinance of Parliament, in the Year 1645. That if any Person
hereafter shall at any time use, or cause to be used, The Book of
Common Prayer, in any Church, Public Place of Worship, or in any private House
or Family, within the Kingdom; the first Offense Five Pound; the second Ten;
the third to suffer One whole Year's Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprise.
This had been hard indeed, if the Saints had not done it! But they were
encouraged by Honest Cromwell, who published an Order, November. 24. 1655. That no
Person who had been sequestered for Delinquency, been in Arms against the
Parliament, adhered to, abetted or assisted the Forces raised against them;
should keep in their Houses or Families, as Chaplains or Schoolmasters, for the
Education of their Children, any sequestered or ejected Minister, Fellow of a
College, or Schoolmaster, nor permit any of their Children to be brought up
by such -- That no such Person of the Church of England, should any where
administer Baptism or the Lord's Supper, or Marry any Persons, under some
strange and hard Penalties, which I think improper to mention, and I hope our
Judges will not insist upon that Point; for then our Argument falls to the
Ground, our loud Complaints of Suffering must perfectly cease. I have ever
admired the Wisdom and Policy of the Dissenting Guides in this, as in many
other things, like that of the Romish Clergy, To keep the People in Darkness,
not permitting them to know the Truth, or read the Books that have been written
in defense of it; no, not so much as to acquaint themselves with the Common
Prayers, to understand them; and all that while the unknowing People might rail
with a better Grace, with some show of Honesty; because they not erring against
Knowledge, their wilful Ignorance may be some, though a very lame excuse for
their Separation from the Church of England.

It Is needless to multiply Particulars; I might in the Presbyterian Mode
increase the Number to Two and fortiethly, when all might be reduced to three
or four Heads. If I Am not much mistaken, the Book will be sufficiently baffled,
when I have added one more, which I take to be Instar omnium, viz. How
unconcluding and inconsequent is it, to say, That because such and such Members
have many notorious Faults, therefore the Dissenters ought not to Vote for
them? Alas! the Saints themselves are not free from Vices of the same kind
(though they don't own them) and so the most corrupt Members are the most
agreeable Persons to understand their Secrets, to be entrusted with their
Designs. To say, A Man's bad, as bad as may be, and offer that as a Reason
against the Dissenters Electing him, is altogether as improper, as to deny
Birds of a Feather their natural Society: For, if the Blood and Treasure
extorted by them, the Spoils and Ravages of the late War, the enslaving and
oppressing all Ranks of Men; and (what is above all) the horrible Murder of an
excellent, incomparable Prince, amount not so high as to be accounted any Sin;
what can it signify to be corporally Vile? To be guilty of that common, that
venial Sin of Uncleanness among them? But lest this duller heavy Trot of Prose
should tire the Patience of our prudent Judges, be pleased to take The
Vindication of the Saints, in this smoother and more delightful Amble of a late
Poet.

Listen, Dear, Holy, my Beloved Friends, A new Poem:

To th'cutting Scandals our Opponent sends;
And join with me t'assist our Burrough's Knight;
Let Us vindicate our Members to our Might.
It cuts to th'quick to see our Corporation
Carry the Looks of Shame and Lamentation;
We'll not stand still to see our Enemy batter
Our Tow'ry Castles, and our Knights bespatter;
For if we dare but make one Sally out,
Wormly and Ware will send Recruits, no doubt.
What though our Knight a burning Letcher be?
What if his Son's to th'full as bad as he?
What though our famous Porringer-Publican
To tamper with the squeamish Maid began?
And our Ware -Friend, the Pharisaick Scot,
A Meal as well as Malt-Prize would have got,
And run away forthwith? Pray, Sirs, why not?
For Lust and ripe Deceit are sav'ry Spices
With us; not singly seasoned, grant 'em Vices.
Suppose his Worship, Mr. Openmouth,
To serve a Turn, swears flatly North is South?
If Master Maggot, and old Drugs Ponteus,
From plaguey Popery pretend to free us;
Though they are often forced to trim, to buckle,
And to the vilest Shifts sometimes to truckle;
What though enlightened Friends for once comply
To the Substance, and the outward Form deny,
To keep up Trade and Christian Liberty?
What though the ven'mous Brazen Serpent vote
For 's wealthy Lodger? Though he would cut his Throat,
If 't was not by that means, to gain a Groat.
When Coin runs thin, when Times are hard and pinching,
From hungry Justice then methinks best flinching.
The Scot by vigorous Praying turned the Penny;
For Women largely drop when they have any.
Some ask, Why all this Privacy in Prayer?
Why pretty Cousin, and a Sister fair,
In one House might not holy Notes compare?
Some fulsome, rank Hypocrisy can smell,
In a Religion stooping to the Tail,
But to my wiser Friends I now appeal.
Should Prayer or Sanctity be made
A Tool to work lascivious Ends? In Imitation of Hudibras.

Both, Bad; but sure his midnight Trade
Abuses less the sober Friends.
For every one does not espy
The Husband put to By -- by -- by,
When Fowl and Gravy-Sauce appears,
In pious Lust up to the Ears,
Nor yet the pretty Dance he takes,
When Ware -Chimes the Music makes;
When Friday -night is thought the best
To play fine Pranks 'bove all the rest;
The watchful Wives set open Back-doors,
To be his Proselytes and Whores;
So paying off the Men's old Scores,
Whilst they securely lodge above,
Attending on their Barely-Jove.
Pity; another brisk young Squire,
Flask'd away Five Pounds like Wildfire,
To build this Holy Scot an Hive,
To make his Bees the faster thrive;
And never once come to tuste the Honey,
Shedd smelt so rank of Smock and Money.
Besides he heard from trusty Scout,
Of the Rencounter that fell out,
As Questions and Commands in the Field,
The Ladies being forced to yield:
So truly give his Worship's due,
In time he prudently withdrew;
Cuckoldry might have been his Fate,
His Offspring mungrelliz'd; Estate
Might dwindled be into decay,
Whilst Wife and sharping Gamsters play.
Ah, Scot! thy Handkerchief cannot dry
All Tears that fall from lustful Eye.
Ye knew his Country-Predecessor
Was such a Sanctity-Professor;
His Love one Object must out-ride;
He then on two Wives got astride;
Witness the Wades-Mill Evidence,
Who had it from a Lard of Sense:
Nay, as their Pastors, so their Flock,
Place all their Comfort in the Smock.
Incestuous Opportunity
Made one with his Wife's Sister lie;
Another Saint to London went,
With Country-Diet not content;
Nor being used to Town-Intrigue,
Gave such Discov'ries of the League,
That though he had secured his Whore,
Came Towns-man knocking at the Door;
Your Business, Sir; who want you here?
Are you not, 'pray, mistaken, Sir?
Says shame-fac'd Miss: With that dashed in
Friend Tarr, and under Bed of Sin
Found Fornicator.
The Daughter of an Indian Weed,
With many more in place succeed;
Teach Men the Art of groping Hens,
And Grope for Grope makes them amends.
Would every Man his Butt'ry shut,
Then neither Mealman's Dog, nor yet
A sharper Curr could steal a bit.
Cheer up, my Friends, Flesh has its failing;
What if in Borough 't is prevailing,
The matters not worth our bewailing:
For I have made it very plain,
Our Neighboring Saints are much more vain.
If this piece of Poetry works kindly for the Dissenters, we'll set a pleasant
new Tune to 't; it may be more grateful to some of our Saints, than any Hymn or
Psalm of David, metred and set by the greatest Art of honest Hopkins and
Sternhold in the Beginning of the Reformation.

Now we have sweetened the Court, and put all into some good Harmony; before the
Jury goes out to agree upon their Verdict, it is proper to hear some able
Counsel on both Sides, relating to this Cause Between the DISSENTERS, and the
CHURCH.

Judge. If you say no better for the Saints, than has been hitherto offered, in
their Defense against the Book, I give my Opinion, That after all their
Articles about the Errors and Insufficiencies of it, the sober Party are Ten
or Fourteen times worse than they seemed before this Trial. But let the Jury do
as they see fit; I am not to prejudicate, I am bound to let you know, what I
apprehend to be good Sense and Law; to instruct, not to govern you? Pray attend
to the Counsel; for, First, the Dissenters; Secondly, the Church. We'll hear
them with Patience.


Dissent. Advoc. My Lord and Jury! I Am retained in the GOOD OLD CAUSE; I Am for
Conventiclers against Churchmen. I must tell the Court, That the Cause before
you at this time, is very weighty; the Peace of our Town, the Welfare of our
Country depends upon it. The first Argument I shall offer for the Saints, is
their Infallibility: Every Dissenter from the Church, carries an undoubted Pope
in his own Breast; so that it is strange, nay almost impossible for him to be
mistaken, in my Opinion; Though all other Men find the woeful Infirmities of
Humane Nature, the Weakness and Short-sightedness of their Understandings, and
the daily Experience how prone they are to Errors and Misapprehensions; yet
the Saints are always sure, positive, and peremptory, that they are in the
Right, and all others in the Wrong that differ from them: The early
Prepossessions of their Opinions, the powerful Prejudices of Education, an
implicit, and unexamin'd Belief of what their Guides and Leaders teach 'em,
have such mighty irresistible Force upon their minds; That they no more doubt
the Truth and Goodness of any Cause they are engaged in, than they question the
Certainty of the Scriptures, or the plainest Demonstrations in the
Mathematics. Can it be supposed that Men, who pass for Saints, can have any
Pride, Partiality, or Self-Conceit, to put them out of the Right Way; or that
they can possibly think more highly of themselves, and their Way, than in Duty
they ought to think? If not, The Conventicle is better than the Church.


Church Advoc. My Lord, and the Court! I am for the honest Churchmen; was in
hopes, That the Dissenters had been sick of their Old Cause; I know some of the
Wisest of them, wish they had never been at Controversy with the Church; they
have had such ill luck as to be worsted in all their Arguments; In answer to
this, of Infallibility; The Churchmen truly say, That as there is but one
Independent, so but One Infallible Being, which is GOD. We derive all our Gifts
from that Fountain; and no Man can be sure of any Point of Faith, but as he is
directed by the known Dictates of that Infallible Wisdom. That the Dissenters
are not void of Mistakes, seeing they do apparently contradict and oppose each
other, and frequently themselves too in Matters of Religion. That the things
wherein we differ are confessedly disputable; and therefore not certain; and
every Dissenter agrees to this, That the Church is the Best Religion and
Government, next to that of his own particular Fancy and Opinion, and by
consequence must be really best, as being held so in the most general Esteem
and Approbation of Religious Men. The Presbyterian would rather turn Churchman
than be an Anabaptist; The Independent would do so, than be a Quaker; The
Quaker, was he to change, would choose the Church, sooner than any other
Pesuasion in England; so that the Church being voted for on all hands, to have
the second Place, to be approved before and above all other, but that which the
particular Dissenter pretends to, it may well be concluded by Majority of
Voices, to be the BEST, to be preferred to any single Opinion whatsoever, which
has no other Foundation to support it, but it self: And this particular
Opinion, upon due Enquiry, may proceed from nothing but Humor or Interest; the
Conduct of a mis-inform'd Judgment, Passion, Self-Love, Fancy or Mistake, more
than the Real Concerns of Truth and Piety; Both which are constantly defended
by This Church: A Church founded on the firmest Rock, against which the Storms
and Tempests, the Policy and Force of Hell have not yet totally prevailed; nor
ever will, unless by our Divisions and Contempt, we provoke the Vengeance of
Heaven to remove her from us.


Dissent. Advoc. Yet, Brother! we have terribly shak'd your Church; and it
seems but in a tottering Condition, at this time. Though Hell can never prevail
so far, but that there shall be a Church to the end of the World; yet this is
not meant of a National, but the Universal Church of Christ.


Chapter Advoc. I grant, that many National Churches, where Christian Religion had
a long time slourish'd; have been delivered up into the Hands of Turks and
Infidels; we have then the greater reason to look about us; And if there should
be no Remedy, but that our Church must fall; shall Englishmen throw it down?
Will it be any Credit to Dissenters, to overturn the Church? or to grow
unreasonably fond of those methods (to strengthen the Protestant Interest;)
which the Malice and Subtilty of the Devil and his Instruments have contrived
to destroy it?


Diss. Advoc. That in all their Divisions the Dissenters will tell ye, they
have no ill Designs upon the Church; only are for the Advancement of the
Reformed Religion, into a greater Perfection than the Church of England is yet
arrived at, in these four Points: Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Life.


Chapter Advoc. I wish you had no worse Ends than these in your Separation! and
that upon fair Trial it may appear, that these Ends are possible to be
obtained, by this Means; the People are put in Expectation of a Blessed Change;
a fine New Church Government, a Presbytery for an Hierarchy, and perhaps not
long after, a Government of State, instead of a King.


Diss. Advoc. Let me proceed distinctly; I hope I may be able to satisfy the
Court. First, For Doctrine, we are for proposing higher Notions than that
Church ever taught; To feed the People with stronger Meat, than with which the
Church has fed her Children; To preach the Doctrine of God's Secret Decrees; To
make the People Believe, that the Lord has no more to lay to the Charge of an
Elect Person yet in the D. Crisp, p. 274, 275.
height of Iniquity and Excess of Riot, committing all the Abominations that
can be committed, than he has to lay to the Charge of a Saint Triumphant in
Glory; That God permits Sin, that there may be room Ruth. on Dan. 6. xxvi.
before the Commons, in the Year 43.
enough in the Play for Pardoning-Grace; And many other such Doctrines, as tend
more to the Edification of the People, than you can meet with in the Church of
England.


Chapter Advoc. It Is strange, that Men should glory in their Shame, value
themselves for such wild Notions as never before obtained in the Church of God!
Herein you excel the Church, in Fancy, in Errors, but not in Truth. Our
Doctrines are Faith, Hope, Charity, Humility, Peace, Meekness, Justice,
Patience, Obedience, and Perseverance to the End: Our Ministers teach the same
Truths that our Dear Savior and his Apostles taught, Sound and Orthodox; The
Words of Eternal Life; tending truly to Edification, to build Men up in the
Unity of the Church; To grow in Grace, in Knowledge, and in all Virtue. I would
to God, the Dissenters might be in Love with such Edifying Doctrines as these
are: But, alas! This talk of higher Notions, of greater Edification, is many
times mere Wantonness, and Instability of Humor; and too often rather Fancy
than Effect: Men conceit that they are better edified, (not when they are more
fully instructed in any weighty Point of Faith, or more perfectly informed in
some necessary Duty, or more efficaciously moved to the Practice of what they
know; but) when they are more gratified and pleased at the hearing of a Sermon,
or the like. Those that are troubled with these itching Ears, instead of being
edified, are commonly 2 Timothy 4. 5.
the most ignorant of all Men; they often make an unwise choice in their
Teacher; and provoke God to leave them to the Vanity of their own Minds: when
they depend rather on the supposed Abilities of a Man, than the Blessed
Influences of the Holy Spirit; and look more at Paul that plants, and Apollos
that waters, than at God that gives the increase. For it is the Blessing of God
alone, and not any Man's Skill in dispensing them, that make the Word and
Ordinances any way beneficial to us; with the help of his Grace, those Means of
Instruction, which we sometimes the most undervalue, may be profitable to our
Salvation; without it, our Ears or Fancies may be entertained; But we cannot be
edified by the most fluent and popular Tongue, nor the most melting and
pathetical Expressions in the World; but much less by such Doctrines as were
taught by the Dissenters when the Church was down. I tremble to name them! That
the Scriptures cannot be said to be the Word of God; and are no Vid. Catalog.
and Discovery of Errors.
more to be credited than the Writings of Men, being not a Divine but Humane
Tradition. That God has a hand in, and is the Author of the Sinfulness of his
People; not of the Actions only, but of the very Pravity which is in them; That
all Lies come out of his Mouth; That the Prince of the Air, that rules in the
Children of Disobedience, is God. That in the Unity of the Godhead, there is
not a Trinity of Persons, but that it is a Popish Tradition; That the Doctrine
of Repentance is a Soul-destroying Doctrine; That Children are not bound to
obey their Parents at all, if they be ungodly. That the Soul of Man is mortal,
as the Soul of a Beast; That there is no Resurrection on at all of the Bodies
of Men; nor Heaven nor Hell after this Life. These are only a Taste; not all,
nor the hundredth part, nor the worst of those Doctrines taught by Dissenters
in the late unhappy times; when the wholesome Food of the Soul, and the
Dispensers of it were quite laid aside: So much for Doctrine.


Diss. Advoc. I protest, Brother, you have been too hard for me in this; but,
Gentlemen of the Jury, Truth may be on our side next time: If we don't excel
the Church in Doctrine, let us try for Worship. Do you think that our Spiritual
way of Worship, is not better than the Forms of the Church? That a Liturgy,
though made and reviewed with that Prudence and Moderation, Care and
Circumspection, Wisdom and Piety, as any thing extant in that kind; can be so
good, as the sudden, indigested, extempore Effusions of our Gifted Men? Do you
imagine, that Inspired Men can be guilty of any undecent, incoherent,
irreverent Expressions, as some will complain of 'em for? Or that a Form of
Prayer can be so prevalent with the God of Order, as a saying just what the
Spirit hints? What say you to that?


Chapter Advoc. I am sorry you should so far undervalue the Prayers of our Church,
and your own Judgment, in comparing any performances of Prayer in your way, to
the most excellent Liturgy of the Church of England: I durst put it upon this
Expedient; Let any Prayer made occasionally and extempore, by the ablest and
most cautious (of those that magnify the Conventicle way, and despise ours,)
be taken exactly in Writing, and published to the World, I am very well
assured, that one Man, without any great pains, may find more things
exceptionable in that single Prayer, in a short time, than the several Parties
of Dissenters, with all the Diligence they have hitherto used, have been able
to discover in the whole Service of the Church, in more than a hundred Years.
Our Prayers, as to the Substance, are what Christ and his Apostles used, in a
Language understood by all those that are concerned in them; to which we may
all safely say, Amen. But for sudden Prayers, though they may happen to be
good, yet for the greatest part they are dangerous; something of Heresy in
every Sentence, some Indecencies and Absurdities may be in every Word. Reflect
upon the Dissenters in that time when this Liturgy was out of use, and every
one left to his own Liberty. It Is scarce possible to believe what wild and
prodigious Extravagancies were upon all occasions used in Holy things;
especially in Prayer, the most immediate Act of Worship and Address to God.
It Is an Affront to the Majesty of Religion, that there should be any thing in
it, Childish and Trivial, Absurd and Frivolous; that its Sacred Mysteries
should be exposed to Contempt and Scandal; by that Levity and Distraction, that
Heat and Boldness, those Weaknesses and Indiscretions, those loose, raw and
incongruous Effusions, which in most Congregations of those times did too
commonly attend it. How can there be that Sobriety, that Sense and true
Devotion in an Extempore Prayer, (where the Mind is employed to find out Words;
and looks more like studying or making of a Prayer, than Praying,) as in those
Public Forms, which are considered and fixed; where the Spirit or Soul has no
more to do, than to mount upon to Heaven with the Wings of true Devotion, and
offer her Requests (in these Words) at the Throne of Grace? Was it any
Amendment, instead of praying, From Fornication, Goood Lord, deliver us; to
say, with a Dissenter, Lord, Unlust us? To leave out our admirable Collects for
the peaceable and orderly Government of the Church, and instead of these, to
blaspheme the Almighty! by telling him, If he did not finish the good Work
which he had begun, in the Reformation of the Church, Vid. View of Troubles,
2d. Part, Edw. Began.
he would show himself to be a God of Confusion; and such an one, as by cunning
Stratagems had contrived the Destruction of his own Children? That God would
bless the King, and mollify his hard Heart, that delights in Blood; For that
he was fallen from Faith in God, and become an Enemy to his Church? Let thy
Hand, we pray thee, O Lord our God, be upon him, and upon his Father's House!
But not upon thy People, that they should be plagued. O God! O God! many are
the Hands lift up against us; But there is one God, it is thou thy self. O
Father! who do us more mischief than they all. We know, O Lord! that Abraham
made a Covenant, Moses and David made a Covenant, and our Savior made a
Covenant But thy Parliament-Covenant, is greater than all Covenants: with
abundance of such intolerable stuff as this. I could name Places, Time, and
Persons, but I forbear.


Judge. Have you any more to say upon this Head, concerning Worship, for the
Dissenters?


Dess. Advoc. My Lord, It Is the Way they have been used to; and 'twill be hard
to persuade them to try any other.


Judge. If that be all; go on to the Third Head, about Discipline, or
Church Government; I am willing to hear all out.


Diss. Advoc. We thank your Lordship, and the Court; we have not much to say in
This; But New Lords, New Laws; we are for Change; and rather than not have some
Amendment in those things we have so long preached against; nay if all that old
Discipline is not laid aside, we'll venture the losing of all the Religion we
have, rather than submit to the Church.


Chapter Advoc. I Am sorry you have no better Argument than Obstinacy. When People
cannot but acknowledge the Doctrine and Worship of a Church to be according to
Truth, it is a Weakness, an Absurdity, to find fault with its Discipline, which
was appointed for the better Performance of Religion: And the parting from that
which is well established, the dis-setling of that which is well fixed, is not
the way to greater Purity and Perfection, but to the Corruption and Decay of
Religion; unless you can show, that the Church was so much over-seen, as to
constitute Canons and Orders, inconsistent with, or destructive of the
Established Religion. Would the Church be so careful to Reform from Popery, and
to deliver a Pure Religion down to Posterity; and not likewise take care of
such a Discipline as might preserve the Esteem and Practice of that holy
Religion? Prove any Order of our Church sinful, or not correspondent with
Religion; that Order, that Usage shall immediately be discontinu'd. This, I am
sure, you and all the Dissenters in England cannot prove. The single and plain
Question then is, Whether the Government of the Church, or That among
Dissenters, is to be chosen by any Wise Man? Look back upon the Changes made in
Church Matters, by Dissenters, in the late Sanctified Times; Those Changes,
those Alterations, were not so conducive in their Nature for the Edifying and
Well-governing of the Church, as those things which they illegally removed. As
for Instance: The Ordination by a Bishop, accompanied with Presbyters, was more
certain and satisfactory, than that by Presbyters, without a Bishop. Was it not
better to have Forms of well-compos'd Prayers, than to petition, or rather
affront the Almighty with Noise and Nonsense? Was it not better to repeat the
Creed standing, than to leave it quite out of the Directory? Was it an
Advantage to Christian Piety, to change the Gesture of Kneeling in the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, when the Sacred Elements are given, together
with Prayer, for that less-reverent one of Sitting? of Sitting especially with
the Hat on, as the most uncomely Practice of some was and is? The People being
taught to cover the Head, while the Minister was to remain bare among them. --
Was the Alteration of giving the Elements, an Amendment? Read the Directory for
Public Worship, in the time when the Dissenters did their best to excel the
Church; Take ye, eat ye; This is the Body of Christ which is broken for you;
This City is the New Testament in the Blood of Christ, which is shed for the
Remission of the Sins of may: The Words denoting Christ's present Crucifixion;
and either actually, or in the future certainty of it, give countenance to the
Romish Sacrifice of the Mass. -- Nor was the Civil Pledge of the Ring in
Marriage bettered by the Invention of some Pastors, who took a Ring of their
Women-converts, upon admittance into their Church. The Forbidding the
Observation of Christ's Nativity, and other Holy Days, did not add one
Hairs-breadth to the Piety of the Nation; but, on the other Hand, it took at
least from the Common People one ready Means of fixing in their Memories the
most useful History of the Christian Religion. -- It Is possible for mere Dwarfs
in Understanding and Policy to contrive an Alteration in Government that may be
pleasing to themselves for a time, during their Passion, and the Novelty of the
Model in their own Fancy, not yet disturbed by some unforeseen Mischief or
Inconvenience: But it is extreme difficult, upon the whole matter, to make a
true and lasting Improvement, fitted and framed to all Cases and Circumstances
of Affairs in Religious Observances. So that if we make a fair Comparison, and
let Experience and Reason rule in this Case, we must say, That the Government
of the Church is Best still.


Diss. Advoc. If we have got no Ground of the Established Church in Matters of
Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, I hope it may be granted we have the
Advantage, by much, in the Purity of Life: We are holier and less offensive
than other Men. If you will not allow That, we are certainly far more demure and
private in our Vices, more wary and cautious in letting (...) Faults be seen by
the World; while the Churchmen are most care(...)n that Point, and seem far
worse than they really are.


Chapter Advoc. It Is worth our observation, That no Argument has hitherto been
offered in favor of the Dissenters, but carries a sufficient Confutation along
with it. I have the Charity to think well of some Men, who, out of a true
desire of pleasing God, having no worldly Design at the bottom, do in some
Circumstances differ from us. I am persuaded there are many well-meaning
Dissenters, who from their Hearts detest all known Wickedness: And such only
will rightly consider the Mischiefs of Separation, which every one that truly
fears God, ought most carefully to avoid. The Church of England loves Religion
and Goodness in all Men; and declares, there is nothing more Valuable in the
World; but cannot excuse the Body of Dissenters from being the Occasion of many
Impieties in the Nation. Their very Separation destroys the true Spirit of
Religion, which is Charity; it lets loose great Numbers, who cannot govern
themselves; moving them to live Atheists or Idolaters; to pour Contempt upon
the whole Church of Christ; confirms Men in their evil Courses, and exposes the
Church as a Prey to the Common Enemy. Gentlemen! give me leave to say, That to
propose Maintenance of Charity and all Virtue, by overthrowing the Church, is
as improbable a Project, as his who in Henry the Seventh's time proposed a
Rebellion without Breach of the Peace. When the Government of King and Bishop
was subverted, there were presently as many Religions as Men; monstrous Swarms
of Errors and Heresies broke in upon us, more than had been before known in the
Church of God; and upon this, an Inundation of all sorts of Wickedness
overspread the Land: So horrible was the Effect, that one of their own Authors
tells us, That for many hundred Years there had not been a Party pretending
Godliness, Tenderness Edw. Gangr.
of Conscience, Strictness, above other Men, (as this Party did) that has been
guilty of so many Sins, horrible Wickedness, provoking Abominations, as they
are. Hell seemed to be broke loose, to have invaded all Quarters, in despite of
their Covenant, and all the little Schemes of their so-much-magnified
Reformation: That they have overpass'd the Deeds of the Prelates, justified the
Bishops, in whose Time never so many, nor so great Errors were heard of; much
less such Blasphemies, and Confusions. We have worse things amongst us, more
corrupt Doctrines, and unheard of Practices, than ever were in all the Bishops
days. Our Reformation is become a Deformation: We first put down the
Common Prayer, and then some put down the very Scriptures, slighting and
blaspheming them: Some cast down Bishops and their Officers; others cast to the
Ground all Ministers, and all the Reformed Churches: Some had cast out the
Ceremonies in the Sacraments; others had cast out the Sacraments themselves.
With abundance more, too tedious to repeat.

Another of their Authors tells the Parliament, in a Sermon, That the Covenant
cries (God grant not against you) for the Reformation Jenkyns Sermon. 46.
of the Kingdom, the Extirpation of Heresies, Schisms, Profaneness, etc. These
Impieties abound, as if we had taken a Covenant to maintain them; since it was
taken, These Sins, which we have Covenanted against; have more abounded, than
in the space of ten times so many Years before.

Another makes this Remark, That one of the Fruits of this Blessed 1648.
Parliament, and of those two Sectaries (Presbyterians and Independents) is,
That they have made more Jews and Atheists than are in all Europe besides.

Gentlemen of the Jury! You may see by what means it was, that this Nation came
to be pestered with Opinions and Practices, beyond the Example of former Ages,
to the infinite Prejudice and dishonor of our Religion and Nation: You may
guess what a blessed Reformation we may expect from the Ruin of the Church:
The same Causes, set on foot by the same Principles, will eternally produce the
same Effects: And though Men at first may mean never so well, yet Temptations
will insensibly grow upon them, and Accidents occur, which in the Progress may
carry them infinitely beyond the Line of their first Intention, and engage them
in such Courses, out of which, when they come to discern their Error, it may
be too late for them to retire.


Diss. Advoc. It Is in vain to plead against Matters of Fact; but I would have
you know, our Dissenters are more for Spirit and Truth, more modest and
peaceable, than those of that Time; we are more conformable to the Laws, less
turbulent and offensive to Government; and, generally speaking, did we believe
that our Schism or Separation from the Church was a Sin, or the Occasion of
Sin, we should no longer remain in the Practice of it, but presently join with
the Church, and never more forsake her Communion.


Chapter Advoc. You may guess at the Spirit and Temper of the Dissenters, by their
obstinate and indefatigable Stiffness in Opposing the Church. Let the World
judge; let themselves be Judges in this Case: When the Church requires no
Popish, no Antichristian Terms of Communion; when the Dissenters can offer no
Argument that has not been abundantly answered; they entrench themselves within
their strongest Holds of Stiffness and Resolution, never, never to yield, though
they are sufficiently convinced and baffled. If the Dissenters have any thing
more of Moderation and Peace, than appeared in the late Times of Anarchy and
Confusion, we are obliged to the Church, the Pillar and Ground of Truth, and to
the Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws, that lay some restraint upon them. But once
remove This Church, or quite let loose the Reins of Government, and we shall
soon find what manner of Spirit does influence these Men. -- The first Race of
Dissenters were far more for Unity and Peace, than these are; they meddl'd not
with Things out of their Line, nor mixed themselves with Matters of State: All
they desired was, to have no Violence offered to their Consciences. When they
could not conform as Ministers, they did as Private Christians. Men that were
most eminent amongst 'em for Learning, Piety, Preaching, Writing, Experience,
and Fame, have done more toward the Unity of the Church, than our Modern
Dissenters do at this day. They have owned our Communion lawful; they have
received the Communion kneeling; they have bred up their Children to the
Ministry of the Church; they have joined in the Liturgy; they have been married
according to the Form of it. The ancient Nonconformists would not separate,
though they feared to subscribe.

But now the Government has been so kind to settle Liberty of Conscience by a
Law, our Conscionable Men turn their Backs upon the Church, Vid. The Lawfulness
of hearing the Public Ministry, by Mr. Nigh, Mr. Robinson, etc. See Mr. Corbet
's Nonconformist's Plea for Lay-Communion, Mr. Marshal, Hist. Indep.
and make no scruple (though by causeless Separation) to cut themselves off from
its Communion; not considering, that nothing, next to the Glory of God, should
be more heartily desired and endeavored by all Men, than the Unity and Peace
of the Church; and consequently, there is scarce a greater Sin than Schism is,
that rends and divides it: A Sin (if you believe the ancient Fathers) that
shuts Men out of Heaven; a Sin that cannot be expiated by the Blood of
Martyrdom. This is the Sense which the best and most pious Christians that ever
lived had of it; That it is better to suffer any thing, than that the Church of
God should be rent asunder: That it is every whit as glorious, and a far greater
Martyrdom, to die for not dividing the Church, than for refusing to sacrifice
to Idols: That a Person going from Church to Schismatics, though in that
capacity he should die for Christ, yet can he not receive the Dionysius the
good Bishop of Alexandria, Vid. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 45.
Crown of Martyrdom: That such a one has no Part in the Law of God, or the
Faith of Christ, or in Life or Salvation: That without this Unity and Charity,
a Man cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; though he should deliver up
himself to the Flames, or cast his Body to Wild Beasts, yet this would not be
the Crown of his Faith, but the Punishment of his Falsehood; not the glorious
Exit of a Religious Courage, but the Issue of Despair: He may be killed, but
not crowned: He rents the Unity of the Church, destroys the Faith, disturbs the
Peace, dissolves Charity, and profanes the Holy Sacrament. These and many other
severe things are to be found in St. Cyprian. And Cypr. de Unit. Eccl. fol.
181, 182.
now, if the Glory of God, the Peace of the Church, and the Good of Souls, are
as necessary, as indispensible in these Days, as they were of old, How
dangerous, how desperate is the Condition of those Men, who endeavor to
deprive us of them? If Father Mouth, Father Elymas, Father Pen, and the rest of
our Dissenting Fathers, can prevail with the unthinking People, to fall in love
with their Vices; can be such degenerate Christians (if we may call them
Christians) as to make no scruple of Schism and Separation, which are so
fearful and damnable; then the Determination will be so natural, the Case so
plain, that the Jury will scarce need to go from the Bar to consider any
further of it.


Diss. Adv. I have no more to offer: We'll leave it to the Court.


Chapter Advoc. With all my heart; only beg pardon, that our Pleadings have been a
little too tedious.


Judge. You Gentlemen of the Jury, I take you to be wise and honest Men, who
will not contend so much for Conquest as Truth: You have heard this Cause
debated by Learned Council on both Sides; go and consider duly which of them is
Best, for Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Life: How dangerous a thing it is
to make Public Ruptures in Church or State: Whether Church or Conventicle
stands upon the best and surest Foundation: Whether any Man's private Opinion
or Fancy, Humor or Interest, ought to be advanced above the Judgment of the
Ancient Fathers, the Practice of the Church for many hundred Years, or above
the Quiet and Peace of a Nation. Remember, that TRUTH is now upon Trial; and
that it will be to your lasting Reputation, if without partiality you do what is
Right and Just, in defense of Truth. To that purpose, I give you more than
ordinary Time; while I dispatch some other Affairs of less moment, you may
agree upon your Verdict.


[Exit Jury. Judge. Call in the Quakers. -- You stand here Indicted for Coining
and Altering the King's current English Language, pretending a greater Findness
and Propriety of Expression than other Men; undertaking to teach the most
Learned Doctors and Professors in both Universities, and to contradict the
whole Nation. You are Lords High Commissioners for Youing and Thouing; but are
under a Foreign, and therefore unlawful Authority: You had your Commission and
Example from Ignatius Loyola, the first Broacher of this whimsical Nicety; and
may justly be suspected and questioned for it. -- What say you, Friends?


1 Quak. I say [YOU] to Many, [THOU] to One. Singular, One, Thou. Plural, Many,
You.

The Reasons are,

1. These Words are so used in the Bible, and all other Literal Translations.

2. From their Agreement with the Second Persons Singular and Plural in other
Languages,

LATIN, GREEK, and HEBREW. As,

1. Thou is singular; because in Latin, Tu is singular. (...) Greek, Su (...)
Hebrew, Attah

2. You is only plural; because in Latin, Vos is plural. (...) Greek, Humeis
(...) Hebrew, Attem


Judge. He that has any Judgment in the English Tongue, or is Master of any
Sense, will confess, That [THOU] is not of the singular Number, because Tu, Su,
or Attah, are so; but because Englishmen use [THOU] in the singular Number;
Neither is [YOU] of the plural, because Vos, Humeis, or Attem, are of the
plural; but because Englishmen use [YOU] sometimes in the plural Number. It Is
the Usage of a Nation, that is the Reason of their Language; and all
Englishmen, except Quakers, use [YOU] to One, as well as to Many; The Variety
of English, in this, being above most other Languages. And though we use [THOU]
singular, for the more strict Translation of the Scripture; yet the Original is
as capable to be translated into [You] as Thou. The Translations of the Bible
may be varied, according to the commonest Use of a Language; but the perpetual
Use of a Language does not depend upon one or more Translations. It Is plain,
that You and Thou, as all other words, have their diverse Acceptations. We find
in Scripture, and all other English Authors, [YOU] to One, as well as [YOU] to
Many.

Genesis 18. 3, -- My Lord! --

4. Let a little water, I pray YOU, be fetched.

Job 18. 2. Bildad said to Job, How long will it be 'ere [YOU] make an end?

Jer. 2. 28, -- O Judah --

29. Wherefore will YOU plead with me?

Jer. 3. 20. YOU, O house of Israel!

You, to one Lord, You, to one Job, You, to one Judah, and You, to one Israel.

We find also that [THOU] is not only used to a singular One, but to a plural
One; or a singular Many; as --

Jer. 4. 1. THOU, O Israel!

29. THOU, O City!

Isa. 26. 20. Come, my people, enter THOU.

In which places Israel, is a plural One, or singular Many; a City, is a plural
One, or singular Many; People, is a plural One, or singular Many; and yet

Thou, O Israel! Thou, O City! Thou, O People!


2 Quak. But in strictness, if it be proper for the Scripture to translate Thou
to One; why may not I say Thou to a King? to a Judge? a Minister? a Father now?
as well as to say Thou to GOD?


Judge. It Is not so proper to say Thou to a King, as to God; because the King
cannot judge of our Hearts, as God can: If we say, Thou, O GOD! He understands,
whether we speak with that Reverence and Honor to Him, which belongs to our
Duty: But the King cannot tell our Honor to him, but by such Words and Actions
as declare it: And for other Superiors, (though Thou in Scripture be commonly
used to them, according to other Languages, which have not so good distinction
of Words for the second Person as English has) yet, [YOU] in our Days being a
Term of Respect and Civility, of Honor and Reverence; and [THOU] (except in
Scripture, and other Literal Translations) being a Word for the most part of
Contempt, Insolence, Imperiousness, and Indignity: We ought to prefer You
before Thou, though it be to One; And if other Languages have not so good a
Propriety, to set forth their Humility toward, and to show their Estimation of
one another, we should not contemn or dispute against our own Language, because
others are not so good; but to use our You to a single Person, since it has in
it the forenamed Excellencies.

If you know not what belongs to a Synecdoche, read 2 Cor. 4. and you
Synecdoche est cum totum ponitur pro part, aut pars pro toto; Numerus
singularis pro plurali, Numerus pluralis pro singulari. Vossius, lib. 4. c. 6.
shall find the plural Number put for the singular, almost throughout the
Chapter: He that has looked least into Ancient Authors will find long before
Ignatius Loyola, or the Pope, the Plural put for the Singular, and the Singular
for the Plural; and this Spiritual Fancy of Youing and Thouing, could never
have taken place, with any sort of Men that had not been Strangers to Grammar,
Logic, Metaphysics, good Learning or Sense: If the Quakers are so, it is Loss
of time, to spend it on so trifling a Subject. Call in the Jury.


Friend Henry. Verily Friends! there is enough said, to convince us of great
Folly; in standing so much upon this odd proud conceited piece of Singularity.


Judge. I Am glad to find any one of your Party so truly ingenuous, as once to
confess you're in the wrong; the Court will hear you with greater Regard, in
what remains; -- Here Is a Bill of Complaint, or an Indictment against You, and
other Dissenters, for using false Lights, for having false Hearts, false
Spirits; for being guided by such Principles as are not of God. The Reasons of
this Enquiry are from the many sorts of Lights and Spirits in the World; as,
Light Uncreated and Created, Light Proper and Metaphorical, Light of Nature,
and of Scripture, Light of Sense and Reason; Light Innate, and Light Created.
So there are many sorts of Spirits, besides good Ones; A Familiar Spirit, a
Lying Spirit, a Spirit Lev. 20. 27. 1 Kings 22. 22.
of Perverseness, a Foul Spirit, a Deaf and Dumb Spirit, a Spirit of Error and
Delusion, a Spirit of Slumber, a Spirit of the World, and a Isa. 19. 14. Mar.
9. 25. 2 Th. 2. 11.
Spirit of God. The Question is, Which of these Lights, or Spirits, the Quakers
and other Separatists, are guided by?


Quak. We are not for troubling our selves with a speculative Discourse
concerning Lights or Spirits; but we declare, that there is in us and in all
Men, a Light sufficient to instruct and govern us in Matters of Faith and Life:
This is it we desire to walk by; and so long as we do so, we hope none will
blame or condemn us for it.


Judge. Whom will you be tried by?


Quak. By the Sturdiness and Strength of our own Persuasion; which it is our
will and pleasure to call, the Testimony within us.


Judge. You should be tried by God and the Country; but if you would be tried
by the Testimony within, we must examine, whether that be a sure Test or Rule
of Trial: For if the Test be false, the Trial must be uncertain and foolish:
Let me ask, How you know your Testimony within is from the Holy Ghost?


Quak. We know it by this, That God has given us of his Spirit, 1 John 4. 13.


Judge. How do you know he has given you of his Spirit?


Quak. We know it by this, that we cannot sin, 1 John 3. 9.


Judge. How are you assured that you cannot sin?


Quak. Because we are born of God, 1 John 3. 9.


Judge. How know ye that ye are born of God?


Quak. We know it by this, Because we have a new Name given us, which no Man
knows, but he that has it, Rev. 2. 17.


Judge. How do you know of a new Name given you?


Quak. We know it by that Spirit which dwells in us, Romans 8. 11.


Judge. How do you know the Spirit of Truth from the Spirit of Error?


Quak. Our Answer is still at hand, and out of the Scriptures too; He that
knows God, hears us; and he that is not of God, hears not us, 1 John 4. 6.


Judge. What Witness have you to prove it?


Quak. The Spirit bears witness with our Spirits, Romans 8. 16.


Judge. Produce your Witness.


Quak. He that believes has the Witness in himself, 1 John 5. 10.


Judge. Friends! I have catechized you till I have lost you; you run in a
circular identical way of Discourse, turn round till you grow giddy; you wrest
and misapply the Word of Life; God grant it may not be to your own Destruction.
You argue very weakly; -- You have the Spirit of God, because you are assured
of it: You are ass^^'d of it, because of the Spirit that dwells in you. -- The
best that I like in you, is, your seeming to depend upon the Scriptures: These
are the best Criterion, or Touchstone, to try whether your Spirit and Light be
True or Counterfeit. But then we must not fix upon dubious, disputable Texts,
but the plainest and most easy; whose Sense and Meaning is agreed on by Men of
all Judgments: Texts delivered in such clear and univocal Terms, that opposite
Parties do apprehend them in the very same way; and these cannot well be Matter
of Cavil and Dispute.


Quak. I may not object against this.


Judge. The Spirit that is of God is, 1. A Spirit of Truth: 2. Of Holiness Joh.
14. 17. Romans 1. 4, 18. Ephesians. 4. 3, 4. 1 Cor. 4. 12. Isa. 11. 2.
and Purity: 3. Of Unity and Love: 4. Of Meekness and Order: 5. Of Knowledge,
Wisdom, and Understanding. -- If any Man, who is outwardly of a seeming good
Life, is yet of very ill Judgment in Points essential to Christianity; as, to
deny the Sacraments and other Parts of Religion, instituted by the Spirit of
Truth; he must needs be misinstructed by the Spirit of Error and Fascination;
let his outward Conversation be what it will, let his visible Course of Life be
never so 1 John 4. 6.
plausible or severe. On the contrary, If a Man be Orthodox, and at the same
time Dishonest; of some good Opinions, but evil Practice; holds the Truth, but
in Unrighteousness, so as to allow, abet, and encourage Villainies; he is not
seasoned by the Holy, but the Unclean Spirit; let his Judgment be what it can:
For an honest Heathen is not so bad as a Christian Knave. If a Man makes
Division in a Church or Kingdom, dissolves the Bond of Peace, and shall
endeavor to crumble Religion into as many small Pieces, as idle Heads can
suggest; they are misled by that Spirit whose Name is Legion; that old cunning
Serpent, that deceives the World, Mar. 5. 9. Rev. 12. 9. If any, in pretense of
being meek ones, who are by right of Promise to inherit the Earth, demurely
tread upon Crowns and Crosiers, and would be levelling all that by God's
Providence overtop them, These must be guided by the Spirit of the bottomless
Pit, Rev. 9. 11. Lastly, If Men do cite and urge Scripture against the whole
Tenor and Stream of it, and wander into the wrong way, even by that very Word
which does direct them into the right one, we may soon discern what manner of
Spirit they are of; the Spirit of Slumber, the Spirit of dead Sleep, that has
blinded the Mind, Romans 11. 8. Isa. 29. 10. These Rules are proper for the
Trying of our Quakers, and other Men's Spirits. But, Gentlemen of the Jury,
there is one thing more to be added; That Vices are apt many times to pass for
Virtues; many Lies, to Flesh and Blood, are more plausible than Truths; hardly
any thing can be so false, but may have Colors and Probabilities to set it
off; and that a Multitude of ignorant People do often swallow the grossest
Errors, in the disguise of the greatest Truths; taking them all down at once,
without chewing. For this reason, you cannot pass a right Judgment upon
Pretenders to the Spirit, until you have searched into the main or general
Current of their Lives, as well as the mere Conduct and Carrying on their
Designs; with the Means they make use of, as well as the End they seem to aim
at; with all their Actions in a Lump, as well as with the most specious and
fairest of them. And when this is done thoroughly, then let the Hypocrites and
Impostors be what they will, let the Features of Religion be never so
artificially and neatly drawn, let the Colors be laid on with never so
delicate a Pencil, and let that Pencil be managed with never so exquisite
Address; 'twill be most easy to find the Difference betwixt the Picture and
the Life: Let Zeuxes lively Grapes be never so apt to deceive the Birds, yet
the Deadness of his Boy will unfold the Cheat. And truly the Arts of Deceiving
are very obvious: Men that will be infatuated and deceived by them, must be Men
of the lowest Size in Understanding.


Judge. In like manner, as the Spirit, so the Light is to be examined; Whether
the Light within you, be a true Light, or a false one? Whether indeed it be
Light, or only the Appearance of Light in the Soul? Men in this Case should set
themselves, as before an Earthly Jury, and say thus; There Is a Light which I
talk of, and persuade others to walk after: But what? does it show me, That all
whatsoever is forbidden in holy Scripture, must be avoided; whatever it
requires, must be obeyed?

1. Does it teach you not to employ your selves in Things secret and
unreveal'd? Deuteronomy. 49.

Not in Fables and endless Genealogies, 1 Timothy 1. 4.

Not in the Tattling of wandering, idle Busybodies, 1 Timothy 5. 11, 13.

Not with them which teach otherwise than the Apostles, or that consent not to
wholesome Words, 1 Timothy 6. 3. Romans 16. 17.

Not with them which dote about Questions and Strife of Words, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4,
5.

Not in opposition of Science, falsely so called, 1 Timothy 6. 20.

Not in Words to no profit, but the subverting of the Hearers, 2 Timothy 2. 14.

Not in foolish and unlearned. Questions, 2 Timothy 2. 23.

Not in thinking more highly of our selves than we ought, Romans 12. 3.

Not to be wise in our own conceit, but to condescend to others, Romans 12. 16.

Not in rioting and drunknness, chambering, wantonness, strife, and envying,
Romans 13. 13.

Not in judging and setting at naught our Brother, Romans 14. 10.

Not rendering evil for evil, nor railing for railing, Romans 27. 17. 1 Pet. 3. 9.

Not using our liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, 1 Pet. 2. 16.

Not to believe them that say, Christ is in the secret chambers, Mat. 24. 26.

These are plain undeniable Scriptures: And now, Does thy Light teach thee,
that all these things are to be avoided? That Riotting and Drunkenness are to
be avoided? Or if perhaps it do, ask farther, Does it show thee that all the
other Particulars are to be avoided, as well as Drunkenness? See, my Friend,
does thy Light show thee, that thou must not exercise thy self in things that
are Secret and Unreveal'd? Does it forbid all that the Scripture forbids? O
look into thy Soul! Is there a Light in it against all that teach otherwise
than the Apostles? that consent not to the form of wholesome words committed to
Timothy, and other ordained Ministers? Is there a Light in thee, against those
that dote about Questions and Strife of Words; against opposing of Science
against Science, one Light against another, Christ the Light, against the Light
of Christ; the knowledge of the Quakers conceived Light, to make the Knowledge
of the Scripture useless and impertinent? Does the Light direct thee not to
think highly? not to be wise in thy own conceit? not to judge or set at naught
thy Brother? not to render railing for railing? not to use thy Liberty as a
cloak of maliciousness, nor to hearken to or believe them that say, Christ is
in the secret Chambers, Meetings and Conventicles? Put the Case to thy self;
Does the Light I talk of, direct me to avoid all these, or does it not? If not;
then,

1. It is no Light, Isa. 8. 20. If they speak not according to this Word, it is
because there is no Light in 'em.

2. It is great Darkness, St. Mat. 6. 23. If the Light that is in thee be
Darkness, how great is that Darkness?

3. It is Satan transformed into an Angel of Light, 2 Cor. 11. 14. No marvel
(if the false Apostles and deceitful Workers transform themselves into the
Apostles of Christ:) For Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light.

This, Friends! is the Light within you, if it teach you not to avoid all these
things that are against the Scripture; and, if you find your Light within you
does show, that unreveal'd Truths belong not to you; that Doters about
Questions, Opposers of Revealed Truths, Non-consenters, Contemners, Railers,
Cloakers of their Sins with the Pretense of Liberty, are to be avoided. Then,

2. Ask farther, How is thy Life? See what Rays thy Light has cast upon all thy
Faculties: Does it show you a Light to exercise

Brotherly Love, in honor preferring one another? Romans 12. 10.

If it be possible, to live peaceably with all men? Romans 12. 18.

To have Faith to our selves? Romans 14. 22.

To hold fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering? Ephesians. 4. 14.

To follow the Churches of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13, 14.

To study to be quiet, and to do our own business, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11.

To esteem the Clergy very highly for their work sake? 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13.

To please others for their edification, not our selves? Romans 15. 2. 1 Cor. 10.
33.

To be of a condescending and yielding temper? Romans 12. 16.

To walk by the same Rule? Phil. 3. 15, 16.

To practice Godliness, Meekness, Long-suffering, forbearing one another, Unity
of the Spirit? Ephesians. 4. 1, 2, 3.

Women to keep silence in the Churches, to be under obedience, and learn at
home, with all silence and subjection? 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35. 1 Timothy 2. 11, 12, 14.

This is the Truth of the Infallible Scriptures, which has been delivered to
you and to me, not now only, but by all our Christian Predecessors: This is a
sure Word of Prophecy, whereto we must take heed, if we will not be carried
about with diverse and strange Doctrines.


Henry. Truly, my Conscience, as a thousand Witnesses, comes in against me.
It Is a folly to make a Defense, when a Man finds himself condemned in his own
Breast.


Judge. I take Friend Henry to be a very honest Man, one that loves and speaks
Truth: Pray let us hear him a little farther in this Matter.


Henry. I confess, These are Truths not to be denied; many Particulars to be
avoided, and many to be practiced, by every good Christian. I know that the
World is grown to that pass, that the repeating of the plainest Texts is
accounted by many as unconcluding in Divinity, as in Philosophy: But it is time
for us to lay aside all our Sophistry, and to prefer the Wisdom of God before
our own. O! my deluded Brethren! have we not troubled the Nation and our selves
too much with unreveal'd Secrets; harkening to Fables, and rejecting the Truth?
Have we not been for making a Church, a Saint, a Minister, a Heaven, a Christ,
a Light, a God, in our own Imagination; while the Truths in Scripture are
nothing worth in respect of These? Have we not delighted in Tattlings,
Wanderings, busying our selves in Things which concern us not? Are not our
Opinions new Opinions, contrary to the Church? Don't we use our Liberty for a
Cloak of Disorder, a Cloak to Sacrilege, a Cloak to usurp the Divinest
Employments? To cry, All are one in Christ Jesus; therefore all are one in a
Kingdom, a Church, a Family? We are all free from beggarly Rudiments, the
Rudiments of the Ceremonial Law; therefore we are free from Ceremonies of Order
and Decency among Christians; therefore no Tithes to be paid, no Priests to be
maintained; though the Priesthood of Christ be not a Levitical, but long before a
Levitical Priesthood, a Priesthood after his Order that received Tithes, a
Tything Priesthood, before the Levitical Law was instituted; and that not for a
short duration, but for ever, after the Order of Melchizedech. We have
declaimed against Priest, to destroy Minister; we say, Christ is an
High Priest, and yet have Heb. cap. 5, 6, 7.
denied his Ministers to be Priests of an Inferior Order: Our Lives have been
questioning, tatling, opposing, railing, damning Lives: And truly, Friends,
such Lives are contrary to the Light of Christ, the Light of the Word, or any
Light, but that which the Scripture calls Darkness. And however we may come off
before an Earthly Judge, 'twill be too hard for you to answer these Things at
an higher Tribunal. Then, Brethren, 'twill be better for you to say, Lord, we
have believed, trusted, hoped in thy Word; than, We have disputed, questioned,
and contemned it: Better for our Light to say, O Lord, we have received thy
Prophets in thy Name, give us, we beseech thee, a Prophet's Reward; than, We
have slain thy Prophets, reviled and set at naught thy Ministers, and their
Ministry. Therefore, as you love your Salvation, as you desire the Favor and
Fruition of God; if your Souls, Reputations, and Consciences are dear to you;
no more of these Things, which the Light of Eternal Truth tells us we must
avoid.


Judge. What say you to the Practical Part of Religion? Can you clear your
selves in the foregoing Particulars?


Henry. I wish we could do so: But, alas! when I examined my Life by the Rules
of Truth, I found little of the Christian in me, while I adhered to my own
Light. For, is this Brotherly Love, to separate from the Church, and think
nothing worth our Labor, but what opposes it? Is this to prefer one another
in Honor, when we think our selves so holy, that we abhor the Congregations of
Churchmen; think we are polluted, to join in Prayer and Communion with them;
so wise, that all Words besides our own are vain Words, all Books but ours are
mere Errors; that we, and none else, have the Light, the Word, the Truth, all
Privileges? Is it to live peaceably as is possible, when we think it an
excellency to disturb Order, to find fault with every thing but our own
Inventions, and agree in nothing but to disturb that which is established? Is
this the Peace we are to exercise? Is this the Quietness of Illuminated
Christians? The True Light shows us, That if we have Faith, we must have it to
our selves, not to disturb the Church of God with it. We may all be Christians,
and yet have our several Opinions: But if we have our Opinions different from
the received Opinions of the Visible Church, we ought to keep them to our
selves; not to divulge or disperse them, to disturb our Brethren. How can we
say, that we hold fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering, when we
scarce know what Article of Faith we have not rejected? We dispute of Heaven or
Hell, of any Light or Way to Heaven, but that within us. First, We contemned
and threw off the Bishops, the Worship and Discipline appointed and approved by
them: Next, We contemned the Presbyters, which we used as a Means to destroy
Bishops: We rejected the Independents, which showed us a different Way from
Presbytery. Is there any thing we now approve in any of them, but the
Extempore's? And not them neither, but as they serve a Turn. Is this holding
fast, to seek all new? to reject old Doctrines, old Principles, Rules, and
Ceremonies? We are Waverers, Questioners of all things, Holders of nothing. --
The Truth tells us, We are to study Quietness, to esteem a Minister very highly
in Love for his Works sake, to withdraw from every Brother that walks
disorderly, to follow the Churches of God: But our Lives do directly oppose the
Truth: Nobis quiet a movere, merces videbatur: We have always been for Troubled
Waters; if we could but question or contradict, put an odious Gloss or
Interpretation upon the Church, That was a Pleasure to us. We love the Clergy
so well, that we would detain their Tithes, that Poverty might make them
Blessed: We rail against Tithes, not that we think 'em unlawful, but for other
Reasons: We have a long time made it our Business to revile the Clergy of
England, to finite the Shepherds that the Sheep might be scattered, and to draw
the Hearts of the People from them. Are not we to withdraw from every Brother
which walks disorderly? And does not he walk disorderly, who walks contrary to
those Duties which the Apostles have taught in their Epistles? Are we not to
follow the Churches of God? But we have followed every Separation; a
Meeting House, a Desert, a Secret-chamber, a Schism-shop, a Seducing-school,
any Place but a Steeplehouse. How do we follow the Apostles, if we don't as
they require? Do we practice that Lowliness, Meekness, and many other Christian
Duties? Do we agree with others as far as we can, and wait till God shall be
pleased farther to reconcile us? We should not permit Women to lay aside their
Silence and Subjection, and to become Speakers in our Seducinghouses: I Am sure
they don't instruct in Meekness, but question with Impudence, evade by
Ignorance, gloss by Impertinence, and conquer by no Impudentia pro telo;
Ignorantia pro scuto.
Dispute, but violent Bawling, and invincible Insolence. Women's Disputing lost
us Paradise; and Women's Preaching can do no less than lose us the Truth of our
Doctrine, and the Peace and Safety of the Church. And if my Brethren would duly
consider the Plainness and Authority of these unerring Rules of Christian Light
and Life, and what the Spirit has said to the Churches in the Holy Scripture,
they would soon be of my mind; the Difference betwixt us and the Church of
England would here be ended.


Judge. Did not I tell you, that Friend Henry would show himself an honest Man?
Has any of that Party more to offer for themselves? Let them come forth, and
they shall be heard.


Quakers. We object against the Clergy of England, That they are no true
Ministers, as being sent by Men; whereas St. Paul declares, that he was not of
men, neither by men, but by Jesus Christ, Gal. 1. 1.


Judge. The Apostle may be considered, either in respect of his

First Calling, which we commonly call Internal or Extraordinary Calling; and
so indeed St. Paul was not called of man, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ, Acts
9. 4, 5, 6. Or in respect of his

Second Calling, that is, External or Ordinary Calling; and so St. Paul was
called by man, as much as any Minister in our Church was called by Man: For,

1. He had the Hands of Ananias put upon him, to receive his Sight, and to be
filled with the Holy Ghost, Acts 9. 17.

2. He was separated in the Church at Antioch, by Fasting and Prayer.

3. He was not to be believed, till he had the Testimony of Barnabas, as
Letters of Orders or Commendation from the Church, Acts 9. 27. 2 Cor. 3. 1.

It Is necessary, that Extraordinary Ministers should have an extraordinury
Assurance of their being sent of God: Moses must work Miracles, and Christ must
work Miracles: But, Ordinary Ministers are to give but ordinary Assurance, that
they are ordained by the Church, and that they preach nothing contrary to the
Form of sound Words revealed in the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 13. 1. Gal. 1. 7, 8, 9. 1
John 4. 1.


Quak. Is this all the Evidence we must expect of the Truth of a Minister?


Judge. This is as much as can be expected in Cases of this Nature. Miracles
are sometimes required; but never unless upon extraordinary Occasions: And
these Miracles our Dissenters can no more pretend to, than the present Clergy
of the Church of England; and to reject all their Admonitions, by enquiring
into the Proof of their Authority, or Christ's speaking in them, was an old
Wile of Christ's and St. Paul's Enemies, which they do not resolve, but pass
by, as if that were to be supposed, not disputed. Vid. Mark 11. 28. 2 Cor. 13.
3.


Quak. But your Priests take too much upon them? Why all these Robes, Riches,
Tithes, Oblations? Why should the Priests be so well provided for? Every one of
us is as holy, as deserving as any of Them.


Judge. It has ever been the Practice of Separatists, to envy and misapply the
Privileges of the Church. Look into the Congregation of Korah; not one of them
(thinks he) but was at least as good as Moses and Aaron. Methinks I hear 'em
say, How much do they take upon 'em? How do they lift up themselves above the
Congregation of the Lord? Why all this Blue, and Purple, and Scarlet? all this
Linen, Gold, and Jewels, for one Priest? What a Plating, and a Wyring, and
Cunning Work's here? Here Is a stir about Ephods, Curious Girdles,
Breast-plates, and Coats! Cannot the Priest be well enough without these Linen
Coats, these Surplices, Mitres, and Bonnets? What a Lording it do they keep
with their curious Garments, their costly Hems, their intermixed Bells and
Pomegranates? It Is not enough for them to have Robes, but they must have plated
Gold too; nay, Plates of Gold are not enough neither, but they must have Jewels
enclosed in them. What Jewels? Yes, Rows of Jewels. 1. A Ruby, a Topaz, a
Carbuncle, Exodus 39. 10, 11, 12, 13.
2. An Emrald, a Sapphire, a Diamond, 3. A Lygure, an Agate, an Amethyst, 4. A
Beryl, an Onyx, a Jasper.


Here Is Pride upon Pride! Here Is taking upon 'em to purpose! What are these
Priests more than we, that they should be thus robed, we naked and ragged?
Gold! Plated Gold! Plates with Jewels! Jewels in whole Rows! Rows engraven!
Ingravings of the most curious manner! The Ingravings of a Signet! We may well
be poor, whilst we must maintain all this Pride of Aaron and his Sons: This is
like to be a Soul-saving Priest, that has as much in every Jewel, as would
provide sufficiently for many of us.

If Judas should be Judge, he would cry, [All this Waste] at the anointing of
Jesus. And what did they against Aaron or Christ, which you do not carry on
against the Clergy of England? And what do you object against the present
Clergy, that was not objected against Moses and Aaron?

Talk ye of the Pride of the Priests? So did they.

Talk ye of taking too much upon them? So did they.

Talk ye of the Priests being above you? So did they.

Talk ye of the Holiness of your Congregations? So did these abominable
Conspirators.

Ah! Holiness! If this be Holiness, it is Holiness to be abhorred;
Mouth-Holiness, Heart-Hellish-Holiness! If this be Holiness, then be as plain
as the conspiring Jews were against our Savior, Not this man, but Barabbas;
Not Moses, but, Korah; Not Aaron, but Abiram; Not Jesus, but Judas; Not God,
but the Devil.


Judge. Well, Gentlemen, you have heard a long and fair Debate; the Arguments
and Proofs on both Parts, for and against the Church, with diverse Objections
against The Best Choice for Religion and Government: Tell me, Are you agreed
upon your Verdict?


Jury. All agreed.


Judge. Is the Book Guilty, or Not guilty?


Jury. Not guilty, my Lord.


Judge. Because I would have no Mistake, Do you find for Church or Conventicle?


Jury. Unanimously for the Church, against all Dissenters, and all their
Adherents.


Judge. The Verdict's just; and you have showed your selves Men of great
Integrity in this Case. -- Call the Heads of the Latitudinarians,
Presbyterians, Independents, Seekers, and Quakers: Have you any thing more to
say why Sentence should not pass upon you?


Young Couns. My Lord, we plead the Act of Parliament for Liberty of
Conscience, which we all interpret as a sufficient Authority to empower us to
do what we please; and may excuse, if not justify, all our Proceedings.


Judge. You do strangely abuse and misinterpret that Law; it was designed in
favor of Tender Consciences, but not to take away all Conscience. I wish the
Dissenters may all show themselves those Good Men who truly deserve Favor.


Quak. We are a rich and thriving People, we prosper wherever we go; and this
we offer as an Argument, that Heaven favors us; and that we justly expect
Encouragements from Men.


Judge. Is God's permitting Men to be prosperous, or to sin on with Impunity,
any good Reason of his approving them? God permits what he abominates, his own
Dishonor: How patiently did he permit the Disobedience of the First Adam? And
the Crucifixion of the Second? All the Villainies in the World do come to pass
by God's Permission; however contrary they are to his Rules and Precepts. If
prosperous Impiety does therefore cease to be Impiety; because it is prosperous
and permitted; that is, not hindered by Force and Violence, (inconsistent with
a free Moral Agent) then the Great Sultan, and the Great Cham, and the Great
Mogull, as well as the Great Bishop of Rome, are by an equal Sound-Consequence,
the greatest Favorites of Heaven; And then the Argument of Symmachus had been
unanswerably conclusive against the Primitive Christians, who for 300 Years and
upwards, lay groaning under the Yoke of the Heathens Tyranny: or Lastly, If
Permission were still a Mark of Approbation, then Dionysius, or Diagoras, had
argued logically well, when having robbed the Delphick Temple, and immediately
after escaped a Shipwreck; He gave it out, that the Gods had approved his
Sacrilege; Not at all, that he believed, but laughed at Providence. Riches and
Prosperity are not always Blessings to the Enjoyers of them; but very often
bestowed on the worst of Men to their hurt; The Divine Wisdom reserving a
better Reward for his dearest Servants in the World.


Presb. and Indep. My Lord! We are not satisfied, that our dividing and
separating from the Church of England deserves so bad a Name as that of Schism;
if it does, we must expect a very severe Sentence; and the Court must be
justified in its Proceedings against us.


Judge. You have had enough offered before, by the Church's Advocate; but to
leave the Matter more clear, take the Judgment of your Principal Men, who when
time was, reasoned thus against those that subdivided from them.

If we be a Church of Christ, and Christ hold Communion with us, why do you
separate from us? If we be the Body of Christ, do not A Vindication of the
Presbyterian Government, 1649. p. 130.
they that separate from the Body, separate from the Head also? If the Apostle
calls those Divisions of the Church of Corinth (wherein Christians did not
separate into diverse formed Congregations, in the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper) Schisms, 1 Cor. 1. 10. may not your Secession from us, and professing
you cannot join with us as Members, and setting up Congregations of another
Communion, be more properly called Schism? You gather Churches together out of
your Churches; and set up Churches in an opposite Way to our Churches; and all
this you do voluntarily, and unwarrantably, not having any sufficient Cause for
it.

In the same Book, they tell us of a Twofold Schism, Negative and Positive.
Negative, when Men do peaceably and quietly withdraw from Communion with a
Church, from which they are departed. The other is, when Persons withdrawing,
do consociate and withdraw themselves into a distinct and opposite Body,
setting up a Church against a Church; which (say they) Camero calls a Schism,
by way of Eminence. And farther tells us, there are Four Causes that make a
Separation from a Church lawful; 1. When they that separate are grievously and
intolerably persecuted. 2. When the Church they separate from is Heretical. 3.
When it is Idolatrous. 4. When it is the Seat of Antichrist. And where none of
these Four are found, there the Separation is insufficient, and Schism. Now we
are fully assured, that none of these Four Causes can be charged upon our
Congregations; Therefore you must not be displeased with us, if we blame you as
guilty of positive Schism.

All which is as true now, as it was then; and as applicable to us and them,
and it was to them and their Dissenters. The Presbyterians and Independents,
are indeed more guilty of Schism, in separating from the truly Apostolical
Church of England; than they could be in dividing from each other.


Seekers. But we think there are some things in the Constitution of that Church
might be contrived to better Purposes; and we would find out a Church, that
needs no Amendment, no Alteration.


Judge. Then you must be of no Church on this side Heaven; you seek in vain;
because such Perfection is not in this World; yet as great a Degree of it in
the Church of England, as in any Church or Congregation on Earth; and for ought
yet appears, much greater. But that every supposed Corruption in a Church is
not a sufficient Ground of Separation, or Warrant enough to rend and tear the
Church in pieces. Let Mr. Calvin judge between us, who says, That wherever
the Word of God is duly preached, and reverently Instit. lib. 4. Sect. 10, 11,
12. fol. 349.
attended to, and the true Use of the Sacraments kept up, there is the plain
Appearance of a True Church; whose Authority no Man may safely despise, or
reject its Admonitions, or resist its Counsel, or set at naught its Discipline;
much less separate from it, and violate its Unity; For that our Lord, has so
great a Regard to the Communion of his Church, That he accounts him an Apostate
from his Religion, who obstinately separates from any Christian Society, which
keeps up the true Ministry of the Word and Sacraments; That such a Separation
is a Denial of God, and of Christ; And that it is a dangerous and pernicious
Temptation, so much as to think of separating from such a Church, the Communion
whereof is never to be rejected, so long as it continues in the true use of the
Word and Sacraments -- Though otherwise it be overrun with many Blemishes and
Corruptions.

Which is as plain and full a Determination of the Case, as if he particularly
designed it against the Doctrine and Practice of the Modern Dissenters from our
Church.


Quak. I hope the Nation will yet believe us to be very honest harmless Men;
who deal fairly and kindly with all Persons; never oppressing, griping, or
defrauding any Man; we are at a Word; avoid abundance of that vain unnecessary
Talk, which others use in Trading; and therefore I humbly desire that the Court
would acquit us.


Judge. You have forfeited much of that good Opinion, that the Nation once had
of you; and all the Riches you boasted of, were gotten by Peoples Credulity,
trusting you too much, before they tried you: All your Religion is now dwindled
into a bare Pretense of Honesty, which at best, is not equal to that of the
more Ancient Heathens; Your YEA or NAY, your Single Word shall bite as much as
a Thousand; a Lie may soon be told; -- and if the World complains of you for
any Dishonesty, in overreaching or deceiving your Neighbors, all is put off
with your Spiritual Distinction; It Is not, (say you) downright Cheating of Men,
but a sanctified Out-witting 'em, which is owned and practiced amongst you.


Presbyt. My Lord! We have two or three Gentlemen to produce in our Vindication.


Judge. Who are they?


Presbyt. St. Hierome, Aerius, and Honest John Calvin; The first says, That
Bishop and Presbyter are all one: The second, That they differ nothing in
Order, Dignity, and Power: And the last was so offended with Episcopacy, That
he threw out the Bishop of Geneva, and turned the Name of Bishop into that of
Superintendent; and under that Title, He and his Godly Successors, have there
about one hundred Years, governed that Church.


Judge. Hierome must be a Saint now, for letting fall one single Sentence in
favor of the Presbyterians: But those that are acquainted with St. Hierome's
Writings, well know, that this Passage was intended to beat down the Usurpation
of the Deacons at Rome, who then began to out-top the Presbyters; on this
Account, he was tempted to magnify and extol the Place and Dignity of
Presbyters in the Church; And though he said, that Bishops and Presbyters are
all one, He yet in other places excepts the Office of Ordination and
Government; And does at other times plainly and frequently assert the Authority
of Bishops over Presbyters; and did himself constantly live in Communion with,
and Subjection to Bishops. John Calvin could not advance himself at Geneva
without the Bishop's Fall; and yet had all things belonging to a Bishop, but
the Name; As Old Noll had in the Monarchy but the bare Title of King. The
Geneva or Presbyterian Discipline was begotten in Rebellion, born in Sedition,
and nursed up by Faction. Aerius was one of the worst Friends you could have
produced; he was vexed to see himself slighted, and not preferred to a
Bishopric, as his Companion Eustathius was; And this made the haughty Man
start aside, and talk extravagantly against Bishops; ^^at the Church branded
and excommunicated him for an Heretic, and Epiphanius represents him little
better than a Madman, distempered by Pride, Emulation, Envy, Covetousness,
Ambition: These were the Causes of his opposing Episcopal Government. If you
consult Blondell, Salmatius and Daille, whose great Parts, Learning, and
indefatigable Industry, could, if any thing, have made out the contrary; you will
see they have been forced to grant, That Episcopacy obtained in the Church
within a few Years after the Apostolic; But our Church can safely carry it
higher, even to the Apostles themselves; so much you urged me to speak,
concerning the Antiquity, and Dignity of Bishops in the Church.


Dissent. We all acknowledge, we have had Freedom enough to speak for our
selves; we have but one thing more to plead; and then we shall submit to your
Lordship's Determination. -- Our Separation from the Church must be allowed,
because there are in it many wicked People, scandalous ill Livers; who for want
of due Exercise of Discipline, or by the Inadvertence or Connivence of its
Governors, do remain in it; and so give us just occasion of Offense and
Separation: There are two Texts of Scripture for us in this Case, 2 Cor. 6. 17.
Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and
touch not the unclean thing; so Rev. 18. 4. Come out of her, my people! that ye
be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.


Judge. This I take to be none of the least Absurdities the Dissenters are
guilty of. Are there no such Mixtures, no Offenders, no ill Livers amongst you?
Are they all holy, harmless, and pure that come to your Congregations? If not,
you have the same Reasons to separate, to come out from among them, as to
withdraw from the Church, for fear of Pollution; and by the same Argument, you
must never join in any Communion while the World endures. The want of
Discipline, we may thank you for; You, You Dissenters, are the Cause that so
many Immoralities are now tolerated; That Excommunication, and other necessary
Censures of the Church (which formerly kept People in good Order, and preserved
the Honor and Reputation of Religion) are by your Encouragement of
Disobedience, both omitted and mocked at. And were you truly Men of tender
Consciences, this one Consideration would make your Hearts ache. Look into the
State of the Church, under the Jewish Administration, and you will find, that the
Sins of neither Priest nor People, owning the True God, became at any time the
occasion of Separation to them. What Sins could be greater than those of Eli's
Sons? And yet did not the People of God, Elkanah and Hannah by Name, refrain to
join with them in the Public Worship? 1 Samuel 2. 17, 24. In Ahab's time, when
all Israel halted betwixt God and Belial, yet then did the Prophet Elijah
summon all Israel to appear on Mount Carmel, and held a Religious Communion
with them, in Preaching, and Praying and Offering a Miraculous Sacrifice, 1
King. 18. All along, when both Prince, Priests, and People were very much
depraved and debauched in their Manners, we don't find that the Prophets at any
time exhorted the Faithful and Sincere to separate from the rest; or that they
themselves set up any separate Meetings, but continued in Communion with the
Church, preaching to them, and advising them to Repentance.

Look into the New Testament, you will see in the Apostolic Churches of Corinth,
Galatia, and the seven Churches of Asia, many of the Members were grown very
Bad and Scandalous; yet we don't read the Example of any Good Man separating
from the Church, or any one Precept (rightly understood) from the Apostles so
to do. They don't tell them that the whole Body was polluted, by those filthy
Members; and that if they would be safe themselves, they must withdraw from
their Communion; but exhort 'em to use all Means to reclaim them: And if
neither private nor public Admonitions and Reproofs would do, then to suspend
them from the Communion of the Church, till by Repentance and Amendment, they
rendered themselves capable of being restored to Peace and Pardon.

Our Blessed Savior knew the Jewish Church to be a corrupt Church; Priests and
People lewd and vicious, yet kept in Communion with it, and commanded his
Disciples so to do. We read that the Scribes and Pharisees, who ruled the
Ecclesiastical Chair at that time, had perverted the Law, corrupted the Worship
of God, were blind Guides, devoured Widows houses, Matt. 15. 6, 7, 8.
were Hypocrites, and such as only had a Form of Godliness; yet did not our
Savior separate from their Communion; but was made under the Law, freely
submitted himself to all the Rites and Ceremonies of it. He was circumcised on
the Eighth Day, redeemed by a certain Price, being a Son and a Firstborn,
observed the Passover, and other Feasts enjoined by their Law; Yea, and that of
the Dedication too, which was but of Human Institution; was baptized amongst
them, preached in their Temples and Synagogues, reasoned with 'em about
Religion, exhorted his Disciples to hear their Doctrine, though not to follow
their Practices. Now, what greater Cause, on the Account of Corruption and
Manners, could be given to separate from a Church, than was there? Yet how
careful was our Savior, both by his Example and Precept, to forbid and
discountenance it?

Consider the Representations of a Church, given in Scripture, and elsewhere;
to show, that it is a Mixture of Good and Bad; It Is called a Field, in which
Wheat and Tares grew up together; a Net, wherein are Fishes of all sorts; a
Barn, wherein there is Corn and Chaff; a Vine, that has fruitful and barren
Branches; an House, in which are Vessels of Gold and Silver, and of lesser
Value; a Marriage Feast, at which were wise and foolish Virgins, etc. St.
Hierome compares the Church to Noah's Ark, wherein were preserved the Clean and
Unclean. And without Vanity I may speak it, though we have too many wicked
People belonging to the Church of England; yet there are at the same time, a
far greater Number of truly pious Christians (that live up to the Strictness of
Religion) to be found in the Communion of this Church, than amongst all the
Dissenters in the whole Kingdom.

As for the two places in Scripture, produced for your Separation; read like
truly Wise Men; consider the Coherence and Design of them, and it will plainly
appear, that by the first Text is meant, That Christians in the Church of
Corinth, should not meddle with Unclean and Abominable Practices that were used
by the Heathens in the Worship of their False Gods: These they were not to
touch; to have no Fellowship with them in these, but rather to reprove them;
that is, in Judgment to condemn, by Word to reprove, and in Conversation to
avoid them. So that this is nothing at all touching the Duty of one Christian
communicating with another; though it has too often been so abused and
mis-interpreted. And for the second Text, it is certainly to be understood also
of Idolaters; and, according to most Interpreters, of the Roman Idolatrous
Polity; and is a Command to all Christians to forsake the Communion of That
Church, lest they endanger their own Salvation, by Communicating with her in
her Idolatrous Worship. And if this be the true Sense of the Words, it
abundantly justifies our Separation from the Roman Church; but affords not the
least Plea for Dissenters to separate from Ours. -- And now I pass to

THE SENTENCE.

YOU Latitudinarians, Presbyterians, Independents, Seekers, and Quakers: You
have had a fair and impartial Trial, upon an Indictment for your Opposing and
unjustly Separating from the Church of England: The Jury has brought you in
Guilty. You stand condemned by many Laws of this Realm: You are condemned by
the Holy Scriptures; you are condemned by the Practice of the Church of Christ,
for above 1500 Years together; and by that of all Reformed Churches, who were
zealous for Episcopal Government, used Liturgies and Public Forms of Prayer,
had Festival Commemorations of Saints, not to pray to 'em, but to praise God
for 'em; had their Rites and Ceremonies in their Public Worship, more in
Number, and more liable to Exceptions, than those used in our Church at this
Day. You are separated from a Church that was planted by our Lord and his
Apostles, watered with the Blood of Holy Martyrs, and redeemed by the Blood of
the Holy JESUS. You are withdrawn from a Church that proposes no sinful Terms
in all her Communion; a Church wherein a Man may be as faithful a Servant of
the True God, as Loyal a Subject to his Prince, as Honest a Man in his
Dealings, as good a Neighbor, and as firm a Friend, as can be found in any
Church or Society of Men in the Christian World. Therefore,

You, Sir Anthony, 'Squire, Mouth, Maggot, and Ponteus, with all the rest who
are obstinate Opposers of so Excellent, so Incomparable a Church; You must go
to the Place from whence your many Erroneous Opinions came, (Rome or Geneva)
there to be dealt with according to your Merits: And the Lord have mercy upon
your Souls.

Here follow their several CONFESSIONS.


Sir Ant. Here now, behold! upon my bended Knees, I confess the Justice of the
Court, ask Mercy of this abused Corporation, and bid Adieu to it, and all my
silly and credulous Votaries, in these mournful Words: Good People, I own that
our Rise was unjust;
Our Fall, the Desert of Deceit and of Lust.



Squire. O Pan! aliique Dii! Dat mihi ut intus,
Sim pulcher! --
I know not what God can be a Friend to me! I invoke them all; that though I
appear in the darkest Colors to the Worlds Eye, I may not always suffer the
gloomy Storms of an evil Conscience, nor be continually frighted with the
Deformities of my Soul. Siccine perpetuo cruciantur crimina Luctu?
Hic turpem spectate virum! and ludibria Fati!
Ah scelus! Ah Facinus! me vix mercede potitum,
Sub Veneris Ouercu* Threnis* mea Musa reliquit.
I who once was a great Man amongst Poets, Historians, Linguists, Orators,
(especially in the Opinion of the Fair Sex) have scarce a Word left to plead in
my excuse. -- I must withdraw: Time and true Repentance may do much; but it is
impossible I can presently retrive my lost Reputation; and what signifies a
Chair of State, without it? I Will then make a Virtue of Necessity; in this
Public Place, abdicate my Office, and with all Humility resign That which I
cannot hold. Farewell, Scydromedia! when I am gone, Farewell for ever.


Judge. I heartily wish, that All Dissenters would make such ingenuous
Confessions, as these two Gentlemen have now made: However, I shall, in another
Place, fairly represent this their Civil Behavior toward the Court, to gain
'em a Reprieve, and, if possible, a Pardon: The first I do, the latter I dare
not promise.


Quak. Verily, Friends, our Light within us, our Personal Light, we have
trusted to, like an Ignis Fatuus, has led us upon many perilous Boggs, and
amazing Precepices, and there left us.


Presbyt. Ah, Brethren! I that have often preached Hell and Damnation to
others, (enough to scare People out of all Sense, as well as Religion) am now
under the Sentence of Condemnation. My Soul, alas! is like a glimmering Candle
in a dark deceitful Lantern; a Lantern, I say, whose Sides are all Dark. I can
give but little or no Direction to the People. I have a small Degree of Light
or Comfort now left to support me: And, Oh! I must expect less when I come to
die!


Indep. My Spirit is like, very like, may well be compared unto; I say, it is
like a poor, venomous, disturbed Spider, in a broken Cobweb; it makes all the
haste it can to escape the Broom of Impartial Justice.


Seeker. It Is as plain as the Sun in a Cowcumber, that there are some few good
meaning People among the many Sorts of Dissenters. I have sought, pried, and
narrowly looked into them; and truly have never been able to fix in any of
their Persuasions, to my content. Since I foolishly departed from the Church of
England, in vain have I pursued what is not to be had in Error and Schism;
namely, True Peace and Satisfaction of Mind.


Judge. I observe, our Phanatical Canters are very unlucky at Simile's; and
after all their Juggling, when they come to be serious, to make a right
Discovery, they are at a loss: Then they cry out, Alas, Sirs! how sadly have we
been cheated, misled, and deluded; nay, almost inevitably ruined our selves and
others, by forsaking the Church of England? And I need use no more Words to
advise the Dissenters to return speedily to that Pillar and Ground of Truth,
which cannot deceive them.

The SPEECH to the CHURCH.
ALL you Gentlemen, Lovers of the Church of England, of that most sound
incomparable Religion and Government therein established: Be you unbyas'dly
true to that Church; lay aside all those unhappy Feuds and Animosities which
these English Jesuits, the Dissenters, have raised amongst you. Meet often,
understand one another, maintain a friendly Correspondence with all that have
any Favor for this Church: Agree as one Man in every Public Election: And let
those who are to serve in Parliament, be sure constantly to attend on that
Trust reposed in 'em, not to receive the Honor only, but faithfully to do the
Service for which they are chosen; not by absenting, or any inadvertency, to
leave the Church to the Mercy of those Men, who, whilst their Master is roaming
about, sit still there, seeking whom they may devour. Let all honest Churchmen
favor and encourage the Conformable Clergy, set a good Example to their
Tenants and Neighbors, to fill the Churches. Serve your King and Country with
all cheerfulness. Let no Man's Estate or Quality raise him above the Care of
seeing Justice duly administered, lest by forcing the Government to find
Magistrates and Juries among inferior, illiterate, and illprincipled Men, you
venture your Rights and Liberties, Estates, Religion, and Lives, (more valuable
than Ease) in very dangerous Hands. Nothing can be carried against you, nor to
the prejudice of King or Church, if you appear for your selves and them.
Remember once more, that Dissenters are ever for dividing of you, and by your
Divisions to increase their own Party; that so often as you differ, on any
Public Occasions, so often you disable the Church, and weaken your own
Interest. Can it be any Fault to use the same Policy for preserving the Best
Churoh in the World, which the several Sectaries use to advance themselves by?
They unite; and besides that, they rarely lay out any Money, but with those of
their own Party. So the Donatists upheld their Separation from the Church, and
kept their Party fast together, by Trading only within themselves; by employing
none to Till their Grounds, or be their Stewards, but those that would be of
their Side; nay, sometimes hiring Persons, by large Sums, to be baptized into
their Party; as Crispin did the People of Mapalia. How evident is the same
Policy among our modern Quakers? It needs neither Proof nor Vid. Aug. Ep. 173.
ad Crisp.
Observation. Independency was a Faction, not matter of Conscience; needy,
broken, decayed Men, who knew not how to live, and hoped to get something,
became Sticklers for it: Thus it was in the Late Times, and thus it is Now.
Look into the Trading Part of the Nation; and he must be an heedless and
indiligent Observer, that does not take notice how Interests are formed, and by
what Methods Parties and Factions are kept up: How many thousands of the poorer
sort of Dissenters depend on this or that Man for their Work, Livelihood, and
Subsistence; how many depend on others for Trade and Custom; whom accordingly
these Leading Men can readily produce to give Votes, and increase Parties, on
all Public Occasions: And (which is no less remarkable) what very small
Encouragement any Man finds from them, that once deserts 'em, and comes over to
the Church of England. If we, that are Gentlemen, and all that wish well to the
Church, would cease to enrich our Opposers, by Trading or Dealing with them;
but would unanimously agree to Encourage our Friends, by dealing with no
others; We should never lose the Day at any Election, nor need any more Laws to
bring Men to Church: For, the Dissenters would soon grow weary of their
ungainful, their unprofitable Separation.

Here ends the TRIAL.

Court. Huzza! Huzza! Church and King! Church and King!


THE EPILOGUE.
WHen truest busy Fame, all over
Such Rumors spread, never heard before
From Stew or Pit, from Carp and Cage,
(Unless in Conventickling Age)
Old Putt and Tickler slily came
I an ancient Scydromedia.
Town with fine new Name,
Thinking, at sight, to have subdued
The noisie, talking Multitude,
Or, by their known Dissimulation,
To Milk, or Ride the Corporation;
Else, if in Charter but one Flaw,
To make all void by Dint of Law:
But, Good Old Cause, the Devil's in it,
And Members too, appeared in Print:
Prevailing Truth! that plaguey Book,
With this Impartial Jury took;
And Stranger yet, the Cause when tried,
It Is thought not one forswore or ly'd.
Safely I swear, Whoever writ it,
Did to all Sorts and Sizes fit it;
Left naught untouched, not amorous Oak,
Disguising Periwig, or Cloak,
Bold Pyrate, Chamber-Practice, Rape,
Could not that Author's Pen escape.
The Sober Party, justly fitted,
Lost is their Cause; the Church acquitted.
Cast and condemned the Whiggs are, crossed
With Grief and sore Amazement tossed.
It Is vain to boast of Innocence,
Or color Vileness with Pretense.
Say ye, Sir! Say ye! one Saint cried,
We never more shall stem the Tide;
Not all our Violence and Spite
Can take away the Churches Right:
If Judge Sincere, and Jury Loyal,
We'll never move for second Trial.
How well-advis'd, the Bell-man lurks,
Shunning to try his Waterworks?
While some perhaps of blessed intent,
Are doomed to suffer Banishment.
Be gone then, Hotspurs! cross the Main,
Freach up Presbytery in Spain:
Why should your Bond of Conscience be
By Inquisition 's Danger free?
Bewitching Elymas! no more
Thy Thievish Porringor adore;
Tell Pope this Truth, Thy Cant and Whine
Are Friends to Rome: Then he will be thine.
There great Reward thou may obtain,
Till Mischief sends thee back again.
Mouth! who can bellow, bray, or bark,
And speak all Lingua 's of the Ark;
Go, among Wolves and Tigers go;
On these thy mighty Gifts bestow:
Creatures of Reason better know.
Let Maggot never turn to Fly,
More generate or multiply,
Lest he proud Swarms of Insects breed,
That may this Sheepish Nation bleed;
Never out of Fleece once show thy Head,
Till we conclude, The Maggot 's dead.
Ponteus! purge Presbyter John,
Much grieved with Superstition,
Swelled with a Tympany of Pride,
And damned ill Qualities beside:
Give him a swinging Dose; repeat,
Till thou have made the Cure complete;
However, carry on the Cheat.
Friend Henry! Thou, of all the rest,
Deserve to be accounted Best:
Stay Friend; Thou have the Churches Voice,
The Wise and Good applaud thy Choice.
No Church-Whiggs, or Dissenters Crew,
None but the honest Church-man's true;
None else give God and King their Due.
FINIS.

