THE TRIAL and PLEA OF JAMES Earl of DERBY, Prisoner of War, before a Court
Martial at Chester, October. 1. 1651.

The Articles were several particulars of Treason, by his Invading ENGLAND,
raising Forces, etc. The Answer is a confession of the fact.

The Plea is a Plea of Quarter, which he conceives to be a good Bar to a Trial
for Life, by Court Martial or Council of War, though not against a mere
Civil Judicature.

His Plea was overruled by the Court upon this account, That the Court
Martial was directed by Parliament. So that the Court proceeded to Sentence,
only gave him a fortnights time from the first of October.

From this Sentence he appealeth to his Excellency the Lord General.

2 Kings 6.21, 22. And the King of Israel said to Elisha when he saw them, my
Father shall I smite them? shall I smite them?

And he answered, thou shall not smite them, would thou smite those whom
thou have taken Captive with thy Sword, and with thy Bow.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1651.

THE Charge and Articles OF HIGH TREASON AGAINST The Earl of Derby, with the
Trial, examination, and Confession, on Tuesday and Wednesday, before a
Court-Marshal at Chester.
UPon the 16th of this instant month, by an extraordinary Messenger from
Chester it is advertized, That the Earl of Derby was brought before the
Court-Marshal, consisting of Col. Duckenfield and 15 Commission-Officers, where
the Judge Advocate brought in, and read the Charge against him, consisting of
High Treason, viz.

1. That he had in a most traitorous and hostile manner, been aiding, abetting,
and assisting to Charles Stuart (Son to the late Tyrant.)

2. That he had held correspondency and confederacy with the said Charles
Stuart, and his accomplices; and to the utmost of his power, endeavored the
subversion and extirpating of this present Government; as also the violating
and abolishing the Law and Discipline, so happily by them established.

3. That he had traitorously endeavored to involve this NATION in another
bloody and intestine War, by issuing forth and sending Warrants in Lancashire,
and summoning in the people to a Randevouz.

4. That he had most traitorously appeared in the head of a party, both in
Cheshire, Lancashire, and other places within this Nation, and granted
Commissions, signed C. R [being a signal used by the grand enemy of this
Common-wealth] to diverse Gentlemen, Papists, and others, for the raising of
forces against the Parliament, etc. The Judge Advocate having read the Charge,
his Lordship made a short Speech in answer thereunto, to wit, That he had not
acted in the least, contrary to the Commands of his Master the King; but what
he had done, was in order and obedience to the power and Instructions from him
received.

After which Col. Duckenfield and the rest of the Council, proceeded to
examination, and stated the matters of fact, consisting of High Treason; which
caused his Lordship to look very pensively, and moved him so far, that he would
fain do something which might be considered, and himself in it; and withal,
declares a good inclination to deliver up the Isle of Man, to the present
power; only here lies a scruple, That he is afraid it will be imputed as a very
ignoble and dishonorable thing, to surrender up his Children and Lady in it.
But after some time spent in this business, the Council referred the further
proceedings in his Trial until another time.

The matters of fact exhibited against him, are of a very high nature, and its
probable may draw a severe sentence upon him: diverse other persons of quality
there are which were engaged also in this treasonable design, who are likewise
to be brought to the Bar of Justice: Therefore I conceive it requisite, to
present to the freeborn people of this Nation: certain Rules and Proposals,
showing the happiness and joy that will redound to all those at the hour of
death that walk steadfastly in the ways of Holiness; and the misery and
torments that will befall on the contrary, to those that are opposers, and kick
against the Ordinances thereof. An evident demonstration whereof follows.

The Substance of the Earl of Derby's Speech to enforce his plea.
I Understand my self to be Convented before you, as well by a Commission from
the Lord General, as by direction of an Act of Parliament of the 12th. of
August last.

To the Articles I have given a full and ingenuous Answer, what may present it
self for my advantage, I have gained liberty to offer and urge by Advise.

And I doubt not but in matter of Law the Court will be to me instead of
Counsel in Court.

Sir, I shall first observe to you the nature and general order of a Court
Martial, with the Laws and Axioms of it, as far as concerns my Case, and
then shall apply my plea to such Orders, etc.

And therefore I conceive (under favor) that the Laws of a Court Martial, are
as the Laws of Nature and Nations, equally binding all persons, and in all
places Military; and to be observed inviolably.

And therefore it is, if a Judgment be given in one Court Martial, there is
no appeal to any other Court Martial.

Of which Law Martial, the Civil Law gives a plentiful Accoun,t far above
what the Common Law does; as Grotius de iure belli, etc.

But because it is one only point of Martial Law, which I am to insist upon
for my life, -- I shall name it, and debate the Jus, the right of it, -- It is
Quarter for life given me by Captain Edge.

Which I conceive to be a good bar to avoid trial by a Council of War for
Life.

That you are a Council of War, will be admitted, and being so, that you must
judge and proceed to Laws of War, and no otherwise, cannot be denied.

That Quarter was given me, if it be scrupled, I am ready to prove, and being
given, that it is pleadable is above dispute.

I shall only remove one Objection, which is, that though this be a Court
Martial, yet the special Nature of it is directed by Parliament.

To this I Answer, though the Parliament direct the Trial as it is, yet it
limits it to a Court Martial, which cannot direct it self, nor is directed of
its own nature by any such direction.

For to appoint a Court Martial to proceed by any other Laws, than a Court
Martial can, -- is a repugnancy in Naturarei.

So that as such Court Martial retains it is proper Laws and Jurisdictions for
the support of it self; so the pleas and liberties incident to that cannot be
denied the Prisoner.

That Quarter, and such Quarter as I had given, is a good plea for life to a
Council of War, I shall not endeavor so much to evince by Authors (that being
the proper work of the learned in Civil Laws) but by such way as that which we
call ius gentium, is proved by common practice, and strong reason.

For the first I shall not need to bring any Foreign instances, being before
you whose experiences has made this thing familiar to you; and I believe you
will agree with me, That I am not only the first Peer, but the first Man,
tried by a Court Martial after Quarter given; unless some matters ex post
facto, or subsequent to such Quarter, brought them within he examen of such
Court Martial.

And (as I am informed) upon the great Trial of the Earl of Cambridge, Lord
Capell, Earl of Holland, etc that plea of Quarter being thoroughly urged, it
was only avoided upon this ground, That it was no good Plea against a Civil
Jurisdiction, there being no color of dispute, but tacitly admitted and
concluded, that it was a good plea against a Military jurisdiction.

And though the Lord Capell and Lord Gorings quarter seemed to have some
advantage, as being given by the General, and by way of Articles, yet that
quarter given to the Earl of Cambridg was given him by a particular Captain,
and that quarter, as quarter considered, as strong as the other, only both
avoided by the civil jurisdiction in the high Court of Justice.

It being a rule in war, that quarter has as much force being given in action,
as Articles have in a Cessation, both irreversible by any Military power.

And though it may be a received opinion in politiques, that no Generals or
soldiers concessions should prejudice the States interest, yet they shall be
bars to their own power.

I confess I love the laws of Peace more then those of war, yet in this case I
must adhere to those of war.

And I would only know, whether a quarter was given me for a benefit to me, or
for a mischief; it for a benefit, I am now to have it made good; if for a
mischief, then it destroys the faith of men in arms.

And I have read this for a maxim of war, that promises made by Kings, or
States Commanders, ought to be observed inviolably, else there never will be
any yielding.

And I shall lay this before you as a Rule, that quarter given by the meanest
soldier (if not forbidden) obliges as far as if the General had done it.

And I never read or heard, that any Soldiers received to mercy, were (after
12 hours respite) ever denied quarter, or tried by a Court Marshall.

It may be objected then, that it may rest in the power of no private soldier
by giving quarter to pardon treason.

To that I say, I pleaded it not as an absolute pardon, but as a bar to a
Court Marshall.

I shall infer further from conclusions of reason.

The profession of a soldier has danger enough in it, and he need not add
any to it, to destroy the right of arms. I am before you as a Court Marshall,
it may be all of you, or most, have in some action or other since these
troubles began, received quarter for your lives, and would it not be hard
measure that any Court Marshall should try you afterward.

If this quarter be foiled or nulled, all the Quarter, Articles, terms or
conclusions made since the war began may be examinable by any subsequent Court
Marshall, nay, by this the sword, the Law of Arms, all Millitary interest, and
your own safety, are judged and jeoparded as well as mine.

But I shall not multiply, presuming you will not judge by the laws of war, in
which capacity only you sit; and that you will in Religion and Justice allow
that plea which is universally, even in all parts of the world allowable.

If you are dissatisfied, I pray that as an essential to Justice I may have a
Doctor of the Civil Law assigned me, or at least Liberty to produce their
books and opinions.

And that in the interim you suspend your sentence

Touching my levying forces in the Isle of Man and invading England, I might
plead my self (and that truly) a stranger to all the Acts of Treason, and in
particular to the Act of the 12th. of August, -- And that the Isle of Man is
not particularly named in any of the Acts of Treason, and not being
particularly named, those Acts reach not, nor bind those of that Island, -- And
in particular, that I was in the Isle of Man, when the last Act was made. And
the Law looks not backwards; -- And whilst I was in England, I was under an
unlikelihood and unpossibility of knowing the new Acts, which I leave to
judgment. But because I have, as to my Fact, confessed and submitted to the
Parliaments Mercy,

I do, as to your Military power, earnestly plead Quarter, as a Bar to your
further trial of me. And I doubt not but you will deeply weigh a point so
considerable, both to your concernments and Consciences, before you proceed to
Sentence.

And admit my Appeal to his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell, on this
single point.

To the Right Honorable his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell. The humble
Petition of James Earl of Derby, a Sentenced prisoner in Chester.
Showing,
THat it appears by the annexed what Plea your Petitioner has urged for
life, in which the Court Marshall here were pleased to overrule him, it being a
matter of Law, and a point not adjudged nor presidented in all this war: And
the plea being only capable of appeal to your Excellency, whose wisdom will
safely resolve it; and your Petitioner being also a prisoner to the High Court
of Parliament in relation to his rendition of the Isle of Man.

In all he most humbly craves your Excellencies Grace, that he may as well
obtain your Excellencies judgment on his plea, as the Parliaments mercy, with
your Excellencies favor to him, and he shall owe his life to your Lordships
service, And ever pray, etc. DERBY.


To that objection, that a private Officer cannot give quarter for life, is
oppose the constant customs of men in arms in all Nations, and the particular
warrant of the civil Law in that behalf. One particular case was pressed by his
Lordship, and presented to his Excellency the Lord Genesis Cromwell.

A Case wherein six private Soldiers gave quarter to six thousand of the
enemy, among whom were the chiefest Officers of the enemies Army, the General
only excepted.
IN the year 16^1. The prince of Orange being with the States Army at Bergen
ap Zo^me, to prevent the enemy of a design of Landing in some part of Zealand,
or some of those lesser Islands that divide it and Holland, the enemy being
shrouded and distracted, and so forced a shore, half a dozen private Soldier
of the Princes Army came to the place, to whom 6000 and above gave themselves
prisoners; and the quarter was made good unto them, and they allowed to their
Ransomes by the Prince of Orange, notwitstanding he was with his Army on a very
hasty march, with an intention to have cut them all off, in regard there was no
quarter given by Water, nor any certain ransom. In which business above
three hundred Officers were prisoners. This Case is attested by

Foulcke Houncks. The. Alcock.


Colonel Cromwell and Mr. Hugh Peter's were present at this Action.

Whereas further it has bin objected against the said Earl of Derby, that he
killed one Captain Bootle at the taking of Boulton; for his vindication, from
that imputation, he produced an Affidavit of a man of good repute voluntarily
taken before Doctor Aylet in the Chancery, in the year 1647. as follows.
PEter Cropper of Bickerstaffe in the County of Lancaster Gentleman, makes
Oath, That about the latter end of the Month of May, in the year 1644. at the
time when Prince Rupert took the Town of Bolton in Lancashire, by assault; he
this Depone^t, being there present, saw the now Earl of Derby near unto the
Cross in Bolton; and it being rumored then, that the said Earl had slain one
Bootle, that had bin once his Porter, he looked and saw the said Bootle
wounded, but not dead; and soon after, one Col. Clifton, since deceased,
standing by, with his sword ran the said Bootle through once or twice, saying,
If thou have not enough, thou shall have more, or words to that effect; upon
which the said Bootle fell down dead; and he further says, that this killing
of the said Bootle, was above an hour before the said Town was taken, or any
general Quarter given; for that the Princes Soldiers did pursue those in the
Town above an hour after the said Bootles death, before they ceased, and gave
Quarter.

In the presence of Edward Stockley Gentleman. Peter Cropper,
Jurat 12 die May 1647.

ROB. AYLET.




Besides this, a Gentleman of Honor and Repute, Colonel Russell, attested
voluntarily before his Excellency the Lord General, that the Earl of Derby,
at the taking of Bolton charged with Prince Ruperts Lifeguard, who entered the
Town next to the Forlorn hope, and that Quarter was not given of an hour and
half after; so that if the Earl of Derby killed Bootle, it must needs be in the
height of the storm, Bootle being killed at the first entrance.

Upon the whole is is submitted to his Excellency the Lord General, and the
Council of the Army, whether the Earl of Derby being a prisoner of war, after
quarter given by a Capt. of the L. Genesis own Regiment, may be Sentenced to death
by a Court Martial.

FINIS.

