I DO appoint Dorman Newman to Print the Trial of Henry Baron Delamere, and
order that no other Person presume to Print the same.

March 20. 1685/6

Jeffreys Canc.

THE TRIAL OF HENRY Baron Delamere FOR HIGH TREASON, In WESTMINSTER HALL, the
14th Day of January, 1685.

Before the Right Honorable George Lord Jeffreys, Baron of Wemm, Lord High
Chancellor of England, Constituted Lord High Steward on that Occasion.

On which Day, after a full Hearing, the Lord Delamere was Acquitted from all
Matters laid to his Charge.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman at the Kings Arms in the Poultry. MDCLXXXVI.

THE TRIAL OF HENRY Baron of Delamere. Die Jovis, xivto Januarii, 1685.
Cl. of Cr. SErgeant at Arms, Make Proclamation.


Serj. at Arm. O yes, O yes, O yes. My Lord High Steward of England his Grace
does straightly charge and command all manner of persons to keep silence, and
to give ear to the King's Majesty's Commission to his Grace my Lord High
Steward of England, upon pain of Imprisonment.


Then the Commission was read, his Grace and all the Peers standing up
bare-headed. Then the Staff being carried between Garter King at Arms, and the
Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, was with three reverences delivered upon the
knee to his Grace, and by him re-delivered to the Gentleman Usher of the Black
Rod, to hold during the Service. Cl. of Cr. Sergeant at Arms, Make Proclamation.


Serg. at Arm. O yes, His Grace my Lord High Steward of England does straightly
charge and command all manner of persons here present, except Peers, Privy
Counselors, and the reverend Judges now assistant, to be uncovered.


Cl. of Cr. Make Proclamation.


Serg. at Arms. O Yes. My Lord High Steward of England his Grace straightly
charge and commands all Justices, Commissioners, and all and every other
person and persons to whom any Writ or Precept has been directed for the
certifying of any Indictment or Record before his Grace my Lord High Steward of
England, That they do certify and bring in the same forthwith, according to
the Tenor of the same Writ and Precept, to them or any of them directed, upon
Pain and Peril shall fall thereon.


Then Sir Edward Lutwich one of his Majesty's Sergeants at Law and Chief
Justice of Chester delivered in his Writ and Return at the Clerks Table. The
Writ of Certiorari and the Return thereof were read in haec verba. L. H.
Steward. Call the Lieutenant of the Tower to return his Precept, and bring his
Prisoner to the Bar.


Cl. of Cr. Make proclamation.


Serg. at Arms. Lieutenant of the Tower of London, return thy Writ and Precept
to thee directed, together with the Body of Henry Baron of Delamere, thy
Prisoner, forthwith, upon Pain and Peril shall fall thereon.


The Prisoner was brought to the Bar by the Lieutenant of the Tower: The Writ
and Return thereof, together with his Grace's Precept, and the Return thereof
were read in haec verba. Cl. of Cr. Make proclamation.


Serg. at Arms. Sir Roger Harsnet Knight, Sergeant at Arms to our Sovereign
Lord the King, return the Precept to thee directed, together with the Names of
all the Lords and Noblemen of this Realm of England, Peers of Henry Baron of
Delamere, by thee summoned, forthwith, upon Pain and Peril shall fall thereon.


The Sergeant at Arms delivered in his Precept and Return at the Clerks Table.
L. H. Steward. Read the Precept and the Return.


They were read in haec verba. Cl. of Cr. Make an O Yes.


Serg. at Arms. O Yes. All Dukes, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons of this Realm of
England, Peers of Henry Baron of Delamere, who by Commandment of my Lord High
Steward of England His Grace, were summoned to appear here this Day, and are
now present in Court, answer to your Names, upon Pain and Perii will fall
thereon.


The Peers summoned were called over, and those that appeared, standing up
uncovered, answered to their Names, each making a Reverence to the Lord High
Steward. Cl. of Cr. Laurence Earl of Rochester Lord High Treasurer of England.


L. H. Treas. Here.


Cl. of Cr. Robert Earl of Sunderland Lord President of his Majesty's Privy
Council.


Lord Presid. Here.


Cl. of Cr. Henry Duke of Norfolk Earl Marshal of England.


D. of Norf. Here.


Cl. of Cr. James Duke of Ormond Lord Steward of his Majesty's Household.


He did not appear. Cl. of Cr. Charles Duke of Somerset.


D. of Some. Here.


Cl. of Cr. Christopher Duke of Albermarle.


He did not appear. Cl. of Cr. Henry Duke of Grafton.


D. of Graft. Here.


Cl. of the Cr. Henry Duke of Beaufort Lord President of Wales.


D. of Beauf. Here.


Cl. of Cr. John Earl of Mulgrave Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household.


E. of Mulg. Here.


Cl. of Cr. Aubery Earl of Oxford.


E. of Oxf. Here.


Cl. of Cr. Charles Earl of Shrewsbury.


E. of Shrews. Here.


Cl. of Cr. Theophilus Earl of Huntingdon.


E. of Hunt. Here.


Cl. of Cr. Thomas Earl of Pembroke.


E. of Pemb. Here.


Cl. of Cr. John Earl of Bridgwater.


E. of Bridgw. Here.


Cl. of Cr. Henry Earl of Peterborow.


E. of Peterb. Here.


Cl. of Cr. Robert Earl of Scarsdale.


E. of Scarsd. Here.


Cl. of Cr. William Earl of Craven.


E. of Craven. Here.


Cl. of Cr. Richard Earl of Burlington.


He did not appear. Cl. of Cr. Louis Earl of Feversham.


E. of Feversh. Here.


Cl. of Cr. George Earl of Berkeley.


E. of Berk. Here.


Cl. of Cr. Daniel Earl of Nottingham.


E. of Notting. Here.


Cl. of Cr. Thomas Earl of Plymouth.


E. of Plim. Here.


Cl. of Cr. Thomas Viscount Falconberge.


L. Falconberge. Here.


Cl. of Cr. Francis Viscount Newport Treasurer of his Majesty's Household.


L. Newport. Here.


Cl. of Cr. Robert Lord Ferrers.


L. Ferrers. Here.


Cl. of Cr. Vere Essex Lord Cromwell.


L. Cromwell. Here.


Cl. of Cr. William Lord Maynard Comptroller of his Majesty's Household.


L. Maynard. Here.


Cl. of Cr. George Lord Dartmouth Master General of his Majesty's Ordnance.


L. Dartmouth. Here.


Cl. of Cr. Sidney Lord Godolphin.


L. Godolphin. Here.


Cl. of Cr. John Lord Churchill.


L. Churchill. Here.


Then his Grace the Lord High Steward addressed himself to the Lord Delamere
the Prisoner at the Bar in this Manner. L. H. Steward. My Lord Delamere, the
King being acquainted that you stand accused of High Treason, not by common
Report or Hearsay, but by a Bill of Indictment found against you by Gentlemen
of great Quality, and known Integrity within the County Palatine of Chester,
the place of your Residence, has thought it necessary in Tenderness to you, as
well as Justice to himself, to order you a speedy Trial.

My Lord, if you know your self innocent, in the name of God, do not despond,
for you may be assured of a fair and patient hearing, and in your proper time a
free Liberty to make your full Defense: and I am sure you cannot but be well
convinced, that my Noble Lords that are here your Peers to try you, will be as
desirous and ready to acquit you, if you appear to be innocent, as they will to
convict you if you be guilty.

But, my Lord, if you are conscious to your self that you are guilty of this
heinous Crime, give Glory to God, make amends to his Vicegerent the King by a
plain and full discovery of your Guilt, and do not, by an obstinate persisting
in the Denial of it, provoke the just indignation of your Prince, who has made
it appear to the World, that his Inclinations are rather to show Mercy than
inflict Punishments. My Lord, attend with patience, and hear the Bill of
Indictment that has been found against you read. Read the Bill of Indictment
to my Lord.


Cl. of Cr. Henry Baron of Delamere, Hold up thy hand.


L. Delamere. My Lord, I humbly beg your Grace would please to answer me one
Question, whether a Peer of England be obliged by the Laws of this Land to hold
up his hand at the Bar, as a Commoner must do; and I ask your Grace this
question the rather, because in my Lord Stafford's Case it was allowed to be
the privilege of the Peers not to hold up their hands.


L. H. Steward. My Lords, this being a matter of the privilege of the Peerage,
it is not fit for me to determine it one way or the other; but I think I may
acquaint your Lordships, that in point of Law, if you are satisfied this is the
Person indicted, the holding, or not holding up of the hand is but a Formality,
which does not signify much either way.


L. Delamere. I humbly pray your Grace's direction in one thing farther,
whether I must address my self to your Grace when I would speak, or to your
Grace with the rest of these Noble Lords my Peers.


L. H. Steward. You must direct what you have to say to me, my Lord.


L. Delamere. I beg your Grace would please to satisfy me whether your Grace
be one of my Judges in concurrence with the rest of the Lords?


L. H. Steward. No, my Lord, I am Judge of the Court, but I am none of your
Tryers. Go on.


Cl. of Cr. HEnry Baron of Delamere, thou stand Indicted in the County
Palatine of Chester by the name of Henry Baron of Delamere of Mere in the said
County of Chester, For that thou as a false Traitor against the most
Illustrious and most Excellent Prince, James the Second, by the Grace of God of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, thy natural Lord, not having the
fear of God in thy Heart, nor weighing the duty of thy Allegiance, but being
moved and seduced by the Instigation of the Devil, the cordial Love, and true,
due, and natural Obedience which a true and faithful Subject of our said Lord
the King, toward him our said Lord the King, should and of right to bear,
wholly withdrawing; and contriving, practicing, and with all thy might
intending, the Peace and common Tranquillity of this Kingdom of England to
disquiet, molest, and disturb; and War and Rebellion against our said Lord the
King, within this Kingdom of England, to stir up, move, and procure, and the
Government of our said Lord the King of this Kingdom of England to subvert,
change and alter, and our said Lord the King from the Title, Honor, and Kingly
Name of the Imperial Crown of his Kingdom of England to depose and deprive, and
our said Lord the King to Death and final Destruction to bring and put; the
fourteenth day of April in the first Year of the Reign of our said Lord James
the Second now King of England, etc. and diverse other days and times as well
before as after, at Mere in the County of Chester aforesaid, falsely,
maliciously, devilishly, and traitorously, with diverse others false Traitors
and Rebels, to the Jurors unknown, did conspire, compass, imagine, and intend
our said Lord the King, thy supreme, true and natural Lord, not only from the
Kingly State, Title, Power, and Government of his Kingdom of England to deprive
and cast down, but also the same our Lord the King to kill, and to Death to
bring and put, and the ancient Government of this Kingdom of England to change,
alter, and wholly to subvert, and a miserable slaughter among the Subjects of
our said Lord the King throughout his whole Kingdom of England, to cause and
procure, and Insurrection and Rebellion against our said Lord the King within
this Kingdom of England to procure and assist, and the same thy most wicked,
most impious, and devilish Treasons and traitorous compassing Imaginations and
purposes aforesaid to fulfill and bring to effect, thou the said Henry Baron of
Delamere, as a false Traitor then and there, to wit, the said fourteenth day of
April in the first year abovesaid, and diverse other days and times as well
before as after, at Mere aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, falsely,
unlawfully, wickedly, and traitorously with Charles Gerrard Esquire and other false
Traitors to the Jurors unknown, did assemble thy self, gather together,
consult, and agree to raise and procure diverse great sums of Money, and a
great number of armed men, War and Rebellion within this Kingdom of England to
levy and make, and the City of Chester in the County of the same City, as also
the Castle of our said Lord the King of Chester at Chester in the County of
Chester aforesaid, and all the Magazines in the same Castle then being, to
enter, take, seize, and surprise, and into thy possession and power to obtain;
and that thou the said Henry Baron of Delamere afterward, to wit, the 27th day
of May, in the first Year abovesaid, falsely, unlawfully, wickedly, and
traitorously did take a Journey from the City of London unto Mere aforesaid,
in the County of Chester aforesaid, thy traitorous purposes aforesaid to fulfill
and perfect: And that thou the said Henry Baron of Delamere, afterward, to
wit, the fourth day of June, in the first Year abovesaid, at Mere aforesaid, in
the County of Chester aforesaid, in further prosecution of thy unlawful, most
wicked, and traitorous purposes aforesaid, diverse Liege People and Subjects of
our said Lord the King, to the Jurors unknown, with thee the said Henry Baron
of Delamere, and the aforesaid other false Traitors, to the Jurors unknown,
falsely, unlawfully, and traitorously, in the War and Rebellion aforesaid, and
in thy traitorous purposes aforesaid, to join and adhere, did excite,
animate, and persuade, against the duty of thy Allegiance, against the Peace of
our said Lord the King that now is, his Crown and Dignity, and against the form
of the Statute in that case made and provided. How say thou Henry Baron of
Delamere, art thou Guilty of this High Treason whereof thou stand Indicted,
and have been now Arraigned, or not Guilty?


L. Delamere. My Lord, I humbly beg the Indictment may be read again.


L. H. Steward. Let it be read again. Which was done.


L. Delamere. May it please your Grace, I humbly beg the favor to be heard a
few words before I plead to this Indictment.


L. H. Steward. My Lord Delamere, I am very unwilling to give your Lordship any
interruption, but according to the Methods of Law, which must be observed in
your Case, as well as all others, You must plead to the Indictment before you
be heard to any thing else.


L. Delamere. May it please your Grace, I have something to offer to your
Grace's and their Lordships consideration which is a matter of Law.


L. H. Steward. I know not what matter of Law you have to offer: If you have a
mind to demur to the Indictment, you may.


L. Delamere. Will your Grace please to hear what I have to say? and then I
shall submit it to your Grace's Judgment.


L. H. Steward. I would hear what you have to say, my Lord, with all my heart,
if I could: But I must then pass by all the Forms and usual Methods of
proceeding, and that without any advantage to you too, and that I suppose your
Lordship will not desire of me. Ask my Lord, Whether he be guilty, or not
guilty?


Cl. of Cr. How say thou, Henry Baron of Delamere, Art thou guilty of this
High Treason whereof thou have been indicted, or not guilty?


L. Delamere. I beseech your Grace to hear me, what I have to say, I shall not
detain your Grace very long, but I beg your Grace to hear me.


L. H. Steward. My Lord Delamere, I must keep you to the known Rules and
Methods of Law: This is not your time to speak but to plead; in your proper
time you shall be fully heard whatsoever you have to say.


L. Delamere. If your Grace please, I have something to say which concerns all
the Peers of England in point of Right.


L. H. Steward. My Lord, you must either plead, or demur to this Indictment,
that is the usual Practice before any thing else can be done.


L. Delamere. My Lord, I have a Plea to offer to your Grace and my Lords; and
it is with reference to the Privilege and Right of the Peers of England.


L. H. Steward. If you have any Plea to offer, it must be received, my Lord.


L. Delamere. My Lord, amidst the hardships I have lain under by my frequent
Imprisonments and close Confinement --


L. H. Steward. My Lord Delamere, You must keep up to the Legal Method of
Proceedings: In Cases of this nature I would, as far is possible for me to do,
indulge a Person of your Quality, and in your condition; but withal I must do
right to the Court, and not permit any Breach to be made upon the Legal Course
of Proceedings. You must plead, or demurr to the Indictment before you are
heard to say any thing.


L. Delamere. Will your Grace be pleased to hear me tell you my Reasons why I
offer you a Plea of this nature to the Indictment?


L. H. Steward. My Lord, if you have any Plea, put it in.


L. Delamere. Will your Grace be pleased to accept it as I have done it? It may
be it is not so formal, because I have had no Council allowed me to peruse and
sign it. But as it is, I here offer it to your Grace's consideration.


L. H. Steward. Ay, put it in.


Then it was delivered to the Clerk. L. H. Steward. Read it.


Cl. of Cr. The humble Plea of Henry Lord Delamere, to the Indictment of High
Treason against him, now to be tried by the Lord High Steward and Peers here
assembled.

THE said Lord Delamere saving to himself all benefit of Advantage of any
further or other matter of exception to the Generality, Incertainty or
Insufficiency of the said Indictment, and all matters and things which do or
may concern the same, for Plea hereunto says,

That he was by his Majesty's Writ Summoned to this present Parliament which
began the Nineteenth Day of May last, and attended his Duty there as a Peer of
this Realm.

That for High Treason supposed to be committed by him, during the Sitting of
the same Parliament; he was the Twenty sixth Day of July last, committed, by
Warrant of the Earl of Sunderland one of his Majesty's Principal Secretaries of
State, to the Tower of London.

That the Peers in Parliament assembled, taking Notice by his Petition of the
Ninth of November last, of his being absent from his Attendance in Parliament,
sent a Message to his Majesty to know the reason why he the said Henry Lord
Delamere, a Peer of that House, was absent from his Attendance there.

Upon the Tenth Day of November last, the Lord Treasurer reported his Majesty's
Answer to the said Message, viz. That the said Lord Delamere was absent from
his Attendance in Parliament, because he stood committed for High Treason, for
levying War against the King this last Summer, testified upon Oath, and that
his Majesty had given directions that he should be proceeded against with all
speed according to Law.

The House of Peers not being satisfied with this Answer, the Debate thereof
was adjourned till the Monday morning following.

On which Day the Lords resuming the Debate concerning the Lord Delamere and
the King's Message; after some Debate, the Lord Chancellor, by his Majesty's
Command, gave the House an account what Proceedings had been against the Lord
Delamere since his Majesty's Answer to their Address concerning his absence
from the House, which was to this Effect:

That the King had given Order for a speedy Prosecution of him: That the
Treason whereof he was accused was committed in Cheshire; and that being a
County Palatine, the Prosecution ought to be there, and not in the King's
Bench; as it might be if the Treason had been committed in another County: and
that therefore his Majesty had given Order for a Commission of Oyer and
Terminer into Cheshire, in order to the finding of an Indictment against him
for the said Treason: And that accordingly a Commission of Oyer and Terminer
was already sealed; and if the Indictment be not found before the end of the
Term, the said Lord Delamere's Prayer being entered in the Kings's Bench, he
should be Bailed.

All which Proceedings do more fully appear in the Journals of the said House
of Peers; to which the said Henry Lord Delamere does refer himself.

Afterward, that is to say, upon the (...) Day of (...) the said Parliament
was Prorogued by his Majesty unto the Tenth Day of February next, as by the
said Journals it does also appear.

Upon all which Matters, the said Henry Lord Delamere does humbly tender this
his Plea to the Jurisdiction of your Lordships in this Cause, and does humbly
conceive your Lordships ought not to proceed in the Trial of him upon the
Indictment of High Treason now before you: And that for these following Reasons,

First, Inasmuch as it appears by the said Petition of the said Henry Lord
Delamere, and the several Orders of the Lords, and the King's Answers to the
Message of the Lords thereupon, That the said House are already possessed of
his said Cause, which is for the same supposed Treason for which he was at
first committed, and which is the same Treason for which he now stands indicted
before your Lordships. And for this Reason your Lordships, as he humbly
conceives, by the Law and Custom of Parliament, which is part of the Law and
Custom of the Land, ought not to proceed against him upon the said Indictment;
but his said Cause ought wholly to be determined and adjudged in the said House
of Peers, and not elsewhere, as in like Cases has been formerly done.

Secondly, Whereas it is the Right and Privilege of the Peerage of this Realm,
That no Peer thereof ought to be tried or proceeded against for High Treason
during the continuance of the Parliament, except in the said House of Peers,
and before. the whole Body of the Peers there. And whereas the aforesaid
Parliament is now continuing by Prorogation until the tenth day of February
next abovesaid, the said Henry Lord Delamere humbly conceives that by the Law
and Custom of Parliament hitherto used, which is part of the Law and Custom of
the Realm, he ought not, nor can be tried before your Lordships for the said
Treasons, because the said Parliament is still continuing, and not dissolved.

And lastly, The said Henry Lord Delamere does further say, That he is the same
Henry Lord Delamere mentioned in the Commitment, Petitions, Messages, Answers
and Indictment now read unto him, and the said Treason for which he was
committed is the same Treason mentioned in the Commitment, Petition, Messages,
Answers, and Indictment, as aforesaid.

To which said Indictment he humbly conceives he is not bound by Law to make
any further or other Answer.


L. Delamere. May it please your Grace, and you my Noble Lords, I do not offer
this Plea out of any diffidence or distrust in my Cause, nor out of any dislike
I have to any of your Lordships that are here Summoned to be my Tryers; I
cannot hope to stand before any more just and Noble, nor can I wish to stand
before any others; but your Grace and my Lords will pardon me if I insist upon
it, because I apprehend it a Right and Privilege do to all the Peerage of
England, which, as it is against the Duty of every Peer to betray or forgo; so
it is not in the power of any One, or more, to wave it, or give it up without
the consent of the whole Body of the Peers, every one of them being equally
interested.

This, my Lord, I humbly demand as my Right and Privilege as a Peer of
England, and submit to the direction of your Grace and my Noble Lords.


L. H. Steward. What say you to it, Mr. Attorney?


Mr. Attor. General. May it please your Grace; This Plea that is here offered
by this Noble Lord, is a Plea to the Jurisdiction, but, with submission, it
needs very little answer, for it has very little in it: The Force of the Plea
is, That he ought to be tried by the whole Body of the House of Peers in
Parliament, because the Parliament is still continuing, being under a
Prorogation and not dissolved; and because there was some agitation of the
matter concerning this Prosecution, upon his Petition, in the House of Lords;
and therefore it concludes, That he ought not to be tried by your Grace and
these Noble Lords upon this Commission, but by all the Lords in Parliament.
With submission, my Lord, This is contrary to all the ancient Precedents, and
against the known Rules of Law; for the Law is, If the King pleases to try a
Peer in Parliament, then the Record may be brought into the House, and there
they proceed as in other Cases, and all the Peers are Judges. Thus it is in the
time of a Session of Parliament; but if the Parliament be prorogued, there are
many instances (and indeed none to the contrary) that after a Prorogation, the
Proceedings are before the High Steward by Commission. And as to the other part
of the Case, I have this to say to it, That there is nothing at all depending
in the House of Lords that can oust this Court of the Jurisdiction; for there
was not so much as any Indictment returned there, no, nor so much as found
during the Session of Parliament. All the agitation was only upon my Lords
Petition, and the King's Answer; that he intended as speedy a Prosecution as
could be: Besides, my Lord, your Grace sees it is a Plea in paper and in
English, without any Councels hand, and therefore I hope your Grace does not
expect that I should formally demur to a Plea in this form, and that contains
no more of Substance in it. But I must desire your Grace to overruled it, and
that the Prisoner may plead in chief.


L. Delamere. My Lord, I humbly pray that I may have Council, assigned me, to
put my Plea into Form, and to argue the matter of it.


L. H. Steward. My Lord Delamere, I am sure I ought and ever shall be as tender
of the Privileges of the Peers of England, as any other Person whatsoever: For
I am concerned, as well in interest as inclination so to be, having the honor
to be one my self: But I know your Lordship will not think the Privilege of
the Peers is concerned in this matter; nor will your Lordship, I dare say,
insist upon matters that are purely dilatory, if your Lordship be satisfied
that they are so: And therefore give me leave, my Lord, to mind you of a few
things, whereby your Lordship will easily see. That the chief things on which
you insist are grounded upon mistakes: First, You say, The House of Peers was
possessed of the Cause; which could not be, and I will tell you why: Because
there was no Indictment ever removed thither, or lodged there. Which plainly
proves that the Lords were never possessed of the Cause. Nor indeed was the
Bill found upon which you are now arraigned till after the Prorogation of the
Parliament. So that they could never come to be possessed of this matter. These
are mistakes in Point of Fact, and your Lordship cannot but well know them to
be so.

And there is as great a mistake in the Law, That during the continuance of a
Parliament (though it were prorogued, yet if not dissolved) a Peer cannot be
tried but by the House of Lords. This certainly is a very strange Doctrine, and
is not only against the reason and methods of Law, but contrary even to your
Lordships own experience. For your Lordship cannot but very well remember, that
during the continuance of the Parliament, after a Prorogation, the Lord
Cornwallis was tried before the High Steward, and such a number of Peers as
were then summoned, upon such a Commission as I now sit here by. But indeed
during the Sitting of the Parliament, then all the Peers are both Tryers and
Judges, as was in the Cases of my Lord Stafford, and my Lord of Pembroke; they
being a Court of Judicature, then actually sitting; and therefore this Plea is
grounded as upon mistake in Fact, so, upon a mistake in point of Law. So that
though, as I said at first, it is both my duty and interest to preserve the
privileges of the Peers, yet I must take care that no injury be done to the
Law; and truly I take this Plea to be altogether dilatory, and I suppose your
Lordship is satisfied of it, and will not insist upon it.


L. Delamere. If your Grace please, It was alleged and agreed in the Case of
my Lord of Bristol, that the Cause of a Peer in time of Parliament properly
belonged only to the House of Lords; And that which possessed the House of
Lords of his Case, was, as I apprehend, no more than is in my Case, a petition
upon the account of being absent; and there the Lords claim the cognizance of
the whole Cause, and nothing was done but in the House of Lords. And as to the
Instances your Grace has mentioned of my Lord Cornwallis, (and there was
another of them, my Lord Morley) this Question was never under Debate in those
Cases; therefore I suppose they cannot be admitted as Precedents.


L. H. Steward. But, my Lord, it would have been an Error in the whole
Proceedings, if this Court had not Jurisdiction: And sure the Judges, who are
always called to assist in such Cases; and who, in matters of life, even in the
Cases of common persons, are so tender and careful, that there be no
irregularity in the Proceedings, would not have let things pass in that manner,
had they been erroneous.


L. Delamere. My Lord, I think no other Precedents are produced but those two,
and there the Question was never debated.


L. H. Steward. I only put you in mind of those that were lately within memory;
but no question of it there are a great many more Instances to be given.


Mr. Attor. Genesis I pray your Grace's Judgment to overruled the Plea, and that
my Lord may plead in chief.


L. Delamere. I hope your Grace will be pleased to assign me Council to put my
Plea in Form; and that I may have time for it, that they may be heard to make a
solemn Argument in Law.


L. H. Steward. My Lord, if you insist upon it, and think it worth the while to
have Council heard, we will hear them.


L. Delamere. I submit it to your Grace, I only offer it that I may not be
wanting to the support of the Peers Privileges; I assure your Grace, I speak
not to put off the Cause, for I am willing to come to my Trial, and I have
reason so to be, for I question not but to make my innocence appear.


L. H. Steward. My Lord, I tell you what my opinion of the Plea is, but if you
insist upon it to have your Council heard, I will hear them.


L. Delamere. I have no Council here, if your Grace please to give me time to
send for them, and that they may prepare to argue it.


Mr. Attor. Genesis No, my Lord, If your Grace will hear Council, I for the King
must pray that it may be done presently; for a Plea to the Jurisdiction is
never favored, nor is the party to be allowed time to maintain it, but he must
be ready at the time it is offered.


L. Delamere. Pray, My Lord, how was it done in the Case of Fitz-Harris, his
Plea was a Plea to the Jurisdiction, and he had four days allowed him to put
his Plea in form, and to instruct his Council.


L. H. Steward, I am not able at present to remember what was done in such or
such a particular Case: But according to the general method and course of Law,
the Plea to the Jurisdiction is not favored, nor time allowed to it, but the
party must be ready to maintain it presently.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis But, with Submission, my Lord, That Case of Fitz Harris is
nothing to this Noble Lord's Case neither: There was a formal Plea put in in
Writing, and drawn up in Latin, and a formal Demurrer joined; and thereupon I
did take time to speak to it. But, with your Grace's favor, by the Law, the
Prisoner must be always ready to make good his Plea, if he will oust the Court
of their Jurisdiction.


L. H. Steward. Mr. Attorney, If my Lord Delamere does insist upon having his
Council heard, it is not fit for me to refuse hearing what they can say.


Mr. Attor. Genesis But that must be presently then, My Lord.


L. Delamere. It is my Duty, my Lord, to submit to what your Grace and my noble
Lords shall determine: I would insist upon nothing that should offend your
Grace or them.


Mr. At. Genesis If your Grace pleases, You are the only Judge in this Case in
Matters of Law: For these Noble Lords, the Peers, are only Tryers of the Fact.
Therefore, I appeal to your Grace's Judgment, and pray for the King, that this
Plea may be overruled; it being vicious, and naught, both in Form and
Substance.


Lord H. Steward. My Lord Delamere, I must acquaint you, That, according to the
Constitution of this Court, Matters of Law are determined by Me, as the sole
Judge, while I have the Honor to act under this Commission: But if your
Lordship insist upon it, to have your Council heard, God forbid that I should
deny it You. I will hear what your Council will say: and afterward I will,
according to the best of my Understanding, deliver my Judgment.


Lord Delamere. My Lord, I have never had any Council assigned me.


Lord H. Steward. My Lord, If You have any Council ready, we will Hear them.


Lord Delamere. If your Grace please to assign me Council, and give me Time to
send for them, and them Time to prepare. I will obey your Grace's Directions;
but I could have none here ready, because none were assigned me.


Lord H. Steward. My Lord, You cannot, by the Course of Law, have Council
allowed You in the Case of a Capital Crime, till such time as the Court, where
You are called to Answer, is apprized, that there is some Matter of Law in your
Case, that may need Council to be heard, to Inform their Judgment, and which
they may think convenient to hear Council to: For if in case any Prisoner at
the Bar shall beforehand be allowed to have Council to start frivolous
Objections, such as this (and we all know, that there are some who will be
easily prevailed with, to endeavor to pick Holes where there are none) and to
offer Matters foreign from the things whereof the Party stands accused; and
upon the Prisoner's bare Request, Council must be heard to every trivial Point,
the Courts of Law would never be at an end in any Trial; but some dilatory
Matter or other, would be found to retard the Proceedings: But it does not
consist with the Grandeur of the Court, nor your Lordship's Interest, to let
such a frivolous Plea interrupt your Lordship's Trial. However, if your
Lordship has Council ready, I will not refuse to hear them.


Lord Delamere. My Lord, I hope, the Privilege of the Peers of England, is not
frivolous. I assure your Grace, I do not offer this Matter, as if I thought it
more conducing to my Interest, than my Trial now. No, my Lord, it is not for my
self, but for the whole Body of Peers, of which I have the Honor to be a
Member: And if my Lords, here, are satisfied it is not the Right and Privilege
of the Peers, I acquiesce.


Lord H. Steward. Pray, good my Lord, do not think that I should say any such
thing, that the Privilege of the Peers is frivolous; for you do not hear me
say, That this is one of their Privileges. As I would not willingly mistake
You; so I desire your Lordship would not misapprehend or misrepresent Me. I
spoke not at all of the Peer's Privilege, but of your Plea: I tell your
Lordship, I think your Plea is not a good Plea, to Oust this Court of the
Jurisdiction of your Cause. But if your Lordship have a mind to have your
Council heard to it, in God's Name, let them come; they shall be heard: And
when that is done, to satisfy you the more, I will advise with my Lords the
Judges, that are there to assist, what they take to be the Law in the Case;
and, upon the Whole, I will deliver my Judgment as well as I can.


Lord Delamere. I hope, your Grace will be pleased to advise with my Lords, the
Peers, here present; it being upon a Point of Privilege.


Lord H. Steward. Good my Lord, I hope You that are a Prisoner at the Bar, are
not to give Me direction, who I should advise with, or how I should demean my
self here.


Lord Delamere. I beg your Grace's Pardon; I did not intend to give your Grace
any Direction.


Lord H. Steward. My Lord, I shall take care to perform that Duty that is
incumbent upon me, and that with all Tenderness to your Lordship: And, I assure
your Lordship, I will have as much care that I do not injure You, as I will
that I do not wrong my own Conscience; and I will endeavor to discharge my
Duty to both, with the utmost Fidelity.


Lord Delamere. I humbly thank your Grace; I question it not: But if your Grace
please --


Lord H. Steward. My Lord, You must pardon Me; I can enter into no further
Interlocutions with your Lordship. If your Lordship have any mind to have any
Council heard, and your Council be ready, we will hear them.


Lord Delamere. If your Grace require of Me to produce Council presently, and
they to argue it immediately, I must acquaint your Grace, I cannot do it: For I
have none here.


Lord H. Steward. My Lord, I cannot tell how to help it; the Plea must then be
overruled and rejected.


Clerk of the Crown. Henry, Baron of Delamere, Art thou Guilty of the
High Treason whereof thou stand Indicted, and have been now Arraigned, or
Not Guilty?


Lord Delamere. Not Guilty.


Clerk of the Crown. Culprit, How will thou be Tried?


Lord Delamere. By God, and my Peers.


Clerk of the Crown. God send thee good Deliverance. Sergeant at Arms, Make
Proclamation.


Sergeant at Law. O Yes. If any one will give Evidence on behalf of our
Sovereign Lord the King, against Henry, Baron of Delamere, the Prisoner at the
Bar, concerning the High Treason whereof he stands Indicted, let them come
forth, and they shall be Heard; for now he stands at the Bar, upon his
Deliverance.


Then his Grace gave the Charge to the Peers Tryers in this manner: Lord H.
Steward. My Lords, I know You cannot but well remember, what unjust and
insolent Attempts were made upon the rightful and unalterable Succession to the
Imperial Crown of these Realms, under the pretense of That, which has been so
often found to be the Occasion of Rebellion; I mean, the specious Pretense of
Religion, by the fierce, froward, and Phanatical Zeal of some Members of the
House of Commons, in the last Parliaments under the late King, CHARLES the
Scond, of ever Blessed Memory.

Which, by the wonderful Providence of Almighty God, not prevailing, the Chief
Contrivers of that horrid Villainy, consulted together how to gain that
Advantage upon the Monarchy by open Force, which they could not obtain by a
pretended Course of Law.

And in order thereto, it is but too well known, how they had several
Treasonable Meetings, made bold and riotous Progresses into several Parts of
the King's Dominions, thereby endeavoring to debauch the Minds of the
well-meaning, though unwary and ignorant, Part of the King's Subjects.

But these their evil Purposes, it pleased God also to frustrate, by bringing
to Light that cursed Conspiracy against the Life of His Sacred Majesty, King
CHARLES the Second; as also, against That of our dread Sovereign, that now is,
whom God long preserve.

These Hellish and damnable Plots, one would have thought, could not have
survived the just Condemnation and Execution of some of the chief Contrivers of
them; especially considering, that after it had pleased Almighty God, to take
to Himself our late Merciful and dread Sovereign, no sooner was His Sacred
Majesty, that now is, Seated in the Royal Throne of His Ancestors; but He made
it His utmost Endeavors, not only to convince the World, that He had quite
forgot those impudent and abominable Indignities that had been put upon Him,
only for being the best of Subjects, and the best of Brothers: but did also
give forth the most Benign Assurances imaginable to all his loving People, that
He would approve Himself to be the best of Kings.

And further, to evince the Reality of these His Gracious and Heroic
Resolutions, He immediately called a Parliament; and therein repeated, and
solemnly Confirmed His former Royal Declarations of having a particular Care of
maintaining our Established Laws and Religion: With which that Wise, Great, and
Loyal Assembly, were so fully and perfectly satisfied, that they thought they
could not make sufficient Returns of Gratitude for such Gracious and Princely
Condescentions.

And yet, my Lords, while the King and the Parliament were thus, as I may say,
endeavoring to outdo each other in Expressions of Kindness, that wicked and
unnatural Rebellion broke out; and thereupon the Arch-Traytor, Monmouth, was,
by a Bill brought into the Lower House, and Passed by the general Consent of
Both Houses, (and I could wish, my Lords, for the sake of that Noble Lord at
the Bar, that I could say, It had Passed with the Consent of every particular
Member of each House) justly Attainted of High Treason.

My Lords, What share my Lord at the Bar had in those other Matters, I must
acquaint You, is not within the Compass of this Indictment, for which You are
to Try him, as his Peers: For That is for a Treason alleged to have been
Committed by him, in His Majesty's Reign that now is.

Give me Leave, my Lords, to detain You but with a Word or two more on this
Occasion; and that is, To let You know, That as my Lord at the Bar may, with
great Safety and Security to himself, rely upon your Lordship's Candor and
Integrity, that You will be tenderly careful, and ready to acquit him of the
Treason whereof he is accused, if upon the Evidence that shall be given You,
You shall find him Innocent: So I must tell You, The King has an entire
Confidence in your Resolution, Fidelity, and good Affections to Him, that You
will not, by reason of the Prisoner's Quality, and nearness to You, as being a
Peer of this Realm, acquit him if he shall appear to be Guilty.

My Lords, I have one thing further to mind your Lordship's of, That, according
to the usual Forms of Proceedings in these Cases, if your Lordship's have any
Questions to propound, wherein You would be satisfied as to any Matter either
of Fact or Law, your Lordships will be pleased to put those Questions to Me,
and I shall take care to give your Lordships the best Satisfaction I can.


Lord Delamere. My Lord High Steward, I beg the Favor of your Grace, I may
have One to write for me.


Lord H. Steward. Ay, by all means; Let my Lord have whom he pleases to write
for him.


Then Sir Thomas Jenner, One of His Majesty's Sergeants at Law, and Recorder of
the City of London, opened the Indictment thus: Mr. Recorder. May it please
your Grace, my Lord High Steward of England, and You my Noble Lords, the Peers
of the Prisoner at the Bar: Henry, Baron of Delamere, the Prisoner at the Bar
stands indicted for that He, as a False Traitor against the most Illustrious
and most Excellent Prince, our-Soveraign Lord the King that now is; not having
the Fear of God in his Heart, nor weighing the Duty of his Allegiance* the
Fourteenth Day of April last, at Mere, in the County of Chester, did
maliciously Conspire, with other False Traitors, to the Jurors unknown, the
Death and Deposing of the King: And for the better, and more effectual
fulfilling of those his Treasons, the said Fourteenth Day of April, at Mere
aforesaid, did Maliciously and Traitorously Assemble, Consult, and Agree with
Charles Gerrard, Esquire and other False Traitors, to Raise great Sums of Money,
and procure Numbers of Armed Men, to make a Rebellion against the King, and the
City and Castle of Chester to seize, with the Magazines there: And that
afterward, the Twenty-Seventh Day of May last, he took a Journey from London
to Mere aforesaid, to accomplish his Treasonable Intentions. And further, That
upon the Fourth Day of June, in further Prosecution of his Traiterous Purposes
at Mere aforesaid, he did encite diverse Subjects of our Lord the King, to join
with him, and other false Traitors, in his Treason: And this is laid to be
against the Duty of his Allegiance, against the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the
King, his Crown and Dignity, and against the Form of the Statute in that Case
made and provided. To this Indictment, may it please your Grace, and the rest
of these Noble Lords, my Lord Delamere, the Prisoner at the Bar, has Pleaded
Not Guilty; and for his Trial, has put himself upon his Peers. We shall
therefore call our Witnesses for the King; and if We prove him Guilty, We do
not question, but your Lordships will find him so.


Mr. At. Genesis May it please your Grace, my Lord High Steward of England, and
You my Noble Lords, the Peers: My Lord Delamere, the Prisoner at the Bar,
stands Indicted for Conspiring the Death of His Majesty, and in order thereunto
to Raise a Rebellion in the Kingdom.

My Lords, In proving this Charge upon him, we crave Leave to give your Grace,
and your Lordships, some short Account by Witnesses, that we have here, of a
former Design that was previous to this Matter, for which this Noble Lord
stands here accused: And We shall not trouble your Grace, and your Lordships,
with any long Evidence, because it has received many solemn and repeated
Trials; and, as to the Proof of it, has been Confirmed by as many Verdicts. But
We do it rather, to give some Account as an Introduction to a Material
Evidence, by showing, That Cheshire, which was the Province of this Noble Lord,
was One of the Stages, where that Rebellion was principally to be acted; and
that, preparatory to it, great Riotous Assemblies, and Tumultuous Gatherings of
the People, were set on foot by the Conspirators.

We shall then show, my Lords, That after the late Duke of Monmouth, (the Head
of the Conspiracy) went beyond Sea, (especially after the Death of the late
King) frequent Messages, and Intercourse of Correspondency, were sent and held
between him, and the rest of his Accomplices abroad, and their Fellow-
Conspirators here at home.

And particularly, We shall prove, That a little before the Rebels came over
last Summer, into the West, the Duke of Monmouth did dispatch one Jones (who
was one of the most considerable Agents in this Contrivance) to come from
Holland into England, to let his Friends know, that though he had intended to
go into Scotland, and begin his Work there; yet now his Resolutions were for
England; where, he hoped, his Friends would be prepared for him. And with this
Message, and Resolution of his, Jones was to acquaint some Lords, (who they
were, the Witness will tell your Lordships; but) among others, this Noble Lord,
the Prisoner, was one: And to acquaint them besides, That he would immediately
set sail for England, whither he would come so soon as he could get. That he
had a Design to have Landed in Cheshire, where he expected to be most readily
received; but finding That inconvenient, they should have notice Four or Five
Days beforehand, of the Place of his Landing; which, he intended, should be in
the West. And among the Directions that Jones had to give to those Lords, one
was, That they should immediately repair into Cheshire, there to wait for the
News.

These Instructions Jones had given him in Writing; but Sealed up with an
Injunction, not to open them till he came to Sea; and then he was to peruse
that Writing, and deliver his Message according to his Instructions: And in
that Writing was the Name of this Noble Lord, as one that was principally
relied on, to carry on the Rebellion in Cheshire. And We shall give You an
Account, That the late Duke of Monmouth did look upon Cheshire, as one of his
main Supports; and upon my Lord Delamere, as a Principal Assistant There.

My Lords, This Message was Jones to communicate to Captain Mathews, and
Captain Mathews was to transmit it to this Noble Lord, and the other Persons
that were concerned with him. Jones arrived with this Message here in England,
upon the Twenty-Seventh of May; [And I must beg your Lordships, to observe the
Time particularly:] But Captain Mathews, to whom he was directed, was not to be
found; nor Major Wildman, to whom, in the Absence of Captain Mathews, he was to
apply himself, as You will hear more fully from the Witness's own Mouth:
Thereupon he sends for one Disney, (a Name which your Lordships cannot but
know, he being since Executed for Treason) and one Brand, whom your Lordships
will likewise hear of; and they meet with this same Jones, who communicates his
Message to them, and they undertake to deliver it to the Persons concerned;
Captain Mathews being out of Town, and Major Wildman not to be found.

That very Night, my Lords, this same Brand and Disney they meet this Noble
Lord, my Lord Delamere at the Coffee-House, and give him an Account of the
Messages: And as soon as ever he had received the Message, upon that
Twenty-Seventh of May, at Ten of the Clock at Night, does my Lord Delamere
dispatch out of Town, with only one Servant to attend him, and Two other
Friends that he had picked up, or appointed to meet him, and go with him.

With all these Badges of Plot and Design, does my Lord Delamere set out that
Night. It was the same Night that Jones came to Town: It was late at Night. He
changed his Name, and went by the Name of Brown. He chose to go all the
By-roads, and would not keep the High-common-road; and went with great speed,
as We cannot but presume according to the Message delivered by Jones, on
purpose to repair into Cheshire.

And if your Lordships please to observe, You will find several remarkable
Instances of Plot and Contrivance in the matter: First, That a Nobleman, and
one of 10 considerable a Character in his Country, as my Lord Delamere, should
make such haste out of Town with 10 small an Equipage, as but one Servant;
Then, That he should go so late at Night: Again, That he should change his
Name; and That should prove to be a Name not casually taken up, as the first
Name he could think of next his own; but a Name of distinction, that he was
known by among all his own Party: For all the Communications between the
Confederates and Him, were managed, as to Him, under the Name of Brown: By that
Name, several of the late Duke of Monmouth's Traiterous Declarations were sent
for; which were to be sent to him, or by him, into Cheshire: And that alone,
with Submission, my Lords, would be a shrewd Circumstance of Suspicion, that a
Noble Lord, such an one as my Lord Delamere, should assume the Name of a
Commoner, and post out of Town so ill accompanied in a Disguise at that time of
Night; especially the Parliament being then Sitting, as really it was.

But besides all this Circumstantial Evidence, We shall prove, by Positive
Testimony, what the hasty Business was, that made my Lord undertake this
Journey in this manner: For, having notice of the Duke of Monmouth's Intention
to Land speedily in England, when he comes into Cheshire, he actually sets
about the Work to put that County in a forwardness to assist in the Rebellion,
endeavors to stir up the People to join with him; and acquaints One that he
employed in that Affair, with the whole Design, that he was engaged to raise so
many Thousand Men, and so much Money, to be ready by such a Day.

Nor does my Lord rest here: But, after the Duke of Monmouth was Landed in the
West, to corrupt the Minds of the People, We shall prove what Discourses he
had, (and these will testify his Inclinations to the Cause) concerning the
great Victories he had obtained over the King's Forces, and how he applauded
his Conquests.

My Lords, We shall plainly show You all this that I have opened in plain
Proof; And then, We shall submit it to your Lordships Judgments, Whether this
Noble Peer be Not Guilty, as he has Pleaded to his Indictment.


Lord H. Steward. Call your Witnesses, Mr. Attorney; Who do You begin with?


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord Howard of Escrick: We desire he may be first sworn.


Which was done. Lord H. Steward. Well, What do You ask my Lord Howard?


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I call You to give an Account what You know of a Design
of an Insurrection that was to have been; and in what Parts; and what share
Cheshire was to have had in it, in the late King's Time.


Lord H. Steward. You hear the Question; What say You to it, my Lord?


Lord Howard. My Lord, I am to direct my self to speak to what was done in the
late King's Time: For, as to that Noble Lord at the Bar, I have nothing to say
against him.


Lord H. Steward. My Lord Howard, If I apprehend Mr. Attorney aright, You are
not called as a particular Witness against my Lord Delamere; but only to give
an Account, what was agreed upon in any Consultations, where You were present,
in the late KING's Time, about a Conspiracy for an Insurrection?


Lord Howard. If so, my Lord, then I am called, not to be an Evidence against
my Lord Delamere, but, against my Self; that is, to repeat what I have often
delivered at several Trials, in the Courts of Justice; and which I must always
repeat with Shame and Confusion for my Guilt, as I cannot but always reflect
upon it with Sorrow and Horror. But if it be for the Service of His Majesty,
and this Honorable Court, for me so to do, I shall endeavor to comply with
it, and repeat it as well as I can, by the Assistance of a broken Memory; it
being an Account of Things done several Years past, and from a Memory
interrupted by such Accidents as are very well known, and as have disabled me
to make a more distinct and particular Relation before so great an Auditory.

My Lords, I suppose, it will be expected, I should begin my Account with the
Occasion and Ground, and the Time when those Things happened.


Lord H. Steward. Take your own Method, my Lord.


Lord Howard. Truly, my Lord, I am not able to fix the particular Time, unless
You will give me leave to reckon the Years by the Sheriffs of London, as the
Romans used to do theirs by their Consuls; for I have no other means of
computing the exact Time.


Lord H. Steward. Pray, my Lord, tell the Times, as near as you can, and use
what Helps for your Memory you think best.


Lord Howard. My Lords, It was in that Year, when Mr. Shute, and Mr. Pilkington
were Sheriffs for the City of London: And at that Time, it is well known how
great Heats did arise upon the Contests that were in the City, about Election
of Officers for the Year ensuing, --


Mr. Attorney General. May it please your Grace, My Lord Delamere seems to be
faint with standing: If your Grace please, a Chair may be provided, for my Lord
to sit in.


Lord H. Steward. Ay, by all means: Let a Chair be provided for my Lord to sit
down. Go on, my Lord.


Lord Howard. My Lord, I was saying, that the Contests about the disputed
Election of Sheriffs, had occasioned such heats in the City of London, and
other Places, that it was even beyond the common expressions of discontent: I
knew nothing of any particular Design there was in hand till about six weeks
after, when Captain Walcot came to me, a Person I had known some time before,
and, upon discourse, acquainted me, that he had found out that there were some
persons engaged in a considerable Action that was near its execution, and that
in order to it, he had had notice given him to make preparation, and thereupon
he had thought fit, for that reason, to withdraw from the place where he did at
that time Lodge, (which was in Red-Lyon-Court in Fleet Street, as I remember)
and betake himself to a private Lodging, that he might be the readier for
Action; and to put himself into a better equipage for joining in the
enterprise, he had bought himself a Horse, and sent his Son into Ireland to
turn all he could into ready money, and return it, that he might be the better
able to go through with the undertaking. My Lords, this was a great surprise to
me; for though I knew, as all the rest of the World did, that there were great
discontents, yet, till then, I never had any intimation of any particular
design: I told him I was going into the Country, but should be glad to know how
things went, and desired him to write to me, and gave him a little Cabala or
Cipher to disguise the matter he was to write about: and when I was in the
Country, I did receive several Letters which intimated something of a design
that was going on, and at last he writ, with some warmth to me, of a necessity
we were under to enter into Action; and of the readiness of my Correspondents;
(for the style of the Letters was that of Merchants, for so was the Cant that I
had given him): But truly I was not overhasty in my return to London, because
I rather chose to see what would be the Issue of what was then projected,
before I did intermeddle in such an Affair, and so made use of all the delays
I could to retard my return, and came not to Town till that week which
determined the long-continued controversy in London; Nay, and then also avoided
meeting with any body in any set-way, till I could better see how things were
managed, and what event they would probably come to; thereupon I would not go
to my own House, but took up my Lodging at Mile-end, and lay there 3 or 4 days,
till the day came for confirming the new-elected Sheriffs, and the election of
a new Lord Mayor, which, as I take it, is on the day before Michaelmas-day, and
Michaelmas-day: When that day was over, I could not find there was any
intention of entering into any sort of Action; I found indeed there were great
murmurings in the mouths of all sorts of People, and very angry warm speeches,
and nothing else: So I thought the business was over for that time, and
thereupon away I went to my own House. This, my Lords, was upon the Saturday as
I remember: Upon the Monday Morning, Captain Walcot came to me, and desired
that he might have some private discourse with me in my Garden; and there he
told me, My Lord Shaftsbury had withdrawn himself, and that he did believe
things were in a great preparation for Action: I desired him to tell me what it
was; he answered me, That he desired to be excused in that, for I must go to my
Lord Shaftsbury, who would give me an account of the whole; and withal he told
me, my Lord Shaftsb^^^ had been much deserted and ill used by those Lords upon
whose concurrence he had relied, and that was the reason why he had withdrawn
himself, and kept himself so private: I told him, I did not know my Lord
Shaftsbury had any desire to speak with me; yes he said he had, for he had sent
him to me on purpose, and he was to bring back my answer, whether I would Join
or no. I told him, if my Lord desired to speak with me, I would wait upon him,
and thereupon I went with him, and he carried me to a place where my Lord
Shaftsbury was retired in the City, somewhere about Foster-Lane or Wood-Street,
at the house of one Watson: When I came there, after Salutation, my Lord
Shaftsbury began to make great reflections upon the misery and badness of the
times, particularly, upon the issue of that great Affair, the election of the
Sheriffs, which had ended so unfortunately to the terror of all good men: For
whereas before the great and sure resort of innocence, was to the Integrity of
our Juries, when returned by fair and equal Sheriffs, they looked upon the
eagerness of getting those Persons Sworn that were then in Office to be a
design to entrap the innocent, the elected Sheriffs being esteemed persons
that would accommodate themselves to the humor of the Court; and now every man
must be run down for crimes that he was no way guilty of, if the singer of the
Court did but point him out to destruction. The apprehension of this, he said,
had made him withdraw himself, not knowing how soon he might be seized, should
he have remained in public; and he thought the danger was as imminent upon,
and likely to reach to others, as well as to him; and particularly to my self,
and therefore, he said, the sense of this danger ought to put every Englishman
that had a value for his Country, and any thing that was dear to him in it,
upon using his utmost endeavors to give some prevention to those calamities
which were impendent over us, and which threatened the destruction of all men
that stood up for the rights of the people; and this, he said, was his
resolution.

My Lord, In order to this, he declared to me, what Preparations had been made
for the Raising of Force for this purpose; he said, there were eight or ten
Thousand Men (I cannot fix the particular number) that he was well assured to
have ready in the City; That there had been diverse Horse (I think about
Fourscore or an Hundred he named) that about a Fortnight before, had been, by
parcels, drawn into the Town, without being observed; and these were in daily
expectation to go into Action; but through the unhandsome Disappointment of the
Duke of Monmouth, and the other Lords that adhered to him, who were to have
joined in the Acti^^^ and have set the Wheels at work in other Parts, he was
^^^t alone to do the whole in his Province of London, they being not ready to
concur according to their Engagement: But as he should have the greater
Danger, so he should have the greater Glory; and he resolved to go through with
the Attempt, or Perish in the Execution. To all this Discourse, I gave such an
Answer as the nature of the thing required: I told my Lord Shaftsbury, I could
not deny all those things to be true, as he had represented them in his
Discourse; and that I would not distrust his Judgment so much, as to suppose,
he would enter upon such an Affair, without due deliberation of all the
Circumstances requisite to it; and so I would not question, but there was such
Preparations, and that he had assurance of such a Force, as he had spoke of,
whenever they should begin any Action: But I told him something stuck with me,
and troubled me very much, That, in a time of such difficulty, when the
convenient Help of the Nation was all little enough to join in the Work, he
should stand by himself, and Engage in such an Enterprise, in Separation from
those other Lords, of whose Help there would be so much need: He said, he could
not help it, they had appointed this time and that, but now, when it came to
the push, they were not ready to do their parts; but the People were now in
such expectation of something to be done, especially in London, that it was
impossible to restrain them, and as impossible to get those Lords ready to join
with them: I told him, I was altogether unacquainted with the proceedings in
this Affair, and that all of it was wholly new to me: But pray, My Lord, said
I, give me leave to Act that part in this business, that, I think, will most
conduce to the Successful Issue of it, which is, to be a Mediator between You;
and let me desire you to let things rest as they are, till I have endeavored
to Create a better Understanding between your Lordship, and those Lords, of
whose Tergiversation you seem to complain. Upon this, my Lord was in: a great
heat, and expressed himself with great warming but at last, with much ado, he
gave me Permission to go to the Duke of Monmouth, and assure him, and the rest
of the Lords that were concerned, and tell them from him, That, if they would
be ready to take the Posts that were assigned them, according to their own
former Agreement, and immediately enter upon Action, he would join with them,
but if not, he was resolved to go on alone. This was, as I remember, upon
Tuesday, the Second of October; upon the Wednesday Morning, I went to find out
the Duke of Monmouth, but coming to his Lodgings, he was gone to Moor-Pank,
where, when I came, I found several Persons with him, I but after a little
time, I separated him from the Company, and whispering to him, I gave him to
understand, how great a Disorder I found my Lord Shaftsbury in, and how great a
Complaint he made of his being deserted by him, and the other Lords engaged
with him, and what Resolution he had taken to set upon the Work alone: My Lord,
says he, I think the Man is Mad, his Fear makes him lose his Understanding; I
do not know why he hides himself from his Friends, that no body can telll where
he is; but as to that which he speaks of, often our forsaking him, and breach of
Faith, he is mistaken; For, it is true indeed, we are about doing the Thing,
that he is so eager for, but we are not for doing it so hastily, as his Fears
precipitate him to do; and he must excuse us, if we Comply not with his Humor,
to hazard the whole Undertaking by a rash beginning. Upon that, I said to him,
My Lord, I shall not discourse the Particularities of the business with your
Grace; but this is all that I at present Address to your Grace for, to be a
means, if I can, with your Grace, as I have been with him, to procure a Meeting
between you, that you may Settle it with one another. Withal my heart, says
the Duke, pray let it be so; for, though my Lord Shaftsbury is angry without a
cause, yet I would not have him lose himself in a temerarious Undertaking: My
Lord, said I, I will tell him what you say, and will see if I can work him to a
Compliance with the Proposal. The next day, being Thursday, my Lord, I went to
my Lord Shaftsbury again, and reported to him, the Discourse I had with the
Duke of Monmouth, and what Answer he had given to his Complaint of their
deserting him: He Replied, It was false, they had positively engaged to be
ready by such a time, and had appointed the very Day; but now they were off,
and would not tell when they would be ready and withal, he told me, he greatly
suspected the Duke of Monmouth to have a secret Correspondence with the King. I
then desired him, That he would please to consent to the Treaty that was
proposed, and give the Duke of Monmouth, and the Lords a Meeting; he, in great
heat, Replied, No, he would come no more at them: It is strange, my Lord, said
I, that you should have such an Opinion of these Men, that they would go about
to betray you; they are not Men of that size: but he persisted in it, that they
had dealt perfidiously with him: For, after a positive Agreement, when the
Thing was brought just to the Birth, they withdrew their helping-hand; but he
was sure, in London, he could Raise a sufficient Force to do the Work, and if
he were but once set on Horseback, he would Head them himself: But yet he was
willing to put it off for a Fortnight, or three weeks longer, if they would be
sure to keep pace with him. With this Proposal I went the next day, which was
Friday, to the Duke of Monmouth, and had the same Answer from him, that I had
before; but withal, he bid me tell my Lord Shaftsbury, That he did make it his
earnest Request to him, to give him, and his other Friends a Meeting, before he
Engaged in this business: For, he found by his precipitation, he was about to
Destroy himself, and all that adhered to him. Thereupon, I came to my Lord
Shaftsbury again, upon the Saturday; and when I came there, after a long and
importunate urging all the Arguments I could think of; I so far prevailed with
him, that he agreed to give them a Meeting, upon condition, that it should be
the next day; and because it should be so private, that no notice might be
taken of it, he chose to have the Meeting at his own House, where no body would
suspect him to be, and whither he would be conveyed, under the Disguise of a
Parson. I went back with this Message to the Duke of Monmouth, who did
undertake, that the other Lords should be there.


Lord H. Steward. My Lord Howard, not to interrupt you, Did he name those other
Lords? If he did, pray acquaint my Lords, who they were?


Lord Howard. My Lord Shaftsbury named my Lord Russel, and my Lord Gray, and a
great many more that should bear their parts. I went to the Duke of Monmouth,
and told him of it, I say, and he engaged, that they should certainly be there:
But, upon the Sunday Morning, when I came to the Temple, there I found a
Message left for me, That my Lord Shaftsbury had received an Alarm, That there
were some great Toryes lived near his House in Aldersgate Street, who were
continually Spying about; and so great a Company might make their more than
ordinary Observation. That this gave him such a Jealousy, as would not permit
him to Meet according to his Appointment: Afterward, I came to a better
understanding of the Reason of this, and found there was some fineness in it,
(which I could not comprehend before; But after this time, I never saw my Lord
Shaftsbury, for he removed then to other Lodgings. So that, what I now speak of
him, is only what I had, by hearsay, from others: For, I had no knowledge of
what passed, as to him, but what I had from Capt. Walcot; who told me, That
after that, there were several days of Meeting appointed, but still, from time
to time, put off; but upon what reason, I cannot particularly remember.

This is all I know of my Lord Shaftsbury; and the latter Part is wholly by
Hearsay from Walcot: But by reason of this Agitation, we continued under
Expectation till such time as my Lord Shaftsbury went into Holland; where he
shortly after died. And truly, I thought, at that time, much of the Design was
quashed, and laid aside: But, soon after, Ferguson came over; who, when he came
Here, began to revive and quicken the Business, and push it on to Execution. I
spoke with him at the One Bell in the Strand; and there he gave me an Account
of all the Steps that had been taken: He told me what Preparations had been
made in the City, in general; what to seize the Gates of the City; what to
Possess themselves of the Tower; what to attacque the Guards; and several other
Things, which I cannot now so well remember; the Impressions of them being worn
out of my Memory, by length of Time, and other Accidents.

This, in general, is all that I can say, as to what was previous to the
particular Engagement wherein I was concerned: For, at last, after many
Discourses, the Troubles and Difficulties of the Times increasing, and the
Dangers that threatened us, as we thought, growing higher and higher, this gave
an Occasion for our uniting Councels, and entering into a kind of Juncto; which,
I suppose, is Foreign to this Affair before your Lordships; and therefore, I
suppose, would be likewise impertinent for me, to trouble your Lordships with.


L. H. Steward. Mr. Attorney, Do you desire my Lord Howard should give an
Account of those other Meetings, and Consultations, at which he was present?


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I think there will be no need of it; and I am unwilling
to take up your Grace's Time, to no purpose.


Lord Howard. As for that Noble Lord at the Bar, I know nothing concerning him.


Lord H. Steward. Then, Gentlemen, Will You have him asked any more Questions?


Mr. At. Genesis No, my Lord.


Lord H. Steward. My Lord Delamere, Will You ask him any Questions?


Lord Delamere. No, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Before my Lord Howard goes, I would ask him one Question in
general, Whether he knew of any Design of a Rising in Cheshire?


Lord Howard. No, my Lord, I knew of none at all.


Mr. At. Genesis Then We desire my Lord Gray may be sworn.


Which was done. Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Will You give his Grace, and my Lords an
Account, what You know of any Designs of an Insurrection or Rebellion, when You
were beyond Sea, or before? and who were engaged in it?


Lord Gray. My Lord, I am Subpoena'd hither, on behalf of the King; and I am
also Subpoena'd on behalf of my Lord, the Prisoner at the Bar: I do not know
any thing, that I can speak of my own Knowledge, against the Prisoner; nor have
I any thing to say, that I know of, that will be for his Advantage. But I am
here ready to Answer such Questions, as shall be asked of me, either of One
side, or the Other.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, the Question I ask You, is, What do You know of any
Design of a Rising in Cheshire, and when?


Lord Gray. About the Time of Election of Sheriffs for the City of London; I
mean that memorable Time of the Contested Election, which furnished the World
with so much Discourse, and was the occasion of such Heats and Animosities:
About that Time, the Duke of Monmouth, and my Lord of Shaftsbury began to
discourse about making use of That, as an Opportunity to accomplish their
Design; For they thought the Ferment was so high, that Men would easily be
disposed to an Insurrection; And after many Discourses to that purpose, they
came to this Resolution, That they would apply themselves to make what Interest
they could, to procure a Rising in Three several Parts of the Kingdom at once:
One in Cheshire, whither the Duke of Monmouth was to betake himself: and there
be advised by my Lord Macclesfield, my Lord Brandon, my Lord Delamere that then
was, and the Prisoner at the Bar, what Gentlemen were proper to apply to, for
joining in the Design: The Second was in London, which was assigned to be the
Province of my Lord of Shaftsbury* And the Third was, in the West; which was
committed to the Care of my Lord Russel. The Duke of Monmouth did accordingly
go his Progress into Cheshire, as is very well known; and, upon his Return, was
taken into Custody by the Sergeant at Arms: Upon which, Sir Thomas Armstrong
was sent Post to Town, and get an Habeas Corpus; and withal, to deliver a
Message to Me, to be Communicated with my Lord Russel, and my Lord Shaftsbury:
Which Message, as near as I remember, was to this Effect; That he had been
kindly received by the Gentlemen of the Country; and had discoursed the Matter
with them, and found them all inclined very much to his Satisfaction: That upon
his being Arrested, he had been advised to make his Escape into Cheshire, and
Rise immediately; but that he would not do a Matter of that great Importance,
without the Approbation of his Friends. This is all that I know of any thing,
that was designed in Cheshire.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, my Lord, what do you know of any Messages that Capt.
Matthews or Jones brought over from Holland, and to whom, and from whom?


L. Gray, Sir I will give the best Account I can, upon the sudden, for I am not
prepared to give a particular distinct account, in regard I did not know it
would be expected from me, nor indeed that it would affect the Prisoner at the
Bar.


L. H. Stew. Pray, my Lord, give my Lords the Peers as succinct and particular
an account as you can.


L. Gray, My Lord, soon after the late Kings Death, the Duke of Monmouth was at
Amsterdam with my Lord Argyle, where there was an account given of the Design
that was in hand, of an Insurrection in Scotland, and the preparations that had
been made in order to it; and at that time there came over to Holland Mr. Crag,
that came as I was informed from Major VVildman, and his Errand was to promote
and recommend a Reconciliation between the Duke of Monmouth, and my Lord
Argyle, who till that time had acted in separate Interests; and Crag then gave
an account that Means and Money were prepared; he had no particular Message to
the Duke, because he did not know of meeting him there at that time: The Duke
of Monmouth upon this Encouragement, did send Captain Matthews into England,
with a Message to Major VVildman, wherein he did desire him that he would
procure a Meeting with my Lord Macclesfield, My Lord Brandon, my Lord Delamere,
and I think Mr. Charleton, and acquaint them that he had received a full
account of my Lord Argyle's affairs, and the preparations that had been made
for it, and accordingly he had ordered his own affairs to join with him; he
likewise sent Crag with a Message to the same purpose to other Friends in
London, and he dispatched away one Battescomb into the West, to prepare things
there. When Crag returned back again to the Duke, he gave him an account that
Major VVildman had procured a Meeting with those Lords and Gentlemen, that I
mentioned before, who were all of Opinion, That the Duke of Monmouth should go
for Scotland, for they thought that his coming there, would be the best Service
he could do the interest at present, and they should know the strength of the
Enemy here, by their sending Forces to suppess the Rebellion there. There was
likewise a particular Message from Major VVildman to the Duke of Monmouth, That
he desired he would bring over with him a Broad Seal to Seal Commissions with,
and to take upon him the Title of King; the other particular branches of the
Message, I do not so well remember, but only this, he was particularly asked,
Whether the Prisoner at the Bar was there, and he said he was, --


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, my Lord Gray, will you give an account what you know of
Jones's coming over, and what Errand he was sent of.


Lord Gray, Jones came some time after Crag returned, and he gave an account of
other things conformable to what Crag had said, and was sent back again to
England by the Duke of Monmouth to give an account of his being ready to sail;
he gave him also a Letter, the Contents whereof I did not see, I had some short
account of it, but whether it were written to any particular Person, I cannot
tell; the sum of his Message was, That he would land by that time he could get
thither.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord Gray, you had frequent Discourse with the Duke of
Monmouth, and so I suppose can give an account who he kept Correspondence with,
and upon whose assistance he relied.


Lord Gray, I suppose few people will believe we were so weary of our Lives, as
to come and throw them away with Threescore, or a very few more Men, (for it
was but a very small number we began with) except we had had expectation of
good assistance, This I am sure of, by all my discourses with the Duke of
Monmouth, he did depend very much upon Cheshire, and was resolved to have
landed and begun there; but afterward he considered of it, and thought better
to send some sort of excuse for not landing in Cheshire; That the persons that
were to be applied to there, being men of great Quality and Interest in their
Country, and able to manage it without his assistance; But in the West, the
Friends he relied on, were not of that considerable Quality, and therefore he
chose to land there.


Mr. At. Genesis What Lords did he name, that he depended upon?


Lord Gray, I did name them; my Lord Macclesfield, my Lord Brandon, and my Lord
Delamere; but I observed when the Duke of Monmouth spoke of his Friends in
Cheshire, he did name my Lord Macclesfield, and my Lord Brandon as Persons.


E. of Nottingham. My Lord Steward, I humbly pray this Witness may be asked, to
whom that Letter was written, that he says the late Duke of Monmouth sent by
Jones?


Lord H Stew. You hear my Lord's question, who did Monmouth send that Letter by
Jones to?


Lord Gray. My Lord, I never saw the Letter, nor do I know any directions there
were upon it; I always looked upon it as a paper of Instructions given to him
about the time when, and the name of the place where the Duke was to land.


Mr. At. Genesis We will give an account of that by Jones by and by, My Lord. Now
swear Nathaniel VVade,


Which was done. Lord H. Stew. Well, what do you ask this Witness?


Mr. At. Genesis Wade, That which I call you for, is this, to give an account
what you know of any design of landing in Cheshire, or elsewhere, and of
Jones's coming over, and what Errand he was sent upon?


Mr. Wade, My Ld. I shall give an account as far as I know; after the death of
the late King, Captain Matthews came to Amsterdam and gave an account there,
that the Duke of Monmouth intended to be there shortly to meet and consult with
my Lord Argyle, who, we understood, then was preparing for an expedition into
Scotland; thereupon I was sent into Freezland to desire my Lord Argyle to come
to Amsterdam, which he did; and there the Duke of Monmouth did consult with
him, and they did agree together, that at the same time that my Lord Argyle
made an Insurrection in Scotland, the Duke of Monmouth should Invade England,
and to that end, that he should send to those Friends he had in England to be
ready to assist him when he came there; and in order to it, he did send Captain
Matthews, who amongst other things, was to go to the Dukes Friends in Cheshire,
and amongst them, my Lord Delamere was named to be one, and the business was to
desire them to be ready to assist him when he should land; accordingly Captain
Matthews went; but a little after his going away, I think one Crag came over,
and he came from Major Wildman, and his business was to endeavor a good
understanding between the Duke of Monmouth, and my Lord Argyle, who were then
at some difference; and to endeavor to make them act jointly by united
Councils; a little after he was sent back again into England to Major Wildman,
to desire him to assist them with some Money; he went back again, and returned,
but brought no Money; thereupon he was sent again, by the Duke of Monmouth,
because the first time he was not sent by him; the Sum demanded was Six
Thousand Pounds, or Four Thousand Pounds, and at last he sent for a Thousand
Pound; Crag returned with this Answer, That they could not assist them with
Money, for they did not know to what end they should have Money, but to buy
Arms, and for that the people were well provided enough already, and there was
no need of Money for that purpose. The Duke of Monmouth a while after sent Mr.
Crag, and pawned all the Jewels he had, to raise Money, and fitted out Three
Ships for this Service, laden with Ammunition, and because he had promised my
Lord Argyle to make a diversion, in England, while he Invaded Scotland, he
resolved to go with that provision he had, and desired by Mr. Crag, that since
those Lords and Gentlemen that were to assist them, had sent no Money, as was
desired of them, and expected from them, they should now trouble themselves
with no further needless consultations; but should repair each man into his own
Country, where their interest was greatest, to be ready when he should come;
and in order to this, the Duke of Monmouth did set sail from Holland, and came
to Lyme, and landed there; and did afterward order his March, so that he might
most conveniently meet with his Cheshire Friends, that is, toward Gloucester,
and so to get Gloucester Bridge, that thereby gaining the command of the River
of Severn, those of Cheshire, if they did, as was expected, make an
Insurrection at the same time, they might easily join together. In pursuance of
this design we came to Keinsham Bridge, and there a party of the Kings Horse set
upon us, and we took some Prisoners, and thereupon thought it advisable not to
let the Kings Army join together, but to go back and engage those that were
already come together, and that was the reason we did not go over the Bridge.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you know any thing of Jones's coming into Holland, and for
what?


Mr. Wade, My Lord, I had forgot that; a little before Crags going last away,
Jones came over, and his business was to know why we staid so long, for the
Duke of Monmouth's Friends in England had expected him long before, and he was
dispatched away quickly to acquaint them the Duke was coming.


Mr. At. Genesis Who was he sent to, to acquaint with his coming?


VVade, To Major Wildman, he was directed to Major Wildman.


Mr. At. Genesis Who else were to be acquainted with it?


Wade, Among the rest, my Lord Delamere, my Lord Macclesfield and my Lord
Brandon were to be acquainted that he was coming, and expected that they should
raise what Forces they could to assist him.


Lord H. Stew. Will my Lord Delamere ask him any Questions?


Lord Delamere, No my Lord, I never saw his Face before, tat I know of.


Lord H. Stew. Who do you go to next, Mr. Attorney?


Mr. At. Genesis Next we call Richard Goodenough; Swear him, which was done. That
which I would know of you, Mr. Goodenough is, Whether Jones was sent of my
Message, and about what?


Goodenough, My Lord, I was beyond Sea with the Duke of Monmouth, and Mr. Jones
was sent (among other persons) to my Lord Delamere to give him notice that he
should be ready against the time that the Duke should land, and take care to
secure himself, that he might not be seized here in Town, for we were
apprehensive such a thing would be attempted.


Mr. At. Genesis What directions were given him, what Lords to go to?


Goodenough, My Lord, we were informed in Holland, that my Lord Delamere was
one of those Lords that had promised to draw his Sword in his behalf.


Mr. At. Genesis Had you any discourse with the Duke of Monmouth about it at any
time?


Goodenough, Yes, I have discoursed with the Duke of Monmouth several times.


Lord H. Steward. Ay, what did he say to you about it?


Goodenough, My Lord, he said (among other things) that he hoped my Lord
Delamere would not break his promise with him?


Lord H. Stew. My Lord Delamere, will you ask him any Questions?


Lord Delamere, No, my Lord, I never saw his Face before, that I know of, I
will assure you.


Lord H. Stew. That is pretty strange, so famous an Undersheriff of London and
Middlesex, as he was.


Mr. At. Genesis Then swear Jones, which was done: Pray will you give an account
what Message you received from the Duke of Monmouth upon your going over into
Holland, and to whom you were to deliver it, and what became of it?


Jones, My Lord, I went to Holland about the latter end of April last; my
going, as I have acquainted his Majesty and the Council, was not only about
this Affair, for I had other business that called me thither, which I shall not
now take up your time, or trouble you with repeating of; but having some
knowledge from Mr. Disney, that there were some intentions of doing something,
tho it was communicated to me but very darkly, and therefore that little I did
know, made me the willinger to go for Holland so soon as I did; but before I
went, I had a mind to understand something more of the design, and therefore
the night before I went, I came to Mr. Disney, and acquainted him with my
intended Journey; Mr. Disney did persuade me against it, thinking that I had
gone upon this account, but I told him the occasion, which he partly knew, why
I went; but withal I told him, I did intend to see the Duke of Monmouth, and if
he had any Message that he would have delivered to him, I would deliver it very
safely; he told me all the Message I should deliver to the Duke of Monmouth, if
I saw him, was to desire him to keep to the last Conclusion which he would find
in a Letter that had been sent to him, and that if he had not yet received the
Letter, it was to come by the Crop-hair'd Merchant, or the Crop-ear'd Merchant,
I cannot say which, but I think it was the Crop-hair'd; I asked him what that
Message was, lest the Letter should miscarry, for I told him, if I should go to
the Duke of Monmouth, and refer him to a Letter wherein a Message was to be
brought him, which he was to keep to, and that Letter should miscarry, I should
in effect bring no message at all to him; my Lord, thereupon he told me, that I
should acquaint the Duke of Monmouth that his Friends in England would not by
any means have him come for England, but that he should continue where he was,
or if he thought good to go for Scotland, they approved of it; this is the sum
of what he said to me, as near as I can remember. When I came to Amsterdam,
there was one Mr (...) that was killed at Philips Norton, went with me to the
Duke of Monmouth's, and when I came to him, I acquainted him, as Mr. Disney
appointed me to do, that there was such a letter sent by such a person, and
that such a Message was included in it; My Lord, he was in a great passion, I
know not how to express it, and seemed to be very much troubled, and did
reflect very much upon Major Wildman, and said, that was Wildman's work, and he
said, (as I think that was the word he used) Wildman was a Villain, or to that
purpose; but withal he said it was too late to send such a message now, and
that he was resolved to come for England; and he would make VVildman hang with
him, or fight for it, with him; that Wildman did think by tying his own purse,
he should tie his hand, but he should find it should not be so, and some other
words of the like nature, he used; but this is the substance of what he said;
he gave some account what preparations had been made, he said Money was very
short, and he had been fain to pawn all he had to raise what Money was raised,
upon his own charge. He asked me if I did think to return to England shortly; I
told him if he had any service to command me for England, I had some little
business to do at Rotterdam, which I would dispatch, and then I would perform
his Commands; he told me, he would be glad I did return as soon as I could for
England, and that this should be the Message I should carry to Wildman in
answer to the Message he had sent him, That he would come for England, and he
should either fight with him, or hang with him, and that was all he had to say
to him. I was coming away from him, but he stopped me, and told me he would not
have me go out of Town till he had spoke with me again; this was upon the
Sunday, accordingly I did go in the Evening to him, and when I came, he told
me, he would have me stay till Tuesday Morning, for he was going out of Town,
and intended to be back again at that time, but if not, I should receive from
my Lord Gray what he had to say to me. He did not come upon the Tuesday, but my
Lord Gray did come, and I think to the best of my remembrance Mr. Crag was with
me; he told me all he had to say was, That the Duke intended to be in England
within Nine days, and that upon the Thursday seven-night after I came away, the
Duke would be in England; and he bid me to remember to tell Brand that when he
heard the Duke was landed, he should acquaint Sir Robert Payton with it, but
not till he was landed; for tho they did think that he would join with them
when the thing was begun, yet they ought to be careful who it was communicated
to, for fear it should be discovered and disappointed; this was all that I had
in command from my Lord Gray. I came to Rotterdam, and dispatched my business
there, and would have come away, but it happened there were no Ships coming for
England, nor would there be any in a Fortnights time; thereupon I returned to
Amsterdam; when I came back, I went to see the Duke to give him an account how
it happened that I was not gone for England; the Duke told me he was glad I was
not gone; for now he had a further Message for me to carry, and he would have
me stay 2 or 3 days in Town for it; I staid three days, and came again to him,
but he told me he was not ready for me yet; then I stayed two or three days
longer till the 21 st of May to the best of my remembrance; it was upon a
Thursday that he gave me the Message that I was to bring into England; I came
to him in the Morning, and he told me I should come to him upon the Evening of
that day, and when I came, there was a Paper lay before him on the Table, and
he took the Paper and sealed it up, I cannot say he wrote all that was in that
Paper, but the Paper that lay before him was not finished when I came in, and
that he did not write while I was there, I am sure; but he took it up and
sealed it before me, and when he had sealed the Paper, he told me, I must
as soon as I came for London, see for Captain Matthews, Sir Thomas Armstrong's
Son in Law, who lodged at Mr. Blake's in Covent Garden, and desire him to
acquaint my Lord Macclesfield, my Lord Brandon, and my Lord Delamere with his
design of coming for England, and that he was resolved to set out upon the
Saturday Morning after I came away, which was upon the Friday; he told me
Captain Matthews was to send one Post to that place that was named in the Note
to receive Intelligence of his landing, and that should be brought to his
Friends here immediately (he designed should be 24 Hours before the Court had
notice of it in Town), and those Lords were to be in readiness, that as soon as
they knew he was landed, they might repair to their several Posts to assist
him. I told him that I would deliver what Message he gave me, and asked him,
what I was to do with the Paper he put into my hands; thereupon, as near as I
remember, he used these expressions to me, I do by you, as Princes do by their
Admirals, when they send them out upon any considerable expedition, which
requires secrecy in the management of it, they have their Commission delivered
to them sealed up, which they are not to break open till they are at Sea. So
here I deliver you your Instructions sealed up, which you are not to open till
you are at Sea; and when you have opened them, and read what is contained in
them, I would have you tear the Paper, and throw it into the Sea, or otherwise
dispose of it, lest you be surprised and searched at your landing, and my
Papers found about you. My Lord, I asked him, because I would be as punctual in
my Message as I could, what those Lords were to do, when they came out of Town,
whether they should come directly to him or no; he told me no, not that, but
they should go into the Country, and secure their Interest for him there. I
asked him then, if Captain Matthews be out of the way, and I be disappointed of
meeting with him, shall I deliver this Message to the Lords my self; he told me
no, by no means, for those Lords were Persons of Quality, and that that was not
a thing to be done by me; what shall I then do, my Lord, said I, if Captain
Matthews be out of the way? you need not question that, says he, but if you
meet not with Matthews, speak to Wildman.

My Lord, with these instructions (and this as near as I can remember is the
Sum of all he said to me) I came away, and came to Sea; when I was out at Sea,
I broke open the Letter that I had given me by the Duke, and I will tell you as
near as I can, what were the Contents of it; there was written in it to this
Effect:

TAUNTON in Somersetshire is the place to which all are to resort; the Persons
to be acquainted with the time of landing, are the Lord Macclesfield, the Lord
Brandon, and the Lord Delamere; the place to send the Coach to, is to Taunton
to Mr. Savages House at the Red Lion; the place where the Post was appointed to
return, was Captain Matthews Lodging, at Mr. Blake 's, and he was to receive
the message, or if he did not, he was to appoint one that should receive it; or
if it were to return to any other place, that was left to him to do as he
thought fit. And this was all, as near as I can remember; when I had seen this,
I came to London, and being very weary and tired, when I came home, I went to
Bed


Mr. At. Genesis Pray tell the Court as near as you can, what day it was you came?


Jones. I came out of Holland the 22 d of May, I came home the 27 th, and
looking upon my Almanac, I find that it was the Wednesday Fortnight before the
Duke landed, that I came; when I was come home, I sent for Mr. Disney, and he
came to me immediately; I told him I had seen the Duke, and desired that he
would help me to the speech of Captain Matthews; he told me he was out of Town
too; then I desired to speak with Major Wildman, he told me he was gone out of
Town too; then I told him I must deliver my Message to him, and I told him this
message as I have told your Lordships before, and therefore left it to him to
convey it to the knowledge of those Lords that were concerned; he did seem to be
unwilling, and told me he did not know how to communicate it to those Lords,
and asked me why I would not deliver the Message my self; I told him I did ask
the Duke of Monmouth that very question, whether I might, and he had forbid me,
and ordered me to deliver it either to Captan Matthews, or to Major Wildman;
and since they were absent, I knew not any to communicate it to, but only to
him, in order to their having notice of it. He told me he would do what he
could.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray who were present when you had this Discourse with Disney?


Jones, There was none present but himself then, for it was the first time that
I spoke with him after I came from Holland; I told him there was a Post to go
to receive intelligence, which should bring notice of his landing, 24 Hours
before it could be known at Whitehall, and therefore it were fit they should be
in a readiness; he did scruple at it, and said he did not know where to get any
one that could convey the Message to them, but he would do what he could; and
concluded to meet at night in Smithfield, and he did so, and there were two
Persons with him, Mr. Crag, and Mr. Lisle, and another, I think his name was
Brand, and he took me and Brand aside, and did ask me where was the place that
the Post was to go; I told him where, and then he did discourse of the Dukes
coming over, but I mentioned not any thing of the Lords, but only to Disney;
and after an hours talk or thereabouts, we parted. I saw Mr. Disney once
afterward, but what he did with the Message I cannot tell, he gave me no
account of it; I did indeed before I went out of Town see him at the Half Moon
Tavern in (...) I went out of Town, and met the Duke of Monmouth at Lyme where
he Landed, and when I came to him, I told him what I had done with my Message,
and how it happened that I could not deliver it to the persons that he had
ordered; the Duke told me he was satisfied that I had done what I could, but
seemed to be troubled that Matthews was out of Town. And this is the sum of
what passed in my knowledge as near as I can remember.


Mr. At. Genesis Had you no discourse with Disney what he had done with the
Message, when you met at Smithfield?


Jones, No, because those men were Strangers to me, and I had never seen them
before.


Mr. At. Genesis But afterward had you no discourse with Brand nor Lisle about
it.


Jones, No not at all: Brand I never spoke but once with, and Lisle would not
own that he was the man that was there.


Lord H. Stew. Have you any more questions to ask him, Mr. Attorney?


Mr. At. Genesis No, my Lord.


Lord H. Stew. My Lord Delamere, will your Lordship ask him any questions?


Lord Delamere, No, my Lord, I never saw his face before this time, that I know
of, in my life.


Lord H. Stew. Then who do you call next, Mr. Attorney?


Mr. At. Genesis The next Witness that we call, my Lord, is Story,


Who was sworn. Lord H. Stew. Well, what do you ask him?


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Story, pray will you give an account what notice you had of
Jones's message, and what was done upon it, and what discourse you had with any
body concerning my Lord Delamere, the Prisoner at the Bar, and with whom?


Story, My Lord, I had notice of it by one that lived at Bishopsgate, who told
me the 28 th of May last, that Mr. Jones was returned home from Holland upon a
message from the Duke of Monmouth, and that he had agreed to go to Taunton, and
there he expected Mr. Dare or Mr. Williams to bring an account that the Duke
was landed; and he said that Mr. Jones's message was delivered to Disney in the
absence of Captain Matthews, who was out of Town; that after Disney had
received the message from Jones, he went and had some discourse with my Lord
Delamere, and that that night my Lord Delamere went out of Town with two
Friends, and went a by-way through Enfield Chase, toward Hatfield.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray when was it you went out of Town, Story?


Story, The 28 th of May.


Mr. At. Genesis Who went out of Town with you?


Story, No body, but I overtook Mr. Brand that Evening.


Lord H. Stew. Pray repeat what it was he acquainted you with?


Story, He told me that the day before, Jones was returned home with a message
from Holland, which message was to be delivered to Captain Matthews, but in his
absence Disney received it, and that Evening after he had discoursed with my
Lord Delamere, my Lord that night went out of Town, and two Friends of mine he
said went with him, and did convey him away by a by-way through Enfield Chase
toward Hatfield.


Lord H. Stew. Have you any more questions to ask him, Mr. Attorney?


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Sir, had you any discourse with the late Duke of Monmouth
at Shepton Mallet? and about what?


Lord H. Stew. By the way, Friend, where is that Brand that you speak of?


Story, He is killed; I did not see him dye, but he is said to be killed at
Keinsham Bridge.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray what discourse had you with the late Duke of Monmouth about
the Prisoner at the Bar?


Story, I heard the late Duke of Monmouth say at Shepton Mallet, that his great
dependence was upon my Lord Delamere and his friends in Cheshire, but he was
afraid they had failed him, or betrayed him, or some such word he used, and he
said he could have been supplied otherwise, but that he had a dependence upon
them.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray what Office had you under the Duke of Monmouth?


Story, I was Commissary General.


Mr. At. Genesis Well, we have done with you.


Ld. H. St. Will you ask him any questions, my Lord Delamere?


Ld. Del. If your Grace please I have a question to ask him.


Ld. H. St. Ay, with all my heart; what question you will, my Lord.


Ld. Del. My Lord, I desire to know whether he knows one Saxon.


St. What Saxon does your Lshp. mean, one that was in the Army?


Lord Delamere, Yes, one Thomas Saxon.


Story, Yes, my Lord, I knew him a Prisoner in Dorchester Prison, where I was a
Prisoner my self.


Ld. H. St. Has your Lordship nothing more to ask him but that?


Lord. Delamere, No, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Now, my Lord, we call some persons to prove, that that very
night when Jones came to Town, my Lord Delamere the Prisoner at the Bar goes
out of Town without any servant, changes his name, and goes a by-way: Swear
Vaux and Edlin?


Vaux was sworn. Lord H. Stew. Well, what says this man?


Mr. At. Genesis Pray give my Lords an account whether you went out of Town with
my Lord Delamere, and when?


Vaux, My Lord, perhaps I may not remember the very words that I gave my
Evidence in before, but I will repeat the Substance.


Mr. At. Genesis It is not so long ago, but you may easily recollect your self;
pray what day was it that my L. Delamere sent for you?


Vaux, The 26 th day of May, and I went out of Town the 27 th.


Mr. At. Genesis You are upon your Oath, and you must remember you are sworn to
tell the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth.


Vaux, Sir I shall take care to do it as far as I can remember.


Mr. At. Genesis Whither was it that he sent for you?


Vaux, To the Rummer Tavern in Queenstreet, and the next day I went out of Town
with him.


Mr. At. Genesis What day of the Month did you go out of Town?


Vaux, It was the 27 th day of May.


Mr. At. Genesis What time of the night was it you went out of London?


Vaux, It was about 9 or 10 of the Clock.


Mr. At. Genesis What name did my Lord Delamere then go by?


Vaux, He went by the name of Brown.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I would acquaint your Grace that this is an unwilling
Witness, and we are forced to pump all out of him by questions?


Vaux, I do tell you the truth of all that I know.


Mr. At. Genesis How far did you ride that night?


Vaux, To Hoddesden.


Mr. At. Genesis What time did you get thither?


Vaux, About 12 of the Clock.


Mr. At. Genesis Whither did you go then?


Va. We went to Hitchen, and I returned back again the next day.


Mr. At. Genesis Whither was my Lord Delamere going then?


Vaux. To see his Son that was sick in the Country.


Lord H. Stew. What he told you so, did he?


Vaux, Yes, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis What other Company went with you?


Vaux, Two Gentlemen, the one I knew, the other I did not.


Mr. At. Genesis What was the name of him you did know?


Vaux, It was Edlin.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray was that the direct Road to Cheshire that you went?


Vaux, We made it our way.


Mr. At. Genesis You made it your way; but I ask you whether it be the best way?


Vaux, It is the freest Rode from dust.


Mr. At. Genesis But I ask you a plain Question, upon your Oath is it the best
way into Cheshire?


Vaux, Truly, my Lord, I do not know that.


Lord H. Stew. Pray who gave you directions to call my Lord Delamere by the
name of Brown?


Vaux, Himself, my Lord.


L. H. Stew. Was that the first time my Lord went by that name, as you know of?


Vaux, Yes, my Lord, I never heard that he was called by that name till that
time.


L. Del. I was called by the name of Brown at that time, and I will give your
Grace an account by and by of the reason of it.


L. H. Stew. Has your Lordship any Question to ask him?


L. Del. No, my Lord.


L. H. Stew. Then go on to the next.


Mr. At. Genesis Our next Witness is Edlin, pray swear him which was done. Pray
will you give my Lords and the Court an account whither you went with my Lord
Delamere out of Town, and when?


Edlin, The 27 th of May last, I was at the Custom-House, and there came Mr.
Vaux, the Gentleman that was here last, who told me he was going out of Town as
far as Hitchen, and asked me to go along with him; he said he was to go that
evening; I asked him what time he intended to return? he told me he was
resolved to return the next day. I told him, then I would go along with him,
and we appointed the place of meeting to be at the Bell-Inn in Coleman-Street;
when I came there, he said there was a friend that was going along with him,
one Mr. Brown, we went as far as Hoddesden that night.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Mr. Edlin, will you look upon that Gentleman that stands at
the Bar; is that he that went by the name of Brown?


Edlin, Yes, my Lord, that is he.


Mr. At. Genesis Well then, what time did you set out?


Edlin, It was very near nine of the Clock.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray when was it that Vaux met you at the Custom-House?


Edlin, It was about 10 of the Clock in the morning.


L. H. Stew. Pray did you hear or know upon the Road, whither he was going?


Edlin, My Lord, I did never see my Lord Delamere before in my life.


L. H. Stew. But did not he tell you as he went along, whither he was going?


Ed. He said he was going for Cheshire to see a sick Child.


Mr. At. Genesis You say, Sir, that you went first for Hoddesden?


Ed. We did so, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Sir, how long were you riding that, from the Bell in
Coleman-Street to Hoddesden?


Ed. it was 3 hours I believe, or about 3 hours and a half.


Mr. At. Genesis Then you rid hard out of Town?


Ed. My Lord, it was toward 9 of the Clock when we got on Horseback, and it
was about 12 or a little more, when we came to Hoddesden.


L. H. Stew. Well, Mr Attorney, is that all you have to ask him?


Mr. At. Genesis Yes, my Lord.


L. H. Stew. Will you ask him any questions, my Lord Delamere?


Lord Delamere, No, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Then, my Lord, to confirm this Evidence, and to explain it, I
shall call you a couple of Witnesses to prove that this Gentleman went by the
name of Brown in the Cant of those that were engaged in this business, that the
name was known as his name by all the Party, and called so constantly in their
Letters and Messages; Swear Tracey, Paunceford, and Thomas Babington. Which was
done


Lord H. Stew. Which will you begin with first?


Mr. At. Genesis We begin with Paunceford; Pray will you give his Grace and these
Lords an account what discourse you heard at Disneys concerning the Prisoner at
the Bar, and what name he was usually called by, in your meetings?


Paunce. My Lord, I shall give as just an account as I can; I was acquainted
with Mr. Disney, and the 14 th of June I was at his house --


Lord H. Stew. What June do you mean?


Paunce. Last June, my Lord, and there were three more besides, one Joshua
Lock, and a Country Gentleman that I have understood since to be one Hooper,
and there was one Halsey; and being there, Lock staid for some Declarations.


Lord H. Stew. What Declarations were those you speak of?


Paunce. The Declarations of the late Duke of Monmouth.


Lord H. Stew. Were they Printed at that time?


Paunce. They were not ready at 4 of the Clock in the Afternoon; but about 9 of
the Clock they were finished, and three were printed off, and were delivered to
Joshua Lock, and when he had received them at that time, there was a discourse
of having them sent into Cheshire to one Mr. Brown; after we had received them,
we came over the Water together, and we landed at Salisbury Stairs, and Lock
was very earnest for going out of Town that night, with those three
Declarations, which, as he said, were to be carried to one Mr. Brown: This was
at 9 of the Clock; and so we parted.


Lord H. Stew. Pray into what Country was he to carry them?


Paunce. A little way out of Town, he said.


Lord H. Stew. Just now you said they were to go to Cheshire?


Paunce. My Lord, the discourse at Disney's house was, that they were to be
sent into Cheshire, but when we came over the water, Lock said he was to go a
little out of Town to one Mr. Brown.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray who was that Mr. Brown as they meant, as you apprehended?


Paunce. I understood Mr. Brown to be my Lord Delamere by some discourse.


Lord H. Stew. Whose discourse did you understand it by?


Paunce. The first time, my Lord, that I heard of my Lord Delamere's going by
the name of Brown, was upon a discourse with one Edlin.


Lord H. Stew. Prithee tell us what that discourse thou had with Edlin, was.


Paunce. Mr. Edlin about the latter end of May last, went out of Town, as I
heard, and when he came back again, I asked him whither he went? he said he was
invited by a Friend to go with him out of Town, and my Lord Delamere went along
with them, and went by the name of Brown.


Mr. At. Genesis What discourse had you with Disney, or any body else about my
Lord Delamere's going by the name of Brown?


Paunce. Mr. Disney did use to mention my Lord Delamere by the name of Brown.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray were you at any meeting with any body, and whom, at any
Tavern, and what Tavern where any such discourse was had?


Paunce. My Lord, I was at a meeting at the Castle Tavern with Mr. Vermuyden,
and my Brother Babington, and one Manning, but there was no mention then of any
Brown that I remember, nor of my Lord Delamere, but only there was something in
relation to the landing of the Duke of Monmouth; the question was asked where
he was to land, and Mr. Vermuyden made answer he did not know.


Lord H. St. Will your Lordship please to ask this Witness any questions, my
Lord?


Lord Delamere, Pray, Sir, did you ever know any body else that went by the
name of Brown besides me?


Paunce. May I answer this question, my Lord?


Lord H. Stew. Answer it, yes you must, you are sworn to tell the truth, and
the whole truth, man.


Paunce. My Lord, there was a discourse of Mr. Vermuyden's going by the name of
Brown.


Lord H. Stew. Will you ask him any more questions, my Lord?


Lord Delam. No, my Lord.


Lord H. Stew. Then go on, Mr. Attorney.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Mr. Babington, do you tell my Lords what you know of my
Lord Delamere's going by the name of Brown?


Babing. My Lord, I shall give an account; When I first knew any thing of the
Transactions, I was with my Brother Paunceford, Mr. Vermuyden, and one Chadwick
that went into the West, and there was a discourse of two Gentlemen that went
by names I did not know; Brown was one, and I was desirous to know who was
meant by it; I was at that time but newly acquainted with the concerns of these
people; and so I found they were fearful to entrust me; but afterward I was at
the Castle Tavern where my Brother, and my Uncle Vermuyden was, and in
discourse of Mr. Brown, some body happened to name my Lord Delamere's name, but
he was presently taken up, You mean Mr. Brown, ay, says he, I do.


L. H. St. About what time was this, pray you?


Bab. About the middle or latter end of May last.


Mr. At. Genesis Were you at Disney's when the Declarations were printed there?


Bab. Mr. Attorney, I will give an account of that afterward, but I have
something else to say first; After this, I was diligent to know of my Uncle
Vermuyden and my brother, who this Mr. Brown was; my Uncle told me it was my
Lord Delamere, and desired me whenever I discoursed of him, to call him by that
name, and I have very good reason to believe Mr. Vermuyden knew of the matter,
because he was acquainted with a great many of that sort of people, and
declared he had collected and knew of moneys that were gathered for that
purpose; and he had a good account of Monmouth's landing, and of the Force he
had in the West, and how long it was presumed that he could maintain that Force
without assistance from any body else, and so I presume he was very well
acquainted with the whole Transaction: Afterward I happened to be at Disney's
over the Water, there was my Brother Paunceford, Mr. Halsey, and my self.


Mr. At. Genesis Tell what passed there at that time.


Bab. Disney showed me a Declaration that was not perfected quite, but after
that we fell into a discourse about Mr. Brown, and afterward my Lord
Delamere's name was named by some body, that some of the Declarations were to
be sent to him, and I remember Mr. Disney said he was afraid my Lord Delamere
was not capable of doing that service that was expected from him in Cheshire
for want of some of those Declaratious, which would be mighty useful to him to
inform the people, they being Monmouth's Declarations.


Lord H. Stew. Had Lock any of those Declarations away for that Mr. Brown you
speak of?


Bab. I never knew Lock my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis What number of Declarations did Disney print?


Bab. Disney told us he hoped in 24 hours to have 500 printed, a good number of
them were to be sent to my Lord Delamere, and several of them were dispersed.


Lord H. St. Have you any more questions to ask him, Mr. Attorney?


Mr. At. Genesis No, my Lord.


Lord H. Steward, Will you ask him any questions, my Lord Delamere?


Lord Delamere, No my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Then may it please your Grace, the next Witness we shall bring,
shall be to prove that my Lord Delamere took frequent Journies backward and
forward in a very little commpass of time, and the same Witness will likewise
tell you what Discourse he had with my Lord during the very time of Monmouths
Rebellion, to stir up the people to join with him. Swear Hope, which was done
Pray tell my Lords what Discourse you had with my Lord Delamere, and when?


Hope, Upon the Sunday before the Coronation, my Lord Delamere came down Post
to my House, toward his own House in Cheshire --


Lord H. Steward, Prithee where is thy House, for these Noble Lords do not know
thee, perhaps, so well as I do, therefore tell us where it is?


Hope, My Lord, my house is at the Three Tunns in Coventry.


Lord H. Steward, Well, go on, tell what thou know.


Hope -- Some time after that he came down Post again, and a little after he
went up again Post, and he told me he went down another way; and after that,
the 21 st of June, he came down Post again, this was upon a Sunday, the Sunday
Sennight after the Duke of Monmouth landed.


Mr. At. Genesis Had he any Servant with him at that time?


Hope, Yes he had.


Lord H. Steward, Had he a Servant with him every time he came down Post?


Hope, No, he came over, I remember, without any servant, only with a Post Boy.


Lord H. Steward, Well, and what Discourse had you with him at that, or any
other time?


Hope, My Lord, that Sunday the 21 st of June, my house was very full of people
to enquire news, it being in the time of the Rebellion, every one was desirous
to know how things went; and there was one Ingram in the house, that came to
me, and asked what news from London, for they say, says he, that the Duke of
Albemarle is killed, and his Hearse brought to Westminster Abbey; thereupon I
knowing my Lord Delamere was come from London, I went into the Room to my Lord,
and desired to know of his Lordship what was the news in London; he told me he
was little at Court, and therefore could not tell much News; I then asked him
what he heard concerning the Duke of Albemarle; said I, they say here, he is
killed; says my Lord, I am sorry for it, if it be so, but I fear it is too
true; but if he be killed, it is said he is killed by his own Party; I asked
him how? he told me a Party of the Duke of Albemarle's men were commanded to
Fire at the Duke of Monmouth's men, but instead of shooting at them, they shot
into the Ground, upon which they were very severely handled by their Officers,
which so enraged them, that they fired upon them, and killed several of them,
and amongst others, the Duke of Albemarle was killed; and he told me the Duke
of Monmouth had several Field Pieces, and Arms sufficient for near 30000 men.


Mr. At. General. Pray, did he show you any Places in any Maps?


Hope. There was in the Room. Adams's Map of England, and my Lord Delamere
showed me which way Monmouth went, and pointed out such and such Towns that he
was possessed of, and withal said, he did fear there would be many bloody Noses
before the Business was at an end.


Mr. At. General. How many times do you think my Lord did ride post to and fro?


Hope. About five times I believe.


L. H. Steward. Within what space of time?


Hope. From the Sunday Sev'night before the Coronation to the Twenty first of
June following.


L. H. Steward. Have you done with him Mr. Attorney?


Mr. At. General. Yes, my Lord.


L. Delamere. My Lord High Steward, with your Grace's leave, may I ask this
Witness any Questions?


L. H. Steward. Yes, my Lord, what you please.


L. Delamere. 'Pray, Did I go down post four or five times, do you say in that
space?


Hope. My Lord, I say you did go so often backward and forward.


L. Delamere. What time was that, you say, I came without any Servant, only
with a Post-boy?


Hope. I cannot tell.


L. H. Steward. Will your Lordship ask him any more Questions?


L. Delamere. No, my Lord.


Mr. At. General. Then, my Lord, we desire Thomas Saxon may be sworn which was
done 'Pray, Mr. Saxon, will you give an account to his Grace, and my Lords,
what you know of my Lord Delamere, the Prisoner at the Bar, concerning any
Insurrection or Rebellion designed by him in Cheshire, and when?


Saxon. At the beginning of June last, I was sent for to Mere, my Lord
Delamere's House in Cheshire, where when I came, I was conveyed into a lower
Room, where were my Lord Delamere, Sir Robert Cotton, and Mr. Crew Offleys, and
they told me I was recommended to them by my Lord Brandon, who had said, I was
an honest useful man, and they hoped I would prove so: For they had sent to the
Duke of Monmouth, who was in Holland, and received an answer by one Jones, and
as soon as they had an answer, my Lord Delamere came away post into the Country
under another Name, and by being conveyed through Moorfields, came down to
raise Ten thousand men for the Duke of Monmouth in Cheshire, by the first of
June; but now they had considered of it, and found they could not raise them
till Midsummer, for they must have time to raise a Sum of money, forty thousand
pound in that Country to maintain the men: They asked me, whether I would not
undertake to carry a Message to the Duke of Monmouth, I told them I would, and
I had there given me eleven Guineas, and five pounds in Silver for my Journey,
and I did hire a Horse afterward, and did deliver my Message to the Duke of
Monmouth.


L. H. Steward. When was this do you say?


Saxon. This was the beginning of June.


L. H. Steward. What day of June?


Saxon. I cannot tell to a day, what day in June it was, for I did not set it
down; but I believe it was the third or fourth of June.


L. H. Steward. How came you to be recommended by my Lord Brandon to these
Gentlemen: Were you acquainted with my Lord Brandon?


Saxon. I was acquainted with him: The first time I was with him was at Over,
the next time was at my Lord's own House.


Mr. At. General. Ay, 'pray tell my Lord, how you came acquainted with my Lord
Brandon?


Saxon. Upon the Monday in Easter Week last, being at Over, I was sent for by
my Lord Brandon to drink a glass of Ale, and smoke a pipe of Tobacco with him,
and when I came thither, my Lord told me he had a desire to be acquainted with
me; so we drank a considerable while; and he was attended at that time with one
Hollingshead, and one Mr. Lee; and after we had drank pretty smartly, and after
some discourse, Lee and Hollingshead went forth, being called out to speak with
some body, about an Estate or a Tenement that they were concerned in: After
they were gone out, my Lord Brandon began to discourse about the Elections of
Parliament Men, how unfairly they had been carried, he said, he stood both for
the Town and County of Lancaster, but had lost it by an unfair Election; for
the other Party had made Seven-score Freemen in one night in the Town, and by
that means had carried it against him; which had exasperated the Country so
much, that they were resolved to make it an occasion of raising up the Country
in Arms, under pretense of maintaining the Christian English Liberties; and
that they had a design to send for the Duke of Monmouth, and make him King; and
that they must make use of such men as me, that were men of Interest in the
Country, to stir up the People to rise in Arms; and if I would come to
Gosworth, his House, upon the Monday after, he would tell me more of that
Business: I went according to the time, and there he told me a great deal to
the same purpose, and withal he showed me a Letter that he had written to the
Duke of Monmouth; which Letter I afterward saw at Bridgwater.


L. H. Steward. Have you any more Questions to ask him?


Mr. At. General. No, my Lord; But if my Lord Delamere please to ask him any
Questions, he may.


L. Delamere. I humbly pray he may repeat the Evidence he has given against
me, for I have not heard what he has said.


L. H. Steward. Turn toward my Lord Delamere, and repeat the Evidence that you
gave against him, so as he may hear you: Which he did to the same effect, as
before.


L. H. Steward. 'Pray, from whom did you receive that money?


Saxon. I received it from my Lord Delamere.


L. H. Steward. My Lord Delamere, will you ask him any Questions?


L. Delamere. Yes, may it please your Grace.


L. H. Steward. Then the Method you are to take, is this, you must propound
your Questions to me, and then I will propound them to the Witness?


L. Delamere. I desire to know, may it please your Grace, when was the first
time that he declared this that he has now sworn against me.


L. H. Steward. My Lord desires to know of you, when it was that you first made
known this against him?


L. Delamere. And to whom my Lord?


Saxon. I suppose I told Mr. Storey of it first, my Lord, at Dorchester after I
was taken Prisoner for the Rebellion.


L. Delamere. When did he tell it Storey, my Lord?


Saxon. I think it was a Fortnight after my acquaintance with him.


L. H. Steward. Were you then in the same Prison with Storey?


Saxon. Yes I lay with him in the same Bed.


L. Delamere. If your Grace please, I would ask him another Question?


L. H. Steward. Ay, what you will.


L. Delamere. I desire to know, when was the first time that he made Oath of
this, and upon what occasion it was?


L. H. Steward. What say you to that?


Saxon. The first time I made Oath of it, was when I lay sick.


L. Delamere. Will your Grace please to ask him, where that was, and when?


Saxon. It was before His Majesty's Counselors, that were sent to take my
Examination in Newgate.


L. H. Steward. 'Prethee, I do not know when thou came to Newgate, it may be
thou have been there oftener than once?


Saxon. I gave my first Information immediately after I was brought to Town,
when I was removed from Dorchester Goal to Newgate.


L. Delamere. My Lord, I desire your Grace would ask him what time he came up?


Saxon. The beginning of the last Term.


L. Delamere. Then I desire to know, my Lord, whether he did remain a Prisoner
in the Country all the other time?


Saxon. Yes, I did so, from the Tenth of July, till the time that I was brought
up to Newgate.


L. Delamere. My Lord, I desire to know of him, whether I had ever employed him
about any of my Concerns, that should give me an occasion of trusting him with
such Secrets?


L. H. Steward. What Business of Importance had my Lord Delamere ever employed
you about before this time?


Saxon. I was never employed about any Concerns of my Lord Delamere's before
that time, neither was I ever in his Company, but only then, and then as
recommended by him to him; for they said, they must make use of such as me to
make their Designs known to the Country, for the accomplishing what they did
intend.


L. Delamere. Recommended by him, who does he mean?


Saxon. By my Lord Brandon.


L. Delamere. If your Grace please, I desire to know what the Business was that
he was to do?


Saxon. I was to inform the Country concerning the time of the rising, my
Acquaintance abounded that way, and by their Discourse they had got men in
every Place to acquaint the Country when they should rise.


L. H. Steward. Were you acquainted with any great Number?


Saxon. My Lord, I was a Public Tradesman in Middlewich, and much acquainted
with the ordinary sort of People.


L. Delamere. My Lord, he says he was sent for to my House, I desire to know
who was the Messenger that was sent for him?


Saxon. My Lord, I did ask him his name, but he would not tell it me; he told
me he was but Tenant to my Lord Delamere, and had been employed in such
Businesses for my Lord Delamere's Father, Sir George Booth, he was a lame man
in one Arm, for he had his hand shot away at the Siege of Nantwich.


L. Delamere. It was Tom Long the Carrier, I suppose, or some such Fellow or
other, that I sent for him; My Lord, I desire to know what time of Day or Night
was it when he came to my House?


Saxon. It was just when it began to be dark, the Messenger came to me in the
Afternoon to fetch me thither, and I sent for a man's Horse that lived near me,
and when it was brought me, he asked me what made me go so late, I told him I
had occasion to go late, and I should return late, and the man stayed at my
House for his Horse till it was late; but I not coming home, he left order for
his Horse to be brought to him.


L. Delamere. Next my Lord, I desire to know when he came to my House, whether
he did alight from his Horse at the Stables that belong to the House or no?


Saxon. I did alight just at the Old Buildings, and the man's Horse that came
with me and mine were taken into the Stables.


L. Delamere. 'Pray, my Lord, ask him who took his Horse from him?


Saxon. The man that came with me, and he went into the house and brought out a
Candle.


L. Delamere. My Lord, I would ask him whether the Door he was let in at was
that which was nearest to the Stable, or which Door?


L. H. Steward. Do you know what Door of the house you were let in at?


L. Delamere. My Lord, I ask him whether it were the next Door to the Stable?


Saxon. My Lord, I cannot very well give an account of that, for I was never at
the house before?


L. Delamere. 'Pray, my Lord, let him recollect himself, whether it were the
Door next the Stable or not.


L. H. Steward. Ay, with all my heart, if he can.


Saxon. I did not see any other Door but that I came in at, and therefore I
cannot tell which Door it was.


L. Delamere. These Questions, my Lord, I take to be proper for me to ask, and
I believe I shall make it appear so to your Grace to be so by and by.


L H. Steward. Good my Lord, take your full liberty, and ask what Questions you
please; for I know my Lords here will be all very well pleased that you have
all Scope allowed you that can be.


L. Delamere. I humbly thank your Grace, I desire to know of him, who let him
into the house?


Saxon. The man that came with me went with me just to the Door, and let me in
within the Door, and I saw no other man but that man, till I came into the Room
where my Lord and those two Gentlemen were.


L. Delamere. Was there no body else but we there?


Saxon. No, you were so wise; you would let no body be by.


L. Delamere. My Lord, I shall trouble this Witness no farther at present.


L. H. Steward. Then Mr. Attorney General, will you proceed?


Mr. At. General. My Lord, we shall give no more Evidence at present, but
shall rest it here till we see what Defense this Noble Lord will make for
himself.


L. H. Steward. Then, my Lord Delamere, your time is now come to make your
Defense, you have heard what has been Evidenced against you, and my Lords now
expect to hear what you have to say for your self?


L. Delamere. May it please your Grace, a great part of the Day is spent, and I
would beg the Favor of your Grace, that I may have the favor till to morrow
morning to review the Notes I have taken, and then I shall make my Defense.


L. H. Steward. My Lord Delamere, I had this very thing in my thoughts before I
came hither this Day, because I did foresee that this was likely to be a long
Cause, and the proceeding in it would take up much time: I have a little doubt,
I must needs say in my own mind, whether it may be done by Law; I know very
well, if this were a Trial in full Parliament, there have been Precedents to
warrant the Adjournment till another Day, though it be in the midst of a Trial;
and in the middle of the Evidence: But this Court, I take to be of the same
nature, though of a degree higher, with the other ordinary Courts of
Judicature; and whether it be not obliged and tied up to the same Method of
Proceeding with those other Courts, where all Capital Offenses are tried, is a
thing I am in some doubt about: In those Courts it has not been usual to
Adjourn the Court after Evidence given; nay, it has been sometimes a Question,
whether the Judges in those Courts, after the Jury are gone from the Bar, to
consider of their Verdict, could Adjourn themselves: I say, the Judges have
sometimes made a Doubt of it, though I know, the Point is now settled, and the
Practice is, that they may, and do: But this is most certain, after the
Evidence given, the Jury cannot be Adjourned, but must proceed in their
Enquiry, and be kept together till they are agreed of their Verdict; this has
caused some Hesitancy in me, what the Law may be in this Case; therefore I
think it may be proper to consult with my Lords the Judges; for I desire, the
thing may be considered and settled.


L. Delamere. My Lord, I humbly beg this Favor of your Grace, but to Adjourn
till to morrow.


L. H. Steward. With all my heart, my Lord, if it may be done by Law.


L. Delamere. I hope it may, my Lord, and I beg that Favor of your Grace.


L. H. Steward. My Lord, I should be very glad to comply with your Lordship's
desires, but truly I have considered of it, and do doubt whether I can by Law
do it: In full Parliament it is clear it may be done, but upon this Commission,
after my Lords the Peers are once charged, and the Evidence partly given,
whether I can then Adjourn them till another Day, is with me a Doubt: My Lords,
if your Lordships please, before such time as my Lord, the Prisoner at the
Bar, enters upon his Defense, I will with your leave propound the Question to
my Lords the Judges, and hear their Opinion what the Law is.


L. Delamere. My Lord, I shall hardly be able to finish all I have to say in
any convenient time this Day.


L. H. Steward. But, my Lord, if an Adjournment cannot be by Law, I cannot help
it.


L. Delamere. There has a great deal been said, and it will require a great
deal of time to give it an Answer.


L. H. Steward. Ay, but if it cannot be done as you would have it, we must be
contented to stay the longer together; for I would not abridge you of your
Defense; therefore, my Lords the Judges, if you will please to go together and
consider of it, and report your Opinions, what the Law is in this Case, and we
will stay till you come again?


Then the Judges withdrew into the Exchequer Chamber. E. Nottingham. My Lord
High Steward, I do humbly conceive, this is a Matter that concerns the
Privilege of the Peers, and because it is a Matter that does so much concern
the whole Peerage; I think, my Lords here ought in some measure to concern them
selves about it: Therefore, my Lord, I have a short Motion to make to your
Grace, that, considering the Consequence that the Precedent of this Case may
draw with it, since, my Lords the Judges, are gone together to consult of this
Point, of which, I may say, they are not altogether the sole Judges: We may
also withdraw to consider of this Matter with them, because it may not be
proper for my Lords in Public here, to offer what they may have to say, to
incline my Lords the Judges in their Judgments one way or other?


L. Falconberge. My Lord, I humbly offer this to your Grace, upon the Motion
that this Noble Lord has made, that, with Submission, I take this to be a thing
that concerns the Privilege of Peerage only, and I conceive the Judges are not
concerned to make any Determination of that Matter. I think therefore, my Lords
here ought to retire with them to consider of it.


L. H. Steward. My Lords, I think, with Submission to your Lordships, that this
is a Question naturally proper for my Lords the Judges to give their Opinions
in, whether this Court, as a Court of Judicature for the Trial of this Noble
Lord, may, in the midst of the Trial adjourn till another day: And the
privilege of the Peerage cannot at all come in question here as I conceive.


L. Falconberg. My Lord, that we conceive is a point of privilege which
certainly the inferior Courts can have no power to determine.


L. H. Steward. If your Lordships have a mind to withdraw you may.


Lords. Ay, withdraw, withdraw.


Then the Peers withdrew, and after half an hour the Judges returned and took
their places as before, and after about an hour the Peers returned to their
former places. L. H. Steward, My Lords the Judges have you considered of the
Matter that has been proposed to you, and what is your Opinion?


L. C. J. Herbert. May it please your Grace, the Judges in obedience to your
Graces Commands have withdrawn, and considered of what your Grace proposed to
them, and with humble Submission they take the Question to be this.

Not, whether your Grace may Adjourn your Commission from one day to another,
for that is clear you may, and has been practiced, for that is the Case of the
Earl of Somerset and his Wife.

But the Question is, Whether, after the Prisoner is upon his Trial, and the
Evidence for the King is given, the Lords being, as we may term it, Charged
with the Prisoner, the Peers, Tryers, may separate for a time, which is the
consequent of an Adjournment to another day.

And my Lord the Judges presume to acquaint your Grace, that this is a matter
wholly new to them, and that they know not upon recollection of all that they
can remember to have read, that either this matter was done, or questioned,
whether it might or might not be done in any Case.

My Lord, If the matter had been formerly done, or been brought into question
in any Case, where it had received a determination, and reported in any of our
Books of Law, then it would have been our duty to contribute all our Reading
and Experience for the satisfaction of this great Court: But being, as it is, a
new question, and a question that not only concerns the particular Case of this
Noble Lord at the Bar, but is to be a president in all Cases of the like
nature for the future: All we can do is, to acquaint your Grace and my Noble
Lords, what the Law is in the inferior Courts in Cases of the like nature, and
the Reason of the Law in those points, and then leave the Jurisdiction of this
Court to its proper Judgment.

My Lord, in the first place, where the Trial is by a Jury, there the Law is
clear, the Jury once charged can never be discharged till they have given their
Verdict, this is clear; and the reason of that is, for fear of Corruption, and
tampering with the Jury, an Officer is sworn to keep the Jury together without
permitting them to separate or any one to converse with them; for no man knows
what may happen, for (though the Law requires honest men should be returned
upon Juryes, and without a known Objection are presumed to be probi and legales
homines, yet) they are weak men, and perhaps may be wrought upon by undue
Applications.

This, My Lord, it is said, fails in this Case, because the Lords that are to
try a Peer, are Persons of that great Integrity and Honor, that there is not
the least presumption of their being to be prevailed upon in any such way; and
for that reason, because of the confidence which the Law reposes (and justly)
in Persons of their Quality, they are not sworn as common ordinary Jurors are,
but are charged and deliver their Verdict upon Honor.

My Lord, in the Case of a Trial of a Peer in Parliament, as your Grace was
pleased to observe, and as is very well known by late Experience, there the
matter has been Adjourned till another day, and for diverse days; the Evidence
being given in several Parcells, and yet there the danger is as great (if any
were to be supposed) of tampering: But whether the Lords being Judges in that
Case, and in this Case, only in the nature of a Jury makes the difference,
though in both Cases it is but like a Verdict, for they give their Opinions
Seriatim, whether the Peer tried be Guilty or not Guilty, that they submit to
your Graces consideration.

Upon the whole matter, My Lord, whether their being Judges in the one, and not
in the other instance, alters the Case, or whether the Reason of Law in
inferior Courts, why the Jury are not permitted to separate till they have
discharged themselves by their Verdict, may have any influence upon this Case,
where that reason seems to fail, the Prisoner being to be tried by his Peers,
that are men of unquestionable unsuspected Integrity and Honor, we cannot
presume so far as to make any Determination in a point that is both new to us,
and of great Consequence in it self; but think it the properest way for us,
having laid matters as we conceive them before your Grace and my Lords, to
submit the Jurisdiction of your own Court to your own determination.


L. H. Steward. My Lords; I confess I would always be very tender of the
Privilege of the Peers, wherever I find them concerned; but truly I apprehend,
according to the best of my understanding, that this Court is held before me.
It is my Warrant that convenes the Prisoner to this Bar. It is my Summons that
brings the Peers together to try him, and so I take my self to be Judge of the
Court.

My Lords it is true may withdraw, and they may call the Judges to them to
assist them, which shows they have an extraordinary Privilege in some Cases
more before the High Steward, than Juries have in inferior Courts in Cases of
common Persons: For if it be in a common Case, no Jury can call either Counsel
or Judges to assist them, in the absence of the Prisoner, but if they will have
advice, it must be asked in open Court in the presence of the party accused.

But now, My Lords, if you have a mind to consult with me in private, as I now
sit by Virtue of this Commission, which is his Majesty's Warrant for me to hold
this Court, I could not withdraw with you, but you must ask all your questions
of me, in the presence of the Prisoner in open Court; whereas if it were in
full Parliament, as were the Cases of my Lord Stafford, and my Lord of
Pembroke, then he that were the High Steward might go along with you when you
withdrew, and consult with you, and give his Opinion, which I cannot do in this
Case; for I am bound to sit in Court, while you withdraw to consider of the
Evidence, and am not to hear any thing said to me, but what is said in open
Court in the presence of the Prisoner, except it be when you deliver your
Verdict.

This I confess my Lords has a great weight with me, and I know your Lordships
will be very tender of proceeding in such a Case any way but according to Law;
For though you are Judges of your own Privileges, yet, with Submission, you
are not Judges of the Law of this Court; for that I take to be my Province.

Why then, Suppose my Lords, I should take upon me to do as my Lord Delamere
desires and adjourn the Court, and suppose the Law should fall out to be that
indeed I ought not so to have done, would it be any advantage to this Noble
Peer, if he should be acquitted by your Lorships after such an Adjournment,
might not the evil consequence of that be, that he might be Indicted for the
same crime, and tried again? For all the Proceedings after that would be Void,
and liable to be reversed.

And if on the other side your Lordships should think fit, upon the Evidence
you have now heard, and what he shall say for himself, to convict him after I
have adjourned as is desired, and I pass Judgment upon him, as it will be a
Duty incumbent upon me to pass Sentence on him, if you convict him; what will
become of the Case then; and how shall I be able to answer it, as having done
my duty, when I pronounce a Judgment notoriously Erroneous and Illegal? for so
it will be, if the Law prove to be against my adjourning: This, my Lords, is a
matter of great moment, and worth the Consideration.

But in the other Case of a Trial in full Parliament, the Lord that Sits where
I do, is only as the Chairman of the Court rather than Judge, he gives a Vote
in such proceedings; and therefore my Lord the Prisoner did very well at the
beginning to ask the Question, whether I had any Vote in his Trial, as a Peer
jointly with your Lordships: If I sat in full Parliament I should without all
question give my Vote as well as any other Peer, but sitting here by immediate
Commission from the King pro hac vice, High Steward; I acquaint you as I did
him, I have no authority to give any Vote: My Business is to see the Law
observed and fulfilled as Judge.

Certainly, My Lords, your Lordships and I, and all mankind ought to be tender
of committing any Errors in Cases of Life and Death, and I would be loath, I
will assure you, to be recorded for giving an Erroneous Judgment in a Case of
Blood, and as the first man that should bring in an illegal Precedent, the
Consequence of which may extend I know not how far.


M. At. General. Will your Grace give direction for my Lord to proceed?


L. H. Steward, Yes, he must proceed I think.


L. Delamere. May it please your Grace, and you my Lords, it is an offense of a
very high Nature for which I am this day to answer before your Lordships; yet I
thank God I am not afraid to speak in this place, because I am not only certain
and very well assured of my own Innocence, no such thought having as yet entered
into my heart; but I am also well assured of your Lordships Wisdom and Justice,
which cannot be imposed upon or surprised by Insinuations and florid Harangues,
nor governed by any thing but the Justice of the Cause.

My Lords, I can with a great deal of Comfort and Satisfaction say, that these
Crimes wherewith I am charged are not only Strangers to my Thoughts, but also
to what has been my constant Principle and Practice; For I think that in
matters relating to the Church and the things enjoined therein, few have
conformed more in Practice then I have done; and yet I do confess, and am not
ashamed to say it, that I have always had a Tenderness for all those who could
not keep pace with me, and Charity for those that have outgone me, and differed
from me, though never so far; nay though of a different Religion: For I always
thought Religion lay more in Charity than Persecution.

While I had the Honor to be a Magistrate in my Country, I did constantly duly
and impartially execute the Laws, and in every public trust I was very
faithful in the Discharge of it, for I never voted nor spoke in any manner but
as my Conscience and Judgment did dictate to me. I have always made the Laws
the measure of my Loyalty, and have still been as Zealous and Careful to give
the King his Prerogative, as to preserve to the people their Properties, and
have endeavored as far as in me lay to live peaceably with all men.

This, My Lords, was not only the Dictates of my own Inclinations, but it was
the Principle of my lather, and the Lesson that he taught me: I say of my
Father, who was so greatly Instrumental in snatching this Nation out of its
Confusion, and restoring it to its ancient Government, by settling his late
Majesty upon his Throne, and consequently was the means of his present Majesty
that now is, his coming so peaceably to the Crown: And this I may the more
boldly speak, because I speak it by good Authority; because in the Patent that
created my Father a Peer, his late Majesty is pleased to say, his rising was
mainly instrumental in his Restoration. I beg the Favor of your Grace and my
Lords, that I may read to you that Clause in the preamble of the Patent, which
I have here ready to produce.

Which was read, and then, my Lord proceeded as follows, viz. My Lords, I
suppose most of your Lordships did know him, and whosoever did so, I dare say
did believe him to be a good man: For my part I did not know a better Copy to
write after than his Example, which I endeavored always to imitate, and that I
hope will go very far to vindicate me from the Imputation of being inclined to
any such Crime as I stand charged with.

My Lords, it is now late, and therefore I shall cut off a great deal of what I
had intended to say to your Lordships, that I may not take up too much of your
time, and come immediately to my Defense, as to what I stand accused of.

And first, my Lords, I shall observe that here have been a great many
Witnesses produced, and a great deal of Swearing, but little or nothing of
Legal Evidence to affect me; for there is but one man that says any thing home
and positively against me (and whom I shall answer by and by) all the rest are
but Hear-says, and such remote Circumstances, as may be tacked to any Evidence
against any other person, but are urged against me for want of greater matters
to charge me with; and therefore I hope the producing and pressing of these
things against me, is rather a strong Argument that I am Innocent, and that
there have been mischievous and ill designs of some against me, than that I am
guilty; for if they had had other and greater matters, your Lordships would
have been sure to have heard of them.

With your Lordships leave, I cannot but observe to your Lordships an excellent
saying of that great man my Lord of Nottingham (whose Name will ever be
remembered with Honor in our English Nation,) when he sat in the same place
that your Grace does now, at the Trial of my Lord Cornwallis, which I will read
to your Lordships. Speaking to the Peers he has this passage.

I know your Lordships will weigh the Fact, with all its circumstances, from
which it is to receive its true and its proper Doom. Your Lordships are too
just to let Pity make any abatement for the Crime, and too wise to suffer
Rhetoric to make any Improvement of it: This only will be necessary to be
observed by all your Lordships, that the fowler the Crime is, the clearer and
plainer ought the Proof of it to be; there is no other good Reason can be
given, why the Law refuses to allow the Prisoner at the Bar Counsel in matter
of Fact, when Life is concerned, but only this, because the Evidence by which
he is condemned ought to be so very evident and so plain, that all the Council
in the world should not be able to answer it.

My Lords, I think the Evidence that has been given against me this day does
not come up to this. And I hope your Lordships will regard this saying of my
Lord Nottinghams, as more worthy of your consideration, than the fine
Flourishings and Insinuations of the Kings Council, which tend (if it be not so
designed) rather to misguide your Lordships, than to lead you to find out the
Truth.

My Lords, I shall now tell you the method that I shall proceed in, in making
my Defense; and I begin with Saxon, for he I perceive is the great Goliath,
whose Evidence is to maintain this Accusation, and if I cut him down, I suppose
I shall be thought to have done my own business; therefore to that I shall
apply my self first, and do it if I can; and I will in the first place examine
several persons that are his Neighbors and have conversed, with him what they
have heard and know of him; and first I desire Richard Hall may be called


L. H. Steward. My Lord Delamere, if you begin that way to call Witnesses
against Saxon, it is fit he should be here to know what is said against him.


L. Delamere. Ay, with all my heart, My Lord.


L. H. Steward. Then call Saxon again.


Then Saxon and Hall came both in L. Delamere. Pray Mr. Hall tell my Lords here
what you know of Thomas Saxon.


L. H. Steward. What is it you ask of this Witness?


L. Delamere. My Lord, I desire him to give an account what he knows of a
Letter, that was forged by Saxon, in the name of one Hildage.


Hall. About the nineteenth of December in the year 1683, I received a Letter
by Thomas Saxon from Richard Hildage, wherein he desired me to send him the sum
of six pounds odd money which I owed him; I received the Letter and paid the
money, and to the best of my knowledge some little time after I met with the
said Hildage at Newcastle, who asked me to pay him the money I owed him: I
replied I had paid the money, according to his Note, but he said he never gave
any such Note, and threatened to sue me; thereupon I sent one Lord to Hildage,
that is here now in the Court, and desired Hildage his forbearance for a while,
till I could get the money from Saxon back again, and afterward he sent again
for his money, and I sent to Saxon for it, but still the money did not come.


L. H. Steward. Did you ever speak with Saxon himself?


Hall. No, but with his wife, who came to me about it, but he acknowledged, he
wrote the Letter before John Lord.


Saxon. Did not my wife tell you that Richard Hildage lent me the money?


L. H. Steward. Nay, you must not Dialogue with one another, but if you have
any questions you must propound them to the Court: My Lord Delamere, have you
any more questions to ask him?


L. Delamere. No, my Lord.


L. H. Steward. Then what is it you would have him asked, Saxon?


Saxon. I desire you would please to ask him whether or no, he did not lend me
the money?


L. H. Steward. He, who do you mean?


Saxon. Richard Hildage did.


L. H. Steward. What say you did Richard Hildage lend him the money?


Hall. No, my Lord.


L. H. Steward. Look you, my Lord Delamere, the Objection carries a great deal
of weight in it, to prove him a very ill man, if it be fully made out.


L. Delamere. My Lord, if your Grace please I can prove that he owned the
writing of the Letter to another man.


L. H. Steward. My Lord, he does own here, that he wrote the Letter and that he
wrote it in Hildage's name, but he says, the Letter he so wrote in Hildage's
Name was by Hildage's direction, and if so, that takes off the Objection made
against him.


L. Delamere. I must submit that to your Grace, whether what he says in that
matter be Evidence.


L. H. Steward. What Hildage did, or did not, is the main turn of the question
in this Case; for he might lend him the money, and yet afterward might say,
when he thought he might lose it, that he did not send any such Letter, and all
this be true, and Saxon in no fault: I must confess, if Hildage were here,
himself, and should deny the lending of the money, or the giving him Directions
to receive it, you would have fixed a shrewd Objection upon him; but otherwise
Hear-says and discourses at second hand are not to take off the Credit of any
man's Testimony.


L. Delamere. But Hall says Hildage denied the receipt of the money, or any
Order for receiving of it.


L. H. Steward. That signifies nothing, being but by second hand.


Saxon. If it please your Grace, here is my Brother in Court will give you an
account of it.


L. H. Steward. Well, well, Hold your tongue; will your Lordship please to go
on?


L. Delamere. The next Witness, my Lord, that I shall call, shall be Francis
Ling who came in.


L. H. Steward. What do you ask this Witness?


L. Delamere. Mr. Ling, pray will you tell his Grace, and my Lords, what you
know concerning Saxon's receiving any Money in the name of Mrs. Wilbraham,
without her Order.


Ling. He called at this same Hildage's at Newcastle, and received twenty five
Shillings, and said it was for Mrs. Wilbraham in her name, but she never
received a penny of the Money, nor knew of his having received it, till he came
to pay another Quarter.


L. H. Steward. Where is that Mrs. Wilbraham, is she here?


Ling. No, my Lord, she is a Neighbor of ours, an Ancient Woman, fourscore
years of Age, and cannot come so far.


L. H. Steward. This is the same Case with the other, you can never think to
take off the Credibility of Witnesses by such Testimony; for this is only a
Tale out of an Old Woman's Mouth: What if that Old Woman told him a false Story?


Ling. She said --


L. H. Steward. I care not what she said, this is no Evidence at all.


L. Delamere. Then 'pray call Richard Shaw who came in.


L. H. Steward. Well, what says this Witness?


L. Delamere. Shaw, can you tell any thing of Thomas Saxon's writing a Letter,
and sending it in the Name of one Paugston a Bailiff?


Shaw. He writ a Letter, as I understand, concerning some money that I owed
him; for I owed him a little money, and being I did not pay it, he does forge a
Letter, and puts William Paugston's name to it, so I got up the other Morning
--


L. H. Steward. Where is Paugston? Is he here?


Shaw. No, my Lord, he is not, but he told me he did not write the Letter.


L. H. Steward. Why, this is just the same again, and we all know how easy a
thing it is to hear a Bailiff tell a Lie.


Shaw. I cannot tell, but I called --


L. H. Steward. All that is nothing, It is a difficulter matter to hear such
Fellows speak truth, than any thing else, I am sure.


L. Delamere. The next Witness that I shall call, is, Peter Hough who Appeared.


L. H. Steward. There is your Witness, What say you to him?


L. Delamere. Pray acquaint his Grace, and my Lords, what you know of Saxon's
cheating you in the making of a Bond.


Hough. My Lord, he had six Pound ten Shillings in money, and ten Shillings in
work done, for which he was to give me a Bond, and hereof he made the Bond
himself. I thought it had been right, and took it; but about the time when the
money was become due, I looked upon it, and it proved to be but for 6 l.


L. H. Steward. What should it have been for?


Hough. It should have been for six Pounds ten Shillings in money, and ten
Shillings in work.


L. H. Steward. Did not he give thee a Bond for all thy money?


Hough. It should have been so, but I never had it.


L. H. Steward. Had you never the money?


Hough. No, I never had the money.


L. H. Steward. What did he say the Bond should be made for?


Hough. For seven Pounds.


L. H. Steward. What say you to it Saxon?


Saxon. My Lord, I had five Pounds ten Shillings of him in money, and ten
Shillings in work, for which I gave him Bond, there were the Witnesses names at
it, the Bond was fairly read, and I sealed it, and he took it with him.


L. H. Steward. Ay, but he says it was to be for seven Pounds.


Saxon. I never had any more of him than six Pounds, and for that I gave him
Bond.


L. H. Steward. Was the Bond read to you?


Hough. He read it himself, and he made it himself.


L. H. Steward. How did he read it? What did you apprehend by his reading it
was made for?


Hough. I took it as he read it to be made for seven Pounds.


Saxon. He may say what he pleases, but I had no more of him but six Pounds; I
was to give Bond for no more.


L. H. Steward. Now the Witnesses to this Bond would be very proper to be
produced here: For, if he did make the Bond but for six Pounds, when the Debt
that was to be secured was seven Pounds, that is a sign that he had an
intention to cheat him of the twenty Shillings.


L. H. Delamere. That shows what a kind of man he is.


L. H. Steward. But this is but Witness against Witness, for he says he owed no
more, and was to make the Bond for no more.


Hough. It was as I tell you, I assure you, my Lord.


Saxon. I had no more of him than six Pounds.


Hough. Did not I ask you afterward one Question more, and told you it was a
Cheat, and you said it should be mended?


L. H. Steward. Well, my Lords have heard it, they will consider what weight to
lay upon it.


L. Delamere. 'Pray call Edward Wilkinson who appeared.


L. H. Steward. What do you ask him?


L. Delamere. Wilkinson, 'pray tell my Lords, how Saxon dealt with you about
your Horse?


Wilkinson. My Lord, he hired a Horse of me for three days, and was to give me
twelve pence a day, but he never came again, nor had I any satisfaction for my
Horse, but I lost my Horse by the Bargain, and my money too.


L. H. Steward. How long ago was it since he hired your Horse?


Wilkinson. My Lord, it was the Twenty third of June, to the best of my
remembrance.


L. H. Stew. Did not he agree with you for 12 d. a day as long as he used your
Horse?


Wilkinson. I expected to have my Horse in 3 days time.


L. H. Stew. But mind my Question, Did you agree that he should have him but 3
days? or, was he to give you 12 d. a day for so long as he kept him out?


Wilkinson. I was to have 12 d. a day for him.


L. H. Stew. What, as long as he used him, or only for 3 days?


Wilkinson. He did agree with me to bring him again in 3 days.


L. H. Stew. I perceive by the time, he rid into the Rebellion with this Horse,
and he was a very Knave for so doing, upon my Conscience?


L. Delamere. Call William Wright. who came in Pray will you give my Lords an
account what Reputation this Thomas Saxon is of in his Country.


Wright. My Lord, this Thomas Saxon came to live at Sambige, and I had some
dealings with him as well as other men, and I never found him to perfect his
word in any thing.


L. H. Stew. What did thou never find him?


Wright. To perfect his word in any thing, My Lord.


L. H. Stew. That is, make good his word I suppose, but that is your Cheshire
Phrase.


Wright. Whereupon I met with him one Evening after Evening Prayer, and said to
him, Thomas Saxon, if I cared no more for keeping my word than thou do, it
were no matter if I were hanged; for to be sure, if thy mouth open, thy tongue
lies; and he turned away from me, and would not answer me a word; and since
that he owed me some money, and when I asked him for it, he told me if I did
trouble him for the Money it should be the worse for me; whereof all the Town
knows as well as I that I cannot set him forth in words as bad as he is.


L. H. Stew. Can you instance in particular, Friend, of any Fraud, Cheat, or
Cozenage that he has been guilty of? for it is not what the Town says, but what
can be proved, that we must take for Evidence; the Town that thou live in may
reckon thee but an idle Fellow, and yet thou may be a very honest man for
all that.


Wright. I trust, My Lord, I am so, and shall always prove so.


L. H. Stew. Well, what do thou know ill of him?


Wright. He did not keep his word with me.


L. H. Stew. Wherein do thou mean?


Wright. As to Money he owed me.


L. H. Stew. How much Money did he owe thee?


Wright. He owed me a deal.


L. H. Stew. How much do thou call a deal?


Wright. I cannot tell how much exactly.


L. H. Stew. Does he owe thee any thing now?


Wright. Yes, but I cannot justly tell how much.


L. H. Stew. My Lord Delamere, I would be very unwilling to interrupt the
method of your defense, or abridge you in your Evidence; but really this
objection that you endeavor to prove by this Witness, is not at all, as I
conceive, for your Lordships Service: For it is a very hard case, if any one
that owes money and does not pay it, shall for that very reason lose the credit
of his Testimony, this rather gives a countenance to what he says, that you
know no other Objections but such trivial ones to make against him.


L. Delamere. Then, If your Grace please, I will make short work of it, and
spare your time; I shall pass over this part of my Evidence, though I have many
more witnesses to this point, and come to other matters, to matter of Fact to
encounter this positive proof that has been given against me. Your Grace and my
Lords do observe, that this man Saxon has testified that about the 3 d or 4 th
of June last for there he fixed the time this man as an extraordinary Person
that was fit to be trusted in an Affair of this Nature, being confided in, and
recommended by my Lord Brandon, was sent for by me to Mere, where he found me
and Sir Robert Cotton and Mr. Offley, who did employ him to transact the matter
of stirring up the Country, in order to a rising and joining with the late
Duke of Monmouth: Now I will first prove to your Lordship in general, that Sir
Robert Cotton was not in Cheshire for Many weeks, nay several months, both
before and after the time he speaks of: And next in particular I shall prove,
as to the time that he has pitched upon, by diverse Persons that saw Sir Robert
Cotton here then in London, and give you particular reasons for it: First to
prove that he was here in Town so long in general: I shall produce his Servants
that saw him every day: Call -- Billing who appeared Pray Sir will you give an
account what time Sir Robert Cotton came to London, when he went out of London,
and whether you were frequently in his Company and saw him here.


Billing. My Lord, to the best of my remembrance, Sir Robert Cotton came to
Town the 10 th of April last, and I was with him here in Town, at his house at
the Horse-Ferry till the latter end of July, and saw him constantly more than
once or twice every day for that time, I used to come into his Chamber most
Mornings before he was up, I used to buy in his Provision for his House, I saw
him in Bed, or heard he was in Bed every night.


L. H. Stew. Did you belong to him?


Billing. I am his Servant.


L. Delamere. He lived with him in the House all the while he says?


Billing. Then about the latter end of July he went out of Town for 3 days to
Epsom, and then he came to Town again, and continued here till the time he was
committed to the Tower, and never was in Cheshire since the 6 th of April last.


L. H. Stew. How come you to remember so punctually when he came to Town, and
that he staid here all the while?


Billing. I know it by my Accounts for the Journey up, and by the Tradesmens
Bills for the Provision of the House ever since.


L. H. Stew. In what Capacity did you serve Sir Robert Cotton?


Billing. I bought in all the Provision for his House, and paid the Tradesmens
Bills.


L. H. Stew. Have you any Papers in your Pocket that will point to any
particular time.


Billing. I have not the Tradesmens Bills here, My Lord, nor my own Accounts,
but I have looked upon them, and by that I am sure what I have testified is
true.


L. H. Stew. Who do you call next, My Lord?


L. Delamere. Call Margaret Davis, who appeared, Pray will you give an account
to my Lord, what time Sir Robert Cotton came to Town, and to the best of your
remembrance when he went out of Town again.


Davis. He came to Town upon the 10 th of April last, or thereabouts, and he
has not been out of Town any night since, except it were in August.


L. H. Stew. What day did he come to Town do you say?


Davis. About the 10 th of April.


L. H. Stew. And you say he did not go out of Town till August?


Davis. No, My Lord.


L. H. Stew. How do you know this?


Davis. I was constantly in the House with him.


L. H. Stew. But how came you to be so exact as to the time?


Davis. I saw him continually every day.


L. H. Stew. How came you to see him?


Davis. I live with him in the House?


L. H. Stew. Pray recollect your self as to the time that he went out of Town,
for I perceive the other man says it was the latter end of July.


Davis. It was in August certainly, My Lord.


L. Delamere. My Lord, the other witness says it was the latter end of July,
and that may be very well consistent, neither of them speaking to a day.


L. H. Stew. Well, are you sure he was in Town all the Month of June?


Davis. Yes, he was.


L. H. Stew. Well, who do you call next?


L. Delamere. Mrs. Sidney Lane, who appeared.


L. H. Stew. What do you ask this Gentlewoman?


L. Delamere. I examine her to the same point: and I question not but I shall
make it out to your Grace, and my Lords, none of us all three that he has named
were there at that time.


L. H. Stew. I shall be very glad of it, My Lord?


L. Delamere. Pray Mrs. Lane will you give an account when it was Sir Robert
Cotton came to Town, and how long he staid here?


Mrs. Lane. He came to Town the April before the Coronation, and never lay out
of Town I am sure all those 3 Months of April May and June after he came to
Town.


L. Delamere. This Gentlewoman, My Lord, lived in the same House with him.


Mrs. Lane. I did so, My Lord, and saw him every night and morning.


L. Delamare. If your Grace please I have 2 or 3 more witnesses to the same
purpose, but I would spare their Lordships time, if this point be fully cleared.


L. H. Stew. Pray, My Lord, do not abridge your self, for I know my Lords will
not grudge the time, but are very desirous you should have full Liberty in what
is pertinent.


L. Delamere. Then I desire Charles Reeves may be called, who appeared I pray,
My Lord, that this Man may give an account what time it was Sir Robert Cotton
came to Town, and how long he stayed here.


Reeves. If it please your Lordship, he was in Town before the Coronation, and
I saw him here every day from that time till after July, once or twice every
day.


L. H. Stew. Did you belong to him?


Reeves. Yes, and I do now.


L. H. Stew. In what Capacity, Friend?


Reeves. My Lord, I am his Footman.


L. Delamere. May it please your Grace, the next Witness I have to produce is
Mr. Ashburnham, being he cannot easily remove, I beg he may be heard in the
place where he is.


L. H. Stew. Ay, let him speak where he is, and let him speak out.


L. Delamere. Pray Sir, will you please to recollect your self what time you
saw Sir Robert Cotton, and where, the last Summer?


Ashburnham. My Lord, I being at Sir Robert Cotton's House at Westminster, he
desired me to present a Petition of his to the House of Commons for him, and it
was about the latter end of the time allotted for Petitions, I cannot exactly
tell what day of the week or Month it was, but I saw him that day I presented
his Petition, and I saw him at the Committee of Elections 2 or 3 days after.


L. Delamere. Sir William Twisden I desire may be also heard what he has to say
to the same point. Who answered to the same effect.


L. Delamere. Mr. Heveningham is my next Witness, My Lord, who I desire that he
would please to give your Grace and my Lords an account, when he remembers to
have seen Sir Robert Cotton in Town.


Mr. Heveningham. My Lord, It was a more than ordinary occasion that makes me
remember the thing and the time so particularly. I was engaged in a dispute in
the House of Commons about my own Election, and that was upon the 2 d of June,
then was a Case debated in the House, whether a Mayor that was elected a
Burgess for any Town could sit upon his own Return, it was then carried he
should not, and the next day which was the third of June, another question came
on, whether Sir Joseph Williamson was duly elected and returned, and I remember
at that time I was walking with Sir Robert Cotton in the Court of Requests, and
Mr. Neal came out of the House, and told me, that it was carried by five, that
he was not, and then Sir Robert Cotton was with me.


L. H. Stew. So you speak as to the 2 d and 3 d of June?


Mr. Heveningham. My Lord, had it not been upon this particular occasion, I
could not have remembered the time so exactly.


L. H. Stew. You give a very good token for your remembrance, and my Lords hear
what you have said.


L. Delamere. Will your Grace please that the Clerk of the House of Commons may
be called, and examined to the Journal of that House, when it was Sir Robert
Cotton preferred his Petition, and that will fix the time as to what Mr.
Ashburnham and Sir William Twisden have said?


L. H. Stew. Call whom you please, My Lord.


L. Delamere. It seems he is not ready, but I hope I have given your Grace and
my Lords sufficient satisfaction, that Sir Robert Cotton was not there at that
time that this fellow speaks of. I will now go on and prove Mr. Offley was not
there neither, and the first Witness I call to that, shall be Sir Willoughby
Aston, whom I desire your Grace will be pleased to hear speak in his place.


L. H. Stew. Well, what do you say, Sir Willoughby?


Sir W. Aston. My Lord, I desire to be guided in what account I shall give by
the Questions that shall be asked.


L. H. Stew. What is it that you ask Sir Willoughby Aston?


L. Delamere. Pray can you remember, Sir Willoughby, what time it was, and
whether about the latter end of May last, or when, that you know of Mr.
Offley's being at your House, and how long he stayed there?


Sir W. Aston. I can give an account of his Motion for ten days together, but
that perhaps may be more than is necessary.


L. H. Stew. It will not be improper, Sir, for you to give as exact and
partiular account as you can of the times.


Sir W. Aston. If your Grace please, I will do it.


L. H. Stew. Pray do, Sir.


Sir W. Aston. Upon the 26 th of May, which was Tuesday, at night Mr. Offley
and his Lady, and some of their Relations, came to my House, upon Wednesday the
27 th of May Mr. Offley was so sick that he kept his Chamber and his Bed all
day, upon the 28 th of May which was Thursday, he was so ill that he kept his
Chamber all day, and rose about five at night, and I then waited upon him, and
sat with him 3 hours in his dressing room, on Friday the 29 th of May he went
to Church, that day was employed a great part in Devotion, upon the 30 th of
May which was Saturday, Mr. Offley and his Lady went, and a great part of my
Family went with them, to one Mr. Pickerings six miles off my house, there they
dined, and returned at night to my House, upon Sunday the 31 th of May, I have
a particular remark whereby I remember that Mr. Offley went to visit Mr.
Needham, upon Monday the first of June, Mrs. Offley and the Women of my Family
went to visit my Lady Brooks, but Mr. Offley not being well staid at home: On
Tuesday the second of June he was still at my house, there was a great deal of
Company there, and he was in the Company all the day long: On Wednesday the 3
d, I fell sick in the Morning about 4 of the Clock, but Mr. Offley was in the
house all the morning, but in the afternoon he went to make a visit two miles
from my house, at a place called the Warehouse, where the Ships ride at
Anchor; and upon Thursday morning which was the 4 th of June he went from my
House: Now if your Lordship desire to know any thing about any particular time
about this Compass, I Will give you the best account I can.


L. H. Stew. Can you tell where he went when he went from your House?


Sir W. Aston. He went directly home, as he said.


L. H. Stew. Did you hear at any time that he stayed by the way, between his
going from you and coming to his own House?


Sir W. Aston. My Son went with him two or three Miles of his way, and I heard
that at Middle-wich he staid to speak with some of the Militia Officers that he
met with by the way there at a Muster, and afterward went directly home.


L. H. Stew. Pray is the usual way from his house to yours by my Lord
Delamere's?


Sir W. Aston. No, My Lord, directly another way.


L. H. Stew. Will you ask Sir Willoughby Aston any more Questions?


L. Delamere. No, My Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis If your Grace please I would ask Sir Willoughby Aston one
question? Sir, I desire to know how far it is from your house to my Lord
Delamere's?


Sir W. Aston. Sir, It is about 11 Miles.


L. H. Stew. 11 Miles you say, Sir?


Sir W. Aston. Yes, My Lord, 11 of those Northern miles.


L. Delamere. My Lord, I have some more witnesses to examine to this point.


L. H. Stew. Call whom you please, My Lord?


L. Delamere. I call Mr. Gregory next, My Lord: who appeared Pray give my Lord
an account, when Mr. Offley went from Sir Willoughby Aston's last Summer, and
whither he went?


Gregory. My Lord, my Master went from Sir Willoughby Aston's House --


L. H. Stew. Who is your Master?


Gregory. Mr. Offley, My Lord. It was upon the 4 th of June at 9 of the Clock
in the morning, and went from thence to Middlewich, and was at home at his own
house about 5 of the Clock in the Evening, as I was told, for I did not go
directly home with him.


L. H. Stew. Was he at Mere that day at my Lord Delamere's?


Gregory. No, not that I know of, I was not with him.


L. Delamere. Then pray call Thomas Kidd. who appeared Pray were you that day
with Mr. Offley when he went from Sir Willoughby Aston's?


Kidd. Yes, My Lord, I was.


L. Delamere. What day was it?


Kidd. The 4 th of June.


L. Delamere. Then whither went he?


Kidd. He went the direct Road to his own House, I never parted from him, nor
did he stop any where till he came to Middle-wich, where the Country Militia
were exercising, and he just alighted off his Horse, and spoke with Major
Minshaw and some of the Officers, but never so much as drunk by the way till he
came to his own house.


L. H. Stew. What, to his house in Staffordshire?


Kidd. No, but to Crew-Hall in Cheshire.


L. H. Stew. Does Mere lie in the Road between Sir Willoughby Aston's and
Crew-Hall, so that your Master might be there within that time?


Kidd. No, that he could not do.


L. H. Stew. Were you with Mr. Offley the whole Journey home?


Kidd. Yes, My Lord, I was.


L. H. Stew. Were you no time from him?


Kidd. No, My Lord, I was not.


L. H. Stew. What time did he come home?


Kidd. He came to his own house about 4 or 5 a Clock at night.


L. H. Stew. And did not he go from thence that night?


Kidd. No, My Lord.


L. Delamere. Now, My Lord, I will prove as to my self that I was in London at
the time as he speaks of. And first, I desire Sir James Langham may be heard to
that:


He appeared, but gave no Evidence. L. Delamere. Pray call -- Booth who appeared


L. H. Stew. What is this Gentleman's name?


L. Delamere. He is my Brother, My Lord, his Name is -- Booth.


L. H. Stew. What do you ask him?


L. Delamere, Pray can you remember what time in June you saw me in Town here?


Mr. Booth. My Lord, I saw my Brother here in Town, the 3 d, 4 th, 5 th, 6 th.
and so on to the 10 th of June, and the 10 th of June I went out of Town my
self, I saw him sometimes twice or thrice a day in that time, for I did not
lodge above half a score doors from him.


L. H. Stew. Where was that?


Mr. Booth. In great Russel Street.


L. H. Stew. How come you to remember the time so particularly?


Mr. Booth. It was that day Sennight before I went out of Town, which was
Wednesday the 10 th of June, and had it not been for that particular
circumstance, I had not remarked it so much as to be able particularly to
remember it.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Mr. Booth, did you know of your Brothers going out of Town
the 27 th of May?


Mr. Booth. I heard he was gone out of Town about that time.


L. H. Stew. Why then, when came he hither to Town again?


Mr. Booth. I cannot tell, but I saw him upon the 3 d of June in the Evening.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, it is not possible for him so to do in that time, if he
rode Post.


L. H. Stew. He did make a great deal of haste backward, and forward, that is
certain.


L. Delamere. My Brother does not know when I went, but as he heard, he says.


L. H. Stew. But pray; my Lord, mind the Objection that has been made, for it
carries a great deal of weight in it. It is plainly proved by two Witnesses,
that you went out of Town the 27 th of May at 9 of the Clock at night, and rode
to Hoddesdon, and the next day came to Hitchin about Noon, then they left you
and returned back again to London that Night, and you told them you were going
to see a sick Child of yours in Cheshire, how came you to make such Post-haste
back again, that he should see you here in London the 3 d of June?


Mr. Booth. My Lord, I am certain I saw him that day in the Evening, and so on
to the 10 th.


L. H. Stew. Did my Lord then tell you how your Friends did in Cheshire?


Mr. Booth. I cannot remember the particular discourse we had.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Sir, when did he tell you he came to Town?


L. H. Stew. You say you used to see him every day once or twice a day.


Mr. Booth. Yes, I did so.


L. H. Stew. Pray where was he the 2 d of June?


Mr. Booth. He was not come to Town?


L. H. Stew. How long time was it before that, that you had not seen him?


Mr. Booth. I had not seen him of several days before.


L. Delamere. If it please your Grace, here is another Brother of mine that saw
me at the same time, and though he be my Brother I hope he is a good Witness.


L. H. Stew. Ay, God forbid else; what is his name?


L. Delamare. George Booth.


L. H. Stew. Well, what say you, Sir?


Mr. George Booth. My Lord, I saw my Brother Delamere here in Town the 4 th of
June, by this particular circumstance which I cannot err in, that the next day,
as I take it, I went down with him to the House of Lords, to hear my Lord
Macclesfield's Cause, which was then there to be heard upon the Appeal of Mr.
Fitton, and my Brother was in the House of Lords at that time, which was the 5
th of June.


L. H. Stew. My Lord Delamere, I think it not amiss to put you in mind of one
thing, which it is fit your Lordship should give some answer to: Does your
Lordship deny that you went out of Town the 27 th of May?


L. Delamere. No, My Lord, I do not; I acknowledge I did so.


L. H. Stew. Then it will be fit for you to give an account where you were the
28 th of May, and so all along till the 3 d of June?


L. Delamere. If you Grace please, I hope I shall give you full satisfaction in
that by and by, but I have one witness more to this point of my being in Town
at such a time, that I could not be in Cheshire, when this Fellow says I was;
and that is my Lord Lovelace.


L. H. Stew. There is my Lord Lovelace, what will you ask him?


L. Delamere. Whether he did not see me at the Trial of my Lord Macclesfield in
the House of Lords.


L. Lovelace. I was in the House of Lords that day that my Lord Macclesfield's
Trial was, and I remember I did see my Lord Delamere there.


L. H. Stew. But we are as much at a loss now as ever we were, for what day
that Trial was does not appear: What day was my Lord Macclesfield's Trial?


L. Delamere. The Journal of the House of Lords proves that to be the 5 th of
June.


L. Lovelace. My Lord stood just by the Bar, and if I am not mistaken took
notes.


L. Delamere. My Lord, I hope now I have satisfied your Grace, and the rest of
my Lords, that none of us three whom this fellow has mentioned were there at
that time at Mere, when he says we were: For my own part I do positively
affirm, and I speak it as in the presence of Almighty God, that I have not seen
Sir Robert Cotton at my house that I know of these many years, and I believe
Mr. Ossley was never in my House since I was Master of it: And I do likewise
protest that, to my knowledge, I never saw the face of this Man till now that
be is produced as a witness against me; I am sure I never spoke with him in all
my life, nor never sent for him to come to my house: And if your Lordship
please to consider the Story that he tells, it will easily appear to be very
improbable, for he neither tells you who the Messenger was that was sent for
him, nor the way that he came into the House, which any body that has ever been
at the House could not mistake. For when I asked him what door it was he came
in at it was for this reason, because he must needs have gone a great way
about, if he had not come in at the usual Entry into the house, for I have but
one door into my house except that by the Stables, which is a great way off
the house? and it being about that time of the year, if it were 8 or 9 of the
Clock in the Evening, he must needs discern which way he came in: And, besides,
My Lords, Is it probable what he says, that he should see no body stirring
about the House except it were this man without a hand, that he says was sent
for him? I assure your Lordships, I have not, nor had my Father ever, that I
know of, any Servant or Tennant that was maimed in that manner that he speaks
of; he says, he was recommended to us by my Lord Brandon: But he cannot tell
your Lordship any thing that ever he had done, to recommend him either to him
or us: I did ask him what important Service he had ever done for me, that might
give a credibility to my employing him in such a business as this. My Lord, I
cannot help it, if People will tell false Stories of me, but I hope your
Lordships will consider the credibility of it; Is it to be imagined that I
would take a man I knew nothing of, upon another man's word, into so great a
confidence, as to employ him about a business of this Nature? I am glad that he
was called in here again for your Lordships to view him, I beseech your
Lordships to look at him; Is this Fellow a likely Fellow to be used in such an
Affair? Does he look as if he were fit to be employed for the raising of ten
thousand men? Does he seem to be a man of such considerable Interest in his
Country? A Fellow, that though it be not direct Evidence, yet by several
Witnesses, I have shown to be a Man of no Reputation in his Country, nay of a
very ill one; and could we have none else to employ in a matter of this moment
but such a Fellow as his Neighbors would not take his word for any thing? It
is an improbable Story upon these accounts, if I should say no more. Your
Lordships likewise see, that he is so well thought of, that he dare not be
trusted out of Newgate, but is kept still a Prisoner, and as such gives
Evidence here: And I know your Lordships will not forget that he swears to save
himself, having been a Rebel by his own Confession, and he would fain exchange
his Life for mine, till he has a Pardon, which as yet, as I am informed, he has
not; the Objection will still lie upon him, that he swears to save himself,
which will render his Testimony not credible, and the Law requires the
Witnesses, in Treason, to be credible ones: And yet, forsooth! this Man, that
no body that knows him will believe a word he says, must be taken to be the man
of Integrity, Zeal, and Industry; the man of Management and Dispatch, the Man
of Interest and Authority in his Country, that nothing can be done, but he
must have a hand in it. My Lords, I think I need say no more of him; your
Lordships time is precious, too precious indeed to be spent upon such a
Subject, and so I set him aside.

My Lords, there is a thing that I perceive the King's Counsel lay a great
weight upon, and that is my going down upon the 27 th day of May, and my
frequent riding Post to and fro. I shall now satisfy your Lordships of the
Reasons of my Journeys. The first time which was betwixt the Coronation and the
sitting of the Parliament was upon this reason; I went down to take possession
upon a Lease of a considerable value which was renewed to me by the Bishop. I
did not think of going down at that time so soon; but I had word wrote me out
of the Country that the Bishop was ill, and that obliged me in point of
Interest to make haste down. And this I shall prove by one that was Attorney for
me, and another that was a witness of my taking Possession: And for this, I
first call Mr. John Edmonds who came in Pray Sir, will you tell his Grace and
my Lords, what you know of my coming down into the Country in the beginning of
May, and upon what account, and what time it was?


Mr. Edmonds. May it please your Lordship upon the 5 th of May, my Lord
Delamere did me the Honor to come to my House, and he stayed there a little
while, and desired me to be a Witness of his taking possession upon a Lease of
my Lord Bishop of Chester's, and we went into the House that was next to mine,
which was (...) and there did take Possession.


L. H. Stew. Where is your house?


Mr. Edmonds. At Boden, in Cheshire.


L. H. Stew. When was this, do you say?


Mr. Edmonds. The 5 th of May.


L. Delamere. Pray Sir, will you satisfy my Lord, whether the Bishop was not
ill at that time?


Mr. Edmonds. My Lord, I had been a little before at Chester, and hearing my
Lord Bishop was not very well, I went to Mr. Allen, and told him I was desirous
to see my Lord, and speak with him, if I might; he told me my Lord was so ill,
that he would speak with no body.


L. H. Stew. Was it a Lease for Years, or a Lease for Lives?


Mr. Edmonds. It was a Lease for Lives.


L. H. Stew. Then that might require my Lord's taking Possession. Who do you
call next, My Lord?


L. Delamere. Mr. Henry.


L. H. Stew. What do you ask this Man, My Lord?


L. Delamere. Pray, will you give his Grace and my Lords an account, whether
you were not Attorney, and delivered me Possession upon the Lease of my Lord
Bishop of Chester.


Mr. Henry. My Lord, I was Attorney by appointment, and the 5 th of May last I
delivered Possession to my Lord Delamere at one of the most remarkable places
of the Land that belonged to that Lease of the Bishop.


L. Delamere. My Lords, I hope this a satisfactory reason for my going down at
that time, the Bishop being ill, and the Lease being worth 6 or 7000 l. The
next time that I have to speak to, is, That of my going the 27 th of May, And
for that I give this answer; I did go out of Town the 27 th of May, The
occasion of my going was, I had taken up a resolution before to go see my Child
that was not well, but I had not taken my Journey so soon, nor with such
privacy, but that I had notice, there was a Warrant out to apprehend me, and
knowing the inconveniences of lying in Prison, I was very willing to keep as
long out of Custody as I could, and therefore I went out of the way, and under
a borrowed name. When I came to my house in Cheshire, there were not above 5 of
my own Servants that saw me all the while I was there, and I saw no body but
them, but while I was there my Wife sent me an Express, that as to the Warrant
she hoped it was a mistake, and there was no such thing; but my eldest Son was
very ill, and if I intended to see him alive I must make haste up, this was the
occasion of my quick return, and I shall satisfy your Lordships by Proof, that
I came thither in that manner to avoid the Warrant, and for no other Reason.


L. H. Stew. You say you went to see a sick Child in the Country.


L. Delamere. May it please your Grace, my Mother that is here, wrote me word
that my Child was not well.


L. H. Stew. Pray, what made you come back again so soon?


L. Delamere. Because I had an Express sent me by my Wife that my other Son
was like to dye.


L. H. Stew. Call your Witness, my Lord.


L. Delamere. Mrs. Kelsey, who came in Pray will you give an account what I
said, when I came down, was the occasion of my coming so privately and
changing my Name?


Mrs. Kelsey. My Lord heard, he said, there was a Warrant for taking of him up,
and he gave me that for a reason; besides his little Son in the Country was ill.


L. H. Stew. What, she lived in the Country, did she?


Mrs. Kelsey. My Lord, I was in the house with him.


L. Delamere. If your Lordships please my Mother may be examined?


L. H. Stew. Yes, with all my heart.


She sat by him at the Bar. L. H. Stew. Pray Madam, will you lift up your
Voice, that my Lords may hear what you say.


Lady Delamere. My Lords, This Child of his that was in the Country, was more
than ordinarily precious to him, in regard it was born to him at that time,
when he was an innocent honest Man, (as he is now a Prisoner in the Tower for
high Treason,) above two years ago, and I think it increased his affection to
the Child, that God had given it to him when he was in that affliction, My
Lord, I knowing the affection that the Father and Mother both had to the Child,
my care in their absence I thought ought to be more exercised about him: The
Child sucked, but I ^^w the Child decline, and therefore I was of Opinion that
he sho^^d be weaned, and I sent up word, that if they did not take car^ quickly
and look a little after him, I was afraid he would go i^ (...) Consumption.
Upon this my Son came down, I saw him not indeed, because he was very private
all the while he was in the Country, but while he was there, it pleased God to
visit his eldest Son with a dangerous distemper, upon which my daughter sent
for him Post, if he intended to see his Son alive. And thereupon I think he
made what haste back again he could.


L. H. Stew. Were you in the same house with him, Madam?


Lady Delamere. My Lord, I say, I did not see him all the time he was there, I
only tell you what I heard.


L. H. Stew. How long was he in the Country?


Lady Delamere. I cannot tell exactly that, I think he was not above two days.


L. H. Stew. He must be but one day by computation of time?


L. Delamere. Pray, My Lord, I will satisfy you in that point presently: Mrs.
Kelsey will give an account what time it was that I came down, and when I
went away.


Mrs. Kelsey. My Lord came down upon the Sabbath Day night, and stayed there
Monday, and went away the Tuesday morning.


L. H. Stew. Look you, My Lord, the 27 th of May was upon a Wednesday, that
night you went out of Town, and wont to Hoddesden, Thursday which was the 28 th
you came to Hitchin at Noon, Friday was the 29 th, Saturday the 30 th, Sunday
was the 31 th, then you came to your House, Monday the 1 st of June, Tuesday
the 2 d, then you came away, and upon Wednesday the 3 d you were in Town, so
says your Brother.


L. Delamere. It was so, my Lord.


L. H. Stew. Which way did you come back?


L. Delamere. I came Post through Coventry, my Lord, and that was the time that
Hope speaks of, that I told him I had come another way into Cheshire, when I
came down.


L. H. Stew. My Lord, you say you went down to secret your self from a Warrant
that you apprehended was out against you, and that made you go a by-way, how
came you then to come so publicly back, the ordinary Post Rode?


L. Delamere. If your Grace please, I have told you I had an Express came from
my Wife that told me it was a mistake as to the Warrant, but my Child was very
ill, and I must make haste up.


L. H. Stew. Have you any more Witnesses, my Lord?


L. Delamere. Yes, my Lord, I desire Mr. Kelsey may be called,


He came in. L. H. Stew. Well, what say you?


Mr. Kelsey. My Lord came down upon the Sunday night at 11 of the Clock, and
stayed at home all Monday, and on Tuesday morning, at 3 of the Clock in the
morning, he took Horse ^^r London, and I have Letters by me that are dated the
4 th of ^^^e which was Thursday, that told me my Lord was come to Town ^^e
night before.


L. H. Stew. Whose are those two Letters?


Mr. Kelsey. They were from my Lady and Mrs Vere Booth, and both came by the
same Post.


L. Delamere. I shall call one Witness more, My Lord, to prove that my Child
was sick here in Town and the time, and that is Sir Thomas Millington, who was
his Physician.


Sir Thomas was called, and came in. L. Delamere. Pray Sir Thomas, can you
recollect your self what time my Son was ill last year.


Sir Tho. Millington. My Lord, I was sent for to my Lord Delamere's Son upon
the 28 th of May, and I found him then very ill, and he continued so for two
days. Insomuch as I told my Lady Delamere his Mother that I thought the Child
would not escape, I told it likewise to Sir James Langham, who is my Neighbor
in Lincolns Inn Fields; what they did upon it, whether they sent for my Lord
Delamere to Town or no, I cannot tell, but I know punctually this was the time
by reason of the Bills I wrote are dated on that day, otherwise I could not
have remembered the time, but the Bills being sent me from the Apothecary, I
find that date to them.


L. H. Stew. Pray, Mr. Attorney will you call Edlin again, or Vaux, either of
them.


Mr. At. Genesis Here is Edlin, my Lord.


L. H. Stew. Where did you part with my Lord Delamere, and when?


Edlin. Upon Thursday the 28 th of May at Hitchin.


L. H. Stew. What time of the day was it when you parted?


Edlin. It was about 10 of the Clock.


L. H. Stew. He went forward Post into Cheshire, did he not?


Edlin. He did not go Post, I suppose, for he went upon his own Horse.


L. H. Stew. Did he go upon his own Horse?


Edlin. It was the same Horse he went to Hitchin upon.


L. H. Stew. Have you any more Witnesses, my Lord?


L. Delamere. No, My Lord, I hope I have given their Lordships satisfaction in
all points, and need to give no further Evidence.


L. H. Stew. Have you any thing more then to say, My Lord?


L. Delamere. My Lords, I acknowledge I did go at that time privately a
By-Road, and by the name of Brown, and as for Jones, who it is said came from
Holland that day, I appeal to him himself, and I call God to Witness I never
saw the man before now in my life; nay, till after I was made a Prisoner upon
this account, I never so much as heard of his Name; and your Lordships see by
the Proofs, that all that has been said against me, except what this Fellow
Saxon has testified, is but hearsay, nay indeed but hearsay upon hearsay at the
third and fourth hand.

My Lords, if People will make use of my name, and say this, and that, and the
other, and among themselves talk of Messages sent to me; can I or any man in
the world help it? at this rate who can be innocent, If a man must be guilty
because others intend to draw him into Treason? For there is no more in the
utmost that this proof can amount unto. It is at the pleasure of any two men in
the world, to take away the Lives, Honors, and Estates of any of your
Lordships, if it be a proof sufficient to make you guilty of Treason, for them
to swear you were intended to be drawn into Treason.

And, my Lords, as to the truth of the thing it self, that there was any
Message or Correspondence between the late D. of Monmouth and me, I call God to
witness I have neither wrote nor sent Letter or Message to him, or received
Letter or Message from him, this 3 years: I cannot tell what expectation he
might have concerning me or any body else. It is very probable he might have
expectation of assistance from some body, and that without such expectations he
would not have made the attempt he did: But, my Lords, all that is nothing to
me, I had no correspondence either by Letters or Messages with him, so that all
that has been said upon that point of his expectation, and what he declared, I
must give the same answer to that I gave to the Evidence about Jones's Message,
That admitting it to be true, he did declare so, yet, no proof being made of an
actual correspondence, it is no more but only an intention in him to draw men
into the Commission of Treason; and if that be allowed for proof of guilt, I
must repeat it again, there is no man can be innocent.

Upon the whole matter, my Lord, I must leave my Case to the consideration of
your Lordships: I am not Master of so much Law or Rhetoric as the Kings
Counsel, to plead in my own Cause, and I have had but little time to recollect
and apply my defense to my accusation, but I hope what Evidence I have offered
has given your Lordships full satisfaction that I am not guilty of what I stand
charged with.

And after all that has been said, my Lords, I would beg your Lordships to
consider this, that if in case I were guilty of these things, and were
conscious to my self of having been engaged in an Affair of this nature, can
any man imagine I could have been so hardy as to have surrendered my self upon
the Kings Proclamation, nay, if I with those other two Gentlemen that he has
named, had had any transactions of this kind, with such a Fellow as he has been
made appear to be by his Neighbors (that must needs be thought a man of no
Faith, because of no Reputation, though he gives himself a great Character as a
man of great Interest, of wonderful dispatch and dexterity in the management of
such matters) so as at first sight to put this large confidence in him; Can it
be imagined I so little regarded my own Life and all that is dear to me, as to
have surrendered my self, were it not that I was certain of my own innocence and
integrity: Life it self, my Lords, is to be preferred above all things but
Honor and Innocence; And Job says, Skin for skin and all that a man has will
he give for his life, and why should I be presumed to have so little a value
for it, as voluntarily to deliver up my self to destruction, had I been
conscious that there was any one, who could really testify any thing that
could hurt me.

Besides, My Lords, this very Fellow Saxon is but one Evidence, and how far you
will believe him, I must submit it to you, but surely one Witness will never be
sufficient to convict a man of Treason, though thousands of hear-says, and such
trival circumstances be tacked to it, especially when they are tacked to an
Evidence, which I dare say your Lordships are far from thinking it deserves any
Credit.

My Lords, I desire your leave to ask this one Question; Would not any of your
Lordships think himself in a bad condition as to his Fortune, if he could
produce no better Evidence to prove his Title to his Estate than what has been
produced against me this day to take away my Life, and if such Evidence as this
would not be sufficient to support a Title to an Estate, certainly it can never
be thought sufficient to deprive a man of Life, Honor, Estate, and all.

My Lords, I am not the only Man that has been or may be falsely accused; God
knows how soon the misfortune of a False Accusation may fall to the Lot of any
of your Lordships; I pray God it never may, but since that may happen, I
question not, but your Lordships will be very cautious, how by an easy
Credulity you give encouragement to such a wickedness: For Knights of the Post
will not end in my Trial if they prosper in their Villainy, and perhaps it may
come home to some of your Lordships, if such practices be encouraged, as I
cannot but firmly believe they will not.

My Lords, the Eyes of all the Nation are upon your Proceedings this day; Nay I
may say, your Lordships are now Judging the cause of every man in England, that
shall happen to come under like Circumstances with my Self at any time
hereafter: For accordingly as you judge of me now, just so will inferior Courts
be directed to give their Judgments in like Cases in time to come.

Your Lordships very well know, Blood once spilt can never be gathered up again,
and therefore unless the Case be very clear against me, you I am sure will not
hazard the shedding of my blood upon a doubtful Evidence: God Almighty is a God
of Mercy and Equity: Our Law, the Law of England, is a Law of Equity and Mercy,
and both God and the Law require from your Lordships Tenderness in all Cases of
Life and Death, and if it should be indifferent, or but doubtful to your
Lordships (which upon the Proofs that I have made, I cannot believe it can be)
whether I am innocent or guilty, both God and the Law require you to acquit me.

My Lords, I leave my Self, my Cause and all the Consequences of it with your
Lordships; And I pray the All-Wise the Almighty God direct you in your
Determination.


Lord High Steward. Have you any thing more to say, My Lord?


Lord Delamere. No, My Lord.


Lord High Steward. Then Mr. Attorney, and you that are of the Kings Counsel,
What have you to say more?


Mr. Soll. General. May it please your Grace, and you my Noble Lords the Peers
of my Lord Delamere, the Prisoner at the Bar.

The Evidence that has been given against this Noble Lord is of two Natures,
part of it is positive Proof, and part is circumstantial, and though it be
allowed that there must be two Witnesses in Cases of Treason, and that
Circumstances tho never so strong, and sufficient to fortify one positive
Proof, do not nor can make a second positive Witness; Yet I crave leave to say,
that there may be Circumstances so strong and cogent, so violent and necessary
to fortify a positive Testimony, that will in Law amount to make a second
Witness such as the Law requires.

My Lords, I do not say every Circumstance will do it, but such as necessarily
and violently tending to the same thing that was positively proved.

As for Example. If a man comes and Swears against another that he said he will
go immediately and kill the King, and another man that did not hear those
words, comes and testifies his Lying in wait, that circumstance of Lying in
wait, that was an action indifferent in it self, yet, when applied to the
positive Proof, will be a second witness to satisfy the Law, which requires
two witnesses in Treason.

It must confess, My Lords, when we will make Circumstances to be a second
Evidence, they must be such as are necessarily tending to fortify the positive
Evidence that was given by the single Witness: Now whether that be so in this
Case, I must, as becomes me, leave to your Lordships Consideration: It is not
my business to carry the Evidence further than it will go, and I am sure it is
not my duty to let it lose any of its weight; and if it have not that force it
ought to have, I should be to blame, as not having done what belongs to me to
do: I will therefore state the Fact to your Lordships plainly as it stands upon
the Proof, and submit the whole to your Lordships Determination.

My Lords, Our positive Proof with which I crave leave to begin, is but by one,
single Witness, and that is Saxon, and his Evidence is this, That being in
Cheshire where he lives, he was sent for about the 3 d or 4 th of June last to
my Lord Delamere's House at Mere, and there he was brought into a Lower Room,
where he saw my Lord Delamere, Sir Robert Cotton, and Mr. Crew Offley: That my
Lord Delamere told him he had received a Message lately by one Jones, that was
sent from the Duke of Monmouth, whereby he understood that the Duke would
speedily be in England, and that they must provide Men and Arms to assist him
when he came; That he was a Man recommended to them by my Lord Brandon, and
that upon his recommendation they had thought fit to entrust him in the matter,
and withal told him, They were to raise 40000 l. and 10000 Men in that County:
He tells you likewise, these Gentlemen gave him 11 Guineys and 5 l. in Silver
to go of an Errand for them to the Duke of Monmouth, which he undertook to do,
and hired a Horse to that purpose.

This, My Lords, is the positive Proof, and this, I must acknowledge,
standing-single and by it self, will make but one Witness; but whether the
Circumstances that have been offered to your Lordships by the other Witnesses,
be such violent Circumstances as necessarily tend to fortify and support that
positive Evidence, and so will supply the defect of a second Witness, is the
next question that I come to consider, and I shall take them into consideration
in the same order that the Evidence was delivered.

The first step, My Lords, that was made as to any Evidence that touches this
Noble Lord at the Bar, was what was testified by my Lord Gray, (for as to the
other part of the Evidence that related to the Conspiracy in general, I need
not trouble your Lordships with the repetition of it (that there was such an
one is notoriously known) but I say that part of the Evidence in his History of
the Conspiracy, which my Lord Gray brought home to my Lord Delamere was this,

That upon the first Meetings and Consultations, it was resolved upon, That the
Duke of Monmouth should go into Cheshire to make an Interest there, and among
the Persons that he was directed to go to, and to apply himself to for advice
there, as Persons fit to be trusted, this Noble Lord was one.

That upon the Duke of Monmouth's Return out of Cheshire, he did give his
Confederates here in Town an Account, how well he had been received, and that
he liked all things very well there: This my Lords, is the first Circumstance
offered that has been to you, to show that he had a Confidence in my Lord
Delamere; as a Principal Support of his Designs at that very time.

The next thing that we offer, is this Message of Jones's, and for that, our
Evidence has fully and plainly made it out to your Lordships, That Jones did go
over into Holland, and his Business there was an Errand from Disney and Major
Wildman, and the Confederates here. The effect of his Message was, That it was
their Opinion, That the Duke of Monmouth should go for Scotland and join with
my Lord Argyle; but upon the Receipt of the Message, he being angry, said, It
was too late for such a Message now, and he would come into England, for he was
ready to Sail, and thereupon he did send this same Jones back again into
England upon a Message, to inform the Lords and others of his Party, among whom
my Lord Delamere was one, That he would have them betake themselves into their
several Countries, and not stay to be taken or clapped up here, for that, he did
understand, was the design; and this Message was delivered in Writing (now that
the Duke of Monmouth did write a Note and give it to Jones, is verified by my
Lord Gray's Testimony too) and this was Sealed up, and he was not to open it
till he came to Sea, and when he did open it, he found it contained a
Signification of the Place where he was to Land, and where he was to
Rendezvous, which was Taunton, and who were the Persons that were to have
Notice of it, among whose Names we find my Lord Delamere's to be one; but he
does likewise tell you, he was not the man that was to carry the Message to
these Persons, but he was to deliver it to Matthews or Wildman, and they were
to transmit it to the other Persons.

He tells you likewise, That when he came to Town, which was the 27th of May,
he met neither with Matthews nor Major Wildman; whereupon being at a loss what
he should do with his Message, for want of those other Persons, he acquainted
Disney that was Executed, with his Errand, who promised to take care that it
should be delivered.

This, My Lords, is all Jones's Evidence, for Jones does not say that he
himself acquainted, or that Disney did acquaint my Lord Delamere with the
Message.

But here, My Lord, is the main Circumstance that renders the matter
suspicious, That very Night that Jones came to Town, and Disney being
acquainted with the Message, had undertaken to get it delivered, does my Lord
Delamere at Ten of the Clock at Night go out of Town, in the Company of two
Friends under the Disguise of the Name of Brown, and a Bye-Road, and so goes
down to his own House in Cheshire; This I say, is the Circumstance that renders
the thing suspicious.

Now my Lords, if we do prove by such sufficient Evidence, as may make the
matter manifest to you, that my Lord Delamere had Notice of Jones's Message
(for upon that Point the Case will turn, whether he had Notice such a Message
was brought, that such things were in agitation, such Preparations made, and
that they were all to go into the Country) then I say, his going down is a
violent Presumption, he had an intent to comply with the Message, and join in
the Design.

But now, My Lords, comes the Question, the main Question, How is it made out
that he had Notice, Jones brought such a Message?

Jones indeed, My Lords, does not say that he himself imparted it to him, or
that Disney told him he had Communicated it, but I think there is another
Witness, and that is Storey, who says, That Brand, one that knew of the
Message, did acquaint him, that my Lord had received it at the Coffee-House,
and that Night went out of Town.

It is true, My Lords, this is but a Hearsay, but that which followed being
matter of Fact, my Lord's going out of Town that Night, so late in the Night,
and in such an unusual suspicious manner, gives more Credit to the Relation,
than as a bare Hearsay could have of it self.

For unless there be some good account given of my Lords thus going out of
Town, it is a kind of necessary Presumption, that he acquainted with the
Message, part of which was, That he should go out of Town; and if so, it can
have no other Construction, with Submission, than to be in pursuance of, and
complying with the Directions that that Message brought him from the Duke of
Monmouth.

My Lords, to carry this a little further, there were two Witnesses produced
that went out of Town with him; they seem indeed unwillingly to give their
Evidence, but I shall faithfully repeat what Testimony they gave: Their Names
were Vaux and Edlin.

Vaux he says he met my Lord Delamere at the Rummer-Tavern in Queen Street the
26th day of May, which was the day before Jones came to Town, and that then he
appointed to go out of Town the next day, which was the 27th, and accordingly
he did go.

Edlin he says, he met Vaux at the Custom-House upon the 27th of May in the
Morning, and being desired by him to go with him out of Town, he did so, and
there was with him a Gentleman whose Name was Brown, and who now appears to be
my Lord Delamere; they went in Company with him as far as Hitchin, where they
left him upon Thursday the 28th at Noon.

This Evidence is produced to show, That my Lord did go out of Town at that
time, and in that manner as has been alleged, and that these Persons went with
him to conduct him a private way that he should not go the common Road. Your
Lordships will consider what Answer has been given to this, and what account
my Lord Delamere has given of himself.

Another thing my Lords, that renders this matter suspicious, is the Name which
my Lord was pleased to assume to disguise himself by, it being a Name by which
the Party use to call my Lord in their Discourses of him; And to prove that, we
have likewise produced two Witnesses, Babington and Paunceford.

Babington, he says, That in their Consultations there were Discourses of my
Lord Delamere under the Name of Brown, and once at a Tavern when my Lord
Delamere was named by one in the Company, he was presently catched up for it,
and replied to, You mean Mr. Brown; and so it seems that was the Canting Name
under which they discoursed of my Lord Delamere.

The other Witness Paunceford, he tells you, That being at Disney's House, and
concerned with him in the printing the Late Duke of Monmouth's Declarations
(for the printing of which, Disney was Executed) one Lock came for some of
those Declarations for Mr. Brown, and they were to be sent into Cheshire: so
that though your Lordships observe the Witness says, some body else was called
by the Name of Brown, yet you have had no account given you, that there was any
other Brown in Cheshire.

It is true indeed, My Lords, that these are only things that Disney said, and
Lock said; But I must take leave to say, it is very suspicious, that if my Lord
went out of Town into Cheshire under the Name of Brown, and some Persons shall
on the behalf of Brown come for Declarations to be sent into Cheshire, and my
Lord commonly in that Parley go by the Name of Brown, that those Declarations
were for my Lord, and that will be a great Evidence of his Correspondence with
Monmouth.

But I confess, My Lords, all this while our Proof is Circumstantial, and
indeed there is no positive Proof but that of Saxon, and in him our Proof must
center, for without him I must acknowledge nothing that has been offered will
be Proof against my Lord upon this Indictment, for bare Circumstances and bare
Suspicions will be no Proof against any Man, but such as are violent and
necessary, and those joined to a positive Proof, such as the Law requires.

Now then, My Lords, I come to the Consideration of what weight and stress is
to be laid upon this positive Evidence of Saxons: And here I must confess there
are objections made to this Testimony, to which I cannot readily give an
Answer; for Saxon has sworn, that he was there at such a time, and that he was
sent for and entertained as a Person recommended by my Lord Brandon, as fit to
be entrusted with the Secret, and capable of being employed to stir up the
Country, in order to the prosecution of a Design they had on foot to raise a
Rebellion, and he does Charge Sir Robert Cotton and Mr. Crew Offley to have
been there at the same time.

The Evidence, My Lords, that has been produced to falsify this positive
Witness, in the point of Sir Robert Cotton's being there, has been by Five or
Six Witnesses, who testify Sir Robert Cotton's being in Town, and not
elsewhere from the 10th of April to the latter end of July; and I do not see
what we have to say in answer to their Testimony; I must agree the Proof to be
full in that Point, and if the Evidence they give be true, I cannot say that
Saxon's Evividence can be true in that Point.

Likewise as to Mr. Offley, Sir Willoughby Aston and others have testified,
that he was not at my Lord Delamere's at the time Saxon speaks of: For he gives
you an account where he was every day from the 26th of May to the 4th of June,
and his own Servants bring him to his own House, upon the 4th of June in the
Evening, which is quite another way than from Sir Willoughby Aston's to my Lord
Delamere's; If this likewise be true, what Saxons says, cannot be true, I must
agree it.

There is another thing that is offered on my Lord Delamere's part, That he was
himself in Town at that time that Saxon says he was at Mere; But here indeed
the matter seems to be a little more strange and dubious, that my Lord should
make so much have down, as to go out late at Night, and so cautiously as to go
by a wrong Name, and yet to ride to Town again the Post-way to be here just the
3d of June, when Saxon swears he was in Cheshire.

I must confess there is the Proof of his two Brothers that say, They saw him
in Town the 3 d and 4 th of June: There is likewise some account given of his
going out of Town, that it was upon a Message received from his Mother; that
his Child in the Country was sick, and indeed he did go a By-way and change
his name for fear of a Warrant in a Messengers hands that was out against him
to apprehend him.

Now, My Lords, I do not hear any thing that has been offered, that there was
any such Warrant, or any discourse to ground that apprehension upon; My Lord
had the first and only apprehension of a Warrant; but upon what Reasons he
himself best knows: This apprehension made him go out of Town so privately, he
says, because he would not be prevented of seeing his sick Child.

But how comes it to pass that my Lord makes such a speedy Return: By the
Proofs it appears he did not get there till Sunday Night, and upon the Tuesday
Morning comes Post for London.

The account that he gives of that, is this, His have was to see another Child,
that was here sick in Town; For he had received an express from his Wife upon
the Monday to acquaint him, that the Coast was clear, and there was no Warrant
out against him, but if he intended to see his Child alive, he must make have
up to Town; and accordingly upon the Tuesday morning early he sets out, and
upon the Wednesday in the Evening is here in Town again.

But, with submission, My Lords, there is no good Account given by this noble
Lord, what reason there was for so many Post-Journeys backward and forward, as,
had been testified, he to have made within a very little compass of time; for
besides this of his return Post upon the 2 d of June, there is only an Answer
given to one of the rest, which is, That of the 5 th of May, when he says he
went to take possession of the Land that he held by a Lease then renewed to him
by the Bishop, which being of some Value and Consideration to his Lordship, and
the Bishop being sick, he thought it necessary to go down Post himself, and
would not be content to receive Livery by Attornment. This is the only answer
that is given to all those times of his riding Post that have been given in
Evidence.

These are matters of Suspicion that are offered to your Lordships, but I
confess matters of Suspicion only; unless clear, positive, probable Proof be
joined with them, will not weigh with your Lordships to convict a man of
High Treason where two Witnesses are required. But whether these matters of
Suspicion be such violent and necessary Presumptions as tend to fortify the
positive Testimony, I must leave that to the Consideration of your Lordships.


Lord High Steward. You do not call any more Witnesses then I perceive.


Mr. Soll. General. No, My Lord.


Lord High Steward. My Lords, it has not been usual of late, for those who have
sat in the place where I now am, upon those Occasions to give you Lordships
any trouble in repeating or observing upon the Evidence: In this Case the
Evidence that has been given has been very long, and it would be too great a
Presumption in me, should I have any manner of doubt in the least, that either
your Lordships have not well observed it, or the Learned Counsel for the King
have been defective in collecting or remarking upon it, so as to need my
Assistance.

But, my Lords, I confess there is something I cannot omit taking notice of,
not for your Lordships sakes, but for the sake of this numerous and great
Auditory, that one mistake in point of Law might not go unrectified, which
seemed to be urged with some earnestness by the Noble Lord at the Bar, That
there is a necessity in point of Law, that there should be two Positive
Witnesses to convict a man of Treason.

He seemed to lay a great stress upon that, but certainly his Lordship is under
a great mistake, as to the Law in that Point; for without all doubt, what was
urged in answer to this Objection by that Learned Gentleman that concluded for
the King, is true, There may be such other substantial Circumstances joined to
one Positive Testimony, that, by the Opinion of all the Judges of England,
several times has been adjudged and held to be a sufficient Proof.

As for the purpose, in this Case, suppose your Lordships, upon the Evidence
that has been given here this day, should believe Saxon swears true, who is a
Positive Witness, and shall then likewise believe that there was that
Circumstance of Jones's coming over from Holland with such a Message upon the
27 th of May (which is directly sworn in Evidence, you are the Judges of that
Evidence) and what the other Witnesses have sworn likewise, and is not denied
by my Lord, the Prisoner at the Bar, that he went out of Town that Night,
changed his Name, and went an indirect By-Road, certainly these Circumstances
if your Lordships be satisfied he went for that purpose do necessarily knit the
positive Testimony of Saxon, and amount to a second Witness.

That is, if Saxon's positive Testimony be true, then suppose all these
Circumstances that gove the Jealousy do make up a strong presumption to join
with the positive Evidence of Saxon, then you have two witnesses as the Law
requires, especially, if the answer given by the Prisoner to those
Circumstances be not sufficient (as the slender account he gives of his so
frequent Journeys in so short a compass of time) but that there still remains
some Suspicion; I could have wished indeed, that matter might have been made
somewhat more clear; that no shadow of Suspicion might remain.

Your Lordships are Judges: And if you do not believe the Testimony of Saxon,
whose Testimony has been so positively contradicted by diverse Witnesses of
Quality, the Prisoner ought to be acquitted of this Indictment: If your
Lordships please, You may go together and consider of it.


Lords. Ay withdraw, withdray.


Then the Peers withdrew in their order according to their Precedence with the
Sergeant at Arms before them. Lord High Steward. Lieutenant of the Tower, take
your Prisoner from the Bar:


The Prisoner was taken into the little Room appointed for him at the entrance
into the Court. The Peers staid out about half an hour, and then returned in
the same Order that they went out in, and Seated themselves in their places as
before. Cl. Crown. Sergeant at Arms, take the appearance of the Peers, Lawrence
Earl of Rochester Lord High Treasurer of England.


He stood up uncovered and answered. Lord Treasurer. Here.


And so did all the rest. Lord High Steward. My Lords, are you agreed of your
Verdict?


Lords. Yes:


The Lord High Steward took their Verdict Seriatim, beginning with the puisue
Peer in this manner: Lord High Steward. How say you my Lord Churchill, is Henry
Baron of Delamere guilty of the High Treason whereof he stands Indicted and
has been Arraigned, or not guilty.


The Lord Churchill stood up uncovered, and laying his hand on his Breast
answered, Lord Churchill. Not guilty upon my Honor.


And so did all the rest of the Peers. Lord High Steward. Lieutenant of the
Tower, bring your Prisoner to the Bar.


The Prisoner was brought again to the Bar. Lord High Steward. My Lord
Delamere, I am to acquaint you that my Noble Lords your Peers, having
considered of the Evidence that has been given, both against you and for you,
after they were withdrawn, have returned and agreed of their Verdict, and by
that Verdict have unanimously declared, that you are not guilty of the
High Treason, whereof you have been Indicted, and this day Arraigned, And
therefore I must discharge you of it.


Lord Delamere. May it please your Grace, I shall pray to Almighty God, that he
will please to give me a Heart to be Thankful to him for his Mercy, and my
Lords for their Justice; And I pray God deliver their Lordships, and all honest
men, from Wicked and Malicious, Lying and False Testimony; I pray God bless His
Majesty and Long may he Reign.


Lord High Steward. And I pray God continue to him his Loyal Peers, and all
other his Loyal Subjects.


Cl. Crown. Sergeant at Arms, make Proclamation.


Sergeant at Arms. Oyes. My Lord High Steward of England, his Grace straightly
wills and commands all manner of Persons here present to depart hence in
Gods Peace and the Kings, for his Grace my Lord High Steward of England now
dissolves his Commission.


GOD SAVE THE KING. At which words his Grace taking the white Staff from the
Usher of the Black Rodd, held it over his own Head and broke it in two: Thereby
dissolving the Court.



FINIS.

